Learn: : ; . ; . . s i  services f 
The negative psychological impact of infertility and resultant stress inherent in the
treatment of fertility problems is well documented in the research literature (Greil,
1997). Disclosing emotional reactions to stressful and traumatic experiences through
writing has been shown to have beneficial effects on psychological well-being in
healthy students and clinical populations (Frattaroli, 2006; Smyth, 1998). The principal
aim of this thesis was to examine the efficacy of a written emotional disclosure
intervention for individuals with infertility. However, initially the potential moderating
effects of delivering the intervention via a computer and within the context of the home
was examined. This showed that the adaptation of the traditional laboratory based,
handwritten intervention developed by Pennebaker and Beall (1986) did not impact on
the short-term or longer-term effects of written emotional disclosure. Subsequently,
following a study which failed to recruit participants from an assisted conception unit, a
written emotional disclosure intervention for individuals with infertility was examined
using an internet-mediated delivery. Results showed that the effectiveness of writing
about the experience of infertility and infertility treatment in producing changes in
psychological well-being at 4-week follow-up was related to changes in the content of
the disclosure narratives across the writing sessions. Analysis revealed that for those
individuals in the disclosure group who showed an increase in their use of negative
emotion words and cognitive words in their writing over the three disclosure sessions
was associated with a reduction in symptoms of psychological distress. The findings of
this study are discussed in relation to the heterogeneity of the sample and possible
impact of the recruitment methods used. The contribution of this thesis has been to
directly test the potential moderating effects of methodological variation in intervention
delivery and examine the utility of a written emotional disclosure intervention for
individuals with infertility, in doing so the findings of this thesis contribute to the
expanding literature. Recommendations are made for more systematic examination of
the utility of disclosure writing and investigation of the process by which positive
changes occurs in individuals with infertility and other clinical populations.
