DIVERSIFICATION OF LEGUME-FEEDING PSYLLIDS 
Psyllids ( jumping plant lice) are small phytophagous insects that are related to aphids,
scales and whiteflies (Hemiptera, Stemorrhyncha). Psyllids are highly host specific,
occurring on one or a few closely related hosts, and they predominantly feed on
dicotyledonous angiosperms. In the subfamily Arytaininae (Psylloidea, Psyllinae) there are
five psyllid genera that feed exclusively on shrubby legumes in the Genisteae
(Leguminosae, Papilionoideae), and the species diversity for both plant and insect groups
is highest in the Mediterranean. I made a detailed field survey of psyllids on Genisteae
hosts in the western Mediterranean, including southern Iberia, NW Africa and two of the
Macaronesian archipelagos (Canary Islands and Madeira). These collections (over 300) of
both psyllids and legumes provided the basis for the taxonomic, phylogenetic and co
diversification analyses presented in this study.
I have reassessed the classification of the legume-feeding psyllids native to
Macaronesia, and I have revised the taxonomy of one genus (Arytainilla). I present
evidence that the largest Macaronesian group has a unique island origin distinct from the
predominantly continental genera. This Macaronesian group, which also has three
continental members, is described as a new genus in order to clarify the monophyly and
placement of this group within the Arytaininae. Seventeen new psyllid species in four
arytainine genera, discovered in continental and Macaronesian regions, are proposed.
I constructed phylogenies for both the arytainine psyllids and their legume host
plants, in order to compare colonization, biogeographic patterns and island radiations. I
present a phylogenetic study of the Palaearctic arytainine psyllids that incorporates both
morphological data (adult and nymphal characters) and molecular data (mitochondrial
genes: cytochrome oxidase I and II, including the intervening tRNA leucine; and the small
ribosomal subunit rRNA). To investigate the evolution of the island legumes and to
establish the relationships between continental and island host plants, a molecular
phylogeny of part of the Genisteae was generated from sequences of the nuclear region:
ITS1-5.8S-ITS2. The legume phylogeny shows a Mediterranean origin for the Canarian
Genisteae (Adenocarpus, Genista and Teline), and a diphyletic origin for Teline -  with two
distinct island groups nested within Genista. The psyllid phylogeny shows that the two
largest genera are paraphyletic, but there is some evidence that the Genisteae-feeders, as a
whole, are monophyletic. The phylogenetic analyses for both psyllids and legumes
highlight the problems of establishing host-parasite interactions using traditional
morphological classifications alone. Colonization and biogeographic patterns among the
island psyllid species implies a close correlation between the radiation of psyllids and the
diversity of their host plants.
Psyllid and legume phylogenies are compared in order to establish the extent of
phylogenetic congruence between the insects and their host plants. To test assumptions of
cospeciation, an absolute time scale is applied to both plant and insect phylogenies. A
comparison of psyllid and legume phylogenies suggests that, whilst rare cospeciation
events may play a significant role in promoting diversification, historical reconstructions of
psyllid-legume interactions are complicated by systemic host switching. Psyllids appear to
be opportunistic specialists with host switching occurring when the plant lineage fluctuates
in geographical abundance, population structure or through dispersal. However,
preadaptation is evident in many cases where selection of a new host may be constrained
by plant chemistry and architecture. Successful establishment by a psyllid colonist is more
likely when available hosts are phylogenetically and ecologically related to the original
host. A history of parallel cladogenesis between psyllid and legume lineages is rejected in
favour of a fluctuating lineage model of co-diversification which presents a more realistic
interpretation of the present day pattern of host associations.
