Change management in the banking industry: the case of Ecobank Ghana Limited
The Ghanaian banking industry has undergone several changes in the past decade because
of the effects of the global financial crisis in 2008 resulting in the collapse of some banks
in Ghana. The Bank of Ghana introduced many measures to make the banking industry in
Ghana robust. All banks were expected to introduce change strategies in line with the
directives of Bank of Ghana. These changes had great impact on employees due to lack of
understanding of the change. Conducting business in an ever-changing environment
demands that all stakeholders especially employees understand change and change
management processes and practices to make it effective. This is because employees were
required to tweak their thinking and practices to respond to the changing needs and
expectations demanded of them by management and the central bank. The collapse of
some of the banks in the process of change was attributed to among other factors, poor
employee engagement, poor communication, and poor employee commitment change. The
role of management during change was also sighted to be unsatisfactory.
In view of the above, this case study sought to explore and analyse the understanding of
employees of the banking industry in Ghana regarding change and change management
processes and practices. Only Ecobank Ghana Limited out of the 27 banks in Ghana was
selected as case for this research. This is because some of the banks were established
within the last 5 years and did not have enough change experiences. Other banks gave the
presence of COVID-19 as a reason not to participate in this study. That notwithstanding,
Ecobank Ghana Limited was representative of the Ghana banking industry because of its
wide geographical spread across the country and its long-standing operations since 1990.
The bank also satisfied all Bank of Ghana requirements.
The qualitative method was adopted for the study. This was meant to allow the researcher
the opportunity to explore the experiences of employees in respect of finding answers to
the research questions of the study. It also allowed the researcher to probe deeper into
employee perspectives on the subject matter. It was also cost effective and easy to use.
Data was gathered through in-depth telephone interviews with the use of a semi-structured
interview guide. This was appropriate due to the cancellation of flights as a result of Covid
19. As part of the data collecting process, participants were required to answer questions
relating to their understanding of change and their experiences of change relative to
employee engagement, communication, employee commitment to change, role of
managers and resistance to change. In all, 39 employees of Ecobank Ghana Limited,
cutting across all levels and different departments were interviewed. Data were analyzed
using thematic analysis with 5 themes guided by the research questions.
The case study found out that there was no consensus on the understanding of employees
on change and change management which had a potential of adversely affecting the
effective implementation of any change project. The study also found out that the general
feelings of employees with the introduction of change were negative and mostly expressed
as fear, uneasiness, doubtfulness and uncertainty. Majority of employees did not feel
engaged in the change process with the explanation that their views did not matter to
management. Additionally, majority of employees were not satisfied with how change was
communicated to them indicating that, in most cases they got information from the
grapevine. In spite of the above findings, the majority of employees did not resist change
because they did not see the need to resist change, and also for the fear of victimization and
loss of their jobs and position.
Additionally, appreciating the dynamics between the reality of organisational change and
employees Ecobank Ghana Limited is vital to management, policy makers and the industry
regulator. Furthermore, whilst there is considerable literature on change and change
management, not much has been made to tackle and resolve the fears, concerns and
expectations of these changes upon employees of the bank and this has dangerous
implication for the success of future change. Moreover, little evidence exists in the
literature of the positive or negative aspects of change and change management from the
viewpoint of employees and as stakeholders at the receiving end, the success or otherwise
of change and change management rely on how employees accept and buy into the change
initiative.
The study recommends a strategic change framework for Ecobank Ghana Limited in
particular, and the Ghanaian banking industry in general that will potentially guide the
effective initiation, implementation and evaluation of change management within the
industry.
