INCORPORATING THE 3RS (REFINEMENT, 
Antivenom is the only effective treatment for snakebite and comprise
immunoglobulins obtained from venom-immunised horses or sheep. Globally,
more than 45 manufacturers make over 120 snake antivenoms; it is a
regulatory requirement that the venom-neutralising efficacy of all antivenoms
are assessed preclinically. The World Health Organisation (WHO)
recommended preclinical tests of efficacy are the median lethal venom dose
(LD50) and median effective antivenom dose (ED50) assays performed in mice.
They result in substantial pain and suffering to the mice with death/survival as
their metric. With NC3R-funding, we sought to apply the Refine, Reduce and
Replace principles of animal experimentation to these murine assays.
Pain is a near-universal symptom of snake envenoming, and one of our
objectives was to identify an effective analgesic that could be utilised without
invalidating the assay results.  The Mouse Grimace Scale and Activity scores
were used to measure pain. We examined the effects of two opioid analgesics,
buprenorphine and morphine, in a range of venom LD50 and ED50 assays. Both
were effective at reducing pain scores, but death rates were higher in those
which had received buprenorphine, hence morphine is preferable.
We demonstrate that each venom exhibits a distinct set of lesions, the severity
of which appears time and dose dependent, and that the observed murine
pathological lesions show significant similarities to those reported in
envenomed human victims. Applying the 3R principles, we have used
pathological observations, in combination with ante mortem observations, to
establish more humane end-points, consequently reducing the duration of LD50
and ED50 assays from 24 to 6 hours. In addition, we have implemented a dose-
staging element into experimental design in which one dose is given and the
next dose(s) selected based on the results of the previous dose, reducing total
mice required.
To reduce the numbers of assays, and therefore mice, we have shown an
excellent correlation between in vitro binding assays, cytotoxicity neutralisation
assays and in vivo ED50 using antivenoms derived from the same pool of donor
animals. Comparison of the results of in vitro binding assays between 35
different venom/antivenom combinations showed a poor correlation overall,
but the correlation improved when each of five venoms were considered
separately.
The possibility of replacing the in vivo LD50 and ED50 tests, using a cell-based
neutralisation assay was investigated using two cell lines from diverse tissues
of origin, namely VERO epithelial-type cells and neural SH SY5Y. All venoms
studied produced a cytopathic effect in both cell lines, with the VERO cells
being more sensitive to viper venoms and SH SY5Y cells to the effects of
elapid venoms, when both cell lines were grown in co-culture. However,
variability of results made optimisation of a neutralisation assay inadequate for
use as an alternative to in vivo tests.
