Microsoft Word - Feklyunina_thesis.doc
This study seeks to analyse the impact of the perceived, projected and self-images of a state
on its foreign and domestic policies. It approaches this problem by exploring the evolution
of international images of the Russian Federation in the West in the years of Vladimir
Putins presidency (2000-2008) and by examining attempts by the Russian authorities to
improve them with the help of foreign propaganda. Russian political elites have always
been very sensitive to perceptions of Russia in Western Europe and later in the United
States of America. Following the collapse of the Soviet Union, Russias images in Western
countries underwent significant transformation. Although relatively positive in the early
1990s, they became more negative towards the end of Boris Yeltsins presidency before
reaching their negative peak during Putins second presidential term. The energetic
efforts of the Russian authorities in the years of Putins presidency to promote a more
favourable image of the country provide extremely rich material for analysis, which has
largely not yet been utilised in the academic literature.
To facilitate the analysis of Russias perceived images and the effectiveness of foreign
propaganda, the thesis includes two case studies that examine the issues at question in
greater detail in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Federal
Republic of Germany. Based on extensive primary research (elite interviewing and
discourse analysis), the study seeks to make a three-fold contribution to the academic
literature. Firstly, it is the first systematic examination of Russian foreign propaganda in the
post-Soviet period. By analysing Russias attempts to improve its image in the international
arena, the thesis contributes to the literature in the field of International Political
Communication that has already examined public diplomacy campaigns conducted by
other, mainly Western, countries. Secondly, it aims to provide a deeper insight into the role
of subjective, non-material factors in Russian foreign policy. Finally, it seeks to make a
contribution to the social constructivist IR literature by presenting a theoretical analysis of
the role of national images in international relations.
