Detection of trapped survivors in 
Every few years an earthquake of high magnitude occurs around the globe resulting in
collapsed structures with people trapped inside them. The seismic research method has
the potential to detect physical movement or signals by measuring vibration due to
structure  borne sound using seismic sensors. The placement and positioning of these
sensors is critical for the successful detection of the survivors and prediction models
could be developed and used as a tool to assist in the decision making of the rescue
teams. This thesis investigates the potential to use Statistical Energy Analysis (SEA)
to model the vibration transmission between structural members of a collapsed
reinforced concrete building in order to find trapped survivors.
Experimental Modal Analysis (EMA) was carried out to validate finite element models
of reinforced concrete beam junctions with surface-to-surface contact conditions
which are used to investigate the normal contact stiffness between reinforced concrete
beams. It is shown that the contact stiffness follows a lognormal distribution and that
the mean value could be used as approximation of the contact stiffness in beam
junctions.
An ensemble of 30 random beam junctions was generated for Monte Carlo simulations
with Finite Element Method (FEM) that allowed Experimental Statistical Energy
Analysis (ESEA) to be used to determine Coupling Loss Factors (CLFs) between the
two beams. These were compared with CLFs calculated using an analytical model
based on a lump spring connector (LSC). It was shown that close agreement
(difference within 5 dB) was achieved only for bending waves or torsional waves
between FEM ESEA and the analytical model up to the frequency where half the
bending or torsional wavelength equalled the longest side of the contact area. When
all wave types were combined, reasonable agreement (difference within 10 dB) can be
achieved at frequencies below 900 Hz.
FEM, SEA path analysis and general SEA matrix solutions were used to estimate
vibration transmission in piles of beams using both FEM ESEA CLFs and CLFs from
an analytical model of a lump spring connector. It was shown that SEA is more
accurate when the number of transmission paths increases and that reasonable
agreement is achieved between SEA and FEM up to 700 Hz for the majority of the
beams in the piles.
Additionally, an ensemble of 30 randomly damaged beam-to-column junctions was
generated using a Monte Carlo simulation with FEM. This allows an assessment of
ESEA with two or three subsystems to be used to determine the CLFs between the
beam and the column considering either only bending modes or the combination of all
modes. It is shown that the bending modes are dominating the dynamic response of
the junctions over the combination of all the modes and that the uncertainty of
predicting the CLFs using FEM ESEA is sufficiently low that it should be feasible to
estimate the coupling even when the exact angle between the beam and the column is
unknown. In addition, the use of two instead of three subsystems for the junction
significantly decreases the number of negative coupling loss factors in FEM ESEA
indicating that the two-subsystem model provides a reasonable basis on which to build
an SEA model.
For the one who changed my perspective on life,
for .
