Glasgow Theses Service 
The route of the witness through the criminal justice system, from identification to testimony,
has always been fraught with difficulty.  There are innumerable sources of influence,
intimidation and manipulation which can affect a witnesss performance at any point on this
pathway.  In recent years, and in an effort to resolve several of the issues surrounding
witness performance, the British Government have introduced a number of legislative
measures to improve performance at identity parades and enhance the court experience of
vulnerable witnesses and thereby improve the quality of their testimony.  While it seems that
these measures have been generally well received, there remain some valid questions over
their implementation and whether they are eliciting the desired effects.
The sequential identity parade system, V.I.P.E.R. was devised primarily as a cost-cutting
procedural change by West Yorkshire Police in 1999. However, V.I.P.E.R.s design was
heavily influenced by the large extant literature declaring a sequential superiority effect for
target absent parades.  Specifically, the data claim that sequential identity parades
significantly reduce the rate of false identifications from target absent parades whilst
preserving hit rates for target present parades.  Yet all of the studies purporting this effect
have used a very different procedure to that employed by V.I.P.E.R.; these studies use, and
recommend, a strict sequential procedure whilst UK legislation requires V.I.P.E.R. parades
to be shown twice.  Thus the effects of using a V.I.P.E.R. parade upon rates of identification
and misidentifications have yet to be empirically investigated.  The results of this study
revealed that there was no significant effect of parade presentation mode upon rates of
correct identifications for target present parades or the rate of mistaken identifications in
target absent parades.
The next step for many witnesses is the progression of their case to trial.  The incidence of
intimidation and vulnerability of adult witnesses appears to be increasing and so a range of
Special Measures, more commonly used with child witnesses, were extended to adult
witnesses who meet legislative criteria.  However, there again has been no investigation into
the effects the use of the Special Measures for adult witnesses has upon jurors perceptions
of that witness, the defendant and, if there is a change in perceptions, whether they are
substantive enough to alter the trial verdict.  The current experiments revealed that the use
of a screen does not significantly alter jurors perceptions and had no effect on conviction
rates.  The use of live CCTV links led the witness to be perceived as less credible but again
this did not affect the verdict.  It is the use of pre-recorded video evidence which raises the
most concern; witnesses testifying in this manner are perceived as significantly less credible
and believable which in turn has a significant effect upon conviction rates.   However, when
tested in a deliberating jury group situation, all the Special Measures were associated with
the witness being perceived as more credible compared to the control condition, although
these differences were not significant, and there was no significant effect upon the rate of
guilty verdicts across all conditions.
Overall, it appears that the implementation of both of these legislative steps have had
varying degrees of success.  While the V.I.P.E.R. identity parade procedure has reduced
running costs it appears that there are no significant differences between V.I.P.E.R. and
simultaneous procedures for either target present or target absent identity parades.
Conversely, it appears that the introduction of the Special Measures for vulnerable adult
witnesses has been largely well received and tentatively successful in reducing witness
anxiety.  The data suggest that there are no significant negative effects associated with
using these Special Measures, certainly under the more ecologically valid condition of the
deliberating jury group.  Nevertheless, a series of policy recommendations have been made
for both identity parade and testimony procedures with the aim of further enhancing the
witnesss performance and experience through the criminal justice system.
