Final Emily E Stanton Theorising the Practical Knowledge of Grassroots and Civil Society Peacebuilding.pdf
Scholars	and	practitioners	increasingly	advocate	that	attention	be	paid	to	bottom-
up	grassroots	and	civil	society	peacebuilding	to	ensure	legitimacy,	relevance	and
sustainability.		Northern	Ireland	is	well	positioned	to	add	insights	from	its	own	50-
year	history	of	bottom-up	efforts.	However,	despite	its	length	and	a	substantial
financial	investment	from	donors,	knowledge	from	practical	peacebuilding	has	been
underutilised.	Local	practitioners	have,	instead,	been	described	in	academic
literature	as	lacking	in	strategy	and	coherence.	Seeking	to	address	this	gap,	this
research,	using	a	qualitative	inductive	approach,	investigated	what	peacebuilders
have	learned	from	their	applied	practice	spanning	the	years	1965-2015.
Insights	from	the	research	findings	were	found	to	echo	scholarly	debates	about
knowledge	production	for	peace,	such	as:	Whose	knowledge	counts?	What	kind
of	knowledge	matters?		Critical	peace	scholars,	identifying	a	technocratic	turn	in
liberal	peacebuilding,	argue	that	it	privileges	international	actors	and	thematic
knowledge	over	local	actors	and	local	knowledge.	In	Northern	Ireland	peacebuilding
was	locally-led;	however,	tensions	associated	with	professionalisation	remain	and
at	times,	are	viewed	to	subordinate	practical	knowledge.
This	thesis	argues	that	grassroots	and	civil	society	peacebuilders	hold	valid	and
valuable	knowledge	but	to	understand,	explain	and	maximise	its	use	-	an
epistemological	rediscovery	is	necessary.		The	Aristotelian	term,	phronesis	(practical
wisdom)	is	adopted	as	an	explanatory	frame	and	conceptualised	as	a	form	of
nuanced	context-knowledge	gained	by	experience.	Phronesis	was	evidenced	in	the
fieldwork	data	as	necessary	to	lever,	lubricate	and	catalyse	social	change.	As	a
conceptual	frame,	its	salience	for	knowledge	production	was	proven	by:	adding
explanatory	power;	as	a	source	for	innovation;	and	for	theory	building.	Importantly,
phronesis	also	amplifies	debates	demonstrating	why	local	knowledge	is	necessary
for	peacebuilding	relevancy.	This	thesis	concludes	that	evidence	demonstrates	the
importance	of	the	conceptualisation	of	phronesis	for	expanding	current	scholarship
on	bottom-up,	grassroots	and	civil	society	peacebuilding	in	Northern	Ireland	and
internationally.
