A Reinforcement Learning  Quality of Service 
The Internet of Things (IoT) ecosystem is characterised by heterogeneous devices dynamically
interacting with each other to perform a specific task, often without human intervention. This
interaction typically occurs in a service-oriented manner and is facilitated by an IoT
middleware. The service provision paradigm enables the functionalities of IoT devices to be
provided as IoT services to perform actuation tasks in critical-safety systems such as
autonomous, connected vehicle system and industrial control systems.
As IoT systems are increasingly deployed into an environment characterised by continuous
changes and uncertainties, there have been growing concerns on how to resolve the Quality of
Service (QoS) contentions between heterogeneous devices with conflicting preferences to
guarantee the execution of mission-critical actuation tasks. With IoT devices with different
QoS constraints as IoT service providers spontaneously interacts with IoT service consumers
with varied QoS requirements, it becomes essential to find the best way to establish and manage
the QoS agreement in the middleware as a compromise in the QoS could lead to negative
consequences.
This thesis presents a QoS negotiation framework, IoTQoSystem, for IoT service-oriented
middleware. The QoS framework is underpinned by a negotiation process that is modelled as
a Markov Decision Process (MDP). A model-based Reinforcement Learning negotiation
strategy is proposed for generating an acceptable QoS solution in a dynamic, multilateral and
multi-parameter scenarios. A microservice-oriented  negotiation architecture  is developed that
combines  negotiation, monitoring and forecasting  to provide a  self-managing mechanism  for
ensuring the successful execution of actuation tasks in an IoT environment. Using a case study,
the developed QoS negotiation framework was evaluated using real-world data sets with
different negotiation scenarios to illustrate its scalability,  reliability and performance.
