Transforming earth and fire: new narratives of identity and place in the Northern Ireland peace process
This thesis explores the cultural geographies of peacebuilding through a study of
Belfast, Northern Ireland. I investigate the connections between transformations of
contested landscapes, shifting meanings of place, and new narratives of identity and
belonging emerging through the Northern Ireland peace process. The aims of my
research serve two theoretical objectives: first, to examine how transformations of
contested cultural landscapes provoke new perceptions of place and geographic scale;
and second, to examine how these transformations shape the expression, creation and
negotiation of identity in societies emerging from violent conflict. For this project, I
have developed a collaborative, qualitative methodological approach that combines
semi-structured interviews and participant observation. I ground my research in case
studies of two contested landscapes, both of which bear symbolic and material weight
from Northern Irelands thirty-year civil war. The first case study explores republican
cultural identities in relation to Divis Mountain, the highest point in Belfast, as it
transitions from a British military base to a public recreational resource. The second
case study focuses on peacetime transformations of the contentious 11th Night bonfire
tradition and their implications for shifting expressions of loyalist cultural identity.
Crucially, I cross-cut these case studies with a third strand of inquiry that explores
transformations of contested landscapes in relation to identities and ideas of
belonging among Northern Irelands growing minority ethnic populations. I position
this project as a challenge to existing models of analysis for Northern Ireland. By
opening the dominant Protestant-Catholic binary to explore the less-studied
perspectives of ethnic minorities, I highlight the diversity of cultural identities
emerging in post-ceasefire Belfast. I argue that practice in and scholarship on
Northern Ireland must expand beyond traditional, binary conceptualizations of
sectarian conflict to acknowledge how diverse relationships, identities and
communities are vital to the process of building peace.
