Characterization of FER1L5, a novel dysferlin
The ferlins are mammalian homologues of the C-elegans sperm vesicle fusion protein FER-1
characterised by multiple C2 domains and a C-terminal anchor. To date three human ferlin
proteins, dysferlin, myoferlin and otoferlin have been characterized. Dysferlin and myoferhn
have a role in muscle membrane fusion. Dysferlin mutations cause muscular dystrophy and
are associated with defective sarcolemmal repair. Myoferlin has a role in myogenesis.
Through bioinformatic analysis our group identified a novel ferlin, FER1L5, which by
homology modelling and sequence analysis showed highest similarity with dysferlin and
myoferlin. Previously, FER1L5 gene expression was shown to be elevated during C2C12
myoblast fusion. This led to the hypothesis that PERILS may have a role in muscle membrane
fusion. In this study this was investigated in the C2C12 cell line using a specific polyclonal
antibody to FER1L5. FER1L5 was shown to be present in vesicles. By biochemical
fractionation FER1L5 was detected in low density vesicles the membranes of which were
non-resistant to non-ionic detergent. The fractionation data showed that FER1L5, dysferlin
md myoferlin vesicles have similar properties. By immunolabelling FER1L5 was shown to be
present in distinct vesicles in myotubes compared to dysferlin and myoferlin respectively.
During myoblast fusion FER1L5 expression was detected at all stages and high expression
was observed at membrane fusion sites of fusing myoblasts. FER1L5 (but also dysferlin and
myoferlin) showed a nuclear distribution during myoblast fiision. In myotube nuclei FER1L5
was localized to subnuclear bodies sensitive to actinomycin D. Using the C3H-ER-MyoD cell
line, I have shown that FER1L5 is not an early marker of muscle differentiation. The role of
FER1L5 in muscle membrane fiision was investigated by examining the fusion index and
membrane repair ability of C2C12 cells following PERILS inhibition. PERILS was shown to
be required for myoblast fusion and membrane repair.
In this study, I have also shown that C2C12 myotubes are active in membrane shedding.
Using live cell imaging and confocal analysis, MVB like structures containing ferlin vesicles
were shown to be released extracellularly from C2C12 myotubes. EM studies confirmed these
findings.
Overall my data shows that PERILS has a role in muscle membrane fusion. My work
highlights that further studies on PERILS are required for example to determine i f PERILS a
therapeutic target in dysferlinopathy and to identify the mechanisms involved in PERILS
mediated membrane fusion.
