THE GEOCHEMISTRY OF RIVER WATERS IN FORMER 
Inductively coupled plasma - mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) has been applied to a
reconnaissance survey of river water geochemistry in former metalliferous mining
areas of mid- and north Wales. A semi-quantitative method of analysis, with a single
internal standard, was used which is a rapid and sensitive technique with detection
limits <1 tgL-1 for many elements and provides values which agree with fully
quantitative results to within 30%, while agreement is often much better than this.
Abandoned metal mines and waste tips throughout Wales are a continuing source of
environmental contamination. Metals such as Pb, Zn, Cu, Cd, Co and Ni have been
found in river waters reflecting the presence of weathering sulphide minerals.
Differences in background geology also influence the river water geochemistry
between the study areas, in particular the buffering capacity, which is a function of
the Ca and Mg content. This in turn controls the pH and the impact of acidic and/or
metal contaminated inputs. The carbonate gangue content of mineral veins also has an
important role in buffering mine and tip drainage by partly neutralising acidity
released by the oxidation of FeS2 minerals.
Examination of seasonal changes in geochemistry has been made in 3 main areas
around Coed y Brenin, Llangynog and Flint between November 1989 and July 1991.
The range of element concentrations at individual sites often vary by a factor of 2
and, in some cases, may be upto several orders of magnitude. In general, Ca and Mg
show patterns of high summer/low winter concentrations reflecting dilution in wetter
winter months and reduced dissolution of basic ions with increasing throughflow.
Metals such as Zn, Pb, Cu, Cd, Al, Mn and Ba, however, tend to show low
summer/high winter patterns due to a washing out effect with increasing rainfall
inputs. PH also plays an important role with increases in acidic inputs from organic
matter during winter aiding metal dissolution. Such seasonal variation must be taken
into account if waters are to be used for geochemical mapping. '
