The Relationship Between 
The thesis asks what the reading processes are through which children and
adults both use and transfonn their culture and how these processes relate to
our understanding of what reading is and how it is defmed. In order to address
the question, a polysemic picture-book, The Tunnel (Anthony Browne, 1989),
was selected as a dual-address, pluralist text, to be read with groups of
Bangladeshi children from the London borough of Tower Hamlets and children
from rural Sussex. The researcher's own reading fIrst looked at the levels of
meaning created by the relationship between the words and pictures and how
these are revealed by the graphic codes. The text was read as an account of the
relationship between inner and outer reality, dealing with unconscious fears
and desires of growing up and using archetypal and kenotypal imagery to
develop the theme. Literary theories are then discussed which may have
explanatory power for such a reading and the processes by which meanings are
constructed, including psychoanalytic theory and those perspectives in which
the reading process is seen as a partnership which privileges the reader.
Children's literature is discussed in the light of these theories, and the need is
seen for texts that will themselves provide reading lessons for readers who are
still developing.
Literary theory sees reading as a partnership in which both text and
reader are culturally constituted, but both have the power to transfonn each
other. Having discussed reading, the study then considers readers and the social
context for their reading, discussing the tenn 'culture' with reference to
Vygotskian theories of the intemalisation of social processes, and cultural and
multicultural studies which may illuminate differences in the children's
reading.
8arthes's semiotic codes are seen as an appropriate coding system for
the analysis of layers of meaning in both the text and the children's readings of
it. Analysis indicates differences in their interpretation of cultural detail and
intertext and in understanding of the polysemic nature of the text: there was
also resistance to the theme of gender in all groups of children. Nevertheless
there were also marked similarities in approach and the text enabled all Groups
actively to construct meanings in the context of their own literary, cultural and
personal experiences. The thesis concludes, therefore, that such polysemic texts
have power for all children and should be an integral part of their literary
experience.
IMAGES ON PAGES 1, iv, 131,
