i Hi, U N i V . Ki> 1 i i
Envenoming by the African saw scaled viper, Echis ocellatus causes 23,000 deaths each
year in West Africa. Envenoming results in massive haemorrhagic and necrotic morbidity
in the short term and often in permanent disfigurement and renal dysfunction in the long
term. The only effective treatment is the administration o f  antivenom prepared from horses
and sheep immunised with whole venom. Although life-saving, antivenoms contain
numerous redundant antibodies that dilute the effectiveness o f  the toxin-specific antibodies.
To address this deficiency, our group have initiated a project to develop a DNA
immunisation strategy to generate a panel o f  toxin-specific antibodies to neutralise
haemostasis-disruptive toxins in the venom o f  the most medically important vipers in
Africa.
The objective o f  my research project was therefore to generate, using DNA immunisation,
antibodies specific to the major haemostasis-disruptive toxins in venom o f  E. ocellatus.
Because cDNAs encoding these haemostasis-disruptive toxins were not present in the
genetic databases, it was necessary for me to create an E. ocellatus venom gland cDNA
library to isolate cDNA sequences encoding these toxins, including snake venom
metalloproteases [SVMPs], C-type lectins [CTLs], serine proteases and phospholipase A 2
[PLA2S]. Utilising a PCR approach to isolate cDNAs encoding such toxins was highly
successful and resulted in a significant contribution to the literature and genetic databases
concerning SVMPs, PLA2 CTL and serine proteases. The deduced amino acid sequences
o f  the E. ocellatus cDNAs encoded proteins with high overall sequence similarity to the
viper group II PLA2 protein family, the a  and p CTL subunits in venoms o f  related Asian
and American vipers, kinin-releasing and fibrinogen-clotting serine proteases from venom
o f  B. jararaca  and a prothrombin-activating metalloproteinase from the venom o f  the East
African viper, respectively. Moreover, the data obtained in this study showed that the E.
ocellatus genome contains several, nearly identical, copies o f  these genes that differ only
by a small number o f  amino acid residues.
The high degree o f  sequence conservation o f  these E. ocellatus toxins with analogous
molecules from related vipers extended to the conservation o f  structural domains,
predicted to have high immunogenic potential. Thus, my next task was to prepare DNA
immunisation constructs from the cDNAs that encoded E. ocellatus SVMP, CTL and
serine protease toxins. To achieve this, one o f  the cDNA sequences encoding the carboxyl-
disintegrin cystine-rich domain [EoDC] o f  the prothrombin activator, was incorporated
within the mammalian expression plasmid pSecTag-B. Mice immunised with the EoDC
DNA construct responded with high titres o f  IgG. The results showed that the epidermal
route o f  DNA delivery by Gene Gun was superior in inducing high IgG titres over
intradermal or intramuscular injection. The cellular responses o f  the DNA immunised mice
was not examined in this study because the ultimate intent was to generate antibodies for
passive serotherapy and not for vaccine purposes. Furthermore, the results showed that the
EoDC-specific antibody reacted with analogous molecules in venoms o f  a variety o f  Echis
species. This result was predicted from analysis o f  the antigenic index profile. Thus, results
suggest that the structural conservation o f  venom toxins from phylogenetically-distinct
vipers can be exploited by this toxin-specific antivenom production approach to generate
antivenoms with remarkable potential.
