JUSTICE IN THE AFTERMATH OF THE 1994 RWANDA GENOCIDE: A STUDY OF GACACA COURTS 
This thesis considers the transitional justice process that followed the aftermath of the
1994 Rwanda genocide. Because both the Rwandan Government and the international
community through the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda opted for prosecution of
alleged perpetrators responsible for the genocide, this thesis primarily considers this
prosecution process, its achievements and hardships.
The thesis considers prosecution of genocide, an international crime in domestic law
and in particular, the role played by the Gacaca process. It analyses the Gacaca process, what
it aims to achieve, how it proposes to achieve it and whether it has actually achieved these
objectives. The Gacaca process particularly aims to disclose the truth of what happened in the
1994 Rwanda genocide, speed up genocide trials in an inexpensive manner, eradicate the
culture of impunity and lastly but by all means not least, reconcile and strengthen the
Rwandan people.
The Gacaca process seeks to achieve this through modified traditional courts which
involve the whole population. These trials are held in the very community alleged
perpetrators, survivors and their judges live. As such, the thesis, through empirical data
collected for six months in 2006, considers how Gacaca trials impact on the very
communities in which people live.
Gacaca's main driving force is its confession process where the accused is given
tremendously reduced sentences in exchange for a confession. In so doing, the accused
provides important evidence for the prosecution, but also provides answers to survivors who
want to know the truth of what happened to their loved ones. Through this process, the
accused is also expected to make a public apology for the crimes he committed. In exchange
for a confession, accused persons receive reduced sentences which also help to reduce prison
population.
The thesis is built on two major themes: justice and reconciliation. It analyses how
these interrelated themes interact and, or conflict. Because the Gacaca process aims to
achieve both objectives, this thesis considers whether these have indeed been achieved
through transitional justice.
The research draws on already existing literature on the subject and empirical data
collected in Rwanda for a six month period between March and August 2006. Interviews
were held with survivors of genocide, government officials, Gacaca judges and alleged
perpetrators both in prisons and those living in the communities. In addition, the researcher
conducted court observations in towns and villages.
From the research methodology used, this thesis argues that a society going through a
transition, especially after genocide on a scale like Rwanda's, not only needs to prosecute for
the crimes committed, but also need to reconcile its people. It is only through justice and
reconciliation that people can live together again in peaceful and stable communities. It
concludes that although the Gacaca process has its difficulties, it is the only hope Rwanda has
to achieve these objectives.
