EVERYDAY ETHNICITIES 
This thesis is an ethnography of the categories "Hutu" and "Tutsi" in Rwanda, a decade
after the 1994 genocide. It firstly traces the historical production of these identities and
reconsiders the relationship between "ethnicity" and violence in Rwanda. Although the
genocide resulted from a complex culmination of factors, it argues that the specific way
the identities "Hutu" and "Tutsi" were constructed was significant in the production of
violence. Over time, particular essentialist stereotypes became attached to these
categories and were a powerful factor in mobilising civilians to participate in the killing.
The thesis then explores how the categories "Hutu" and "Tutsi" are understood, used
and experienced in the everyday lives of young Rwandans living in contemporary
Kigali. Despite current state policies that seek to de-emphasise "ethnic" identities, it
demonstrates that the categories "Hutu" and "Tutsi" remain salient. Although other
social identities are important and some young Rwandans are forging inter- `ethnic" ties,
the thesis reveals their persistent need to uncover the "ethnic" identity of significant
others. It explores the complexities and contradictions of everyday processes of "ethnic"
identification and demonstrates the worrying persistence of essentialist stereotypes
about "the Hutu" and "the Tutsi". It juxtaposes these "conceptual" stereotypes, the more
complex, uncertain "concrete" reality inhabited by young Rwandans, and their diverse,
often contradictory, narratives about the past.
The thesis then examines young people's perspectives on "reconciliation" in Rwanda
and how various government initiatives impact on their lives. It concludes that current
approaches to reconciliation are not addressing negative aspects of the "ethnic" logic
that persists in Rwanda and, in some cases, may inadvertently entrench them. Whilst
these "ethnic" myths and stereotypes alone will not produce further violence, they
suggest that any recurrence of violence would once again have "ethnic" targets and, if
unchecked, could again take place on a large scale.
