THE DETERMINATION OF PROTONA TION STATES IN PROTEINS 
A large area of biological research is targeted at detennining exactly how enzymes
work at a mechanistic level. The results of such investigations are of interest to
pharmaceutical companies for drug development, for example for the inhibition of
enzymes involved in disease. They are also of interest to industry, especially where
there is a need to commercialise a natural process. Furthermore determination of the
mechanisms of these processes is also valuable academically.
Although much research is focused on the classic structure-function relationship of
enzymes, the details of protonation states are generally unavailable from classical
structural determination methods (namely X-ray crystallography), they are however
important. The mechanisms of many enzyme catalysed reactions involve proton
transfer, and consequently research into protonation state determination is becoming
more commonplace. For example, the action of the serine protease family involves a
catalytic mechanism in which protons are transferred. Enzymes in this family are
responsible for the proteolysis of peptide bonds, and as such are involved in many
biological processes such as digestion and blood clotting. Serine proteases are one of
the most well studied families of pro teases and includes proteins such as trypsin and
subtilisin. Its precise mechanism of action has been debated for over 50 years.
Another important family of proteins is that of the aspartic proteases, which includes
proteins such as endothiapepsin and the critically important HIV -1 protease, the
protein responsible for the fonnation of the infectious HIV virus particle. The
mechanism of action again involves the transfer of protons, and a clear
understanding of this mechanism is important for HIV antiviral drug development.
These two families of enzymes and their mechanisms are discussed in the following
section.
A number of experimental techniques allow the determination of protonation states
in proteins. These include ultra-high resolution X-ray protein crystallography,
neutron protein crystallography, and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy. Furthermore, protonation states can be predicted from estimated pKa
values if the pH of crystallisation is known, however this requires the protein
structure to have already been determined via X-ray crystallography" or NMR
solution structure determination. NMR is limited in its scope as it is generally only
possible to use it to study small proteins due to the complex nature of the spectra
obtainedl . X-ray crystallography requires sub-atomic resolution for determination of
protonation states directly from electron density maps2, although protonation states
information can be inferred using analysing of bond length changes at around 1.0-
1.5A resolution3 Neutron protein crystallography provides a direct method to
determine protonation states in proteins even at modest resolutions of 2-3A 4,
however the limitation of this technique is that large sample volumes are required
and it is beneficial if the sample is perdeuterated.
In this thesis the use of three protonation state determination techniques are
considered; firstly, determination from bond length analysis of high resolution X-ray
crystallographic data, secondly, determination from neutron protein crystallography
and fmalIy, inferred protonation states from prediction methods using estimated pKa
values. These techniques have been used to determine the protonation states in a
number of proteins including classic test cases such as lysozyme and trypsin, as well
as a more recent and important case, that of myosin binding protein C, a muscle
protein implicated in Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (HCM).
1.1 Examples of protein families with mechanisms involving the transfer
of protons
