According to Richard English, one of the most conspicuous features of the scholarly 
literature in recent years has been the lack of scrutiny which certain subjects have 
received  subject(s) which the explosion of the Northern Irish conflict might have 
been expected to stimulate (English, 1996, p.221). One subject, which has received 
little academic consideration, despite recent developments, has been the area of 
unionism and human rights in Northern Ireland. The overall aim of this thesis is to 
investigate and consider the attitudes of influential strands of unionist opinion towards 
the concept of human rights as that narrative as been applied and interpreted in 
Northern Ireland.  
In order to consider fully the position of influential strands of unionist opinion on 
human rights, the thesis does this firstly, through theoretical engagement with what is 
meant by the concept of human rights and an examination of unionist political 
thought. Secondly, through examining the practical application of human rights in 
Northern Ireland, which means investigating the position of influential strands of 
unionist opinion on a Northern Ireland Bill of Rights (pre and post Belfast 
Agreement) and the relationship of key unionist elites with the Northern Ireland 
Human Rights Commission (NIHRC). 
The thesis poses four interconnected and overlapping questions. Firstly, are influential 
strands of unionist opinion sceptical and suspicious of human rights as that concept as 
been interpreted and applied in Northern Ireland? Secondly, if unionists have 
expressed anxiety, what aspects of human rights discourse in Northern Ireland are key 
unionist elites sceptical of? Thirdly, is this anxiety universal or do significant 
cleavages within unionism exist? Fourthly, why are unionists anxious about human 
rights discourse in Northern Ireland? 
This thesis aims to address the absence of any research or academic study of this area 
of Northern Ireland politics and in doing so increase our knowledge and 
understanding of unionisms relationship with this particular aspect of the peace 
process in Northern Ireland and of recent debates about the protection of human rights 
in Northern Ireland. It also aims to move beyond the anecdotal and rhetorical manner 
in which this area has been presented in the academic literature and in popular 
political discourse and develop a deeper understanding than currently exists about the 
nature of the relationship between key unionist elites and human rights in Northern 
Ireland.   