The Belfast Peace Walls: 
Since the first paramilitary ceasefires in 1994 the peace and political processes in
Northern Ireland have addressed several politically sensitive issues such as policing,
paramilitary decommissioning, and power sharing. However, one issue that has
been absent from both processes is that of the peace walls. These physical lines of
demarcation were constructed by the British government from 1969 in response to
sectarian violence and disorder. No peace walls have ever been removed, and they
continue to dominate the landscapes of Loyalist and Republican working class
communities. However, for the first time in recent history, Northern Irelands
elected representatives, through the recently devolved Ministry of Justice, have
policy responsibility for the peace walls. To date, there has been no locally
developed policy framework or strategy on the peace walls, nor does it appear that
peace walls are even on the NI Executives agenda.
There is no evidence to suggest that the physical barriers will simply disappear and
so public policy decisions will, at some point, have to be taken in relation to the
future of these walls. Mindful of this reality, this dissertation seeks to place the issue
of peace walls into the narrative of the Northern Ireland conflict and the subsequent
peace and political processes through the lens of public policy theory and practice.
Using Belfasts peace walls as a case study, the thesis applies Kingdons Multiple
Streams Approach to explore the problems, policies and politics that surround the
issue of peace walls, while also considering the necessary conditions required to
generate a window of opportunity to place peace walls onto the decision-making
agenda of the NI Executive.
As the research shows, for a window of opportunity to emerge there needs to be
collective agreement at the micro level between Loyalist and Republican
communities that peace walls are a problem that require some form of government
intervention. Furthermore, there needs to be a willingness to take ownership of the
operational delivery and implementation of a policy process for the peace walls at
the meso level involving local government and private investors with local
knowledge, expertise and innovation driving the process. And finally, at the macro
level there also needs to be a moratorium on the construction and strengthening of
peace walls, along with and a cross party consensus on the need to develop a policy
framework that provides communities and local government with the confidence
and political legitimacy to participate in a policy process on peace walls.
