Cellular effects of protease inhibitor concentrates from 
Prostate cancer is the most prevalent male cancer in the United Kingdom. The etiology
of prostate cancer is complex and multifactorial, with diet appearing to play a crucial
role in disease prevention. Diets consumed in Westernized societies are rich in fats
and processed foods, while diets consumed in Asia, where prostate cancer incidence is
comparatively lower, are rich in plant based foods. Epidemiological evidence supports
the protective role of legumes and pulses, such as soybean, against prostate
carcinogenesis. A putative chemo-preventive agent present in soybean and legumes is
the Bowman-Birk Inhibitor (BBI), a protease inhibitor whose anti-cancer potential has
been demonstrated in in vitro and in vivo models , including prostate cancer. The aim of
this thesis was to investigate the effects of soybean and chickpea protease inhibitor
concentrates (PICs) in LNCaP, DU 145 and PC-3 prostate cancer cell models that
represented differing stages of carcinogenesis, namely initiation, promotion and
metastasis. A pilot in vivo study was also carried out in mice injected with DU 145 cells
to investigate the effect on  tumour mass growth. Our study highlights  anti-genotoxic
activity of chickpea PIC that induced a reduction in H2O2-induced DNA strand breaks
assessed by the Comet assay in LNCaP cells. Both PICs proved effective against cancer
promotion, decreasing cell proliferation in all three cell lines in vitro, with cell-cycle
arrest apparent at the S phase in PC-3 cells  The findings suggest that soybean PIC may
possess anti-metastatic activity given the observed inhibition of  highly invasive PC-3
cells through Matrigel and associated down-regulation of MMP-1. A beneficial
modulation of genes linked to the initiation, promotion and progression stages of
prostate carcinogenesis was observed. In conclusion, our study supports the role of PICs
as anti-cancer agents against prostate cancer and suggests possible mechanisms of
actions accounting for the observed effects.
