The Contribution of Psychological Resources in the 
Research suggests that in order to be creative and weather organisational changes, employees need
to feel psychologically safe (Edmondson, 1999). And yet today, many organisations operate in such a
way as to confound this: constant change, matrix structures, poor leadership and job insecurity
undermine mechanisms that can create Psychological Safety.
Psychological Safety has been considered a group construct (Edmondson, 1999). This study adds to
the field by investigating the role of Psychological Safety at an individual level, hypothesising that the
greater the individuals psychological resources, the greater their levels of Psychological Safety.
The study measured psychological resources using three models: Kahns (1990) Psychological
Dimensions, Goods (2009) Cognitive Flexibility and the Psychological Capital (PsyCap) model
(Luthans & Church, 2002). Extant research suggests that resilience is a result of the leveraging of
resources, therefore the role of resilience in the Psychological Capital model was hypothesised to sit
outside of the Psychological Capital model.
Focus groups, a student pilot study (N=40) and an employee study (N=160) supported the hypothesis
that resilience sits outside the Psychological Capital model. Results showed that attitudes of
Optimism and Hope predicted Psychological Safety and Self-Efficacy, Hope and Attentional Control
predicted Resilience. Underlying each of these were emotional resources, cognitive resources,
openness and self-consciousness. The greater the level of psychological resources, the more positive
the attitude and the greater the Psychological Safety and Resilience scores.  A mixed methods
longitudinal study demonstrated skills that enable Hope, Optimism and Self-Efficacy as well as
openness could be developed within a half day workshop.
This research recognises that employees have a role to play in their own Psychological Safety and
resilience. Implications of the research and recommendations based on these findings are then
suggested for organisations and employees. Students were found to have less psychological
resources than employees though this requires further research.
Keywords: Psychological Safety, resilience, psychological resources, self-efficacy, hope, optimism,
cognitive flexibility.
