Drivers and Barriers to Business Growth: A case study of Small Businesses in Nigeria.
Small businesses are the key drivers of most developed and emerging economies
around the world. According to SMEDAN- the governing regulator for Micro, Small and
Medium-sized Enterprises in Nigeria, approximately 55% of the nations gross domestic
product (GDP) and an average of 85% of the registered companies that pay taxes to maintain
social and economic development are small businesses. Literature has highlighted different
factors that influence business growth without recommending key concepts tailored to
developing countries with emerging markets like Nigeria that would enhance sustainable
business growth in Sub-Saharan Africa. This study examines the drivers and barriers to
business growth for small businesses (micro and small-sized enterprises) in Nigeria.
Owners characteristics and firm characteristics are the vital constructs examined for
this research and attention is drawn to the business and management skills of small business
owners. An interpretivist approach was adopted, using Churchill and Lewiss model,
Jovanovics model, and Resource-based view theory. A qualitative data collection approach
was chosen for this study. Data through semi-structured interviews were drawn from 33
MSEs across the country to represent the regions with the highest success rate of small
businesses and the geopolitical zones in Nigeria.
Findings reflect the barriers to growth such as access to finance, basic infrastructures,
and other resources but also highlight the lack of business and management skills of small
business owners. This distinguishes growth for small-sized enterprises identifying growth
drivers such as customer service, innovation, character, staff retention, and leadership. This
study puts forward a framework based on existing models to aid small business owners in
achieving sustainable business growth in Nigeria and sub-Saharan Africa. Limitations to this
study were limited to gaining access to small business owners in a global pandemic (COVID
19). Implications for stakeholders and recommendations are given to policymakers to
enhance communication and support for all small businesses.
Keywords: MSEs, Business growth, Business and Management skills, Owners
characteristics, Firm characteristics.
