Intrusion Detection in SCADA Systems
Modern Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) systems are essential for
monitoring and managing electric power generation, transmission and distribution. In the age
of the Internet of Things, SCADA has evolved into big, complex and distributed systems that
are prone to conventional in addition to new threats. So as to detect intruders in a timely and
efficient manner a real time detection mechanism, capable of dealing with a range of forms of
attacks is highly salient. Such a mechanism has to be distributed, low cost, precise, reliable
and secure, with a low communication overhead, thereby not interfering in the industrial
systems operation.
In this commentary two distributed Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs) which are able to
detect attacks that occur in a SCADA system are proposed, both developed and evaluated
for the purposes of the CockpitCI project. The CockpitCI project proposes an architecture
based on real-time Perimeter Intrusion Detection System (PIDS), which provides the core
cyber-analysis and detection capabilities, being responsible for continuously assessing and
protecting the electronic security perimeter of each CI. Part of the PIDS that was developed
for the purposes of the CockpitCI project, is the OCSVM module. During the duration
of the project two novel OCSVM modules were developed and tested using datasets from
a small-scale testbed that was created, providing the means to mimic a SCADA system
operating both in normal conditions and under the influence of cyberattacks.
The first method, namely K-OCSVM, can distinguish real from false alarms using the
OCSVM method with default values for parameters  and  combined with a recursive
K-means clustering method. The K-OCSVM is very different from all similar methods that
required pre-selection of parameters with the use of cross-validation or other methods that
ensemble outcomes of one class classifiers. Building on the K-OCSVM and trying to cope
with the high requirements that were imposed from the CockpitCi project, both in terms of
accuracy and time overhead, a second method, namely IT-OCSVM is presented. IT-OCSVM
method is capable of performing outlier detection with high accuracy and low overhead
within a temporal window, adequate for the nature of SCADA systems.
The two presented methods are performing well under several attack scenarios. Having to
balance between high accuracy, low false alarm rate, real time communication requirements
and low overhead, under complex and usually persistent attack situations, a combination
of several techniques is needed. Despite the range of intrusion detection activities, it has
been proven that half of these have human error at their core. An increased empirical and
theoretical research into human aspects of cyber security based on the volumes of human
error related incidents can enhance cyber security capabilities of modern systems. In order to
strengthen the security of SCADA systems, another solution is to deliver defence in depth by
layering security controls so as to reduce the risk to the assets being protected.
