Resource allocation in the legume-
The symbiosis between plants of the legume family and nitrogen-fixing rhizobia
underpins global food security. Legume crops are a major source of protein in human
diets, either directly or indirectly as feed for livestock. Application of inoculant rhizobial
strains is common practice in many areas, as plant growth is often nitrogen limited and
the symbiosis can significantly enhance yields. However, rhizobial strains and outcomes
of the symbiosis vary widely. This variation has also been studied by evolutionary
biologists interested in the stability of mutualisms. They proposed that plants may
prevent establishing symbioses with ineffective strains (partner choice), or provide them
with fewer resources (sanctioning). I studied both mechanisms, combining modelling
and experimental approaches.
Mathematical modelling was used to predict how plants should allocate resources
to maximise growth rates, depending on rhizobial nitrogen provision and carbon
requirements and on soil nitrogen conditions. The use of marked mutant strains  easily
distinguishable and differing in a single rhizobial characteristic  overcame previous
experimental difficulties. It was found that pea (Pisum sativum L.) plants are not able to
exert partner choice, but do sanction in a more complex way than was previously
established. In line with model predictions, resources were preferentially allocated to the
single  best available  strain, so that resources allocated to an intermediate-fixing strain
depended on whether or not a strain providing more nitrogen was available. Contrary to
model predictions, there was no indication of discrimination based on rhizobial carbon
requirements.
The results cannot be explained by resource allocation in proportion to nitrogen
received, and indicate systemic integration of information from different nodules. I
formulate a hypothesis about the underlying plant regulatory mechanisms, and discuss
implications of the results for selecting inoculant strains and enhancing yields in the
field. Future work will rely on further integration of theoretical and applied methods and
perspectives.
