SUSTAINABLE ALTERNATIVES TO FISH MEAL AND FISH OIL IN FISH NUTRITION: 
The current general economic and food crises have generated an unsettled future
for food and feed production and prices in general. Increasing demand, prices and
fluctuations in supply in world markets for fishmeal, fish oil, soybean meal, maize and
wheat meal emphasize the need to reduce the dependence of the fish feed industry on
these ingredients by increasing choices among a wider range of raw materials. Legume
seed such as peas, chickpeas and faba beans are promising ingredients for aquafeeds
due to their high protein compared to cereals but also for their energy content. The
objective of the present study was to investigate the use of these legumes in both high
and low inclusion level in diets for the two main species farmed in the Mediterranean
countries namely, European seabass (Dicentrarchus labrax L.) and gilthead seabream
(Sparus aurata L.).
In Chapter 3 the effects of different processing conditions were examined on
whole seed flours of tested ingredients with respect to both nutritional and
antinutritional factors and physical characteristics of the experimental diet pellets
including high and low levels of each legume. Extrusion of raw material resulted in a
clear reduction in trypsin inhibitors (TI) with chickpeas showing a decrease of up to
90% and complete inactivation for wheat flour, while for peas and faba beans reduction
was less than 50% in most cases. Extrusion processing was less effective in the
reduction of phytic acid and total tannins, occasionally reaching 22% and 18%
respectively. Oligosaccharides and total NSP were not drastically affected by
processing, however faba bean NSP showed greater reduction. A redistribution of
soluble and insoluble NSP fractions was noted for chickpea and pea flours after
extrusion. Physical characteristics of the pellets were not negatively affected for any of
the tested diets.
In Experiment I the effects of total or partial wheat substitution by legumes were
investigated on nutrient digestibility, gastrointestinal evacuation rate and serum glucose
response of European seabass. Use of legumes in seabass and seabream diets resulted in
an overall increase in gastrointestinal evacuation time and a delay in glucose load.
Specifically, gastric evacuation time was greatly delayed when seabass was fed a diet
with high levels (30%) of chickpeas, while foregut evacuation time was mostly delayed
by the diet including a high level (30%) of faba beans. In addition, glucose levels in
seabass serum were also affected by the type of carbohydrates ingested with wheat
starch showing more rapid increase and decrease of glucose compared to fish fed pea
and chickpea diets, while faba bean starch resulted in a lower glucose peak.
In Experiment II growth, digestibility, hematological parameters, histological
effects and fillet organoleptic characteristics and the interaction between starch
inclusion level (8% and 16% or 17% and 35% of legumes respectively) and legume
type were estimated when tested legumes replaced wheat in European seabass diets.
Digestibility coefficients were satisfactory for all nutrients (>93%) while legume diets
at a low level had beneficial effects on growth parameters when compared to the control
diet, with chickpeas showing a significant improvement in SGR (P<0.05). High level
legume diets did not result in any negative effect on growth. HSI was increased with
increasing starch/legume inclusion in the feed and serum glucose also increased for fish
fed high levels of faba beans and chickpeas. Carcass proximate composition was not
affected by replacement of wheat in the diets, excluding the increase of fat content in
fish fed chickpeas. Sensory analysis showed no differences between fish fed the control
and high legume inclusion diets.
Lastly in Experiment III growth, hematological parameters, histological effects
and the interaction between starch inclusion level (low and high) and legume type were
evaluated when tested legumes were included in gilthead seabream diets. Decreased,
but not significantly so, growth was observed for all diets including legumes compared
to the control. Poorer SGR were observed for pea and faba bean diets when these
legumes were included at high levels. Liver glycogen increased with increasing starch
level, but HSI did not differ significantly for any of the diet treatments.
Histological examination of hindgut did not show pathological effects, such as
enteritis, for in either species or for any of the diets. Increased absorptive vacuoles were
found for control and pea diets (high level) only for seabass.
The findings of this thesis showed that the two important species cultivated in
Mediterranean countries responded differently to the same raw materials used at high
levels in the diets. Overall legumes had a strong effect on gastrointestinal evacuation
reducing the rate of feed or digesta passage. Peas, chickpeas and faba beans
successfully replaced wheat in seabass diets resulting in improved growth coefficients.
However, when the same legumes included in seabream diets growth performance was
not improved compared to the wheat based diet.
