Studies in Positron and Gamma Ray Production for Future Facilities
The next generation of particle colliders after the LHC (Large Hadron Collider)
at CERN are likely to be high-precision electron positron colliders such as the
ILC (International Linear Collider) or CLIC (Compact Linear Collider). This next
generation of colliders will give new scope to explore particle interactions in more
detail than in current accelerators. However, producing a sufficient numbers of
positrons is a significant challenge. One of the most difficult problems associated
with the production of positrons is designing a production target that will survive
in an intense photon beam while rotating at high speeds to spread out the energy
from the beam. In the first part of this thesis I present a solution to a torque
problem affecting the positron production target of high-energy electron-positrons
colliders. Typically, the target experiences a braking force due to immersing the
wheel inside a strong magnetic field to improve the capture efficiency for positrons.
Using OPERA 3D software, a large number of simulations were performed to
explore the movement of the target wheel inside the field. I developed a new
magnet design which could help to reduce the torque effects. I show that a decrease
in the torque parallel to the drive shaft from 500 Nm to 20 Nm is possible in
principle, while a torque of 10 Nm perpendicular to the drive shaft is predicted.
Also, the baseline design of the ILC (International Linear Collider) positron source
requires the production of an intense flux of gamma rays. In the second part of
this thesis I present an investigation of different magnetic field maps and the tra-
jectories of electrons passing through the undulator. I present an investigation of
using the spent gamma ray beam of the ILC for additional applications, including
nuclear physics. As a result of changing the collimator shape, as well as the pa-
rameters of the undulator magnets, I obtain spectra from numerical simulations
using the HUSR/GSR software package. I show that a narrow bandwidth energy
spectrum of 5% and photon flux of 1013 photon/s is possible in principle.
