Semantic text classification for cancer text mining
Cancer researchers and oncologists benefit greatly from text mining major
knowledge sources in biomedicine such as PubMed. Fundamentally, text mining
depends on accurate text classification. In conventional natural language processing
(NLP), this requires experts to annotate scientific text, which is costly and time
consuming, resulting in small labelled datasets. This leads to extensive feature
engineering and handcrafting in order to fully utilise small labelled datasets, which
is again time consuming, and not portable between tasks and domains.
In this work, we explore emerging neural network methods to reduce the burden
of feature engineering while outperforming the accuracy of conventional pipeline
NLP techniques. We focus specifically on the cancer domain in terms of applications,
where we introduce two NLP classification tasks and datasets: the first task is that
of semantic text classification according to the Hallmarks of Cancer (HoC), which
enables text mining of scientific literature assisted by a taxonomy that explains the
processes by which cancer starts and spreads in the body. The second task is that
of the exposure routes of chemicals into the body that may lead to exposure to
carcinogens.
We present several novel contributions. We introduce two new semantic classifi-
cation tasks (the hallmarks, and exposure routes) at both sentence and document
levels along with accompanying datasets, and implement and investigate a conven-
tional pipelineNLP classification approach for both tasks, performing both intrinsic
and extrinsic evaluation. We propose a new approach to classification using multi-
level embeddings and apply this approach to several tasks; we subsequently apply
deep learning methods to the task of hallmark classification and evaluate its outcome.
Utilising our text classification methods, we develop and two novel text mining
tools targeting real-world cancer researchers. The first tool is a cancer hallmark text
mining tool that identifies association between a search query and cancer hallmarks;
the second tool is a new literature-based discovery (LBD) system designed for the
cancer domain. We evaluate both tools with end users (cancer researchers) and find
they demonstrate good accuracy and promising potential for cancer research.
