DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY
In response to the global drive towards sustainable construction, CLT has emerged as a
competitive alternative to other construction materials. CLT buildings taller than 10-storeys
and CLT buildings in regions of moderate to high seismicity would be subject to higher lateral
loads due to wind and earthquakes than CLT buildings which have already been completed.
The lack of structural design codes and limited literature regarding the performance of CLT
buildings under lateral loading are barriers to the adoption of CLT for buildings which could
experience high lateral loading. Previous research into the behaviour of CLT buildings under
lateral loading has involved testing of building components. These studies have generally
been limited to testing wall systems and connections which replicate configurations at
ground floor storeys in buildings no taller than three storeys. Consequently, to develop the
understanding of the performance of multi-storey CLT buildings under lateral loading, the
performance of wall systems and connections which replicate conditions of those in above
ground floor storeys in buildings taller than three storeys were experimentally investigated.
The testing of typical CLT connections involved testing eighteen configurations under cyclic
loading in shear and tension. The results of this experimental investigation highlighted the
need for capacity-based design of CLT connections to prevent brittle failure. It was found that
both hold down and angle bracket connections have strength and stiffness in shear and
tension and by considering the strength of the connections in both directions, more
economical design of CLT buildings could be achieved. The testing of CLT wall systems
involved testing three CLT wall systems with identical configurations under monotonic lateral
load and constant vertical load, with vertical loads replicating gravity loads at storeys within
a 10-storey CLT building. The results show that vertical load has a significant influence on wall
system behaviour; varying the vertical load was found to vary the contribution of
deformation mechanisms to global behaviour within the elastic region, reinforcing the need
to consider connection design at each individual storey.  As there are still no structural design
codes for CLT buildings, the accuracy of analytical methods presented within the literature
for predicting the behaviour of CLT connections and wall systems under lateral loading was
assessed. It was found that the analytical methods for both connections and wall systems are
highly inaccurate and do not reflect experimentally observed behaviour.
