BREWIN - Thesis full_FINAL (for digital repository)
This thesis examines the interaction of Georgian painting and national politics in the
first two decades of Soviet power in Georgia, 1921-1939, focussing in particular on the
period following the consolidation of Stalins power at the helm of the Communist Party in
1926-7. In the Stalin era, Georgians enjoyed special status among Soviet nations thanks to
Georgias prestige as the place of Stalins birth. However, Georgians advanced sense of their
national sovereignty and initial hostility towards Bolshevik control following Georgias
Sovietisation in 1921 also resulted in Georgias uniquely fraught relationship with Soviet
power in Moscow in the decades that followed. In light of these circumstances, this thesis
explores how and why the experience and activities of Georgian painters between 1926 and
1939 differed from those of other Soviet artists. One of its central arguments is that the
experiences of Georgian artists and critics in this period not only differed significantly from
those of artists and critics of other republics, but that the uniqueness of their experience was
precipitated by a complex network of factors resulting from the interaction of various
political imperatives and practical circumstances, including those relating to Soviet national
politics.
Chapter one of this thesis introduces the key institutions and individuals involved in
producing, evaluating and setting the direction of Georgian painting in the 1920s and early
1930s. Chapters two and three show that artists and critics in Georgia as well as
commentators in Moscow in the 1920s and 30s were actively engaged in efforts to interpret
the Partys demand for national form in Soviet culture and to suggest what that form might
entail as regards Georgian painting. However, contradictions inherent in Soviet nationalities
policy, which both demanded the active cultivation of cultural difference between Soviet
nationalities and eagerly anticipated a time when national distinctions in all spheres would
naturally disappear, made it impossible for an appropriate interpretation of national form to
be identified. Chapter three, moreover, demonstrates how frequent shifts in Soviet cultural
and nationalities policies presented Moscow institutions with a range of practical challenges
which ultimately prevented them from reflecting in their exhibitions and publications the
contemporary artistic activity taking place in the republics of the Caucasus and Central Asia.
A key finding of chapters four and five concerns the uniquely significant role that
Lavrenty Beria, Stalins ruthless deputy and the head of the Georgian and Transcaucasian
Party organisations, played in differentiating Georgian painters experiences from those of
Soviet artists of other nationalities. Beginning in 1934, Beria employed Georgian painters to
produce an exhibition of monumental paintings, opening at the Tretyakov Gallery in Moscow
in 1937, depicting episodes from his own falsified history of Stalins role in the revolutionary
movement in Transcaucasia. As this thesis shows, the production of the exhibition introduced
an unprecedented degree of direct Party supervision over Georgian painting as Beria
personally critiqued works by Georgian painters produced on prescribed narrative subjects in
a centralised collective studio. As well as representing a major contribution to Stalins
personality cult, the exhibition, which conferred on Georgian painters special responsibility
for representing Stalin and his activities, was also a public statement of the special status that
the Georgians were now to enjoy, second only to that of the Russians. However, this special
status involved both special privileges and special responsibilities. Georgians would enjoy
special access to opportunities in Moscow and a special degree of autonomy in local
governance, but in return they were required to lead the way in declaring allegiance to the
Stalin regime.
Chapter six returns to the debate about national form in Georgian painting by
examining how the pre-Revolutionary self-taught Georgian painter, Niko Pirosmani, was
discussed by cultural commentators in Georgia and Moscow in the 1920s and 30s as a source
informing a Soviet or Soviet Georgian canon of painting. It shows that, in addition to
presenting views on the suitability of Pirosmanis painting either in terms of its formal or
class content, commentators perpetuated and developed a cult of Pirosmani steeped in
stereotypes of a Georgian national character. Further, the establishment of this cult during
the late 1920s and early 1930s seems to have been a primary reason for the painters
subsequent canonisation in the second half of the 1930s as a Great Tradition of Soviet
Georgian culture. It helped to articulate a version of Georgian national identity that was at
once familiar and gratifying for Georgians and useful for the Soviet regime. The combined
impression of cultural sovereignty embodied in this and other Great Traditions of Soviet
Georgian culture and the special status articulated through the 1937 exhibition allowed
Georgian nationalism to be aligned, for a time, with support for Stalin and the Soviet regime.
