Why Parades are Peaceful 
Across the world, from India to Israel, it is common for parades to trigger
episodes of ethnic violence. In Northern Ireland, Catholics and Protestants have
sometimes come to blows over parades, however the number of parades-related
riots is small. This is puzzling, because between 2006-2016 over 30,000 parades
associated with Northern Irelands Protestant & Catholic populations took place.
If parades are indeed a spur to ethnic enmity, we should expect Northern
Ireland to experience far more violence than it does. This thesis seeks to explain
why this is not the case.
First, I demonstrate that there is indeed a link between ethnic conflict and
the desire to parade. I show that threats to the status of ones ethnic group
correlate with increased participation in parades.
Second, I find that PUL parades that march in the vicinity of borders
between majority-Catholic and majority-Protestant areas, are more likely to be
protested. The fact that such borders are rare in Northern Ireland constitutes
one explanation for the absence of parades-related violence.
Third, I assess the role played by local leaders in preventing violence. By
examining Belfasts Crumlin Road parade dispute, I show that peace activists can
prevent violence under certain conditions. These conditions prove to be far more
common outside of Belfast. This offers another explanation for why parades-
related violence is unexpectedly rare in Northern Ireland.
In making this argument I draw upon both quantitative and qualitative
sources. My study of parade motivation and protests depends upon a previously-
unused dataset obtained from the Parades Commission of Northern Ireland. My
study of the Crumlin Road parades dispute uses a combination of interviews and
analysis of newspapers and archival material. In summary, I use this evidence to
argue that parades in Northern Ireland should trigger more ethnic violence, but
the absence of hard borders and the presence of peace activists ensures they do
