A Thesis Submitted for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy at  
In recent years, the interest in the use of home grown protein sources for
the dairy industry has increased due to fluctuations in cost and availability of
soyabean meal (SBM). Forage legumes have been of particular interest due to
their high crude protein content, ranging between 170 to 220 g/kg DM. Protein in
forage legumes is degraded rapidly within the rumen, however a high yielding
dairy cow requires high levels of by-pass protein to maintain milk yield. Tannins
are phenolic compounds that can bind to forage protein in the silo or rumen,
providing protection from microbial breakdown, before dissociating in the small
intestine, increasing the amount of by-pass protein available from the forage
legume. Studies were therefore conducted to evaluate the effects of tannins, either
naturally occurring or added to forage legumes at ensiling, on the nutritive value,
nitrogen utilisation and performance of high yielding dairy cows. In the first study,
the effect of the addition of condensed or hydrolysable tannins at inclusion rates of
0, 25, 50 or 75 g/kg DM at ensiling on the nutritional value of forage legumes was
investigated. Forage source influenced all nutritional values including DM, CP,
ash, NDF and ammonia nitrogen content, whilst forage DM content increased from
329 to 364 g/kg as inclusion of tannin increased from 0 to 75 g/kg DM. Addition of
tannins influenced forage pH with forages supplemented with condensed tannins
having a higher pH than those supplemented with hydrolysable tannins. Forage
pea silages have varying levels of naturally occurring condensed tannins and also
a high crude protein content and the second study investigated the effect of the
inclusions of forage pea silages differing in tannin content on dairy cow
performance. Dairy cows fed pea silage containing low levels of condensed tannin
had the lowest dry matter intake whilst milk yield was highest in cows fed grass
silage. Similarly, milk protein was highest in cows fed grass silage, but there was
no effect of treatment on milk fat content. Milk fat content of C18:2 n-6 was highest
in cows when fed grass silage (P < 0.001), whilst C18:3 n-3 was highest in cows
fed pea silage containing high levels of tannin. In comparison to forage pea
silages, lucerne and red clover silages have limited amounts of naturally occurring
tannins but also have a high content of crude protein. The addition of hydrolysable
tannins at ensiling can bind to the forage protein in the silo improving the
availability of by-pass protein from the forage, therefore the third study
investigated the addition of hydrolysable tannins at 25 g/kg DM to lucerne and red
clover silage on the performance of lactating dairy cows. The inclusion of tannin
had no effect on dairy cow performance, however forage source influenced dry
matter intake with cows fed lucerne silage having the highest intake (P < 0.05),
similarly, OM and N intake was highest in cows fed lucerne silage. In both dairy
cow studies, DM, N and OM digestibility were not significantly affected by forage
type or the presence of tannins. In conclusion, any commercial advantage from
feeding forage legumes to high yielding dairy cows will be based on savings in N
from fertiliser or dietary protein rather than animal performance, whilst tannins will
have little effect on milk performance.
