Synchrotron X-ray Diffraction 
The technique of single crystal synchrotron X-ray diffraction is applied in the study of solid state
proton transfer processes in hydrogen bonded molecular complexes. Proton transfer processes are
of interest where they are responsible for a number of physical and chemical properties within
solid state functional materials; their study gives insight into the occurrence of such properties and
where they may be targeted and tuned in future materials. The synchrotron X-ray diffraction
technique has been trialled with respect to the potential it offers for high throughput capability for
studying proton transfer processes as a function of an external stimulus or across a number of
molecular systems.
Chapter 1 contains a review of the literature of the hydrogen bond, including its role in crystal
engineering and proton transfer effects. In Chapter 2, the theory behind the analytical techniques
used in the study of hydrogen bonded molecular complexes, in which crystallographic methods are
fundamental, are described. In Chapter 3 the research project aims and objectives are presented;
these objectives are targeted at the use of single crystal synchrotron X-ray diffraction in the study
and rationalisation of solid state proton transfer processes. In Chapter 4, the experimental methods
implemented in this research project to achieve these research goals are reported.
Chapter 5 is the first of the result chapters and applies the synchrotron single crystal X-ray
diffraction technique in the study of variable temperature proton disorder in centrosymmetric
hydrogen bonded carboxylic acid dimers. Chapter 6 focuses on the design of proton transfer
systems implementing a number of crystal engineering strategies in the design of short strong
hydrogen bonds (SSHBs) for potential proton migration studies. Chapter 7 applies a combination
of diffraction methods (synchrotron and laboratory X-ray diffraction) and refinement strategies in
the study of temperature dependent proton migration across SSHBs, allowing the potential of these
methods in the study of proton migration to be assessed. Chapter 8 is the final application of the
synchrotron technique in studies of proton transfer behaviour investigating static proton transfer
behaviour in molecular complexes of the proton sponge 1,8-bis(dimethylamino)naphthalene with
organic acids. The urea-acid inclusion materials presented in Chapter 9 additionally allow the
investigation of the hydrogen bond as a crystal engineering tool in the design of hydrogen bonded
solvent-inclusion networks.
In the last chapter, Chapter 10, conclusions from the findings in Chapters 5 to 9 are pulled together
and patterns explored. Drawing on these overall findings, some suggestions for future work are
also made.
xxxvii
