This thesis has been submitted in fulfilment of the requirements for a postgraduate degree 
Quantum machine learning (QML) has proven to be a fruitful area in which to
search for applications of quantum computers. This is particularly true for those
available in the near term, so called noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ)
devices. In this Thesis, we develop and study QML algorithms in three applica-
tion areas. We focus our attention towards heuristic algorithms of a variational
(meaning hybrid quantum-classical) nature, using parameterised quantum circuits
as the underlying quantum machine learning model. The variational nature of
these models makes them especially suited for NISQ computers. We order these
applications in terms of the increasing complexity of the data presented to them.
Firstly, we study a variational quantum classifier in supervised machine learning,
and focus on how (classical) data, feature vectors, may be encoded in such models
in a way that is robust to the inherent noise on NISQ computers. We provide
a framework for studying the robustness of these classification models, prove
theoretical results relative to some common noise channels, and demonstrate
extensive numerical results reinforcing these findings.
Secondly, we move to a variational generative model called the Born machine,
where the data becomes a (classical or quantum) probability distribution. Now, the
problem falls into the category of unsupervised machine learning. Here, we develop
new training methods for the Born machine which outperform the previous state
of the art, discuss the possibility of quantum advantage in generative modelling,
and perform a systematic comparison of the Born machine relative to a classical
competitor, the restricted Boltzmann machine. We also demonstrate the largest
scale implementation (28 qubits) of such a model on real quantum hardware to
date, using the Rigetti superconducting platform.
Finally, for our third QML application, the data becomes purely quantum in
nature. We focus on the problem of approximately cloning quantum states, an
important primitive in the foundations of quantum mechanics. For this, we develop
a variational quantum algorithm which can learn to clone such states, and show
how this algorithm can be used to improve quantum cloning fidelities on NISQ
hardware. Interestingly, this application can be viewed as either supervised or
unsupervised in nature. Furthermore, we demonstrate how this can algorithm
can be used to discover novel implementable attacks on quantum cryptographic
protocols, focusing on quantum coin flipping and key distribution as examples. For
the algorithm, we derive differentiable cost functions, prove theoretical guarantees
such as faithfulness, and incorporate state of the art methods such as quantum
architecture search.
