Simulation of Nuclear Observables in
The neutrons and gamma rays created in nuclear reactions provide a way to measure
conditions in Inertial Confinement Fusion (ICF) experiments. Interpretation of nuclear
measurements requires detailed theoretical models and numerical simulations. This
thesis presents a computational study of the nuclear observables based on radiation
hydrodynamics simulations of ICF experiments. Current measurement techniques are
replicated to highlight their strengths and shortcomings. Novel analyses are developed
to measure conditions in experiments which are currently unmeasured.
Novel features of the scattered and high energy neutron spectrum are investigated.
The neutron backscatter edge spectral shape is shown to be determined by the scattering
rate weighted ion velocity distribution. A spectrum model is developed, tested and
shown to infer currently unmeasured values for fluid velocity and temperature in the
dense DT fuel. For magnetised spherical implosions, secondary DT neutrons exhibit
yield increases and spectral anisotropy. The alpha knock-on component of the tertiary
neutron spectrum shows sensitivity to hotspot transparency.
Images of the DT primary and scattered neutrons are calculated for several radiation
hydrodynamics simulations. The primary neutron image shape analysis is shown to
be robust against differential attenuation effects. The use of multiple energy gates
to measure areal density within different angular ranges is demonstrated. Activation
diagnostics are shown to have finite angular resolution due to the extended nature of
the hotspot.
The time history of fusion gamma rays is found to be correlated to the rate of me-
chanical work performed on the hotspot. The length of peak delays between fusion and
carbon gamma rays indicate the degree of burn truncation. Images of carbon gamma
rays can be used to measure large scale asymmetries in the remaining ablator.
Combining and expanding on nuclear measurements allows a more complete picture
of hydrodynamic conditions. This will aid in understanding and improving ICF exper-
iments.
