Microsoft Word - CVThesis_ready to print_22042011.doc
The metabolism of transitory starch is of central importance to many aspects of plant
growth and development. Studies carried out on A. thaliana have greatly enhanced our
knowledge of the pathways involved, highlighting their complexity. However, information
about these pathways in other species is lacking. In particular, almost nothing is known
about the metabolism of transitory and storage starch in legumes, a family that includes some
of the most agriculturally important forage and grain crops.
In this study, the model Lotus japonicus was used to explore the metabolism of starch in
legumes and investigate its importance for several agriculturally important traits.
Characterisation of mutants from a forward genetic screen was linked with TILLING reverse
genetics to assemble a comprehensive suite of starch mutants. These mutants were used to
elucidate the main components of starch synthesis and degradation in L. japonicus. Although
these components were for the most part conserved with those in A. thaliana and other
species, the control of flux through the pathways and their importance in sustaining normal
plant growth were shown to be different. Whereas a severe deficiency in starch synthesis had
much less effect in L. japonicus than in A. thaliana, the loss of the capacity for starch
degradation had a much more profound consequence for plant growth. Further investigation
of these differences may lead to a better understanding of the regulatory mechanisms linking
the metabolism of starch with plant growth. This suite of L. japonicus mutants was also used
in combination with a collection of annual and perennial species of the genus Lotus to
investigate the importance of carbon partitioning for the perenniality trait. Results of this
analysis suggested that root starch reserves play an important role in determining the
vegetative re-growth vigour in perennial Lotus species.
A mes grands-parents, Jean et Odette Rigault;
A mes parents et mes frres, Robert, Maryline, Guillaume et Rmi Vriet;
En mmoire de ma grand-mre, Odette Vriet.
