Microsoft Word - Edited thesis for resubmission Jan 17.docx
Introduction: This thesis completed a genealogical enquiry which considered
how dementia has been conceptualised historically and contextually, plus the conditions
that have allowed for the emergence of certain dementia discourses over others. It
explored how dementia has generated biomedical, neuro, psychological, pharmaceutical,
technological, charitable and academic forces that in turn, produce and maintain the
power of these forces, plus the dominant biomedical model of dementia. It also examined
the role of family and marriage in the context of dementia.
Method: Drawing upon Foucaults work and discourse theory, professionally
produced leaflets from dementia assessment clinics and NICE (2006) guidelines for
dementia were examined. Secondly, participants with diagnoses of Dementia (PWDD)
and their spouse were interviewed either jointly or separately (fourteen participants in
total). Ten transcripts were analysed from a discourse theory perspective.
Results: The document analysis presented various discursive themes, which
corroborated the findings in the transcript analysis. From the transcripts, nine main
discourses were identified. For instance, the feared fate constructed the inescapability of
dementia in old age relating to dementia facts and figures. Pay no mind involved paying
little attention to dementia and setting dementia talk aside. The biomedical truth of
dementia depicted professional technologies as truths supporting the biomedical
origins of dementia. Spouses with and without diagnoses of dementia tended to adopt
dissimilar discourses, resulting in spouses monitoring and correcting PWDD and
PWDDs resistance. Marriage discourses constructed the importance of marriage and the
need to overcome trials and tribulations.
Discussion: Unexpected findings in the data were strongly gendered discourses,
plus, where spouses without dementia were positioned in the role of the informal
professional yet also the confessing patient. Marriage discourses appeared to be
complimentary in making marriage a natural sphere for caring. Biomedical discourse on
dementia was effective in self-management of dementia signs and electing ethically
bound spousal support, effective as a modern form of power where there are limited
societal resources.
Dementia within the Marital Sphere 3
