Learning Control Knowledge within an
The research reported in this thesis is concerned with extending existing tech
niques within machine learning for the task of learning more expressive control
knowledge. In particular, it discusses research pursued within a sub-area of
machine learning, called Explanation-Based Learning (EBL).
Past efforts in EBL have resulted in some success in learning useful control
knowledge for problem solving. Much of this success derives from experience
of previous research into problem solving, especially for characterising much of
the domain knowledge required for learning. Thus, previous EBL programs have
identified some descriptors about the state of the problem and its solution, which
may provide useful knowledge for controlling the problem solving process.
The solutions described within this thesis improve the ability to learn more
expressive control knowledge, by extending the power of the EBL approach. Part
of the solution is achieved by integrating the best features of the previous EBL
programs, in the following manner:
identify the various types of control knowledge specified in EBL programs
to date,
analyse the learning techniques involved in these EBL programs,
develop an extended EBL approach which incorporates the best features of
these techniques and learns all these different types of control knowledge
This approach reflects a standard methodology of extending scientific knowledge
based upon a rational reconstruction of the fruits of previous research.
As a result of the rational reconstruction within this thesis, importance has
been given to the role of a meta-language, for describing control knowledge. The
specifications of operators may be represented at the meta-level as general prop
erties of problems and their solutions. Together with mechanisms for connecting
the specification of operators involved in the solution, generalised plans may be
learned from examples of solutions to such problems.
The importance of the meta-language within the extended EBL program be
comes more apparent when it is applied to the task of learning theorem proving
strategies or proof plans. The complex nature of theorem proving strategies re
quires all the expressibility that is available with the extended EBL program.
Hence, it provides a rich domain for exploring the role of a meta-language in
learning useful control knowledge.
I declare that this thesis has been composed by myself and that the
work described in it is my own.
