Microsoft Word - Final corrected thesis_printing version.docx
Background: The timing of menopause can predict the duration of vasomotor
menopausal symptoms (VMS), as well as the risk of hormone-related cancers such as
ovarian, endometrial and breast cancer. Although evidence suggest an association
between diet and the timing of menopause and its associated sequelae, current evidence
are limited and conflicting. Thus, this thesis studied the associations between diet and age
at natural menopause, the presence of VMS and the risk of hormone-related cancers.
Methods: Two of the largest and most complete datasets in the world were used to
explore this topic: the UK Womens Cohort Study (UKWCS) and the International
collaboration for a Life course Approach to reproductive health and Chronic disease
Events (InterLACE).
Results: In the UKWCS, prospective analyses demonstrated that high intakes of oily fish
and fresh legumes were associated with a delayed onset of menopause. Conversely,
refined pasta and rice was associated with an earlier menopause. Specific dietary patterns
were also linked to the onset of natural menopause. Furthermore, survival analyses
demonstrated that intakes of processed meat and total meat were associated with a higher
risk of breast and endometrial cancer. Higher intakes of tomatoes and dried fruits were
inversely associated with breast and endometrial cancer respectively.
Using InterLACE consortium, a pooled analysis of three studies showed that soy product
consumption was protective against the incidence of VMS.
Conclusion: This work has demonstrated, for the first time, how diet can play a role in
influencing age at natural menopause in the UK. Further evidence for an association
between diet and the presence of VMS and the risk of hormone-related cancers was
provided. The complexity and cultural variations in diet suggest the need for further
observational studies as well as randomized control trials to confirm whether specific
dietary changes could modify the timing of natural menopause.
