Russia on a Throne of Bayonets: 
Scholars of Boris Yeltsins Russia argue that it was a period of demilitarisation. Research
largely focuses on militarisation in terms of its physical dimensions and by investigating
subjects, individuals and institutions with a direct link to the military.  These scholars
instead attribute the success of Russian militarism in the post-Soviet period to Vladimir
Putin. However, this is not entirely the case. This thesis challenges the assumption that
the collapse of the Soviet Union constituted a break in the militarisation of society,
arguing that the focus of current literature is too narrow to provide a comprehensive
understanding of Russian militarism at this time. Instead, the research investigates
Russian militarisation during the 1990s through a cultural lens by examining the
prominent discourses across four societal domains: media, education; social welfare; and
commemoration. Two discourses of a militaristic nature prevailed, including the moral
obligation and civic duty of Russian people to protect the fatherland, and Russia as a
besieged fortress. These narratives underpin Russian identity and have contributed
towards the survival of Russian militarism beyond regime change. The thesis examines
political documents, including laws, notes and letters, from the State Archive of the
Russian Federation and the Yeltsin Centre, Russian newspapers and Russian school
historical textbooks from the Russian State Library to answer the following questions:
what top-down mechanisms militarise society? What discourses are prominent in the four
societal domains and in what way do they contribute towards the militarisation of society?
How do the discourses within the different societal domains fit into (and add to) current
literature on the state of militarism and militarisation in Post-Soviet Russia? The thesis
found that the rituals of the Putin era were rooted in Yeltsins Russia, and that through a
cultural lens, societal militarisation can be seen to persist without a strong military
apparatus.
