ORBIT - Online Repository of Birkbeck Institutional Theses
This thesis examines the development of Soviet journalism between 1953 and
1968 through a case study of the youth newspaper Komsomolskaia pravda.
Stalins death removed the climate of fear and caution that had hitherto
characterised Soviet journalism, and allowed for many values to be debated and
renegotiated. This study examines these debates within their wider
professional, social, and political contexts, and thus illuminates the possibilities
and limits of reform in the post-Stalin era. In a period of rising educational
levels, a widely-perceived crisis of youth values, and growing mass media
saturation both from within the Soviet Union and from outside, Komsomolskaia
pravda journalists understanding of themselves as protectors and educators of
the public came into conflict with the belief that the press should be
entertaining and informative. Moreover, there were continued tensions
between the requirement for the press to be a beacon of social change, which
journalists enthusiastically embraced, and the need for it to ensure social
stability. This led to the collapse of the Stalinist propaganda state model.
The thesis comprises five short thematic histories, each discussing
different facets of the newspapers work. It arrays a wide range of sources, from
memoirs to Agit-Prop documents, but its main sources are the newspapers
themselves and the transcripts of editorial discussions and Party meetings,
which together explain not only what was published, but why. By examining the
press from the point of view of its producers, this study challenges previous
interpretations of Soviet propaganda. It shows that Soviet journalists were not
wholly subservient to Party dictates, but were not dissidents either. Instead, the
thesis suggests that the professionalization of journalism and relaxation of
political controls allowed journalists to develop shared norms and establish
priorities that borrowed from, but differed from those of the Party, leading to
frequent conflict and confusion.
