This electronic thesis or dissertation has been
Since its commercialisation in 1995, the Internet has grown exponentially. Cisco estimates that the
number of Internet users will increase to 5.3 billion in 2023 from 3.9 billion as of 2018. To confront
the issue of increased Internet usage, new, smarter, and more versatile networking solutions are
required.
Software Defined Networking (SDN) is a relatively new paradigm that introduces a centralised
approach where the intelligence of each network device is stored in a central SDN controller. SDN
offers several advantages over distributed networking including, faster adaptation to network
topology changes, easier integration of network applications, simultaneous control of many network
devices, etc. However, despite these advantages, SDN traditionally uses heuristic algorithms such as
single metric shortest path which may not be suitable for Quality of Service (QoS) based routing.
The aim of the research was to create, implement and test a routing algorithm as an alternative to
existing heuristic algorithms. Q-Routing was selected as the basis of a new routing algorithm as
literature shows that Q-Learning holds several advantages over other reinforcement learning
algorithms while being faster at pathfinding than shortest path in distributed networks. The Q-Routing
based algorithm had to meet several criteria: i) Use the advantages presented by SDN. ii) Employ
multiple network metrics for QoS based routing. iii) Perform as well as K-Shortest Path. iv) Find paths
faster than K-Shortest Path. v) Adapt to dynamic network environments. vi) Work efficiently in
network topologies of different sizes and densities.
Research was split into three phases, initially looking at SDN based single metric Q-Routing leading to
the final algorithm, Dual Metric, Multi-Estimate, Pareto, Q-Routing which successfully met all stated
goals. Emulated results show that the algorithm in terms of the percentage of flows blocked
performed as well as K-Shortest Path while being faster at pathfinding in both static and dynamic
network environments.
Dedication and Acknowledgements
During the course of this PhD, I have been supported by many people who without their support, this
research would not have been possible. In that vein, I would first like to thank my academic
supervisors, Professor Trevor Martin and Professor Reza Nejabati for their guidance, knowledge and
feedback throughout the PhD.
Next, I would like to thank my colleagues and the academic staff within the Centre for Doctoral
Training (CDT) for Communications, High Performance Networking (HPN) and the University of Bristol
in general for their continuous support and advice with specific thanks going to Anderson Bravalheri
from HPN, visiting Associate Professor Magnos Martinello from the Universidade Federal do Esprito
Santo and Professor Celio Trois from the Universidade Federal de Santa Maria.
Special thanks go to Suzanne Binding, CDT Manager and the administrative staff of the School of
Computer Science, Electrical and Electronic Engineering and Engineering Maths, and Barb Lowden,
HPN Administrator for fielding endless questions during the course of my research.
I would also like to thank CDT program, the University of Bristol, and the Gilchrist Educational Trust
for their financial support during the course of the PhD and my industrial supervisors from Roke Manor
for their valued feedback.
Finally, I want to give special thanks to my late friend and colleague, Giovanni Ciurleo who offered
unflinching support after the passing of my father and to my late father, who gave me the courage to
embark on this journey.
