Precipitate characterization and 
Andrea Impagnatiello submitted this thesis entitled Precipitate characterization and
stability in V-based alloys for nuclear fusion reactors for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy
at the University of Manchester, 2016. The aim of this work was to investigate the
precipitation and stability of nm-sized Ti oxides in vanadium-based alloys, a prime candidate
material for future nuclear fusion reactors based on the magnetic confinement of the plasma.
Fusion energy reproduces the nuclear reactions occurring in stars. It can potentially produce
more energy than current nuclear fission power plants, and it is meant to be a solution to the
clash of todays increasing energy demand with the continuous decrease of fossil-based
energy sources, whose use is harmful for the environment. The operating conditions in a
fusion reactor will be unprecedented in terms of ultra-high temperatures, stresses, radiation
fields and very corrosive media. Only a limited number of materials may be able to withstand
such combination of harsh environmental conditions, and vanadium-based alloys are among
them. Recent research efforts have identified V-4Cr-4Ti as the most promising vanadium-
based alloy for application in the first wall of future fusion nuclear reactors such as DEMO
and beyond. The presence of TiO-type precipitates, containing relatively small amounts of
C and N, strongly influences the final mechanical properties and radiation resistance of the
alloy. Therefore, a thorough understanding of the precipitate structure and evolution at both
relatively high temperatures and radiation dose levels is primordial to predict and optimise
the final performance of the structural component in the fusion reactor.
This thesis is written in alternative format and collects one article already published in Scripta
Materialia, and two additional articles to be submitted to peer-review scientific journals.
Atomic resolution imaging of the precipitates, coupled with chemical analysis, constitutes the
main body of the first article: a novel intergrowth of the fcc Ti oxide in the bcc V matrix is
revealed at the precipitate/matrix interface. The evolution of the vacancies present in the TiO
precipitates above 400C, together with the recovery of dislocations in the matrix and the
formation of extra precipitates, is studied in the second article by positron annihilation
spectroscopy and micro-hardness measurements. The formation of additional precipitates
below 400C induced by radiation is assessed in the third article using proton irradiation as a
surrogate of neutron damage. The structure of those additional precipitates and of the
dislocation loops induced by the proton bombardment is characterized by advanced analytical
electron microscopy.
