 Geodynamic and Seismological Investigation of the 
This thesis examines foreshock and aftershock seismicity patterns with the accelerated
seismic release model and the non-extensive statistical physics approach in the South
Aegean. The convergence and subduction of the African lithosphere under the Aegean
Sea plate creates the seismically active Hellenic Arc. Strong earthquakes occur
frequently, with evidence of a great magnitude earthquake in the past. To evaluate and
understand the large earthquake likelihood, the accelerated seismic release model
(ASR) has been used as hazard estimation technique. This method uses a power law
equation to quantify the cumulative energy release (or Benioff strain, or number events)
from the earthquakes that occur before the large event. The mainshocks are considered
as critical points while the foreshocks are evolution pattern of the critical phenomena. A
theoretical model to explain the earthquake preparation process has been proposed. This
is based on the energy conservation laws and non-extensive statistical physics. The
analytic expressions of the proposed model indicate the existence of a common critical
exponent in the ASR power law equation. In addition, the critical exponent is
independent from the measured quantity and reflects the physical parameters of the
critical area, such as the Euclidian dimension, the Guttenberg-Richer b-value and the
extensivity of the system during the large earthquake preparation period. The evaluation
of the proposed model has been carried out with the identification of the critical areas
for three strong events in South Aegean with retrospective analysis.
The two strong event aftershocks of 2013 and a swarm sequence occurred in 2016 have
been located and relocated in order to evaluate the spatiotemporal attributes of these
sequences. Cross sections and fault plane solution provided in the examination of the
spatial distribution of the events. By combining the detailed aftershock and foreshock
catalogues, it is possible to better understand the activation mechanisms. Also, the time
differences between two continuous earthquakes (interevent time) has been examined
with the ideas of non-extensive statistical physical. The results suggest that a
distribution of the entropic index q could explain the extensivity of the system as the q
value varies with time. The use of the non-extensive statistical physics has clearly
helped to better understand the behaviour of the seismicity patterns.
