Microsoft Word - Corrected thesis 124 May 19 FINAL.doc
Citizen	 social	 science	 is	 an	 emerging,	 multi-sited,	 socially	 structured	 practice	 for	 social
research.	 As	 an	 innovative	 form	 of	 coproduction	 and	 participatory	 research,	 it	 involves
engaging	citizens	in	conducting	social	research.	To	date,	when	citizen	social	science	has	been
theorised,	 the	 focus	 has	usually	 only	 been	on	 its	 potential	 as	method:	 as	 a	 form	of	 crowd-
sourced	 data	 collection,	 and	 in	 a	 context	 of	 increasing	 technological	 advancements	 in,	 and
possibilities	 for,	data	gathering.	 Just	 like	citizen	science,	which	 involves	 the	public	 in	 large-
scale	 collective	 volunteer	 science	 projects,	 citizen	 social	 science	 presents	 both	 a	 challenge
and	an	opportunity.	It	can	challenge	the	ways	in	which	social	science	research	is	undertaken,
raising	questions	around	who	can	collect	data,	who	can	analyse	 it,	 and	how	 it	 can	be	used.
The	 possibilities	 of	 citizen	 social	 science	 bring	 into	 focus	 issues	 of	 data	 quality,	 diverging
motivations,	 claims	 of	 expertise	 and	 skills,	 and	 the	 relationship	 between	 data	 collection,
analytical	 frameworks,	 and	 social	 realities.	 There	 is	 the	 potential	 for	 the	 flattening	 of
hierarchies	in	the	social	research	process	as	knowledge	is	made	together.
The	 thesis	 seeks	 to	 understand	 how	 citizen	 social	 science	works	 in	 practice.	 It	 reports	 on
three	 social	 science	 probes	 using	 citizen	 social	 science-based	 approaches:	 i)	 a	 secondary
analysis	 of	 Mass	 Observation	 Archive	 data,	 ii)	 a	 study	 involving	 citizens	 reporting
observations	of	empty	houses,	and	iii)	a	community	based	history	project	about	perceptions
of	the	changing	nature	of	a	local	area.	The	research	sets	out	three	key	facets	of	citizen	social
science:	 the	challenges	 for	research	design	and	execution,	 the	ethical	 issues	raised,	and	 the
potential	 for	 data	 use.	 The	 thesis	 elaborates	 on	 them	 as	 new	 evidence	 of	 the	 practices,
processes	and	challenges	of	citizen	social	science.
The	 findings	 suggest	 that	 citizen	 social	 science-based	 methods	 can	 be	 disruptively
transformative:	for	the	individual	participant	in	terms	of	how	they	can	become	engaged	with
the	 issues	raised	by	the	research;	 for	the	discipline,	 in	the	way	that	 it	allows	seeming	 non-
experts	to	be	involved	in	the	analysis	of	data,	as	well	as	its	generation;	and,	moreover	policy
makers	are	beginning	to	take	such	data	seriously.	Overall,	the	research	highlights	how	citizen
social	 science	 can	 be	 an	 exercise	 in	 the	 collective	 sociological	 imagination	 and	 collective
experimentation.	It	presents	an	opportunity	for	the	transformation	of	social	science	research,
beyond	 just	 an	 instrumental	 methodological	 innovation,	 but	 there	 are	 challenges	 and
limitations.
