Reinforcement Learning-based Spectrum 
TAO JIANG, Ph.D. THESIS, COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH GROUP, UNIVERSITY OF YORK 2011
more efficient in terms of handling uniform traffic. However, FCA schemes are
not traffic adaptive. When it comes to fluctuating traffic, even though there are
channels available in the neighbouring cells, calls are blocked due to insufficient
channels in the current cells [9].
Dynamic Channel Assignment (DCA) was developed as a better solution to serve
fluctuating traffic. In a DCA scheme, instead of having a fixed frequency plan, all
channels are placed into a channel pool and potentially available to all the local
users [12-13]. The channels are then assigned on a call-by-call basis. Research
shows that DCA schemes achieve better performance when handling uneven
traffic which varies both spatially and temporally [9]. DCA schemes can be
divided into two categories: Centralized Dynamic Channel Assignment (CDCA)
and Distributed Dynamic Channel Assignment (DDCA).
In the CDCA schemes, a centralized controller assigns channels from the channel
pool to the calls. Extensive information needs to be exchanged between the base
station and the central controller, resulting in a large number of control overhead
[14-17]. DDCA schemes utilize localized information to select the suitable
channel without any communication with other base station (user) [18-19].
DDCA schemes normally rely on interference or Carrier-to-Interference Ratio
measurements. DDCA schemes remove the control overhead required by the
CDCA schemes, but the behaviour of DDCA schemes is likely to be more selfish
than other approaches so that new activations may introduce excessive
interference to the existing transition links [20]. Cognitive radio, a DDCA based
technique, is likely to avoid causing such problem by utilizing more advanced
spectrum sensing techniques and new functions like learning. One of the main
differences between cognitive radio and conventional DDCA techniques is that
unlike previous DDCA techniques which were designed for all users in a
dedicated band, cognitive radio is proposed to use the spectrum licensed to other
systems (the primary network) [4].
