A Microscopic Study of Nuclear
This thesis is concerned with the application of the time-dependent Hartree-Fock method,
adopting the Skyrme effective nuclear interaction, to investigate induced nuclear fission
processes. Three-dimensional, symmetry-unrestricted constrained Hartree-Fock calcula-
tions of 240Pu are presented to obtain the static potential energy surface corresponding
to an increasing quadrupole deformation. The time-dependent Hartree-Fock method
is applied to evolve in time these deformed states. Different types of fission process
are considered. Firstly, the evolution of static configurations which are deformed suf-
ficiently such that they fission upon time evolution, without any external excitation,
(deformation-induced fission) is investigated. The fragments smoothly form during a
gradual evolution of the static state (taking up to  1500 fm/c for scission to occur),
and the resulting fission products agree well with experimental neutron-induced fission
data. The kinetic energy released in the process is also shown to compare well to ex-
perimental results. Secondly, the effect of providing an external excitation field to static
configurations which would not otherwise fission (boost-induced fission) is investigated.
Upon application of an instantaneous excitation, the evolution of the densities displays a
violent oscillatory behaviour as the state evolves to fission, in contrast what was seen for
the case of deformation-induced fission. The resulting fission products lie at the edges
of typical mass distributions obtained from experiment. The evolution of the densities
following the application of a gradual excitation field demonstrates behaviour similar
to deformation-induced fission, suggesting that the timescale for the energy deposition
has consequences regarding the fission dynamics. The comparison to experimental results
following the application of a gradual excitations field is improved compared to an instan-
taneous excitation. Overall, the results provide a significant exploratory investigation of
fission treated as a dynamic process, and suggest that the time-dependent Hartree-Fock
method has potential to be applied further to describe the dynamics of nuclear fission.
