Imperial College London
A long-term ambition of researchers is to develop readily available expert systems to support
decision makers. There is great interest in combining web-based information and Machine
Learning techniques, which are enjoying a renaissance attributed to the ready availability of
computing resources, to answer real-world strategic questions. Given the contribution of in-
dustry to overall national economic health, one such question is what industry mix is necessary
to support national strategy? The proposed conceptual graph model and accompanying frame-
work, applied the strengths of machines and computational techniques to inform national indus-
trial policy in a data-driven paradigm. This thesis makes three contributions: the development
of a novel conceptual graph model and associated framework, both based on a multi-disciplinary
literature review, and their subsequent demonstration using both simulated binary and real-
world statistical data. The graph model, drawing from experience in the government defence
sector, linked national intent to industry via intermediate nodes such as capability. The wider
framework combined supervised Bayesian Belief Network Machine Learning with web-scraping
via the graph model to infer national intent. Proof of concept was achieved through the use of
both simulated and real-world data, confirming the ability of the chosen inference approach to
learn the required relations. Ultimately the framework was able to identify industry variables
which best explain observed capability for two real-world case studies although it failed to draw
inferences across industries using real data. Further avenues of investigation were addressed, in-
cluding the use of unstructured text as a data source and alternative Machine Learning methods
to account for time-series data. The potential of the web as a data source is truly staggering.
This thesis goes some way to bridging the gap between this vast store of information and its
incorporation in an evidence-driven pipeline in support of strategic decision making.
