Microsoft Word - Nick Harrop Completed PhD Thesis 20100915 latest.doc
Written by a full-time clinician, this thesis explores an example of Big IT in
healthcare, the National Programme for IT in the United Kingdom National Health
Service. It is unique in exploring the interaction between people and information
technology in the healthcare workplace, from an engaged standpoint within one of the
National Programmes implementation sites, in order to provide a critical and a socio-
technical appreciation.
The National Programme (a global intervention in the NHS context) will be
implemented locally, in every NHS institution and in each part of each institution. Its
global aspect is essentially rational, eliminating local considerations. Its local aspects
are occasioned and situated in a fluid, essentially social context. The tension between
the global and the local is mirrored, every time a healthcare professional interacts with a
patient, in the interplay between a standard intervention and a non-standard situation.
Background and Purpose of the Thesis
A substantial consensus is developing, that the National Programme has under-
estimated the importance of the socio-technical dimension. The purpose of the thesis is
to develop an approach that will equip clinicians and managers at implementation sites
to understand and comment critically but constructively, on the design, implementation
and evaluation of information systems, so they can promote the successful assimilation
of the National Programme for IT at their own place of work from a socio-technically-
informed position.
Methodological Approach and Setting
The body of the thesis is a set of five case studies which deploy developments of
Checklands Soft Systems Methodology (NIMSAD : Jayaratna, 1994 ; Multiview :
Avison & Wood-Harper, 1990) within Pawson & Tilleys (1997) Realistic Evaluation
framework. The case studies, conducted in an ordinary NHS Trust hospital, examine the
mechanisms and context within which the new information systems proposed by the
National Programme might be expected to promote the Trusts five most important
strategic goals.
Driven by the practice of information systems implementation, itself intimately bound
up with, and inseparable from, the evaluation, the design and the strategic purpose of
the information system, the thesis develops an approach that brings to life the complex
implementation context through the eyes and the concerns of operational clinicians as
well as strategic managers.
