Intrusion Detection Systems using
The increased reliance on networked technologies has led to a digital transformation
of general- and special-purpose networks that further interlace technologies and
heterogeneous systems. The ever-evolving technological landscape of interconnected
devices constantly expands the network attack surface, which has contributed to the
number and complexity of cyber attacks in recent years. The analysis of network traffic
through Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) has become an essential element of the
networking security toolset. To cope with the increased rate and complexity of cyber
attacks, researchers have utilised Machine Learning (ML) and Deep Learning (DL)
techniques to develop IDS to cope with new and zero-day attacks. However, the lack
of large, realistic, and up-to-date datasets hinders the IDS development process.
This thesis proposes an empirical investigation of ML and DL algorithms to detect
known and unknown attacks in general- and special-purpose networks. The thesis
further investigates how ML and DL algorithms can learn from a limited amount of
data while retaining high accuracy. To this effect, a special-purpose IoT dataset is
generated and evaluated against six ML techniques. The challenges and limitations
of identifying anomalies in special-purpose networks are identified and discussed.
In an attempt to reduce the need for large training datasets, this thesis investigates
the utilisation of Few-Shot learning paradigm to train IDS using a limited amount of
data. For this purpose, Siamese networks are used and evaluated in three scenarios.
This thesis further investigates the use of autoencoders to detect zero-day attacks.
The zero-day attack detection experiments highlight the problem of discriminating
benign-mimicking attacks. To overcome this challenge, an additional layer of feature
abstraction is proposed; to improve accuracy through the cumulative aggregation of
network traffic.
The results of this research demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
approaches for IDS development. Siamese networks demonstrate their ability to
learn from limited data. The proposed autoencoder models exhibit their potential
to detect zero-day attacks. Finally, the significance of flow aggregation features in
discriminating benign-mimicking attacks is demonstrated.
