Industrial Control Systems Cybersecurity 
Andres Santiago Robles Durazno  2021  Page 18
component in the Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA), which is the
system responsible for monitoring, collecting and processing input and output data
from field devices such as motors, valves, sensors, and pumps. Before the PLC, the
machinery could be controlled only with the use of relays (Ghaleb et al., 2018).
Relays operate by means of a coil that creates a magnetic force to switch from one
state (ON) to another (OFF) when they are energized. For instance, a motor can be
controlled by attaching a relay between the power source and the motor. The state
ON/OFF of the motor changes when the relay is energized/de-energized. The
control logic for such systems is defined on how these relays are wired. Depending
on the complexity of the control system, the number relays required can quickly
become problematic, thus troubleshooting might require hours in cabinets that
contain hundreds of relays.
In 1969 the first PLC is launched to the market and it represented a massive
step forward in versatility since it allowed to focus on the operation of the control
system in a single point. Currently, PLCs are not new technology, but their
functionalities have evolved to include networking, advanced data-handling
capabilities and web server. This has allowed to execute tasks of a high level of
complexity (Unitronics, 2017). For example, the Siemens PLCs models 1200 and
1500 have a web server embedded that can host a simple web page or a complex
HTML5 application. In spite of this, cyber-security concerns remain in many
professional spaces because early PLCs were not designed with security in mind, as
they were isolated devices. As for now, they can be found directly connected to the
internet, which poses a high risk and an imminent threat for the control process
connected to it.
In the PLC market, the main end-user segment includes industries such as
automotive, chemical and petrol-chemical, paper, packaging and printing, food and
beverages, mining and metallurgy, water and waste-water treatment as well as oil,
gas and nuclear power plants (Thirumurugan, 2018). Many manufacturers have
registered the PLC as their trademarks. This includes worldwide leading automation
vendors such as Siemens, ABB, Emerson, Schneider (Modicon), Rockwell (Allen-
Bradley), Mitsubishi, Fortive (Danaher), Yokogawa, GE, Honeywell and Omron
(Arizton, 2018). The main PLC sellers in the global market are Schneider, Rockwell,
Siemens, Mitsubishi, and Omron. According to online resources (Community, 2016),
Industrial Control Systems Cybersecurity Analysis and Countermeasures
