City, University of London Institutional Repository
Over 800,000 people worldwide lost their lives to earthquakes in the last decade and
on average 171 people die every day due to earthquake related damage to structures
and buildings. Precisely understanding the effects ground motion has on manmade
structures is crucial to making them earthquake resistant. This can only be achieved
by the precise measurement, recording, and analysis of ground displacement trends
during a seismic event.
Although there is a vast amount of recorded seismological data available, current
technology and processing methods fail to represent accurate ground displacement
over time as the considerable technological challenges have yet to be overcome.
Raw seismic data has so far been primarily acquired with instruments utilising
geophone or accelerometer based sensors. These instruments produce prominent
time domain displacement errors due to the various system and sensor inaccuracies,
and due to non-linear response. Since accelerometers provide acceleration over time
data: whilst geophones are velocimeters, and therefore provide velocity over time
data; in order to derive true ground displacement over time, a double, or single
numerical integration is required respectively. During this essential numerical
integration processes of data from such sensors, even small in magnitude errors
accumulate to yield rather large displacement trend offsets over a typical event
recording period of 60 to 120 seconds.  In addition, the numerical integration
process itself poses considerable challenges due to the theoretically infinite number
of samples and the accurate determination of initial conditions required for an exact
mathematical result to be obtained. The latter, is currently performed by averaging
an up to 60 second pre-event data trend stored on the instrument.
Most post-integration data from current instruments appears to contain low
frequency drifts amongst other noise artefacts, and generally requires baseline
correction algorithms in an attempt to correct for these effects. Such corrections,
although helpful, only aid to minimise the perceived effects of an assumed and
collective source of error, and hence are largely unable to tackle the individual error
contribution of each element within the system. Since individual element
contribution is of a dynamic nature, the validity of these algorithms is limited by the
~ 4 ~
accuracy of the initial assumptions made about a specific set of data. Faced with
such a multivariable and uncertain dynamic behaviour, where even mathematical
system modelling is of inadequate long term accuracy, a solution that aims to
directly minimise these errors at source, rather than attempt to correct them post-
acquisition, is of immense importance when it comes to the recording, analysis, and
understanding of earthquakes.
This thesis describes the design, implementation, and evaluation of a High Precision
Active Gyro Stabilised (HPAGS) sensor unit of exceptional performance for the
provision of highly accurate ground displacement data. Experimental results
demonstrated that the device described herein, was able to diminish the inherent
non-linear and environment-dependant effects of current sensors, and thus was able
to provide highly improved time domain displacement data.
~ 5 ~
