Resistant starch from underutilised legumes 
Aquaculture is an important protein source for Malaysia. However, the susceptibility
of fish to disease leads to heavy losses and hinders production. A potential solution is
the supplementation of diets with prebiotics: non-digestible carbohydrates which
improve growth and health by modulating gut microbiota to favour beneficial
bacteria. Resistant starch (RS) is a prebiotic commonly fed to terrestrial animals, but
little work has been performed on aquatic animals. Therefore, this study investigated
the use of RS isolated from underutilized crops as a prebiotic in fish. Six species of
underutilised legumes (adzuki beans, mung beans, black-eyed peas, pigeon peas,
Bambara groundnuts and red lentils) were used for starch isolation via alkaline
steeping, followed by processing involving enzyme or acid hydrolysis, and lastly
gelatinisation and retrogradation to increase RS yield. Starch was isolated with yields
of 25  40%, while enzyme hydrolysis pre-treatment was more effective and
improved RS content up to 18.06% in most legumes. The starch and RS samples were
then supplemented at 5% (w/v) in nutrient broth to investigate their prebiotic effect
on fish gastrointestinal lactic acid bacteria. Enzyme pre-treatment improved the
growth of W. cibaria, L. garvieae and E. gilvus by up to 43.9% for most legumes
tested. Red lentil and adzuki bean enzyme-RS showed highest prebiotic potential and
was applied in the zebrafish growth trial, while only red lentil was used in the Asian
sea bass growth trial. Supplementation of diets with RS from legumes provided no
significant difference in the growth and performance parameters measured in both
zebrafish and Asian sea bass when supplemented at 2.5% and fed for five and six
weeks respectively. Further studies involving analysis of immune parameters is
necessary to identify prebiotic potential on targeted fish. Nevertheless, this study
contributed to promote future work in using underutilised legumes as prebiotic
source to improve the fish health under commercial conditions of rearing.
