Assessing the Bacterial Zoonotic Risks Associated with the Pet Trade
Background. Zoonotic diseases can impart devastating consequences on social,
medical, ecological and economical levels. An important driver of zoonotic disease
is the pet trade; however, little is known about the presence of bacterial species
across publicly accessible surfaces within pet shops. Furthermore, the increasing
popularity of exotic pets can disproportionately affect some species over others; for
example, Python regius, colloquially known as the Ball Python, is the most traded
pet python species globally. The extent of the trade, along with the practice of
ranching, is potentially unsustainable. Aims/Objectives. This project aimed to i)
develop a DNA extraction method suitable for retrieving data from low-biomass
samples; ii) identify key bacterial zoonotic pathogens, referred to as target genera,
within the literature to provide a foundation for microbial community analysis; iii)
characterise bacterial communities associated with a range of surfaces - primarily
publicly accessible - within a pet shop; iv) characterise bacterial microbiota asso-
ciated with Python regius and feeder rodents within breeding farms in Africa; and
v) use the information gathered from the wider literature to infer the presence of
target genera within the pet shop and animal samples. Results. Phenol-chloroform
extraction was found to be the most sensitive DNA extraction method, with a limit
of detection of 28 cells. The systematic literature review found that: i) there were
research biases at the genus and animal level, with Salmonella and fish and birds
investigated the most respectively. Overall, nearly 10 % of genera isolated from the
pet shop samples were target genera. Samples clustered based on animal type, in-
ferring the presence of distinct animal-associated microbiomes. However, with one
exception, these relationships became less distinct when clustering the target gen-
era only. Multiple target genera were present across at least half of the samples, in
addition to those accounting for more than 1 % of the sequencing reads. Finally, all
of the sample types from Python regius and feeder rodents contained target genera,
although feeder rodents contained a greater number of target genera for oral and
rectal samples relative to the corresponding snake samples. Summary. The results
are indicative of the presence of multiple potentially pathogenic genera within pet
shops and the key animal species. More research is required using techniques ca-
pable of identification at the species and strain level to confirm the pathogenicity
potential.
