ANGLIA RUSKIN UNIVERSITY 
The Korean War has significantly impacted on both Korea and world history. More than one
million people died and it devastated almost all Korean territory in about three years.1 It also
left millions of people separated from their families across the borders. The war has not
technically ended yet, as the parties in the war concluded a truce in 1953 and have not signed
a peace agreement. This situation has created political as well as military tensions between the
two Koreas over several decades. Moreover, North Koreas nuclear programmes have made
the matter worse in domestic as well as international affairs. However, the two Korean leaders
in the historic inter-Korean summit on 27 April 2018 agreed to declare the formal end of the
war soon, and North Korean leader Kim Jong Un and the U.S President Trump met three times
between June 2018 and June 2019 to discuss denuclearisation in North Korea and possible
security measures to unease tension in the Korean Peninsula, and President Trump mentioned
a few days ago that he would like to have a Third summit with Kim Jung Un within this year.
In this historic moment, the study of the origin of the Korean War has a deep significance in
that there have been various different approaches to explain why the war happened and who
was most responsible for it. By clarifying the origin of the Korean War in depth with underused
historical resources released from Russia, China, North Korea and the US government, this
thesis will help historians, as well as the Korean public, to resolve their misunderstanding of
this war that has created tensions in the Korean Peninsula over the past six decades.
Internationally, the Korean War played a significant role in accelerating the development of
the Cold War between Washington and Moscow. During the early post-war period, the wartime
alliance had been eroded by turning points such as the Truman Doctrine, the Marshall Plan,
Sovietisation of Eastern Europe, the civil war in Greece, the Berlin blockade and the success
of the Chinese Communist Revolution. The Korean War, in this context, can be considered as
the first hot war, which contributed to introducing a new phase of the Cold War. Dean Acheson
mentioned Korea saved us meaning that the Korean War revived NSC-68, which became a
1 The Defense Ministry of South Korea, The Korean War, Seoul: Ministry of Defense, 1954.
catalyst to changing US policy towards communism. 2  Previously, George Kennans
containment policy towards the Soviets did not aim for military confrontation. Instead, its goal
was to support industrial development in Europe and Japan to protect the Western world. With
the military offensive launched by the North Korean forces, however, the US policy makers as
well as its public began to consider it as Communist expansionism and therefore reacted more
aggressively to protect their strategic interests. Consequently, the Korean War accelerated the
militarisation of the NATO and in response, the Warsaw Treaty Organisation was created,
which aggravated East-West tensions in Europe. In the Asian theatre, it took a couple of
decades for the US and Communist China to normalise relations due to direct military
confrontation in the war. In addition, the US signed the Treaty of San Francisco and the
Security Treaty with Japan without the Soviets presence during the Korean War. As a result,
the Korean War served as a catalyst to intensify the confrontation of the Cold War.
The importance of the Korean War in world history, therefore, has attracted many scholars to
attempt to explain the origins of the war in various ways; the so-called orthodox, revisionists
and post-revisionists approaches. These views can range widely from arguing that the Korean
War was due to Moscows direct order to claiming that South Korea launched the initial attack
against the North. This obvious contrast seems to be caused by limited materials and resources
that scholars were able to use in their study. In this context, this thesis is an attempt to elaborate
on the conventional arguments over the origins of the Korean War and therefore contribute to
clarifying it more accurately with the support of underused declassified documents from
Russia, China, North Korea, and the US government. The documents which were used in this
thesis were obtained in various ways; Firstly, the Russian Federation Presidential Archives and
Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs' External Policy Archives decided to provide Russian
government's historical documents, 548 pages for 216 cases, related to the Korean War to the
Republic of Korea in June 1994, and those documents were stored in the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs in the ROK. Secondly, as marking the 45th anniversary of the Korean War in 1995, the
undisclosed historical documents, 3,000 pages for 950 cases, in the Russian Federation
Presidential Archives, the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs Archives, the Soviet Communist
2 Dean Acheson, Present at the Creation: My years in the State Department, New York: W.W. Norton & Company,
1969, p.363; David Halberstam, The Coldest Winter, America and the Korean War, New York: the Amateurs Ltd,
2007, p.201.
Party's Central Committee Archives, and the Russian Ministry of Defense Archives were given
to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in the ROK. Thirdly, in 2003, the historical documents
related to the Korean War were obtained from the Russian Federation Far East History
Archives. Since 2006, the Military Compilation Institute under the Ministry of Defense in the
ROK reached an agreement with the Russian Military History Institute on exchanging
historical documents related to the Korean War. Since then, the Central Archives under the
Russian Ministry of Defense and the Russian Military History Institute have provided the
historical documents related to Korea between 1950 and 1953. Some declassified Russian
documents can be found at Woodrow Wilson International Centre for Scholars
(http://www.digitalarchive. wilsoncenter.org) to be accessed via the internet. As for Chinese
documents, they are mostly obtained from the Chinese government including the Chinese
Central Literature Research Centre. Chinese news articles and other documents were found in
the national library and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in the ROK. With regards to North
Korean historical documents, they were possessed in the North Korea Information Centre in
the Ministry of Unification in the ROK, and interviews with North Korean defectors. Mostly
they were about Kim Il Sung's directives to North Korean cadres, which have been underused
in an academic field. The U.S documents mostly written by CIA have been declassified and
can be accessed via internet (http://www.cia.gov/library). Foreign documents possessed in the
ROK have been translated into Korean. There is still limitation to access to all relevant
information related to the Korean War, which needs to be resolved in the future to clarify the
whole story about the Korean War.
This thesis will focus on Stalins policy towards Korea during the early post-war period
between 1945 and 1950, and will argue that Stalin did not intend to occupy the whole of Korea
from the time of the Red Armys occupation of the northern part of Korea in August 1945. The
conclusion is that Stalin reacted to US policy and took defensive measures to protect Soviet
strategic interests, so Korean issues need to be viewed in the wider context of the Cold War to
reveal exactly what caused the war. This approach will offer an alternative explanation of its
origin. After examining underused declassified documents from all the major warring parties,
it concludes that Stalin was the main actor in the process of the Korean War. Stalins
involvement in the Korean War was as follows; firstly, North Korean military forces were fully
armed with Soviet armaments and equipment with Stalins directives. Secondly, military
http://www/
http://www.cia.gov/library
operation planning and action was guided under active participation of Stalin and Soviet
military personnel. Thirdly, Stalin's directives and advice towards China as well as North
Korea's leadership were a major part of conducting the war, although Stalin's involvement was
carried out confidentially. Fourthly, both Mao and Kim were not successful in persuading
Stalin for a swift victory - early participation of the Chinese People's army in the war for Mao,
and punctual and sufficient military procurement for both Chinese and North Korean forces.
Stalin's objectives were not to expand Communism in Asia but to extend the war in Korea. In
other words, Stalin did not want China backed North Korea or the U.S backed South Korea to
win the war. So what was Stalins objective in the Korean War? It can be referred from the
letter written by Stalin to Klement Gottwald, the President of Czechoslovakia, on 27 August
1950.3 In the letter, Stalin said "America cannot deal with China, and therefore, it would not
