Dementia Friendly Living Environments: An 
Over the last two decades the use of the environment as a therapeutic tool in the care
of people with dementia has become more popular. Despite this, there is a lack of
research which includes an empirical measure of behaviour to assess the impact that
dementia friendly interventions have on people with dementia. Much of the current
research focuses on the perceptions of the staff and relatives on the impact the
environment has on people with dementia. There is a small body of research which
attempts to include an empirical measure of behaviour, however due to small sample
sizes in this type of research it is difficult to generalise the findings to a wider
population. An extensive literature review identified the living area of care homes as
the area most commonly used by residents yet it is the area that has received the least
attention in terms of creating a dementia friendly environment.
The research carried out for this PhD thesis aims to assess the efficacy and impact of
an intervention in the physical environment of seven different living areas of dementia
care homes in the West of Scotland. The intervention was designed to give residents a
choice of where to sit and options to engage in different activities (e.g., watching TV
or looking out of the window). A behaviour mapping tool was employed as the main
data collection method to provide an empirical measure of the range of behaviours
occurring in the living area and also the overall usage levels. Behaviour mapping was
used for three weeks pre and post intervention to assess the changes in usage and
behaviour of the residents. Additional data sources were also consulted alongside the
behaviour mapping, these included staff focus groups, relative questionnaires and a
standardised measure of the organisational environment.
The results showed a significant increase in positive behaviours post
intervention such as social interactions, engaging in activities such as watching TV
and looking out the window. There was also a significant decrease in negative
behaviours such as agitation and passivity post intervention in line with the research
hypotheses.  Residents also appeared to engage more with the environment and were
less likely to appear psychologically withdrawn and apathetic. The patterns of
behaviour change observed across the seven environments were very similar,
providing support for the efficacy of the principles the interventions were based on.
This research highlights the importance of the design of living areas in dementia care
homes and provides empirical evidence to inform the future design of these areas. The
research highlights important issues which need to be considered in future design,
including the impact that small cost effective environmental interventions can have on
people with dementia as well as the need to involve staff and caregivers in research
and the planning of interventions. Overall the current research has addressed the
current gaps in knowledge within the field of dementia friendly environments by
adopting a methodology to provide an empirical measure of behaviour with a larger
sample size and also by studying areas of dementia care homes that have previously
been neglected.
