LedgerThesis_OnlineVersion
As one of the main categories of pathogens, an understanding of parasitic infection in the past
is essential to understanding disease in past populations. Evidence for parasites in the human
past is steadily growing with examples from many different continents and time periods.
Studies have been done in the Roman period however, this evidence does not cover all
regions of the Roman empire. At its greatest extent the empire covered much of Europe,
North Africa, and parts of the Middle East and different regions had strong cultural
influences, not only from pre-existing cultural groups, but also from connections outside the
empire. For these reasons there are likely to be variations in disease presence regionally. One
of the main aims of this dissertation is to illuminate possible regional variations in parasitic
infection in the Roman empire and compare this to earlier and later time periods in order to
consider possible explanations for parasite taxonomic diversity in the empire. Archaeological
sediments were collected from Roman period sites in previously understudied regions, such as
Italy, Turkey, and the frontier regions, as well as pre-Roman and post-Roman time periods
that had limited or no data. These samples were analysed for preserved parasite eggs and cysts
using microscopy and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). In the Roman period,
predominately soil-transmitted helminths were found in samples from the Mediterranean
region while those from northern Europe had additional zoonotic taxa. In the pre-Roman
period the taxonomic diversity found was much higher, especially at the Bronze Age site of
Must Farm in the marshes of Britain. The parasites found in the post-Roman sites studied here
were very similar to that in the Roman period. A consideration of sanitation infrastructure
presence, design, and use based on archaeological and historical evidence points to some
potential reasons for the consistent presence of roundworm and whipworm across the Roman
empire. Additionally, differences in diet, cooking practices, animal husbandry, and climate
are considered as contributors to taxonomic diversity in different regions of the empire.
