Fleets and Prouinciae in the Roman Republic: institutions, administration and the conceptualisation of empire between 260 and 49 B.C.
This research explores the institutional and political mechanisms used by the Romans for
defining, assigning and undertaking naval tasks during the Republic. It is primarily
concerned with how these mechanisms developed and functioned as the Roman Empire
expanded between the third and first centuries. Whilst the significance of the contribution
made by Romes naval forces to her overseas military success has been widely recognised
by both ancient and modern historians, little attention has been paid to the important
questions of how, when and why the tasks of preparing and commanding the fleets were
actually assigned. It follows that the contributions that answers to these questions can
make to the wider debates concerning the functions of the Senate, the role and autonomy
of magistrates, the nature of the prouincia and even the conceptualisation of empire have
been largely overlooked. The underlying purpose of this study is to redress these omissions
by focussing on the prouincia as a means of defining naval commands and what these
commands reveal about the concept of the prouincia more generally. As we shall see,
prouinciae were fundamental for the working, development and conceptualisation of the
Roman Empire.
The wider debates noted in the previous paragraph will be introduced at the
appropriate points in the course of this study. This preliminary chapter will be used to
contextualise my approach to the above questions through an examination of the
historiography of Roman fleets and the early historical development of the naval tasks
under investigation. It is divided into three parts. The first part will consider how Roman
fleets were viewed by Polybius in his Histories. This is the earliest surviving work to
mention Roman fleets at any length and has had a profound influence on modern
scholarship. Polybius also outlines a chronology for the creation of the Roman fleet. This
will be assessed in order to determine an appropriate starting point for this research. The
second and third parts will then discuss the evidence for the role played by senior
magistrates in the construction and command of the first large Roman fleet. These two
discussions will each be used to frame the questions and themes to be discussed in
Chapters II-IV.
I.ii. The invention of the Roman fleet: Polybius and historiography
I.ii. The invention of the Roman fleet: Polybius and historiography
For who is so worthless or indolent as not to wish to know by what means and
under what system of polity the Romans in less than fifty-three years have
succeeded in subjecting nearly the whole inhabited world to their sole government
a thing unique in history? Or who again is there so passionately devoted to other
spectacles or studies as to regard anything as of greater moment than the
acquisition of this knowledge?
These are the famous words with which Polybius outlined the underlying theme of his
Histories: how and why the Romans acquired a dominant position () between 220
and 167 that enabled them to give orders and ensure that they were obeyed.
