Recharacterising Face Recognition Deficits in Developmental Prosopagnosia 
Developmental prosopagnosia (DP) is a neurodevelopmental condition characterised by a
relatively selective deficit in face recognition. Current approaches to diagnose the condition
vary within the field, making comparisons across studies difficult. Furthermore, theoretical
inferences rely on accurate identification of people with DP and, combined with the fact that
some individuals also report moderate-to-severe psychosocial consequences of the condition,
the methods used to diagnose DP have been under increasing scrutiny. Thus, the present thesis
aimed to address contemporary issues relating to the diagnosis of DP. Specifically, the thesis
begins by investigating the utility of self-report, and presents a list of empirically-driven
hallmark symptoms of the condition which can aid the identification of DP in children and
adults, both in oneself and in others. The thesis then explores objective measures of face
processing; Chapter Four presents, for the first known time, the test-retest reliability for the
Cambridge Face Memory Test (CFMT)  the leading test of unfamiliar face recognition.
Interestingly, this value falls just short of accepted psychometric protocols, and
recommendations for using two separate tests of the same subprocess of face processing are
suggested. With this in mind, Chapter Five supported the diagnostic utility of repeat assessment
for face perception. We present a new test of face matching and, in combination with the
original Benton Facial Recognition Test, advocate the use of identifying face perception
deficits in DP by administering two separate tests. Finally, we come away from behavioural
measures to consider more nuanced means of dissociating DP from other developmental
conditions that are commonly associated with face recognition difficulties. For instance, many
people with autistic spectrum conditions (ASCs) struggle with face recognition, and many DPs
avoid social situations  an outward symptom that may be confused with ASCs. Given face
recognition difficulties likely have different underpinnings in the two conditions, Chapter Six
employs eye-tracking methods to differentially diagnose face recognition impairments in DP
versus ASCs. Whilst sample size is low due to the interruption of data collection by COVID-
19, we find that those with ASC look more towards non-social stimuli than DP participants,
particularly when the scene is more social and interactive. Those with DP look more towards
extrafacial information, such as hair and bodies, than ASC participants. The thesis concludes
with a summary of recommendations for the future diagnosis of DP.
