On Combating Online Radicalisation:
The Internet is the crime scene of the 21st century.
The complexity of cybercrimes is constantly increasing with advanced tools,
attack vectors, and Modus Operandi adopted by offenders every day. Criminals
have easy access to advanced technical abilities that they need to carry their attacks,
using what is called crime-as-a-service, from the dark web and online black markets.
Similarly, the nature of cybercrimes has generated multitudes of data introduced by
the cyber aspect of these crimes, which makes the process of identifying evidence
similar to searching for a needle in a haystack. To aid law enforcement to better
detect, analyse, and understand the threat landscape posed by cyber-criminals,
research into the area of cybercrime intelligence has flourished. Law enforcement
faces numerous challenges when policing cybercrimes. The methods and processes
they use when dealing with traditional crimes do not necessarily apply in the cyber
world. Additionally, criminals are usually technologically-aware and one step ahead
of the police. Furthermore, current tools created to support law enforcement to
better police cybercrimes more often conflict with how they are used to operate,
and are too complex, thus making them difficult to adopt.
In this thesis, we aim to design and develop a cybercrime intelligence framework
for law enforcement that provides decision support to detect and analyse the
behaviour of cyber-criminals. To do so, we need to better understand the cyber-
criminal ecosystem, as well as understand the current capabilities of law enforcement
agencies, and the challenges they face when policing cybercrimes. We achieve
this through semi-structured interviews conducted with professionals and law
enforcement agents investigating cybercrimes. From there, we define a framework to
aid them in addressing some of the challenges they face. Moreover, the cybercrime
landscape varies considerably in regards to the type of crime and what they target.
Some crimes target computers and systems while others target the human. As
there has been considerable research focusing on analysing cybercrimes that target
systems such as (Malware, Hacking, DDOS), the focus on the crimes that target
the human ( e.g., cyber-bullying, online radicalisation) has recently become more
evident. In this research, we focus on the area of online radicalisation and utilise our
framework to better understand the properties of radical propaganda and develop
methods to defend against its spread. We focus on the ISIS group aiming to identify
measures to automatically detect radical content and activities in social media.
We identify several signals, including textual, psychological and behavioural, that
together allow for the identification of radical messages, using methods such as
natural language processing, social network analysis, and machine learning. Our
findings can be utilised as signals for detecting online radicalisation activities by
law enforcement and social media platforms to help keep the online world safe.
