Title :      A smart home anomaly detection framework 
Smart Homes (SHs), as subsets of the Internet of Things (IoT), make use of Machine
Learning and Artificial Intelligence tools to provide technology-enabled solutions which
assist their occupants and users with their Activities of Daily Living (ADL). Some SH
provide always-present, health management support and care services. Having these
services provided at home enables SH occupants such as the elderly and disabled to
continue to live in their own homes and localities thus aiding Ageing In Place goals and
eliminating the need for them to be relocated in order to be able to continue receiving
the same support and services.
Introducing and interconnecting smart, autonomous systems in homes to enable
these service provisions and Assistance Technologies (AT) requires that certain inter-
faces in, and connections to, SH are exposed to the Internet, among other public-facing
networks. This introduces the potential for cyber-physical attacks to be perpetrated
through, from and against SH. Apart from the actual threats posed by these attacks
to SH occupants and their homes, the potential that these attacks might occur can
adversely affect the adoption or uptake of SH solutions.
This thesis identifies key attributes of the different elements (things or nodes and
rooms or zones) in SHs and the relationships that exist between these elements. These
relationships can be used to build SH security baselines for SHs such that any deviations
from this baseline is described as anomalous. The thesis demonstrates the application of
these relationships to Anomaly Detection (AD) through the analysis of several hypothet-
ical scenarios and the decisions reached about whether they are normal or anomalous.
This thesis also proposes an Internet of Things Digital Forensics Framework (IDFF),
a Forensics Edge Management System (FEMS), a FEMS Decision-Making Algorithm
(FDMA) and an IoT Incident Response plan. These tools can be combined to provide
proactive (autonomous and human-led) Digital Forensics services within cyber-physical
environments like the Smart Home.
