The development of quality indicators for 
This study is a mixed-method study that seeks to develop a set of institutional
dementia care indicators to evaluate quality of care and inform the improvement
of quality of life (QOL) for Taiwanese people with dementia living in care homes.
It also uses comparative analysis to compare the different features of policy and
its delivery in dementia care between Scotland and Taiwan, a comparison
designed to aid the development of dementia care policy, and the
establishment of quality indicators for institutional dementia care, in Taiwan.
This study employed the person-centred care approach at the micro
perspective, and the total quality management (TQM) approach at the macro
perspective, in order to inform a seamless care model for people with dementia
living in care homes. Data were collected in two stages: comments from experts
in dementia care were recorded in an exercise using Delphi methodology;
subsequently the opinions of service receivers were recorded in a fieldwork
exercise. The Delphi exercise (stage one) acted as the pre-test, involving 24
experts in dementia care in Scotland and Taiwan in evaluating the usefulness
and applicability of proposed quality indicators for institutional dementia care.
Quantitative and qualitative data from the Delphi panel were analyzed. The
fieldwork (stage two) collected 237 questionnaires (from 122 residents with
dementia and 115 family members) in 14 Taiwanese care homes for people
with dementia (including special care units within care homes). The field test
data were analyzed using reliability and item analysis, confirmatory factor
analysis (CFA), and descriptive and inferential statistics.
Initially, 43 proposed quality indicators for institutional dementia care were
identified through literature review. However, after two Delphi rounds, only six
key dimensions (41 quality indicators) were identified by consensus as the
important items for use in measurement of quality of care for people with
dementia living in Taiwanese care homes. Through reliability and item analysis,
and CFA, this research developed a model which is a three-factor structure
(social care, health and personal care, and environment) with 18 quality
indicators. The 18 quality indicators have high reliability, validity, and credibility
and load onto a second order factor which represents quality of care for people
with dementia living in care homes. Further analysis was then conducted to
explore how relative ratings on these three factors differed according to
measured characteristics of the residents and their family members. In general,
only a few strong patterns of difference emerged and multiple linear regression
analysis suggested that differences in ratings could not be attributed to
influences of socio-economic and socio-demographic differences between
respondents.
The study concludes that the Delphi method could be used as a methodology
for health services research to integrate the opinions of multidisciplinary
dementia experts and that CFA is an effective technique to study the empirical
factor structure. The findings suggest that the 18 quality indicators could be
suitable criteria for people with dementia and their family members to evaluate
care quality and select an appropriate care home. The indicators also have
important policy implications for the Taiwanese Government and regulations
intended to ensure that care homes meet the requirements of service receivers.
