City, University of London Institutional Repository
This thesis empirically examines the contribution of financial institutions to systemic
risk by looking at their interactions with market-based finance. The financial crisis of
2007-09 catalysed the transformation of the financial system with the introduction of
the post-crisis regulations, which were aimed at mitigating systemic risk by addressing
vulnerabilities that manifested in the crisis. This resulted in the increased resilience of the
banking sector, which was at the centre of the financial crisis, as well as the proliferation
of market-based finance as an alternative source of funding for corporations. Yet, as the
recent market turmoil due to Covid-19 has showcased, this has created new vulnerabilities
which necessitate the continuous assessment of the evolving financial system.
The thesis is based on three essays. The first essay examines the effects of the mandatory
collateralisation of over-the-counter derivatives contracts on counterparty, liquidity and
systemic risks of the largest dealer banks and central counterparties (CCPs). Using a
stress test network model calibrated to the banks balance sheet data, we document risk-
shifting effects in the form of risk transformation from counterparty to liquidity risk and a
reduction of systemic risk at the expense of increased propensity for contagion from the
CCP to its members. In addition, we find that the expansion of central clearing reduces
systemic risk, in accordance with regulatory predictions.
The second essay examines the effects of exchange-traded funds (ETFs) on the under-
lying securities liquidity, returns and volatility via information links which are formed
when investors use information from one asset to price the other. Using a proprietary
dataset of Irish ETF holdings from the Central Bank of Ireland, we find that ETFs form
close information links with the underlying equities but weak ones with the underly-
ing corporate debt securities because of the higher accessibility of the former, leading to
stronger co-movements of liquidity, returns and volatility with the equities compared
to the corporate debt securities. The results indicate that ETFs can affect the underlying
markets in different ways depending on their accessibility, contributing to the ongoing
debate on the role of ETFs in propagating shocks and systemic risk.
Finally, the third essay examines the resilience of banks to liquidity shocks originating
from money market funds (MMFs) using a stress test network model calibrated to the
full US MMF holdings data, following the introduction of post-crisis regulations in both
sectors. My findings suggest that while the banks can withstand a withdrawal of short-
term funding from MMFs due to their high liquidity reserves, the MMFs can incur severe
fire sales losses in the face of large redemption shocks and in the absence of a regulatory
authority acting as buyer of last resort of commercial paper, despite the regulations
introduced to increase their resilience.
