Investigating the cross-disciplinary 
Earthquake early warning (EEW) systems typically provide early estimates of
earthquake magnitude, hypocentre location and/or ground-shaking estimates,
as well as alerts ranging from a few seconds to tens of seconds, before the
arrival of the damaging ground shaking at a target site. The warnings provided
by these systems allow for the implementation of fast protection actions carried
out by individuals like drop, cover, and hold-on, or the evacuation of buildings
if the lead time is long enough. Nevertheless, the information and warning time
provided by an EEW system could also be used by earthquake engineers as
EEW seems to bear a powerful potential for the automatic activation of
protection measures for infrastructure and critical systems, aiming at the
reduction of risk due to earthquakes. Such automatic actions may include
stopping elevators at the nearest floor, opening firehouse doors, slowing rapid-
transit vehicles and high-speed trains to avoid accidents, to mention some.
Few are the attempts found in literature about engineering applicability of
EEW. This scarcity might be related to the fact that the real-time estimation of
earthquake source parameters contains considerable uncertainty that may
lead to potential economic losses if false or missed alarms are not avoided.
However, different state-of-the-art studies regarding decision-making
procedures for EEW have suggested more reliable approaches that can
potentially reduce the uncertainty in the estimates provided by the system
(e.g., earthquake source parameters and ground shaking), reducing the
probability of triggering missed/false alarms, and therefore minimising the
expected losses.
The potential of designing new real-time advanced building protection
applications for EEW is the motivation of this thesis. Mainly, two applications
are considered:
1) Design of controlled structural systems using the early warning information,
particularly, the use of semi-active devices denominated magnetorheological
dampers. A control algorithm that governs the behaviour of the dampers is
calibrated to obtain the most favourable response of a benchmark structure
equipped with one damper. The results reveal that the developed EEW-based
control algorithm can effectively reduce the expected loss of the considered
case-study structure.
2) Prediction of shaking demands that can be expected in mid-rise to high-rise
buildings, using a simplified continuum building model. A series of illustrative
examples show how the newly developed prediction models can be efficiently
used, in a Bayesian framework, for building-specific EEW applications based
on the (acceleration) response in buildings, such as a) early warning of floor-
shaking sensed by occupants; and b) control of elevator in buildings.
The progress of technology and advances in the scientific understanding of
engineering and seismology have promoted the rapid development of EEW
systems around the world. However, their effectiveness is often limited as they
lack the integration between their technical and social components. This thesis
also aims at filling this gap to investigate which measures could be needed to
increase the organisational resilience of local community stakeholders and the
private sector. This topic is explored by implementing a mixed-method
approach on the case study Mexico City (Mexico), that can be considered an
area at risk due to the combination of high seismic hazard, structural and social
vulnerabilities.
This thesis shows the promising applicability of engineered applications of
EEW systems and suggests a robust framework for the integration of the
technical and societal components of EEW.
