K-means landscapes: exploring
K-means, one of the simplest clustering algorithms, is ubiquitous in every scientific
field. Its cost function supports many possible clustering solutions, and location of
low-valued clustering solutions can be challenging. Hence, the topography of the cost
function surface is crucial to understanding K-means performance. We present the
application of energy landscape theory to the K-means cost function to elucidate its
topography, which we deduce from K-means landscapes described in terms minima
and transition states.
We analyse K-means landscapes for Fishers Iris dataset, the glass identification
dataset, and many variations in which we alter their properties. For K-means the
number of clusters must be prespecified, and we consider the effect of that choice
on the Iris landscapes. K-means landscapes are also constructed for the glass and
Iris datasets with varying numbers of outliers, and different feature standardisa-
tions. Both the removal of outliers and standardisation are common procedures
during dataset preprocessing. Moreover, we systematically change the cluster over-
lap and cluster populations for the two datasets, both of which are crucial to K-
means accuracy. The K-means landscapes for all these modified datasets allows us
to understand the effect of the most important dataset features on cost function
topography.
In all cases we observe that the cost function topography changes independently
of K-means accuracy; a dataset modification that increases clustering accuracy can
also make the cost function surface harder to explore. Therefore, the maximum
accuracy is not always sufficient to understand K-means success, and we must also
consider the feasibility of obtaining these accurate solutions. The K-means land-
scapes allow us to address the second of these considerations. For most dataset
properties the resulting topography changes are largely systematic, and the con-
cepts can be applied to novel datasets to predict K-means performance, highlight
possible problems, and select a sampling strategy to improve future applications.
