WestminsterResearch
Introduction: In 1978, the Alma Ata Declaration pledged global solidarity towards the
progressive realisation of the right to health for all by the year 2000. The strategy was to be
achieved using the principles of Primary Health Care, such as the promotion of equitable
access to health, through an intersectoral lens with the active engagement of communities.
This target was not achieved, due to the lack of political commitment. In 2015 seventeen
new Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) were established to reduce global inequities by
2030. We need to learn lessons from the past and focus on creating a more just global
health system. The COVID 19 pandemic will have long term economic and social
consequences, which could reduce health system resources and capacity. However,
promoting the right to health could lead to a more equitable and peaceful global society.
Ensuring timely access to essential effective health care services is a key priority for the third
Sustainable Development Goal, with Universal Health Coverage as a specific target.
Aim: The aim of this research was to present the significant contribution of original
knowledge that the selected published works contributed to global health policy discourse,
on the factors required for improving timely access to health services, especially in fragile
contexts.  There were three research questions answered: what are the factors needed to
improve timely health service utilisation in fragile contexts? Is Universal Health Coverage the
same as the right to health, as set out in the Alma Ata? Can Social Health Insurance alone
achieve Universal Health Coverage to meet Sustainable Development Goal three?
The literature: Nine peer reviewed published papers were selected, covering publications
from 2008 to 2018. All papers were reviewed by academic and professional peers, along
with organisational or journal editors. Six papers resulted from primary research, published
by either the contracting organisation, or a peer reviewed journal. One paper was a
scholarly comment published in a peer reviewed journal and one publication was the result
of a scoping review, published by Save the Children.
Methodology and theoretical framework: A mixed method participatory action approach
was used for seven of the nine papers. These seven published research papers combined
secondary data collection and analysis, with the collection of primary qualitative research.
The former was analysed through excel files and the qualitative findings were analysed
through thematic analysis and workshops with participants. One briefing report resulted
from a scoping review or peer reviewed material and health financing grey papers.  All
research was carried out with a critical enquiry approach using evidence to reduce health
inequities. An adapted theoretical framework approach was used to analyse the
publications to support the overall commentary. The framework utilised merged the
Primary Health Care principles of equity, voice and governance through an intersectoral lens
with Gaventas four expressions of power. This adapted framework captured the critical
enquiry approach of the collective evidence, to support change in health policy and practice.
Evidenced based health and nutrition advocacy can strengthen the power with and to those
with unequal access to health. Each publication was published at key moments, to
encourage change.
Findings: The original research demonstrated that Universal Health Coverage is not the
same as the right to health, as health requires concurrent investment in multiple sectors
such as social protection, food security, nutrition, water and sanitation and quality
education. However, it could be an effective stepping stone for the progressive realisation
of the right to health. The research found no evidence to support Social Health Insurance
alone could achieve Universal Health Coverage. Where it was implemented successfully it
used public taxation funds to cover health for the poorest. Even in these situations the co-
payments led to delays in timely health seeking. Overall, four factors were identified as
essential to ensure timely health service utilisation, especially in fragile contexts: (i) Health
services provided free at the point of access, through publicly funded taxation, were more
equitable than social health insurance or user changes. (ii) Concurrent investment in social
protection, food security, nutrition, water and sanitation and quality education with
community health services, could prevent 2.5 million under five-year-old child deaths
annually. (iii) Services are more effective when there is active engagement with
communities. (iv) Good governance has resulted in reductions in under five morality rates,
however, the lack of financial support for the World Health Organisation has resulted in
fragmented global health governance, which must be urgently addressed.
Further research is needed to support the strengthening of resilient health systems, free at
point of access, through national taxation systems.
Key words: Alma Ata, Right to Health, Equity, Nutrition, Voice, Global Health Governance,
Fragile contexts, Astana Declaration and Universal Health Coverage
Chapter one: Global Policies and Targets to Promote the Right to Health for All from 1978
The thesis reflects the significant contribution of original knowledge that the selected nine
published works contributed to global health policy discourse, focusing on the factors
required for improving timely access to health services, especially in fragile contexts. The
commentary calls for renewed commitment to the Alma Ata principles of equity and voice,
through an intersectoral lens, for the progressive realisation of the right to health for all.
The Alma Ata quote below is particularly relevant in todays pandemic-affected world,
where inequities are rising, and peace seems to be a distant dream.
What the Alma Ata promised:
The promotion and protection of the health of the people, is essential to sustained
economic and social development, and contributes to a better quality of life and to
world peace Alma Ata Declaration (Alma Ata Declaration, WHO 1978).
