OpenAIR citation: 
For most of Rwandas post-independence past, the country has been marked by ethnic feuding,
mass population movements and long exiles in neighboring countries, and civil wars that
culminated in the genocide in 1994. As this research shows in its review of literature of the history
of Rwandas post-independence period, the civil wars of ethnically differentiated access to power
and wealth have had social, cultural and economic effects.
Hundreds of thousands of people were driven into long time exiles and others were born in
neighboring countries acquiring foreign cultures, education and professional experiences. After the
civil war and genocide, the exiled Rwandan communities abroad [Rwandaliens] returned and
integrated with the indigenous [Rwandigenous], and together they have charted a path for Rwanda
and in particular its present leadership styles. Twenty years on, Rwanda has been described by its
development partners as a country on an uphill economic recovery trajectory.
However, a note of caution must be sounded. How has foreign culture  acquired by Rwandaliens
affected indigenous Rwandan culture, and its influence thereof on the present leadership
styles?
This thesis assesses the most common leadership styles in companies/organizations in Rwanda,
in order to build a theory of the predominant leadership styles and culture in Rwanda in the
context of the post-genocide era.
In examining the changes that have taken place in business/organizations in terms of leadership
style and culture in post-genocide Rwanda, this research contributes to growing body of research
on cognizance of cultural influence on leadership styles in Africa. It argues that failure to recognize
the differences that exist between African and other (western) contexts or insufficient cognizance
of local cultural contexts leads to ineffectual leadership styles. The African cultural particularity
differences addressed in this thesis as pertinent to leadership styles are; collectivism, family
arrangements, language barrier, philosopy of business, and contextual surprises. This was
accomplished through analysis of stakeholders views and perspectives, conducted in an inductive
methodological stance. This is because such inferences are best understood through a process of
immersion in the context being studied.
Specifically, through narrative interviews, the researcher sought to explore experiences, different
ideas, attitudes, and views held by middle managers in companies in Rwandan. The research
sought to explore the stakeholders perspectives on the most common leadership styles, what
influenced their leadership styles, and their view of culture in Rwanda.
Emerging from the data, five leadership styles were identified; paternalism, 'task-oriented',
'team-oriented', 'self-protective' and hybrid style, the last of which combines the strength of
traditional and more contemporary leadership styles. These styles are discussed in the context of
societal culture, informal training (personality and family upbringing), formal training (education,
professional training, work experience), as well as organizational culture (policies and laws) in
post-genocide context.
In order to draw conclusion about the causal connection between the predominant leadership
styles and culture, a causal inference framework is used based on eight cultural variables
identified by GLOBE with the occurrence of an effect based on the views of research participants.
Causal inference was an important aspect in the process of developing a theory that takes as its
starting points the perspectives and words of native members (research participants) of the
culture whose beliefs and behaviors are being studied.
Research findings suggests that four of the five leadership styles presented are endorsed by the
sample of leaders  paternalistic, task-oriented, team oriented and hybrid, but not the self-
protective style. The case is made, from the perspective of participants, that leadership style is
influenced by several variables, including cultural background, professional background and, to a
degree, organizational culture. Whereas the emergent theory reflects the particularity of the
context being studied, the constructs of the accounts or descriptions of the concepts are
expressed in a worldview of existing theories and conceptual frameworks.
By presenting the particularity of the context (emic perspective) and the worldview of leadership
styles, the thesis provides a new thinking of the questions of leadership styles and culture. The
styles are not mutually exclusive to specific cultural values and that some styles may fall in more
or even all categories of cultural values.
