Russia's Internal Borders: 
Why did Russia not disintegrate in the 1990s? For nearly a decade, political analysts,
Russian specialists, pundits, politicians, and even President Boris El'tsin warned that
the country stood on the brink of collapse. It was thought that the forces that tore the
Soviet Union asunder would continue their work within Russia's borders. Of the
most striking political developments over the turbulent El'tsin era, one must surely
include the simultaneous processes of political and economic decentralization, the
rapid expansion of executive power at all levels of government, and the growth of
regional autonomy - the latter reflected in part by the sheer variety of political
regimes among Russian regions. As regional administrations began to flex their
muscles, the requirements of democratization and the preservation of the Russian
Federation presented contradictory mandates. The separatist politics pursued by the
leading Russian republics, and the outright attempt at secession by Chechnia, seemed
to confirm that post-Soviet Russia's birth certificate was issued with an expiration
date.
But Russia did not cease to exist. After the deft transfer of power to Vladimir
Putin, Russia's new president attacked the sources of regional autonomy and began a
re-centralization of the state. The governors were removed from the upper house of
parliament, the Federation Council (Sovet Federatsii). Regional legislation was to be
brought in line with federal law in short order. The tax code was restructured in the
center's favor and regions were encouraged to abandon bilateral agreements signed
with Moscow during the El'tsin period. To monitor and coordinate politics in
Russia's 89 regions, seven Federal Districts (Federal'nye Okrugd) were created as an
extra-constitutional reform of the Presidential Administration. And with few
exceptions, Russia's governors capitulated almost overnight. Why? Did the
disorganization of El'tsin's regional policy mask the brittleness of regional autonomy?
Is Russia really an aspiring unitary state, temporarily masquerading as a federation?
Possibly, but such arguments conceal the diversity of political regimes sheltered
within the borders of Russia's regions, ranging from (relatively) democratic to
sultanistic. Could such diversity persist if regional autonomy is on the decline? The
one area which appeared to remain impervious to both outright change and credible
threats from Moscow throughout the 1990s was the question of altering Russia's
internal borders. Under Putin, the country's internal borders are on the move.
The change is not coincidental. Consider the difference that ten years can
make: in 1991, internal borders could be promoted in federal status (often
unilaterally), activated as salient components of ethno-national identity, identified
with arbitrary and imperial Soviet central planning, and utilized to claim jurisdiction
over natural resources and tax collection within a region's territorial boundaries. But
by 2001, the asymmetrical federal structure that enshrined differences in regional
status was under assault, the front runners of ethno-national separatism became the
outliers 1 , anti-imperial claims all but vanished from center-regional relations, and
Moscow was reclaiming its jurisdiction over taxation and natural resources. From
this brief comparison it seems likely that the politics of Russia's internal borders is
inextricably bound with the construction of the Russian state, the emergence of
regional political regimes, and the content of regional (and possibly national)
1 "Obviously, time has revealed the 'ethnic' revival account of a potential disintegration of Russia as
flawed, since non-compliance with federal state-building and secession potential has been a serious
challenge in just two republics: Tartarstan and Chechnya." James Hughes, "Managing Secession
Potential in the Russian Federation," in Ethnicity and Territory in the Former Soviet Union, ed. James
Hughes and Gwendolyn Sasse (London: Cass, 2002), 40.
identity. 2
It is surprising, then, that there are no existing studies of Russia's internal
borders. The reason for this has less to do with Russian studies than with the relative
lack of attention to borders in political science. This study argues that borders are
social and political institutions in their own right that are vital yet contingent
components of the state. 3 Borders bear directly on the cultivation (or dissipation) of
state capacity as reservoirs for identity and normative legitimacy. Border changes are
rare, but often spectacular when they occur. Most of the time, they organize
constituencies, resources, and interests below the level of political awareness as
accepted rules of the game. When the state's territorial shape is in flux, however,
borders are claimed and contested by actors on the national, provincial, and local
levels of the regime. The outcomes of such "transforming episodes" define the shape
of politics, the bases of the state's legitimacy, its potential capacity, and ultimately the
nature of the regime. 4
The empirical touchstone for this study is Vladimir Putin's reform of center-
regional relations during his first term in office from 2000 to 2004. Beginning with
the creation of the seven Federal Districts, and culminating in the accomplishment of
the first regional merger in December 2003, Putin's first term constitutes just such a
"transforming episode" in which the decentralization of the El'tsin era was reversed,
2 This set of relationships is not unique to Russia. Duchacek's study of territorial communities
suggests multiple historical analogies. Ivo D. Duchacek, Comparative Federalism: The Territorial
Dimension of Politics (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc., 1970), Ch.s 1-3.
3 "...the territorial shape of a state, qua institution, is one of its most salient contingent dimensions.
Understanding patterns of change and stability in the territorial composition of a state thus entails
analysis of processes of institutionalization and deinstitutionalization." Original emphasis. lan S.
Lustick, "Thresholds of Opportunity and Barriers to Change in the Right-Sizing of States," in Right-
Sizing the State: The Politics of Moving Borders, ed. Brendan O'Leary, lan S. Lustick, and Thomas
Callaghy (New York: Oxford University Press, 2001), 80.
4 "State borders are politically important because they serve as a constraint which advantage certain
groups and rival elites within the state at the expense of others. Substantial changes in the territorial
shape of a state represent institution transforming episodes. Struggles over the size and shape of the
state must accordingly be understood as struggles over the 'rules of the game."' Ibid., 79.
the regime abandoned the rhetorical legitimacy of claims to demoralization in
exchange for an etatist veneer, and the diminishing of Russia's central state capacity
ground to a halt. As such, it provides an opportunity to re-evaluate the scholarly
literature on Russia's center-regional relations in the 1990s. In particular, this study is
concerned to resolve the puzzle of how Putin has managed to revive central state
capacity, seemingly out of thin air.
While such an approach is something of a departure from the existing
literature, examining internal borders as institutions provides greater leverage for
understanding the puzzling trends in Russia's center-regional relations. In this regard
it differs from existing studies of Russian regional politics, which take different pieces
of the puzzle in isolation. It also reveals deeper issues that are often neglected in
political science regarding the relationship of internal borders and territorial
integration, to state-building and democratization. This is not to say that these issues
have been altogether neglected. The bulk of Western literature on Russian regional
politics to date has focused on idiographic case studies, though by the mid-1990s one
could identify three broad areas of theoretical concentration: federalism, ethno-
nationalism, and the dynamics of regime transitions. 5 Taken together, these studies
show a collective movement in focus from suggesting why the Russian Federation
was at risk of disintegration in the early-1990s, to puzzling over how it remained
intact at the decade's end. The following sections take these approaches in turn with
