Between the Diaspora and the Nation-State:
Based on fourteen-months of multi-sited, ethnographic fieldwork that compares two Hmong
communities in Vang Vieng, Laos, and Sacramento, California in the United States, my doctoral
thesis examines how the Hmong diaspora is constituted in the absence of a territorial ethnic
homeland. Although scholars claim that the Hmong originated in the southwestern part of China,
many Hmong are uncertain about their origins and have lost their connections to the ancestral
homeland. This thesis suggests we examine diasporas as a dialectical process involving both
transnational continuity and national differentiation. Despite their further migratory dispersal
after the Vietnam War, Hmong in Laos and the United States have actively created a
transnational diasporic community by maintaining their cultural practices across national
borders, particularly in the domains of kinship practices and spiritual rituals.
At the same time, diasporic Hmong have also created partial homes in the nation-states
where they reside. Therefore, their ethnic traditions and perceptions are transformed according
to different national contexts, such as local socioeconomic conditions, state policies, and access
to economic capital. This results in cultural differences within the diaspora. In addition, Hmong
in different countries disagree about their relative position in the diaspora in relation to each
other, leading to discursive fragmentation. As a result, diasporas are refracted through different
national affiliations.
Nonetheless, the sense of national belonging among diasporic Hmong remains partial
because they continue to experience social, economic, and ethnic marginalization as an ethnic
minority group in both Laos and the United States, which causes them to maintain a diasporic
affiliation to Hmong scattered in other countries as an alternative source of ethnic belonging. In
this sense, the Hmong are constantly positioned in-between the diaspora and the nation-state.
