Niek schreuder PHD Thesis - Ready examination April 30 2020
External beam radiation therapy using accelerated protons has undergone significant
development since the first patients were treated with accelerated protons in 1954.  Widespread
adoption of proton therapy is now taking place and is fully justified based on early clinical and
technical research and development.  Two of the main advantages of proton radiotherapy are
improved healthy tissue sparing and increased dose conformation.  The latter has been improved
dramatically through the clinical realization of Pencil Beam Scanning (PBS).  Other significant
advancements in the past 30 years have also helped to establish proton radiotherapy as a major
clinical modality in the cancer-fighting arsenal.  Proton radiotherapy technologies are constantly
evolving, and several major breakthroughs have been accomplished which could allow for a major
revolution in proton therapy if clinically implemented.
In this thesis, I will present research and innovative developments that I personally initiated or
participated in that brought proton radiotherapy to its current state as well as my ongoing
involvement in leading research and technological developments which will aid in the mass
adoption of proton radiotherapy.  These include beam dosimetry, patient positioning technologies,
and creative methods that verify the Monte Carlo dose calculations which are now used in proton
treatment planning.  I will also discuss major technological advances concerning beam delivery
that should be implemented clinically and new paradigms towards patient positioning.  Many of
these developments and technologies can benefit the cancer patient population worldwide and
are now ready for mass clinical implementation.  These developments will improve proton
radiotherapy efficiencies and further reduce the cost of proton therapy facilities.
This thesis therefore reflects my historical and ongoing efforts to meet market costs and time
demands so that the clinical benefit of proton radiotherapy can be realized by a more significant
fraction of cancer patients worldwide.
