Search for medium effects with jet-like hadron correlations at ALICE at the LHC
We present an analysis of the properties of jets in protonproton and leadlead
collisions at the ALICE experiment at the CERN Large Hadron Collider, using the
technique of two-particle angular correlations. The data sample comprises proton
collisions at energies of
s = 7 TeV and
s = 2.76 TeV, and lead collisions at a
nucleonnucleon collision energy of
sNN = 2.76 TeV, from data taking periods in
2010 and 2011.
The jet width and transverse momentum imbalance, quantified by the jet fragmen-
tation transverse momentum jT and the net partonic transverse momentum kT re-
spectively, were studied in minimum bias proton collisions. The width was found to
be independent of hadron transverse momentum, with a value of
j2T  0.8 GeV.
This is higher than measurements from earlier experiments at lower beam energies,
consistent with theoretical expectations.
k2T was found to increase with collision
energy and also with the transverse momentum of the hadrons in the jet.
The dependence of jet yield on the produced multiplicity was studied in proton
and ion collisions, with the multiplicity providing an estimator for the ion colli-
sion centrality. The ratio of awayside to nearside yield was studied, with a view
to identifying suppression of jet momentum through interaction with a deconfined
quark-gluon plasma. This suppression was identified in lead collisions as expected
from previous results, but no suppression was observed in high multiplicity proton
collisions.
The jet width and transverse momentum imbalance were also studied as a function
of multiplicity, with the width quantified by jT and the imbalance quantified by the
correlation function awayside peak width. In proton collisions, the jet width was
measured to be
j2T  0.8 GeV independently of multiplicity; this was consistent
with the measurements in minimum bias collisions. No firm evidence of medium
effects was observed in measurements of the awayside peak width in proton or lead
collisions, but the jet width was observed to decrease in lead collisions of increasing
centrality. This was interpreted as a suppression of the high momentum hadrons in
the jets.
