Quantum Reinforcement Learning for 
This thesis proposes Quantum Reinforcement Learning (QRL) as an improvement to
conventional reinforcement learning-based dynamic spectrum access used within cognitive
radio networks. The aim is to overcome the slow convergence problem associated with
exploration within reinforcement learning schemes.
A literature review for the background of the carried out research work is illustrated.
Review of research works on learning-based assignment techniques as well as quantum search
techniques is provided. Modelling of three traditional dynamic channel assignment techniques
is illustrated and the advantage characteristic of each technique is discussed. These techniques
have been simulated to provide a comparison with learning based techniques, including QRL.
Reinforcement learning techniques are used as a direct comparison with the Quantum
Reinforcement Learning approaches. The elements of Quantum computation are then
presented as an introduction to quantum search techniques. The Grover search algorithm is
introduced. The algorithm is discussed from a theoretical perspective. The Grover algorithm
is then used for the first time as a spectrum allocation scheme and compared to conventional
schemes.  Quantum Reinforcement Learning (QRL) is introduced as a natural evolution of the
quantum search. The Grover search algorithm is combined as a decision making mechanism
with conventional Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms resulting in a more efficient
learning engine. Simulation results are provided and discussed. The convergence speed has
been significantly increased. The beneficial effects of Quantum Reinforcement Learning
(QRL) become more pronounced as the traffic load increases. The thesis shows that both
system performance and capacity can be improved. Depending on the traffic load, the system
capacity has improved by 9-84% from a number of users supported perspective. It also
demonstrated file delay reduction for up to an average of 26% and 2.8% throughput
improvement.
