A possible lowintermediate temperature proton conductor based on Silicon Oxide Phosphate, Stefan Saxin
The main material studied in this project is silicon oxide phosphate, often referred to
in the literature as Si5O(PO4)6. This material has highly unusual coordination of the
silicon (octahedral, as well as the more common tetrahedral). The structure is
hexagonal, it has been assigned to space group R -3 and lattice parameters a  7.85 ,
c  24.14 .
This works main focus is on understanding the interplay between structure and
properties in order to enhance protonic conductivity for a fuel cell electrolyte.
Silicon oxide phosphate was synthesised with the solid-state method, using a gel
precursor made from H3PO4, water and SiO2. Various compositions were made with
different P/Si starting ratios, ranging between 0.57  1.5.
There were small but significant differences in the a,b axes for the different
compositions that corresponded to conductivity behaviour of hydrothermally treated
P-Si compositions. This correlation was also found to appear in 31P NMR for the
chemical shift at - 44 ppm for untreated P-Si compositions as well as in the
temperatures of the DTA peaks for the hydrothermally treated compositions. This all
implies that this particular P-Si system with the addition of water becomes a ternary
system that enables protonic conductivity.
A proposed mechanism for the protonic conductivity is given where it is suggested
that protons flow along the internal channels of the structure using two waters that
provide dual pathways for protons. This is possible through utilization of a proton
thought to be in the structure (a P_OH bond of 1.57 ).
Protonic conductivity could further be increased in the system by incorporating 85%
H3PO4 in the P-Si materials, thus these materials act as matrices for the phosphoric
acid.
Another composition, Ge5O(PO4)6 with 5% extra germanium, was hydrothermally
treated and found to have protonic conductivity at higher temperatures than the silicon
oxide phosphate analogues.
