Reinforcement Learning and Reward Estimation
Modelling dialogue management as a reinforcement learning task enables a system
to learn to act optimally by maximising a reward function. This reward function is
designed to induce the system behaviour required for goal-oriented applications,
which usually means fulfilling the users goal as efficiently as possible. However,
in real-world spoken dialogue systems, the reward is hard to measure, because the
goal of the conversation is often known only to the user. Certainly, the system can
ask the user if the goal has been satisfied, but this can be intrusive. Furthermore, in
practice, the reliability of the users response has been found to be highly variable.
In addition, due to the sparsity of the reward signal and the large search space,
reinforcement learning-based dialogue policy optimisation is often slow. This thesis
presents several approaches to address these problems.
To better evaluate a dialogue for policy optimisation, two methods are proposed.
First, a recurrent neural network-based predictor pre-trained from off-line data
is proposed to estimate task success during subsequent on-line dialogue policy
learning to avoid noisy user ratings and problems related to not knowing the users
goal. Second, an on-line learning framework is described where a dialogue policy
is jointly trained alongside a reward function modelled as a Gaussian process with
active learning. This mitigates the noisiness of user ratings and minimises user
intrusion. It is shown that both off-line and on-line methods achieve practical policy
learning in real-world applications, while the latter provides a more general joint
learning system directly from users.
To enhance the policy learning speed, the use of reward shaping is explored and
shown to be effective and complementary to the core policy learning algorithm.
Furthermore, as deep reinforcement learning methods have the potential to scale to
very large tasks, this thesis also investigates the application to dialogue systems.
Two sample-efficient algorithms, trust region actor-critic with experience replay
(TRACER) and episodic natural actor critic with experience replay (eNACER),
are introduced. In addition, a corpus of demonstration data is utilised to pre-
train the models prior to on-line reinforcement learning to handle the cold start
problem. Combining these two methods, a practical approach is demonstrated
to effectively learn deep reinforcement learning-based dialogue policies in a task-
oriented information seeking domain.
Overall, this thesis provides solutions which allow truly on-line and continuous
policy learning in spoken dialogue systems.
