Role and regulation of chemotaxis and
Fertilisers are used to provide crop plants with essential nutrients such as nitrogen
but with a high energy cost and detrimental environmental effects. The symbiosis of
legumes with rhizobia exhibits none of these problems since the bacteria provide fixed
nitrogen directly to the plant. Further understanding of the initiation of symbiosis
may enable improvements to the farming of crop legumes and enable the same
processes to be mimicked in engineered systems of other crops. Although motility
and chemotaxis are known to be crucial for competitive plant root colonisation
(the first stage of symbiosis), little is known about their importance after this
stage. In this thesis, I aimed to describe the importance of chemotaxis and motility
in sequential stages of symbiosis up to the generation of root nodules filled with
nitrogen-fixing rhizobia. To this end, the chemotaxis and motility systems of
the model rhizobia Rhizobium leguminosarum biovar viciae 3841 (Rlv3841) were
characterised, in both free-living and plant-associated states.
Rlv3841 motility is driven by flagella rotation modulated by two chemotaxis
systems, Che1 and Che2, that respond to signals sensed by chemoreceptors. In
this work we found that Rlv3841 has a diverse set of chemoreceptors that enable
the bacteria to sense and respond to a variety of chemical gradients, by both
externally sensing in the periplasm and internally sensing metabolic state. We also
found a novel system that halts the bacteria in response to high concentrations
of TCA cycle intermediates independent of the chemotaxis systems. An inorganic
phosphate uptake system (PstSCAB) and a putative methyltransferase (encoded
by RL3464) were found to be critical to the response, although their downstream
effectors were not identified. Finally, we characterised the importance of the
chemotaxis and flagella systems of Rlv3841 at sequential stages of the symbiosis.
This involved marking bacteria with luminescence, fluorescence and enzymatic
activity and assaying the bacteria by optical imaging, flow cytometry and staining.
We found that there are several critical stages in which chemotaxis and motility are
essential and that these occur after the plant root has been colonised by the rhizobia.
In particular, we found that Che1 and flagella are important for movement around
the root and to root hair tips and that Che2 is involved in infection thread formation
and bacteroid differentiation. Overall, this work improves our understanding of
the chemotaxis and motility systems of Rlv3841 and their importance across the
whole Rhizobium-legume symbiosis cycle.
