REPROGRAMMING ACTIVITY IN MAMMALIAN ES CELLS
The cloning of Dolly the sheep and other mammals via nuclear transfer showed that the
adult somatic nucleus could have its developmental potential restored. This restoration is
the result of heritable epigenetic modifications made by nuclear reprogramming
mechanisms. Little is known about factors affecting such nuclear reprogramming and
even less about the mechanisms responsible. A murine cell hybrid system was established and optimised to study nuclear reprogramming of somatic cells via fusion with embryonic stem cells. The system generated hybrid clones which displayed an ES phenotpye and in which the somatic Oct-
4 promoter had been reactivated. These cell lines expressed alkaline phosphatase activity
and undifferentiated cell marker SSEA-4 but not markers associated with differentiated
cells (SSEA-1 and CD90). These lines were pluripotent, dmonstrating the ability to form
the three embryonic lineages both in vivo and in vitro.
This system was used to investigate whether several treatments (all either known or
expected to perturb global gene expression patterns) affected nuclear reprogramming.
Moderate heat shocking of thymocytes prior to fusion with ES cells resulted in increased
reprogrammed hybridisation frequencies but as fusion was also increased it was
impossible to verify whether an increase in nuclear reprogramming was partly
responsible. Serum starvation of primary embryonic fibroblasts significantly increased
nuclear reprogramming, as did ES cell confluence. ES cells were found to lose their
capacity to reprogram as they reached high passage numbers. Constitutive or transient
expression of nucleoplasmin in HM-1 cells did not increase reprogramming but instead
to cell death.Attempts were made to generate hybrids from human ES cells, but no hybrids were
successfully generated. This was at least partly due to human ES cells being more
difficult to fuse with other cells even using a range of different fusagens. Finally it was
found that treating human ES cells with hyaluronidase prior to electropulsing resulted in
5x more heterokaronformation indicating that the ECM of the these cells had prevented
fusion. Much remains to be learnt about the mechanisms underpinning reprogramming.