Study of the Drell-Yan process with the
The Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN, at which protons collide at un-
precedented center of mass energies and very high instantaneous luminosity, gives
unique possibilities for precise tests of the Standard Model and to search for new
physics phenomena. A precise prediction of the processes at the LHC is essential
and the knowledge of the parton density functions (PDFs) of the proton plays a
key role in this.
In this thesis, three analyses covering different aspects of the Drell-Yan process
are presented. In the first analysis a new heavy neutral gauge boson, a so-called
Z  boson, is searched for. Those new gauge bosons are predicted by some theo-
ries extending the Standard Model gauge group to solve some of its conceptual
problems. Decays of the Z  boson in final states with a lepton (` = e, ) and
the corresponding anti-lepton are considered. The data in use were collected by
the ATLAS experiment in the year 2015+2016 at a center of mass energy of
13 TeV. The collected data corresponds to an integrated luminosity of 36.1 fb1.
The Standard Model prediction for the expected background is estimated with
Monte Carlo simulations and methods based on data. The resulting spectrum of
the di-lepton invariant mass is tested, using statistical methods, for differences
between data and the Standard Model predictions. No significant deviation from
the Standard Model predictions is found. Much more stringent limits have been
set on the parameters of interest for various models comparing with the Run 1
results. For new gauge bosons, Z SSM , Z
and Z
predicted in extended gauge
theory models, the observed lower limits on mass have been set to be 4.5 TeV,
4.1 TeV and 3.8 TeV at 95% confidence level, respectively. While for the Contact
Interactions, the observed lower limits on the corresponding energy scale  are
set between 24 TeV and 40 TeV depending on the different scenarios.
In the second analysis, the double-differential cross section measurement of the
process pp  Z/  `+` at a center of mass energy of
s = 8 TeV is used
in a PDF fit to put constraints on the photon PDF of the proton. The analysed
data were recorded by the ATLAS experiment in the year 2012 and correspond
to an integrated luminosity of 20.3 fb1. These data are sensitive to the photon
structure of the photon and allow a determination of x(x,Q2) with uncertainties
at the 30% level for 0.02  x  0.1. The results of this study, is in agreement
and exhibit smaller PDF uncertainties that the only other existing photon PDF fit
from LHC data, the NNPDF3.0QED analysis, based on previous LHC Drell-Yan
measurements. The results are also in agreement within uncertainties with two
recent theoretical calculations of the photon PDF, LUXqed and HKR16.
In the third analysis, a measurement of the double-differential Drell-Yan cross
section in the di-muon channel is presented differentially in terms of di-muon
invariant mass and double differentially in terms of di-muon invariant mass and
rapidity. The cross sections are measured using 3.2 fb1 of ATLAS data taken dur-
ing 2015 at a centre of mass energy of
s = 13 TeV. Dedicated studies to address the
main challenges of the analysis, namely the understanding of the trigger SF and
of the muon isolation are reported, and the data-driven methods for estimating
the QCD/multijet background are described in detail. The extracted fiducial cross
sections agree within uncertainties with the theoretical predictions from Powheg
interfaced with the Pythia v8.1 parton shower program.
Finally, due to the page limit in this thesis, my work for the ATLAS Collaboration
is not presented because it was not strictly related to the physics covered here.
This work consists in six public (PUB) notes: two on the MC modelling of V +jets
processes [1, 2], three on the MC modelling of the tt+jets process (with particular
emphasis on the implementation of new NLO merging schemes in the ATLAS
software) [35] and one about the inclusion of tt data recorded by the ATLAS
detector at 8 TeV (both lepton+jets and di-lepton decay channels) in a combined
PDF fit, together with the ep deep inelastic scattering data from HERA and the
inclusive ATLASW and Z boson data recorder at 7 TeV [6]. During my PhD course
I got involved in other publications which are mentioned in Chapter 4.
