Microsoft Word - Thesis - submission copy - corrected.docx
In 533, Justinian I ordered the conquest of the former Roman provinces of Africa, which had
been lost to the Vandals a century earlier.  The reconquest has been regarded, by
contemporaries and modern scholars alike, as one of the defining successes of the reign.
However, despite the evident achievements of the campaign, Roman victory over the Vandals
marked little more than the beginning of the Eastern Roman Empires attempt to consolidate
its position in Africa.  The unanticipated threat posed by hostilities from the Berber tribes
would continue until 548.
Roman-Berber relations, unlike other aspects of Justinians foreign relations, have received
comparatively little attention, and this study aims to reassess the establishment of Roman
authority in Africa and the Eastern Roman Empires response to the Berber threat.  In
particular, it considers whether this response should be seen as a series of ad hoc reactions to
immediate circumstances, or whether it is possible to identify a coherent Roman policy vis--
vis the Berbers.
The major conclusions of this study fall in two areas.  First, it argues that Roman objectives in
Africa were far more limited than has generally been supposed, with the empires territorial
ambitions not extending beyond key coastal positions which offered strategic and commercial
advantages, and from which the empire could project its limited authority into the interior.
Second, this study concludes that the Eastern Roman Empires actions with respect to the
Berber tribes lacked coherence.  Attempts to implement a system of client rulers were
unsuccessful, partly as a result of the competition between individual Berber leaders as they
sought to establish independent polities within the frontiers of the former Roman Empire; and
partly as a result of an increasing lack of resources, as well as the instability caused by
constantly changing leadership within the African civil and military administrations, which
prevented the development of coherent long term strategies for addressing the Berber threat.
