Intensity-dependent effects in the
The high energy physics community considers electron-positron linear col-
liders in order to complement the results obtained at the Large Hadron
Collider. In order to achieve the design luminosity above 1034 cm2s1,
these linear colliders require a nanometer beam size at the Interaction
Point (IP). The electron and positron beams are transported inside the
Beam Delivery Systems (BDS) from the linear accelerators (LINACS) to
the IP. The beam is focused by two strong quadrupoles in the Final Fo-
cus System (FFS) where chromatic effects and aberrations are corrected
thanks to a local chromaticity correction scheme. Two projects are being
studied now, the International Linear Collider (ILC) and the Compact
Linear Collider (CLIC). Their FFS and the local chromaticity correction
are being tested at the Accelerator Test Facility 2 (ATF2) at KEK in
Japan. This test facility has been studying this matter for more than 20
years, achieving two of its main goals: obtaining a stable beam size around
37 nm at the IP and an orbit stabilisation with a nanometer precision at
the IP. However, these goals were achieved at 10% of the nominal beam
intensity. Indeed, when increasing the beam intensity, the beam becomes
more unstable and its size grows. This is mainly due to wakefields in the
ATF2 extraction line. Ultra-relativistic electrons going through the beam
pipe interact with the surrounding structure and create an electromag-
netic field, the wakefield. This field interacts with electrons inside the
same bunch (short-range wakefield) but also with electrons in the follow-
ing bunches (long-range wakefield). In ATF2, one considers that bellows,
flanges and cavity BPMs are the main sources of wakefield. This effect
results in increasing significantly the beam size at the IP. This thesis will
show the impact of these intensity-dependent effects inside ATF2 and
how to mitigate them. It will also show the impact of the same intensity-
dependent effects in future electron-positron linear colliders, the ILC and
