University of Bradford eThesis 
I came to this research study as a result of a long journey, having worked
with people living with dementia and their families since qualifying as a
Mental Health Nurse in 1982. In the mid 1980s I was introduced to working
therapeutically with families by Alison Roper Hall, a Consultant Clinical
Psychologist with expertise in family therapy. This was an important learning
opportunity for me and influenced my thinking and my practice going forward.
For example, I undertook a small research study exploring how families
understood and coped with dementia for my MA dissertation in 1995. This
research emphasised for me how important it was to view dementia in the
context of family relationships, recognising that all family members including
the person with dementia actively influenced how dementia was experienced.
During this time, opportunities for learning and developing my practice
encompassed working therapeutically with families living with dementia
including those families experiencing young onset dementia. Working with
people living with young onset dementia and their families brought the need
for a relational context to practice into sharp focus for me because family
members such as children, young people and parents were highly visible and
had needs that were not always met by services.  Furthermore, people living
with less common forms of dementia such as frontotemporal dementia (FTD)
appeared to experience particular challenges to relationships. Their
experience appeared markedly different from families living with Alzheimers
disease, because FTD impacted directly on relationships due to its effect on
social and emotional functioning. The challenges these families faced
represented a steep learning curve for me as I tried to understand how to
help them, particularly in the context of an absence of relevant research to
guide and support interventions.
While research into FTD gained momentum between 2000 and 2010, this
rarely translated to a focus on interventions which supported people living
with FTD and their families. Furthermore, the perspectives of people living
with bvFTD remained unheard in this research, despite a broader
acknowledgement in research and practice of the need to achieve this
(Wilkinson 2002). Thus my efforts to develop my understanding and support
families including the person with bvFTD were often challenged and there
were times when it felt I could offer little more than a listening ear. Over time I
realised that this was a significant gap that needed to be addressed. Thus in
2010, I began this research study to explore the family experience of living
with bvFTD.
My experience as a practitioner, researcher and educator has influenced my
reasons for undertaking this study and has affected the way that I have
carried it out. Additionally it influences what I hope this study will achieve.
This research has inevitably influenced my perceptions of myself as a
partner, mother, step-mother and grandmother within my own family, with all
the joys and challenges this brings and therefore influenced the way in which
I have interpreted the data and developed the stories being told. In this
thesis, I provide an account of a qualitative longitudinal study with seven
families who live with behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD).
Furthermore I consider the practice implications of their experience.
