Textual Data Mining Applications for Industrial Knowledge Management Solutions
In recent years knowledge has become an important resource to enhance the business
and many activities are required to manage these knowledge resources well and help
companies to remain competitive within industrial environments. The data available
in most industrial setups is complex in nature and multiple different data formats may
be generated to track the progress of different projects either related to developing
new products or providing better services to the customers. Knowledge Discovery
from different databases requires considerable efforts and energies and data mining
techniques serve the purpose through handling structured data formats. If however the
data is semi-structured or unstructured the combined efforts of data and text mining
technologies may be needed to bring fruitful results. This thesis focuses on issues
related to discovery of knowledge from semi-structured or unstructured data formats
through the applications of textual data mining techniques to automate the
classification of textual information into two different categories or classes which can
then be used to help manage the knowledge available in multiple data formats.
Applications of different data mining techniques to discover valuable information and
knowledge from manufacturing or construction industries have been explored as part
of a literature review. The application of text mining techniques to handle semi-
structured or unstructured data has been discussed in detail. A novel integration of
different data and text mining tools has been proposed in the form of a framework in
which knowledge discovery and its refinement processes are performed through the
application of Clustering and  Apriori Association Rule of Mining algorithms. Finally
the hypothesis of acquiring better classification accuracies has been detailed through
the application of the methodology on case study data available in the form of Post
Project Reviews (PPRs) reports. The process of discovering useful knowledge, its
interpretation and utilisation has been automated to classify the textual data into two
classes.
