Microsoft Word - PhD Thesis JD 2020 complete
Since the first isolation of graphene by Geim and Novoselov in 2004, a new field
involving the preparation of tailored derivatives of this material has been exponentially
growing. One of the major targets of this scientific endeavour is the conversion of
graphene from conductor to semiconductor, leading to a new generation of
miniaturized high-performance transistors and spintronics. To prepare semiconductors
based on graphene, many different strategies have been pursued, mostly based on
physical methods, or doping of graphene. In the latter approach, the most interesting
results have been achieved using surface assisted chemistry, resulting in the formation
of graphene presenting various heteroatoms as dopants (B, N, O, S) and
semiconducting properties. However, this approach has been often limited by a difficult
control over structure and inclusion of the dopants. A possible solution to these
limitations comes from the preparation of BN-doped graphene. This highly polar couple
is isoelectronic and isosteric with CC double bonds, thus allowing for an inclusion of the
dopant without important changes in graphene structure. This results in a material with
very similar morphology but different opto-electronic properties, featuring a wider
bandgap compared to pristine graphene. From this point of view, evidence of a
dependence of the bandgap size of graphene from doping percentage and position
was obtained from theoretical investigations, highlighting the importance of a precise
synthesis of the materials, which is not achievable with top-down methods.
Consequently, a bottom-up approach in which BN-doped PAHs are synthesised using
organic synthesis and then used as building blocks to form extended systems,
represents the most reliable strategy towards precisely doped materials.
A vast library of BN-doped PAHs has been synthesised by many different groups using
different precursors, doping patterns, and strategies. Among these, the use of
functionalized borazines as precursors has been often neglected and limited to the
synthesis of the archetypal borazine-doped nanographene, namely Hexa-peri-
hexabenzoborazinocoronene (HBBNC). The high interest towards this molecule,
which can be considered as the smallest unit of a borazine-doped graphene (Figure
1A), is related to theoretical studies predicting an efficient HOMO-LUMO gap widening
in this derivative compared to the full carbon congener. Synthetic attempts resulted in
HBBNC formation in low yield as very insoluble product, thus resulting in incomplete
characterizations, which failed to produce comprehensive experimental evidence for
the effect of the borazine doping on nanographene systems.
