Microsoft Word - Thesis_File_with_corrections_20_06_2019
The structure of this work is according to the the new alternative thesis format
approved by the Faculty of Science at The University of Sheffield (more information
can be found at https://www.sheffield.ac.uk/rs/code/altformat). The alternative format
entails chapters be written as part of published or pre-published journal articles.
The Introduction chapter includes a paper titled N2-fixing tropical legume
evolution: a contributor to enhanced weathering through the Cenozoic? published in
the peer-reviewed journal Proceedings of the Royal Society: Biological Sciences in
July, 2017 (free-access to the article is available online at the Royal Society website:
http://rspb.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/284/1860/20170370). Chapters 1, 2 and
3 as well as the Discussion & Conclusions chapter include pre-publication work
formatted according to chosen target journals and their specific requirements.
All the laboratory experimental and computational work within this thesis was
carried out by myself with the exception of fieldwork which included a certain amount
of assistance from collaborators and my partner. The draft original version of each the
five chapters were written by me with co-authors contributing to subsequent revisions
during the editing process.
To summarise the contents of this thesis briefly: the introduction discusses the
evolution of the first legume-rich tropical forests in the early Cenozoic (58-42 Mya)
and the effect they had on biogeochemical cycles in general and silicate rock
weathering and climate in particular. This work puts forward a hypothesis that early
Cenozoic forests rich in N2-fixing legumes caused enhanced weathering regimes
globally, stimulating the drawdown of atmospheric CO2.
Chapter 1 utilises a large-scale replicated weathering field study in Neotropical
secondary forests in Panama rich in fixing legume trees demonstrating that N2-fixers
exerted 2-fold greater silicate rock weathering than non-fixers linked to significant
differences in soil acidity and belowground microbial community structure and
function.
Chapter 2 summarises our findings from another tropical system along a
secondary forest chronosequence in the Australian Wet Tropics, showing that N2-
fixing and ectomycorrhizal monodominant Acacia celsa drives greater P and K-
specific weathering dissolution from basalt silicate rocks throughout the
chronosequence. Highly nodulated Acacia trees were also linked to greater total basalt
and dunite weathering rates than non-fixers. Analyses from chapters 1 and 2 employ
Next-Generation sequencing technology and omics-driven approach in demonstrating
a consistent effect of N2-fixing legume trees on their belowground microbiome in
tropical forests that is that high inputs of fixed N are a strong determinant in
functionally entraining the microbial community to high levels of mineral weathering.
Consequently, this work also highlighted target candidate microbial genes and
metabolic pathways linking those differences to enhanced weathering.
In order to test some of the highlighted candidate weathering genes in vitro, the
next study, described in detail in Chapter 3 deployed the large transposon-mutant
collection of the tropical soil -proteobacterium Burkholderia thailandensis E264,
selecting 11 mutant lines for further analysis. Data from replicated in vitro weathering
experiments implicated several genes in the process of bacteria-mediated weathering.
Further phylogenetic and taxonomic analyses of the soil pools of these genes indicated
many elusive and uncultured bacterial lineages as carriers of those weathering genes
thus highlighting their potential role in soil mineral weathering. This included the
proposition and description of a new class within the Acidobacteria phylum, Ca.
Acidipotentia, cl. nov.
The final Discussion and Conclusion chapter covers meta-analyses of data from
my original datasets as well as already published literature to establish the role of N2-
fixers in ecosystem succession beyond ther ecosystem N enrichment effects. The
results from this chapter provide evidence for enhancements in acidification, soil
lithotrophy, microbial respiration and anaerobic metabolism in soil beneath N2-fixers
that may all converge in a second previously unrecognised ecosystem service carried
by N2-fixers: that of enhanced weathering and subsequent increase in available nutrient
stocks in such early successional systems.
Thesis Contributions Note
All the laboratory experimental and computational work within this thesis was
carried out by myself with the exception of fieldwork which included a certain amount
of assistance from collaborators and my partner. The draft original version of each the
five chapters were written by me with co-authors contributing to subsequent revisions
during the editing process. A chapter-specific breakdown:
Chapter 1  D.Z.E. wrote the draft, carried out the analyses and conceived the
hypothesis; all co-authors contributed to edits and revisions of the main manuscript.
Chapter 2  D.Z.E. carried out the field and laboratory work and wrote the first
draft; D.Z.E., D.J.B. and J.R.L. designed the experimental design; all co-authors
contributed to edits and revisions of the main manuscript.
Chapter 3  D.Z.E. and A.W.C. carried out the field work; D.Z.E. carried out
the laboratory work and wrote the first draft; D.Z.E., D.J.B., A.W.C. and J.R.L. came
up with the experimental design; all co-authors contributed to edits and revisions of
the main manuscript.
Chapter 4  D.Z.E. designed the experiment and carried out the experimental
and statistical work related to it; D.Z.E wrote the first draft and D.J.B. and J.R.L have
contributed to it with edits and comments.
Chapter 5  D.Z.E. wrote the first draft and carried out the meta-analyses found
within it; all co-authors contributed with comments.
Signatures of co-authors:
