Hadronic Jet Physics and the Quest for New
The Standard Model of particle physics is one of the triumphs of contemporary
science, but it is well-established that this theory must be incomplete. This thesis
focuses on searching for the production of new matter, motivated by beyond-
Standard Model framework of supersymmetry, with data recorded by the ATLAS
experiment during Run 2 of the Large Hadron Collider. One of the crucial physics
objects in the search for new matter described in this thesis is the hadronic jet.
Before describing in detail the multi-jets search for new matter, which uses 36
fb1 of ATLAS data in signal regions where at least 7 hadronic jets are required
in the final state, the latest developments in hadronic jet physics at ATLAS shall
be motivated and studied. Particular detail will be paid to new approaches in jet
reconstruction, jet mass calculations and the corresponding jet mass resolution,
and jet calibration at the energy and mass scales. Furthermore the issue of pileup
contributions to hadronic jets shall be described, together with recent studies
outlining how new developments in inputs to jet reconstruction and jet grooming
can be used to improve the performance of hadronic jets in ATLAS and mitigate
the effects of pileup therein. The full power of jet reconstruction at ATLAS will
then be utilised in the multi-jets analysis. With the 36 fb1 ATLAS data-set, no
statistically significant evidence for new matter is reported, and new constraints
on the mass of gluinos and stops are pushed up to 1.8 TeV and 1.4 TeV, at the 95 %
confidence level, respectively (within the context of particular sets of new physics
models). The multi-jets search is sensitive to final states with moderate EmissT , and
consequently is used to assess the LHC sensitivity to both R-parity-conserving
(RPC) and R-parity-violating (RPV) supersymmetric scenarios. World-leading
constraints across this RPC-meets-RPV spectrum will be assessed at the 95 %
confidence level. Finally the ultimate plans for the full Run 2 iteration of the
multi-jets analysis, amounting to 140 fb1 of data, will be described.
Hadronic Jet Physics and the Quest for New
Matter in Multi-Jet Final States with the
ATLAS Detector at the Large Hadron Collider
