Tectonic earthquake swarms in the 
According to the Gutenberg-Richter relationship, there are vastly more small micro-earthquakes
than there are large ones. This scales logarithmically, such that each step down in magnitude
corresponds to a 10 times increase in abundance. Yet, historically, large magnitude events have
mostly held the spotlight, in terms of both headlines and research focus. Their newsworthiness is easy
to understand: though they occur far less frequently, the biggest earthquakes often have devastating
consequences, whereas those below magnitude 3 are usually not felt. This also relates to one reason
that they were historically not studied in detail: to accurately locate these small events is only possible
with highly sensitive and closely spaced seismometers. However, as seismic monitoring technology
has advanced, and dense seismic networks have become more widespread, the value of studying
small earthquakes has become apparent.
Their utility is in many aspects founded on their sheer frequency. This opens up the possibility to
study deformation processes at far higher temporal resolution than previously possible from, for
example, the few data points provided by large-magnitude aftershocks. They also occur in a vastly
wider range of geological settings, including at volcanoes, geothermal reservoirs, glaciers, in relation
to mining and other anthropogenic deformation, including hydro-fracking, as well as at fault systems
large and small. Furthermore, recent advances in methods and algorithms for calculating precise
relative locations for large numbers of small earthquakes allows for these faults and structures to be
imaged in exquisite detail, and to gain a deeper understanding than by studying only their temporal
occurrence.
These advances also raise new challenges. To take full advantage of the spiralling quantities of
continuous seismic data requires new, automatic processing techniques to replace traditional
workflows founded on manual analysis of earthquake waveforms. This is met, however, by new
opportunities afforded by continuing rapid advances in computational processing capabilities.
Together, these promise a small revolution in the approach we take to analysing seismic data, and a
significant step forward in the understanding we might gain from it.
In this dissertation I describe an automated workflow for generating precise images of
microseismicity from continuous seismic data, and apply it to shed new light on tectonic earthquake
swarm seismicity in Central Iceland. The layout is as follows:
In the remainder of this Chapter I describe the seismicity and tectonics of Iceland, and
briefly discuss the observation of seismic swarms here and elsewhere.
In Chapter 2 I describe QuakeMigrate: a new, open-source software package for the
automatic detection and location of microseismicity from continuous seismic data.
In Chapter 3 I outline the collection of seismic data in Iceland, the pre-processing
procedures applied, and the application of QuakeMigrate to generate a highly complete
and robust earthquake catalogue for the region around Askja volcano, in the Northern
Volcanic Zone of Central Iceland.
In Chapter 4 I compare the location results from this new automatic algorithm with those
from previous manual analysis.
In Chapter 5 I present the relative relocation workflow applied to precisely image shallow
earthquake swarm seismicity caused by a diverse range of processes.
In Chapter 6 I describe the geometry of the intricate fault network revealed by the
relocated seismicity, revealing previously unknown kinematics, and a suggested causal
link to volcanic deformation in Askja caldera.
In Chapter 7 I discuss the systematic migration of earthquake hypocentres observed
during individual seismic swarms, captured here in unprecedented resolution. This
analysis has important implications for the understanding of earthquake nucleation
processes and the spectrum of fault behaviour; from fully aseismic creep to stick-slip
earthquake sequences.
In Chapter 8 I describe a unique observation of tectonic earthquake swarms triggered by
static stress changes, here caused by the 2014 Brarbunga-Holuhraun dike intrusion.
1.2  Geological setting: the tectonics and seismicity of Iceland
Iceland represents a subaerial section of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. It is anomalous in comparison to the
overwhelming majority of the 60,000 km mid-ocean ridge system, which resides at a remarkably
constant depth of 2.5 km below sea level (White and Lovell, 1997). Iceland is the product of long-lived
hotspot volcanism, which began at the same time as the continental breakup that formed the North
Atlantic Ocean (White and McKenzie, 1989; White, 1989). It sits at the centre of the Greenland-
Iceland-Fare Ridge, which consists of thicker crust, recording enhanced melt production in the North
Atlantic Igneous Province from the early Tertiary to the present day (Figure 1.1a).
Figure 1.1: Map of Iceland and its location in the North Atlantic. (a): Ocean floor bathymetry is shown in blue
colours; note the ridge extending between Greenland and the Fare Islands, with Iceland at its centre, which
records Tertiary hotspot volcanism in the North Atlantic. The Mid-Atlantic Ridge is denoted by the red line; as it
comes on land it separates into three broader zones (b). These volcanic zones  the WVZ, EVZ and NVZ
(western, eastern and northern)  mark where plate spreading is accommodated on land in Iceland. Reproduced
from Green (2016).
The Mid-Atlantic Ridge is significantly offset to the east across most of Iceland, corresponding to
the position of the underlying mantle plume. This thermal anomaly causes both the enhanced melt
production and isostatic support that elevate Iceland above sea level (White and McKenzie, 1989;
White et al., 1992; Wolfe et al., 1997; Darbyshire et al., 1998; French and Romanowicz, 2015). The
plume is centred beneath the Vatnajkull icecap (V; Figure 1.1b), which also correlates with the
location of the highest crustal thicknesses observed in Iceland (Darbyshire et al., 1998; Jenkins et al.,
2018) and the most intense volcanic activity. The eastwards offset has accumulated progressively
over a series of rift jumps, presumably re-aligning the centre of rifting with the plume head in each
case. The most recent rift jump is still in progress, with spreading shifting from the western volcanic
zone (WVZ) to the EVZ (Hardarson et al., 1997).
