Integrated Scale Down Of The Primary 
This thesis describes the development o f a linked 1000th scale mimic o f four
distinct unit operations, including precipitation and centrifugation. These
operations are utilised during the production o f an anti-snake venom Fab
fragment. A new approach has been used to define the important engineering
parameters that impacted on the recovery process; the effect of these was verified
by experimental work. The mimic requires only millilitre quantities o f material to
predict changes in the physical and biological properties o f key components, such
as particle size and antibody activity. The potential impact o f several process
changes on the characteristics o f the feed stream and on purification steps further
downstream has been assessed, which is not possible without a linked system.
Microfiltration has been examined as a possible alternative to the current
centrifugal method o f recovering the antibody particles. A small-scale stirred cell
device was used to carry out a number o f operations in a single piece of
equipment; these included separation, concentration and buffer exchange. An
overall increase in the yield o f 10% was observed. This was attributed to the
ability o f microfiltration to reduce material losses by integrating a number o f
operations.
A preliminary investigation has been conducted into the possibility o f utilising
Protein G affinity chromatography in place o f the current four-step precipitation
and centrifugation recovery operation. A mathematical model capable o f
predicting the size and shape o f the breakthrough curves has been developed; the
predicted curves were tested by comparison with breakthrough curves produced
under different experimental conditions. The initial results demonstrated the
feasibility of utilising affinity chromatography as a one step recovery process.
However the predicted breakthrough curves varied from the experimental curves
suggesting that the mathematical model requires refinement.
