2 8 0 9 2 8 8 6 4 3
In the central nervous system, small conductance calcium-activated potassium
channels (SK) are important for the generation of the afterhyperpolarisation that
follows single or trains of action potentials. Three SK channels have been cloned
(SKI, SK2 and SK3), which are selectively blocked by the venom toxin apamin and
present distinct pharmacological properties. The principal aim of this work is to
investigate the subcellular distribution of SK2 and SK3 channels in neurones. For
this purpose, antibodies directed against specific regions of SK2 and SK3 subunits
were raised, purified and characterised. Immunohistochemistry on rat brain sections
showed that the SK2 protein is localised in somatic and dendritic structures in
various brain regions. SK3 immunoreactivity is mainly associated with fibers, but
also with neuronal somata and dendrites. Intense SK3 expression was detected in the
substantia nigra pars compacta, the locus coeruleus and the dorsal raphe. In these
brain regions, the distribution of the channel was analysed in relation to monoamine-
containing neurones, at two different developmental stages. In this work, I also
report the characterization of a new SK2 variant, SK2-860, which differs from the
SK2 subunit by having an extended amino terminus. Heterologous expression of this
variant in primary neurones indicates that the majority of the protein is located in
clusters distributed throughout the cytoplasm. Western blot analysis with the SK2
antibody and with a specific antibody for the new variant showed that SK2-860
subunit is expressed in the rat central nervous system. The distribution pattern of the
SK2-860 in the rat brain largely overlaps the one observed for SK2.
Finally, in the last part of this work, the molecular determinants responsible for the
difference in apamin sensitivity among the different members of the SK channel
family were investigated. The study showed that the extracellular loop that connects
transmembrane segments S3 and S4 of SK channel a  subunits significantly
contributes to apamin sensitivity of SK2 channels.
