Dementia and Intersectionality: Exploring the experiences of older people with dementia and their significant others
The aim of this thesis is to demonstrate that new and varied views of dementia
surface when the concept of intersectionality is applied to dementia research;
and that these perspectives pose challenges to our assumptions about what it
is like to have dementia.  Grounded theory research from a feminist and anti-
oppression perspective was undertaken to explore the question of the
relationships between older peoples experiences of dementia and the
intersections of gender, class, race, and ethnicity.  During nine months of field
research in Canada, interviews, participant observation, photography, and
focus groups were undertaken with eight older people with dementia and their
significant others.  The participants ranged from multiply marginalized to
multiply privileged on the basis of their race, ethnicity, gender, and class.  The
grounded theory arising from this research explains the complex nature of the
relationships between the subjective experiences of older people living with
dementia and the intersections of ethnicity, race, class, and gender.  I argue
that there is a connection between social location and lived experiences of
dementia; and that these relationships can be observed across and within the
categories of experiencing, othering, and theorising.  Experiencing captures the
diversity of older peoples experiences of dementia, which range from not a big
deal to a nuisance to hellish:  these views are associated with social location,
with the multiply privileged older people holding the most negative views of
dementia and the multiply marginalized older people dismissing the significance
of dementia.  Othering refers to the marginalisation to which people with
dementia are subject: it is shown to be a marked feature of life with dementia
and to be connected to social location, with the multiply privileged people being
othered more often as a result of their dementia status; the more marginalised
participants demonstrating resilience (as an acquired characteristic); and all
being subject to both othering practices and enabling behaviours enacted by
members of their social worlds, such as their significant others.  The theorising
category refers to people with dementia being active meaning makers who
theorise about dementia:  the outcome of this intellectual activity is shown to be
related to social location, with the most privileged participants being the only
ones to view dementia as a brain disease; and all others making strategic use
of the normal aging theory to avoid marginalisation due to dementia.  The result
of the theorising done by older people with dementia is a dialectical theory of
dementia that positions dementia as a bio-psycho-social phenomenon, disrupts
the false dichotomy between normal and pathological, and integrates emic and
etic perspectives on dementia.
