Microsoft Word - thesis_final.docx
The plant root microbiota, consisting of diverse microbial communities within and
around the plant roots, can significantly influence plant development and stress
tolerance. The goal of this thesis was to analyse the microbe-microbe and plant-
microbe interactions in the root. For this purpose, Serendipita indica, a mutualistic
fungal root endophyte, able to improve plant performance and disease resistance in
host plants, was studied. Strategies of the fungus to establish colonisation within
the plant were studied by investigating the effect of putative S. indica effector
proteins on the plant auxin signalling pathway. Single S. indica effectors were
found to alter the expression of auxin-related genes, with consequent effects on
plant growth, indicating a potential competitive advantage of S. indica gained
through effectors against other microbes. Furthermore, by analyzing the effect of
two beneficial fungal endophytes, S. indica and Colletotrichum tofieldiae on the
rhizobiome composition of Arabidopsis thaliana, inoculated individually on plant
roots, I aimed to reveal plant- and/or microbe-derived patterns that are involved in
shaping the root microbiome. Using a gnotobiotic system and a synthetic bacterial
community, I demonstrated the persistence of the bacterial community in the plant
root, as well as the transition of C. tofieldiae to a potentially pathogenic lifestyle
hereby affecting plants survival. To further test these patterns in a natural
environment, a bacterial taxon commonly utilized in agriculture, Rhizobia, was
used as a mutualist root symbiont of the legume Medicago truncatula. Rhizobia
strains were tested for their ability to stimulate plant growth and nutrient supply as
well as their competitiveness in representative UK soil types and their different
natural microbiomes. Sinorhizobium meliloti 1022 was found to enhance plant
growth and nitrogen acquisition in all soil types, altering the bacterial community
structure and composition of the root endosphere, while the fungal community
structure and composition was driven only by the soil characteristics. Overall, this
work contributes towards elucidating the stability of beneficial plant-microbe
interactions in natural communities and in different environments. The long-term
aim of such study is to integrate molecular and environmental factors to generate
customized beneficial microbiomes that can be applied to sustainably support crop
production.
