Integrating Rational and Heuristic Elements in 
This research used a theoretical model that included six decision-making styles to analyse the
decision-making styles of executives in Qatar. Quantitative research techniques were used in this study,
but these were supplemented with semi-structured interviews conducted with four top executive
decision makers to provide an indication of decision-making in Qatari Executives, the covid 19
pandemic obstructed further interviews and detail thematic analysis. However, a five-point Likert scale
questionnaire was custom designed that contained six decision-making styles of the theoretical model
that were identified from existing theory and empirical research: rational, heuristic, intuitive,
dependent, avoidant, and spontaneous decision-making styles. A series of eleven dichotomous
questions represented decision-making contexts at different levels and there were four demographic
variables. The questionnaire was administered to 350 Qatari executives. Principal components analysis
indicated that all the six decision-making styles were important to the Qatari executives with different
level of agreement.
The research findings confirm that decision-making is a multifaceted and multi-dimensional
phenomenon, where the focus in decision-making varies from context to context: Qatari executives
use a combination of decision-making styles in making important decisions. However, the research
indicates that individuals, at times rely on shortcuts when making decisions.  A mixed environment
driven model to decision-making process is proposed. In this model, when problems that are more
complex, and dynamic are coupled with a poor environment then more intuitive and heuristic processes
are used and less rational. That contrasts with situations involving simple, stable scenarios that are
coupled with a supportive environment where more rational and risk avoidant process are used, using
less intuition and fewer heuristics.
Age was not significantly correlated with any of the decision-making styles. Avoidant
decision-making style had a positive significant correlation with number of years in the current
business. Intuitive decision-making style had a positive significant correlation with level of Education
and dependent decision-making style has positive significant correlation with both number of years in
the current business and level of education. Spontaneous decision-making was not dependent on any
of the eleven business contexts.
Concerning different business contexts, immediate payment decisions slightly negatively
impacted on all the six decision-making styles but not significantly. Avoidant decision-making style
was negatively impacted by the day-to-day activities of the business and negatively impacted by short-
term activities but positively impacted by long-term activities. Heuristic decision-making was
impacted positively by short-term activities but negatively by the allocation of resources, the use of
resources, how many people to deploy on the task, broad organisational issues, top executives, and
strategic decisions. Rational decision making was significantly impacted on by the use of resources
and how many people are deployed on tasks. Intuitive decision making was significantly impacted
negative by short-term activities. Dependent decision-making was impacted negatively by how many
people to deploy on tasks and broad organisational issues. Two of the eleven business concerns a)
immediate payment decisions and b) managers across the organisation do not significantly impact on
any of the decision-making styles.
Keywords: Decision Making Process, Decision Making Styles, Factor Analysis, Heuristic Decision
Making, Rational Decision Making, Intuitive Decision Making, Dependent Decision Making,
Spontaneous Decision Making, Avoidant Decision Making.
