This thesis has been submitted in fulfilment of the requirements for a postgraduate degree 
In a variety of scientific applications we require methods to construct three
dimensional maps of properties of the interior of solid media, and in the
geosciences the medium is usually the Earths subsurface. For each such map
we need the corresponding map of uncertainties in those properties in order to
assess their reliability.
Seismic tomography is such a method which has been used widely to study
properties of the subsurface of the Earth, for example, using surface wave
dispersion data. Surface wave tomography is usually conducted using a two-step
method by first estimating two-dimensional (2D) surface wave phase or group
velocity maps at a series of frequencies and then inverting those for the 3D spatial
velocity structure through a set of 1D inversions for structure with depth beneath
each geographical location. Since surface wave tomography is a highly non-
linear problem, it is usually solved using Monte Carlo (MC) sampling methods.
However, since the 1D inversions in the second step are usually performed
independently, lateral spatial correlations of the Earth can be lost. We therefore
introduce a one-step MC method which inverts for a 3D velocity structure directly
from frequency-dependent surface wave travel time measurements by using a
fully 3D parametrization. The method was first applied to a synthetic test and
compared with two-step linearised and two-step MC methods. The results show
that by including lateral spatial correlations in the inversion the new method
estimates velocity models and associated uncertainty significantly better in the
sense that it produces more intuitively reasonable and interpretable results, and
the computation cost is also comparable to the two-step MC method.
We apply the 3D MC surface wave tomography method to a real dataset recorded
using a dense passive seismic array installed on the North Sea seabed. The
ambient noise data of each receiver pair are cross correlated to extract Scholte
waves, in which two Scholte wave modes are observed. We separated the two
modes using a dispersion compensation method. For each separated mode phase
velocity maps are determined using Eikonal tomography. Those phase velocity
maps are then used to estimate 3D shear velocities of the subsurface. To further
understand the limitation of the approach, we conducted three different inversions:
the usual 1D depth inversions, a 2D inversion along a 2D cross section and a fully
3D inversion. With each inversion the shear velocity structure is extracted along
the same cross section and compared. The results confirm that 1D inversions
can produce errors due to independence of those inversions, whereas 2D and
3D methods improve the results by including lateral spatial correlations in the
inversion. The 3D results better match an existing shear velocity model obtained
from active source seismic reflection tomography. This is probably because the 3D
method uses frequency-dependent measurements directly, which naturally avoids
errors introduced in the first 2D Eikonal tomography step. The results show a
clear low velocity river channel, and exhibit another low velocity anomaly both in
the phase velocity maps at short periods (< 1.6 s) of the fundamental mode and
in the shear-velocity model in the near surface (< 250 m). The latter anomaly is
correlated with the distribution of seabed pockmarks, indicating that the anomaly
might be related to the circulation of near surface fluids.
Apart from surface waves, seismological body wave travel times have also been
used to study the Earths interior and to characterize earthquakes. Body waves are
generally sensitive to structure around the sub-volume in which earthquakes occur
and produce limited sensitivity in the near surface, whereas surface waves are more
sensitive to the shallower structure. Thus body waves and surface waves can be
used jointly to better constrain the subsurface structure. Since the tomographic
problem is usually highly non-linear, we apply MC sampling methods to invert
for source parameters and velocity models simultaneously using earthquake body
wave travel times and ambient noise surface wave dispersion data. The method is
applied to a mining site in the U.K. where induced seismicity is recorded using a
small local network and ambient noise data are available from the same stations.
The results show that by using both types of data, earthquake source parameters
and velocity models can be better constrained than in independent inversions.
Synthetic tests show that the independent inversion using only body wave travel
times can cause biases in the results due to trade-offs between source parameters
and velocity models, while this issue can be largely resolved using joint inversion,
indicating that the ambient noise data can provide additional information.
Although MC sampling methods have been used widely to solve seismic tomo-
graphic problems, they are computationally expensive and remain intractable for
large dataset problems. We therefore introduce variational inference methods to
solve seismic tomographic problems. Variational inference solves the Bayesian
inference problem using optimization, yet still provide probabilistic results. In
this thesis we introduce two variational methods: automatic differential vari-
ational inference (ADVI) and Stein variational gradient descent (SVGD), and
apply them to 2D seismic tomographic problems using both synthetic and real
data. We compare the results with those obtained using two different MC sam-
pling methods, and demonstrate that variational inference methods can provide
accurate approximations to the results of MC sampling methods at significantly
lower computational cost, provided that the gradient of model parameters with
respect to data can be computed efficiently.
