8719782
UNIVERSITY OF SURREY LIBRARY
ProQuest Number: 10130546
All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS 
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a com p le te  manuscript 
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.
ProQuest 10130546
Published by ProQuest LLO (2017). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.
All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States C ode
Microform Edition  ProQuest LLO.
ProQuest LLO.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway 
P.Q. Box 1346 
Ann Arbor, Ml 48106- 1346
3 DIMENSIONAL PROTON BEAM WRITING FOR MICRO ELECTROMECHANICAL |
SYSTEMS APPLICATIONS
Harry Igbenehi
Submitted for the Degree of 
Doctor of Philosophy 
from the 
University of Surrey
UNIVERSITY O F
#  SURREY
Ion Beam Centre 
Advanced Technology Institute 
Faculty of Engineering and Physical Sciences 
University of Surrey 
Guildford, Suney GU2 7XH, UK
July 2009
 H. Igbenehi 2009
Summary
Proton beam writing is a direct write lithographic technique that uses finely focused MeV 
proton beams to create structures in a target material. The depth the protons travel in a 
material is dependent on its energy, this unique property of proton beams allow multi level 
stiTictures to be created in materials.
FEW has been demonstrated successfully on semiconductor materials, glass and polymers.
This thesis is a study of the application of FEW in creating Micro Electro-Mechanical 
Systems (MEMS) in a polymer SU 8 and SU 8 polymer nano composite with silver, and 
shows experimental steps, theoiy and computer simulations involved in creating an 
electrostatic actuated micro-gripping device.
Proton beam writing in silver SU 8 composite results in the creation of electrically 
conducting microstructures. The unique predictability of the range of protons in materials is 
leveraged in the creating of free standing conducting cantilevers structures which are used as 
the building blocks for a micro gripping device. The electrostatic actuation has been modelled 
using a finite element modelling software Sugar 3.1, and the results are comparable with 
actual actuations in a realized micro-gripping device.
Keywords: Proton Beam Writing, MEMS, SU 8, Silver, Nano Composites.
Dedication
Gladys, Yvonne, Tamara
Acknowledgement
My deepest thanks and appreciation to my primaiy supeivisor. Professor Karen J. Kirkby, for 
the oppoitiinity to conduct research under her tutelage. I am eternally indebted to her for calm 
patience, kindness, moral and financial support. From her I have learnt a new way to think, to 
plan and follow a plan in logical sequence, something I had never learnt nor had to do earlier. 
Her attention to detail and film resolve to get work done are attiibutes I can only aspire to 
emulate. I hold her in the highest esteem.
Words can hardly express my gratitude to Professor Roger P. Webb for believing I could 
accomplish my research even when I was in doubt.
I am indebted to Dr. Geoff Grime, for his relaxed approach to problem solving, for explaining 
the principles of physics, for writing OMDAQ, for relentlessly fixing the machines and 
experimental tools and his presence which somewhat made the machines stable.
Michael Merchant for his ability to visualize and depict complex concepts and for 
explanations in plain English together with Dr. Vladimir Palitsin, for critiquing my ideas, for 
help with machines, mnning into the late hours, fabrication and support without which I 
could never have done any meaningful research. I thank Adrian Cansell and Mark Browton 
for their working knowledge of the accelerator and ability to create any tools necessary for 
the job.
Dr. Inma Gomez-Morilla for teaching research methods and experimental planning together 
with Dr. Prashant Mistiy for PBW laying the foundations for my work. Dr Chris Jeynes for 
Ion beam analysis techniques as well as explaining the plasma source, motor generator and 
vacuum systems and Dr Melanie Webb for RBS analysis. Dr. David Cox and Dr. Andy Smith 
for SEM and electrical measurements. Many thanks too to Vitor Marques at Oxford 
Department of Materials, for Nano indentation measurements.
My thanks go to all the staff at the ATI and IBC especially Mrs. Karen Arthur for the support 
and skillfulness in dealing with tricky situations. I truly appreciate the numerous friendships 
gained with past and present fellow research students at the ATI and IBC; your deeds and 
names too numerous to mention.
C on ten ts
4.9 Aligning multi-level microstructures produced using ion beam lithography by
5 Implementation and Characterization o f an Electrostatically Actuated MicroTweezer in
5.2 Electroless Plating of Structures Created Using Proton Beam Writing In SU 8... 98
III.) I-V measurement Data Tables of Conductive SU 8 Silver Microstructure 134
IV.) Selection o f 3 Dimensional Stmctures Created by proton beam writing 135
List of Figures
Figure 2.5 SUSPRE simulation showing ions energy loss and ion concentration as a function
Figure 2.6: Comparison of the penetration properties of different lithographic techniques... 25 
Figure 2.7 Radial Energy deposited due to dose distribution as a function o f depth, 2.0MeV
Figure 3.2 Resist thickness as a function of Spin speeds wet thickness and measured after a
Figure 3.4 Measuring film thicknesses using the Dektak, scanning measurement in two
Figure 3.5 Measuring film thicknesses on the Dektak profilometer when the film thickness
Figure 3.6: Spectrophotometer Absorbance spectra measurements for Filter and SU 8 [46]. 43
Figure 3.8: Elemental map showing measurement of beam spot size on a copper grid 45
Figure 3.12: Beam spot size relative to pixel size to ensure the full image is scanned 47
Figure 4.2 Square and Grid patterns iiTadiated unto PMMA using OMDAQ software 54
Figure 4.3 Optical and SEM images of stmcture produced in PMMA with an implant dose of
Figure 4.4: Optical and SEM images of stmctures produced in PMMA at a proton implant
Figure 4.5: Optical and SEM images of stmctures produced in PMMA at a proton implant
Figure 4.6 Square pattern, structure to be created on SU 8 using OMDAQ software 58
Figure 4.7 a) Proton implanted SU 8 with a dose of 5nC/mm^ b.) magnified section of
interest. Guiding lines show the show the poorly formed sidewalls and edges 58
Figure 4.8 a) Proton implanted SU 8 with a dose of lOnC/mm^ b.) An enlarged image of the
Figure 4.9 a) Proton implanted SU 8 with a dose o f 15nC/mm^ b.) An enlarged image of the
region highlighted in black. Wliite lines have been used to show the edges 60
Figure 4.10 a) Proton implanted SU 8 with a dose of 20nC/mnf b.) A enlarged image of the 
region highlighted in black. White lines have been used to show the edges 60
Figure 4.11: The Table top effect is created by the beam scanning the edges of a structure
Figure 4.12 a) Proton implanted SU 8 with a dose o f 25nC/mm^ b.) A enlarged image of the
Figure 4.13 a) Proton implanted SU 8 with a dose of 30nC/mm2 b.) Magnified image of the 
surface, White guide lines have been used to show the edges. The red square
Figure 4.14 a) Proton implanted SU 8 with a dose o f 30nC/mm2 b.) A enlarged image o f the 
stmcture's surface. White guide lines have been used to show the edges. The red
Figure 4.15: 3-dimensional stmcture created by proton beam writing in SU 8, and
Figure 4.16: Optical and SEM micrographs of a 3-dimensional stmcture created by proton
Figure 4.17: Height variation due to dose variation in SU 8 inadiated with Electron beams 66 
Figure 4.18a, b: Scan patterns, Stmcture produced by increasing the exposure dose of SU 8 to
Figure 4.19: Graph showing the variation o f surface heights of stmctures produced due to the
Figure 4.20: Scan patterns for 3-dimensional multilevel structure to be created by proton
Figure 4.21: Optical micrographs of a multilevel 3-dimensional stmcture created by proton
Figure 4.22: Scan patterns and depictions of 3-dimensional multilevel cantilever stmcture
Figure 4.23a, b, c: SEM micrographs of 3-dimensional multilevel cantilever sti'ucture created
Figure 4.24: Resist film thicknesses in pm against Number of Attempts. The aim is to obtain
Figure 4.25: Dektak profilometer film thickness measurement of 63.3pm, target thickness of
Figure 4.26: Stmcture created in SU 8 using UV lithography without the softbake control, b
Figure 4.27: SEM pictograph of Structure created in SU 8 using UV lithography showing
Figure 4.28a, b: Bar stmcture a) After and b) Before implementation of Soft Bake Control in
Figure 4.29a,b: Optical Micrograph showing After and Before implementation o f beam spot
Figure 4.30a, b; SEM micrograph o f failed Cantilever stmctures due to miss- alignment
Figure 4.31: SEM Micrograph showing the broadening of the beam as it reaches its end of
Figure 4.32: SEM micrograph showing (a ,b) Stmcture without beam blank controls (c)well 
fonned physically isolated structures 30 pm apart, demonstrating effective beam
Figure 4.33: Cantilever stmctures without (a, b) and with (c) post irradiation controls 87
Figure 4.34 : SEM Micrograph of process controlled cantilever structure (b) smallest feature 
Figure 4.35 : SEM micrograph showing multiple contiolled process structure and dimension;
Figure 4.36: SEM micrograph depicting the basic gripper shape, (a, b) structures suffer from 
bubble formations, (c) Process control for bubbles implemented by pre-bake
Figure 4.37: SEM micrograph showing multiple controlled structures, (a) Sporting logo( b)
Figure 4.38 a, b c: SEM micrograph depicting the basic gripper shape, (a, b) stmctures has 
suffered misalignment, (c) Process control for misalignment implemented by
Figure 4.39: SEM micrograph depicting the basic gripper stmcture that has suffered
Figure 4.40: A diagram showing the path of an energetic Ion through a focusing system 91
Figure 4.41: XART simulation of beam trajectory deflections due to the influence of the
Figure 4.42: Close up view of simulated beams at the target showing varying deflections for
Figure 5.1 a, b: Micrographs showing after (a) and before (b) Electroless plating with Gold.
Figure 5.2 a, b: Micrographs showing after differences in charging in an SEM (a) before (b)
Figure 5.4 a, b: PIXE Image showing the distiibution of elements on the showing the
Figure 5.5 a, b: 75 pm tall 3 Dimensional test stmctures created by 2.5 MeV Proton beam
Figure 5.6.a) 8 pm test structure produced in Ag/SU 8 nano-composite using UV lithography 
[100]( b) 75 pm test structure produced in Ag/SU 8 nano-composite using proton
Figure 5.7: nori-ohmic Logarithmic I-V curve of Ag/SU 8 Composite showing threshold 
switching in Ag/SU 8 composite nano particle stmctures created by 2.5MeV proton
Figure 5.8 (a) 3 Dimensional freestanding cantilever structure created by 1.0 and 2.5MeV 
proton beams on a 50pm thick layer of 15% Ag/SU 8 nano-composite, (b) Test 
cross structure created by 2.5MeV proton beams on a 75pm thick layer of 15%
Figure 5.9(a): Micro-gripper structure created from 2 cantilevers separated by a driver 
electrode, (b): 50pm thick Cantilever structure on Silicon substrate, created using
Figure 5.10: Multi-cantilever microgripper structure created in SU 8 Ag nano-composite. 112
Figure 5.13: Load displacement results for Cantilever arm. Power pad and Driver electrode.
Figure 5.14: Sugar 3.1 Simulation of electrostatic actuation obtained for an SU 8 Ag
Figure 5.15b: Actuation micrographs of microgripper: (a) Before actuation gap is 49.32pm.
Glossary of Terms
DI De-Ionized
EBL Electron Beam Lithography
EBS Elastic Back Scattering
EDA Ethylenediamine
EDC EthylCarbodiamide Hydrochloride
ESR Election storage Ring
EUV Extieme Ultra Violet Lithography
FIB Focused Ion Beam
H^ Proton
ITRS International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors
keV Kilo Election Volt
LIGA Lithographie Galvanik Abfomiung (X-ray Lithography Electroforming and
Molding)
MEMS Micro Electro-Mechanical Systems
MeV Mega Electron Volt
NGL Next Generation Lithographic Techniques
OMDAQ Oxford Micro-beam Data Acquisition System
PBW Proton Beam Writing
PIXE Particle Induced X-ray Emission
PMMA Poly (methyl metaciylate)
RBS Rutherford Back Scattering
SRIM Stopping and Range o f ions in Matter
SU 8 EPON (SU 8)
UV Ultra Violet
Helium Ion
FWHM Full Width Half Maximum
GPa Giga Pascal
Rpm Revolutions per minute
SEM Scanning Electron Microscopy
CHAPTER 1
1. Introduction
Lithography in electronics involves the transfer of a pattern of circuit tracks onto 
materials using media such as light, x-rays and election beams. Different techniques 
and processes are used in each lithographic medium.
Semiconductor lithographic processes can be broadly classified as masked or 
maskless. A mask selectively allows a transferring medium to pass through 
according to a predetermined pattern. Masks are expensive and are not designed to 
be adaptable to modifications.
This thesis discusses a maskless direct write lithographic technique where the 
transferring medium is a Proton beam, selectively guided with computer software 
along a defined route to create a pattern directly on a material.
Apart from tiansfening patterns of circuit tracks, lithographic techniques with the 
addition of a depth dimension have led to the creation of Micro Electi o-Mechanical 
System devices (MEMS). MEMS devices are 3-dimensional microstructures that 
operate by exploit the structural, electronic and mechanical properties of the material 
it is produced fiom.
1.1 Objectives
The main objective of this thesis is to investigate Proton Beam Writing (PBW) in 
creating Micro Electro-Mechanical System (MEMS) in a polymer SU 8 and a silver 
nano particle modified SU 8 polymer.
To achieve this, the following need to be done:
 A study to find the optimum fluence for proton beam writing in SU 8
 Using the optimum fluence to create a range of structures
Using the unique properties o f PBW to create freestanding overhanging 
microstructures.
Creating electrically conducting freestanding microstructures 
Studying the mechanical properties of created conducting microstructures 
Modeling and demonstration o f actuation of freestanding stmctures as basic 
form of MEMS.
1.2 Structure of the Thesis
This thesis is divided into seven chapters. Chapter one is an introduction of the main 
objective, stmcture and novel contributions of the thesis. Chapter two is a literature 
review on the key publications in PBW and provides a brief comparison of the 
cuiTent lithographic techniques with PBW. The mechanism by which PBW works is 
also explained as well as its advantages over other lithographic techniques.
Chapter 3 briefly describes tlie equipment used in the experiments, experimental 
techniques, and sample preparation for experimental work. Chapter 4 describes the 
experimental aims and experimental works, identifies processes and investigates 
process sensitivities and level o f control needed.
Chapter 5 describes a unique set of experiments in the creation of electrically 
conductive microstmctiues, as well as provides theory on how these stmctures are 
feasible. It culminates in the use of knowledge gained through previous experiments 
in the demonstration o f a simple MEMS device. Chapter 7 concludes this thesis by 
highlighting the novel contribution to the field and recommendations for further 
research in this field.
1.3 Novel Contribution of the Thesis
The main objective of this thesis is to demonstrate proton beam writing (PBW) as a viable 
direct write lithographic technique in the creation of micro electro-mechanical systems 
(MEMS) in polymer metal composites.
This is the first time PBW has been investigated and demonshated to create conducting 
microstmctures in SU 8 Silver nano composite polymer resist.
To date PBW has been perfonned in Silicon, Gallium Arsenide, glass and polymers in the 
creation of microstmctural and micro-optical devices. The demonstiation of electrostatic 
actuation in polymer PBW microstructures is novel.
CHAPTER 2
2 Literature Review on Proton Beam Writing
2.1 Introduction
In 1796, inventor Aloys Senefleder discovered that engraved stone when treated 
with chemicals and ink applied to it, had the ability to transfer the patterns made on 
it to paper [1]. Successive improvements on Senefleders technique and etching 
processes over time, led in 1961 to the creation of the first patterned silicon 
integrated circuit using a photolithographic process with the achievement a 
resolution of 5 pm [2].
Proton beam writing using MeV accelerated proton beams is a relatively new direct 
write lithographic technique pioneered at the National University of Singapore in 
2002 [3]. Proton beam writing is classified as a Next Generation Lithographic 
technique (NGL); which purpose is to keep up with Moores law [4] overcoming 
cost and space constraints inherent to older yet veiy successful lithographic 
techniques.
The International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRS) in the year 2002 
lists fabrication of optical masks as a challenge that must be overcome by NGL 
techniques [5]. In 2003 the ITRS obseives that any breakthrough in direct write 
techniques will lead to inherent cost and cycle time reductions [6].
Proton beam writing is one of only a few lithographic techniques that can produce 
high aspect ratios 3-dimensional stmctures. Creating microstmctures by lithography 
on polymeric materials such as SU 8 or poly-methyl-metaciylate (PMMA) is faster, 
cheaper and have ease o f process advantages over creating similar structures in 
bulk semiconductor materials such as Silicon and Gallium arsenide [7].
This chapter surveys the literature on the cuiTent application of 3-dimensional proton 
beam writing in polymers, specifically SU 8 and PMMA. However, it first 
introduces optical lithography and then other potential NGL techniques (Extreme 
Ultra-Violet, X-ray, electron beam, and Focused Ion Beam lithographic techniques.)
2.2 Semiconductor Lithography Techniques
In the literature on lithographic techniques for 3-dimensional structures, resolution 
and aspect ratios are criteria by which the lithographic process and structures are 
commonly judged. The aspect ratio of a 3-dimensional stmcture refers to its height 
to width ratio. Stmctures are often referred to as being high-aspect ratio when they 
have a high vertical length compared to a vertical breadth. There are varied factors 
that limit the aspect ratio o f stiuctures fomied with a lithographic technique, these 
factors can range from processing techniques to the material with which the 
structures is made.
Resolution is defined as the fineness o f detail that can be distinguished in an image 
or structure. There are fundamental limitations to the resolution o f structures. 
Dependent on the lithographic technique, limitations include: scattering, penetrative 
depth, diffiaction and wavelength of the lithographic medium within stmctural 
materials. Processes such as etching and development also affect resolution.
2.2.1 Masked Processes Optical Lithography
Optical lithography is perhaps the best known lithographic technique. It involves the 
tiansmission o f visible to near ultraviolet light fi om an illumination source, through 
a mask. The shapes defined by the mask are projected unto the surface of the 
substrate. Figure 2.1 shows the conventional set up for optical lithography.
Light Source 
(24S to 1S3nm)
C ondenser 
L ens System
Reduction 
Lens System
R esis t on 
Si W afer
Figure 2 .1 Optical Lithography apparatus. [I]
The resolution of structures produced by optical lithography is related to the 
wavelength of the light source, this limits feature size of structures produced using 
optical lithography [8].
An effect attributed to the wavelike nature of light known as the diffraction limit, 
also places a limit on feature size. Diffraction is the bending or spreading of light 
when met with and obstruction such as when light passes through a slit as could be 
contained in the mask. Nitayama et al. describes a method of using a phase shifting 
mask to reduce the effects of diffraction [9].
Optical lithographic techniques also suffer from optical proximity effects, where size 
and structural features are dependent on proximity to other structures. Ong et al. 
describes proximity effects using optical lithography [10].
2.2.2 Extreme Ultra Violet Lithography (EUV)
The use of ultraviolet light was seen as a natural progression to optical lithography, 
after all, the smaller the wavelength the smaller the feature size and hence greater 
device density. Extreme ultraviolet lithography utilizes radiation of wavelengths of 
between 10-14 nanometers.
Conventionally a plasma based source is used as the illumination source for EUV 
lithography. A mask bearing defined patterns is used to expose a UV sensitive
material (photoresist) to ultraviolet light. A set of shaped mirrors is used to reduce 
the sizes and hence dimensions of structures produced [11].
The Figure 2.2 shows the general basic setup of an EUV lithographic system [8]
Condenser
Mirrors
Wafer
Plasma
extreme ultraviolet IHhogiaohy
Figure 2.2: EUV lithography .schematic diagram [8]
2.2.3 X-Ray Lithography (LIGA)
The use of X-rays for semiconductor lithography was first proposed in 1975 by 
Physicists D. Spears and H. I. Smith [12]. X-ray lithography works in much the 
same way as optical lithography. X-rays are produced from electron storage rings 
(ESR) and so called soft X-rays are produced form plasma ionized atoms.
A resist sensitive to X-rays is patterned via a mask made of X-ray opaque 
materials. The desired pattern is transferred onto a silicon wafer through etching. 
Figure 1.3 shows the schematic setup for X-ray lithography.
c c c
nd ^
Figure 2.3 X-Ray Lithography Setup [8]
The improved resolution of structures produced by X-ray lithography is attributable 
to the very short wavelengths of X-rays between 0.01 -  l.Onm. Due to the shorter 
wavelengths, the resolution obtained due to the diffraction limit is much smaller than 
for optical systems.
Because most materials are transparent to X-ray, the refractive focusing lenses and 
mirrors assembly are replaced by diffraction grating masks.
Schmidt et al. report that structures with aspect ratio of 100: 1, have been produced 
using X-ray lithographic technique [13]. Masks opaque to X-rays are expensive, 
frequently require to be created using other lithographic techniques and are a major 
contributing factor to the reputed high cost of running X-ray lithography.
2.3 Direct Write Processes
2.3.1 Electron beam Lithography
Electron beam lithography is a direct write process, which utilizes electrons with 
wavelengths of between 0.2 -  0.5 angstroms at energies in the order of 20 - 50 keV 
scanned over an electron sensitive resist material. Structures produced are smaller 
than lOOnm [14,15].
A typical EBL set-up consists of an electron source, a focusing colunm and software 
controlled mechanical stage. This set up is very similar to a scamiing electron 
microscope.
The major disadvantage of EBL is the scattering o f the electron beams below the 
surface of the material. EBL has a low penetrative depth in photoresist with typical 
penetration of 20 pm in PMMA by a 50 keV beam. High aspect ratio stiuctures are 
difficult to produce using EBL, Owen reports that penetrative depth and lateral 
scattering are of similar orders [16].
2.3.2 Focused Ion Beam Lithography
Focused ion beam lithography is a direct write technique that depends on the energy 
of accelerated heavy ions (nonnally 50keV Gallium) sputtering away the targets 
surface. The basic setup for FIB lithography is the same as with EBL with the 
electron source replaced by a gallium source.
FIB suffers significant process speed disadvantages, as materials are sputtered at a 
rate in the order of 0.5pm7s meaning it would take several hours to produce 3- 
dimensional structures [17]. As the material is sputtered away there is no need for a 
chemical developer, which offers an advantage on reduction in process steps 
required [18].
Arshak et al. describes recent applications o f FIB lithography in nanolithography 
where changing the energy o f the ions results in die production o f negative or 
positive resist images [18].
2.3.3 Newer Lithographic Techniques
Nano-Imnrinting Lithography: Nano-imprinting is not necessarily to be considered a 
competing technology to Proton beam Lithography, as much as a complimentary 
technique since; some aspects of it especially the molds have the possibility of being 
created using Proton beam lithography. The process involves the use of a mold or 
stamp. A mold is imprinted unto a soft polymer by being pressed into it. Polymers 
are usually deposited upon a substrate such as silicon. Ansari et al, describe a
method of creating molds for Nano Imprint Lithography using Proton beam 
lithography [19].
Scanning Probe Arrays: Studies have shown that atomic force microscope tips can 
be used to scribe a polymer resist deposited on semiconductor material; at veiy high 
resolutions near atomic scales. Wilder et al. describe a method of changing the 
chemical properties of resist using field emissions from the tips of atomic force and 
tunneling microscopes [20].
Two-Photon 3D Lithography: This lithographic technique uses light activated
j molecules to initiate chemical reactions within polymers. The technique uses organic
.] dyes which absorbs two photons of light simultaneously.
j Two-Photon lithography produces stmctures with resolutions of up to 30nm
I corresponding to 4% of the wavelength o f the light source, and scan speeds across
' the resist of 10 microns per second are typical [21].
Once iiTadiated simultaneously, the molecules transfer an electron to fonn a simple 
I acid or a radical group that can initiate a chemical reaction - such as cross-linking or
I bond breaking. Juodkazis et al. describes an application of two photon lithographic
I process in the creation of nano-rods in photoresist [21].
2.4 Proton Beam Writing
Proton beam writing is a technique that uses a focused MeV proton beam to write 
directly on a material. Diuing the early developmental stage it suffered from an 
absence o f commercial tools for the focusing of MeV protons. This setback was 
overcome by the creation o f compact magnetic quadmpole lenses for focusing MeV 
ions [22]. A focused beam spot o f 35 x 75 nm^ has been achieved [23].
The relatively high energy of the accelerated protons cause deep penetration into 
materials, 2MeV protons will penetrate 60pm into PMMA [24]. The accelerated 
protons are stopped below the surface o f the material they enter, the way this 
happens give proton beam writing some unique properties, which are explained 
below.
2.4.1 Ion Stopping in Materials
Ions are stopped within a material by a process which combines electronic and 
nuclear stopping. The slowing down of incident ions when it comes close to a 
nucleus of an atom within the lattice of the material is known as nuclear stopping. 
The energy loss attributed to nuclear stopping is also refeiTed to as elastic energy 
loss.
The interaction of incident ions with the electrons in the target material is known as 
electionic stopping. The loss of energy due to electronic stopping is also refened to 
as inelastic energy loss.
Zeigler et al. describe an algorithm used for calculating stopping of MeV ions due to 
interactions with electrons and nuclei o f target materials [25]. The energy loss 
called the stopping power, S, is expressed as:
S(E) = - d E /d x  equation (2.1)
A materials stopping power is the rate o f change of kinetic energy with distance of 
propagation within the material.
The stopping power is measured in keV/nm and is composed of both nuclear and 
electionic stopping as described below:
\dE /dx]to(al \dE /dx] nuclear \dE /d%] electronic Cquation (2.2)
The figure 2.4 is a nuclear and electionic stopping plot which helps to visualize the 
effect o f nuclear and electionic stopping on the ions, as its energy decreases. The 
stopping power (y-axis) is plotted against the incident ions energy.
Total slopping -----
Etodrcnic sloping -----
Niiclaar slopping10
0.01 0.1 1 10  100 
Ion nrgy [MaV]
1000 10000
Figure 2.4: Nuclear and Electronic Stopping o f  hydrogen ions in silicon [26],
On entry into the surface of a material, electronic stopping is predominant as the 
ions possess high inertial energy. Once within the material, ions interact with lattice 
electrons, the ions lose energy and then slows. Electronic stopping peaks, then 
nuclear stopping predominates and the protons lose more energy, rapidly come to a 
halt upon repeated collisions with host nuclei [27].
The interaction of incident ions with the materials lattice and the process by which 
it is stopped allow ions to travel for a given range within the material before it is 
stopped. The range of ions in materials is important in proton beam writing, 
especially when creating 3 dimensional structures.
2.4.2 Range of ions in materials
A materials chemical composition and physical properties determine how far 
incident MeV ions will travel before being halted by nuclear and electronic stopping 
[26]. The length of travel for individual ions, normal to the surface is the range of 
the ion at the specified energy.
The projected ranges of ions in a given material can be calculated and simulated by 
algorithm [26,27] which have been incorporated into simulation software tools. 
Ziegler et al. describe a method based on combination of monte-carlo algorithms and 
classical mechanics [26]. Peng et al. describe a method of calculating ranges based 
on the energy at which incident ions arrive at the target surface [28]. These software
algorithms also give a theoretical estimate of the range of ions within materials. 
Bahkmetjev et al. reports that there is a discrepancy between projected stopping 
ranges and experimentally observed stopping ranges, no explanation was given for 
this reported phenomenon, however calls for further investigation in to this issue 
[29].
The figure 2.5 shows (Surrey University Sputter Profile Resolution) SUSPRE 
software [28]simulating the range of Hydrogen ions in PMMA.
( A i i K H i a i n s I
Figure 2.5 SUSPRE simulation showing ions energy loss (red curve) and ion concentration (black curve) as a Junction o f  
depth, fo r  H+ ion at l.OMeV in PMMA.
The figure 2.5 shows the depth distribution of ions within the material as they lose 
energy eventually coming to rest at the end of their range within a material. This is 
useful as it estimates the depth at which most of the ions will stop. The energy loss 
of the ions within the material is also shown (red).
It is worthy of note that the peak concentration of ions occurs deeper into the 
material and do not correspond to the energy loss peak. This is explained by 
referring back to figure 2.4. The peak energy loss corresponds to the peak in 
electronic stopping; when nuclear stopping predominates, the ions come to rest in 
the material [28].
The predictability of the stopping protons in a material and its computation using 
stopping algorithms is an advantage of proton beam lithography over other
lithographie techniques such as electron beam lithography. The properties of proton 
beam lithography are considered below.
2.5 Properties of Proton Beam Writing
Proton beam writing has some unique properties. The figure 2.6 below shows a 
comparison of the different lithographic techniques and uses a Silicon wafer as a 
substrate [22]. The properties of writing with proton beams which serve as distinct 
advantages over other lithographic techniques are:
2 MeV P>olon$ SO keV QdRum 50 h*V Elecdora keV x*rays. EUV
Figure 2.6: Comparison o f the penetration properties o f  different lithographic techniques [22],
2.5.1 Ease of Patterning
Proton beam writing is a direct write technique; as such this eliminates the need for 
use and production of normally expensive lithographic mask. The use of software in 
writing a pattern using proton beams also allows for design transferability. The same 
pattern may also be transferred to a different substrate.
Raj ta et al, describe a method of controlling proton beams to form a desired pattern 
using software called OMDAQ, for proton beam writing in micro-machining 
applications [30]. OMDAQ was originally designed for data acquisition, and was 
modified for use in proton beam lithography; it required patterns to be written in a 
pseudo-hexadecimal code.
In 2005 Betiol et al described a software called lonscan for the precise control and 
patterning of beams for use in proton beam writing [31] this was an improvement on 
an earlier released version of lonscan in 2001 [32].
Apart from a user specified code as in OMDAQ, lonscan can also scan a pattern 
based on a bitmap image specified by the user. The software resolution and the 
pattern with which the beam is controlled have effects on the properties of stmctures 
produced. Teo et al reports that lonscan currently has a better resolution than 
OMDAQ as such structures with smother surfaces have been produced [33]. This is 
primarily because OMDAQ has a maximum scan resolution of 256 x 256 pixels 
compared with 1024 x 1024 in lonscan.
2.5.2 Narrow Beam Path
When compared to other lithographic teclmiques there is veiy little beam broadening 
with MeV ions, and this occurs mostly at tlie end o f range.
The low lateral spread that occurs at the end of range provides a considerable 
advantage over electron beam writing when creating 3 dimensional stmctures with 
high aspect ratios [22]. Figure 2.6 shows that electron beams disperse widely on 
entry into a substrate.
The ITRS reports that greater compactness, which is achieved by low lateral spread 
has the potential to reduce the spacing between stmctures, as such more structures 
could be created and the yield of a wafer would be increased [5].
2.5.3 Defined High Penetration Depth
When compared with elections, ions are integer multiples of about 1800 times 
heavier. Wlien accelerated they tend to retain their inertial energy and do not 
interact with the targets surface electrons. The penetration depth within a material is 
well defined and can be varied by changing the ion energy [26].
The ability to change the penetration depth of proton beams within a resist enables 
the creation of multilevel stmctures in a single layer device. Teo et al describe a
method of creating a multilevel structure in a single layer material by changing the 
energy o f the proton beams [34,33].
2.5.4 Reduced Proximity Exposure Effect
Proximity exposure effect is the phenomenon whereby a materials uniform 
exposure to a beam produces a non-uniformly distributed pattern in the exposed 
material [12].
This effect is created by the backscatter o f particles. Watt et al report that Proton 
beam writing has a Virtual absence o f secondaiy electrons [23].
However Whitlow et al observed that there is some fonn of proximity exposure 
effect in proton beam writing, this effect is observable in tlie forms of variation 
between patterned elements and variation within or inside a scanned pattern [35].
Whitlow et al report that when compared with electron beam lithography, proximity 
exposure effects in Proton beam lithography are much smaller, due to the ability to 
focus the beam to the nanometre range. This opens up the possibility of writing 
highly defined nanometer stmctures [35].
Proximity exposure effect becomes a problem when the patterns to be exposed are of 
high spatial density with small features. Since the energy from the highly accelerated 
particles is distributed over the edges of the exposed area, the small features 
produced may be deformed [35].
2.5.5 Dose exposure in Proton Beam Lithography
Apart from the end of range regions the dose exposure is reported to be relatively 
constant when using proton beam writing, when compared to electron beam 
lithography and extieme ultiaviolet lithography which exhibit an exponential 
reduction in the exposure dose [26].
Osipowicz et al. report that the smallest feature size obtainable is directly linked to 
the dose distribution of the proton beam within the resist [36]. Waligorski et al. 
report that it is possible to calculate the distiibution of the dose along the path of an
ion up till its range [37,38]. Equation 2.3 shows the distribution of dose along an 
ions track.
amv^r r + 6
Equation (2.3)
Equation 2.3. Radial distribution o f  dose along the path o f  an ion [37, 38]
Where Z is the effective charge given by the ion velocity v through the resist 
containing N electrons per cm^, e = The electron charge , m = electron mass. R = 
maximum range of the secondary electrons, r = the radial distance from the ion 
track, 0 is the range of an electron with specific energy. K(r) is a correction factor 
accounting for radial dose due to primary events in the r  = 1 -  10 nm distances [38].
Figure 2.7 below gives a 3-dimensional graphical example of the energy deposited 
radially along the path of an ion within a resist due to the dose distribution.
Figure 2.7 Radial Energy deposited due to dose distribution as a function o f  depth. 2.0 MeV protons in PMMA [36].
Calculating and estimating the dose distribution of ions in materials can be done 
using software tools [25,26,28]. Depending on the dose distribution of ions within a
material, bonds could be broken or created, electrons displaced or lattice structures 
altered.
Teo describes a method of vaiying the feature heights of structures produced in 
silicon by changing the dose of protons with which the stmctures are written. This 
unique feature of proton beam writing has an advantage over other lithographic 
technique in the production of 3 dimensional high aspect ratio stmctures [33],
2.6 Proton Beam writing in Polymers
The relatively cheap cost and ease of engineering have made polymers a suitable 
material for proton beam writing. Modification o f the polymeric properties of 
polymer materials, by energetic properties have been reported since 1963 [39]. 
Deposition of energy by incident ion beams triggers chemical processes in polymers 
[40]. Hioki et al. reports that ion irradiation o f polymers induces irreversible changes 
in their physical, electrical and optical properties [41], Some of the changes in 
polymers due to ion implantation are; polymer chain scissioning, cross-linking, and 
loss of molecular mass [42].
The mechanical properties of polymers, including its physical strength and modulus 
of elasticity can also be modified by the ion implantation [43, 44].
PMMA and SU 8 are a few of the polymers that have been studied for use in proton 
beam writing, this thesis will now look at the development o f proton beam writing in 
both polymers.
2.6.1 Proton beam writing in PMMA
Developed in 1928, PMMA is a widely used polymer photoresist, in the 
semiconductor lithography industry. It consists of a chain of polymerized methyl 
meta acrylate monomer. Figure 2.8 shows the chemical stmcture of the monomer.
Figure 2.8: PMMA consist o f  a chain o f  the Methyl-ineta actylate monomer.
On exposure to high velocity proton beams, the energy transfeired from the beams 
break the polymer chains, this is known as chain scissioning. Van Kan et al. reports 
that the most suitable fluence to expose PMMA at 2.0 MeV to be 80nC/mm^ [45]. 
Chain scissioning lowers the molecular weight of the resultant polymer. The lower 
molecular weight of the resultant polymer makes exposed regions soluble in a 
chemical developer [46,42].
Since the regions exposed to the proton beams are removed via a chemical process, 
PMMA is classified as a positive resist when used in proton beam writing. However 
when exposure doses exceed 563nC/mm^ the molecules crosslink with each other 
and forms a network of larger molecules, causing PMMA to exhibits negative resist 
properties such that iiTadiated regions remain [47]. Proton beams at 2.0MeV have a 
range o f 65 pm in PMMA of density 1.19g/cm^ calculated by SRIM simulation 
software [24].
Table 2.1 shows the range of proton beams in PMMA as calculated by SRIM 
software as the ion energy is increased.
SRIM also gives us an indication of the mean deviation of the ions from the 
penefration path known as straggling. To create a 3-dimension picture straggling is 
expressed in both its longitudinal and lateral foims.
Ion Energy 
(MeV)
Projected 
Range (pm)
Straggling(pm)
Straggling(pm).
1.00 27.32 1.18 0.96
1.50 51.33 2.02 1.69
2.00 65.12 3.14 2.55
2.50 96.82 4.86 3.56
3.00 128.38 6.52 4.71
Table 2.1: SRIM  simulations o f  the projected range o f  ions in PMMA [24].
2.6.2 Proton beam writing in SU 8
SU 8 is a chemically amplified high contrast epoxy based photoresist. The figure 2.9 
shows the chemical structure of the polymer.
Figure 2.9 Structure o f  the SU  8 EPON Epoxy Polymer C = 87, H  = 94, O 16 [46],
On exposure to proton beams, cross linking, polymerization and hardening takes 
place. Energy deposited on exposure to ion beams, initiates polymerization through 
the formation of acids within the resist. Wlien iiTadiated with UV a post exposure 
bake process facilitates polymerization within the resist [48]. However on exposure 
to proton beams the post exposure bake process is not required. Van Kan et al report 
that the most suitable fluence to expose SU 8 at 2.0 MeV to be 30nC/mm^ [45].
Proton beams at 2.0MeV have a range of 55pm in SU 8 calculated by SRIM 
simulation software [24, 39]. Table 2.2 shows the range of proton beams in SU 8 as 
calculated by SRIM software as the ion energy is increased [24].
Ion Energy 
(MeV)
Projected 
Range (pm)
Sti-aggling
Stiaggling
(pm).
1.00 17.79 0.77 0.72
1.50 33.29 1.33 1.25
2.00 52.55 2.07 1.88
2.50 75.80 3.19 2.62
3.00 95.38 3.96 3.14
Table 2.2: SRIM  Simulation fo r  SU  8 Epoxy resists.
Regions unexposed to proton beams, dissolve in a chemical developer, as such SU 8 
is classified as a negative resist when used in proton beam writing.
The use of SU 8 for lithographic purposes, suffer from the inability to readily 
remove it after the hard bake step. While a hard bake is not required with proton 
beam writing, inadvertently hardened regions are difficult to remove. Dentinger et 
al. describe a process whereby hardened SU 8 is removed using a mixture of 
chemical salts at 350 degrees Centigrade [49].
2.7 Applications of Proton beam writing in polymers
Proton beam writing in polymers has mainly been applied in mechanical and optical 
devices, or design of parts thereof. The following are examples of areas in which 
proton beam writing in polymers have been applied.
2.7.1 Mechanical Applications of proton beam writing in PMMA
Proton beam writing in PMMA has been demonstiated in the production o f micro 
opto-mechanical components. Volckaerts et al. demonstrates the use of Proton beam 
writing in PMMA to produce micro injection molds for casting and replication of 
micro-devices [50]
Ansari et al. describe the use of proton beam writing in PMMA in fabricating stamps 
for nano imprint lithography [51]. They describe the production of 3-dimensional 
structures in PMMA using proton beam writing and subsequent deposition plating of 
the structures with nickel to be used as stamps for a nano imprinting.
Van Kan et al. describes the fabrication of a free standing stincture used as a 
resolution standard for focusing MeV ion beams. The standard is produced by 
proton beam writing in PMMA and subsequent nickel electroplating of the stmctures 
produced [52]. This application demonstiated focusing MeV protons to the smallest 
beam spot size recorded 29.2nm.
2.7.2 Optical Applications of proton beam writing in PMMA
Refractive micro lens arrays have been created using proton beam writing in 
PMMA. Ottevaere et al. describe a process where micro lens anays are produced by 
irradiating PMMA with protons and using an organic monomer vapour to initiate 
swelling o f the exposed regions and hence spherical micro-lenses [53].
Sum et al. describe a non-lithography application in the formation of y-branching 
waveguides in PMMA, by using the change o f refractive index of proton exposed 
PMMA near the ends of the protons range [54]. This experiment showed the 
usefulness of proton beam writing for rapid prototyping of waveguides for optical 
circuits.
2.7.3 Mechanical Applications of proton beam writing in SU 8.
An application of Proton beam writing in SU 8, has been the production of stamps 
for other lithographic processes or molds for the micro structural devices. Van Kan 
demonstrates the production of stamps and molds using proton beam writing in SU 8 
and a technique for electroplating structures produced with copper and nickel [55]. 
Micro chamiels have uses in micro-fluidic applications, Tey et al. describe a process 
using proton beam writing in SU 8, where the Youngs modulus of proton implanted 
SU 8 is evaluated and then goes on to describe a micro machining method for the 
formation of embedded micro-channels in SU 8 resist [44]
2.7.4 Optical Applications of proton beam writing in SU 8.
Optical applications of Proton beam writing in SU 8 have been demonstrated. Sum 
et al. describe such applications in the production of: low loss optical waveguides, 
passive optical y-branching waveguides and some micro-optical components such as 
Braggs diffraction gratings and micro Fresnel lens arrays [22,56,57].
2.8 Proton Beam writing in conductive Polymer
The methods of modifying the electiical properties of SU 8 as described in literature fall 
broadly under two main categories; mixing SU 8 with a conductive polymer and introduction 
of conductive nano-particles.
Leeuw et al. describes a method of creating conductive SU 8 by creating a mixture with a 
semiconductor doped organic polymer Polyaniline [58]. However Nordstrom et al. reports 
that due to the acidic nature of the constituent Polyaniline mixture, cross-linking is initiated 
in SU 8 and a thick inliomogeneous mixture results. This mixture presents difficulty in 
spincoating [59].
The introduction o f nano particles into SU 8 involves the dispersion of electrically conductive 
nano-particles into SU 8. Gammelgaard describes the addition of carbon black nano-particles 
to SU 8 to create an electiically conductive photo-plastic/carbon cantilever for sensor 
applications [60].
In electro-optical applications non-conducting but optically transparent nano-particles may be 
used for optical parts of the microstructures. Chiamori et al. describe a method o f the physical 
incorporation of optically transparent diamondoids (which are hydrogen teiminated diamond 
fragments) by dispersion in SU 8 [61].
Multi-walled carbon nanotubes have been chemically bonded to SU 8 and dispersed using 
ultrasonic iiTadiation. Zhang et al. describes a process where hydroxyl groups in 
functionalised carbon nanotubes react with open epoxide groups within the SU 8 polymer, to 
create a dark unifonn mixture tliat is conductive and curable by exposure to ultraviolet 
radiation [62]. Chiamori et al. further describe incorporation of single walled carbon 
nanotubes and achieving conductivity in the resultant composite when single walled nano 
particles comprise between 1% -5% by weight are dispersed in the polymer [61].
Jiguet et al. describe a method of incorporating silver nano particles into SU 8 and 
fabricating electiically conductive composites. However they also report difficulties in 
spincoating the resultant nano-composite such that spreading is required over the substiate. 
The resultant nano-composite resist is thick and not easily curable by UV lithography as the 
silver particles are not transparent to UV [63].
In order to create electro-mechanical stmctures in SU 8 using proton beam writing, 
modification of the resists electiical properties or the electrical properties of stmctures 
created is necessary. Chapter 5 describes a novel method of making stmctures produced in
s u  8 conductive by the selective electi'oless plating of gold such stmctures written in SU 8 by 
proton beam writing. Chapter 5 describes the conduction mechanism by percolation theory 
and creating conducting microstmctures by proton beam lithography in SU 8 /silver nano 
composite.
Having considered the literature regarding lithography with proton beams, especially in 
polymers, frirther chapters in this thesis is devoted to techniques, equipment and the 
experimental process required to demonstrate electrostatic actuation in micro electro
mechanical microgripper device created by proton beam lithography.
CHAPTER 3
3 Experimental Methods
3.1 Sample Preparation
To fit on sample holders, silicon or glass substrates are cleaved using a diamond tipped scribe 
into 2cm x 2cm square shaped samples.
In order to maximize cohesion with the resist, the surface of the substiate is made rough 
microscopically using a piranha etch process. This also removes organic residues. The 
piranha etch process could potentially be dangerous, care must be taken as well as personal 
protective equipment worn. This step should be performed in an acid fume cupboard.
1. Fill a beaker with 100ml hydiogen peroxide (30% concentration), and a second 
beaker filled with 300ml sulphuric acid (90% concentration).
2. Pour in the sulphuric acid in to the beaker containing the hydrogen peroxide solution.
3. Immediately introduce the samples, the reaction is exothermic, the solution seems 
agitated and appears to boil. Leave the samples in the mixture for 10 minutes or until 
the reaction stops.
4. Carefully remove the samples using tweezers and clean.
The sample is cleaned by using a three stage clean process.
1. Dipped into acetone to remove organic residues
2. Methanol used to remove inorganic residues and residue from the acetone;
3. Isopropyl alcohol (IPA) to remove methanol residues.
3.2 PMWIA Procedure
Bulk PMMA is cleaved into 2cm x 2cm samples using a scalpel. The film covering on both 
the top and bottom surfaces are carefully removed with a pair of tweezers; care is taken not to 
scratch the surface to be wiitten on. Gloves are worn so as not to leave any residue on the 
surface of the PMMA sample.
A sticky pad is glued to the bottom surface so it can be attached seamlessly to a sample 
holder for use in proton beam writing.
3.2.1 Developing PMMA
When PMMA is proton iiTadiated the regions exposed have a lower molecular weight as a 
result o f broken bonds in the polymer, regions with lower molecular weights are soluble in a 
developer solution which consist o f 20% Isopropyl alcohol, and 80% methyl isobutyl ketone 
(MIK).
The development step consists o f immersing the iiTadiated sample developer solution for 5 
minutes and then IPA for 1 minute. The sample is rinsed in de-ionized water then gently air 
dried with an air gun. The figure 3.1 depicts the development process for proton inadiated 
PMMA, this behavior is described as being positive to the proton beams as irradiated regions 
are removed by development
Development
 Un-iiTadiated Regions Irradiated R egions
Figure 3.1: Development o f  proton irradiated PMMA.
3.3 SU 8 Procedure
3.3.1 SU 8 Spincoating
Spincoating is an essential step in depositing SU 8 unto a substiate. It involves using a 
spincoating machine to deposit photoresist upon a substrate, spinning at regulated speeds 
which in-tura dictates the resulting film thickness. Due to SU 8 light sensitivity, spincoating
is performed under yellow light conditions in the class 100 cleanroom. The steps for 
spincoating SU 8 unto a silicon substrate are as follows:
1. Placed cleaned cleaved substrate sample on a hotplate at 120 C for five minutes to 
remove any water that may be on its surface; this is known as a dehydration bake.
2. Clean the spinner with acetone, and cover in foil paper to prevent staining as SU 8 
when cured is difficult to remove. Checked that the vacuum of the spinner works 
properly, and to ensure that there are no liquids in the vacuum pipes.
3. Removed the sample fiom the hotplate, then set to 65C place the sample on the 
spimier and set it to be in the middle of the chuck. Switch the vacuum of the spinner 
on, so as to hold the sample in place while spinning.
4. Decant SU 8 into a small amber bottle; heat the amber bottle of SU 8 to 65C on the 
hotplate for five minutes. This would remove any bubbles that may be present in the 
resist. Once the bubbles have been visibly removed, aspirate SU 8 into a drop bottle, 
or a syringe.
5. Spread an even layer of SU 8 on the surface of the sample using the drop bottle. This 
is done while the spinner is stationary. A two- staged spinning program should be 
used; a 10 second ramp, followed by 50 seconds at a steady speed.
6. Select the resist spin speed and time using a stopwatch. The spin speed is dependent 
on the desired resist thickness. The figure 3.2 below shows the observed and 
measured spin speeds and the corresponding wet thickness, alongside a measured 
thickness after the soft bake process (Film measurements are explained in section 
3.4). The difference in film thickness after soft baking is due to the solvent loss by 
evaporation.
W et Thickness100
After Softbake
1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
Spin Speeds {rpm)
Figure 3.2 Resist thickness as a /unction o f  Spin speeds wet thickness blue [46] and measured after a softbake (Red)
I . In order to remove any edge beads, and to prevent the sample sticking to the hotplate 
during baking, rotate the spinner chuck by hand and use a cleanroom wipe moistened 
in acetone on the edges of the sample.
3.3.2 Softbake
8. Place microscope slides on the spin-coater to prevent the sample sticking to the 
bottom. The slides should be placed in the middle of the hotplate to ensure uniform 
heating, and the hotplate is level.
9. Place the sample on the microscope slides and leave at 65C for 20 minutes. This is 
known as a pre-bake stage.
10. Ramp up the hotplate to 95C for 2 hours and 30 minutes. During this softbake 
process, check the sample is dry; by inserting a needlepoint into the film edges until 
the film is hard.
II . Allow the sample to cool to room temperature; it is now ready for proton beam 
lithography.
3.3.3 Development
After lithography has been performed, SU 8 is developed using a chemical developer; this 
removes all un-irradiated regions and leaves behind a structure created by the scanned 
pattern. The figure 3.3 below depicts this process, which is described as being negative to 
the proton beams since irradiated regions remain after development.
Development
Irradiated Regions 
I I U n-irradiated Regions
Substrate
Figure 3.3: Development o f  irradiated SU  8 (negative resist to proton beams)
12. Fill a beaker with 100ml of Microchem resist developer.
13. Remove the sample fi*om the sample holder and place one at a time into the resist 
filled beaker.
14. Agitate the beaker mildly using a vibrating hotplate set to room temperature for 10 
minutes, or until all the undeveloped portions of the film is removed.
15. To check if  there are any underdeveloped regions; Squirt Isopropyl alcohol (IPA) on 
the sample. If  a white residue is visible, the sample is underdeveloped re-introduce 
into the developer solution.
16. Rinse with acetone and blow dry with a nitrogen gun.
3.4 Processing procedure for SU 8- Ag Nano-Composite Polymer
3.4.1 Spin coating
Spincoating is an essential step in depositing SU 8-Ag Nano-composite polymer unto a 
substrate. It involves using a spinning resist upon a substrate at speeds which dictate their 
film thickness. The spincoating process is similar to that of SU 8 in section 3.31 however 
there are these noted differences.
1. A Piranha etched cleaned cleaved silicon substiate is placed on a level hotplate at 
120 C for five minutes to remove any water that may be on its surface; this is known 
as a dehydration bake.
2. A two- staged spinning program should be used; a 30 second ramp, followed by 150 
seconds at a steady speed.
3. For a 75pm resist layer, a 30 second ramp to 500rpm is followed by a 150 second spin 
at 2300ipin.
4. The spin coated substrate is degassed by placed in a degassing vacuum chamber for 
15 minutes.
3.4.2 Softbake
5. The Softbake process is identical to that of SU 8 as detailed in section 3.3.2
3.4.3 Development
After lithography has been performed, SU 8-Ag is developed using a chemical developer;
this removes all un-irradiated regions and leaves behind a stincture created by the
scanned pattern. This process is identical to the process described in section 3.3.3 with the
following differences:
6. Agitate the beaker mildly using a vibrating hotplate set to room temperature for 27 
minutes, or until all the undeveloped portions of the film is removed.
7. The noticeable silver debris left on the substrate is removed by sonification for 10 
seconds.
8. A blow gun is generally not used with SU 8-Ag, as there is a risk of breaking 
overhanging structures.
3.5 Measurement of Resist film Thickness
3.5.1 Dektak Profilometer
Film thickness was measured using the Dektak- 3 surface profiler, when the tip is scanned 
across a sample, its stylus measures small vertical heights and plots the output on a screen. It 
is equipped with a camera and can auto adjust data if the sample is not level. The Dektak 3 
surface profiler cam measure film thickness between 0.01 pm and 65 pm and has an eiror of 
The stylus exerts some force on the film and can create scouring, or create grooves on the 
film. In order to obtain accurate results the film is measured fiom the films surface to the 
substiate surface and then vice versa (from the top of the substrate to the film). The average 
height if there is any discrepancy is taken to be the film height. The figure 3.4 below 
illustrates how film thickness measurements are made.
Scanning direction
R esist
Substrate
Figure 3.4 Measuring Jiiin thicknesses tising the Dektak, scanning measurement in two directions.
If the film height is expected to exceed the 65 pm range of the Dektak profilometer, two 
measurement starting points are created at the edge o f the films surface using a scalpel. The 
Figure 3.5 illustrates measuring film thickness above the range of the Dektak.
Scanning D irection
BResistSubstrate
Figure 3.5 MeasuringJiim thicknesses on the Dektak profiiometer when the fiim  thickness exceeds 65pm
The camera and screen output is used to observe and adjust for new measurement starting 
point. The auto-level feature of the Dektak is particularly usefiil as the scalpel cut features are 
hardly horizontal.
3.5.2 Talystep
Where measurements o f film thickness or feature heights are less than 12pm, a Taylor 
Hobson Talystep profilometer is used. As the sample is moved across the sapphire tipped 
stylus, any variations in the feature height is measured from a fixed zero point and recorded 
on thermal graph paper. The Taylor Hobson Talystep tool has an error of 5% and a maximum 
measurement o f 12pm.
3.6 Creating a UV filter for SU 8
Light from external sources e.g. a lithography chamber exposes the surface regions of SU 8 
as such there is no distinction between irradiated and un-irradiated regions. This renders the 
sample unsuitable to be used for proton beam lithography.
In order to prevent SU 8 exposure to light a suitable filter (which blocks out the wavelengths 
that SU 8 is sensitive to) was created from polycarbonate material obtained from Entegris 
A Varian model FTIR spectrophotometer with 3% error was used to measure the absorbance 
spectrum of the polypropylene material to be used as a filter. The figure 3.6 below shows the 
measured absorbance of the material and compares this with the absorbance data of SU 8 
(provided by Microchem Inc.) within the ultraviolet to visible light spectrum.
220 260 300 340 380 420 460 500 540 580
W avelenght (nm)
Filter Absorbance 
SU 8 Absorbance
Figure 3.6: Spectrophotometer Absorbance spectra measurements fo r  Filter and SU 8 [46].
The absorbance spectrum of SU 8 fits underneath that of the polypropylene material, as such 
when used as a filter for external light, it blocks out any irradiation that SU 8 is sensitive too. 
In order to use the material as a light filter for the irradiation chamber, a 5cm x 5cm section is 
cleaved using a heated scalpel. The filter is inserted between the light source and fiber optic 
cables illuminating the chamber. The filter may also be used to make a box to protect the 
sample from any other light sources during transportation.
3.7 The Tandetron Accelerator
In the Stephens lab, the Tandetron accelerator is a two-stage electrostatic particle accelerator, 
ions are extracted from plasma using a 20kV extraction voltage. The ion specie extracted is 
determined by the gas used in the duoplasmatron source. The figure 3.7 shows the layout of 
the Tandetron accelerator in the Stephens lab.
FC XT
CD PC
PC: rmnj Cup
Figure 3.7: The Tandem accelerator Stephens Lab University o f  Surrey.
When Hydrogen gas is used as the source gas, plasma formed in the duoplasmatron source is 
concentrated using a magnetic field for increased efficiency. With the extraction voltage 
applied, negatively charged Hydrogen ions are extracted and focused using Einzel lenses.
An analyzing magnet selects the right isotope; it is used to ensure that only ions of a 
predetermined mass and energy is selected. It achieves this by bending the stream of ions 90 
degrees using magnetic steerers. Ions with wrong masses or energy are not deflected and are 
thus removed from the stream.
When a terminal acceleration voltage is applied, the negatively charged Hydrogen ions are 
accelerated through a stripping canal, where a nitrogen stripper gas changes their potential by 
stripping them of electrons to make them positively charged. The stripper cells are powered 
by the use of a motor-generator. A turbo pump is used to re-circulate the nitrogen gas and 
maintain a vacuum.
The now positively charged hydrogen ions (Protons, H ) are accelerated from their extraction 
voltage to the terminal voltage. The protons are next accelerated by using a repelling force
from the terminal voltage down to ground potential. The protons now have an energy that is a 
product of the electronic charge and twice the terminal voltage. It is this two step acceleration 
process (from extraction voltage to terminal voltage and then to ground potential) working in 
tandem that lends the name tandetron accelerator its name.
A selector magnet uses a magnetic field to steer the now accelerated proton beams 30 
towards a microbeam line used for lithography. The beam spot is visible on a scintillator that 
fluoresces when struck by proton beams. The proton beams are focused by using a set of 3 
magnetic Quadrupole (Four Poled) lenses. These lenses are used to focus the beam to a spot 
on a quartz target by converging it in different planes. Typical obtained beam spot sizes are 
2pm X 2pm.
3.7.1 Measuring the Beam Spot Size
The beam spot size is measured by scanning the proton beams in a raster pattern over a 
copper grid. When proton beams hit a material there is an emission of x-rays; this is known as 
particle induced x-ray emission (FIXE). The x-rays have characteristic properties of the 
material which produces them, which are detected and recognized using a PIXE detector and 
software which creates and records a count.
A copper grid made from 8pm thick and 12.5pm wide copper bars spaced 25pm apart is used 
to measure the beam spot size. As the beam is scanned across a copper bar, vertically and 
horizontally the PIXE detector and software calculates the beam dimensions from generated 
Full Width Half Maximum graph a 10% to 90% rise time of the counts. The figure 3.8 below 
shows the elemental map of the copper grid from PIXE data, and measurements of the beam 
spot size scanning the proton beam over copper bars.
F igure  3 .8 : E lem en ta l m ap  show ing  m ea su rem en t o f  beam  .spot size  on  a  co p p er  grid.
It is important to know the beam spot size because this will place a practical limit on the 
dimensions of structures produced.
3.7.2 Sample Loading
Wlien loading light sensitive samples such as SU 8, low light conditions are observed, the 
shutters over the windows are drawn and fluorescent bulbs in the laboratory are turned off. 
The samples glued to aluminium sample holders and inserted into the evacuated lithography 
chamber. The Figure 3.9 shows a schematic of the inside of the chamber used for lithography. 
The chamber is in vacuum during lithography. During sample loading the chamber is 
pumped down and evacuated.
SULi detcSor
MIcfoscope
absorber
Faraday cup
Figure 3.9: Schematic o f  the Lithography Chamber
Before the sample is loaded, the light source to the chamber is filtered with a suitable UV 
filter. After the samples are loaded, the lithography chamber is brought back to vacuum.
3.7.3 Scan Pattern Generation
In order to produce structures, the ions are scanned over the surface of a proton sensitive 
material in a predetermined manner, using a microprobe scanning system by Oxford 
Microbeam ltd.
The Oxford Microbeam Data Acquisition software OMDAQ originally designed for data 
acquisition is adapted for scan pattern generation [32]. A text file contains infomiation about 
the stmcture as well as the resolution of the structure in a hexadecimal matrix. The OMDAQ 
software has a maximum resolution o f 256pixels x 256pixels. The figure 3.10 below shows 
the matrix file 5 pixels by 16 pixels wide and the image pattern generated by OMDAQ.
5x1 6
1100110011001100
1100110011001100
1100110011001100
1100110011001100
1100110011001100
Figure 3.10: OMDAQ matrix file  and the corresponding image pattern generated
A pixel co-ordinate is generated from the matrix data and dictates points where the beam 
should be on or off using a beam blanking circuit.
lonscan software produces a scan pattern from a set of instructions written in a text file [32]. 
It is specifically created for lithography and has a maximum pixel resolution of 64000pixels x 
64000pixels. The lonscan software uses a scan pattern referred to as a turtle mode it traces 
out the edges of the pattern and later fills in the rest o f the pattern using a raster scan. Figure 
3.11 shows an example of the instructions to lonscan to create a rectangular pattern with a 
1024 X 1024 pixel resolution, the x and y co-ordinates are given and an example of the image 
pattern generated.
lEmcI
11024
IRREC
Figure 3. II:  lonscan text file  input and corresponding image pattern generated [32]
3.7.4 Scan Resolution and Pixel Size
The scan resolution and the scanning area determine the pixel size. When generating an 
image to be scanned, it was later determined to be important that the beam spot size should be 
marginally larger than the image pixel size; this ensures that the full image is scanned. As 
shown in Figure 3.12 the ideal relative size of the beam spot was found to be 1.25 times the 
pixel size.
Beam spot size = 1.25 
Pixel size
Pixel size
Figure 3.12: Beam spot size relative to pixel size to ensure the Jull image is scanned
3.8 Dose Calculations
The unit used for the measurement o f implant dose is nC/mnf, this measures the charge per 
square millimetre that is put into the target.
The charge of a proton is numerically equal to the charge of an electron and their
measurement unit is the coulomb. The charge of a proton is 1.60217 x 10~^^ 
coulombs.
Hence where a charge of 1 coulomb is measured there are 6.2415 x 10^ protons.
The coulomb is also a measure of the amount of charge tr ansported by a current o f 1 
Ampere in 1 second.
Taking the percentage of the implant region scanned into consideration, the dose can 
is then given by equation 1 below.
D o s e (  n C / m m 2 )  =  X % P^centage scan Area g  ( 3 , | )
Scan  S ize  (mm ) n v /
Equation 3.1: Calculation o f  implant dose in nC/mm^.
The current used for dose calculations is the average current taken just before and 
after iiTadiation. It is measured off the metallic sample holder by the use of a desktop 
ammeter. This is an analogue ammeter with 1% error rating and the readouts are 
subject to parallax eiTors.
The irradiation time is measured on the OMDAQ software, and is also crosschecked 
by a tabletop stopwatch. OMDAQ also estimates the percentage scan area with 
respect to the total scan size.
The scan area is input into OMDAQ and is physically set in the scaiming amplifier 
hardware.
3.8.1 Dose normalization by Elastic Backscattering Spectrometry
Incident MeV accelerated protons interact with the nucleus of a target material. 
Some of the positively charged protons come within the vicinity of a nucleus and are 
repelled or backscattered through columbic interacting forces. The probability that 
an incident proton is back scattered can be predicted by the Rutherford fonnula [64].
The Energy at which ions backscatter is dependent on factors such as the incident 
energy and the mass of the atoms they collide with. As such measuring the energy of 
the scattered ions indicates the chemical composition o f the target.
A wide angled silicon diode detector is placed such that particles scattered from the 
target is collected. The detector is used to collect data such as charge, the frequency 
of the backscattered ions and an energy spectrum of the back scattered ions.
Rutherford backscattering spectroscopy is most sensitive to heavy elements and is 
used mostly for thin films where the target thickness is less than 20pm [64, 65].
In polymer targets, which contain light elements such as Carbon, Oxygen and 
Hydrogen; high energy ions may penetrate the Columbic barrier and the scattering is 
affected by the target atoms nuclear potential. In thick targets the ions may not fully 
interact with the whole charge of the target nucleus. It is in cases such as these that 
non-Rutherford elastic backscattering specfrometiy (BBS) is used; for high 
sensitivity of light elements and thick samples [66].
The BBS spectmm obtained is analyzed using Data Furnace software [67], 
which compares spectra obtained from a material with known spectra from a 
calibration sample. A fit is made conelating the data, hence a charge to count ratio 
is then established using the charge obtained and the detector characteristics.
3.8.2 Example of dose normalization of SU 8 using spectroscopy
Dose calibration is an effective way of ensuring that the amount of protons 
implanted into a material is carefully monitored and measured. This allows a 
specified dose to be applied.
Dose calibration is an effective way of ensuring that the amount of protons 
implanted into a material is carefully monitored and measured. This allows a 
specified dose to be applied.
EBS was carried out using protons with energies of 1.0 and 2.5 MeV. The 
detector scattering angle was 150, solid angle 60msr. The sample was SU 8
(C.442O.081H.477).
Average beam current measured at the target sample holder was 3 Op A for IMeV and 
120pA for 2.5MeV, beam spot size was 4 pm x 5 pm.
The EBS spectrum collected upon irradiation was calibrated using a Au/Ni/Si02/Si 
calibration sample with a known spectrum [67]. Spectra from SU 8 resist was 
collected at 1.0 and 2.5MeV. Data furnace and SigmaCalc were used to fit and 
compare the spectra obtained with the calibration sample [68].
Proton beam was raster scanned across the surface of the calibration sample at 1.0 
MeV. A spectrum was collected from the detector and analysed using Data furnace. 
The Figure 3.13 from data furnace plots out the counts obtained (Red) and a 
statistical fit created from the samples known elemental composition (Green) within 
a range of energy channels, each channel is 3.96 keV wide. The edges for elements 
have been highlighted.
g.  cdAfOlOldiHExpl
\  s. 1
 I-------
Channel
Figure 3.13: IM eV calibration spectrum from  Au/Ni/Si02/Si sample.
Spectrum was then obtained from raster scanning protons at IMeV on SU 8 
target. The spectrum was analysed using data furnace. The Figure 3.14 highlights 
the carbon and oxygen edges and plots the counts obtained (Red) and a statistical fit 
created from SU 8 elemental composition (Green). Each channel on the x- axis is 
3.96 keV wide.
 caW A t o  i  da f. Ex pt 
  < a lr iK iO i cliM .fir
Figure 3.14: IM eV spectrum obtained from  SU 8.
When the spectrum obtained from SU 8 is analysed and compared to the 
calibration spectrum using data furnace. It is seen that at 1.0 MeV there were 16322 
eounts for a charge solid angle product of 14.47 [xC.msr for the entire integrated 
spectrum.
Calibration of the sample of known spectra was done again at 2.5MeV and the 
Figure 3.15 shows the spectrum obtained, each channel on the x axis is 8.89 keV 
wide. In order to get data furnace simulation to fit the signal, a scattering angle of 
170 and straggling with a factor of 1.2 was entered into the software for 
computation.
VM 4**1 F#l
Figure 3.15: Spectra from Calibration .sample (Au/Ni/SiOi/Si) at 2.5MeV
Spectrum was similarly collected from the SU 8 sample at 2.5 MeV. Figure 3.16 
shows the obtained spectra. Each channel on the x-axis is 8.89keV wide.
lOOtH  ca lf0401.dai.xpt 
  caH0401 lid l.fil
ChamnW 512
Figure 3.16: SU 8 EBS spectrum with 2.5M eVprotons.
The spectrum obtained from SU 8 at 2.5MeV is analysed and compared to the 
calibration spectrum at the same energy using data furnace. There are 115777 
counts for a charge solid-angle product of 1.424 [xC.msr for the entire integrated 
spectrum.
Having obtained a count for the detectors charge solid angle produet, a count to 
charge ratio is established. Since the charge is dependent on the number of protons 
present. The dose is easily eomputed and can be normalized by EBS using the 
counts obtained.
CHAPTER 4
Creation of 3 Dimensional structures using 
proton beam writing
Having considered the theoretical basis and the experimental tools required in 
chapter 2 and 3, this chapter aims to detail the experimental processes and steps in 
the creation of 3 dimensional structures using by proton beam writing. The figure
4.1 is a pictorial depiction of the aims. The experimental steps leading to the creation 
of multilevel, freestanding cantilevers structures are detailed in this section.
1.0 MeV exposure 
2.5 MeV exposure
Figure 4.1: Creating a multilevel 3-dimensional structure in SU 8 by proton beam.
Investigation of process controls and sensitivities will be discussed in section 4.8. 
Structures optimized by implementation of controls would be compared with non 
optimized structures created as shown in the early sections of this chapter.
In the experimental steps leading up to the creation of multilevel freestanding 
structures this thesis will firstly consider proton beam writing in a positive resist 
medium PMMA and then proton beam writing in SU 8. This section next documents 
the experimental determination of the optimal dose process parameter, through to the 
creation of a freestanding cantilever structure in SU 8.
4.1 Proton Beam Writing in PMMA
Proton beam writing on PMMA is demonstrated in this section. As explained in 
section 2.6.1, this involves the breaking of polymer bonds and the subsequent 
dissolution of lower molecular weight material in a developer to yield structures in 
un-irradiated areas. This experimental confirmation of PMMAs positive behavior 
(see fig. 3.1) to proton beams is documented below.
4.1.1 Experimental Procedure for Proton Beam writing in PMMA
1mm thick PMMA samples were cleaved into 2cm x 2cm sections and then loaded 
into the irradiation chamber as described in section 3.6.2.
The patterns of the scans were created using OMDAQ software and is depicted in 
figure 4.2.
lOOOum lOOOum
Figure 4.2: (a.) Square and (b) Grid patterns irradiated unto PMMA using OMDAQ software.
A 2.0 MeV proton beam is used for irradiation; the beam spot size measured was 4.2 
X 3.7 |im^. The average beam current at the target was 100 pA and the irradiation 
area was 1000 x lOOOpm . The applied proton implant dose was done at 75, 107 and 
378nC/mm^.
As described in section 3.2.2; the structures were developed to remove the irradiated 
regions. The structures produced were then observed using an optical microscope 
that stores digital images. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was also performed 
at the department of material science.
The irradiations are performed using the pattern in figure 4.2a with increasing dose 
starting at 75nC/mm^. The figure 4.3a shows optical micrograph of a structure 
produced with a dose of 75nC/mm^ the edges of the structure has been highlighted, 
since PMMA is transparent optical imaging can be quite challenging.
Figure 4.3 Optica and SEM images o f  structure produced in PMMA with an implant dose of75nc/mm'
Scanning electron microscopy has been performed on the highlighted region as 
shown in figure 4.3b. The edges of the structure is highlighted, the structure which 
has been coated in carbon, shows craters or depressions created by the beam not 
scanning the area uniformly and dwelling longer on each crater site.
The dose is increased further to 107nC/mm and the figure 4.4a shows us the optical 
micrograph of the structure produced. Lines have been used to highlight where the 
edges of the structure are. When compared visually with the structures produced at 
75nC/mm^ (figure 4.3a) the structures are more highly defined with distinct shapes 
corresponding to areas exposed to the beam.
Figure 4.4: Optical and SEM images o f  structures produced in PMMA at a proton implant dose o f  I07nC/mm^.
The figure 4.4b is an SEM image of the structure shown in figure 4.4a. The structure 
is carbon coated and its edges have been highlighted in black. Red circles have been 
used to indicate where craters have formed due to non-uniform scanning of the 
beam. A grid-like pattern is also visible and has been enlarged as seen in figure 4.4b. 
This grid-like pattern is as result of the beam spot being smaller than the pixel size 
as discussed in section 3.6.2.
The scan pattern is changed from squares to a grid pattern as depicted in figure 4.2b. 
the beam spot size is increased to match the pixel size as described in section 3.6.2 
The irradiation dose is further increased from 107nC/mm^to 378 nC/mm^, there is 
improvement in the structural features as shown in figure 4.5a, b and c. with an 
absence of craters in the structures produced.
Figure 4.5: Optical and SEM images o f  structures produced in PMMA at a proton implant dose of378nC/mm^.
Figure 4.5a shows the optical micrograph before development, showing a change in 
the optical properties of the proton irradiated PMMA with an dose of 378nC/mm^, 
there also seem to be bubbles within the resist.
Figure 4.5b shows an SEM image a section of the same strticture, highlighted in a 
red square are residues most likely from carbon coating and incomplete 
development. There is also some charging under the electron beam. The section 
highlighted by a white box is shown in figure 4.4c; there are some ridges on the
edges of the structure produced. These are artifacts o f the raster scanning method
used by the OMDAQ software. |
4.1.2 Experimental Findings of proton beam writing in PMMA i
This experimental confirmation of PMMAs positive behavior to proton beams is j
has been shown. It has also been observed that stmctures created with doses above |
170 nC/mm^ inclusive have well defined and distinct features. This is in agreement j
with reports in literature, that most suitable doses to expose PMMA with protons at |
2.0MeV are doses above 80 nC/mm^ [49]. j
There is an observable change to the optical properties of PMMA, this was observed 
at an exposure dose of 378 nC/mm^. This is in agreement with the literature as Sum .
et al. reported changing the optical properties o f PMMA by proton iiTadiation [54].
4.2 Proton Beam Writing in SU 8
Having observed documented, and experimentally confirmed the behavior of 
PMMA as a positive resist to proton beams, this section demonstiates proton beam 
writing in SU 8 and seeks to confirm experimentally that SU 8 exhibits negative 
behavior with respect to proton beams. A relationship between the inadiation dose 
and the features of stmctures produced will also be obseiwed.
4.1.2 Experimental Procedure for Proton Beam Writing in SU 8
After sample preparation as described in section 3.3 and loading; a 2.0 MeV proton 
beam is used to irradiate a 50 pm thick layer of SU 8 spun unto a 1 mm thick silicon 
substrate.
The beam spot size measured was 2.2 x 3.5 pm^. The average beam current at the 
target was 200 pA and the irradiation scan area was 1000 x lOOOpm^. Structures 
were produced with implant doses of: 5, 10, 15, 20, 25 and 35nC/mm^. Figure 4.6a 
depicts the scan patterns created in OMDAQ and figure 4.6b shows what the created 
structures should look like.
1OOOu m
1000 Jim
50 u m
Figure 4.6 (a) Square pattern, (h) proposed structure to be created on SU 8  using OMDAQ software.
Optical micrographs of the structures created are shown. To demonstrate proton 
beam writing in SU 8, the patterns generated are scanned over the resist at a range of 
doses. A low implant dose of 5nC/mm* has been used to create the first structures. 
Figure 4.6a shows micrographs of structure obtained at 5nC/mm^ A line is used to 
depict where the edges of the structure should be.
Figure 4.7  a) Proton implanted SU 8 with a dose o f  5nC/mm (Scale Bar 100 microns) b.) magnified section o f  interest. 
Guiding lines show the poorly form ed sidewalls and edges (Scale Bar 50 microns).
The structures produced at 5nC/mm do not have distinct edges. The surface highlighted in 
figure 4.7b is uneven and undulating. These observed features are attributed to incomplete 
cross-linking within the polymer due to a low dose.
The implant dose is then increased to lOnC/mm^ the figures 4.8a and 4.8b are micrographs of 
the structure produced. The region highlighted in red in the figure 4.8a is due to a scanning 
anomaly in the proton beam. The edges of the structure are highlighted with guide lines to aid 
visibility. The scale bar is 200 pm wide.
Figure 4.8 a) Proton implanted SU 8 with a dose o f  lOnC/mm^ (Scale Bar 200 microns) h.) An enlarged image o f  the 
highlighted region. The lines are to show the edges (Scale Bar 100 microns).
The figure 4.8b zooms in on the selected region in white in figure 4.8a. The scale bar is 100 
pm wide. When the structures are compared with the structures produced at 5nC/mm^ from 
figures 4.7, these structures have improved edges and the surface is smoother.
The dose is then increased to 15nC/mm" and the structures created are observed in figures 
4.9a and 4.9b. Figure 4.8a shows a structure with defined edges. The comers of the structure 
are not sharp. The scale bar is 200 pm wide and a square has been used to highlight the edges 
of the structure.
Figure 4.9 a) Proton implanted SU 8 with a dose o f  I5nC/mm b.) An enlarged image o f  the region highlighted in black. 
White lines have been used to show the edges
Figure 4.9b zooms in on surface of the region highlighted in black in the figure 4.9a the scale 
bar is 100 pm, this micrograph shows smoother surfaces and improved edges, when 
compared with structures produced at lower doses.
The same pattern is irradiated on the sample and the dose is increased further to 20nC/mm^. 
The resulting structures are shown in figures 4.10a and 4.10b. The figures 4.10a show a 
structure with improved edges and defined side walls. The comers of the structure are 
rounded. The white square is used to highlight the edges.
Figure 4. JO a) Proton implanted SU 8 with a dose o f  20nC/mm b.) A enlarged image o f  the region highlighted in black. 
White lines have been used to show the edges
Figure 4.10b is a higher magnification image of the surface of the structure highlighted by a 
black square in figure 4.10a. When compared to structures produced at lower doses, it is seen 
that the edges of the structures formed are improved.
A red square in figure 4.10a is used to highlight a Table top effect, which is a feature 
caused by the beam scanning the edges of the sample twice this effect is depicted figure 4.11.
D arker R egions have 
been  scanned  tw ice
B eam  forw ard  scan  path
B eam  retu rn  scan path
Figure 4.11: The Table to p  effect is created by the beam scanning the edges o f a structure twice on its return and forw'ard 
paths.
The implant dose is again increased to 25nC/mm^, the structures produced are observed as 
shown in figure 4.12a and figure 4.12b. The table top effect is visible in both micrographs.
Figure 4.12 a) Proton implanted SU 8 with a dose o f  25nC/mm^ b.) A enlarged image o f  the structures surface. White guide 
lines have been used to show the edges.
The structure produces at 25nC/mm shows improved sidewalls and edges that are sharper 
structures produced at lower doses. The surface as seen in figure 4.12b is smoother than those 
of structures produced with lesser doses.
The next structure is produced with an implant dose of 30nC/mm^ it is reported in the 
literature to be the most suitable dose at which to produce structures in SU 8 [45].
Figure 4.13 a) Proton implanted SU 8 with a dose o f  30nC/mm2 b.) Magnified image o f the surface. White guide Unes have 
been used to show the edges. The red square highlights a table top effect.
The figures 4.13a and 4.13b show micrographs of the structure produced at 30nC/mm . The 
white square in figure 4.13a highlights the well defined comers and edges of this stmcture. 
There is a reduction in the table top effect when compared with stmctures created with 
lower doses, as can be seen in figure 4.13b. The smooth surface of the stmcture is visible in 
figure 4.13b.
A further increase was made to the dose and a stmcture was produced at 35nC/mm^. This is 
higher than the optimum proton exposure dose for SU 8 at 2.0MeV [45]. The figures 4.14a 
and 4.14b are micrographs of the stmcture produced.
Figure 4.14 a) Proton implanted SU 8 with a dose o f  35nC/mm2 b.) A enlarged image o f  the structures surface. White guide 
lines have been used to show the edges. The red square highlights the reduced table top effect.
The figure 4.14a shows sharper comers, and nearer vertical sidewalls than other structures 
produced with lower doses. Figure 4.14b highlights the very smooth surface of the stmcture, 
highlighted in a red square is the reduced Table top effect. Structures produced at
35nC/mm show better structural properties that that obtained at 30nC/mm^ for SU 8 
irradiated with protons at 2.0MeV.
4.2.2 Experimental Findings of proton beam writing in SU 8
Observations made from the study of structures created in SU 8, confirm that SU 8 exhibits 
negative resist behavior on exposure to proton beams. This is in agreement with observations 
reported in the literature.
Comparing the physical properties of structures obtained when the dose increases show that 
physical properties of structures such as the relative surface smoothness, comer sharpness 
and verticality of the structure improves with an increase in the implant dose.
This dose study confirms that suitable proton doses to expose SU 8 at 2.0 MeV are above 
30nC/mm^ which agrees with findings reported in literature [45].
Having determined exposure doses for SU 8, the next section will look at an application of 
proton beam writing in SU 8.
4.3 Application of Proton Beam Writing in SU 8
This section aims to demonstrate an application of proton beam writing in SU 8. It shows the 
creation of a 3-dimensional structure that is to be used for a biological application. The 
pattern of the structure is depicted in figure 4.15.
20 iim X 20 iim hole enclosure for storing 
Scanned pattern in
OMDAQ
Figure 4.15: proposed 3-dimensional structure to be created by proton beam writing in SU 8, and corresponding scan 
shape.
A hole measuring 20 pm x 20 pm is to be enclosed within a square shaped structure created 
by implanting a 20 pm layer of SU 8 spun unto a glass substrate. This enclosure would be 
used to store biological cells in an application to study communication within cells.
There was an average beam current of 300pA and a beam spot of 2.2 x 2.7 pm^ was 
used to irradiate a 20 pm thick layer of SU 8 spun unto a 2 mm thick glass substrate 
at a dose of 30nC/mm^. The resulting structures created after development is 
discussed below.
Figure 4.16a and 4.16b are micrographs of the structure produced after development, 
while figure 4.16c is an SEM image of the same structure.
Figure 4.16: Optical and SEM micrographs o f  a 3-dimensional structure created by proton beam writing in SU 8 fo r  a 
biological application..
The figure 4.16a shows the 3-dimensional structure produced. The arrow on the top 
part of the structure is to highlight bubbles produced in the resist film. A line on the 
bottom part on the structure is scouring from the profilometer tip for height 
measurements. The dimensions at the top of the hole seem to be approximately 50 
pm X 50 pm, however upon magnification as seen in figure 4.16b, which is a 
magnified image of the area of interest highlighted by a white square in figure 4.15a. 
The hole measures approximately 20 pm x 20 pm. The figure 4.16 is an SEM image 
of the structure and the hole with the hole highlighted.
4.3.1 Application findings
This example has demonstrated an application of proton beam writing for use in 
biological applications. This application was done as a proof of concept study and 
can be taken further to create a set of similar enclosures linked by chamiels to study 
commimication between biological cells.
Some applications require much more than enclosures and may need multilevel 
stmctures to be created within a resist film. The next experiment will involve the 
creation of multilevel stmctures in SU 8 using proton beam writing.
4.4 The Dose Energy Effect in Structural Heights
Highlighted by the use of squares in figures 4.10 through 4.14 is an unusual effect 
termed a table top effect. It has been obsei-ved that this feature is caused by the beam 
scanning the edges of the sample twice.
The edges receive twice the irradiated dose of its surrounding areas. As a table top or 
the region with a higher dose has a higher surface height; this shows that the 
inadiation dose forms a contributory factor with the Proton energy in the 
determination of structural heights.
4.4.1 Theoretical Basis
A variation in the heights o f stmctirres produced in SU 8 by varying the dose has been 
observed in Electron beam lithography of SU 8 [14, 15, 69]. The figure 4.17 below shows the 
heights of stmctrrres change with an increase in dose.
Figure 4.17: Height variation due to dose variation in SU 8 irradiated with Electron beams [69]
The red arrow in figure 4.17 denotes decreasing the doses in steps from 1, 0.8, 0.7 and
0.5nC/cm", and the black arrow shows the corresponding decrease in heights [69]. It should 
be noted that these structures were produced using electron beam lithography and the authors 
did not measure the difference in heights of the structures produced.
The findings that similar effects of dose variation are seen in both electron beam lithography 
and proton beam lithography are significant; EBL is normally performed by accelerating 
electrons at 50keV, compared with PBW where protons 1800 heavier are accelerated to 
2.0MeV.
The effect of a variation in the heights of structures produced in SU 8 using proton 
beam writing has not yet been reported in literature. The theory behind this 
observation is that a threshold dose exists, at which the protons deposit enough 
energy within the material to form a bond and harden the resist.
As the dose increases the resist is hardened up to the surface of the film. As the 
theoretical threshold is reached the resist hardens in steps as can be seen in figure 
4.17 where there the energy absorbed is enough to harden the resist so that it is not 
removed during development.
4.5 Example of Structural Height Variation by Dose Variation
This section shows the experimental demonstration of the variation of structural 
height by varying the dose. Structures will be produced in SU 8 by varying 
irradiation dose while keeping the proton energy constant. The heights of the 
structures produced are also measured.
This example of creating a multilevel structure in SU 8 using proton beams at a 
single energy is not yet reported in literature.
4.5.1 Experimental Procedure in Varying Heights by Varying Dose
A 2.0 MeV Proton beam was used to irradiate a 65 pm thick layer of SU 8 spun unto 
a 1 mm thick silicon substrate.
The average beam current was 100 pA. The beam spot size was 2.5 pm x 1.5 pm. 
The scans were rectangular shapes with a scan area of 100 pm x 1000pm. Figure 
4.22a below shows the scan pattern created in OMDAQ. The dose of each of the 
rectangular pattern was increased in steps of 5nC/mm^ starting from 5nC/mm^ and 
increasing to 45nC/mm^.
4.5.2 Observations
The figure 4.18b is an SEM micrograph showing five of the nine structures produced 
after development. The arrow shows the structures produced by increasing the dose 
from 25nC/mm^ to 45nC/mm^.
Figure 4.18a, h: Scan patterns. Structure produced by increasing the exposure dose o f SU 8 to the proton beam at a single 
energy.
The heights of the structures were measured using a profilometer and the results are 
plotted in the graph of figure 4.19 below. The error bars are from 1% error of the 
profilometer as stated in section 3.4 and are related to the surface heights.
.SP 52V
I  ^  48
5  46
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 4540
Surface Heights
Proton Exposure Dose (nC/mm^)
Figure 4.19: Graph showing the variation o f  surface heights o f  structures produced due to the proton implant dose.
4.5.3 Experimental findings
The observations confirm that the level height (i.e. from the substrate to the surface 
of the hardened resist) of structures created by proton beam writing in SU 8 can be 
varied by the proton implant dose.
This findings are consistent with observations made earlier of crossover points (see 
figure 4.10) where areas scanned twice, effectively receiving a double exposure have 
a higher surface level than the surrounding regions. This effect will also be visible in 
figure 4.21 (in the highlighted surfaces A and B the height of the surface level differ).
This finding in SU 8 can be exploited in the creation of multilevel structures in SU 8 
by the use of protons at a single energy. It could be seen as a method of building 
structures from the ground up.
However uses of the above described method for the creation of MEMS type 
structures are limited. The regions of lower heights are often of poorer structural
quality, and may only be used in the transfer o f a design such as in a mold and not as 
a pennanent part of a device,
4.6 Proton Beam Writing of Multi-Level Structures in SU 8
This section demonstrates by experiment, tlie creation of multilevel stmctures in SU 
8 at different energies using proton beam writing.
The range of protons within a material is dependent on its energy. The range of 
protons at different energy in SU 8 has been simulated using SRIM software (see 
Table 2.2). As SU 8 exhibit negative resist properties with respect to proton beams, 
multilevel stmcture can be created by irradiating at multiple energies. The figure
4.1 a shows such a stmcture.
Multilevel stmctures require hardening of the resist to a depth equivalent to the 
range of the protons in the material. In structure depicted in figure 4.1a the support 
bars in black are created using 2.5MeV protons, while the slaps in white are created 
using 1.0 MeV protons.
This experiment aims to create a similar multilevel stmcture and the procedure and 
results obtained are discussed next.
4.6.1 Experimental Procedures
Proton beams with energies o f l.OMeV and 2.5 MeV are used to iiTadiate a 63 pm 
thick layer of SU 8 spun unto a 1 mm thick silicon substrate.
The average beam current was 3 Op A for IMeV and 120pA for 2.5MeV. The beam 
spot size was 4 pm x 5 pm.
The scan area was 1000 x 1000 pm^ for the scan at 2.5 MeV and 500 x 500 p n f  for 
the 1.0 MeV scan. The proton exposure dose for both scans was 30nC/mm^,
normalized using EBS spectrometry (See section 3.7.2). The figure 4.20 shows the 
scan pattern as created in OMDAQ.
Scans at 1.0 MeV 
Scans at 2.5 MeV
Figure 4.20: Scan patterns fo r  3-dimensional multilevel structure to be created by proton beam writing in SU 8
The horizontal bars scan at 2.5 MeV was done before the vertical bar scans at 1.0 
4.6.2 Experimental Findings
The figures 4.21 a, b; show a multilevel structure created. In the figure 4.18 the 
structure is seen with both vertical and horizontal bars, there is some residue within 
the enclosures formed by the bars; this is due to an incomplete development of the 
SU 8 resist.
Figure 4.21: Optical micrographs o f  a multilevel 3-dimensional structure created by proton beam writing in SU 8.
The figure 4.21b is a higher magnification micrograph of the region highlighted in 
white in figure 4.21a, It shows 3 distinct surfaces; surface A is the surface of the 1.0 
MeV vertical bars, surface B is the surface of the 2.0 MeV horizontal bars while 
surface C is the surface of the silicon substrate.
Extra bars are highlighted in red (Figure 4.21a) these bars created in-between 
structures are enoneous and is an effect o f the absence of beam blanking which 
should prevent the beam scanning in between structures.
This experiment has demonstrated the creation of multilevel structures in SU 8 using 
proton beam writing. This use of more than 2 energies could produce structures with 
even more levels, which may be used in a variety o f applications. The next example 
will show an application o f multilevel structures created in SU 8 in the formation of 
a simple cantilever structirre.
4.6.3 Application of Proton Beam Writing in SU 8 Muitilevel Cantilever 
Structure.
The cantilever is a simple multilevel structure which forms one of the basic 
structures used in micro electro-mechanical systems (MEMs). The cantilever finds 
applications in accelerators, resonators and intercomrects [70,71].
This example is an application showing a simple multilevel cantilever structure 
being created in SU 8 using proton beam writing. A method of determining its 
properties is also discussed.
4.6.4 Experimental Procedures In creating a Cantilever structure
Proton beams with energies of 1.5 MeV and 2.5 MeV are used to irradiate a 70 pm 
thick layer of SU 8 spun unto a 1 rnrn thick silicon substr ate.
The average beam cunent was lOOpA for 1.5 MeV and 20pA for 2.5MeV. The beam 
spot size was 5 pm x 5 pm.
The figure 4.22 depicts the scan patterns in OMDAQ used and the expected 
cantilever stnrcture. The scan area was 150 x 500 pm^.
70 fun
33 run
500 rim
150 urn
Scan at 1.5 MeV 
Scan at 2.5 MeV 200 rim
Figure 4.22: Scan patterns and depictions o f  3 -dimensional multilevel cantilever structure created by proton beam writing in 
SU 8 (Not drawn to scale)
The proton exposure for both scans was SOnC/mm". The irradiation was done 
sequentially and the patterns overlap, care is taken to match the scans so they are just 
above each other. After the scans the structures were developed and the resultant 
cantilever is shown below.
_ i 
II in I rum \ iir l  iu <
Figure 4.23a, b, c: SEM micrographs o f  3-dimensional multilevel cantilever structure created by proton beam writing in SU  
The figures 4.23 a, b, c are SEM micrographs of a cantilever structure produced in 
SU 8. The dimensions of the cantilever has been labeled using arrows in figure 4.23a
the figure 4.23a shows the right of the stmcture tilted at 45. Noteworthy that while 
SRIM simulations (table 2.2) estimates the range of protons in SU 8 at 1.5MeV to be 
33 pm, the measured range equivalent to the thickness of the cantilever is 39 pm. 
This 18% difference is possibly attributable to longitudinal stiaggling and may cause 
problems with freestanding stmctures where there is only a veiy slight clearance 
from the surface. The figure 4.23b and c, shows the left side of the same stmcture 
tilted at 45 and 0 respectively.
4.6.5 Experimental Findings
A table top effect is visible on the structures produced; this is seen as a tapering of 
the edges. As discussed earlier this is a direct result o f a variation of the dose on the 
surface o f the material due to repeated scanning. In order to eliminate this effect the 
dose parameter must be controlled.
4.7 Implementing Process Controls for 3 Dimensional Proton Beam 
Lithography
Experimental Process Windows
A set of process windows and parameters are defined to ensure process parameter control and 
repeatability of stmctures produced by proton beam writing. The process o f writing 3 
dimensional stiuctures using proton beams can be divided into 5 sub processes, listed and 
discussed below:
1. Sample Preparation
2. Machine Related Parameters and Control
3. Structure Pattern and Scanning
4. Stmcture Inadiation Dose
5. Post IiTadiation Stmctural Development.
4.7.1 Sample preparation:
Wlien the sample requires that the resist is spun unto a substrate, spimiing must be conducted 
at appropriate speeds for the particular resist. The spin curves for SU 8 is given by the
manufacturer's data sheet. Figure 3,2 showed the spin speeds and the corresponding resist 
thicknesses.
The thickness of spun resists is measured by a Dektak profilometer, as described in section 
3.4. The most accurate measurement of resist film thickness using this method is up to a 
maximum of 65 gm. Film thicknesses higher than this are subject to errors obtained from 
repeating the measurement process. The use o f a profilometer for measurements leaves 
scouring marks, so the thickness o f samples is not measured prior to iiradiation. In order to 
maintain control of the spin coating process, it is important to spin-coat a batch o f substrate 
using the same speed parameters, obtaining the average film thickness from this batch.
Substrates in most cases silicon must be cleaved to 2 cm x 2 cm square samples to ensure that 
it fits into a sample holder in the irradiation chamber. Cleaving is performed using a scribe in 
a clean room environment, from the back o f the substi'ate to ensure there are no scratches to 
the surface of the substrate.
To ensure maximum cohesion with the resist, the surfaces of the substrate must be etched 
using a piranha etch solution in a process described in section 3.1. A dehydration bake at 
120 centigrade for at least 5 minutes is always performed.
It is important to inscribe on the back of the substrate the spin thickness so that it could easily 
be identified.
4.7.2 Machine Related Parameters and Control
Ideally the energy at which protons are extracted and accelerated should be constant, however 
due to faults, it is subject to fluctuation in power supply. Typical fluctuations in terminal 
voltage result in the beam missing the sample entirely. This is non-statistical and not 
quantifiable. Pulsations in the beam intensity may result in structures o f vaiying properties 
being produced. The actual energy at which protons are accelerated is determined by the 
machines efficiency at that energy.
Beam current is an important process parameter. The beam cuiTent produced by the machine 
is not always constant; this results fiom the proton beams heating up the slit, creating thermal 
expansion and eventually cutting into the beams path thus reducing the beam current. Beam 
current must be constantly monitored and the slits adjusted periodically.
Assuming the beam current to be the average of the current before and after irradiation is at 
best inaccurate and does not allow for experimental planning where the beam current is used 
to determine dose.
Another machine related process is the avoidance of unintended exposure of resists to 
inadiation sources. A suitable UV filter as described in Section 3.5 should always be used.
4.7.3 Structure Pattern and Scanning;
The resolution of the structures produced is limited by the software that generates the 
patterns, 256 x 256 pixels when using OmdaQ and 1024 x 1024 when using lONSCAN and 
DAQ++(Revised version o f OmdaQ). In order to produce structures with an even exposure, 
pixel size must be less than the beam spot size as described in section 3. 6.2.
To avoid exposure of unintended regions while the beam travels from one stiucture to 
another, beam blanking must be used to stop the beam when it is required to move from one 
pattern to another.
The maximum scan size of patterns is limited to 2 cm x 2 cm by the scanning amplifier 
hardware. The hardware is also calibrated for fixed energy and must be recalibrated if not 
using energies in multiples of lOOOkeV.
Scanning stmctures larger than the scans size requires the use of a micrometer gauge to 
accurately position the beam at its new starting point. This produces errors as the micrometer 
has an error of 2 fxm in all 3-axes, making an exact match point-to-point almost impossible. 
Wlien presented with structures with dimensions larger than the maximum scan size, a three 
axes motorized stage with very high accuracy should always be used where available.
Scanning can be done in either free running mode (where the beam is set to scan as fast as it 
can) or timed per pixel. Using free iiinning mode is susceptible to beam latency issues 
(where the beam may remain on a particular pixel for longer or shorter than required). This 
may lead to non unifoim exposure. To ensure adequate control of the scamiing, timed 
scanning per pixel should be used; however this method assumes that the beam current is 
fixed.
4.7.4 Dose and Structure parameters
Both the range and broadening o f protons in target materials are statistical in nature, and 
therefore are imprecise; as such depth of penetration and properties of the stiiictures cannot 
be precisely predicted before being experimentally detennined.
The calculation of dose is dependent on the current as seen in equation 3.1. Since cunent 
varies during inadiation; manually calculated dose is at best an estimate. Dose calculation 
using BBS spectroscopy as described in section 3.7 .1 also uses statistical methods in order to 
generate a fit. As such the dose is never determined absolutely.
The dose range for use in proton beam writing in PMMA is between 60 -  500 nC/mm^. 
Doses higher than 563 nC/mm^ makes irradiated regions insoluble making it exhibit negative 
resist properties [42, 46].
The dose range at which stmctures are produced in SU 8 is between 5 - 50nC/mm^. Swelling 
of the polymer due to gas formation occurs at doses above 50 nC/mm^ while burning or 
melting occurs at doses above 250 nC/mm^ [45,72].
4.7.5 Post Irradiation Structural Development Processes
For a range of resist the development time is given in the manufacturers datasheet. However, 
these are not absolute values but are estimates and vary from time to time. As a rule of 
thumb, development should be continuously monitored until all un-irradiated regions are 
removed in the case of negative resist, or until all irradiated regions are removed in the case 
of positive resists.
The concentiation of the developer must be maintained. This is particularly important in 
developing PMMA where the developer solution is created immediately prior to 
development.
Vigorous agitation to the developer solution must be used when developing structures created 
in SU 8, ensuring all non iiradiated regions are removed.
It is important to air diy carefully so as not to destroy the stmctures. Air guns should never 
be aimed directly at the structures, rather approximately 30cm away.
Wlien imaging stmctures produced using a scanning electron microscope, gold or carbon 
coating is used to enhance image contrast. These coatings tend to leave residue and reduce 
observability of the structures. Using a low vacuum Environmental scanning election 
microscope eliminates the need for coating prior to imaging.
The table 4.1 presents a summaiy of the important process parameter in proton beam writing 
in polymers.
Process Parameter Types of Constraint Control
Sample
Preparation
Spin speeds(rpm) Spin Coater speed 
measurements.
Using the same spin coater for 
a batch.
Confirmation measurement by 
tachometer.
Film thickness Profilometer errors. 
Repeatability errors.
Minimize errors by keeping 
resist thicknesses below 65 
Use same size samples and 
create a batch for reference. 
Keep baking times constant. 
There may still be Variation in 
thickness within a batch of 
spins using the same 
parameters
Adhesion Non clean surface Use Piranha etch solution. 
Dehydration bake before 
spinning.
Irradiation Beam Current Fluctuates, and is not Constant 
and decreases as the slits heat 
up and expand.
Monitor the beam current and 
open slits to achieve required 
currents.
Dose Under-dose and overdosing. 
Dose calculations are 
dependent on beam currents. 
Beam latency may increase 
dose at points on the scan.
The dose range for PMMA is 
between 60-500 nC/mm .
The dose range for SU 8 is 
between 5-50  riC/mni .
Using the dose to estimate 
irradiation times per pixel.
EBS Dose normalization 
although statistical in nature is 
the most suitable for dose 
calculations
Beam Spot Varies and fluctuates on a 
daily basis.
May be smaller than the pixel 
size of the scan.
Emphasis should be placed on 
maintaining a feasible and 
repeatable beam spot (3 pm x 
3 pm) rather than the smallest 
beam spot obtainable.
The beam spot is measured by 
PIXE.
Beam spot size variation is 
non-statistical and it is 
impredictable.
Unintended
Exposure
Exposure of resist from UV 
soiu'ces within the resist
Use a UV filter,
Low light conditions must be 
observed at all times before 
development
Scanning Scan Size Limited by the scan hardware 
to 2cm X 2cm
Scan patterns should be kept 
smaller than 2crn x 2cm.
Scan Resolution Limited by the Resolution of 
the scan software. To 256 x
The resolution of scans should 
not exceed the maximum as
256 pixels using OmdaQ and 
1024 X 1024 using DAQ++
stipulated by the scanning 
hardware.
Pixel size should also be less 
than the beam spot size.
Scans should be timed per 
pixel.
Stmcture
Fonnation
Range and 
Features.
The Range and scattering of 
Protons in materials is 
statistically detennined
Experimental determination of 
stnictural properties and 
compare with theoiy.
There would be variations in 
structures produced.
Development Underdevelopment Development times vary due 
to concentrations of developer.
Underdeveloped regions may 
be present.
Datasheets development times 
are estimates
Create developer solution 
using accurate measurements. 
The use of strong agitation 
during development is 
necessary to remove 
underdeveloped r egions. 
Continue and repeat 
development steps until the 
resist is fully developed.
Imaging Residue and 
Charging.
Residue is visible on Carbon 
or gold coated samples.
Charging obscures images 
when under high vacuum
Use of a low vacuum SEM 
eliminates the need for coating 
of samples prior to imaging.
Tabic 4.1: A sum m ary o f  im portant process param eters for proton beam  w riting in polymers.
4.8 Implementation of Process Controls
A set of process control parameters were defined in Table 4.1. Applying these contiol 
parameters is vital to ensure the repeatable production of 3 dimensional structures with good 
physical properties such sidewall smoothness and edge angle shaipness. The application of 
conti'ols will be discussed in this chapter.
Controls of the following parameters have been implemented:
1. Sample Preparation
2. Machine related parameters and conti'ol
3. Software and scanning patterns
4. Post Iiradiation development.
As the intended parameters have been discussed in earlier sections, only details of 
adjustments required for the implementation o f the control is discussed.
4.8.1 Sample Preparation
Wafer Cleaning and Spin-Coating:
The oxide layered wafer is cleaved into 2cm x 2cm square samples and cleaned using a 
piranha etch process discussed earlier. Using piranha etch procedure does not remove the 
grown oxide as the oxide layer with its unique blue/purple shimmer is visually present after 
the etch step. A dehydration bake at 120 centigrade is always performed for 5 minutes.
The speed of the spin coater was measured and verified using a handheld contact tachometer. 
The figure below show the results of spin coats carried out at a specified speed of 2500rpm 
spun with a Laurel Tech programmable Spin Coater in an experiment to obtain a film 
thickness of 65pm.
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
Figure 4.24: Resist film  thicknesses in fjm against Number o f  Attempts. The aim is to obtain a film  thickness o f  65pm.
Measurement was done by the Dektak profilometer with a digital readout. The method of 
measuring structures higher than 60pm is detailed in section 3.4. The image below is a digital 
readout of film thickness using the Dektak profilometer.
g ATI
Figure 4.25: Dektak profilometer film  thickness measurement o f  63.3pm, target thickness o f  65pm.
4.8.2 Soft Bake Control
A major control process difference is the soft bake process of the resist. Soft bake had 
previously been performed until the spin-coated sample was dried. However, in order to 
improve the SU 8 resist performance and hence structural properties. The soft bake process 
must be carried out for 2.5 hours and the resist cooled and allowed to reflow and harden.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of this control parameter, the figure 4.26 below show the 
difference between structures produced in SU 8 using UV lithography using a Quintel Mask 
Aligner before and after the implementation of the control.
Figure 4.26: Structure created in SU 8 using UV lithography without the softhake control, b c: with softbake parameter 
control implemented.
Comparisons of both structures highlight the smoothness and verticality of the structure 
walls. Figure 4.27 below shows SEM images. However, sample charging is noticeable as an 
SEM machine has not been used in environmental mode. The edges of the structure are 
noticeably rounded and are a feature of the mask design.
Figure 4.27: SEM pictograph o f  Structure created in SU 8 using UV lithography showing straight edges, created by 
implementing a softbake control.
4.8.3 Implementation of Soft bake Control in PBW
Soft bake control was implemented while spin coating and structures produced in SU 8 using 
proton beam lithography. Figure 4.28 a, b show SEM micrographs before and after soft bake 
control is implemented.
Figure 4.28 a) Before implementation o f  Soft Bake Control in similar structures created in SU 8 using 2.5MeV (b) Similar 
bar structure after implementation o f  controls.
The structure created using proton beam lithography while implementing the soft bake 
control exhibit better physical properties. This is noticeable as the structure stands out 
distinctly from the substrate.
4.8.4 Machine related parameters and control
Beam Spot size and Rounded Comers
The technique of measuring the beam spot size using PIXE is discussed in section 3.6.1. 
Optimization and control of the beam spot size is performed manually by scanning the beam 
across a low visibility quartz target. As this process is manual and subject to visual 
perceptions, it is hardly repeatable and is very likely to vary.
As the beam spot is the lithographic medium in proton beam writing the smallest feature 
producible is limited to its dimensions. Just as a pencil tip cannot make an impression smaller 
than the tips diameter; the beam spot diameter defines the sharpness of comers o f structures 
created using proton beam lithography. As such with typical beam spot sizes of 3pmx 3pmit 
is likely that stmctures produced will exhibit comers rounded to circa 4um.
When the beam spot size is optimized the stmctures created have less rounded comers which 
correspond to the smaller beam spot diameter. The figure 4.29 a, b show similar stmctures 
before and after optimization of beam spot size.
Figure 4.29a,h: Optical Micrograph showing After and Before implementation o f  beam spot optimization control.
Beam position control and misalignment
The procedure for creating 3 dimensional structures using protons accelerated to 2 distinctly 
different energies is detailed in section 4.6.1.
Irradiations at a lower energy have to be performed to overlap exactly over high energy 
irradiation. If there are significant misalignments the structure produced at a lower energy is 
not connected to the high energy structure and is lost during the development process. 
Individual backlash on 3 axes make the use of a micrometer screw gauge impractical for use 
in 3 dimensional proton beam lithography. With the use of a 3 axis automated stage, there is 
better control to create overlapping structures.
The beam focusing system uses a set of magnetic Quadrupole lenses to focus the beam in the 
different axes. When the energy of the beam is changed there is a shift in the central axes of 
the beam. This is due to a varied effect of stray magnetic fields, from the earths magnetic 
field and from electrical and magnetic metallic structures close to the beam line.
As there is now a slight deflective change in the beam, it enters the focusing system less than 
parallel and as such, there is a change or shift in the beam spot position which leads to 
misalignments. Due to the nature of the focusing system, these misalignments are more likely 
to occur in the vertical axis.
The figures 4.30 a, b are SEM micrographs of misaligned cantilever structures produced with 
a micrometer screw gauge and a 3-axis automated stage respectively.
Figure 4.30a, b; SEM micrograph o f  failed Cantilever structures due to miss- alignment using; a) Micrometer screw gauge, 
(b) Automated 3-axis stage.
The SEM image shows a totally collapsed cantilever structure misaligned due to backlash 
form micrometer screw gauges for axis positioning. Figure 6.5b shows a better formed
structure as other control parameters have been implemented. However the misalignment is 
evident as the overhanging stiucture hangs in between two distinct structures.
4.8.5 Implementation of Beam Positioning Control
Registration marks or home markers would be a useful tool for implementing beam 
positioning control. A copper grid marked at a fixed position can be used to re-centre the 
beam and then determine the offset which is then used to compute new co-ordinates. It is also 
possible to use a copper thin copper cross, such that a cunent is detected only when the beam 
is on the copper cross; the offset determined and the structures re-aligned.
4.8.6 End of range Spread
In order to create cantilever stmctures with high clearance from the surface of the substrate, 
the film thickness has to be just under the range of the protons at the highest energy used for 
lithography.
However, in the overhanging parts of the stiuctures created using lower energy, the beam 
must reach its end of range within the resist. The beam spreads as it reaches its end of range. 
This is due to increased collisions with the nuclei o f its target material as explained in section 
2.4.2.
This end of range spreading is a feature of proton beam writing. As such, overhanging 
regions of cantilever structures will show a widening at their bases. The end o f range effect is 
also visible in structures created using high energy protons where the thickness o f the film is 
just under the range of the energetic protons.
There is no control for tlie end of range spread applicable to overhanging stmctures, as the 
end of range is always reached. However, for non-overhanging regions of stmctures, the film 
thickness can be kept well below the range o f the protons such that the spreading takes place 
within the substrate material.
The SEM micrograph in figme 4.31 shows the broadening of the beam as it reaches near its 
end of range. In the middle section, the stmcture is 8 pm wider at the base than it is at its top.
Figure 4.31: SEM Micrograph showing the broadening o f  the beam as it reaches its end o f  range.
4.8.7 Beam Flux Density
As earlier noted, the beam spot size is not always repeatable. In order to maintain uniformity 
and repeatability beam flux density control is implemented. This is done by maintaining a 
fixed beam current per beam spot size for any structures produced, especially when the 
structures are produced using more than one proton energy.
4.8.8 Software and Scanning Control Parameters
Software Resolution
While the resolution of the structure is controlled and limited by the scanning software, the 
use of software with higher resolution improves the resolution of the structure formed.
The use of DAQ++ increases the resolution and hence verticality of the sidewalls as it has a 
maximum resolution of 1024 x 1024 pixels. Structures were produced in DAQ++ with a 
resolution of 512 x 512 pixels, with the beam spot matched to pixel and scan size. DAQ++ 
accepts 1 bit gray scale bitmaps. As such, it is no longer necessary to encode structure 
patterns using hexadecimal code.
Scanning Pattern Control
Scanning pattern control involves putting the longest region of the beam along the beams 
vertical path as the beam is scanned in raster mode. This control method helps in the creation 
of straight sidewalls as the beam travels vertically along the sidewalls rather than 
horizontally.
Beam Blanking
Beam blanking uses an applied voltage to sweep the beam away from its target while the 
beam is moving from one pixel to another. This prevents the unintended exposure of parts of 
resist. With beam blanking, it is possible to create a composite structure that is isolated from 
each other physically and later on electrically.
The SEM Micrograph figure 4.32 below shows the effect of effective beam blanking in 
ensuring unwanted regions of resist are not irradiated, thereby creating structures which are 
physically isolated from each other in a single irradiation step.
Figure 4.32: SEM micrograph showing (a ,h) Structure without beam blank controls (c)well form ed physically isolated  
structures 30 pm  apart, demonstrating effective beam blanking.
The structure shown in figure 4.32 has had other forms of control as well as beam blanking 
control applied to it.
4.8.9 Post Irradiation deveiopment.
Post irradiation development control involves the removal of all un-irradiated regions by 
development. In order for overhanging regions to be visibly un-attached to the substrate, 
development is done with mild agitation on a vibrating hotplate at room temperature.
The SEM figure 4.33 a, b below shows the differences between the applications of post 
irradiation development.
Figure 4.33: Cantilever structures without (a, h) and with (c) post irradiation controls.
The SEM micrograph above clearly contrasts between cantilevers formed with and without 
process controls. Figure 4.33a is not properly developed; as such there is not a clear 
separation from the substrate. Figure 4.33b is also not properly developed as non irradiated 
regions are not totally removed, while the cantilever figure 4.33c clears the surface of the 
substrate by 75 micrometers.
4.8.10 Implementation of Multiple Parameter Controls
Implementing controls of single process parameters lead to structures with better physical 
properties such as sidewall verticality and edge sharpness. These have been illustrated 
pictorially by comparing side by side cantilever structures created with and without process 
control application.
The SEM micrograph Figure 4.34a, b: Well formed cantilever structure showing straight 
edges and sharp comers. When compared with a similar cantilever produced without process
controls as in figure 4.34c, the effectiveness of implementing multiple process controls can 
be more appreciated.
. -  ' b
Figure 4.34: SEM Micrograph o f  process controlled cantilever structure (b) smallest feature size is 6pm .(c) No
process controls.
Thin structures can be created by implementing a combination of dose, beam blanking and 
post irradiation development controls, as depicted in figure 4.35 a, b where a 2 pm thin cross 
shape is written on 100 pm thick SU 8.
Figure 4.35: SEM micrograph showing multiple controlled process structure and dimension; 2pm  wide and 100 pm  thick.
Other miscellaneous controls include a pre-bake control for proton beam writing on SU 8 
silver composite structures. The substrate must be degassed in a vacuum chamber prior to
soft bake. The figures 4.36 are micrographs depicting structures produced before and after 
vacuum degassing controls.
Figure 4.36: SEM micrograph depicting the basic gripper shape, (a, b) structures suffer from  bubble formations, (c) Process 
control fo r  bubbles implemented by pre-bake vacuum degassing.
The figures 4.37 depict beam scan controlled structures. This is achieved by matching the 
beam spot size to the pixel size. When combined with dose, post irradiation control and pre- 
bake control (SU 8 silver composite) processes, producible structures are only limited by the 
scanned bitmaps and the physical characteristics of the beam.
"'20/2009 HV a  pci De: VVC hFvv
1 11 4 AM 2 0 kV 3 0 298v ETC 7 2 rani Q 45
Figure 4.37: SEM micrograph showing multiple controlled structures, (a) Sporting logo( b) Cross test structure, (c) P illar 
test structure.
The figure 4.38 shows an alignment issue controlled by the use of registration marks. The 
next section investigates a novel method for alignment control by use of 2 beam species.
Figure 4.38: SEM micrograph depicting the basic gripper .shape, {a, b) structures has suffered misalignment, (c) Process 
control fo r  misalignment implemented by registration mark.
4.9 Aligning multi-level microstructures produced using ion beam 
lithography by matching magnetic rigidity of MeV ions
In the preceding sections, the use of energetic ions for lithography has been demonstrated in 
creating 3 Dimensional microstructures. Similar structures find uses in MEMS, microfluidics, 
optoelectronics and microelectronics.
A stream of high energy (MeV) ions in most cases protons are focused using a set of 
Quadrupole lenses and scanned across a resist in a defined pattern to produce high aspect 
ratio structures. Structures with sub lOOnm dimensions have been demonstrated [33,73]. The 
range of protons in materials at a given energy is well defined and can be predicted by the use 
of software tools such as SUSPRE (Surrey University Sputter Profile Resolution) and SRIM 
[26,28] which are based on monte-carlo algorithms.
Multi-level microstructures can be produced by changing the energy of the proton beams 
[33]. Given the potentially small size obtainable, aligning these structures such that regions 
created using particles of different energies overlap, is prone to problems such as mechanical 
vibrations, effects of magnetic fields (both stray and earths) and backlash of the lithographic 
stage micro-positioning systems.
The figure 4.39 depicts a microstructure created in a 70pm thick layer of SU 8 on a silicon 
substrate using proton beams accelerated to l.OMeV and 2.5MeV; showing misalignment of 
regions created using different energies.
Figure 4.39: SEM micrograph depicting the basic gripper structure that has suffered misalignment.
While most external factors causing misalignment would be similar for structural regions 
created with multiple energies, this thesis will investigate what effects the earths magnetic 
field has on the energetic ions when used for lithography. We will also consider a novel 
solution on minimizing these effects and aligning the structures.
4.9.1 Effect of the Earths magnetic Field on MeV Ions
The Tandetron Proton Beam Accelerator at the University of Surreys ion beam centre has 
been used for this work in Ion beam lithography. The length of the accelerator is 
approximately 6 metres [74].
As we follow its path, let us consider briefly the forces acting on a single 3MeV Ion 
travelling across a 6 metre beamline as illustrated in figure 2. In this scenario we will assume 
the beamline to be a single straight cylindrical chamber in vacuum, terminating at the entry 
point of the Quadrupole focusing system.
i   
B(T) = 50,000 nT
F = qvB ^  ^
F o f i i c i n o
Figure 4.40: A diagram showing the path o f  an energetic Ion through a focusing system.
The charged particle has a constant velocity along the beam line, which we can calculate with 
the following parameters:
Mass o f Proton -  1.6726 x 10'^  Kg 
Proton Charge = 1.6022 x 10'*^
3.0 MeV = 4.80652939 x 10  joules
From : F =  ^m v 2  , the velocity o f the 3MeV Ion is calculated
3MeV Velocity = 2 X 4.80652939 x -  = 2.3973 X 10  m/s
21.6726 X 10' '
The time of flight is governed by the relationship between length and velocity
T =  V t;  =  s e c o n d s  = 2.5027 x lO seconds 
According to Lorenz law, during the protons time of flight it is subjected to an acceleration 
created by the force of the earths magnetic field. 50,000nT is a generally accepted 
approximation for the earths magnetic field at the surface [75].
The value for the acceleration experienced during flight is obtained:
F =  m a  =  Bvq, a  =
50000 X 10-9 X 2.3973 x  10^ x  1.6022 x  10-i9 
a  =   1.6726 X 10 " -------------------------- =  "  4819 ^  I d 
This acceleration acts on the particle during its time o f flight thus creating a deflection 
from its path.
The deflection 5 ;^ =  I /2 = 3 . 5960 mm
The Table 4.2 below shows the calculated displacement from an Ions path due to the earths 
magnetic field.
Charge
E-19C
27Kg MeV
Energy
E-13J
Velocity
T TOP E- 
Lorenz 
Acc E+10
Displacement
H* 1.60 1.67 1.0 1.60218 13841123 4.33491 6.63 6.23
H* 1.60 1.67 1.5 2.40326 16951844 3.53944 8.12 5.09
H* 1.60 1.67 2.0 3.20435 19574304 3.06524 9.37 4.40
H* 1.60 1.67 2.5 4.00544 21884737 2.74164 10.5 3.94
h" 1.60 1.67 3.0 4.80653 23973528 2.50276 11.5 3.60
3.20 6.65 1.0 1.60218 6943091 8.64168 1.67 6.25
He++ 3.20 6.65 1.5 2.40326 8503515 7.05591 2.05 5.10
He** 3.20 6.65 2.0 3.20435 9819013 6.11059 2.37 4.42
He** 3.20 6.65 2.5 4.00544 10977991 5.46548 2.65 3.95
He** 3.20 6.65 3.0 4.80653 12025786 4.98928 2.90 3.61
He 1.60 6.65 1.0 1.60218 6943091 8.64168 0.837 3.12
He* 1.60 6.65 0.62 1.00136 5488995 3.95
He* 1.60 6.65 1.5 2.40326 8503515 7.05591 1.02 2.55
He* 1.60 6.65 2.0 3.20435 9819013 6.11059 1.18 2.21
He* 1.60 6.65 2.5 4.00544 10977991 5.46548 1.32 1.98
He* 1.60 6.65 3.0 4.80653 12025786 4.98928 1.45 1.80
Table 4.2: Deflect iom form beams path into focusing system due to earths magnetic field.
4.9.2 Experimental: Magnetic rigidity of Charged Particles
The magnetic rigidity o f an Ion in motion is its momentum per unit charge. In a particle 
accelerator system used for Ion beam lithography; this is used to calculate the force required 
to bend an accelerated Ion along a specified path.
The magnetic rigidity (P) can be expressed mathematically as
P = K mE Equation (4.1)
Where K is a constant, m is the mass of the Ion in atomic mass units and Q is the charge per 
proton units [73].
Figures 4.41 and 4.42 are simulations of influence of Earths Magnetic field on a beamline 
with Quadrupole triplets lenses excited in an "Oxford triplet" configuration [76] .
This simulated beamline is "similar" to the University of Surrey microbeam; simulated using 
a set of Oxford OM52 lenses, instead of the slightly longer set of OM50 lenses used in the 
Surrey Microbeam. However for the purposes of this thesis, the difference is negligible.
The magnitude of the earth's magnetic field in the simulation is 50,000 nT. This is simulated 
as a magnetic dipole excited over the entire length of the beamline. For convenience the 
magnetic dipole is aligned in the X-Z plane only. So, no deflection in the Y-Z plane is 
observed.
It is interesting that the width of the beam increases significantly through the bore of the 
lenses for the "misaligned" ions. Small bore lenses may not be able to completely accept the 
misaligned beam.
The simulations and interpretation of the results performed using "XART", (a numerical ray- 
tracing software written by M.J. Merchant & G.W. Grime, Ion Beam Centre, University of 
Surrey ) have been performed by M.J Merchant [77].
O x t u i c l  T i i i : ) l o t  i i i H i i o n c e d  V i v  E n r t h  F i e l dI" V  M.s.s. C h a rg e , Eiioi'Sj- (a iim .e V ..\l iA ') : DIJ
2 3I 1
III KHJ
Length: 6.37 in.
Figure 4.41: XART simulation o f  beam trajectory deflections due to the influence o f the earth's magnetic field.
O x fo rd  T rip le t  influoncccl b y  E a r th  F ie ld
1 II M. \- 
1.25 M o \ '
2  5 M o \ H ' *
<i :w r ,
Length: 6.3(7 ni.
Figure 4.42: Close up view o f  simulated beams at the target showing varying deflections fo r  different energy beams.
From the Table 1 above, the ions enter into the focusing system with a deflection normal to 
the earths magnetic fields. The system is optimized and focused to the fixed deflection 
which in effect becomes a system zero. Table 1 shows similar deflections for both and 
He^^ ions for ions with same Energy.
In order to bend accelerated ions of different species along the same path, it is important to 
keep the magnetic rigidity constant. This will in effect maintain the system zero after 
focusing, and the beam aligned on the same spot.
The terminal voltage applied to the accelerator is dependent on the energy and charge of the 
ion in proton units. This is expressed as:
1 +  Equation (4.2)
A mathematical expression for maintaining a constant magnetic rigidity in the Tandetron 
accelerator is thus given by:
p I _ imVt (1 + Q)
  \  Equation (4.3)
As an example for 2.5MeV protons (m = 1, Q = 1), the terminal voltage = 1250 keV
Pi *  5o
this gives the constant value ' k *  .In  order to maintain the beams path, we shall use an
accelerated Ion of a different specie He^^ (m =4, Q = 2) while keeping the value constant at
^  ' k  * SO Such that SO *  V, *  8 3 3 .33k.V
When using the single charged He^ ion specie, the terminal voltage Vt required in 
maintaining the magnetic rigidity value constant is V* % 3 1 2 .5k#V. in this instance the 
Energy given to the ion is reduced to 625keV
4.9.3 Results and discussions
The figure 2 below shows the results of multilevel structures created using ion beam
lithography on a 70 pm thick layer of SU 8. The overhanging regions have been created by
using He++ ions at 2.5MeV. The base regions have been created using H+ ions at 2.5MeV.
Figure 4.43. Multilevel freestanding structure created by Ion beam lithography in SU 8.
When compared with the earlier structure shown in figure 1, it is evident that the structures 
are better aligned. This method of alignment uses both the magnetic rigidity of ions and 
maintaining the effects of the earth magnetic field.
It is worthy of note that while the structures might be aligned, there is a trade off in 
penetrative depths of the ions and hence the physical dimensions of the structure produced. 
In the experiments using a 2.5MeV helium beam, the estimated depth of the freestanding 
regions is 10.24pm as opposed to 33pm from a IMeV proton beam [25].
CHAPTER 5:
5 Implementation and Characterization of an 
Eiectrostaticaiiy Actuated MicroTweezer in 
This chapter will bring together the body of knowledge gained fiom previous chapters and 
demonstrate the creation of a simple Micro Electio-Mechanical system (MEMS) by proton 
beam lithography on SU 8 resist that has been modified by the addition o f silver nano
particles, to achieve electrical conductivity. Creation of this electi'ostatically actuated 
microstructure leverages on proton beam writings unique properties of having a defined 
penetration depth at a given energy. As already demonstrated fine standing cantilever 
stmctures can be produced by iiradiating at two distinct energies.
For electrostatic actuation to be achieved, the mechanical properties of the microstructure 
needs to known. As this is the only demonstration of proton beam writing in SU 8 -silver 
composite, the mechanical properties have not yet been reported in literature and must be 
experimentally determined. The following section discusses novel methods of creating 
conducting microstructures with proton beam writing.
5.1 Conducting Micro-Structures
In creating functional polymer-based microstructures especially for micro electio- 
mechanical systems, the electrical properties o f either the stiuctiues or the resist of which 
they are made are modified to enliance conductivity. This section will consider firstly the 
modification of the electrical properties of already created microstmctures by plating with a 
conducting metal; and then the modification of the resist by integration firstly of, and then 
with conductive metal nano-particles.
These experimental techniques are novel: The electroless plating o f proton beam written SU 
8 microstmctures is yet to be reported on in literature, as well as proton beam written 
microstmctures on modified conductive SU 8 silver composite.
5.2 Electroless Plating of Structures Created Using Proton Beam Writing 
In SU 8
5.2.1 Growth of Silicon Dioxide as an Insulating Layer
When modifying the electrical properties of proton beam written microstmctures, it is 
important to electrically isolate conducting sections of the microstmctiues. A layer of Silicon 
dioxide on the substrate seiwes to electrically isolate sections of the microstructure. In order 
to provide sufficient insulation, a layer o f Silicon dioxide is created with a thickness 
sufficient to withstand the operating voltages o f the device.
O f the several techniques for the forming a layer of Silicon dioxide on a silicon substrate, wet 
thermal oxidation of silicon is chosen due to a higher growth rate thus faster oxide growth 
time compared with other oxidation methods [78].
Before the wet oxidation of silicon is performed in a furnace, the Silicon wafer must be 
cleaned. The wafer cleaning process involves the use of a water, hydrogen peroxide and 
Ammonium hydroxide mixture for removing organic contaminants, and a water, hydrogen 
peroxide and hydrochloric acid solution for removal of metallic inorganic contaminants. 
Equation 6.1 below show the chemical reaction involved in the wet oxidation of silicon.
Si +  2H2O Si02  +  2H2
Water vapour in the form of Steam was used as the oxidant in a furnace heated up to 
llOOCelsius for 6hours. Hydrochloric Acid (HCl) is intioduced into the oxidation process to 
improve the dielectr ic str ength o f the oxide produced [79].
5.2.2 Growth Rate and Thickness Modeling and Measurements
The growth rate and the eventual thickness o f the oxide grown can be mathematically 
modeled. The Deal-Groove model is commonly used to express the growth rates of silicon 
oxides and are valid for temperatures in the regions of 700 -1300 Celsius and oxide 
thicknesses between 0.03 -  2.0|Lim [80].
Using the Deal Grove model the thickness o f the obtained silicon oxide is defined in 
Equation 5.1 as
^  b Equation (5.1)
Wliere Xo is the thickness o f the oxide and A (|am) is constant = 0.11 jim for an oxidation 
temperature of 1100 C and B (pnf/h) is the Parabolic rate constant =0.510 at 1100 C.
T o it  is a coiTective estimate of time needed to grow an existing oxide layer on the wafer, we 
assume no native oxide as such t  = 0, and t = oxidation time in hours.
The estimated thickness of the oxide grown for 6 hours using the wet thermal oxidation 
technique, applying the Deal-Grove model is l,69(rm [81]
The thickness of the oxide measured by single wavelength ellipsometiy using a Helium Neon 
laser operating with a wavelength o f 632.8nm was 1.43 pm. However it is worthy o f note that 
ellipsometiy measurements are not generally reliable for thick films and an estimate as 
obtained from the deal-grove model is required to be input to the ellipsometer.
Silicon dioxide has a breakdown voltage of 1 x 1 0 ^  V/cm such that 1.4pm will withstand a 
potential difference of 1400 Volts before its insulating properties change. This level of 
insulation will be adequate for safe use with laboratory equipment.
5.2.3 Theory of Electroless Plating
Electioless plating of stmctures created in non-electrically conducting polymers serves to 
modify their electrical properties and create a conduction path for charges. Henry et al 
demonstrated that the metallic nano-particles are attached to the surface of bulk commercially 
available PMMA when the surface is modified by UV exposure [82]. The PMMAs surface 
modification activates amine groups, allowing these amine terminated PMMA to react with 
colloidal gold.
Electroless plating of structures created in SU 8 by UV lithography has been demonstrated by 
Dai et al; however these structures require being surface activated by UV radiation. The UV 
radiation serves a dual purpose of breaking polymer bonds on the structure surface to aid 
reaction with metal nano particles as well as generating an oxidizing film on the silicon 
substrate that could act as electrical insulation [83, 84].
The use of UV inadiation to activate the surface of SU 8 microstructures for metallization is 
most suitable for metallization o f the top o f structures and not side walls. To metalize
sidewalls however, the stmctuies need to be tilted. Even then, the minimum features of 
structures are influenced by the proximity o f microstiuctures and the maximum tilt angle of 
the incident UV rays.
This section will detail the experimentation process required to selectively metalize the 
surface (including sidewalls) o f proton beam written SU 8 microstiuctures by a chemical 
electroless plating method. Tests are conducted to confirm the presence o f the metal gold on 
the microstructures.
5.2.4 Experimental Process
Once an insulating layer has been grown on the substiate, a layer of SU 8 is spun unto the 
substiate and patterns are written unto the resist and developed. The process for modifying 
the electi'ical properties of the resultant microstructure by the electroless plating of proton 
irradiated SU 8 is described below.
1. Proton IiTadiated SU 8 stiuctures on a Si02 on Si substrate are immersed in a 
compound of 750 mg EthylCarbodiamide Hydrochloride (EDC), 75ml Phosphate 
Buffer and 900uL Ethylenediamine (EDA) Covered and Stiixed for 12 hours.
2. Samples is then removed and placed in a solution of 29.4mg of Gold tetra chlorate 
(III) Hydrate and 75ml DI water. Solution is covered with foil and stirred for 2 hours.
3. Samples are next submerged in a solution o f 570mg Sodium Borohydiide and de
ionized water for 1 hour.
4. Samples are air dried.
5.2.5 Results and Discussions
The experimental process is similar to that described by Dai et al apart from the UV 
activation requirements. The figure 5.1a, b; are micrograph showing the same stiuctures 
before and after the electroless plating with gold.
Figure 5 .1: Micrographs showing after (a) and before (b) Electroless plating with Gold.
There is some debris on the surface of the substrate after the electroless plating process.
tmdhmimtretftrt.
tStim*
Figure 5.2 : Micrographs showing after differences in charging in an SEM (a) before (b) Electroless plating with Gold.
The figure 5.2 is a micrograph of a second microstructure showing a reduction in charging in 
an SEM. As charging in an SEM reduces with better conductivity of the imaged samples, this 
gives reason to believe that there is metallization on the structure.
To confirm that there has been successful metallization of the surface of the microstructure, a 
PIXE spectra is obtained, analyzed and used to confirm what specie of elements are present 
in the microstructure. The figure 5.3 is a PIXE spectra obtained from a point irradiation on 
the surface on a microstructure.
The PIXE spectra confirms the presence of Antimony Sb from the SU 8s photo-acid 
initiator. Chlorine either from the resist epoxy groups or/and from the EthylCarbodiamide
Hydrochloride (EDC) solution used in the electroless plating process. PIXE also confirms the 
presence of gold. To see a geographic distribution of the elements with respect to the 
microstructure, a PIXE scan generating an elemental map is performed.
The figure 5.4a, b are PIXE elemental maps confirming the presence of (a) Antimony Sb and 
(b) Gold Au on the microstructure. The PIXE micrograph shows the distribution of the 
elements on the microstructures and environs.
Mil 11II I IN , I II
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24
II l l l l i j i l  I i l l .
24 26 28 ab 32
JULLIJ
Figure 5.3. PIXE Map showing the presence o f  Au on a point on the SU 8 pad.
The figure 5.4a shows that antimony from the photo-acid initiator is present only on the 
polymer microstructure and not on the oxide grown substrate. The figure 5.4b shows the 
presence of gold on the surface of the structure, as well as scattered around being present in 
the debris visible on the substrates surface
Figure 5.4: PIXE Image showing the distribution o f  elements on the showing the presence of: (a) antimony (b) Gold by 
electroless plating.
The presence of gold on the sidewalls is confirmed, and also visible. It appears like a more 
intense ring around the microstructure, as the spectra is collected from a slightly tilted angle.
This process of electroless plating of proton beam written SU 8 is novel and not yet reported 
in literature. It has distinct advantages as it does not require that already formed 
microstructure be subject to UV irradiation. It has been possible to metalize sidewalls with 
30pm spacing, without the need of tilting or modification to the microstructure design to 
accommodate the maximum incidence angles of UV beams.
5.3 Proton Beam Writing in Modified SU 8 Silver Nano-Composite
5.3.1 introduction
Conti'ol processes for proton beam writing as a direct write lithographic technique has been 
demonstrated to produce 3 dimensional microstructures in Chapter 4. Mechanical and micro- 
optical structures have been demonstrated in polymers such as SU 8 using this technique, in 
Literature [1 - 3].
In order to create MEMS type micro electro-mechanical structures in SU 8 using proton beam 
writing; modification o f the photoresists electrical properties or the electrical properties of 
any structures created is required. Section 5.2 described a novel method of making proton 
beam written structures on SU 8 conductive by a selective electroless plating process, 
whereby gold is plated to modified surface o f the created structures.
The methods of modifying the electrical properties of polymers such as SU 8 as described in 
literature fall broadly under two main categories; mixing SU 8 with a conductive polymer and 
introduction of conductive metallic nano-particles. Such conductive polymers have found 
uses in optical and gas sensing applications [58].
The properties of polymers and that of SU 8 specifically have been modified to induced 
changes by the addition o f nano-particles. Damean et al report the SU 8 exhibiting 
ferromagnetic properties due to the addition of Nickel nano-spheres, while Jiguet et al report 
a reduction in mechanical str ess by incorporation of nano-silica particles [85,86].
5.3.2 Modification of SU 8 to induce Electrical Conductivity.
To create micro electro-mechanical structures from SU 8 the conductivity of the polymer 
must be modified. Leeuw et al. describes a method of creating conductive SU 8 by a mixture 
with a semiconductor doped organic polymer PANI (Polyaniline) [58]. However M. 
Nordstr om reports that due to the acidic nature of the constituent Polyaniline mixture, cross- 
linking is initiated in SU 8 and a tliick inliomogeneous mixture results. This mixture presents 
difficulty in spincoating and producing structures lithographically [59].
Conductive properties of SU 8 can be modified by the introduction of nano particles into SU 
8 involving the physical dispersion of electrically conductive nano-particles into the polymer. 
Gammelgaard describes the addition of carbon black nano-particles to SU 8 to create an
electrically conductive photo-plastic/carbon cantilever for sensor applications [60]. H. 
Chiamori et al. describe a method of physical incorporation of optically transparent and 
electrically conductive diamondoids by dispersion in SU 8 [61].
Multi-walled carbon nanotubes have also been chemically bonded to SU 8 and dispersed into 
the resist by ultrasonic irradiation. Zhang et al. describes a process where hydroxyl groups in 
fiinctionalised carbon nanotubes react with open epoxide groups within the SU 8 polymer, to 
create a dark unifoiin mixture that is conductive and curable by exposure to ultraviolet 
radiation [62]. Chiamori et al. also describe incorporation of single walled carbon nanotubes 
and conductivity in the resultant composite when single walled nano particles comprise 
between 1% - 5% by weight [61].
Jiguet et al. describe a method of incorporating silver nano particles into SU 8 and 
fabricating electrically conductive composites. However they also report difficulties in 
spincoating the resultant nano-composite such that spreading is required over the substrate. 
The resultant nano-composite resist is thick and not easily curable by UV lithography as the 
silver particles are not transparent to ultraviolet radiation, and as such transparent substrates 
with backside exposures were required. The structures produced had a maximum height of 5 
pm [87,63].
The difficulties associated with other lithographic techniques in patterning SU 8 containing 
metallic nano-particles due to dispersions and opacity are not present in proton beam 
lithography. This thesis now report a process for creating electrically conductive 
raicrostraictures in SU 8 /silver nano composite by proton beam lithography. However and 
understanding of the effects energetic proton beams have on polymers containing metallic 
nano-particles will be required to explain conduction mechanisms and features of the 
structures produced and characterized.
5.3.3 Percolation Theory and Conduction of Polymers
Percolation theory provides a model for explaining electrical conductivity of polymer films 
containing randomly dispersed rrario particles of varying sizes. Conduction is achieved when 
an electron overcomes coulomb charging energy and tirnnelling of [these] single electrons 
between neighbouring metal nano particles [88].
When a voltage is applied to the film or structure containing metallic nano particles, the 
cunent flow induces a process of electro-migration which creates cunent channels or
percolation paths. These are reported to be nano particles separated by nano metr es distances 
[89,90]. According to percolation theory, the percolation threshold is the per-volume ratio of 
nano particles to the polymer resist required for the creation of a continuous conduction path. 
This is reported to be 12% for uniformly spherical nano particles such as Silver and 25% for 
simple cubic lattices [59,91] however S. Jiguet et al. report electrical conduction in Silver 
filled SU 8 with volumes of 6% determined experimentally [63].
The discrepancies in determining percolation thresholds theoretically vs. experimentally 
probably arise since the percolation model does not factor any contribution to the 
conductivity from the polymer matrix. McCklusky et al. describes a matrix iterative model 
for the electrical conductivity of polymers containing dispersed silver nano-particles. The 
matrix iterative model provides an accurate experimental fit and is a modification to the 
percolation model which reportedly does not adequately describe the conduction of dispersed 
nano-particles in polymers [92].
Wliile ohmic conductivity has been reported in conducting polymers such as Polyaniline 
[93,94], nonlinear electrical conductivity have been reported in silver nano-particle polymer 
composite where tunneling occurs on approaching the percolation threshold.
Kiesow et al. report a reversible but drastic change of up to six orders of magnitude in current 
to voltage behaviour in a silver nano-particle composite material. This behaviour is termed 
threshold switching [95].
5.3.4 Effect of MeV ions on Nano Particles
As mentioned earlier exposure to MeV accelerated protons, create a photo-acid initiated 
cross-linking thus bond foimation in the SU 8 resist. The cross linked regions have higher 
molecular mass and thus are insoluble to development solution, yielding 3 dimensional 
structures. A change in the electiical conductivity of Polyaniline based on fluence when 
exposed to MeV ions is reported [96].
However when polymers that contain nano-particles and are exposed to high energy ion 
beams, both the polymer and the nano-particles are modified. Shape transformation of 
spherical nano-particles into ellipsoids, varied defomiations as well as melting along the ion 
tracks have been reported [97].
Aggregation or cluster formation is also reported when silver nano-particles in a polymer- 
nano composite is exposed to MeV ion irradiation irrespective of fluence, gold nano-particles 
however reportedly formed helical patterns [98].
5.3.5 Experimental Process
The experimental process is described in section 3.4
5.3.6 Demonstration of conducting microstructures
Patterned 3 Dimensional structures were created on a 75 pm thick Ag/SU 8 nano-particle 
composite, with 2.5 MeV protons with a fluence of 30nC/mm^. Irradiations were performed 
using the University of Surreys tandem particle accelerator.
Scanning electron micrographs as seen in figure 5.5a, b, show a 3-dimensional test structures 
produced from the composite.
Figure 5.5 : 75 pm  tall 3 Dimensional test structures created by 2.5 MeV Proton beam lithography o f  Ag/SU 8 nano
composite.
The structures produced show what seem to be aggregations or clumps silver particles, 
leaving micro voids. This is probably a clustering effect of the silver nano particles on 
exposure to MeV ion beams [98].
When compared to structures produced in the same polymer composite using UV 
lithography, a marked improvement is seen in the structure height as well as distinctness of 
features such as edges. The micrographs in figure 5.6 shows contrasts the structural 
differences based on the lithographic method 5.6a UV lithography [100] 5.6b Proton beam 
lithography.
Figure 5.6.{a) 8 ftm test structure produced in Ag/SU 8 nano-composite using UV lithography 1100}( b) 75 pm  test structure 
produced in Ag/SU 8 nano-composite using proton beam lithography.
5.3.7 Measurement of Electrical Conductivity
The I-V characteristics of the resultant proton beam written composite structure was 
determined by 2 probe measurement using a Keithley 236. The figure 5.7 depicts the 
experimentally determined IV curve of a 250 x 250 pm^ structure using 2 probes placed on 
opposite edges.
10000(0
I-V Curve of Ag/Su8 Composite
l.OOOOE-6
lO.OOOM-9
l.OOOOE-9
lOOOOOCU
Figure 5.7: non-ohmic Logarithmic I-V cur\>e o f  Ag/SU 8 Composite showing threshold switching in Ag/SU 8 composite 
nano particle  structures created by 2.5M eV proton beam lithography.
Unlike Polyaniline the structures exhibit non-ohmic conductivity [93, 94] and also exhibit 
current to voltage change / switching in 4 orders of magnitude [95]. This suggests that the 
conduction mechanism is based on nano tunneling as explained by the percolation conduction 
model. The curve obtained and shown in figure 5.7 is not reversible, and when repeated the
point at which the switching behavior is apparent reduces subsequently as though the material 
was storing a charge. The experimental measurement has been current limited to 0.01 A to 
limit the amount of energy applied to the resist.
This thesis has so far demonstrated the creation of conducting 3-dimensional microstructures 
in Ag/SU 8 nano-composite using proton beam lithography. The structural features and 
feature heights are improved when compared to structures created using other lithographic 
techniques. The structures created are electrically conductive and conduct electricity via 
tunneling, while exhibiting current switching where the resistance of structures drops to at 
least four orders of magnitude.
Proton beam lithography is unique due to the predictability of the penetration depth of 
protons in a target at specific energy. This feature could be exploited in creating freestanding 
conductive microstructures that can be actuated or utilized for Radio Frequency applications. 
The figure 5.8a is a micrograph a test structure showing a conductive 3 Dimensional 
freestanding structure created by 1.0 and 2.5MeV proton beams on a 50pm thick layer of 
15% Ag/SU 8 nano-composite.
Figure 5.8 (a) 3 Dimensional freestanding cantilever structure created by 1.0 and 2.5MeV proton beams on a 50pm thick 
layer o f  15% Ag/SU 8 nano-composite, (b) Test cross structure created by 2.5MeV proton beams on a 75pm thick layer o f  
15% Ag/SU 8 nano-composite
The micrograph in Figure 5.8b highlights the changeability of structural patterns as proton 
beam lithography is a direct write process that does not require mask fabrication. Having 
created electrically conducting microstructures, the next section investigates the mechanical 
properties of these structures.
5.4 Determination of Mechanioai properties by Nano-indentation
This section will deal with obtaining measurements of the mechanical properties of proton 
beam written SU 8 Silver composite structures as well as using the properties to model 
electrostatic micro-grippers and compare our simulated models with experimental actuation 
results.
A Berkovich shaped indenter is used to determine experimentally by load displacement the 
Youngs modulus of elasticity, hardness and the plastic work properties of conductive 
microgripper structures. The mechanical properties obtained are used in the finite element 
modeling software to obtain simulated values for actuation and with experimental actuation 
results.
In order to create MEMS type micro-gripping structures in SU 8 using proton beam writing; 
modification of the photoresists electrical properties hence the electrical properties of any 
structures created is essential. This thesis have earlier demonstrated a novel method of 
making proton beam written structures conductive by using a modified SU 8 epoxy with 
silver nano particles [58].
5.4.1 Theory of Nano-indentation
Micro-indentation studies to determine the mechanical properties of SU 8 have given the 
Youngs modulus of elasticity of SU 8 at between 4 -  6.21GPa [101,102]. However for 
proton irradiated SU 8 the highest values reported in literature is 5.32GPa as obtained by Tey 
et al. It is reported that the modulus of elasticity of SU 8 iiTadiated by proton beams increases 
with the implant dose [44]. However the Youngs modulus of elasticity for SU 8 structures 
produced with implant dose exceeding 14 nC/mm^ has not yet been experimentally 
determined.
This chapters goals will be to determine the modulus of elasticity and hardness property of 
SU 8 Silver composite implanted at doses of 75 and 90nC /m nf. This will achieved by load 
displacement testing of a microgripper structure produced by proton beam lithography using 
a nano-indenter.
5.4.2 SU 8 Device Fabrication
Current methods exist for producing micro-gripping structures in silicon and in polymers 
including SU 8, using a range of actuation methods [103,104]. However these methods 
require many steps and especially in silicon the thickness of the cantilever arms are limited 
by the penetration depth of the lithographic media.
Proton beam writings unique properties of having a defined penetration depth at a given 
energy makes for creating a free standing cantilever structure by irradiating at multiple 
energies. The SU 8 Silver composite resist is irradiated at 2.5MeV for the rigid pads and 
driver electrode and 1 .OMeV for the overhanging cantilever structures. The thickness of the 
cantilever arm can be varied by changing the implant energy.
The micro-gripper structure in its simplest form is essentially made of two cantilever 
structures separated by beam which acts as a driver electrode. Figure 5.9a shows a planer 
view of the cantilever structure, while figure 5.9b shows the created structures with electrical 
probes in place. There are practical limitations to this design of micro-grippers as electrostatic 
cantilevers cannot be used in fluidic media or biological materials. This is a demonstration of 
a concept and could find uses in micro/nano manipulation with a gripping effect.
0 -  400 V dc
I______
L= length
g =gop
w = width
d  = deflection
2/20.2009 HV Spol Mag Del VVD 
12 42 53 PM 15 0 K\/ 3 0 13 4 r
r  I
[ _  1.0 MeV 
B  2.5 MeV
Figure 5.9(a): M icro-gripper structure created from  2 cantilevers separated by a driver electrode, (b): 50pm thick 
Cantilever structure on Silicon .substrate, created using PBW at multiple energies.
The 5 ^im tipped electrodes have been placed on the rigid pads of the device and are precisely 
positioned by the use of a piezoelectric stack micromanipulator manufactured by Attocube 
systems Inc.
The electrical pads in the created device as depicted in Figure 5.9 b is 50|im  thick and was 
created by a 2.5MeV proton beam irradiation dose of 90nC/mm^ The central driver electrode 
arm was created by a 2.5MeV proton beams with an irradiation dose of 75 nC/mm", while the
20 pm thick freestanding cantilever structures were created by a l.OMeV proton beam dose 
of 90nC/mm^.
The figure 5.10 a,b,c, show the freestanding regions of the microgripper structure prior to 
electrical connection via microprobe tips. The substrate is Silicon and electrical isolation 
between voltage biased structures is from the region of damage created in the substrate by the 
protons stopping at its end of range [26].
a b c
Figure 5.10: Multi-cantilever m icrogripper structure created in SU 8 Ag nano-composite.
The gripper electrodes in the above structure, requires to be electrostatically attracted to the 
driver electrode in order for gripping action to be performed. The actuation and subsequent 
gripping force can be modelled and estimated, hence would depend on experimentally 
obtaining the mechanical properties of the structure.
5.4.3 Nano-Indentation Measurements
A Berkovich indenter (sharp 3 faced diamond tipped structure) is inserted through the surface 
of the proton beam written structure, and the mechanical properties of the structure is 
determined by the application of a known load force while sensing the material displacement 
produced [105,106].
A Micromaterials NanoTest 600 machine as shown in figure 5.1 la  was used to indent the 
structure at pre-programmed points 20 pm apart along the driver electrode, the power pads 
and the cantilever structures.
diamond 
in contact 
wiMi sample
filciiDnless 
pivot
sample
/  holdai
Figure 5.11: Experimental set-up o f  NanoTest 600 Indenter with Berkovich tip.
The machine set-up is depicted as shown in figure 5.1 lb. When a known current is passed 
through a coil, a calibrated load is applied to the top of a pendulum via frictionless bearings 
whilst the tiny Berkovich diamond probe is in contact with the sample. Computation of this 
load force and measurement of resulting penetration depth by changes in capacitance, leads to 
determination of the mechanical properties of the test structure.
The indentation was conducted at room temperature 25C and load limited at 2mN, the 
loading rate was ImN/s and the peak load holding period was 120seconds.
The figure 5.12 shows features of load displacement curves that are obtained by plotting the 
load against the tip penetration depth. The modulus of elasticity can be obtained from the 
gradient of the first unload segment of the curve as highlighted (in Red) by Er in figure 5.12 
[106].
Figure 5.12: Features o f  a Load Displacement plot (P-h Cur\>e)
The Equations (5.2 -  5.5) shows how the mechanical properties of Hardness and Elasticity 
are obtained from the measured data.
Hardness
=    Equation (5.2)
K- =  C x  \  ) Equation (5.3)
A .p.(hi -  hi ) Equation (5.4)
Youngs Modulus for Su 8 with silver is given by
f  EQuation (5.5)
/^rsiiSAg E,,,
Wliere is the plastic work , V.,. is the volume of material displaced, is the 
maximum load force, h is the relative displacement at a point,  ,. ,,8   is the contact 
elasticity and VsuSAg is the Poissons ratio of SU 8 = 0.22 [102].
5.5 Nano-Indentation Results and Discussions
The figures 5.13a, b: show the results obtained fiom the Nano-indentation experiments 
earned out. The load displacement curve obtained in Figure 5c is consistent with that 
obtainable from polymeric materials. The cui'ves are fitted using an algorithm for studying 
defoiTnations in polymeric materials [105].
The freestanding 100 pm cantilever's load displacement curve, is skewed to the right 
compared with that for the power pad (square) and the driver electrode (Cential Arm). The 
figure 5.13a shows that the cantilever bends when the indenter is inserted. On subsequent 20 
pm step indentation away from the tip the Elastic modulus begins to become similar to other 
sections of the structure.
<00 I <#____ #J I
20  um
100 200 300 500 600 700
Figure 5 .13: Load displacement results fo r  Cantilever arm, Power pad and Driver electrode.
The table 2 tabulates the results obtained for the hardness and modulus of elasticity of various 
sections of the structure as well as their corresponding proton implant dose. Youngs modulus 
values range from 7.85 -  10.67 GPa.
W ork (nJ)
Results
Elastic
modulus
(GPa)
Standard
deviation
Hardness
(GPa)
Standard
deviation
Plastic
w ork
Standard
deviation
Elastic
w ork
Proton Dose
nC/mm^
Driver
Electrode 7.85 1.33 0.54 O i l 0.40 0.07 0.16 75
Pow er Pads
10.67 4.12 0.81 0.38 0.31 0.07 0.15 90
Table 2: Nano-indentation results showing; Elastic modulus and Hardness o f  structure with corresponding implant dose.
5.5.1 Modelling the Micro-Grlpper using Sugar 3.1
The mechanical properties obtained from the nano-indentation study gives us the required 
information to model the cantilever structure and estimate the actuation of the device as well 
as the pull in voltages.
From figure la  the micro-gripper device resembles a parallel plate capacitor with a gap (g) 
between the gripper electiodes and the driver electrode. The deflections of the elecfrodes, 
caused by electrostatic forces are dependent on the dimensional and mechanical properties of 
the cantilevers such as: Cantilever Length (1), Initial gap between electiodes (g), cantilever 
width (w), cantilever thickness (T), modulus of elasticity (E), Poisson ratio (Vs).
Finite element modelling for SU 8 cantilever stmctures used in micro-grippers, have shown 
them suitable and flexible enough to bend without breaking [103] Results obtained during 
nano indentation also show the cantilever section is capable of bending without breaking . 
Sugar is a 3 dimensional simulation program for MEMS devices. It is net list based and mns 
using models created in Matlab or C programming language [107]. The gap3de model is 
used as it describes a 2 dimensional electiostatic gap made from two electronic mechanical 
beams.
The material properties of the device as well as dimensions are used in creating a model for 
the quick estimation of actuation forces as well as pull in voltages [108,109].
v<^SU6AIcmpi  iflOK0bekM11 MM AtfMiw WMA#mtnm 9W Wv I amcMMi
Param eter Value
Initial gap 50 pm
Youngs Modulus 10.67 GPa
Beam Length 300 pm
Poissons Ratio 0.22
Arm Thickness 30 pm
Width of Arm 20 pm
Figure 5.14: Sugar 3.1 Simulation o f  electrostatic actuation obtained fo r  an SU 8 Ag microgripper at (a) 400V (b) lOOOV 
and (c) 0 V.
The figures 5.14 are simulated actuations of the modelled microgripper structure. Modelling 
the dimensional and mechanical properties of the micro-gripping structure using sugar 3.1, 
the simulation; shows a simulated actuation of 1.3 pm at 400Volts and 11.24pm at lOOOV. 
These simulation results at 400V is comparable with experimentally obtained electrostatic 
actuation as shown in figures 5.15, which are SEM micrograph as a 400V-dc bias is applied 
between the power pads and the driver electrode. The darkened SEM image is a secondary 
effect of the removal of ions from the electron gun, thereby affecting brightness of the 
images.
Figure 5.15: Actuation micrographs o f  microgripper: (a) Before actuation gap is 49.32pm. (b) After 400V gap is 47.24 pm.
As a 400Volt dc bias is applied through probes as described in figure 6.1b the resultant 
actuation is small but can be seen with the aid of guide lines, showing an actuation of 2.18 
pm achieved experimentally. Further experimental testing at voltages higher than 400Vdc 
were not performed due to equipment voltage ratings and safe operating procedures as a 
possibility exist of sparking between the gaps.
5.5.2 Discussion of Exprimentai work
This thesis have determined experimentally by Nano-indentation the Youngs 
modulus and hardness properties of proton beam irradiated SU 8 Silver composite as 
between 7.10 -  10.67GPa and 0.45 -  0.81 GPa respectively. There is a
demonstrable increase in the hardness and Youngs modulus with increasing implant 
dose. The trends of these findings agree with previously obtained measurements by 
Micro-indentation techniques in SU 8 and are relatively higher values than obtained 
by proton beam writing in unmodified SU 8 polymer resist.
Given that the mechanical properties of proton irradiated SU 8 Silver composite 
have been found for these implantation doses; Thinner cantilever arms of the order 
of 3 pm would be required to produce an actuation of 15 pm with a rather safe 
voltage of 20Volts.
Further experimentation would be required to measure experimentally the resonance 
frequency of similarly created cantilever stmctures to ascertain the correlation of 
modeled behaviour to experimental behaviour for cantilevers of vaiying lengths.
Chapter 6
6 Conclusions and Recommendation for
Further Work j
This subsection provides a summary of experimental work caiTied out so far and j
recommendation for friture work. j
Proton beam writing has been demonstrated in the polymer resist materials PMMA and SU 8. j
A dose study conducted in PMMA confinned literature reports that it exhibits positive j
behavior when exposed to proton beams. Experimental findings also agree with literature that ;
a dose above 80nC/ram^ is suitable for the production of defined structures. i
Majority of the work carried out in this thesis has been on SU 8 and SU 8 Silver composite. \
A  suitable filter was created for use in the chamber for proton beam writing. Experimental 
findings agree with literature that SU 8 exhibit negative behavior to proton beams. An
optimum dose at which structures are produced in SU 8 with protons at 2.0 and 2.5 MeV
have been detennined to be 30nC/ m n f which is also in agreement with literature. The
technique of using EBS specti'ometry for dose normalization has been demonstr ated.
Processes control have been identified and implemented and demonstrated by the creation of 
thin high aspect ratio microstructures and 3diiuensional free standing cantilever structures.
6.1 Contributions to the field
In the experimental demonstration o f proton beam writing for 3 dimensional micro electro
mechanical systems, the following goals were set, and represent this thesis unique 
contr ibution to the field of research.
1.) Electio-less metallization o f proton bearu written microstiuctures in SU 8
2.) Proton Beam Writing of conductive metal/polymer microstructures.
3.) Demonstration o f electrostatic actuation in PBW MEMS micro-gripping microstructure
6.1.1 Electro-less metallization of proton beam written microstructures In SU 8
This process of electroless plating proton beam written SU 8 is novel and not yet reported in 
literature. There are distinct advantages of not requiring already fonued microstiuctures be 
subject to UV irradiation. Demonstrated also was the metallization o f sidewalls with 30pm 
spacing, without the need of tilting or modification to the microstructure design to 
accommodate the maximum incidence angles of UV beams. Confirmation of the electroless 
metallization was performed by PIXE analysis.
6.1.2 Proton beam writing of conductive metal/polymer microstructures.
This thesis has demonstrated tlie creation conducting of 3-dimensional microstructures in SU 
8 Silver nano-composite using proton beam lithography. Proton beam writing on this 
composite material, provide improved stmctural features and high aspect ratio structures 
when compared with other lithographic technique as these scatter due to diffr action attributed 
to the metallic nanoparticles.
The stiuctures created are electrically conductive, conducting electricity via tunneling. 
Current switching where the resistance o f stiuctures drops to at least four orders of magnitude 
are demonstrated to be exhibited in these conducting stiuctures. Proton beam writing of 
conductive microstiuctures is a unique contribution to the field.
Freestanding conducting cantilever stiuctures have also been created using PBWs unique 
predictability of the penetration depth of protons specific energy. O f the potential 
applications for conducting microstiuctures, a MEMs application was chosen.
6.1.3 Demonstration of electrostatic actuation In PBW MEMS micro-gripping 
microstructure
Another unique contribution to the field has been the demonstration of a very basic MEMS 
demonstrating electrostatic actuation in conducting microstiuctures created by proton beam 
writing. A small actuation in same order as simulation predictions have been recorded and 
demonstrated.
Unique mechanical properties of these created microstiuctures have been studied by Nano
indentation and the Youngs modulus and hardness measurements obtained experimentally.
These data have been used in the finite element modeling o f the electro-mechanical 
properties of the created microstructures.
There has been a demonstrable increase in the hardness and Youngs modulus with 
increasing implant dose. Although considerably harder stiuctures are obtained by the use of 
PBW lithographic technique, this increasing trend is in agreement with expectations in 
literature and off previous documented micro-indentation measurements of unmodified SU 8.
Given that the mechanical properties of proton iiTadiated SU 8 Silver composite have been 
found for these implantation doses; Thinner cantilever anus of the order o f 3 pm would be 
required to produce an actuation o f 15 pm with a rather safe voltage of 20Volts
Also demonstrated in SU 8 were 3-dimensional multilevel structures created by use of 
protons with 2 distinct energies. A novel application o f 3-dimensional stiuctures, for a 
biomedical application was also demonstrated. Further work would involve creating a more 
complex structure with a network of canals.
6.2 Recommendation for Further Research
With a nanobeam line currently being installed at the Ion Beam Centre, experiments should 
be conducted to reduce the scale of structures produced. Electrostatically actuated 
microstiuctures created using a nano beam will operate on smaller safer voltages.
CuiTent simulation software for modelling the interactions between energetic ions and targets, 
cannot curTently predict the interactions between such ions and a target containing randomly 
dispersed nano particles. Further work would include modeling the interaction of ion beams 
within a nano-particle polymer composite target containing randomly distiibuted nano- 
particles with known volume ratios.
At smaller dimensions a more complicated microgripping structure which works on the 
principle of electro-thermal actuation should be investigated. This should be based on the 
differential expansivity of cantilever arms with varied thickness. Suitably insulated electro- 
thermally actuated micro gripping stiuctures may be utilized for biological specimen without 
the risk of electrocuting them.
As the potential to create nano-composite microstiuctures with varied properties exist, 
software for modelling the interaction o f energetic ions with Nano-composite polymers 
should be investigated.
Proton beam written structures in SU 8 silver nano composite may find use as rapid tool for 
prototyping as conducting stiuctures could easily be electroplated and used as lithographic 
stamps.
Referencess
[1] A. Senefelder, A complete course o f  lithography, Kluwer Academic/Plenum 
Publishers, 1977 (Reprint of 1819 Edition).
[2] S.L Association, International Technology Roadmap for semiconductors, Semtech 
Austin, 1999.
[3] J. van Kan, I. Rajta, A. Bettiol, and F. Watt, Proton beam nano-machining: A new 3D 
nano lithographic technique, 2002, pp. 71 - 74 Proceedings of the 13th 
Micromechanics Europe Workshop.
[4] G. Moore, Electronics 38,(1965), Cramming more components onto integrated 
circuits, p. 114.
[5] International semiconductor roadmap (2003), Jan. 2007.
[6] International Semiconductor roadmap, Jan. 2007.
[7] R. Chen, Integration goes plastic, Oe magazine-The monthly publication o f  SPIE: 
The International Society fo r  Optical Engineering, vol. 2, 2002, pp. 24-26.
[8] P. Rai-Choudhury, Handbook o f  microlithography, micromachining, and 
microfabrication, Spie Press, 1997.
[9] ' A. Nitayama, T. Sato, K. Hashiraoto, F. Shigemitsu, and M. Nakase, New phase
shifting mask with self-aligned phase shifters for aquarter micron photolithography, 
1989, pp. 57-60.
[10] E. Ong, B. Singh, R. Ferguson, and A. Neureuther, Comparison o f proximity effects 
in contrast enliancement layer and bilayer resist processes, Journal o f  Vacuum 
Science & Technology B: Microelectronics and Nanometer Structures, vol. 5, 1987, p. 
[11] L. Harriott, Limits of lithography, Proceedings o f  the IEEE, vol. 89, 2001, pp. 366- 
[12] D. Spears and H. Smith, High-resolution pattern replication using soft x rays, 
Electronics letters, vol. 8, 1972, pp. 102-104.
[13] A. Schmidt, G. Himmelsbach, R. Luettge, D. Adam, F. Hoke, H. Schacke, N. Belie, H. 
Hartmann, F. Burldiard, and H. Wolf, High-precision mask fabrication for deep-x-ray 
lithography, 2000, p. 235. Proc. SPIE Vol 3996, p. 235-243, 16th European 
Conference on Mask Technology fo r  Integrated Circuits and Microcomponents
[14] C. Vieu, F. Carcenac, A. Pepin, Y. Chen, M. Mejias, A. Lebib, L. Manin-Ferlazzo, L, 
Couraud, and H. Launois, Electron beam lithography: resolution limits and 
applications, Applied Surface Science, vol. 164, 2000, pp. 111-117.
[15] J, Goodberlet, J. Hastings, and H. Smith, Performance of the Raith 150 election-beam 
lithography system, Journal o f  Vacuum Science & Technology B: Microelectronics 
and Nanometer Structures, vol. 19, 2001, p. 2499.
[16] G. Owen, Election lithography for the fabrication of microelectronic devices, 
Reports on Progress in Physics, vol. 48, 1985, pp. 795-851.
[17] C. Friedrich, P. Coane, and M. Vasile, Micromilling development and applications for 
microfabrication, Microelectronic engineering, vol. 35, 1997, pp. 367-372.
[18] K. Arshak and M. Mihov, State-of-the-art of focused ion beam nanolithography, 
Journal o f  Optoelectronics and Advanced Materials, vol. 7, 2005, pp. 193-198.
[19] K. Ansari, J. van Kan, A. Bettiol, and F. Watt, Fabrication of high aspect ratio 100 nm 
metallic stamps for nanoimprint lithography using proton beam writing, Applied 
Physics Letters, vol. 85, 2004, p. 476.
[20] K. Wilder, H. Soh, A. Atalar, and C. Quate, Hybrid atomic force/scanning tunneling 
litliogi'aphy, Journal o f  Vacuum Science & Technology B: Microelectronics and 
Nanometer Structures, vol. 15, 1997, p. 1811.
[21] S. Juodkazis, V. Mizeikis, K. Seet, M. Miwa, and H. Misawa, Two-photon 
lithography o f nanorods in SU-8 photoresist, Nanotechnology, vol. 16, 2005, pp. 846- 
[22] A. Bettiol, T. Sum, J. Van Kan, and F. Watt, Fabrication of micro-optical components 
in polymer using proton beam micro-machining and modification, Nuclear Inst, and 
Methods in Physics Research, B, vol. 210, 2003, pp. 250-255.
[23] J. Van Kan, A. Bettiol, K. Ansari, E. Teo, T. Sum, and F. Watt, Proton beam writing: 
a progress review, International Journal o f  Nanotechnology, vol. 1, 2004, pp. 464- 
[24] F. Watt, A. Bettiol, J. Van Kan, B. Teo, and M. Breese, Ion beam lithography and 
nanofabrication: a review, International Journal o f  Nanoscience, vol. 4, 2005, pp. 
269-286.
[25] J. Ziegler, J. Biersack, and U. Littmark, The Stopping and Ranges of ions in Solids, 
Vol. I, JFZiegler (Pergamon, 1980), pp. Chapter 3, 8.
[26] J. Ziegler, The electronic and nuclear stopping of energetic ions, Applied Physics 
Letters, vol. 31, 1977, p. 544.
[27] M.S. J. Lindhard, Medd 33, vol. No 14, 1963.
[28] N. Peng, C. Jeynes, R. Webb, I. Chakarov, and M. Blamire, Optimisation of masked 
ion inadiation damage profiles in YBCO thin films by Monte Carlo simulation, 
Physica C: Superconductivity and its applications, vol. 372, 2002, pp. 55-58.
[29] I. Baklimetjev, A. Fertman, A. Golubev, A. Kantsyrev, V. Luckjashin, B. Sharkov, V. 
Turtikov, A. Kunin, V. Vatulin, and N. Zhidkov, Research into the advanced 
experimental methods for precision ion stopping range measurements in matter, Laser 
and Particle Beams, vol. 21, 2003, pp. 1-6.
[30] I. Rajta, I. Gomez-Morilla, M. Abraham, and A. Kiss, Proton beam micromachining 
on PMMA, Foturan and CR-39 materials, Nuclear Inst, and Methods in Physics 
Research, B, vol. 210, 2003, pp. 260-265.
[31] A. Bettiol, C. Udalagama, J. Kan, and F. Watt, lonscan: scamiing and control 
software for proton beam writing, Nuclear Inst, and Methods in Physics Research, B, 
vol. 231, 2005, pp. 400-406.
[32] A. Bettiol, J. van Kan, T. Sum, and F. Watt, A LabVIEW'*' -based scanning and 
control system for proton beam micromachining, Nuclear Inst, and Methods in 
Physics Research, B, vol. 181, 2001, pp. 49-53.
[33] E. Teo, E. Tavernier, M. Breese, A. Bettiol, F. Watt, M. Liu, and D. Blackwood, 
Three-dimensional micromachining of silicon using a nuclear microprobe, Nuclear 
Inst, and Methods in Physics Research, B, vol. 222,2004, pp. 513-517.
[34] E. Teo, M. Breese, E. Tavernier, A. Bettiol, F. Watt, M. Liu, and D. Blackwood, 
Three-dimensional microfabrication in bulk silicon using high-energy protons, 
Applied Physics Letters, vol. 84, 2004, p. 3202.
[35] H. Whitlow, M. Ng, V. Auelyt, I. Maximov, L. Montelius, J. van Kan, A. Bettiol, 
and F. Watt, Lithography of high spatial density biosensor stmctures, 
Nanotechnology, vol. 15, 2004, pp. 223-226.
[36] T. Osipowicz, J. Van Kan, T. Sum, J. Sanchez, and F. Watt, The use of proton 
microbeams for the production o f microcomponents, Nuclear Inst, and Methods in 
Physics Research, B, vol. 161, 2000, pp. 83-89.
[37] M. Waligorski, R. Hamra, and R. Katz, The radial distiibution o f dose around the path 
of a heavy ion in liquid water, N ucl Trades Radiai. Meas, vol. 11, 1986, pp. 309- 
[38] Z. Chunxiang, D. Dunn, and R. Katz, Radial distribution of dose and cross-sections 
for the inactivation of dry enzymes and viruses, Radiation Protection Dosimetiy, vol. 
13, 1985, pp. 215-218.
[39] W. Barakas, Nuclear Research Emulsion, 1963.
[40] Z. Zhu, Y. Sun, C. Liu, J. Liu, and Y. Jin, Chemical modifications of polymer films 
induced by high energy heavy ions, Nuclear Inst, and Methods in Physics Research, 
B, vol. 193, 2002, pp. 271-277.
[41] T. Hioki, S. Noda, M. Sugiura, M. Kakeno, K. Yamada, and J. Kawamoto, Electrical 
and optical properties of ion-irradiated organic polymer Kapton H, Applied Physics 
Letters, vol. 43, 1983, p. 30.
[42] F. Abel, V. Quillet, and M. Schott, Degradation o f polystyrene thin films under d, 
He4e and 12C inadiation studied by ion beam analysis: Effects of energy loss, sample 
thickness and isotopic content, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research 
Section B: Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms, vol. 105, 1995, pp. 86-90.
[43] G. Rao and E. Lee, Effects o f sequential He and Ar implantation on surface properties 
of polymers,V . Mater. Res, vol. 1996, 1996.
[44] F. Tay, J. Van Kan, F. Watt, and W. Choong, A novel micro-machining method for 
the fabrication o f thick-film SU-8 embedded micro-channels, Journal o f  
Micromechanics and Microengineering, vol. 11, 2001, pp. 27-32.
[45] J. Van Kan, J. Sanchez, B. Xu, T. Osipowicz, and F. Watt, Resist materials for proton 
micromachining, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Phys Res-Section B Only-Beam 
Interact Mater Atoms, vol. 158, 1999, pp. 179-184.
[46] M. Ltd, SU 8 -100 Negative tone Epoxy Resin Photo resist, 1999.
[47] I. Zailer, J. Frost, V. Chabasseur-Molyneiix, C. Ford, and M. Pepper, Crosslinked 
PMMA as a high-resolution negative resist for electron beam lithography and 
applications for physics of low-dimensional structures, Semiconductor Science and 
Technology^, vol. 11, 1996, pp. 1235-1238.
[48] Negative Tone Photo Resist formulation 50 -100 . Microchem Incoporated. See 
http://www.microchem.eom/products/pdfySU8_50-1 OO.pdf Last accessed April 2009
[49] P. Dentinger, W. Clift, and S. Goods, Removal of SU-8 photoresist for thick film 
applications, Microelectronic engineering, vol. 61, 2002, pp. 993-1000.
[50] B. Volckaerts, H. Ottevaere, A. Vila, M. Mumzabal, C. Debaes, P. Vynck, P. 
Tuteleers, V. Baukens, A. Hermanne, and I. Veretennicoff, Deep lithography with 
protons for the fabrication of refractive micro-optical modules,
[51] K. Ansari, P. Shao, J. van Kan, A. Bettiol, and F. Watt, Proton beam fabrication of 
nickel stamps for nanoimprint lithography, Nuclear Inst, and Methods in Physics 
Research, B, vol. 231, 2005, pp. 407-412.
[52] J. Van Kan, P. Shao, P. Molter, M. Saumer, A. Bettiol, T. Osipowicz, and F. Watt, 
Fabrication of a free standing resolution standard for focusing MeV ion beams to sub 
30nm dimensions, Nuclear Inst, and Methods in Physics Research, B, vol. 231, 2005, 
pp. 170-175.
[53] H. Ottevaere, B. Volckaerts, M. Mmnzabal, A. Vila, P. Vynck, P. Tuteleers, V. 
Baukens, J. Lamprecht, J. Schwider, and A. Hermanne, Refractive Microlens Arrays 
made by Deep Lithography with Protons: Technology and characterisation, pp. 87-90.
[54] T. Sum, A. Bettiol, H. Seng, I. Rajta, J. Van Kan, and F. Watt, Proton beam writing of 
passive waveguides in PMMA, Nuclear Inst, and Methods in Physics Research, B, 
vol. 210, 2003, pp. 266-271.
http://www.microchem.eom/products/pdfySU8_50-1
[55] J. van Kan, I. Rajta, K. Ansari, A, Bettiol, and F. Watt, Nickel and copper 
electroplating of proton beam micromachined SU-8 resist, Microsystem Technologies, 
vol. 8, 2002, pp. 383-386.
[56] T. Sum, A. Bettiol, S. Rao, J. van Kan, A. Ramara, and F. Watt, Proton beam writing 
of passive polymer optical waveguides, p. 161.
[57] J. Van Kan, A. Bettiol, and F. Watt, Three-dimensional nanolithography using proton 
beam writing, Applied Physics Letters, vol. 83, 2003, p. 1629.
[58] D. De Leeuw, G. Gelinck, and M. Matters, Method of producing vertical 
interconnects between thin film microelectionic devices and products comprising such 
vertical interconnects, 2003.
[59] M. Nordstrra, S. Keller, M. Lillemose, A. Johansson, S. Dohn, D. Haefliger, G. 
Blagoi, M. Havsteen-Jakobsen, and A. Boisen, SU-8 Cantilevers for Bio/chemical 
Sensing; Fabrication, Characterisation and Development of Novel Read-out Methods, 
Sensors, vol. 8, 2008, pp. 1595-1612.
[60] L. Gammelgaard, P. Rasmussen, M. Calleja, P. Vettiger, and A. Boisen, 
Microfabricated photoplastic cantilever with integrated photoplastic/carbon based 
piezoresistive strain sensor, Applied Physics Letters, vol. 88, 2006, p. 113508.
[61] H. Chiamori, J. Brown, E. Adhiprakasha, E. Hantsoo, J. Straalsund, N. Melosh, and B. 
Pruitt, Suspension of nanoparticles in SU-8: Processing and characterization of 
nanocomposite polymers, Microelectronics Journal, vol. 39, 2008, pp. 228-236.
[62] N. Zhang, J. Xie, M. Guers, and V. Varadan, Chemical bonding of multiwalled 
carbon nanotubes to SU-8 via ultrasonic irradiation, Smart Materials and Structures, 
vol. 12, 2003, pp. 260-263.
[63] S. Jiguet, A. Bertsch, H. Hofinann, and P. Renaud, Conductive SU8-silver composite 
photopolymer, 2004, pp. 125-128.
[64] A. Gurbich, N. Banadas, C. Jeynes, and E. Wendler, Applying elastic backscattering 
spectrometry when the nuclear excitation function has a fine stmcture, Nuclear Inst, 
and Methods in Physics Research, B, vol. 190, 2002, pp. 237-240.
[65] J. Weilin, Z. Peiran, D. Aihua, and Y. Shiduan, MeV proton elastic backscattering 
analysis of silicon nitride and oxide layers on silicon, Journal o f  Applied Physics, 
vol. 70, 1991, p. 2610.
[66] A. Nurmela, Non-Rutherford Elastic Scattering Cross Sections for Materials 
Analysis, Unoversity o f Helsinki,, 2001.
[67] C. Jeynes, N. Barradas, M. Blewett, and R. Webb, Improved ion beam analysis 
facilities at the University o f SuiTey, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Phys Res- 
Section B Only-Beam Interact Mater Atoms, vol. 136, 1998, pp. 1229-1234.
[68] C. Jeynes, SigmaCalc EBS cross-sections, Jan. 2007.
[69] M. Kovarik and S. Jacobson, Fabrication of Three-Dimensional Micro-and Nanoscale 
Features with Single-Exposure Photolithography, Anal. Chem, vol. 78, 2006, pp. 
5214-5217.
[70] J. Kim, Y. Yamagata, B. Kim, S. Takuechi, and T. Higuchi, SU-8 based Cantilever 
Biosensor with the Electrospray Deposited Protein Film, Nihon Kikai Gakkai Nenji 
Taikai Koen Ronbunshu, vol. 5, 2003, pp. 21-22.
[71] A. Johansson, J. Janting, P. Schultz, K. Hoppe, I. Hansen, and A. Boisen, SU-8 
cantilever chip interconnection, Journal o f  Micromechanics and Microengineering, 
vol. 16,2006, pp. 314-319.
[72] M. Ltd., Nano SU 8 Negative tone Photo resist Formulations 50- 100, Jan. 2009.
[73] F. Watt and G. Grime, Applications o f  Nuclear Microprobes, Adam Hilger, Bristol, 
1987.
[74] P. Mistry, I. Gomez-Morilla, G. Grime, R. Webb, R. Gwilliam, A. Cansell, M. 
Merchant, K. Kirkby, E. Teo, and M. Breese, New developments in the applications 
of proton beam writing, Nuclear Inst, and Methods in Physics Research, B, vol. 237, 
2005, pp. 188-192.
[75] J. Piil-Henriksen, J. Merayo, O. Nielsen, H. Petersen, J. Petersen, and F. Primdahl, 
Digital detection and feedback fluxgate magnetometer, Measurement Science and 
Technology, vol. 7, 1996, pp. 897-903.
[76] F. Watt and G. Grime, The high-energy ion microprobe, Particle induced X-ray 
emission spectrometiy (PIXE), 1995, pp. 101-165.
[77] M. Merchant and G. Grime, "XART", a numerical ray-tiacing software for Nuclear 
microprobes., Unhuhlished.
[78] G. Neudeck and R. Pienet, Inti^oduction to Microelectronic Fabrication, Prentice Hall.
[79] S. Sze, VLSI Technology, 1983. McGraw-Hill Book Co
[80] B. Deal and A. Grove, General relationship for the themial oxidation o f silicon,
Journal o f  Applied Physics, vol. 36, 1965, p. 3770.
[81] E. Perozziello, Advanced Silicon Thermal Oxide Thickness Calculator. University of 
Stanford (2001). Accessible on, 02 27 02 2008, 2008 2001. 2008.
[82] A. Hemy and R. McCarley, Selective Deposition of Metals on Plastics Used in the 
Constmction of Microanalytical Devices: Photo-Directed Formation o f Metal Features 
on PMMA]', /. Phys. Chem, B, vol. 105, 2001, pp. 8755-8761.
[83] W. Dai and W. Wang, Selective metallization of cured SU-8 microstiuctures using
electroless plating method, Sensors & Actuators: A, Physical, vol. 135, 2007, pp. 
300-307.
[84] W. Dai, Design and Fabrication o f Micro Transducers using Cured SU8 Polymer as 
Main Stmctural Material, Louisiana State University,, 2006.
[85] N. Damean, B. Paiviz, J. Lee, T. Odom, and G. Wliitesides, Composite ferromagnetic 
photoresist for the fabrication o f microelectro-mechanical systems, Journal o f  
Micromechanics and Microengineering, vol. 15, 2005, pp. 29-34.
[86] S. Jiguet, M. Judelewicz, S. Mischler, A. Bertch, and P. Renaud, Effect of filler 
behavior on nanocomposite SU8 photoresist for moving micro-parts, Microelectronic 
engineering, vol. 83, 2006, pp. 1273-1276.
[87] P. Renaud, S. Metz, S. Jiguet, and A, Bertsch, Composite photopolymer 
microstiuctures: fr om planar to 3D devices, 2003.
[88] K. Muller, J. Herrmann, B. Raguse, G. Baxter, and T. Reda, Percolation model for 
electron conduction in films of metal nanoparticles linked by organic molecules, 
Physical Review-Series B- vol. 66,2002, pp. 75417-75417.
[89] R. Fedorovich, A. Naumovets, and P. Tomchuk, Electronic phenomena in 
nanodispersed thin films, Journal o f  Physics-Condensed Matter, vol. 11, 1999, pp. 
9955-9968.
[90] B. Alekseenko and R. Fedorovich, Influence of Adsoiption on Current-Voltage 
Characteristics of Discontinuous Metal Films, Thin Solid Fihns, vol. 92, 1982, pp. 
253-258.
[91] D. Stauffer and A. Aharony, Introduction to percolation theoiy 2nd Edition, CRC 
press, 2003.
[92] P. McCluskey, J. Morris, V. Vemeker, P. Kondracki, and D. Finello, Models of 
electrical conduction in nanoparticle filled polymers, 1998, pp. 84-89.
[93] N. Jacosalem, R. Vequizo, L. Pamatong, and H. Miyata, Conductivity Measurements 
of Chemically Prepared Polyaniline Film Sample, Polymer Chem, vol. 32, 2002, pp. 
65-74.
94] M. Diaz-De Leon, Electiospinning nanofibers of polyaniline and 
polyaniline/(polystyrene and polyethylene oxide) blends, p. 17.
95] A. Kiesow, J. Moms, C. Radehaus, and A. Heilniann, Switching behavior of plasma 
polymer films containing silver nanoparticles, Journal o f  Applied Physics, vol. 94, 
2003, p. 6988.
96] S. Klaumiinzer, Modification of nanostmctnres by high-energy ion beams, Nuclear 
Inst, and Methods in Physics Research, B, vol. 245, 2006, pp. 1-7.
97] A. Sharma and A. Srivastava, Ion beam induced modifications in nitroso substituted 
polyaniline: Spectral and electrical studies, Current Applied Physics, vol. 7, 2007, pp. 
650-654.
98] A. Biswas, D. Avasthi, D. Fink, J. Kanzow, U. Schiirmann, S. Ding, O. Aktas, U.
Saeed, V. Zaporojtchenko, and F. Faupel, Nanoparticle architecture in carbonaceous
matrix upon swift heavy ion inadiation of polymer-metal nanocomposites, Nuclear 
Inst, and Methods in Physics Research, B, vol. 217, 2004, pp. 39-50.
99] G. Inc, Functional Su8 PhotoEpoxy Datasheet GCM3060, Jan. 2009.
100] J. Sebastien, B. Arnaud, H. Heimich, and R. Philippe, SU8-silver photosensitive 
nanocomposite, Adv Eng Mater, vol. 6, 2004, pp. 719-724.
101] M. Hopcroft, T. Kramer, G. Kim, K. Takashima, Y. Higo, D. Moore, and J. Bmgger, 
OS6 (2)-7 (OS06W0411) Micromechanical Testing of SU-8 Cantilevers - ATEM 03 
JSME MMD, 2003, p. 109.
102] A. Al-Halhouli, I. Kampen, T. BCi'ah, and S. Btittgenbach, Nanoindentation testing of 
SU-8 photoresist mechanical properties, Microelectronic engineering, 2008.
103] N. Chronis and L. Lee, Electrothennally activated SU-8 microgripper for single cell
manipulation in solution, Microelectro-mechanical Systems, Journal of, vol. 14,
2005, pp. 857-863.
104] O. Millet, P. Bernardoni, S. Rgnier, P. Bidaud, E. Tsitsiris, D. Collard, and L. 
Buchaillot, Electiostatic actuated micro gripper using an amplification mechanism, 
Sensors & Actuators: A. Physical, vol. 114, 2004, pp. 371-378.
105] C. Liu, P. Conway, D. Li, and M. Hendiiksen, Analysis of the micro-mechanical 
properties in aged lead-free, fine pitch flip chip joints, Journal o f  Electronic 
Packaging, vol. 126, 2004, p. 359.
106] S. Yang, Y. Zhang, and K. Zeng, Analysis of nanoindentation creep for polymeric 
materials, o f  Applied Physics, vol. 95, 2004, p. 3655.
107] M. Inc, MATLAB: high-performance numeric computation and visualization software, 
MathWorks Inc., 1992.
108] J. Clark, D. Bindel, N. Zhou, S. Bhave, Z. Bai, J. Demmel, and K. Pister, Sugar: 
Advancements in a 3D multi-domain simulation package for MEMS, 2001.
109] Z. Bai, D. Bindel, J. Clark, J. Demmel, K. Pister, and N. Zhou, New numerical 
techniques and tools in SUGAR for 3D MEMS simulation, 2000, pp. 31-34.
Appendix
I.) Sugar 3.1 Matlab Actuation Simulation Code
 Modified Net list information file for SU8AG 
  dq = []; 
for k=l: 1000 
param.V = k;
net =cho_load('C:\[File Path]\siigar31 -010906\sugar31-010906\src\lua\deflect.net',param);
dq = cho_dc(net, dq);
tip(k) -  clio_dq_view(dq, net, 'c', 'y');
  q = chodc(net); 
figure(l); cho display(net); 
figure(2); cho_display(net, q);
 Modified MUMPS process information file for SU8AG 
suSsilver = 
material {
Poisson = 0.22,  Poisson ratio = 0.22
thermcond -  0.20,  Thermal conductivity Su8 = 0.2e-6/C
viscosity = 1.78e-5,  Viscosity (of air) = l,78e-5
fluid = 2e-6,  Between the device and the substrate.
density = 2300,  Material density = 2300 kg/ni'^3
Youngsmodulus = 10.67e9,  Young modulus = 10.67GPa N/m'^2
pemiittivity = 3.718e-ll  pennittivity: C^2/(uN.um^2)=(C.s)^2/kg.um^3;
sheetiesistance -  20,  Same as Poly-Si sheet resistance [ohm/square]
stress = 0,
stiaingradient = 0,
thermalexpansion = 0,
ambienttemperature = 0
p i =
material { 
parent = suSsilver, 
h = 5 Ou
material { 
parent = suSsilver, 
h = 3 Ou
-  Dimensional and Electi'ical Connection Model file for SU8AG Microgripper -
--'SU8Ag.net'
use("mumps8.net")
use("mumps.net")
use("stdlib.net")
Vsrc {node "A", node " f ;  V = 400} 
eground (node "f'}
anchor (node "A", p i; 1=1 OOu, w=100u, oz=180) 
beam2de {node "A", node "b", p i; 
l=300u, w=3u, h=20u, R=100}
gap2de {node "b", node "c", node "D", node "E", p2;
1=3OOu, w 1=3Ou, w2=20u, gap=50u, Rl=100, R2=100} 
eground {node "D"} 
eground {node "E"}
anchor {node "D", p i; l=5u, w=10u, oz=-90}
II.) Nano-Indentation Data Tables
Gripper Cantilever Arm
Cycle Max. Plastic Max.
Hardnes
Contact Plastic Elastic
Compli
Depth Depth Load s Er ERP ance Work Work MSE
1/Er-(1
(nm) (nm) (mN) (GPa) (GPa) (nm/Mn) (nJ) (nJ) 1/Er (Vi2/Ei2))
355.529 268.220 2.08949 0.97310 10.4984 0.32551 55.713 0.302 0.165 0.000 0.095 0.494''10.081
325 354 1 5 92 2 076 301 478 575 252 379 276
480.895 401.375 0.46582 0.19811 50.030 0.445 0.154 0.001 0.124 0f123 7 # 6  
583 568 2.11922 9 8.03176 9 998 524 624 275 506 633 BL:433.398 357.288 2.11174 0.57763 9.32797 0.21302 48.055 0.388 0.146 0.001 0 147 0:1 oe
993 226 6 5 5 3 496 012 416 145 204 332 37
404.766 327.372 2.11898 0.68246 0.23640 48.698 0.310 0.153 0.001 0.100 0.999 4 ( ^ 8
469 72 3 3 9.9881 9 684 912 834 557 119 m
442.683 364.294 2.11153 0.55693 8.89269 0.21517 49.498 0.411 0.152 0.001 0.112 0.144- 8C%8
526 998 1 3 6 9 695 626 464 468 452 570 m459.444 362.328 2.11803 0.56434 7.23658 0.26803 61.136 0.354 0.173 0.004 0.138 0.137
748 328 9 8 1 4 069 235 87 236 187 314 106
420.614 342.829 2.11704 0.62560 9.51057 48.989 0.314 0.155 0.002 0.105 0.104 9 .1 ^
472 729 2 6 2 0.22689 567 349 158 136 146 273 022
443.123 345.151 2.11428 0.61696 7.49364 0.28385 61.784 0.390 0.170 0.004 0.133 0.132 7.177
767 518 6 1 7 3 307 105 129 689 446 573 906
503.583 424.658 2.10957 0.41687 0.18585 49.883 0.443 0.157 0.001 0.130 0.130 7.316
855 541 2 6 7.63783 6 946 775 801 634 927 054 941
576.372 481.181 0.32826 5.61408 0.19782 60.281 0.546 0.185 0.001 0.178 0.177 5.368
717 309 2.10549 9 7 9 409 509 863 588 123 25 674
256.808 178.452 2.10929 2.05160 17.0658 0.43908 49.530 0.167 0.140 0.000 0.058 0.057 16.48
333 308 6 7 98 7 606 183 329 665 596 723 549
334.731 254.586 2.12349 1.08823 12.1925 0.31480 50.322 0.243 0.141 0.006 0.082 0.081 11.72
874 613 2 3 38 5 929 844 176 475 017 144 723 i
462.764 378.497 2.11398 0.53721 8.19258 0.22502 53.151 0.400 0.161 0.002 0.125 0.124 7.853
9033 8819 9889 3333 3111 1333 019 561 129 192 568 695 641
52.0871 48.8736 0.00475 0.11250 1.37499 0.03294 5.9790 0.073 0.012 0.001 0.023 0.023 1.326
1094 7179 5663 7787 8064 3776 2834 48 693 321 946 946 703
Electrical Pads (Square)
Cycle Max. Plastic Max.
Hardnes
Contact Plastic Elastic
Compli
Depth Depth Load s Er ERP ance Work Work MSE
1/Er-(1-
(nm) (nm) (mN) (GPa) (GPa) (nm/Mn) (nJ) (nJ) 1/Er (Vi2/Ei2))
366.672 300.546 2.07421 0.78304 12.3889 0.22001 42.506 0.276 0.131 0.000 0.080 0.079 11.91
337 426 5 4 32 9 621 131 405 841 717 844 819
461.859 379.603 2.10788 0.51462 8.13929 0.21669 52.030 0.392 0.161 0.001 0.122 0.121 7.800
382 012 8 8 1 1 829 912 814 724 861 988 772
379.888 312.634 2.11615 0.74253 11.9811 0.21512 42.374 0.320 0.131 0.001 0.083 0.082 11.52
315 176 9 1 39 1 967 014 913 145 465 592 175
370.014 297.838 2.11309 0.81120 11.6605 0.24233 45.542 0.306 0.153 0.001 0.085 0.084 11.21
243 183 6 7 2 3 062 974 564 689 759 887 025
375.123 295.649 2.11418 0.82278 10.6677 0.26881 50.121 0.312 0.150 0.001 0.093 0.092 10.24
694 355 3 1 35 3 377 692 24 497 741 868 683
577.340 496.060 2.11394 0.31102 6.41274 51.265 0.487 0.164 0.001 0.155 0.155 6.136
641 827 1 1 4 0.16385 911 957 64 615 939 067 718
293.104 215.479 2.11354 1.46681 14.5806 0.36024 48.969 0.215 0.127 0.003 0.068 0.067 14.05
435 406 6 5 68 3 865 971 644 461 584 711 383
397.388 323.988 0.69574 10.6331 46.189 0.311 0.144 0.001 0.094 0.093 10.21
252 578 2.11882 4 85 0.22655 033 728 984 596 045 172 334
426.347 331.362 2.12004 0.66756 8.05099 59.737 0.311 0.165 0.004 0.124 0.123 7.715
078 045 5 5 7 0.28665 741 741 269 77 208 335 551
295.995 226.043 2.12084 1.34978 15.5479 0.30946 43.977 0.212 0.129 0.001 0.064 0.063 14.99
182 424 5 5 74 2 279 661 43 171 317 444 901
462.101 372.641 2.11315 0.53416 7.63417 0.24006 56.446 0.339 0.179 0.002 0.130 0.130 7.313
657 864 6 7 6 9 236 247 365 06 99 117 417
254.776 202.737 2.11843 1.64077 23.0296 0.25668 32.753 0.178 0.102 0.001 0.043 0.042 22.36
598 463 6 3 65 2 172 524 915 082 422 549 461
395.403 313.983 2.12118 0.73836 9.88050 0.25931 51.178 0.311 0.155 0.001 0.095 0.094 11.29
29 139 8 6 5 4 973 701 607 559 671 798 119
353.882 283.399 2.11801 0.89130 12.5307 0.24870 44.370 0.273 0.149 0.001 0.030 0.030 4.223
364 086 1 8 68 7 728 732 108 63 764 764 601
398.345 319.734 2.11622 0.81285 10.9691 0.25326 49.530 0.310 0.150 0.002 0.100 0.099 10.67
3169 2639 16 7267 3047 98 697 989 467 12 816 943 397
80.0122 73.2211 0.00385 0.37585 4.23010 0.04613 7.1635 0.073 0.020 0.001 0.030 0.030 4.120
8203 2756 6521 7124 3395 9805 568 666 879 214 238 238 747
Driver Electrode (Profile)
Cycle Max. Plastic Max.
Hardnes
Contact Plastic Elastic
Compli
Depth Depth Load s Er ERP ance Work Work MSE
1/Er-(1-
(nm) (nm) (mN) (GPa) (GPa) (nm/Mn) (nJ) (nJ) 1/Er (Vi2/Ei2))
700.557 573.457 2.07769 0.23170 0.22163 81.564 0.590 0.265 0.000 0.284 0.284 3.349
826 938 2 8 3.50915 8 782 781 59 064 969 096 567
802.137 559.939 0.24711 1.91958 0.43254 152.55 0.499 0.446 0.000 0.520 0.520 1.829
022 315 2.11683 4 3 3 3727 958 903 373 946 074 741
1077.51 858.653 2.08045 0.10642 1.38203 0.25488 140.26 0.805 0.409 0.000 0.723 0.722 1.316
4812 522 5 6 6 9 5015 598 837 081 57 697 734
600.550 443.000 2.07847 0.37913 3.62190 0.35564 101.06 0.463 0.271 0.000 0.276 0.275 3.457
342 016 9 7 9 4 7704 999 462 328 097 225 54
549.450 457.392 2.08317 0.35763 6.02711 0.20126 58.921 0.420 0.177 0.001 0.165 0.165 5.765
467 622 4 8 4 7 541 429 896 118 917 044 735
351.209 268.093 2.08182 0.97037 10.9924 0.31002 53.232 0.282 0.142 0.003 0.090 0.090 10.56
093 42 4 8 71 5 593 517 118 608 971 098 178
305.261 244.884 2.09417 1.15219 16.5378 0.24655 38.441 0.175 0.116 0.003 0.060 0.059 15.96
573 135 4 3 85 5 525 056 394 937 467 594 796
378.760 293.821 2.09342 0.82410 9.94025 0.28908 54.099 0.263 0.159 0.001 0.100 0.099 9.541
465 088 9 7 7 5 04 707 589 675 601 728 942
383.063 305.010 2.09442 0.76935 10.4543 49.688 0.322 0.144 0.001 0.303 0.302 6.035
095 765 6 8 37 0.2559 933 704 417 238 277 404 58
417.370 320.485 2.11265 0.70789 8.11385 0.30230 61.145 0.282 0.182 0.001 0.240 0.240 5.370
854 609 4 7 8 8 989 113 551 27 831 831 119
556.587 432.473 2.09131 0.57459 0.28698 79.098 0.410 0.231 0.001 0.276 0.275 6.319
5549 843 37 56 7.24986 54 0849 686 676 369 765 979 67
245.137 191.110 0.01395 0.35551 4.83070 0.06824 39.675 0.187 0.115 0.001 0.207 0.207 4.533
2439 3333 7606 115 28 796 1729 711 578 384 082 065 326
III.) I-V measurement Data Tables of Conductive SU 8 Silver 
Microstructure
1 (Amperes) V (Volts) 1 (Amperes) V (Volts)
9.7551 E-12 0.00 9.9999E-3 21.50
151.1411E-12 0.50 9.9999E-3 22.00
297.7574E-12 1.00 9.9999E-3 22.50
468.0773E-12 1.50 9.9999E-3 23.00
780.8533E-12 2.00 9.9999E-3 23.50
1.1548E-9 2.50 9.9999E-3 24.00
1.5345E-9 3.00 9.9999E-3 28.00
1.8758E-9 3.50 9.9999E-3 28.50
2.2766E-9 4.00 9.9999E-3 29.00
2.8391 E-9 4.50 9.9999E-3 29.50
3.4695E-9 5.00 9.9999E-3 30.00
4.1736E-9 5.50 9.9999E-3 30.50
4.8499E-9 6.00 9.9999E-3 31.00
5.5229E-9 6.50 9.9999E-3 31.50
6.4427E-9 7.00 9.9998E-3 32.00
7.5383E-9 7.50 9.9998E-3 32.50
8.6491 E-9 8.00 9.9999E-3 33.00
9.7103E-9 8.50 9.9999E-3 33.50
12.1387E-9 9.00 9.9999E-3 34.00
16.2552E-9 9.50 9.9999E-3 34.50
19.8154E-9 10.00 9.9998E-3 35.00
23.6088E-9 10.50 9.9998E-3 35.50
28.4596E-9 11.00 9.9999E-3 36.00
33.8867E-9 11.50 9.9999E-3 36.50
43.8879E-9 12.00 9.9998E-3 37.00
51.9202E-9 12.50 9.9998E-3 37.50
64.0565E-9 13.00 9.9999E-3 38.00
75.8589E-9 13.50 9.9998E-3 38.50
90.0249E-9 14.00 9.9999E-3 39.00
105.5527E-9 14.50 9.9998E-3 39.50
125.8606E-9 15.00 9.9998E-3 40.00
154.0485E-9 15.50 9.9999E-3 40.50
175.6059E-9 16.00
207.6652E-9 16.50
243.2118E-9 17.00
299.5408E-9 17.50
371.6452E-9 18.00
448.8985E-9 18.50
560.3821 E-9 19.00
65.6808E-9 19.50
1.0649E-6 20.00
1.7737E-6 20.50
IV.) Selection of 3 Dimensional Structures Created by proton beam 
writing
:f*.V
