Learn: : ; . ; . . s i  services f 
j Collegiate Learning Centre j 
Collegiate Crescent Campus: 
Sheffield S10 23P i
1 0 1  9 6 8  1 4 1  1
REFERENCE
ProQuest Number: 10701300
All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS 
The qua lity  of this reproduction  is d e p e n d e n t upon the qua lity  of the copy subm itted.
In the unlikely e ve n t that the au tho r did not send a co m p le te  m anuscrip t 
and there are missing pages, these will be no ted . Also, if m ateria l had to be rem oved,
a no te  will ind ica te  the de le tion .
ProQuest 10701300
Published by ProQuest LLC(2017). C opyrigh t of the Dissertation is held by the Author.
All rights reserved.
This work is protected aga inst unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States C o de
M icroform  Edition  ProQuest LLC.
ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway 
P.O. Box 1346 
Ann Arbor, Ml 4 81 06 - 1346
ONLINE WRITTEN EMOTIONAL DISCLOSURE: EFFECTS ON 
PSYCHOLOGICAL WELL-BEING IN INDIVIDUALS WITH INFERTILITY
Katie Jane Cutts
A thesis submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements of 
Sheffield Hallam University 
for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy
August 2009
Acknowledgements
I owe my deepest gratitude to my supervisors Dr Madelynne Arden, Dr Keith Hurst and 
Dr John Reidy for their guidance, encouragement and support throughout the last five 
years. I would also like to thank the Psychology members of staff at Sheffield Hallam 
University for allowing me to interrupt their teaching sessions to recruit participants and 
conduct my studies. I am also thankful for the advice and support I have received from 
various members of staff over the years.
I would like to thank Mr Jonathan Skull and his staff at the Assisted Conception Unit, 
Jessops Wing for allowing me access to patients at the clinic and for making me feel 
welcome in my time there. Thank you to the patients, students and infertility forum 
users who took the time to participate in my studies.
I am indebted to my postgraduate colleagues whose support has been invaluable. 
Special thanks goes to Dr Catherine Day and David Moore who were there from the 
beginning, you have both made the challenges of the last five years easier to bear. I 
would also like to thank Sue Jamison-Powell, Kyle Brown, Hannah Fawcett, Keeley 
Abbott and Andrew Denovan for the hours of engaging conversation and evenings of 
fun and frivolity, I am grateful to have had the opportunity to be part of such a great 
group of individuals and I have made some lifelong friends.
Special thanks must go to my family. Returning to education as a mature student with 
two young children over ten years ago would not have been possible without the 
unconditional emotional and practical support of my mum, sister Denise, Auntie Joan, 
Uncle George and mother-in-law Audrey. I can never repay you for the hours of 
babysitting, cleaning, ironing and cooking that you have done just to make things 
easier for me. I am forever in your debt.
Last but by no means least I would like to thank my husband Gary and two wonderful 
children, Lizzie and Alex, without their love, support and patience I would not have 
been able to pursue my dreams. You are the ones who have suffered the 
consequences of me taking on this PhD. At times you have been neglected and have 
had to take second place, especially in the last six months, but have never complained. 
I could not have achieved this without you.
I would like to dedicate this thesis to my dear departed father. I know how proud of me 
he would be.
Abstract
The negative psychological impact of infertility and resultant stress inherent in the 
treatment of fertility problems is well documented in the research literature (Greil, 
1997). Disclosing emotional reactions to stressful and traumatic experiences through 
writing has been shown to have beneficial effects on psychological well-being in 
healthy students and clinical populations (Frattaroli, 2006; Smyth, 1998). The principal 
aim of this thesis was to examine the efficacy of a written emotional disclosure 
intervention for individuals with infertility. However, initially the potential moderating 
effects of delivering the intervention via a computer and within the context of the home 
was examined. This showed that the adaptation of the traditional laboratory based, 
handwritten intervention developed by Pennebaker and Beall (1986) did not impact on 
the short-term or longer-term effects of written emotional disclosure. Subsequently, 
following a study which failed to recruit participants from an assisted conception unit, a 
written emotional disclosure intervention for individuals with infertility was examined 
using an internet-mediated delivery. Results showed that the effectiveness of writing 
about the experience of infertility and infertility treatment in producing changes in 
psychological well-being at 4-week follow-up was related to changes in the content of 
the disclosure narratives across the writing sessions. Analysis revealed that for those 
individuals in the disclosure group who showed an increase in their use of negative 
emotion words and cognitive words in their writing over the three disclosure sessions 
was associated with a reduction in symptoms of psychological distress. The findings of 
this study are discussed in relation to the heterogeneity of the sample and possible 
impact of the recruitment methods used. The contribution of this thesis has been to 
directly test the potential moderating effects of methodological variation in intervention 
delivery and examine the utility of a written emotional disclosure intervention for 
individuals with infertility, in doing so the findings of this thesis contribute to the 
expanding literature. Recommendations are made for more systematic examination of 
the utility of disclosure writing and investigation of the process by which positive 
changes occurs in individuals with infertility and other clinical populations.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 2: LITERATURE REVIEW
CHAPTER 3: METHODOLOGICAL REVIEW
CHAPTER 4: AIMS AND OBJECTIVES
CHAPTER 5: TESTING METHODOLOGIES 1
CHAPTER 6: TESTING METHODOLOGIES 2
CHAPTER 7: INTERNET-MEDIATED RESEARCH
CHAPTER 8: DISCLOSURE WRITING: A WEB-BASED INTERVENTION
CHAPTER 9: TEXT ANALYSIS OF A N  O N LIN E  INFERTILITY SUPPORT F O R U M
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL DISCUSSION
1 0 .3 .1  Im p le m e n ta tio n  of a  H o m e - based Em o tio n a l  D isclosure Interventio n  for N ew  Referral IVF 
APPENDICES
A .2  THE D E VE LO PM EN T A N D  IM P L E M E N T A T IO N  OF A  DISCLOSURE W R IT IN G  IN T E R V E N T IO N  IN  
A.9 SPSS OUTPUT FOR HIERARCHICAL REGRESSION ANALYSIS -  LIWC VARIABLES AS PREDICTORS 88
A. 12 SPSS OUTPUT FOR HIERARCHICAL REGRESSION ANALYSIS -  LIWC VARIABLES AS PREDICTORS. I l l
A .19 SPSS O U T P U T  FOR HIERARCHICAL REGRESSION ANALYSIS -  LIW C VARIABLES AS PREDICTORS. 157
L is t  o f  F i g u r e s
F ig u r e  6 .1 :  Fl o w  d ia g r a m  o f  C h a p te r  5  process a n d  t im e s c a l e  o f  p a r t ic ip a t io n  for  h o m e - ba sed  p a r t ic ip a n t s .
List of Tables
T able  5 .2  M ea n s  a n d  s t a n d a r d  d e v ia t io n s  f o r  a g e  a n d  w e ll - b e in g  m e a s u r e s  a t  s t u d y  e n tr y  by g r o u p
T ab le  5 .4  M ean s  a n d  s t a n d a r d  d e v ia t io n s  f o r  all o u t c o m e  v a r ia b le s  as  a  f u n c t io n  o f  m o d a l it y  a n d  c o n d it io n
T able  5 .5  M ea n s  a n d  s t a n d a r d  d e v ia t io n s  co lla psed  a c r o ss  g r o u p s  fo r  m a in  effect  o f  a s s e s s m e n t  p e r io d  w it h
T able  5 .6  M ea n s  a n d  s t a n d a r d  d e v ia t io n s  fo r  all  o u t c o m e  va r ia b le s  as  a  f u n c t io n  o f  c o n d it io n  for  pre
T ab le  5 .7  M ea n s  a n d  s t a n d a r d  d e v ia t io n s  fo r  w o r d  c o u n t  a n d  t o t a l  p e r c e n ta g e  o f  p o s it iv e  e m o t io n , n e g a t iv e
T ab le  6 .1  M ea n s , s t a n d a r d  d e v ia t io n s  a n d  r a n g e  o f  scores  fo r  w e ll - b e in g  m e a s u r e s  a t  s t u d y  e n t r y  f o r  h o m e -
T able 6 .2  M ea n s  a n d  s t a n d a r d  d e v ia t io n s  fo r  a g e  a n d  w e ll - b e in g  m e a s u r e s  a t  s t u d y  e n t r y  fo r  a ll  g r o u p s . . 1 4 4
T able 6 .4  M ea n s  a n d  s t a n d a r d  d e v ia t io n s  fo r  all  o u t c o m e  va r ia b le s  as  a  f u n c t io n  o f  c o n t e x t  a n d  c o n d it io n
T able 6 .5  M ea n s  a n d  s t a n d a r d  d e v ia t io n s  c o lla psed  ac r o ss  g r o u p s  fo r  m a in  effect o f  t im e  w it h  F T ests a n d
T able 6 .6  M ea n s  a n d  s t a n d a r d  d e v ia t io n s  fo r  w o r d  c o u n t  a n d  t o t a l  p e r c e n ta g e  o f  p o s it iv e  e m o t io n , n e g a t iv e
T able 8 .2  M ea n s  a n d  s t a n d a r d  d e v ia t io n s  fo r  a g e , t im e  t r y in g  t o  c o n c e iv e  a n d  w e ll - b e in g  m e a s u r e s  a t  s t u d y
T ab le  8 .4  M ean s  a n d  s t a n d a r d  d e v ia t io n s  f o r  p h ysic a l  a n d  p s y c h o lo g ic a l  s y m p t o m s  fo r  a ll  g r o u p s  a t  ba selin e
T able 8 .5  M ean s  a n d  s t a n d a r d  d e v ia t io n s  fo r  w o r d  c o u n t  a n d  t o t a l  p e r c e n ta g e  o f  p o s it iv e  e m o t io n , n e g a t iv e
T able 8 .6  S u m m a r y  o f  H ie r a r c h ic a l  Re g r e s s io n  A na lyses fo r  PSI, FPI, d e p r e s s io n , a n x ie t y  a n d  stress a t  4 - w e e k
T able 8 .7  Su m m a r y  o f  H ie r a r c h ic a l  Re g r essio n  A nalyses fo r  in t r u s io n  a n d  a v o id a n c e  a t  4 - w e e k  f o l l o w - u p  (N
T able 9 .2  M e a n s  a n d  s t a n d a r d  d e v ia t io n s  ( in  p a r e n th e s e s ) o f  t h e  p e r c e n ta g e  o f  w o r d s  per  c a t e g o r y  p r o d u c e d
T able 9 .3  M ean s  a n d  s t a n d a r d  d e v ia t io n s  ( in  p a r e n th e s e s ) o f  t h e  p e r c e n ta g e  o f  w o r d s  per  L IW C  c a t e g o r y  fo r  
Abbreviations
ART -Assisted Reproductive Technologies
DASS21 - Depression and Anxiety Stress Scale-21-Item
EEQ -  Essay Evaluation Questionnaire
GSI -  Global Severity Index
HCU - Health Care Utilisation
H F E A - Human Fertilization and Embryology Authority
ICSI - Intracytoplasmic Sperm Injection
IES -  Impact of Event Scale
IUI - Intrauterine Insemination
IVF - In Vitro Fertilization
LIWC -  Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count
M -  Mean
NA -  Negative Affect 
Ol - Ovulation Induction 
PA -  Positive Affect
PANAS -  Positive and Negative Affectivity Scale 
PSI -  Physical Symptoms Inventory 
SCL-90-R -  Symptom Checklist -90-Revised 
SD -  Standard Deviation
Chapter 1
Introduction to the Thesis
1.1 Background to the Thesis
For most people having children is an essential part of adult life which is shaped by 
social, religious and cultural demands (Seibel, 1997). The negative impact that infertility 
and subsequent medical investigations and treatments can have on psychological 
functioning is well documented (Greil, 1997). Additionally, evidence suggests that there 
is a reciprocal relationship between stress and infertility, particularly that stress may 
influence the outcome of infertility treatment (e.g. Boivin & Schmidt, 2005). The 
literature on the psychological impact of infertility and infertility treatment clearly 
indicates a need for intervention in this population of individuals (Cousineau & Domar, 
2007). Yet, the literature would also suggest hesitancy in couples to engage with the 
traditional face-to-face psychotherapeutic interventions that could help to alleviate their 
distress (e.g. Wischmann, 2008). The need for an intervention that is effective in 
reducing distress, yet is acceptable to this population of individuals is evident. A written 
emotional disclosure intervention is one such alternative that could be of potential 
benefit to individuals with infertility. Writing about stressful experiences in the context of 
written disclosure has been shown to provide psychological and physical health 
benefits in healthy individuals and patient populations (Frattaroli, 2006; Smyth, 1998). 
Moreover, such interventions are considered largely free from the stigma associated 
with traditional psychosocial therapies (Sexton & Pennebaker, 2004).
In order to examine the effectiveness of a written disclosure intervention in individuals 
with infertility a study was designed to implement and evaluate the effectiveness of 
such an intervention in individuals attending an assisted conception unit. Couples who 
were attending the unit for their first cycle of In Vitro Fertilization (IVF) were invited to 
take part in the study. Due to recruitment and attrition problems the continuation of this 
study became unfeasible (see Appendix A.2 for details of this study). Subsequently, an 
alternative method of recruitment and delivery was employed. Individuals with infertility
were recruited from online infertility support forums and the intervention protocol was 
adapted to be administered via the internet.
1.2 Structure of the Thesis
Chapter 2 (section 2.2) outlines the prevalence and causes of infertility and reviews the 
literature examining the psychological impact of infertility/infertility treatment and 
potential for intervention in this population. Section 2.3 provides a review of the 
psychological and physical health benefits of writing about traumatic and stressful 
experiences and the potential therapeutic value of a written disclosure intervention for 
individuals with infertility is proposed.
Chapter 3 provides a critical review of the methodological variation that is seen across 
written disclosure studies. To facilitate the implementation of the disclosure intervention 
in different populations and examine the limitations of written disclosure under various 
conditions it has been necessary to make modifications to the design features, 
procedure, instructional content and study setting of the original written disclosure 
protocol employed by Pennebaker and Beall (1986). In developing an intervention for 
individuals with infertility that can be administered within the home context, via a 
computer, this format deviates from the more traditional laboratory based, hand-written 
methodology that has been widely used in disclosure studies. The direct effects of 
deviating from the standard lab-based, hand-written methodology to a home-based, 
computer-mediated format are examined in two studies. Chapter 5 presents a study 
that directly examines the short-term and longer-term effects of writing using pen-and- 
paper versus typing on a computer. In a study examining the short-term effects of 
writing versus typing Brewin and Lennard (1999) found that participants who disclosed 
their thoughts and feelings using pen-and-paper reported a more negative mood 
immediately after the task than those who typed. A more recent examination of this 
effect by Sharp and Hargrove (2004) failed to support these earlier findings. No studies 
to date have examined the direct effect of modality on the longer-term benefits of 
disclosure, although studies utilising computer-mediated formats have reported positive 
intervention effects (Burton & King, 2008; Hemenover, 2003). A study examining the 
potential moderating effects of study context on outcome is presented in Chapter 6. 
Arguably, the main rationale for the adaptation of the laboratory based intervention to 
one that is delivered in the home setting has been to increase accessibility and 
flexibility of the intervention and maximize recruitment and retention of specific 
populations, in particular the chronically ill (e.g. Wetherell et al., 2005). The difficulty in 
evaluating the impact of context on disclosure from the available literature is that there
is a great deal of inconsistency in the findings of studies that have been conducted 
within the context of the home, which may in part be attributable to additional 
methodological differences and the diversity of populations across studies. Whilst some 
advocate the adaptation of the standard lab-based disclosure intervention for home 
application (van Middendorp et al., 2007) others have cautioned against the use of 
disclosure writing in the home (Sheffield, Duncan, Thomson & Johal, 2002). Therefore 
one of the aims of the thesis is to directly examine the effects of these methodological 
adaptations to the disclosure protocol prior to implementation of a home-based 
internet-mediated intervention for individuals with infertility.
Recruiting participants and conducting psychological studies via the internet presents a 
number of ethical and methodological issues. The implications of internet-mediated 
research and effectiveness of psychotherapeutic interventions delivered via the internet 
are reviewed in Chapter 7. Chapter 8 present the findings of an internet-mediated 
written disclosure intervention for individuals with infertility, recruited from online 
infertility support forums. One of the potential issues arising from conducting a writing 
intervention with individuals who are using internet forums is that they may already be 
disclosing their emotions in the context of the internet forum. In a study by Alpers et al. 
(2005) the content of the narratives taken from multiple disclosure studies were 
compared with the messages posted to a breast cancer support forum. The pattern (in 
terms of percentages) of emotional and cognitive words used by breast cancer forum 
members in their messages was similar to that of the pattern seen in multiple 
disclosure studies (Pennebaker, Francis & Booth, 2001). A study comparing the 
emotional content of the disclosure narratives written by intervention participants with 
infertility and the content of messages posted to an infertility support forum message 
board is presented in Chapter 9. Finally, Chapter 10 provides a summary of the main 
findings of the thesis and considers the implication of these findings within the broader 
context of the written disclosure literature. Future directions for research are discussed.
Chapter 2
Literature Review
2.1 Overview
Most men and women take for granted that they will have children when they so desire. 
Thus, infertility is for many an unanticipated life crisis (Menning, 1980). The broad aim 
of this thesis is to develop and implement a written disclosure intervention for 
individuals experiencing infertility. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a review 
and critical evaluation of the current literature relevant to the aims of the thesis. Section
2.2 describes the emotional reactions of individuals who are confronted with infertility 
and reviews the literature that has examined the reciprocal relationships between 
infertility, its associated treatments and psychological well-being. The need to develop 
and deliver effective psychosocial interventions is considered in light of research that 
suggests individuals dealing with infertility and infertility treatment perceive a number of 
constraints with face-to-face therapeutic interventions (e.g. McNaughton-Cassill, 
Bostwick, Arthur, Robinson & Neal, 2002). Section 2.3 describes a brief disclosure 
writing intervention (Pennebaker & Beall, 1986) that could be an effective alternative for 
individuals experiencing infertility. The short-term and longer-term effects of disclosure 
writing are described and the evidence for the effectiveness of writing as an 
intervention for reducing physical and psychological symptoms is reviewed.
2.2 Infertility
2.2.1 Definitions and Prevalence within the United Kingdom
Infertility affects one in seven couples in the United Kingdom (Human Fertilization and 
Embryology Authority; HFEA, 2006). The National Institute for Clinical Excellence 
(NICE) define infertility as the "failure to conceive after regular unprotected sexual 
intercourse for two years in the absence of known reproductive pathology" (NICE, 
2004; p. 10). Within this definition, the term infertility refers to an involuntary reduction in 
the ability to conceive children and not an absolute infertility (sterility) which is a total 
inability to conceive (Seibel, 1997). Infertility can be classified as primary, where 
pregnancy has never been achieved, or as secondary, where pregnancy has been
previously achieved, although the pregnancy may have not been successful (e.g. 
resulting in miscarriage or ectopic pregnancy; Taylor, 2004).
Within the medical and psychological literature there is some incongruity in the 
terminology used in reference to couples experiencing involuntary childlessness, with 
the terms sub-fertility and infertility often being used interchangeably. Couples who 
have a reduced chance of conception, because of one or more factors, are defined 
clinically as sub-fertile (Johnson & Everitt, 1995) which represents a relative condition. 
The term 'infertility' translates into 'not fertile', which is synonymous with sterility 
(Penzias, 2007). However, the term 'infertility' is used consistently within the medical 
and psychological literature as an identifier of the individual or population under 
examination irrespective of their diagnosis. Whilst it has been argued that the current 
terminology is misleading and ambiguous and should be abandoned (Habbema et al., 
2004) others have suggested that this would lead to confusion and that the term 
'infertility' should be accepted universally as an identifier of a problem (irrespective of 
the relative or absolute condition), with further qualifying details being presented as 
necessary (Jenkins et al., 2004). In this thesis, the term 'infertility' or infertile will be 
used when describing the literature and population under investigation, with further 
categorization of the relative or absolute nature of the infertility problem when 
necessary.
2.2.2 Causes of Infertility
Impaired fertility has a wide range of causes with approximately 40 per cent of cases 
being due to female factor infertility, including ovulatory dysfunction, tubal damage, 
endometriosis and fibroids, and 30 per cent due to male factors such as reduced sperm 
motility and/or low sperm numbers (HFEA, 2004). The remaining 30 per cent of cases 
are either due to both partners or are unexplained (idiopathic) (HFEA, 2004). The 
single most important factor influencing a couples chances of conception is maternal 
age (Bayer, 2007; Skull, 2004). In general, female fertility is in decline from the age of 
24 and accelerates in decline after the age of 37 (Bayer, 2007). Although semen 
parameters are known to change as the male ages (i.e. decreases in semen volume 
and motility) the impact on male fertility is often subtle or insignificant (Bayer, 2007). 
Particular lifestyle choices and behavioural factors are also associated with reduced 
chances of conception. For example, extremes of body weight are associated with 
ovarian dysfunction (Bayer, 2007) and smoking is associated with decreased fertility in 
both males and females (Seibel, 1997). Excessive alcohol consumption and
recreational drug use can also negatively impact fertility (Skull, 2004; Taylor, 2004). 
There is evidence that male fertility, particularly in relation to semen quality, can be 
adversely affected by certain occupational exposures including heat, radiation, 
chemical exposure and exposure to certain metals (Jensen, Bonde & Joffe, 2006). The 
possibility that stress may also play a causal role in male and female infertility has been 
considered (e.g. Wasser, Sewall & Soules, 1993).
2.2.2.1 Psychological stress as a cause of infertility
A number of studies have suggested that psychological factors such as interpersonal 
stress may be of significance in the aetiology of infertility (e.g. Wasser et al., 1993). 
While there is little evidence to support a psychogenic hypothesis of infertility, which 
rests on the assumptions that unconscious conflicts and/or psychological disturbances 
in the couple are the root cause of idiopathic infertility (Greil, 1997; Wischmann, 2003), 
there is growing evidence that stress may play, at least a contributory, role in 
reproductive difficulties in both men (Clarke, Klock, Geoghegan & Travassos, 1999) 
and women (Csemiczky, Landgren & Collins, 2000).
Wasser and Isenberg (1986) describe the Reproductive Suppression Model as an 
explanation for reproductive failure in women. According to this model the human 
reproductive system has evolved sensitive physiological and behavioural mechanisms 
that suppress reproduction at times when environmental conditions are unfavourable. 
Psychosocial stress is one such factor that activates these physiological mechanisms 
(Wasser & Isenberg, 1986). Wasser et al. (1993) tested this hypothesis by examining 
the distress levels of infertile women with functional abnormalities of the hypothalamic- 
pituitary-ovarian axis (e.g. anovulation) in comparison to women with anatomical 
abnormalities (e.g. tubal damage) and a control group of women with functional 
abnormalities who were not trying to become pregnant. If psychosocial stress causes 
infertility (rather than infertility causing stress), it would be expected that both groups of 
women with functional abnormalities would report higher levels of stress than women 
with anatomical abnormalities. Consistent with this hypothesis both groups of women 
with functional abnormalities reported higher levels of distress and less social support 
than the women with anatomical infertility.
The link between stress and reproduction is a complex relationship (Campagne, 2006). 
Stress affects multiple sites, initiating cardiovascular, metabolic and endocrine 
responses (Ferin, 1999). A review by Ferin (1999) of the relationship between stress 
and women's reproductive cycles indicated a number of potential links between the
neuroendocrine stress response and inhibition of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal 
(HPG) axis. Activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis during stress 
has the potential to inhibit the HPG axis and the secretion of hypothalamic 
gonadotropin-releasing factor (GnRH) (Ferin, 1999). During stress the HPA axis 
secretes corticotrophic-releasing hormone (CRH) from the hypothalamus, 
adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) from the pituitary and cortisol from the adrenal 
cortex (Bartlett, 1998). Glucocorticoids such as cortisol inhibit the HPG axis (Rivest & 
Rivier, 1995). Additionally, the immunosuppressant effects of cortisol may affect 
implantation of the fertilised ovum into the uterus lining (Smeenk et al., 2005). Cortisol 
levels have been shown to be higher among infertile women compared to fertile women 
(Csemiczky et al. 2000). Demyttenaere, Nijs, Evers-Kiebooms and Koninckx (1992) 
found that anticipatory cortisol (measured in the minutes before oocyte retrieval and 
embryo transfer) predicted pregnancy rates in women undergoing assisted 
reproduction. Studies that have indirectly examined the impact of stress on male 
reproduction have indicated a decline in semen quality in the male partners of women 
undergoing fertility treatment (Clarke et al., 1999; Harrison, Callan & Hennessey, 
1987).
2.2.3 The Treatment of Infertility
Approximately 50 per cent of couples who have experienced an unexpected delay in 
conception will conceive naturally or with minimal medical intervention (Taylor, 2004). 
For those who experience a more persistent problem1 there are a number of treatment 
options available.
2.2.3.1 Drug therapies and surgical procedures
Ovulatory dysfunction accounts for approximately 30 per cent of female factor 
diagnoses (Hamilton-Fairley & Taylor, 2004). The medical treatment of ovulatory 
problems with ovulation induction (Ol) can be achieved with drug therapies (i.e. 
clomiphene citrate, metformin, gonadotropins) or surgically using laparoscopic ovarian 
diathermy2 (LOD). Unfortunately, Ol drugs can produce a number of side effects 
including nausea, vomiting, headaches and emotional irritability (Oskowitz, 2007), and 
a less common but more serious complication of Ol drug treatments is ovarian 
hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS) which develops in 1-2 per cent of women,
1 The National Institute for Clinical Excellence (NICE, 2004) recommend that clinical investigations 
should be offered when couples have been trying to conceive, without success, for a period o f no less than 
12 months.
 Also known as d rilling  this procedure involves making punctures in the ovary to encourage ovulation 
(Hamilton-Fairly &  Taylor, 2004).
symptoms include abdominal pain and distension, shortness of breath and vomiting 
(Bayer, 2007). The success rates of drug versus surgical Ol are similar (approximately 
50 per cent live birth rate; Farquhar et al., 2007), yet drug therapy carries a much 
greater risk of multiple pregnancy (Hamilton-Fairley & Taylor, 2004). Procedures such 
as hysterosalpingogram3 (HSG) and laparoscopy4 are used in both the diagnosis and 
management of tubal infertility (Bayer & Alper, 2007).
In the case of male infertility, drug therapies are rarely used, though gonadotropin 
therapy is used in the treatment of the rare condition hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, 
which is caused by pituitary or hypothalamic defects (Hirsh, 2004). Surgical procedures 
are used in cases where there is an obstruction of the testicle as in some cases of 
obstructive azoospermia (no sperm in the semen) or in the case of vasectomy reversal 
(Hirsh, 2004). In cases where sperm is being produced and there is an obstruction 
sperm production is impaired, surgical sperm retrieval techniques such as 
percutaneous epididymal sperm aspiration (PESA) and testicular sperm extraction 
(TESE) can be performed (Bayer, 2007). The retrieved sperm can then be used in the 
process of assisted reproduction.
2.2.3.2 Assisted reproductive technologies (ART)
ART procedures include any technique in which the oocytes and/or sperm are handled 
or manipulated outside of the body (McLachlan, 1997). ART procedures are generally 
the last treatment option for those couples for whom other less invasive treatments 
have been unsuccessful. The three main types of assisted reproduction are Intrauterine 
Insemination (IUI), In Vitro Fertilization (IVF) and Intracytoplasmic Sperm Injection 
(ICSI). IUI is a minimally invasive form of assisted reproduction that is available to 
couples where the female is ovulating regularly and is often the first step in treating 
couples with unexplained infertility (Rowell & Braude, 2004), mild male factor fertility 
problems or minimal to mild endometriosis (NICE, 2004).
The most commonly performed and recognized ART procedure for treating infertility is 
IVF (Laufer, Simon, Hurwitz & Glatstein, 1997). IVF is a procedure in which fertilization 
occurs outside of the womans body. The resulting embryo is then transferred to the 
woman's uterus. The average IVF cycle lasts 4-6 weeks from start to the pregnancy 
test and comprises of five stages; ovarian hyper-stimulation, egg retrieval, fertilization,
3 An out-patient x-ray procedure that involves introducing an iodine-containing solution into the uterine 
cavity and fallopian tubes (Bayer, 2007).
4 A  day surgery procedure that requires anaesthesia (Khalaf, 2004).
embryo culture, and embryo transfer (Centre for Reproductive Medicine and Fertility, 
2002). IVF is used to treat both female and male factor infertility, and the minimum 
requirements for IVF are that the patient has a normal uterine cavity, can produce 
sufficient oocytes (although IVF is also used with oocyte donation) and that there is 
enough sperm to achieve fertilization (Laufer et al., 1997).
In cases of severe oligozoospermia5, ICSI is used at the fertilization stage of the IVF 
process, whereby a single sperm is injected directly into the oocyte (van Steirteghem, 
Liebaers & Devroey, 1997). ICSI represents 44 per cent of all IVF treatments in the 
United Kingdom (HFEA, 2006). Current figures suggest that for women under the age 
of 35 years the success rate for IVF/ICSI is 28.2 per cent. The success rate of IVF 
gradually reduces for women as they become older, with a decline to 23.6 per cent for 
women aged 35-37, 18.3 per cent for women aged 38-39 and 10.6 per cent for women 
aged 40-42 (HFEA, 2006).
2.2.4 Emotional Impact of Infertility
For most people having children is an essential part of adult life which is shaped by 
social, religious and cultural demands (Seibel, 1997). According to Menning (1980) 
infertility is for many an unanticipated life crisis that carries the potential for 
maladjustment but also positive growth. In a study of couples entering treatment, 
Freeman, Boxer, Rickels, Tureck and Mastroianni (1985) reported that 49 per cent of 
women and 15 per cent of men considered infertility to be the most upsetting 
experience of their life. Indeed, the emotional response to infertility is well documented 
(Cousineau & Domar, 2007; Greil, 1997). Dunkel-Schetter and Lobel (1991) identify 
five reactions that are dominant within the literature (1) grief and depression, (2) anger, 
(3) guilt, (4) shock and denial and (5) anxiety. In fact infertile women report comparable 
levels of depression and anxiety to women with cancer, myocardial infarction and 
Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) (Domar, 1993).
Lazarus and Folkmans (1984) transactional model of stress and coping has provided a 
theoretical framework for understanding the emotional impact of infertility (Stanton, 
1991; Stanton, Tennen, Affleck & Mendola, 1991). From this perspective stress occurs
5 Severe oligozoospermia is a defined as a sperm count <5 x 10A6/ml, normal semen parameters are 
defined as a sperm count >20 x 10A6/ml, progressive m otility >50% and normal morphology >30% 
(WHO, 1999).
when an event is appraised by the person as taxing or exceeding his or her resources 
and endangering his or her well-being (p.19). According to Lazarus and Folkman 
(1984) it is the evaluation of an event as relevant and negative that constitutes a 
stressful appraisal. Primary appraisals of stressors that may lead to the perception of 
stress can be defined as those that constitute harm/loss (i.e. damage that the person 
has already sustained), threat (i.e. anticipated harm or loss) and challenge (i.e. events 
that hold the potential for gain or growth). For individuals who consider parenthood as 
an important life goal, infertility may well constitute a stressful event. Indeed, Stanton et 
al. (1991) found that couples can appraise their infertility as both harmful and 
challenging. Women who perceived their infertility to be more threatening and less 
challenging reported higher levels of distress and this was particularly so in women 
who perceived they had less control over their fertility.
Feelings of loss of control among couples experiencing infertility have been commonly 
reported in the literature (Dunkel-Schetter & Lobel, 1991; Mahlstedt, 1985; Matthews & 
Matthews, 1986). According to Dunkel-Schetter and Lobel (1991) infertile couples 
experience two types of loss of control; the loss of control over current events (i.e. daily 
activities, sexual relationships, bodily functions); and future events (i.e. the ability to 
plan for the future, the ability to meet life goals). The evidence indicates that this loss of 
control may be particularly stressful (Benyamini, Gozlan & Kokia, 2005; Campbell, 
Dunkell-Schetter & Peplau, 1991). Campbell et al. (1991) found that the relationship 
between control in infertility and psychological adjustment was differentiated by specific 
domains of control in women undergoing IVF. Campbell et al. (1991) distinguished 
between general (i.e. work, interpersonal relationships) versus situation specific control 
(i.e. pregnancy, infertility treatment), and their findings indicated that general control 
and infertility specific control were largely unrelated, both predicting different aspects of 
psychological adjustment. While higher levels of general control were predictive of life 
satisfaction lower levels of infertility specific control predicted depression. Women felt 
less in control of becoming pregnant but more in control of their medical treatment.
For some, infertility can have a positive impact on marital relationships by increasing 
communication, bringing couples closer together and strengthening the relationship 
(Schmidt, Holstein, Christensen & Boivin, 2005). Yet, the social stigma associated with 
infertility means that infertile couples often experience feelings of social isolation in 
relation to other interpersonal relationships (Abbey, Andrews & Halman, 1991; Atwood 
& Dobkin, 1992). Whilst social relationships can be supportive for individuals 
experiencing fertility problems they can simultaneously be a source of stress (Wilson &
Kopitzke, 2002). Mindes, Ingram, Kliewer and James (2003) considered the role of 
unsupportive social interactions, and the impact these have on psychological 
adjustment among women with fertility problems. Such unsupportive responses include 
behavioural and emotional disengagement, intrusiveness, minimizing the problem and 
blaming. Results indicated that infertility-specific unsupportive interactions were 
associated with increased depressive symptoms, overall distress and low self-esteem. 
This relationship appeared to be partially mediated by avoidance coping, that is, for 
women in this sample the experience of negative social interactions activated a coping 
process that proved to have negative psychological consequences.
2.2.4.1 Coping with infertility and infertility treatments
According to Lazarus and Folkman (1984) coping efforts can be categorised into two 
main types, problem-focused and emotion-focused. Problem-focused coping consists 
of efforts aimed at solving or changing the situation. In the context of infertility it can be 
argued that this could include seeking out information and medical opinion, seeking 
treatment and acting upon the information and options available. Emotion-focused 
coping is aimed at reducing the emotional distress associated with the situation and 
includes such strategies as escape/avoidance and denial. Stanton (1991) suggests that 
both emotion-focused and problem-focused strategies might be useful in the context of 
infertility. More specifically Stanton (1991) suggested that problem-focused strategies 
may be of use in the context of diagnostic and treatment procedures whilst emotion- 
focused strategies may be helpful in attenuating the resultant emotional distress and 
lack of control in these situations. Couples do indeed use multiple coping strategies in 
their effort to cope with their infertility (Stanton, Tennen, Affleck & Mendola, 1992). 
When comparing the coping efforts of the men and women in the study Stanton et al.
(1992) found that women were more likely to use social support and avoidance, 
whereas men were more likely to use distancing, self-control and problem-solving.
Studies that have examined the effect of coping strategies in reducing distress have 
consistently shown that avoidance coping is associated with higher levels of 
psychological distress in both men and women (Berghuis & Stanton, 2002; Cook, 
Parsons, Mason & Golombok, 1989; Peterson, Newton, Rosen & Skaggs, 2006; 
Stanton et al., 1992). Conversely, seeking social support, planful problem solving and 
reappraisal have been shown to be more adaptive coping strategies (Berghuis & 
Standton, 2002; Peterson et al., 2006; Stanton et al., 1992).
In a meta-analysis of gender differences in coping, Jordan and Revenson (1999) 
reviewed eight studies that examined both men and womens coping responses to the 
stress of infertility. The results indicated that there were more similarities than 
differences between the sexes. Men and women only differed significantly on three of 
the eight coping strategies examined in the analysis. Specifically, women used the 
strategies of seeking social support, escape/avoidance and positive reappraisal more 
than men.
Taking the view that the couple should be studied as the unit of analysis within the 
context of infertility, some studies have examined the impact of dyadic coping and its 
relationship with psychological adjustment to infertility (Berghuis & Stanton, 2002; 
Levin, Sher & Theodos, 1997; Peterson, Newton & Rosen, 2003; Stanton et al., 1992). 
For example, Berghuis and Stanton (2002) found that both the individuals own coping 
efforts and their partners coping influenced distress. For women, when they or their 
partners made more use of problem-focused coping, depression levels were found to 
be lower. For men, depressive symptoms were lower when they or their partner also 
used less avoidant coping. Levin et al. (1997) demonstrated the effects of the 
concordance of coping efforts within infertile couples using the Coping Inventory for 
Stressful Situations -  Situation Specific Coping (CISS-SSC; Endler & Parker, 1994). 
Couples who were concordant in high task-oriented coping reported higher levels of 
marital satisfaction, which was lower amongst couples who were concordant in their 
low use of task-oriented coping. In relation to emotion-oriented coping the findings 
indicated that the lowest levels of marital satisfaction were reported when coping was 
discordant, specifically where men used high amounts of emotion-oriented coping and 
their partners used low amounts.
Studies that have looked specifically at coping with ART indicate that problem-focused 
coping strategies are more adaptive in this context (Demyttenaere et al., 1998; 
Edelmann, Connolly & Bartlett, 1994). Whereas seeking support is often adaptive for 
women experiencing infertility (Slade, Raval, Buck & Lieberman, 1992). A study by 
Hynes, Callan, Terry and Gallois (1992) found that in women, seeking social support 
after a failed IVF attempt was associated with increased levels of depression. The 
authors suggest that in this situation women may seek social support for emotional 
rather than instructional reasons (Hynes et al., 1992).
Therefore, variability in emotional reactions to infertility and its associated treatments 
may in part be determined not only by the adaptive value of the coping strategies used
by the individual in dealing with the problem but also by the reciprocal coping strategies 
used by their partner. There are however a number of other factors that are associated 
with the variability in emotional reactions to infertility.
2.2A.2 Variability in the emotional reactions to infertility
The distress of infertility may be different for men and women as women tend to report 
higher levels than their male partners (Daniluk, 1997; Wright et al., 1991). There are 
thought to be a number of reasons for this difference. Even though women now have 
more career options available to them compared with past generations of women, 
motherhood is still considered to be the primary goal for women (Ullrich, 2000). 
Additionally, regardless of the location of diagnosis of the aetiology of the infertility, the 
majority of invasive tests and treatments are borne by the female. Indeed, women in 
couples where the fertility problem lies with the male report similar levels of distress to 
women who are themselves infertile (Natchtigall, Becker & Wozny, 1992). One factor 
that is associated with a more negative response in men is a male factor diagnosis 
(Connolly et al., 1992; Natchigall et al., 1992; Throsby & Gill, 2004). Male infertility is 
thought to threaten the male role, as virility is an important component of masculinity 
(Connolly, Edelmann & Cook, 1987).
The depression associated with infertility has been shown to increase with age in 
women, and this is thought to be a consequence of both the biological limits on 
reproductive lifespan and age limits on alternative parenting options, such as adoption 
(Berg & Wilson, 1991). However, others have noted a reduction in depressive 
symptoms among women as the number of treatments and duration of infertility 
increases (Demyttenaere et al., 1998). Infertility is not a discrete event but an unfolding 
process (Dunkel-Schetter & Lobel, 1991), and as such, psychological functioning 
across stages of diagnosis and treatment fluctuates. An acute stress reaction to the 
initial diagnosis and treatment phase shifts into a more chronic stress reaction to 
ongoing treatment and uncertainty (Berg & Wilson 1991). This chronic stage, which 
Berg and Wilson (1991) suggest is more pervasive around the third year following 
diagnosis and beyond, is related to the stage in the treatment process at which ART 
are often attempted. Studies that report the emotional impact of infertility most often 
draw their samples from fertility clinics, and these patients are often at various stages 
of their infertility course. This may therefore significantly impact on the emotional 
reactions reported. It is prudent therefore to consider the emotional impact of infertility 
treatment at different stages within the treatment cycle.
2.2.5 Emotional Reactions Before, During and After Assisted 
Reproduction
To quantify accurately the stress involved in ART is difficult (Hammarberg, Astbury & 
Baker, 2001), primarily because couples who arrive at this juncture will undoubtedly 
have been experiencing fertility problems for a number of years. The following section 
will consider the emotional reactions at different stages of the treatment process. The 
majority of research has been conducted with IVF patients.
2.2.5.1 Before
The possibility of failure of the IVF process is often given little consideration by those 
undergoing IVF for the first time. Couples are often overly optimistic and have 
unrealistic expectations of the treatment being successful (Collins, Freeman, Boxer & 
Tureck, 1992; Slade, Emery & Lieberman, 1997; Visser, Haan, Zalmstra & Wouters, 
1994). Although couples entering IVF treatment are in general well adjusted (Edelmann 
et al., 1994; Holter, Anderheim, Bergh & Moller, 2006; Verhaak et al., 2001) some 
studies show that women have higher levels of depression (Merari, Chetrit & Modan, 
2002) and anxiety (Slade et al., 1997; Theiring, Beaurepaire, Jones, Saunders & 
Tennant, 1993; Visser et al., 1994) prior to starting treatment than population norms. 
Women also tend to report higher levels of depression and anxiety than their male 
partners when embarking on the IVF process (Holter et al., 2006; Leiblum, Kemmann & 
Lane, 1987; Slade et al., 1997) and also anticipate that the treatment process will be 
more stressful (Collins et al., 1992).
In a longitudinal study of 144 couples embarking on their first cycle of IVF treatment 
Slade et al. (1997) found that women scored higher than their male partners on a 
measure of state and trait anxiety and that womens scores were higher than 
population norms, whereas men scored below population norms. This gender 
difference in the reporting of anxiety is not surprising considering that it is the female 
partner who is the primary focus of this invasive treatment process. Similarly, 
depression scores were also significantly higher for the female partners, but were not 
significantly different to population norms (Slade et al., 1997). This finding is consistent 
with other studies that have found relatively normal levels of depression in women 
embarking on an IVF programme for the first time (Edelmann et al., 1994; Verhaak et 
al., 2001; Visser et al., 1994). However, women undergoing repeat cycles are at 
greater risk of developing clinically relevant levels of depression (Beaurepaire, Jones, 
Thiering, Saunders & Tennant, 1994: Thiering et al., 1993). According to Thiering et al.
(1993) elevated depression levels in repeat cycle patients may reflect a more stable 
response to their ongoing failure to conceive. Depression is associated with loss, and 
for repeat cycle patients the loss of possible success and parenthood is more pertinent 
than it is for first time patients who have high expectations of the treatment being 
successful (Beaurepaire et al., 1994).
2.2.5.2 During
Responses to different stages of the IVF process have been examined both 
retrospectively (Baram, Tourtelot, Muechler & Huang, 1988; Hammarberg et al., 2001; 
Leiblum et al., 1987) and prospectively (Boivin & Takefman, 1995; Merari, Feldberg, 
Elizur, Goldman & Modan, 1992; Reading, Chang & Kerin, 1989). A prospective 
longitudinal study by Boivin and Takefman (1995) examined fluctuations in stress 
levels over a complete IVF cycle using a daily stress measure. The study found that 
women reported higher levels of stress at the stimulation, oocyte retrieval and embryo 
transfer stages of the process, with lower levels of stress at the luteal phase (waiting 
period before pregnancy test). These results are consistent with the findings of an 
earlier prospective study by Merari et al. (1992). Yet, when Boivin and Takefman
(1995) asked women to retrospectively recall how they felt at the luteal phase, they 
remembered this period to be the most stressful irrespective of treatment outcome. 
According to Boivin and Takefman (1995) the discrepancy between retrospective and 
momentary assessment may be due to women downplaying their negative reactions at 
the time as a means of coping. Retrospectively women are more able to freely express 
how they were feeling. Consistent with this explanation, Hammarberg et al. (2001) 
found that when women were asked to identify the stress associated with IVF up to 
three years after treatment, the participants rated oocyte retrieval and the luteal phase 
as the most stressful.
Few studies have examined how the male partner reacts to the IVF process. However 
one study found that while women experienced more overall distress and fatigue 
throughout the cycle, the reaction pattern relating to treatment stage was similar for 
men and women (Boivin et al., 1998). Increases in levels of distress at oocyte retrieval, 
fertilization, embryo transfer and pregnancy test day were evident, and more marked 
increases in distress were associated with the oocyte retrieval and embryo transfer 
stages in both men and women. In a retrospective study of couples after unsuccessful 
treatment, women reported higher stress levels at every stage of the IVF process 
compared to men, but both men and women ranked the luteal phase and discovering
that the IVF treatment had been unsuccessful as the most stressful aspects of the 
process (Baram et al., 1988).
2.2.5.3 After
The single most important determinant in emotional response following IVF is whether 
pregnancy has been achieved (Holter et al., 2006). In a systematic review of the 
literature on the psychological impact of IVF, Verhaak, Smeenk, Evers et al. (2007) 
found that when IVF treatment results in pregnancy the negative emotions invoked by 
the treatment process immediately disappear. For those who do not achieve a 
pregnancy, treatment failure is highly distressing in the short-term (Slade et al., 1997; 
Verhaak, Smeenk, van Minnen, Kremer & Kraaimaat, 2005) yet there are few 
indications of a protracted negative reaction, and couples tend to adjust well in the 
long-term (Freeman et al., 1987; Verhaak, Smeenk, Evers et al., 2007; Weaver, 
Clifford, Hay & Robinson, 1997). The most commonly reported reactions to 
unsuccessful treatment are frustration, sadness, anger and depression (Baram et al., 
1988; Holt et al., 2006; Leiblum et al., 1987). Whilst life satisfaction is often lower in 
women who do not conceive as a result of IVF (Hammaberg et al., 2001; Weaver et al.,
1997), treatment failure does not appear to have a negative impact on marital 
relationships (Freeman et al., 1987; Hammarberg et al., 2001: Leiblum et al. 1987) and 
has in some studies been shown to have a positive effect, strengthening relationships 
and improving communication (Baram et al., 1988; Holter et al., 2006: Leiblum et al.,
1987).
In order to determine the long-term impact of unsuccessful treatment, Verhaak, 
Smeenk, Nahuis et al. (2007) conducted a prospective study of 298 women entering 
their first IVF (or ICSI) treatment cycle. Participants were followed over a five year 
period. The results indicated that women who did not achieve a pregnancy had higher 
levels of anxiety and depression just after treatment than they did pre-treatment, but by 
the three and five year follow-up period depression and anxiety had returned to pre
treatment levels. Depression and anxiety levels were higher in women at follow-up who 
were still pursuing the desire for a biological child compared to women who had chosen 
to pursue adoption or had chosen to pursue other life goals (e.g. career). One study 
that has examined the longer-term consequences of unsuccessful treatment in couples 
who had made the decision to cease treatment found that poorer adjustment to 
infertility was associated with a lack of social support, less marital and sexual 
satisfaction and low self esteem. Gender, age, or the location of the diagnosis, were
not associated with adjustment (Daniluk & Tench, 2007). Couples who adopted (50% 
of the sample) demonstrated better adjustment overall.
2.2.6 The Impact of Psychological Stress on the Outcome of Assisted 
Reproduction
Accumulating evidence suggests that there is a reciprocal relationship between stress 
and infertility (see section 2.2.2.1), particularly that stress may influence the outcome of 
infertility treatment. A number of studies investigating the relationship between 
psychological factors and ART treatment report an association between negative 
psychological symptoms in female patients and treatment success rates. In particular, 
higher levels of depression (e.g. Thiering et al., 1993), state anxiety (e.g. Demyttenaere 
et al., 1988; Sanders & Bruce, 1997; Smeenk et al., 2001) and infertility specific stress 
(Boivin & Schmidt, 2005) have been shown to be associated with lower pregnancy 
rates.
In a multi-centre study, Smeenk et al. (2001) found that higher baseline levels of 
depression and state anxiety (measured in the period just before down-regulation6) 
predicted lower pregnancy rates in female IVF (and ICSI) patients, but did not predict 
the response to stimulation or fertilization. Similarly, Klonoff-Cohen, Chu, Natarajan 
and Sieber (2001) found that women who reported experiencing higher levels of stress 
at baseline (first clinic visit) had lower pregnancy rates and live births, however in this 
study baseline stress was also associated with a decrease in the number of oocytes 
retrieved and embryos transferred. Procedural stress (assessed by immediate ratings 
of affect prior to oocyte retrieval) was associated with success of oocyte retrieval, 
fertilization and embryo transfer but not treatment outcome. Boivin and Schmit (2005) 
looked specifically at the effects of infertility related stress on treatment outcome in 
both men and women. They found that higher levels of infertility stress in both partners 
was associated with poorer outcome after controlling for age and duration of infertility. 
More specifically, infertility related personal and marital stress showed stronger effects, 
and the number of cycles needed to become pregnant was associated with marital 
stress in women. Additionally, biological indicators of stress such as cardiovascular 
reactivity (Facchinetti, Matteo, Artini, Volpe & Genazzani, 1997), cortisol 
(Demyttenaere et al. 1992) and immunological changes (Gallinelli et al., 2001) show an 
association with treatment outcome.
6 Down-regulation o f the pituitary using Gonadotropin Releasing Hormone (GnRH) agonist is the first 
stage o f treatment required to prevent a Luteal Hormone (LH ) surge prior to ovulation induction (Alper, 
2007).
In contrast, some studies have found no influence of psychological factors on treatment 
outcome (Anderheim, Holter, Bergh & Moller, 2005; Merari et al., 2002; Merari et al., 
1992; Slade et al., 1997). According to Merari et al. (2002) these differences in 
reported findings may be due to variations in the timing of assessment, or the use of 
different self-report measures and demographic differences in study participants (e.g. 
location of diagnosis, duration of fertility). In fact, the participants recruited by Slade et 
al. (1997) and Anderheim et al. (2005) were new referral patients, and as discussed in 
section 2.2.5.1 those who are experiencing treatment for the first time tend to be overly 
optimistic about their chance of success and do not exhibit the same emotional 
responses as repeat cycle patients.
The emotional stress associated with the IVF process has been shown to be one of the 
most influential factors in a couples decision to discontinue treatment (Olivius, Friden, 
Borg & Bergh, 2004; Smeenk, Verhaak, Stolwijk, Kremer & Braat, 2004). Accordingly, 
there is a general consensus that patients undergoing ART treatment should receive 
counselling and support in order to reduce the stress levels prior to and during the 
treatment process (Domar, 2004; Slade et al., 1997). Indeed, psychosocial 
interventions have been shown to be effective in reducing negative affect in both men 
and women experiencing infertility (Boivin, 2003; Wischman, 2008).
2.2.7. Psychosocial Interventions
A number of different approaches have been used in the delivery of psychosocial 
interventions for infertile couples including cognitive behavioural treatment (CBT; e.g. 
Facchinetti, Tarabusi & Volpe, 2004), counselling (e.g. Connolly et al., 1993), stress 
management and coping training (e.g. McQueeny, Stanton & Sigmon, 1997) and group 
based interventions (e.g. McNaughton-Cassill et al., 2002). In a review of 25 studies, 
Boivin (2003) concluded that there was moderate support for beneficial effects of 
psychosocial interventions on the well-being of infertile people (p.2333). Overall, the 
majority of interventions showed some positive effects on at least one outcome 
measure. Positive effects on measures of anxiety (61.5% of studies) were more 
frequently reported than on measures of depression (38.4% of studies). Positive 
intervention effects were reported in all studies using infertility specific stress measures 
(e.g. McQueeny et al., 1997) but interventions generally failed to have an impact on 
interpersonal measures (i.e. marital and sexual satisfaction).
In a study by Domar et al. (2000) the effectiveness of a CBT based group intervention 
and a support group intervention were examined against a control group in women who
had been trying to conceive for between one and two years. Results indicated that both 
the treatment groups received positive benefits compared to controls at six and 12 
month follow-up, with the CBT group reporting significant improvements over the 
support group. However, this study reported high attrition rates with control group 
participants citing distress as the main reason for discontinuation with the study. 
Attrition rates were also high in the intervention groups. Participants cited a number of 
reasons for drop-out, which included dissatisfaction with group assignment, a wish to 
seek other psychological treatment and an unwillingness to participate in a group 
based intervention (Domar et al., 2000). The majority of education-focused 
interventions included in the review by Boivin (2003) were group-based (70%), yet 
infertility patients are often reluctant to participate in support groups (Schmidt et al.,
2003). Indeed, a study by McNaughton-Cassill et al. (2002) similarly found that 
participants were often unwilling to participate in scheduled group sessions due to time 
constraints, travel problems and work commitments. Therefore, McNaughton-Cassill et 
al. suggest that alternative approaches to the delivery of psychosocial interventions 
should be considered for infertile individuals who experience these constraints.
A few studies also report a positive effect of intervention on pregnancy rates. Boivin
(2003) identified three studies (Domar et al., 2000; Sarrel & de Cherney, 1985; 
Tuschen-Caffier, Florin, Krause & Pook, 1999) that had shown an effect on pregnancy 
rates, out of eight studies that had used pregnancy as an outcome. Boivin (2003) 
reports an average cumulative pregnancy rate of 48.3 per cent in studies that found 
positive effects on other outcome measures compared to 24.7 per cent in studies that 
reported no effect. In a more recent randomized controlled trial Hosaka, Matsubayashi, 
Sugiyama, Izumi and Makino (2002) implemented a five session group intervention 
(including relaxation training, psychological support and guided imagery) in female 
infertility patients. Compared to a non-treatment group of controls, women in the 
intervention group reported a significant reduction in distress. A significant reduction in 
natural killer7 cell activity was also found in the intervention group in addition to an 
increased pregnancy rate, indicating a potential immunological pathway through which 
psychosocial interventions can impact upon biological outcomes. Further research is 
needed to determine why some interventions might be effective in improving pregnancy 
rates.
7 Natural k ille r cells are non-specific lymphocytes that provide immunological defence against cells 
which are infected or cancerous (Herbert &  Cohen, 1993).
2.2.8 Conclusion
In consideration of the stressful nature of infertility and its associated treatments, the 
HFEA (2004) specifies that all patients seeking IVF/ICSI or donor insemination should 
be offered psychosocial counselling. Yet, patients often do not perceive the need for 
counselling (Cousineau & Domar, 2007). In a survey of fertility clinics across the UK, 
71 per cent of patients said they would use counselling services if they were free of 
charge, however, the level of uptake is low with studies reporting as little as eight to 12 
per cent of patients actually seeking counselling (Boivin, Scanlan & Walker, 1999; Kerr, 
Brown & Balen, 1999). This discrepancy is thought to be caused by numerous factors 
including time constraints, fear of being labelled as having a psychological problem, 
and fear of stigmatization (Boivin et al., 1999; Wischmann, 2008).
The literature on the psychological impact of infertility and infertility treatment clearly 
indicates a need for intervention in this population of individuals (Cousineau & Domar, 
2007). Yet, the literature would also suggest hesitancy in couples to engage with 
psychological interventions that could help to alleviate their distress. One possible 
approach that has been suggested as an alternative for individuals experiencing 
infertility is a brief writing intervention (McNaughton-Cassill et al., 2002). Research 
examining coping with stressful events has shown that writing about stressful 
experiences can be beneficial for both psychological (Greenberg, Wortman & Stone, 
1996; Paez, Velasco & Gonzalez, 1999) and physical well-being (Greenberg & Stone, 
1992; Pennebaker & Beall, 1986), and that such interventions are considered largely 
free from the stigma associated with traditional psychosocial therapies (Sexton & 
Pennebaker, 2004).
2.3 The Writing Cure: Disclosure Writing
2.3.1 Emotional Expression
Kennedy-Moore and Watson (2001) define emotional expression as observable verbal 
and non-verbal behaviours that communicate or symbolise emotional experience 
(p.187). Emotional expression can take a number of forms, for example, laughing can 
demonstrate an expression of happiness, whilst crying can demonstrate an expression 
of sadness. One particular form of emotional expression is that of emotional self
disclosure. Verbal self-disclosure is at the heart of psychotherapy and within this 
context the expression of private thoughts and feelings can be beneficial (Stiles, 1995). 
The expression of emotion can be a means of alleviating distress (Stanton, Danoff- 
Burg, Cameron & Ellis, 1994). It would appear that the benefits of self-disclosure are
not limited to verbal expression as research has shown that there are psychological 
and physical health benefits to be gained through written self-disclosure (see Smyth 
1998).
2.3.2 Written Emotional Disclosure
The laboratory based technique developed by Pennebaker and Beall (1986) involves 
healthy participants being assigned randomly to one of two or more conditions and 
being asked to write about either traumatic or stressful experiences (experimental 
group) or superficial topics (control group). Participants are typically instructed to write 
about their assigned topic for 3-5 consecutive days, for 15-20 minutes each day 
(Pennebaker & Seagal, 1999). Pennebaker and Beall (1986) utilised a trauma-emotion 
group, who were asked to write only about their feelings relating to an upsetting 
experience; a trauma-facts group, who wrote about only the facts of a personal 
experience, devoid of any emotionality; a trauma-combination group, who wrote about 
the factual aspects of a personal experience along with their feelings about the 
experience and a control group who wrote about different trivial topics on the four 
occasions (e.g. describe your living room). All participants wrote for a period of 20 
minutes on four consecutive days in the privacy of a laboratory cubicle. Participants in 
the trauma conditions disclosed a wide range of personal topics such as the death of a 
close family member or friend, the breakdown of relationships, health problems, sexual 
and physical abuse and leaving home to attend college. The personal nature of some 
of these topics indicated that individuals were able and willing to disclose details about 
intensely personal experiences through this medium. Furthermore the majority of 
participants chose to write about topics that they had not previously discussed with 
other people (Pennebaker & Beall, 1986). Pennebaker and Beall (1986) demonstrated 
that writing about the emotions surrounding personally relevant topics was associated 
in the short-term with an increase in blood pressure and negative mood, yet in the long
term participants reported a reduction in physical health problems.(i.e. colds or flu, 
headaches).
2.3.3 Short-term Effects
2.3.3.1 Subjective distress
In the short-term, writing about emotionally salient events can and often does result in 
transitory distress (Pennebaker & Seagal, 1999). The traditional writing instructions that 
typically ask participants to focus on their deepest thoughts and feelings about a 
stressful or traumatic event will inherently evoke negative emotions. For an event to be
appraised as stressful or traumatic it will pose some form of challenge, threat or harm 
to the individual and their goals (Lazarus & Folkman, 1984). Topics that individuals 
disclose in their writing, though considerably varied, are often powerful recounts of 
events such as bereavement, divorce, or physical and sexual abuse. Immediately after 
disclosure participants report feeling more nervous and guilty (Francis & Pennebaker, 
1992), more sad and depressed (Batten, Follette, Hall, & Palm, 2002), have reported 
significantly higher levels of anxiety (Kloss & Lisman, 2002) and experience more 
physical symptoms such as a racing heart, stomach-ache, and headache (Greenberg & 
Stone, 1992; Paez et al., 1999; Pennebaker, Kiecolt-Glaser & Glaser, 1988) than 
controls who write about non-emotional topics. The initial distress that participants 
experience after their disclosure does not appear to have a negative impact on their 
overall subjective experience of participation in the studies. Participants typically report 
that they find the whole experience to be valuable and meaningful (Pennebaker et al.,
1988), and the majority agree that they would participate in the study again 
(Pennebaker, 1989).
In a meta-analysis of 13 disclosure studies Smyth (1998) concluded that there was no 
relationship between the level of post-writing distress and subsequent changes in 
health outcomes. There does however appear to be an association between the level 
of physiological reactivity in response to writing and longer-term outcomes in disclosure 
participants (Epstein, Sloan & Marx; 2005; Sloan & Marx, 2004b; Sloan, Marx & 
Epstein, 2005).
2.3.3.2 Physiological arousal
Physiological arousal is regulated by the autonomic nervous system (ANS), which is 
subdivided into two anatomically separate structures. These are called the sympathetic 
nervous system (SNS), which has excitatory effects and controls functions associated 
with arousal (e.g. increased pulse and heart rate), and the parasympathetic nervous 
system (PNS), which has inhibitory effects and controls functions associated with 
states of relaxation, with an associated reduction in heart rate (Carlson, 2007). When 
faced with physical or psychological stress the SNS becomes dominant and increases 
in cardiovascular reactivity occur in response to the threat or challenge encountered 
(Applehans & Luecken, 2006). It follows therefore that changes in arousal initiated by 
emotional disclosure will be associated with cardiovascular reactivity. Increases in 
diastolic blood pressure (DBP), systolic blood pressure (SBP) and heart rate have been 
shown to be associated with such disclosure. Participants who talked into a voice 
recorder for six minutes about traumatic and upsetting experiences demonstrated such
reactivity (Pennebaker, Hughes & OHeeron, 1987). In the period after talking there 
was a significant drop in SBP levels to below that at baseline for those rated as high 
discloser's (based on judges rating of how personal and stressful the disclosed trauma 
had been).
Whilst writing and talking about traumatic events may differ in that one modality 
requires the vocalisation of expression and the other does not, the pattern of 
cardiovascular reactivity to written emotional disclosure appears to reflect that 
produced by talking. Pennebaker and Beall (1986) found that participants in the 
disclosure group evidenced a significant short-term increase in SBP after the first 
writing session with a moderate decrease in SBP after writing in subsequent sessions. 
Similarly, Epstein et al. (2005) found a significant increase in heart rate at first writing 
session for participants in the disclosure group when compared to controls. There were 
no group differences in cardiovascular reactivity at subsequent sessions. Interestingly, 
greater heart rate reactivity was found to be associated with reductions in depressive 
symptoms and physical health complaints at one month follow-up (Epstein et al., 2005).
As a measure of emotional reactivity to the writing task, Sloan and Marx (2004b) used 
salivary cortisol8 before and after writing sessions. Results indicated a significant initial 
increase in salivary cortisol at the first writing session for disclosure participants 
compared to controls, however, disclosure and control participants did not differ in 
physiological reactivity at subsequent sessions. Sloan and Marx (2004b) point out that 
salivary cortisol is sensitive to novelty and as such the findings of the study could be 
indicative of a physiological response to the novelty of the writing task at the first writing 
session. The fact that other studies have shown a consistent pattern of findings across 
writing session in the disclosure participants using other physiological indicators of 
emotional reactivity such as cardiovascular activity (Epstein et al., 2005; Pennebaker & 
Beall, 1986) would suggest that the changes in salivary cortisol found by Sloan and 
Marx (2004b) are more likely to be a mechanism of emotional disclosure rather than a 
response to the novelty of the writing task. Furthermore, initial increases in salivary 
cortisol at the first writing session have been shown to be associated with longer-term 
improvements in post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) symptom severity (Sloan et al., 
2005; Sloan & Marx, 2004b) and depressive symptom severity (Sloan & Marx, 2004b).
8 Salivary cortisol is free cortisol that enters the saliva glands by passive diffusion, the sampling o f 
salivary cortisol via salivettes (cotton swabs) in the mouth is a non-invasive and stress free technique o f 
measuring cortisol frequently used in behavioural research (Levine, Zagoory-Sharon, Feldman, Lewis &  
Weller, 2007).
These correlational findings point to a potential pathway between disclosure and the 
ionger-term physical and psychological health benefits that have been reported.
2.3.4 Longer-term Effects
In the longer-term (see Chapter 3 section 3.4.4 for a discussion on variation in length of 
outcome assessment) the written emotional disclosure task has been shown to have 
salutary effects. Studies have examined the effects of emotional disclosure on a 
number of health parameters including psychological well-being (e.g. Epstein et al., 
2005), physical health (e.g. Pennebaker & Beall, 1986) and immune functioning (e.g. 
Pennebaker et al., 1988), as well as behavioural markers (e.g. Cameron & Nicholls, 
1998).
2.3.4.1 Psychological well-being
Psychological effects have not been consistently reported as a result of disclosure. 
Whilst a number of studies have reported positive psychological changes, including 
improved mood (Paez et al., 1999; Pennebaker et al., 1988), a reduction in symptoms 
of depression and/or anxiety (Epstein et al., 2005; Hemenover, 2003; Schoutrop, 
Lange, Hanewald, Davidovich & Salomon, 2002), a reduction in trauma-related 
avoidance and intrusion (Klein & Boals, 2001a; Lutgendorf & Antoni, 1999; Schoutrop 
et al., 2002) and PTSD symptom severity (Sloan et al., 2005), others have found 
disclosure writing to have no effect on psychological well-being (Greenberg & Stone, 
1992; Kloss & Lisman, 2002) and some studies have suggested that disclosure writing 
could have detrimental psychological effects (Greenberg et al.,1996). It is possible that 
these diverse findings could be due to the methodological variations used across 
studies. Note that variations in methodology are reviewed in detail in Chapter 3 of this 
thesis, but as an example, Kloss and Lisman (2002) did not find any changes in anxiety 
levels as a function of disclosure writing, which could be due to their use of the trait 
anxiety subscale of the State-Trait Anxiety Scale (Spielberger, 1983). This measure 
asks respondents to rate how they generally feel, and asking about general anxiety 
differs to the more common approach in the disclosure literature whereby evidence for 
reductions in anxiety symptoms have normally been demonstrated using state 
measures that assess the respondents experiences of anxiety related symptoms 
specifically over the preceding week. For example, Hemenover (2003) found a 
significant reduction in anxiety related symptoms in the disclosure group at three month 
follow-up compared to controls as assessed by the Symptom Checklist-90-Revised 
(SCL-90-R; Derogatis, 1977). Schoutrop et al. (2002) reported similar reductions in 
symptoms using the Dutch version of the SCL-90-R, and Epstein et al. (2005) found
disclosure writing to be equally effective on anxiety symptoms as measured by the 
Depression and Anxiety Stress Scale-21-Item (DASS2 1 ; Lovibond & Lovibond, 1995). It 
can be seen therefore, that disentangling methodological differences and findings in 
relation to the impact of the writing task on psychological well-being is difficult.
Greenberg et al. (1996) reported detrimental effects of writing about a traumatic event, 
with participants reporting an increase in avoidance of thoughts relating to the trauma 
they had disclosed and an increase in fatigued mood as measured by the Naval Health 
Research Centre Mood Scale (Vickers & Kusulas, 1989). However, this study utilised a 
single 30 minute writing session as opposed to the three or four writing sessions that 
are commonly employed in disclosure studies (see section 3.4.1 for a more detailed 
discussion). Consequently, this single intervention writing task may have exposed 
participants to the emotions surrounding the events they wrote about, without providing 
adequate opportunity for participants to work through their related thoughts and 
feelings. Consistent with a model of stress response syndromes (see section 2.3.6.2 
this chapter for a discussion of the exposure hypothesis of disclosure) an increase in 
trauma related avoidance would be indicative of attempts to protect the individual from 
being overwhelmed by the emotions and thoughts relating to the event (Foa & Kozak, 
1986; Horowitz, 1986). Despite inconsistencies in the literature, two meta-analyses of 
written disclosure studies (Frattaroli, 2006; Smyth, 1998) concluded that in general 
writing about traumatic or stressful events is associated with a reduction in distress 
(see section 2.3.4.4).
2.3.4.2 Physical well-being: subjective and objective measures
The physical effects of disclosure writing have been evaluated through a variety of 
subjective and objective measures. Studies have used a number of self-report 
measures to assess the effects of written disclosure on physical health including 
symptom specific measures (e.g. Pennebaker Inventory of Limbic Languidness; PILL, 
Pennebaker, 1982) and self-reported number of days off university due to illness, as 
well as more objective measure such as health care utilisation (HCU), and immune 
functioning.
2.3.4.2.1 Self-reported symptoms and health care utilisation
Studies have reported beneficial health effects of writing for disclosure group 
participants compared to controls based on significant differences at follow-up 
assessments in self-reported physical symptoms (Epstein et al., 2005; Greenberg et 
al., 1996; Pennebaker & Beall, 1986; Sheeses, Brown & Graziano, 2004; Sloan &
Marx, 2004b; Sloan et al., 2005), self-reported sick days (Pennebaker & Beall, 1986; 
Sloan & Marx, 2004b; Sloan et al., 2005; Sheese et al., 2004) and recorded HCU 
(Greenberg et al., 1996; Pennebaker & Beall, 1986; Pennebaker & Francis, 1996; 
Pennebaker, Colder & Sharp, 1990; Pennebaker et al., 1988). For instance, Sloan and 
Marx (2004a) report a study with university students who completed the PILL 
(Pennebaker, 1982) and self-reported the number of days they had been sick since the 
beginning of the semester at baseline, and then again four weeks after the writing 
intervention. Relative to control group participants, those in the disclosure group 
evidenced a significant reduction in physical symptoms and sickness days.
The highly significant effects of writing on self-reported health in a study by Greenberg 
et al. (1996) appeared to be due to increasing upper respiratory symptoms in the 
control group and decreasing upper respiratory symptoms in the disclosure group over 
a four week period. Greenberg et al. (1996) also reported a significant reduction in 
HCU at follow-up for disclosure participants compared to controls. The results indicated 
that whilst the proportion of visits to the health centres in the disclosure groups9 had 
decreased (real-trauma group 12 to 9%; imaginary-trauma group 15 to 12%) there had 
been a sharp increase in the proportion of visits made by control group participants 
from 13 to 26 per cent. Although these findings could be interpreted to suggest that it is 
the control manipulation that has detrimental effects as opposed to disclosing emotions 
as being beneficial, examination of health centre data for the whole university 
suggested an overall increase in HCU for the period of the study. This is similar to 
other studies that have found increases in HCU in control group participants which 
often reflect normal season changes in illness rates (Pennebaker & Beall, 1986; 
Pennebaker et al., 1990; Pennebaker et al., 1988) and suggests that disclosure writing 
could attenuate this effect.
Self-report and HCU measures of physical illness do not always show consistent 
change when used together. Greenberg and Stone (1992) found no differences 
between groups on HCU but they did find a reduction in self-reported illness symptoms 
at follow-up for disclosure group participants who had rated the trauma they disclosed 
as severe. A possible explanation for the failure to find any effects on HCU compared 
to self-report symptoms is that the more frequently experienced illnesses (i.e. common 
cold) and symptoms (i.e. headache) do not often require the attention of a doctor and 
so go unreported (see section 3.5.1 for a detailed discussion of the problems
9 Greenberg et al. (1996) included an imaginary trauma group to examine the inhibition theory o f 
disclosure.
associated with self-report measures of physical health and more objective measure of 
HCU). Findings using self-report physical health measures have not been consistently 
encouraging however, with a few studies having failed to produce health benefits via 
the disclosure writing task (Kloss & Lisman, 2002; Mario & Wagner, 1999; Murray, 
Lamnin & Carver, 1989), and in one instance participants in the disclosure group 
actually reported significantly more physical symptoms and days taken off sick at a 
three week follow-up compared to controls, though at later periods of follow-up (seven 
weeks and 30 weeks) the groups did not differ on physical well-being measures 
(Sheffield, Duncan, Thomson & Johal, 2002).
Stronger evidence for a link between the disclosure writing and physical health 
improvements come from studies that have examined longer-term changes in immune 
functioning.
2.3.4.2.2 Immune functioning
Interactions between psychosocial and immunological factors are thought to be 
mediated primarily by the HPA and sympathetic adrenal medullary (SAM) axes, which 
are both responsive to stress, and it is through these pathways that psychosocial 
interventions are thought to modulate the chronic effects of stress and normalize 
endocrine and immune function (Lutgendorf & Costanzo, 2003). Pennebaker et al. 
(1988) were the first to demonstrate the effects of written emotional disclosure on 
immune functioning. Changes in the proliferation of T-lymphocytes (white blood cells) 
to stimulation by two types of mitogen10, phytohemagglutinin (PHA) and concanavalin 
(ConA), were assessed at baseline, on the fourth day of writing (final day of four, 30 
minute writing sessions) and at six week follow-up. A significantly higher response to 
PHA stimulation (indicative of an enhanced immunological response) at follow-up was 
found in disclosure participants compared to controls who wrote descriptively about 
their day, the ConA data was only available from the baseline and post writing 
assessments, the direction of change between groups paralleled that of the PHA data 
but failed to reach statistical significance. Subsequently, a number of studies have 
provided further evidence of positive immunological effects via disclosure. Esterling, 
Antoni, Fletcher, Margulies and Schneiderman (1994) found that individuals who either 
wrote or spoke (into a tape recorder) about a stressful event showed significantly 
decreased Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) antibody titres compared to controls; an indication 
of better immune control over the latent virus. Natural killer cell activity was found to be
10 A  mitogen is an agent that stimulates lymphocyte proliferation, o f which phytohemagglutinin (PHA) 
and concanavalin (ConA) are types.
higher in verbal disclosure participants compared to controls; an effect that was 
moderated by level of hostility. Disclosure participants high in hostility evidenced 
greater natural killer cell activity than disclosure and control participants low in hostility 
(Esterling et al., 1994). However, Booth and Petrie (2002) point out that the 
measurement of lymphocytes as an immunological variable from blood samples (the 
method of measurement in the aforementioned studies) does not necessarily indicate 
changes in the immune system as a whole. The limitation of this method of 
measurement is that the concentration of lymphocyte components in the blood is only 
approximately 10 per cent of the total body content and not necessarily representative 
of activity in the lymphatic organs (Booth & Petrie, 2002).
Several studies have now demonstrated that the effects of disclosure on immunological 
markers appear related to health consequences. For example, Petrie, Booth, 
Pennebaker, Davison and Thomas (1995) examined the influence of a written 
disclosure intervention on the immune response to a hepatitis B (a serious viral 
infection) vaccination programme. Consistent with the findings of previous disclosure 
studies positive immunological changes were seen in the disclosure group. Compared 
to controls, disclosure participants developed a significantly higher level of antibodies 
against the hepatitis B virus, suggesting that emotional disclosure may influence an 
individuals immunity to infection (Petrie et al., 1995). More recently written disclosure 
has also been shown to be associated with faster wound healing 14 and 21 days after 
a punch biopsy (Weinman, Ebrecht, Scott, Walburn & Dyson, 2008). Extending these 
findings beyond healthy student populations, Petrie, Fontanilla, Thomas, Booth and 
Pennebaker (2004) demonstrated that disclosure writing can produce important 
immunological changes in HIV patients, by increasing CD4+ lymphocyte counts 
(declines in CD4+ lymphocytes are associated with progression to acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome: AIDS). The findings that emotional disclosure interventions can 
impact upon immune parameters have been consistently positive. Taken together 
these findings indicate that the reported health benefits of disclosure may be to some 
extent mediated by the effects on immune function.
2.3.4.3 General functioning
In addition to the health implications already detailed, positive effects related to 
disclosure writing have been shown in other domains of functioning. For example, 
studies that have utilised a disclosure writing task with new entry college students have 
found that writing about the transition to college not only reduces subsequent visits to 
physicians compared to controls (Cameron & Nicholls, 1998) but has also been
associated with either an improvement in academic performance as assessed by 
average semester grades referred to as grade point average (GPA; Cameron & 
Nicholls, 1998; Lumley & Provenzano, 2003) or a trend towards maintaining GPA in 
disclosure groups relative to controls (Pennebaker et al.,1990; Pennebaker & Francis, 
1996). How disclosure writing might improve academic performance is unclear. One 
possible explanation is that as a consequence of writing about the stressors of moving 
to college, students ruminate (go over in the mind) less about these stressors and are 
subsequently better able to focus on their academic studies (Pennebaker & Francis, 
1996). This explanation is plausible given the more recent finding that working memory 
capacity in first year university students was improved following an emotional 
disclosure task; an improvement that was associated with academic performance and 
mediated by a decrease in intrusive and avoidant thinking (Klein & Boals, 2001a).
In attempts to extend the generalisability of findings beyond students the disclosure 
paradigm has also been evaluated with career professionals. For example, Alford, 
Malouff and Osland (2005) found a reduction in distress and increase in job satisfaction 
in a sample of child protection services officers who were asked to write about their 
recent stresses, emotions, and related thoughts and plans (p.181) compared with a 
control group. Although the results of this study are promising, the period between pre
test and post-test assessment was only two weeks. While this could be indicative of the 
potency of disclosure writing, it is not possible to establish if the intervention effects 
were maintained beyond the immediate outcome of the intervention period. 
Additionally, in a study by Spera, Buhrfeind and Pennebaker (1994), a group of job- 
seeking unemployed engineers who wrote about the thoughts and emotions 
surrounding their job loss, were found to be more likely to gain full-time employment 
than control group job seekers (both writing controls and non-writing controls). 
Unexpectedly, the writing task was not associated with any physiological or self- 
reported health changes and the increased re-employment rate in disclosure group 
participants did not appear to be mediated by either motivational factors, anxiety levels 
or in quantitative efforts to get a job (i.e. increased phone calls, job applications, 
making more contacts). Therefore, Spera et al. (1994) could only speculate that having 
the opportunity to address their emotions and reassess their current situations led to a 
qualitative difference in their re-employment efforts. The only behavioural difference to 
emerge between the groups of job-seekers at follow-up was the level of alcohol 
consumption, with the disclosure group consuming less alcohol six weeks following the 
study compared to controls. It is not possible though to establish if this reduction in
alcohol consumption is an intervention effect or a consequence of improved 
employment status of the intervention group.
In general, disclosure writing has not been shown to have any impact on health related 
behaviours such as consumption of prescribed drugs, alcohol and tobacco or 
engagement with exercise (Pennebaker & Beall, 1986; Pennebaker et al., 1990; 
Pennebaker et al., 1988; Petrie et al., 1995). Nevertheless, Ames et al. (2007) found 
disclosure writing used as an augmentation within a brief office based smoking 
cessation programme, which used a motivational interviewing approach and nicotine 
replacement therapy alongside the disclosure itself, showed some promising effects. 
Participants in the Ames et al. (2007) study wrote on three consecutive days prior to 
their quit date and on the subsequent two days after they quit. Those who expressed 
their emotions about stopping smoking had significantly higher biochemically confirmed 
abstinence rates than control participants at eight week follow-up. At six months and 
one year follow-up this treatment effect had diminished.
2.3.4.4 Overall effect
In order to bring together the divergent findings of these studies and establish if 
disclosure writing is effective in improving well-being, a number of meta-analyses have 
been conducted (Frattaroli, 2006; Harris, 2006; Frisina, Borod & Lepore, 2004; Smyth, 
1998). In the first published meta-analysis of disclosure writing, Smyth (1998) 
evaluated 13 controlled studies that had included non-clinical samples (i.e. students). 
An overall effect size of d = 0.47, indicated a 23 per cent improvement in long-term 
health in participants asked to write about stressors over the control group (Smyth,
1998). Effect sizes differed across outcome types, physiological functioning outcomes 
(i.e. immune functioning; d = 0.68) and psychological functioning outcomes (i.e. 
anxiety; d = 0.66) showed the highest effect sizes. Physical health outcomes as 
assessed by self-reports and health centre records (d = 0.42) and general functioning 
outcomes (i.e. GPA; d = 0.33) showed lower effect sizes but all were statistically 
significant at p<.001. The effect size for health behaviours (i.e. alcohol use) was not 
significant {d = 0.03). Psychological and physiological functioning outcomes had 
significantly higher effect sizes than general functioning outcomes.
Frisina et al. (2004) included nine studies in their meta-analysis of trials utilizing 
participants from clinical populations (e.g. breast cancer patients, severely depressed 
or suicidal individuals). Overall, emotional disclosure was found to be more effective for 
alleviating physical symptoms {d = 0.21, p = 0.01) than psychological symptoms (d =
0.07, p = 0.17). Analysis of outcomes differentiating between participants from medical 
(e.g. cancer patients, asthma sufferers) or psychiatric populations (e.g. psychiatric 
prison inmates, PTSD sufferers) indicated that disclosure writing in psychiatric 
populations was largely ineffective, whereas for people dealing with physical illness 
writing has the potential to be of clinical significance (Frisina et al., 2004).
A meta-analysis by Harris (2006) concentrated on studies that measured HCU, 
including those that used self-reported HCU and data collected from health centre 
records. Harris (2006) concluded that disclosure writing was effective in significantly 
reducing HCU in healthy people, although the reported overall effect size was small 
(Hedges11 g = 0.16, 95% Cl = 0.02 to 0.31). Disclosure writing did not appear to 
reduce HCU in people suffering from pre-existing medical conditions (Hedges g = 
0.21, 95% Cl = -0.03 to 0.43) or those who had been selected based on their current 
psychological state (e.g. pre-screened for psychological or somatic disorder), or had 
experienced a specific stressful experience (e.g. bereavement; Hedges g = 0.06, 95% 
Cl = -0.12 to 0.24). As discussed in section 2.5.1, HCU as an outcome measure is 
problematic. When interpreting these findings, and making comparisons between 
samples the differing health care needs of these groups should be considered. It is 
unclear if a reduction in HCU in people with pre-existing medical conditions and 
psychological disorders can be considered beneficial or if we would expect to see 
changes in HCU in these populations irrespective of the writing intervention (e.g. due to 
continuing/differential treatment regimens).
A more recent meta-analysis by Frattaroli (2006) included 146 disclosure studies and 
reported an overall effect of r -  0.075. Frattaroli (2006) further calculated effect sizes 
for a range of outcome categories, indicating fairly modest effects for psychological 
health (r = 0.056), physiological functioning (r = 0.060), reported health (r  = 0.072), 
subjective impact (r = 0.0159) and general functioning (r = 0.046), all were statistically 
significant. The only outcome type found not to improve as a result of disclosure were 
health behaviours (r = 0.007), which is consistent with the earlier findings of Smyth 
(1998) (also see section 1.4.3.3). Noting the difference in overall effect size of Smyths 
(1998) earlier study and the authors own more recent one Frattaroli (2006) argues that 
this difference may be due to the large number of unpublished studies (48%), that tend 
to have smaller effect sizes, included in her analysis (compared with 23 per cent in 
Smyths analysis). Despite the smaller effect size reported in this recent meta-analysis
11 Hedge's g gives an effect size that is not biased by small sample sizes and is an adjustment o f Cohen's d 
(Cohen, 1977) (Hedge's g = [ 1 -(3/4N-9)] x Cohen's d) (Hedges &  Olkin, 1985).
the evidence suggests that disclosure writing is a useful intervention, even if 
improvements appear to be modest (Smyth, Nazarian & Arigo, 2008).
2.3.5 Comparisons with Other Therapies
Smyth (1998) reported an effect size of d = 0.66, r = 0.31 in a meta-analysis for 
psychological functioning following disclosure writing, which is comparable to the effect 
size reported by Haby, Donnely, Corry and Vos (2005) in a meta-analysis of the effects 
of CBT (d = 0.68) and that reported by Smith and Glass (1977) in a review of 
psychotherapy studies (r = 0.32). A number of studies have attempted to establish 
directly if the effects of disclosure writing are comparable to other forms of therapeutic 
interventions. While disclosure writing has been shown to be superior to drawing 
therapy in alleviating psychological distress (Chan & Horneffer, 2006) the results of 
studies comparing disclosure writing with face-to-face therapies are equivocal.
Murray et al. (1989) compared two 30 minute psychotherapy sessions with two 30 
minute writing sessions in undergraduate students. A distinct pre-post intervention 
effect upon affective arousal was found between the writing and psychotherapy groups 
with those writing about a traumatic event reporting a significant increase in negative 
mood following the first writing session compared to the psychotherapy session 
participants. Content analysis of the recordings and writings from the sessions showed 
that writing group participants used more negative emotion in their narratives than the 
psychotherapy participants. Greater cognitive change, self-esteem and adaptive 
change was noted in the psychotherapy session narratives compared with the writing 
sessions. There were no significant group effects in self-reported sick days at six 
month follow-up, but a strong trend was noted in the number of self-reported days of 
restricted activity (writing 1.5 days; psychotherapy 3.9 days; control 7 days). These 
findings led Murray et al. (1989) to be pessimistic about the use of writing over more 
traditional psychotherapy treatments. The authors suggested that within the 
psychotherapy group, the expression of stressful emotions relating to trauma was 
attenuated by the presence of the therapist, whereby the resolution of these emotions 
is brought about by discussion with the therapist, resulting in a reappraisal of the event. 
These adaptive changes were not present in the written disclosure group. In a 
subsequent replication of Murray et al.'s (1989) study Donnelly and Murray (1991) 
reported comparable changes between written expression and psychotherapy when 
the number of session was increased to four. Donnelly and Murray (1991) found that 
whilst the two treatment groups did not differ significantly from each other in terms of 
narrative content, both treatment groups did differ significantly from the control group in
that those in the treatment groups showed a gradual shift from negative to positive 
content and increases in cognition and self-esteem as assessed by experimenter 
ratings. Consistent with the findings of Murray et al. (1989), participants in the writing 
group reported an increase in negative mood immediately following the writing session 
that was not seen in the psychotherapy group. Rather than being interpreted as an 
unfavourable outcome of written disclosure, Donnelly and Murray (1991) argue that 
whilst the presence of a therapist may serve to ameliorate the negative emotions 
aroused within the sessions, the positive therapeutic progress achieved at the 
conclusion of the four sessions is the same. It is not possible however to generalize the 
findings of these two studies to psychotherapy populations as the participants in these 
studies were convenience samples drawn from student populations and not from a 
clinical population seeking psychotherapy. Furthermore, the psychotherapy sessions 
were fewer in number and length than would be commonly seen in clinical practice and 
there was no assessment of long-term psychological outcome. These studies do 
however provide tentative evidence that writing has benefits akin to psychotherapy, but 
only for individuals who do not have serious mental health problems.
Two studies have examined the longer-term effects of written disclosure in participants 
selected for elevated anxiety (Muris, Meesters & Gobel, 2002) and depressive 
symptoms (Stice, Burton, Bearman & Rohde, 2006) in direct comparison to other 
therapeutic techniques. Muris et al. (2002) found a written emotional disclosure 
intervention to have comparable effects to a cognitive coping intervention in highly 
anxious children. Significant decreases in self-reported symptoms of anxiety and worry 
were seen in both intervention groups from pre-treatment to post-treatment although 
larger effect sizes were observed in the cognitive coping group which focussed 
primarily on the cognitive component of a CBT programme. However, the lack of a 
significant group by assessment (pre - post treatment) interaction for anxiety symptoms 
suggests that this difference in effectiveness between the interventions was not 
substantial. Furthermore, the results indicated that both the cognitive coping 
intervention and the emotional disclosure intervention yielded clinically significant 
improvements in anxiety disorder and symptoms of worry (54.5% and 38.5% 
respectively) the level of which was not significantly different between groups.
Overall, in terms of comparisons with other therapies, writing can be seen as an 
alternative way for individuals to disclose their emotions relating to personal issues 
outside of the therapeutic process, while receiving similar benefits to disclosing in
therapy, suggesting that this therapeutic approach may be useful for hard to reach 
groups (Smyth & Helm, 2003).
2.3.6 Mechanisms of Change
While the evidence that disclosure writing has a number of psychological and physical 
benefits is now well established in the literature, the mechanisms through which this 
phenomenon exerts its effects are less understood. The hypotheses put forward 
include an inhibition-confrontation model (e.g. Pennebaker, 1989), an exposure based 
model (Sloan & Marx 2004a), a cognitive processing model (Pennebaker et al., 1997), 
a model of narrative development (Campell & Pennebaker, 2003) and a model of social 
integration (Pennebaker & Graybeal, 2001). Each one of these models and the 
evidence to support it will be considered in turn.
2.3.6.1 Emotional inhibition/confrontation
Pennebaker (1989) proposed an inhibition model of disclosure writing based on the 
theoretical rationale that emotional inhibition, a conscious attempt to inhibit strong 
emotions and associated thoughts and behaviours, can act as a physiological stressor 
and that individuals who experience traumatic episodes in their lives, but do not confide 
in others about these traumas, are more likely to report health problems (Pennebaker & 
Susman, 1988). According to inhibition theory the failure to confront traumatic or 
stressful events requires a great deal of psychological work that results in chronic 
autonomic arousal (Francis & Pennebaker, 1992). Over time, the work of active 
inhibition acts as a low level cumulative stressor (Traue, Lee & Kessler, 1997). 
McEwen (1998) documented the adverse health effects of cumulative stressors and the 
failure of the body to adapt the stress response to them. Activation of the HPA is an 
adaptive response to acute stress, which is defined as a stress reaction provoked by a 
major or minor event that is appraised as threatening or harmful at that particular 
moment in time but is present only for a brief period (Lazarus, 1999). Over time, in 
response to cumulative stress, the HPA axis is dysregulated so that it is to some extent 
on all the time, this in turn leads to immunological alterations that have consequences 
for the development of physical disease (Kiecolt-Glaser, McGuire, Robles & Glaser, 
2002). The idea of disinhibition is similar to that of catharsis originally proposed by 
Breuer and Freud (1895/1966) that the venting of repressed emotions could cure 
people of their symptoms. However, Pennebaker (1989) points out that although there 
are similarities in these methods, the inhibition approach differs in its emphasis on 
conscious thought.
In order to examine the effect of disclosure on health and immune functioning 
Pennebaker et al. (1988) randomly assigned healthy participants to write about either a 
traumatic experience (ideally one that had not been discussed with others) or a trivial 
event. Overall findings supported the utility of disclosure writing with experimental 
participants evidencing a decrease in HCU compared to controls as well as a 
significant increase in immune response to the mitogen PHA (see section 2.3.4.2.2 for 
a more complete discussion of these findings). To test directly the emotional inhibition 
model Pennebaker et al. (1988) examined the influence of active inhibition on immune 
functioning. Participants were asked to rate to what degree they had actively held back 
from discussing with others the event they had written about, and from this the 
participants were split into groups of high disclosers (n = 11) and low disclosers (n = 
14). High disclosers exhibited a marginally higher response to PHA stimulation than 
low disclosers, however this did not reach significance (p = .06). A significant 
interaction revealed that from baseline to the last day of writing, the high disclosers 
exhibited an enhanced response to the mitogen ConA compared to the low disclosers. 
Although the findings of Pennebaker et al. (1988) support the view that disclosure 
writing allows individuals to confront actively previously inhibited emotions relating to 
traumatic experiences, the evidence is far from conclusive that the dis-inhibition of 
emotions is in itself responsible for the health benefits that are seen. Instructions did 
not explicitly direct participants to write about events that they had actively inhibited, 
rather just ones they had not previously discussed. Although participants wrote about 
events that where highly personal and subjectively traumatic, they included events that 
were ongoing such as relationship problems which they would arguably have had less 
time to inhibit.
Evidence to support the emotion inhibition/confrontation model of disclosure remains 
equivocal with contrary evidence suggesting that whether a participant writes about 
previously disclosed or non-disclosed traumatic or stressful events are as likely to 
produce positive health changes (Greenberg & Stone, 1992; Smyth, 1998). 
Additionally, Greenberg et al. (1996) found that event-specific emotional disinhibition is 
not necessary for generating positive health effects following written emotional 
expression. Greenberg et al. (1996) were surprised to find that individuals who read a 
description of an imaginary traumatic event, which they were then asked to imagine 
experiencing and write about, made fewer illness visits to a health centre compared to 
controls. The inhibition hypothesis cannot account for the changes seen in the 
imaginary trauma group, however the authors postulate that within this group the health 
effects could be mediated by enhancing affective regulation. The health benefits seen
in this group were related to perceiving the imaginary event as more traumatic, higher 
levels of negative mood post-writing and lower levels of negative mood at longer-term 
follow-up suggesting that participants who benefited most from the imaginary trauma 
writing were those who immersed themselves in the imaginary trauma but were better 
able to regulate these negative emotions over the following weeks.
2.3.6.2 Exposure and habituation
Some have suggested that the process of written disclosure may provide a context in 
which negative emotional associations can be habituated via repetition and exposure 
(Bootzin, 1997; Sloan & Marx, 2004a; Sloan & Marx, 2004b). Foa and Kozaks (1986) 
emotional processing theory proposes repeated exposure to aversive stimuli can 
ultimately lead to extinction of the negative emotional associations and pathological 
fear related to the stimuli. For exposure based therapies to be successful individuals 
should initially experience high levels of emotional activation (emotional engagement) 
when confronted with the aversive stimuli followed by a gradual reduction in this 
emotional activation (habituation) over repeated sessions (Foa & Kozak, 1986). 
Though initially developed to treat anxiety disorders, exposure therapy has been 
effective in ameliorating the symptoms associated with PTSD. In this context the 
repeated reliving of the trauma ameliorates anxiety by contradicting the individuals 
expectation that the resultant symptoms (e.g. fear, anxiety) are dangerous (Jaycox, 
Foa & Morral, 1998). It is suggested that repeatedly confronting the images and 
emotions associated with a traumatic event through writing could lead to a reduction in 
the negative emotions associated with the event (Sloan & Marx, 2004a). Findings of 
studies that have tested the exposure hypothesis have been mixed.
Sloan and Marx (2004b) examined the physiological (salivary cortisol) and self-reported 
emotional response to a disclosure task in individuals who had moderate levels of post 
traumatic stress symptoms. The findings indicated that consistent with exposure theory 
individuals who wrote about traumatic events showed significantly greater emotional 
reactivity at their first session compared to controls, followed by a significant reduction 
in reactivity at following sessions. Although improvements were seen in both physical 
and psychological symptoms at four week follow-up in disclosure group participants 
compared to controls, emotional reactivity was only associated with improvements in 
psychological symptoms. However, one aspect of this study that differs from that of 
exposure based therapies is that participants were free to write about different events 
at each session, indeed only half of the disclosure group participants wrote about the 
same event at each session. Whereas exposure based therapies assume that
exposure to the same event or memories is required for habituation, Sloan & Marx 
(2004b) suggest their findings may indicate that repeated exposure to any stimulus (in 
this case any emotional memories) that elicits a negative emotional response may be 
sufficient for the extinction/reduction of negative affect. To test this hypothesis Sloan et 
al. (2005) instructed participants to write about the same event and compared them to 
a group who had been instructed to switch topics. While repeat disclosers showed 
increased physiological activation to the first writing session, followed by a gradual 
decrease, in the topic switching group a significant increase in physiological activity at 
the first session was still evident at the second session. The authors suggest that this 
merely indicated faster habituation in the repeat disclosure group. However the longer- 
term psychological and physical changes seen in the repeat disclosure group were not 
evident in the topic switching group providing little support for Sloan and Marx's 
(2004b) assertion that habituation may not require repeat disclosure.
Studies that have used self-report measures of emotional arousal (i.e. negative affect, 
anxiety) have shown little support for an exposure/habituation theory of disclosure (see 
Smyth 1998). For example, Kloss and Lisman (2002) found that although participants 
showed a significant increase in anxiety at the initial disclosure session followed by a 
reduction over sessions, no changes were found in longer-term well-being. 
Furthermore, the number and length of writing sessions in disclosure studies are not 
typical of the multiple exposure sessions, lasting approximately 45-90 minutes, which 
clients undergo in exposure therapy (Baike & Wilhelm, 2005; Sloan & Marx, 2004a). 
Consequently, Pennebaker and Chung (2007) argue that a purely habituation based 
explanation is unlikely to be sufficient in explaining the effects of disclosure.
2.3.6.3 Cognitive processing
The idea that disclosure writing may lead to cognitive changes has been considered by 
a number of authors (e.g. Esterling, LAbate, Murray & Pennebaker, 1999; Niederhoffer 
& Pennebaker, 2005). It is thought that the act of converting emotions and images into 
words helps the individual to change and organise the way they think about their 
experience (Pennebaker & Seagal, 1999). The difficulty in measuring cognitive change 
has meant that this explanation has been difficult to test empirically. Donnelly and 
Murray (1991) and Murray et al. (1989) measured cognitive change through judges 
evaluations of the narrative content based on ratings on a scale of one to seven of the 
content exhibiting a deeper understanding of the problem or reviewing the problem in a 
more adaptive way (Murray et al., 1989). Disclosure participants showed greater 
cognitive change across the four sessions than controls. Additionally, Klein and Boals
(2001a, 2001b) have shown that disclosure writing can increase working memory 
capacity which could promote improvements in cognitive processing.
Park and Blumberg (2002) identified changes in the cognitive appraisal of events using 
the Stress Appraisal Measure (Peacock & Wong, 1990). A reduction in both threat and 
uncontrollability appraisal were noted from session one to session four of writing, in 
addition to a reduction in the stressfulness rating of the event. Increases in judges 
ratings of understanding, resolution/acceptance and congruency within the narratives 
were related to lower levels of reported stressfulness at session four, whereas an 
increase in understanding across the four days was related to lower appraisals of 
uncontrollability. Although disclosure group participants exhibited a number of cognitive 
changes across the writing sessions the only change variable associated with 
improvements in psychological well-being at follow-up was stress appraisal.
This cognitive change account of disclosure writing has typically been examined by 
looking at language use across the writing study. Using a computerized text analysis 
programme called Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC; from Francis & 
Pennebaker, 1992), Pennebaker and Francis (1996) found that participants were more 
likely to benefit from expressive writing if they used a high number of positive emotion 
words compared to a moderate number of negative emotion words. More important 
however was an increase in the use of cognitive words that represent causation (i.e. 
because) and insight (i.e. realize). Further support for this was found by Pennebaker et 
al. (1997) who analysed the narrative data from six previous studies and found that 
participants' physical health and adaptive behaviours improved with an increased use 
of cognitive words. The findings also suggested that greater expression of negative 
emotions compared to the expression of positive emotions, in terms of frequency, was 
related to poorer health outcomes. A greater use of cognitive words has also been 
shown to be associated with improvements in immune functioning (Petrie et al., 1998; 
Rivkin, Gustafson, Weingarten, & Chin, 2006).
2.3.6.4 Narrative development
According to Ramirez-Esparza and Pennebaker (2006), constructing a story is more 
powerful than having a story (p.215). Further examination of the pattern of cognitive 
language use in disclosure narratives revealed an interesting difference between those 
writers who experienced benefits and those who did not. The evaluation of the 
narratives by judges indicated that those stories which judges perceived as 
constructing a story were associated with an increase in cognitive word use
(Pennebaker, 1997). This suggests that developing a narrative may be an important 
factor in the beneficial effects of disclosure writing. In the only study to empirically 
examine this hypothesis Smyth, True and Souto (2001) randomly assigned participants 
either to write about their most traumatic event in a fragmented format, by listing details 
of the event and their thoughts and feelings about the event, or to construct a narrative. 
Although the fragmented group produced comparable amounts of emotion only the 
narrative condition reported health benefits at follow-up.
Using a different analysis strategy Campbell and Pennebaker (2003) considered the 
importance of linguistic style in effective disclosure. Using the technique of Latent 
Semantic Analysis (LSA; Landauer, Folt & Laham, 1998) the authors identified a 
relationship between pronoun use and health improvements; such that the more people 
alternated their use of first person singular pronouns (i.e. I, me, my) and other personal 
pronouns (i.e. she, you, them) the more their health improved. This pattern of pronoun 
use is thought to reflect a change in perspective from one writing day to the next, the 
key element being flexibility in perspective switching across sessions and not 
directional change (Campbell & Pennebaker, 2003). However, a note of caution is 
raised by a number of authors in interpreting the correlational findings as causal in 
studies that have examined language use and health outcomes (Bootzin, 2001; 
Campbell & Pennebaker, 2003; Pennebaker & Chung, 2007). For example Bootzin 
(1997) argues that linguistic changes observed in writing narratives may be a 
consequence of, rather than a cause of, emotional and cognitive changes within the 
person. Notwithstanding this, the findings of Campbell and Pennebaker (2003) suggest 
the importance of discussing the self and social relationships in written disclosure.
2.3.6.5 Social integration
More recently researchers have started examining the social effects of disclosure 
writing and whether writing might facilitate social integration. This has been measured 
using a digital recording device, the Electronically Activated Recorder (EAR; Mehl, 
Pennebaker, Crow, Dabbs & Price, 2001), which is an event sampling device that is 
designed for the assessment of natural socially interactive behaviour (verbal 
communication). The EAR is typically worn by participants for two days and records 30 
seconds of every 12-13 minutes (Pennebaker & Graybeal, 2001). Transcription of the 
data is followed up with coding by judges of the behavioural variables of interest (e.g. 
talking with one person, talking with more than one person, being alone). In a pilot 
study of the social effects of disclosure writing, participants wore the EAR for two days 
two weeks prior to writing, and again two weeks later (Pennebaker & Graybeal, 2001).
Those in the disclosure group talked more with their friends, laughed more and used 
more positive emotion words in their conversations at follow-up than they did prior to 
writing. In a more recent examination of this phenomenon with bilingual students, Kim 
(2008) also noted increased social interaction in disclosure group participants 
compared to controls. It is not clear how or why disclosure writing might improve social 
integration or how this might ultimately affect well-being. One suggestion is that writing 
could help individuals to personally understand their trauma, leading to a willingness to 
discuss it with others and thus become more socially integrated (Niederhoffer & 
Pennebaker, 2005).
2.3.6.6. Summary
A number of potential mechanisms of change have been proposed to explain how 
disclosure through writing can enhance well-being. The search for one general 
mechanism of action has not been successful, but it is noteworthy that not all the 
theories have been adequately tested and the findings for each are equivocal. The fact 
that none of the theories alone provide a sufficient explanation for the improvements in 
well-being reported so far in empirical studies may indicate a need to consider a 
complex combination of the previously proposed mechanisms (Sloan & Marx, 2004b; 
Smyth et al., 2008). Alternatively, it may be that the mechanisms through which 
disclosure writing exerts its effects are determined by a combination of event, context 
and participant characteristics.
2.3.7 Who Benefits From Writing?
While much of the empirical evidence for the effectiveness of writing comes from 
studies using healthy individuals (primarily university students), there has been a 
recent move toward examining the therapeutic benefit of writing in other populations. 
Writing has been shown to reduce asthma symptoms in adolescents aged between 12- 
17 years (Warner et al., 2006) and anxiety in school children aged between 8-12 years 
(Muris et al., 2002). Prison inmates who had been convicted of sex crimes experienced 
a reduction in illness visits to the infirmary after writing compared to controls (Richards, 
Beal, Seagal & Pennebaker, 2000) and Bernard, Jackson and Jones (2006) found that 
first-episode psychosis patients who wrote about their illness reported a reduction in 
the overall severity and avoidance of psychosis related stimuli. The preceding review 
has largely included studies that have used university student samples, and while there 
are no studies to date that have directly examined if there are any differential effects of 
disclosure writing between university students and the general population, the results 
of a recent meta-analysis concluded that participants with higher stress or poorer
physical health were more likely to benefit from disclosure writing (Frattaroli, 2006). 
Thus, the following section provides a review of studies that have examined the effects 
of disclosure in three specific populations; the traumatized, the bereaved and the 
chronically ill.
2.3.7.1 Traumatized samples: specific trauma symptoms & post traumatic stress 
disorder
The type and severity of events disclosed by participants in disclosure studies is 
diverse (e.g. sexual abuse, death of a pet, argument with a lover). This diversity within 
studies has been suggested to be a possible explanation for the inconsistencies in 
efforts to replicate findings (Brown & Heimberg, 2001). A number of studies have 
utilised a trauma-focused intervention for populations that have experienced specific 
types of events, with mixed findings. The events studied include domestic violence 
(Koopman et al., 2005), childhood sexual abuse (Batten et al., 2002), rape (Brown & 
Heimberg, 2001), a natural disaster (Smyth, Anderson, Hockemeyer & Stone, 2002) 
and the diagnosis of cancer in a child (Duncan et al., 2007). For example, two studies 
that focussed on the female victims of sexual assault, examined the effects of 
disclosing emotions about the experience of rape (Brown & Heimberg, 2001) and 
childhood sexual abuse (Batten et al., 2002) and found no psychological or physical 
benefits of disclosure for these groups. Batten et al. (2002) suggested that the 
influence of self-selection bias may have influenced their findings, given the relatively 
mild levels of distress in the sample at baseline; this group of sexual abuse survivors 
may have already developed resilience to the effects of their trauma. This explanation 
is consistent with the findings of a study with women who had experienced intimate 
partner violence (Koopman et al., 2005). Written disclosure was found only to be 
effective in reducing depressive symptoms in female victims of domestic violence who 
had high levels of depression at baseline. Similarly, disclosure was shown to reduce 
posttraumatic stress symptoms in highly distressed parents of children recently 
diagnosed with cancer (Duncan et al., 2007).
Written disclosure as a therapeutic intervention for individuals exhibiting posttraumatic 
stress symptoms appears to be beneficial for those with mild to moderate symptoms 
(Sloan & Marx, 2004b; Sloan & Marx, 2006) but has been shown to have an 
unfavourable outcome in those with a clinical diagnosis of PTSD. Gidron, Peri, 
Connolly and Shalev (1996) implemented a written disclosure intervention in trauma 
survivors recruited from a psychiatric trauma clinic. At five week follow-up disclosure 
group participants who had written about their most traumatic experience for 20
minutes on three consecutive days, reported an increase in avoidance symptoms and 
HCU relative to controls. Content analysis of the narratives produced by disclosure 
participants indicated a positive relationship between the use of emotion words and 
increases in symptoms and health care visits. The authors suggested that the length 
and number of writing sessions utilized in this study may not be enough for effective 
habituation in PTSD patients. However, in a more recent study by Smyth, Hockemeyer 
and Tulloch (2008) disclosure writing was found to provide some, if limited, benefits for 
PTSD patients. Writing about trauma was associated with reductions in anger and 
tension and a trend towards less depression at three month follow-up. The 
inconsistency in findings between these two studies may in part be due to 
methodological variations. Smyth et al. (2008) utilized a more structured writing 
protocol in which participants were guided to write in a manner that would enhance 
insight and followed the general principles of psychotherapeutic treatments for PTSD. 
Participants conducted the three, 20 minute writing sessions in a small private room on 
one single day (with 15 minute intervals between sessions). Whereas Gidron et al.
(1996) had participants write at home on three consecutive days, following a more 
unstructured writing format that has been typically used in disclosure studies (e.g. 
Pennebaker at al., 1988). Furthermore, a five week follow-up period may not be of 
sufficient duration to capture the psychological benefits of disclosure as it has been 
found that improvements may not emerge for many months (Gortner, Rude & 
Pennebaker, 2006).
2.3.7.2 Bereaved individuals
Individuals choose to write about a multitude of topics in disclosure studies, but one 
theme that is prominent across studies is bereavement (Pennebaker et al., 1997; 
Pennebaker et al., 1988; Pennebaker & Beall, 1986). However, studies that have 
asked participants to write exclusively about the death of a loved one have not been 
able to replicate the physical health effects of general disclosure studies (Range, 
Kovac & Marion, 2000; Stroebe, Stroebe, Schut, Zech & van den Bout, 2002). In 
addition, writing about grief and loss does not appear to facilitate recovery in recently 
widowed females (Stroebe et al., 2002) or for individuals who have experienced a 
sudden (non-suicide) death (Range et al., 2000).
Kovac and Range (2000) did find that writing about the intentional death (suicide) of a 
loved one reduced the unique grief characteristics of suicidal bereavement. Thirty 
undergraduate students, who had been pre-selected based on their experience of 
losing a loved one to suicide within the previous two years, completed the Grief
Recovery Questionnaire (GRQ: Lehman, Ellard & Wortman, 1986), the Grief 
Experience Questionnaire (GEQ: Barrett & Scott, 1989) and the Impact of Event Scale 
(IES: Horowitz, Wilner & Alvarez, 1979) at pre-test, post-test and follow-up. Participants 
in the experimental condition were asked to write about their thoughts and feelings 
surrounding the death of their loved one, whilst those assigned to a control condition 
were instructed to describe their bedroom. A reduction in the unique aspects of suicidal 
grief as measured by the GEQ were seen from post-test to follow-up in experimental 
group participants compared to controls. There were no changes in avoidance, 
intrusion (IES) or general grief (GRQ) as a function of disclosure writing in this 
population.
The lack of support for the effectiveness of written emotional disclosure in bereaved 
individuals appears to parallel the findings of other bereavement interventions 
(Stroebe, Schut & Stroebe, 2005). Grief counselling or therapy has proven only to be 
effective for bereaved individuals who were experiencing complicated grief (Schut, 
Stroebe, van den Bout & Terheggen, 2001). The term complicated grief is used to refer 
to a grief reaction that shows a marked deviation from the normal pattern and is 
maladaptive. Amongst the risk factors for a poor bereavement outcome are previous 
psychiatric problems, concurrent other stresses and the nature of the bereavement. 
Sudden traumatic death which includes suicide, murder and fatal accidents can 
contribute to complicated grief (Stroebe et al., 2005). The fact that the only written 
disclosure study to facilitate any change in grief reaction was with individuals who had 
been bereaved through suicide (Kovac & Range, 2000), a form of bereavement that is 
associated with complicated grief, is consistent with the general pattern of findings in 
the bereavement literature.
Although a number of studies which have shown positive benefits for disclosure group 
participants have included individuals who have written about the death of a loved one 
(e.g. Pennebaker & Beall, 1986) the fundamental difference is that in bereavement 
specific studies participants have been directed to write about their bereavement and 
grief (e.g. Range et al., 2000). In studies that have utilised the standard disclosure 
instructions participants self-select the topic of disclosure. In these cases it may be that 
individuals who choose to write about the death of a loved one are expressing a 
genuine need to disclose what they consider to be the most stressful or traumatic 
experience of their life. Although a person will undoubtedly experience sadness at the 
loss of a loved one, this loss may not be experienced as an enduring stressor 
(Bonanno & Kaltman, 1999). Some of the participants in the bereavement specific
studies had experienced their loss many years ago and may therefore, through a 
natural process of grief, already have come to terms with their loss.
2.3.7.3 Patients with physical illness
Written emotional disclosure has been shown to have the potential to improve 
symptoms in patients suffering from chronic illness such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA) 
(Danoff-Burg, Agee, Romanoff, Kremer & Strosberg, 2006; Smyth, Stone, Hurewitz & 
Kaell, 1999; Wetherell et al., 2005), asthma (Bray et al., 2003; Smyth et al., 1999), 
lupus (Danoff-Burg et al., 2006), fibromyalgia (Broderick, Junghaenel & Schwartz, 
2005) and chronic pain (Graham, Lobel, Glass & Lokshina, 2008). Smyth et al. (1999) 
found clinically relevant improvements in physician rated disease activity in RA 
patients, and lung function as measured by spirometry12 in asthma patients who wrote 
about traumatic events compared to controls at four month follow-up. Wetherell et al. 
(2005) found an emotional disclosure intervention to be effective in improving mood in 
RA patients but not disease activity. Although there was an indication of some benefit 
for the disclosure group compared to the control group, this appeared to be due to 
deterioration in disease activity (increases in symptoms) in the control group. It is 
possible that the follow-up period of ten-weeks was not sufficiently long enough to 
reveal any significant physical changes associated with emotional disclosure in RA 
patients. For example in the Smyth et al. (1999) study the improvements seen four 
months after the disclosure intervention were not manifest at a two month assessment.
Taking into consideration the apparent delay in the effect of emotional disclosure in RA 
and asthma patients Broderick et al. (2005) employed an extended follow-up period of 
ten months in their examination of disclosure writing in fibromyalgia patients. Self- 
reported assessments of pain, fatigue and psychological well-being were administered 
pre-treatment and post-treatment at four and ten months post intervention. Consistent 
with their predictions the disclosure group participants improved on measures of pain, 
fatigue and psychological well-being at four month assessment compared to controls. 
Post-treatment assessment scores did not differ from those at pre-treatment 
suggesting that onset of change does not occur in the immediate aftermath of 
disclosure. The scores had returned to baseline by ten months indicating that the 
effects of disclosure writing are not persistent.
12 A  spirometer measures the amount o f air leaving the lungs and is measured in terms o f forced 
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEVi).
Tentative support for the value of disclosure writing in cancer patients has been shown 
in three studies that have recruited patients with different types of cancer (Rosenberg 
et al., 2002; Stanton et al., 2002; Zakowski, Ramati, Morton, Johnson & Flanigan,
2004). In a randomized controlled trial 60 early stage breast cancer patients were 
assigned to one of three groups. The first group wrote about their thoughts and 
feelings regarding their experience of breast cancer, the second wrote about only 
positive thoughts and feelings regarding their experience of breast cancer, and the third 
group was the control condition who wrote about the facts of their breast cancer and 
treatment. At three months the women who expressed their emotions (both the positive 
and standard disclosure group participants) relating to their experience of cancer 
reported significantly fewer negative physical symptoms and cancer related morbidities 
than the control group. A reduction in distress levels was only evident in women who 
were low in cancer related avoidance suggesting that it is ineffective to ask women who 
have made a concerted effort to avoid thinking about their experiences, to write about 
their cancer and treatment (Stanton et al., 2002). Rosenberg et al. (2002) found that 
disclosure writing had no effect on distress in prostate cancer patients, but intervention 
group patients reported experiencing significantly less prostrate pain at follow-up than 
control participants. Although there were no other significant effects there was a trend 
toward lower HCU and lower consumption of medicines in the intervention group.
These findings together would suggest that some cancer patients may receive physical 
health benefits from disclosure writing but are unlikely to experience any psychological 
benefits. However, baseline measures of distress for both patient samples revealed 
that the breast cancer sample reported lower levels of distress than other breast cancer 
patient samples (Stanton et al., 2002) and the prostate cancer patients had distress 
scores comparable to general population norms suggesting that there was little room 
for positive change (Rosenberg et al., 2002). The findings of a study by Zakowski et al.
(2004) suggest that disclosure writing may be best targeted at cancer patients who are 
experiencing social constraints on expression either because of a perceived 
inadequacy of social support networks or social barriers to talking about their cancer 
experience.
2.3.8 Conclusion
Writing about stressful and traumatic events can result in transient distress. 
Nevertheless, the evidence suggests that, for some, in the longer-term, writing is 
associated with improvements in physical and psychological well-being. The 
mechanism by which disclosure writing exerts these positive changes is still unclear
and may involve more than one process. Comparisons between writing and traditional 
face-to-face therapies provide support for the utility of this brief intervention as an 
alternative approach. The feasibility of delivering a writing intervention in patient 
populations has been successfully demonstrated. Disclosure writing has been shown to 
provide some, if at times limited, benefits for individuals with elevated levels of distress 
and chronic medical conditions, this is especially so for those who experience 
constraints in self-disclosure relating to their condition.
2.4 Overall Summary
Research has shown that a writing intervention which promotes disclosure of thoughts 
and feelings can be effective in improving psychological and physical well-being in both 
healthy populations (e.g. Greenberg & Stone, 1992) and medical patients (e.g. Stanton 
et al., 2002). The implication of these findings is that a disclosure writing intervention 
may prove to be a valuable therapeutic tool that could be used to ameliorate distress in 
infertile individuals. The perceived associated costs of counselling and time constraints 
mean that uptake of counselling services is poor in this population (Boivin et al., 1999). 
Writing does not require a trained counsellor or expensive equipment to be 
administered; consequently writing is a low-cost, and time efficient means of self
disclosure that allows for the expression of thoughts and feelings that is relatively free 
from social constraints and value judgements. Disclosure writing has the potential to 
improve health and well-being in individuals experiencing both the chronic stress of 
infertility (Berg & Wilson, 1991) and the acute stress of ART (Boivin & Takefman, 
1995).
The methods used by Pennebaker and Beall (1986) have been subject to much 
modification in subsequent studies. The methodological differences between studies 
are an important factor when considering the inconsistency in findings. In order to 
develop a disclosure protocol that is feasible and effective for infertile individuals it is 
necessary firstly to consider how methodological variation can impact on the outcome 
measures used. Chapter 3 provides a critical review of the various methods used in 
written disclosure studies, the findings of which will inform the development of an 
intervention to be administered in this population.
Chapter 3
Methodological Review: 
Disclosure Writing
3.1 Overview
Chapter 2 identified a number of psychological, physical and behavioural benefits that 
can be achieved through emotional disclosure. The disclosure of personal experiences 
can work for some but has limited benefit for others (see 2.3.7.1 -  2.3.7.3). Since the 
publication of the first written disclosure study by Pennebaker and Beall (1986) more 
than 150 studies examining the effects of disclosure in a variety of populations have 
been published. Interpreting the relative effectiveness of disclosure in the many studies 
published is confounded by the diversity of methods employed in these studies. Over 
the last 20 years, numerous modifications have been made to the standard disclosure 
protocol (Pennebaker, 1994; Pennebaker & Beall, 1986), often without consideration 
for the consequence that these changes may have on the efficacy of the disclosure 
interventions (e.g. Sheese, Brown, & Graziano, 2004; Ullrich & Lutgendorf, 2002). 
However, modifications to design features, procedures, instructional content and study 
setting have been arguably necessary to accommodate the application of the 
intervention into different populations and also to examine the limitations of disclosure 
under various conditions. The purpose of this chapter is to review the methodological 
variations that have been employed within disclosure studies and in doing so to identify 
the likely boundary conditions of the disclosure intervention. Using the terms written 
disclosure, written emotional disclosure, emotional disclosure, and disclosure 
writing a search of the databases, PsychlNFO, ScienceDirect and Web of Science was 
conducted in the autumn of 2004 and regularly updated to identify studies relevant to 
this thesis. In addition to using these search strategies, published studies were located 
using the reference lists of relevant papers and books. Table 3.1 presented at the end 
of this chapter provides a methodological overview of the disclosure studies that have 
been reviewed in the preparation of this chapter.
3.2 Topic of Disclosure
3.2.1 Type and Severity
Very few disclosure studies select participant samples based on their history of trauma 
(Greenberg, Wortman & Stone, 1996; Schoutrop, Lange, Hanewald, Davidovich & 
Salomon, 2002; Sloan, Marx, Epstein & Lexington, 2007). Indeed, the majority of 
studies have been conducted with healthy young adult students (see Frattaroli, 2006). 
Arguably, as a consequence of their young age a proportion of these individuals will not 
have experienced a significant trauma in their life. In studies that have administered a 
variation of the standard disclosure instructions in which participants freely choose a 
traumatic or stressful topic about which they disclose their thoughts and emotions, the 
events described have varied in the magnitude of severity. For example, common 
topics include the death of a loved one, family violence and abuse, serious illness, 
actual or threatened physical and sexual attacks, family and romantic relationship 
problems, moving away from home and difficulties associated with university or 
employment. Although disclosure has been argued to be broadly beneficial (Kacewicz, 
Slatcher & Pennebaker, 2007; Pennebaker, 1997) some studies have found the health 
benefits of disclosure to be restricted to those individuals who describe subjectively 
more severe traumas (Greenberg & Stone, 1992; Lutgendorf, Antoni, Kumar & 
Schneiderman, 1994). For example, Greenberg and Stone (1992) found that 
participants who rated the traumas they had disclosed as more severe reported a 
reduction in physical symptoms at two month follow-up compared to non-severe 
trauma participants and controls.
Studies that have selected participants based on trauma history have produced 
equivocal findings. For example, Batten, Follette, Rasmussen Hall and Palm (2002) 
reported no beneficial psychological or physical effects of disclosure writing in female 
participants, recruited due to their history of childhood sexual abuse, who were asked 
specifically to describe these events. Similarly, rape victims who wrote about the event 
did not experience any improvements in psychological well-being or symptoms of 
PTSD (Brown & Heimberg, 2001). In addition, individuals selected based on their 
experience of bereavement do not appear to gain any benefits from disclosing their 
thoughts and feelings about the death of a loved one (Kovac & Range, 2000; Range, 
Kovac & Marion, 2000; Stroebe, Stroebe, Schut, Zech & van den Bout, 2002; see 
section 2.3.7.2). Arguably, the inconsistency in findings relating to the effect of trauma 
severity on outcome could be due to the willingness of participants to describe their 
ordeals. In the studies of Greenberg and Stone (1992) and Lutgendorf et al. (1994)
participants were free to choose events about which they wrote, whilst in the studies 
that recruited participants based on a specific trauma history (e.g. rape) participants 
have been instructed to concentrate on that specific trauma. It is argued that 
constraining individuals by asking them to focus on a specific topic may render the 
disclosure task to be less effective because the individual may focus more on the act of 
writing and less on their emotional involvement with the event (Kacewicz et al., 2007)
Evidence does suggest that the choice of topic can in some cases selectively affect the 
outcome (Pennebaker & Chung, 2007). For example, writing about the experience of 
coming to college has been shown to improve academic functioning as measured by 
semester grade point average (GPA) in students (Cameron & Nicholls, 1998; 
Pennebaker, Colder & Sharp, 1990; Pennebaker & Francis, 1996), and writing about 
losing a job has been found to be associated with higher re-employment rates (Spera, 
Buhrfeind & Pennebaker, 1994). Additionally, studies that have asked individuals to 
focus on writing about their experience of life threatening illnesses have reported 
improvements in illness specific outcomes in these patients. For instance, Stanton et 
al. (2002) found that patients with breast cancer, who were asked to write about their 
experience of the illness, reported a reduction in medical visits for cancer related 
morbidities. Petrie, Fontanilla, Thomas, Booth, and Pennebaker (2004) found that 
individuals with HIV reported a significant increase in CD4+ lymphocyte counts after 
writing about emotional aspects of their life including their HIV status. These findings 
appear to contradict the suggestion of Kacewicz et al. (2007) that constraining the 
choice of writing topic is not beneficial. However, the main difference between these 
studies is the distinction between writing about past events, for example specific 
trauma history (e.g. Batten et al., 2002) and writing about events which are current and 
ongoing, for example, going to college (e.g. Pennebaker et al., 1990) or life threatening 
illness (e.g. Stanton et al., 2002).
3.2.2 Past or Current Events
One variation in the instructions given to participants relates to that of the time frame 
between the incident and disclosure. Assigning participants to write about topics such 
as their illness status (e.g. Rosenberg et al., 2002) or going to university (e.g. 
Pennebaker & Francis, 1996) inherently requires them to focus on an ongoing event. 
Conversely, studies that ask participants to describe an event of their own choosing do 
not control for the recency of the event. Some studies do specify the time frame of the 
event that participants write about, asking them to focus on events that are in the past
(e.g. Schoutrop et al., 2002), ongoing (e.g. Gortner, Rude & Pennebaker, 2006) or 
either past or ongoing (e.g. Francis & Pennebaker, 1992). However, no study to date 
has examined if time since the event to intervention has a direct impact on the 
effectiveness of disclosure. The results from two meta-analyses (Frattaroli, 2006; 
Smyth, 1998) suggest that time frame is an important factor in disclosure studies. In the 
most recent and extensive meta-analysis published, Frattaroli (2006) found that the 
time since occurrence of the described event significantly moderated both the 
psychological and reported health effect size. In 86 per cent of the 146 studies 
participants were assigned to write about a negative event, the average time from the 
incident to disclosure was 16 months in these studies. The results suggested that 
writing about a more recent event was associated with larger effect sizes.
Frattaroli (2006) also examined the impact of time reference in the disclosure 
instructions, looking at the effects of asking participants to write about either past 
events or giving them the choice to describe current or past events. Surprisingly, 
Frattaroli (2006) did not find that this reference to time frame moderated the effect of 
disclosure. This is in direct contrast to the findings of Smyth (1998) who found that 
participants who were asked to address ongoing traumas in their writing showed 
greater improvements in psychological well-being compared to those who were 
instructed to write about either past or current traumas. Frattaroli (2006) does note 
however that in the meta-analysis data set, there was no significant difference in time 
since occurrence of the described event between studies that asked participants to 
disclose a current event compared with those that gave participants the choice of 
describing either a past or current event, suggesting that participants often choose to 
describe more recent events when given the option.
3.2.3 Previous Disclosure
As discussed in section 2.3.6.1, the health benefits seen from confronting traumatic 
experiences through writing were initially believed to be achieved by reducing the 
stress associated with the conscious inhibition of thoughts and feelings relating to the 
events that individuals disclosed (Pennebaker, 1989). Yet, in the first published study 
of disclosure writing, in which health benefits of disclosure were reported (Pennebaker 
& Beall, 1986), participants were not instructed to write about events which they had 
held back from discussing with others. The subsequent guidelines produced by 
Pennebaker (1994) for running disclosure studies include instructions to participants to 
write about events that they have not discussed in great detail with others (p.3). A
number of studies have adhered to this format and found positive benefits of writing 
about undisclosed or minimally disclosed events (e.g. Francis & Pennebaker, 1992). 
Equally, the majority of studies have not instructed participants to consider previous 
disclosure when selecting the events they write about and the outcome for some of 
these studies has been similarly positive (e.g. Epstein, Sloan, & Marx, 2005). Other 
methodological differences between these studies mean that it is impossible to fully 
determine the impact of previous disclosure on outcome but two studies that have 
directly tested disclosure status have found physical (Greenberg & Stone, 1992) and 
psychological improvements (Paez, Velasco & Gonzalez, 1999) after writing regardless 
of previous disclosure. Corresponding with these findings Frattaroli (1996) found that 
previous disclosure did not moderate the physical health effects of writing and the 
moderating effect on psychological outcomes was only marginally significant (p= .06).
3.2.4 Writing about the Same or Different Events
It is suggested that the writing instructions given to participants should not restrict them 
in their choice of writing topic (Kacewicz et al., 2007). In particular, participants should 
be given the option to write about the same or different events at subsequent writing 
sessions (Pennebaker, 1994). In fact the majority of studies explicitly instruct 
participants in this way (e.g. Booth, Petrie & Pennebaker, 1997). There are very few 
studies that restrict participants to disclosing their thoughts and feelings about the 
same event over the course of the study (exceptions include: Klein & Boals, 2001a; 
Sheese et al., 2004; Radcliffe, Lumley, Kendall, Stevenson & Beltran, 2007; Kraft, 
Lumley DSouza & Dooley, 2008; Sloan et al., 2007) unless the event is the specific 
focus of intervention, for example in studies with cancer patients that ask them to write 
about their experience of cancer (e.g. Low, Stanton & Danoff-Burg, 2006). Although 
not entirely consistent with the views of Kacewicz et al. (2007), the findings from 
Frattarolis (2006) meta-analysis of disclosure studies suggest that whether participants 
write about the same or different topics is of little importance with regards to producing 
effects of disclosure. However, in a direct test of the effect of topic switching Sloan, 
Marx and Epstein (2005) found that only participants who were instructed to write 
repeatedly about the same topic over three days reported improvements in 
psychological and physical functioning. Furthermore, physiological activation in 
response to writing as assessed by salivary cortisol indicated that participants who 
switched topics showed increased physiological reactivity to the first and second writing 
session, whilst those who wrote about the same topic only showed reactivity to the first 
session. These findings are consistent with an exposure based theory of disclosure
writing (see section 2.3.6.2) and suggest that habituation may have occurred at a faster 
rate in those who wrote about the same event (Sloan et al., 2005). It is notable that a 
large proportion of the sample in the study of Sloan et al. (2005) had, in the past, been 
in psychotherapy (42%) and had used psychotropic medication (37%) and the majority 
reported that their response to treatment had been poor to moderate. It is possible 
therefore that the past treatment characteristics of this sample represent a special 
group in which writing repeatedly about the same topic is more beneficial. More 
importantly the instructions given to the different topic group which required them to 
change topics at each session could be considered, for some, more restrictive than 
being asked to stay on topic. For example, some participants may not have found one 
writing session to be sufficient to express all their thoughts and feelings about that 
particular topic before having to move onto another. The fact that these participants 
were not given the option to choose how to write may be more important in determining 
the effects found in this study than what they actually wrote about.
3.3 Writing Instructions
3.3.1 Orientation of the Topic: The Negatives, the Positives or the Benefits
The focus of most disclosure studies has been to examine the effect of writing about 
negative experiences on well-being. Studies have asked participants to write about 
negatively valenced events using a number of approaches such as asking them to 
write about the most traumatic and upsetting experience of their lives (e.g. Greenberg 
& Stone, 1992), the most stressful experience (e.g. Esterling, Antoni, Fletcher, 
Marguiles, & Schneiderman, 1994), important emotional issues (e.g. Greybeal, Sexton 
& Pennebaker, 2002) and difficult or emotionally disturbing events (Gortner et al., 2006; 
the range of writing instructions employed are listed by study in Table 3.1).
More recently studies have shown that writing about positive life events and 
experiences can also produce physical and psychological health benefits. For example, 
Burton and King (2004) found that instructing individuals to write about the most 
(p. 155) resulted in a more positive mood than writing about plans for the day or 
describing inanimate objects (control). Longer-term effects on health centre visits were 
found, such that positive writing had a buffering effect, with control participants having 
more illnesses post writing than those who wrote about positive experiences. Similarly, 
writing (and talking) about a best possible self in the context of accomplishing life goals 
was also effective in reducing HCU and increasing positive mood compared to writing
(or talking) about their schedule for the following day (Harrist, Carlozzi, McGovern & 
Harrist, 2007).
Studies that have compared writing about negative experiences versus writing about 
positive experiences have produced mixed findings. King (2001) found that writing 
about a best possible self, a traumatic event, or a combination of the two produced 
comparable reductions in HCU compared to controls at five month follow-up. Similarly, 
Burton and King (2008) found that writing about positive or negative experiences 
produced comparable improvements in self-reported health at 4-6 week follow-up 
compared to controls. Whereas a study by Klein and Boals (2001a) looking at the 
effects of writing about either a negative or positive experience on working memory 
only found improvements in individuals who wrote about negative life events. Mario and 
Wagner (1999) found positive writing to be superior to negative writing for improving 
psychological health. Whereas Harris, Carl, Thoresen, Humphreys and Faul (2005) 
found neither set of instructions to be effective in improving pulmonary function in 
asthmatics.
More consistent health effects have been found in studies that have asked participants 
to write about the benefits or positive aspects of a stressful or traumatic event that they 
have experienced versus writing about the negative emotional aspects. King and Miner 
(2000) found that writing about the positive aspects of a trauma produced a 
comparable reduction in health centre visits at three month follow-up to writing about 
the more negative aspects of trauma. Writing from both perspectives also produced 
comparable reductions in illness visits compared to controls. Writing about either the 
benefits or negative emotional aspects of having cancer resulted in reduced doctor 
visits for cancer related morbidities (Stanton et al., 2002) and reduced fatigue in 
patients with lupus and rheumatoid arthritis (Danoff-Burg, Agee, Romanoff, Kremer & 
Strosberg, 2006).
Arguably, the difficulty in drawing any clear conclusions about the utility and 
comparability of differently valenced writing instructions is confounded by the variation 
in assessed outcomes, methodological and procedural differences and sample 
characteristics. For example, Stanton et al. (2002) found that writing about the positive 
benefits of cancer only produced beneficial psychological effects for women who were 
high in cancer-related avoidance, whereas writing about the negative emotional 
aspects of cancer was more effective in producing psychological change in women low 
in cancer-related avoidance. Similarly, Austenfeld and Stanton (2008) found differential
effects on reductions in hostility as a function of self-reported emotional expressiveness 
for those who wrote about a trauma relative to those who wrote about a best possible 
self. It would be prudent therefore to consider further under what conditions positive 
writing or the standard trauma protocol may be more suitable. For instance asking 
students to write about the positive aspects of a past trauma may seem innocuous in 
comparison to asking them to write about the negative aspects, however forcing cancer 
patients or those experiencing a chronic debilitating illness to focus on the benefits of 
their experience may seem insensitive to their situation.
Considering the multifaceted explanations that have been proposed as possible 
mechanisms for the effects of writing about negative events (see section 2.3.6.1 -  
2.3.6.5), the mechanisms through which positive writing might exert its effects have yet 
to be examined. It has been suggested that writing about positive events or the positive 
aspects of negative events may enhance self-regulation of emotions (King & Miner, 
2000), whereas writing about life goals may provide an opportunity for individuals to 
more effectively pursue these life goals (King, 2001). Alternative explanations for why 
writing about the positive aspects of negative events are to be found within the positive 
psychology literature, for example Frederickson and Joiner (2002) argue that finding 
positive meaning in the face of adversity triggers positive emotion and this in turn 
creates an upward spiral to emotional well-being. More research is needed to identify 
not only the conditions under which positive writing is more effective, but also the 
mediators of these effects.
3.3.2 Wording of Instructions
The original and widely used instructional set recommended by Pennebaker (1994) is 
relatively unstructured. The writing instructions provide such prompts as explore your 
deepest emotions and thoughts (p.3) and suggest that the writer relates their specific 
experience to people you love, who you are, or who you want to be (p.4). On the final 
day of writing participants are directed to consider how their experience/s may be 
related to your current life and your future (p.4). Some studies have provided directed 
questions in order to assist participants in what specific information about the event 
they should discuss (Barry & Singer, 2001) or to help them choose a topic about which 
to write (Lutgendorf et al., 1994). Based on findings that both emotional and cognitive 
processes are mediators of the positive physical and psychological health effects seen 
in disclosure writing (Lepore, Greenberg, Bruno & Smyth, 2002) others have 
emphasized the importance of emotional expression and cognitive assimilation in their
instructions (Broderick, Junghaenel & Schwartz, 2005; van Middendorp, Sorbi, van 
Doornen, Bijlsma & Geenen, 2007; Smyth, Hockemeyer & Tulloch, 2008). For 
example, the instructions given to disclosure participants in a study by Broderick et al.
(2005) direct participants at the second writing session to write in a story format (i.e. 
the narrative should have a beginning, a middle, and an end) and to think about the 
effects the trauma had had on their beliefs and life view. At the third session 
participants were encouraged to reflect on any insights they may have gained from the 
previous writing sessions and any changes in how they felt about the trauma. Others 
have gone further still and have developed a guided disclosure protocol (GDP) which 
provides very specific instructions on how to write, integrating self-reflection and self
regulation strategies (Gidron, et al.,2002).
Overall, it is unclear as to what the effect of modifying the writing instructions has on 
the outcome of disclosure writing. Frattaroli (2006) reported that the presence of 
directed questions in the instructional set was associated with a significantly larger 
effect size for psychological health but not physical health. However, Frattarolis (2006) 
meta-analysis does not differentiate between the nature of the directed questions, or 
whether examples were included in the instructions, so the effects of each are not 
clear. Two studies that have directly examined instructional content have found 
conflicting results (Ullrich & Lutgendorf, 2002; Sloan et al., 2007). Ullrich and 
Lutgendorf (2002) compared instructional sets that emphasized only emotional 
expression versus the combination of emotional expression and cognitive assimilation. 
They found that participants who wrote about both the emotional and cognitive aspects 
of a traumatic event reported an increase in positive growth that was not evidenced in 
those who focused only on their emotions. More importantly, focusing on the emotional 
aspects of a trauma resulted in an increase in self-reported illness symptoms. 
Conversely, Sloan et al. (2007) found that focusing on the emotional aspects of a 
trauma was associated with improvements in both psychological and physical health at 
one month follow-up, whereas focusing on the cognitive aspects alone did not produce 
these effects. Although both these studies selected their student samples based on a 
trauma history, it is difficult to make direct comparisons between the studies because of 
different setting and procedural variations. Participants in Ullrich and Lutgendorfs 
(2002) study wrote at home for ten minutes, on eight separate occasions over a one 
month period, whereas Sloan et al. (2007) had participants write in a laboratory for 15 
minutes on three consecutive days. Furthermore, the time frame for follow-up utilised 
by Ullrich and Lutgendorf (2002) may have impacted on the findings. Although self- 
reports of physical and psychological well-being were completed with an interval of one
month, participants completed the writing phase of the study only a few days before the 
follow-up assessment. It is not unusual for participants to experience an increase in 
physical symptoms in the immediate days after writing (Greenberg & Stone, 1992). 
Consequently it is difficult to distinguish between the effect of the unique instructional 
set and the procedural variations on the outcome of these two studies.
3.3.4 Control Groups: Writing and Non-writing
In order to establish that the positive health effects reported by experimental group 
participants are a function of the writing instructions and not a consequence of just 
writing per se, disclosure studies have typically included a control group for comparison 
that are asked to write about trivial or neutral topics. As can be seen in Table 3.1, the 
instructions that have been utilised in control conditions have varied, for example 
control group participants have been asked to write about the days activities (e.g. 
Kloss & Lisman, 2002), recent social events (e.g. Paez et al., 1999), or to describe their 
surroundings (e.g. Greenberg et al., 1992) or pictures (e.g. Kelley, Lumley & Leisen, 
1997). Another approach is to utilise instructions that are representative of a time 
management type task, asking participants to write about their plans for the following 
day, week, month (e.g. Petrie, Booth, Pennebaker, Davison, & Thomas, 1995) or 
coming years (Lumley & Provenzano, 2003). Some studies employ a combination of 
the two approaches (e.g. Bernard, Jackson, & Jones, 2006). However, a number of 
studies that have employed time management type instructions have reported health 
improvements in the control groups (Batten et al., 2002; Frayne & Wade, 2006; Gillis, 
Lumley, Mosely-Williams, Leisen, & Roehrs, 2006). For example, Mackenzie, 
Wiprzycka, Hasher and Goldstein (2007) found that stressed caregivers who wrote 
about how they used their time as a caregiver reported improvements in physical and 
psychological well-being, compared to those who wrote about the stressful aspects of 
being a caregiver or about significant world events. Due to this potential for writing 
about time management to have beneficial outcomes, some studies have also included 
a non-writing control group in their design (e.g. Broderick et al., 2005).
The writing instructions given to control group participants are often selected as a 
function of the population under investigation. In patient populations it is arguably 
inappropriate to ask control participants who, for example, may be undergoing cancer 
treatment, to write about their shoes or the contents of their closet. In such instances 
control instructions often direct participants to write factually about their illness (e.g. 
Stanton et al., 2002), relevant health behaviours such as diet and exercise (de Moor et
al., 2002) or have used a multiple baseline design13 (Bray et al., 2003; Duncan et al.,
2007) or non-writing control group (e.g. Solano, Donati, Pecci, Persichetti, & Colaci,
2003). Indeed, Wetherell et al. (2005) found that rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients who 
were asked to write about their daily activities reported an increase in disease activity 
(i.e. swollen and tender joints, inflammation) at ten week follow-up. In a follow-up study 
looking at participants views on disclosure writing, control participants reported that 
they found writing about their day to day activities emotive, which is not surprising 
given the day to day struggles they faced because of RA. Therefore control participants 
were writing about day to day struggles without being able to resolve or express openly 
their feelings about their experience (Byrne-Davis et al., 2006). Given these findings it 
would appear prudent to tailor the control writing instructions to the population under 
investigation to prevent evoking emotions that cannot be sufficiently resolved or 
equally, confounding the outcome of the study by inadvertently introducing another 
treatment variable to the design. The inclusion of a non-writing control, along with an 
appropriate writing control group, which is seen in some studies (e.g. Broderick et al., 
2005), would appear to be a sensible addition in order to provide adequate 
experimental control.
3.4 Procedural Variations
3.4.1 Length and Number of Disclosure Sessions
The length and number of writing sessions or dose utilised in disclosure studies varies 
widely (see Table 3.1). The length of writing per single session ranges between 3-50 
minutes with the majority of studies using a 20 minute cut off (e.g. Pennebaker et al., 
1990). The number of writings sessions administered also varies greatly ranging from 
1-10 sessions with most studies asking participants to write on at least three separate 
occasions (e.g. Smyth et al., 2008). Pennebaker (1994) suggests that multiple 
sessions are most effective and this is supported by Frattaroli (2006) who found that 
writing on three or more occasions is associated with larger physical and psychological 
health effects than writing on fewer than three occasions. Similarly, writing for 15 
minutes or more was also found to be associated with larger physical health effect 
sizes but not psychological effects (Frattaroli, 2006). Nonetheless, studies have found 
brief sessions of writing to have some benefits, in fact as little as one 10-15 minute 
session has been shown to reduce the negative emotions relating to the collective
13 The multiple baseline design or A A B  design involves administering assessment measures twice pre
intervention (A A ) followed by the assessment measure post intervention (B). This design controls for 
time effects and potential demand effects o f assessment and is used in the absence o f a control group 
(Cotton, 1998).
trauma of a terrorist attack in Spanish students at two month follow-up (Fernandez & 
Paez, 2008). Similarly, Burton and King (2008) reported a reduction in self-reported 
physical symptoms 4-6 weeks after writing about either negative or positive 
experiences for only two minutes on two separate occasions compared to controls. 
Furthermore, the size of the physical health effect was comparable to that reported in 
the meta-analysis of Smyth (1998). Consequently, these findings would suggest that in 
situations where either time and/or resources are limited or lengthy repeated disclosure 
would not be acceptable to the population under investigation there is scope to tailor 
the dosage of disclosure to the practical demands of the study or sample.
3.4.2 Time between Writing Sessions
Typically, participants are asked to complete their writing over consecutive days. In fact 
Pennebaker (1994) advises this timeframe for writing, suggesting that participants 
report finding larger intervals between sessions unfavourable for re-entering the mind 
set for writing. However, the spacing of sessions over consecutive days is not always 
practical. Some studies have had participants write at weekly intervals to coincide with 
scheduled classroom sessions (Chan & Horneffer, 2006; Horneffer & Jamison, 2002; 
Pantchenko, Lawson & Joyce, 2003). Others have spaced sessions at the participants 
convenience allowing them to conduct sessions over a week (Radcliffe, Lumley, 
Kendall, Stevenson & Beltran, 2007) or three week period (Stanton et al., 2002: see 
Table 3.1 for study variations in spacing of session). Based on the findings of Smyth 
(1998) that spacing writing sessions over longer periods of time may be beneficial to 
the writer, others have incorporated larger time intervals in an attempt to achieve 
stronger intervention effects (Langens & Schuler, 2005; van Middendorp et al., 2007; 
Mackenzie et al., 2007; Ullrich & Lutgendorf, 2002).
In a recent study by Smyth et al. (2008) the feasibility of an intense one day 
intervention that involved three 20 minute writing sessions with a 15 minute rest interval 
between each session was tested in patients with a diagnosis of post traumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD). Whilst the majority of participants found this intense protocol 
acceptable (one participant withdrew after the first writing session due to distress) at 
three month follow-up there was no effect on PTSD symptom severity. A reduction in 
tension and anger in the trauma writing group compared to controls and a trend 
towards a reduction in depression would suggest that the writing intervention has the 
potential to be effective in this population but may need to be administered over a 
longer period (section 2.3.7.1 for a discussion of the efficacy of writing in this
population). The only study to test directly the differential effects of long versus short 
interval writing (weekiy versus daily) found no systematic differences between the two 
time frames (Sheese et al., 2004) which is consistent with the findings of Frattaroli
(2006) that time between writing (analysis of daily versus weekly) does not moderate 
the health effects of disclosure writing. The implications of this being, researchers can 
reasonably administer the writing sessions to fit with the demands of either the study or 
the participants.
3.4.3 Modality: Writing, Typing, Talking and Drawing
Originally conceptualized as a writing intervention (Pennebaker & Beall, 1986), 
disclosure studies have been conducted employing a number of modalities (see Table 
3.1). Whilst the majority of studies adhere to the more traditional modality of disclosing 
their experiences in handwriting (e.g. Sloan & Epstein, 2005) others have asked 
participants to type their narratives using a computer (e.g. Hemenover, 2003), disclose 
verbally into a tape recorder (e.g. Kelley, Lumley & Leisen, 1997), disclose verbally to a 
researcher (e.g. Schilte et al., 2001) or disclose their emotions about a stressful events 
through drawing (Chan & Horneffer, 2006; Pantchenko et al., 2003). Studies have often 
departed from the traditional handwritten protocol in favour of a modality that is better 
suited to the functional ability of their participants, as in the case of Wetherell et al. 
(2005) who gave participants with RA the option of handwriting their narratives or 
verbally disclosing them into a tape recorder. Similarly, others have chosen to provide 
participants with personal computers on which to type their narratives (Booth et al., 
1997; Burton & King, 2008; Graybeal, Sexton & Pennebaker, 2002; Hemenover, 2003; 
Petrie et al., 2004) or for practical reasons have asked participants to submit their 
narratives via e-mail (Sheese et al., 2004) or conduct the study online (Gortner et al., 
2006; Slatcher& Pennebaker, 2006).
Studies that have directly compared verbal and written disclosure would suggest that 
the health effects are comparable (Donnelly & Murray, 1991; Harrist et al., 2007; 
Murray, Lamnin & Carver, 1989) though participants who talked in these studies did so 
in the presence of another individual, a factor that has been shown to influence the 
parameters of disclosure (Donnelly & Murray, 1991; Murray et al., 1989; Pennebaker, 
Hughes & O'Heeron, 1987). One study that has compared the effect of different 
modalities on the modulation of the immune response to exposure to the Epstein-Barr 
virus, found that verbal disclosure was superior to written disclosure, and both 
modalities produced a significantly better immune response compared to controls
(Esterling et al., 1994). Drawing as a means of disclosure was not found to produce the 
same psychological benefits as disclosure writing (Chan & Horneffer, 2006; 
Pantchenko et al., 2003), possibly due to the fact that many of the drawing participants 
reported feeling uncomfortable expressing themselves through this particular modality.
Frattaroli (2006) reported that typing does not have any differential impact on the 
outcome of disclosure. However, to date there are only two published studies that have 
compared the effect of writing modality on disclosure. In the first of these studies, 
Brewin and Lennard (1999) found that participants who wrote longhand reported a 
more negative mood immediately after the task than those who typed. Further analysis 
showed that participants who wrote longhand reported that they revealed significantly 
more about the event and found it more beneficial than those who typed. Conversely a 
more recent study by Sharp and Hargrove (2004) found that post writing affective 
arousal was not differentiated by modality, and that participants who wrote longhand or 
typed about an emotional topic reported similar levels of disclosure. The only difference 
between the two modalities was that typing participants produced significantly more 
words than their longhand counterparts. Whilst Brewin and Lennard (1999) speculated 
that their findings could suggest that the effects of disclosure might be in part 
dependent on the modality of expression, the longer-term effects of typed disclosure 
were not assessed. Before any clear conclusions can be made about the comparability 
of typed and written disclosure, research needs to determine if the longer-term 
psychological and physical health effects of disclosure are moderated by these 
modalities.
3.4.4 Timing of Follow-up Assessment
As can be seen in Table 3.1, the time between disclosure and post-test assessment 
has varied considerably from study to study, with some administering outcome 
measures immediately after the final disclosure session (e.g. Deters & Range, 2003), 
at weekly intervals (Cepeda et al., 2008; Sheese et al., 2004) or even up to two years 
post intervention (Schilte et al., 2001), with the average time to follow-up being three 
months (see Frattaroli, 2006). Despite the large number of disclosure studies that have 
now been conducted and the variation in post-test assessment times that have been 
employed it is still unclear what the optimal time of post-test assessment should be. 
Frattaroli (2006) found that studies that assessed participants less than a month post 
intervention had larger psychological but not physical health effect sizes, than those 
that assessed participants for at least one month. In fact, studies have reported
improvements in psychological functioning in disclosure participants a matter of days 
post intervention (Alford, Malouff & Osland, 2005; Chan & Horneffer, 2006; Ullrich & 
Lutgendorf, 2002). However, a notable methodological similarity in the aforementioned 
studies is that the writing sessions were not conducted on consecutive days, but over a 
number of weeks, consequently, the time between first disclosure and follow-up ranges 
from two to eight weeks. Considering that psychological improvements have been 
found after one session of disclosure (Fernandez & Paez, 2008) it is possible that the 
mechanisms through which psychological changes occur may have become activated 
prior to the final disclosure session. Others have found that psychological 
improvements do not emerge until many months following disclosure. For example, 
Gortner et al. (2006) found a reduction in symptoms of depression at six months post 
intervention that were not evident at five weeks. Similarly, Sheffield, Duncan, Thomson 
and Johal (2002) found that reported improvements in anxiety and insomnia at 30 week 
assessment were not evident at three and seven week follow-up.
In terms of physical health the findings regarding the timing of the follow-up 
assessment are similarly mixed. Studies that have examined immunological changes 
after writing indicate that positive changes can be seen relatively quickly. Esterling et 
al. (1994) found an enhanced response to the latent Epstein-Barr virus one week after 
disclosure. In addition Petrie et al. (2004) found a systematic continued increase in the 
CD4+ lymphocyte count in patients with HIV at two weeks, three and six months post 
intervention. Improvements in self-reported physical symptoms have also been found 
at one month post-intervention (Epstein et al. 2005; Sloan et al., 2005). However, 
Greenberg et al. (1996) failed to find an effect within this one month time frame and 
suggested that the high levels of negative mood aroused by disclosure writing may 
have an immunosuppressive effect in the initial few weeks following disclosure, the 
effects of which may take time to subside. Studies that have examined the health 
effects of disclosure writing in patient samples show some support for this premise. For 
example, Smyth, Stone, Hurewitz and Kaell (1999) found that physician rated disease 
activity did not differ between disclosure and control groups in RA patients at two week 
or two month follow-up. However, at four month follow-up disclosure group participants 
had improved disease activity ratings. Similarly, Stanton et al. (2002) found that self- 
reported somatic symptoms and recorded medical appointments for cancer related 
morbidities in breast cancer patients reduced at three month follow-up a as function of 
disclosure, although these health benefits were not evident one month post
intervention.
In addition it is also not clear for how long benefits can be maintained. Broderick et al.
(2005) found that the improvements in pain, psychological well-being and fatigue seen 
in disclosure participants with fibromyalgia four months post intervention were no 
longer evident at ten months. However, Gidron et al. (2002) found that clinic 
attendance for individuals in the disclosure group previously classified as frequent clinic 
attendees14 was significantly reduced compared to controls at three month follow-up; 
and that this group difference was maintained at 15 months. Arguably, the difficulty in 
interpreting the findings presented with regards to the timing of follow-up assessments 
is that the variability in results will likely be a consequence of a complex combination of 
the characteristics of the samples under investigation, variations in methodology and in 
particular how the dependent variables of well-being are assessed.
Considering the uncertainty about the optimum time at which disclosure effects emerge 
and for how long they persist, the use of multiple post-test assessment periods and 
outcome types, within the practical limits of the study, should be employed.
3.5 Outcome Type
Considering the large number of disclosure studies that have been conducted it is not 
surprising that a wide variety of physical and psychological well-being, behavioural, 
physiological and immunological measures have been used to evaluate the disclosure 
paradigm.
3.5.1 Objective Versus Subjective Assessment of Physical Health
An assortment of self-report physical health measures have been used in disclosure 
studies including Pennebakers Inventory of Limbic Languidness (PILL; Pennebaker
1982), the Short Form Health Survey (SF-36; Ware & Sherbourne, 1992) and the 12- 
item Pennebaker Symptom Scale (Pennebaker, 1982). Studies have also judged 
physical well-being based on self reported health care utilization (HCU; e.g. Cameron & 
Nicholls, 1998). Studies in patient populations have utilised self-report measures that 
represent the physical limitations or characteristics of the disorder, for example the 
Multidimensional Pain Inventory (MPI; Kerns, Turk & Rudy, 1985) has been used in 
studies with fibromyalgia patients (Broderick et al., 2005), migraine sufferers (Kraft et 
al., 2008) and women with pelvic pain (Norman, Lumley, Dooley, & Diamond, 2004).
14 Based on the inclusion criteria o f having visited the clinic at least twice during the past 3 months, no 
known mental illness or major cognitive difficulties and no known chronic illness (Gidron et al., 2002).
Because self-reports can be subject to demand characteristics, some studies have 
assessed objective health measures such as HCU (e.g. Pennebaker et al., 1990) or in 
the case of chronic illness patients, physician rated disease activity (e.g. Kelley et al., 
1997). However, Frattaroli (2006) found that whilst disclosure did not appear to affect 
objective measures of disease activity, self reported measures did improve. As 
discussed in detail in section 2.3.4.4, a meta-analysis by Harris (2006) including only 
studies that measured HCU (both self-report and objectively assessed) concluded that 
disclosure writing was effective in significantly reducing HCU in healthy people. HCU 
as an outcome measure is problematic. First self-reported HCU can be subject to 
multiple demand characteristics. Second, even the more objective measures of HCU 
(e.g. health centre recorded visits) are still an indirect measure of health status. For 
example, an increase or decrease in visits to the doctor may not be indicative of an 
actual change in health but of a change in the individuals threshold for reporting illness 
(Cohen & Williamson, 1991). Equally, the more frequently experienced illnesses such 
as the common cold and gastrointestinal viruses and symptoms such as headaches 
and sore throats do not often require the attention or diagnosis of a doctor and so go 
unreported. It is unclear if a reduction in HCU in people with pre-existing medical 
conditions and psychological disorders can be considered beneficial or if we would 
expect to see changes in HCU in these populations irrespective of the writing 
intervention (e.g. due to continuing/differential treatment regimens).
3.5.2 Physiological and Immunological Measures
A number of longer-term immune and physiological parameters have been examined in 
the disclosure literature, including the bodys response to the Epstein-Barr virus 
(Esterling et al., 1994) and hepatitis B vaccinations (Petrie et al., 1995), wound healing 
after a punch biopsy (Weinman, Ebrecht, Scott, Walburn & Dyson, 2008), HIV viral load 
and CD4+ lymphocyte counts (Petrie et al., 2004) and blood pressure (O'Connor & 
Ashley, 2008). The immediate post-writing effects on blood pressure, heart rate, skin 
conductance levels (Pennebaker et al., 1987) and salivary cortisol (Sloan & Marx, 
2004a) have also been examined. The findings of studies that have examined the 
longer-term immunological effects and short-term physiological effects of disclosure are 
discussed in sections 2.3.4.2.2 and 2.3.3.2 respectively, however in the meta-analysis 
of Smyth (1998) the effect size for immune functioning was one of the largest (d = 
0.68). Ideally studies should utilise these more objective markers of physical 
functioning in order to establish the wider benefits of disclosure (Pennebaker, 1994),
however the use of immunological and physiological markers is expensive and is 
therefore dependent on the financial limitations of the study.
3.5.3 Psychological Well-being
The measurement of the psychological effects of disclosure is necessarily dependent 
on self-report. The exact nature of psychological functioning that has been assessed in 
disclosure has varied considerably as have the measures used to assess the different 
categories of psychological functioning. For example, the most common measures of 
mood have been the Positive and Negative Affectivity Scale (PANAS: Watson, Clark & 
Tellegan, 1988) and the Profile of Mood States Short Form Scale (POMS: Shacham,
1983). Symptoms of depression and anxiety have been measured using well validated 
measures such as the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI: Beck, Ward & Mendelson, 
1961), the Symptom Checklist- 90-Revised (SCL-90-R: Derogatis, 1992) and the 
Depression Anxiety and Stress Scale-21-item (DASS2 1 ; Lovibond, & Lovibond, 1995). 
The impact of Event Scale (IES; Horowitz, Wilner & Alvarez, 1979) has been widely 
used to assess the frequency of event related intrusive and avoidant thoughts and as a 
measure of PTSD symptomology. Frattaroli (2006) reported that the only categories of 
psychological well-being to improve as a result of disclosure over the 146 studies 
analysed were those of depression, anxiety, distress, subjective well-being and anger. 
Irrespective of the variation in measures used, the effect size for psychological 
outcomes has been found to be comparable to that of the physiological effects on 
disclosure, with students experiencing better psychological outcomes (Smyth, 1998). 
This finding is supported by Frisina, Borod and Lepore (2004) who found disclosure 
writing to be more effective in alleviating physical symptoms than psychological 
symptoms in populations with physical illness.
3.6 Study Setting
3.6.1 Context: Laboratory, Home or Medical Setting
The laboratory based procedure developed by Pennebaker and Beall (1986) has been 
the blueprint for numerous studies examining the effects of written emotional disclosure 
(e.g. Pennebaker & Francis, 1996). Subsequently, researchers have taken the writing 
intervention out of the laboratory and into other settings such as the hospital room 
(Schwartz & Drotal, 2004), out-patient clinic (de Moor et al., 2002; Duncan et al., 2007), 
home (e.g. Langens & Schuler, 2005) and prison (Richards, Beal, Seagal, & 
Pennebaker, 2000: see Table 3.1 for the contexts in which studies have been 
conducted). Arguably, the main rationale for taking the writing intervention out of the
controlled setting of the research laboratory has been to maximize the recruitment and 
retention of specific populations, in particular the chronically ill (e.g. Wetherell et al.,
2005). Whilst this adaptation of the standard protocol may help to widen the application 
of disclosure writing some have questioned if this adaptation to the protocol may limit 
its effectiveness (Schwartz & Drotar, 2004; Sheffield et al., 2002; Smyth & Catley, 
2002). For example, Schwartz and Drotar (2004) examined the effectiveness of writing 
about traumatic events in a sample of caregivers of children and adolescents with 
cancer or sickle cell disease. Although participants were given the option to complete 
the disclosure sessions in a private room at the hospital, the majority chose to remain 
in the childs hospital room. At four month follow-up disclosure participants did not 
report any changes in mood, anxious or depressive symptoms or caregiver appraisal of 
stress compared to controls, in fact controls reported more vitality than disclosure 
participants over time. This finding led Schwartz and Drotar (2004) to caution against 
the implementation of disclosure writing in the inpatient setting of a hospital and 
recommend that writing should take place in a setting separate from that of the hospital 
room. Whilst it is reasonable to assume that the stressors and distractions of a childs 
hospital room may interfere with the disclosure process, it is notable that in this study 
participants were asked to write about any traumatic event and not specifically about 
the stressors they encountered caring for a sick child. Given the evidence that the topic 
of disclosure can selectively affect the outcome, particularly in relation to ongoing 
stressors (see section 3.2.2) the lack of improvements reported in caregiver appraisals 
of stress may not have been a result of the study setting, Solano et al. (2003) found, for 
example, that writing about being in hospital (whilst in hospital) did have positive effects 
on post-operative course in male urology patients.
Although clinic and hospital settings may have consequences for research participants, 
they still maintain the legitimate authority that is inherent in the traditional laboratory 
environment (Smyth & Catley, 2002), that is they maintain a level of control that is not 
possible within a home setting. Sheffield at al. (2002) attempted to replicate the lab 
based protocol used in previous disclosure studies (e.g. Pennebaker & Beall, 1986) in 
a home-based context with a student sample. At three weeks follow-up disclosure 
participants reported experiencing more physical symptoms and higher rates of 
absence from college due to illness than controls. This led the authors to caution 
against the use of disclosure writing in the home. However, previous studies conducted 
in the traditional laboratory setting have also reported short-term increases in physical 
symptoms in trauma group participants (Greenberg & Stone, 1992; Kloss & Lisman, 
2002; Park & Blumberg, 2002) suggesting that the reporting of increased physical
symptoms, in the short-term, is not unique to the home setting. Indeed, in Sheffield et 
al.'s (2002) study, at 30 week follow-up, disclosure group participants reported lower 
levels of anxiety and insomnia than control groups, suggesting that the home-based 
intervention was effective to some extent.
The evidence for the effectiveness of home-based disclosure interventions with chronic 
illness populations is somewhat equivocal. For example, studies that have 
implemented home-based disclosure interventions with cancer sufferers have found 
only limited support for the effectiveness of the intervention in this population (Cepeda 
et al., 2008; Rosenberg et al., 2002; Zakowski, Ramati, Morton, Johnson & Flanigan,
2004). Equally, studies that have been conducted in lab-based settings with cancer 
sufferers have also found limited support for the effectiveness of disclosure writing (see 
section 2.3.7.3) suggesting that this type of intervention may have limited utility in this 
population irrespective of the context in which it is conducted. Conversely, Frattaroli
(2006) found that effect sizes tended to be larger for psychological outcomes in studies 
where participants disclosed at home. The methodological, sample and procedural 
variability in studies that have been conducted in different settings makes it difficult to 
draw any clear conclusions about the impact of different settings without a direct 
examination of the moderating effect of study context on disclosure.
3.6.2 Audience Effects
There are three differential audience effects that can arise in the course of disclosure 
studies: verbally disclosing to another, the sharing of written disclosure with the 
researcher and disclosing in a public room. Studies which consider the differential 
effects of verbal disclosure often involve directly disclosing to another individual (e.g. 
Harrist, et al., 2007). Differences have been noted for the immediate effects on post 
disclosure mood, such that talking in the presence of another arouses less negative 
affect than writing alone (Donnelly & Murray, 1991; Harrist et al., 2007; Murray et al., 
1989). Consistent with this finding, Pennebaker et al. (1987) found that participants 
who talked in the presence of another were less likely to cry or have a wavering voice, 
this inhibition of affect was also reflected in skin conductance levels (see section
2.3.3.2 for a discussion of the short-term physiological effects of disclosure). As 
mentioned in section 3.4.3, the longer-term outcome of verbal disclosure is comparable 
to that of written disclosure (Harrist et al., 2007; Donnelly & Murray, 1994), though 
individual differences in emotional processing may moderate the effect of these 
different modalities (Cohen, Sander, Slavin & Lumley, 2008).
Most disclosure studies ask participants to submit their writing upon completion (e.g. 
Epstein et al., 2005). In this instance the writing is no longer private as an audience 
becomes privy to the content. Considering that the submission of writing is 
commonplace in disclosure studies, in order that the content can be subject to analysis, 
there has been little consideration of the consequences of sharing the content of 
written disclosure with others. Very few studies have allowed participants complete 
privacy of disclosure, either by allowing them to keep their writing (Broderick, Stone, 
Smyth, & Kaell, 2004; Horneffer & Jamison, 2002) or by guaranteeing that their writing 
will not be read by anyone (Schoutrop, Lange, Hanewald, Duurland, & Bermond, 1997; 
Schoutrop et al., 2002; Stice, Burton, Bearman & Rohde, 2006). Some studies report 
that participants are told they can keep their writing if they wish, although few are 
reported to choose this option (Klein & Boals, 2001a; Pennebaker & Beall, 1986; 
Weinman et al., 2008). Frattaroli (2006) reported that in studies where participants did 
not submit their writing to the researcher the psychological effect sizes were 
significantly larger than in studies where participants did submit. However, in a direct 
test of this effect, Radcliffe, Lumley, Kendall, Stevenson and Beltran (2007) found the 
opposite. In their study, participants who did not share their writing with the researcher 
reported lower levels of intrusion at three month follow-up than those who did. Both 
groups had lower levels of trauma related avoidance at follow-up compared to controls. 
Furthermore, participants who shared their writing reported significantly less 
depression at follow-up than those who kept their writing private. Shared disclosers had 
significantly lower levels of interpersonal sensitivity at follow-up compared to controls, 
whereas private disclosers did not differ from controls. One possible explanation for 
this is that shared disclosers may have put more effort into their writing knowing that it 
would be in some way evaluated by the researcher, whilst private disclosers may have 
felt less obliged to adhere to the writing protocol and thus did not engage with task 
sufficiently leading to reduced benefits (Radcliffe et al., 2007).
The privacy of the setting in which participants conduct the disclosure session may also 
be important. Pennebaker (1994) advocates the use of a unique and solitary 
environment for disclosure. Due to practical constraints, such as time and resources, 
and also to maximise recruitment, studies that are conducted within the academic 
environment, with student samples, are occasionally conducted in group settings. This 
can be in the laboratory (e.g. Chung & Pennebaker, 2008) or in the classroom (e.g. 
Chan & Horneffer, 2006). The presence of an audience in this context, namely other 
participants, has been found to moderate the psychological effects of disclosure 
(Frattaroli, 2006) such that disclosure in the solitary conditions of a private room,
produce larger psychological effect sizes than disclosure in group conditions where 
other participants are present.
Interpersonal disclosure, whether it be through talking to another or sharing writing 
about a traumatic or stressful experience, appears not to affect the longer-term 
outcome of disclosure studies. However, there are possible implications for conducting 
disclosure sessions where others are present (i.e. in a classroom with other students). 
Arguably, the presence and involvement of a researcher differs from that of conducting 
disclosure in the presence of others, be they peers or strangers, in that the researcher 
may be considered within the role of therapist.
3.6.3 Administration of Instructions
The writing instructions given to participants are commonly delivered in two ways, 
either in writing or verbally. Whilst the setting of some studies (e.g. at home or in a 
classroom) necessitates that written instructions are provided (e.g. Cepeda et al.,
2008) those conducted in the more controlled setting of the laboratory are able to 
administer instructions verbally (e.g. Francis & Pennebaker, 1992). In fact some 
studies administer instructions verbally and in writing in order to emphasize adherence 
to the protocol (e.g. Greenberg et al., 1996). Some home based studies have provided 
telephone prompts to participants in addition to providing written instructions in an 
attempt to increase adherence (Beckwith McGuire, Greenberg, & Gevirtz, 2005; 
Bruera, Willey, Cohen & Palmer, 2008; Gill, Lumley, Mosley-Williams, Leisen & 
Roehers, 2006). In a unique study by Broderick et al. (2004) the effectiveness of a 
home-based writing intervention for RA patients delivered via videotaped instructions 
was examined. Although the delivery of instructions via videotape appeared to be 
feasible the study failed to find any disclosure effects. Whilst it is unclear what the 
cause of these null findings were the way in which instructions are administered is not 
generally thought to have any effect on the outcome of disclosure (Frattaroli, 2006).
3.7 Summary
The methods used in disclosure studies have varied considerably. The protocol 
described by Pennebaker and Beall (1986) has been subject to numerous 
modifications and adaptations to such an extent that the standard protocol no longer 
exists (if indeed it ever did). While Pennebaker (1994) has argued to maintain some of 
the original methodological features of the protocol, such as the instructional set and 
solitary laboratory context of disclosure, it is evident that in order to broaden the
accessibility, and examine the feasibility, of the disclosure intervention as a therapeutic 
tool, it is necessary to move beyond the constraints of the original protocol. In doing so 
it is necessary first of all to directly examine the differential effects of methodological 
adaptations to the original protocol. Whilst the findings of meta-analyses of disclosure 
studies can guide us in the development of future adaptations, the independent 
moderating effects of a number of the methodological variations that exist in the 
literature are yet to be directly tested.
This thesis aims to develop and implement a written disclosure intervention for 
individuals with infertility. The reluctance of individuals experiencing infertility and 
undergoing treatment to engage in face-to-face therapies (see section 2.2.7) suggests 
that the method by which an intervention is delivered in this population is important, if 
such an intervention is to be feasible. In order to overcome some of the barriers to 
participation that individuals with infertility may encounter (e.g. time constraints, 
accessibility), the intervention will be implemented within the home using a computer. 
The consequence, of adapting the written disclosure protocol to be delivered within the 
home context and using a computer to complete the writing task is a departure from the 
more traditional laboratory based, hand-written methodology that has been widely used 
in disclosure studies. It is not clear from the available evidence what the direct effects 
are of deviating from the standard lab-based, hand-written methodology to a home- 
based, computer-mediated protocol. Before this intervention can be developed and 
implemented in individuals with infertility it will be necessary to determine what impact 
these methodological changes might have on the efficacy of a disclosure intervention. 
Chapter 4 outlines the aims and objectives of this programme of research and the 
sequence of investigations that will be conducted.
% 5rsi
O  to
5 Ino m
C  </)0) a; E
I to
3  M-
2  O  00
*> 0)
5 - o >
U  h - <  n  a
o  .2
<u oj a.
X O) ai ai
 "Ou _
ro <u
.>  O
=5 -DU ro > E : o  
oo3 o  -=
.. it: "a 5
^ a(/> 5=
_c C E
lo CDto 03CL
66 ___ C CD to=3 66>- rHO CD JD E
(N 03CQ "oLL.
o3 Ln 
ClO c*
o g S
M  in  C
E  m  
QJ Q> E-I to =.
.Q  O
E 1/13 M- ol
Z  O i/i
o  > .  
 -  QJ 
to "D
C  -Q
T  C'N
S | 8  
S  I
03 QJ 
.<=> U 
M C03 QJ
I -  QJ
QJ QJ
to C i i  QJ qj 3 O Q.
 QJ (0
  CO j_,2  n uZ xi ra
|  2 ^  InI   2 ^
+ U- f- J  
  3  U  T J
<C to 03
GJ cn
O .  O
CD 00
y -O .2 C CL *o o
  qj.y Sm  c03 Qj
C  " 2  _
I   a
|  s  *
E Q. .E
in    I -p l_  -C  c
 8 QJ W
>  oo> c
_ 00 E 
ro .E ';-
o . 5  5
oj "O  cu I  c -5  O
<  S  ro *i c
is 5  _
M fS| ,0
cn m  2
(U _TO c-
>  - g
>   in  
.y q j ;
OJ -= 
c  .c  o
- U N
  4-
in in J2 tio
.y  -2 m .E
2 2 *2 
E +2 c
3  w  QJ 
0J -E  *3 
-E  t  ro 02 to D-
J= it t2 O 
*  >   O E N  
.y  in  ~
QJ OJ1 Qj 
TJ c  It
O O ^  
CO X  66
3 fc
5  EO =:
.2 J2
co CL)
<  51 Q.to  n: 5  %
CuO c  
t :  o
m  5 ;
C  tn _<u <u 
C 00 "D _- c c ro o 
  5  o  -P u
U  H -
c = ai 
>  z r. >  t />
TO .2 43 3
r  T 3  ua>   ro QJ
_ c  ^  ^- C  . _  u  r a
'43 o ro
 >  cd.Z- <s) n4- r- Ttd >-U Z X *
f u  i 5  u
^ a3 cu>* T3 
c o  r o  .55 o -q >* u
-B 5
o g Fo o = 3 o J2
O  co L L  CT C  Q .
d) <D ClO 
CUD CUD c  
_Qj Qj
o 5 TO
ol o
0 0-0 E ;  o 
< Q. ol i/)
o iSJ 
X  =
5  T 
co CD
  = :< - >  j_
m C  OJQJ (TJ (J
CD C C
u OJ CD
CD CD "O
u Q. CD
_ 0 8 O l <
CD 03
c  ..
 St  3 m CL
m o  k o 
18 5 
c  1 =?- E oCD
U  X5 8
  m tuo c 
+S O 3
00 m C
C  in  
OJ QJ E
- I  V )  c .
3  M- qj
Z  O  /)
2  3  >.
o  o  ro
X :  "O
H  on m
0J qj qj
^  > >O o  o
C  *  4-* ~  cuu cu w 
ro +3 ^
ro QJ -g  
u  b ; u  
 O + j
9- r. ro>. ai _ch -Q i
CuO qj
 '  =
CU QJ
QJ o  E
3  JS g
+- x :  l l
IS) > 
_oj E oo 
5  i/> o3 C i
QJ ~o
00 QJ
03 N
t  isO 01 
U  Q-
3  QJ
I -  v .i x j  
ra o l ro 
J2 <  m 
x: ce op *j M 
3 3 3o o o
-5 -E x:
QJ CuO
O. .E
'Sf- 5
>  +* *>  .2   
-C  -O  u
x: .E 15 re
 Q- in "to
ro OJ > - _q
QJ _QJ JO 3  
X  in  Q- in
X I SO
,S2   
* i  C
E QJro = QJ O &  i_>
Q i:  3  c  ro cqj ro ro E x : ~
cc u  a . x i. a . <_>
QJ j f
<  a:
q j _  in  <-* x: J2.2 c IS
a qj qj
E t t  oJ ^
E   c  *  _  q . .E o3
 t i QJ
o3 N
  S
 o 3
BO m C
C to =
<u <u Ej  in c
Z  O  Oo
cu ai js 5
Q  - D  u  >
o25 S
O) ro
3  . h  
-D  5  O  5
 ro  
<  ~  <H <- <U 4- _
C  TO 03
<u ^  cu 
s Si .y <u
5  ro 5 cZ 3 ^ i
to d; 
(73 J2
I "O Q
^    E
W <U H
  C *Q- .E 00
J2 QJ
TO QJ
TO CUD
cud ro
^  CO c
ra ^ '43
i t  =
Csl03
C  Ln
u o  J_
LU 00
-  ._' cu
'-=  C  JZ
 s a
~ 5 LU <  U -
to  i -
- cd cd
-  1 =  T3
s? S S -F. ai
O  C  O ro
08   _
N  00
-ro ' ' 
c  t i
r - ~
; E  3
3  CU
oo ro
n <u
  V,
S  *5i(0 VIQ. 01 lO 00
E '<o
3  *4- s
Z  O />
u  i-
ro ro
a . 5
 SrO O) sz > o o
o > u 
c " 0 0o ro .E
O  to 
=  x: JJ U ro
^ _ro 
|  J o  
$ 2 %
T3Cro *u
> Sro ro 
o XI 
2  .2, 
qj ro
< TJ .c
S> QQ. (J
e? c*.
>  >
t- o2  cn 
QJ ^  cn 
x? Ji c 5 > 
P  c  ro
    s  *
10 to  t -  4_,
ro ro i_ x
x ~  o ro
5  c
 QJ c -u QJ iS c 
<  5  Q. ro
qj ro
c l  to  ro
O  S3
E c o ro
|  , V? 08  S
-> > E c' *2
V? Si .2  ro J=
= O  = . S
0  ^   iJ 5
CM4->
L0ro lO
CL cu cu
, ro 3
 5  J2    ^  
ro ro E t i
ro  XI c roSO ,
n i -J  xS 'S- QJ
S  rsl c
ro c c ro o t
'3 Z3 
E ~QJ 4->
it -o
I I< XI
i 3  v i
ro ro 01 o ^, ro o.  ro oj >-
ro 1-
l - s
  -S
t_- ro 
ro c ^  
c  c  to
t ;  QJ o  o o 
O o3 Ci
CU qj qj
CUD qj S
2  5  5  
> ro cm 
< ^  oi
x _ro
to >.
g. ro -5-C  (Uro *-> f -  
o  00 +-> *-> c l~
ro i 2
ro S |  QJ J2< D Q.
to  <U 
(U CD
O- >-ro ro
'> .E o 
    E
o .QJ
E e? g _
ro T l x  00
O ftl
CU) >
3  *Q 08
. 0  o
() Jj Jj 13 w O.
w cro x i  _n ,0J ^  ^
    a)
S o S
g    
i l 3 1
3  5 -  
Z  O </>
+ 0)
5 - o >
u  i-
.aQjO 'C c
  VIE oj ui
C -Qro o
o3 f j
Ofi CTI
E "uT
-Q  O
<u 2 o
.y > J=
ro to ^
E E 3
I .E o oj
*o l/ i O    _
c  _QJ > ,  ro
a> to 
E_ 2 ^CD .to cu
x> <u
u aj to
73 El Q.
c i  oj m
5 M 3 U tu
t r l  i -  ^  o j  caj o u 
Q. O 73Q - +j  x  i-  c
3  o  01 Q . q =
o. c  x o <
J F o
3  +-1M ty) C_)
f t  JS 
Si QJ J5
LO 4-> 1-
2   > .c o -o 
QJ >- c ^
'5  O w
TO C Q. <a;
.2 o3 _
7= +_, |^
F ^  o* f i i  >
+v  E
(/) 1> f\J
 C *a  .E o3
?T 10 aj o  
S <NQ)^ o E -5 
 x  3 ro 
X  | X  li-
03 PT
LO N O LO
E -g w ETO   TO
X  U  <> X
>oc    _
a j  cn
 3?^PL- * - 1 
c  q j c 
CD > O
th 3  E
 .1  -
c 5 f t  _
OJ QJ E
3 X Z  O  1/1
E QJ O -Q
*v QJ
5 - o > u I- qj yq 'o.
r  oj ^  o
5 ~ 5 .2
. 2  o
ri to
E c QJ E
i  *s 1
I  8  *- _Q ti
ol ai QJ c 
c  ai
u  q . . >
rCX QJ 
03 0 0  U
C D Q. 
F  CUD
  3  .E
J   -O
03 v/)
to qj
QJ toU o.
o 'i/l (N
'E   E o
ro (N
l/l C _Q
qj ro qj
-*= E c 
6 0   c
3  - C  qjX 3 a.
u 3" o3 -o
^ TO v, c    - c o rao 
-  QJ __> .2  
i i  OJ OJ
I S  s S i
60 O c o03 (N
5 o i-i CL O TO O r3 <n
60 r -
*  .2  
60  
C 10<u cu E
ro > C .S-
U l_ oj O)cV  +3ja _c o i-
2  ro 60 -Q >* c +> ro & 
tt ? S
_E to  
o  03 c  
oo " 5 i_
2 2 o
< (N Q.
C C ^
- -5 . O  
QJ LO 10
r =    q j ro
5 73O o
Ol Q_
LU CU
CU QJ 
<U C U
i l l
to  cu
c .Eai ro 
"ro .SP 
tri E
o3 ro r_l_ r* >.E o ~a
QJ O  ro^  rtj *1
o3 ro
  roO 5(N 00
LO p j  
LO O  O O 
^  CM
ro P   
    Q . rs l 
O  ' ' 
O  _ :
E 03 S
'  3 <U ^0-5 ro 0 0 o
66 <N
c  OJ_C ir +-1
t  O  3
M  i C
C  V)  =
a/ <u E
X I o
- i  M
=  0J
Z  O to
5 - o > 
u  i -
I  -t o
S .  2
111 QJ 
QJ * -
-Q  5
o3  rsi
5 toV
00  
<  Csl J=E 5
c rs i
i :  ^  OJ q j
ro qj
i ' l
o3 TO
>- c   _
QJ ro  
C  >  O
C O O  
=  i -  f N
o '+-  rsi
  C  <D j_,
>5 .g S 
tO _  4- Hi .. c
OJ Q . $  Qj
K  85 S  
ao  .S' >
X  0)
"Occu
o #  cu 
-  1 5  
5  CD cu 
2 E 5 
^ ^  5 2  
<  ^  00 
~  ts Ol
Er fel
ro S O 
13 o l |
S t  1
 5  '5 b  2  ?  ?
> -  2 "
=  6 0  i -
C QJ II
to 15 ^
U . y  QJ
  o  U x:
c o p  ro
CLO c
-c E -t :  o 3
M  w  C
C m 
0) OJ 
k.; <u C Q. O > U I-
m >.O) c ruo ro -a
-5 ab aj
m .E  ^
E o 
  =   ^
  c
q j 5
i/) Q. (U
o3 l- w (D o c  00 
ro nj
i  ro 75
cu oo zs to
c  c  ~  c
=  025 _OD
S    ^  CC Oi
^  qj r
QJ - . O
p  QJ JO > 5 _
-    CU QJ
OJ fO
QJ _  c  oo
j - j  ^  c : qj
qj O  O  c
J r  > *  oo * -
*2 (U fc . 
-C o  
m X  O
  S5  a  C i
o 3O U
QJ ol _Q -M
o o ro ro"q. c QJ uQ_
O+- 3oo_o
ro3 ooO
q. 00 u.5d T3O CUD TD CLOC c
QJ> c r oc c c
QJ O QJ o
cClOO
"+-ro3
u QJ M t o
a) QJ
o2 <n
od 4
l l03 fO 
_ J  U
.y S c
ro qj
rf OJ)ai 
>- H
Q- ro
to ai
O  in  uE ro >
a; ft a>
. oa-o
sf > o  c OJ a) o <3-
E F o E 2o 3  o .5 o
2  j  O  O  c i
  S3
.0 3
M  w  CCm  
0) j i  -i m i
-Q  O
E 5>t ^ m
3  a;
Z  O </>
M OJC CL
rs i 2
(LI O
< 0 X 3
E EO ns
C  0 0  TO ___
2  rT C LO  INI O
o  <  5  C i
< x: c
  u ao
: r  .n > +-
- 2  o  O
00 m QJ X  u -
o03 Ci
ai ai
Q. CL
(6  ai
. y  B
0.1 xol <u
5 d) SI
o  Si 71 S >
_TO _0J
a> 'to
> C ~  
N  og
OJ o s
a o 2 b
CUD 3
<D CU hra. Q-
1 (6
h 0) "O  13 Q .
m  N  T3 
_ro _a> =3
0) '(6 00
> c  ' o  cnN  cn|Uol 
o oa d
-= 01
u n 00  
g .E 3 
m 5  nj ro
o </>
 IOO V)
C to<u a) E
- i  to
Z  O </>
OJ 3  D  ^  
  O  -Q  O
-C Q. OJ
E .2 E E
5 E .2
ro ro   wa; > c
V) "i_ u -D >3 o = ro T5 io CD T5
~ 5) i/i OJ
Q- o &0 O) "=  >  
X  QJ
3 -9 r7
o3 S'
9  Ol
CD tO  
(TJ C l
C o2 H ro ,  
jo to c
CD OJ qc -c tr 
C  OO CD
v _ro
ro U t.
jQ  A , o j<u i i/> -~-c o ro oo  u 77; oo
5  ~ S 2a  m  o3 u
C  to 
<U <U 
O i/i
(N  O  O)
to  toro C to <N
v  J5 3  H  
 o *
to  t j  -C  (U
.93 C ^  c
. t  15 (N
+3 3  U O
OJ COJ o 
o QJ o3 o
  Jg c
m 11) <3
U3 w, 
CO CO
OJ C  CM,t TO rH
O Q. o  ><
ul -O -C O)
.93 c  c  toro rvj
+3 3S 
ai o ai  -C C S
TO QJ
= to 03 S
E o o o
< 5  5
- > 
-= C 5P
 > T 
oi o  
= ST ro u  -a 
T3   c
Q - U -  I  CQ CL m  J  y  W  m
5  c- o
c  T3
    QJ TO
LO - C  QJ co
 S'5
a  o?S G.
5O  ro
> -  CO
TO o -C _
CO *+T
  to
.E oi
to' 08
>  qj
;C JO tlD
5  o i Jo .33, io o  oj .ax >- 5 Q o S
. y  S+-> c
TO QJ
u o >- .52
to  o g
0) Q1 ^ dc t/i o. _L
v 501 o 
tO <N 
g Si 
q. . o3
> -  - O l
 -  c
u i O l  
a j o j  ) -
>  U  QJ
*  .2  M  
C  l/> 
01 OJ
C wM
O  to
ro  o j c
m-  e  *_ 0)
      g
CL> qj on i
= S- =01 C  T3"{E <U o>C m
 i 5 |  0)
- . S Si- 'C o
F  < QO Q. q. m i_> x y- <u
11 11 oj '   + i
S  S < IJ5 a ro  E
^  E i
OJ Q .
4/1 C 
Q _  TO
**- 0 +3
01 -o
03 O)
E 'F,
CO ro y
u li u
ro ~0 
G jO    
OJ 
to  O  _
c - ro
oi o E
c "  - 
c  *S
r o t  0
s 3>E. c
5 . 2
c 2 -  <u o o j  
5  5  o3  S
QJ rsi
q j rs i
U(-m uroiS /2 rorN| 
u i  io  j  I  Q  io  i i
 *  cuo c 
f- Ol
t: .o 3no VI c
C v) -(u <u E
O  to
k.*; <u5 - o >. 
u  i -
w  flJ cq P Q. _ 00
ti (TJ 
* J3cu t :
Q j 3  
>  -*-1 to
03 5 CuO  
QJ - ~  
C  to
oj o E
= ' I  -C c ^O M  S 3  E gi
u S " 3  > 2i/i j  i  q to d
03 QJ
to  QJ
<3* CUD
66 oo
QJrsi
4*  i c Q_ CUD
03 _J b 03
u00 a  qj00 DX 66
E t ot o
0 0  o
01 <u 
"O aj
 " 4-, QJ
U ^ (U 
<  CN T3
QJ -  C ^^ M O  
QJ O  TO o
w m (5 Ci
 r" to  QJ QJ
%  >  O O 42 O < >  co m TD O
i l l
O H 
QJ -Q
-C ^ S' 
H E o
to  a . Cl.
03 -5
* *  o 
i n ' E
ao ro
^  qj
lS) 4->+J TO
C  QJ i- rzj
F JJ o  Q.
= I   H I
LO C  Q_ to
>  i 
 -  5  CD
i  S f
I  i<u
tr >
  _  c ro 
<v O E 
1   -
<  <N Q . <  fN  Q .
S ^ tto  S o ^c c c 3  c 4-< ^
QJ CD +- fxj QJ _5 QJ
O  C  Q_ M
u a; x "5
QJ >  QJ
QJ QJ rj
TO QJ TO QJ TO QJ
ro 9 -_  x  c  Q . CL)
O) O Z3 T 3
fO OJ
TO QJ
ro O.
c Sro O 
c    ro O  
_ 2  c l  
LO LU
ro o3 c
'   CuO :r~c <u c t:TO  Oo ^ x o
  Q - QJ 
CO LU I
C  QJ
O " _2 Q. 
t o  LU
-  00 
I sci LO
x  "o iS Q
mft) 1/1 Q. 01 
in  m
O  i /i
e * * /  
X  S +  .2 3M in
C / i ' :
a) oj E
<N rf i  I
3 *- wZ  O <7)
a  fl)
5    o  >
E =, x :
a> qj
E ? >(U c =
sr ol
u  uO L
c n> W)
4- (1) Ck- V) *3
 -  '   to -f
E T3 c
J2 c  o
cl  ro c
>  TO
w  h  . h
a  +* vtz ^o  i l
(D V) >E co <U -*-
 k. m
3    *-" l_
TO TO ^  J-
i_ i ro
l -  .E o  c
IE  a/ ro tj
M l 2
E 15 
. 2  JS 
**-'  
' E  5      1/1
1 1   i  |  
I    I   IU  (/) ra u  (Q
CUD QJ
0  = 1i- ro J2 
3  a n
T3   ai ro >- c 
o oo "i/I
Z) a.
-f-> (D
E c _ 
in <  X
QJ (N
> 2  01 o
a/ 0)
0) -C 
 =  oo| 1  L  
n l   a
8  a S
xT 5   5L <u =
C T  vE 3  ro t/i X y
*-c 3E o 
to  on
B *  s<D -m >S n + O 
CL> fM
c  Td  -  *u
cu c  52  
"o o 0J o
oo Q  Q. (_)
o3  s_
-  OJ 
T3 -M
T *t "  3- 
a ir  ^g)
a  3  oj S
oo m  c l H
c  "  -C E -t-*O 3
M  </i C
C  <n =
0) QJ 
E '5*
^ S: qj Z  O co
o  O O  -9 -c
Q- -E S .E 
2 "5j  "nj o.
5 '-o
co o3
C  CD 
.2 o3
E  0-
C -E O 
O  QJ Q. 3
E CO _  
C . ro s  o
QJ O  X   00
 o 
C  > -  V )  3m a  o
O  ro QJ  '
u i  a 3  
O  JC *  
QJ ^ 12 -o EU  ^  f I V) z-x00 "O 0) Si 00 2
SH  -g re  a.
O  x>  3  >  Q . 
a c  * ;  . 2  qj > .
<  03 > - CD ~G to
,2 ro </>
U  00 03
ra <5 . 2
E E ~
C o
>  -- 
_Q -Q
"O Eai o00 (J
a E 
< 0 . 0
,  .  QJ 
QJ OJ N  C_a _a  a 
OJ QJ t i  -O  p j
 E r c 8
+_+-> U  03 pu
UO 00 >  w
TO a;
o3 a;
O TO
QJ "S 
E cr> 
QJ c 02 3 QJ H
CO CL H
Cut) c
un C  E (/> 01 QJ E
*>  OJE Q- o >U H
roc - o -a
QJ QJ
o3 QJ
5  > QJ
r o3 o
* L' C00 o COo -5 = OJ -Si 5T3 ro oc ai i:
<  CO CO
.E ro 
2  ol
> K tj E
CD 03  - to
2. o3
y  ai <n
T  M O
=  t; o. 3 (VI
-i E
E  T 3   ai
e  :e  c
3  ^  QJ
2    '*= - C t . r o
o3 oo
O  rs i 
T 3  ' 'c c
0 ) OJO c
r  T ) QJ
 '-s >  > e?
In Q> -E" 
Q . T 3  O
 2  % C~ 2.-S -a
o > -O ro
uo QJ is)
QJ 5    QJ
E -a <u
o a.L) 03
03 to
-c t  ro
-O ro c 03
c I 5
ro  O
= > -
03 <U
* co it:
|  PT
tuo c 
M in C
C  V) 
OJ 91 E
 33 *- S3
Z  O </>
5   -  o  > 
U  I -
UD V)
U  6J
' c    
1 =  O  
U  -C
o 3  . . 
: =  c n  ro 2}
<u OJ 
^  >  
ro  o
o3 x:
  S iw  i :  ^03 ^  4-;
^  fN QJ
  ^  C
tO CO *_
CD ro_ro o
~  CD Cn (U < 5 Q.
X I .60
03 <D
' u  r-
1/3 03
i |< 5
*sf QJ
*I v_(N -rj do o -rr- C c ^  t
'0" T   to o
1-1 O  ^CD 03 <D
tU (j 1VJ
.* u  4  C 
03 <D
^  g -
I OJ
.  u  o i l  o  
c 1/1 - o
ro _, c  pm
    ro
V  M  60
ro .E c
^ 5  5
ro g  g
    
to i_
.33 O  TJ
tj  ro
<  Q. T3
ro to </>
 5 c
$  "to
QJ QJ
^    5
^  CN
a    o 3
5  Sj
5 E ' i -   
t  ^ 3 )
o j to aj E
T3 (D   __
C u D ro
O  c  >+- c5 .53 qj o
, TJ 43ui flu c o
  X  2 
03 .
^  C 
  *    .E to o
$ oa a.
a o c ^ ro
ro JS
J Z  CL
o ^u  O
Q. </>
3  ro
oj Qi
QJ toi/i +-
2 rn 
r> ? 00o .c o
<  rsi
i_ >. ro co 
Q  n o  u  a .
  ro (xi
< / )
C/3 CO 
 a  > .  
QJ ro
a5 ro
Er '* 
0  .2 , 
r o - 
9/3 C/3
"o QJ
> ,  ~  
> T3 > 0  
C/3 5fJ 
T3  55
yc ro
Chapter 4
Aims and Objectives
4.1 Aims
The principal aim of this thesis is to examine the efficacy of a written emotional 
disclosure intervention for individuals with infertility. The negative psychological impact 
of infertility and resultant stress inherent in the treatment of fertility problems is well 
documented in the research literature (see section 2.2). It is acknowledged that 
individuals experiencing infertility would (and do) benefit from psychosocial 
interventions aimed at alleviating the distress associated with their infertility (Boivin,
2003). Yet, individuals with infertility perceive a number of constraints (i.e. time, travel 
problems and work commitments that are problematic for attending scheduled therapy 
sessions) with the traditional face-to-face therapeutic interventions that are available to 
them (McNaughton-Cassill, Bostwick, Arthur, Robinson & Neal, 2002). Disclosure 
writing, which has been shown to provide positive benefits for some patient populations 
and individuals with elevated levels of distress, and is largely free from the stigma 
associated with traditional psychosocial therapies (see section 2.3), has been 
suggested as an alternative approach for this population of individuals (McNaughton- 
Cassill et al., 2002). Additionally, the flexibility of the disclosure writing protocol means 
that it can be delivered within the home environment, making the intervention more 
accessible and reducing the time burden of attending scheduled intervention sessions.
Since the development of the original disclosure protocol by Pennebaker and Beall 
(1986) studies that have utilised the disclosure intervention have often adapted the 
standard protocol to meet the specific demands of the study or population under 
investigation without considering the consequences for intervention efficacy (see 
Chapter 3). For the purpose of this thesis the disclosure protocol will be adapted to be 
delivered using a home-based computer-mediated format. Whilst the delivery of 
disclosure writing interventions delivered within a home-based context (e.g. Sheffield, 
Duncan, Thomson, & Johal, 2002) or via a computer (Gortner, Rude & Pennebaker, 
2006; Sheese, Brown & Graziano, 2004) is not new, it is not clear if a departure from
the standard hand-written, lab-based methodology of the disclosure protocol, to one 
that is computer-mediated and delivered outside of a controlled laboratory setting (i.e. 
in the home), has an impact on the efficacy of the intervention. In addition to attempting 
to replicate the findings of previous disclosure studies (e.g. Pennebaker et al., 1988; 
Pennebaker & Beall, 1986), a further aim of this thesis is to test methodologies and 
examine the potential moderating effects of disclosure modality (writing versus typing) 
and context (lab versus home) on study outcome.
The findings of a study examining the impact of modality on disclosure is presented in 
Chapter 5. Chapter 6  presents the findings of a study which examines the impact of the 
context in which the disclosure intervention is delivered on outcome. Chapter 8  
presents the findings of a study examining the effects of an internet-mediated written 
emotional disclosure intervention for individuals with infertility recruited from internet 
based infertility support forums.
In addition to the aims set out above, this thesis also aims to examine the role of 
language in disclosure by analysing the linguistic content of essays written by 
participants and if changes in word use influence changes in psychological and 
physical well-being in each of the studies.
4.2 Objectives
The specific objectives of the thesis are as follows:
i. To replicate the findings of previous research that has found writing about 
stressful and traumatic events to be beneficial for improving physical and 
psychological well-being.
ii. To determine if writing about traumatic or stressful events using pen-and-paper 
(handwritten) versus writing about traumatic or stressful events using a 
computer (typed):
a. Moderates the short-term effects of disclosure
b. Moderates the longer-term effects of disclosure
iii. To determine if writing about traumatic or stressful events in a laboratory versus 
writing about traumatic or stressful events in the home:
a. Moderates the short-term effects of disclosure
b. Moderates the longer-term effects of disclosure
iv. To establish if disclosing thoughts and feelings about infertility has any 
beneficial effects for the physical and psychological well-being of individuals 
with infertility.
v. To assess the impact of changes in narrative content in disclosure essays on 
changes in psychological and physical well-being.
Chapter 5
Testing Methodologies 1: Paper-and-Pen 
Versus Computer.
5.1 Overview
Chapter 2 identified a growing body of research that has demonstrated the 
effectiveness of emotional disclosure writing on general well-being. There is, as 
discussed in Chapter 3, a great deal of variation in the methods utilised in the studies 
reviewed and a number of uncertainties remain about what effect variations in the 
structure of administering disclosure writing interventions have on outcome (Smyth & 
Pennebaker, 2008). One particular departure in methodology from the standard writing 
task developed by Pennebaker is the adaptation of the intervention to a computer 
based task. A number of studies have elected to have participants conduct the writing 
sessions on personal computers (PCs) in the laboratory (Burton & King, 2008; 
Hemenover, 2003) or at home (Gortner, Rude & Pennebaker, 2006; Sheese, Brown & 
Graziano, 2004). However, with the exception of Sheese et al. (2004), none of these 
studies have acknowledged that the effectiveness of the writing intervention may, in 
part, be moderated by the medium through which it is delivered or the context in which 
it is conducted.
5.2 Introduction
The use of computers in the home, schools and workplace is widespread and 
computer-mediated modes of communication (e-mail and instant messenger {IM} 
systems) are commonplace. Arguably, students are especially more accustomed to 
using e-mail and IM to communicate and the recent phenomenon of online journals 
(weblogs or blogs) would suggest that through this increased familiarity with computers 
people are becoming more comfortable expressing personal and emotional information 
via such technological means (Qian & Scott, 2007; Suler, 2004). Indeed, a meta
analysis examining self-disclosure on computer forms (interview and questionnaire) 
compared to traditional pen-and-paper forms found greater self-disclosure of sensitive 
information on computer forms (Weisband & Kieser, 1996; see section 7.4.3.1).
There are a number of advantages to using a computer-mediated intervention. Within 
the context of written emotional disclosure research, having participants type their 
stories allows the researcher to analyse participant narratives using computerized 
content analysis programmes (i.e. Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count; LIWC) without 
having to transcribe the hand written narratives, a process that can be time consuming. 
Additionally, the demands of writing intervention studies often mean that sample sizes 
are small (e.g. Duncan et al., 2007), a computer based writing intervention, which can 
be administered via the internet, is well placed to provide access to a much wider 
population including community samples, and potentially larger numbers of 
participants, thus increasing the statistical power of studies and widening the scope for 
investigating variables that moderate the effect of written disclosure (Sheese et al.,
2004). Arguably, providing participants with the flexibility to choose the medium through 
which they would feel more comfortable expressing their emotions could be beneficial 
for recruiting and retaining participants in disclosure studies.
Whilst there are clear advantages to adapting the standard writing intervention to a 
computer-mediated format, there may be an impact on the effectiveness of the 
intervention. Whilst the standard writing task is conducted in a laboratory using a pen- 
and-paper (longhand writing), computer-mediated delivery of the writing task is often 
conducted within the home. Thus, delivery of the writing intervention differs from that of 
the standard delivery methods in both modality (pen-and-paper or typing) and context 
(laboratory or home).
Sheese et al. (2004) utilized e-mail for the submission of participants' writing in a study 
that used a home-based protocol. Participants completed pre-treatment and post
treatment assessments of physical health, mood and quality of social relations. Self- 
reports of physical health were completed on a weekly basis, and were also assessed 
through e-mail communications with the researcher, with writing instructions submitted 
and returned via e-mail. Participants in the control group reported more sick days and 
missed classes as a result of illness on average, over the five weeks following the 
writing intervention, than did the trauma writing group. The authors did not however 
control for pre-intervention absences or sick days, and even though analysis of post
intervention retrospective self-reported health indicated an improvement in the 
disclosure group relative to controls, this effect was no longer evident when pre
treatment self-reported health was controlled for. Equally, Gortner et al. (2006) found a 
web-based writing task that was conducted in both the lab and the home was only 
effective for reducing depressive symptoms in students identified as high suppressors
of emotional expression. It is not possible however to draw any conclusions about the 
impact of using a computer-based format on the outcome of these two studies as the 
findings may also be confounded by the contexts (home; Sheese et al., 2004; and 
home or laboratory; Gortner et al., 2006) in which they are implemented.
The broad aim of this thesis as outlined in section 4.1 is to examine the efficacy of a 
brief writing intervention for individuals with infertility. In order to achieve this aim, and 
considering the mixed findings of both Sheese et al. (2004) and Gortner et al. (2006) it 
is necessary to determine whether the modality and/or the context of disclosure 
moderate the effectiveness of the writing task. The current chapter will address the 
issue of modality, whilst Chapter 6  will address the question of context.
The standard method of disclosure employed in writing studies is via the use of pen- 
and-paper, often within a laboratory setting (e.g. Pennebaker & Beall, 1986), and it is 
through this methodology that positive results have been widely reported (Paez, 
Velasco & Gonzalez, 1999; Pennebaker, Kiecolt-Glaser, & Glaser, 1988). Two studies 
that have deviated from the pen-and-paper protocol by having participants write their 
narratives on PCs, but within the laboratory, have reported positive findings (Burton & 
King, 2008; Hemenover, 2003). Burton and King (2008) utilized computer based 
writing sessions for a brief two minute intervention conducted on two consecutive days 
and found an improvement in physical health at four-to-six week follow-up in disclosure 
group participants compared to controls. Likewise, in a study that utilized the standard 
20 minute writing session on three consecutive days, Hemenover (2003) found a 
laboratory based computer-mediated writing intervention to be effective in reducing 
psychological distress and increasing feelings of mastery and personal growth. Taken 
together, the findings of these studies would suggest that the adaptation of the 
standard pen and paper protocol to a computer based format is acceptable, however, it 
is not clear from these findings if there are qualitative differences between the two 
modalities.
To date there are only two published studies that have compared the effect of writing 
modality in the standard laboratory context. In the first Brewin and Lennard (1999) 
hypothesised that there would be differential effects of writing longhand compared to 
typing. Based on the assumption that for most adults writing is a routinized activity, 
whereas typing is not, Brewin and Lennard (1999) hypothesised that writing would lead 
to a greater arousal of negative emotion immediately following the writing task and that 
there would be greater disclosure in those writing by hand. The results confirmed that
participants who wrote longhand did report a more negative mood immediately after the 
task than those who typed. Further analysis revealed that participants who wrote 
longhand reported that they revealed significantly more about the event and found it 
more beneficial than those who typed, leading the authors to speculate that the 
improvements in well-being seen in written disclosure studies may be partly dependent 
on the modality of expression.
A possible explanation for the differential effect of modality is that typing may place an 
excessive cognitive load on working memory (Brewin & Lennard, 1999). Writing 
longhand, although requiring the assimilation of orthographic knowledge15 and fine 
motor skills, is considered largely an automated process by the time an individual 
reaches adulthood (Christensen, 2004). Conversely, having to attend to the task of 
typing, which for many people will be much less automated, may impede emotional 
involvement in producing the narrative. In addition to this, it is arguably the case that 
the disclosing of personal information is likely to be more readily associated with writing 
longhand (e.g. journals and diaries) than typing, as typing has tended to be used more 
for prescriptive forms of writing (e.g. formal letters, academic papers; Brewin & 
Lennard, 1999) although this is changing with the advent of online journals and 
blogging. Additionally, the speed at which text is produced by hand is often slower than 
text produced using a keyboard (Rogers & Case-Smith, 2002) and this may encourage 
deeper processing of thoughts and feelings (Pennebaker & Chung, 2007).
The findings of a more recent study examining modality were in sharp contrast to those 
of Brewin and Lennard (1999). Sharp and Hargrove (2004) found that post-writing 
affective arousal was not differentiated by modality, and that participants who wrote 
longhand or typed about an emotional topic reported similar levels of disclosure. It is 
conceivable that the difference in post-writing arousal between these two studies may 
be related to an increase in the use of computers between the times when the studies 
were conducted. In order to examine the impact of modality on writing content, analysis 
of the linguistic content of the narratives was conducted using Linguistic Inquiry and 
Word Count (LIWC; see section 5.4.3). Differences were found in eight of the word 
categories examined (positive emotion words, negative emotion words, anxiety words, 
anger words, sad words, pronouns, I and self reference) for the percentage of words 
used in the emotional essays by participants in the emotion group, who used 
significantly more of these words than their control group counterparts (the control
b An understanding o f the visual representation o f symbols as letters and the rules o f how these letters are 
used i.e.  i  before e except after c  .
group participants were asked to provide a detailed description of the content of their 
closet). There were no differences as a function of modality beyond word count, with 
typing participants producing significantly more words than their longhand counterparts. 
The conflicting findings of the two modality studies presented above (Brewin & 
Lennard, 1999; Sharp & Hargrove, 2004) indicate that it is difficult to draw clear 
conclusions on the impact of modality on the Pennebaker paradigm. Although each of 
these studies has addressed the expression of emotion through differing writing 
modalities (hand written versus typing), a limitation of both the studies presented is that 
the results are based on a single writing session. The standard writing task involves 
between three-to-four writing sessions and the positive results that are seen in the 
standard writing studies are associated with changes in linguistic content across these 
writing sessions. Specifically, an increased use of causal and insight words from the 
first to the last day of writing in trauma group participants is associated with 
improvements in health (e.g. Pennebaker & Francis, 1996). This pattern of cognitive 
word use is thought to represent a change in cognitive processing of the event being 
written about (see section 2.4.5.3). Indeed, the appraisal of events as less stressful 
and more controllable is associated with a progressive increase in understanding, 
acceptance and congruency of the event over the writing sessions (Park & Blumberg, 
2002). Therefore, the evidence would suggest that the modality by which the disclosure 
writing task is performed is unlikely to moderate the effectiveness of the intervention, 
however this hypothesis has not been adequately examined.
5.3 Aims
This aims of the current study are twofold, firstly this study seeks to test the hypothesis 
that the disclosure of thoughts and feelings relating to traumatic events is beneficial in 
improving well-being as measured by self-reports of general psychological distress, 
depression, anxiety and physical symptoms. In doing so this study also aims to test 
that hypothesis that expressing thoughts and feelings using a computer-based modality 
(typing) does not produce different immediate and longer-term effects to using a pen- 
and-paper modality (writing). In order to establish if the narrative content varies as a 
function of modality the study will also examine the linguistic content of essays written 
by disclosure group participants. In addition, changes in word use will be examined as 
predictors of outcome in the disclosure groups.
5.4 Method
5.4.1 Participants
Eighty-seven participants (78 female; 9 male) completed the study. The mean age of 
the sample was 20.43 years (SD = 5.73) and age of participants ranged from 18 to 53 
years.
5.4.2 Design
The study used a quasi-experimental, repeated measures design. Participants were 
non-randomly allocated to one of five groups: writing disclosure, writing control, typing 
disclosure, typing control and non-writing control.
Allocation to group was based on seating position in the classroom such that the first 
person was in the writing disclosure group, the second person in the typing disclosure 
group and so on. Non-writing control participants were recruited in separate classes so 
as not to bring attention to the fact that their role in the study was different to those who 
had writing tasks. Figure 5.1 shows the study design which comprised a baseline 
assessment, six week intervention period in which three 15 minute writing sessions 
were conducted at 14 day intervals by the writing/typing groups and then two follow-up 
assessments at 2 -weeks and 6 -weeks post-intervention were completed by all 
participants. The dependant variables measured at baseline and follow-up 
assessments were depression, anxiety, psychological distress, physical symptoms, 
intrusion and avoidance.
Figure 5.1: Flow diagram of study process and timescale of participation
Writing/Typing
Groups
Writing/Typing 
Session 1
14 Day Interval
Writing/Typing 
Session 2
14 Day Interval
Writing/Typing 
Session 3
Non-Writing
Control
Baseline
Assessment
14 Day Interval/alSs* 2-Week
Writing
Assessment
4 Week Interval
6 -Week
Writing
Assessment
5.4.3 Measures
The following measures were used:
Impact of Event Scale (IES; Horowitz, Wilner & Alvarez. 1979).
The IES is a 15-item self-report questionnaire that can be used to evaluate current 
subjective distress for any specific life event (total score) and cognitive processes of 
intrusion and avoidance (subscales). The intrusion subscale consists of seven items 
which measure intrusive symptoms including intrusive thoughts, nightmares, intrusive 
feelings and imagery. Eight items measure avoidance symptoms including numbing of 
responsiveness, avoidance of feelings, situations and ideas. Example items include 7 
thought about it when I didnt mean to (intrusion) and 7 stayed away from reminders of 
it  (avoidance). Responses are scored 0, 1, 3, and 5 which relate to frequency of 
occurrence. Higher scores reflect a more stressful impact of the event. Both the 
intrusion and avoidance subscales have demonstrated acceptable internal reliability (a 
= .79 and a = .82, respectively; Corcoran & Fischer, 1994) and test-retest reliability (a = 
.87 and a = .79; Horowitz et al., 1979).
Essay Evaluations Questionnaire (EEQ; Greenberg & Stone, 1992)
The EEQ is used to assess a participant's subjective evaluation of an event and their 
previous level of disclosure about that event (i.e. whether they have talked about their 
feelings previously). Respondents are asked to indicate on unipolar 7-point Likert 
scales the extent to which the essay they write is personal, meaningful, and revealing 
of their emotions, as well as how much they want to talk to others about the event, and 
how much they have talked to others, or how much they have held back from talking 
about the event with other people. Each item is individually scored (see Appendix A.3).
The Positive and Negative Affectivitv Scale (PANAS; Watson. Clark & Tellegan. 1988). 
The PANAS is a 20-item self-report scale that is used to measure either state or trait 
dimensions of positive affect (PA) and negative affect (NA). The scale consists of ten 
adjectives that describe negative moods (e.g. irritable) and ten adjectives that describe 
positive moods (e.g. excited). In the present study the immediate version of the PANAS 
is used to evaluate participants moods immediately following each writing session. 
Respondents are asked to give an answer from one to five (one being very slightly/not 
at all, five being extremely) to the question Indicate to what extent you feel this way 
at the present moment. Watson et al. (1988) found the PANAS to have good internal 
reliability (a = .87 for NA, a = . 8 8  for NA), and good test-retest ( 8  weeks) reliability (r = 
0.68 for NA, r = 0.71 for PA). Higher scores on each of the scales indicate a higher 
level of the appropriate affect.
The Physical Symptoms Inventory (PSI; Spector & Jex, 1998).
The PSI is an 18-item self-report causal indicator scale that assesses the presences of 
physical and somatic health symptoms. Each item represents a physical symptom for 
example headache, chest pain, or dizziness. Respondents are asked to indicate if they 
'did not have if, 'had it but did not see a doctorJ, or 'had it and did see a doctor' for each 
symptom in the past 30 days. Possible scores on the PSI range from 0 to 18, with 
higher scores representing higher levels of symptoms.
The Symptom Checklist-90-Revised (SCL-90-R; Deroqatis. 1992).
The SCL-90-R is a 90-item self-report measure of general psychopathology. 
Participants are asked to rate how much a particular problem has bothered them over 
the previous seven days on a scale of zero to four (0 = not at all, 4 = extremely). The 
SCL-90-R measures nine primary symptom dimensions: somatization, obsessive- 
compulsion, interpersonal sensitivity, depression, anxiety, hostility, phobic anxiety, 
paranoid ideation and psychoticism. The inventory also measures three global indices 
of distress; Global Severity Index (GSI), Positive Symptom Distress Index and Positive 
Symptom Total. For the purpose of this study the depression and anxiety dimensions of 
the scale will be used as well as the GSI to assess psychological distress. Example 
items include, Feeling blue (depression) and Heart pounding or racing (anxiety). Both 
the depression and anxiety dimensions have demonstrated good internal consistency 
(a= .90 and a= .85 respectively; Derogatis, Rickels & Rock, 1976) and 1 week test- 
retest reliability (r = .75 and r = .80 respectively; Horowitz, Rosenberg, Baer, Ureno & 
Villasenor, 1988).
Derogatis (1992) suggests that SCL-90-R symptom dimension raw scores should be 
converted to standard normalized T-scores using the norm group that is most 
representatives of the individual being examined. Raw scores were converted to T- 
scores using the non-patient adult norms. Although the mean age of the adult norm 
group is 46.0 (SD = 14.7) which is higher than that of the current sample, the 
adolescent norms are more appropriate for those in the 13-18 age group. As 57 per 
cent of the current sample were outside this age range (only 5.4% of the sample were 
aged 18), and as adult norms have been used in previous research with a much 
younger student sample (Kerr, Johnson, Gans & Krumrine, 2004; mean age 17.9 
years), it was decided that the adult norms were more appropriate for the current 
sample.
The Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count Programme (LIWC: Pennebaker, Francis & 
Booth, 2001)
The LIWC is a computerized text analysis programme that processes written text and 
calculates the proportion of words used based on 74 word categories such as negative 
emotions (e.g. hate, grief), positive emotions (e.g. happy, good), and cognitive 
mechanisms such as insight (e.g. think, know) and causation (e.g. because, effect). 
The programme also searches for a number of standard linguistic dimensions such as 
word count, percentage of pronouns, articles and prepositions from a dictionary of 
2,300 words and word stems. The linguistic indices to be used in this study are word 
count, negative emotion, positive emotion and cognitive mechanism words.
In addition to the above questionnaires participants completed demographic 
information at baseline to determine their age, gender, their current diary keeping 
activities and current use of psychotropic medication as well as any involvement in 
psycho-therapeutic treatment.
5.4.4 Ethics
The study was conducted in accordance with the British Psychological Society 
guidelines for conducting research with human participants (Code of Conduct, Ethical 
Principles and Guidelines, 2004). The study was subject to scrutiny by the Faculty 
Research Ethics Committee, and approval was granted (see Appendix A.4 for the 
Ethics Proforma and Letter of Approval). Consideration was given to the sensitive and 
distressing nature of topics that participants could potentially disclose, as a result of 
which all participants were informed that there was the potential to experience 
emotional discomfort during their participation in the study and steps were taken to 
minimise this by providing contact information to services that were available to them 
should they experience any distress as a consequence of their participation.
5.4.5 Procedure
Recruitment for the study was conducted at the start of the second semester (January). 
All questionnaires and writing tasks were completed in the laboratory where 
participants were attending a timetabled session. After a brief introduction to the study, 
participants were given an information sheet specific to their allocation to group (see 
Appendix A.5 for information sheets) to read and asked to review and sign a consent 
form if they wished to participate in the study (see Appendix A . 6  for consent form). 
Students who declined to take part were asked to take a 30 minute break from the
seminar and asked to leave the room. Those who agreed to participate were given the 
opportunity to ask questions, all participants were informed of their rights to withdraw 
and withhold information. All participants completed baseline assessments of physical 
symptoms and psychological well-being
Those assigned to the typing conditions were directed to a computer and given a floppy 
disks containing a Rich Text Format (RTF) 16 with writing instructions and document in 
which to type. Participants in the handwriting conditions were provided with a writing 
booklet that contained the relevant condition instructions. Participants remained seated 
at their tables with approximately one typing participant and one writing participant at 
each table. Typing and writing participants completed their tasks simultaneously under 
exam conditions.
5.4.5.1 Writing instructions
The writing/typing instructions given to participants were adapted from Pennebaker 
(1994) to correspond with the requirements of the current study. The instructional set 
recommended by Pennebaker (1994) are devised for a study in which participants write 
over four consecutive days, in order for the instructions to correspond to the current 
study, in which three writing sessions were conducted at 14 day intervals, any wording 
within the instructional set which referred to the timing of the writing sessions was 
changed to relate to the current study. Although Pennebaker (1994) suggests that 
writing sessions be conducted over consecutive days, the current study utilised a 14 
day interval between writing sessions to coincide with the timing of scheduled 
classroom sessions in which the study was conducted. Time between writing sessions 
(daily versus weekly) does not moderate the health effects of disclosure writing 
(Frattaroli, 2006; see section 3.4.2 for a detailed discussion).
On day one the disclosure condition participants were given the following instructions:
What I would like to have you write about today and over the next two writing 
sessions is the most traumatic, upsetting experience of your entire life. In your writing, 
I want you to really let go and explore your very deepest emotions and thoughts. You 
can write about the same experience on all three days or about different experiences
16 Rich Text Format (* .rtf) is a standard file  format that allows documents to be transferred between 
different computer platforms, this type o f document does not retain personal information o f the author 
(metadata) that is routinely stored in Word document formats (*.doc) and thus the anonymity o f the 
author is maintained.
each day. In addition to a traumatic experience, you can also write about major 
conflicts or problems that you have experienced or are experiencing now. Whatever 
you choose to write, however, it is critical that you really delve into your deepest 
emotions and thoughts. Ideally, we would also like you to write about significant 
experiences or conflicts that you have not discussed in great detail with others. You 
might tie your personal experiences to other parts of your life. How is it related to your 
childhood, your parents, people you love, who you are, or who you want to be. All of 
your writing will be completely confidential. Dont worry about spelling, grammar or 
sentence structure. The only rule is that once you begin writing continue to do so until 
your time is up, if you run out of things to say just repeat what you have already written. 
Again, in your writing, examine your deepest emotions and thoughts. 
The following time management instructions were given to control participants:
What I would like you to write about today and over the next two writing 
sessions is how you use your time. Each day, I will give you different writing 
assignments on the way you spend your time. In your writing, I want you to be as 
objective as possible. I am not interested in your emotions or opinions. Rather I want 
you to try to be completely objective. Feel free to be as detailed as possible. In todays 
writing, I want you to describe what you did yesterday from the time you got up until the 
time you went to bed. For example, you might start when your alarm went off and you 
got out of bed. You could include the things you ate, where you went, which buildings 
or objects you passed by as you walked from place to place. The most important thing 
in your writing, however, is for you to describe your days as accurately and as 
objectively as possible. 
Participants were instructed to write continuously in silence for 15 minutes. At the end 
of the 15 minutes participants were asked to complete the PANAS and EEQ. Session 2 
and Session 3 writing/typing sessions were completed 14 days apart in the classroom, 
under the supervision of the investigator. Writing instructions were adjusted to 
correspond to the writing session, with disclosure condition participants given the 
option to write about the same or a different event at each session, whilst control 
participants continued to write about managing their time (see Appendix A.7 for writing 
instructions for all sessions and conditions).
As discussed in section 3.4.4 it is not known what the optimum follow-up period is for 
observing the beneficial effects of disclosure, however Frattaroli (2006) found that
studies that assessed participants less than a month post intervention had larger 
psychological effect sizes, than those that assessed participants for at least one month. 
Indeed, improvements in psychological functioning have been reported in the days post 
disclosure (e.g. Ullrich & Lutgendorf, 2002). In view of these findings the current study 
utilised multiple follow-up assessments. Assessment of physical symptoms and 
psychological well-being were completed in the timetabled sessions two weeks after 
the final writing session (2-week follow-up) and again four weeks later (6-week follow- 
up) by all groups (see Figure 5.1 for a flow diagram of the study process). Debriefing 
was conducted in a timetabled session approximately one week after the study had 
finished, in addition, a debriefing document outlining the background to the study, its 
aims and expected outcomes was made available to participants via the University's 
web pages (see Appendix A.8 for debriefing information).
5.5 Results
5.5.1 Preparation of Data
Data was entered into SPSS and screened for omissions and invalid entries. Missing 
items were identified for items on the SCL-90-R at baseline (n = 10), 2-week follow-up 
(n = 7) and 6-week follow-up (n = 6). Derogatis (1992) notes that up to 20 per cent (< 
18) of the items can be omitted without having a substantial effect on the GSI, and the 
omission of any one item in each dimension does not affect the validity of the test. Two 
of the cases identified had a total of two items missing each belonging to a different 
dimension of the scale. Corrections for missing values where made when calculating 
raw scores (sum of item values were divided by the actual number of responses as 
opposed to the total possible number of responses). The IES data at baseline was 
missing for one participant and at 2-week follow-up for another due to non-completion. 
These cases were retained in the study and are included in the analysis of all other 
variables.
To allow for analysis of essay content, hand written essays were transcribed into type 
written format. Essay data for one participant (writing disclosure group) failed to save at 
the final session, so all essay data for this participant was removed from the analysis. 
Typed essays were cleaned in preparation for analysis with the LIWC software 
according to guidelines (Pennebaker et al., 2001); spelling errors were corrected, and 
abbreviations, hyphenated words and time markers (e.g. 6.00 am should be 6.00 a.m. 
or 6.00am) were formatted appropriately for analysis.
5.5.1.1 Uptake and attrition
Two hundred and twenty seven participants were recruited into the study. Of the 120 
participants allocated to writing groups, 12 participants did not complete the second 
writing session, and a further 13 did not complete the final writing session. Of the 
remaining 202 participants 81 did not return for the 2-week follow-up assessment and a 
further 32 did not return for the final 6-week assessment. Incomplete data was 
therefore collected from 138 participants (22 writing-control group; 27 experimental 
group; 89 non-writing control group). Overall 89 participants completed the study; two 
were removed (see section 5.4.1.2) from the final analysis leaving a total of 87 
participants. A comparison of baseline GSI scores indicated that those who did not 
complete the study had higher levels of psychological distress at baseline (Mean = 
0.86; SD = 0.70) than those who did complete the study, independent samples T-test 
(two-tailed) confirmed that participants who did not complete the study had marginally 
higher levels of psychological distress at study entry compared to those who did 
complete the study (t(223.85) = 1 -93, p = .055).
5.5.1.2 Checking assumptions
Data for all variables were examined to determine suitability for parametric analysis. 
Two cases were identified as having extreme scores on a number of the main outcome 
variables, inspection of the data sheets suggested that these participants had not 
responded to the questionnaires in line with the instructions so were removed from the 
data set. The grouped data was screened for univariate outliers based on the criterion, 
>3 standard deviations from the mean (Stevens, 2002). Eleven outliers were identified 
within the grouped data (essay evaluation scores n = 1; negative affect scores n = 3; 
positive emotion words n = 2; negative emotion words n = 2; anxiety scores n = 3) and 
the distribution of the grouped data was found to be significantly skewed (>2.58 or - 
2.58; Clark-Carter, 2004) in two of the grouped variables (positive emotion words = 
3.07; negative affect = 2.71). Whilst it is advised by some that steps should be taken to 
reduce the impact of outlying scores through either transformation of the data or 
adjustment of the outlying score (Tabachnick & Fidell, 2001), there is variability in the 
treatment of outliers amongst researchers (Orr, Sackett & Dubois, 1991). On 
examination of the cases with outlying scores it was decided that the cases 
represented legitimate scores and were not due to errors or omissions so were 
retained in the subsequent analysis. In such situations Kruskal (1960) suggests that all 
analysis be conducted with and without the outlying scores. Analysis using adjusted 
scores did not alter the results, for this reason the results reported are for unadjusted 
scores.
5.5.1.3 Statistical analysis and sample size considerations
Consistent with the analysis techniques employed in a number of disclosure studies 
(Pennebaker & beall, 1986; Pennebaker & Francis, 1996; Schwartz & Drotar, 2004; 
Sloan, Marx, Epstein & Lexington, 2007) analysis of the immediate effects (positive 
affect and negative affect), longer-term effects (depression, anxiety, GSI, physical 
symptoms, intrusion and avoidance) and language use (negative emotion words, 
positive emotion words and cognitive mechanism words) of written disclosure were 
examined using a series of factorial analysis of variance (ANOVA). Hierarchical linear 
regressions were employed in the analysis of language change across writing sessions 
as a predictor of outcome. Change scores were calculated for each of the word 
categories by subtracting the total percentage of words used at the first writing session 
from the total percentage of words used at the final writing session as has been done in 
previous research (Pennebaker, Mayne & Francis, 1997; Rivkin, Gustafson, 
Weingarten & Chin, 2006; Schwartz & Drotar, 2004; Ullrich & Lutgendorf, 2002).
A series of a priori power analysis were conducted using Gpower 3.0.10 (Erdfelder, 
Lang & Buchner, 2007) to determine the optimal sample size requirements to obtain an 
effect size equivalent to those observed in previous disclosure writing studies. For 
example in the meta-analysis conducted by Smyth (1998) an effect size of d = .66 was 
calculated for psychological well-being and d = .42 for self-reported physical health 
which constitutes a medium effect size (Cohen, 1977). Using these previously 
published effect sizes as a guide, power calculations indicated that a total sample size 
of 86 (a = .05, power = .80, Critical f = (1, 84) = 3.95) would be required to detect 
between-group main effects, a total sample size of 43 (a = .05, power = .80, Critical f = 
(2, 84) = 3.11) would be required to detect within-group main effects and a total sample 
size of 40 (a = .05, power = .80, Critical f = (6, 72) = 2.51) would be required to detect 
interaction effects in the analysis of the short-term and longer-term effects of 
disclosure. Whilst the analysis of the longer-term effects with the inclusion of a control 
group for comparison would require a total sample size of 108 (a = .05, power = .80, 
Critical f = (2, 105) = 3.08) to detect between-group main effects, 43 (a = .05, power = 
.80, Critical f = (2, 84) = 3.11) would be required to detect within-group main effects 
and a total sample size of 36 (a = .05, power = .80, Critical f = (4, 66) = 2.51) would be 
required to detect interaction effects. Additionally, for the analysis of language use in 
disclosure a total sample size of 86 (a = .05, power = .80, Critical f = (1, 84) = 3.95) 
would be required to detect between-group main effects, a total sample size of 43 (a = 
.05, power = .80, Critical f = (2, 84) = 3.11) would be required to detect within-group 
main effects and a total sample size of 28 (a = .05, power = .80, Critical f = (2, 52) =
3.18) would be required to detect interaction effects. Consequently, the sample size in 
the present study is smaller than that which was determined to be adequate from a 
priori power calculations. However, the present study sample size is comparable to that 
of previous studies in which effects of disclosure have been detected using equivalent 
analysis techniques (Pennebaker & Beall, 1986; Pennebaker & Francis, 1996; 
Weinman, Ebrecht, Scott, Walburn & Dyson, 2008). When sample size is small this 
increases the probability of making a Type II error (rejecting the research hypothesis 
when it is indeed true). Consistent with method employed by OConnor, Archer and 
Frederick (2004) to address this problem, the effect sizes (reported as partial eta 
squared) for all non-significant main and interaction effects are included for 
comparison. However, as is noted by OConnor et al. (2004) any such effects may be 
due to chance alone and therefore the effect sizes reported alongside non-significant 
findings should be interpreted with this in mind.
A priori power calculations for the hierarchical linear regression analysis were also 
conducted in order to determine required sample size for the analysis of word change 
predictors of well-being and indicated that a total sample size of 85 (a = .05, power = 
.80, Critical f = (4, 80) = 2.49) would be required to detect effects in a design with four 
predictor variables. Again, the size of the sample to be included in this analysis is 
smaller than that recommended, but comparable to that of studies which have used 
hierarchical regression and found word change to be predictive of changes in wellbeing 
following disclosure (van Middendorp & Geenen, 2008; Schwartz & Drotar, 2004).
5.5.2 Sample Characteristics and Baseline Data
Ninety percent of the sample were female (n = 78). The mean age of participants 
(20.44 years, SD = 5.73) is comparable to that of other writing studies that have used a 
student sample (Lumley & Provezano, 2003; Park & Blumberg, 2002; Greenberg & 
Stone, 1992). Ninety seven per cent of the participants were Caucasian (n = 84), one 
person identified themselves as black, one as Asian and one classified themselves as 
other. A small number of participants reported that they were currently using 
psychotropic medication (n = 3) and five were receiving counselling17. Although over 
half of the participants (n = 46) indicated that they currently kept a diary, only six of the 
diary keepers used their diary to write down their feelings and thoughts, the remainder 
of the sample used diaries for more practical purposes including recording
17 Removing participants receiving counselling or psychotropic medication from the analysis did not alter 
the findings o f the study.
appointments (n = 72), things to do (n = 2) and recording dates of significant events (n 
= 5). One person did not report for what purpose they kept a diary.
Descriptive information for all well-being measures at baseline is presented in Table 
5.1. For the purpose of comparing this sample with other studies both raw score 
calculations and standard normalized T-scores for the SCL-90-R symptom dimensions 
are presented, all further analysis is conducted using the raw score calculations. In 
terms of physical health, symptom reporting was lower in this sample (Mean = 3.97) 
than that of published norms (Spector & Jex, 1998).
Table 5.1 Means, standard deviations and range of scores for well-being measures at 
study entry.
Measures N Mean SD Range
Physical Symptoms Inventory 87 3.97 2.39 0-11
SCL-90-R Variables
Depression 87 0.98 0.71 0.08-3.08
(59.74) (8.03) (42-80J
Anxiety 87 0.54 0.54 0-3.0
(54.76) (9.78) (37-80)
Global Severity Index 87 0.70 0.46 0.06-2.21
(59.60) (8.11) (37-79)
Impact of Event Subscales
Intrusion 86 10.63 9.03 0-33
Avoidance 86 10.71 9.13 0-34
Normalized T-scores and standard deviations for the SCL-90- R variables are 
presented in parentheses.
Similarly, IES scores for intrusion and avoidance were lower than scores reported in 
studies that have used comparable samples (Schoutrop, Lange, Hanewald, Davidovich 
& Salomon, 2002; Lutgendorf & Antoni, 1999; Greenberg, Wortman & Stone, 1996). 
Sample mean raw scores on depression, anxiety and GSI dimensions were higher than
those of the adult norm group from which standard normalized T-scores were 
calculated.
The scores from the current sample were more in line with those in the adolescent non
patient norm group (depression, Mean = 0.80, SD = 0.69; anxiety, Mean = 0.66, SD = 
0.62; GSI, Mean = 0.76, SD = 0.54), this may be due to the fact that 75 per cent of the 
current sample are closer in age (18-19) to the adolescent norm group (mean age 
15.6) than the adult norm group (mean age 46.0).
5.5.3 Checking for Group Differences
To determine if there were any existing differences between the groups prior to the 
intervention phase of the study a series of one-way analysis of variance with the 
groups: writing disclosure, writing control, typing disclosure, typing control and non
writing control entered as the independent variables were conducted. The analysis 
showed that the groups did not differ in terms of age (F(4,86) = 2.23, p = .073), physical 
symptoms (PSI) (F(4i86) = 0.04, p = .997), psychological distress (GSI) (F(4i 86) = 1-16, p 
= .335) or symptoms of depression (F(4,86) = 0.72,p = .584) and anxiety (F(4,86) = 0.49, 
p = .740). Groups also did not differ in terms of intrusive (F(4,85) = 0.65, p = .628) and 
avoidant (F(4i85) = 0.33, p = .858) symptoms relating to traumatic experiences (means 
and standard deviations are presented in Table 5.2).
I l l
Table 5.2 Means and standard deviations for age and well-being measures at study
entry by group allocation.
Group
Writing Writing Typing Typing Non-
Disclosure Control Disclosure Control Writing
Control
( n -  17) (n = 18) (n = 15) (n = 19) (n = 18)
Age 19.00 19.72 19.60 19.79 23.89
(1.71) (4.38) (4.05) (3.79) (10.74)
PSI 3.94 3.78 4.07 3.95 4.06
(2.29) (2.62) (2.40) (2.72) (2.18)
Depression 1.09 0.93 1.14 1.01 0.76
(0.88) (0.68) (0.69) (0.71) (0.62)
Anxiety 0.61 0.59 0.57 0.56 0.39
(0.55) (0.54) (0.49) (0.70) (0.37)
GSI 0.78 0.81 0.78 0.56 0.59
(0.56) (0.56) (0.49) (0.32) (0.39)
Intrusion 11.38 9.06 13.67 10.00 9.67
(7.69) (10.74) (9.38) (9.35) (7.92)
Avoidance 11.44 10.56 12.29 8.84 10.89
(10.10) (10.33) (9.31) (6.90) (9.57)
Standard deviations are presented in parentheses.
5.5.4 Instruction Adherence and Content of Essays
A series of checks were conducted to determine if participants in the writing groups had 
adhered to the writing instructions. Independent sample T-tests (two-tailed) on post
writing scores on the EEQ (Greenberg & Stone, 1992) confirmed that participants in the 
disclosure groups rated their essays as more personal (t(5 3.58) = 9.60, p<.001, d = 2.62), 
more meaningful (t(67) = 14.03, p<.001, d = 3.43) and more revealing of their emotions
(t(54.12) = 13.45, p<.001, d = 3.66) than controls, had wanted to talk to others about the 
event (t(56.66) = 7.51, p<.001, d = 2.00), and had held back from talking about the event 
(1(57.25) = 4.27, p<001, d = 1.13) more than control groups. Consistent with previous 
research (e.g. Pennebaker & Francis, 1996) comparisons of emotional content of 
essays using LIWC text analysis was used to further validate adherence to writing 
instructions. Positive and negative emotion words were calculated as a percentage and 
averaged across the three writing sessions. Independent samples T-tests (two-tailed) 
revealed that disclosure group participants used significantly more negative emotion 
words (t(33.90) = 13.26, p<.001, d = 4.57), positive emotion words (t(52.2 9) = 5.09, p<.001, 
d = 1.41) and cognitive words (t(66) = 17.31, p<.001, d = 4.63) than control group 
participants in their essays. These results suggest that the experimental manipulation 
was successful and that the narratives from participants in the disclosure groups were 
revealing of peoples' emotions as per their writing task instructions.
The themes in the disclosure narratives were consistent with those reported in other 
disclosure studies (Epstein, Sloan & Marx, 2005; Greenberg et al., 1996; Lutgendorf & 
Antonio, 1999). The events disclosed at the first writing session included the death of a 
close family member or friend (25.8%); break-up of a relationship (25.8%); serious 
illness or accident involving self, close friend or family member (12.9%); breakdown of 
parent's marriage (12.9%); coming to university (9.7%); academic pressures (3.2%); 
and bullying (3.2%). Of the 31 disclosure participants 17 wrote about the same event at 
each session and 14 wrote about different events over the three sessions, other events 
disclosed in the following sessions included death of a pet, onset of a phobia, physical 
attack, miscarriage, loss of property and family moving away.
5.5.5 Post-Writing Arousal
Two separate 2 x 2 x 3  mixed design analysis of variance (ANOVA) were performed to 
assess the effects for the Independent Variables (IVs), modality (computer vs. hand 
writing), condition (disclosure vs. control) and session (writing session 1, 2, & 3) on 
post-writing affective arousal as measured by negative affect (NA) and positive affect 
(PA). Means and standard deviations across groups are presented in Table 5.3. For 
NA, analysis indicated an overall main effect for condition (F(1, 65 ) = 15.14, p <.001, r f  
= ,1918), such that participants in the disclosure condition (those who expressed their 
emotions) reported higher levels of negative affect overall immediately after writing
18 Reported effect sizes (q2) represent pa rtia l eta squared.
compared to the control writers who wrote or typed about their plans for the day/week 
(Means 16.70 and 12.62 respectively).
Table 5.3 Mean affect scores post-writing as a function of modality, condition and 
session.
Group
Disclosure Control
Writing Typing Writing Typing
(n = 17) (n = 15) (n = 18) (n = 19)
Post-Session NA WS 1 17.18 (6.12) 16.60 (5.10) 12.11 (3.11) 12.11 (4.69)
WS 2 19.18(8.34) 15.60 (7.39) 14.11 (4.89) 13.74 (6.80)
WS 3 19.06 (7.93) 12.60 (3.01) 11.89 (2.25) 11.74 (2.81)
Post Session PA WS 1 20.58 (6.10) 21.67 (7.97) 21.39 (6.58) 22.37 (6.82)
WS 2 22.29 (9.12) 21.20 (8.04) 20.00 (7.09) 22.79 (7.38)
WS 3 21.24 (6.51) 20.27 (8.71) 20.06 (5.16) 21.32 (6.63)
WS = Writing session. Standard deviations in parentheses
There was no significant main effect for modality (F(1> 6s) = 3.13, p = .082, q2 = .05) and 
no significant interaction between modality and condition (F(165) = 2.56, p = .115, q2 = 
.04). There was a significant within-participants main effect of writing session for NA 
(F(2 , 130) = 3.30, p = .04, q2 =.05). Post hoc19 pairwise comparisons indicated a 
significant reduction in NA from writing session two to writing session three (p = .020, d 
= .29; means 15.59 and 13.77 respectively). There were no interactions between 
writing session and modality (F(2 , 130) = 2.18, p = .117, q2 = .03), writing session and 
condition (F(2 , 130) = 0.42, p = .660, q2 = .01) or writing session by modality by condition 
(F,2 . ,30} = 1.97, p = . 143, n2 = -03).
For PA there was no significant between-participants main effect for modality (F(i, 65) = 
0.24, p = .623, q2 = .004) or condition (F(1, 65) = 0.01, p = .935, q2 = .00) and no 
significant interaction between modality and condition (F(1, 65) = 0.54, p = .465, q2 = 
.01). There was no within-participant main effect for writing session (F(2, 130) = 0.51, p = 
.60, q2 = .01) and no significant within-participant interactions between writing session 
and modality (F(2,130) = 0.12, p = .883, q2 = .002), writing session and condition (F(2j 130)
19 All w ithin-participant post-hoc procedures are conducted using least-significant difference 
(LSD) pairw ise comparisons.
= 0.19, p = .829, n2 = -003) or writing session by modality by condition (F(2, 130) = 0.57, p 
= .566, r|2 = .01).
5.5.6 Longer-term Effects of Writing
To examine for any differences in well-being as a function of writing group and modality 
a 3-way mixed ANOVA was conducted with modality (typing vs. writing) and condition 
(disclosure essay vs. control essay) as between-participant variables and assessment 
period (baseline, 2-week post writing and 6-week post writing) as the within-participant 
variable, separately for PSI, depression, anxiety, GSI, avoidance and intrusion. The 
means and standard deviations for outcome measures as a function of group and time 
of assessment are presented in Table 5.4.
5.5.6.1 Physical symptoms
Analysis of PSI scores showed no significant main effects for condition (F(1i65) = 0.73, p 
= .396, r)2 = .001), modality (F(1, 65) = 0.01, p = .940, r\2 = .00), or for the interaction 
between condition and modality (F(1, 65) = 0.12, p = .731, r| 2 = .002). Self reported 
physical symptoms did not differ significantly between assessment periods (F(177, 15.22) 
= 2.10, p = .133, rj2 = .03) and no interaction effects emerged between assessment 
period and modality (F(1.77 , 115.22) = 0.21, p = .781, rj2 = .003), between assessment 
period and condition (F(1.77, 115.22) = 0.89, p = .404, q2 = .01) or assessment period by 
modality by condition (F(1.77, n5.22) = 0.80, p = .437, rj2 = .01).
5.5.6.2 Psychological distress
An examination of the group means (Table 5.4) suggests a reduction in symptoms of 
depression, anxiety and psychological distress (GSI) from baseline to 2-week follow-up 
and again at 6-week follow-up. Depression scores did not differ between conditions 
(F(1,65) = 3.40, p = .07, r|2 = .05) or modalities (F(1i65) = 0.24, p = .878, r\2 = .00) and no 
significant interaction between condition and modality emerged (F(1i65) = 0.75, p = .785, 
n2 = .001).
A significant main effect of assessment period for depression scores (F(1.82, 118.2 0) = 
16.15, p<.001, rj2 = .20) followed up with pairwise comparisons confirmed that 
symptoms reduced from baseline to 2-week assessment (p = .004, d = 0.33) and again 
from 2-week to 6-week assessment (p= .016, d = 0.22).
in m 0CTc
M" 05 M" M" x - M" 05 CM CO T CO
Is-  05 LO M" CM CM co co co m ; CM
CO r -  d  d d  d d  d 00 CO Is-'
___ o Is- _v xfr M" LO 05 CO T - ,_ 0 0 CO CD
05 o 0 0 05 LO M" CM T - CO CM co CM r  o
T nJ- CM T d d d  d d  d T 05 05 05
II II II
c c c
M" CM T CO o CD CM 05 CD 05
05 Is- o  r - LO Is- LO CO CO M" 0 0
CO CM t- '  d d  d d  d d  05 0 0
CO co r -  LO Is-  CM Is- x -  0 5 0 5
co M " LO LO CO x f  M " CD Is- co
CM d  d d  d d  d Is-' h-' d
__s CM LO __s CD o h - 00 O CO _ o T Is-
00 CM CD 00 Is- LO M- M- CD CO 00 o 05 CD
X- M" CM T d d d  o o o v_ 05 f- ' 05
II II II
c c c
CO CM co oo 05 M" T - CD CD x f CD
Is- CO 05 CD LO LO 00 LO O  h - LO
co CM d  d d  d d  d 05 d d
O  Is- M" x - Is-  LO 05 T -
CD CM 00 CD CO CO LO xj-
x f  co d  o d  d d  o
Is-  o M" 05 Is-  05 co oo
0 O  M - T - CD LO x f Is-  x T
c x T  CM t-  o d  d d  d
O  M- 
O  CM
M" CM
CO M"
co co 
Is-  co 
CD co
CO 05
0 5I-J
00 CO CM x f oo M"
o oo CO LO Is- LO
T' d d  o d d
CO 0 5  
CO CD
x -  Is- '
_s Is- CM ,_v 0 0 CM CD T - x- o _ o CD CO
LO 0 0 h - LO 05 LO M" LO Is-  M" LO o 05 05
T Xt" CM T d d d  d o d T_ 05 Is-' d
II II II x
c c c
x f LO T - LO CM 00 r -  05 CO CO 05
05 05 00 Is- M" xr LO x f XT- CD CD
co d  d d  o d  d 05 CO x
_ 0 0 M" ,__ co 0 0 LO CD 05 x - ,_^ CD 05 CO
Is- T 05 Is- o r - LO CD CO LO CD O  Is- CD
T LO CM T_ d d  o d  d T x   d CM
II II II X X x
The failure to find any significant interaction effects for depression between 
assessment period and modality (F(1.82, 118.20) = 1-42, p = .246, r f  = .02), assessment 
period and condition (F(1.82, 118.20) = 1-54, p = .219, rj2 = .02) or assessment period by
modality by condition (F(1.82, 118.20) = 0.30, p = .723, i f  = -01) suggested that this
20improvement was independent of condition or mode of disclosure. Figure 5.2 
illustrates changes in depression scores for each group at each assessment period.
Figure 5.2 Depression scores for groups bv assessment period.
a Baseline 
b 2-week 
6-week
Disclosure Disclosure Control Control
Writing Typing Writing Typing
Figure 5.3 Anxiety scores for groups bv assessment period.
~~---------------- I ------- ------------ ----
T ' ;-L l i
-----
i l l
Disclosure Disclosure 
Writing Typing
Control
Writing
Control
Typing
h Baseline 
s 2-week 
si 6-week
The same pattern of results was seen for symptoms of anxiety as illustrated in figure 
5.3. There was no significant main effect for condition (F(1,6s) = 0.82, p = .367, i f  = .01)
20 Error bars w ithin figures represent standard error.
or modality (F(1i 65) = 0.97, p = .329, r f  = .02) and no significant interaction between 
condition and modaiity (F(165) = 0.15, p = .696, r f  = .002). A significant main effect of 
assessment period suggested that anxiety scores changed over the study period (F(1.65, 
107.0 7) = 10.55, p<001, r f  = .14). Pairwise comparisons indicated that anxiety 
symptoms reduced from baseline to 2-week assessment (p = .016, d = .30) and again 
from 2-week to 6-week assessment (p = .026, d = .21). No significant within group 
interaction effects were observed between assessment period and modality (F(1.65 , 107.07) 
= 0.63, p = .507, r f  = .01), assessment period and condition (F(1.65i 107 .0 7) = 0.72, p = 
.464, r f  = .01) or assessment period by modality by condition (F{165i 107.0 7) = 0.32, p = 
.686, r|2 = .01).
Similarly, GSI scores did not differ between conditions (F(1, 65) = 2.18, p = .144, r f  = 
.03) or mode of disclosure (F(1i65) = 0.64, p = .427, rj2 = .01). No significant interaction 
between modality and condition (F(1i 65) = 1.35, p = .250, r f  = .02) emerged. A 
reduction in GSI mean scores across the study period for all groups was confirmed by 
a significant main effect of assessment period (F(2, 130) = 19.45, p<.001, r f  = .23). 
Pairwise comparisons confirmed a significant reduction in GSI scores from baseline to 
2-week assessment (p = .002, d = .31) and a further significant reduction was seen 
again at the 6 -week assessment (p=.003, d = .27). Again there were no significant 
interaction effects between assessment period and condition (F(2 , 130) = 1.28, p = .282, 
rj2 = .02), assessment period and modality (F(2,130) = 1.27, p = .285, r f  = .02) or time 
by condition by modality (F(2, 130) = 0.17, p = .848, r f  -  .003). Changes in GSI scores 
across groups are illustrated in Figure 5.4.
Figure 5.4 GSI scores for groups bv assessment period.
a Baseline 
a 2-week 
w 6-week
Disclosure Disclosure Control Control
Writing Typing Writing Typing
Overall, results indicate that there were significant improvements in psychological well
being across the study, these improvements, however, were independent of condition 
or modality. This improvement in well-being did not extend to physical health which 
showed no significant change over the study period. The means and standard 
deviations based on main effects of time for all outcome variables are presented in 
Table 5.5.
5.5.6.3 Symptoms of intrusion and avoidance
Examination of the mean scores for intrusion indicated a gradual reduction in intrusive 
thoughts across the study in all but one of the groups (a reduction at 2-week 
assessment for the disclosure typing group was followed by a slight increase at 6-week 
assessment). No significant between group effects for condition (F(1i 63) = 0.91, p = 
.343, rj2 = -01) or modality (F{1,63) = 0.11, p = .742, rj2 = .002) emerged.
Table 5.5 Means and standard deviations collapsed across groups for main effect of 
assessment period with F-Tests effect sizes for all outcome variables.
Baseline 2-Week Post 
Writing
6-Week Post 
Writing
F P= n*
PSI M 3.94 4.54 4.13 2.10 .133 .03
SD 2.46 2.78 2.39
DEP M 1.03a 0.81a 0.68a 16.15 <.001 .20
SD 0.73 0.59 0.59
ANX M 0.59a 0.43a 0.34a 10.55 <.001 .14
SD 0.57 0.48 0.38
GSI M 0.73a 0.59a 0.48a 19.45 <.001 .23
SD 0.48 0.41 0.41
Intrusion M 11.00 9.57 8.78 2.66 .082 .04
SD 9.36 8.86 8.63
Avoidance M 10.71 10.49 9.96 0.33 .721 -
SD 9.15 10.02 9.64
Note: Means with the same superscript are different at the .05 level.
The interaction between modality and condition was not significant (F(1. 63) = 0.01, p = 
.938, rj2 = -00). No significant within-group main effect for assessment period (F(1.75, 
iio.2 7) = 2.66, p = .082 rj2 = .04) or significant interactions emerged between 
assessment period and modality (F(1.75i n 0.27) = 0.95, p = .380, rj2 = .02), assessment 
period and condition (F(1 75, 110.2 7) = 0.45, p = .612, q2 = .01) or assessment period by 
modality by condition (F(1.75,110.2 7) = 0.39, p = .648, q2 = .01).
The pattern of means for avoidance suggested that all but the disclosure typing group 
experienced a gradual reduction in avoidance across the study. However, avoidance 
scores did not significantly differ between conditions (F(1i63) = 1.05, p = .310, q2 = .02) 
or mode of disclosure (F(1i 63) = 0.43, p = .515, q2 = .01). There was no significant 
interaction between modality and condition (F(1i 63) = 0.08, p = .778, q2 = .001). 
Avoidance did not significantly change between baseline and follow-up assessments 
(F(2 , 126) = 0.33, p = .721, q2 = .01) and there were no interactions between assessment 
period and modality (F(2, 126) = 0.60, p = .549, q2 = .01), assessment period and 
condition (F(2, 126) = 0.04, p = .961, q2 = .001) or assessment period by modality by 
condition (F(1i 126) = 0.50, p = .610, q2 = .01).
5.5.7 Analysis with a Non-writing Control Group Comparison
As modality did not moderate the observed effects of writing, both writing and typing 
disclosure groups were collapsed into a disclosure condition and control condition for 
comparison with the non-writing control condition. A 3 x 3 mixed ANOVA was 
conducted with condition (disclosure, writing control and non-writing control) as a 
between-participant variable and assessment period (baseline, 2-week follow-up and 6- 
week follow-up) as the within-participant variable, separately for PSI, depression, 
anxiety, GSI, intrusion and avoidance. The means and standard deviations for outcome 
measures as a function of condition and time of assessment are presented in Table 
5.5.7.1 Physical symptoms
The pattern of mean scores for the PSI suggest an increase in self-reported physical 
symptoms in all conditions from baseline to 2-week follow-up assessment, followed by 
a reduction in symptoms at 6-week assessment. PSI scores did not differ significantly 
between conditions ( F (2 , 84) = 0.42, p = .656, q2 = .01). There was no significant main 
effect of assessment period ( F (1 .86, 156.01) = 2.73, p = .07, q2 = .03) although the data
suggested a trend, and there was no interaction between assessment period and 
condition (F(3 .72. 156.0 1) = 0.54, p = .694, r f  = .01).
Table 5.6 Means and standard deviations for all outcome variables as a function of 
condition for pre-writing. 2-weeks post writing and 6-week post writing assessment.
B/line
Disclosure
Writing-control 
B/line 2- 6- 
week week
B/line
Control
PSI M 4.03
(n = 32) 
5.03 4.25 3.86
(n = 37) 
4.11 4.03 4.06
(n = 18) 
4.72 4.44
SD 2.28 2.80 2.63 2.64 2.73 2.20 2.28 2.40 3.09
DEP M 1.11 1.00 0.82 0.97 0.65 0.56 0.76 0.67 0.79
SD 0.77 0.66 0.68 0.69 0.48 0.49 0.62 0.64 0.88
ANX M 0.60 0.51 0.40 0.58 0.36 0.28 0.54 0.37 0.32
SD 0.51 0.58 0.42 0.62 0.37 0.35 0.54 0.43 0.46
GSI M 0.78 0.70 0.54 0.68 0.49 0.43 0.58 0.59 0.55
SD 0.50 0.47 0.45 0.46 0.32 0.38 0.39 0.54 0.51
Intrusion M 12.49 10.06 9.71 9.72 9.14 7.97 9.67 9.06 9.61
SD 8.48 9.43 9.36 10.00 8.45 8.00 7.92 10.46 12.03
Avoidance M 11.85 11.81 10.97 9.72 9.36 9.08 10.89 8.67 10.11
SD 9.57 10.54 10.04 8.78 9.56 9.33 9.57 9.42 10.48
5.5.7.2 Psychological distress
Examination of the mean scores suggests a gradual reduction in psychological 
symptom reporting across the study period for all conditions with the exception of 
depression which improves at the 2-week assessment but appears to deteriorate at 6- 
weeks in the non-writing control condition. Depression scores did not differ significantly 
between conditions (F(1,84) = 1-84, p = .165, r f  = .04). A significant within-group main 
effect for assessment period emerged (F(2, i6s) = 8.18, p<.001, r f  = .09). Pairwise 
comparisons confirmed a significant overall reduction in depression scores from 
baseline to 2-week assessment (p = .021, d = .30), 6-week assessment scores 
remained significantly lower than baseline depression scores (p<.001, d = .41) but 
scores did not differ significantly between 2-week and 6-week assessment (p = .368).
There was a significant interaction effect for assessment period and condition (F(4, 168) 
= 2.98, p = .0 2 1 , rj2 = .07). Both the writing control condition (F(2, 72) = 14.80, p<.0 0 1 , r f  
= .29) and the disclosure condition (F(2) 62) = 4.59, p = .014, r| 2 =.13) participants 
experienced a significant reduction in depressive symptoms overall. Further 
examination of this interaction effect also suggested that the reduction in depression 
scores in the writing control condition from baseline to 2 -week follow-up was 
significantly greater than the reduction seen in the disclosure condition at this time (p = 
.035, d = .61), however at 6 -week follow-up depression scores were not significantly 
different between the writing groups (p = .220). Non-writing control participants did not 
report any significant reduction in symptoms (F(2,34) = 0.60, p = .556, r\2 = .03).
Analysis of anxiety scores showed no main effect of condition (F(1, 84) = 0.82, p = .443, 
r f  = .02). Consistent with the pattern of mean scores there was a significant main 
effect of assessment period (F(1.73, 145.67) = 7.41, p = .001, r f  = .08). Pairwise 
comparisons confirmed that there was a significant reduction in anxiety scores from 
baseline to 2-week follow-up (p = .05, d = .26) and between 2-week to 6 -week follow- 
up (p = .046, d = .18). Six week assessment anxiety scores remained significantly 
lower than baseline scores (p<.001, d = .44). There was no significant interaction 
between assessment period and condition for anxiety scores (F (3 47, i 4 5 .6 7) = 1.1 1, p = 
.35, r f  = -03).
Likewise, GSI scores did not differ between conditions (F(1i84) = 1.12, p = .333, r f  = 
.03) but did produce a significant main effect of assessment period (F(2, 168) = 9-88, 
p<.001, r f  = .11). Again, pairwise comparisons indicated a significant reduction in GSI 
scores from baseline to 2-week follow-up (p = .03, d = .44) and between 2-week to 6 - 
week follow-up (p = .03 d = .23). GSI scores remained significantly lower than baseline 
scores (p<.001, d = .47) at 6 -week follow-up. There was no significant interaction 
between assessment period and condition for GSI scores (F(4i 168) = 1.90, p = .11, r f  = 
.04).
Overall, the results suggest that writing about a traumatic event did not produce 
significant differential outcomes for symptoms of anxiety or global psychological 
functioning compared to writing about plans for the day/week or not writing at all. 
However, writing about either a traumatic event or plans for the day/week did appear to 
produce a significant reduction in depressive symptoms compared to not writing at all.
5.5.7.3 Symptoms of intrusion and avoidance
The pattern of the mean scores for intrusion indicated a gradual reduction in intrusive 
thoughts across the study in all but the non-writing control condition who reported an 
increase in intrusion from 2-week assessment to 6-week assessment. No significant 
between-group effect for condition (F(1i 82) = 0.44, p = .645, r f  = .01) emerged and 
there was no significant within-group effect for assessment period (F(1.84i 150.77) = 1.52, p 
= .223, r f  = .02). There was no significant interaction between assessment period and 
condition (F{3.68,150.77) = 0.47, p = .743, r f  = .01).
Avoidance scores followed the same pattern as intrusion scores. Again avoidance 
scores did not significantly differ between conditions (F(1i82) = 0.58, p = .563, r f  = .01). 
Avoidance scores did not significantly change between baseline and follow-up 
assessments (F(2,164) = 0.50, p = .608, r f  = .01) and there was no interactions between 
assessment period and condition (F(4i 164) = 0.28, p = .888, r|2 = -01).
5.5.8 Language Analysis
In order to determine if modality had a differential effect on the production of emotional 
narratives in terms of content, the analysis of the number of words produced and the 
percentage of positive emotion, negative emotion and cognitive words within disclosure 
narratives was conducted using a 2-way mixed ANOVA with modality (writing and 
typing) as the between-group variable and writing session (session 1, session 2, and 
session 3) as the within-group variables. The means and standard deviations for the 
linguistic indices are presented in Table 5.7. Modality did not have a significant effect 
on number of words written (F(1j29) = 1.87, p = .182, r f  = .06). A significant main effect 
for writing session (F(1.32i 38.30) = 12.17, p<.001, r f  = .30) suggested that there was a 
significant difference in the number of words produced across writing sessions. 
Pairwise comparisons confirmed that the number of words produced reduced from the 
first to the second session (p = .046, d = .23), and again at the final session (p = .001, 
d = .50). There was no significant interaction between session and modality F(1.32j 38 30) 
= 2.56, p = .086, n2 = -08).
Disclosure groups did not differ in their use of positive emotion words as a function of 
modality (F(1i29) = 1.38, p = .250, r f  = .05). The means indicated an overall increase in 
the percentage of positive emotion words used across the writing sessions but this did 
not reach statistical significance (F(2, 58) = 2.99, p = .058, r f  = .09). There was no 
significant interaction between session and modality (F(2,58) = 1.34, p = .271, r f  = .04).
Similarly, the use of negative emotion words did not differ between modalities (F(1> 29) = 
0.14, p = .710, r]2 =.01). Analysis did reveal a difference in the use of negative emotion 
words across writing sessions (F(2, 58) = 4.19, p = .020, r\2 = .13). Pairwise comparisons 
indicated that this effect was due to a reduction in the use of negative emotion words 
from session 2 to session 3 (p = .011, d = .38), the percentage of negative emotion 
words used from session one to session three also reduced significantly (p = .01, d = 
.50). The interaction effect between session and modality was not significant (F(2, 58) = 
2.84, p = .067, n2 = 09).
Table 5.7 Means and standard deviations for word count and total percentage of 
positive emotion, negative emotion and cognitive process words of disclosure group 
essays.
Writing Group Typing Group
( n -  17) (n = 14)
WS 1 WS 2 WS 3 WS 1 WS 2 WS 3
Word Count M 405.53 414.53 341.71 484.33 421.60 364.80
SD 66.91 82.03 114.16 171.00 119.22 154.24
Pos. emotion words M 1.34 1.73 1.53 1.62 1.66 2.45
(%) SD 0.83 1.07 0.91 0.71 1.03 1.28
Neg. emotion words M 3.56 3.50 3.41 3.89 3.65 2.44
(%) SD 1.92 1.89 1.60 0.82 1.40 1.07
Cognitive Words M 7.81 7.71 8.37 8.00 8.42 8.42
(%) SD 2.12 2.16 2.50 1.76 1.92 2.01
WS = writing session
Finally, the use of cognitive words did not differ between modalities (F(1, 29) = 0.37, p = 
.546, q2 = -01) or writing sessions (F(2, 58) = 0.52, p = .595, r|2 = .02). There was no 
significant interaction between session and modality (F(2i59) = 0.25, p = .777, r\2 = .01). 
Taken together the analysis of narrative content suggests that writing longhand and 
typing are comparable in terms of linguistic output. Variations in word count and use of 
negative emotion words as a function of writing session were not differentiated by the 
mode through which they were produced.
5.5.8.1 Language use as a predictor of outcome
Regression analyses were used to establish if changes in word use across the writing 
sessions in the disclosure groups (writing and typing disclosure groups were examined 
together as modality was not found to moderate word usage across the writing session) 
were predictive of changes in well-being. Hierarchical linear regressions were 
conducted separately for the 2-week and 6-week assessment on each of the outcome 
variables (PSI, depression, anxiety, GSI, intrusion and avoidance). The baseline value 
of the dependent variable was entered in the first step of the regression as a control. 
The change scores for the word categories; negative emotion, positive emotion and 
cognitive mechanisms were entered together at the second step21.
Results from the hierarchical regression analyses are summarized in Table 5.8 and 
Table 5.9. Table 5.8 presents the results of the regression analysis for the outcome 
variables assessed at 2-week follow-up. The analysis showed that a change in 
negative emotion words significantly predicted avoidance scores after controlling for 
baseline levels of avoidance (p = .34, t = 2.21, p = .04). Those who used fewer 
negative emotion words at writing session three compared to writing session one had 
fewer symptoms of avoidance at 2-week follow-up. Summarized in Table 5.9 are the 
regression analyses for outcome variables at 6-week assessment. Analyses showed 
that a change in negative emotion words significantly predicted anxiety scores after 
controlling for baseline levels of anxiety (p = .29, t = 2.53, p = .02). Those who used 
less negative emotion words at the final writing session compared to the first writing 
session reported fewer symptoms of anxiety at 6-week follow-up. Changes in word use 
did not predict scores for any other outcome variable at 2-week or 6-week assessment 
period22 (non-significant findings are not reported here, SPSS outputs for all 
hierarchical regressions can be found in Appendix A.9).
21 In their study with caregivers o f children Schwartz and Drotar (2004) entered negative emotion word 
change prior to cognitive word change based on the theoretical rationale that habituation to negative 
emotion would proceed an increase in cognitive processing. However, the relative importance o f word 
categories as predictors o f change has not been consistent across studies and the mechanisms by which 
disclosure writing might influence well-being may d iffer as a function o f the population under 
investigation. Therefore, word category change scores were entered together in the present study as has 
been done in previous research (R ivkin et al., 2006; Low, Stanton &  Danoff-Burg, 2006).
  Analysis o f the writing-control group data did not find these patterns o f change.
Table 5.8 Summary of hierarchical regression analyses for outcome variables at 2-
week assessment.
Variable
Stepl Step 2
Predictors B SEB P B SEB P
PSI PSI (baseline) 0.45 0.21 .37* 0.47 0.22 .38*
Neg. Emotion Change -0.07 0.30 -.04
Pos. Emotion Change -0.23 0.33 -.13
Cognitive Change 0.13 0.19 .13
R2 0.13 0.17
AR2 - 0.03
Depression Depression (baseline) 0.53 0.12 .63** 0.48 0.13 .57**
Neg. Emotion Change 0.03 0.06 .09
Pos. Emotion Change 0.01 0.06 .02
Cognitive Change -0.05 0.04 -.21
R2 0.40 0.45
AR2 - 0.05
Anxiety Anxiety (baseline) 0.80 0.16 .69** 0.78 0.16 .67**
Neg. Emotion Change 0.04 0.04 .11
Pos. Emotion Change -0.08 0.05 -.21
Cognitive Change -0.05 0.03 -.23
R2 0.69 0.77
AR2 - 0.12
GSI GSI (baseline) 0.66 0.12 .71** 0.64 0.14 .69**
Neg. Emotion Change 0.01 0.04 .03
Pos. Emotion Change -0.03 0.04 -.11
Cognitive Change -0.03 0.02 -.19
R2 0.50 0.55
AR2 - 0.05
Intrusion Intrusion (baseline) 0.45 0.20 .42* 0.39 0.19 .35
Neg. Emotion Change 1.35 0.97 .24
Pos. Emotion Change -1.39 1.00 -.23
Cognitive Change -0.47 0.59 -.13
R2 0.17 0.31
AR2 - 0.14
Avoidance Avoidance (baseline) 0.76 0.15 .70** 0.58 0.17 .53**
Neg. Emotion Change 2.09 0.94 .34*
Pos. Emotion Change -0.58 0.88 -.09
Cognitive Change 0.26 0.51 .07
R2 0.49 0.58
AR2 - 0.10
*p < .05. **p < .01.
N = 31 for PSI, depression, anxiety and GSI; N = 30 for intrusion and avoidance
Table 5.9 Summary of hierarchical regression analyses for outcome variables at 6 -
week assessment.
Variable
Stepl Step 2
B SEB P B SEB P
PSI PSI (baseline) 0.75 0.16 .65** 0.74 0.17 .64**
Neg. Emotion Change 0  . 1 1 0.23 .07
Pos. Emotion Change 0 . 1 2 0.25 .07
Cognitive Change -0.04 0.15 -.05
R2 .43 .44
AR2 - . 0 1
Depression Depression (baseline) 0 . 6 6 0 . 1 0 .76** 0.64 0 . 1 1 7 4 **
Neg. Emotion Change 0.04 0.05 . 1 1
Pos. Emotion Change 0.04 0.05 . 1 0
Cognitive Change 0.05 0.03 .18
R2 .58 .63
AR2 - .05
Anxiety Anxiety (baseline) 0.63 0 . 1 0 .77** 0.58 0 . 1 0 .70**
Neg. Emotion Change 0 .07 0.03 .29*
Pos. Emotion Change -0 . 0 2 0.03 -.06
Cognitive Change -0 . 0 2 0 . 0 2 - . 1 0
R2 .77 .83
- . 1 0
GSI GSI (baseline) 0.67 0 . 1 1 .76** 0 . 6 8 0.13 .77**
Neg. Emotion Change 0 . 0 1 0.04 .05
Pos. Emotion Change -0 . 0 2 0.04 -.06
Cognitive Change 0 . 0 1 0 . 0 2 .06
R2 .58 .59
AR2 - . 0 1
Intrusion Intrusion (baseline) 0.50 0.18 .46* 0.49 0 . 2 0 .37*
Neg. Emotion Change 1 .37 0.99 .25
Pos. Emotion Change 0.05 1 . 0 2 . 0 1
Cognitive Change -0.41 0.60 - . 1 2
R2 . 2 1 .28
AR2 - .07
Avoidance Avoidance (baseline) 0.58 0.16 .56** 0.45 0 . 2 0 .43*
Neg. Emotion Change 1.27 1 . 1 1 .23
Pos. Emotion Change 0.95 1.04 .15
Cognitive Change -0.09 0.60 -.03
R2 .31 .36
AR2 - .05
*p < .05. **p < .01.
N = 31 for PSI, depression, anxiety and GSI; N = 30 for intrusion and avoidance
5.6 D iscussion
This study aimed to replicate the findings of previous disclosure studies (e.g. 
Pennebaker et al., 1988; Pennebaker & Beall, 1986) in producing positive health 
benefits for individuals who wrote about a traumatic event compared to individuals who 
wrote objectively about their past, present and future daily routines. In this study writing 
about traumatic or stressful events was not associated with improvements in self- 
reported physical well-being measured by recent illness symptoms (PSI). Psychological 
well-being (depression, anxiety, GSI) improved significantly from the baseline to the 2- 
week post writing follow-up (six weeks after the start of the study) and again at the 6- 
week post writing follow-up in both the writing and typing disclosure groups and the 
writing and typing control groups. Improvements in psychological well-being were not 
differentiated by modality of disclosure. Inclusion of a non-writing control condition in 
follow-up analysis indicated that whilst there were improvements in all conditions 
(writing and non-writing) on symptoms of anxiety and global distress (GSI), symptoms 
of depression did not significantly improve in the non-writing control condition as they 
did in the writing conditions.
In terms of the immediate effects of writing, the findings of this study were consistent 
with those reported in the disclosure literature (see Smyth, 1998). Assessment of post
writing mood indicated that negative mood was significantly higher in the disclosure 
condition than the writing control condition, which corresponds with the highly 
emotional and personal nature of the topics that disclosure participants wrote about. 
However, it is not known if groups differed on negative or positive affect prior to starting 
writing, as this study failed to account for pre-writing mood, although it is important to 
note that there were no group differences on baseline measures of psychological well
being taken immediately preceding the first writing session. Similarly, the linguistic 
content of disclosure essays were more emotionally valenced than those produced by 
the control groups as indicated by the relative percentage of negative emotion and 
positive emotion words in the narratives.
Disclosure group essays were differentiated from those produced by control groups in 
the content of words that represented cognitive processes, such as words relating to 
insight and causation. Thus, the similar improvements seen in the well-being of 
participants in both the writing groups (disclosure and control) are unlikely to be due to 
similarities in the content of their writing per se. Although the improvements seen in 
psychological well-being in the present study were not limited to those in the disclosure 
groups, the way that disclosure participants wrote about the traumatic or stressful
events they had experienced appeared to influence some of the beneficial changes. 
Changes in the use of words from writing session one to session three indicated that a 
reduction in negative emotion words across the writing sessions was predictive of a 
reduction in symptoms of avoidance at 2-week follow-up and a reduction in anxiety at 
6-week follow-up for disclosure participants, changes which were not replicated in the 
writing-control group. This decrease in the use of negative emotion words and 
subsequent changes in avoidant symptoms and anxiety are consistent with the 
habituation explanation of disclosure (see section 2.3.6.2) and point to the importance 
of emotional processing in disclosure.
One possible explanation for the overall improvements in psychological well-being 
seen in the writing/typing groups is that these changes could represent a gradual 
adjustment to university over the second semester of the participants' first year, 
however, the final follow-up assessment was conducted at a time when students would 
have been completing final assessments and revising for exams, which is a time 
usually associated with increases in psychological distress (Stowell, 2003). It is notable 
that in the non-writing control group, depressive symptoms did not reduce at follow-up, 
as they did in the disclosure and control writing groups, The finding that writing/typing- 
control participants in this study reported an improvement in psychological well-being is 
not unique. Mario and Wagner (1999) and Horneffer and Jamison (2002) have also 
found a reduction in psychological distress in writing-control participants in their 
studies. A possible explanation for these unexpected findings advocated by both Mario 
and Wagner (1999) and Horneffer and Jamison (2002) is that writing about life 
experiences, independent of emotional valence or content, may improve psychological 
well-being. It is noteworthy that the current study utilised similar control group writing 
instructions as used by Mario and Wagner (1999) and Horneffer and Jamison (2002). 
These instructions, which ask participants to write about their plans for the day and 
subsequently plans for the following week, may provide participants with the 
opportunity to organize and reflect on their responsibilities (Horneffer & Jamison, 
2002). This possible explanation is supported by the findings that students who 
perceive being in control of their time, in relation to time management of their studies, 
is shown to be related to lower levels of stress (Macan, Shahani, Dipboye & Phillips, 
1990). Considering the timing of the writing sessions in this study (start of a new 
semester) and assessment periods, it seems feasible that the time management style 
instructions given to the writing-control group may have inadvertently proved beneficial 
to participants. Tentative support for this comes from the reduction in levels of intrusion 
across the study, with participants reporting a near significant reduction in their
frequency of intrusive thoughts irrespective of group. Pennebaker (1989) suggested 
that disclosure writing may facilitate psychological adjustment by reducing the 
frequency of stressor-related intrusive thoughts, and this reduction is normally only 
seen in those who write about traumatic or stressful experiences (Lutgendorf & Antoni, 
1999). The levels of intrusion amongst the participants in the present study were lower 
than those reported in other disclosure studies, and as such may represent a sample in 
which there was limited scope for change resulting in a floor effect.
The principal aim of the study presented in the current chapter was to determine the 
impact of writing modality on the immediate and longer-term outcomes of disclosure 
writing. Contrary to the findings of Brewin and Lennard (1999) that writing longhand 
about a trauma is associated with greater arousal of negative mood than typing, the 
current study found no differential effect of modality on post writing arousal. Consistent 
with the findings of Sharp and Hargrove (2004), this study found that writing and typing 
about a traumatic event were comparable in terms of linguistic output. There were no 
differences in the percentage of negative emotion, positive emotion or cognitive 
process words used between writing modalities. Sharp and Hargrove (2004) did find 
that typing was associated with the production of more words, however in the current 
study there were no differences in word count between typed and hand written essays.
The limitation of previous studies that have examined the impact of modality on 
disclosure writing is that conclusions have been based on a single writing session. This 
study sought to expand on these findings by examining the effect of modality on the 
longer-term outcomes of disclosure writing. The findings did not indicate that the 
improvement in psychological well-being seen in the writing groups was differentiated 
by the modality through which participants produced their narratives and as such the 
medium through which disclosure writing is produced appears to have no impact on the 
potential therapeutic properties of disclosure writing. The ability to generalise the 
current findings is limited by the fact that the sample consisted solely of undergraduate 
students who are arguably more familiar with computers than some subgroups of the 
population. Nonetheless, the findings would suggest that computer based applications 
of the Pennebaker paradigm are acceptable for individuals who are accustomed to 
using this modality.
One potential limitation of the present study is that, unlike Brewin and Lennard (1999), 
this study did not control for typing ability in individuals assigned to type their 
narratives. It is not clear then if typing ability impacts on either the short-term or long
term outcome of a computer based intervention but given the higher level of post 
writing negative affect seen in the hand writing groups of the present study compared 
to the typing groups post writing, and that there were no differences in word count 
between the writing and typing groups it would seem that this sample were both 
comfortable with and competent with using this modality of writing.
5.7 Summary
This study sought to replicate and expand on the findings of previous research and in 
doing so examined the potential moderating effect of modality on the outcome of 
disclosure studies. Whilst, the study unexpectedly found a reduction in symptoms of 
anxiety and general distress across the study for all participants, irrespective of group 
assignment, the finding that symptoms of depression improved in the writing control 
group as well as the disclosure group, but not the non-writing control group, indicated 
the potential benefits of writing about time management. The study was able to provide 
support for Sharp and Hargrove's (2004) earlier contention that writing longhand and 
typing produced comparable levels of linguistic output and collectively these findings 
would suggest that adaptation of the writing intervention to a computer-based format 
does not moderate the effectiveness of the writing intervention when conducted in the 
standard laboratory setting. In order to advocate the adaptation of the intervention to a 
home-based format it is necessary to consider how context of writing may impact upon 
its efficacy. The delivery of the intervention within the context of the home deviates 
from the standard lab-based delivery used in the majority of studies. Therefore, the aim 
of the study in Chapter 6 is to examine directly the effect of context on disclosure 
writing.
Chapter 6
Testing Methodologies 2: Writing in the 
Laboratory versus Writing at Home
6.1 Introduction
The adaptation of the standard writing intervention to a home-based format alters the 
context in which disclosure occurs. In the first study conducted by Pennebaker and 
Beall (1986) a student sample of participants were directed by the experimenter to 
write in private cubicles in a laboratory setting. This laboratory based procedure has 
been the blueprint for numerous studies examining the effects of written emotional 
disclosure (e.g. Pennebaker & Francis, 1996; Greenberg, Wortman & Stone, 1996). 
Subsequently, researchers have taken the writing intervention out of the laboratory and 
into other settings such as the hospital room (Schwartz & Drotal, 2004) and the home 
(e.g. Langens & Schuler, 2005; Rosenberg et al., 2002). Arguably, the main rationale 
for this adaptation of the writing intervention has been to maximize recruitment and 
retention of specific populations, in particular the chronically ill (e.g. Wetherell et al., 
2005). Whilst this adaptation of the standard protocol may help to widen the application 
of disclosure writing to other populations there is some debate as to what the 
consequences are of this change of setting on the efficacy of disclosure writing (Smyth 
& Catley, 2002; Solano, Bonadies & Di Trani, 2008).
The difficulty in making comparisons between disclosure studies that have been 
conducted in the laboratory and those conducted at home, is that published studies 
conducted in the home context have made additional changes to the standard writing 
protocol, and increased the diversity in population characteristics (see section 3.6.1) 
thus differentiating the effects of home writing over other changes is difficult. Primarily, 
the majority of home-based studies are conducted with chronic illness samples (e.g. 
Wethrell et al., 2005; Zakowski et al., 2004), although some have been conducted with 
students (Langens & Schuler, 2005; Sheffield, Duncan, Thomson & Johal, 2002; Ullrich 
& Lutgendorf, 2002; Wing, Schutte & Byrne, 2006) and a community sample 
(Swanbon, Boyce & Greenberg, 2008). The instructional set given to participants has 
also differed between these studies with some home-based participants writing about
their thoughts and feelings relating to a traumatic or stressful event (Vedhara et al., 
2007; Wetherell et al., 2005) as per the standard writing instructions, whilst others have 
been instructed to write about positive experiences (Wing et al., 2006), their feelings 
about their illness (Rosenberg et al., 2002; Zakowski et al., 2004), how ongoing 
stressful events have affected their illness (Gills, Lumley, Mosley-Williams, Leisen & 
Roehers, 2006) or in the case of a study with HIV negative gay men, their thoughts and 
feelings about coming out (Swanbon et al., 2008). For example, Ullrich and Lutgendorf 
(2002) had students write at home about a traumatic or stressful event. The 
instructions given to participants were designed to facilitate cognitive processing and 
emotional engagement in one group, whilst in another group the instructions directed 
the participants to focus only on their emotions. In contrast to the standard instructions 
usually given to control group participants, Ullrich and Lutgendorf (2002) asked their 
control group to write factually about loss and trauma in the media. Although the 
authors found that facilitating cognitive processing was effective in increasing positive 
growth compared to focusing on emotions or facts about trauma or loss, no health 
benefits emerged. In addition to this, the number and length of sessions were different 
to that of the standard protocol, whereby participants wrote for 10 minutes, twice a 
week over a period of a month. As discussed in section 3.4.1, the number and length of 
disclosure sessions has been found to moderate the overall effect of disclosure, such 
that studies with three or more writing sessions have marginally larger effect sizes for 
psychological health than studies with fewer than three sessions, and studies in which 
writing lasted at least 15 minutes had significantly larger effect sizes for physical health 
(but not psychological health) than those which utilized writing sessions of fewer than 
15 minutes (Frattaroli, 2006). It is therefore not possible to determine what effect, if 
any, context alone had on the outcome of the Ullrich and Lutgendorf (2002) study.
The findings of one study that has attempted to replicate the standard protocol used in 
previous disclosure studies (e.g. Pennebaker & Beall, 1986) in a home-based context, 
led the authors to caution against the use of disclosure writing in the home. Sheffield et 
al. (2002) conducted a home-based study in a student sample and found that at 3- 
week follow-up participants who wrote emotionally over three consecutive days for 10 
minutes experienced more physical symptoms and higher rates of absence from 
college due to illness compared to controls who wrote about a superficial topic, such as 
their plans for the day, and a non-writing control group. Groups did not differ on 
physical health measures at 7-week follow-up and 30-week follow-up. An increase in 
reporting of physical symptoms in disclosure participants is not unique to home-based 
studies. Previous studies conducted in the standard laboratory setting have reported
short-term increases in physical symptoms in disclosure group participants (Greenberg 
& Stone, 1992; Kloss & Lisman, 2002; Park & Blumberg, 2002). A possible explanation 
for the reported increase in physical symptoms in the Sheffield et al. (2002) study 
relates to timing of assessment. Participants were asked to report both the presence of 
physical symptoms and days absent due to illness during the previous month. 
Therefore it is possible that the group differences observed at 3-week follow-up 
represent differences prior to or during the writing period. Indeed, at 30-week follow-up 
disclosure group participants reported lower levels of anxiety and insomnia than control 
groups, suggesting that the home-based intervention was effective to an extent 
(Sheffield et al., 2002).
The evidence for the effectiveness of home-based disclosure interventions with chronic 
illness populations is also equivocal. For example, studies that have implemented 
home-based disclosure interventions with cancer sufferers have found only limited 
support for the effectiveness of the intervention in this population (Cepeda et al., 2008; 
Rosenberg et al., 2002; Zakowski et al., 2004). Cepeda et al. (2008) found no effect of 
disclosure on pain intensity or sense of well-being in oncology patients suffering a 
variety of different cancers (e.g. breast cancer, kidney cancer), though further analysis 
indicated that patients rated as disclosing a higher degree of emotion in their narratives 
reported lower pain intensity and had higher well-being scores at follow-up. Similarly, 
Zakowski et al. (2004) found that disclosure was only effective in buffering the effects 
of stress for prostrate and gynaecological cancer patients who reported high levels of 
social constraint. Equally, studies that have been conducted in lab-based settings with 
cancer sufferers have also found limited support for disclosure writing (see section 
2.3.7.3) suggesting that this type of intervention may have limited utility in this 
population irrespective of the context in which it is conducted.
In contrast to writing in the laboratory under the supervision of the experimenter, 
disclosure studies conducted in the home environment are arguably less controlled 
(Smyth & Catley, 2002), and there is the potential for participants not to adhere to the 
protocol. In a study that specifically examined the adherence to, and feasibility of, 
home-based oral disclosure (into a tape recorder) in participants with rheumatoid 
arthritis, van Middendorp, Sorbi, van Doornen., Bijlsma, & Geenen (2007) adapted the 
standard disclosure instructions given to participants to induce emotional engagement, 
cognitive restructuring and positive future directedness in order to optimize the home 
application. They found that not only were participants able and willing to comply with 
the instructions given based on self-reported ratings and the content of the narratives
they produced, but that a reduction in negative emotion over the disclosure sessions 
was paralleled by an increase in positive emotions, suggesting that home application 
was tolerable in this population. In addition to this, the retention of participants in the 
study was high with a 99.6 per cent completion rate, suggesting that the intervention 
was acceptable to participants and adherence to the study requirements within this 
home-based setting was not problematic. This led van Middendorp et al. (2007) to 
advocate the adaptation of the standard lab-based disclosure intervention for home 
application. However, no follow-up assessments were reported so it is not possible to 
draw any conclusions from this study on overall effectiveness of the intervention on 
well-being, though a previous home-based disclosure intervention in this population 
reported improvements in mood and stability in disease activity compared to controls 
(Wetherell etal.,2005).
Whilst there are clear advantages to the provision of home-based interventions in 
terms of increasing accessibility and flexibility, especially for individuals with reduced 
mobility, the evidence produced thus far for the utility of written disclosure in the home 
is equivocal. The difficulty in evaluating the impact of context on disclosure from the 
available studies is attributable to the methodological inconsistencies and differing 
populations across studies, thus making comparisons difficult. Whilst a recent meta
analysis found higher psychological health effect sizes in home-based studies 
(Frattaroli, 2006) to date there has been no attempt to examine directly if context 
moderates the efficacy of disclosure writing.
6.2 Aims
This aim of the present study is to establish directly if the context in which thoughts and 
feelings are expressed moderates both the immediate and longer-term effects of 
disclosure writing. In order to establish if the narrative content varies as a function of 
context, the study will also examine the linguistic content of essays written by 
disclosure group participants, and changes in word use will be examined as predictors 
of outcome in the disclosure groups.
6.3 Method
6.3.1 Recruitment
The existing dataset from the study presented in Chapter 5, which consisted of data 
collected exclusively within a laboratory setting, was used in the current study to form 
the comparison lab-based condition. Recruitment of participants into the home-based
groups was conducted at the start of the first semester (October). To maintain 
consistency with the existing lab-based sample, first year undergraduate participants 
were recruited from the equivalent teaching sessions as the lab-based participants. An 
independent T-test (two-tailed) confirmed that lab-based participants and home-based 
participants did not differ in terms of their levels of psychological distress at recruitment 
(t(487) = -0.28, p = .782).
6.3.2 Participants
The home-based sample consisted of 129 females and 15 males, with a mean age of 
20.29 years (SD = 5.07). Two hundred and thirty one participants (207 female; 24 
male) were included in the final data set (87 lab-based, 144 home-based). The mean 
age of the sample was 20.35 years (SD = 5.32) and the age of participants ranged 
from 18 to 53 years. See section 5.4.1 for lab-based participants' information.
6.3.3 Design
The study used a quasi-experimental, repeated measures design. There were six 
groups in the current study, which includes the lab-based disclosure, lab-based writing 
control and the lab-based non-writing control conditions recruited in Chapter 5. 
Participants recruited into the home-based samples for the current study were non- 
randomly allocated to a home-based disclosure group, a home-based writing control 
group or a home-based non-writing control group.
As in Chapter 5, allocation to condition was based on seating position in the classroom, 
similarly the non-writing control participants were recruited in separate classes so as 
not to bring attention to the fact that their role in the study was different to those who 
had writing tasks. Figure 6.1 shows the study design which replicated that of Chapter 5 
and comprised a baseline assessment, six week intervention period in which three 15 
minute writing sessions were conducted at 14 day intervals by the home-based writing 
groups, and then two follow-up assessments at 2-weeks and 6-weeks post-intervention 
were completed by all participants. The dependant variables measured at baseline and 
follow-up assessments were depression, anxiety, psychological distress, physical 
symptoms, intrusion and avoidance.
Figure 6.1: Flow diagram of Chapter 5 process and timescale of participation for home- 
based participants.
Home-based Non-Writing
Writing Control
Groups
Writing 
Session 1
Baseline
Assessment
14 Day Interval
Writing 
Session 2
14 Day Interval
Writing 
Session 3
/a lN i14 Day Interval ^  2-Week
Writing
Assessment
4 Week Interval
6-Week
Writing
Assessment
6.3.4 Measures
This study utilised the same measures as Chapter 5 (see section 5.4.3) which include; 
the Symptom Checklist-90-Revised (SCL-90-R; Derogatis, 1992), the Impact of Event 
Scale (IES; Horowitz, Wilner & Alvarez, 1979), the Essay Evaluations Questionnaire 
(EEQ; Greenberg & Stone, 1992), the Physical Symptoms Inventory (PSI; Spector & 
Jex, 1998) and the Positive and Negative Affectivity Scale (PANAS; Watson, Clark & 
Tellegan, 1988). Content analysis of participants narratives was conducted using the 
Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count Programme (LIWC: Pennebaker, Francis & Booth, 
2001) which is described in section 5.4.3.
6.3.5 Ethics
The study was conducted in accordance with the British Psychological Society 
guidelines for conducting research with human participants (Code of Conduct, Ethical 
Principles and Guidelines, 2004). The study was subject to scrutiny by the Faculty 
Research Ethics Committee, Sheffield Hallam University for which approval was 
granted (see Appendix A.4 for the Ethics Proforma and Letter of Approval). 
Consideration was given to the sensitive and distressing nature of topics that 
participants could potentially disclose, all participants were informed that there was the 
potential to experience emotional discomfort during their participation in the study and 
steps were to taken to minimise this by providing contact information to services that 
were available to them should they experience any distress as a consequence of their 
participation.
6.3.6 Procedure
The procedure followed by lab-based participants is described in section 5.4.5. 
Potential participants for the home-based conditions were given a brief introduction to 
the study, identical to the one given to those in the lab-based conditions, and were 
given an information sheet to read (see Appendix A. 10) and asked to review and sign a 
consent form if they wished to participate in the study (see Appendix A.6). Those who 
agreed to participate were given the opportunity to ask questions, and all participants 
were informed of their rights to withdraw and withhold information. Participants were 
asked to provide an e-mail address at which they could be contacted so that reminders 
could be sent to them at each time point of the study to remind them to complete the 
writing tasks and the questionnaire booklets on the correct days. All writing tasks 
booklets and questionnaire booklets were sealed in individual envelopes and were 
dated to indicate when participants should open them for completion. All envelopes
also included a stamped addressed envelope in which participants could return their 
completed booklets. Participants were instructed to complete the baseline assessment 
questionnaires (PSI, SCL-90-R and IES) that evening at home and return it in the 
envelope provided. As some participants also had writing tasks to complete, those with 
tasks to do were asked to also complete the first task that evening following completion 
of the baseline measures.
The writing instructions given to participants in the home-based conditions were 
identical to those used in Chapter 5 (see section 5.4.5.1 and Appendix A.7). 
Instructions included in the packs of those in the writing groups asked them to write 
continuously in silence for 15 minutes and at the end of the task to complete the 
PANAS and EEQ and return their writing and completed questionnaires in the 
envelopes provided.
Follow-up assessment questionnaires (identical to baseline measures) were also 
included in the study packs to be completed at home two weeks after the final writing 
session and again four weeks later. Detailed instructions of when and how each task or 
questionnaire should be completed were included in the study packs. To minimize 
attrition, all participants were sent an e-mail to remind them when to complete each 
writing task or questionnaire. At the end of the study all participants (including those 
who had not completed the study) were sent a debriefing document outlining the 
background to the study, its aims and expected outcomes (see Appendix A.11).
6.4 Results
6.4.1 Preparation of Data
Data for home-based participants was entered into SPSS and screened for omissions 
and invalid entries. The data for one participant was removed due to non-completion of 
large sections of the questionnaires. A number of missing items were identified on the 
SCL-90-R at baseline (n = 16), 2-week follow-up (n = 15) and 6-week follow-up (n = 3). 
No single participant had more than one item missing from one of the SCL-90-R 
dimensions or more than 20 per cent of the items omitted overall, thus calculation of 
the scales was not substantially affected (Derogatis, 1992). The total IES data was 
missing for two participants at 2-week follow-up and for three participants at 6-week 
follow-up due to non-completion. The total PSI data was missing for one participant at 
6-week follow-up. A number of participants failed to complete the PANAS immediately 
after the first writing session (n = 7), second writing session (n = 4) and third writing
session (n = 3). The home-based diaries were transcribed into type written format and 
prepared for analysis with the LIWC software as described in section 5.5.1.
6.4.1.1 Uptake and attrition
A total of 264 participants were recruited into the home-based phase of the study. Of 
the 155 participants allocated to home-based writing groups, 22 participants failed to 
return the writing booklet for the first writing session, a further 10 participants did not 
return the second writing session booklet, and a further 28 did not return the final 
writing session booklet. Of the remaining 214 participants (including 109 non-writing 
control group participants) 33 failed to return the 2-week follow-up assessment booklet 
and a further 35 failed to return the final 6-week assessment booklet. Overall 145 
home-based participants completed the study; one was removed from the final analysis 
because large sections of the questionnaires had not been completed, leaving a total of 
144 participants (home-based disclosure n = 51; home-based writing control n = 38; 
home-based non-writing control n = 55). Of the home-based participants, those who 
did not complete the study did not differ on baseline GSI scores to those who did 
complete the study (t(262) = --57, p = .566, two-tailed).
To determine if recruitment into the different context groups (home-based versus lab- 
based) was related to attrition, a 2 x 2 x2 was conducted which showed that there was 
a significant relationship between study context and attrition (%2 = 12.29, DF = 1, 
p<.001). Examination of the observed and expected frequencies indicated that this 
association is mainly attributable to the finding that fewer lab-based participants 
completed the study.
6.4.1.2 Checking assumptions
Data for all variables in the home-based sample were examined to determine suitability 
for parametric analysis. Maintaining consistency with the steps taken in Chapter 5, the 
criterion of >3 standard deviations from the mean (Stevens, 2002) was used to screen 
for univariate outliers. Thirty four outliers were identified within the grouped data 
(negative affect scores n = 7; positive affect scores n = 2; word count n = 1; positive 
emotion words n = 2; negative emotion words n = 2; cognitive words n = 1; PSI scores 
n = 1; depression scores n = 5; anxiety scores n = 6 ; GSI scores n = 6 : intrusion scores 
n = 1 ) and the distribution of the grouped data was found to be significantly skewed 
(>2.58 or <-2.58) (Clark-Carter, 2004) in three of the grouped variables (session 1 
negative affect = 2.88; session 2 negative affect = 3.66; session 3 negative affect =
3.13). Examination of the cases with outlying scores suggested that the cases 
represented legitimate scores and were not due to errors or omissions so were 
retained in the subsequent analysis. Again for consistency with Chapter 5 analysis 
was repeated with adjusted and unadjusted scores. Analysis using adjusted scores did 
not alter the results, for this reason the results reported are for unadjusted scores.
6.4.1.3 Statistical analysis and sample size considerations
Consistent with the analysis techniques employed in Chapter 5 analysis of the 
immediate effects (positive affect and negative affect), longer-term effects (depression, 
anxiety, GSI, physical symptoms, intrusion and avoidance) and language use (negative 
emotion words, positive emotion words and cognitive mechanism words) in written 
disclosure were examined using a series of factorial analysis of variance (ANOVA). 
Hierarchical linear regressions were employed in the analysis of language change 
across writing sessions as a predictor of outcome. Change scores were calculated for 
each of the word categories by subtracting the total percentage of words used at the 
first writing session from the total percentage of words used at the final writing session 
as in Chapter 5.
For the present study a priori power analysis conducted using Gpower 3.0.10 
(Erdfelder, Lang & Buchner, 2007) indicated that a total sample size of 108 (a = .05, 
power = .80, Critical f = (2, 105) = 3.08) would be required to detect between-group 
main effects, 43 (a = .05, power = .80, Critical f = (2, 84) = 3.11) would be required to 
detect within-group main effects and a total sample size of 54 (a = .05, power = .80, 
Critical f = (10, 96 = 1.93) would be required to detect interaction effects in the analysis 
of the short-term and longer-term effects of disclosure. Additionally, for the analysis of 
language use in disclosure a total sample size of 86 (a = .05, power = .80, Critical f = 
(1, 84) = 3.95) would be required to detect between-group main effects, a total sample 
size of 43 (a = .05, power = .80, Critical f = (2, 84) = 3.11) would be required to detect 
within-group main effects and a total sample size of 28 (a = .05, power = .80, Critical f 
= (2, 52) = 3.18) would be required to detect interaction effects. Thus the achieved 
sample size in this study (n = 144) meets the pre-determined requirements. As already 
noted in Chapter 5, calculation of sample size requirements for hierarchical linear 
regression indicates a required sample size of 85 (a = .05, power = .80, Critical f = (4, 
80) = 2.49) to detect effects in a design with four predictor variables. The size of the 
sample to be included in this analysis (n = 83) is only marginally smaller than that 
recommended.
6.4.2 Home Based Sample Characteristics and Baseline Data
As is common in writing studies, and consistent with Chapter 5, the majority of the 
home-based participants were female (n = 129). Comparable with Chapter 5, over 
ninety per cent (n = 132) of the participants recruited into the home-based conditions 
were Caucasian, three identified themselves as black, four as Asian and five classified 
themselves as other. Four of the home-based participants reported using psychotropic 
medication and five were receiving counselling23.
Table 6.1 Means, standard deviations and range of scores for well-being measures at 
study entry for home-based participants.
Measures N Mean SD Range
Physical Symptoms Inventory 144 4.62 2.83 0-13
SCL-90-R Variables
Depression 144 1 . 0 1 0.75 0-3.77
(60.17) (8.35) (38-80J
Anxiety 144 0.65 0 . 6 6 0-3.10
(56.07) (10.65) (37-80)
Global Severity Index 144 0.76 0.57 0.09-3.32
(60.35) (8.71) (40-80J
Impact o f Event Subscales
Intrusion 144 9.50 8.67 0-33
Avoidance 144 10.83 9.01 0-34
Normalized T-scores and standard deviations for the SCL-90- R variables are 
presented in parentheses.
Fewer than half of the participants (n = 63) indicated that they currently kept a diary, 
with the majority of diary keepers indicating that they used a diary for recording 
appointments or significant events (n = 53), whilst 10 reported using the diary to write 
down their feelings and thoughts.
Descriptive information for all well-being measures at baseline in the home-based 
sample is presented in Table 6.1. The descriptive information for the lab-based sample
23 Removing participants receiving counselling or psychotropic medication from the analysis did not alter 
the findings o f the study.
is presented in Table 5.1, section 5.5.2. Again, for the purpose of comparing this 
sample with other studies both raw score calculations and standard normalized T- 
scores for the SCL-90-R symptom dimensions are presented, all further analyses are 
conducted using the raw score calculations. The reporting of physical symptoms (Mean 
= 4.62) at baseline in the home-based sample is lower than that of published norms 
(Spector & Jex, 1998).
Similarly, IES scores for intrusion and avoidance were lower than scores reported in 
studies that have used comparable samples (Schoutrop, Lange, Hanewald, Davidovich 
& Salomon, 2002; Lutgendorf & Antoni, 1999; Greenberg et al., 1996) and are similar 
to those reported in the lab based sample in Chapter 5. As was found with the lab- 
based sample, the mean raw scores on depression, anxiety and GSI dimensions in the 
home-based sample were comparable to the normative scores for adolescent non
patients rather than the adult norm group from which the standardized normalized T- 
scores were calculated. See section 5.5.2.
6.4.3 Checking Group Difference
To determine if there were any existing differences between the lab-based and home- 
based groups on baseline measures, a series of one-way analysis of variance with the 
groups: lab-based disclosure, lab-based writing control, lab-based control; home-based 
disclosure; home-based writing control and home-based control entered as the 
independent variables were conducted. Means and standard deviations are presented 
in Table 6.2. The analysis showed that the groups did not differ significantly in terms of 
physical symptoms (PSI) (F(5i230) = 1.17, p = .327), psychological distress (GSI) ( F (5, 230) 
= 0.94, p = .454), symptoms of depression (F(5,230) = 0.77, p = .576) or anxiety ( F (5 , 230) 
= 0.89, p = .491).
Groups also did not differ in terms of intrusive ( F (5 , 229) = 0.74, p = .597) and avoidant 
(F( 5 ,229) = 0.39, p = .854) symptoms relating to traumatic experiences. A Kruskal-Wallis 
one-way ANOVA indicated that the groups differed in terms of age (x2 = 11.64, p = 
.04). Post hoc analysis showed that the lab-based control group were significantly older 
than all other groups (see Table 6.2 for means).
Table 6.2 Means and standard deviations for age and well-being measures at study
entry for all groups.
Group
Home- Home- Home- Lab- Lab- Lab -
based based based based based based
Disclosure Writing- Control Disclosure Writing Control
Control Control
(n = 51) (n = 38) (n = 55) (n = 31) (n = 37) (n = 18)
Age 20.24 19.84 20.65 19.29 19.76 23.89
(4.93) (4.94) (5.35) (3.04) (4.03) (9.96)
PSI 5.04 4.13 4.56 4.00 3.86 4.06
(2.55) (3.18) (2.81) (2.31) (2.64) (2.18)
Depression 1.00 0.92 1.09 1.11 0.97 0.76
(0.76) (0.66) (0.81) (0.78) (0.69) (0.62)
Anxiety 0.64 0.56 0.72 0.59 0.58 0.39
(0.65) (0.57) (0.73) (0.51) (0.62) (0.38)
GSI 0.74 0.68 0.85 0.78 0.68 0.59
(0.51) (0.46) (0.68) (0.51) (0.46) (0.39)
Intrusion 9.00 9.08 10.26 12.48 9.54 9.67
(8.26) (8.50) (9.23) (8.48) (9.92) (7.92)
Avoidance 9.88 10.95 11.63 11.85 9.68 10.89
(7.66) (10.08) (9.46) (9.57) (8.66) (9.57)
Standard deviations are presented in parentheses.
6.4.4 Instruction Adherence and Content of Home-based Essays
Manipulation checks were conducted to determine if participants in the home-based 
writing groups had adhered to the writing instructions (results of manipulation checks
for lab-based groups are presented in see section 5.5.4). Independent sample t-tests 
(two-tailed) on post-writing scores on the EEQ confirmed that participants in the 
disclosure group rated their essays as more personal (t(5 5.5 5) = 10.60, p<.001, d = 2.43), 
more meaningful ( t (8o) = 14.01, p<.001, d = 3.07) and more revealing of their emotions 
(t(80) = 15.53, p<.001, d = 3.50) than writing controls; in addition they had wanted to talk 
to others about the event (t(8 i) = 3.04, p= .003, d = 0.69), and had held back from 
talking about the event ( t (8o) = 4.38, p<.001, d = 0.97) more than the writing control 
group. As further validation of participants' adherence to writing instructions, 
comparisons of emotional content of essays using LIWC text analysis was conducted. 
The percentage of positive and negative emotion word content was averaged across 
the three writing sessions. Independent samples t-tests (two-tailed) revealed that 
home-based disclosure group participants used significantly more negative emotions 
words (t(5 6 .82) = 14.63, p<.001, d = 2.93), positive emotion words (t(87) = 6.78, p<.001, d 
= 1.49) and cognitive words (t(86.25) = 20.37, p<.001, d = 4.24) than control group 
participants in their essays. These results suggest the narratives produced by the 
home-based disclosure group were revealing of their emotions as per their writing task 
instructions and consistent with the lab-based disclosure narratives in Chapter 5.
The diversity of events disclosed by the home-based disclosure group were again 
consistent with those reported in other disclosure studies (e.g. Epstein, Sloan & Marx, 
2005). The variety of events disclosed at the first writing session included the death of 
a close family member or friend (27.5%); serious illness or accident involving self, close 
friend or family member (27.5%); breakdown of parent's marriage (11.8%); break-up of 
a relationship (9.8%); physical or sexual abuse (7.8%) coming to university (3.9%); 
suicide attempt (3.9%); and bullying (3.9%). Of the 51 home-based disclosure group 
participants 28 wrote about the same event at each session and 23 wrote about 
different events over the three sessions.
6.4.5 Post-Writing Arousal
Two separate 2 x 2 x 3  mixed design analysis of variance (ANOVA) were performed to 
assess the effects for the Independent Variables (IVs), context (home vs. lab), 
condition (disclosure vs. control) and session (writing session 1, 2, & 3) on post-writing 
affective arousal as measured by negative affect (NA) and positive affect (PA). Means 
and standard deviations across groups are presented in Table 6.3. For NA, analysis 
indicated an overall main effect for condition (F(1t 145) = 50.86, p <.001, r|2 = .26 24), such
24 Reported effect sizes ( r f )  represent partia l eta squared.
that participants in the disclosure groups reported higher levels of negative affect 
overall immediately after writing compared to those who wrote about their plans for the 
day/week (means 18.70 and 12.44 respectively).
Table 6.3 Mean affect scores post-writing as a function of context, group and session.
Group
Disclosure Writing-Control
Home Lab Home Lab
(n =45) (n =32) (n =35) (n =37)
Post-Session WS 1 21.53 (9.40) 16.91 (5.58) 12.06 (3.50) 12.11 (3.97)
WS 2 20.78 (8.60) 17.50 (8.00) 12.26 (3.19) 13.92 (5.87)
WS 3 19.42 (8.76) 16.03 (6 .8 8 ) 12.46 (2.99) 11.81 (2.51)
Overall means 20.10(7.53) 16.81 (5.60) 12.32 (1.85) 12.61 (3.14)
Post Session WS 1 22.53 (8.95) 21.09 (6.94) 23.89 (7.36) 21.89 (6.63)
WS 2 20.07 (8.30) 21.78 (7.27) 21.97 (7.94) 21.43 (7.27)
WS 3 21.36 (7.83) 20.78 (8.38) 24.00 (9.47) 20.70 (6.65)
Overall means 21.22 (6.99) 2 1 . 2 2  (6 .2 1 ) 23.01 (6.99) 21.34 (5.02)
A marginally significant main effect of context (F(1i 145) = 3.77, p = .055, r\2 = .03) 
suggested that home-based participants experienced higher levels of NA post-writing 
than those who wrote in the lab. These main effects were, however, moderated by a 
significant interaction between context and condition (F(1i 145) = 5.51, p = .020, rj2= .04), 
which was followed-up with post hoc comparisons. An independent T-test (two-tailed) 
confirmed that the home-based disclosure participants reported higher levels of NA 
post-writing than their lab-based counterparts (t(8i) = 2.12, p = .037, d = 0.51). No 
significant within-participant main effect of writing session for NA (F(2, 290) = 2.63, p = 
.074) or interactions between writing session and context (F{2l 29 0) = 1.15, p = .318), 
writing session and condition (F(2, 290) = 1.17, p = .313) or writing session by context by 
condition (F(2,2go) = 0.67, p = .515) emerged.
For PA there was no significant between-participants main effect for context (F(1, 145) = 
0.94, p = .335) or condition (F(1, 145) = 0.98, p = .323) and no significant interaction 
between context and condition (F(i, i 45) = 0.76, p = .384). There was no within- 
participant main effect for writing session (F(2, 2go) = 1.33, p = .265) and no significant 
within-participant interactions between writing session and context (F(2, 2go) = 2.37, p = 
.095), writing session and condition (F(2, 290) = 0.08, p = .925) or writing session by 
context by condition (F(2,290) = 0.40, p = .674).
6.4.6 Longer-term Effects of Writing
To examine for any differences in well-being as a function of condition and study 
context a 3-way mixed ANOVA was conducted with context (home-based vs. lab- 
based) and condition (disclosure writing vs. control writing vs. non-writing control) as 
between-participant variables and assessment period (baseline, 2-week post writing 
and 6-week post writing) as the within-participant variable, separately for PSI, 
depression, anxiety, GSI, avoidance and intrusion. The means and standard deviations 
for outcome measures as a function of group and time of assessment are presented in 
Table 6.4.
6.4.6.1 Physical symptoms
Analysis of PSI scores showed no significant between group main effects for condition 
(F(2>223) = 1-34, p = .264), study context (F(1i223) = 0.96, p = .327), or for the interaction 
between condition and context (F(2, 223) = 0.08, p = .925). A significant within group 
main effect of time for self reported physical symptoms (F(1.93j430.34) = 3.29, p = .04, r\2 = 
.03) indicated an overall change in physical symptoms for the sample. Pairwise25 
comparisons indicated that physical symptoms increased from baseline to 2 -week 
assessment (p = .02, d = 0.14) and then decreased from 2-week to 6 -week 
assessment (p = .047, d = 0.10) to a level that was not different from baseline (p = 
.508). No interaction effects emerged between time and context (F(1.93i 430.34) = 0.98, p 
= .382), between assessment period and condition (F(3.86 t 430.3 4) = 0.54, p = .702) or 
assessment period by context by condition (F(3.86i 430.34) = 0.24, p = .910).
23 All within-participant post-hoc procedures are conducted using least-significant difference 
(LSD) pairwise comparisons.
  CD 8.1 g
0  03
c  T3
Q < 5
'(/) c 
^  Ml  P
-J Qo  LJ
CM LO 03 h - M"in m - in 00 M" 00 CO co CO CO CO Is- CM
LO 03 00 LO 13 00 i  03 r- LO co M" T CD in M"
03 LO 03 CO O 03 O 03 00 03 03 03 o 03 03 03
oLO CMCO
oo 0 0
03 LO
CM inc o
0 3 0 3 0 3 T_ d d 03 03 03 0 3
CO in _ 0 3 T
CO 0 3 00 1*CO N-
d 0 3 d CO d
o Is- CM 0 0 CO CO o LO CO o in o c o in 0 3 CM
M " CO m - 'sT c o CO in 03 o M- o CM Is- CO 0 3
o o 0 3 03 c o 0 3 0 3 o o 0 3 oo T - 00 0 0 0 3 0 3 0 3 rZ
CO CO
O  CM
o CM CM oo CO (\ T_ o T_ 00 CM M" r^- CO CO M" h - CO
o co q I' Is- o T CO Is- 03 I n T q co o CO
03 00 00 CM dT- 03 03 03 1^ 03 03
o 03 00 03 03 03
Is- T Is- CO CO 00
M" CO CO CO CO N
in o O Is- LO CO CM CO CO CM 00 00 00 03 03 T_ T_
in in CO LO M" M" O M" M" M- CO CO CO CO CO CO M" in
d d o d d d d d o d o d d d d d o d
M" CO in oo o M" 00 00 in oo 03 CO in h - T_ 03 CO in
Is- Is- CO f - Is- in cq in in CO M" M- 00 Is- Is- in in in
o d d d d d d o o o d d d d d d o d
M" 03 00 oo CM Is- o in CM h - in co in Is- Is- CO CO
CD in CO in in M- in M" CO CO co CO h - q Is- co M" M"
d d d d d d d d d d d d d d d d d d
M" CO Is- o T o CO CM oo oo CO CO 00 03 h - CM
CO LO LO CO LO q in q M" in co CM Is- CD in co co co
d d d d d d d d d d d d o d d d d d
CO CO CM Is- CO 00 CO CM l~- 03 00 03 03 CO CM M" 00
r - r - 00 Is- CO q CO CO in q M" M" 00 OO 00 CO CO 00
o d d d d d d d d d d d d d d d d d
o M" o CM CM 03 oo h'- in CO 03 00 CO CO 00 03
o q 00 T q 00 03 r - Is- 03 CO in q q 03 r - CO Is-
T_ o T_ T_ o d d d d o d T_ T_ d o d o
Y CM oo N . co 00
CO CO co co CO Y
o oo O co 00 o in CM h~ T CO oo o 03
in oo CM CM 00 CO < CM Is- CO CO CM oo q q N M" q
CM CM CO CM CM CM CO CO CM CM CM CM CM co oo CM CM CO
CO CO 00 CO CO in CO 03 O OO CM h - CO CM CO CM M"
03 O IS) o O CM T CM o iq CM q q q q q Is- q
M" in ' t LO M" M" M" CO Lt CO M" M- in M" M"
(D <D CD CD 0 0
c CD CD c CD CD c CD CD c 0 0 c 0 0 c 0 0
CD CD CD CD CD CD  0 0  0 0  0 0
DQ   CD  *5 m m  5 m | $l
CM CO CM CO CM CO CM CO CM CO CM CO
00CO COCO
fl)  CO 
i -  03 
3  JO
O) CD
5  EI  
^  TO 
03 CD 
C  C /3  
  03
.tz jo
CD</3
Figure 6.2 illustrates changes in physical symptoms for each group at each
assessm ent period.
Figure 6.2 PSI scores for groups by assessment period.
 3  CO<D 
Disclosure Disclosure Control 
HB LB WHB
Control
Control
Control
h Baseline 
h 2 -week 
u 6 -week
Key: HB = Home-based, LB = Lab-based. WHB = Writing home-based, WLB = Writing 
lab-based, NWHB = Non-writing home-based, NWLB = Non-writing lab-based.
6.4.6.2 Psychological distress
An examination of the group means (Table 6.4) suggests a reduction in symptoms of 
depression, anxiety and psychological distress (GSI) from baseline to 2-week follow-up 
and again at 6 -week follow-up, these changes are illustrated in Figure 6.3. Depression 
scores did not differ between conditions (F(2, 225) = 1-62, p = .200) or context (F(1i 225) = 
1.95, p = .164) and no significant interaction between condition and context emerged 
(F(2 ,225) = 1-06, p = .349). A significant main effect of assessment period for depression 
scores (F(1.78, 400.92) = 9.43, p<.0 0 1 , r| 2 = .04) followed up with pairwise comparisons 
confirmed that symptoms reduced from baseline to 2 -week assessment (p = .018, d = 
0.14) and again from 2-week to 6 -week assessment (p= .031, d = 0.12). None of the 
interaction effects for depression between assessment period and context (F(i.78 , 400 .92) 
= 1.24, p = .289), assessment period and condition (F(3.5 6, 40 0.9 2) = 2.07, p = .093) or 
assessment period by context by condition (F(3 .56, 400 .92) = 1.16, p = .327) reached 
statistical significance suggesting that this improvement was independent of condition 
or context of study.
Figure 6.3 Depression scores for groups by assessm ent period.
 0-8 U)
0  ~ ~ 
Q. 0.6
Q 0.4
5  0.2
Disclosure Disclosure Control Control Control Control
HB LB WHB WLB NWHB NWLB
a Baseline 
h 2-week 
m 6-week
Figure 6.4 Anxiety scores for groups by assessment period.
  0.5
HB LB WHB WLB
Disclosure Disclosure Control Control Control Control
NWHB NWLB
h Baseline 
u 2-week 
6-week
Figure 6.4 illustrates symptoms of anxiety at each assessment period. Symptoms of 
anxiety did not differ between conditions (F(2,225) = 0.74, p = .479) but a significant main 
effect of context (F(1> 225) = 4.19, p = .042, p2 = .02) suggested that overall home-based 
participants reported more symptoms of anxiety than the lab-based participants (means 
0.58 and 0.43 respectively). There was no interaction between condition and context
(F(2, 225) = 0.63, p = .533). A significant main effect of assessment period suggested 
that symptoms of anxiety changed over the study period (F(1.74i 390.87) = 8.20, p = .001, 
rj2 = .04). Pairwise comparisons indicated that anxiety symptoms reduced from 
baseline to 2-week assessment (p = .005, d = 0.18) but did not differ significantly 
between the 2 -week and 6 -week assessment (p = .2 1 1 ) although anxiety symptoms 
remained significantly lower at 6 -week assessment than reported at baseline (p = .0 0 1 , 
d = 0.23). No significant within group interaction effects were observed between 
assessment period and context (F (1.74>390.87) = 0.96, p = .373), assessment period and 
condition (F(3.47,390.87) = 0.59, p = .647) or assessment period by context by condition 
(F(3.47,390.87) = 0.62, p = .623).
GSI scores did not differ between conditions (F(2, 22 5) = 1-35, p = .261) or context of 
study (F(1, 225) = 2.57, p = .110). There was no significant interaction between context 
and condition (F(2,225) = 0.67, p = .513). Similarly to depression and anxiety, GSI scores 
reduced across the study period for all groups (see Figure 6.4) as indicated by a 
significant main effect of assessment period (F( 1 76 , 395.69) = 13.48, p<001, n2 =  .06). 
Pairwise comparisons confirmed a significant reduction in GSI scores from baseline to 
2-week assessment (p = .003, d = 0.15) and a further significant reduction was seen 
again at the 6-week assessment (p=.0.01, d = 0.13). Again there were no significant 
interaction effects between assessment period and condition (F(3.52, 395.69) = 1.21, p = 
.306), assessment period and context (F(1.76, 395.69) =  -63, p =  .513) or assessment 
period by context by mode (F(3 .5 2 i 395.69) = 0.91, p = .449).
Figure 6.5 GSI Scores for groups by assessment period.
a Baseline
h  2-week 
a 6-week
Disclosure Disclosure Control Control Control Control
HB LB WHB WLB NWHB NWLB
Overall, results indicate that there were significant improvements in psychological well
being across the study, these improvements, however, were independent of condition 
and context. This improvement in well-being did not extend to physical symptoms 
which significantly increased between baseline and 2-week follow-up assessment 
before returning to baseline levels at 6-week follow-up. The means and standard 
deviations based on main effects of time for all outcome variables are presented in 
Table 6.5.
6.4.6.3 Symptoms of intrusion and avoidance
Examination of the mean scores for intrusion indicated a gradual reduction in intrusive 
thoughts across the study in all but two of the groups, a reduction at 2-week 
assessment for the lab-based control group was followed by a return to baseline levels 
at 6-week assessment and home-based writing control group showed a slight increase 
at 2-week assessment followed by a reduction at 6-week assessment to below 
baseline levels. No significant between group effects for condition (F(2, 218) = 0.22, p = 
.802) or study context (F(1, 218) = 0.63, p = .427) emerged. The interaction between 
context and condition was not significant (F(2i218) = 0.42, p = .660).
Table 6.5 Means and standard deviations collapsed across groups for main effect of 
time with F Tests and effect sizes for all outcome variables.
Baseline 2-Week Post 
Writing
6-Week Post 
Writing
F P= n*
PSI M 4.34a 4.73ab 4.43d 3.29 .04 .02
SD 2.68 2.88 2.93
DEP M 1.00ab 0.903 0.81aD 9.43 < . 0 0 1 .04
SD .74 0.73 0.74
ANX M 0.613 0.503 0.47 8.20 . 0 0 1 .04
SD 0.62 0.57 0.61
GSI M 0.74a 0.653 0.593 13.48 < . 0 0 1 .06
SD 0.53 0.52 0.55
Intrusion M 9.96 9.08 8.52 2.83 .066 .01
SD 8.86 9.38 9.31
Avoidance M 10.73 10.39 9.62 1.39 .25 .01
SD 9.01 9.87 9.47
Note: Means with the same superscript are different at the .05 level
The within-group main effect for assessment period failed to reach significance (F(18i, 
3 9 4.0 7) = 2.83, p = .066, r\2 = .01) and no significant interactions emerged between
assessment period and context (F(1.81i 3 9 4.0 7) = 0.15, p = .844), assessment period 
and condition (F(3.62> 394.07) = 0.42, p = .773) or assessment period by context by 
condition (F(3.62,394.07) = 0.30, p = .858).
Similarly, the pattern of means for avoidance suggested that all but the lab-based 
control and lab-based writing control groups experienced increases in avoidance at 
follow-up. Again, avoidance scores did not significantly differ between conditions (F(2, 
218) = 0.13, p = .879) or context of study (F(1> 218) = 0.003, p = .959). There was no 
significant interaction between context and condition (F(2,218) = 0.70, p = .498). Within- 
group analysis showed that avoidance did not significantly change between baseline 
and follow-up assessments (F(1.94, 422.54) = 1.39, p = .250) and there were no 
interactions between assessment period and context (F(1.94, 422.54) = 0.60, p = .545), 
assessment period and condition (F(3.88,422.54) = 0.35, p = .842) or assessment period 
by context by condition (F(3.88,422.54) = 0.39, p = .808).
6.4.7 Language Analysis
In order to determine if context had a differential effect on the production of emotional 
narratives in terms of content, analysis of the number of words produced and the 
percentage of positive emotion, negative emotion and cognitive words within disclosure 
group narratives was conducted using a 2-way mixed ANOVA with context (home and 
lab) as the between-group variable and writing session (session 1 , session 2  and 
session 3) as the within-group variables. The means and standard deviations for the 
linguistic indices are presented in Table 6 .6 . Context had a significant effect on the 
number of words produced in the trauma narratives (F(1,80) = 5.39, p = .023, r\2 = .06), 
the means indicated that home-based participants produced fewer words than their lab- 
based counterparts. A significant main effect for writing session (F(i.84i i47.30) = 29.77, 
p<.001, n2 = .27) suggested that there was a significant difference in the number of 
words produced across writing sessions irrespective of context. Pairwise comparisons 
confirmed that the number of words produced reduced from the first to the second 
session (p = .006, d = 0.26), and again at the final session (p <.001, d = 0.41). There 
was no significant interaction between session and study context F(1.84i 147.30) = 0.60, p = 
.538).
Context of study also appeared to have an impact on the number of positive emotion 
words in the narratives (F(1,80) =4.05, p = .057, r\2 = .05) with home-based participants 
using a higher percentage of positive emotion words in their writing than lab-based
participants. The means also indicated an increase in the percentage of positive 
emotion words used across the writing sessions which was confirmed by a significant 
within-group main effect (F(183i 146.52) = 4.53, p = .015, r\2 = .05). Although the use of 
positive emotion words remained stable from writing session one to session two (p = 
.616), at session three all participants used significantly more positive emotion words 
than at session one (p = .013, d = 0.35) and session two (p = .026, d = 0.31). There 
was no significant interaction between session and study context (F183)146.52) = 0.29, p 
= .728). Conversely, the use of negative emotion words did not differ between contexts 
(F(1, so) = 0.01, p = .910). Analysis did reveal a difference in the use of negative emotion 
words across writing sessions (F(2, i6o) = 3.49, p = .033, n2 = .04). Pairwise comparisons 
indicated that this effect was due to a reduction in the use of negative emotion words 
from session two to session three (p = .030, d = 0.22). There was no interaction effect 
between session and context (F(2, 160) = 2.09, p = .127).
Table 6.6 Means and standard deviations for word count and total percentage of 
positive emotion, negative emotion and cognitive process words of disclosure group 
essays.
Home-based Writing Lab-based Writing
(n = 52) (n = 32)
WS 1 WS 2 WS 3 Mean
Total
WS 1 WS 2 WS 3 Mean
Total
Word M 385.20 351.84 310.00 350.71 442.47 417.84 352.53 404.28
Count SD 100.85 119.43 124.59 102.75 130.82 99.52 138.54 108.39
Pos. M 1.98 1.93 2.34 2.07 1.47 1.65 1.98 1.70
emotion
words
SD 1.06 1.12 1.34 0.88 0.77 1.05 1.43 0.77
Neg. M 3.36 3.46 3.28 3.45 3.75 3.56 2.88 3.40
emotion
words
SD 1.45 1.82 1.67 1.42 1.50 1.63 1.52 1.19
Cognitive M 8.08 8.46 8.30 8.28 7.90 8.13 8.13 8.06
Words
SD 2.08 2.16 2.43 1.52 1.91 2.10 2.67 1.42
WS = writing session
Finally, the use of cognitive words did not differ between contexts (F(1, 80) = 0.44, p = 
.508) or writing sessions (F(2, 160) = 0.46, p = .630). There was no significant interaction 
between session and context (F(2, 160) = 0.03, p = .966).
6.4.7.1 Language use as a predictor of outcome
As was done in Chapter 5, regression analyses were used to establish if changes in 
word use across the writing sessions in the disclosure groups were predictive of 
changes in well-being. The previous analysis of word use across contexts and sessions 
(section 6.4.7) indicated that home-based participants used significantly more positive 
emotion words in their writing than lab-based participants overall. However, increases 
in positive word use across the writing sessions were not differentiated by context. 
Therefore, as in Chapter 5, disclosure groups (home-based and lab-based) were 
collapsed into one group for the regression analysis. Hierarchical linear regressions 
were conducted separately for the 2-week and 6-week assessment on each of the 
outcome variables (PSI, depression, anxiety, GSI, intrusion and avoidance). The 
baseline value of the dependent variable was entered in the first step of the regression 
as a control. The change scores for the word categories; negative emotion, positive 
emotion and cognitive mechanisms were entered together at the second step as in 
Chapter 5.
Results from the hierarchical regression analyses are summarized in Table 6.7 and 
Table 6.8. The analysis showed that at 2-week follow-up a change in the use of 
negative emotion words ((3 = .29, t = 3.49, p = .001) and cognitive mechanism words ((3 
= -.23, t = -2.75, p = .007) significantly predicted anxiety scores after controlling for 
baseline levels of anxiety. Those who used less negative emotion words and more 
cognitive mechanism words at writing session three compared to writing session one 
had fewer symptoms of anxiety at 2-week assessment An increase in the use of 
cognitive mechanism words across the writing sessions also predicted a reduction in 
symptoms of depression ((3 = -.19, t = -2.08, p = .041), psychological distress (GSI; (3 = 
-.20, t = -2.35, p = .021) and intrusion ([3 = -.21, t = -2.08, p = .041) at 2-week follow-up 
after controlling for baseline levels (all regression analysis for outcome measures at 2- 
week follow-up are summarized in Table 6.7). Changes in word use did not predict 
scores on the avoidance and PSI measures at 2-week follow-up.
Table 6.7 Summary of Hierarchical Regression Analyses for outcome variables at 2-
week assessment.
Variable
Stepl Step 2
Predictors B SEB P B SEB P
PSI PSI (baseline) 0.61 0.10 .55** 0.61 0.11 .54**
Neg. Emotion Change 0.02 0.13 .01
Pos. Emotion Change -0.02 0.18 -.01
Cognitive Change -0.03 0.09 -.03
R2 0.30 0.30
AR2 - 0.001
Depression Depression (baseline) 0.56 0.09 .59** 0.53 0.08 .56**
Neg. Emotion Change 0.05 0.03 .16
Pos. Emotion Change 0.03 0.04 .06
Cognitive Change -0.05 0.02 -.19*
R2 0.35 0.40
AR2 - 0.05
Anxiety Anxiety (baseline) 0.61 0.09 .62** 0.57 0.08 .58**
Neg. Emotion Change 0.08 0.02 .29**
Pos. Emotion Change -0.01 0.03 -.03
Cognitive Change -0.05 0.02 -.23**
R2 0.38 0.50
AR2 - 0.12
GSI GSI (baseline) 0.67 0.09 .65** 0.64 0.09 .62**
Neg. Emotion Change 0.03 0.02 .14
Pos. Emotion Change 0.02 0.03 .04
Cognitive Change -0.04 0.02 -.2 0 *
R2 0.43 0.47
AR2 - 0.05
Intrusion Intrusion (baseline) 0.48 0.11 .43** 0.46 0.11 .41**
Neg. Emotion Change 0.29 0.46 .06
Pos. Emotion Change 0.37 0.63 .06
Cognitive Change -0.69 0.33 -.2 1 *
R2 0.19 0.23
AR2 - 0.05
Avoidance Avoidance (baseline) 0.66 0.11 .55** 0.62 0.12 .52**
Neg. Emotion Change 0.23 0.48 .05
Pos. Emotion Change 0.90 0.66 .13
Cognitive Change -0.47 0.34 -.13
R2 0.30 0.33
AR2 - 0.03
*p < .05. * * p  <  .01.
N = 83 for PSI, depression, anxiety and GSI; N = 81 for intrusion and avoidance
Table 6.8 Summary of Hierarchical Regression Analyses for outcome variables at 6-
week assessment.
Variable
Stepl Step 2
B SEB P B SEB P
PSI PSI (baseline) 0.67 0 . 1 1 .55** 0.67 0 . 1 2 .55**
Neg. Emotion Change 0  . 0 2 0.14 . 0 1
Pos. Emotion Change 0.08 0.19 .04
Cognitive Change -0 . 0 2 0 . 1 0 - . 0 2
R2 0.31 0.31
AR2 - 0 . 0 0 2
Depression Depression (baseline) 0.71 0.08 .71** 0 . 6 8 0.09 .6 8 **
Neg. Emotion Change 0 .07 0.03 .18*
Pos. Emotion Change 0.04 0.04 .08
Cognitive Change -0.03 0 . 0 2 -.13
R2 0.50 0.54
CM01< - 0.04
Anxiety Anxiety (baseline) 0.63 0.09 .64** 0.60 0.08 .60**
Neg. Emotion Change 0  .08 0 . 0 2 .28**
Pos. Emotion Change 0 . 0 1 0.03 . 0 1
Cognitive Change -0.04 0 . 0 2 -.19*
R2 0.40 0.50
AR2 - 0 . 1 0
GSI GSI (baseline) 0.76 0.09 .69** 0.72 0.09 .67**
Neg. Emotion Change 0.04 0 . 0 2 .15
Pos. Emotion Change -0 . 0 1 0.03 - . 0 2
Cognitive Change -0.03 0 . 0 2 -.15
R2 0.48 0.52
AR2 - 0.04
Intrusion Intrusion (baseline) 0.54 0 . 1 1 .48** 0.51 0 . 1 1 .46**
Neg. Emotion Change 1 .37 0.99 .25
Pos. Emotion Change 0 . 2 2 0.64 .04
Cognitive Change -0.46 0.33 -.14
R2 0.23 0.27
AR2 - 0 . 0 2
Avoidance Avoidance (baseline) 0.56 0 . 1 1 .51** 0.54 0 . 1 1 .50**
Neg. Emotion Change 0.58 0.44 .13
Pos. Emotion Change -0 . 1 0 0.62 - . 0 2
Cognitive Change -0 . 0 2 0.32 - . 0 1
R2 0.26 0.28
AR2 - 0 . 0 2
*p < .05. **p  <  .01.
N = 83 for PSI, depression, anxiety and GSI; N = 81 for intrusion and avoidance
Table 6.8 presents the results of the regression analysis for the outcome variables 
assessed at 6-week follow-up. As was found at 2-week follow-up, those who used less 
negative emotion words (p = .28, t = 3.43, p = .001) and more cognitive mechanism 
words (p = -.19, t = -2.36, p = .021) at writing session three compared to writing 
session one had fewer symptoms of anxiety at 6-week follow-up. A decrease in 
negative emotion words significantly predicted a reduction in depressive symptoms at 
6-weeks after controlling for baseline levels (p = .18, t = 2.26, p = .027). Changes in 
word use did not significantly predict scores for any other outcome variables at 6-week 
follow-up26 (non-significant findings are not reported here, SPSS outputs for all 
hierarchical regressions can be found in Appendix A. 12).
6.5 Discussion
Writing about traumatic or stressful events was not directly associated with 
improvements in physical or psychological well-being. All study participants reported a 
reduction in depressive symptoms and psychological distress (GSI) from baseline to 
the 2-week post writing follow-up and again at the 6-week post writing follow-up. 
Anxiety symptoms improved between baseline and 2-week follow-up and remained 
stable at 6-week follow-up. All participants reported an increase in physical symptoms 
from baseline assessment to 2-week follow-up, by the 6-week assessment reporting of 
physical symptoms had returned to baseline levels. Home-based participants reported 
having more symptoms of anxiety overall across the study period, yet the 
improvements seen on the psychological well-being measures across the study were 
not differentiated by study context.
Assessment of post-writing mood indicated that negative mood was significantly higher 
in the disclosure groups than the writing control groups, which corresponds with the 
highly emotional and personal nature of the topics that trauma group participants wrote 
about and is consistent with the literature (see section 2.3.3.1). However, the home- 
based disclosure group reported experiencing more negative mood following writing 
than the lab-based disclosure group. Whilst this finding might suggest that home-based 
participants were better able to emotionally engage with the task than their lab-based 
counterparts, the pattern of linguistic content in the disclosure narratives does not 
reflect this differentiation between the contexts (negative emotion word content of lab 
and home based narratives were equivalent). However, it is suggested here that 
perhaps a more plausible explanation is that those in the lab, who wrote not only under
26 Analysis o f the writing-control group data did not find these patterns o f change.
the supervision of the experimenter but in the presence of their peers, may have felt it 
necessary to regulate the emotions evoked by disclosure compared to disclosure 
participants afforded the privacy of the home environment. The lab-based context of 
this study is not exactly equivalent to that of the lab-based protocol described and 
advocated by Pennebaker (1994). In order to maximise recruitment, and save time and 
resources, participants completed the study in timetabled classroom sessions. Writing 
in a solitary environment has been found to produce larger psychological effect sizes in 
the long-term, compared to writing in the presence of an audience (Frattaroli, 2006), 
irrespective of the differences found in the short-term between lab-based and home- 
based disclosure groups this study did not find that context moderated the longer-term 
effects of disclosure (see section 3.6.2 for a discussion of audience effects). The level 
of post-writing distress did not diminish significantly across writing sessions although 
there was a trend towards an overall reduction, though the level of post-writing distress 
experienced by participants is not thought to be related to subsequent changes in 
health (Smyth, 1998).
Consistent with the writing instructions given, the linguistic content of disclosure essays 
were more emotionally valenced than those produced by the writing control group as 
indicated by the relative percentage of negative emotion and positive emotion words in 
the narratives. Disclosure group essays were also differentiated from those produced 
by control groups in the content of words that represented cognitive processes, such as 
words relating to insight and causation. The percentage of negative emotion words in 
the disclosure narratives reduced at each writing session and the positive emotion 
words significantly increased by the third writing session. Previous research has found 
this pattern of emotion word change to predict improved health (Pennebaker, Mayne & 
Francis, 1997), in particular that positive emotion words are linearly related to health 
(Pennebaker & Francis, 1996; see section 2.4.5.3). However, in this study positive 
emotion word change did not predict improvements on any of the physical and 
psychological measures. Consistent with the findings in Chapter 5, a reduction in 
negative emotion words predicted a reduction in symptoms of anxiety. Improvements in 
anxiety were also predicted by an increase in cognitive mechanism words, these 
changes in word use influenced anxiety symptoms at the 2-week and 6-week follow-up. 
Additionally, an increase in the use of cognitive mechanism words predicted a 
reduction in intrusive thoughts and a reduction in depressive symptoms and 
psychological distress at 2-week follow-up but not 6-week follow-up. A reduction in 
depressive symptoms at 6-week follow-up was predicted by a reduction in negative 
emotion words but not by cognitive mechanism words (as at 2-weeks). Consistent with
other findings (Pennebaker et al., 1997; Ulrich & Lutgendorf, 2002; Warner et al., 2006) 
these results highlight the benefits of both emotional and cognitive processing in 
disclosure.
The difference in word count between home-based and lab-based disclosure narratives 
suggests that home-based participants wrote fewer words overall, although the number 
of words produced in both disclosure groups reduced over the three writing sessions. It 
is possible that home-based participants did not strictly adhere to the 15 minute timing 
of the writing session as was instructed. To counter this some studies have contacted 
participants via telephone at designated times to remind them when to start writing and 
followed this with a return call to tell them when to stop (Vedhara et al., 2007; Wetherell 
et al., 2005). Additionally, attrition from the study was found to be higher in the lab- 
based groups than the home-based group with over 60 per cent of lab-based 
participants failing to complete the study (compared to 45% in the home-based 
condition). However, this is likely related to non-attendance at class rather than actual 
withdrawal from the study. Withdrawal from the home-based groups in this study was 
also higher than that reported by other home-based studies in student samples 
(Langens & Schuler, 2005; Ullrich & Lutgendorf, 2002).
The finding that changes in psychological well-being were not moderated by context is 
promising for the applicability of disclosure writing outside of the laboratory. Although, 
the reporting of anxiety was higher in the home-based groups, an overall reduction 
from baseline to 2-week follow-up across all groups was seen. The fact that changes in 
psychological well-being were not differentiated by condition in the home-based sample 
is comparable to that seen in Chapter 5 from which the lab-based participants were 
drawn. It seems plausible that these changes could represent a gradual adjustment to 
university. Though this idea was rejected as a possible explanation for the findings of 
Chapter 5, unlike the lab-based sample, the home-based sample were recruited at the 
beginning of the first semester with the final follow-up assessment being completed just 
prior to Christmas break and as such students would arguably have been looking 
forward to their first break from studies and for some an eagerly anticipated return to 
their families. Additionally, as discussed in some detail in Chapter 5, previous studies 
have reported improvements in psychological well-being in study participants that is not 
differentiated by writing condition (Horneffer & Jamison, 2002; Mario & Wagner, 1999). 
Contrary to the findings in Chapter 5; the non-writing control groups experienced the 
same reduction in psychological symptoms as the two writing groups.
The deterioration in physical health at 2-week follow-up is similar to that reported by 
Sheffield et al. (2002), however this deterioration was not differentiated by context, and 
was seen in all groups. This increase in the reporting of physical symptoms is not 
unusual in the disclosure literature. This is especially so in studies with generally 
healthy student samples, where symptoms are assessed using self-report measures 
(Greenberg & Stone, 1992; Kloss & Lisman, 2002; Park & Blumberg, 2002). As this 
deterioration in physical health was not differentiated by experimental condition it is 
likely that this finding represents a seasonal change in the health status associated 
with coming to university (University of Bath, 2008).
6.5.1 Discussion of Findings for Chapters 5 and 6
A common aim of Chapter 5 and Chapter 6 was to replicate the findings of previous 
work that have found the written expression of thoughts and feelings relating to 
traumatic events to be beneficial in improving both psychological and physical well
being. The finding that symptoms of depression, anxiety and psychological distress 
(GSI) improved within all groups with the exception of the non-writing control group in 
Chapter 5 was unexpected but not unique. Considering these unexpected findings in 
both studies, one possible explanation that needs to be considered is that the results 
were confounded by response expectancy effects (Kirsch, 1985) and the mere 
suggestion that there may be a relationship between writing and health, as was 
communicated to participants via the information sheet at recruitment, could account 
for the direction of psychological change in participants. According to response 
expectancy theory, response expectancy is the anticipation of ones own non-volitional 
reaction to a specific event or behaviour, including emotional reactions, that are self- 
fulfilling, that is they tend produce the expected effect (Kirsch, 1985). Response 
expectancies are an important determinant of the placebo effect (Kirsch, 1997), more 
specifically and of particular importance to the findings in Chapter 5, response 
expectancies have been shown to have a direct effect on depressive symptoms in 
undergraduate students (Kirsch, Mearns & Catanzaro, 1990). Kirsch et al. (1990) found 
that the best single predictor of depression scores was coping expectancy, that is, the 
belief that the use of various coping strategies would make them feel better. 
Surprisingly, the frequency with which active coping strategies were used was not 
related to levels of depression, suggesting that the expectancy of feeling better may be 
sufficient to make you feel better independent of the behaviour on which the 
expectancy is predicted (Kirsch et al., 1990). It is conceivable then that in studies one 
and two the mere suggestion that there is a relationship between writing and well-being
that was expressed to the writing groups may have led participants to expect some 
positive outcome from their participation, thus creating positive response expectancy 
and consequently a reduction in symptoms. Problematic for this explanation is that the 
non-writing control groups did not write and should not therefore have had such 
expectancies. However, non-writing control groups were told that their involvement in 
the study was necessary to understand how well-being changes over time, thus the 
suggestion that the researcher was interested in change may have served to produce 
a demand effect in these groups too.
The possibility that the effects of disclosure writing may in part depend on positive 
expectancies of writing is something that has recently been considered. In a study that 
manipulated the positive expectancies, Patterson and Singer (2007-2008) found that 
women who were given the expectancy that writing about trauma would be beneficial 
for their physical and psychological well-being reported a reduction in symptoms of 
interpersonal sensitivity and psychoticism at one month follow-up, participants who 
were given expectancies in the control group did not report any reduction in symptoms 
at follow-up. However, control participants who were not given expectancy information 
also reported a reduction in symptoms of psychoticism. Additionally, participants who 
were told that they could expect beneficial effects from the writing task (control and 
disclosure) reported having similar expectations of the possible positive or negative 
effects of the task as those who were not given expectancy information, thus 
suggesting the manipulation of positive expectancies was not successful. Conversely, 
Langens and Schuler (2007) found that writing about emotional events induced positive 
expectancies and that these positive expectancies were related to improvements in 
physical well-being and the emotional impact of events (as assessed by the IES). 
However, Langens and Schuler (2007) suggest that positive expectancies do not 
present a sufficient condition for a change in emotional well-being as positive 
expectancies were not related to changes in well-being in the control group. These 
findings appear to challenge the suggestion that the effects found in the present study 
may be due to response expectancies in both the trauma and writing control groups. 
However, the method by which Langens and Schuler (2007) assessed expectancies, 
may have contributed to the direction of their findings. All participants, irrespective of 
the condition they were allocated to, were asked to bring to mind an emotional event 
and write down eight words they associated with the event, they were then asked to 
rate the emotional impact of this event on the IES. Whilst experimental participants 
went on to write about this event in detail at the subsequent intervention sessions, 
control participants were asked to describe their surroundings or their journey to the
venue. It was after the intervention period had finished that participants were asked to 
rate their expectancies associated with the writing intervention, however, all questions 
related to the upsetting experience. Whilst these instructions would have been 
pertinent to the three writing sessions for the experimental group, for the control group 
their point of reference would have been the phase at which they wrote eight words 
relating to an upsetting event and not the actual intervention phase per se. It seems 
likely therefore that the expectancies of the two groups were different because they 
were rating different writing events.
Notwithstanding the outcome of studies in Chapters 5 and 6, the finding that both 
modality and context did not moderate this outcome is promising for the adaptation of 
the standard disclosure intervention to an internet-mediated protocol. Although the 
findings of this study raised the concern that the lack of experimenter control in studies 
conducted in the home environment may lead to problems with protocol adherence and 
high attrition it is anticipated that with the adaption to an internet-mediated protocol, the 
issue of timing in particular can be addressed and that the population of focus 
(individuals experiencing infertility) may have more motivation to continue once 
involved as has been found with other patient populations (van Middendorp et al., 
2007; Wetherell et al., 2005).
The failure to measure pre-writing affect in studies one and two limits the interpretation 
of the difference seen in post-writing affect, however the fact that there were no group 
differences on the baseline measures of psychological well-being taken immediately 
preceding the first writing session adds some validity to the post-writing outcomes. 
Finally, the possibility that the longer-term psychological effects reported in studies one 
and two may in part be due to expectancy effects needs to be addressed in future 
studies.
6.6 Overall Summary
The findings of Chapter 5 and Chapter 6 combined, show that the modality by which 
participants disclose their thoughts and feelings relating to stressful and traumatic 
experiences and the context in which disclosure occurs does not moderate the longer- 
term effects of a disclosure intervention. These findings would indicate that the 
adaptation of the standard lab-based written protocol to one that is delivered via a 
computer within the context of the home is feasible.
Whilst the studies the studies in Chapter 5 and Chapter 6 were not able to replicate the 
findings of previous research that have found improvements in physical (e.g. 
Pennebaker & Beall, 1986) and psychological well-being (e.g. Epstein et al., 2005) in 
student samples who have written about traumatic or stressful events compared to 
controls who have written about neutral events, analysis of the language used by 
disclosure participants in their writing suggested that emotional and cognitive 
processing did occur in the writing sessions. A reduction in the use of negative words 
and increase in the use of cognitive mechanism words influenced improvements in 
psychological well-being in disclosure participants, a pattern of change that has been 
found in previous studies (e.g. Pennebaker et al., 1997). Notwithstanding these 
positive changes for disclosure group participants, the overall improvements seen in all 
participants (control and disclosure) are problematic for interpretation of the current 
findings. The possibility that expectancy and demand effects might account for the 
changes seen in control group participants needs to be addressed in the design of the 
subsequent study in individuals with infertility.
The principal aim of this thesis is to examine the efficacy of a written disclosure 
intervention for individuals experiencing infertility. Whilst the findings of Chapter 5 and 
Chapter 6 are not able to be generalized readily beyond a student sample, combined 
with the positive findings of previous home-based studies in patients with chronic 
conditions (see section 2.3.7.3) the prospect of developing and providing an effective 
computer mediated home-based disclosure intervention for individuals experiencing 
infertility is encouraging. As discussed in Chapter 1 the development and 
implementation of a study recruiting individuals with infertility attending an assisted 
conception unit proved to be unfeasible (see Appendix A.2 for details of the 
development of this study). Therefore, internet based infertility support forums were 
employed as an alternative method of recruitment; subsequently the intervention was 
adapted to be delivered via the internet. Internet-mediated research presents a number 
of ethical and methodological challenges. Chapter 7 presents a review of these 
challenges that need to be considered in the design and implementation of a web- 
based disclosure intervention.
Chapter 7
Internet-Mediated Research: Ethics, 
Methodological Issues and Interventions.
7.1 Overview
The potential consequences of delivering a written disclosure intervention in a home 
based, computer-mediated format have been examined in Chapter 5 and Chapter 6 , 
and findings suggest this format to be feasible. In adapting the written emotional 
disclosure protocol to be delivered via the internet, there are a number of ethical and 
methodological challenges that need to be considered. The methodological and ethical 
issues of conducting an internet based intervention are thus presented in this chapter. 
Initially, the use of the internet by infertile individuals is described in section 7.2.1. The 
ethical challenges associated with using internet users for the purpose of research are 
discussed in detail in section 7.3 and the implications of using internet-based 
methodologies are considered in section 7.4. Section 7.5 provides a brief overview of 
internet-mediated interventions and evidence for the application of a written emotional 
disclosure to this format.
7.2 Accessing Special Groups via the Internet
In 2008, 65 per cent of households within Great Britain had internet access (Office for 
National Statistics, 2008). This represented an increase of 5.03 million households 
since 2002. The internet can often be the primary source of information and support for 
individuals experiencing health issues. There has been a rapid growth of health related 
resources available on the internet including virtual communities and online support 
groups. Indicative of the availability of these resources, Coulson (2008) reports that the 
results of a search of online support groups via the Yahoo Groups health and wellness 
section returned a listing of 136,000 groups. With the growing accessibility of the 
internet this medium offers new possibilities for recruiting participants for health 
research (Brownlow & ODell, 2002). There are a number of advantages to accessing
participants via the internet, including access to larger and more geographically diverse 
populations and those with specific conditions or illnesses that cannot be easily 
accessed through traditional recruitment methods (Hamilton & Bowers, 2006; Keller & 
Lee, 2003). Additionally, the internet provides the opportunity to conduct research in 
patient groups that would normally only be accessible via hospital departments and 
doctors surgeries.
7.2.1 Use of the Internet by Infertile Individuals
Individuals experiencing infertility are increasingly using the internet as a source of 
information and support (Malik & Coulson, 2008a). The internet can provide a quick 
and relatively inexpensive resource for obtaining information relating to infertility 
problems and treatment (Rawal & Haddard, 2006). The use of the internet for fertility 
related issues is particularly high amongst treatment seeking individuals (Haagen et al. 
2003; Rawal & Haddard, 2006; Weissman, Gotlieb, Ward, Greenblatt & Casper, 2000). 
Rawal and Haddard (2006) found that 58 per cent of a sample of patients currently 
undergoing treatment in a UK based hospital reported using the internet for infertility 
related issues. Other studies have reported similarly high rates of fertility specific 
internet use amongst infertility patients (Haagen et al., 2003; Weissman et al., 2000). 
Although the majority of infertility patient internet users appear to seek information 
specifically relating to diagnosis and treatment, studies report that between 10 and 41 
per cent of patients also use the internet to seek emotional support (Haagen et al., 
2003; Rawal & Haddard, 2006; Weissman et al., 2000).
The range of negative psychosocial consequences of infertility, and the protective 
effect that perceived social support can have on psychological adjustment to the 
stressful nature of infertility, are discussed in section 2.2.4.1. However, couples who 
are dealing with fertility problems often find it difficult to access support from within their 
social circles (Domar, 1997). Infertility patients also report that they often feel unable to 
talk to their own doctors about psychological problems, somatic complaints and sexual 
and relationship problems (Himmel, Meyer, Kochen & Michelmann, 2005). For some 
therefore, fertility related online support groups can be a valuable source of emotional 
support.
Previous research has shown that accessing online support for health related issues 
can have a number of psychosocial benefits (Davison, Pennebaker & Dickerson,
2000). Indeed, Malik and Coulson (2008a) found that individuals who contributed to or
lurked27 on infertility related discussion boards reported a number of benefits of online 
social support. Seeking support and advice through online interactions provided a 
number of benefits over that of face-to-face interactions, in particular, issues of 
convenience and availability of 24hr support were identified, and it appears that the 
anonymity afforded by the internet removed the fear or embarrassment of discussing 
particularly painful and negative emotions and being able to communicate with 
individuals who were in similar situations to themselves reduced feelings of isolation 
and improved their relationship with their partner (Malik & Coulson, 2008a).
Notwithstanding the benefits of internet-mediated support and the availability of fertility 
related information via the web, there can also be drawbacks to seeking information or 
support in this manner. Concerns have been raised about the quality and 
trustworthiness of infertility related information available on the internet (Marriott et al., 
2008) and the potential for this information to be harmful or distracting rather than 
helpful (Rawal & Haddad, 2006). For some there can also be the danger of becoming 
obsessed with or reliant on the online community to the cost of their offline 
relationships (Epstein, Rosenberg, Venet Grant & Hemenway, 2002). Epstein et al. 
(2 0 0 2 ) surveyed visitors to an international infertility resource website and obtained 
information about their use of internet resources including infertility related discussion 
boards. The study identified two types of internet users in this predominantly female 
(99.1%) sample: namely those who acknowledged the internet as the only outlet for 
talking about their infertility, and those who had alternative outlets. Not surprisingly 
individuals whose only outlet was the internet reported spending more hours per day 
on the internet and getting more support from the discussion boards. Individuals who 
had alternative outlets for talking about their infertility reported less depression, 
considered infertility to be less stressful, worried less, reported using better coping 
strategies for dealing with their infertility and were more satisfied with their 
relationships. However, it is not clear from the results of this study if the poor emotional 
profile of infertile individuals who rely on the internet for support is due to their over 
reliance on the internet or if it is that individuals who experience more infertility related 
distress are more inclined to seek out and be over-reliant on this type of support.
27 Reading online or e-mail communications without taking part in the discussions (Merriam-Webster 
Online Dictionary).
7.3 Ethical Issues in Internet-Mediated Research
7.3.1 Research Involving Online Communities
Research involving online communities poses complex ethical issues for researchers. 
In studies that utilise a planned research methodology, discussion groups are set up 
specifically to generate research data (Alpers et al., 2005; Skinner et al., 1997). In this 
context users who complete the registration process to become a member of the 
discussion group are informed of the research purpose of the site. For example, the 
TeenNet Project (Skinner at al., 1997) has developed an interactive health promotion 
website in which users between 10 and 24 years of age are able to access health 
information and communicate with their peers about such issues as smoking, body 
image, sex and relationships. This communication is conducted through the message 
board section of the site named HotTalk. Whilst registration to the site is compulsory, in 
order to use the features of the site, users do not have to consent to take part in 
research and so are free to use the site without the obligation of being a participant. 
There is clearly an ethical responsibility to seek consent from users when websites are 
created with the specific purpose of being a research tool (Flicker, Haans & Skinner, 
2004). It is more common though for researchers to take an opportunistic approach to 
the gathering of data from existing discussion groups (Whitehead, 2007) and it is this 
approach that is arguably more ethically challenging.
7.3.1.1 Public versus private space
Ethically it is accepted that the observation of behaviour for research purposes, when 
performed within a public place where one would reasonably expect to be observed by 
strangers (British Psychological Society Code of Ethics and Conduct, 2006: p.13) does 
not require the consent of those being observed. The ethical dilemma for those wishing 
to analyse messages posted in online discussion boards is whether the public 
accessibility of these posts constitutes being within the public domain and therefore 
available for use by researchers without consent (Sixsmith & Murray, 2001). This is a 
contentious debate. Some argue that communication within a publicly accessible forum 
constitutes the public domain as defined by traditional ethical principles and as such 
gathering of information from these sources is not subject to consent (Finn & Lavitt, 
1994; Sudweeks & Rafaeli, 1995). Consequently, there are a number of examples of 
studies that assume this attitude in the practice of data collection (Brewer, Van Raalte, 
& Cornelius, 2007; Coulson, Buchanan & Aubeeluck, 2007; Finn, 1999; Malik & 
Coulson, 2008b). However, others disagree with this approach, arguing that whilst
online messages may be publically accessible, posters never intended their messages 
to be used for research purposes (Waskul & Douglas, 1996).
The anonymity afforded to users of online discussions boards can help to facilitate 
honesty and unreserved expression in their online communications (Malik & Coulson, 
2008b). Barnes (2004) argues that online communities can often create an illusion of 
privacy and that posters often forget that they are communicating within a public space. 
However, seeking permission to access the content of message boards can be 
problematic. Due to the fluctuating population of online communities it may not be 
possible to seek consent from all users and threads that are sampled for analysis may 
contain posts by users that are no longer active on the boards and by active members 
from whom there has been no response to the researcher's request. Furthermore, by 
seeking consent this may have an unforeseen impact and may change the dynamics of 
the group (Eysenbach & Till, 2001).
In the absence of any clear regulations for conducting research with online 
communities a number of guidelines have been recommended. In relation to the 
distinction between public and private space, King (1996) argues that any discussion 
group to which access requires registration confers a sense of perceived privacy. 
Agreeing with this view, Bruckman (2002) suggests that any discussion board that is 
accessible without a password may be considered a public archive.
A report published by the British Psychological Society (Guidelines for ethical practice 
in psychological research online, 2007) suggests that when conducting research with 
online communities:
any requirements for consent by participants obviously needs to be tempered by 
a consideration of the nature of the research, the intrusiveness and privacy 
implications of the data collected, analysed and reported, and possible harm
caused by the research The researcher should be clear about the extent to
which their own collection and reporting of data would pose additional threats
to privacy over and above those that already exist" (p. 3).
There is an obligation to protect the privacy and anonymity of group members, 
therefore the British Psychological Society (2007) make a number of recommendations 
to safeguard against breaching participant anonymity: i) online pseudonyms should be 
treated with the same confidentiality as the individuals real name, ii) direct quotations
of posts should not be reported unless consent has been sought from the author and 
all identifying material should be removed, iii) in the absence of consent researchers 
should avoid using direct quotations that could be traced to the individual poster via a 
search engine (i.e. Google) and should instead consider the use of paraphrased quotes 
for illustrative purposes, iv) the web address of the discussion forum should not be 
published alongside any data or findings generated from the site.
7.3.1.2 Identity and anonymity
The anonymity afforded to participants recruited via the internet can mean a lack of 
control for the researcher in confirming the identities of participants. The nature of 
internet-mediated research is such that there is usually no face-to-face contact 
between participant and researcher and therefore it is difficult to verify the true identity 
of the research participant. Internet recruitment makes it easier for individuals to pose 
as 'research participants' and to falsify their true identity, a problem that is arguably 
greater for experimental or questionnaire based research (Hamilton & Bowers, 2006). It 
is not known how widespread identity deception is within internet-mediated research, 
however, Walther (2002) points out that online research is open to no more deception 
than mail-based surveys and telephone interviews. It is difficult to verify the identity of 
participants without incorporating checks of personal documentary identification (i.e. 
driving licence), and whilst not being foolproof this approach may also deter individuals 
from participating (British Psychological Society, 2007). Where verification of personal 
identity is not of importance to the study or cannot be obtained for practical reasons, it 
is suggested that knowledge of the areas being addressed can be used as a crude test 
of participant authenticity (Hamilton & Bowers, 2006). This is arguably more easily 
established from qualitative data such as e-mail interviews or narrative accounts. An 
associated problem is that of multiple submissions, whereby respondents participate on 
more than one occasion. Repeat responding can be of concern for the quality of data 
but is not thought to be a threat to reliability (Gosling, Vazire, Srivastava & John, 
2004). Though repeat responding it is not thought to be a widespread problem 
(Birnbaum, 2004) it is an issue that should be addressed in internet-mediated study 
designs. Reips (2002) proposes a number of precautions that can be put in place to 
prevent repeat responding. These include, collecting personal information that allows 
identification, asking participants to indicate if they have participated in the study 
previously, checking the Internet protocol28 (IP) addresses of submissions for
28 A  unique identifying number o f a computer on a specific network, this can be used to identify location.
duplicates or redirecting subsequent requests from used IP addresses and 
implementing password dependent access.
7.3.1.3 Confidentiality and security
When collecting electronic data it is necessary to strike a balance between maintaining 
anonymity and confidentiality and obtaining enough identifying information to either 
prevent multiple submissions or to facilitate completion rates in repeated measures 
designs. The method through which data is collected on the internet presents different 
challenges for confidentiality. The contents of a discussion board post can contain 
identifying information and, as discussed in section 7.3.1.1, this information should be 
removed along with pseudonyms when the data is downloaded and before it is stored 
for analysis. E-mail is not a completely secure form of communication (Birnbaum,
2004), therefore Hamilton and Bowers (2006) provide a number of recommendations 
for dealing with e-mail data to maintain confidentially including, cutting and pasting the 
e-mail into a text file and removing all identifying information, deleting the e-mail and 
making sure that participants information is not saved in the address book. Indeed, 
Birnbaum (2004) advocates using similar precautions with personal data generated 
from the internet as that generated in the laboratory which include: i) avoiding storing 
names and addresses of participants, ii) storing data on a different server to the one 
that hosts the study and, iii) protecting servers and folders that contain data with 
passwords.
7.4 Methodological Issues in Internet-Mediated Research
7.4.1 Recruitment of Participants via the Internet
There are a number of techniques that can be used to recruit participants via the 
internet. The use of e-mail recruiting is one method that can be effective for qualitative 
and quantitative research, though it is considered poor netiquette29 to send unsolicited 
e-mails to mailing lists without the co-operation of the list holders or administrators of 
member groups (Birnbaum, 2004). There are now a number of open access sites 
dedicated to hosting online psychology studies (e.g. Online Psychology Research UK 
at http://onlinepsvchresearch.co.uk/) that are designed to help researchers recruit 
participants. Worldwide access to such sites means that internet study samples are 
often demographically and culturally diverse (Reips, 2002), providing cross-cultural and 
international research opportunities (Birnbaum, 2004). One very popular recruitment
29 A  set o f social conventions for online behavioural standards recognised by online communities 
(Scheuermann &  Taylor, 1997).
http://onlinepsvchresearch.co.uk/
method, which is often utilised when access is needed to groups with specific 
characteristics, is to post research invitations or links to study sites on internet 
discussion boards (forums). Posting links and information about the study on 
discussion boards that are specific to the population of interest (e.g. individuals 
undergoing fertility treatment) is one of the most effective methods of accessing 
individuals who are hard to reach by traditional methods (Illingworth, 2001) and some 
discussion groups have specific message boards on which study information and 
invitations can be posted. Hamilton and Bowers (2006) argue that this opt in method is 
not dissimilar to placing requests for participants within specific clinical settings (i.e. on 
notice boards within a clinic waiting room).
7.4.2 Sampling and Generalisability
It is argued that the recruitment of research participants via the internet is marred by 
sampling bias (Whitehead, 2007). A major concern with internet recruitment is whether 
internet users are representative of the general population (Gosling et al., 2004; 
Hamilton & Bowers, 2006). The findings from recent surveys in the UK and USA 
indicate that internet users are typically white, under the age of 30 years old and 
college educated (Office of National Statistics, 2008; Pew Internet and American Life 
Project, 2009). Additionally, individuals who do not have access to the appropriate 
computer equipment and internet technology, be that due to demographic status or 
technological naivety, are excluded for participation in online studies (Beddows, 2008). 
Gosling et al. (2004) compared the demographic profile of a web sample (n = 361,703) 
with that of traditional samples used in studies published over a twelve month period in 
the Journal of Personality and Social Psychology {n = 102,959). They found that the 
internet sample was generally more diverse than the traditional sample in terms of 
gender, age and socioeconomic status but were comparable in terms of race. Gosling 
et al. (2004) agree that internet samples are not a suitable alternative for true random 
samples but argue that few time and cost effective methods permit researchers access 
to truly representative samples. Indeed non-representative samples (e.g. volunteers or 
undergraduate students) are commonly used in psychological research. In many cases 
general population representativeness is not a priority. More important is that the 
sample used to obtain the data is representative of the population to which the findings 
are to be generalized (Gosling et al., 2004).
Studies that have compared demographic profiles of infertility patients who are users 
and non-users of the internet have found them to be similar (Haagen et al., 2003;
Rawal & Haddard, 2006). Weissman et al. (2000) found that infertile couples from all 
socioeconomic backgrounds actively used the internet to access fertility related 
information. For example, patients attending a public infertility clinic were significantly 
more likely to be unemployed, have a lower combined household income and lower 
levels of education compared with patients attending a private clinic, however, internet 
usage for fertility related issues was not significantly different between patient groups 
(38.5% at the public clinic and 46.3% at the private clinic; Weissman et al., 2000). 
While general usage internet statistics indicate that men (75%) are more likely to 
access the internet than women (6 6 %; Office for National Statistics, 2008), female 
infertility patients are more likely to access the internet for fertility related issues than 
their male partners (Haagen et al., 2003; Weissman et al., 2000). This difference 
between men and women in fertility-related internet usage is not surprising as research 
indicates that women are in general the ones more likely to seek emotional support for 
their fertility related concerns and instigate medical tests and treatments (see Greil, 
1997).
Self-selection can limit generalisability, consequently Reips (2000) recommends 
providing access to the online study via many different web sites as a method to 
reduce self-selection bias. Self-selection can also be interpreted as voluntariness 
(Reips, 2000, 2002) which is the voluntary nature of an individuals motivation to 
participate. Reips (2002) argues that this can be advantageous since voluntariness 
reduces effects of psychological reactance (p.248) which include effects such as 
careless responding, providing deliberately false answers and dropout (Reips, 2002). 
However, research does suggest that individuals who volunteer to take part in 
psychological research tend to be more altruistic and self-disclosing than non
volunteers (Rosenthal & Rosnow, 1975) and that voluntariness is related to the 
personality factors openness to experience and agreeableness (Dollinger & Leong, 
1993). Although self-selection bias will still remain via this method, it does mean that 
participants can be sampled from a number of related sources, thus widening out the 
inclusion of potential participants.
7.4.3 Computer Administration of Self-Report Questionnaires
Administering questionnaires via the internet offers a number of advantages over 
traditional pen-and-paper administration, such as reducing missing data (Fouladi, 
McCarthy & Moller, 2002), data entry costs and errors (Pasveer & Ellard, 1998) and 
immediacy of results (Booth-Kewley, Larson & Miyoshi, 2007). In addition to these
practical advantages there is also growing evidence that online administration may 
reduce social desirability effects (e.g. Richman, Kiesler, Weisband & Drasgow, 1999; 
Dwight & Feigelson, 2000) and elicit greater self-disclosure (e.g. Booth-Kewley et al., 
2007; Feigelson & Dwight, 2000; Weisband & Kiesler, 1996).
7.4.3.1 Self-disclosure and social desirability effects
Some studies have found that individuals are more inclined to disclose sensitive 
behaviours such as substance use and sexual behaviour on computerized surveys 
than pen-and-paper based equivalents (Booth-Kewley et al., 2007; Wright, Aquilino & 
Supple, 1998), whilst others report no differential effect of mode of administration on 
self-disclosure of sensitive behaviours (Bates & Cox, 2008; Locke & Gilbert, 1995). In a 
meta-analysis of studies comparing mode of administration Feigelson and Dwight 
(2 0 0 0 ) found a small but significant effect (d = .2 2 ), such that computer based 
assessment resulted in more candidness when responding to questions about sensitive 
behaviours. Weisband and Kiesler (1996) found similar disclosure effects for computer 
based administration. Additionally, they found that the effect size for online studies with 
patient samples was significantly larger than that of studies with student samples. 
Though Weisband and Kiesler (1996) hypothesised that effect sizes might be larger in 
patients samples due to an increased sense of privacy in a population that they 
suggest are more sensitive to the consequences of self-disclosure, the authors 
acknowledge that differences in experience with computers and psychological tests 
between the samples could also account for variation in effect size.
While self-report measures are subject to social desirability effects (Holtgraves, 2004) it 
is argued that this response distortion is less problematic when self-report measures 
are administered online (Martin & Nagao, 1989). A possible explanation for this effect 
on socially desirable responding is the perceived anonymity afforded by the faceless 
context of the online environment. Joinson (1999) found evidence for the importance of 
perceived anonymity in the administration of self-report measures. Participants were 
administered measures of social anxiety, social desirability and self-esteem via the 
internet or in the traditional pen-and-paper format and participants were assigned to 
anonymous or non-anonymous conditions. Joinson (1999) found that participants who 
responded online scored significantly lower on the measures of social anxiety and 
social desirability and higher on the measure of self-esteem than participants who 
responded using the traditional pen-and-paper format. Additionally, anonymous online 
respondents had lower social anxiety and social desirability scores overall, whereas 
non-anonymous pen-and-paper respondents had the highest scores on these two
measures. However, the findings of a meta-analysis examining social desirability 
responding on computer based questionnaires found the effect of computer 
administration to be small and that this effect has diminished over time (Dwight & 
Feigelson, 2000). Whilst perceptions of anonymity might lead to less social desirability 
responding Dwight and Feigelson (2000) suggest as individuals become more 
accustomed to using computer technology and aware of the capabilities of computers 
(i.e. that communications can be monitored) that social desirability responding might 
increase, likening this effect to the Big Brother Syndrome (Rosenfeld & Booth-Kewley, 
1996).
7.4.3.2 Reliability and validity
The layout of the questionnaire online will often depend on the software used to 
generate the web-based display as well as the browser software and settings of the 
respondent. In addition to these aesthetic differences, concerns have been raised 
about the lack of control in online testing and potential for extraneous factors (e.g. 
environmental distractions, fatigue) to influence responding (Buchanan, 2002). Given 
the numerous potential differences between online and pen-and-paper measures a 
number of studies have sought to examine if these differing modes of administration 
are psychometrically comparable. Studies that have examined the reliability and validity 
of equivalent online and pen-and-paper measures assessing a number of dimensions, 
including personality (e.g. Buchanan & Smith, 1999), psychological and physical 
symptomology (e.g. Herrero & Menese, 2006; Ritter, Lorig, Laurent & Matthews, 2004; 
Vallejo, Jordan, Diaz, Comech & Ortega, 2007), attachment (Fouladi et al., 2002) and 
health behaviours (Denscombe, 2006), have in general found them to be 
psychometrically similar. Ritter et al. (2004) recruited an internet sample via 
advertisements on various health discussion boards, medical e-newsletters and online 
support groups. They assessed a total of 16 health-related measures relating to health 
distress, health care utilization, health behaviours and illness intrusiveness. The results 
of the study showed that there were few differences between the online and pen-and- 
paper measures, with internal consistency and test-retest reliability not differing 
significantly. However, there was a trend towards internet respondents reporting more 
health distress than their paper based counterparts.
Differences in score distribution between the two modes of administration have been 
reported in other studies, particularly in relation to measures of negative affect. For 
example, Peterson, Johannsson and Carlsson (1996) found that computerized scores 
on the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI; Beck, Ward & Mendelson, 1961) tended to be
higher for the computer administered version than the pen-and-paper version. 
Similarly, Davis (1999) found higher levels of self-rumination amongst students 
administered the internet version of the Ruminative Response Scale (RRS), a subscale 
of the Response Style Questionnaire (RSQ; Nolen-Hoeksema & Morrow, 1991) which 
assesses how participants respond to their own symptoms of negative emotion. There 
are a number of possible reasons for these differences. Firstly, it has been suggested 
that internet users tend to be more depressed (Kraut et al., 1998), though in these 
instances this is unlikely to explain the differences as not all participants were recruited 
via the internet (e.g. students and hospital patients). Additionally, one would expect 
those who were internet users to have high scores on the pen-and-paper version also 
(Ritter et al., 2004). A second possible explanation relates to the potential for increased 
self-disclosure in online questionnaires (see section 7.4.3.1). It is possible that this 
tendency to be more candid when assessed online is represented in more honest, and 
consequently, higher scores on self-relevant measures (Joinson, 1999). A third, more 
problematic explanation is that computer anxiety may contribute to the non-equivalent 
scores found between the modes of administration (George, Lankford & Wilson, 1992; 
Schulenberg & Yutrzenka, 1999; Tseng, Tiplady, Macleod & Wright, 1998). George et 
al. (1992) found that BDI scores were higher in students who completed a 
computerized version of the scale when computer anxiety was high. This correlation 
was not found with the pen-and-paper administration, suggesting that increased 
depression scores reflected a negative reaction to testing rather than the actual 
construct being measured. Similarly, Tseng et al. (1998) found that computer anxiety 
was associated with more negative ratings of mood when measures were administered 
by computer. Arguably, the confounding effects of computer anxiety on mood ratings 
are less likely to be a problem with samples recruited via the internet.
Vallejo et al. (2007) found a modality effect contradictory to earlier research (e.g. 
Peterson et al., 1996). The authors administered the General Health Questionnaire-28 
(GHQ-28; Goldberg & Hiller, 1979) and the Symptom Checklist-90-Revised (SCL-90-R; 
Derogatis, 1992) to a sample of students. The test-retest design used involved 
completing the pen-and-paper version as the test and the online version as the re-test. 
Both online versions showed acceptable reliability and validity equivalent to the pen- 
and-paper versions. However, SCL-90-R scores on the pen-and-paper version were 
higher than the online scores. In fact the results suggested that for the Global Severity 
Index (GSI) 23.2 per cent of the variance could be explained by mode of 
administration. The authors suggest that mixed administration could be problematic 
especially for the assessment of repeated measures designs used to assess treatment
outcomes. The difference between modality is big enough to cover or reflect the effects 
of a treatment (Vallejo et al., 2007). In addition, even though the online version showed 
acceptable reliability and validity the variability in scores as an effect of mode of 
administration suggests that for the online version it may not be appropriate to use the 
normative data for the SCL-90-R which is derived from the pen-and-paper forms. Even 
if the psychometric properties of measures administered online are acceptable, the use 
of norms established from pen-and-paper assessments are not appropriate for use with 
online versions, in light of this Buchanan (2003) argues for the cautionary use of 
measures that rely on normative data, especially for clinical application.
Notwithstanding the potential variations in normative data across modalities a number 
of commentators would agree that the evidence to date demonstrates that the use of 
internet based questionnaires as a data collection method can provide a reliable 
equivalent to pen-and-paper based methods (e.g. Denscombe, 2006; Fouladi et al.,
2002).
7.4.4 Response and Dropout Rates
Response rates to internet based surveys are calculated in a number ways, usually 
determined by the variation in recruitment methods (Whitehead, 2007). Response rates 
can be reported based on the number of responses of interest generated from an 
advertisement to the study (Illingworth, 2001) or the number of completed responses to 
e-mailed questionnaires or hyperlinks (Ritter et al., 2004). Studies that have compared 
response rates of unsolicited e-mail versus unsolicited postal questionnaires have 
found that e-mail response rates are lower (e.g. Leece et al., 2004). Higher response 
rates can be achieved when participants are recruited via online discussion boards 
(Ritter et al., 2004) or receive initial e-mail requests of participation prior to delivery of 
the study questionnaire (Metha & Sivadas, 1995). For example, in a study conducted 
by Illingworth (2001), of the 65 responses to an advert posted on an infertility 
discussion board, 70 per cent returned completed e-mail questionnaires.
Dropout can be problematic for internet-based studies (Reips, 2002). When studies are 
conducted within the laboratory, often in the presence of an experimenter, social 
pressure or possible embarrassment may deter participants from quitting half way 
through (Birnbaum, 2004). To quit a study online simply requires closing the open 
browser. The reported rates of dropout for online studies vary widely from between one 
per cent and 87 per cent (mean, 34%; Musch & Reips, 2000) and are dependent on a 
number of factors including complexity of procedures, financial incentives and
placement of questions asking for personal information (ONeil, Penrod & Bornstein,
2003).
Reips (2002) recommends using what he terms the high-hurdle and warm-up 
techniques to reduced dropout. High-hurdle techniques include, informing participants 
of the seriousness of the research, providing realistic estimates of how long the study 
will take, asking for e-mail addresses and other personal data early on (if required) and 
pre-warning participants if the study involves anything of a sensitive nature. Dropout in 
within-participants or repeated measures designs can present a problem for the validity 
of the research (Reips, 2002). Findings from one longitudinal internet-mediated study 
are encouraging, whereby Hiskey and Troop (2002) recruited internet users exposed to 
trauma and reported a response rate of 6 8  per cent at 6  month follow-up 
(administration was repeated at 3 and 6  months after the initial recruitment phase). 
Considering the sensitive nature of the study, and the time between completion 
phases, the rates found within this study are promising.
7.5 Delivery of Psychological Interventions via the internet
In addition to providing researchers with the opportunity to access large and diverse 
samples, the internet also offers a new method of delivering health interventions. The 
last ten years has seen an increase in the development and availability of internet- 
based treatment interventions taking the form of structured therapy programs (e.g. 
Kenardy, McCaffery & Rosa, 2003), counselling via e-mail (e.g. Cohen & Kerr, 1998), 
therapist-assisted chat rooms (e.g. Barak & Bloch, 2006) and psycho-educational 
programmes (e.g. Winzelberg et al., 2000). There are a number of unique advantages 
to internet-delivered interventions such as increasing access to services for isolated, 
stigmatized or disabled groups, reducing costs to users and more widely to health 
services, providing 24 hour access and convenience to users (Griffiths, Lindenmeyer, 
Powell, Lowe & Thorogood, 2006; Lauder, Chester & Berk, 2007). The conditions 
targeted in these interventions have varied widely and include weight loss (e.g. Tate, 
Wing & Winett, 2001), smoking cessation (e.g. Schneider, Walter & ODonnell, 1990), 
disordered eating (e.g. Luce, Winzelberg, zabinski & Osborne, 2003), depression (e.g. 
Christensen, Griffiths & Jorm, 2004), anxiety (e.g. Kenardy et al., 2003), panic disorder 
(e.g. Klein & Richards, 2001) and cancer (e.g. early stage breast cancer; Owen et al.,
2005).
The effectiveness of internet-delivered interventions has been subject to a number of 
reviews (Cuijpers, van Straten & Andersson, 2008; Griffiths & Christensen, 2006;
Proudfoot, 2004; Ritterband et al., 2003). For example, Griffiths and Christensen 
(2006) conducted a systematic review of 15 randomised controlled trials of self-help 
internet-delivered interventions. These interventions targeted conditions such as 
depression, anxiety, stress and insomnia using a number of methods including 
Cognitive Behaviour Therapy (CBT), relaxation training and provision of psycho- 
educational material. All but two of the interventions reviewed reported at least one 
positive outcome. Cuijper et al. (2008) conducted a systematic review of twelve CBT 
based internet delivered studies for health problems. Findings indicated that 
interventions targeting pain and headaches showed comparable effects to that of face- 
to-face interventions. Overall, these reviews suggest that internet interventions are both 
feasible and effective. The conditions under which interventions are offered (either 
research or routine care) does not appear to moderate the efficacy (Proudfoot, 2004). 
These optimistic findings also demonstrate that some psychological treatments can be 
successfully adapted for use via the internet (Ritterband et al., 2003). The majority of 
interventions delivered via the internet have been CBT based protocols as this 
therapeutic method better lends itself to being adapted to a text format (Cuijpers et al., 
2008). However, one research group have adapted a structured writing protocol, 
previously used in clinical practice (Lange, 1996; 1994), for delivery via the internet 
(Lange, van de Van, Schrieken, Bredeweg & Emmelkamp, 2000) called Interapy which 
has been shown to be effective in reducing a number of psychological symptoms.
7.5.1 Interapy
The Amsterdam Writing Group have developed a structured writing intervention based 
on the disclosure writing protocol of Pennebaker (e.g. Pennebaker & Beall, 1986) and 
adapted it to be administered through the internet via a web based programme called 
Interapy30 (Lange et al., 2000). The intervention consists of ten, 45 minute structured 
writing sessions that emphasise self-confrontation, cognitive reappraisal, and social 
sharing of feelings. There is also the involvement of an Interapy therapist who provides 
feedback to the participant on their writing. Participants also receive psycho- 
educational information in order to stimulate self-confrontation (i.e. focus on the most 
painful images) and cognitive reappraisal of their writing Results from trials of Interapy 
have been promising, with a pilot study carried out with undergraduate students finding 
significant post-treatment improvements in symptoms of avoidance, intrusion, anxiety, 
somatisation and depression in treatment group participants compared with waiting list 
controls (Lange et al., 2000). Comparable effects were seen with participants recruited
30 Interapy can be accessed at www.interapv.com but is at present only open to Dutch-speaking clients.
http://www.interapv.com
via the Interapy website, with highly significant decreases in trauma related symptoms 
and general psychopathology observed in treatment group participants compared to 
waiting list controls, with large effects sizes (ranging from d =.95 to d =.1.66) (Lange, 
Schoutrop, Schrieken & van de Ven, 2002). Participants who were recruited from the 
general population accessed the Interapy website of their own accord, thus they were 
actively seeking therapy. The results of the trials conducted by Lange and colleagues 
are encouraging and would suggest that traditional paper based therapeutic 
interventions can be successfully applied to an online format.
7.6 Summary
The internet can offer researchers an alternative medium through which to recruit 
diverse and hard to reach populations of participants and deliver specially adapted 
therapeutic interventions. In particular, individuals with infertility regularly use the 
internet to access information and support, thus there is an opportunity to gain access 
to this population via this medium. The lack of face-to-face contact with participants 
recruited via the internet, and electronic storage and transmission of data can present 
ethical challenges, whilst methodological issues can have implications for the 
generalisability of findings and reliability of data generated through this medium, which 
will be addressed in the design and implementation of the study presented in Chapter 
8 . Notwithstanding these challenges internet-mediated interventions have been shown 
to be effective in a number of domains. Specifically, the findings of trials conducted by 
Lange and colleagues of an internet-mediated structured writing intervention provide 
support for the examining the efficacy of a web-based written emotional disclosure 
intervention. The development and testing of such an intervention for individuals with 
infertility is described in Chapter 8 .
Chapter 8
Disclosure Writing: A Web-based 
Intervention for individuals Experiencing 
Infertility.
8.1 Overview
The implementation of a disclosure writing intervention for individuals with infertility 
attending an assisted conception unit was found to be unfeasible (see Appendix A.2). 
As a consequence of low participant response and high attrition the study was 
terminated and an alternative context for recruitment of this population was sought. 
This chapter presents the findings of an internet-mediated written disclosure 
intervention for individuals with infertility recruited from online infertility support forums. 
This study will also address how possible expectancy and demand effects might 
account for the findings reported in Chapter 5 and Chapter 6 .
8.2 Introduction
The studies presented in Chapter 5 and Chapter 6  showed that an adaptation of the 
standard laboratory based disclosure protocol, to one that is computer-mediated, and 
delivered within the context of the home, did not have a negative impact on the longer- 
term outcome of the intervention. Taken together with encouraging results of online 
trials conducted by Lange and colleagues (2000, 2003), the findings of these studies 
provide support for the argument that the delivery of a written disclosure intervention 
using a web-based format, which will be accessed via the internet and therefore 
delivered within the context of the participants homes, is a feasible alternative to the 
more traditional delivery format seen in previous studies (e.g. Pennebaker & Beall, 
1986). Note however, that the finding that participants in Chapter 5 and Chapter 6  of 
this thesis reported improvements in symptoms of depression, anxiety and distress, 
irrespective of allocation to group (control versus disclosure), has highlighted 
methodological issues that will be addressed in the current study.
As discussed in detail in section 6.5.1, a possible explanation for the overall 
psychological improvements seen in study participants is that of the response
expectancy effect (Kirsch, 1985). Indeed, Langens and Schuler (2007) have suggested 
that having positive expectancies about the emotional effects of writing plays a role in 
the positive outcomes that are reported in the disclosure literature. The method by 
which Langens and Schuler (2007) examined positive expectancies in their study was 
to ask participants to rate their expectancies, post-intervention, of writing about an 
upsetting event. To examine directly the role of positive expectancies, and consistent 
with the method used by Patterson and Singer (2007-2008) the current study will 
provide information to one group of participants about the positive effects of disclosure 
writing prior to starting the intervention in order to compare them at follow-up with 
disclosure participants who have not been provided with this information.
Consistent with the design of studies in Chapter 5 and Chapter 6  the study reported in 
this chapter will also include a non-writing control group in addition to a writing control 
group. As discussed in section 3.3.4, writing control participants are typically asked to 
write about a trivial or neutral topic (i.e. plans for the day; Horneffer & Jamison, 2002). 
However, some studies that have examined the effects of disclosure writing in patient 
samples have utilised control writing instructions that are arguably more appropriate 
and relevant for individuals experiencing chronic or serious illness (e.g. renal cancer 
patients; de Moor et al., 2002). Following the more ethically appropriate method used 
by Stanton et al. (2002) in their study with breast cancer patients, whereby control 
participants were asked to write factually about their illness and treatment, the current 
study will ask participants assigned to the writing control group to write factually about 
their infertility with reference to their diagnosis and treatment history.
8.3 Aims
The principal aim of this study is to determine the efficacy of a web-based written 
emotional disclosure intervention for infertile individuals. Secondly, this study aims to 
establish if positive expectancies about the emotional effects of disclosure moderate 
both the immediate and longer-term effects of disclosure writing. This study will also 
examine the linguistic content of essays written by disclosure group participants to 
determine if changes in word use are predictive of the physical and psychological 
outcome of disclosure.
Figure 8.1 Flow diagram of study process and timescale of participation
Advert: Potential participants 
access website via link in 
adverts placed on infertility 
forums.
Home page: Information on 
Inclusion criteria and indication 
that participants must be willing 
to discuss their infertility 
experience to continue
No: Close 
browser Yes: Random allocation 
to group
Day 1
No consent:
Thank you for < 
visiting the site.
Study information and 
consent.
_______ j
Yes/User registration: E-
mail details and allocation 
of password sent to e-mail
Writing Participants Non-Writing Control
Writing 
Sessions 1, 2, 
& 3 (conducted 
on consecutive 
days following 
Day 1)
4-Week Interval
Baseline assessment
4-Week Interval
Follow-up assessment
Study End: Debrief and 
opportunity to feedback 
on study.
8.4 Method
8.4.1 Design
The web-based study31 used an experimental, repeated measures design. Participants 
were randomly allocated to one of four conditions: expectancy (disclosure writing with 
positive expectancies), disclosure (disclosure writing), writing control (infertility specific 
factual writing) or non-writing control. Random allocation occurred prior to receiving 
study information (see section 8.4.5, this chapter). Figure 8.1 shows the study design 
which comprised of a baseline assessment, three day intervention period of three 15 
minute writing sessions (writing groups only) and a 4-week follow-up assessment. The 
dependant variables measured at baseline and follow-up assessments were 
depression, anxiety, general stress, fertility problem stress, physical symptoms, 
intrusion and avoidance.
8.4.2 Measures
This study utilised the following measures that were also used in the studies presented 
in Chapters 5 and 6 ; the Impact of Event Scale (IES; Horowitz, Wilner & Alvarez, 
1979), the Essay Evaluations Questionnaire (EEQ; Greenberg & Stone, 1992), the 
Physical Symptoms Inventory (PSI; Spector & Jex, 1998)and the Positive and Negative 
Affectivity Scale (PANAS; Watson, Clark & Tellegan, 1988). Content analysis of 
participants narratives was conducted using the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count 
Programme (LIWC: Pennebaker, Francis & Booth, 2001) which is described in Chapter 
In addition to the measures noted above, this study also included the following:
The Fertility Problem Inventory (FPI; Newton. Sherrard & Glavac. 1999).
The FPI is a 46-item measure of infertility stress. Participants are asked to indicate 
their agreement with each item on a six-point Likert scale ranging from strongly 
disagree to strongly agree. The FPI contains five separate subscales that represent 
domains of stress specific to infertility; these are social concerns, sexual concerns, 
relationship concerns, need for parenthood and rejection of childfree lifestyle. Each of 
the five scales has shown good internal reliability (all a>.80; Newton et al., 1999). 
Examples of items include; For me, being a parent is a more important goal than 
having a satisfying career (need for parenthood subscale) and I feel like I ve failed at 
sex (sexual concerns subscale). All positively phrased items are reverse scored and a
31 The company PersonalityScience.org designed the survey tool used to collect the data for this study.
composite score derived from summing the five subscales provides a global measure 
of infertility-related distress. Higher scores indicate increased infertility-related distress. 
Newton et al. (1999) interpret mean global FPI scores as follows; for females, a score 
of 97 or below represents low stress, scores of 98-132 represent average stress, 
scores of 133-167 represent moderately high stress and scores of 168 or greater 
represent very high stress. For males, scores of 87 or below represent low stress, 
scores of 88-113 represent average stress, scores of 114-146 represent moderately 
high stress and scores of 147 or greater represent very high stress. For the purpose of 
this study the global FPI score was used to assess infertility-related distress, the global 
FPI has demonstrated high internal reliability (a = .93) and good test-retest reliability in 
addition to demonstrating moderate discriminant and convergent validity (Newton et al. 
1999).
The Symptom Checklist-90-Revised (SCL-90-R; Derogatis, 1992) was used in the 
studies presented in Chapters 5, 6  and Appendix A.2 to assess psychological well
being (depression, anxiety and distress), however, copyright restrictions prohibited the 
web-based administration of this measure. As an alternative the Depression Anxiety 
Stress Scales-21 (Lovibond & Lovibond, 1995) was used in the current study. The 
DASS21 is within the public domain and therefore does not carry such restrictions on 
administration. The DASS21 is a short form of the self-report 42-item DASS (Lovibond 
& Lovibond, 1995). The three subscales of the DASS21 assess the core symptoms of 
depression (i.e. dysphoria), anxiety (i.e. autonomic arousal) and stress (i.e. difficulty 
relaxing) with each scale consisting of seven items. Respondents are asked to indicate 
on a four point severity scale (0-3) the extent to which they have experienced each 
state over the preceding week. Example items include I felt that I had nothing to look 
forward to (depression), I was aware of dryness in my mouth (anxiety) and I found it 
hard to wind down (stress). Sub-scales are calculated by summing the score for the 
relevant items and doubling this to derive a score that is directly equivalent to the 42- 
item measure (Loiviband & Loviband, 1995). In addition to the benefit of reducing 
response demands, the shorter DASS21 has been shown to have a cleaner factor 
structure when compared with the 42-item DASS in both clinical (Clara, Cox & Enns,
2001) and non-clinical populations (Henry & Crawford, 2005). The sub-scales of the 
DASS21 have demonstrated good internal reliability (a = . 8 8  depression, a = .82 anxiety 
and a = .90 stress) and convergent and discriminant validity (Henry & Crawford, 2005).
Participants also completed questions relating to demographic information at baseline 
to determine such characteristics as age, gender, nationality and occupation. Additional
questions focused on fertility and treatment history and internet use (see Appendix 
A.13 for demographic questions).
8.4.3 Ethics
The study was conducted in accordance with the British Psychological Society 
guidelines for conducting research with human participants (Code of Conduct, Ethical 
Principles and Guidelines, 2004) and the British Psychological Society Guidelines for 
Ethical Practice in Psychological Research Online (2007). The study was subject to 
scrutiny by the researchers Faculty Research Ethics Committee, and approval was 
granted (see Appendix A.14 for the Ethics Proforma and Letter of Approval). Obtaining 
informed consent in studies that are internet-mediated, and so do not involve any face- 
to-face contact between the participant and researcher, can present ethical challenges 
(Flicker, Haans & Skinner, 2004). Based on the recommendations of Flicker et al. 
(2004) and BPS guidelines (British Psychological Society, 2007) detailed information 
was given to participants based on the requirements of the condition they had been 
allocated to (see section 8.4.5), this was provided on entry to the study along with 
contact details of the researcher. Participants were encouraged to print this information 
so they could contact the researcher if they were adversely affected by their 
participation or wished to withdraw. In the absence of a signature a consent button 
was used to signify participants consent as recommended by Birnbaum (2000). The 
protection of privacy and security of data was paramount for the study. The study was 
hosted on a secure server and participants were required to register a username, 
access at all stages was password dependent. In order to prevent repeat responding 
the web-site was set up to redirect attempts to re-register using the Internet protocol 
(IP) address as an identifier (see section 7.3.1.2. for a discussion on repeat 
responding).
8.4.4 Recruitment Strategy
To reduce self-selection bias a multiple site entry technique was used (see section 
7.4.2; Reips, 2000). A search of the internet identified 17 English language infertility 
specific discussion forums that were currently active based in the UK, USA and South 
Africa. An e-mail was sent to the administrator of each forum asking permission to post 
an advert for research participants (see A. 15 for e-mail). Six of the 17 forums gave 
permission for the advert to be placed on their site. The advert, entitled Coping with 
Infertility, included a brief description of the research, contact details of the researcher 
and a link to the study web-site (see Appendix A. 16 for advert).
8.4.5 Procedure
Figure 8.1 illustrates the study process for participants. Upon accessing the study 
website, participants were directed to the studys home page which provided details of 
the inclusion criteria for the study. The guidelines produced by the National Institute for 
Clinical Excellence (NICE, 2004) state that individuals who have not conceived within 
one year of unprotected sexual intercourse should be offered clinical investigations to 
determine any underlying pathology. Based on these guidelines the criteria for 
inclusion stated that participants must have been trying to conceive for a period of no 
less than 12 months. Additional criteria asked that participants be able to read and 
write in English, be over the age of 18 years and be willing to answer questions about 
their physical and emotional health and write about their experiences. Upon agreeing to 
these criteria, participants were able to access the information and consent stage of the 
process, and it was at this stage in the recruitment process that the random allocation 
(a random assignment function written into the web-site software) to condition 
occurred. The information that participants received was specific to their group. In 
addition to allowing for informed consent to be given, providing group specific 
information allowed for the manipulation of expectancy. To determine if having positive 
expectancies about the emotional effects of writing had an effect on the outcome of the 
study the instructions given to participants allocated to the expectancy group included 
the following information:
Health care professionals appreciate how stressful it can be for people who are 
experiencing difficulties in having a child. The experience of infertility can differ from 
person to person. For some, pregnancy is eventually achieved naturally but for others 
these difficulties can only be resolved through assisted conception. This study will 
investigate the stressful nature of infertility and how writing about the feelings and 
emotions associated with infertility can help people to better cope with their experience. 
This research will expand on previous research that has found writing to be effective in 
improving the way people feel.
The study instructions given to participants allocated to the non-expectancy group were 
as follows:
Health care professionals appreciate how stressful it can be for people who are 
experiencing difficulties in having a child. The experience of infertility can differ from 
person to person. For some, pregnancy is eventually achieved naturally but for others 
these difficulties can only be resolved through assisted conception. This study will
investigate these different experiences and how this is related to physical and 
psychological well-being.
Group specific study information pages can be found in Appendix A.17.
Participants were given the options; I consent to participate in the study, I do not 
consent to participate in the study or I would like to ask the researcher a question. 
Participants who did not give consent were thanked for their interest, and participants 
who chose to consent were asked to create a username and provide an e-mail address 
to begin the registration process. Nobody chose the option of asking the researcher a 
question. After registration, a password was sent the participant's e-mail address, and 
this email contained a link from where they could log in to the website and begin the 
study.
Participants completed questions relating to demographic information, internet usage 
and fertility history, followed by baseline assessments of physical symptoms and 
psychological well-being. Upon completion of this background information the non
writing control participants were informed that they would receive an e-mail in four 
weeks time providing them with a link to the study site and asking them to log in to 
continue with the study. All writing participants were directed to the first writing session 
of the study. Whereas writing session in studies one and two were conducted at 
fortnightly intervals to coincide with scheduled classes, for the purpose of the current 
study the writing sessions were conducted over three consecutive days. Although the 
time between writing is not thought to moderate the effect of written disclosure 
(Frattaroli, 2006), Pennebaker (1994) advises this timeframe for writing, suggesting 
that participants report finding larger intervals between sessions unfavourable for re
entering the mind set for writing.
8.4.5.1 Writing instructions
The writing instructions given to participants were adapted from a study with breast 
cancer patients (Stanton et al., 2002) which follow the instructions of Pennebaker 
(1994). On day one the disclosure and expectancy group participants were given the 
following instructions:
Over the three writing sessions in this study I would like you to write about your 
deepest thoughts and feelings concerning your experience of difficulties in having a 
child. I realize that people who encounter such difficulties experience a full range of
emotions, and i want you to focus on any and all of them. In your writing I want you to 
really let go and explore your deepest emotions and thoughts. You might think about all 
the various feelings and changes that you experienced before being diagnosed, after 
diagnosis and relating to any medical investigations and treatments you have 
undergone. Whatever aspect you choose to write about, it is critical that you focus on 
your deepest thoughts and feelings. You might also tie your thoughts and feelings 
about your difficulties in having a child to other parts of your life - people you love, who 
you are, or who you want to be and your future. Again the most important part of your 
writing is that you really focus on your deepest emotions and thoughts. The only rule 
we have is that you keep writing for the entire 15 minutes. If you run out of things to 
say, just repeat what you have already written. Don't worry about grammar, spelling, or 
sentence structure. Just write. 
Day one writing instructions for writing control participants were as follows:
Over the three writing sessions in this study I would like you to write a detailed 
account of the facts surrounding your attempts to have a child and any treatments you 
have undergone. I realize that people who encounter such difficulties experience a full 
range of emotions when faced with the prospect of involuntary childlessness but in your 
writing I want you to concentrate only on the facts. I am interested in the specific facts 
surrounding your or your partners' diagnosis (if you have one) and treatment options in 
order to understand different peoples experiences. Your writing can include details of 
doctors appointments, the information you have been given, treatments you have been 
offered or have considered as well as those you have undergone. You can also write 
about any future treatments or appointments you have or may be considering and what 
these will involve. Again, the most important part of your writing is that you concentrate 
only on the facts and write in as much detail as possible. The only rule we have is that 
you keep writing for the entire 15 minutes. If you run out of things to say, just repeat 
what you have already written. Don't worry about grammar, spelling, or sentence 
structure. Just write.
Prior to starting writing participants completed the PANAS and were then instructed to 
write continuously for 15 minutes at which time the page would close automatically. At 
the end of the writing sessions participants again completed the PANAS in addition to 
the EEQ. On the second and third day of the study automated e-mails were sent to 
participants with a link to the web-site asking them to log back in to the website to 
complete the writing sessions.
Four weeks after completion of the baseline measures, all participants received an 
automated e-mail to ask them to log back into the study site to complete the follow-up 
questionnaires. Upon completion of these measures participants were directed to a 
debriefing page (see Appendix A. 18 for study debrief) and thanked for their continued 
participation. Participants were given the option to provide feedback for the study if 
they so wished, but none did so.
8.5 Results
8.5.1 Preparation of Data
Data was downloaded from the web server and transferred into SPSS. Writing files 
were converted into text files and cleaned in preparation for analysis with the LIWC 
software as described in section 5.4.3. One participant had only written two words for 
day threes writing task, suggesting that they had not attempted to write for the full 15 
minutes. Whilst the main outcome data for this participant (i.e. fertility stress) is 
retained in the analysis, the writing data was not included in any subsequent analysis 
due to the non-compliance with the study protocol32.
8.5.1.1 Uptake and attrition
One hundred and sixty eight potential participants registered on the website of which 
111 participants logged in to begin the study (26 disclosure; 31 expectancy; 26 writing- 
control; 28 non-writing control). Fourteen participants withdrew before completing all of 
the baseline assessment. Of the 70 participants allocated to writing groups, 28 
participants did not complete the first 15 minute writing session or return after writing 
session one, 1 2  did not complete the second 15 minute writing session or return after 
writing session two and one further participant did not complete the final writing 
session. Of the remaining 56 participants 17 did not return to the site to complete the 4- 
week follow-up assessment. Overall 39 participants completed the study (5 disclosure; 
10 expectancy; 8  writing control; 16 non-writing control). A comparison of baseline 
scores for those with complete baseline data (n = 97) using independent samples T- 
tests (two-tailed) showed that completers and non-completers did not differ on levels of 
depression (t(95) = -.57, p = .567), anxiety (t(95) = .23, p = .823), stress (t(95) = -.76, p = 
.449) or fertility problem stress (t(95) = 1.51, p = .135). A 2 x 4 x 2 showed that there was 
a significant relationship between allocation to group and attrition (x2 = 9.17, DF = 3, p 
= .027). Examination of the observed and expected frequencies indicated that this
32 Removing this participants data from the main analysis did not alter the results.
association is mainly attributable to the finding that attrition was lower in the non-writing 
control group.
8.5.1.2 Checking assumptions
Data for all variables were examined to determine suitability for parametric analysis. 
The grouped data did not contain any univariate outliers based on the criterion,>3 
standard deviations from the mean (Stevens, 2002) and was found to be normally 
distributed (skewness statistic not greater than 2.58 or -2.58; Clark-Carter, 2004).
8 .5.1.3 Statistical analysis and sample size considerations
Consistent with the analysis techniques employed in Chapters 5 and 6  analysis of the 
immediate (positive affect and negative affect), longer-term (depression, anxiety, GSI, 
physical symptoms, intrusion and avoidance) and narrative (negative emotion words, 
positive emotion words and cognitive mechanism words) effects of written disclosure 
were examined using a series of factorial analysis of variance (ANOVA). Hierarchical 
linear regressions were employed in the analysis of language change across writing 
sessions as a predictor of outcome. Change scores were calculated for each of the 
word categories by subtracting the total percentage of words used at the first writing 
session from the total percentage of words used at the final writing session as in 
Chapters 5 and 6.
For the present study a priori power analysis conducted using Gpower 3.0.10 
(Erdfelder, Lang & Buchner, 2007) indicated that a total sample size of 136 (a = .05, 
power = .80, Critical f = (3, 132) = 2.68) would be required to detect between-group 
main effects, a total sample size of 54 (a = .05, power = .80, Critical f = (1, 53) = 4.02) 
would be required to detect within-group main effects and a total sample size of 48 (a = 
.05, power = .80, Critical f = (3, 44) = 2.82) would be required to detect interaction 
effects in the analysis of the short-term and longer-term effects of disclosure. 
Additionally, for the analysis of language use in disclosure a total sample size of 8 6  (a 
= .05, power = .80, Critical f = (1, 84) = 3.95) would be required to detect between- 
group main effects, a total sample size of 43 (a = .05, power = .80, Critical f = (2, 84) = 
3.11) would be required to detect within-group main effects and a total sample size of 
28 (a = .05, power = .80, Critical f = (2, 52) = 3.18) would be required to detect 
interaction effects. The achieved total sample size for the present study (n=39) is 
again somewhat smaller than that which was determined to be adequate from a priori 
power calculations. Consistent with method employed in Chapter 5 the effect sizes
(reported as partial eta squared) for all non-significant main and interaction effects are 
included for comparison.
As already noted in Chapters 5 and 6 , calculation of sample size requirements for 
hierarchical linear regression indicates a required sample size of 85 (a = .05, power = 
.80, Critical f = (4, 80) = 2.49) to detect effects in a design with four predictor variables. 
The size of the sample to be included in this analysis (n = 14) is somewhat smaller 
than recommended. The results of this analysis should therefore be considered as 
tentative.
8.5.2 Sam ple C haracteristics and Baseline Data
8.5.2.1 Demographic profile
All of the 39 participants who completed the study were female. The mean age of 
participants was 32.08 years (SD = 4.18 yrs) and the age of participants ranged from 
24 to 42 years. Eighty-seven per cent (34) of participants were married; the remaining 
13 per cent (5) were cohabiting with their partner. Thirty eight participants identified 
themselves as white, and one as Asian. The majority of participants identified their 
nationality as British (n = 25), but the sample also included participants of South 
African (n = 11), American (n = 2) and Finnish (n = 1) nationality. In terms of 
occupational status, participants were in full-time paid work (n = 25), in part-time paid 
work (n = 6 ), looking after the home (n = 4) or in full-time education (n = 3). One 
participant did not indicate their current occupational status. Two participants reported 
that they were currently using psychotropic medication and seven participants were 
receiving counselling33.
A minimum period of 12 months trying to conceive was indicated as inclusion criteria 
for study eligibility. However, one participant who completed the study indicated that 
they had been trying to conceive for a period of only seven months. Examination of the 
demographic information showed that this participant had received a diagnosis and 
was currently undergoing ART treatment following a diagnosis of infertility during trying 
to conceive her first child. This suggested that the participant did represent the target 
population of this study and so the participants data was retained. Time trying to 
conceive for the whole sample ranged from seven to 135 months (mean months = 
37.33, SD = 24.79) and 90 per cent (n = 35) of the sample had received a diagnosis 
from a medical professional.
33 Removing participants receiving counselling or psychotropic medication from the analysis did not alter 
the overall findings o f the study relating to intervention efficacy see section 8.5.6.2.
Figure 8.2 Location of infertility diagnosis for web-based study sample.
n = 21
 Female Factor
 Male factor 
Both Partners
 Unexplained
Figure 8.2 illustrates the location of infertility diagnosis for the sample, showing that the 
majority of participants were experiencing female factor diagnoses. The causes of 
female infertility were identified as ovulatory dysfunction (n = 12), tubal factors (n = 4), 
uterine factors (n = 3), multiple factors (i.e. ovulatory and uterine; n = 5) and recurrent 
miscarriage (n = 1). Male factor diagnoses were identified as low sperm count or 
morphology (n = 9) and azoospermia (n = 1). Of the 39 participants, 70 per cent (n = 
27) indicated that they were currently undergoing or seeking infertility treatment. The 
majority of the sample was undergoing ART (n = 14) and were either waiting for 
treatment to start or were in between cycles (n = 3). The remaining ten participants 
were either receiving drug or surgical interventions (n = 8 ). One participant was 
awaiting referral to discuss treatment options and one was trying alternative therapies. 
Four participants indicated that they already had children, the number of children 
ranged from one to three.
8 .5.2.2 Internet usage
Information collected on internet usage showed that the time spent on the internet daily 
varied a great deal across the sample, ranging from 20 minutes a day to 640 minutes a 
day (mean = 108.72, SD = 113.75). The number of infertility specific forums used 
ranged from one to five (mean = 1.54, SD = .90). In terms of frequency of use, over 50 
per cent of the sample reported that they accessed infertility specific forums more than
four times a week (n = 20), of the remaining participants, five used the forums 3-4 
times a week, eight used the forums 1 - 2  times a week and six participants less than 
once a week. Although all participants indicated that they accessed infertility forums 
only 23 actually posted messages on the forums, the remaining 16 participants read 
the posts but were not active users. Estimates of post counts for active forum users 
ranged from one to 2000 (mean = 250.86, SD = 449.53) with users posting between 
one to 30 messages a week (mean = 4.90, SD = 6.47). Active users were also asked to 
indicate if they expressed any emotion in the messages, all users indicated that they 
did. Estimates of the percentage of weekly posts that included some emotional 
expression ranged between 20 per cent and 100 per cent (mean = 53.7, SD = 30.16).
8.5.2.3 Psychological and physical well-being at baseline
Descriptive information for all well-being measures at baseline is presented in Table 
8.1. Physical symptom reporting was higher in this sample than that of published norms 
(Spector & Jex, 1998) as were levels of depression, anxiety and stress (Henry & 
Crawford, 2005).
Table 8.1 Means, standard deviations and range of scores for well-being measures at 
study entry.
Measures N Mean SD Range
Physical Symptoms Inventory 39 6.33 3.19 0-13
Fertility Problem Stress 39 146.08 35.11 64-230
DASS 21 Variables 39
Depression 13.95 10.31 0-42
Anxiety 8.67 7.93 0-26
Stress 16.31 9.50 0-36
Impact of Event Subscales 39
Intrusion 22.26 9.27 0-35
Avoidance 17.54 7.36 0-30
This sample also reported higher levels of fertility problem stress compared to 
normative data of infertility treatment seeking females (Newton et al., 1999) and those 
undergoing IVF treatment (Peterson, Newton, Rosen & Schulman, 2006). The mean 
IES scores for intrusion and avoidance were higher than those reported by Miller et al. 
(1998) in a sample of women undergoing infertility treatment. Indeed, scores were 
similar to that of a sample of female psychiatric outpatients reported in the same study.
8.5.3 Checking Group Differences
To determine if there were any existing differences between the groups at study entry a 
series of one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with condition (disclosure, 
expectancy, writing control and non-writing control) entered as the independent 
variable were conducted. The analysis showed that the study groups did not differ in 
terms of age (F(3 ,35) = .48, p = .700), time trying to conceive (TTC) (F(3 ,3 5) = 1.32, p = 
.284), physical symptoms (F(3 ,35) = .80, p = .502), fertility stress (F(3i35) = 2.06, p = .123), 
depression (F(3 ,35) = .40,p = .752), anxiety (F(4)86) = .69, p = .563) and general stress 
(F (3 ,35) = -82,p = .491).
Table 8.2 Means and standard deviations for age, time trying to conceive and well
being measures at study entry by group.
Group
Disclosure Expectancy Writing Control Non-Writing
(n = 5) (n = 1 0  ) (n = 8 ) (n = 16 )
Age (years) 30.20 (3.56) 32.90 (3.38) 32.50 (5.35) 31.94 (4.36)
TTC (months) 31.60(13.01) 48.90 (37.86) 40.50(19.97) 30.31 (17.52)
PSI 4.80 (3.03) 7.40 (2.63) 5.88 (3.68) 6.38 (3.34)
Fertility Stress 159.00(31.19) 123.60 (31.81) 150.25 (41.62) 154.00 (31.29)
Depression 18.00(15.17) 15.00 (12.66) 12.25 (8.24) 12.88 (8.42)
Anxiety 8.00 (7.62) 8.20 (6.83) 12.25 (8.71) 7.37 (8.44)
Stress 20.80 (14.74) 16.00 (9.29) 12.50 (10.24) 17.00 (7.41)
Intrusion 2 2 . 0 0  (6.16) 26.90 (6.69) 19.25 (11.39) 20.94 (9.96)
Avoidance 21.00 (5.70) 18.00 (5.14) 13.00 (8.38) 18.44 (7.98)
Standard deviations are presented in parentheses.
Groups also did not differ in terms of intrusive (F(3i35) = 1.25, p = .307) and avoidant 
(F(3,35) = 1.54, p = .221) symptoms relating to their infertility (means and standard 
deviations are presented in Table 8.2).
8.5.4 Instruction Adherence and Content of Essays
Between-group differences on post-writing scores of the EEQ (Greenberg & Stone, 
1992) were examined using a series of one-way ANOVA to determine if writing 
participants had adhered to their group specific writing instructions. Scores for each 
EEQ item were averaged across the three writing sessions. All writing groups rated 
their essays as equally personal (F(2. io.6 5) = 0.83, p = .462) and meaningful (F(2 , 19) = 
0.47, p = .631). Groups did not differ on how much they had wanted to talk to others 
about the event (F(2,19) = 1.46, p = .258) or had held back from talking about the event 
(F(2i 19) = 1.02, p = .381). A significant difference was found between groups on ratings 
of how revealing of their emotions their writing was (F(2i 12.17) = 6.01, p = .015). Post 
hoc34 comparisons confirmed that participants in the disclosure group (p = .006, d = 
1.69) and expectancy group (p = .037, d = .97) revealed their emotions more than 
writing controls suggesting adherence to the instructions.
As further validation of participants' adherence to writing instructions, comparisons of 
emotional content of narratives using LIWC text analysis was conducted. Consistent 
with the procedure used in Chapter 5 and Chapter 6 , the percentage of positive and 
negative emotion word content and cognitive word content was averaged across the 
three writing sessions and between-groups differences were examined using one-way 
ANOVA. The negative emotion word content of narratives was found to differ across 
groups (F(2, 19) = 13.20, p<.001). As per instructions post hoc comparisons indicated 
that both the disclosure (p<.001, d = 2.70) and expectancy group (p = .001, d = 2.22) 
participants used significantly more negative emotion words than writing control 
participants in their narratives. Groups did not differ in their use of positive emotion 
words (F(2, i9) = 1.83, p = .187). Cognitive word use differed as a function of writing 
group (F2, 19) = 3.94, p = .037). Post hoc comparisons showed that this difference was 
due to disclosure (p = .03, d = 1.52) and expectancy group (p = .024, d = .94) 
participants using more cognitive mechanism words in their essays than writing control 
participants. This pattern of results suggests that participants adhered to the writing 
instructions.
34 All post-hoc procedures are conducted using least-significant difference (LSD) pairw ise 
comparisons.
8.5.5 Pre and Post-Writing Arousal
Two separate 3 x 2 x 3  mixed design ANOVAs were performed to assess the effect of 
writing group (disclosure, expectancy and writing control), time (pre-writing and post
post writing) and session (writing session 1, session 2, and session 3) on affective 
arousal as measured by negative affect (NA) and positive affect (PA). Means and 
standard deviations between-groups and across writing sessions are presented in 
Table 8.3. For NA, the main effect of writing group was marginally significant (F(2 , 19) = 
3.31, p = .059, r)2 = ,26)35. Although the p-value was above .05, r\2 indicates a large 
effect, it is likely that the small sample size caused a lack of power in this analysis.
Table 8.3 Means and standard deviations for negative and positive affect ore and post 
writing session.
Group
Disclosure Expectancy Writing Control
(n = 5) (n -  9) (n = 8)
Pre Post Pre Post Pre Post
Negative Affect (NA)
WS1 M 2 2 . 0 0 25.40 24.89 33.78 19.13 17.13
SD 1 2 . 1 0 9.40 10.43 1 0 . 8 6 7.12 3.98
WS 2 M 25.00 26.00 2 0 . 0 0 24.78 16.13 15.25
SD 10.46 6.36 8.19 12.84 4.29 3.15
WS 3 M 2 0 . 2 0 22.60 16.67 24.11 14.00 13.00
SD 9.88 11.84 7.00 1 1 . 2 1 4.54 4.47
Overall means M 22.40 24.67 20.52 27.56 16.43 15.13
SD 10.52 8.98 7.93 9.96 4.56 2.81
Positive Affect (PA) 
WS 1 M 22.60 19.80 23.89 22.33 23.50 24.38
SD 1 2 . 2 0 10.33 9.53 8.83 8 . 8 6 12.41
WS2 M 2 1 . 2 0 18.20 22.89 22.89 23.50 25.63
SD 5.89 7.33 9.58 9.58 10.31 12.61
WS 3 M 2 2 . 0 0 2 0 . 2 0 23.89 22.33 2 0 . 8 8 2 1 . 8 8
SD 9.77 10.55 7.98 9.21 8.79 10.99
Overall means M 21.93 19.40 23.56 22.51 22.63 23.96
SD 9.14 9.32 8.49 8.69 7.36 10.62
WS = Writing session
33 Reported effect sizes ( r f ) represent p a rtia l eta squared.
Examination of the overall means suggests that disclosure and expectancy group 
participants reported higher levels of NA overall (M = 23.53, SD = 9.68 and M = 24.04, 
SD = 7.92, respectively) than the writing control group (M = 15.77, SD = 3.41), however 
post hoc pairwise comparisons showed only the difference between the expectancy 
and writing control groups was significant (p = .027, d = 1.36).
A significant main effect of writing session (F(2,38) = 8.31, p = .001. r\2 = .30) followed up 
with pairwise comparisons suggested that there was an overall reduction in NA 
between writing sessions one and three (p = .001, d = .67; mean = 23.98, SD = 9.48 
and mean = 18.11, SD = 8.12 respectively) and writing sessions two and three (p = .40, 
d = .31; mean = 20.66, SD = 8.20 and mean = 18.11, SD = 8.12 respectively). The 
interaction between writing group and writing session was not statistically significant 
(F(4 , 38) = 2.07, p = .104, p2 = .18) but r\2 indicates a large effect, again suggesting that 
this analysis is underpowered. The main effect for time was marginally significant (F(i, 
19) = 4.06, p = .058, r|2 = .18) such that NA was higher after writing than before writing 
overall (means 22.45 and 19.78, respectively). This was followed by a significant 
interaction between time and writing group (F(2l 19) = 4.09, p = .033, rf =  .30).
Figure 8.3 Interaction between time and writing group for NA.
27.50'
2 5 .0 0 -
2 2 .5 0 -
20 .00 -
17 .50 -  
15 .00 -
Writing Control
Disclosure
Expectancy
Pre-Writing
As illustrated in Figure 8.3, independent T-tests (two-tailed) confirmed that participants 
in the expectancy group reported higher levels of NA at post writing than in the writing 
control group (t(9.42) = -3.59, p = .005, d = 1.70), the difference in post-writing NA 
between the disclosure group and writing control group approached significance 
suggesting a trend (t(4 .4 9) = -2.31, p =.075, d = 1.43) 36 which is further supported by the 
large effect size. Paired t-tests (two-tailed) showed that the expectancy group reported 
a significant increase in NA from pre-writing to post-writing overall (t(8) = -2.47, p = 
.039, d = 0.78) a finding that was not reflected in the disclosure (t(4) = -1.86, p = .136) 
or control writing groups (t(7) = 1.12, p = .301). There was no significant interaction 
effect for writing session by time (F(3,38) = 0.85, p = .436, g2 = .04) or writing sessions 
by time by writing group (F(4> 38) = 0.71, p = .592, r\2 = .07).
For PA there was no significant between-participants main effect of group (F(2, 19) = 
0.16, p = .854, r|2= .0 2 ) and no within-participants main effect for writing session (F(2 ,3 8) 
= 0.19, p = .826, q2 = -01) or time (F(1i 19) = 0.75, p = .397, r f  = -04). None of the 
interaction effects were significant; group by writing session by (F(4,38) = 0.49, p = .743, 
r| 2 = .05), group by time (F(2 , 19) = 1.64, p = .220, rj2 = -15), writing session by time (F(2, 
38) = 0.19, p = .827, n2 = .01) and group by writing session by time (F(4,38) = 0.16, p = 
.956, i f =  -02).
8.5.6 Longer-Term Effects of Writing
To examine for any changes in well-being as a function of group assignment a two-way 
mixed ANOVA was conducted with group (disclosure, expectancy, writing control and 
non-writing control) as the between-participant variable and assessment period 
(baseline and 4-week follow-up) as the within-participant variable, separately for PSI, 
fertility stress, depression, anxiety, stress, avoidance and intrusion. The means and 
standard deviations for the physical and psychological outcome measures for group by 
assessment period are presented in Table 8.4.
8 .5.6.1 Physical symptoms
Analysis of PSI scores showed no significant main effects for group (F(3,35) = 0.53, p = 
.662, rj2 = .04) or assessment period (F(1i 35) = 0.44, p = .509, r)2 = .01) and there was no 
interaction between group and assessment period (F(3i35) = 1.22, p = .318, rj2= -09).
36 Due to Levenes Test for Equality o f variance being significant (p = .034) this is reported using the 
equal variances not assumed test statistics, the test statistics for equal variance assumed was however 
significant (t(n) = -2.86, p = .016).
o4>
4*o
o c o 05 co c o CO T LO r ^ T CD T CO
o CO T CD CO o CO CD CM LO CO 05 CO 0 5
uri CO c d d d 0 5 CO CD LO 0 5 0 5 05 CD 0 0
LO M" v - T t -
CO m - o 05 CO CM CO M- o T CD M" oo
co CO o C\j CO M; CO M; o M" 05 05 M; 05
CD co M"  cm 00 d 00 d d d 05 oo d
ID co T T CM T
i n  c o
h -  05
CO O o CD LD CM O 00 05 o c o
T- CO o 1"- 0 5 CM LD c o oo o o
q d c d T' c b CD CO d d d CD h-'
LD c o t T T T CM T T -
oo 0 0 ID CM ID M" LD T o M" LO 05 o 0 0
oo CD CM CD CM CM CM i" > LD CM CM CO o CO
LD c d d V - CM 0 0 CM o o CM d 0 5 T c d 0 0
LO M" *- k- T T f-
o o CO o o 00 O 0 5 o 00 O CM
CO 05 CM 00 CM M- ID 0 0 h - CD CO CO 0 0
c d ID d d LD 0 5 CM 0 5 T - ID d 0 5 h -'
CM CO T T k- k- k- CM
O CO O T o CD o CO O 05 O 05 O M"
M" CD CD OO q CD CM oo O CM 05 CD q _
d CM c d q ID CM 0 0 CD CD 05 CD CD 00 LD
CM c o T T CM k-
O CM O T o O O 0 5 o LO o CO o LD
0 0 M; q q o 05 q CM M- q CD h - q CO
LD c d LD
M" c o
CD 05 ID c d o
LD ID
LO 0 0  
C o c o o 05 o Is - O CM O M" o CD O O
q q o T - o T o CD 00 i q o q q
0 M" c d 05 q 00 LD 0 0 h - ' o M- CM CD q ID
c ID c o T T CM CM CM
CO co
LU "c
8 .5.6.2 Psychological distress
FPi scores did not differ between groups (F(3, 35) = 1.84, p = .159, rj2 = .14) or 
assessment period (F(1> 35) = 0.26, p = .613, r\2 = .01) and there was no interaction 
between groups and assessment period on this measure (F(3i35) = 1.37, p = .268, r\2 = 
.1 1 ).
Analysis of the DASS21 subscales found no main effect of groups for depression (F(3,35) 
= 0.58, p = .633, rj2 = .05), anxiety (F(3i 35) = 0.28, p = .841, rj2 = .02) or stress (F(3,35) = 
0.87, p = .467, r)2 = .07). There was no main effect of assessment period for depression 
(F(i, 35) = 0.01, p = .927, q2 = -00), anxiety (F(1i 35) = 1.81, p = .187, r\2 = .05)37 or stress 
(F(i, 35) = 0.20, p = .656, r\2 =.01). The interaction effects between group and 
assessment period were also non-significant for the subscales; depression (F(3, 35) = 
1.13, p = .350, n2= .01), anxiety (F(3,35) = 1.25, p = .307, r|2= .10) and stress (F(3,35) = 
0.92, p = .444, q2 = .07). Overall, results indicate that physical and psychological well
being of participants did not change over the study period, however, the effect size of 
non-significant findings range from small (.0 1 ) to large (.1 0 ) which could indicate that 
that due to the small sample size the study was underpowered.
8.5.6.4 Symptoms of intrusion and avoidance
Symptoms of intrusion and avoidance did not differ between groups [intrusion (F(3i35) = 
1.34, p = .276, r)2 = .10), avoidance (F(3i 35) = 0.80, p = .505, r| 2 = -06)] or assessment 
period [intrusion (F(1i 35) = 0.14, p = .711, r| 2 = .004) avoidance (F(1, 35) = 0.003., p = 
.958, r)2= .000)] and no significant interaction effect emerged [intrusion (F(3)35) = 0.91, p 
= .446, rj2 = -07), avoidance (F(3, 35) = 0.98, p = .412, r\2 = .08)]. This indicates that 
overall participants did not experience a change in the subjective impact of their 
infertility over the study period. Again, effect sizes in this analysis could indicate that 
these findings are due to the small sample size in the study.
8.5.7 Language analysis
In order to determine the pattern of language use in participants' narratives and any 
possible differences between the groups in relation to the manipulation of expectancy, 
an analysis of the number of words produced and the percentage of positive emotion, 
negative emotion and cognitive words within the disclosure and expectancy narratives 
was conducted using a 2-way mixed ANOVA with group (disclosure and expectancy)
37 For anxiety, the main effect o f assessment period was significant when analysis was conducted 
removing participants receiving counselling and/or psychotropic medication (F^^s) -  5.28, p = .029, r f  = 
.20) suggesting a reduction in anxiety at follow-up for all participants.
as the between-group variable and writing session (session 1, session 2 and session 3) 
as the within-group variable. Writing control narratives were not included for analysis in 
view of the findings that control narratives could be differentiated from 
disclosure/expectancy narratives in terms of content, confirming adherence to writing 
instructions (see section 8.5.4).
The means and standard deviations for the linguistic indices are presented in Table 
8.5. In terms of word count, the number of words produced by participants in their 
narratives did not differ between groups (F(ii12) = 0.43, p = .525, r|2= .04). A significant 
main effect for writing session (F(1.91i 2 2.88) = 5.00, p = .017, r|2 = .29) suggested that 
there was a significant difference in the number of words produced across writing 
sessions overall. Pairwise comparisons confirmed that participants produced fewer 
words at the third writing session than the first (p = .032, d = 0.22), similarly fewer 
words were produced at the final writing session than the second (p = .01, d =0.27). 
There was no significant interaction between group and writing session (F(1.91, 2 2 .88) = 
1.78, p = .192, n2=-13).
The percentage of positive emotion words in participants narratives was not different 
between groups (F(1)12) =0.84, p = .377, rj2 = .07) and did not fluctuate across the 
writing sessions (F(2,24) = 0.22, p = .805, n2= .02). There was no significant interaction 
between group and writing session (F(2>24) = .41, p = .670, rj2= .03). Equally, the use of 
negative emotion words did not differ between groups (F(1t12) = 1.14, p = .308, q2= .09) 
or writing sessions (F(2|24) = 1.61, p = .220, q2= .12) and there was no interaction effect 
between group and writing session (F(2|24) = 0.23, p = .794, q2= .02).
Table 8.5 Means and standard deviations for word count and total percentage of
positive emotion, negative emotion and cognitive process words of disclosure and 
expectancy group narratives.
Groups
Disclosure Expectancy Overall
M SD M SD M SD
Word Count
WS1 522.20 167.68 628.22 286.35 590.36 248.78
WS2 582.40 148.87 619.57 325.77 606.36 269.21
WS3 441.80 160.17 585.00 310.67 533.86 268.99
Pos. emotion words (%)
WS1 2.06 0.82 1.87 0.78 1.94 0.77
WS2 2.32 0.90 1.69 1 . 1 2 1.91 1.06
WS3 2 . 2 1 1.05 2 . 1 2 0.65 2.15 0.77
Neg. emotion words (%)
WS1 3.64 1 . 2 1 3.44 1.15 3.51 1.13
WS2 3.12 0.92 2.45 1.07 2.69 1.04
WS3 3.61 1.24 2 . 8 8 1 . 6 6 3.14 1.52
Cognitive Words (%)
WS1 8.47 0.55 8 . 0 1 1.59 8.17 1.30
WS2 8.61 1.04 9.32 1.94 9.07 1.66
WS3 10.35 3.81 9.55 1.49 9.84 2.45
WS = Writing session
Finally, the use of cognitive mechanism words did not differ between groups (F(1i12) = 
0.05, p = .825, rj2 = .004). The main effect for writing session was marginally significant 
(F(1.23, 14.72) = 3.99, p = .058, p2 = -25)38. Pairwise comparisons showed that this was 
due to a significant increase in the use of cognitive mechanism words from writing 
session one to writing session three (p = .012, d = 0.85). There was no significant 
interaction between session and group (F(1 2 3 , u .7 2 )  = -85, p = .393, n2= -07).
8 .5.7.1 Language use as a predictor of outcome
Hierarchical linear regressions were conducted for each of the outcome variables (PSI, 
FPI, depression, anxiety, stress, intrusion and avoidance) to determine is changes in
38 Due to Mauchlys Test o f Sphericity being significant (p = .004) this is reported using the Greenhouse - 
Geisser correct test statistics, the test statistics for spehricity assumed was however significant (F(2,24) = 
3.99, p = .032, rj2 = .25).
word content across the writing session for disclosure participants (disclosure and 
expectancy groups were combined since changes in word use across the study were 
not differentiated by group, see section 8.5.7) were predictive of any change in well
being at follow-up after controlling for baseline values. Following the procedure used in 
Chapters 5 and 6 , the baseline value of the dependent variable was entered in the first 
step of the regression as a control. The change scores for the word categories negative 
emotion, positive emotion and cognitive mechanisms were then entered together at the 
second step as in Chapter 5.
Results from the hierarchical regression analyses are summarized in Tables 8 . 6  and 
7.7. The analysis showed that a change in the use of negative emotion words ((3 = -.26, 
t = -2.29, p = .048) significantly predicted depression scores after controlling for 
baseline values, such that the use of fewer negative emotion words at writing session 
three compared to writing session one was predictive of an increase in depressive 
symptoms at follow-up An increase in the use of cognitive mechanism words across 
the writing sessions predicted a reduction in symptoms of anxiety ((3 = -.57, t = -2.38, p 
= .041) after controlling for baseline values. Changes in word use did not predict scores 
on any other outcome (PSI, FPI, stress, intrusion and avoidance) measures at follow- 
up39. Non-significant findings are not reported here, SPSS outputs for all hierarchical 
regressions can be found in Appendix A.19.
39 Analysis o f the writing-control group data did not find these patterns o f change.
Table 8.6 Summary of Hierarchical Regression Analyses for PSI. FPI. depression.
anxiety and stress at 4-week follow-up (N = 14).
Variable
Stepl Step 2
Predictors B SEB P B SEB P
PSI PSI (baseline) 0.82 0 . 2 2 7 4 ** 0.77 0.23 .69**
Neg. Emotion Change 0.05 0.43 . 0 2
Pos. Emotion Change -0.96 0.75 -.28
Cognitive Change 0.15 0.36 .09
R2 0.55 0.65
AR2 - 0 . 1 0
FPI FPI (baseline) 0.80 0 . 1 1 .90** 0.74 0.13 .83**
Neg. Emotion Change 0 . 0 2 2.67 . 0 0 1
Pos. Emotion Change -5.16 4.65 -.16
Cognitive Change 1.24 2.45 .08
R2 0.82 0.85
AR2 - 0.03
Depression Depression (baseline) 0.92 0.13 .89** 0.80 0 . 1 2 .78**
Neg. Emotion Change -2.17 0.95 -.26*
Pos. Emotion Change -2.25 1.57 -.17
Cognitive Change -1.09 0.77 -.17
R2 0.35 0.40
AR2 - 0.05
Anxiety Anxiety (baseline) 0.99 0.35 .63* 1.42 0.37 .90**
Neg. Emotion Change -0.96 1.39 -.15
Pos. Emotion Change -1.93 2.36 -.18
Cognitive Change -3.03 1.27 -.57*
R2 0.40 0.64
AR2 - 0.24
Stress Stress (baseline) 0.64 0.16 .76** 0.62 0.18 .74**
Neg. Emotion Change 1.39 1 . 1 2 .25
Pos. Emotion Change -1.60 1.95 -.17
Cognitive Change -0.15 0.99 -.03
R2 0.43 0.47
AR2 _ 0.05
*p < .05. **p < .01.
Table 8.7 Summary of Hierarchical Regression Analyses for intrusion and avoidance at
4-week follow-up (N = 14).
Variable
Stepl Step 2
Predictors B SEB P B SEB P
Intrusion Intrusion (baseline) 0.26 0.23 .31 0 . 1 0 0.33 .13
Neg. Emotion Change -0.74 1.08 - . 2 1
Pos. Emotion Change 0.35 2.09 . 0 1
Cognitive Change -0.92 1.03 -.32
R2 0.09 0 . 2 0
AR2 - 0 . 1 1
Avoidance Avoidance (baseline) 0.71 0.42 .44 0.84 0.45 .52
Neg. Emotion Change 1.83 1.39 .36
Pos. Emotion Change -1.95 2.51 -.23
Cognitive Change -0.74 1.17 -.18
R2 0.19 0.35
AR2 - 0.16
*p < .05. **p < .01.
8.6 Discussion
Contrary to previous research that has demonstrated the beneficial effect that writing 
about traumatic or stressful events can have for physical and psychological wellbeing 
(e.g. see Chapter 2, section 2.2), this study found no significant improvements at 
follow-up in physical symptoms, fertility problem stress, depression, anxiety or general 
stress in infertile women who wrote about the experience of infertility compared to 
controls. No significant changes in symptoms of intrusion or avoidance over the study 
period emerged in any of the groups. Furthermore, positive expectancies about the 
emotional impact of writing did not appear to have any impact on the reporting of 
physical or psychological symptoms at follow-up.
Assessment of pre and post-writing mood indicated that both the disclosure and 
expectancy group participants experienced more negative affect immediately after 
writing than the group who wrote factually about their infertility. This pattern of findings 
is consistent with previous research (e.g. Francis & Pennebaker, 1992) and the 
findings of Chapters 5 and 6 . These findings correspond to the highly personal and 
emotional nature of infertility that participants were disclosing. Although writing control 
participants were asked to write about their infertility, and did indeed rate their 
narratives as equally personal and meaningful (compared with disclosure groups),
disclosure groups reported that their writing was more revealing of their emotions than 
participants in the writing control group. Furthermore, examination of the linguistic 
content of essays confirmed that disclosure group essays contained more negative 
emotion words than writing control group essays, which confirms the manipulation of 
writing instructions as having been successful.
Several possibilities may account for the lack of intervention effects in this study. 
Firstly, analysis of the linguistic content of disclosure essays suggested that the 
percentage of negative and positive emotion words remained relatively stable across 
the writing sessions. Previous research has found that participants were more likely to 
benefit from disclosure writing if they used a high number of positive emotion words 
compared to a moderate number of negative emotion words (Pennebaker & Francis, 
1996; Pennebaker, Mayne & Francis, 1997). Indeed, in the study presented in Chapter 
5 of the current thesis the percentage of negative emotion words in the trauma 
narratives reduced at each writing session and the positive emotion words significantly 
increased by the third writing session (although only the change in negative emotion 
word use was related to outcome). Unexpectedly, analysis of the relationship between 
negative word change and outcome showed that an increase in the use of negative 
emotion words from writing session one to writing session three was associated with a 
reduction in depressive symptoms in this sample, a pattern that is contrary to earlier 
findings (Chapters 5 and 6 ) and those reported in the literature (e.g. Pennebaker et al., 
1997) i.e. that a reduction in negative word use across writing sessions is beneficial, at 
least in student populations. These findings do need to be interpreted with caution 
given the very small sample size used in the analysis. However, this inconsistency is 
indicative of how the mechanisms through which written disclosure exerts its effects 
might be dependent on the population in which it is implemented. For example, in a 
study of adolescents with asthma, Warner et al. (2006) found that a greater use of 
negative emotion words was associated with lower asthma related functional disability 
scores in this population. The authors suggested that those who became more 
reflective, self-aware and serious over the writing period showed later health benefits. 
For some infertile individuals, the anonymity afforded by an internet-mediated 
disclosure intervention may have provided an opportunity to express their negative 
feelings about their infertility that they may not have the opportunity to express in their 
everyday social interactions and this may have proved beneficial. A trend towards an 
increase in cognitive word use across writing sessions in this study was noted in 
disclosure participants. Indeed, analysis of the change in word use across the study 
indicated that an increase in the use of cognitive mechanism words was predictive of a
reduction in symptoms of anxiety for those in the disclosure groups. This is consistent 
with the findings of the study presented in Chapter 5 and previous research that has 
found changes in cognitive word use in disclosure narratives to be associated with the 
beneficial changes in physical health (Pennebaker et al., 1997; Pennebaker & Francis, 
1996), positive growth, (Ullrich & Lutgendorf, 2002) and mood (van Middendorp & 
Geenen, 2008) for participants.
Secondly, some characteristics of the sample may have influenced the current findings; 
for example, the women in this sample reported particularly high levels of psychological 
and physical symptoms. Comparisons with published norms for the FPI suggested that 
the women in this study, who would be classified within the moderately high range for 
fertility problem stress, were experiencing higher levels of infertility-related stress than 
the average woman seen for infertility treatment (Newton et al., 1999). Scores on the 
DASS21 subscales (anxiety, depression and stress) for this sample where similarly 
high, being more comparable to a clinical sample of obsessive-compulsive disorder 
(OCD) patients (Antony, Bieling, Cox, Enns & Swinson, 1998) than non-clinical adult 
norms (Henry & Crawford, 2005). One explanation for these findings is that when self
relevant measures (i.e. those measuring psychological functioning) are completed 
online there is a tendency for increased self-disclosure, honesty, and consequently, 
higher scores on such measures (Joinson, 1999; Peterson, Johannsson & Carlsson, 
1996; see section 7.2.7.1 for a detailed discussion). The high levels of fertility problem 
stress (FPI) reported in a recent study which examined the efficacy of a web-based 
psycho-educational infertility source for female infertility patients (Cousineau et al.,
2008) provides some support for this explanation. The patients in Cousineau et al.s 
web-based study were of a similar profile to those in Peterson et al.s (2006) study (i.e. 
treatment seeking, recruited from a fertility clinic, of similar age) yet had higher FPI 
scores; one difference was that the participants in Peterson et al.s study completed the 
paper-based FPI. Notwithstanding the potential impact of online administration of 
measures, it is possible that the higher levels of symptom reporting in this sample of 
infertile women are associated with them being recruited from the internet. More 
specifically, this sample was recruited from infertility forums. Whilst there is no 
evidence to suggest that users of infertility forums have poorer psychological well-being 
in general, there is evidence to suggest that being a member of an online infertility 
community may encourage some infertile women to withdraw from real-world 
interactions which is associated with higher levels of depression and perceptions of 
fertility as being more stressful (Epstein, Rosenberg, Venet Grant & Hemenway, 2002).
The fact that this particular sample of infertile women was heterogeneous may have 
been problematic for finding any intervention effect. As discussed in section 2.2.5 the 
stage of treatment at which an individual finds themselves can influence their 
psychological state, with fluctuations in levels of stress across the treatment cycle 
(Boivin & Takefman, 1995). While those embarking on treatment might be optimistic 
about achieving success (Visser, Haan, Zalmstra & Wouters, 1994), for those who do 
not achieve a pregnancy, treatment failure is highly distressing (Slade, emery & 
Lieberman, 1997; Verhaak, Smeenk, van Minnen, Kremer, & Kraaimaat, 2005). Indeed, 
examination of the baseline descriptive data for the sample shows that standard 
deviations are large (see Table 8.1) indicating that there is a great deal of variation in 
scores particularly on the DASS2 1 . This is not surprising given the variation in years 
TTC and number and type of treatments and stage of treatment of the women in this 
sample. Infertility specific intervention studies in general recruit samples that share 
some characteristics beyond that of being infertile, for example, McNaugton-Cassill, 
Bostwick, Arthur, Robinson and Neal, (2002) recruited couples entering an IVF cycle 
and evaluated a support group intervention delivered over the treatment cycle. 
Similarly, Facchinetti, Tarabusi and Volpe (2004) recruited patients on a waiting list for 
IVF-ET to receive a 16 week course of CBT treatment. Others have included strict 
exclusion criteria to maintain as much homogeneity in the sample as possible (e.g. 
Hosaka, Matsubayashi, Sugiyama, Izumi & Makino, 2002). For example, Domar et al. 
(2000) recruited women into a group based CBT programme who had been trying to 
conceive for between one to two years, women with clinical levels of depression were 
excluded from the study.
Given the above, it is arguable that disclosure writing may only be beneficial for a sub
sample of infertile women (i.e. new referral IVF patients, women with a specific 
diagnosis). Alternatively, it is possible that written disclosure provides little benefit for 
forum users because they are already expressing their thoughts and feelings about 
their infertility on the forums of which they are members. The anonymity afforded by 
online communities provides an opportunity for individuals experiencing infertility to 
freely express their thoughts and emotions without the fear of stigmatization and 
embarrassment that face-to-face communications can entail (Malik & Coulson, 2008a). 
Of the 39 participants in the sample 23 were active members of infertility forums. 
Although there was a great deal of variation in the number of forums that individuals 
used and how prolific these active forum members were in posting messages on the 
discussion boards, all active users indicated that they expressed their emotions in their 
posts. This could also explain the stability of emotional language use across the writing
sessions, for this sample of participants the writing sessions may not have provided the 
novei opportunity to express thoughts and feelings that it does for others who do not 
have this outlet. Interestingly a comparison of the content of posts from a breast cancer 
support forum with content of essays from multiple disclosure studies (see 
Pennebaker, Francis & Booth, 2001 for normative data) suggested that the percentage 
of negative and positive emotion words used by forum members in their messages was 
similar to that of the pattern seen in the emotional writing groups of disclosure studies 
(Alpers et al., 2005). The possibility that infertility forum users are expressing their 
thoughts and feelings in a similar way to that seen in disclosure writing research, 
warrants further investigation.
It could be argued that the 4-week follow-up period was insufficient to detect longer- 
term effects of disclosure. Indeed, some studies that have utilized multiple follow-up 
periods have found that improvements in well-being are not evident until many months 
following disclosure. Gortner, Rude and Pennebaker (2006) found that disclosure 
writing in depression vulnerable students was associated with a reduction in depressive 
symptoms at 6 -month follow-up but not at 5-week follow-up. Similarly, studies 
examining the benefits of written disclosure in fibromyalgia patients (Gillis et al., 2006), 
rheumatoid arthritis patients (Smyth, Stone, Hurewitz & Kaell, 1999) and breast cancer 
patients (Stanton et al., 2002) have found that the physical benefits of disclosure often 
do not appear until at least 3-4 months after the intervention. Therefore it is possible 
that any benefits of disclosure in this sample of women with infertility may not have 
become apparent until after the follow-up period of 4-weeks used in this study. 
However given the considerable drop-out experienced in this study it seems likely that 
a longer follow-up period would have resulted in unacceptably low sample sizes.
Finally, for some populations, disclosure writing appears to provide little or no benefit. 
This has been shown to be particularly so for individuals experiencing bereavement 
(e.g. Stroebe, Stroebe, Schut, Zech & van den Bout, 2002; see section 2.3.7.2 for a 
discussion). Infertility constitutes a major loss, the emotional reaction to which is grief 
(Covington, 1988). As identified by Menning (1980) the grief associated with infertility is 
often not recognized by others and is socially unspeakable (p. 317). As expressed by 
a woman with infertility:
A lot of people dont understand that infertility is very much like having a child 
die. You grieve for the baby who wasnt conceived this month, and for all the babies 
youll never have (Lasker & Borg, 1987 p. 20).
VVhiist it is possible that the characteristics of loss and grief in individuals with infertility 
might explain the lack of an intervention effect in this study, the evidence suggests that 
disclosure writing does appear to provide some positive benefits for individuals 
experiencing complicated grief (Kovac & Range, 2000). The term complicated grief is 
used to refer to a grief reaction that shows a marked deviation from the normal pattern 
and is maladaptive (Stroebe et al., 2005). Bergart (2000) likened the grief associated 
with infertility to that of disenfranchised grief which refers to the experience of loss for 
which there is no opportunity to publicly mourn. Covington (1988) suggests that a 
distinction can be made between couples who are unable to conceive and those who 
are able to achieve a pregnancy but never carry to term (experiencing miscarriage or 
stillbirth), such that whilst the symptoms of grief might be the same, the mourning 
process will not. For, example the loss of pregnancy is an acute, recognizable event, 
whilst the losses associated with the inability conceive (i.e. the loss of fertility, the loss 
of never experiencing a pregnancy) constitute an unrecognizable, chronic situation. For 
some couples both of these situations can arise (Covington, 1988). Within this context 
the losses associated with the inability to conceive could be likened to that of 
complicated grief, therefore disclosure writing may only be beneficial for those 
individuals with infertility who are experiencing a grief reaction similar to that of 
complicated grief. From the personal information available it is not possible to establish 
the nature of loss experienced by the participants within this study, however, 
considering different diagnoses and treatment characteristics of the sample it is likely 
that experience of loss within this sample will be varied.
There are a number of limitations that should be considered when interpreting the 
results of this study. Of the 111 participants who logged into the study web-site only 39 
actually completed the study. Though high attrition rates are not unusual in the 
disclosure literature (e.g. Ullrich & Lutgendorf, 2002) this level of attrition might suggest 
that the writing intervention was not well received in this sample. The possibility is 
supported by the findings that allocation to group was associated with drop out; more 
specifically that attrition was lower in the non-writing control group. A consequence of 
this level of attrition is that the final sample size of this study was relatively small, to 
address the issue of Type II error, effect sizes were included for all non-significant 
findings. A number of medium to large effects, that did not achieve statistical 
significance, are noted in the analysis of the short-term and longer-term effects of 
disclosure that could indicate the study was underpowered. However, it also possible 
that these effects were due to chance, therefore replication of this study with a larger
sample is needed before any clear conclusions can be drawn. Another implication of 
the sample size in this study is that the opportunity to examine potential within group 
moderators was limited. There was a great deal of heterogeneity in this sample in 
relation to location of diagnoses, duration of infertility, current treatment and stage of 
treatment. The potential failure to find any intervention effects may be due to the fact 
that written disclosure may only provide benefits for a select few.
8.7 Summary
The aim of this study was to examine the efficacy of an internet-mediated written 
emotional disclosure intervention for individuals with infertility. Additionally, this study 
sought to examine the possible moderating effect of positive expectancies on the 
outcome of written emotional disclosure. The findings are mixed. This study found no 
significant improvements in the physical or psychological well-being of participants who 
disclosed their thoughts and feelings about their infertility compared to those who wrote 
factually about their infertility, or non-writing controls. Furthermore, positive 
expectancies did not moderate the outcome of disclosure at 4-week follow-up. Analysis 
of the linguistic content did find that for participants assigned to the disclosure groups 
an increase in the use of negative emotion words from the first writing session to the 
final writing session was associated with a reduction in depressive symptoms at follow- 
up. This is an unexpected finding that is likely related to the unique characteristics of 
the sample. Similarly an increase in the use of cognitive words across the writing 
sessions was associated with a reduction in symptoms of anxiety: a finding that is 
consistent with previous research (e.g. van Middendorp & Geenen, 2008). These 
findings suggest that written emotional disclosure did provide some, albeit limited, 
positive psychological benefits for individuals with infertility, more specifically for those 
who produced this pattern of increasing cognitive word use in their narratives.
Notwithstanding these positive findings, possible explanations for the lack of a main 
intervention effect in this study include the heterogeneity of the sample (years TTC, 
location of diagnosis and current treatment status), the distinction between individuals 
in their grief reaction to their infertility, the time at which follow-up measures were 
completed and the method of recruitment used in the study. The fact that a large 
proportion of participants, who were recruited via infertility discussion forums, were 
active forum users and reported expressing their emotions in the messages they 
posted might account for the overall null effects in this study. The possibility that 
infertility forum users are expressing their thoughts and feelings in a similar way to that 
seen in disclosure writing will be examined in Chapter 9.
Chapter 9
Text Analysis of an Online Infertility Support 
Forum: Emotional and Cognitive Content.
9.1 Overview
The findings presented in Chapter 8  suggest that disclosing thoughts and feelings 
about infertility via an internet-mediated writing intervention does not provide any 
physical or psychological benefits for a sample of women with infertility. One of the 
possible explanations for these null findings is that this group of women, who were 
recruited from infertility discussion forums, are already expressing their thoughts and 
feelings about their infertility on the forums of which they are members. The purpose of 
this study is to examine the emotional and cognitive content of messages posted to an 
infertility specific discussion board using the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count 
Programme (LIWC: Pennebaker, Francis & Booth, 2001) and to make comparisons 
with the linguistic content of the disclosure narratives produced by participants in 
Chapter 8 . In addition, the linguistic content of Chapter 8  participant narratives will be 
compared descriptively with that of published normative data (Pennebaker et al., 2001).
9.2 Introduction
The growth of internet resources over the last decade has provided a domain through 
which individuals who are experiencing fertility problems can access information about 
diagnosis and treatment, receive support and share their stories (Epstein, Rosenberg, 
Venet Grant & Hemenway, 2002). The use of the internet for fertility related issues is 
particularly high amongst treatment seeking individuals (see section 7.2.1; Haagen et 
al., 2003; Rawal & Haddard, 2006; Weissman et al., 2000). One of the most often cited 
motivations for fertility related internet use is to gain a better understanding of the 
fertility problem the individual is facing (Haagen et al., 2003). In a survey of internet use 
in patients (couples) awaiting the start of IVF and ICSI treatment conducted by Haagen 
et al. (2003), patients indicated that the most commonly searched for topics on the
internet were causes, treatment options, success percentages of treatments and 
patient organizations. This is consistent with other studies that have found information 
seeking to be the most common motivation for internet use in infertility patients (Rawal 
& Haddard, 2006; Weissman et al. 2000). Haagen et al. (2003) found that 41 per cent 
of couples also used the internet to seek emotional support for their infertility problems. 
This is in contrast to the findings of a survey of UK fertility patients which found that 
only 10 per cent of the 58 patients surveyed used the internet to seek emotional 
support (Rawal & Haddad, 2006). The finding that the female partner more 
predominantly used the internet for fertility related issues in Haagen et al.'s (2003) 
study is one possible explanation for this discrepancy. Research has shown that 
women show a preference for groups that offer emotional support for health issues 
whereas men show a preference for information-oriented groups (Mo, Malik & Coulson,
2009). Indeed, in a survey of 589 users of an infertility discussion/support forum run by 
an international fertility organisation, Epstein et al. (2002) found that 99.1 per cent of 
respondents were female.
Infertility discussion forums are one unique domain through which individuals can seek 
information and support. Indeed, as discussed in section 7.2.1, infertility specific 
discussion forums can provide a number of benefits for users (e.g. reducing feelings of 
isolation). One particular benefit noted by participants in a study by Malik and Coulson 
(2008) is that the anonymity of the discussion forums provides an environment in which 
painful and negative emotions can be disclosed. It is possible therefore that those who 
use infertility specific discussion forums are disclosing thoughts and feelings in a 
similar way to that encouraged in a written disclosure intervention, as implemented in 
Chapter 8 . Indeed, in an examination of the linguistic content of a breast cancer 
discussion forum using the LIWC, Alpers et al. (2005) found that the pattern (in terms 
of percentages) of emotional and cognitive words used by participants in their 
messages was similar to that of the pattern seen in the emotional writing conditions of 
multiple disclosure studies (Pennebaker et al., 2001). In light of these similar patterns it 
is suggested that verbalising thoughts and feelings through online discussion forums 
may serve to facilitate coping and reduce emotional distress in much the same way as 
written emotional disclosure does (Caplan & Turner, 2007).
9.3 Aims
The principal aim of this study was to examine the emotional and cognitive content of 
messages posted to an online discussion forum used by individuals with infertility and 
make comparisons with the text samples taken from the disclosure study in Chapter 8
and that of previous disclosure studies. In addition, this study examined the motivations 
for posting messages on infertility forums (i.e. advice regarding treatment, symptoms or 
emotional support) using a content analysis approach.
9.4 Method
9.4.1 Ethical Considerations
The study was conducted in accordance with the British Psychological Society 
Guidelines for Ethical Practice in Psychological Research Online (2002). Ethical 
approval for the study was obtained from the Faculty Research Ethics Committee (see 
Appendix A.20 for Ethics Proforma and Letter of Approval). The debate relating to 
conducting research on online communities and access to the content of message 
boards is discussed in detail in section 7.3.1. The infertility discussion forum from which 
messages were downloaded is a publically accessible site that requires no registration 
in order to read or download messages contained on the site. An e-mail was sent to the 
moderators of the site to inform them of the researchers intentions and aims of the 
study. In consideration of the public nature of the discussion board consent was not 
sought from individual members. In accordance with BPS guidelines direct quotations 
of posts analysed in this study are not included as exemplars in order to maintain 
anonymity. In order to maintain confidentiality the name of the forum, sub-forums and 
pseudonyms used by contributors to the message boards are also excluded.
9.4.2 Data Collection and Sampling
Chosen because of its public accessibility and message download facility, the data for 
this study was obtained from a popular public fertility and parenting forum with over 
3000 members. The forum is organised into a number of boards relating to fertility and 
parenting. Within the general fertility board are a number of infertility related sub
forums through which members can seek support and advice specific to their diagnosis 
and fertility treatment. Although the majority of these sub-forums are publicly displayed 
some sub-forums are only accessible to registered members.
Messages posted to the publicly accessible infertility specific sub-forums of the site 
within the preceding month (November-December 2008) were identified and 
downloaded. Because the study was interested in examining if infertility forum users 
are expressing their thoughts and feelings in a similar way to that which is encouraged 
in disclosure writing interventions the LIWC profile of only the opening (original) post of 
each thread was examined. All replies were removed from the thread before analysis.
This technique of sampling was used so as to capture the cognitive and emotional 
content of messages that are unsolicited, rather than those which are responses to the 
requests of others. Using this method allowed the coding of each message into a 
category to provide information on overall message content (see section 9.4.3). 
Messages which were posted by moderators and board administrator's for the purpose 
of providing information about the site or upcoming events and which included content 
cut and pasted from the internet or other sources were removed from the downloaded 
data. This sampling method resulted in a total of 259 opening posts generated by 148 
users.
9.4.3 Coding
Posts were coded into categories. Categories were developed based on a post-hoc 
content analysis. Each message was read and the main topic of the post was 
summarized. Whilst many of the opening posts could be placed within multiple 
categories, posts were categorised based on the primary focus of the message 
contained to examine the motivation for posting on the forum. The posts were then 
grouped based on their similarities into four main categories; seeking advice, seeking 
support, offering support/advice and status update. Seeking advice was defined as 
those messages which directly asked questions or requested information from the 
users of the forum. This category was further subdivided according to the nature of the 
advice sought resulting in the seven subcategories listed in Table 9.1.
Seeking support was defined as those messages which explicitly requested emotional 
or practical support in dealing with their infertility problem or treatment. The category 
offering support/advice was defined as messages which offered unsolicited advice or 
information to other users. The final category of status update was defined as those 
messages in which users provided an update on their infertility diagnosis or treatment 
journey. This category also included messages in which new users introduced 
themselves to the community. Table 9.1 shows that the majority of messages were 
seeking advice (72%). The number of messages seeking support only accounted for 10 
per cent of the total.
Using the defined categories, a second independent rater categorized the messages 
and an inter-rater reliability analysis was performed using the Kappa statistic to 
determine consistently between the two independent ratings. Agreement between the 
raters across the categories and subcategories was moderate, Kappa = 0.59 (p <.001).
When calculated across the four categories (with the advice subcategories collapsed 
into one) agreement was substantial, Kappa = 0.77 (p<.001).
Table 9.1 Message category codes and frequencies.
Category Subcategory Frequency
Examples
Seeking Diagnoses or general 25(10) Recurrent miscarriage, irregular
Advice fertility menstrual cycles, ejaculatory 
problems. Diagnostic procedures and 
interpretation of test results.
Symptoms of 
treatment or 
diagnoses
52 (20) Symptoms of specific disorders i.e. 
endometriosis. Bleeding, nausea, 
vomiting and changes in mood during 
treatment.. Early pregnancy 
symptoms following treatment.
Impact of health 
behaviours
14(5) Potential negative or positive impact 
of alternative therapies, cold and flu 
medication and vitamins on treatment 
and outcome.
Treatment options 2 0  (8 ) Adoption process, egg sharing, 
hospital waiting lists, funding and 
specialist consultants.
Treatment process 60 (23) Common practices and treatment 
guidelines for ART procedures (i.e. 
the use of pessaries).Comparisons 
between treatments and pregnancy 
testing dates.
Relationships/work/life 6 (2 ) Impact of infertility and treatment on 
relationships and life goals. Work and 
time off when undergoing ART.
Non-fertility or 
miscellaneous
Total Advice
10 (4) 
187 (72)
Current affairs and shopping.
Seeking
Support
27 (10) Worries about the outcome of 
treatment. Seeking a buddy who is in 
the same situation/having the same 
treatment.
Offering
support/advice
7(3) Motivational stories and poems. 
Support groups and organizations.
Status update 38 (15) Treatment outcome and test results. 
Introductions by new members.
9.4.4 Sample Characteristics
Due to the anonymous nature of the message boards, the demographic information of 
users is limited to those who chose to include these details. The demographic 
information contained in the member profile, which is located in the margin of the 
posted message, includes information on the post count and location of the poster (i.e. 
country/city). There is the option to include information on current or past treatments. 
Additionally, some members include information on their age, partner's age, diagnosis, 
treatments and number of ART cycles in their signatures40 or in the content of the 
message. This information was noted when present. The gender of the poster was 
inferred from the message content; this was possible because of the level of detail 
(primarily regarding symptoms and treatment) in the posts.
Of the 148 users who posted messages in the period sampled, 98.6 per cent (n = 146) 
were female. The number of posts made to the message boards by users since 
registration to the site (including both opening posts and responses to other members 
messages) ranged from 1 to 4700. As indicated in Figure 9.1 the majority of users in 
this sample identified their location as England, though most users were living in 
Europe the sample also consisted of users from Australia, New Zealand, India and the 
USA, one user did not disclose their location.
Figure 9.1 Country of residence of sampled forum users.
New Zealand S 1
Australia f 1
India 1
USA 1 4
Spain S 1
Gibralter S 1
Belgium \ 1
Greece F 2
Switzerland f 1
Germany -  3
Ireland i  2
Northern Ireland b 3
Wales  7
Scotland _
England
Users
40 Text or graphics appended to the bottom o f an e-mail or post that contains information about the author.
A large number of the messages did not include demographic information. Of the 148 
users 47 users disclosed their age which ranged from 24 to 40 years (M = 32.23 years, 
SD = 4.07 years) and 40 users disclosed the age of their partner which ranged from 23 
to 48 years (M = 33.48 years, SD = 5.73 years). Of the 55 users who disclosed their 
marital status 81 per cent (n = 48) were in heterosexual marital relationships, 15 per 
cent (n = 9) were engaged or co-habiting, one user was in a lesbian relationship and 
one user was single. The length of time trying to conceive was disclosed by 41 users, 
this ranged from 10 months to 132 months (M = 43.05 months, SD = 27.19 months).
Figure 9.2 illustrates the location of infertility diagnosis of the 36 per cent of users who 
disclosed diagnosis information in their posts. The causes of female infertility were 
identified as ovulatory dysfunction (17; 41%), tubal factors (11; 27%), uterine factors (2; 
5%) and unexplained infertility (11; 27%). Male factor diagnoses were identified as low 
sperm count or morphology (13; 37%), azoospermia (5; 14%), failed vasectomy 
reversal (5; 14%), ejaculatory failure (1; 3%) and unexplained infertility (11; 27%).
Figure 9.2 Location of infertility diagnosis of sampled forum users.
 Female Factor
 Male Factor 
S Both Partners
 Unexplained
Of the 129 users who disclosed their current treatment status, 44 per cent (n = 57) of 
the users were undergoing ART treatment at the time of posting and 23 per cent (n =
30) were waiting for treatment to start, were in between cycles or were having a break 
from treatment. The remaining 32 users who indicated treatment status were either 
undergoing fertility tests (8 ; 6 %), trying to conceive naturally (9; 7%), receiving drug or 
surgical interventions (18; 14%; i.e. clomid, ovarian drilling), had adopted or were 
seeking adoption (4; 3%) or were pregnant (3; 2%). Of those who had undergone ART 
treatment the number of cycles they had undergone ranged from 1 to 1 0  (M = 1.4, SD 
= 1.79).
9.4.5 Analysis software
The text analysis programme Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC, Pennebaker, 
Francis & Booth, 2001) previously described in section 5.4.3 was used to analyse the 
content of the opening posts. In addition to the standard word categories (negative 
emotions, positive emotions, cognitive mechanisms) included for analysis in Chapters 5 
and 6 , the word categories optimism, anxiety, anger and sadness were also included in 
the content analysis of the infertility forum data as these categories are representative 
of the emotional reactions to infertility frequently reported in the literature (Domar, 
1993; see section 2.2.4).
9.5 Results
9.5.1 Preparation of Data
Downloaded messages were cleaned in preparation for analysis with the LIWC 
software according to guidelines (Pennebaker et al., 2001); spelling errors were 
corrected, shortened words and colloquialisms were replaced. Hyphenated words and 
time markers (e.g. 6 . 0 0  am should be 6 . 0 0  a.m. or 6 .0 0 am) were formatted 
appropriately for analysis (see section 5.4.3).
9.5.2 Descriptive Statistics and Comparison of LIWC Categories 
disclosure study texts
Presented in Table 9.2 are the mean and standard deviations for the percentage of 
total word use (per word category) of the LIWC categories for the narratives produced 
by disclosure (expectancy and disclosure) and writing control participants in Chapter 8  
(herein referred to as infertility disclosure writing and infertility control writing). 
Presented alongside these are the means provided by Pennebaker et al. (2001) of 
disclosure writing ( 2 0  studies) and control writing (15 studies) text samples taken from 
disclosure studies. Comparison of the means between the infertility sample and 
disclosure study norms suggests that there are parallels in the pattern of emotional and
cognitive content produced in the respective writing conditions. The mean percentage 
of positive emotion, optimism, anxiety and anger words in the infertility disclosure 
writing text are similar to those in the normative disclosure writing text, as are the 
means between the infertility control writing and normative control writing texts.
Table 9.2 Means and standard deviations (in parentheses) of the percentage of words 
per category produced across writing studies
Infertility
Disclosure
Writing
Infertility
Control
Writing
Disclosure
Writing
Norms
Control
Writing
Norms
Text files analysed 52 24 2,028 1,473
Writers/speakers 14 8 768 469
LIWC Categories
Positive Emotions 2.04 1.54 2.7 1.7
(0.56) (0.64)
Optimism 0.54 0.64 0.5 0.4
(0.26) (0 .2 2 )
Negative Emotions 3.10 1.34 2 . 6 0 . 6
(0.91) (0.58)
Anxiety 0.52 0.37 0 . 6 0 . 2
(0.57) (0 .2 2 )
Anger 0.73 0.14 0.7 0 . 2
(0.38) (0.18)
Sadness 1.07 0.39 0.7 0 . 2
(0.36) (0.27)
Cognitive Mechanisms 8.82 7.49 7.8 4.1
(1.19) (0.81)
Comparison of the means for negative emotion, sadness and cognitive words shows 
that there is at least one percentage point of a difference between the disclosure texts, 
such that there is a higher percentage of negative emotion, sadness and cognitive 
words used in the infertility disclosure writing than in the normative disclosure data. 
Additionally, the mean percentage of cognitive words produced in the infertility control 
writing is higher than that of the normative control writing data.
9.5.3 Comparison of Infertility Forum Posts with Infertility Disclosure 
Study Data
Presented in Table 9.3 are the mean and standard deviations for the percentage of 
total word use (per word category) of the LIWC categories for the messages sampled
from the infertility forum and from the narratives produced by disclosure (expectancy 
and disclosure) and writing control participants in Chapter 8 . The mean percentage of 
positive emotion, optimism, anxiety and cognitive words in online messages are similar 
to those produced in the infertility disclosure writing narratives.
Table 9.3 Means and standard deviations (in parentheses) of the percentage of words 
per LIWC category for the infertility forum text and Infertility disclosure study texts
Infertility
Forum
Posts
Infertility
Disclosure
Writing
Infertility
Control
Writing
Text files analysed 259 52 24
Writers/speakers 148 14 8
LIWC Categories
Positive Emotions 2.06 2.04 1.54
(1.67) (0.56) (0.64)
Optimism 0.47 0.54 0.64
(0.76) (0.26) (0 .2 2 )
Negative Emotions 1.97 3.10 1.34
(1.94) (0.91) (0.58)
Anxiety 0.47 0.52 0.37
(0.82) (0.57) (0 .2 2 )
Anger 0.23 0.73 0.14
(0.79) (0.38) (0.18)
Sadness 0.57 1.07 0.39
(1 .2 0 ) (0.36) (0.27)
Cognitive Mechanisms 8.41 8.82 7.49
(3.93) (1.19) (0.81)
The mean percentage of negative emotion and sadness words are higher in the 
infertility disclosure narratives than the infertility forum posts, indeed the pattern of 
negative emotion and sadness word use in the infertility forum posts is much closer to 
that produced by the infertility control writing participants.
To further examine the differences between the infertility texts, 95 per cent confidence 
intervals were calculated for the infertility forum posts and narratives (disclosure and 
control) from study three for each of the LIWC categories. It was not possible to 
calculate confidence intervals for the normative data (Pennebaker et al., 2001) as only 
the means are provided by the authors.
Confidence intervals for the infertility forum posts and infertility disclosure study 
narratives were calculated using the formula provide by Field (2009):
Lower boundary of confidence interval = X  - (1.96 x SE)
Upper boundary of confidence interval = X  + (1.96 x SE)
Field (2009) advises using an alternative method for calculating confidence intervals 
when n is small. Therefore the confidence intervals for the writing control narratives (n 
= 24) were calculated using the formula:
Lower boundary of confidence interval = X  - (fn -1  x SE)
Upper boundary of confidence interval = X  + {tn _ 1 x SE)
For ease of interpretation confidence intervals for each of the LIWC word categories 
are graphically illustrated in Figures 9.3 - 9.9.
Figure 9.3 Confidence intervals across texts for positive emotion words.
Positive Emotion Words
toT3u.0
reMOI-
00 re4->
ccuu1_ 0.5u
Forum Posts Disclosure Writing Control Writing
Exaimantion of the confidence intervals for positive emotion words illustrated in Figure
9.3 indicate a substantial overlap between the confidence intervals for each of the texts 
analysed suggesting that there is no difference between the texts in terms of the 
percentage of positive words produced.
Figure 9.4 Confidence intervals across texts for optimism words.
Optimism Words
. 0.5
i- 0.4 
Forum Posts Disclosure Writing Control Writing
For optimsim words (see Figure 9.4) there is some overlap between the confidence 
intervals for the infertility forum posts and infertility disclosure writing, therefore we 
cannot with any real confidence say if there is likley to be a difference between these 
texts in percentage of optimism words. The fact that the confidence intervals for the 
infertilty control writing and forum posts do not overlap suggets that there is a 
difference between these texts, such that the infertility control writing text contains a 
higher percentage of optimism words than the infertility forum text.
Figure 9.5 Confidence intervals across texts for negative emotion words.
Negative Emotion Words
 2.5
4-1o 2
4  1.5o
0. Forum Posts Disclosure Writing Control Writing
As illustrated in Figure 9.5 for negative emotion words the percentage of negative 
emotion words produced by infertlity disclsoure writing participants is higher than that
produced in the infertlity forum posts and the infertility control writing which suggests a 
difference in the pattern of negative emotion word used across the texts.
Figure 9.6 Confidence intervals across texts for anxiety words.
Anxiety Words
Forum Posts Disclosure Writing Control Writing
For anxiety words there appears to be little if any difference between the infertility 
forum posts and infertrility disclosure writing narratives (see Figure 9.6). Whereas the 
confidence intervals shown in Figure 9.7 for anger words sugget that the percentage of 
anger words in the infertility discloure writing narratives is higher than in the infertility 
forum and infertility control writing texts.
Figure 9.7 Confidence intervals across texts for anger words.
Anger Words
Q- Forum Posts Disclosure Writing Control Writing
Figure 9.8 Confidence intervals across texts for sadness words.
Sadness Words
Forum Posts Disclosure Writing Control Writing
As illustrated in Figure 9.8 the percentage of sadness words produced by infertlity 
disclsoure writing participants is higher than that produced in the infertlity forum posts 
and the infertility control writing. For cognitive mechanism words, the confidence 
intrevals for the control writing text suggest the percentage of cognitive mechanism 
words in this text is lower than that produced in the fourm and disclosure texts (see 
Figure 9.9).
Figure 9.9 Confidence intervals across texts for cognitive mechanism words.
Cognitive Mechanism Words
Forum Posts Disclosure Writing Control Writing
Overall, these findings suggest that there are some differences between the texts in the 
pattern of linguistic content.
9.6 D iscussion
Examination of the content of messages posted to an infertility forum compared to the 
content of narratives produced by individuals with infertility in a web-based disclosure 
study identified differences in the percentage of emotion and cognitive words produced 
in these two settings. More specifically, the percentage of negative emotion words, 
anger words and sadness words is higher in the infertility disclosure narratives than the 
infertility forum posts. The pattern of positive emotion, optimism and cognitive word 
use does not appear to differ between the infertility forum and infertility disclosure 
writing texts. The use of cognitive mechanism words and negative emotion words does 
appear to be lower in control writing narratives than in both the forum text and infertility 
disclsoure narratives.
The majority of messages sampled from the infertility forum were posted by females, 
this is consistent with other studies that have found fertility related internet use to be a 
predominantly female activity (Epstein et al., 2002; Haagen et al., 2003). Though based 
in the UK the site attracted a number of users from overseas. Examination of the 
content of messages from users residing outside the UK indicated that these members 
appeared to be British users who had relocated abroad, all users were English 
speaking. Where possible other demographic characteristics (e.g. age, diagnosis, 
treatment status) of forum users were noted, because a large number of the users 
chose not to include this information it is not possible to provide a complete 
demographic profile of this sample of infertility forum users. However, the information 
that is available suggests that female forum users are comparable in age to the women 
who took part in the infertility disclosure study and are also comparable to the female 
fertility patients surveyed by Haagen et al. (2003) and the forum sample of Epstein et 
al. (2002). Consistent with the treatment characteristics of the infertility disclosure study 
participants, the available treatment information indicated that the majority of forum 
users were either currently undergoing ART treatment, were waiting for treatment to 
start or were in-between cycles. From the available diagnostic information the main 
indications of infertility were female factor problems and time trying to conceive was 
over three years. This profile is characteristic of the samples used in empirical studies 
that are obtained from fertility clinics (e.g. Klonoff-Cohen, Chu, Natarajan & Sieber,
2001). The similarity in characteristics of the individuals posting messages to the
infertility forum and the women who participated in the online disclosure study makes 
the comparison of language use across these samples valid.
Nearly three quarters of messages were posted with the aim of seeking advice. The 
emphasis being on the process and symptoms of treatment, this is not surprising 
considering the majority of users, for whom information was available, were undergoing 
ART or seeking treatment. Only ten per cent of posts were categorized as explicitly 
seeking support which corresponds with the findings of Weissman et al. (2000) and 
Rawal and Haddad (2006) that fertility related internet use in fertility patients is 
predominantly focussed on accessing information and advice. Similarly, a survey of 
internet forum users also indicated that a large proportion of the users found the boards 
extremely valuable for sharing information about their own treatment (Epstein et al.,
2002). This was more important for users who had no other outlet through which to talk 
about their infertility experiences. Whilst the data sampled here indicates that fewer 
messages were focused on actively seeking support this is not to say that users who 
asked for advice and information relating to their treatment and symptoms did not find 
the responses they received supportive and that these users have not at some time 
posted messages explicitly seeking support. What this data reflects is a motivation of 
forum users to better understand their treatment. Indeed, Rawal and Haddad (2006) 
suggest that the use of the internet to seek advice not only helps to improve their 
knowledge and awareness of the medical aspects of infertility but also gives them a 
sense of control which can be an important factor in the psychological adjustment to 
infertility (see section 2.2.4).
Interpretation of the any difference in the means between the disclosure study texts is 
limited by the fact that the data was not subject to inferential statistical analysis. 
Comparison of the means for emotional and cognitive content of the infertility study 
narratives and the normative writing data provided by Pennebaker et al. (2001) show 
that the pattern of word use in the respective disclosure writing groups are comparable 
in terms of positive emotion, optimism, anxiety and anger word content. However, the 
means suggest that the use of negative emotion and sadness words is higher in the 
infertility disclosure writing narratives than the normative disclosure writing data. 
Previous research has found that participants were more likely to benefit from 
disclosure writing if they use a high number of positive emotion words compared to a 
moderate number of negative emotion words (Pennebaker & Francis, 1996; 
Pennebaker, Mayne & Francis, 1997). Indeed, an increase in the use of negative 
emotion words across the disclosure writing sessions has been shown to be associated
with an increase in symptoms (Pennebaker & Francis, 1996; Pennebaker et al;, 1997). 
Based on previous findings a possible explanation for the failure to find any beneficial 
intervention effects in the infertility disclosure participants is the disproportionate 
expression of negative emotion words in their writing. Problematic for this explanation 
is the fact that in the study presented in Chapter 8, the analysis of linguistic changes 
across writing sessions in the infertility disclosure narratives showed that an increase in 
the use of negative emotion words from the first to the last writing session was 
predictive of a reduction in depressive symptoms (see section 8.6). Arguably, the 
higher rate of negative emotion and sadness words within the disclosure narratives of 
the infertility sample is likely to represent the negative emotional reaction to infertility 
and infertility treatment that is well documented in the literature (e.g. Dunkel-Schetter & 
Lobel 1991; see section 2.2.4), the expression of which, in the context of a writing 
study, is associated with psychological benefits.
One possible explanation for the lack of an intervention effect in Chapter 8 was that the 
participants, who were recruited from infertility forums, were already expressing their 
thoughts and feelings in the messages they posted to the forums, in much the same 
way as is done in disclosure writing. Comparison of the emotional and cognitive 
content of messages posted to a forum with that of the disclosure narratives of infertility 
disclosure participants suggest that whilst the expression of positive emotions (positive 
emotion and optimism words) in the infertility forum posts do not appear to differ greatly 
from the level expressed in the disclosure narratives there are differences between the 
texts in the level of expression of negative emotions. The mean percentage of negative 
emotion, anger and sadness words in the infertility forum messages is lower than in the 
disclosure narratives. Indeed, in terms of percentage of anger and sadness words, the 
infertility forum data appears to have a similar pattern of word use to the infertility 
control writing narratives. The cognitive content of the infertility forum messages and 
infertility disclosure narratives were similar and contained a higher percentage of 
cognitive words than the infertility control narratives. Whilst an increase in the use of 
cognitive words has been shown to be associated with health improvements in 
disclosure studies (Pennebaker et al., 1997) and indeed was shown in Chapter 8 to 
predict a reduction in symptoms of anxiety, within the context of the infertility forum 
messages the high percentage of cognitive words most likely represents the 
questioning nature of opening posts (i.e. Why is this? Do you think? Is this because?) 
rather than cognitive assimilation of the users infertility experience. Because the level 
of analysis in this study was across messages and not across individual users it is not 
possible to determine if word content changes over time for these forum users. Yet
overall, it would seem that there are quantitative differences in the expression of 
emotions in messages posted to an infertility discussion forum and the expression of 
emotions in the disclosure narratives of participants recruited from such forums.
There are a number of possible explanations for the elevated negative emotional 
content of the disclosure narratives compared with the negative emotional content of 
messages posted to an infertility forum. Firstly, as indicated by the high standard 
deviations for the negative emotion and sadness words in the infertility forum data, 
there is a great deal of variation in the negative content across messages, this is not 
surprising given the different types of message posted to the forums (see Table 9.1) 
the emotional tone of which would be dependent on the focus of the messages (i.e. a 
message relaying details of a failed treatment cycle would likely be more negative in 
tone than one relaying details of a successful treatment cycle). Whereas, in the 
disclosure task participants are instructed to write specifically about their thoughts and 
feelings relating to their infertility and how this has affected their lives, therefore the 
emotional tone of all the disclosure narratives is arguably more likely to be consistent 
across the individual narratives.
An alternative explanation to that suggested above is that the high level of negative 
emotion expressed in the infertility disclosure narratives might be specific to this 
sample (i.e. infertile women who are forum users) rather than being characteristic of 
written disclosure in individuals with infertility. Just over half of those in the disclosure 
writing groups indicated that they were active users (i.e. posted messages as opposed 
to just reading messages) of the infertility forums which they visited. All active forum 
users indicated that they expressed some emotion in their messages posted to the 
forums and therefore were accustomed to disclosing their emotions through writing in 
an online context. Although Malik and Coulson (2008) found the anonymity afforded by 
an online infertility discussion forum to be beneficial for allowing individuals to express 
their feelings more fully, their study also indicated that at times participants felt highly 
sensitive to the remarks of other members, and stories of grief often left them with 
overwhelming feelings of sadness. It is possible therefore that at times infertility forum 
users might feel the need to temper the expression of negative emotions in their 
messages to spare the feelings of other members. The disclosure writing context may 
have provided forum users with the opportunity to be more honest about their negative 
feelings relating to their infertility, their treatment and how this has affected their 
relationships. Within the disclosure writing context feelings of sadness and anger could 
be expressed without repercussions from or for others. This explanation is plausible
considering the previously mentioned findings that increased negative emotion word 
use was associated with reduced depression at follow-up in the infertility disclosure 
participants.
A final yet related point is that there may have been an element of self-selection bias in 
the infertility disclosure study sample. Potential participants were provided with 
condition specific information prior to consent, that is, those in the writing groups were 
aware before agreeing to participate that they would be required to write about their 
experiences. Indeed, attrition rates were associated with allocation to condition such 
that attrition was lower in the non-writing control group (see section 8.5.1.1). It is 
possible therefore, that those who chose to take part in the study were those who 
relished the opportunity to write about their experiences outside of the forum 
environment. Epstein et al. (2002) found women who reported the internet as their only 
outlet for talking41 about their infertility to have a poorer psychological profile than those 
who indicated that they had alternate outlets to talk about their infertility. The use of the 
internet as the only outlet was associated with higher levels of depression and 
perceptions of fertility as being more stressful. The elevated psychological symptoms 
and fertility related distress reported in the infertility disclosure study sample combined 
with the elevated levels of negative emotional content of disclosure narratives could 
suggest that the sub-sample of forum users who agreed to participate in the Chapter 8 
study are characteristic of those identified by Epstein et al. (2002).
9.7 Sum m ary
A comparison of the pattern of emotional and cognitive word content in the disclosure 
narratives of individuals with infertility and the normative data generated from previous 
disclosure studies (Pennebaker et al., 2001) show that positive emotion, optimism, 
anxiety, anger and cognitive word content of the texts appear relatively similar, 
whereas the negative emotion and sadness word content of infertility disclosure texts 
appears to be higher than in the normative disclosure data. Similarly, the use of 
negative emotion, sadness and anger words in the narratives produced by disclosure 
participants with infertility is higher than in the messages posted to an infertility 
discussion forum, while the level of positive emotion and cognitive content is relatively 
similar. Therefore these findings appear to suggest that there are distinct differences
41 This group also included women who did not actively post or respond to messages in the in fe rtility  
forums but did read the messages. Participants were assigned to the only outlet (OO) group and the 
alternate outlet (AO) group based on their response to the question  The internet is the only outlet for 
talking about in fe rtility  (Epstein et al., 2002).
between the level of emotional expression in messages posted to an infertility forum 
and those expressed in the disclosure narratives produced by users of infertility forums.
It is possible that the high level of negative emotional content produced in the 
disclosure narratives is unique to the characteristics of this sample of infertility forum 
users, who have elevated levels of psychological symptoms. The findings presented in 
this chapter, combined with the finding in Chapter 8 that an increase in the use of 
negative emotion words in the disclosure narratives is associated with a reduction in 
depressive symptoms at follow-up, would suggest that the failure to find an intervention 
effect is unlikely to be due to the fact that participants were already expressing their 
emotions in the messages posted to the infertility forums, of which they were members, 
in the same way that emotions are expressed in written emotional disclosure.
Chapter 10
General Discussion
10.1 A im s of the Thesis
The main aim of this thesis was to examine the efficacy of a written emotional 
disclosure intervention for individuals with infertility. The potential moderating effects of 
adapting the traditional laboratory based writing intervention to a computer-mediated 
intervention, delivered outside of the controlled laboratory environment was also 
examined. The delivery of a home-based disclosure intervention for individuals with 
infertility recruited from an assisted conception unit and undergoing In Vitro Fertilization 
(IVF) treatment for the first time proved to be unfeasible. In order to achieve the 
primary aim of the thesis participants were recruited from online infertility support 
forums and the written disclosure intervention was adapted to be delivered via the 
internet. The findings of each of the studies have been discussed in detail in their 
respective chapters. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a summary of the main 
findings of this thesis and to consider the implications of these findings within the 
broader context of the written disclosure literature. The implications of these findings 
and future directions for research are discussed.
10.2 Testing M ethodologies
There has been a great deal of inconsistency in the findings of studies that have 
examined the effects of emotional disclosure interventions in various populations (see 
section 2.3). The methodological variation across these studies is a likely contributory 
factor in some of the inconsistencies reported (see Chapter 3). In order to overcome 
some of the potential barriers to participation in psychosocial interventions that 
individuals with infertility face, the adaptation of the traditional laboratory based writing 
intervention to one delivered within the context of the home was required. To allow for 
additional flexibility, the intervention protocol was also adapted to provide participants 
with the option to complete the writing intervention via computer, a departure from the 
standard pen-and-paper format that is used in the majority of studies. However, if such
departures in methodology influence the outcome of disclosure, these effects would 
need to be considered when interpreting the findings of a home-based (and potentially 
computer-mediated) intervention and became of particular importance for the 
subsequent adaptation of the disclosure intervention to an internet-mediated format. 
Therefore, examination of the moderating effects of modality (writing versus typing) and 
context (lab-based versus home-based) of administration of a disclosure intervention 
were examined in Chapter 5 and Chapter 6, respectively.
Chapter 5 showed there to be no effect of modality on the short-term or longer-term 
outcome of a disclosure intervention. The finding that there was no difference in 
language use between the modalities, in terms of the percentage of emotion and 
cognitive words contained in the essays, and none of the improvements seen in the 
groups were differentiated by the modality of disclosure, was encouraging for the 
adaption of the written disclosure intervention to a computer-mediated format.
The findings of Chapter 6 showed that improvements in psychological well-being at 
follow-up were not differentiated by the context in which the written emotional 
disclosure intervention was delivered. The fact that home-based participants produced 
fewer words in their essays than their lab-based counterparts is probably due to a lack 
of adherence to the 15 minute writing period. The lack of experimenter control in home- 
based studies can be problematic and has previously been overcome by contacting 
participants via telephone as a means of controlling the timing of the writing session 
(e.g. Vedhara et al., 2007). Using this means of control is arguably more feasible in 
studies where participants are recruited face-to-face and agreed times of contact can 
be arranged. Imposing specific writing times on participants removes the element of 
flexibility which was one of the rationales for delivering the intervention within the 
context of the home (and subsequently via the internet) in individuals with infertility. 
The computer software used to deliver the internet-mediated intervention presented in 
Chapter 8 allowed for writing sessions to be timed. This provided participants with a 
timing counter and restricted them from moving on to the next page before the time 
was up and this provided some control of the timing of writing sessions. The conclusion 
drawn from the combined findings of the studies presented in Chapters 5 and 6 was 
that the adaptation of the standard lab-based written protocol to one that is delivered 
via a computer or within the context of the home is feasible, providing support for the 
adaptation of the writing task to a home-based, computer-mediated format used in 
Chapter 8. This is an important finding given the increasing use of computers to deliver 
psychosocial interventions (see section 7.5). The finding that the effectiveness of a
written emotional disclosure intervention is not moderated by a home-based, computer- 
mediated delivery adds to the recent literature supporting the adaptation of therapeutic 
techniques to an internet-mediated format (Cuijpers, van Straten & Andersson, 2008).
One of the additional aims of Chapters 5 and 6 was to replicate previous research that 
has found the written expression of thoughts and feelings relating to traumatic events 
to be beneficial for improving psychological (e.g. Epstein, Sloan & Marx, 2005) and 
physical well-being (e.g. Pennebaker & Beall, 1986). Symptoms of anxiety and 
psychological distress (GSI) decreased for all participants in the disclosure, writing 
control and non-writing control groups in Chapter 5. Depressive symptoms reduced in 
the disclosure and writing control groups but not the non-writing control group. In 
Chapter 6 improvements in anxiety, depression and psychological distress were found 
in all groups. These findings are not unique to the two studies presented here; previous 
research has also noted improvements across groups irrespective of group assignment 
(Horneffer & Jamison, 2002; Mario & Wagner, 1999) and has suggested that the time 
management instructions given to participants in the control groups might improve well
being by providing participants with the opportunity to organize and reflect on their 
responsibilities (Horneffer & Jamison, 2002). While this explanation is in part plausible 
for the findings of Chapter 5, the improvements found in non-writing controls in Chapter 
6 must have arisen from a different process. One possibility is that the improvements 
noted in these studies represent a gradual adjustment to university in these students 
who are first year undergraduates. Alternatively, it is suggested, that the overall 
improvements seen across control groups (writing and non-writing) in the studies 
presented here may be due to a combination of expectancy (e.g. Langens & Schuler, 
2005) and demand effects. In order to investigate this possibility, two experimental 
conditions were incorporated into the study design in Chapter 8. In the first condition 
participants were told that they could expect the writing to be therapeutic, whilst in the 
second condition participants were not told of the likely effects of writing. Expectancy 
was not found to moderate the outcome of disclosure in this study. However, this 
finding does not refute the possible role of expectancy in the improvements seen in the 
earlier studies. The conditions under which the intervention was presented in the 
studies of Chapters 5 and 6 are somewhat different to that of the internet-mediated 
study in Chapter 8. The introduction and delivery of study information in both studies 
(Chapter 5 and Chapter 6) was presented to participants face-to-face by the 
investigator, within the classroom, this could arguably have provided a sense of 
legitimate authority that is inherent to the more traditional laboratory setting of written 
disclosure (Smyth & Catley, 2002; see section 3.6.1), the positive effects of which may
be experienced irrespective of the context in which the writing intervention is 
administered. It is possible therefore that the physical presence of a legitimate authority 
within the study process (i.e. researcher, clinician) is a necessary (or sufficient) 
condition of positive expectancy. Further research is needed to determine under what 
conditions (if any) positive expectancy effects are likely to occur.
If the improvements in psychological well-being reported by control participants in the 
studies of Chapter 5 and Chapter 6 are a consequence of positive expectancies, the 
question of whether this is also applicable to the psychological improvements reported 
by disclosure participants arises. While it is possible that the improvements seen in 
psychological well-being could in part be attributed to positive expectancies in the 
experimental groups, there is evidence that the experimental manipulation was 
effective. Manipulation checks revealed that disclosure participants evaluated their 
writing as more personal, more meaningful and more revealing of their emotions than 
writing control participants. Additionally, disclosure essays contained significantly more 
negative emotion, positive emotion and cognitive words than control essays. This 
pattern of findings, in terms of both the subjective rating of essay content and the more 
objective computerised content analysis of essays, is consistent with that of studies 
where written emotional disclosure has been shown to improve the well-being of 
participants compared to controls (e.g. Epstein et al., 2005). More importantly, analysis 
of the pattern of word use across the studies indicated that an increase in the use of 
cognitive words and a reduction in the use of negative emotion words were predictive 
of various improvements in psychological symptoms at each of the follow-up periods in 
the disclosure group. The relationship between psychological improvements and word 
use was not found in the control writing narratives. This provides further support for the 
effective manipulation of experimental disclosure in these studies and suggests that the 
improvements seen in disclosure group participants represent the effects of written 
emotional disclosure.
10.3 W ritten Em otional Disclosure fo r Individuals w ith Infertility
10.3.1 Im plem entation of a Hom e-based Em otional D isclosure Intervention
for New Referral IVF Patients.
The development and implementation of a home-based written emotional disclosure 
intervention for individuals with infertility, more specifically, new referral IVF patients is 
described in Appendix A.2. Recruitment into the study began in January 2007, 
however, due to there being fewer patients attending the clinic than had been
anticipated, combined with a low response rate and high attrition, the study was 
terminated in May 2007. The main factor in the decision to terminate the study 
prematurely was that the number of clinic attendees who were eligible to participate in 
the study was small and the study protocol (or at least the timing of it in relation to the 
cycle of IVF treatment) seemed unacceptable to potential participants. Difficulties in 
obtaining ethical approval to extend the study protocol to include repeat cycle IVF 
patients meant that there was little opportunity to try and increases recruitment 
numbers. The result being that the implementation of written emotional disclosure 
intervention was considered unfeasible under these circumstances.
10.3.2 Internet-m ediated W ritten Em otional Disclosure
Chapter 8 presents the findings of an internet-mediated written disclosure intervention 
for individuals with infertility. Individuals who wrote about their thoughts and feelings 
relating to their infertility and infertility treatments did not report any improvements in 
physical (PSl) or psychological well-being (fertility problems stress, depression, anxiety 
and stress) at 4-week follow-up compared to those who wrote factually about their 
infertility or a non-writing control group. Although there was no main effect of 
disclosure, further analysis revealed that changes in word use from writing session one 
to writing session three predicted improvements in psychological well-being at 4-week 
follow-up. More specifically, an increase in the use of cognitive mechanism words 
across the writing sessions was predictive of a reduction in symptoms of anxiety and 
an increase in the use of negative emotion words was predictive of a reduction in the 
symptoms of depression. The relationship between language use across the writing 
sessions and improvements in psychological well-being was not evident in the analysis 
of the linguistic content of writing control narratives in individuals with infertility. As a 
result of the small sample size used in the study these findings should not be 
considered as definitive. However, we can tentatively suggest that the benefits of 
disclosure in this population might be dependent on the approach used when 
disclosing their thoughts and feelings relating to their infertility and associated 
treatment, an approach that appears to be at odds with the disclosure literature (i.e. an 
increase in negative emotion word use is often associated with poorer health 
outcomes; e.g. Pennebaker & Francis, 1996). As previously suggested (see section 
8.6), for some infertile individuals, the anonymity afforded by an internet-mediated 
disclosure intervention may have provided an opportunity to express their negative 
feelings about their infertility that they may not have the opportunity to express in their 
everyday social interactions. Further research is needed to determine if this 
relationship between negative emotion word use and improved well-being is replicated
in this population, if so it may be that directing individuals with infertility to express their 
negative emotions in their writing will enhance the effects of disclosure for this group of 
people.
One possible explanation for the findings in this study was that individuals with infertility 
recruited from online infertility support forums were already expressing their thoughts 
and feelings in messages posted to the infertility forum discussion boards in a similar 
way to that which is seen in disclosure writing. As nearly 60 per cent of the sample 
reported that they were active users of infertility forums and that they all, to some 
degree, expressed their emotions in the messages they posted to the discussion 
boards, a comparison of the emotional and cognitive content of messages posted to an 
infertility forum with that of the essays written by the participants in Chapter 8 was 
conducted. The findings, reported in Chapter 9, showed that there were a number of 
differences in the content of narratives produced by disclosure participants and that of 
the content of messages posted to an infertility forum. Whilst the percentage of positive 
emotion words and cognitive process words were similar across the two domains, the 
use of negative emotion, sadness and anger words in the narratives produced by 
individuals with infertility in the disclosure intervention was higher than that of the 
messages posted to the infertility forum discussion boards. This finding suggests that 
there are quantitative differences in the type of disclosure which occurs within the 
context of a disclosure intervention and that of an infertility support forum.
The high attrition rate of the study reported in Chapter 8 indicated that there was little 
motivation amongst infertility forum users to participate in the online disclosure study 
(see section 10.3.4). Conversely, the demand for and use of infertility forums is 
apparently great. A search of the World Wide Web shows that there are a large number 
of online support/discussion forums available for individuals with infertility. Indeed one 
of the larger international forums has in excess of 49,000 registered members and 
contains over 649,000 posts. Therefore a large number of individuals with infertility are 
accustomed to and comfortable using infertility forums to disclose their thoughts and 
feelings about their infertility. It may be that intervening within the context of the 
infertility forum may be a more feasible option for these individuals. It is possible that 
directing participants to write down their thoughts and feelings about their infertility, in a 
manner that encourages them to increase their use of cognitive words and negative 
emotion words over the course of their writing (as was shown to be predictive of 
improvements in anxiety and depression participants in Chapter 8), within the forum 
environment may be beneficial. One caveat to this proposal is that forum users may be
inclined to censor the expression of negative emotions within their messages posted to 
the discussion boards (see section 9.6). Therefore an alternative approach, when 
conducting disclosure interventions using an online format, may be to have 
participants disclose through weblogs or blogs (as they are more commonly known) 
which authors have the option to keep private or make accessible to others. Future 
research would need to examine if blogs could be used as a feasible alternative format 
through which individuals with infertility, and indeed other populations, could be 
encouraged to disclose their thoughts and feelings about stressful life events.
One possibility for the null findings in this study is that due to the small sample size 
there was insufficient power to detect significant intervention effects. Alternatively, the 
4-week follow-up period used in Chapter 8 may have been too short a duration to find 
any effects. A number of studies have noted that the physical and psychological effects 
of disclosure can be delayed until up to three months after the intervention period in 
clinical populations (Gillis, Lumley, Mosley-Williams, Leisen & Roehrs, 2006; Graham, 
Lobel & Lokshina, 2008; Smyth, Stone, Hurewitz & Kaell, 1999; Stanton, Danoff-Burg & 
Sworowski, 2002). Therefore it would seem prudent to include follow-up periods 
beyond that of the 4-week interval used in Chapter 8.
10.3.3 Heterogeneity
An interesting aspect of the study in Chapter 8 which requires further investigation 
relates to the heterogeneity of the sample, which is largely attributable to the 
recruitment methods utilised within the study (see section 7.4.2). The sample, though 
all female, varied in term of the number of years they had been trying to conceive, the 
type and number of treatments that they had undergone and the stage of treatment 
which they were at whilst taking part in the study. As discussed earlier in section 2.2.5 
and reiterated in Chapter 8, each of these factors can influence the psychological state 
of the individual, and studies that have examined the therapeutic effects of various 
interventions for individuals with infertility have often included strict inclusion and 
exclusion criteria as a means of maintaining as much homogeneity in the sample as 
possible (e.g. Facchinetti, Tarabusi & Volpe, 2004; McNaughton-Cassill, Bostwick, 
Arthur, Robinson & Neal, 2002).
With random assignment to condition it is assumed that the characteristics on which 
individuals differ will be represented across conditions, however when sample sizes are 
small and potential confounds are numerous this is problematic. One possible solution 
is to match participants across conditions. Matching on pre-test scores and fertility
characteristics (i.e. years TTC, diagnoses, treatment) before assignment to condition, 
could arguably have increased homogeneity in the Chapter 8 study. Alternatively, 
post-hoc analysis can provide some indication of the effectiveness of the intervention in 
sub-samples of the population under investigation. Unfortunately, the small sample size 
within this study precluded analysis of the moderating effects of these factors.
10.3.4 Attrition
Attrition was a potential issue in the Chapter 8 study. Of the 168 individuals who 
registered to the study website 66 per cent started the study, but only 35 per cent of 
these actually completed the study (a 23% completion rate overall). Attrition was 
related to group allocation, such that those in the non-writing control group were more 
likely to complete the study. This is not surprising given that the requirements of 
participants in the non-writing condition (completing measures at two time points) were 
somewhat less onerous than was required of participants assigned to the writing 
conditions (completing three, 15 minutes writing sessions in addition to the measures). 
Although, the high attrition rate within this population could indicate that there was little 
motivation to take part in the intervention. This coupled with the unwillingness of IVF 
patients (see Appendix A.2) to take part in a writing intervention study questions the 
feasibility of such an intervention in this population.
10.3.5 Infertility  Forum  Users
One of the unexpected findings in this thesis was the elevated level of psychological 
symptoms in the infertility sample. The level of infertility-related stress reported by the 
women in this sample was higher than that of the average female infertility patient 
(Newton, Sherrard & Clavac, 1999). Scores on the DASS21 subscales were similarly 
high (anxiety, depression and stress), being more comparable with the levels reported 
by a clinical sample of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) patients than adult non
patient norms (Antony, Bieling, Cox, Enns & Swinson, 1998; Henry & Crawford, 2005). 
It is possible that the level of symptom reporting by participants in Chapter 8 is a 
consequence of the online administration of the measures (Joinson, 1999; see Chapter 
7 for a discussion). Alternatively, these findings could be a true reflection of the 
psychological profile of this sample of infertility forum users. This raises the question of 
why these women have such high levels of fertility stress, depression, anxiety and 
stress.
Participation in online support groups is reported to provide a number of psychosocial 
benefits for individuals experiencing health related problems (White & Dorman, 2001; 
Winzelberg et al., 2003). For some individuals with infertility online support forums are 
a valuable source of emotional support (Haagen et al., 2003; Rawal & Haddard, 2006; 
Weissman et al., 2000). However, there is evidence to suggest that being a member of 
an online infertility support group may encourage some infertile women to withdraw 
from real-world interactions and this has been shown to be associated with higher 
levels of depression and perceptions of fertility as being more stressful (Epstein, 
Rosenberg, Venet, Grant & Hemenway, 2002). Epstein et al. (2002) found that women 
who considered the internet to be their only outlet for talking about their infertility had 
higher levels of depression and found their infertility more stressful than women who 
had alternative outlets. Unsurprisingly, women who used the internet as their only 
outlet also reported receiving less emotional support from partners, parents, friends 
and other infertile couples. It is not possible to determine the level or quality of social 
support that the women who participated in the online disclosure study (Chapter 8) had 
available to them so it is not known if this was a factor in the elevated psychological 
symptoms reported by these women. Any benefits that these women were receiving 
from their use of the infertility forums did not appear to translate into enhanced well
being. This assumption is speculative at this stage as it is entirely possible that the 
women in this sample may have had even higher levels of distress prior to using the 
infertility support forums of which they were members. However, based on the findings 
of a systematic review of 38 studies of health related online support forums, which 
concluded that there was no robust evidence for an effect of online communities on 
such outcomes as depression and perceived social support (Eysenbach, Powell, 
Englesakis, Rizo, & Stern, 2004), this scenario seems to be less likely. Considering the 
remarkably high levels of distress reported in this sample, future research is needed to 
examine what factors may mediate the relationship between internet forum use and 
psychological well-being in individuals with infertility.
10.4 The W riting Cure: D isclosure W riting
The findings of this thesis contribute to a growing body of literature that has examined 
the utility of disclosure writing as a therapeutic intervention for individuals experiencing 
chronic health-related conditions. The major contribution of this thesis is to extend this 
literature to include the application of a written emotional disclosure intervention in 
individuals with infertility. The implications of these findings for application and theory 
will be considered next.
10.4.1 Does W ritten Em otional D isclosure W ork?
Since the first published study by Pennebaker and Beall (1986) reported that writing for 
15 minutes on four consecutive days about a personally upsetting event was 
associated with a reduction in health problems in students there have been over 150 
studies published examining the effects of written emotional disclosure on physical and 
psychological well-being. Much of the empirical evidence for the positive effects of 
disclosure have been found in studies with healthy student populations (see Chapter 2, 
section 2.3). A move to examine the utility of written emotional disclosure in clinical 
populations has found mixed results (see section 2.3.7). The results of this thesis 
contribute to the research that has shown written emotional disclosure to be of 
potentially limited utility in some populations. The conclusion to be reached from the 
available evidence and the findings of this thesis is that disclosure writing can provide 
benefits for some but not everyone.
Given the inconsistencies in the findings with clinical populations identification of the 
active ingredients of a disclosure writing intervention is necessary. A number of 
possible explanations have been suggested for there being no main effect of disclosure 
in this study of individuals with infertility including issues of heterogeneity and method 
of recruitment (see section 10.3). However, the overriding conclusion seems to point 
towards the effects of this intervention being heavily moderated. Research that has 
examined the influence of individual differences on the efficacy of written emotional 
disclosure have found evidence for the moderating effect of a number of variables 
including personality (e.g. alexithymia; Paez, Velasco & Gonzalez, 1999), preferred 
coping style (i.e. emotional approach coping; Kraft, Lumley, DSouza & Dooley, 2008) 
and event-related characteristics (i.e. cancer-related avoidance; Stanton et al., 2002). 
Foremost it is plausible that only people who want to express their emotions and feel 
comfortable doing so will find any benefit (Kennedy-Moore & Watson, 2001). It seems 
that the reported reluctance of infertile individuals to engage in counselling (e.g. 
Cousineau & Domar, 2007) might also extend to expressing emotions. Perhaps 
infertility is such a private concept that there is reluctance by individuals to engage in 
any type of intervention.
The accumulating evidence that suggests the effects of disclosure are greatly 
moderated by methodological variation and participant characteristics is problematic for 
the clinical utility of written emotional disclosure, as it seem that only a select few may 
benefit from this type of intervention under certain conditions. If it is necessary to 
screen each individual to determine suitability for treatment using this technique then
this limits the clinical application of such an intervention. A number of commentators 
have expressed their apprehension about the clinical utility of written emotional 
disclosure as a bona fide therapeutic intervention (Baikie & Wilhelm, 2005; Bootzin, 
1997; Sloan & Marx, 2004a). As Kacewicz, Slatcher and Pennebaker (2008) point out
expressive writing is not a panacea it is still uncertain for whom it works best,
when it should be used, or when other techniques should be used in its place (p. 18). 
Indeed, Baikie and Wilhelm (2005) caution against replacing appropriate psychological 
treatment in clinical populations with disclosure writing and recommend disclosure 
writing as an adjunct to tried and tested treatments. Certainly, from the findings of this 
thesis it would not be prudent to recommend written emotional disclosure as an 
alternative to the psychosocial treatments currently available for individuals with 
infertility. Nevertheless, disclosure writing could still be usefully recommended as a 
therapeutic tool (as an adjunct rather than an alternative) for this population based on 
its cost-effectiveness (requires a pen and paper at the minimum) and potential to 
provide benefit to some.
10.4.2 M echanism s of Change
The mechanisms by which written emotional disclosure is thought to produce its effects 
are discussed in section 2.3.6. It is widely acknowledged that there is unlikely to be a 
single theoretical explanation for the beneficial effects that writing can produce 
(Pennebaker, 2004; Sloan & Marx, 2004a) and it may be that the mediating processes 
of disclosure are determined by a combination of the event being disclosed and 
participant characteristics. The paradoxical findings of the relationship between 
changes in language use and subsequent changes in psychological symptoms in the 
studies of this thesis point towards the complexity of generating a clear theoretical 
explanation for how disclosure writing works.
Although this thesis did not directly examine the potential mediating processes of 
disclosure, examination of the linguistic changes across the writing sessions provided 
some indication of the important processes that may contribute to improvements in 
well-being. In Chapter 5 a reduction in negative emotion words across the writing 
sessions was predictive of a reduction in symptoms of avoidance at 2-week follow-up 
and a reduction in anxiety at 6-week follow-up for disclosure participants. This 
decrease in the use of negative emotion words and subsequent changes in avoidant 
symptoms and anxiety are consistent with the habituation explanation of disclosure 
(see section 2.3.6.2). In Chapter 6, an increase in the use of cognitive words across the 
writing sessions predicted a reduction in the symptoms of depression, anxiety and
psychological distress, in addition to a reduction in intrusion at 2-week follow-up. The 
only association between cognitive word change and well-being to remain consistent at 
6-week follow-up was for anxiety. The relative importance of cognitive word change in 
this study would indicate some support for the cognitive change hypothesis of 
disclosure writing (e.g. Esterling, LAbate, Murray & Pennebaker, 1999; see section 
2 .3 .6 .3 ).
Contrary to the divergent findings reported in Chapters 5 and 6, the pattern of findings 
in Chapter 8 indicated the importance of both emotional and cognitive processing in 
written emotional disclosure. Previous research has cautioned against a focus on the 
expression of negative emotions in disclosure writing (Pennebaker et al., 1997) yet in 
Chapter 8 an increase in the use of negative emotion words across the writing sessions 
was predictive of a reduction in symptoms of depression, whereas as an increase in 
cognitive word use was predictive of a reduction in symptoms of anxiety.
It would not be unexpected to find that the process or processes by which 
improvements in clinical samples are produced differ from that which is found for 
healthy student samples. However, the inconsistency in the two studies in this thesis 
which utilised identical writing instructions in student samples drawn from the same 
population demonstrates why there is real incongruity within the literature. The findings 
of this thesis do provide some hints about an answer to the question of how disclosure 
works. The findings that change in emotion and cognitive processing words appear to 
be linked to changes in subsequent mental health needs to be systematically 
examined, indeed as future studies explore the efficacy of written emotional disclosure 
in other populations additional mediators and moderators are likely to be discovered 
adding further complexity to the debate. Sloan and Marx (2004a) suggest that future 
research should focus its attention on identifying the underlying mechanism of written 
emotional disclosure. However, Pennebaker (2004) disagrees and instead argues that 
attention should be given to finding out who does and who does not benefit from written 
emotional disclosure rather than focusing on the why. It would seem that as we are no 
closer to providing any definitive answers to these empirical questions that both the 
who? and the why? should be examined concurrently. As is indicated in the 
discrepancy in the findings between the studies of Chapters 5, 6 and 8 it is plausible 
that the mechanism through which writing exerts its effects in infertility patients is, say 
for example, different to that of healthy students or indeed, other clinical populations 
(i.e. cancer patients). A much more systematic assessment is needed of the potential 
utility of disclosure writing specific to the population of interest, under what
circumstances does it work best in this population and how does it work in this 
population.
10.5 Future D irections
This thesis has identified a number of issues that need to be addressed with further 
research, including the impact of positive expectancies on the effects of disclosure 
writing, factors that mediate the relationship between forum membership or activity and 
psychological well-being in individuals with infertility, and the possible feasibility and 
efficacy of using weblogs as an alternative format for emotional disclosure in infertility 
forum users. The potential for written emotional disclosure to be a useful intervention 
for individuals with infertility needs to be examined in more homogenous samples of 
this population, recruited from a variety of sources and delivered in different contexts. 
For example, those who are yet to undergo treatment or are newly diagnosed via GPs 
surgeries, family planning clinics or hospital outpatient departments.
In terms of methodology, the feasibility of an internet-mediated intervention in patients 
recruited outside of this context is likely to be limited (i.e. requires access to the 
internet, competency in accessing and using the features of the site) therefore 
alternative formats of intervention delivery should be further examined (i.e. within the 
home, within the clinic). If the effects of disclosure take time to manifest (see section 
10.3.2) then future research would need to examine well-being at various intervals (i.e. 
1-month, 3-months) to determine if the effects of written emotional disclosure in 
individuals with infertility are indeed delayed. Until further research has examined the 
feasibility and efficacy of written emotional disclosure in wider and larger samples of 
individuals with infertility and under different conditions the real value of disclosure 
writing in this population will not be known.
10.6 Sum m ary and Conclusion
The main aim of this thesis was to examine the efficacy of a written emotional 
disclosure intervention for individuals with infertility. In doing so the thesis also 
investigated the moderating effects of adapting the traditional laboratory based writing 
intervention to one that was computer-mediated and delivered outside of the controlled 
laboratory environment. The modality (computer versus pen-and-paper) and context 
(lab versus home) of written emotional disclosure was not found to moderate the short
term or longer-term effects of disclosure on physical and psychological well-being. 
Positive expectancy and demand effects were possible explanations for the
improvements in psychological well-being that were noted across all groups 
(disclosure, writing control and non-writing control).
The recruitment of new referral IVF patients from an assisted conception clinic proved 
to be problematic because of limited patient numbers and the unpopularity of the 
protocol alongside IVF treatment demands. As a result the implementation of the 
intervention within this context became unfeasible. The subsequent adaptation to an 
Internet-mediated written emotional disclosure intervention showed that this type of 
intervention provided limited benefit for individuals with infertility. The results of this 
thesis suggest that disclosure writing may be of utility to specific individuals, particularly 
those who use more negative emotion and cognitive mechanism words in their writing. 
Further examination of the efficacy of this type of intervention in individuals with 
infertility recruited from alternative sources and under different conditions is required 
before any clear conclusions can be offered about the overall utility of such an 
intervention in this population.
In conclusion, this thesis has shown that the modalities and contexts in which writing 
occurs produce equivalent outcomes. Writing about thoughts and feelings relating to 
the experience of infertility and its associated treatments was beneficial for individuals 
who wrote with an increasing use of negative emotion words and cognitive mechanism 
words across the intervention session. This thesis has shown that how disclosure 
writing works in healthy students does not appear to be how it works in individuals with 
infertility. The contribution of this thesis has been to directly test the potential 
moderating effects of methodological variation in intervention delivery and examine the 
utility of a written emotional disclosure intervention for individuals with infertility, in 
doing so the findings of this thesis contribute to the expanding literature.
References
Abbey, A., Andrews, F. M., & Halman, L. J. (1991) The importance of social 
relationships for infertile couples well-being. In A.L. Stanton & C. Dunkel- 
Schetter (Eds.), Infertility: Perspectives from Stress and Coping Research (pp. 
61-86). New York: Plenum Press.
Alford, W. K., Malouff, J. M., & Osland, K. S. (2005) Written emotional expression as a 
coping method in child protective services officers. International Journal of 
Stress Management, 12, 2, 177-187.
Alper, M. M. (2007) Treatment options III: in vitro fertilization. In S. R. Bayer, M. M. 
Alper & A. S. Penzias (Eds.), The Boston IVF Handbook of Infertility (2nd ed.) 
(pp. 91-109). London: Informa UK. Ltd.
Alpers, G. W., Winzelberg, A. J., Classen, C., Dev, P., Koopman, C., Roberts, H., et al. 
(2005) Evaluation of computerized text analysis in an Internet breast cancer 
support group. Computers in Human Behaviour, 21, 343-358.
Altman, D. G, Bland, J M. (2005) Treatment allocation by minimisation. British Medical 
Journal, 330, 843-843.
Ames, S. C., Pattern, C. A., Werch, C. E., Schroeder, D. R., Stevens, S. R., 
Fredrickson, P. A. et al. (2007) Expressive writing as a smoking cessation 
treatment adjunct for young adult smokers. Nicotine and Tobacco Research, 9, 
2, 185-194.
Anderheim, L., Holter, H., Bergh, C., & Moller, A. (2005) Does psychological stress 
affect the outcome of in vitro fertilization? Human Reproduction, 20, 10, 2969- 
2975.
Antony, M. M., Bieling, P. J., Cox, B. J., Enns, M. W., & Swinson, R. E. (1998) 
Psychometric properties of the 42-Item and 21-Item versions of the Depression 
Anxiety Stress Scales in clinical groups and a community sample. 
Psychological Assessment, 10, 2, 176-181.
Applehans, B. M. & Luecken, L. J. (2006) Heart rate variability as an index of regulated 
emotional responding. Review of General Psychology, 10, 3, 229-240.
Atwood, J. D. & Dobkin, S. (1992) Storm clouds are coming: ways to help couples 
reconstruct the crisis of infertility. Contemporary Family Therapy, 14, 5, 385- 
Austenfeld, J. L. & Stanton, A. L. (2008) Writing about emotions versus goals: Effects 
on hostility and medical care utilization moderated by emotional approach 
coping processes. British Journal of Health Psychology, 13, 1, 35-38.
Baikie, K. A. (2008) Who does expressive writing work for? Examination of alexithymia, 
splitting, and repressive coping style as moderators of the expressive writing 
paradigm. British Journal of Health Psychology, 13, 1, 61-66.
Baikie, K. A. & Wilhelm, K. (2005) Emotional and physical health benefits of expressive 
writing. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 11, 338-346.
Barak, A. & Bloch, N. (2006) Factors related to perceived helpfulness in supporting 
highly distressed individuals through an online support chat. Cyber Psychology 
and Behaviour, 9, 60-68.
Baram, D., Tourtelot, E., Muechler, E., & Huang, K. E. (1988) Psychosocial adjustment 
following unsuccessful in vitro fertilization. Journal of Psychosomatic Obstetrics 
and Gynaecology, 9, 181-190.
Barnes, S. B. (2004) Issues of attribution and identification in online social research. In 
M. D. Johns, S. S. Chen, & G. J. Hall (Eds.) Online Social Research: Methods, 
Issues, and Ethics (pp. 203-222).New York: Peter Lang Publishing.
Barrett, T. W. & Scott, T. B. (1989) Development of the grief experience questionnaire. 
Suicide and Life-Threatening Behaviour, 19, 201-215.
Barry, L. M. & Singer, G. H. S. (2001) Reducing maternal psychological distress after 
the NICU experience through journal writing. Journal of Early Intervention, 24, 
4, 287-297.
Bartlett, D (1998) Stress: Perspective and Processes. Buckingham: Open University 
Press.
Bates, S.C., & Cox, J. (2008) The impact of computer versus paper-pencil survey, and 
individual versus group administration, on self reports of sensitive behaviours. 
Computers in Human Behaviour, 24, 903-916.
Batten, S. V., Follette, V. M., Rasmussen Hall, M. L., & Palm, K. M. (2002) Physical 
and psychological effects of written disclosure among sexual abuse survivors. 
Behaviour Therapy, 33, 107-122.
Bayer, S. (2007) Factors affecting Infertility. In S. R. Bayer, M. M. Alper & A. S. Penzias 
(Eds.), The Boston IVF Handbook of Infertility (2nd ed.) (pp. 15-24). London: 
Informa UK Ltd.
Bayer, S. R. & Alper, M. M. (2007) The infertility workup. In S. R. Bayer, M. M. Alper & 
A. S. Penzias (Eds.), The Boston IVF Handbook of Infertility (2nd ed.) (pp. 25- 
44). London: Informa UK Ltd.
Beaurepaire, J., Jones, M., Thiering, P., Saunders, D., & Tennant, C. (1994) 
Psychosocial adjustment to infertility and its treatment: Male and female 
responses at different stages of IVF/ET treatment. Journal of Psychosomatic 
Research, 38, 3, 229-240.
Beck, A. T., Ward, C., & Mendelson, M. (1961) Beck Depression Inventory (BDI). 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 4, 561-571.
Beckwith McGuire, K. M., Greenberg, M. A., & Gevirtz, R. (2005) Autonomic effects of 
expressive writing in individuals with elevated blood pressure. Journal of Health 
Psychology, 10, 2, 197-209.
Beddows, E. (2008) The methodological issues associated with internet-based 
research. International Journal of Emerging Technologies and Society, 6, 2,
124-139.
Benyamini, Y., Gozlan, M., & Kokia, E. (2005) Variability in the difficulties experienced 
by women undergoing infertility treatments. Fertility and Sterility, 83, 2, 275-283.
Berg, B. J. & Wilson, J. F. (1991) Psychological functioning across stages of treatment 
for infertility. Journal of Behavioural Medicine, 14, 11-26.
Bergart, A. (2000) The experience of women in unsuccessful infertility treatment: What 
do patients need when medical intervention fails? Social Work in Health Care, 
30, 4, 45-69.
Berghuis, J. P. & Stanton, A. L. (2002) Adjustment to a dyadic stressor: A longitudinal 
study of coping and depressive symptoms in infertile couples over an 
insemination attempt. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 70, 2, 
433-438.
Bernard, M., Jackson, C., & Jones, C. (2006) Written emotional disclosure following 
first-episode psychosis: Effects on symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder. 
British Journal of Clinical Psychology. 45, 403-415.
Birnbaum, M. H. (2004) Methodological and ethical issues in conducting social 
psychology research via the Internet. In C. Sansone, C. C. Morf, & A. T. Panter 
(Eds.), Handbook of Methods in Social Psychology (pp. 359-382). Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Boivin, J. (2003) A review of psychosocial interventions in infertility. Social Science and 
Medicine, 57, 2325-2341.
Boivin, J., Andersson, L., Skoog-Svanberg, A., Hjelmstedt, A., Collins, A. & Bergh, T. 
(1998) Psychological reactions during in-vitro fertilization: similar response 
pattern in husbands and wives. Human Reproduction, 13, 11, 3262-3267.
Boivin, J., Scanlan, I. C., & Walker, S. M. (1999) Why are infertile patients not using 
psychosocial counselling? Human Reproduction, 14, 5, 1384-1392.
Boivin, J., & Schmidt, L. (2005) Infertility-related stress in men and women predicts 
treatment outcome 1 year later. Fertility and Sterility, 83, 6, 1745-1752.
Boivin, J. & Takefman, J. E. (1995) Stress level across stages of in vitro fertilization in 
subsequently pregnant and non-pregnant women. Fertility and Sterility, 64, 4, 
802-810.
Bonanno, G. A. & Kaltman, S. (1999) Toward an integrative perspective on 
Bereavement. Psychological Bulletin, 125, 6, 760-776.
Booth, R. J. & Petrie, K. J. (2002) Emotional expression and health changes: Can we 
identify biological pathways? In Lepore, S. J. & Smyth. J. M (Eds.) The Writing 
Cure: How expressive writing promotes health and emotional well-being (pp. 
157-175). Washington: American Psychological Association.
Booth, R. J., Petrie, K. J., & Pennebaker, J. W. (1997) Changes in circulating 
lymphocyte numbers following emotional disclosure: Evidence of buffering? 
Stress Medicine, 13, 23-29.
Booth-Kewley, S., Larson, G. E., & Miyoshi, D. K. (2007) Social desirability effects on 
computerized and paper-and-pencil questionnaires. Computers in Human 
Behaviour, 23, 463-477.
Bootzin, R. R. (1997) Examining the theory and clinical utility of writing about emotional 
experiences. Psychological Science, 8, 3, 167-169.
Brantley, P. J., Waggoner, C. D., Jones, G. N., & Rappaport, N. B. (1987) a Daily 
Stress Inventory: Development, Reliability, and Validity. Journal of Behavioural 
Medicine, 10, 1, 61-74
Bray, M. A., Theodore, L. A., Patwa, S. S., Margiano, S. G., Alric, J. M., & Peck, H. L. 
(2003) Written emotional expression as an intervention for asthma. Psychology 
in the Schools, 40, 2, 193-207.
Breuer, J. & Freud, S. (1966) Studies on hysteria. New York: Avon (Original work 
published 1985).
Brewin, C. R. & Lennard, H. (1999) Effects of mode of writing on emotional narratives. 
Journal of Traumatic Stress, 12, 2, 355-361.
British Psychological Society (2004) Code of Conduct, Ethical Principles and 
Guidelines. Available at http://www.bps.orq.uk/the-societv/ethics-rules-charter- 
code-of-conduct/ethics-rules-chartercode-of-conduct home.cfm.
British Psychological Society (2006) Code of Ethics and Conduct. Available at 
http://www.bps.orq.uk/the-societv/code-of-conduct/code-of-conduct home.cfm.
British Psychological Society (2007) Conducting Research on the Internet: Guidelines 
for ethical practice in psychological research online. Available at 
http://www.bps.orq.uk/the-societv/code-of-conduct/code-of-conduct home.cfm.
http://www.bps.orq.uk/the-societv/ethics-rules-charter-
http://www.bps.orq.uk/the-societv/code-of-conduct/code-of-conduct
http://www.bps.orq.uk/the-societv/code-of-conduct/code-of-conduct
Brewer, B. W., van Raalte, J. L., & Cornelius, A. E. (2007) Electronic 
communKNEEcations: A descriptive analysis of anterior cruciate ligament 
message board postings. Physical Therapy in Sport, 8, 3-6.
Broderick, J. E., Junghaenel, D. U. & Schwartz, J. E. (2005) Written emotional 
expression produces health benefits in fibromyalgia patients. Psychosomatic 
Medicine, 67, 2, 326-334.
Broderick, J. E., Stone, A. A., Smyth, J. M., & Kaell, A. T. (2004) The feasibility and 
effectiveness of an expressive writing intervention for rheumatoid arthritis via 
home-based videotaped instructions. Annuls of Behavioural Medicine, 27, 1, 
50-59.
Bruckman, A. (2002) Studying the amateur artist: A perspective on disguising data 
collected in human subjects research on the internet. Ethics and Information 
Technology ,4, 3, 217-231.
Brown, E. J. & Heimberg, R. G. (2001) Effects of writing about rape: Evaluating 
Pennebakers paradigm with a severe trauma. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 14, 
4, 781-790.
Brownlow, C. & ODell, I. (2002) Ethical issues for qualitative research in online 
communities. Disability and Society, 17, 6, 685-694.
Bruera, E., Willey, J., Cohen, M., Palmer, J. L. (2008) Expressive writing in patients 
receiving palliative care: A feasibility study. Journal of Palliative Medicine, 11,1, 
15-19.
Buchanan, T. (2002) Online assessment: Desirable or dangerous? Professional 
Psychology: Research and Practice, 33, 148-154.
Buchanan, T. (2003) Internet based questionnaire assessment: Appropriate use in 
clinical contexts. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy, 32, 100-109.
Buchanan, T., & Smith, J. L. (1999) Using the Internet for psychological research: 
Personality testing on the World-Wide Web. British Journal of Psychology, 90,
125-144.
Burshteyn, D., Lei, T., & Cea-Aravena, J. (2005) Biofeedback and expressive writing: 
Emotional disclosure and its effects on health. Biofeedback, 153-157.
Burton, C. M. & King, L. A. (2004) The health benefits of writing about intensely positive 
experiences. Journal of Research in Personality, 38, 150-163.
Burton, C. M. & King, L. A. (2008) Effects of (very) brief writing on health: The two- 
minute miracle. British Journal of Health Psychology, 13, 1, 9-14.
Byrne-Davis, L. M. T., Wetherell, M. A., Dieppe, P., Weinman, J., Byron, M., Donovan, 
J., et al. (2006) Emotional disclosure in rheumatoid arthritis: Participants' views 
on mechanisms. Psychology and Health, 21, 5, 667-682.
Cameron, L. D. & Nicholls, G. (1998) Expression of stressful experiences through 
writing: Effects of a self-regulation manipulation for pessimists and optimists. 
Health Psychology, 17, 1, 84-92.
Campagne, D. M. (2006) Should fertilization start with reducing stress? Human 
Reproduction, 21, 7, 1651-1658.
Campbell, R.S. & Pennebaker, J.W. (2003) The secret life of pronouns: Flexibility in 
writing style and physical health. Psychological Science, 14, 60-65.
Campbell, S., Dunkel-Schetter, C., & Peplau. L. A. (1991) Perceived control and 
adjustment to infertility among women undergoing in vitro fertilization. In A. L. 
Stanton and C. A. Dunkel-Schetter (Eds.), Infertility: Perspectives from stress 
and coping research (pp. 133-156). New York: Plenum Press.
Caplan, S. E., & Turner, J. S. (2007) Online emotional support: Bringing theory to 
research on computer-mediated supportive and comforting communication. 
Computers in Human Behaviour, 23, 985-998
Carlson, N. R. (2007) Physiology of Behaviour (9th ed.) Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Centre for Reproductive Medicine and Fertility (2002) Information for Patients, Jessop 
Wing, Sheffield Teaching Hospitals, NHS Trust.
Cepeda, M. S., Chapman, C. R., Miranda, N., Sanchez, R., Rodriguez, C. H., 
Restrepo, A. E., et al. (2008) Emotional disclosure through patient narrative 
may improve pain and well-being: Results of a randomized controlled trial in 
patients with cancer. Journal of Pain and Symptom Management, 35, 6, 623- 
Chan, K. M. & Horneffer, K. (2006) Emotional expression and psychological symptoms: 
A comparison of writing and drawing. The Arts in Psychotherapy, 33, 26-36.
Christensen, A. J., Edwards, D. L., Wiebe, J. S., Benotsch, E. G., McKelvey, L., 
Andrews, M., et al. (1996) Effect of verbal self-disclosure on natural killer cell 
activity: Moderating influence of cynical hostility. Psychosomatic Medicine, 58, 
150-155.
Christensen, C. A. (2004) Relationship between orthographic-motor integration and 
computer use for the production of creative and well-structured text. British 
Journal of Educational Psychology, 74, 551-564.
Christensen, H., Griffiths, K.M., & Jorm, A.F. (2004) Delivering interventions for 
depression by using the internet: Randomized controlled trial. British Medical 
Journal, 328, 265-269.
Chung, C. K. & Pennebaker, J. W. (2008) Variations in the spacing of expressive 
writing sessions. British Journal of Health Psychology, 13, 1, 15-21.
Clara I. P., Cox, B. J., & Enns, M. W. (2001) Confirmatory factor analysis of the 
Depression Anxiety Stress Scales in depressed and anxious patients. Journal 
of Psychopathology and Behaviour, 23, 61-67.
Clark-Carter, D. (2004) Quantitative Psychological Research: A Students Handbook. 
Hove: Psychology Press.
Clarke, R., Klock, S. C., Geoghegan, J., & Travassos, E. (1999) The relationship 
between psychological stress and semen quality among in vitro fertilization 
patients. Human Reproduction, 14, 753-758.
Cohen, J. (1977) Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioural Sciences. New York: 
Academic Press.
Cohen, G. E. & Kerr, B. A. (1998) Computer-mediated counselling: An empirical study 
of a new mental health treatment. Computers in Human Services, 15, 13-26.
Cohen, J. L., Sander, L. M., Slavin, O. M., & Lumley, M. A. (2008) Different methods of 
single-session disclosure: What works for whom? British Journal of Health 
Psychology, 13, 1, 23-26.
Cohen, S. & Williamson, G. M. (1991) Stress and infectious disease in humans. 
Psychological Bulletin, 109, 5-24.
Collins, A., Freeman, E. W., Boxer, A. S., & Tureck, R. (1992) Perceptions of infertility 
and treatment stress in females as compared to maies entering in vitro 
fertilization treatment. Fertility and Sterility, 57, 2, 350-356.
Connolly, K. J., Edelmann, R. J., & Cooke, I. D. (1987) Distress and marital problems 
associated with infertility. Journal of Reproductive and Infant Psychology, 5, 49- 
Connolly, K. J., Edelmann, R. J., Cooke, I. D., & Robson, J. (1992) The impact of 
infertility on psychological functioning. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 36, 
5, 459-468.
Cook, R., Parsons, J., Mason, B., & Golombok, S. (1989) Emotional, marital, and
sexual functioning in patients embarking upon IVF and AID treatment for
infertility. Journal of Reproductive and Infant Psychology, 7, 87-93.
Corcoran, K. & Fischer, J. (1994) Measures for clinical practice: A Sourcebook (3rd ed.) 
Vol. 2, Adults. New York: The Free Press.
Corter, A. L. & Petrie, K. J. (2008) Expressive writing in context: The effects of a
confessional setting and delivery of instructions on participant experience and 
language in writing. British Journal of Health Psychology, 13, 1, 17-30.
Cotton, J. W. (1998) Analyzing Within-subjects Experiments. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates.
Coulson, N.S. (2008) Health-related virtual communities: An overview. Health 
Psychology Update, 17,1, 37-41.
Coulson, N. S., Buchanan, H. & Aubeeluck, A. (2007) Social Support in Cyberspace: A 
content analysis of communication within a Huntington's disease online support 
group. Patient Education and Counselling, 68, 2, 173-178.
Cousineau, T. M. & Domar, A. D. (2007) Psychological impact of infertility. Best 
Practice and Research: Clinical Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 21, 2, 293-308.
Cousineau, T. M., Green, T. C., Corsini, E., Seibring, A., Showstack, M. T., Applegarth, 
L. et al. (2008) Online psycho-educational support for women: A randomized 
controlled trial. Human Reproduction, 23, 3, 554-566.
Covington, S. (1988) Psychosocial evaluation of the infertile couple: Implications for 
social work practice. In D. Valentine (Ed.), Infertility and adoption: A guide for 
social work practice (pp. 21-36). New York: Haworth Press.
Cuijpers, P., van Straten, A., & Andersson, G. (2008) Internet-administered cognitive 
behaviour therapy for health problems: A systematic review. Journal of 
Behavioural Medicine. 31, 169-177.
Csemiczky, G., Landgren, B. M., & Collins, A. (2000) The influence of stress and state 
anxiety on the outcome of IVF treatment: Psychological and endocrinological of 
Swedish women entering treatment. Acta Obstetrics and Gynaecology 
Scandinavia, 79, 2, 113-118.
Daniluk, J. C. (1997) Gender and infertility. In Infertility: Psychological issues and 
counselling strategies (pp. 103-125). New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Daniluk, J. C. & Tench, E. (2007) Long-term adjustment of infertile couples following 
unsuccessful medical intervention. Journal of Counselling and Development,
85, 89-100.
Danoff-Burg, S., Agee, J. D., Romanoff, N. R., Kremer, J. M., & Strosberg, J. M. (2006) 
Benefit finding and expressive writing in adults with lupus and rheumatoid 
arthritis. Psychology and Health, 21, 5, 651-665.
Davis, R. N. (1999) Web-based administration of a personality questionnaire: 
Comparison with traditional methods. Behaviour Research Methods, 
Instruments and Computers, 31, 572-577.
Davison, K. P., & Pennebaker, J. W., & Dickerson, S. S. (2000) Who talks? The social 
psychology of illness support groups. American Psychologist, 55, 205-217.
Demyttenaere, K., Bonte, L., Gheldof, M., Vervaeke, M., Meuleman, C., 
Vanderschuerem, D., et al. (1998) Coping style and depression level influence 
outcome in in vitro fertilization. Fertility and Sterility, 69, 6, 1026-1033.
Demyttenaere, K., Nijs, P., Evers-Kiebooms, G., & Koninckx, P. R. (1992) Coping and 
the ineffectiveness of coping influence the outcome of in vitro fertilization 
through stress responses. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 17, 6, 655-665.
De Klerk, C., Hunfeld, J. A. M., Duivenvoorden, H. J., den Outer, M. A., Fauser, B. C. J. 
M., Passchier, J. et al. (2005) Effectiveness of a psychosocial counselling 
intervention for first-time IVF couples: A randomized controlled trial. Human 
Reproduction, 20, 5, 1333-1338.
de Moor, C., Sterner, J., Hall, M., Warneke, C., Gilani, Z., & Amato, R. (2002) A pilot 
study of the effects of expressive writing on psychological and behavioural 
adjustment in patients enrolled in a phase II trial of vaccine therapy for 
metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Health Psychology, 21, 6, 615-619.
Denscombe, M. (2006) Web-based questionnaires and the mode effect; An evaluation 
based on completion rates and data contents of near-identical questionnaires 
delivered in different modes. Social Science Computer Review, 24, 2, 246-254.
Derogatis, L. R. (1992) SCL-90-R: Administration, scoring and procedures manual-ll. 
Baltimore, MD: Clinical Psychometric Research.
Derogatis, L. R., Rickels, K. & Rock, A. F. (1976) The SCL-90 and the MMPI: A step in 
the validation of the new self-report scale. British Journal of Psychiatry, 128, 
280-289.
Deters, P. B. & Range, L. M. (2003) Does writing reduce posttraumatic stress disorder 
symptoms? Violence and Victims, 1, 5, 569-580.
Dollinger, S. J., & Leong, F. T. L. (1993) Volunteer bias and the 5-factor model. Journal 
of Psychology, 127, 29-36.
Domar, A. D. (2004) Impact of psychological factors on dropout rates in insured 
infertility patients. Fertility and Sterility, 81, 2, 271-273.
Domar, A. D., Clapp, D., Slawsby, E., Kessel, B., Orav, J., & Freizinger, M. (2000) The 
impact of group psychological interventions on distress in infertile women. 
Health Psychology, 19, 6, 568-575.
Domar, A. D., Zuttermeister, P. C., & Freidman, R. (1993) The psychological impact of 
infertility: a comparison with patients with other medical conditions. Journal of 
Psychosomatic Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 14, 45-52.
Donnelly, D. A. & Murray, E. J. (1991) Cognitive and emotional changes in written 
essay and therapy interviews. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 10, 
334-350.
Duncan, E., Gidron, Y., Rabin, E., Gouchberg, L., Moser, A. M., & Kapelushnik, J.
(2007) The effects of guided written disclosure on psychological symptoms
among parents of children with cancer. Journal of Family Nursing, 13, 3, 370- 
Dunkel-Schetter, C. & Lobel, M. (1991) Psychological Reactions to Infertility, in (Eds.)
A.L. Stanton & C. Dunkel-Schetter, Infertility: Perspectives from Stress and 
Coping Research (pp. 29-57). New York: Plenum Press.
Dwight, S. A, & Feigelson, M. E. (2000) A quantitative review of the effect of
computerized testing on the measurement of social desirability. Educational and 
Psychological Measurement, 60, 340-360.
Earnhardt, J. L., Martz, D. M., Ballard, M. E., & Curtin, L. (2002) A writing intervention 
for negative body image: Pennebaker fails to surpass the placebo. Journal of 
College Student Psychotherapy, 17, 19-35.
Edelmann, R. J., Connolly, K. J. & Bartlett, H. (1994) Coping strategies and
psychological adjustment of couples presenting for IVF. Journal of 
Psychosomatic Research, 38, 4, 355-364.
Endler, N. S. & Parker, J. D. A. (1994) Assessment of multidimensional coping: Task, 
emotion, and avoidance strategies. Psychological Assessment, 6, 50-60.
Epstein, Y.M., Rosenberg, H.S., Venet Grant, T. & Hemenway, N. (2002) Use of the
Internet as the only outlet for talking about infertility. Fertility and Sterility, 78,
507-514.
Epstein, E. M., Sloan, D. M., & Marx, B. P. (2005) Getting to the heart of the matter: 
Written disclosure, gender, and heart rate. Psychosomatic Medicine, 67, 413- 
Erdfelder, E., Faul, F., & Buchner, A. (1996) Gpower: A general power analysis 
program. Behaviour Research Methods, Instruments & Computers, 28, 1-11.
Esterling, B. A., Antoni, M. H., Fletcher, A. A., Margulies, S., & Schneiderman, N. 
(1994) Emotional disclosure through writing or speaking modulates latent 
Epstein-Barr antibody titers. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 62, 
1, 130-140.
Esterling, B. A., LAbate, L., Murray, E. J., & Pennebaker, J. W. (1999) Empirical 
foundations for writing in prevention and psychotherapy: Mental and physical 
health outcomes. Clinical Psychology Review, 19, 1, 79-96.
Eysenbach, G., Powell, J., Englesakis, M., Rizo, C., & Stern, A. (2004) Health related 
virtual communities and electronic support group: Systematic review of the 
effects of online peer to peer interactions. British Medical Journal, 328, 1166- 
1171.
Eysenbach, G. & Till J. E. (2001) Ethical issues in qualitative research on Internet 
communities. British Medical Journal, 323, 1103-1105.
Facchinetti, F., Matteo, M. L., Artini, G. P., Volpe, A., & Genazzani, A. R. (1997) An 
increased vulnerability to stress is associated with a poor outcome of in vitro 
fertilization-embryo transfer treatment. Fertility and Sterility, 67, 2, 309-314.
Facchinetti, F., Tarabusi, M., & Volpe, A. (2004) Cognitive-behavioural treatment 
decreases cardiovascular and neuroendocrine reaction to stress in women 
waiting for assisted reproduction. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 29, 162-173.
Farquhar C, Lilford RJ, Marjoribanks J, Vandekerckhove P. (2007) Laparoscopic 
'drilling' by diathermy or laser for ovulation induction in anovulatory polycystic 
ovary syndrome. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, Issue 3. Art. No.: 
CD001122. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD001122.pub3.
Faul, F., Erdfelder, E., Lang, A.-G., & Buchner, A. (2007) G*Power 3: A flexible 
statistical power analysis for the social, behavioral, and biomedical sciences. 
Behavior Research Methods, 39, 175-191.
Feigelson, M. E. & Dwight, S. A. (2000) Can asking questions by computer improve the 
candidness of responding? A meta-analytical Perspective. Consulting 
psychology Journal: Practice and Research, 52, 4, 248-255.
Ferin, M. (1999) Stress and the reproductive cycle. The Journal of Clinical 
Endocrinology and Metabolism, 84, 6, 1768-1774.
Fernandez, I. & Paez, D. (2008) The benefits of expressive writing after the Madrid 
terrorist attack: Implications for emotional activation and positive affect. British 
Journal of Health Psychology, 13, 1, 31-34.
Field, A. (2009) Discovering Statistics using SPSS (3rd ed.). London: Sage.
Finn, J. (1999) An exploration of helping processes in an online self-help group 
focusing on issues of disability. Health and Social Work, 24, 3, 220-231.
Finn, J., & Lavitt, M. (1994) Computer-based self-help groups for sexual abuse 
survivors. Social Work with Groups, 17, 21-45.
Flicker, S., Haans, D. and Skinner, H.A. (2004) Ethical dilemmas in research on 
internet communities. Qualitative Health Research, 14, 1, 124-134.
Foa, E. B. & Kozak, M. J. (1986) Emotional processing of fear: Exposure to corrective 
information. Psychological Bulletin, 99, 1, 20-35.
Folkman, S. & Lazarus, R. S. (1988) Manual for the Ways of Coping Questionnaire. 
California: Consulting Psychological Press.
Fouladi, R. T., McCarthy, C. J., & Moller, N. P. (2002) Paper-and-pencil or online? 
Evaluating mode effects on measures of emotional functioning and attachment. 
Assessment, 9, 204-215.
Francis, M. E. & Pennebaker, J. W. (1992) Putting stress into words: The impact of 
writing on psychological, absentee and self-reported emotional well-being 
measures. American Journal of Health Promotion, 6, 280-287.
Frattaroli, J. (2006) Experimental disclosure and its moderators: A meta-analysis. 
Psychological Bulletin, 132, 6, 823-865.
Frayne, A. & Wade, T. D. (2006) A comparison of written emotional expression and 
planning with respect to bulimic symptoms and associated psychopathology. 
European Eating Disorders Review, 14, 329-340.
Fredrickson, B. & Joiner, T. (2002) Positive emotions trigger upward spirals toward 
emotional well-being. Psychological Science, 13, 172-175.
Freeman, E. W., Boxer, A. S., Rickels, K., Tureck, R., & Mastroianni, L. (1985) 
Psychological evaluation and support in a program of in vitro fertilization and 
embryo transfer. Fertility and Sterility, 43, 1, 48-53.
Freeman, E. W., Rickels, K., Tausig, J., Boxer, A., Mastroianni, L., & Tureck, R. W. 
(1987) Emotional and psychosocial factors in follow-up of women after IVF-ET 
treatment. Acta Obstetricia et Gynecologica Scandinavica, 66, 517-521.
Frisina, P. G., Borod, J. C., & Lepore, S. J. (2004) A meta-analysis of the effects of 
written emotional disclosure on the health outcomes of clinical populations. The 
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 192, 9, 629-634.
Gallant, M. D., & Lafreniere, K. D. (2003) Effects of an emotional disclosure writing task 
on the physical and psychological functioning of children of alcoholics. 
Alcoholism Treatment Quarterly, 21, 55-66.
Gallinelli, A., Roncaglia, R., Matteo, M. L., Ciacco, I., Volpe, A., & Facchinetti, F. (2001) 
Immunological changes and stress are associated with different implantation 
rates in patients undergoing in vitro fertilization-embryo transfer. Fertility and 
Sterility, 76, 85-91.
George, C. E., Lankford, J. S., & Wilson, S. E. (1992 measures of negative affect. 
Computers in Human Behaviour, 8, 203-209.
Gidron, Y., Duncan, E., Lazar, A., Biderman, A., Tandeter, H., & Shvartzman, P. (2002) 
Effects of guided written disclosure of stressful experiences on clinic visits and 
symptoms in frequent clinic attenders. Family Practice, 19, 161-166.
Gidron, Y., Peri, T., Connolly, J. F. & Shalev, A. Y. (1996) Written emotional disclosure 
in posttraumatic stress disorder: Is it beneficial for the patient. Journal of 
Nervous and Mental Disease, 184, 505-507.
Gillis, M. E., Lumley, M. A., Mosley-Williams, A., Leisen, J.C., Roehers, T. (2006) The 
health effects of at-home written emotional disclosure in fibromyalgia: A 
randomized trial. Annals of Behavioural Medicine, 32, 2, 135-146.
Goldberg, D.P., & Hiller, V.E. (1979) A scaled version of the General Health 
Questionnaire. Psychological Medicine, 9, 139-146.
Gortner, E.M., Rude, S.S., & Pennebaker, J.W. (2006) Benefits of expressive writing in 
lowering rumination and depressive symptoms. Behaviour Therapy, 37, 292- 
Gosling, S. D., Vazire, S., Srivastava, S., & John, O. P. (2004) Should we trust Web- 
based studies? A comparative analysis of six preconceptions about Internet 
questionnaires. American Psychologist, 59, 93-104.
Graham, J. E., Lobel, M., Glass, P., & Lokshina, I. (2008) Effects of written anger 
expression in chronic pain patients: Making meaning from pain. Journal of 
Behavioural Medicine, 31, 201-212.
Graybeal, A., Sexton, J. D., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2002) The role of story-making in 
disclosure writing: The psychometrics of narrative. Psychology and Health, 17, 
5, 571-581.
Greenberg, M. A. & Stone, A. A. (1992) Emotional disclosure about traumas and its
relation to health: Effects of previous disclosure and trauma severity. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 63, 75-84.
Greenberg, M. A., Wortman, C. B., & Stone, A. A. (1996) Emotional expression and 
physical health: revising traumatic memories or fostering seif-reguiation? 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 71, 588-602.
Greil, A. L. (1997) Infertility and psychological distress: A critical review of the literature. 
Social Science and Medicine, 45, 11, 1679-1704.
Griffiths, K. M. & Christensen, H. (2006) Review of randomised controlled trials on 
internet interventions for mental disorders and related conditions. Clinical 
Psychologist, 10, 1, 16-29.
Griffiths, F., Lindenmeyer, A., Powell, J., Lowe, P., & Thorogood, M., (2006) Why are 
health care interventions delivered over the internet? A systematic review of the 
published literature. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 8, 2, 1438-8871. 
Retrieved January 19, 2009, from http://www.imir.Org/2006/2/e10html.
Guastella, A., & Dadds, M. (2006) Cognitive-behavioural models of emotional writing: A 
validation study. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 30, 397-414.
Haagen, E. C., Tuil, W., Hendriks, J., de Bruijn, R. P. J., Braat, D. D. M. & Kremer, J. A. 
M. (2003) Current internet use and preferences of IVF and ICSI patients. 
Human Reproduction, 18, 10, 2073-2078.
Habbema, J. D. F., Collins, J., Leridon, H., Evers, J. L. H., Lunenfeld, B., & te Velde, E. 
R. (2004) Towards less confusing terminology in reproductive medicine; a 
proposal. Human Reproduction, 19, 7, 1497-1501.
http://www.imir.Org/2006/2/e10html
Haby, M. M., Donnelly, M., Corry, J. & Vos, T (2005) Cognitive behavioural therapy for 
depression, panic disorder and generalized anxiety disorder: a meta-regression 
of factors that may predict outcome. Australian and New Zealand Journal of 
Psychiatry, 40, 9-19.
Hamilton, R., & Bowers, B.J. (2006) Internet recruitment and email interviews in 
qualitative studies. Qualitative Health Research, 16, 6, 821-835.
Hamilton-Fairly, D. & Taylor, A. (2004) Anovulation. In P. Braude & A. Taylor (Eds.), 
ABC of Infertility {pp. 8-11). London: BMJ Publishing Group.
Hamilton-West, K. & Quine, L. (2007) Effects of written emotional disclosure on health 
outcomes in patients with Ankylosing Spondylitis. Psychology and Health 22, 
637-653.
Hammarberg, K., Astbury, J. & Baker, H. W. G. (2001) Womens experience of IVF: a 
follow-up study. Human Reproduction, 16, 2, 374-383.
Harris, A. H. S. (2006) Does expressive writing reduce health care utilization? A meta
analysis of randomized trials. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 74, 
2, 243-252.
Harris, A. H. S., Thoresen, C. E., Humphreys, K., & Faul, J. (2005) Does writing affect 
asthma? A randomized trial. Psychosomatic Medicine, 67, 130-136.
Harrison, K. L., Callan, V. J., & Hennessey, J. F. (1987) Stress and semen quality in an 
in vitro fertilization programme. Fertility and Sterility, 48, 633-636.
Harrist, R. S., Carlozzi, B. L., McGovern, A. R., & Harrist, A. W. (2007) Psychological 
and health benefits of emotional expression about life goals: Writing, talking, 
and moderating influences. Journal of Research in Personality, 41, 923-930.
Hedges, L. V. & Olkin, I. (1985) Statistical methods for meta-analysis. San Diego, CA: 
Academic Press.
Hemenover, S. H. (2003) The good, the bad, and the healthy: Impacts of emotional 
disclosure of trauma on resilient self-concept and psychological distress. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29, 1236-1244.
Henry, J. D., & Crawford, J. R. (2005) The 21-item version of the Depression Anxiety 
Stress Scales (DASS-21): Normative data and psychometric evaluation in a 
large non-clinical sample. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 44, 227-239.
Herbert, T. B. & Cohen, S. (1993) Stress and immunity in humans; A meta-analytical 
review. Psychosomatic Medicine, 55, 4, 364-379.
Herrero, J., & Meneses, J. (2006) Short Web-based versions of the perceived stress 
(PSS) and Center for Epidemiological Studies-Depression (CESD) Scales: A 
comparison to pencil and paper responses among Internet users. Computers in 
Human Behaviour, 22, 830-846.
Himmel, W., Meyer, J., Kochen, M. M., & Michelmann, H. W. (2005) Information needs 
and visitors experience of an Internet expert forum on infertility. Journal of 
Medical Internet Research 7, e20. Retrieved June, 25, 2007, from 
http://www.jmir.Org/2005/2/e20.
Hirsh, A. (2004) Male subfertility. In P. Braude & A. Taylor (Eds.), ABC of Infertility (pp. 
16-19). London: BMJ Publishing Group.
Hiskey, S. & Troop, N.A. (2002) On-line longitudinal survey research: Viability and 
participation. Social Science Computer Review, 20, 250-259.
Holter, H., Anderheim, L., Bergh, C., & Moller, A. (2006) First IVF treatment -  short
term impact on psychological well-being and marital relationship. Human 
Reproduction, 21, 12, 3295-3302.
Holtgraves, T. M. (2004) Social desirability and self-reports: Testing models of socially 
desirable responding. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin. 30, 161-172.
Horneffer, K.J., & Jamison, P. (2002) The emotional effects of writing about stressful 
experiences: An exploration of moderators. Occupational Therapy in Health 
Care, 16, 2, 77-89.
Horowitz, M. J. (1986) Stress-response syndromes: A review of post-traumatic and 
adjustment disorders. Hospital and Community Psychiatry, 37, 241-249.
Horowitz, L. M., Rosenberg, S. E., Baer, B. A., Ureno, G., & Viiiasenor, V. S. (1988) 
The inventory of interpersonal problems: Psychometric properties and clinical 
applications. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 56, 885-892.
Horowitz, M., Wilner, M., & Alvarez, W. (1979) Impact of Event Scale: A measure of 
subjective stress. Psychosomatic Medicine, 41, 209-218.
Hosaka, T., Matsubayashi, H., Sugiyama, Y., Izumi, S., & Makino, T. (2002) Effect of 
psychiatric group intervention on natural-killer cell activity and pregnancy rate. 
General Hospital Psychiatry, 24, 353-356.
Hughes, C.F., Uhlmann, C., & Pennebaker, J.W. (1994) The bodys response to 
processing emotional trauma: Linking verbal text with autonomic activity. Journal 
of Personality, 62, 4 565-585.
Human Fertilization and Embryology Authority (2004) Code of Practice, 6th Edition, 
London, UK.
Human Fertilization and Embryology Authority (2006) Guide to Infertility, London, UK.
Hunt, M., Schloss, H., Moonat, S., Poulos, S., & Wieland, J. (2007) Emotional 
processing versus cognitive restructuring in response to a depressing life event. 
Cognitive Therapy and Research, 31, 833-851.
http://www.jmir.Org/2005/2/e20
Hynes, G. L., Callan, V. J., Terry, D. J., & Gallois, C. (1992) The psychological well
being of infertile women after a failed IVF attempt: The effects of coping. British 
Journal of Medical Psychology, 65, 3, 268-278.
Illingworth, N. (2001) The internet matters: Exploring the use of the internet as a 
research tool. Sociological Research Online, 6, 2. Retrieved January, 20, 2009, 
from http://www.scoresonline.org.Uk/6/2/illingworth.html.
Jaycox, L. H., Foa, E. B., & Morral, A. R. (1998) Influence of emotional engagement 
and habituation on exposure therapy for PTSD. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 66, 1, 185-192.
Jenkins, J., Daya, S., Kremer, J., Balasch, J., Barratt, C., & Cooke, I. et al. (2004) 
European Classification of Infertility Taskforce (ECIT) response to Habbema et 
al., Towards less confusing terminology in reproductive medicine: a proposal'. 
Human Reproduction, 19, 12, 2687-2688.
Jenson, T. K., Bonde, J. P., & Joffe, M. (2006) The influence of occupational exposure 
on male reproductive function. Occupational Medicine, 56, 544-553.
Johnson, M. H. & Everitt, B. J. (1995) Essential Reproduction (4th ed.) Oxford, UK: 
Blackwell Science.
Joinson, A. N. (1999) Anonymity, disinhibition and social desirability on the Internet. 
Behaviour Research Methods, Instruments and Computers, 31, 433-438.
Jordan, C. & Revenson, T. A. (1999) Gender differences in coping with infertility: A 
meta-analysis. Journal of Behavioural Medicine, 22, 4, 341-358.
Kacewicz, E., Slatcher, R. B., and Pennebaker, J. W. (2007) Expressive writing: An 
alternative to traditional methods. In L. LAbate (Ed.), Handbook of Interventions 
to Promote Physical and Mental Health: Theory, Research and Practice (pp. 
271-284). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Keller, H. E. & Lee, S. (2003) Ethical issues surrounding human participants research 
using the internet. Ethics and Behaviour, 13, 3, 211-219.
Kelley, J. E., Lumley, M. A., & Leisen, J. C. C. (1997) Health effects of emotional 
disclosure in rheumatoid arthritis patients. Health Psychology, 16, 4, 331-340.
Kenardy, J., McCaffery, K., & Rosa, V. (2006) Internet-delivered indicated prevention 
for anxiety disorders: Six-month follow-up. Clinical Psychologist, 10, 1, 39-42.
Kennedy-Moore, E., & Watson, J.C. (2001) How and when does emotional expression 
help? Review of General Psychology, 5, 3 187-212.
Kerns, R.D., Turk, D.C., & Rudy, T.E. (1985) The West Haven-Yale Multidimensional 
Pain Inventory (WHYMPI). Pain, 23, 345-356.
http://www.scoresonline.org.Uk/6/2/illingworth.html
Kerr, J., Brown, C., & Balen, A. H. (1999) The experiences of couples who have had 
infertility treatment in the United Kingdom: results of a survey performed in 
1997. Human Reproduction, 14, 5, 934-938.
Kerr, S., Johnson, V. K., Gans, S. E., & Krumrine, J. (2004) Predicting adjustment 
during the transition to college: Alexithymia, perceived stress, and psychological 
symptoms. Journal of College Student Development, 45, 6, 593-611.
Khalaf, Y. (2004) Tubal fertility. In P. Braude & A. Taylor (Eds.), ABC of Infertility 
(pp.12-15). London: BMJ Publishing Group.
Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K., McGuire, L., Robles, T. F., & Glaser, R. (2002) 
Psychoneuroimmunology and psychosomatic medicine: Back to the future. 
Psychosomatic Medicine, 64, 15-28.
Kim, Y. (2008) Effects of expressive writing among bilinguals: Exploring psychological 
well-being and social behaviour. British Journal of Psychology, 13, 1, 43-47.
King, L. A. (2001) The health benefits of writing about life goals. Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 27, 7, 798-807.
King, S.A. (1996) Researching internet communities: Proposed ethical guidelines for 
the reporting of results. The Information Society, 12, 119-127.
King, L. A., & Miner, K. N. (2000) Writing about the perceived benefits of traumatic 
events: Implications for physical health. Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin, 26, 220-230.
Kirsch, I. (1985) Response expectancy as a determinant of experience and behaviour. 
American Psychologist, 40, 11, 1189-1202.
Kirsch, I. (1997) Response expectancy theory and application: A decennial review. 
Applied and Preventative Psychology, 6, 69-79.
Kirsch, I., Mearns, J., & Catanzaro, S. J. (1990) Mood-regulation expectancies as 
determinants of dysphoria in college students. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 37, 3, 306-312.
Klapow, J. C., Schmidt, S. M,, Taylor, L. A., Roller, P., Li, Q..Calhoun, J. W., et al.
(2001) Symptom management in older primary care patients: Feasibility of an 
experimental written self-disclosure protocol. Annals of Internal Medicine, 134, 
905-911.
Klein, B., & Richards, J.C. (2001) A brief internet-based treatment for panic disorder. 
Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 29, 113-117.
Klein, K. & Boals, A. (2001a) Expressive writing can increase working memory 
capacity. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 130, 3, 520-533.
Klein, K. & Boals, A (2001b) The relationship of live event stress and working memory 
capacity. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 15, 565-579.
Klonoff-Cohen, H., Chu, E., Natarajan, L., & Sieber, W. (2001) A prospective study of 
stress among women undergoing in vitro fertilization or gamete intra-fallopian 
transfer. Fertility and Sterility, 76, 4, 675-687.
Kloss, J. D. & Lisman, S. A. (2002) An exposure-based examination of the effects of 
written emotional disclosure. British Journal of Health Psychology, 7, 31-46.
Koopman, C., Ismailji, T., Holmes, D., Classen, C. C., Palesh, O., & Wales, T. (2005) 
The effects of expressive writing on pain, depression and posttraumatic stress 
disorder symptoms in survivors of intimate partner violence. Journal of Health 
Psychology, 10, 2, 211-221.
Kovac, S. H. & Range, L. M. (2000) Writing projects: Lessening undergraduates unique 
suicidal bereavement. Suicide and Life-Threatening Behaviour, 30, 1, 50-60.
Kraft, C.A., Lumley, M.A., DSouza, P.J., & Dooley, J.A. (2008) Emotional approach 
coping and self-efficacy moderate the effects of written emotional disclosure 
and relaxation training for people with migraine headaches. British Journal of 
Health Psychology, 13, 67-71.
Kraut, R. E., Patterson, M., Lundmark, V., Kiesler, S., Mukhopadhyay, T., & Scherlis, 
W. (1998) Internet paradox: A social technology that reduces social involvement 
and psychological well-being? American Psychologist, 53, 9, 1017-1032.
Kruskal, W. H. (1960) Some remarks on wild observations. Technometrics, 2, 1-3. 
Available: www.tufts.edu/~gdallal/out.htm.
Landauer, T. K., Foltz, P. W., & Laham, D. (1998) Introduction to Latent Semantic 
Analysis. Discourse Processes, 25, 259-284.
Lange, A., Schoutrop, M., Schrieken, B., & van de Ven, J-P. (2002) Interapy: A model 
for therapeutic writing through the internet. In S. J. Lepore & J. M. Smyth (Eds.), 
The writing cure: How expressive writing promotes health and emotional well 
being (pp. 215-238). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Lange, A., van de Ven, J-P Q. R., Schrieken, B. A. L., Bredeweg, B., &. Emmelkamp, 
P. M. G. (2000) Internet-mediated, protocol-driven treatment of psychological 
dysfunction. Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, 6, 15-21.
Langens, T. A. & Schuler, J. (2005) Written emotional expression and emotional well
being: The moderating role of fear of rejection. Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 31, 6, 818-830.
Langens, T. A. & Schuler, J. (2007) Effects of written emotional expression: The role of 
positive expectancies. Health Psychology, 26, 2, 174-182.
Lasker, J. N. & Borg, S. (1987) In search of parenthood. Boston: Beacon Press.
Lauder, S., Chester, A., & Berk, M. (2007) Net-effect? Online psychological 
interventions. Intervention Insights. Acta Neuropsychiatrica, 19, 386-388.
http://www.tufts.edu/~gdallal/out.htm
Laufer, N., Simon, A., Hurwitz, A., & Glatstein, I. Z. (1997) In Vitro Fertilization, in (Ed.) 
M. M. Seibel, Infertility: A Comprehensive Text (2nd ed.) (pp. 703-749). 
Stamford, C.A: Appleton & Lange.
Lazarus, R. S. (1999) Stress and emotion: A new synthesis. London: Free Association 
Books.
Lazarus, R. S., & Folkman, S. (1984) Stress, appraisal, and coping. New York: 
Springer.
Leece, P., Bhandari, M., Sprague, S., Swiontkowski, M., Schemitsch, E., Tornetta, P. et 
al. (2004) Internet Versus Mailed Questionnaires: A Randomized Comparison 
(2). Journal of Medical Internet Research 6, 3, e30. Retrieved January, 10, 
2009 from http://www.jmir.Org/2004/3/e30/HTML.
Lehman, D., Ellard, J., & Wortman, C. (1986) Social support for the bereaved: 
Recipients and providers perspectives in what is helpful. Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 54, 438-446.
Leiblum, S. R., Kemmann, E., & Lane, M. K. (1987) The psychological concomitants of 
in vitro fertilization. Journal of Psychosomatic Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 6, 1, 
165-178.
Lepore, S. J. (1997) Expressive writing moderates the relation between intrusive 
thoughts and depressive symptoms. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 73, 1030-1037.
Lepore, S. J., & Greenberg, M. A. (2002) Mending broken hearts: Effects of expressive 
writing on mood, cognitive processing, social adjustment and health following a 
relationship breakup. Psychology and Health, 17, 547-560.
Lepore, S. J., Greenberg, M. A., Bruno, M., & Smyth, J. M. (2002) Expressive writing 
and health: Self-regulation of emotion-related experience, physiology, and 
behaviour. In S. J. Lepore & J. M. Smyth (Eds.), The writing cure: How 
expressive writing promotes health and emotional well being (pp. 99-117). 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Levin, J. B., Sher, T. G., & Theodos, V. (1997) The effect of intracouple coping 
concordance on psychological and marital distress in infertility patients. Journal 
of Clinical Psychology in Medical Settings, 4, 4, 361-372.
Levine, A., Zagoory-Sharon, O., Feldman, R., Lewis, J. G. & Weller, A. (2007) 
Measuring cortisol in human psychobiological studies. Physiology and 
Behaviour, 90, 1, 43-53.
Locke, S. & Gilbert, B. (1995) Method of psychological assessment, self-disclosure, 
and experimental differences: A study of computer, questionnaire, and interview 
assessment formats. Journal of Social Behaviour & Personality, 10, 1, 255-263.
http://www.jmir.Org/2004/3/e30/HTML
Lovibond, S.H. & Lovibond, P.F. (1995) Manual for the Depression Anxiety Stress 
Scales (2nd ed.). Sydney: Psychology Foundation.
Low, C. A., Stanton, A. L., & Danoff-Burg, S. (2006) Expressive disclosure and benefit 
finding among breast cancer patients: Mechanisms for positive health effects. 
Health Psychology, 25, 181-189.
Luce, K., Winzelberg, A., Zabinski, M., & Osborne, M. (2003) Internet-delivered 
psychological interventions for body image dissatisfaction and disordered 
eating. Psychotherapy, Theory, Research, Practice and Training, 40, 148-154.
Lumley, M. A. & Provenzano, K. M. (2003) Stress management through written 
emotional disclosure improves academic performance among college students 
with physical symptoms. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95, 3, 641-649.
Lutgendorf, S. K. & Antoni, M. H. (1999) Emotional and cognitive processing in a 
trauma disclosure paradigm. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 23, 4, 423-440.
Lutgendorf S. K., Antoni, M. H., Kumar, M., Schneiderman, N. (1994) Changes in 
cognitive coping strategies predict EBV-antibody titre change following a 
stressor disclosure induction., Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 38, 1, 63- 
Lutgendorf, S. K. & Costanzo, E. S. (2003) Psychoneuroimmunology and health 
psychology: An integrative model. Brain, Behaviour and Immunity, 17, 4, 225- 
Macan, T., Shahani, C., Dipboye, R., & Phillips, A. (1990) College students time 
management: Correlations with academic performance and stress. Journal of 
Educational Psychology, 82, 760-768.
Mackenzie, C. S., Wiprzycka, U. J., Hasher, L., & Goldstein, D. (2007) Does expressive 
writing reduce stress and improve health for family caregivers of older adults? 
Gerontologist, 47, 3, 296-306.
Mahlstedt, P. P. (1985) The psychological component of infertility. Fertility and Sterility, 
43, 3, 335-346.
Malik, S. & Coulson, N. S. (2008a) Computer-mediated infertility support groups: An 
exploratory study of online experiences. Patient Education and Counselling, 73, 
105-113.
Malik, S. & Coulson, N.S. (2008b) The male experience of infertility: A thematic 
analysis of an online infertility support group bulletin board. Journal of 
Reproductive & Infant Psychology, 26, 1, 18-30.
Mann, T. (2001) Effects of future writing and optimism on health behaviours in HIV- 
infected women. Annals of Behavioural Medicine, 23, 26-33.
Mario, H. & Wagner, M. K. (1999) Expression of negative and positive events through 
writing: Implications for psychotherapy and health. Psychology and Health, 14, 
193-215.
Marriott, J. V., Stec, P., El-Toukhy, T., Khalaf, Y., Braude, P., & Coomarasmy, A.
(2008) Infertility information on the World Wide Web: A cross-sectional survey 
of quality of infertility information on the internet in the UK. Human 
Reproduction, 23, 7, 1520-1525.
Martin, C. L., & Nagao, D. H. (1989) Some effects of computerized interviewing on job 
applicant responses. Journal of Applied Psychology, 74, 72-80.
Matthews, R. & Matthews, A. M. (1986) Infertility and involuntary childlessness: The 
transition to nonparenthood. Journal of Marriage and Family, 48, 641-649.
McCullough, M. E., Root, L. M., & Cohen, A. D. (2006) Writing about the benefits of an 
interpersonal transgression facilitates forgiveness. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 74, 887-897.
McEwen, B. S. (1998) Stress, adaptation and disease: Allostosis and allostatic load. 
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 840, 33-44.
McLachlan, R. I. (1997) The use of assisted reproductive technology for the treatment 
of male infertility. In G. Kovacs (Ed.), The Subfertility Handbook: A Clinicians 
Guide (pp. 124-138). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McNaughton-Cassill, M. E., Bostwick J. M., Arthur, N. J., Robinson, R. D., Neal, G. S.
(2002) Efficacy of brief couples support groups developed to manage the stress 
of In Vitro Fertilization treatment. Mayo Clinic Proceedings, 77, 1060-1066.
McQueeny, D. A., Stanton, A. L., & Sigmon, S. (1997) Efficacy of emotion-focused and 
problem-focused group therapies for women with infertility. Journal of 
Behavioural Medicine, 20, 4, 313-331.
Mehl, M., Pennebaker, J.W., Crow, D.M., Dabbs, J., & Price, J. (2001) The 
Electronically Activated Recorder (EAR): A device for sampling naturalistic daily 
activities and conversations. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, and 
Computers, 33, 517-523.
Mehta, R., & Sivadas, E. (1995) Comparing response rates and response content in 
mail vs. electronic mail surveys. Journal of the Market Research Society, 37, 4, 
429-439.
Menning, B. E. (1980) The emotional needs of infertile couples. Fertility and Sterility, 
34, 313-319.
Merari, D., Chetrit, A., & Modan, B. (2002) Emotional reactions and attitudes prior to in 
vitro fertilization: An inter-spouse study. Psychology and Health, 17, 5, 629-640.
Merari, D., Feldberg, Elizur, A., Goldman, J., & Modan, B. (1992) Psychological and 
hormonal changes in the course of in vitro fertilization. Journal of Assisted 
Reproduction and Genetics, 9, 2, 161-169.
Miller, S. M., Mischel, W., Schroeder, C. M., Buzaglo, J. S., Hurley, K., Schreiber, P. et 
al. (1998) Intrusive and avoidant ideation among females pursuing infertility 
treatment. Psychology and Health, 13, 847-858.
Mindes, E. J., Ingram, K. M., Kliewer, W., & James, C. A. (2003) Longitudinal analyses 
of the relationship between unsupportive social interactions and psychological 
adjustment among women with fertility problems. Social Science and Medicine, 
56, 2165-2180.
Mo, P. K. H., Malik, S. H., & Coulson, N. S. (2009) Gender differences in computer- 
mediated communication: A systematic literature review of online health-related 
support groups. Patient Education and Counselling, 75, 16-24.
Mosher, C. E., & Danoff-Burg, S. (2006) Health effects of expressive letter writing. 
Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 25, 1122-1139.
Muris, P., Meesters, C. & Gobel, M. (2002) Cognitive coping vs. emotional disclosure in 
the treatment of anxious children: A pilot study. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy, 
31, 2, 59-67.
Murray, E. J., Lamnin, A., & Carver, C. (1989) Emotional expression in written essays 
and psychotherapy. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 8, 414-429.
Murray, E. J., & Segal, D. L. (1994) Emotional processing in vocal and written 
expression of feelings about traumatic experiences. Journal of Traumatic 
Stress, 7, 391-405.
Musch, J., & Reips, U.-D (2000) A brief history of web experimenting. In M. H. 
Birnbaum (Ed.), Psychological experiments on the Internet (pp. 61-85). San 
Diego, CA: Academic Press.
National Institute for Clinical Excellence (2004) Fertility: assessment and treatment for 
people with fertility problems. Clinical Guideline 11. London, UK.
Natchtigall, R. D., Becker, G., & Wozny, M. (1992) The effects of gender-specific 
diagnosis on men's and women's response to infertility. Fertility and Sterility, 57, 
1, 113-121.
Newton, C. R., Sherrard, W., & Glavac, I. (1999) The Fertility Problem Inventory: 
measuring perceived infertility related stress. Fertility and Sterility, 72, 54-62.
Niederhoffer, K. G. & Pennebaker, J. W. (2005) Sharing ones story: On the benefits of 
writing or talking about emotional experience. In C. R. Snyder & S. J. Lopez 
(Eds.) Handbook of Positive Psychology (pp. 573-583). Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Nolen-Hoeksema, S., & Morrow, J. (1991) A prospective study of depression and post- 
traumatic stress symptoms following a natural disaster: The 1989 Loma Prieta 
Earthquake. Journal o f Personality and Social Psychology, 61, 115-121.
Norman, S. A., Lumley, M. A., Dooley, J. A., & Diamond, M. P. (2004) For whom does 
it work? Moderators of the effects of written emotional disclosure in a 
randomized trial among women with chronic pelvic pain. Psychosomatic 
Medicine, 66, 174-183.
OConnor, D. B., Archer, J., & WU, F. C. W. (2004) Effects of testosterone on mood, 
aggression and sexual behaviour in young men: A double-blind, placebo- 
controlled, cross-over study. The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and 
Metabolism, 89, 6, 2837-2845.
OConnor, D. B. & Ashley, L. (2008) Are alexithymia and emotional characteristics of 
disclosure associated with blood pressure reactivity and psychological distress 
following written emotional disclosure? British Journal of Health Psychology, 13, 
495-512.
OConnor, M., Allen, J. J. B., & Kaszniak, A. W. (2005) Emotional disclosure for whom? 
A study of vagal tone in bereavement. Biological Psychology, 68, 135-146.
Office for National Statistics (2008) First Release; Internet Access 2008, Households 
and Individuals. Retrieved December, 2008 from 
http://www.statistics.gov.uk/pdfdir/iahi0808.pdf.
Olivius, C. Friden, B., Borg, G. & Berg, C. (2004) Why do couples discontinue in vitro 
fertilization treatment? A cohort study. Fertility and Sterility, 81, 2, 258-261.
ONeil, K. M., & Penrod, S. D. (2001) Methodological variables in web-based research 
that may affect results: Sample type, monetary incentives, and personal 
information. Behaviour Research Methods, Instruments, and Computers, 33, 
226-233.
ONeill, H. K. & Smyth, J. (2001) Effects of written disclosure on post-disaster 
psychological adjustment and symptomatology. Natural Hazards Research and 
Applications Information Centre (Quick Response Report 138). Colorado: 
Author.
Orr, J. M., Sackett, P. R., & DuBois, C. L. Z. (1991) Outlier detection and treatment in 
I/O psychology: A survey of researcher beliefs and an empirical illustration. 
Personnel Psychology, 44, 473- 486.
Oskowitz, S. P. (2007) Treatment options I: ovulation induction. In S. R. Bayer, M. M. 
Alper & A. S. Penzias (Eds.), The Boston IVF Handbook of Infertility (2nd ed.) 
(pp. 75-84). London: Informa UK Ltd.
http://www.statistics.gov.uk/pdfdir/iahi0808.pdf
Owen, J., Klapow, J., Roth, D., Shuster, J. L .Jr., Beilis, J., Meredith, R. et al. (2005) 
Randomized pilot of a self-guided internet coping group for women with early- 
stage breast cancer. Annals of Behavioural Medicine, 30, 1, 54-64.
Paez, D., Velasco, C., & Gonzalez, J. L. (1999) Expressive writing and the role of 
Alexithymia as a dispositional deficit in self-disclosure and psychological health. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 630-641.
Pantchenko, T., Lawson, M., & Joyce, M. R. (2003) Verbal and non-verbal disclosure of 
recalled and negative experiences: Relation to well-being. Psychology and 
Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, and Practice, 76, 251-265.
Park, C. L. & Blumberg, C. J. (2002) Disclosing trauma through writing: Testing the 
meaning-making hypothesis. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 26, 597-616.
Pasveer, K. A., & Ellard, J. H. (1998) The making of a personality inventory: Help from 
the WWW. Behaviour Research Methods, Instruments & Computers, 30, 2, 
309-313.
Patterson, C. L. & Singer, J. A. (2007-2008) Exploring the role of expectancies in the 
mental and physical health outcomes of written self-disclosure. Imagination, 
Cognition and Personality, 27,2, 99-115.
Peacock, E. & Wong, P. (1990) The stress appraisal measure (SAM): A 
multidimensional approach to cognitive appraisal. Stress Medicine, 6, 227-236.
Pennebaker, J.W. (1982). The psychology of physical symptoms. New York: Springer- 
Verlag.
Pennebaker, J. W. (1989) Confession, inhibition and disease. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), 
Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, (Vol. 22, pp. 211-244). New York: 
Academic Press.
Pennebaker, J. W. (1994) Hints on running a writing experiment. Unpublished manual.
Pennebaker, J. W. (1997) Writing about emotional experiences as a therapeutic 
process. Psychological Science, 8, 3, 162-166.
Pennebaker, J.W. (2004) Theories, therapies, and taxpayers: On the complexities of 
the expressive writing paradigm. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 11, 
138-142.
Pennebaker, J. W, & Beall, S.K. (1986) Confronting a traumatic event: Towards an 
understanding of inhibition and disease. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 95, 
274-281.
Pennebaker, J. W. & Chung, C. K. (2007) Expressive writing, emotional upheavals, and 
health. In Friedman, H and Silver, R. (Eds.) Handbook of health psychology (pp. 
263-284). New York: Oxford University Press.
Pennebaker, J. W., Colder, M., & Sharp, L. K. (1990) Accelerating the coping process. 
Journai of Personality and Social Psychology, 58, 3, 528-537.
Pennebaker, J. W., & Francis, M. E (1996) Cognitive, emotional, and language 
processes in disclosure. Cognition and Emotion, 10, 601-626
Pennebaker, J. W., Francis, M. E., & Booth, R. J. (2001) Linguistic Inquiry and Word 
Count, LIWC Manual. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum Publishes.
Pennebaker, J. W. & Graybeal, A. (2001) Patterns of natural language use: Disclosure, 
personality, and social integration. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 
10, 90-93.
Pennebaker, J. W., Hughes, C. F., & OHeeron, R. C. (1987) The psychophysiology of 
confession: Linking inhibitory and psychosomatic processes. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 4, 781-793.
Pennebaker, J. W., Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K., & Glaser, R. (1988) Disclosure of traumas 
and immune function: Health implications for psychotherapy. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 56, 2, 239-245.
Pennebaker, J. W., Mayne, T. J., & Francis, M. E. (1997) Linguistic predictors of 
adaptive bereavement. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 72, 4, 
863-871.
Pennebaker, J. W. & Seagal, J. D. (1999) Forming a story: The health benefits of 
narrative. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 55, 10, 1243-1254.
Pennebaker, J. W. & Susman, J. R. (1988) Disclosure of traumas and psychosomatic 
processes. Social Science and Medicine, 26, 327-332
Penzias, A. S. (2007) Overview of infertility. In S. R. Bayer, M. M. Alper & A. S. Penzias 
(Eds.), The Boston IVF Handbook of Infertility (2nd ed.) (pp. 1-14). London: 
Informa UK Ltd.
Peterson, L., Johannsson, V., & Carlsson, S. G. (1996) Computerized testing in a 
hospital setting: Psychometric and psychological effects. Computers in Human 
Behaviour, 12, 339-350.
Peterson, B.D., Newton, C.R., & Rosen, K.H. (2003). Examining congruence between 
couples' perceived infertility related stress and its relationship to depression and 
marital adjustment in infertile men and women. Family Process, 42, 59-71.
Peterson, B.D., Newton, C.R., Rosen, KH., Schulman, R.S. (2006) Coping processes 
of couples experiencing infertility. Family Relations, Interdisciplinary Journal of 
Applied Family Studies, 55, 227-239.
Peterson, B.D., Newton, C.R., Rosen, K.H., & Skaggs, G.E. (2006). Gender 
differences in how men and women with in vitro fertilization cope with infertility 
stress. Human Reproduction, 21, 2443-2449.
Petrie, K.J., Booth, R.J., & Pennebaker, J.W. (1998) The immunological effects of 
thought suppression. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 1264- 
1272.
Petrie, K., Booth, R., Pennebaker, J. W., Davison, K. P., & Thomas, M. G. (1995) 
Disclosure of trauma and immune response to a hepatitis B vaccination 
programme. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 63, 787-792.
Petrie, K. J., Fontanilla, I., Thomas, M. G., Booth, R. J., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2004) 
Effect of written emotional expression on immune function in patients with 
human immunodeficiency virus infection: A randomized trial. Psychosomatic 
Medicine, 66, 272-275.
Pew Internet and American Life Project (2008) Generational differences in online
activities. Available at http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2009/Generations-
Online-in-2009/Generational-Differences-in-Online-Activities/2-lnternet-use-
and-email.aspx?r=1.
Proudfoot, J. G. (2004) Computer-based treatment for anxiety and depression: is it 
feasible? Is it effective? Neuroscience and Biobehavioural Reviews, 28, 353- 
Qian, H. & Scott, C. R. (2007) Anonymity and self-disclosure on weblogs. Journal of 
Computer Mediated Communications, 12, 4, article 14. Retrieved, November 
29, 2007 from http://jcmc.indiana,edu/vol12/issue4/quian.html.
Radcliffe, A.M., Lumley, M.A., Kendall, J., Stevenson, J., & Beltran, J. (2007) Written 
emotional disclosure: Testing whether social disclosure matters. Journal of 
Social and Clinical Psychology, 26, 362-384.
Ramirez-Esparza, N. & Pennebaker, J. W. (2006) Do good stories produce good 
health? Exploring words, language, and culture. Narrative Inquiry, 16, 221-229.
Range, L. M., Kovac, S. H., & Marion, M. S. (2000) Does writing about bereavement 
lessen grief following sudden, unintentional death? Death Studies, 24, 115-134.
Rawal, N. & Haddad, N. (2006) Use if internet in infertility patients. The Internet Journal 
of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, 5, 2. Retrieved January, 20. 2009, from 
http://www.ispub.com/journal/the_internetJournal_of_gynecology_and_obstetri 
cs/volume_5_number_2_14/article/use_of_internet_in_infertility_patients.html.
Reading, A. E., Chang, L. C., & Kerin, J. K. (1989) Psychological state and coping 
styles across an IVF treatment cycle. Journal of Reproductive and Infant 
Psychology, 7, 95-103.
Reips, U.-D (2000) The Web experiment method: Advantages, disadvantages, and 
solutions. In M. H. Birnbaum (Ed.), Psychological experiments on the Internet 
(pp. 89-114). San Diego, CA: Academic Press
http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2009/Generations-
http://jcmc.indiana,edu/vol12/issue4/quian.html
http://www.ispub.com/journal/the_internetJournal_of_gynecology_and_obstetri
Reips, U.-D (2002) Standards for internet-based experimenting. Experimental 
Psychology, 49, 4, 243-256.
Reynolds, M., Brewin, C. R. & Saxton, M. (2000) Emotional disclosure in school 
children. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 41, 2, 151-159.
Richards, J. M., Beal, W. E., Seagal, J. D., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2000) Effects of 
disclosure of traumatic events on illness behaviour among psychiatric prison 
inmates. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109, 1, 156-190.
Richman, W., Kiesler, S., Weisband, S., & Drasgow, F. (1999) A meta-analytic study of 
social desirability distortion in computer-administered questionnaires, traditional 
questionnaires, and interviews. Journal of Applied Psychology, 84, 754-775.
Ritter, P., Lorig, K., Laurent, D., & Matthews, K. (2004) Internet versus mailed 
questionnaires: A randomized comparison. Journal of Medical Internet 
Research, 6, 3, e29. Retrieved January, 22, 2009 from
http://www.imir.Org/2004/3/e29html.
Ritterband, L. M., Gonder-Frederick, L. A., Cox, D. J., Clifton, A. D., West, R. W., & 
Borowitz, S. M. (2003) Internet interventions: In review, in use, and into the 
future. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 34, 5, 527-534.
Rivest, S. & Rivier, C. (1995) The role of corticotrophin-releasing factor and interleukin- 
1 in the regulation of neurons controlling reproductive functions. Endocrine 
Reviews, 16, 2, 177-199.
Rivkin, I. D., Gustafson, J., Weingarten, I., & Chin, D. (2006) The effects of expressive 
writing on adjustment to HIV. AIDS and Behaviour, 10, 1, 13-26.
Rogers, J. & Case-Smith, J. (2002) Relationship between handwriting and keyboard 
performance in sixth-grade students. The American Journal of Occupational 
Therapy, 56, 1, 34-39.
Rogers, L. J., Wilson, K. G., Gohm, C. L., & Merwin, R. M. (2007) Revisiting written 
disclosure: The effects of warm versus cold experimenters. Journal of Social 
and Clinical Psychology, 26, 556-574.
Rosenberg, H. J., Rosenberg, S. D., Ernstoff, M. S., Wolford, G. L., Amdur, R. J., 
Elshamy, M. R., et al. (2002) Expressive Disclosure and Health Outcomes In a 
Prostate Cancer Population. International Journal of Psychiatry in Medicine, 32, 
1, 37-53.
Rosenfeld, P. & Booth-Kewley, S. (1996) Impression management and computer 
surveys in organizations. In J. W. Beard (Ed.), Impression Management and 
Information technology {pp. 119-131). Westport, CT: Quorum Books.
Rosenthal, R., & Rosnow, R. L. (1975) The volunteer subject. New York:Wiley.
http://www.imir.Org/2004/3/e29html
Rowell, P & Braude, P. (2004) Assisted conception. 1- General principles. In P. 
Braude & A. Taylor (Eds.), ABC of Infertility (pp. 24-26). London: BMJ 
Publishing Group.
Sanders, K. A. & Bruce, N. W. (1997) A prospective study of psychological stress and 
infertility in women. Human Reproduction, 12, 10, 2324-2329.
Sarrel, P. M. & DeCherney, A. H. (1985) Psychotherapeutic intervention for treatment 
of couples with secondary infertility. Fertility and Sterility, 43, 897-900.
Scheuermann, L & Taylor, G. (1997) Netiquette. Internet Research: Electronic 
Networking Applications and Policy, 7, 4, 269-273.
Schilte, A. F., Portegijs, P. J. M., Blankenstein, A. H., van der Hoorst, H. E., Latour, M.
B. F., van Eijk, J. T. M. et al. (2001) Randomised controlled trial of disclosure of 
emotionally important events in somatisation in primary care. British Medical 
Journal, 323, 1-6.
Schmidt, L., Holstein, B., Boivin, J., Sangren, H., Tjornhoj-Thomsen, T., Blaabjerg et al.
(2003) Patients attitudes to medical and psychosocial aspects of care in fertility 
clinics: Findings from the Copenhagen Multi-centre Psychosocial Infertility 
(COMPI) Research Programme. Human Reproduction, 18, 3, 628-637.
Schmidt, L., Holstein, B., Christensen, U., & Boivin, J. (2005) Does infertility cause 
marital benefit? An epidemiological study of 2250 women and men in fertility 
treatment. Patient Education and Counselling, 59, 244-251.
Schneider, S. J., Walter, R., & ODonnell, R. (1990) Computerized communication as a 
medium for behavioural smoking cessation treatment: Controlled evaluation. 
Computers in Human Behaviour, 6, 141-151.
Schoutrop, M. J. A., Lange, A., Hanewald, G., Davidovich, U. & Salomon, H. (2002) 
Structured writing and processing major stressful events: A controlled trial. 
Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 71, 151-157.
Schoutrop, M. J. A., Lange, A., Hanewald, G., Duurland, C., & Bermond, B. (1997) The 
effects of structured writing assignments on overcoming major stressful events: 
an uncontrolled study. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 4, 3, 179-185.
Schulenberg, S. E., & Yutrzenka, B. A. (1999) The equivalence of computerized and 
paper-and-pencil psychological instruments: Implications for measures of 
negative affect. Behaviour Research Method, Instruments and Computers, 31, 
2, 315-321.
Schut, H., Stroebe, M. S., van den Bout, J., & Terheggen, M. (2001) The efficacy of 
bereavement interventions: Determining who benefits. In M. Stroebe, R. O. 
Hansson, W. Stroebe, & H. Schut (Eds.), Handbook of bereavement research:
Consequences, coping, and care (pp. 705-737). Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association.
Schwartz, L., & Drotar, D. (2004) Effects of written emotional disclosure on caregivers 
of children and adolescents with chronic illness. Journal of Paediatric 
Psychology, 29, 105-118.
Seibel, M. M. (1997) Diagnostic evaluation of an infertile couple, in (Ed.) M. M. Seibel, 
Infertility: A Comprehensive Text (2nd ed.) (pp. 3-27). Stamford, C.A; Appleton 
and Lange.
Seih, Y. T., Lin, Y. C., Huang, C. L., Peng, C. W., 7 Huang, S. P. (2008) The benefits of 
psychological displacement in diary writing when using different pronouns. 
British Journal of Health Psychology, 13, 1, 39-41.
Sexton, J. D. & Pennebaker, J. W. (2004) Non-expression of emotion and self among 
members of socially stigmatized groups. In (Eds.) I. Nyklicek, L Temoshok & A. 
Vingerhoets, Emotional Expression and Health: Advances in Theory, 
Assessment and Clinical Applications (pp. 321-333). East Sussex: Brunner- 
Routledge.
Shacham, S. (1983) A shortened version of the Profile of Mood States. Journal of 
Personality Assessment, 47, 305-306.
Sharp, W. G. & Hargrove, D. S. (2004) Emotional expression and modality: an analysis 
of affective arousal and linguistic output in a computer vs. paper paradigm. 
Computers in Human Behaviour, 20, 461-475.
Sheese, B. E., Brown, E. L., & Graziano, W. G. (2004) Emotional expression in 
cyberspace: Searching for moderators of the Pennebaker disclosure effect via 
e-mail. Health Psychology, 23, 457-464.
Sheffield, D., Duncan, E,. Thomson, K. & Johal, S. S. (2002) Written emotional 
expression and well-being: Results from a home-based study. The Australasian 
Journal of Disaster and Trauma Studies, 1. Retrieved, September, 21, 2004, 
from http://www.massey.ac.nz/~trauma/issues/2002-1/sheffield.htm.
Sixsmith J.A. & Murray C.D. (2001) Ethical Issues in the documentary data analysis of 
Internet posts and archives? Qualitative Health Research, 1, 3, 424-432.
Skinner, H. A., Maley, O., Bercovitz, K., Haans, D., Jennings, M. J., Magdenko, L., et 
al. (1997) Using the Internet to engage youth in health promotion. International 
Journal o f Health Promotion and Education, 4, 23-25.
Skull, J. (2004) The subfertile couple. Current Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 14, 132- 
http://www.massey.ac.nz/~trauma/issues/2002-1/sheffield.htm
Slade, P., Emery, J. & Lieberman, B. A. (1997) A prospective, longitudinal study of 
emotions and relationships in in-vitro fertilization treatment. Human 
Reproduction, 12, 183-190.
Slade, P., Raval, H., Buck, P., & Lieberman, B. E. (1992) A 3-year follow-up of 
emotional, marital and sexual functioning in couples who were infertile. Journal 
of Reproductive and Infant Psychology, 10, 4, 233-243.
Slatcher, R. B., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2006) How do I love thee? Let me count the 
words: The social effects of expressive writing. Psychological Science, 17, 660- 
Sloan, D. M. & Epstein, E. M. (2005) Respiratory sinus arrhythmia predicts written 
disclosure outcome. Psychophysiology, 42, 611-615.
Sloan, D. M. & Marx, B. P. (2004a) A closer examination of the structured written 
disclosure procedure. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 72, 2, 
165-175.
Sloan, D. M. & Marx, B. P. (2004b) Taking pen to hand: Evaluating theories underlying 
the written disclosure paradigm. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 11, 
2, 121-13.
Sloan, D. M. & Marx, B. P. (2006) Exposure through written emotional disclosure: Two 
case examples. Cognitive and Behavioural Practice, 13, 3, 227-234.
Sloan, D. M., Marx, B. P., & Epstein, E. M. (2005) Further examination of the exposure 
model underlying the efficacy of written emotional disclosure. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 73, 3, 549-554.
Sloan, D. M., Marx, B. P., Epstein, E. M., & Dodds, J. L. (2007) Expressive writing 
buffers against maladaptive rumination. Emotion, 8, 2, 302-306.
Sloan, D. M., Marx, B. P., Epstein, E. M., & Lexington, J. M. (2007) Does altering the 
writing instructions influence the outcome associated with written disclosure? 
Behaviour Therapy, 38, 2, 155-168.
Smeenk, J. M. J., Verhaak, C. M., Eugster, A., van Minnen, A., Zielhuis, G. A., & Braat, 
D. D. M. (2001) The effect of anxiety and depression on the outcome of in-vitro 
fertilization. Human Reproduction, 16, 7, 1420-1423.
Smeenk, J. M. J., Verhaak, C. M., Stolwijk, A. M., Kremer, J. A. M. & Braat, D.D.M.
(2004) Reasons for dropout in an in vitro fertilization intracytoplasmic sperm 
injection program. Fertility and Sterility, 81, 2, 262-268.
Smeenk, J. M. J., Verhaak, C. M., Vingerhoets, A. J. J. M., Sweep, C. G. J., Merkus, J. 
M. W. M., Willemsen, S. J., et al. (2005) Stress and outcome success in IVF: 
the role of self-reports and endocrine variables. Human Reproduction, 20, 4, 
991-996.
Smith, M. & Glass, G. (1977) Meta-analysis of psychotherapy outcome studies. 
American Psychologist, 32, 752-760.
Smyth, J. M. (1998) Written emotional expression: Effect sizes, outcome types, and 
moderating variables. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 66, 1, 
174-184.
Smyth, J. M., Anderson, C. F., Hockemeyer, J. R., & Stone, A. A. (2002) Does 
emotional non-expressiveness or avoidance interfere with writing about 
stressful life events? An analysis in patients with chronic illness. Psychology 
and Health, 17, 5, 561-569.
Smyth, J.M., & Catley, D. (2002) Translating research into practice: Potential of 
expressive writing in the field. In S. Lepore & J. M. Smyth (Eds.) The writing 
cure: How expressive writing promotes health and emotional well-being (pp. 
199-214). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association Press.
Smyth, J. M. & Helm, R. (2003) Focused expressive writing as self-help for stress and 
trauma. Journal of Clinical Psychology/ In Session: Psychotherapy in Practice. 
59, 2, 227-235.
Smyth, J. M., Hockemeyer, J. R., & Tulloch, H. (2008) Expressive writing and post- 
traumatic stress disorder: Effects on trauma symptoms, mood states, and 
cortisol reactivity. British Journal of Psychology, 13, 1, 85-93.
Smyth, J. M., Nazarian, D., & Arigo, D. (2008) Expressive writing in the clinical context. 
In J. Denollet, I. Nyklicek, & A. Vingerhoets, (Eds.) Emotion Regulation: 
Conceptual and Clinical Issues (pp. 215-233). New York: Springer.
Smyth, J.M., & Pennebaker, J.W. (2008) Exploring the boundary conditions of 
expressive writing: Finding the right recipe. British Journal of Health 
Psychology, 13, 1-7.
Smyth, J. M., Stone, A. A., Hurewitz, A. & Kaell, A. (1999) Effects of writing about 
stressful experiences on symptom reduction un patients with asthma or 
rheumatoid arthritis. Journal of the American Medical Association, 281, 1304- 
1309.
Smyth, J. M., True, N. & Souto, J. (2001) Effects of writing about traumatic 
experiences: The necessity for narrative structuring. Journal of Social and 
Clinical Psychology, 20, 161-172.
Solano, L., Bonadies, M., & Di Trani, M. (2008) Writing for all, for some or for no one? 
Some thoughts on the applications and evaluations of the writing technique. In 
A. Vingerhoets, I. Nyklicek, & J. Demollet (Eds.), Emotion Regulation: 
Conceptual and Clinical Issues (pp. 234-246). US: Springer.
Solano, L., Donati, V., Pecci, F., Persichetti, S., & Colaci, A. (2003) Postoperative 
course after papiiioma resection: Effects of written disclosure on the experience 
in subjects with different alexithymia levels. Psychosomatic Medicine, 65, 477- 
Spector, P. E., & Jex, S. M. (1998) Development of four self-report measures of job 
stressors and strain: interpersonal conflict at work scale, organizational 
constraints scale, quantitative workload inventory, and physical symptoms 
inventory. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 3, 356-367.
Spera, S. P., Buhrfeind, E. D., & Pennebaker, J. W. (1994) Expresive writing and 
coping with job loss. Academy of Management Journal, 37, 3, 722-733.
Spielberger, C. D. (1983) State-trait Anxiety Inventory. Redwood City, CA: Mind 
Garden Inc.
Stanton, A. L. (1991) Cognitive appraisals, coping processes, and adjustment to 
infertility, in A.L. Stanton & C. Dunkel-Schetter (Eds.) Infertility: Perspectives 
from Stress and Coping Research (pp. 87-108). New York: Plenum Press.
Stanton, A. L., Danoff-Burg, S., Cameron, C. L., & Ellis, A. P. (1994) Coping through 
emotional approach: Problems of conceptualization and confounding. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 66, 350-362.
Stanton, A. L., Danoff-Burg, S., Sworowski, L. A., Collins, C. A., Branstetter, A. D., 
Rodriguez-Hanley, A. et al. (2002) Randomized, Controlled Trial of Written 
Emotional expression and benefit Finding in Breast Cancer Patients. Journal of 
Clinical Oncology, 20, 4160-4168.
Stanton, A. L., Tennan, H., Affleck, G., & Mendola, R. (1991) Cognitive appraisals and 
adjustment to infertility. Women and Health, 17, 3, 1-15.
Stanton, A. L., Tennan, H., Affleck, G., & Mendola, R. (1992) Coping and adjustment to 
infertility. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 11, 1, 1-13.
Stetler, C., Chen. E. & Miller, G. E. (2006) Written disclosure of experiences with racial 
discrimination and antibody response to an influenza vaccine. International 
Journal of Behavioural Medicine, 13, 1, 60-68.
Stevens, J. P. (2002) Applied Multivariate Statistics for the Social Sciences (4th ed.). 
Mahwah, NJ; Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Stice, E., Burton, E., Bearman, S. K., & Rohde, P. (2006) Randomized trial of a brief 
depression prevention program: An elusive search for a psychosocial placebo 
control condition. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 45, 863-876.
Stiles, W. B. (1995) Disclosure as a speech act: is it psychotherapeutic to disclose? In 
J. W. Pennebaker (Ed.), Emotion, disclosure, and health (pp. 71-91). 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Stone, A. A., Smyth, J., Kaell, A., & Hurewitz, A. (2000) Structured writing about 
stressful events: Exploring potential psychological mediators of positive health 
effects. Health Psychology, 19, 619-624.
Stowell, J. R. (2003) Use and abuse of academic examinations in stress research. 
Psychosomatic Medicine, 65, 1055-1057.
Stroebe, W., Schut, H., & Stroebe, M. S. (2005) Grief work, disclosure and counselling: 
Do they help the bereaved? Clinical Psychology Review, 25, 395-414.
Stroebe, M., Stroebe, W., Schut, H., Zech, E., & van den Bout (2002) Does disclosure 
of emotions facilitate recovery from bereavement? Evidence from two 
prospective studies. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 70, 1, 169- 
Sudweeks, F. & Rafaeli, S. (1995) How do you get a hundred strangers to agree: 
Computer mediated communication and collaboration. In T. M. Harrison, & T. D. 
Stephen (Eds.). Computer Networking and Scholarly Communication in the 
Twenty-First-Century University (pp. 115-136). New York : SUNY Press.
Suedfeld, P., & Pennebaker, J. W. (1997) Health outcomes and cognitive aspects of 
recalled negative life events. Psychosomatic Medicine, 59, 172-177.
Suler, J. The online disinhibition effect. Cyber Psychology and Behaviour. 7, 4, 321 - 
Swanbon, T., Boyce, L., & Greenberg, M. A. (2008) Expressive writing reduces 
avoidance and somatic complaints in a community sample with constraints on 
expression. British Journal of Health Psychology, 13, 53-56.
Tabachnick, B. G. & Fidell, L. S. (2001) Using Multivariate Statistics (4th ed.). Boston: 
Allyn and Bacon.
Tate, D. F., Wing, R.R., & Winett, R.A (2001) Using Internet Technology to Deliver a 
Behavioural Weight Loss Program. Journal of the American Medical 
Association, 286, 1172-1177.
Taylor, A. (2004) Making a diagnosis. In P. Braude & A. Taylor (Eds.), ABC of Infertility 
(pp. 4-7). London: BMJ Publishing Group.
Taylor, L. A., Wallander, J. L., Anderson, D., Beasley, P., & Brown, R. T. (2003) 
Improving health care utilization, improving chronic disease utilization, health 
status, and adjustment in adolescents and young adults with cystic fibrosis: A 
preliminary report. Journal of Clinical Psychology in Medical Settings, 10, 9-16.
Thiering, P., Beaurepaire, J., Jones, M., Saunders, D., & Tennant, C. (1993) Mood 
state as a predictor of treatment outcome after in vitro fertilization/embryo 
transfer technology (IVF/ET). Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 37, 5, 481-
Throsby, K. & Gill, R. (2004) Its different for Men: Masculinity and IVF. Men and 
Masculinities, 6, 4, 330-348.
Traue, H.C., Lee, V. & Kessler, M. (1997) Pathways linking emotional inhibition and 
pain processes. In A. Vingerhoet,. (Ed.) The (non)-expression of emotion (pp. 
193-209). Tilburg: Tilburg University Press.
Tseng, H.-M., Tiplady, B., Macleod, H. A., & Wright, P. (1998) Computer anxiety: A 
comparison of pen-based personal digital assistants, conventional computer 
and paper assessment of mood and performance. British Journal of 
Psychology, 89, 4, 599-610.
Tuschen-Caffier, B., Florin, I., Krause, W., & Pook, M. (1999) Cognitive-behavioural 
therapy for idiopathic infertile couples. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 68, 
15-21.
Ullrich, M (2000) Motherhood and infertility: Viewing motherhood through the lens of 
infertility. Feminism and Psychology, 10, 3, 323 336.
Ullrich, P. M. & Lutgendorf, S. K. (2002) Journaling about stressful events: Effects of 
cognitive processing and emotional expression. Annals of Behavioural 
Medicine, 24, 244-250.
University of Bath (2008) Freshers Flu. Retrieved October, 12, 2008 from 
http://www.bathsfudent.com/aware/quides/health/illness/freshers-flu/.
Vallejo, M. A., Jordan, C. M. Diaz, M. I., Comech, M. I., & Ortega, J. (2007) 
Psychological Assessment via the Internet: A Reliability and Validity Study of 
Online (vs Paper-and-Pencil) Versions of the General Health Questionnaire-28 
(GHQ-28) and the Symptoms Check-List-90-Revised (SCL-90-R). Journal of 
Medical Internet Research, 9, 1, Retrieved January, 10, 2009 from 
http://www.jmir.Org/2007/1/e2/html.
van Middendorp, H. & Geenen, R. (2008) Poor cognitive-emotional processing may 
impede the outcome of emotional disclosure interventions. British Journal of 
Health Psychology, 13, 49-52.
van Middendorp, H., Sorbi, M. J., van Doornen, L. J. P., Bijlsma, J. W. J., & Geenen, 
R. (2007) Feasibility and induced cognitive-emotional change of an emotional 
disclosure intervention adapted for home application. Patient Education and 
Counselling, 66, 177-187.
Van Steirteghem, A. C., Liebaers, I. & Devroey, P. (1997) Assisted Fertilization 
Techniques, in (ed.) M. M. Seibel, Infertility: A Comprehensive Text (2nd ed.) 
(pp. 751-759). Stamford, CA : Appleton & Lange.
http://www.bathsfudent.com/aware/quides/health/illness/freshers-flu/
http://www.jmir.Org/2007/1/e2/html
Vedhara, K., Moss Morris, R., Booth, R., Horgan, M., Lawrence, M., & Birchall, N. 
(2007) Changes in mood predict disease activity and quality of life in patients 
with psoriasis following emotional disclosure. Journal of Psychosomatic 
Research, 62, 611-619.
Verhaak, C. M., Smeenk, J. M. J., Eugster, A., van Minnen, A., Kremer, J. A. M. & 
Kraaimaat, F. W. (2001) Stress and marital satisfaction among women before 
and after their first cycle of in vitro fertilization and intracytoplasmic sperm 
injection. Fertility and Sterility, 76, 3, 525-531.
Verhaak, C. M., Smeenk, J. M. J., Evers, A. W. M., Kremer, J. A. M., Kraaimaat, F. W., 
& Braat, D. D. M. (2007) Womens emotional adjustment to IVF: A systematic 
review of 25 years of research. Human Reproduction Update, 13, 1, 27-36.
Verhaak, C. M., Smeenk, J. M. J., Nahuis, M. J., Kremer, J. A. M., & Braat, D. D. M. 
(2007) Long-term psychological adjustment to IVF/ICSI treatment in women. 
Human Reproduction, 22, 1, 305-308.
Verhaak, C. M., Smeenk, J. M. J., van Minnen, A., Kremer, J. A. M., & Kraaimaat, F. 
W. (2005) A longitudinal, prospective study on emotional adjustment before, 
during and after consecutive fertility treatment cycles. Human Reproduction, 20, 
8, 2253-2260.
Vickers, R. R., Jr. & Kusulas, J. W. (1989) Initial summary of the relationships between 
personality, mood and illness for MacArthur "Brain, Behaviour and Immunity" 
project. Unpublished manuscript.
Visser, A. Ph., Haan, G., Zalmstra, H., & Wouters, I. (1994) Psychosocial aspects of in 
vitro fertilization. Journal of Psychosomatic Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 15, 
35-43.
Walker, B. L., Nail, L. M., & Croyle, R. T. (1999) Does emotional expression make a 
difference in reactions to breast cancer? Oncology Nursing Forum, 26, 1025- 
1032.
Walther, J. B. (2002) Research ethics in Internet-enabled research: Human subjects 
issues and methodological myopia. Ethics and Information Technology, 4, 3, 
205-216.
Ware, J. E. & Sherbourne, C. D. (1992) The MOS 36-item short-form health survey 
(SF-36). I. Conceptual framework and item selection. Medical Care, 3, 6, 473- 
Warner, L. J., Lumley, M. A., Casey, R. J., Pierantoni, W., Salazar, R., Zoratti, E. M., et 
al. (2006) Health effects of written emotional disclosure in adolescents with 
Asthma: A randomized, controlled trial. Journal of Paediatric Psychology, 31, 6 
557-568.
Waskul, D. & Douglass, M (1996) Considering the electronic participant: Some 
polemical observations on the ethics of on-line research. The Information 
Society, 12, 2, 129-139.
Wasser, S. K. & Isenberg, D. Y. (1986) Reproductive failure among women: Pathology 
or adaptation? Journal of Psychosomatic Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 5, 153- 
Wasser, S. K., Sewall, G., & Soules, M. R. (1993) Psychosocial stress as a cause of 
infertility. Fertility and Sterility, 59, 3, 685-689.
Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegan, A. (1988) Development and Validation of a Brief 
Measure of Positive and Negative Affect- the PAN AS Scale. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 1063-1070.
Weinman, J., Ebrecht, M., Scott, S., Walburn, J., & Dyson, M. (2008) Enhanced wound 
healing after emotional disclosure intervention. British Journal of Health 
Psychology, 13, 1, 95-102
Weisband, S. & Kiesler, S. (1996) Self disclosure on computer forms: Meta-analysis 
and implications. Proceedings of the Computer-Human Interaction Conference. 
Retrieved April 11, 2008 from
http://sigchi.org/chi96/proceedings/papersAA/eisband/sw_txt.html.
Weissman, A., Gotlieb, L., Ward, S., Greenblatt, E., & Casper, R. F. (2000) Use of the 
internet by infertility couples. Fertility and Sterility, 73, 6, 1179-1182.
Wetherell, A. A., Byrne-Davis, L., Dieppe, P., Donovan, J., Brookes, S., Byron, M., & 
Vedhara, K. (2005) Effects of emotional disclosure on psychological and 
physiological outcomes in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: An exploratory 
home-based study. Journal of Health Psychology, 10, 2, 277-285.
White, M. & Dorman, S. M. (2001) Receiving social support online: Implications for 
health education. Health Education Research, 16, 6, 693-707.
Whitehead, L. C. (2007) Methodological and ethical issues in internet-mediated 
research in the field of health: An integrated review of the literature. Social 
Science and Medicine, 65, 782-791.
Wilson, J. F. & Kopitzke, E. J. (2002) Stress and infertility. Current Womens Health 
Reports, 2, 194-199.
Wing, J. F., Schutte, N. S., & Byrne, B. (2006) The effect of positive writing on 
emotional intelligence and life satisfaction. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 62, 
10, 1291-1302.
Winzelberg, A. J., Classen, C., Alpers, G. W., Roberts, H., Koopman, C., Adams, R. E. 
et al. (2003) Evaluation of an internet support group for women with primary 
breast cancer. Cancer, 97, 5, 1164-1173.
http://sigchi.org/chi96/proceedings/papersAA/eisband/sw_txt.html
Wischmann, T. H. (2003) Psychogenic infertility -  myths and facts. Journal of Assisted 
Reproduction and Genetics, 20, 12, 485-494.
Wischmann, T. H. (2008) Implications of psychosocial support in infertility -  a critical 
appraisal. Journal of Psychosomatic Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 29, 2, 83-90.
Winzelberg, A.J., Eppstein, D., Eldredge, K.L., Wilfley, D., Dasmahapatra, R., Dev, P. 
et al. (2000) Effectiveness of an Internet based program for reducing risk 
factors for eating disorders. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68, 
346-50.
World Health Organization (1999) WHO laboratory manual for the examination of 
human semen and sperm-cervical mucus interaction (4th ed.). Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Wright, D. L., Aquilino, W. S. & Supple. A. J. (2008) A comparison of computer- 
assisted and paper-and-pencil self-administered questionnaires in a survey on 
smoking, alcohol and drug use. Public Opinion Quarterly, 62, 3, 331-353.
Wright, J., Duchesne, C., Sabourin, S., Bissonnette, F., Benoit., J., & Girard, Y. (1991) 
Psychosocial distress and infertility: Men and women respond differently. 
Fertility and Sterility, 5 5 ,1,100-108.
Yogo, M. & Fujihara, S. (2008) Working memory capacity can be improved by 
expressive writing; A randomized experiment in a Japanese sample. British 
Journal of Health Psychology, 13, 1, 77-80.
Zakowski, S. G., Ramati, A., Morton, C., Johnson, P., & Flanigan, P. (2004) Written 
emotional disclosure buffers the effects of social constraints on distress among 
cancer patients. Health Psychology, 23, 6, 555-563.
Appendices
A.1 Publications and Conference Presentations 
A. 1.1 Abstracts
Cutts, K. J., Hurst, K. M., Arden, M. A., and Reidy, J.(2007). Emotional disclosure 
through writing and well-being: an analysis of modality [Abstract]. Health 
Psychology Review, 1 (Supplement 1), p 310.
Cutts, K. J., Arden, M. A., Hurst, K. M., and Reidy, J. (2006). Written emotional
expression and the role of context in study outcome [Abstract]. Proceedings of 
the British Psychological Society. Available online from, 
http://www.bps.orq.uk/conferences-and-
events/proceedinqs/proceedinqs home.cfm?&ResuitsType=Abstracts&Confer 
encelD=1286&localAction=details.
A.1.2 Conference Presentations
Cutts, K. J., Arden, M. A., Hurst, K. M., & Reidy, J. (2006) Written Emotional Disclosure 
and the Role of context in Study Outcome. Division of Health Psychology 
Annual Conference, University of Essex, 14th September 2006.
Cutts, K. J., Hurst, K. M., Arden, M. A., & Reidy, J. (2005) Emotional Disclosure
Through Writing and Well-being: an analysis of modality. European Health 
Psychology Society Annual Conference, University of Ireland, Galway. 1st 
September, 2005.
Cutts, K. J., Hurst, K. M., Arden, M. A., & Reidy, J. (2005) Development and Evaluation 
of a Written Emotional Disclosure Intervention in Infertile Individuals. North 
West Consortium for Postgraduates Annual Conference, University of Leeds. 
13th May, 2005.
http://www.bps.orq.uk/conferences-and-
A.2 The Development and Implementation of a Disclosure Writing 
Intervention in Couples Attending an Assisted Conception Unit. 
A.2.1 Overview to the Study
The literature presented in Section 2.1 of this thesis identifies the stressful nature of 
infertility and infertility treatments, and their resultant negative psychological sequelae. 
Psychosocial interventions have been shown to have some beneficial effects on well
being in this population of individuals (Boivin, 2003; see section 2.2.7), yet the 
evidence would suggest that infertile individuals, in particular those seeking or 
undergoing infertility treatment perceive there to be constraints associated with face-to- 
face and group based psychosocial interventions that prevent them from engaging in 
these treatment programmes (McNaughton-Cassill, Bostwick, Arthur, Robinson & Neal, 
2002; Schmidt, Tjornhoj-Thomsen, Boivin & Andersen, 2005). To overcome the 
barriers to participation that infertile individuals encounter with face-to-face 
psychological therapies (i.e. time constraints, difficulty in scheduling session) 
McNaughton-Cassill et al. (2002) have suggested that written disclosure may be an 
appropriate alternative intervention for this population. Based on the empirical findings 
presented in Section 2.2 that has shown written disclosure to be effective in reducing 
psychological symptoms in clinical populations (e.g. women with breast cancer, 
Stanton et al., 2002) the aim of this study was to examine the efficacy of a home-based 
written emotional disclosure intervention for individuals with infertility attending an 
Assisted Conception Unit (ACU).
The findings of the studies presented in Chapters 5 and 6 of this thesis showed that an 
adaptation of the standard laboratory based disclosure protocol, to one that is 
computer-mediated, and delivered within the context of the home, was equivalent in 
terms of the longer-term outcome of the intervention. Taken together the findings of 
these studies provide support for the argument that a written disclosure intervention 
delivered within the context of the participants home via a computer is a feasible 
alternative to the more traditional delivery format seen in previous studies (e.g. 
Pennebaker & Beall, 1986). This chapter outlines the design, procedure and 
implementation of a home-based disclosure writing intervention in patients recruited 
from the ACU of a large city hospital.
A.2.2 Method  
A.2.2.1 Design
The study used a quasi-experimental, repeated measures design. At recruitment 
participants were randomly allocated to one of two conditions; disclosure writing or 
non-writing control42. To maintain equal participant numbers across the two groups 
block randomisation was used to allocate participants to condition (Altman & Bland, 
1999). Randomisation was also conducted on a couple by couple basis (i.e. the couple 
presenting for In Vitro Fertilization (IVF) treatment were randomised into the same 
condition, see section A.2.2.4 of this appendix).
Figure A.2.1 shows the study design which ran parallel to the IVF treatment cycle of the 
participant (see section A.2.2.5 of this appendix); this comprised a baseline 
assessment completed the day before the start of the treatment cycle, an intervention 
period in which disclosure group participants completed three 15 minute writing 
sessions at specific intervals within the treatment cycle, the first session to be 
conducted the day after the scan, the second the day after egg collection and the third 
seven days after embryo transfer. Two follow-up assessments, the first being the day 
before the pregnancy test (approximately 3-4 weeks after the start of treatment) and 
the second 4-weeks after the pregnancy test were completed by all participants. In 
addition, daily stress monitoring was conducted using a daily assessment 
questionnaire each evening throughout the treatment cycle. The dependant variables 
measured at baseline and follow-up assessment were depression, anxiety, 
psychological distress, fertility problem stress, physical symptoms, intrusion and 
avoidance.
42 The studies presented in Chapters 4 and 5 included both a writing control group and a non-writing 
control group. Due to the anticipated challenge o f obtaining ethical approval to ask patients to engage in a 
control based writing task that would potentially offer little  i f  any benefit to the patient the decision was 
taken to only include a non-writing control.
Figure A.2.1 Flow diagram of study process in relation to IVF procedure.
Clinic IVF Procedure Study Procedure
Clinic appointment letter 
sent to patient
Medical consultation
14 days
Nurse consultation
i 1-2-21 Days 
Start of treatment cycle
(2nd day of menstruation)
I 7 Days 
Blood tests and scan
|  7 Days
Egg collection
| 2 Days
Embryo transfer
14 Days
Pregnancy test
Baseline 
Assessment 
(1st day of 
menstruation)
Writing Session 1 
(Day after scan)
Writing Session 2 
(Day after egg collection)
Writing Session 3 
(7 days after embryo 
transfer)
1st follow-up
ControlDisclosure
Study invitation letter 
sent to patient
Meet with patient/s, 
randomise in group, 
obtain consent and 
provide studv Dacks.
assessment 
(Day before 
pregnancy test)
2nd follow-up 
assessment 
(4 weeks after 
Dreanancv test1)
A.2.2.2 Measures
This study utilised the same measures as Chapter 5 and Chapter 6 (see section 5.4.3 
of this thesis) which were; the Symptom Checklist-90-Revised (SCL-90-R; Derogatis, 
1992), the Impact of Event Scale (IES; Horowitz, Wilner & Alvarez, 1979), the Essay 
Evaluations Questionnaire (EEQ; Greenberg & Stone, 1992), the Physical Symptoms 
Inventory (PSI; Spector & Jex, 1998) and the Positive and Negative Affect Scale 
(PANAS; Watson, Clark & Tellegan, 1988). In the studies in Chapter 5 and 6 the 
immediate version of the PANAS was used to evaluate participants moods 
immediately following each writing session. Differences between groups were observed 
in levels of negative affect immediately after writing with home-based disclosure 
participants reporting higher levels of NA than lab-based disclosure participants in 
Chapter 5; unfortunately interpretation of this finding was limited because pre-writing 
mood was not assessed in these studies. For the purpose of the current study the 
immediate version of the PANAS is used to evaluate participants moods immediately 
before and following each writing session.
In addition to the measures noted above, this study also included the following:
The Fertility Problem Inventory (FPI: Newton. Sherrard & Glavac. 1999).
The FPI is a 46-item measure of infertility stress. Participants are asked to indicate 
their agreement with each item on a six-point Likert scale ranging from strongly 
disagree to strongly agree. The FPI contains five separate subscales that represent 
domains of stress specific to infertility; these are social concerns, sexual concerns, 
relationship concerns, need for parenthood and rejection of childfree lifestyle. Each of 
the five scales has shown good internal reliability (all a>.80; Newton et al., 1999). 
Examples of items include; For me, being a parent is a more important goal than 
having a satisfying career {need for parenthood subscale) and I feel like I ve failed at 
sex (sexual concerns subscale). All positively phrased items are reverse scored and a 
composite score derived from summing the five subscales provides a global measure 
of infertility-related distress. Higher scores indicate increased infertility-related distress. 
Newton et al. (1999) interpret mean global FPI scores as follows; for females, a score 
of 97 or below represents low stress, scores of 98-132 represent average stress, 
scores of 133-167 represent moderately high stress and scores of 168 or greater 
represent very high stress. For males, scores of 87 or below represent low stress, 
scores of 88-113 represent average stress, scores of 114-146 represent moderately 
high stress and scores of 147 or greater represent very high stress. For the purpose of 
this study the global FPI score was used to assess infertility-related distress, the global
FPI has demonstrated high internal reliability (a = .93) and good test-retest reliability in 
addition to demonstrating moderate discriminant and convergent validity (Newton et ai. 
1999).
The Wavs of Cooing Questionnaire (WOC: Folkman & Lazarus. 1988)
The WOC is a 66-item process measure of coping that assesses thoughts and actions 
that individuals use to cope with stressful encounters. Individuals are asked to respond 
to each item on a 4-point Likert scale, indicating the frequency with which each strategy 
is used. The WOC contains eight empirically derived scales: confrontive coping, 
distancing, self-controlling, seeking social support, accepting responsibility, escape- 
avoidance, planful problem solving and positive reappraisal. In a sample of married 
couples internal consistency of the eight WOC scales is reported to range from a = .61 
to a = .79 and are higher than alphas reported for most other measures of coping 
processes (Folkman & Lazarus, 1988). The authors also suggest that the WOC can be 
adapted by the researcher to suit the study context making the WOC a valid measure 
for use in IVF patients.
The Daily Stress Inventory (DSI: Brantley. Waggoner. Jones & Rappaoort, 1987). The 
DSI is a 58-item inventory that requires respondents to endorse events experienced in 
the last 24 hours and to rate the perceived stressfulness of the events on a Likert scale 
ranging from (1) occurred but was not stressful to (7) caused me to panic, this provides 
and impact rating of the event. Three daily scores are derived for each individual that 
relate to 1) if the event occurred, this a frequency score (FREQ), 2) the sum of the 
impact rating of the events, which provides a total daily impact score (SUM), and 3) the 
average impact rating of the events which is calculated by diving the total impact score 
by the frequency score (AIR = SUM divided by FREQ). Good internal consistency for 
FREQ and SUM (a = .83 and a = .87 respectively) and concurrent validity with the 
Daily Hassles Scale are reported for the scale. Further to this convergent validity is 
reported with endocrine measures of stress providing support for the validity of the DSI 
as a measure of daily minor stress (Bradley et al., 1988).
Content analysis of participants narratives was conducted using the Linguistic Inquiry 
and Word Count Programme (LIWC: Pennebaker, Francis & Booth, 2001) which is 
described in section 5.4.3. In addition to the above measures a demographic 
information questionnaire was also included in the questionnaire booklet (see A.2.5.1 
of this appendix for demographic information questionnaire).
A.2.2.3 Ethics
The process of obtaining ethical approval for the study began in Spring 2005. Following 
independent scientific review the study was subject to scrutiny by the Local Research 
Ethics Committee (LREC) and approval was granted in May 2006 (See A.2.5.2 - 
A.2.5.3 of this appendix for Research Ethics Application Form and Letters of Ethical 
Opinion). Authorisation of the project by the NHS Foundation Trust was not granted in 
full until November 2006 (see section A.2.3.3 of this appendix for a detailed 
discussion).
A.2.2.4 Recruitment
The principal inclusion criterion for participation in the study was that individuals were 
new referral patients to the ACU and had not previously undergone IVF treatment (this 
includes patients undergoing Intracytoplasmic Sperm Injection (ICSI; see section 
2.2.3.2 for a description of this procedure). Individuals react differently to repeat IVF 
attempts (Beaurepaire, Jones, Thiering, Saunders & Tennant, 1994: Eugster & 
Vingerhoets, 1999; Thiering, Beaurepaire, Jones, Saunders & Tennant, 1993). 
Therefore couples who had undergone previous attempts at IVF were excluded from 
taking part in the study; these exclusion criteria also increased homogeneity across the 
sample. To eliminate the confounding effects of other psychosocial interventions on 
study outcome, patients who were currently receiving psychological treatment 
(including those who had opted to use the clinic counselling services) were excluded 
from the study. Participants who could not read and write, or read and write in English 
were also excluded from the study. The focus of the study was to improve the general 
well-being of patients with infertility, regardless of demographic or diagnosis factors, 
therefore no other exclusion criteria were imposed.
Invitation letters were sent to patients with their clinic appointment letter (see A.2.5.4 of 
this appendix for study invitation letter). On the day of their pre-arranged appointment 
and prior to their medical consultation couples were approached and invited to talk 
about being involved in the study. In the privacy of a consultation room they were given 
a verbal introduction to the study. Couples were informed that it was not compulsory for 
both of them to take part in the study and if one partner wished to be involved in the 
study the other was not obliged to participate if they did not wish to. Those who were 
interested were asked to make themselves available after their medical consultation to 
be given more detailed information on the study, to give consent and to receive the 
study questionnaire packs (and writing materials if they were allocated to the disclosure 
group) to take home with them. At this stage participants were advised of their right to
refuse and that this would not affect their medical treatment. Patients were also 
informed of confidentiality and anonymity throughout the study.
Patients who agreed to participate were given a more detailed verbal briefing (taking 
approximately 20-30 minutes) after their medical consultation. Participants were told 
that the study was concerned with investigating the experience of assisted reproduction 
but were not informed of randomisation of patients into different condition so as not to 
bias their responses to questionnaires. Partners within a couple were randomised into 
the same group to prevent participants becoming aware that there were different 
conditions within the study and thus maintaining experimental control. All participants 
were asked to read the participant information sheet and sign the consent form before 
taking away the study packs (see A.2.5.5 of this appendix for study information sheet 
and A.2.5.6 for consent form).
The study packs contained the baseline assessment questionnaire, daily stress 
monitoring questionnaires, three writing booklets with instructions (or three floppy disks 
containing a Rich Text Format RTF document with writing instructions for those who 
opted to complete the writing session by computer43) and two follow-up questionnaire 
booklets. Stamped addressed envelopes were included for participants to return the 
study materials in.
A.2.2.5 Study Procedure
The study procedure is outlined in Figure A.2.1 and was designed to run parallel to the 
IVF treatment cycle. The IVF protocol requires that patients start their treatment on the 
second day of the females menstrual period. On informing the clinic of the start of 
menstruation patients were contacted by telephone and instructed to complete the 
baseline questionnaire pack and to return the completed questionnaire in the pre-paid 
envelope provided. It is at this stage that participants also began completing the daily 
stress inventory, each evening before going to bed.
The first of the three writing sessions was completed on the day following the patients 
appointment to take blood samples and have an ultrasound scan (approximately eight 
days after the start of treatment). The second writing session was scheduled for the 
day after egg collection (approximately eight days after the first writing session) and the 
final writing session was to be conducted seven days after embryo transfer (between 8
43 None o f the participants chose this option.
and nine days after the second writing session). Spacing writing sessions over the 
course of the treatment cycle (as opposed to over three consecutive days) provided 
participants with the opportunity to write about their thoughts and feelings relating to 
different aspects of the treatment cycle, stages at which stress levels can fluctuate 
significantly (Boivin & Takefman, 1995). Stamped addressed envelopes were included 
for the return of the writing booklets/floppy disks.
The writing instructions given to participants were adapted from a study with breast 
cancer patients (Stanton et al., 2002) which follow the instructions of Pennebaker 
(1994). On day one disclosure group participants were given the following instructions:
Over the three writing sessions in this study I would like you to write about your 
deepest thoughts and feelings concerning your experience of difficulties in having a 
child, and the treatment process you are going through at the moment. I realise that 
people who encounter such difficulties experience a full range of emotions, and I want 
you to focus on any and all of them. In your writing I want you to really let go and 
explore your deepest emotions and thoughts. You might think about all the various 
feelings and changes that you experienced before being diagnosed, after diagnosis, up 
to starting IVF treatment as well as now, during the treatment itself. Whatever aspect 
you choose to write about, it is critical that you focus on your deepest thoughts and 
feelings. You might also tie your thoughts and feelings about your difficulties in having 
a child and your current treatment to other parts of your life - people you love, who you 
are, or who you want to be. Again the most important part of your writing is that you 
really focus on your deepest emotions and thoughts. The only rule we have is that you 
keep writing for the entire 15 minutes. If you run out of things to say, just repeat what 
you have already written. Don't worry about grammar, spelling, or sentence structure. 
Don't worry about erasing or crossing things out. Just write. 
Prior to beginning the writing task participants were asked to complete the immediate 
version of the PANAS. At the end of the 15 minute writing session participants were 
asked to complete the PANAS and EEQ. Participants were to be contacted by 
telephone to remind them to complete their writing sessions (see A.2.5.7 of this 
appendix for writing instructions for all sessions).
The first follow-up assessment of physical symptoms and psychological well-being was 
completed the day before the pregnancy test and the second follow-up assessment
was completed 4-weeks later. A debriefing letter outlining the background to the study, 
its aims and expected outcomes was mailed to participants upon receipt of the 
completed study materials (see A.2.5.8 of this appendix for debriefing information 
letter).
A.2.3 Study Outcome 
A.2.3.1 Sample Size
In order to determine the sample size required to achieve adequate power in the final 
analysis Gpower (Erdfelder, Faul & Buchner, 1996) was used to calculate a priori the 
sample size required to obtain an effect size equivalent to those observed in previous 
diary writing studies. For example in the meta-analysis conducted by Smyth (1998) an 
effect size of d = .66 was calculated for psychological well-being and d = .42 for self- 
reported physical health. These medium effect sizes (Cohen, 1977) are similar to those 
produced by other psychological interventions (Smyth 1998). Using these previously 
published effect sizes as a guide, power calculations indicated that a total sample size 
of 48 (a = .05, power = .80, Critical f = (1, 46) = 4.05, Lambda = 8.47) would be 
required to obtain a comparable effect size for psychological well-being and 22 (a = 
.05, power = .80, Critical f = (1, 20) = 4.35, Lambda = 9.58) for self-reported physical 
health. Thus a final sample size of 48 was considered adequate for the study.
A.2.3.2 Uptake and Attrition
Recruitment of participants to the study began in January 2007. Initially the clinic was 
provided with 40 letters of invitation and these were sent out with letters of appointment 
to new referral patients. Clinical appointments were made for 19 couples for the period 
January 2007 to July 2007. Ten couples registered an interest in the study and were 
seen from January 2007 to May 2007. Of these 10 couples, three were referred for 
other treatment and therefore no longer eligible to take part in the study and one couple 
failed to attend their appointment. Of the remaining six couples (12 potential 
participants), nine participants (four couples and the female from one couple) agreed to 
take part in the study. One participant withdrew due to spontaneous pregnancy (single 
female) and two (a couple) withdrew because they decided not to proceed with the IVF 
treatment. The remaining six participants (three couples) withdrew on day one of the 
study (the start of IVF treatment).
A.2.3.3 Amending the protocol
In initial correspondence with the clinic the number of new referral patients attending 
the clinic for IVF treatment was approximated to be 100 couples over a 12 month
period. In the first month of the study it became apparent that the number of new 
referral IVF patients was somewhat lower than had been anticipated. In February 2007 
a Notice of Substantial Amendment (see A.2.5.1 of this appendix) was submitted to 
LREC to expand the inclusion criteria of the study to include patients who were 
undergoing repeat cycles of IVF and Intra Uterine Insemination (IUI) in order to 
increase the available pool of potential participants. Unfortunately the ethics committee 
would not approve the inclusion of repeat cycle IVF patients in the study as they 
believed it would put them under more unnecessary stress. Approval was given for the 
inclusion of IUI patients in April 2007 (see A.2.5.10 of this appendix for Letters of 
Ethical Opinion relating to this amendment). By May 2007 it was apparent that the 
number of patients attending the clinic who were eligible to take part in the study would 
not be sufficient to meet the sample size required. Furthermore, the attrition rate for the 
study was 100 per cent.
In consideration of the limited number of potential participants, attrition rate and time 
scale remaining of the research programme the decision was taken to terminate the 
study.
A.2.4 Discussion
The main aim of the study was to examine the efficacy of a written disclosure 
intervention for individuals with infertility. Recruitment of individuals attending the ACU 
for IVF treatment began in the January of 2007. Based on the inclusion criteria for the 
study (IVF new referral patients and subsequently IUI referrals) the number of patients 
referred to the clinic was somewhat lower than had been anticipated based on earlier 
estimates provided by the ACU. The refusal of the LREC to allow the inclusion of 
repeat cycle IVF patients into the study meant that that there was no opportunity to 
increase the potential number of participants available. Subsequently, low uptake into 
the study and the 100 per cent attrition rate from the study between January 2007 and 
May 2007 suggested that continuation of the study was unfeasible and the study was 
terminated.
In studies examining the psychological effects of infertility/treatment and interventions 
with patients undergoing IVF treatment response rates are often low (de Klerk et al., 
2005; McNaughton-Cassill et al., 2002) and attrition rates can be high (de Klerk et al., 
2005; Boivin et al., 1998). For example, de Klerk et al. (2005) reported a response rate 
of 32 per cent in a study which examined the effectiveness of psychosocial counselling
in new referral IVF patients, the most common reason for non-participation was the 
time commitment involved (three, one hour counselling sessions over the course if the 
IVF cycle), de Klerk et al. (2005), which utilised a daily stress diary similar to the one 
included in the present studies design, reported an attrition rate of 48 per cent. This is 
similar to that reported by Boivin et al. (1998) who also used daily stress monitoring in 
a sample of new referral IVF patients and reported an attrition rate of 55 per cent. 
Problematic for the present study was the fact that attrition occurred before the study 
commenced.
It was not possible to examine in detail the reasons for non-response and withdrawal 
in the present study as obtaining this information via interview or questionnaire would 
have required additional ethical approval. However, one possible reason for the poor 
response rate to the study (in addition to the limited number of patients who met the 
inclusion criteria) was that patients were also being invited to participate in a drug trial 
which was ongoing in the clinic at the same time as the disclosure study, with the 
success of treatment being a priority for patients, involvement in the drug trial would 
have taken precedent over that of a psychosocial intervention.
Participants who were recruited into the study but withdrew on the day that the study 
was to due to start communicated that they wanted to concentrate solely on their 
treatment. This would suggest that they perceived the disclosure study protocol to be 
an additional and unnecessary burden. Because the study was introduced to patients 
as an investigation into the experiences of people attending an ACU that may help to 
develop services and information for future users and not as a psychosocial 
intervention that may provide direct benefit for the patient there was little motivation to 
participate or continue with the study.
A number of factors contributed to the premature termination of the present study 
including the limited number of eligible participants, a lengthy ethical process, the result 
of which was a limited timescale for recruitment and implementation of the study, and 
the unwillingness of patients to engage with the study at a time when they were 
undergoing a stressful and invasive medical intervention. Though the feasibility of 
implementing a written disclosure study for individuals with infertility recruited within the 
context of an ACU was not supported by this study, the possibility that disclosure 
writing could be a valuable therapeutic tool that could be used to ameliorate distress in 
infertile individuals warranted investigation. In order to further examine the efficacy of a
brief written disclosure intervention for individuals with infertility the written disclosure 
protocol was adapted to be delivered via the internet.
The primary aim of this thesis was to examine the efficacy of a written disclosure
intervention for individuals experiencing infertility. Whilst the studies presented in 
Chapter 5 and 6 are not able to be generalized readily beyond a student sample, the 
findings of these studies support the adaptation of the written disclosure intervention to 
a home-based, computer-mediated format. The prospect of developing and providing 
an effective internet-mediated disclosure intervention for individuals experiencing
infertility is encouraging. Internet-mediated research presents a number of ethical and 
methodological challenges. Chapter 7 presents a review of these challenges that need 
to be considered in the design and implementation of a web-based disclosure
intervention.
A.2.5 Study Documents
Demographic information Questionnaire
Sheffield Hallam University
Patient Identification No:
General Inform ation
Thank you for agreeing to take part in this study. We would like to ask you some general 
questions about you and your health. Please use the available spaces to give your answers, tick 
the boxes and circle responses where indicted_____________________________________________
2. Gender: (please circle) M ale / Female
3. Ethnicity: (please circle one) Black
W hite
Asian
Other (please specify)
4. Please indicate the type of treatment you are receiving? IU I 
IV F 
IC S I 
5. Is this your first attempt at assisted conception? Y E S/N O
6. If you answered NO to question 5. please indicate which treatment/s 
you have previously undergone and on how many occasions.
7. Do you have any children? YE S /N O
If yes, how many do you have?
8. Are you currently receiving counselling/psychotherapy?
(Please circle your response)
9. Are you currently taking psychotropic medication (i.e. antidepressants, anti-anxiety
drugs or mood stabilizers)? (Please circle your response)
Y E S / N O
10. For approximately how long have you
A.2.5.1
11. Have you been given a diagnosis by a doctor? Y E S / N O
12. Who has received the diagnosis? you? 
your partner?   
both of you? 
unclear? 
13. What is the specific diagnosis? for you
14. How is your treatment being
funded? NHS 
Self-funding 
A.2.5.2 Research Ethics Application
Date: 15 /12 /2005  R e ference : 06 /Q 2 305 /2 Online Form
A ll s tud ies except c lin ica l tria ls  o f investiga tiona l m edicinal p roducts
REC Ref 06-02305/2
Short Title of Study Experiences of people attending an assisted conception unit
Cl Name Mrs K. J. Cutts
Sponsor STH Research Department
Please complete this checklist and send it M th  your application
 Send ONE copy of each document {except where stated)
 ALL accompanying documents must bear version numbers and dates (except where staled)
 When collating please do NOT staple documents as they will need to be photocopied.
Docum ent Enclosed? Date Version O ffice use
Covering letter on headed paper   Yes O No 15/12/2005
NHS REC Application Form. Parts ASS Mandatory 15/12/2005 Version 1
NHS REC Application Form. Part C (SSA)   Yes O No 15/12/2005 Version 1
Research protocol (6 copies) or project proposal Mandatory 15/11/2005 Version 3
Summary C.V for Chief Investigator (Cl) Mandatory 15/12/2005
Summary C.V for supervisor (student research)   Yes O No 15/12/2005
Research participant information sheet (PIS)   Yes O No 16/11''2005 Version 3
Research participant consent form  Y e s  O N o 08/07/2005 Version 1
Letters of invitation to participants   Yes O No 12/12/2005 Version 1
GP/Consultant information sheets or letters 0  Yes (> No
Statement of indemnity arrangements   Yes O No 16/11/2005
Letter from sponsor O Yes <> No
Letter from statistician O Yes   No
Letter from funder   Yes O No 14/12/2005
Referees' or other scientific critique report  Y e s  O N o 15/11/2005
Summary, synopsis or diagram (flowchart) of 
protocol m non-technical language
  Yes O No 18/11/2005 Version 1
Interview schedules or topic guides for 
participants
O Yes   No
Validated questionnaire   Yes O No
Non-validated questionnaire O  Yes <> No
Copies of advertisement material for research 
particpants. e g posters, newspaper adverts, 
website For video or audio cassettes, please 
also provide the printed script
O  Yes <> No
Intervention Group Instruction Sheet (> Yes O  No 04/10/2005 Version 1
Control Group Instruction Sheet   Yes O  No 04/10/2005 Version 2
Debriefing Letter  Y e s  O N o 08/07/2005 Version 1
Demographic Information Sheet   Yes O N o 08/07/2005 Version 1
N H S  R EC A pp lica tion  Form  -  V ers ion 5.0 0 A B /1 6024/1
Date: 15/12/2005 Reference. 06/Q2305/2 Online Form
WELCOME TO THE NHS RESEARCH ETHICS COMMITTEE APPLICATION FORM
This page is important An application form specific to your project will be created from the answers you give.
1. Select one research category from the list below:
O  Clinical trials of investigational medicinal products (including phase 1 drug development) 
O Clinical investigations of medical devices 
O Research administering questionnaires for quantitative analysis 
O Research involving qualitative methods only 
O Research limited to taking and working with new samples 
O Non-interventional research
If your work does not fit any of these categories, select the option below:
0  Other research
l a  Please answer the following questions:
a) Does your study Involve the use of any radiation? O Y e s 0  No
b) Will you be taking new samples? O  Yes 0  No
c) Will you be using existing samples9 O Y e s 0  No
2. Is your research confined to one site?
0  Yes O  No
3. Does your research involve work with prisoners?
O  Yes 0 N o
4. Does your research involve adults unable to consent for themselves through physical or mental incapacity?
O  Yes 0  No
5. Is your work an educational project?
0  Yes O  No
6. Is your project an audit or service evaluation?
O  Yes 0  No
N H S REC App lica tion  Form  -  V ers ion 5.0 1 A B /1 6024/1
Date. 15/12/2005 Reference 0 602305 /2 Online Form
NHS Research Ethics Committee im ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Application form
This form should be completed by the Chief Investigator, after reading the guidance notes. See glossary for clarification 
of different terms in the application form.
Short title and version number: (maximum 70 characters -  this will be inserted as header on all forms)
Experiences of people attending an assisted conception unit
Name of NHS Research Ethics Committee to which application for ethical review is being made:
South Sheffield Research Ethics Committee
Project reference number from above REC: 06 Q2305 2 
Submission date: 15/12/2005
PART A: Introduction
A1. Title of the research
Full title The Efficacy of an Expressive Writing Task upon Psychological W ell-being in Individuals Attending an
Assisted Conception Unit
Key words emotional expression
disclosure writing
infertility
in vitro fertilization
distress
coping
appraisal
A2. Chief Investigator
Title: Mrs
Forename/Initials: K. J.
Surname. Cutts
Post PhD Student
Qualifications BSc (Hons) Psychology
Organisation Sheffield Hatlam University, Psychology
Address: Collegiate Crescent
Sheffield
Post Code: S10 2BP
E-m ail k.cutts@shu ac uk
Telephone: 0114 2255844
Fax; 0114 2252430
A copy o f a current C V  (maximum 2  pages o f A4) for the Chief Investigator must be submitted with the application
A3. Proposed study dates and duration
Start date 06/02 2006
End date 02/02/2007
NH S REC App lica tion  Form  -  V ers ion 5 0  2 - 1  A B /1 6024/1
Date: 15/12/2005 Reference: 06/Q2305/2 Online Form
I Duration: Months: 12; Years: 0 I
NHS REC Application Form -  Version 5.0 2 - 2  AB/16024/1
Date: 15/12/2005 Reference 06/Q2305/2 Online Form
A4. Primary purpose of the research: (Tick as appropriate)
C3 Commercial product development and/or licensing
  Publicly funded trial or scientific investigation 
0  Educational qualification
  Establishing a database/data storage facility
  Other
A6. Does this research require site-specific assessment (SSA) of each research site? (Advice can be found in the 
guidance notes on this topic.)
<> Yes O No 
If No. please justify :
If Yes, Part C o f the form w ill need to be completed for each research site and submitted for SSA to the relevant Local 
Research Ethics Committee Do not submit Part Cs tor other sites until the application has been booked for review and  
validated by the main Research Ethics Committee
Management approval to proceed with the research will be required from the RDDepartment for each N HS care organisation in 
which research procedures are undertaken. This applies whether o r not the research is exempt from SSA.
N H S  REC A pp lica tion  Form  -  V ers ion 5 .0  3 A B /1 6024/1
Date: 15/12/2005 Reference. 06/Q2305/2 Online Form
PART A: Section 1
A7. W hat is  the princ ipa l research question-ob jective? (Must be in language comprehensible to a lay person.)
Do IVF/iCSI patients who express their emotions through writing about the stress associated with infertility and their 
treatment, exhibit improvements in physical and psychological we ll-being compared to controls
A8. What are the secondary research questions/objectives? (If applicable, must be in language comprehensible to a lay  
person.)
Does the location of a diagnosis of compromised fertility status (i e mate factor/female factor/mixed e tc ) effect the efficacy 
of the writing task?
Do other moderating variables affect the efficacy of the writing task (e g socio-demographic variables, personality variables 
- e g  alexithymia)
Do self-reported coping efforts change across the study period as a function of the writing task
Is emotional expression or cognitive reappraisal evident within the writing task content?
A9. What is the scientific justification for the research? What is the background? Why is this an area of 
importance?(Must be in language comprehensible to a layperson)
The experience of unwanted childlessness can be devastating for couples, and the physical and emotional demands placed 
on couples undergoing fertility treatment can have a negative impact on psychological functioning (e g Greil, 19S7, Hurst. 
Dye. Rutherford. & Oodit. 19S9. Pook. Krause 8 Drescher. 2002) The stressful nature of the IVF process is such that some 
individuals feel unable to continue with treatment (Smeenk et a l . 2004) In recognising that IVF can be both physically and 
psychologically demanding the Human Fertilization and Embryology Authority (HFEA) (2004) recommends counselling 
services are available for all couples undergoing treatment. Although the majority of clinics provide counselling services for 
their patients, free of charge, couples appear to be reluctant to use these services (Kerr. Brown 8 Baien. 1S99). Suggested 
explanations for this include difficulty of scheduling sessions, time constraints, potential perceived costs and fear of being 
labelled as having a psychological problem (Boivin, Scanlan & Walker. 1999)
Research has shown that a writing intervention which promotes disclosure and emotional expression is effective in improving 
psychological and physical well-being in both healthy participants (e g Greenberg & Stone. 1992) and medical pahents such 
as women with breast cancer, men with prostrate cancer and rheumatoid arthritis patients (e g Stanton et al., 2002). 
Participants in studies which have examined the therapeutic benefits of writing are typically asked to write about their 
deepest thoughts and feeling relating to their past or current expereinces for 15-20 minutes on three to five days 
Particpants are assessed on a number of psychological and physical well-being measures up to six months after the final 
writing session (PennebakerS Segal. 1999)
This study is thus concerned with investigating the therapeutic utility of a writing intervention that is relatively cost effective, 
can be used outside of the traditional clinical setting and is free from the social constraints and stigma that may deter infertile 
couples from seeking psychosocial counselling
N H S R EC A pp lica tion  Form  -  V e rs ion  5 .0  4 A B /1 6024/1
Date: 15/12/2005 Reference. 06/Q2305/2 Online Form
A10. Give a full summary of the purpose, design and methodology of the planned research, including a brief 
explanation of the theoretical framework that informs i t  It should be clear exactly what will happen to the research 
participant, how many times and in what order. Describe any involvement of research participants, patient groups or 
communities in the design of the research.
This section must be completed in language comprehensible to the lay person. It must also be self-standing as it  will be 
replicated in any applications for site-specific assessment on Part C Do not simply reproduce or refer to the protocol Further 
guidance is available in the guidance notes
Wniing about emotional upheavals and stressful experiences has been found to have therapeutic benefits in healthy 
individuals and medical patients The methodology developed by Pennebaker and Beall (1936) involves individuals writing 
about their deepest thoughts and feelings relating to a stressful event on 3 -5  occasions for 15 -20  minutes Putting these 
emotional experiences into words can help people organize their thoughts, leading to new appraisals of past or present 
circumstances, often providing a sense of control over uncontrollable events (Pennebaker, 1997). The purpose of this study 
is to investigate the utility of such a writing intervention for patients attending a fertility clinic in alleviating infertility/treatment 
related stress and improving psychological well-being
Participants New referral male and female IVF/ICSI patients
Design: Recruited participants will be randomly allocated to one of two conditions, the writing intervention group or control 
group Participants will not be informed that they will be randomly allocated into either an intervention group or control group 
as this may bias their responses to questionnaires
Setting Participants will be recruited from an Assisted Conception Unit (ACU) and will be interviewed at the time of their first 
IVF consultation with regards to participation in the study Completion of questionnaires and writing sessions (intervention) 
will be completed in the participants' own homes to minimize participation burden
Method of Data Collection Questionnaires and diaries.
Outcome Measures The study will employ a number of standardised psychological measures including the Symptom 
Checklist-90-Revised (S C L-90-R ; Derogatis. 1983), Fertility Problem Inventory (FPI, Newton. Sherrard 8 Glavac, 1999), 
Impact of Event Scale (IES. Horowitz, Wilner 8 Alvarez. 1979) and Ways of Coping Questionnaire (WOC: Folkman 8 
Lazarus. 1983) Physical symptoms will be assessed using the Physical Symptoms Inventory (PSI. Spector 8 Jex. 1998)
Pre and post writing mood will be assessed using the Positive and Negative Affectivity Scale (PANAS Watson. Clark 8 
Tellegan. 1988) and participants will also be asked to complete an essay evaluation questionnaire (EEQ) and Event 
Appraisal Questionnaire (EAQ. Paez. Velasco, Gonzales. 1999) post writing Daily stress will be measured using the Daily 
Stress Inventory (DSI, Brantley. Waggoner. Jones 8 Rappaport. 1987) and the Toronto Alexithymia Scale (TAS-20, Taylor. 
Bagby 8 Parker, 1997) will be administered at the beginning of the study to determine if participants have deficits in 
emotional awareness, understanding or expression.
Procedure New referral couples attending for IVF'ICSI treatment at the ACU will be contacted by letter prior to their initial 
consultation informing them of the study and requesting their participation Interested couples will be provided detailed 
information (written and verbal) about the study at the time of first consultation and invited to take part
Each participant will receive a study pack containing baseline measures, writing materials and pre and post writing mood 
questionnaires, two sets of lo llow -up questionnaires and a pack containing daily stress monitoring forms All participants will 
be given detailed completion instructions and all packs will include dates for completion and pre-paid addressed envelopes 
for the return of completed questionnaires
The day after recruitment participants will complete the baseline questionnaire booklet (TAS-20. S C L-90-R . WOC. PSI. IES 
and FPi). On the second day participants will begin completing the DSI which they will complete every evening for the next 
48 days On day eight, twenty-two and thirty-six. intervention participants will complete the pre-writing PANAS followed by 
a 15 minute writing session (intervention) and then the post-writing PANAS. EAQ and EEA On day fifty and seventy-eight 
all participants will complete the follow-up questionnaire booklets (SC L-90-R . WOC, PSI, IES and FPI)
in order to maintain continued participation in the study and to provide reminders of completion dates all participants will be 
contacted at key times within the study period via phone/text or e -m a il (at the descretion o( the participant)
NH S R EC A pp lica tion  Form  -  V e rs ion  5 .0  5 A B /1 6024/1
Date: 15/12/2005 Reference 06/Q2305/2 Online Form
A11. Will any intervention or procedure, which would normally be considered a part of routine care, be withheld from 
the research participants?
O Y e s  <S>No
A12. Give details of any clinical intervention(s) or procedure(s) to be received by research participants over and above 
those which would normally be considered a part of routine clinical care.(These indude uses o f medicinal products o r 
devices, other m edical treatments o r assessments, mental health interventions, imaging investigations and taking samples o f 
human biological material.)
Additional
Intervention
Average number per patient
Average time 
taken
(mins-hours/days)
Details of additional intervention or 
procedure, who will undertake it, and 
what training they have received.
Routine Care Research
Psychological
therapies
0 3 15 mins
Participants in the intervention group 
ONLY will complete three 15 minute 
writing sessions. 14 days apart in their 
own home Participants will be asked to 
write about their thoughts and feelings 
relating to their infertility.
N H S R EC App lica tion  Form  -  V e rs ion  5 .0  6 A 8 /1 5024/1
Date. 15/12/2005 Reference 06/G2305/2 Online Form
A13. Give details of any non-d in ical research-related interventions) or procedure(s).(These include interviews, 
non -d in ica l observations and use o f questionnaires.)
Additional Intervention
Average 
number per 
patient
Average time 
taken
(mins'hours/days)
Details of additional intervention or procedure, who 
will undertake it, and what training they have 
received.
Other Questionnaire 18 1 hour/ 3 times
Participants will receive three questionnaire booklets 
from the researcher at the recruitment stage of the 
study. Each booklet will contain six questionnaires that 
ask them to report information relating to their general 
physical and emotional state, fertility problems and 
coping efforts they use to deal with their fertility 
problem All questionnaires are completed in the 
privacy of their own home at allocated time points 
throughout the study
Other Questionnaire 48 5-10  mins/daily
Participants will receive a pack of stress inventories 
that they will be asked to complete daily throughout the 
study at home.
Other Questionnaire 6 5 mins
Participants in the intervention group ONLY will 
complete a  questionnaire that assesses mood state 
immediately before and after writing.
Other Questionnaire 3 2 mins
Participants in the intervention group ONLY will 
complete a five item questionnaire to assess their 
subjective evaluation of the events they write about and 
their previous level of disclosure after each writing 
session.
Other Questionnaire 3 2 mins
Participants in the intervention group ONLY will 
complete a three item questionnaire to assess their 
subjective appraisal of the event they have written 
about This will be completed after each writing 
session
A14. Will individual or group interviews/questionnaires discuss any topics or issues that might be sensitive, 
embarassing or upsetting, or is it possible that criminal or other disclosures requiring action could take place during 
the study (e.g. during interviews group discussions, or use of screening tests for drugs)?
<> Yes O No
If Yes, give details o f procedures in place to deal with these issues
All participants will be asked to complete questionnaires regarding their general physical and emotional w e ll-being as well as 
a questionnaire that asks how participants specifically feel about issues surrounding their fertility and the effect this has on a 
number of aspects of their life. Intervention group participants will be asked to write about these issues and the IVF process 
which could cause them to feel upset. Al participants will be informed at recruitment that they will be asked to divulge 
sensitive information that may cause them to feel some disiress. this information is also included in the information sheet 
along with contact details of support groups and other organisations However, participants will be advised to contact the 
units' counselling services if they become distressed and feel they need to talk to someone. It is not anticipated that any 
criminal or cither disclosures will be made during the study that require action
The Information Sheet should make it clear under what circumstances action m ay be taken
N H S  R EC App lica tion  Form  -  V ers ion 5 .0  7 A B /1 6024/1
Date: 15/12/2005 Reference. 06/Q2305/2 Online Form
A15. What is the expected total duration of participation in the study for each participant?
The expected total duration for each participant in the study is approximately 78 days This is calculated from the day of 
recruitment to the completion of the final fo llow-up questionnaire.
A16. What are the potential adverse effects, risks or hazards for research participants either from giving or withholding 
medications, devices, ionising radiation, or from other interventions (including non-clinical)?
There are no potential risks or hazards for participants but there is the potential for intervention participants to experience 
distress during and after the writing intervention Participants will be informed of this at the time of recruitment and will be 
advised that they should contact the counselling services at the clinic if they feel they cannot cope with their distress 
Information relating to other support groups and contacts w ill be included in the information sheets that participants receive
A17. What is the potential for pain, discomfort, distress, inconvenience or changes to lifestyle for research 
participants?
It is acknowledged that there is the potential for all participants to experience some distress associated with completing 
self-report questionnaires that ask participants to disclose their feelings in relation to specific life events In anticipation of 
this, participants are informed of the potential for distress in taking part in the study and directed to contact the clinic 
counselling services or other support services in this eventuality
In terms of intervention group participants it is well-documented that writing about stressful and traumatic events has the 
potential to cause short-term  distress (Smyth. 1998). particpants will be made fully aware of this and directed to relevent 
support services
It is not anticipated that participation in the study will inconvenience participants or impact on their lifestyle but it is 
acknowledged that there is some element of time commitment required from participants throughout the study and as such 
they will be informed of the all stages and duration of the process In order to reduce burden on participants ail 
questionnaires and intervention writing will be completed in their own homes at their own pace.
A18. What is the potential for benefit to research participants?
As the study is examining the effectiveness of a writing intervention in improving physical and psychological well-being there 
is the potential for intervention group participants to benefit both physically and emotionally
A 19. What is the potential for adverse effects, risks or hazards, pain, discomfort, distress, or inconvenience to the 
researchers themselves? (it any)
None.
N H S R EC App lica tion  Form  -  V e rs ion  5 .0  8 A B /1 6024/1
Date 15/12/2005 Reterence 06/Q2305/2 Online Form
A20. How will potential participants in the study be (i) identified, (ii) approached and (iii) recruited?
Give details for cases arid controls separately if  appropriate:
Following ethical approval potential participants will be recruited from new referral IVF/ICSI patients The principal researcher 
will liaise with a member of the clinical team to identify potential participants Couples who are attending the clinic as new 
IVF/ICSI patients will be sent details of the study by letter prior to the start of their treatment cycle This letter will include a 
general information sheet for them to read outlining the details of the study and what would be expected of them if they 
agreed to take part.
On the same day of their pre-arranged medical consuitaion at the clinic, patients would be approached by the researcher 
and asked if they had considered taking part and those who agree would be given a verbal introduction to the study in the 
privacy of a consultation room and advised of their right to refuse to take part and that this would not affect their medical 
treatment.
Participants would be informed of their rights regarding withdrawal, confidentiality and anonymity before being asked to give 
signed consent
A21. Where research participants will be recruited via advertisement, give specific details.
0  Not Applicable
If applicable, enclose a copy o f the advertisement 'radio script/website. video for television (with a version num ber and date;.
N H S REC A pp lica tion  Form  -  V e rs ion  5 .0  9 A 8 /1 6024/1
Date. 15/12/2005 Reference. 06/Q2305/2 Online Form
A22. What are the principal inclusion criteria?(Ptease justify)
The pnnicpal inclusion criteria are that individuals who take part in the study are new refferals to the Assisted Conception 
Unit (ACU) and have not previously undergone IVF/ICSi treatment tt is important to control for the number of IVF treatments 
experienced by patients as it is possible that couples react differently to repeated IVF attempts (Eugster 8 Vingerhoets. 
1999).
A23. What are the principal exclusion criteria? (Pfease justify)
Participants must be able to read and write to take part in the study and must be able to read and write in English
A24. Will the participants be from any of the following groups?/7fCk as appropriate}
P I  Children under 16
CD Adults with learning disabilities
CD Adults who are unconscious or very severely ill
CD Adults who have a terminal illness
  Adults in emergency situations
CD Adults with mental illness (particularly if detained under Mental Health Legislation)
I'D  Adults with dem ents
  Prisoners
CD Young Offenders
CD Adults in Scotland who are unable to consent for themselves 
CD Healthy Volunteers
CD Those who could be considered to have a particularly dependent relationship with the investigator, e g those in care 
homes, medical students 
CD Other vulnerable groups
Justify the ir inclusion.
None.
N H S RE C  App lica tion  Form  -  V e rs ion  5 .0  10 A B /1 6024/1
Date. 15'12/2005 Reference 06/Q2305/2 Online Form
A25. Will any research participants be recruited who are involved in existing research or have recently been involved in 
any research prior to recruitment?
O Yes O No <> Not Known
If Yes, give details and justify their inclusion. If Not Known, what steps will you take to find ou t?
Potential participants may be engaging in drug trials at the ACU, it is not thought that this will be problematic for this 
research.
A2$. Will informed consent be obtained from the research participants?
<*) Yes O No
I f  Yes, give details o f who will take consent and how it w ill be done Give details o f any particular steps to provide information 
(in addition to a written information sheet) e g. videos, interactive material
If participants are to be recruited from any o f the potentially vulnerable groups listed in A24. give details o f extra steps taken 
to assure their protection. Describe any arrangements to be made for obtaining consent from a legal representative.
If consent is not to be obtained, please explain why not.
Participants will receive information relating to the study in the form of an information sheet and will be verbally briefed at the 
tim e of recruitment by the principal researcher Participants will be given the opportunity to ask questions prior to  giving 
written consent
Copies o f the written information and aH other explanatory material should accompany this application.
A27. Will a signed record of consent be obtained?
  Yes O N o
I f  Yes. attach a copy of the information sheet to be used, with a version number and date.
N H S RE C  App lica tion  Form  -  V e rs ion  5 .0  12 A B /1 5024/1
Dale: 15/12/2005 Reference; G6/Q2305/2 Online Form
A28. How long will the participant have to decide whether to take part in the research?
A letter of invitation to participate in the study w ill be sent to arrive approximately seven days before they are to attend the 
clinic for their medical consultation Participants will be given the researchers contact details at this time if they wish to obtain 
any further information about the study
A29. What arrangements have been made for participants who might not adequately understand verbal explanations or 
written information given in English, or who have special communication needs? (e.g translation, use o f interpreters etc.)
Patients who cannot adequately understand verbal or written information that is given in English will not be able to participate 
in the study The researcher speaks only English and the costs associated with employing the services of an interpretor or 
translator to be available on a daily basis to assist non-English speaking/writing participants would be excessive 
Furthermore, the standardized measures used have been validated in English speaking/writing populations and therefore 
would not be suitable for use with non-English speaking populations without prior validation
A30. What arrangements are in place to ensure participants receive any information that becomes available during the 
course of the research that may be relevant to their continued participation?
If at anytime during the study information becomes available that may affect the continued participation of patients they will 
be informed in writing
A31. Does this study have or require approval of the Patient information Advisory Group (PIAG) or other bodies with a 
similar remit? /see the guidance notes)
O Y e s   N o
A32a. Will the research participants' General Practitioner be informed that they are taking part in the study?
O  Yes  N o
It Yes. encbse a copy o f the information sheet le tter for the GP with a version number and date.
A32b. Will permission be sought from the research participants to inform their GP before this i3 done?
O Y e s    No
It No to either question, explain why not
The research protocol has been discussed with the Consultant in charge of the ACU and their consent for the research to 
3ke part has been obtained The clinical team responsible for the patients' care at the ACU will be aware of the patients' 
involvement in the study, and the demands placed on the patient The clinical team will be the first point of contact for any 
issues relating to their treatment
It should be made clear in the patient information sheet if  the research participants GP will be informed.
N H S  REC A pp lica tion  Form  -  V e rs ion  5 .0 13 A B /1 6024/1
Date. 15/12/2005 Reference 06/Q2305/2 Online Form
A33. Will individual research participants receive any payments for taking part in this research?
O Yes   No
A34. Will individual research participants receive re im bursem ent o f  expenses  or any other in cen tives  o r  ben e fits  for 
taking part in this research?
O  Yes   No
A35. What arrangements have been made to provide indemnity and/or compensation in the event of a  claim by, or on 
behalf of, participants for neg ligent harm?
Sheffield Hallam University has purchased negligence cover and this applies to the research p rqec i here
Please forward copies o f the relevant documents.
A36. What arrangements have been made to provide indemnity and/or compensation in the event of a claim by, or on 
behalf of. participants for n o n -n e a lia e n t harm?
No such cover has been arranged
Please forward copies o f the relevant documents.
N H S REC A pp lica tion  Form  -  V e rs ion  5 .0  14 A B /1 6024/1
Dale: 15/12/2005 Reference: 06/02305/2 Online Form
A37. How is it intended the results of the study will be reported and disseminated? 'T ick as appropriate)
0  Peer reviewed scientific journals 
0  Internal report 
0  Conference presentation 
[~ l Other publication 
0  Submission to regulatory authorities
0  Access to raw data and right to publish freely by all investigators in study or by Independent Steering Committee on 
behalf of ail investigators 
0  Written feedback to research participants 
0  Presentation to participants or relevant community groups 
0  Other/none e.g. Cochrane Review, University Library
If other/none o f the above, give details and justify:
A completed PhD thesis which will include the results of data obtained in the study will be placed in Sheffield Haliam 
University Library in accordance with university procedures.
A3S. How will the results of research be made available to research participants and communities from which they are 
drawn?
Participants will be informed (included in the information sheet) that if they wish to be receive the results of the study that 
they can contact the researcher at any time after the Autumn of 2006 (this is when the complete results of the study should 
be available) and they will be sent a written summary of the findings Participants will also be advised that the full results of 
the study will form part of a PhD thesis and that this will be placed in Sheffield Haliam University Library.
It is anticipated that the finidngs from the study will be presented to the clinical team in the form of a written report or oral 
presentation upon completion of the thesis
A39. Will the research involve any of the following activities at any stage (including identification of potential research 
participants)?(T/ck as appropriate)
0  Examination of medical records by those outside the NHS. or within the NHS by those who would not normally have 
access
0  Electronic transfer by magnetic or optical media, e -m a il or computer networks 
0  Sharing of data with other organisations 
0  Export of data outside the European Union
0  Use of personal addresses, postcodes, faxes, e-m a ils  or telephone numbers 
0  Publication of direct quotations from respondents 
0  Publication of data that might allow identification of individuals 
0  Use of audio/visual recording devices 
0  Storage of personal data on any of the following 
0  Manual files including X-rays 
0  NHS computers 
0  Home or other persona) computers 
0  University computers 
0  Private company computers 
0  Laptop computers
Further details:
Examination of medical records will be only conducted with the consent of participants Personal data will be kept on a 
computer that is for the sole use of the researcher and is password protected
N H S R EC App lica tion  Form  -  V ers ion 5 .0  1 5 - 1  A B /1 6024/1
Date: 15/12/2005 Reference: 06/Q2305/2 Online Form
A40. What measures have been put in place to ensure confidentiality of personal data? Give details of whether any 
encryption or other anonymisation procedures have been used and at what stage:
All data collected from participants will be anonymised using a coding system whereby participants generate their own 6 digit 
ID code which they will include on all questionnaires and writing booklets. It is essential that data collected from each 
participant at each stage of the study can be matched up
Contact information for each participant will also be obtained in the form of address, telephone numbers and e-m a il 
addresses (if applicabe)in order for the researcher to remind participants to complete questionnaires or writing booklets on 
specific days throughout the study To maintain confidentiality contact details will not be kept with participant data and the 
researcher will be the only person able to access the file containing contact details This will be in the form of an electronic 
document that will be password protected and kept on a university computer
All electronic data files (writing transcribed for analysis) will be stored in the researchers file space on the university network 
which is also password protected
Participants will be asked to consent for the researcher to access their medical files This will be to obtain information relating 
to treatment outcome (positive or negative pregnancy test)
A41. Where will the analysis of the data from the study take place and by whom will it be undertaken?
Analysis of the data from the study will take place in the Graduate School, Sheffield Haliam University and will be undertaken 
by the PhD student who is the principal researcher
A42. Who will have control of and act as the custodian for the data generated by the study?
The supervisors of the PhD student. Dr Keith Hurst. Dr Madelynne Arden and Dr John Reidy. Psychology. Faculty of 
Development and Society. Sheffield Haliam University will be custodians
A43. Who will have access to the data generated by the study?
The PhD student and her supervisors will have access to the data
A44. For how long will data from the study be stored?
5 Years 0 Months
Give details o f where they will be stored, who will have access and the custodial arrangements for the data:
Whilst the study is ongoing any data generated from the study will be stored in a locked filling cabinet in the office of the 
researcher Once the PhD is published the raw data and data set will be stored in the univensty archives
N H S  REC A pp lica tion  Form  -  V e rs ion  5 .0  16 A B /1 5024/1
Date: 15/12/2005 Reference: 0602305/2 Online Form
A45-1. How has the scientific quality of the research been assessed?,T/c/< as appropriate)
0  Independent external review 
D  Review within a company
  Review within a multi-centre research group
0  Internal review (e g involving colleagues, academic supervisor)
  None external to the investigator
  Other, e g methodological guidelines (give details below)
Justify and describe the review process and outcome If the review has been undertaken but not seen by the researcher, 
give details o f the body which has undertaken the review
The present study has been developed under the supervison of the students academic supervisors, the study protocol was 
continually reviewed throughout its devteopment by the supervisory team
Independent scientific review was sought through the Research Department. STH NHS Foundation Trust. A favourable 
decision was from the lead reviewer indicated that the study could be taken forward and no changes were required but minor 
suggestions were made The second reviewer requested that changes be made which included: more detailed information 
regarding participants' rights, data protection and data storage and the consultation of service users The changes were 
made and a more detailed outline of the strategy for developing the study was also included
Amendments were also made to the protocol in response to comments from the lead reviewer, which included justification 
for the proposed design and changes to the contact details contained in the participant information sheet
On re-submission the second reviewer requested that one final amendment be made to the protocol and the participant 
information sheet regarding the time taken to complete questionnaires, it was suggested that 1 hour would be a more 
appropriate estimation for completion of the main questionnaire booklets The protocol and information sheets were 
amended accordingly and the study was given approval to commence.
It you are in possession o f any referees' comments or other scientific critique reports relevant to the proposed research, these 
must be enclosed with the application.
A45-2. Has the protocol submitted with this application been the subject of review by a statistician independent of the 
research team?(Se/ecf one o f the following)
O Yes -  copy of review enclosed
O Yes -  details of review available from the following individual or organisation (give contact details below)
<> No -  justify below
The protocol submitted with this application has not been subject to statistical review independently of the supervisory team 
The development of the protocol has been subject to scrutiny of all members of the supervisory team who are experienced in 
lecturing statistics and research methods Dr John Reidy in particular has overall responsibility for the teaching of statistics in 
the Psychology Department and has published a book on statistics for psychologists. It was considered that with the 
combined experience and Dr Reidy's expertise in statistics and research methods that it was not necessary to seek 
independent advice or review
N H S  REC A pp lica tion  Form  -  V ers ion 5 .0  17 A B /1 6024/1
Date; 15/12/2005 Reference. 06/Q2305/2 Online Form
A48. What is the primary outcome measure for the study?
The primary outcome measure for the study is psychological well-being, this will be assessed in terms of levels of anxiety, 
depression, infertility related distress and general overall psychological functioning on day 50 and day 78 of the study This 
will be measured using the Symptom Checktist-90-fievised, Daily Stress Inventory and Fertility Problem Inventory
A49. What are the secondary outcome measures?;// any)
Secondary outcome measures include self reported physical well-being as measured by the Physical Symptoms Inventory 
and coping efforts as measured by the Ways of Coping Questionnaire on day 50 and day 78 of the study Treatment 
outcome will be included as a secondary outcome and will be assesed from the routine pregnancy test at the end of the IVF 
treatment cycle
A50. How many participants will be recruited?
It there is more than one group, state how m any participants will be recruited in each group For international studies, say how  
many participants will be recruited in the UK and in total
Attrition rates in psychological studies involving patients undergoing IVF treatment can be high. In one study that used daily 
stress monitoring similar to that which is to be used in this study, only 45% of participants completed the study (Boivin et a  , 
1998) A final sample of 48 participants is required for the study, in order to achieve this target and allow for attrition 
approximately 100 participants will be recruited
A51. How was the number of participants decided upon?
In order to determine the sample size required to achieve adequate power in the final analysis Gpower (Erdfelder. Faul S 
Buchner, 1996) was used to calculate a  priori the sample size required to obtain an effect size equivalent to those observed 
in previous diary writing studies For example in a meta analysis conducted by Smyth (1998) an effect size of d  66 was 
calculated for psychological well-being and d = 42 for self-reported physical health
If a formal sample size calculation was used, indicate how this was done, giving sufficient information to justify and  
reproduce the calculation
Using these previously published effect sizes as a guide (d  66 and d *= 42) power calculations indicated that a total 
sample size of 48 (A = 05. power = 80. Critical f  (1. 46) -  4 05, Lambda = 8 47) would be required to obtain a comparable 
effect size for psychological well-being and 22 (&  05. power   80. Critical I  (1, 20)  4 35. Lambda  9 58) for 
self-reported physical health Thus a final sample size of 48 will be required
A52. Will participants be allocated to groups at random?
<S> Yes O No
If yes. give details o f the intended method o f randomisation:
Participants will be allocated to the intervention or control group using block randomisation due to there being a relaiivley 
small sample size and to try and maintain equal numbered groups
N H S  REC App lica tion  Form  -  V ers ion 5 .0  18 A B /1 8024/1
Date: 15/12/2005 Reference: 06/Q2305/2 Online Form
A53. Describe the methods of analysis (statistical or other appropriate methods, e.g. for qualitative research) by which 
the data will be evaluated to meet the study objectives.
In order to determine if the intervention has been effective in producing positive benefits in relation to primary and secondary 
outcomes the data will be subject to analysis using ANOVA and t-tes t or the non-param etric equivalent (depending on 
suitability of the data) It is anticipated that secondary analysis will also be conducted using univariate methods to examine 
the influence of other variables on the outcome measures (i e gender and emotional awareness as measured by the 
Toronto Aiexithymia Scale).
Analysis of the diaries written by intervention group participants w ill be conducted using a computerized text analysis 
programme, the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC Pennebaker. Francis & Boothe. 2001). The data generated from 
this will be subjected to univariate statistical analysis to determine the level of emotional and cognitive words used over the 
writing sessions
A54, Where will the research take place?(Trek as appropriatej 
0  UK
  Other states in European Union
f~ l Other countries in European Economic Area
I~1 Other
If Other, give details:
A55. Has this or a similar application been previously rejected by a Research Ethics Committee in the UK, the European 
Union or the European Economic Area?
O Yes <> No
N H S RE C  App lica tion  Form  -  Version 5 .0  19 A B /1 6024/1
Date: 15/12/2005 Reterence. 06/Q2305/2 Online Form
A56. In how many and what type of host organisations (NHS or other) in the UK is it intended the proposed study will 
take place?
Indicate the type o f organisation by ticking the box and give approximate numbers i f  known
Number of 
organisations
0  Acute teaching NHS Trusts 1
0  Acute NHS Trusts
0  NHS Primary Care Trusts or Local Health Boards in Wales 
0  NHS Trusts providing mental healthcare 
0  NHS Health Boards in Scotland 
0  HPSS Trusts in Northern Ireland 
o  GP Practices 
0  NHS Care Trusts 
O  Social care organisations 
0  Prisons
0  Independent hospitals 
0  Educational establishments 
0  Independent research units 
0  Other (give details)
Other:
A57. What arrangements are in place for monitoring and auditing the conduct of the research?
Regular meetings between the supervisors and the student will ensure monitoring and auditing of the research process 
Will a data monitoring committee be convened?
O Y e s  <*>No
If Yes, details o f membership o f the data monitoring committee (DMC), its standard operating procedures and summaries o f 
reports o f interim analyses to the DMC must be forwarded to the NHS Research Ethics Committee which gives a favourable 
opinion o l the study.
What are the criteria for electively stopping the trial or other research prematurely?
Any unforseen adverse event will stop the research
N H S  R EC A pp lica tion  Form  -  V e rs ion  5 .0  20 A B /1 6024/1
Date: 15/12/2005 Reference 06/Q2305/2 Online Form
A58. Has external funding for the research been secured?
<) Yes O N o
If Yes, give details of funding organisation(s) and amount secured and duration:
Organisation: Sheffield Haliam University
Address Collegiate Crescent Campus
Sheffield
Post Code: S10 2BP
UK contact: Prof Peter Ashworth
Telephone: 0114 2252561 Fax:
E-mail: P D.Ashworth@shu ac uk
Amount (): 500.00 Duration 12 Months
A59. Has the funder of the research agreed to act as sponsor as set out in the Research Governance Framework?
O Yes 0 N o
Has the employer of the Chief Investigator agreed to act as sponsor of the research?
O Yes <) No
Sponsor (must be completed in ell cases)
Name of organisation which will act as sponsor for the research 
STH Research Department 
Status:
  NHS or HPSS care organisation O  Academic O  Pharmaceutical industry O  Medical device industry O  Other 
If Other, please specify
Address 305 Western Bank
Sheffield
P o stcode  S10 2TJ
Telephone 0114 271 3740 Fax: 0114271 1790
E-mail: ResearchAdministration@sth.nhs.uk
The responsibilities o f the sponsor m ay be shared between co-sponsors If this applies, name the lead sponsor tor the REC 
application in this box and enclose a letter giving further details o f co-sponsors and their responsibilities.
Sponsors UK contact point for correspondence with the main REC
N H S  R EC A pp lica tion  Form  -  V e rs ion  5 .0  2 1 - 1  A B /1 6024/1
mailto:ResearchAdministration@sth.nhs.uk
Date: 15/12/2005 Reference: 06/Q2305/2 Online Form
Title: Dr Forename/Initials: Brenda Surname: Zinober
Address: 305 Western Bank 
Sheffield
Post Code: S10 2TJ
Telephone: 0114 271 3465 Fax: 0114 271 1790
E-mail: brendazinober@sth.nhs.uk
NHS REC Application Form -  Version 5.0 2 1 - 2  AB/16024/1
mailto:brendazinober@sth.nhs.uk
Date: 15/12/2005 Reference: 06/Q2305/2 Online Form
A60. Has any responsibility for the research been delegated to a subcontractor?
O Y e s    No
A61. Will individual researchers  receive any personal payment over and above normal salary for undertaking this 
research?
O Y e s  O N o
A62. Will individual researchers  receive any other benefits or incentives for taking part in this research?
O Yes O  No
A63. Will the host organisation or the researcher's department/s) or institution(s) receive any payment or benefits in 
excess of the costs of undertaking the research?
O Yes <> No
A64. Does the Chief Investigator or any other investigator/collaborator have any direct personal involvement (e.g. 
financial, share-holding, personal relationship e tc ) in the organisation sponsoring or funding the research that may 
give rise to a possible conflict of interest?
O Y e s   N o
N H S R EC App lica tion  Form  -  V e rs ion  5 .0  22  A B /1 6024/1
Date: 15/12/2005 Reference 06/Q2305/2 Online Form
A65. Other relevant reference numbers if knownfg/Ve details and version numbers as appropriate):
Applicants/organisation's own reference number, e g RD(if available): STH14116
Sponsor's/protocol number STH14116
Funder's reference number 24RPSOSL01F1
International Standard Randomised Controlled Trial Number (ISRCTN)
European Clinical Trials Database (EudraCT) number
Project website
A66. Other key investigators 'collaborators/a// grant co-applicants s hou b  be listed)
Title.
Forename/Initials Surname.
Qualifications
Organisation:
Address
Telephone
Postcode
E -m a il:
N H S REC A pp lica tion  Form  -  V ers ion 5 .0  23 A B /1 6024/1
Date: 15/12/2005 Reference: 06/Q2305/2 Online Form
A67. If the research involves a specific intervention, (e.g. a drug, medical device, dietary manipulation, lifestyle change 
etc.), what arrangements are being made for continued provision of this for the participant (if appropriate) once the 
research has finished?
0  Not Applicable
PART A : Summary of Ethical issues
A68. What do you consider to be the main ethical issues which may arise with the proposed study and what steps will 
be taken to address these?
Participants may find it distressing to write about their fertility problems and the treatments that they are undergoing 
Participants will be advised of this at the time of recruitment Contact details for members of the research team are clearly 
stated on the participant information sheet along with contact details of other useful support groups and organisations First 
and foremost participants will be advised to contact the counselling services at the clinic if they become distressed This 
advice will be given at recruitment In the event of a distressed patient contacting a member of the research team, they will 
be advised to contact the counselling services
It will be emphasized that participants do not have to take part in the study and if they do. they can withdraw from the study, 
without giving a reason and that this will not affect the treatment they receive from the clinic The cut off point for participants 
to withdraw data is after Februray 2007 at which time analysis and write up will be underway Participants will be reassured 
that they do not have to answer any questions that they do not want to and they w ill be given the opportunity to ask for more 
information or to ask any questions they wish
Confidentiality and anonymity of patient information will be maintained at all times. A ll questionnaire data and writing 
booklets collected from participants will be coded, individual participants will not be identifiable from their data and all paper 
documentation will be stored in locked filing cabinets in the office of the researcher whilst the study is ongoing Electronic 
data (writing transcribed for analysis) will be stored in the researchers file space on the university network which is password 
protected Although particpant ID codes w ill be noted in their clinic medical records (stored at the hospital), it will not be 
possible for anyone to cross reference study data with these records as all study data will be stored at the university
N H S R EC A pp lica tion  Form  -  V ers ion 5 .0  24 A B /1 6024/1
Date: 15/12/2005 Reference 06/Q2305/2 Online Form
PART A: Student Page
A70. Give details of the educational course or degree for which this research is being undertaken:
Name and level of course/degree
Degree of Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) Social Science and Law
Name of educational establishment 
Sheffield Haliam University
Name and contact details of educational supervisor.
Dr Keith Hurst, Psychology. Faculty of Development and Society. Sheffield Haliam University, Southbourne Building. 
Collegiate Crescent Campus Sheffield. S10 28P Tel 0114 2254362 E-marl k m hurst@shu.ac.uk
A71. Declaration of supervisor
I have read and approved both the research proposal and this application for the ethical review I undertake to fulfil the 
responsibilities of a supervisor as set out in the Research Governance Framework for Health and Social Care
Signature.
Print Name
Date (dd/mm/yyyy)
A one-page summary o f the supervisors CV should be submitted with the application
N H S REC A pp lica tion  Form  -  Version 5 .0 25 A B /1 6024/1
mailto:hurst@shu.ac.uk
Date: 15/12/2005 Reference. 0602305/2 Online Form
List below all research sites you plan to include in this study. The name o f the site is normally the name o f the acute NHS Trust. 
GP practice o r other organisation responsible for the care o f research participants. In some cases it m ay be an individual unit, 
private practice or a consortium -  see the guidance notes
Principal Investigators a t other sites should apply to the relevant local Research Ethics Committee for site-specific assessment 
(SSA) using Part C o f the application form. Applications for SSA may be made in parallel with the main application for ethical 
review (once the main REC has validated the application), o r following issue o f a favourable ethical opinion. Approval b re a c h  
site w ill be issued to you by the m ain REC bllow ing SSA
1. Name of the research site:
Royal Hallamshtre Hospital. Jessop Wing
Principal Investigator for the study at this site:
Title: Mrs Forename/Initials: Katie J. Surname Cutts
Post PhD Student
Address Sheffield Haliam University
Collegiate Crescent Campus
Sheffield
Postcode S10 2BP
PART B: Section 1 -  List of proposed resea
N H S R EC App lica tion  Form  -  V e rs ion  5 .0  26 A B /1 6024/1
Date: 15/12/2005 Reference. 06/Q2305/2 Online Form
PART B: Section 7 -  Declaration
-  The information in this form is accurate to the best of my knowledge and belief and I take full responsibility for it
-  I undertake to abide by the ethical principles underlying the Declaration of Helsinki and good practice guidelines on the 
proper conduct of research
-  If the research is approved I undertake to adhere to the study protocol, the terms of the full application of which the main 
REC has given a favourable opinion and any conditions set out by the main REC in giving its favourable opinion
-  I undertake to seek an ethical opinion from the main REC before implementing substantial amendments to the protocol or 
to the terms of the full application of which the mam REC has given a favourable opinion
-  I undertake to submit annual progress reports setting out the progress of the research,
-  I am aware of my responsibility to be up to date and comply with the requirements of the law and relevant guidelines 
relating to  security and confidentiality of patient or other personal data, including the need to register when necessary with 
the appropriate Data Protection Officer
-  I understand that research records/data may be subject to inspection for audit purposes if required in future
-  I understand that personal data about me as a researcher in this application will be held by the relevant RECs and their 
operational managers and that this will be managed according to the principles established in the Data Protection Act
-  I understand that the information contained in this application, any supporting documentation and all correspondence with 
NHS Research Ethics Committees or their operational managers relating to the application, will be subject to the provisions 
of the Freedom of Information Acts The information may be disclosed in response to requests made under the Acts except 
where statutory exemptions apply
Signature:
Date (dd/mm/yyyy)
Print Name
NH S REC A pplica tion  Form  -  V ers ion 5.0 39 A B /1 6024/1
Date: 15/12/2005 Reference 06/Q2305/2 Online Form
This form should be completed by the Principal Investigator tor each site (see glossary)
Part C should be completed and sent with the relevant enclosures to each NHS Research Ethics Committee, which needs to 
consider site -spedfic  issues. See guidance notes at the COREC website for further information about the application procedure.
The data in this box is  populated from Part A
Short title and version number:
Experiences of people attending an assisted conception unit
Name of NHS Research Ethics Committee to which application for ethical review is being made:
South Sheffield Research Ethics Committee
Project reference number from above REC: 06.;Q2305/2
Name of NHS REC responsible for SSA:
South Sheffield REC
SSA reference (for REC office use only):
Questions C1. C4, C5, C6. C7. C8 and C 13a correspond to questions A1, A2. A65. A 10. A 12. A13 and A29 on main application 
form respectively and will populate automatically
C1. Title of the reaearchi Populated from A t)
Full title The Efficacy of an Expressive Writing Task upon Psychological W ell-being in Individuals Attending an
Assisted Conception Unit.
Keywords emotional expression
disclosure writing
infertility
in vrtro fertilization
distress
coping
appraisal
C2. Who is the Principal Investigator for this study at this site?
Title Mrs Forename/Initials: Katie J Surname Cults
Posl PhD Student
Qualifications BSc (Honours) Psychology
Organisation Sheffield Haliam University
Address Collegiate Crescent Campus
Sheffield
Post Code: S10 2BP
E-mail: kcutts@ shu ac.uk
Telephone. 0114 2255844
Fax 0114 2252430
A copy o f a current CV (maximum 2  pages o f A4) for the Principal Investigator(s) must be submitted with the application
N H S  R EC A pp lica tion  Form  -  V e rs ion  5 .0  40  C /16024/19424/1
Date: 15/12/2005 Reference. 06/Q2305/2 Online Form
C 2-1. Give the names and posts of other investigators or members of the research team responsible to the local 
Principal Investigator for this site.
Include a ll staff with a significant research role If the site is a network o r consortium, list a ll participating investigators below 
Title:
Forename/Initials:
Surname:
Position
Qualifications:
Role in the research team
C3. Indicate the number of trials/projects within the organisation that the local Principal Investigator has been involved 
with in the previous 12 months:
How many are still current (active or recruiting)?
04. Chief \m es t\g a \o r (Populated from A2)
Title: Mrs Forename/Initials: K. J Surname Cutts
Post: PhD Student
Qualifications BSc (Hons) Psychofogy
Organisation Sheffield Haliam University. Psychology
Address. Collegiate Crescent 
Sheffield
Post Code: S10 2BP
E-mail: k cutts@shu ac.uk
Telephone: 0114 2255844
Fax: 0114 2252430
C5. Other relevant reference numbers if known (Populated from A65)
Applicants/organisation's own reference number, e g RDfif available) STH14116
Sponsor's/protocol number STH14116
Funder's reference number 24RPSOSL01F1
International Standard Randomized Controlled Trial Number (ISRCTN)
European Clinical Trials Database (EudraCT) Number
Project website
N H S  REC A pp lica tion  Form  -  V e rs ion  5 .0 41 C /16024/19424/1
Date: 15/12/2005 Reference 06/Q2305/2 Online Form
C6. Give a full summary of the purpose, design and methodology of the planned research, including a brief explanation 
of the theoretical framework that informs i t  It should be clear exactly what will happen to the research participant, how 
many times and in what order. Describe any involvement of research participants, patient groups or communities in the 
design of the research.
(Populated from A10)
Writing about emotional upheavals and stressful experiences has been found to have therapeutic benefits in healthy 
individuals and medical patients The methodology developed by Pennebaker and Beall (1986) involves individuals writing 
about their deepest thoughts and feelings relating to a  stressful event on 3 -5  occasions for 15-20 minutes Putting these 
emotional experiences into words can help people organize their thoughts, leading to new appraisals of past or present 
circumstances, often providing a sense of control over uncontrollable events (Pennebaker. 1997) The purpose of this study 
is to investigate the utility of such a writing intervention for patients attending a fertility clinic in alleviating infertility/treatment 
related stress and improving psychological we ll-being
Participants New referral mate and female IVF/ICSI patients
Design: Recruited participants will be randomly allocated to one of two conditions, the writing intervention group or control 
group Participants will not be informed that they will be randomly allocated into either an intervention group or control group 
as this may bias their responses to questionnaires.
Setting Participants will be recruited from an Assisted Conception Unit (ACU) and will be interviewed at the time of their first 
IVF consultation with regards to participation in the study Completion of questionnaires and writing sessions (intervention) 
will be completed in the participants' own homes to minimize participation burden
Method of Data Collection: Questionnaires and diaries
Outcome Measures The study will employ a number of standardised psychological measures including the Symptom 
Checklist-90-Revised (S C L-90-R ; Derogatis. 1983), Fertility Problem Inventory (FPI: Newton Sherrard 8 Glavac. 1999). 
Impact of Event Scale (IES Horowitz. Wilner 8 Alvarez. 1979) and Ways of Coping Questionnaire (WOC; Folkman 8 
Lazarus. 1988) Physical symptoms will be assessed using the Physical Symptoms Inventory (PSI, Spector 8 Jex. 1998)
Pre and post writing mood will be assessed using the Positive and Negative Affectivity Scale (PANAS Watson. Clark 8 
Tellegan. 1988) and participants will also be asked to complete an essay evaluation questionnaire (EEQ) and Event 
Appraisal Questionnaire (EAQ; Paez. Velasco. Gonzales. 1999; post writing Daily stress will be measured using the Daily 
Stress Inventory (DSI; Brantley. Waggoner. Jones 8 Rappaport. 1987) and the Toronto Alexithymia Scale (TAS-20. Taylor. 
Bagby 8 Parker. 1997) will be administered at the beginning of the study to determine if participants have deficits in 
emotional awareness, understanding or expression
Procedure New referral couples attending for IVF/ICSI treatment at the ACU will be contacted by letter prior to their initial 
consultation informing them of the study and requesting their participation Interested couples will be provided detailed 
information (written and verbal) about the study at the time of first consultation and invited to take part
Each participant will receive a study pack containing baseline measures, writing materials and pre and post writing mood 
questionnaires, two sets of fo llow -up questionnaires and a pack containing daily stress monitoring forms. All participants will 
be given detailed completion instructions and all packs will include dates for completion and pre-paid addressed envelopes 
for the return of completed questionnaires
The day after recruitment participants will complete the baseline questionnaire booklet (TAS-20. S C L-90-R . WOC. PSI. IES 
and FPI) On the second day participants will begin completing the DSI which they will complete every evening for the next 
48 days On day eight, twenty-tw o and thirty-six. intervention participants will complete the pre-writing PANAS followed by 
a 15 minute writing session (intervention) and then the post-writing PANAS. EAQ and EEA On day fifty and seventy-eight 
all participants will complete the follow-up questionnaire booklets (S C L-90-R , WOC, PSI. IES and FPI)
In order to maintain continued participation in the study and to provide reminders of completion dates all participants will be 
contacted at key times within the study period via phonetext or e -m a il (at the descretion of the participant)
N H S REC App lica tion  Form  -  V ers ion 5 .0 42 C /1 6024/19424/1
Date: 15/12/2005 Reference: 0602305/2 Online Form
C7. Give details of any clinical intervention(s) or procedure(s) to be received by research participants over and above 
those which would normally be considered a part of routine clinical care.(These indude uses o f medicinalproducts or 
devices, other medical treatments or assessments, mental health interventions imaging investigations and taking samples o f 
human biological m ate ria l)
(Populated from A 12)
Additional
Intervention
Average number per patient
Average time 
taken
(mins/hours/days)
Details of additional intervention or 
procedure, who will undertake i t  and 
what training they have received.
Routine Care Research
Psychological
therapies
0 3 15 mms
Participants in the intervention group 
ONLY will complete three 15 minute 
writing sessions. 14 days apart in their 
own home Participants will be asked to 
write about their thoughts and feelings 
relating to their infertility
N H S R EC App lica tion  Form  -  V ers ion 5.0 43  C /1 6024/19424/1
Date: 15/12/2005 Reference. 06/Q2305/2 Online Form
C8. Give details of any non-d in ical research-related intervention(s) or procedure(s).(These include interviews, 
non -d in ica l observations arid use of questionnaires.)
(Populated from A 13)
Additional Intervention
Average 
number per 
patient
Average time 
taken
(mtns/hours>'days)
Details of additional intervention or procedure, who 
will undertake it, and what training they have 
received.
Other Questionnaire 18 i  hour/ 3 times
Participants will receive three questionnaire booklets 
from the researcher at the recruitment stage of the 
study Each booklet will contain six questionnaires that 
ask them to report information relating to their general 
physical and emotional state, fertility problems and 
coping efforts they use to deal with their fertility 
problem. All questionnaires are completed in the 
privacy of their own home at allocated time points 
throughout the study.
Other Questionnaire 48 5 -10  mins/daify
Participants will receive a  pack of stress inventories 
that they will be asked to complete daily throughout the 
study at home.
Other Questionnaire 6 5 mins
Participants in the intervention group ONLY will 
complete a questionnaire that assesses mood state 
immediately before and after writing
Other Questionnaire 3 2m ms
Participants in the intervention group ONLY will 
complete a five item questionnaire to assess their 
subjective evaluation of the events they write about and 
their previous level of disclosure after each writing 
session
Other Questionnaire 3 2 mins
Participants in the intervention group ONLY will 
complete a three item questionnaire to assess their 
subjective appraisal of the event they have written 
about This will be completed after each wntmg 
session.
N H S R EC App lica tion  Form  -  V e rs ion  5.0 44 C /1 6024/19424/1
Date: 15/12/2005 Reference. 06/Q2305/2 Online Form
C9a. Give the name of the research site for which the PI is responsible: (Please give the name only. Further details o f 
locations should be given in C10 The name o l the site is normally the name o f the acute NHS Trust. GP practice or other 
organisation responsible for the care o f research participants In some cases it may be an individual unit, private practice or 
consortium -  see the guidance notes Each GP practice is a separate site unless a formal consortium 'network is in place )
Jessop Wing, Royal Hallamshire Hospital
If you wish to add further information about the definition of the site, please do so below:
C9b. Give the name of the NHS or other organisation with which the PI holds the necessary contract (substantive or 
honorary) to undertake the research at this site:
Sheffield Teaching Hospitals. NHS Foundation Trust
C9c. For NHS sites, give the name and contact details of the Research Governance contact for the research site at the 
care organisation or consortium:
Title: Dr
Forename/Initials Brenda 
Surname: Zmober
Address 305 Western Bank
Sheffield
Postcode S10 2TJ
E-m ail: brenda zinober@sth nhs
C9d. For non-N HS sites, give details of the arrangements for the management and monitoring of the research at this 
site:
CIO. Specify all locations or departments at which research procedures will be conducted at this site.
Include details o f any centres at other NHS care organisations where potential participants may be seen and referred for 
inclusion in the research a t this site. Give details o f any research procedures to be carried out off site, tor example in 
participants' homes.
Recruitment of participants and introduction interview will be conducted in the Assited Conception Unit (ACU) of the Jessop 
Wing. Hallamshire Hospital Completion of all outcome questionnaires and intervention writing will be done by the participant 
in their own home
C l 1. How many research participants samples is it anticipated will be recruited, obtained from this organisation in 
total?
It is anticipated that approximatley 100 participants will be recruited from this organisation.
C12a. Give details of who will be responsible for obtaining informed consent locally, their qualifications and relevant 
expertise and training in obtaining consent for research purposes:
Obtaining consent will be the responsibility of the researcher
Telephone 0114 271 3740 
Fax: 0114 271 1790
N H S R EC A pp lica tion  Form  -  V e rs ion  5.0 4 5 - 1  C /16024/19424/1
Date; 15/12/2005 Reference 06/Q2305/2 Online Form
C13a. What arrangements have been made for participants who might not adequately understand verbal explanations 
or written information given in English, or who have special communication needs? (e g  translation, use o f interpreters 
etc.) (Populated from A29)
Patients who cannot adequately understand verbal or written information that is given in English will not be able to participate 
in the study The researcher speaks only English and the costs associated with employing the services of an interpreter or 
translator to be available on a daily basis to assist non-English speaking, writing participants would be excessive 
Furthermore, the standardized measures used have been validated in English speaking/writing populations and therefore 
would not be suitable for use with non-English speaking populations without prior validation
C13b. What local arrangements have been made to meet these requirements (where applicable)?
0  Not Applicable
C14. In addition to informing the GP (if required), what arrangements have been made to inform those responsible for 
the care of the research participants in the host care organisation of their involvement in the research?
Mr Jonathan Skull. Consultant in Reproductive Medicine who has overall responsibility for the care of patients attending the 
clinic has been informed at all stages of research development and review The principal researcher will liaise with the 
clinical team that are responsible for the care of potential participants
N H S REC A pp lica tion  Form  -  V ers ion 5 .0 4 5 - 2  C /1 6024/19424/1
Date: 15/12/2005 Reference. 0602305-2 Online Form
C15. Are the facilities and staffing available locally adequate to perform any necessary procedures or interventions 
required for the study, and to deal with any unforeseen consequences of these?/7?i/s should include consideration o f 
procedures and interventions in both control and inten/ention arms o f a s tu d y )
<> Yes O No
If Yes, give the information necessary to justify your answer If No, indicate what arrangements are being made to deal with 
the situation:
The inten/ention is designed to be conducted in the privacy of the participants own home and therefore does not require the 
use of the clinics facililities In the event that participants1 experience distress the clinic counselling services are available for 
the participants to use
Cl6a. Give brief details of a contact point where participants may obtain further information about the study.
Participants are directed to contact a member of the research team if they require further information about the study 
Contact details are available on the information sheet as follows
Mrs Katie Cutts Tel 0114 2255844. E-m ail at k cutts@shu ac uk
Dr Keith Hurst Tel 0114 2254362. E-m ail at k.m.hurst@shu ac uk
C16b. What is the contact point for potential compfaints by research participants?
Professor Chris Welsh, Medical Director. STH NHS Foundation Trust, 305 Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2TJ
C16c. Is there a local source where potential participants can obtain independent information about being involved in a 
research study?See guidance notes
Professor Chris Welsh, Medical Director. STH NHS Foundation Trust. 305 Western Bank. Sheffield. S1Q 2TJ
C16d. Please specify the headed paper to be used for the participant information sheet
Sheffield Haliam University 8 STH NHS Foundation Trust
C17. If any extra support might be required by research participants as a result of their participation, what local 
arrangements are being made to provide this?
Arrangements have been made with the ACU for the counselling services to be made available to participants if they 
experience distress as a result of their participation in the study
N H S REG A pp lica tion  Form  -  V e rs ion  5 .0  45  C /16024/19424/1
Date: 15/12/2005 Reference: 06/Q2305/2 Online Form
-  The information in this form is accurate to the best of my knowledge and belief and I take full responsibility for it
-  I undertake to abide by the ethical principles underpinning the Declaration of Helsinki and good practice guidelines on 
proper conduct of research
-  If the research is approved I undertake to adhere to the study protocol, the terms of the full application of which the main 
REG has given a favourable opinion and any conditions set out by the mam REC in giving its favourable opinion
-  I am aware of my responsibility to be up to date and comply with the requirements of the law and relevant guidelines 
relating to security and confidentiality of patient or other personal data, including the need to register when necessary with 
the appropriate Data Protection Controller
-  I understand that research records/data may be subject to inspection for audit purposes if required in future
-  I understand that personal data about me as a researcher in this application will be held by the relevant RECs and their 
operational managers and that this will be managed according to the principles established in the Data Protection Act
-  I understand that the information contained in this application, any supporting documentation and all correspondence with 
Research Ethics Committees relating to the application will be subject to the provisions of the Freedom of Information Acts 
The information may be disclosed in response to a  request under the Acts except where statutory exemptions apply
Signature of the local Principal Investigator *
Date. (dd/mm/yyyy)
Print Name.
' The Chief Investigator should sign where s/he is also the local Principal Investigator for this research site
PART C IS NOW COMPLETE AND SHOULD BE SUBMITTED to the NHS Research Ethics Committee responsible for the 
site-specific assessment.
N H S R E C  App lica tion  Form  -  V e rs ion  5 .0  47  C /1602 4 /19 4 2 4 /t
A.2.5.3 Confirmation of Ethical Approval
South Sheffield Research Ethics Committee
Upstairs 1 Floor Vickers Corridor 
Northern General Hospital 
Herries Road 
Sheffield S57AU 
Telephone: 01142269515
Email: Louise.Horne@sth.nhs.uk
Chair: Dr. M Hatton REC Coordinator: Ms. L Horn
2 1  St A p r i l  2 0 0 6  
M r s  K. J .  C u t t s
P h D  S t u d e n t  S h e f f i e l d  H a l l a m  U n i v e r s i t y ,
P s y c h o l o g y  
C o l l e g i a t e  C r e s c e n t  
S h e f f i e l d  
S 1 0 2 B P
D e a r  M r s  C u t t s
F u l l  t i t l e  o f  s t u d y :  T h e  E f f i c a c y  o f  a n  E x p r e s s i v e  W r i t i n g  T a s k  u p o n
P s y c h o l o g i c a l  W e l l - b e i n g  in  I n d i v i d u a l s  A t t e n d i n g  a n  
A s s i s t e d  C o n c e p t i o n  U n i t .
R E C  r e f e r e n c e  n u m b e r :  06/Q2305/61
T h a n k  y o u  f o r  y o u r  l e t t e r  o f  0 7  A p r i l  2 0 0 6 ,  r e s p o n d i n g  t o  t h e  C o m m i t t e e ' s  r e q u e s t  f o r  f u r t h e r  
i n f o r m a t i o n  o n  t h e  a b o v e  r e s e a r c h  a n d  s u b m i t t i n g  r e v i s e d  d o c u m e n t a t i o n .
T h e  f u r t h e r  i n f o r m a t i o n  h a s  b e e n  c o n s i d e r e d  o n  b e h a l f  o f  t h e  C o m m i t t e e  b y  t h e  C h a i r . . 
Confirmation of ethical opinion
O n  b e h a l f  o f  t h e  C o m m i t t e e ,  I a m  p l e a s e d  t o  c o n f i r m  a  f a v o u r a b l e  e t h i c a l  o p i n i o n  f o r  t h e  
a b o v e  r e s e a r c h  o n  t h e  b a s i s  d e s c r i b e d  in  t h e  a p p l i c a t i o n  f o r m ,  p r o t o c o l  a n d  s u p p o r t i n g  
d o c u m e n t a t i o n  a s  r e v i s e d .
Ethical review of research sites
T h e  C o m m i t t e e  h a s  d e s i g n a t e d  t h i s  s t u d y  a s  e x e m p t  f r o m  s i t e - s p e c i f i c  a s s e s s m e n t  ( S S A .  
T h e r e  i s  n o  r e q u i r e m e n t  f o r  [ o t h e r ]  L o c a l  R e s e a r c h  E t h i c s  C o m m i t t e e s  t o  b e  i n f o r m e d  o r  f o r  
s i t e - s p e c i f i c  a s s e s s m e n t  t o  b e  c a r r i e d  o u t  a t  e a c h  s i t e .
Conditions of approval
T h e  f a v o u r a b l e  o p i n i o n  i s  g i v e n  p r o v i d e d  t h a t  y o u  c o m p l y  w i t h  t h e  c o n d i t i o n s  s e t  o u t  i n  t h e  
a t t a c h e d  d o c u m e n t .  Y o u  a r e  a d v i s e d  t o  s t u d y  t h e  c o n d i t i o n s  c a r e f u l l y .
Approved documents
T h e  f i n a l  l i s t  o f  d o c u m e n t s  r e v i e w e d  a n d  a p p r o v e d  b y  t h e  C o m m i t t e e  i s  a s  f o l l o w s :
mailto:Louise.Horne@sth.nhs.uk
I n v e s t i g a t o r  C V  S t u d e n t  -  M r s .  K  C u t t s
I n v e s t i g a t o r  C V  S u p e r v i s o r  -  M r .  K  H u r s t
P r o t o c o l 3 1 5  D e c e m b e r  2 0 0 5
C o v e r i n g  L e t t e r 1 5  D e c e m b e r  2 0 0 5
S u m m a r y / S y n o p s i s 1 1 8  N o v e m b e r  2 0 0 5
P e e r  R e v i e w 1 5  D e c e m b e r  2 0 0 5
Q u e s t i o n n a i r e  E s s a y  E v a l u a t i o n 1 0 8  J u l y  2 0 0 5
Q u e s t i o n n a i r e  F e r t i l i t y  P r o b l e m  I n v 1 2 2  N o v e m b e r  2 0 0 5  r 2 0 0 5
Q u e s t i o n n a i r e  S t r e s s f u l  E v e n t s 1 0 8  J u l y  2 0 0 5
Q u e s t i o n n a i r e  P h y s i c a l  S y m p t o m s  i n v e n t o r y 1 0 8  J u l y  2 0 0 5
Q u e s t i o n n a i r e  S y m p t o m  C h e c k l i s t 1 0 8  J u l y  2 0 0 5
Q u e s t i o n n a i r e  2 0 - i t e n  t o r o n t o  a l e x i t h y m i a  s c a l e 1 0 8  J u l y  2 0 0 5
Q u e s t i o n n a i r e  D a i l y  S t r e s s  I n v e n t o r y 1 0 8  J u l y  2 0 0 5
Q u e s t i o n n a i r e  W a y s  o f  C o p i n g 1 0 8  J u l y  2 0 0 5
Q u e s t i o n n a i r e  G e n e r a   i n f o r m a t i o n 1 0 8  J u l y  2 0 0 5
L e t t e r  o f  i n v i t a t i o n  t o  p a r t i c i p a n t 1 1 3  D e c e m b e r  2 0 0 5
P a r t i c i p a n t  I n f o r m a t i o n  S h e e t 3 1 6  N o v e m b e r  2 0 0 5
P a r t i c i p a n t  i n f o r m a t i o n  S h e e t  I n f o r m a t i o n  S h e e t 4 0 3  A p r i l  2 0 0 6
P a r t i c i p a n t  C o n s e n t  F o r m 1 0 8  J u l y  2 0 0 5
R e s p o n s e  t o  R e q u e s t  f o r  F u r t h e r  I n f o r m a t i o n 0 7  A p r i l  2 0 0 6
L e t t e r  f r o m  F u n d e r 1 4  D e c e m b e r  2 0 0 5
I n t e r v e n t i o n  G r o u p  I n s t r u c t i o n  S h e e t 1 0 4  O c t o b e r  2 0 0 5
C o n t r o l  G r o u p  I n s t r u c t i o n  S h e e t 2 0 4  O c t o b e r  2 0 0 5
D e b r i e f i n g  L e t t e r 1 0 8  J u l y  2 0 0 5
U n f a v o u r a b l e  O p i n i o n  L e t t e r 0 2  F e b r u a r y  2 0 0 6
E m a i l  C o r r e s p o n d e n c e  f r o m  K e i t h  H u r s t 0 8  F e b r u a r y  2 0 0 6
A d d i t i o n a l  I n f o r m a t i o n  R e l a t i n g  t o  P a r t i c i p a n t  B u r d e n 0 7  M a r c h  2 0 0 6
06/Q2305/61 Page 2
Research governance approval
Y o u  s h o u l d  a r r a n g e  f o r  t h e  a t  r e l e v a n t  N H S  c a r e  o r g a n i s a t i o n s  t o  n o t i f i e d  t h a t  t h e  r e s e a r c h  
w i l l  b e  t a k i n g  p l a c e ,  a n d  p r o v i d e  a  c o p y  o f  t h e  R E C  a p p l i c a t i o n ,  t h e  p r o t o c o l  a n d  t h i s  l e t t e r .
A l l  r e s e a r c h e r s  w h o  w i l l  b e  p a r t i c i p a t i n g  in  t h e  r e s e a r c h  m u s t  o b t a i n  f i n a l  r e s e a r c h  
c o m m e n c i n g  a n y  r e s e a r c h  p r o c e d u r e s .  W h e r e  a  s u b s t a n t i v e  c o n t r a c t  i s  n o t  h e l d  w i t h  t h e  
c a r e  o r g a n i s a t i o n ,  i t  m a y  b e  n e c e s s a r y  f o r  a n  h o n o r a r y  c o n t r a c t  t o  f o r  t h e  r e s e a r c h  c a n  b e  
g i v e n .
Statement of Compliance
T h e  C o m m i t t e e  i s  c o n s t i t u t e d  in  a c c o r d a n c e  w i t h  t h e  G o v e r n a n c e  A r r a n g e m e n t s  f o r  
R e s e a r c h  E t h i c s  C o m m i t t e e s  ( J u l y  2 0 0 1 )  a n d  c o m p l i e s  f u l l y  w i t h  t h e  S t a n d a r d  O p e r a t i n g  
P r o c e d u r e s  f o r  R e s e a r c h  E t h i c s  C o m m i t t e e s  in  t h e  U K .
06/Q2305/61 Please quote this number on all correspondence:
W i t h  t h e  C o m m i t t e e ' s  b e s t  w i s h e s  f o r  t h e  s u c c e s s  o f  t h i s  p r o j e c t  
Y o u r s  s i n c e r e l y
D r .  M  H a t t o n  ' C h a i r
E n c  S t u d y  a p p r o v a l  c o n d i t i o n s
CC STH R&D
A.2.5.4 Letter of Invitation
Sheffield Hallam University
A d d r e s s
N a m e F a c u l t y  o f  D e v e l o p m e n t  a n d  S o c i e t y  
S h e f f i e l d  H a l l a m  U n i v e r s i t y  
4 5  B r o o m g r o v e  R o a d
S 1 0  2 S F
T e l :  { n u m b e r }
E - m a i l :  { e - m a i l  a d d r e s s }
D a t e
D e a r  S i r / M a d a m ,
An invitation to take part in research investigating the experiences of people attending
an assisted conception unit.
A  s t u d y  is  c u r r e n t l y  b e i n g  u n d e r t a k e n  in  t h e  A s s i s t e d  C o n c e p t i o n  U n i t  ( A C U )  o f  t h e  J e s s o p  
W i n g ,  H a l l a m s h i r e  H o s p i t a l  r e g a r d i n g  t h e  e x p e r i e n c e s  o f  p e o p l e  a t t e n d i n g  t h e  A C U  f o r  
I n t r a u t e r i n e  I n s e m i n a t i o n  ( I U I ) ,  in vitro f e r t i l i s a t i o n  ( I V F )  a n d  intra cytoplasmic sperm injection 
( I C S I )  t r e a t m e n t .  T h e  s t u d y  is  a  c o l l a b o r a t i o n  b e t w e e n  S h e f f i e l d  H a l l a m  U n i v e r s i t y  a n d  t h e  A C U .
T h e  a t t a c h e d  i n f o r m a t i o n  s h e e t  e x p l a i n s  t h e  s t u d y  in  d e t a i l ,  a n d  s h o w s  w h a t  w i l l  b e  i n v o l v e d  i f  
y o u  c h o o s e  t o  t a k e  p a r t .  P l e a s e  t a k e  t h e  t i m e  t o  r e a d  t h r o u g h  t h e  a t t a c h e d  i n f o r m a t i o n  c a r e f u l l y .  
I f  y o u  w o u l d  l i k e  m o r e  i n f o r m a t i o n  p l e a s e  f r e e  t o  c o n t a c t  e i t h e r  K a t i e  C u t t s  ( t h e  p r i n c i p a l  
r e s e a r c h e r ; { t e l e p h o n e  n u m b e r )  o r  D r .  K e i t h  H u r s t  ( r e s e a r c h  s u p e r v i s o r ) .
O n  t h e  d a y  o f  y o u r  f i r s t  c o n s u l t a t i o n  a t  t h e  A C U  y o u  w i l l  b e  a p p r o a c h e d  b y  t h e  p r i n c i p a l  
r e s e a r c h e r .  A t  t h i s  t i m e  y o u  w i l l  b e  a s k e d  i f  y o u  a r e  w i l l i n g  t o  t a k e  p a r t  in  t h e  s t u d y  o r  i f  y o u  
r e q u i r e  m o r e  i n f o r m a t i o n  a b o u t  t h e  s t u d y  b e f o r e  y o u  m a k e  a  d e c i s i o n .  I f  y o u  d o  n o t  w i s h  t o  t a k e  
p a r t  in  t h e  s t u d y  t h i s  w i l l  n o t  a f f e c t  t h e  t r e a t m e n t  y o u  r e c e i v e  a t  t h e  A C U .  P a r t i c i p a t i o n  in  t h e  
s t u d y  is  v o l u n t a r y  a n d  y o u  h a v e  t h e  r i g h t  t o  w i t h d r a w  a t  a n y  t im e .
T h a n k  y o u  in  a d v a n c e  f o r  y o u r  t im e .
Y o u r s  s i n c e r e l y ,
K a t i e  C u t t s  B S c .
A p p l i e d  S o c i a l  S c i e n c e  D i v i s i o n  
F a c u l t y  o f  D e v e l o p m e n t  a n d  S o c i e t y
A.2.5.5 General Information Sheet
Sheffield Hallam University
An investigation into the experiences of people attending an assisted conception  
unit. 
Information Sheet
Y o u  a r e  b e i n g  i n v i t e d  t o  t a k e  p a r t  i n  a  r e s e a r c h  s t u d y .  B e f o r e  y o u  d e c i d e  i t  i s  i m p o r t a n t  
f o r  y o u  t o  u n d e r s t a n d  w h y  t h e  r e s e a r c h  i s  b e i n g  c a r r i e d  o u t  a n d  w h a t  i t  w i l l  i n v o l v e .  
P l e a s e  t a k e  t i m e  t o  r e a d  t h e  f o l l o w i n g  i n f o r m a t i o n  c a r e f u l l y  a n d  d i s c u s s  i t  w i t h  o t h e r s  i f  
y o u  w i s h .  Y o u  w i l l  t h e n  h a v e  t h e  o p p o r t u n i t y  t o  m e e t  t h e  r e s e a r c h e r  a n d  a s k  i f  t h e r e  i s  
a n y t h i n g  t h a t  i s  n o t  c l e a r ,  o r  i f  y o u  w o u l d  l i k e  m o r e  i n f o r m a t i o n .  T a k e  t i m e  t o  d e c i d e  
w h e t h e r  o r  n o t  y o u  w i s h  t o  t a k e  p a r t .
T h a n k  y o u  f o r  r e a d i n g  t h i s . _____________________________________________________________________________________________
W hat is the purpose of the study?
H e a l t h  c a r e  p r o f e s s i o n a l s  a p p r e c i a t e  h o w  s t r e s s f u l  i t  c a n  b e  f o r  p e o p l e  w h o  a r e  
e x p e r i e n c i n g  d i f f i c u l t i e s  i n  h a v i n g  a  c h i l d .  F o r  s o m e  p e o p l e  t h e s e  d i f f i c u l t i e s  c a n  o n l y  b e  
r e s o l v e d  t h r o u g h  a s s i s t e d  c o n c e p t i o n  s u c h  a s  I n t r a u t e r i n e  I n s e m i n a t i o n  ( I U I )  In Vitro 
F e r t i l i z a t i o n  ( I V F )  a n d  I n t r a  C y t o p l a s m i c  S p e r m  I n j e c t i o n  ( I C S I ) .  T o  u n d e r s t a n d  t h e  
e x p e r i e n c e  o f  a s s i s t e d  c o n c e p t i o n  m o r e  f u l l y  w e  a r e  c o n d u c t i n g  a n  i n v e s t i g a t i o n  o f  
p a t i e n t s  a t t e n d i n g  t h i s  c l i n i c  t o  u n d e r g o  I U I  a n d  I V F / I C S I  t r e a t m e n t .
W hy have I been chosen?
Y o u  h a v e  b e e n  c h o s e n  t o  t a k e  p a r t  i n  t h e  s t u d y  a s  a  p a t i e n t  a t  t h e  A s s i s t e d  C o n c e p t i o n  
U n i t  ( A C U )  h e r e  a t  T h e  J e s s o p  W i n g ,  s t a r t i n g  a  c y c l e  o f  I U I  o r  I V F / I C S I  t r e a t m e n t  a l o n g  
w i t h  y o u r  p a r t n e r .  A l l  p a t i e n t s  a t t e n d i n g  t h e  A C U  o v e r  t h e  n e x t  1 2  m o n t h s ,  w h o  a r e  
r e c e i v i n g  I U I  o r  I V F / I C S I  t r e a t m e n t ,  w i l l  b e  i n v i t e d  t o  t a k e  p a r t  i n  t h e  s t u d y .
Do I have to take part?
I t  i s  u p  t o  y o u  t o  d e c i d e  w h e t h e r  o r  n o t  t o  t a k e  p a r t .  I f  y o u  d e c i d e  n o t  t o  t a k e  p a r t ,  t h i s  
w i l l  h a v e  n o  e f f e c t  o n  y o u r  t r e a t m e n t  w i t h i n  t h e  h o s p i t a l .  I f  y o u r  p a r t n e r  d o e s  n o t  w i s h  
t o  t a k e  p a r t  y o u  c a n  s t i l l  t a k e  p a r t  i n  t h e  s t u d y ,  y o u  d o  n o t  h a v e  t o  t a k e  p a r t  a s  a  c o u p l e  
i f  o n e  o f  y o u  d e c i d e s  t h a t  t h e y  d o  n o t  w i s h  t o  b e  i n v o l v e d  i n  t h e  s t u d y  t h i s  a l s o  w i l l  n o t  
a f f e c t  y o u r  i n v o l v e m e n t  i n  t h e  s t u d y  o r  t h e  s t a n d a r d  o f  c a r e  e i t h e r  o f  y o u  w i l l  r e c e i v e  
w h i l s t  u n d e r g o i n g  t r e a t m e n t .  I f  y o u  d o  d e c i d e  t o  t a k e  p a r t  y o u  w i l l  b e  g i v e n  t h i s  
i n f o r m a t i o n  s h e e t  t o  k e e p  a n d  a s k e d  t o  s i g n  a  c o n s e n t  f o r m .  I f  y o u  d e c i d e  t o  t a k e  p a r t  
y o u  a r e  s t i l l  f r e e  t o  w i t h d r a w  a t  a n y  t i m e  w i t h o u t  g i v i n g  a  r e a s o n .  A  d e c i s i o n  t o  w i t h d r a w  
a t  a n y  t i m e ,  o r  a  d e c i s i o n  n o t  t o  t a k e  p a r t ,  w i l l  n o t  a f f e c t  t h e  s t a n d a r d  o f  c a r e  y o u  
r e c e i v e .
W hat will happen to me if I take part?
Y o u  w i l l  b e  a s k e d  t o  c o m p l e t e  s o m e  q u e s t i o n n a i r e s  a s k i n g  y o u  a b o u t  h o w  y o u  f e e l  i n  
g e n e r a l .
W hat do I have to do?
I f  y o u  a g r e e  t o  t a k e  p a r t  y o u  w i l l  m e e t  w i t h  t h e  r e s e a r c h e r  a t  y o u r  f i r s t  c o n s u l t a t i o n  a t  
t h e  c l i n i c .  Y o u r  i n v o l v e m e n t  i n  t h e  s t u d y  w i l l  l a s t  t h e  l e n g t h  o f  y o u r  t r e a t m e n t  c y c l e
( a p p r o x i m a t e l y  3  t o  4  w e e k s ) .  T o  o b t a i n  i n f o r m a t i o n  a b o u t  y o u r  e x p e r i e n c e s  o v e r  t h i s  
p e r i o d  w e  w o u l d  l i k e  t o  a s k  y o u  q u e s t i o n s  m a i n l y  a b o u t  h o w  y o u  a r e  f e e l i n g ,  t h e  k i n d s  
o f  s t r e s s e s  y o u  a r e  u n d e r  a n d  t h e  w a y s  y o u  t r y  t o  h a n d l e  t h e s e  s t r e s s e s .  Y o u  w i l l  b e  
a s k e d  t o  c o m p l e t e  q u e s t i o n n a i r e  b o o k l e t s  o n  t h r e e  s e p a r a t e  o c c a s i o n s ,  w h i c h  w i l l  t a k e  
a p p r o x i m a t e l y  4 0  m i n u t e s  t o  1 h o u r ,  a n d  w r i t e  a b o u t  h o w  y o u  f e e l  a b o u t  y o u r  d i f f i c u l t i e s  
i n  h a v i n g  a  c h i l d  a n d  y o u r  o n g o i n g  t r e a t m e n t .  I n  o r d e r  t o  f u l l y  u n d e r s t a n d  h o w  f e e l i n g s  
m a y  a l t e r  t h r o u g h o u t  t h e  t r e a t m e n t  c y c l e  w e  w o u l d  a l s o  a s k  y o u  t o  c o m p l e t e  a  d a i l y  
a s s e s s m e n t  o f  t h e  e v e n t s  t h a t  y o u  e x p e r i e n c e  o v e r  t h e  c y c l e  p e r i o d .  I f  y o u  a g r e e  t o  
t a k e  p a r t  y o u  w i l l  c o m p l e t e  a l l  o f  t h e  q u e s t i o n n a i r e s  a t  h o m e ,  a n d  t h e  r e s e a r c h e r  w i l l  
p r o v i d e  y o u  w i t h  t h e  q u e s t i o n n a i r e  p a c k s  t h a t  y o u  w i l l  n e e d  t o  c o m p l e t e ,  a l o n g  w i t h  
d e t a i l e d  i n s t r u c t i o n s  o u t l i n i n g  w h e n  a n d  h o w  t h e y  s h o u l d  b e  c o m p l e t e d .
W hat are the possible disadvantages and risks of taking part?
Y o u  m a y  f e e l  u n c o m f o r t a b l e  o r  d i s t r e s s e d  i n  w r i t i n g  a b o u t  y o u r  p e r s o n a l  e x p e r i e n c e s  
a n d  a n s w e r i n g  s o m e  o f  t h e  q u e s t i o n s  i n  t h e  s t u d y  p a c k s .  Y o u  d o  n o t  h a v e  t o  a n s w e r  
a n y  q u e s t i o n s  t h a t  y o u  d o  n o t  w a n t  t o ,  b u t  a n y  i n f o r m a t i o n  t h a t  y o u  d o  p r o v i d e  w i l l  
a s s i s t  u s  i n  u n d e r s t a n d i n g  t h e  e x p e r i e n c e  o f  a s s i s t e d  c o n c e p t i o n ,  a n d  o f  c o u r s e ,  t h e  
i n f o r m a t i o n  w i l l  b e  t r e a t e d  i n  c o n f i d e n c e .
T h e r e  i s  s u p p o r t  a v a i l a b l e  f o r  y o u  i f  y o u  f e e l  d i s t r e s s e d  o r  j u s t  w a n t  t o  o b t a i n  f u r t h e r  
i n f o r m a t i o n .  T h e r e  i s  a  l i s t  o f  n a m e s ,  a d d r e s s e s  a n d  p h o n e  n u m b e r s  o n  p a g e  3  b e l o w ,  
s h o w i n g  r e l e v a n t  s u p p o r t  s e r v i c e s .
W hat are the possible benefits of taking part?
T h e  i n f o r m a t i o n  g a i n e d  f r o m  t h i s  s t u d y  m a y  h e l p  u s  t o  d e v e l o p  f u r t h e r  t h e  i n f o r m a t i o n  
a n d  c o u n s e l l i n g  s e r v i c e s  f o r  p a t i e n t s  u n d e r g o i n g  a s s i s t e d  c o n c e p t i o n ,  w i t h  a  v i e w  t o  
a s s i s t i n g  p e o p l e  d u r i n g  w h a t  c a n  b e  a  v e r y  d i f f i c u l t  t i m e .
Will my taking part in the study be kept confidential?
I f  y o u  c o n s e n t  t o  t a k e  p a r t  i n  t h e  r e s e a r c h  y o u r  m e d i c a l  r e c o r d s  h e l d  b y  t h e  A C U  m a y  
b e  e x a m i n e d  b y  t h e  p r i n c i p a l  r e s e a r c h e r .  H o w e v e r ,  p e r s o n a l l y  i d e n t i f i a b l e  i n f o r m a t i o n  
w i l l  n o t  b e  d i s c l o s e d  t o  a n y o n e .  A l l  i n f o r m a t i o n  c o l l e c t e d  d u r i n g  t h e  c o u r s e  o f  t h e  
r e s e a r c h  w i l l  b e  k e p t  s t r i c t l y  c o n f i d e n t i a l .
W hat will happen to the results of the research study?
T h e  r e s u l t s  o f  t h e  s t u d y  w i l l  f o r m  p a r t  o f  a  P h D  t h e s i s .  I f  y o u  a r e  i n t e r e s t e d  i n  k n o w i n g  
a b o u t  t h e  r e s u l t s ,  p l e a s e  i n d i c a t e  t h i s  t o  t h e  r e s e a r c h e r  a n d  y o u  w i l l  b e  c o n t a c t e d  a f t e r  
t h e  s t u d y  h a s  f i n i s h e d  i n  a u t u m n  2 0 0 6 .  Y o u r  n a m e  a n d  a d d r e s s  w i l l  n o t  a p p e a r  o n  a n y  
w r i t t e n  r e p o r t s  o r  o t h e r  m a t e r i a l .  R e s u l t s  f r o m  t h e  i n v e s t i g a t i o n  m a y  a l s o  b e  w r i t t e n  u p  
f o r  p u b l i c a t i o n  i n  r e p u t a b l e  s c i e n t i f i c  j o u r n a l s ,  b u t  a g a i n ,  p l e a s e  b e  a s s u r e d  t h a t  a n y  
i n f o r m a t i o n  p u b l i s h e d  w i l l  n o t  b e  p e r s o n a l l y  i d e n t i f i a b l e .
Who is organising and funding the research?
T h e  s t u d y  i s  b e i n g  f u n d e d  b y  S h e f f i e l d  H a l l a m  U n i v e r s i t y  a n d  i s  b e i n g  c o n d u c t e d  i n  
c o l l a b o r a t i o n  w i t h  t h e  C e n t r e  f o r  R e p r o d u c t i v e  M e d i c i n e  a n d  F e r t i l i t y  h e r e  a t  t h e  J e s s o p  
W i n g .
W ho has reviewed the study?
T h e  S h e f f i e l d  ( S o u t h )  R e s e a r c h  E t h i c s  C o m m i t t e e  a n d  t h e  E t h i c s  C o m m i t t e e  o f  t h e  
F a c u l t y  o f  D e v e l o p m e n t  a n d  S o c i e t y ,  S h e f f i e l d  H a l l a m  U n i v e r s i t y  h a v e  r e v i e w e d  t h i s  
s t u d y  t o  e n s u r e  t h a t  i t  i s  c o n d u c t e d  i n  a n  e t h i c a l l y  a p p r o p r i a t e  m a n n e r .
I f  y o u  d e c i d e  t o  t a k e  p a r t  i n  t h i s  r e s e a r c h ,  y o u  w i l l  b e  a s k e d  t o  c o m p l e t e  a  c o n s e n t  
f o r m .  Y o u  w i l l  b e  g i v e n  t h i s  i n f o r m a t i o n  s h e e t  a n d  a  c o p y  o f  t h e  s i g n e d  c o n s e n t  f o r m  t o
k e e p .  I f  y o u  d e c i d e  t o  t a k e  p a r t ,  y o u  a r e  s t i l l  f r e e  t o  w i t h d r a w  a t  a n y  t i m e  a n d  w i t h o u t  
g i v i n g  a  r e a s o n .
Contact for further Information
I f  y o u  w o u l d  l i k e  m o r e  i n f o r m a t i o n  o r  t o  a s k  a n y  q u e s t i o n s  b e f o r e  d e c i d i n g  w h e t h e r  y o u  
w a n t  t o  t a k e  p a r t  i n  t h i s  s t u d y ,  y o u  c a n  s p e a k  t o  a  m e m b e r  o f  t h e  r e s e a r c h  t e a m :
M r s  K a t i e  C u t t s  T e l :  { n u m b e r } ,  E - m a i l  a t :  ( e - m a i l )
D r  K e i t h  H u r s t  T e l :  { n u m b e r } , ,  E - m a i l  a t :  ( e - m a i l )
INFORMATION ON COUNSELLING AND SUPPORT FOR ISSUES IN IVF/ICSI
A S S I S T E D  C O N C E P T I O N  U N I T :
J e s s o p  W i n g ,  S h e f f i e l d  T e a c h i n g  H o s p i t a l s  N H S  T r u s t :
R e c e p t i o n  T e l :  0 1 1 4  2 2 6 8 0 5 0
C O U N S E L L I N G  S E R V I C E :
J e s s o p  W i n g ,  S h e f f i e l d  T e a c h i n g  H o s p i t a l s  N H S  T r u s t :
T e l :  0 1 1 4  2 2 6 8 0 1 4
I N F E R T I L I T Y  N E T W O R K  U K :
I n f o r m a t i o n  a n d  s u p p o r t  n e t w o r k s  f o r  t h o s e  e x p e r i e n c i n g  f e r t i l i t y  p r o b l e m s .
h t t p : / / w w w . i n f e r t i l i t v n e t w o r k u k . c o m /
A d v i c e  L i n e :  0 8 7 0 1  1 8 8  0 8 8
E v e n i n g  T e l e p h o n e  C o u n s e l l i n g  L i n e :  0 8 7 0 1  1 8 8 0 8 8  a v a i l a b l e  M o n d a y  t o  F r i d a y  f r o m  
7 : 3 0 p m  t o  9 : 3 0 p m .
http://www.infertilitvnetworkuk.com/
A.2.5.6 Consent Form
Sheffield Hallam University
P a t i e n t  I d e n t i f i c a t i o n  N u m b e r :
T i t l e  o f  s t u d y :  An investigation into the experiences of people attending an assisted
conception unit.
P r i n c i p a l  R e s e a r c h e r :  Katie Cutts
Please answer the following questions by circling your responses:
1 .  H a v e  y o u  r e a d  a n d  u n d e r s t o o d  t h e  i n f o r m a t i o n  s h e e t  f o r
t h e  a b o v e  s t u d y ?  Y E S  /  N O
2 .  H a v e  y o u  h a d  t h e  o p p o r t u n i t y  t o  a s k  q u e s t i o n s  a b o u t  t h i s  s t u d y ?  Y E S  /  N O
3 .  H a v e  y o u  r e c e i v e d  e n o u g h  i n f o r m a t i o n  a b o u t  t h i s  s t u d y ?  Y E S  /  N O
4 .  D o  y o u  u n d e r s t a n d  t h a t  y o u r  p a r t i c i p a t i o n  i s  v o l u n t a r y  a n d  y o u  a r e  
f r e e  t o  w i t h d r a w  f r o m  t h i s  s t u d y  a t  a n y  t i m e ,  w i t h o u t  g i v i n g  a n y  r e a s o n
a n d  w i t h o u t  y o u r  m e d i c a l  c a r e  o r  l e g a l  r i g h t s  b e i n g  a f f e c t e d ?  Y E S  /  N O
5 .  D o  y o u  u n d e r s t a n d  t h a t  s e c t i o n s  o f  y o u r  m e d i c a l  n o t e s  m a y  b e  l o o k e d
a t  b y  K a t i e  C u t t s  w h e r e  i t  i s  r e l e v a n t  t o  y o u r  t a k i n g  p a r t  i n  t h e  s t u d y ?  Y E S  /  N O
6 . D o  y o u  g i v e  p e r m i s s i o n  f o r  K a t i e  C u t t s  t o  h a v e  a c c e s s  t o  y o u r  r e c o r d s ?  Y E S  /  N O
7 .  A n y  r e s p o n s e s  t o  q u e s t i o n n a i r e s  o r  p e r s o n a l  w r i t i n g s  w i l l  b e  a n o n y m i s e d .
D o  y o u  g i v e  p e r m i s s i o n  f o r  m e m b e r s  o f  t h e  r e s e a r c h  t e a m  a t  S h e f f i e l d
H a l l a m  U n i v e r s i t y  t o  h a v e  a c c e s s  t o  y o u r  a n o n y m i s e d  r e s p o n s e s ?  Y E S  /  N O
S .  D o  y o u  a g r e e  t o  t a k e  p a r t  i n  t h i s  s t u d y ?  Y E S  /  N O
Y o u r  s i g n a t u r e  w i l l  c e r t i f y  t h a t  y o u  h a v e  v o l u n t a r i l y  d e c i d e d  t o  t a k e  p a r t  i n  t h i s  r e s e a r c h  
s t u d y  h a v i n g  r e a d  a n d  u n d e r s t o o d  t h e  i n f o r m a t i o n  i n  t h e  s h e e t  f o r  p a r t i c i p a n t s .  I t  w i l l  a l s o  
c e r t i f y  t h a t  y o u  h a v e  h a d  a d e q u a t e  o p p o r t u n i t y  t o  d i s c u s s  t h e  s t u d y  w i t h  a n  i n v e s t i g a t o r  a n d  
t h a t  a l l  q u e s t i o n s  h a v e  b e e n  a n s w e r e d  t o  s a t i s f a c t i o n .
K a t i e  C u t t s  B S c ,
A p p l i e d  S o c i a l  S c i e n c e s  D i v i s i o n  
F a c u l t y  o f  D e v e l o p m e n t  a n d  S o c i e t y ,
S h e f f i e l d  H a l l a m  U n i v e r s i t y .
T e l :  { n u m b e r }
E - m a i l  A d d r e s s :  { e - m a i l }
A.2.5.7 Disclosure W riting Instructions 
W riting Session One
O v e r  t h e  t h r e e  w r i t i n g  s e s s i o n s  i n  t h i s  s t u d y  I w o u l d  l i k e  y o u  t o  w r i t e  a b o u t  y o u r  
d e e p e s t  t h o u g h t s  a n d  f e e l i n g s  c o n c e r n i n g  y o u r  e x p e r i e n c e  o f  d i f f i c u l t i e s  i n  h a v i n g  a  
c h i l d ,  a n d  t h e  t r e a t m e n t  p r o c e s s  y o u  a r e  g o i n g  t h r o u g h  a t  t h e  m o m e n t .  I r e a l i s e  t h a t  
p e o p l e  w h o  e n c o u n t e r  s u c h  d i f f i c u l t i e s  e x p e r i e n c e  a  f u l l  r a n g e  o f  e m o t i o n s ,  a n d  I w a n t  
y o u  t o  f o c u s  o n  a n y  a n d  a l l  o f  t h e m .  I n  y o u r  w r i t i n g  I w a n t  y o u  t o  r e a l l y  l e t  g o  a n d  
e x p l o r e  y o u r  d e e p e s t  e m o t i o n s  a n d  t h o u g h t s .  Y o u  m i g h t  t h i n k  a b o u t  a l l  t h e  v a r i o u s  
f e e l i n g s  a n d  c h a n g e s  t h a t  y o u  e x p e r i e n c e d  b e f o r e  b e i n g  d i a g n o s e d ,  a f t e r  d i a g n o s i s ,  u p  
t o  s t a r t i n g  I V F  t r e a t m e n t  a s  w e l l  a s  n o w ,  d u r i n g  t h e  t r e a t m e n t  i t s e l f .  W h a t e v e r  a s p e c t  
y o u  c h o o s e  t o  w r i t e  a b o u t ,  i t  i s  c r i t i c a l  t h a t  y o u  f o c u s  o n  y o u r  d e e p e s t  t h o u g h t s  a n d  
f e e l i n g s .  Y o u  m i g h t  a l s o  t i e  y o u r  t h o u g h t s  a n d  f e e l i n g s  a b o u t  y o u r  d i f f i c u l t i e s  i n  h a v i n g  
a  c h i l d  a n d  y o u r  c u r r e n t  t r e a t m e n t  t o  o t h e r  p a r t s  o f  y o u r  l i f e  -  p e o p l e  y o u  l o v e ,  w h o  y o u  
a r e ,  o r  w h o  y o u  w a n t  t o  b e .  A g a i n  t h e  m o s t  i m p o r t a n t  p a r t  o f  y o u r  w r i t i n g  i s  t h a t  y o u  
r e a l l y  f o c u s  o n  y o u r  d e e p e s t  e m o t i o n s  a n d  t h o u g h t s .  T h e  o n l y  r u l e  w e  h a v e  i s  t h a t  y o u  
k e e p  w r i t i n g  f o r  t h e  e n t i r e  7 5  m inu tes .  I f  y o u  r u n  o u t  o f  t h i n g s  t o  s a y ,  j u s t  r e p e a t  w h a t  
y o u  h a v e  a l r e a d y  w r i t t e n .  D o n ' t  w o r r y  a b o u t  g r a m m a r ,  s p e l l i n g ,  o r  s e n t e n c e  s t r u c t u r e .  
D o n ' t  w o r r y  a b o u t  e r a s i n g  o r  c r o s s i n g  t h i n g s  o u t .  J u s t  w r i t e .
W riting Session Two
T o d a y ,  I w a n t  y o u  t o  c o n t i n u e  w r i t i n g  a b o u t  y o u r  e x p e r i e n c e  o f  d i f f i c u l t i e s  i n  h a v i n g  a  
c h i l d  a n d  t h e  t r e a t m e n t  p r o c e s s  y o u  a r e  g o i n g  t h r o u g h  a t  t h e  m o m e n t .  A g a i n ,  i n  y o u r  
w r i t i n g  I w a n t  y o u  t o  r e a l l y  l e t  g o  a n d  e x p l o r e  y o u r  d e e p e s t  e m o t i o n s  a n d  t h o u g h t s .  Y o u  
m i g h t  t h i n k  a b o u t  a l l  t h e  v a r i o u s  f e e l i n g s  a n d  c h a n g e s  t h a t  y o u  e x p e r i e n c e d  b e f o r e  
b e i n g  d i a g n o s e d ,  a f t e r  d i a g n o s i s ,  u p  t o  s t a r t i n g  I V F  t r e a t m e n t  a n d  n o w ,  d u r i n g  t h e  
t r e a t m e n t .  W h a t e v e r  a s p e c t  y o u  c h o o s e  t o  w r i t e  a b o u t  t h i s  t i m e ,  i t  i s  c r i t i c a l  t h a t  y o u  
f o c u s  o n  y o u r  d e e p e s t  t h o u g h t s  a n d  f e e l i n g s .  R e m e m b e r ,  y o u  m i g h t  a l s o  t i e  y o u r  
t h o u g h t s  a n d  f e e l i n g s  a b o u t  y o u r  d i f f i c u l t i e s  i n  h a v i n g  c h i l d  a n d  y o u r  c u r r e n t  t r e a t m e n t  
t o  o t h e r  p a r t s  o f  y o u r  l i f e  -  p e o p l e  y o u  l o v e ,  w h o  y o u  a r e ,  o r  w h o  y o u  w a n t  t o  b e .  A g a i n  
t h e  m o s t  i m p o r t a n t  p a r t  o f  y o u r  w r i t i n g  i s  t h a t  y o u  r e a l l y  f o c u s  o n  y o u r  d e e p e s t  
e m o t i o n s  a n d  t h o u g h t s .  T h e  o n l y  r u l e  w e  h a v e  i s  t h a t  y o u  k e e p  w r i t i n g  f o r  t h e  e n t i r e  15 
m inu tes .  I f  y o u  r u n  o u t  o f  t h i n g s  t o  s a y ,  j u s t  r e p e a t  w h a t  y o u  h a v e  a l r e a d y  w r i t t e n .  
D o n ' t  w o r r y  a b o u t  g r a m m a r ,  s p e l l i n g ,  o r  s e n t e n c e  s t r u c t u r e .  D o n ' t  w o r r y  a b o u t  e r a s i n g  
o r  c r o s s i n g  t h i n g s  o u t .  J u s t  w r i t e .
W riting Session Three
Today is the last writing session, in your writing today, i again want you to explore your 
deepest thoughts and feelings about your experience of difficulties in having a child 
and the treatment process you are going through at the moment. You can choose to 
write about the same things as you have done on the last two occasions, or you can 
choose a different focus for your writing. Whatever aspect you choose to write about 
this time, it is critical that you focus on your deepest thoughts and feelings. Remember, 
you can tie your thoughts and feelings about your difficulties in having child and your 
current treatment to other parts of your life - people you love, who you are, or who you 
want to be. Again the most important part of your writing is that you really focus on your 
deepest emotions and thoughts. Again the only rule we have is that you keep writing 
for the entire 15 minutes. If you run out of things to say, just repeat what you have 
already written. Don't worry about grammar, spelling, or sentence structure. Don't worry 
about erasing or crossing things out. Just write.
A.2.5.8 Debriefing Letter
Participants Name 
Address
Sheffield Hallam University
Faculty of Development and Society 
Sheffield Hallam University 
45 Broomgrove Road 
S10 2BP
Tel: {number}
E-mail: {e-mail address}
Dear Participant,
SUBJECT: An investigation into the experiences of people attending an assisted conception
unit. - Debriefing Information
Thank you for your participation in this study we very much appreciate that you have taken the 
time to complete the series of questionnaires that were given to you. I would like to take this 
opportunity to provide you with some information about the study and what we hope to find. In 
order to make comparisons patients who were recruited were put into groups. Some 
participants were asked to write about their feelings towards their difficulties trying to conceive 
and their experience of the treatment they were receiving in addition to completing 
questionnaires; others were asked only to complete the series of questionnaires.
It is widely understood that the IVF/ICSI process can be stressful, and that couples have to deal 
not only with the psychological demands associated with the treatment process itself, but also 
with the broader situation in which they find themselves -  that is, the inability to conceive, or 
cause conception, without medical intervention. Because of this, the Human Embryo and 
Fertilization Authority recommend that IVF/ICSI patients have counselling, yet there is a 
concern amongst health professionals that couples who are undergoing such treatments are not 
using the counselling services available to them, at times when it could be of benefit. The 
reasons for this are thought to include time constraints, perceived costs of treatment and fear of 
being labelled as having a psychological problem.
Previous research has shown that writing about thoughts and feelings relating to distressing 
events can help alleviate the distress associated with the event and improve the general-well 
being of the individual. It is hoped that a writing intervention can also be effective for alleviating 
distress in IVF/ICSI patients. This study has sought to investigate this and it is hoped that 
patients who wrote about their experiences showed some improvement in they way they felt. If
this type of writing intervention proves to be effective it could be a useful tool through which 
patients can express their feelings in a way that is free from social constraints and is time 
effective.
Further to this it is also hoped that the results of this study can provide information on how 
people feel in general at different stages of the IVF process, this is the reason why you were 
asked to report on a daily basis how you were feeling and what you had experienced in the last 
24 hours. These results will help to inform future research into the development of interventions 
that can help alleviate the distress associated with IVF treatment.
Thank you again for participating in this study. If you have any questions about the study 
please do not hesitate to contact me on the above telephone number or at the e-mail address.
Yours faithfully
Katie Cutts BSc.
Applied Social Science Division 
Faculty of Development and Society
A.2.5.9 Notice of Substantial Amendments
Central Office for Research
(COREC)
NOTICE OF SUBSTANTIAL AM ENDM ENT
For use in the case o f  all research other than clinical trials o f  investigational medicinal products 
(CTIMPs). For substantial amendments to CTIMPs, please use the EU-approved notice o f  amendment 
form  (Annex 2 to ENTRJCT1) at http://eudract.emea.eu. int/document.html#suidance.
To be completed in typescript by the Chief Investigator in language comprehensible to a 
lav person and submitted to the Research Ethics Committee that gave a favourable 
opinion o f the research (the main REC). In the case o f multi-site studies, there is no 
need to send copies to other RECs unless specifically required by the main REC.
Further guidance is available at http://www.corec.org.iik/applicants/apply/amendments.htm.
Details of Chief Investigator:
Mrs. K. J. Cutts
Name:
Address: Sheffield Hallam University,
Psychology Section
Collegiate Crescent Campus
Sheffield
S10 2BP
Telephone: 0114 2255844
E-m ail: k.cutts@ shu.ac.uk
0114 2252430
Full title of study:
The Efficacy o f an Expressive W riting Task upon 
Psychological W ell-being in Individuals Attending 
an Assisted Conception Unit.
Name of main REC: South Sheffield REC
http://eudract.emea.eu
http://www.corec.org.iik/applicants/apply/amendments.htm
mailto:k.cutts@shu.ac.uk
REC reference number: 06/Q2305/61
Date study commenced: 9th January 2007
Protocol reference (if  applicable), 
current version and date:
Version 4 17/01/2007
Amendment number and date: Amendment 1 17/01/2007
Type of amendment (indicate all that apply in bold)
(a) Amendment to information previously given on the REC application form
Yes No
I f  yes, please refer to relevant sections o f  the REC application in the summary o f  changes  
below.
(b) Amendment to the protocol
Yes No
I f  yes, please submit either the revised protocol with a new version number and date, 
highlighting changes in bold, or a document listing the changes and giving both the 
previous and revised text.
(c) Amendment to the information sheet(s) and consent form(s) fo r  participants, or to any other supporting  
documentation fo r  the study
Y es No
I f  yes, please submit all revised documents with new version numbers and dates, 
highlighting new text in bold.
Is this a modified version of an amendment previously notified to the REC and 
given an unfavourable opinion?
Yes No
Summary of changes
Briefly summarise the main changes proposed in this amendment using language comprehensible to a lay 
person. Explain the purpose o f  the changes and their significance fo r  the study. In the case o f  a modified  
amendment, highlight the modifications that have been made.
I f  the amendment significantly alters the research design or methodology, or could otherwise affect the 
scientific value o f  the study, supporting scientific information should be given (or enclosed separately).
Indicate whether or not additional scientific critique has been obtained
In order to keep the sample under investigation as homogenous as possible the original 
protocol included only new referral IVF/ICSI patients. However the number o f patients 
being referred for first cycle IVF/ICSI treatment has proved to be less than was originally 
approximated in consultation with the clinic. It has become apparent that the study inclusion 
criteria need to be amended to include a wider range o f patients in order to obtain the sample 
size o f 48 required in the time available to achieve adequate power in the final analysis 
(Erdfelder, Faul & Buchner, 1996).
In order to try and improve recruitment into the study the protocol will be amended to 
include patients who are undergoing repeat cycles o f IVF/ICSI and also Stimulated 
Intrauterine Insemination (sIUI), a procedure which follows the same cycle as IVF but does 
not involve the retrieval o f eggs or fertilization outside o f the uterus. Fhe amendment o f 
inclusion criteria does not alter the research design or methodology. Fhere is some evidence 
to suggest that there are differences in the emotional reactions that first time IVF patients and 
repeat cycle patients experience (Thiering, Beaurepaire, Jones, Saunders & Fennant, 1993).
It is suggested that repeat cycle patients, especially women, have increased levels o f 
depressive symptoms (Fhiering et al., 1993) and that first time patients experience more 
feelings o f confusion (Slade, Emery & Lieberman, 1997). Statistical analysis will be 
conducted to determine if  there are any differences on outcome measures between new 
referral IVF/ICSI, sIUI and repeat cycle patients prior to the main analysis.
It is through discussions with the clinical director o f the Assisted Conception Unit that the 
necessity for this change to the protocol has been decided and given that the design has 
remained unchanged the need for additional scientific critique o f this change to the protocol 
is not considered necessary.
This change to inclusion criteria has resulted to some very minor changes to the wording o f 
the protocol (underlined and highlighted in bold writing on pages, 9, 10 and 11) and minor 
changes to the participant information sheet and instruction sheets. Fhe demographic 
information questionnaire has been altered to include additional questions to clarify the 
characteristics o f the patient sample with regard to the clinical procedure which they are 
undergoing (underlined and highlighted in bold writing).
Any other relevant information
Applicants may indicate any specific ethical issues relating to the amendment, on 
which the opinion o f the REC is sought
List of enclosed documents
Document Version Date
Completed Protocol 4 17/01/07
General Information Sheet 4 17/01/07
Patient Invitation Letter 2 17/01/07
Demographic Information Sheet 2 17/01/07
Declaration
  I  confirm that the information in this form is accurate to the best o f my knowledge and I  take fu ll 
responsibility for it.
 I consider that it would be reasonable for the proposed amendment to be implemented.
A.2.5.10 Confirmation of Ethical Approval
National Research
South Sheffield Research Ethics Committee
Upstairs 1 st Floor Vickers Corridor 
Northern General Hospital 
Herries Road 
Sheffield 
S57AU
Tel: 01142269515
03 April 2007
Mrs K. J. Cutts 
PhD Student 
Collegiate Crescent 
Sheffield S102BP
Dear Mrs Cutts
Study title: The Efficacy of an Expressive Writing Task
upon Psychological Well-being in Individuals 
Attending an Assisted Conception Unit.
REC reference: 06/Q2305/61 
Amendment number: 1.1 
Amendment date: 15 March 2007
Thank you for submitting the above amendment, which was received on 17 March 
2007. It is noted that this is a modification of an amendment previously rejected by 
the Committee (our letter of 02 March 2007 refers).
The modified amendment was considered at the meeting of the Sub-Committee of 
the REC held on 03 April 2007. A list of the members who were present at the 
meeting is attached.
Ethical opinion
I am pleased to confirm that the Committee has given a favourable ethical 
opinion of the modified amendment on the basis described in the notice of 
amendment form and supporting documentation.
Approved documents
The documents reviewed and approved are:
Document Version Date
Questionnaire 2 17 January 2007
Protocol 4 17 January 2007
Participant Information Sheet 4 17 January 2007
Modified Amendment 1.1 15 March 2007
Letter of invitation to 
participant
2 17 January 2007
Covering Letter 15 March 2007
R&D approval
All investigators and research collaborators in the NHS should notify the R&D office for the 
relevant NHS care organisation of this amendment and check whether it affects R&D 
approval of the research.
Statement of compliance
The Committee is constituted in accordance with the Governance Arrangements for 
Research Ethics Committees (July 2001) and complies fully with the Standard Operating 
Procedures for Research Ethics Committees in the UK.
I 06/Q2305/61: Please quote this number on all correspondence
Yours sincerely
Miss Tara Bamford
Assistant Committee Co-ordinator
E-mail: Tara.Bamford@sth.nhs.uk
Copy to: Dr Brenda Zinober, Sheffield Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust
mailto:Tara.Bamford@sth.nhs.uk
A.3 Essay Evaluation Q uestionnaire
The following questions are related to the essay you have written today. Please rate 
your response to each question by circling a number ranging from (1) not at all to (7) a 
great deal.
1. Overall, how personal was the essay that you wrote today?
Not at all 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 A great deal
2. Overall, how meaningful was the essay that you wrote today?
Not at a lM  2 3 4 5 6 7 A great deal
3. Overall, how much did you reveal your emotions in what you wrote today?
Not at all 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 A great deal
4. How much have you wanted to talk to others about the event you wrote about today?
Not at a lM  2 3 4 5 6 7 A great deal
5. How much have you held back from talking about the event you have written about 
today?
Not at all 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 A great deal
A.4 Ethics Proforma and Approval Letter 
A.4.1 Ethics Proforma
Faculty of Development and Society 
Application for Research Ethics Approval Staff and 
Postgraduate Research Students
Section A
1. Name of principal investigator: Katie Cutts
Faculty: Development and Society
Email address: katieiane. i .cutts@ student. shu.ac.uk
2. Title of research: An Examination of the Effects of Mode of Writing,
Timing of writing Sessions and Environmental Context in a Written 
Emotional Disclosure Task.
3. Supervisor if applicable: Dr M addy Arden, Dr Keith Hurst and Dr John Reidy
Email address: m .arden@ shu.ac.uk. k.m .hurst@ shu.ac.uk. i.g.reidy@ shu.ac.uk
4. ENT number if applicable:
5. Other investigators (within or outside SHU)
Title Name Post Division Organisation
6. Proposed Duration of Project:
Start date: 3 1st January 2005 End Date: 22nd April 2005
7. Main purpose of Research:
I Educational qualification 
I publicly funded research 
I k taff research project 
I b th e r (Please supply details)
8. Background to the Study and Scientific Rationale (500 words)
mailto:m.arden@shu.ac.uk
mailto:k.m.hurst@shu.ac.uk
mailto:i.g.reidy@shu.ac.uk
In undergraduate populations, disclosing emotional reactions to stressful and 
traumatic experiences through writing has been shown to have beneficial 
influences on physical health, as measured by fewer health care visits and a 
reduction in physical symptoms (Greenberg & Stone, 1992; Pennebaker & 
Beall, 1986), improved psychological well-being (Paez, Velasco & Gonzalez, 
1999; Greenberg, W ortman & Stone, 1996), positive changes in physiological 
markers such as immunological responses (Esterling, Antonio, Fletcher, 
Margulies & Schneiderman, 1994) and improvements in grade point average 
(Lumley & Provenzano, 2003).
The empirical evidence suggesting that the disclosure o f traumatic and stressful 
experiences through writing can have positive physical, psychological and 
behavioural effects are numerous (for a review see Smyth, 1998), yet the 
operative mechanisms for this process remain unclear. A  number o f possible 
explanations for such beneficial effects have been proposed including: emotional 
inhibition (Pennebaker & Beall, 1986), habituation (Lepore, 1997) and cognitive 
adaptation (Pennebaker, Mayne & Francis, 1997). To examine the underlying 
processes involved in disclosure tasks, recent studies have focussed on the 
content o f  written essays. For example, Pennebaker and Francis (1996) found 
that an increased use o f causal and insightful words were associated w ith 
improved physical health at follow-up.
In addition to examining the mechanisms which underlie the writing paradigm  
attention has recently focused on identifying procedural differences that affect 
the disclosure effects. Comparisons have been made between writing and talking 
about traumas with results indicating comparable outcomes (Esterling et al., 
1994). It has been suggested that choice o f topic may selectively influence the 
outcome, for example students who write about their emotional reactions to 
coming to university show improvements in their grades, relative to students 
who write about other traumatic experiences (Pennebaker, Colder & Sharp, 
1990). In a recent meta-analytical review Smyth (1998) suggested that spacing 
writing sessions over longer periods o f time may produce stronger outcome 
effects, however this has not been empirically tested.
Sheffield, Duncan, Thomson and Johal (2002) conducted a home-based study 
and found that at three-week follow-up participants who wrote emotionally over 
three consecutive days experienced a significant increase in physical symptoms 
and absence from college due to illness compared to the unemotive writing and 
control group which led them to caution against the use o f  a written emotional 
expression intervention within a home based context. Contrary to this, 
Wetherell, Byme-Davis, Brookes, Byron, Dieppe, Donovan, Hom e and 
W einman (2003), found that rheumatoid arthritis patients who wrote about a 
traumatic or stressful experience at home, evidenced a significant improvement 
in disease activity and mood state.
One final methodological issue is that o f writing mode, in a study reported by 
Brewin and Lennard (1999) it was suggested that participants who described 
their traumatic experiences by typing experienced less immediate distress 
compared to those who wrote long hand. However, this study failed to go 
beyond an initial writing session and participants were not followed up to
determine if there were any differences in long-term outcome variables between 
the two conditions. Two possible conclusions could be drawn form this finding, 
firstly typing could be a more beneficial option for study participants in terms o f 
reducing the short term distress that is consistently evidenced in these studies. 
Secondly, it is possible that these findings are an indicator that typing 
descriptions o f traumatic events reduces the efficacy o f the writing task and thus 
limits the potential for positive outcomes.
9. M a in  Research Questions
Based on the above theoretical rationale the main aims o f this study are to 
determine how methodological differences such as study context, mode o f 
writing and the timing o f writing sessions, will impact on psychological and 
physical outcomes, as well as examining how cognitive processing o f the trauma 
changes over time as represented by an increase in cognitive words consistent 
with a cognitive adaptation model o f disclosure writing (Pennebaker & Francis, 
1996).
10. S u m m ary  o f M ethods including Proposed D ata  Analyses
Study 1 will be conducted using a randomized, repeated measures, 2 (Typing vs.
writing) x 2 (home vs. laboratory) x2 (neutral event vs. stressful event) x3 (pre
test, post-test and follow-up) design. Study 2 will be conducted using a 2 
(neutral event vs. stressful event) x 2 (consecutive writing vs. fortnightly 
writing) x3 (pre-test, post-test and follow-up) design. Participants will be 
recruited through 1st and 2nd year Research Methods and Practical sessions. 
Participants in the 1st year RMP groups will be randomly allocated to either 
write or type about a stressful or traumatic experience (the experimental 
conditions) or a neutral event (the control condition) over three sessions. Each 
writing session will last 15-minutes and will be conducted within the laboratory 
session. Participants in the 2nd year RMP groups will be randomly allocated to 
either write or type about a stressful or traumatic experience or a neutral event. 
Further to this some participants will be allocated to groups that write only about 
a traumatic experience or a neutral event over three consecutive days to comply 
with the Study 2 protocol. All 2nd year participants will complete the three 
writing sessions at home.
All participants will be asked to complete questionnaires to measure physical 
symptoms, psychological functioning and event appraisal at baseline, 2-weeks 
after completing the writing tasks and again at 7-weeks post-writing. These 
questionnaires include the Impact o f Event Scale (Horowitz, W ilner & Alverez, 
1979), Event Appraisal Questionnaire (Paez, Valesco & Gonzalex, 1999), 
Positive and Negative Affectivity Scale ( Watson, Clark & Tellegan, 1988), 
Physical Symptoms Inventory (Spector & Jex, 1998), Symptom Checklist-90- 
Revised (Derogatis, 1992 and the Toronto Alexithymia Scale (Taylor, Bagby & 
Park, 1997) (See Appendix A for copies o f questionnaires). Those participating 
in the lab-based sessions will complete these questionnaires within lab sessions, 
home-based participants will be given the relevant questionnaires in sealed 
envelopes and will be asked to return these by post (pre-paid envelopes will be
supplied).All participants will be fully debriefed after the final follow-up
session.
For both studies difference in symptomology, psychological functioning and 
affect between groups and across time will be examined using a series o f 
repeated measures ANCOVA's (with baseline scores entered as covariates). 
Analysis o f essays written by experimental group participants will be conducted 
using a text analysis programme (Linguistic Inquiry and W ord Count; LIWC, 
Pennebaker, Francis & Booth, 2001) to measures use o f emotion and cognitive 
words, followed by repeated measures AN O V A s to determine between group 
differences in word usage as well as regression analysis to examine predictive 
ability o f word usage on physical and psychological health outcomes.
Section B
8. Describe the arrangem ents fo r selecting/sam pling and b rie fing  potentia l 
partic ipants . (This should include copies o f any advertisements for volunteers 
or letters to individuals/organisations inviting participation.)
Participants will be recruited though 1st and 2nd year Research Methods and 
Practical sessions by the main researcher. On initial contact with these groups 
the researcher will give a brief overview o f the studys purpose (looking at 
health and writing) and overview o f what would be expected o f  participants 
including, the length o f the study, timing and the writing procedure.
9. W h a t is the potential fo r partic ipants  to benefit fro m  the research?
RMP 1 participants can expect to receive 1 hour and 45 minutes o f research 
credits for taking part in this study.
10. Describe any possible negative consequences o f p artic ip a tio n  in the research  
aiong w ith  the ways in  w hich these consequences w ill be lim ited .
Participants who are allocated to the experimental group will be asked to write 
about traumatic and stressful experiences. Therefore, there is the possibility that 
some individuals will experience some level o f distress after completing a 
writing task. Information sheets (See Appendix B for Information Sheets) given 
to participants will contain a number o f organisations which they can contact if  
they feel that they need to talk to someone about the distress they are feeling. 
Further to this all participants will be informed that if  at any point in the study 
they feel that the writing task is causing them to experience levels o f distress 
with which they cannot cope they are free to withdraw from the study. In the 
event o f a participants becoming highly distressed within the writing session 
they will be free to leave the room, in this event they will be advised to contact 
their support tutor.
11. Describe the arrangem ents fo r obtain ing partic ip an ts ' consent. (This should 
include copies o f the information that they will receive & written consent forms
where appropriate. If  children or vulnerable people are to be participants in the 
study details o f the arrangements for obtaining consent from those acting in loco 
parentis or as advocates should be provided.)
Participants will be asked to read and sign a consent form (See Appendix B for 
Consent Form) prior to participating in the study.
12. Describe how partic ipants  w ill be m ade aw are  o f th e ir r ig h t to w ith d ra w  
fro m  the research. (This should also include information about participants' 
right to withhold information.)
Participants will be advised o f their right to withdraw at any time from the study 
and withhold information in the initial briefing sessions. Right to withdraw and 
withhold information is also included in the consent form.
13. I f  your data collection requires that you work alone with 
children or other vulnerable participants have you undergone 
C rim in a l Records B ureau  screening? Please supply details.
14. Describe the arrangem ents fo r d ebriefing  the partic ipants . (This should 
include copies o f information that participants will receive where appropriate.)
Participants will be debriefed in person in the final session o f  the study as well 
as receiving a debriefing information sheet informing them o f the nature o f the 
study and giving contact details o f the researcher as well as contact information 
for organisation that they can contact if  they feel that they need to talk to 
someone about the information they have divulged in the study. (See (Appendix 
B for Debrief Sheet).
15. Describe the arrangem ents fo r ensuring p artic ip a n t con fiden tia lity . (This 
should include details o f how data will be stored to ensure compliance with data 
protection legislation and how results will be presented.)
To ensure participant confidentiality whilst maintaining the facility to m atch 
baseline and follow-up data all questionnaire sheets and writing booklets will 
contain a coding box. Participants will be asked to devise there own identity 
codes (suggestions for which are included in the information sheet) which to 
complete on all materials they fill in. This will ensure that the data can be 
collected and matched accordingly without revealing the identity o f  any 
participant. In the case o f participants who are completing their tasks by typing 
into text files, no personal information will be recorded either on the disks they 
use, or within the text document. To further ensure anonymity, all files will be 
saved to disk in Rich Text Format (.rtf) which eliminates the possibility o f 
personal information being contained within the document. Contact details will 
be needed to send reminders to those participants in the home-based groups to 
remind them to complete the relevant questionnaires and writing booklets at 
certain times throughout the study. These will be collected on separate sheets to
any other data so that contact details cannot be matched to any collected data. 
All completed questionnaires, writing booklets and contact information will be 
stored in locked filling cabinets in the office o f the researcher.
16. A re  there  any conflicts o f interest in  you u n d ertak in g  this research? (E.g. Are 
you undertaking research on work colleagues; or in an organisation where you 
are a consultant?) Please supply details.
SECTION C
R IS K  A S S E S S M E N T  F O R  T H E  R E S E A R C H E R
1. Will the proposed data collection take place on campus?
QcYes (Please answer questions 4 and 6 only)
1 I I No (Please completmlLquestions)
2. W here will the data collection take place?
(Tick as many as apply if  data collection will take place in multiple venues)
I I 1 Own house/flat I I I Residence of participant
1 1 1 School I 1 I Business/Voluntary Organisation
I I I Public Venue (e.g. Youth Club; Church; etc)
I I 1 Other (Please specify)____________________________
3. How will you travel to and from the data collection venue?
1 I 1 On foot I I 1 By car I I I Public Transport
I I 1 Other (Please specify)_____________________________
Please outline how you will ensure your personal safety when travelling to and from the 
data collection venue:
4. How will you ensure your own personal safety whilst at the research venue?
The research venue is on-campus in an environment that the researcher is familiar 
with. Further to this all research sessions will be undertaken in the presence o f 
lecturers running the sessions. There is no cause to suggest that the researcher will 
experience any threat to her personal safety.
5. If  you are carrying out research off-campus, you must ensure that each time you go 
out to collect data you ensure that someone you trust knows where you are going 
(without breaching the confidentiality o f  your participants), how you are getting
there (preferably including your travel route), when you expect to get back, and 
what to do should you not return at the specified time. Please outline here the 
procedure you propose using to do this:
6. A re there any potential risks to your health and wellbeing associated w ith  either (a) 
the venue where the research w ill take place and/or (b) the research topic itself?
xNone that I  am aware o f  
m  Yes (Please outline below)
7. Does this research project require a health and safety risk analysis for the procedures 
to be used? N o
I f  Y E S  current status o f  Health  and Safety R isk Assessment.
I  confirm  that this research w ill conform to the principles outlined in  the Sheffield  
H allam  University Research Ethics policy.
I  confirm  that this application is accurate to the best o f  m y knowledge.
Principal Investigator's 
signature
Supervisor's signature 
( i f  applicable)
A.4.2 Letter o f Approval
Our Ref AM/HE
30th January 2007
K Cutts 
{Address}
Dear Katie,
Request for Ethical Approval of Research Project
Your research project entitled "An Examination of the Effects of Mode of Writing, 
Timing of Writing Sessions and Environmental Context in a Written Emotional 
Disclosure Task" has been resubmitted for ethical review to the Faculty's 
rapporteurs and I am pleased to confirm that they have approved your project.
However, they have suggested that you remove the paragraph about keeping 
diaries and writing about traumatic events from the information sheet as it is 
confusing.
I wish you every success with your research project.
Yours sincerely
Professor A Macaskill 
Chair Faculty
Research Ethics Committee
Office address:
Sheffield Hallam University 
Faculty o f Development &  Society 
Research Support Team 
Room 1,45 Broomgrove Road 
Collegiate Crescent Campus 
SheffieldS 10 1 BP
Telephone: 0114-2255846 
E-mail: a.p.wilson@shu.ac.uk
mailto:a.p.wilson@shu.ac.uk
A.5 Inform ation Sheets
A.5.1 Inform ation Sheet fo r W riting Participants
An Investigation into the Relationship between Writing and Health
A large number of individuals keep diaries as a means of organising their thoughts and 
feelings relating to the daily events they encounter. In order to understand how writing 
about stressful or traumatic events can help people to organize their thoughts, a study 
is being conducted that asks you to complete a selection of questionnaires relating to 
your general well-being and write about a designated topic for 15 minutes in three 
separate sessions, over the next six weeks.
In this first session you will be asked to complete a number of questionnaires relating to 
how you have felt in general over the last few weeks, as well as your feelings towards 
your chosen writing topic. After this you will be given a writing booklet that contains 
instructions for writing, and space in which to write. You will be asked to write for 15- 
minutes about a chosen topic. Then in your next two RMP sessions you will again be 
asked to write for 15-minutes on a chosen topic. After each writing session you will be 
asked to complete a general well-being questionnaire. Then at 2-weeks and 7-weeks 
following your final writing session you will be asked to complete a number of 
questionnaires relating to your general well-being. The writing session and completion 
of questionnaires will all be conducted within your Research Methods and Practical 
sessions and will amount to 1 hour and 45 minutes towards research credits.
Participation in this study is voluntary. Any information that you give will be 
treated confidentially. Individuals will not be identified in the results o f this 
study, as all the data will be presented anonymously.
To maintain confidentiality a coding system will be used to match questionnaires and 
personal writing completed in the first session with those completed in subsequent 
sessions. To keep it simple and easy to remember, everybody's code will be made up 
of the first three letters of their mothers maiden name and the last three numbers of 
their telephone number i.e. if your mothers maiden name is Smith and your telephone 
number is 07932 678 678 then your code will be 'smi678'. Your own code, similar to 
this one, should be written in the available space at the top of each page on each 
questionnaire booklet and writing booklet.
If after taking part in this study you have any concerns, you will see that listed below 
are some useful contact numbers that you can contact if you feel that you need to talk 
to somebody.
Contact numbers:
Sheffield Ha I lam University Counselling Service: Tel:0114 225 2136
E-mail:counselling@shu. ac.uk
The Samaritans: 08457 90 90 90 
Or your own GP
If you agree to take part in this study please complete and sign the consent form 
overleaf. If you require any additional information please feel free to contact me at {e- 
mail address}.
Thank you.
A .5.2 Inform ation Sheet fo r Typing Participants
An Investigation into the Relationship between Writing and Health
A large number of individuals keep diaries as a means of organising their thoughts and 
feelings relating to the daily events they encounter. In order to understand how writing 
about stressful or traumatic events can help people to organize their thoughts, a study 
is being conducted that asks you to complete a selection of questionnaires relating to 
your general well-being and write about a designated topic for 15 minutes in three 
separate sessions, over the next six weeks.
In this first session you will be asked to complete a number of questionnaires relating to 
how you have felt in general over the last few weeks, as well as your feelings towards 
your chosen writing topic. You will be given a floppy disk which contains three 
documents titled Writing Session 1, Writing Session 2 and Writing Session 3. These 
documents contain instructions for writing and space in which to type. In the first 
session you will be asked to write for 15-minutes about your chosen topic following the 
instructions in Writing Session 1. Then in your next two RMP sessions you will 
complete Writing Session 2 and Writing Session 3, these again will take 15 minutes 
each. After each writing session you will be asked to complete a general well-being 
questionnaire. At 2-weeks and 7-weeks following your final writing session you will be 
asked to complete a number of questionnaires relating to your general well-being. The 
writing sessions and completion of questionnaires will all be conducted within your 
Research Methods and Practical sessions and will amount to 1 hour and 45 minutes 
towards research credits.
Participation in this study is voluntary. Any information that you give will be 
treated confidentially. Individuals will not be identified in the results of this 
study, as all the data will be presented anonymously.
To maintain confidentiality a coding system will be used to match questionnaires and 
personal writing completed in the first session with those completed in subsequent 
sessions. To keep it simple and easy to remember, everybody's code will be made up 
of the first three letters of their mothers maiden name and the last three numbers of 
their telephone number i.e. if your mothers maiden name is Smith and your telephone 
number is 07932 678 678 then your code will be 'smi678'. Your own code, similar to 
this one, should be written in the available space at the top of each page on each 
questionnaire booklet and writing booklet.
If after taking part in this study you have any concerns, you will see that listed below 
are some useful contact numbers that you can contact if you feel that you need to talk 
to somebody.
Contact numbers:
Sheffield Hal lam University Counselling Service: Tel:01142252136
E-mail:counselling@shu.ac.uk
The Samaritans: 08457 90 90 90 
Or your own GP
If you agree to take part in this study please complete and sign the consent form 
overleaf. If you require any additional information please feel free to contact me at {e- 
mail address}.
Thank you.
mailto:counselling@shu.ac.uk
A.6 Consent Form
TITLE OF STUDY: An Investigation into the Relationship between Writing,
and Health
PRINCIPAL RESEARCHER: Katie J. Cutts
Please answer the following questions by circling your responses:
1. Have you read the information sheet about this study? Yes / No
2. Have you been able to ask questions about this study? Yes / No
3. Have you received answers to all your questions? Yes / No
4. Have your received enough information about this study? Yes / No
5. Who have you spoken to about this study?
6. Do you consent to publication of the studys results in reputable 
scientific reports, so long as the results remain totally anonymous ? Yes / No
7. Do you understand that you are free to withdraw from this study:
 At any time? Yes / No
 Without giving a reason for withdrawal? Yes / No
8. Do you understand that you have the right to withhold any information? Yes / No
9. Do you agree to take part in this study? Yes / No
Your signature will certify that you have voluntarily decided to take part in this research
study having read and understood the information in the sheet for participants. It will 
also certify that you have had an adequate opportunity to discuss the study with an 
investigator and that all questions have been answered to your satisfaction.
Signature of
Signature of
A.7 Writing/Typing Instructions 
A.7.1 Disclosure Group Instructions 
Writing Session One
Writing Time: 15 Minutes
What I would like to have you write about today and over the next two writing sessions 
is the most traumatic, upsetting experience of your entire life. In your writing, I want 
you to really let go and explore your very deepest emotions and thoughts. You can 
write about the same experience on all three days or about different experiences each 
day. In addition to a traumatic experience, you can also write about major conflicts or 
problems that you have experienced or are experiencing now. Whatever you choose 
to write, however, it is critical that you really delve into your deepest emotions and 
thoughts. Ideally, we would also like you to write about significant experiences or 
conflicts that you have not discussed in great detail with others. You might tie your 
personal experiences to other parts of your life. How is it related to your childhood, 
your parents, people you love, who you are, or who you want to be. All of your writing 
will be completely confidential. Dont worry about spelling, grammar or sentence 
structure. The only rule is that once you begin writing continue to do so until your time 
is up, if you run out of things to say just repeat what you have already written Again, in 
your writing, examine your deepest emotions and thoughts.
Writing Session Two
Writing Time: 15 Minutes
Today, I want you to continue writing about the most traumatic experience of your life. 
It could be the same topic that you wrote about in the previous session or it could be 
something different. But today, I really want you to explore your very deepest emotions 
and thoughts. Again I will remind you that your writing will be completely confidential. 
Dont worry about spelling, grammar or sentence structure. The only rule is that once 
you begin writing continue to do so until your time is up, if you run out of things to say 
just repeat what you have already written.
Writing Session Three
Writing Time: 15 Minutes
Today is the last writing session. In your writing today, I again want you to explore your 
deepest thoughts and feelings about the most traumatic experience of your life. 
Remember that this is the last day and so you might want to wrap everything up. For
example, how is this experience related to your current life and your future? But feel 
free to go in any direction you feel most comfortable with and delve into your deepest 
emotions and thoughts. All of your writing will be completely confidential. Dont worry 
about spelling, grammar or sentence structure. The only rule is that once you begin 
writing continue to do so until your time is up, if you run out of things to say just repeat 
what you have already written.
A.7.2 Control Group Instructions 
Writing session One
Writing Time: 15 Minutes
What I would like you to write about today and over the next two sessions is how you 
use your time. Each day, I will give you different writing assignments on the way you 
spend your time. In your writing, I want you to be as objective as possible. I am not 
interested in your emotions or opinions. Rather I want you to try to be completely 
objective. Feel free to be as detailed as possible. In todays writing, I want you to 
describe what you did yesterday from the time you got up until the time you went to 
bed. For example, you might start when your alarm went off and you got out of bed. 
You could include the things you ate, where you went, which buildings or objects you 
passed by as you walked from place to place. The most important thing in your writing, 
however, is for you to describe your days as accurately and as objectively as possible.
Writing Session Two
Writing Time: 15 Minutes
Today, I would like you to describe what you have done today since you woke up. 
Again, I want you to be as objective as possible to describe exactly what you have 
done up until coming to this session.
Writing Session Three
Writing Time: 15 Minutes
This is the last day of the experiment. In your writing today, I would like you to describe 
what you will be doing over the next week. The most important thing in your writing, 
however, is for you to describe your days as accurately and as objectively as possible.
A.8 Debriefing Information
Thank you for your participation in this study. This study has a number of aims. Firstly, 
it aims to replicate previous research showing that the expression of emotion through 
writing can be beneficial in improving both physical and psychological well being in 
healthy individuals (Pennebaker, 1997). Secondly, this study aims to investigate how 
methodological changes to the classic Pennebaker Writing Task can affect short and 
longer-term well-being in those people undertaking such a writing task. To address 
these questions the participants in this study were asked to do different things. Some 
people were asked to write about their experiences with pen and paper, and some 
were asked to type, others completed the writing sessions at home and others within 
the Research Methods and Practical session.
In addition to these methodological issues, the study asks a number of questions 
designed to obtain information relating to the processing of information connected to 
the event about which people wrote, and also a measure of how easy it is for people to 
express their emotions.
The results and information obtained from this study will be used to help examine the 
mechanisms that underlie the effects of writing about stressful experiences, and will 
help to determine how future writing studies should be designed to obtain optimum 
benefits for individuals who are experiencing chronic stress.
Thank you again for participating in this study. If you have any questions about the 
study please do not hesitate to contact me at: (e-mail address)
If you feel distressed due to your participation in this study please contact one of the 
following organisations:
Sheffield Hallam University Counselling Service: Tel:0114 225 2136
E-mail:counselling@shu.ac.uk
The Samaritans: 08457 90 90 90 
Or your own GP
Thank you
mailto:counselling@shu.ac.uk
A.9 SPSS Output for Hierarchical Regression Analysis -  LIWC Variables 
as Predictors
A.9.1 Physical Symptoms (PSI)
A.9.1.1 Two week follow-up data
Descriptive Statistics
Mean Std. Deviation N
Time Point 2 Physical 
Symptoms Im^ntory 5.0968 2.82081 31
Time Point 1 Physical 
Symptoms Inventory 4.0968 2.28553 31
NegemChange -.7371 1.71059 31
PosemChange .5777 1.55912 31
CogmeccChange .4952 2.66126 31
Variab les Entered /R em ovld
Variables Variables
Model Entered Removed Method
1 Time Point 
1 Physical 
Symptorps 
Inventory
Enter
2 Posem
Change,
Negem
Change,
Cogme^c
Change
Enter
a. All requested variables entered.
b. Dependent Variable: Time Point 2 
Physical Symptoms Inventory
Model Summary0
C h ange  S ta tis tics
Model R R Square
A d justed 
R Square
Std. E rror o f 
the E stim a te
R  Square 
C h ange F C h a n g e df1 df2 S ig. F C h a n g e
1 .36 6a .134 .104 2 .67043 .134 4.474 1 29 .043
2 .40 6 b .165 .037 2 .76885 .031 .325 3 26 .807
a. P redicto rs: (C onstant), T im e  P o in t 1 Physical S ym ptom s ln \e n to ry
b. P redicto rs: (C o n s ta n t),T im e  P o in t 1 Physical S ym ptom s Inventory, P o sem C hange , N e gem C hange , C o gm e ccC h a n g e
c. D e p e n d e n tV a ria b le : T im e  Po int 2 Physica l Sym ptom s Inventory
ANOVAc
Model
Sum of 
Squares df Mean Square F Sig.
1 Regression 31.905 1 31.905 4.474 .04 3a
Residual 206.804 29 7.131
Total 238.710 30
2 Regression 39.380 4 9.845 1.284 .302b
Residual 199.330 26 7.667
Total 238.710 30
a. Predictors: (Constant),Time Point 1 Physical Symptoms Inventory
b. Predictors: (Constant),Time Point 1 Physical Symptoms Inventory, PosemChange, 
NegemChange, CogmeccChange
c. Dependent Variable: Time Point 2 Physical Symptoms Inventory
Coefficients3
Unstandardized Standardized
Coefficients Coefficients
Model B Std. Error Beta t Sig.
1 (Constant) 3.248 .997 3.258 .003
Time Point 1 Physical 
Symptoms Inventory .451 .213 .366 2.115 .043
2 (Constant) 3.197 1.111 2.877 .008
Time Point 1 Physical 
Symptoms Inventory .468 .224 .379 2.093 .046
NegemChange -.068 .298 -.041 -.227 .822
PosemChange -.230 .325 -.127 -.708 .486
CogmeccChange .133 .191 .126 .697 .492
a. Dependent Variable: Time Point 2 Physical Symptoms Inventory
A.9.1.2 Six week follow-up data
Descriptive Statistics
Mean Std. Deviation N
Time Point 3 Physical 
Symptoms Inventory 4.3226 2.63802 31
Time Point 1 Physical 
Symptoms Inventory 4.0968 2.28553 31
NegemChange -.7371 1.71059 31
PosemChange .5777 1.55912 31
CogmeccChange .4952 2.66126 31
Variab les Entered/Re movfed
Variables Variables
Model Entered Removed Method
1 Time Point 
1 Physical 
Symptoms 
Inventory
Enter
2 Posem
Change,
Negem
Change,
CogmeCjC
Change
Enter
a. All requested variables entered.
b. Dependent Variable: Time Point 3 
Physical Symptoms Inventory
Model Summary0
C h ange  S ta tis tics
Model R R Squa re
A d justed  
R Square
Std. Error o f 
the E stim ate
R Square 
C h ange F C h a n g e df1 df2 S ig. F C h a n g e
1 .65 3a .426 .406 2 .03312 .426 21.507 1 29 .000
D .437 .351 2 .12565 .011 .177 3 26 .911
a. P red ic to rs : (C o n s ta n t),T im e  P o in t 1 Physical S ym ptom s Inventory
b. P red icto rs: (C o n s ta n t),T im e  P o in t l Physical S ym ptom s Inventory, P o sem C hange , N e gem C han ge , C o gm e ccC han ge
c. D e p e n d e n tV a ria b le : T im e  P o in t 3 Physica l Sym ptom s Inventory
ANOVAc
Model
Sum of 
Squares df Mean Square F Sig.
1 Regression 88.901 1 88.901 21.507 ,000a
Residual 119.873 29 4.134
Total 208.774 30
2 Regression 91.296 4 22.824 5.051 .004b
Residual 117.478 26 4.518
Total 208.774 30
a. Predictors: (Constant),Time Pointl Physical Symptoms Inventory
b. Predictors: (Constant),Time Pointl Physical Symptoms Inventory, PosemChange, 
NegemChange, CogmeccChange
c. DependentVariable; Time Point 3 Physical Symptoms Inventory
Coefficients3
Unstandardized Standardized
Coefficients Coefficients
Model B Std. Error Beta t Sig.
1 (Constant) 1.237 .759 1.630 .114
Time Point 1 Physical 
Symptoms Inventory .753 .162 .653 4.638 .000
2 (Constant) 1.315 .853 1.542 .135
Time Point 1 Physical 
Symptoms Inventory .742 .172 .643 4.323 .000
NegemChange .110 .228 .071 .482 .634
PosemChange .123 .250 .073 .492 .627
CogmeccChange -.044 .147 -.045 -.301 .766
a. DependentVariable:Time Point 3 Physical Symptoms Inventory
A.9.2 Intrusion (IES)
A.9.2.1 Two week follow-up data
Descriptive Statistics
Mean Std. Deviation N
Time Point 2 Intrusion 10.4000 9.39773 30
Time Point 1 Intrusion 
Subscale IES 12.7000 8.54259 30
NegemChange -.7973 1.70607 30
PosemChange .6167 1.57038 30
CogmeccChange .4083 2.66172 30
Variables Entered/Removed b
Variables Variables
Model Entered Removed Method
1 Time Point
1 Intrusion
Enter
Subpcale
2 Cogmecc
Change,
Posem
Enter i
Change, 
Negem a 
Change
a. 4j| requested variables entered.
b. Dependent Variable: Time Point2 Intrusion
Model Summary0
Chanqe Statistics
Model R R Square
Adjusted 
R Square
Std. Error of 
the Estimate
R Square 
Change FChange dfl df2 Sig. FChange
1 .415a .172 .142 8.70268 .172 5.817 1 28 .023
2 ,559b .312 .202 8.39295 .140 1.702 3 25 .192
a. Predictors: (Constant),Time Pointl Intrusion Subscale IES
b. Predictors: (Constant),Time Pointl Intrusion Subscale IES, CogmeccChange, PosemChange, NegemChange
c. DependentVariable: Time Point 2 Intrusion
ANOVAc
Model
Sum of 
Squares df Mean Square F Sig.
1 Regression 440.572 1 440.572 5.817 .02 3a
Residual 2120.628 28 75.737
Total 2561.200 29
2 Regression 800.159 4 200.040 2.840 .045b
Residual 1761.041 25 70.442
Total 2561.200 29
a. Predictors: (Constant),Time Pointl Intrusion Subscale IES
b. Predictors: (Constant),Time Pointl Intrusion Subscale IES, CogmeccChange, 
PosemChange, NegemChange
c. DependentVariable: Time Point 2 Intrusion
Coefficients3
Unstandardized 
* Coefficients
Standardized
Coefficients
Model B Std. Error Beta t Sig.
1 (Constant)
Time Point 1 Intrusion
4.605 2.880 1.599 .121
Subscale IES .456 .189 .415 2.412 .023
2 (Constant)
Time Point 1 Intrusion
7.589 3.223
2.355 .027
Subscale IES .388 .194 1.995 .057
NegemChange 1.346 .974 .244 1.382 .179
PosemChange i -1.385 1.000 -.231 -1.385 .178
CogmeccChange -.467 .590 -.132 -.792 .436
a. DependentVariable:Time Point 2 Intrusion
A.9.2.2 Two week follow-up data
Descriptive Statistics
Mean Std. Deviation N
Time Point 3 Intrusion 10.0333 9.33840 30
Time Point 1 Intrusion
Subscale IES 12.7000 8.54259 30
NegemChange -.7973 1.70607 30
PosemChange .6167 1.57038 30
CogmeccChange .4083 2.66172 30
Variables Entered/Removed b
Variables Variables
Model Entered Removed Method
1 Time Point
1 Intrusion
Enter
Suhpcale
2 Cogmecc
Change,
Posem
Enter
Change, 
Negem a 
Change
a. All requested variables entered.
b. DependentVariable: Time Point 3 Intrusion
Model Summaryc
Change Statistics
Model R R Square
/Vtjusted 
R Square
Std. Error of 
the Estimate
R Square 
Change F Change df1 df2 Sig. FChange
1 .455a .207 .179 8.46153 .207 7.322 1 28 .011
2 .530b .280 .165 8.53163 .073 .847 3 25 .481
a. Predictors: (Constant),Time Point 1 Intrusion Subscale IES
b. Predictors: (Constant),Time Pointl Intrusion Subscale IES, CogmeccChange, PosemChange, NegemChange
c. DependentVariable:Time Point 3 Intrusion
ANOVAc
Model
Sum of 
Squares df Mean Square F Sig.
1 Regression 524.236 1 524.236 7.322 .011a
Residual 2004.731 28 71.598
Total 2528.967 29
2 Regression 709.250 4 177.312 2.436 .074b
Residual 1819.717 25 72.789
Total 2528.967 29
a. Predictors: (Constant),Time Pointl Intrusion Subscale IES
b. Predictors: (Constant),Time Pointl Intrusion Subscale IES, CogmeccChange, 
PosemChange, NegemChange
c. DependentVariable: Time Point 3 Intrusion
Coefficients3
Unstandardized
Coefficients
Standardized
Coefficients
Model B Std. Error Beta t Sig.
1 (Constant)
Time Point 1 Intrusion
3.712 2.801 1.326 .196
Subscale IES .498 .184 .455 2.706 .011
2 (Constant)
Time Point 1 Intrusion
6.067 3.276 1.852 .076
Subscale IES .409 .198 .374 2.069 .049
NegemChange 1.370 .990 .250 1.383 .179
PosemChange .048 1.016 .008 .048 .962
CogmeccChange -.406 .599 -.116 -.677 .505
a. Dependent Variable: Time Point 3 Intrusion
A.9.3 Avoidance (IES)
A.9.3.1 Two week follow-up data
Descriptive Statistics
Mean Std. Deviation N
Time Point 2 Avoidance 12.2000 10.48940 30
Time Point 1 Avoidance
Subscale IES 12.1430 9.59337 30
NegemChange -.7973 1.70607 30
PosemChange .6167 1.57038 30
CogmeccChange .4083 2.66172 30
V ariab les Entered/Re movfed
Model
Variables
Entered
Variables
Removed Method
1 Time Point 
Avoidance 
S upscale 
Enter
2 Cogmecc
Change,
Posem
Change,
Negem a
Change
Enter
a. All requested variables entered.
b. Dependent Variable: Time Point 2 Avoidance
Model Summary0
Change Statistics
Model R R Square
/Adjusted 
R Square
Std. Error of 
the Estimate
R Squa re 
Change F Change dfl cH2 Sig. FChange
1 .69 6a .485 .466 7.66348 .485 26.331 1 28 .000
2 .76 3b .582 .515 7.30655 .097 1.934 3 25 .150
a. Predictors: (Constant), Time Pointl Avoidance Subscale IES
b. Predictors: (Constant), Time Pointl Avoidance Subscale IES, CogmeccChange, PosemChange, NegemChange
c. DependentVariable: Time Point 2 Avoidance
ANOVAc
Model
Sum of 
Squares df Mean Square F Sig.
1 Regression 1546.392 1 1546.392 26.331 .00 0a
Residual 1644.408 28 58.729
Total 3190.800 29
2 Regression 1856.158 4 464.040 8.692 .000b
Residual i 1334.642 25 53.386
Total 3190.800 29
a. Predictors: (Constant), Time Pointl Avoidance Subscale IES
b. Predictors: (Constant), Time Pointl Avoidance Subscale IES, CogmeccChange, 
PosemChange, NegemChange
c. DependentVariable: Time Point 2 Avoidance
Coefficients3
Un standardized 
Coefficients
Standardized
Coefficients
Model B Std. Error Beta t Sig.
1 (Constant)
Time Point 1 Avoidance
2.957 2.281 1.296 .205
Subscale IES .761 .148 .696 5.131 .000
2 (Constant)
Time Point 1 Avoidance
7.090 2.827 2.508 .019
Subscale IES .579 .169 .529 3.433 .002
NegemChange 2.086 .943 .339 2.213 .036
PosemChange -.584 .880 -.087 -.664 .513
CogmeccChange .255 .513 .065 .498 .623
a. Dependent Variable: Time Point 2 Avoidance
A.9.3.2 Six week follow-up data
Descriptive Statistics
Mean Std. Deviation N
Time Point 3 Avoidance 11.3333 10.00460 30
Time Point 1 Avoidance 
Subscale IES 12.1430 9.59337 30
NegemChange -.7973 1.70607 30
PosemChange .6167 1.57038 30
CogmeccChange .4083 2.66172 30
Variab les Entered/Re movfed
Variables Variables
Model Entered Removed Method
1 Time Point 
Avoidance Enter
Sul^sc ale 
2 Cogmecc
Change,
Posem
Enter
Change,
Negem
Change
a. All requested variables entered.
b. Dependent Variable: Time Point 3 Avoidance
Model Summary0
Change Statistics
Model R R Square
/Adjusted 
R Square
Std. Error of 
the Estimate
R Square 
Change F Change df1 df2 Sig. FChange
1 .559a .313 .288 8.44098 .313 12.739 1 28 .001
2 .60 3b .363 .261 8.59987 .050 .658 3 25 .585
a. Predictors: (Constant), Time Pointl Avoidance Subscale IES
b. Predictors: (Constant), Time Pointl Avoidance Subscale IES, CogmeccChange, PosemChange, NegemChange
c. DependentVariable: Time Point 3 Avoidance
ANOVAc
Model
Sum of 
Squares df Mean Square F Sig.
1 Regression 907.662 1 907.662 12.739 .001a
Residual 1995.005 28 71.250
Total 2902.667 29
2 Regression 1053.723 4 263.431 3.562 .02 0b
Residual 1848.943 25 73.958
Total 2902.667 29
a. Predictors: (Constant), Time Pointl Avoidance Subscale IES
b. Predictors: (Constant), Time Pointl Avoidance Subscale IES, CogmeccChange, 
PosemChange, NegemChange
c. DependentVariable: Time Point 3 Avoidance
Coefficients3
Un standardized 
Coefficients
Standardized
Coefficients
Model B Std. Error Beta t Sig.
1 (Constant)
Time Point 1 Avoidance
4.252 2.512 1.692 .102
Subscale IES .583 .163 .559 3.569 .001
2 (Constant)
Time Point 1 Avoidance
6.394 3.327 1.922 .066
Subscale IES .445 .198 .427 2.241 .034
NegemChange 1.271 1.110 .217 1.145 .263
PosemChange .954 1.036 .150 .921 .366
CogmeccChange -.091 .604 -.024 -.150 .882
a. Dependent Variable: Time Point 3 Avoidance
A.9.4 Depression (SCL-90-R) 
A.9.4.1 Two week follow-up data
Descriptive Statistics
Mean Std. Deviation N
Time Point 2 Depression 1.0347 .65176 31
Time Point 1 Depression 
Raw Score 1.1241 .77833 31
NegemChange -.7371 1.71059 31
PosemChange .5777 1.55912 31
CogmeccChange .4952 2.66126 31
Variab les Entered/Removfed
Model
Variables
Entered
Variables
Removed Method
1 Time Point 
Depressio 
n Rav  
Score
Enter
2 Cogmecc
Change,
Posem
Enter
Change, 
Negem a 
Change
a. All requested variables entered.
b. Dependent Variable: Time Point 2 Depression
Model Summaryc
Change Statistics
Model R R Square
Adjusted 
R Square
Std. Error of 
the Estimate
R Square 
Change FChange dfl df2 Sig. FChange
1 .62 8a .395 .374 .51582 .395 18.895 1 29 .000
2 .66 7b .445 .360 .52151 .051 .790 3 26 .510
a. Predictors: (Constant), Time Pointl Depression Raw Score
b. Predictors: (Constant), Time Pointl Depression Raw Score, CogmeccChange, PosemChange, NegemChange
c. DependentVariable: Time Point 2 Depression
ANOVAc
Model
Sum of 
Squares df Mean Square F Sig.
1 Regression 5.028 1 5.028 18.895 ,000a
Residual 7.716 29 .266
Total 12.744 30
2 Regression 5.672 4 1.418 5.214 .003b
Residual 7.071 26 .272
Total 12.744 30
a. Predictors; (Constant),Time Pointl Depression Raw Score
b. Predictors: (Constant),Time Point 1 Depression Raw Score, CogmeccChange, 
PosemChange, NegemChange
c. DependentVariable: Time Point 2 Depression
Coefficients3
Un standardized 
Coefficients
Standardized
Coefficients
Model B Std. Error Beta t Sig.
1 (Constant) 
Time Point 1
.444 .165 2.695 .012
Depression Raw Score .526 .121 .628 4.347 .000
2 (Constant) 
Time Point 1
.543 .192 2.834 .009
Depression Raw Score .478 .132 .571 3.620 .001
NegemChange .034 .059 .089 .573 .572
PosemChange .009 .062 .022 .144 .887
CogmeccChange -.052 .036 -.213 -1.439 .162
a. DependentVariable: Time Point 2 Depression
A.9.4.2 Six week follow-up data
Descriptive Statistics
Mean Std. Deviation N
Time Point 3
Depression Raw Score .8462 .67295 31
Time Point 1
Depression Raw Score 1.1241 .77833 31
NegemChange -.7371 1.71059 31
PosemChange .5777 1.55912 31
CogmeccChange .4952 2.66126 31
Variables Entered/Removed b
Model
Variables
Entered
Variables
Removed Method
1 Time Point 
Depressio 
n Raw, 
Score
Enter
2 Cogmecc
Change,
Posem
Enter
Change,
Negem
Change
a. All requested variables entered.
b. DependentVariable: Time Point 3 
Depression Raw Score
Model Summary0
Change Statistics
Model R R Square
Adjusted 
R Square
Std. Error of 
the Estimate
R Square 
Change FChange dfl df2 Sig. FChange
1 .76 2a .580 .566 .44339 .580 40.105 1 29 .000
2 .79 6b .634 .577 .43760 .053 1.257 3 26 .309
a. Predictors: (Constant), Time Pointl Depression Raw Score
b. Predictors: (Constant),Time Pointl Depression Raw Score, CogmeccChange, PosemChange, NegemChange
c. DependentVariable:Time Point 3 Depression RawScore
ANOVAc
Model
Sum of 
Squares df Mean Square F Sig.
1 Regression 7.885 1 7.885 40.105 .00 0a
Residual 5.701 29 .197
Total 13.586 30
2 Regression 8.607 4 2.152 11.236 ,000b
Residual 4.979 26 .191
Total 13.586 30
a. Predictors: (Constant),Time Point 1 Depression Raw Score
b. Predictors: (Constant),Time Pointl Depression Raw Score, CogmeccChange, 
PosemChange, NegemChange
c. DependentVariable:Time Point 3 Depression RawScore
Coefficients3
Un standardized 
Coefficients
Standardized
Coefficients
Model B Std. Error Beta t Sig.
1 (Constant) 
Time Point 1
.106 .141 .748 .461
Depression RawScore .659 .104 .762 6.333 .000
2 (Constant) 
Time Point 1
.116 .161 .722 .477
Depression RawScore .635 .111 .735 5.736 .000
NegemChange .043 .049 .110 .875 .390
PosemChange .044 .052 .102 .845 .406
CogmeccChange .045 .030 .178 1.482 .150
a. DependentVariable: Time Point 3 Depression RawScore
A.9.5 Anxiety (SCL-90-R) 
A.9.5.1 Two week follow-up data
Descriptive Statistics
Mean Std. Deviation N
Time Point 2
Anxiety Raw Score .5226 .58464 31
Time Point 1
Anxiety Raw Score .6154 .50379 31
NegemChange -.7371 1.71059 31
PosemChange .5777 1.55912 31
CogmeccChange .4952 2.66126 31
Variables Entered/Removed b
Variables Variables
Model Entered Removed Method
1 Time Point 
1 Anxiety 
RawScore
Enter
2 Cogmecc
Change,
Negem
Change,
Posem a
Change
Enter
a. All requested variables entered.
b. DependentVariable: TimePoint2 Anxiety Raw Score
Model Summaryc
Change Statistics
Model R R Square
Adjusted 
R Square
Std. Error of 
the Estimate
R Square 
Change FChange df1 df2 Sig. FChange
1 .68 6a .471 .453 .43253 .471 25.811 1 29 .000
2 .76 6b .587 .523 .40380 .116 2.425 3 26 .088
a. Predictors: (Constant), Time Point 1 Anxiety Raw Score
b. Predictors: (Constant), Time Point 1 Anxiety Raw Score, CogmeccChange, NegemChange, PosemChange
c. Dependent Variable: Time Point 2 Anxiety Raw Score
ANOVAc
Model
Sum of 
Squares df Mean Square F Sig.
1 Regression 4.829 1 4.829 25.811 .00 0a
Residual 5.425 29 .187
Total 10.254 30
2 Regression 6.015 4 1.504 9.222 .00 0b
Residual 4.239 26 .163
Total 10.254 30
a. Predictors: (Constant), Time Point 1 Anxiety Raw Score
b. Predictors: (Constant),Time Pointl AnxietyRawScore, CogmeccChange, 
NegemChange, PosemChange
c. Dependent Variable: Time Point 2 Anxiety Raw Score
Coefficients3
Un standardized 
Coefficients
Standardized
Coefficients
Model B Std. Error Beta t Sig.
1 (Constant) 
Time Point 1
.032 .124 .262 .795
Anxiety Raw Score .796 .157 .686 5.080 .000
2 (Constant) 
Time Point 1
.142 .131 1.090 .286
Anxiety Raw Score .776 .158 .669 4.924 .000
NegemChange .038 .044 .112 .865 .395
PosemChange -.077 .049 -.206 -1.570 .129
CogmeccChange -.050 .028 -.226 -1.755 .091
a. Dependent Variable: Time Point 2 Anxiety Raw Score
A.9.5.2 Six week follow-up data
Descriptive Statistics
Mean Std. Deviation N
Time Point 3 Anxiety .4097 .41662 31
Time Point 1 Anxiety 
Raw Score .6154 .50379 31
NegemChange -.7371 1.71059 31
PosemChange .5777 1.55912 31
CogmeccChange .4952 2.66126 31
Variables Entered/Removed b
Variables Variables
Model Entered Removed Method
1 Time Point 
1 Anxiety 
Raw Score
Enter
2 Cogmecc
Change,
Negem
Change,
Posem a
Change
Enter
a. /Ml requested variables entered.
b. Dependent Variable: Time Point 3 Anxiety
Model Summary0
Change Statistics
Model R R Square
Adjusted 
R Square
Std. Error of 
the Estimate
R Square 
Change FChange dfl df2 Sig. FChange
1 .76 7a .588 .574 .27205 .588 41.357 1 29 .000
2 .827b .684 .636 .25147 .096 2.647 3 26 .070
a. Predictors: (Constant),Time Pointl AnxietyRaw Score
b. Predictors: (Constant),Time Pointl AnxietyRaw Score, CogmeccChange, NegemChange, PosemChange
c. Dependent Variable: Time Point 3 Anxiety
ANOVAc
Model
Sum of 
Squares df Mean Square F Sig.
1 Regression 3.061 1 3.061 41.357 .00 0a
Residual 2.146 29 .074
Total 5.207 30
2 Regression 3.563 4 .891 14.086 .00 0b
Residual 1.644 26 .063
Total 5.207 30
a. Predictors: (Constant), Time Pointl AnxietyRaw Score
b. Predictors: (Constant), Time Pointl Anxiety Raw Score, CogmeccChange, 
NegemChange, PosemChange
c. Dependent Variable: Time Point 3 Anxiety
Coefficients3
Un standardized 
Coefficients
Standardized
Coefficients
Model B Std. Error Beta t Sig.
1 (Constant) 
Time Point 1
.019 .078 .250 .804
Anxiety Raw Score .634 .099 .767 6.431 .000
2 (Constant) 
Time Point 1
.122 .081 1.497 .146
Anxiety Raw Score .579 .098 .701 5.902 .000
NegemChange .070 .028 .287 2.525 .018
PosemChange -.016 .031 -.060 -.523 .605
CogmeccChange -.016 .018 -.102 -.904 .374
a. Dependent Variable: Time Point 3 Anxiety
A.9.6 Psychological D istress (GSI; SCL-90-R) 
A.9.6.1 Two week follow-up data
Descriptive Statistics
Mean Std. Deviation N
Time Point Globa
Severity Index .7225 .46529 31
Time Point 1 Global
Senerity Index .7956 .50150 31
NegemChange -.7371 1.71059 31
PosemChange .5777 1.55912 31
CogmeccChange .4952 2.66126 31
Variables Entered/Removed b
Model
Variables
Entered
Variables
Removed Method I
1 Time Point 
1 Global
Enter
Severjjty
Index
2 Cogmecc
Change,
Posem
Enter
Change,
Negem
Change
a. All requested variables entered.
b. Dependent Variable: Time Point Globa Severity Index
Model Summary0
Change Statistics
Model R R Squa re
Adjusted 
R Square
Std. Error of 
the Estimate
R Square 
Change F Change dfl df2 Sig. FChange
1 .70 7a .499 .482 .33483 .499 28.932 1 29 .000
2 .741b .550 .480 .33543 .050 .965 3 26 .424
a. Predictors: (Constant), Time Pointl Global Severity Index
b. Predictors: (Constant), Time Pointl Global Severity Index, CogmeccChange, PosemChange, NegemChange
c. DependentVariable: Time Point Globa Severity Index
ANOVA0
Model
Sum of 
Squares df Mean Square F Sig.
1 Regression 3.244 1 3.244 28.932 .00 0a
Residual 3.251 29 .112
Total 6.495 30
2 Regression 3.569 4 .892 7.931 .000b
Residual 2.925 26 .113
Total 6.495 30
a. Predictors: (Constant), Time Point 1 Global Severity Index
b. Predictors: (Constant), Time Pointl Global Severity Index, CogmeccChange, 
PosemChange, NegemChange
c. DependentVariable: Time Point Globa Severity Index
Coefficients3
Model
Un standardized 
Coefficients
Standardized
Coefficients
t Sig.B Std. Error Beta
1 (Constant) .201 .114 1.761 .089
Time Point 1 Global
Severity Index .656 .122 .707 5.379 .000
2 (Constant) .252 .134 1.877 .072
Time Point 1 Global
Severity Index .643 .137 .693 4.705 .000
NegemChange .009 .039 .032 .226 .823
PosemChange -.032 .041 -.107 -.777 .444
CogmeccChange -.033 .023 -.186 -1.395 .175
a. Dependent Variable: Time Point Globa Severity Index
A.9.6.2 Six week follow-up data
Descriptive Statistics
Mean Std. Deviation N
Time Point 3 Global
Severity Index .5599 .44407 31
Time Point 1 Global
Severity Index .7956 .50150 31
NegemChange -.7371 1.71059 31
PosemChange .5777 1.55912 31
CogmeccChange .4952 2.66126 31
Variables Entered/Removed b
Model
Variables
Entered
Variables
Removed Method
1 Time Point 
1 Global 
Seventy 
Index
Enter
2 Cogmecc
Change,
Posem
Enter
Change,
Negem
Change
a. All requested variables entered.
b. Dependent Variable: Time Point 3 Global Severity Index
Model Summary0
Change Statistics
Adjusted Std. Error of R Square
Model R R Squa re R Square the Estimate Change FChange df1 df2 Sig. FChange
1 .761a .580 .565 .29281 .580 40.002 1 29 .000
2 .76 7b .589 .525 .30596 .009 .187 3 26 .904
a. Predictors: (Constant), Time Point 1 Global Severity Index
b. Predictors: (Constant), Time Pointl Global Severity Index, CogmeccChange, PosemChange, NegemChange
c. DependentVariable: Time Point 3 Global Severity Index
ANOVAc
Model
Sum of 
Squares df Mean Square F Sig.
1 Regression 3.430 1 3.430 40.002 .00 0a
Residual 2.486 29 .086
Total 5.916 30
2 Regression 3.482 4 .871 9.299 ,000b
Residual 2.434 26 .094
Total 5.916 30
a. Predictors: (Constant), Time Pointl Global Severity Index
b. Predictors: (Constant), Time Pointl Global Severity Index, CogmeccChange, 
PosemChange, NegemChange
c. DependentVariable: Time Point 3 Global Severity Index
Coefficients3
Un standardized 
Coefficients
Standardized
Coefficients
Model B Std. Error Beta t Sig.
1 (Constant)
Time Point 1 Global
.023 .100 .235 .816
Severity Index .674 .107 .761 6.325 .000
2 (Constant)
Time Point 1 Global
.033 .122 .270 .790
Severity Index .680 .125 .768 5.456 .000
NegemChange .012 .035 .045 .329 .744
PosemChange -.018 .037 -.063 -.483 .633
CogmeccChange .009 .021 .056 .439 .664
a. Dependent Variable: Time Point 3 Global Severity Index
A.10 Home-based Participant Information Sheet
An Investigation into the Relationship Between Writing and Health
A large number of individuals keep diaries as a means of organising their thoughts and 
feelings relating to the daily events they encounter. In order to understand how writing 
about stressful or traumatic events can help people to organize their thoughts, a study 
is being conducted that asks you to complete a selection of questionnaires relating to 
your general well-being, and write about a designated topic for 15 minutes in three 
separate sessions, over the next six weeks. Then at 2-weeks and again at 6-weeks 
following your final writing session you will be asked to complete a number of 
questionnaires relating to your general well-being. Initially you will be asked to 
complete a questionnaire booklet within this Research Methods and Practical session. 
Following this you will be asked to take home three writing booklets to be completed on 
three separate occasions and two further questionnaires. Completion of all phases of 
the study will amount to 1 hour and 45 minutes towards research credits.
Participation in this study is voluntary. Any information that you give will be 
treated confidentially. Individuals will not be identified in the results of this 
study, as all the data will be presented anonymously.
In this first session you will be asked to complete a consent form and a number of 
questionnaires relating to how you have felt in general over the last few weeks that will 
be worth 15 minutes of research credits. You will be given three envelopes that contain 
instructions for the writing sessions, space in which to write, and a general well-being 
questionnaire that has to be completed before and following your writing. You will also 
be given two further questionnaire packs to be completed at 2-weeks and again at 6- 
weeks following your final writing session.
It is important that you write about your designated topic on specified days therefore 
your selected date will be included on each writing booklet. These are as follows:
 First writing session: Today at home.
 Second writing session: Week beginning 24th October
 Third writing session: Week beginning 7th November
 Second questionnaire pack: Week beginning 21st November 
" Final questionnaire pack: Week beginning 12th December
You will receive your research credits for each questionnaire pack (15 minutes 
each) and writing session (20 minutes each) when you return the completed 
questionnaires and writing booklets. These can be returned to either me or the 
demonstrator in your Research Methods and Practical seminars over the course 
of the study.
Due to the importance of writing at these designated times you will be sent reminders 
via e-mail to complete the writing tasks and the questionnaires and announcements will 
be posted on the Blackboard site. To maintain confidentiality a coding system will be 
used to match questionnaires and personal writing completed in the first session with 
those completed in subsequent sessions. To keep it simple and easy to remember, 
everybody's code will be made up of the first three letters of their mothers maiden 
name and the last three numbers of their telephone number i.e. if your mothers maiden 
name is Smith and your telephone number is 07932 678 678 then your code will be 
'smi678'. Your own code, similar to this one, should be written in the available space at 
the top of each page on each questionnaire booklet and writing booklet.
If after taking part in this study you have any concerns, you will see that listed below 
are some useful contact numbers that you can contact if you feel that you need to talk 
to somebody.
Contact numbers:
Sheffield Hallam University Counselling Service: Tel:0114 225 2136
E-mail:counselling@shu. ac.uk
The Samaritans: 08457 90 90 90 
Or your own GP
If you agree to take part in this study please complete and sign the consent form 
overleaf. If you require any additional information please feel free to contact me at {e- 
mail address}
A.11 Debriefing Information For Home-based Participants 
Debriefing Information
Thank you for your participation in this study. This study has a number of aims. Firstly, 
it aims to replicate previous research showing that the expression of emotion through 
writing can be beneficial in improving both physical and psychological well being in 
healthy individuals (Pennebaker, 1997). Secondly, this study aims to investigate how 
methodological changes to the classic Pennebaker Writing Task can affect short and 
longer-term well-being in those people undertaking such a writing task. To address 
these questions the participants in this study were asked to do different things. Some 
people were asked to write about their experiences at home and others within the 
Research Methods and Practical session.
In addition to these methodological issues, the study asks a number of questions 
designed to obtain information relating to the processing of information connected to 
the event about which people wrote, and also a measure of how easy it is for people to 
express their emotions.
The results and information obtained from this study will be used to help examine the 
mechanisms that underlie the effects of writing about stressful experiences, and will 
help to determine how future writing studies should be designed to obtain optimum 
benefits for individuals who are experiencing chronic stress.
Thank you again for participating in this study. If you have any questions about the 
study please do not hesitate to contact me at: {e-mail address}
If you feel distressed due to your participation in this study please contact one of the 
following organisations:
Sheffield Hallam University Counselling Service: Tel:0114 225 2136
E-mail:counselling@shu. ac.uk
The Samaritans: 08457 90 90 90 
Or your own GP
Thank you
A.12 SPSS Output for Hierarchical Regression Analysis -  LIWC Variables 
as Predictors 
A.12.1 Physical Symptoms (PSI)
A.12.1.1 Two week follow-up data
Descriptive Statistics
Mean Std. Deviation N
Time Point 2 Physical 
Symptoms Inventory 5.0843 2.78587 83
Time Point 1 Physical 
Symptoms Inventory 4.6506 2.48622 83
posemChange .3987 1.48533 83
NegemChange -.2878 2.06033 83
CogmechChange .2431 2.94362 83
Variab les Entered/Removfed
Variables Variables
Model Entered Removed Method
1 Time Point 
1 Physical 
Symptorjis 
Inventory
Enter
2 Negem
Change,
posem
Change,
Cogme^h
Change
Enter
a. All requested variables entered.
b. Dependent Variable: Time Point 2 
Physical Symptoms Inventory
Model Summary0
Change Statistics
Model R R Square
Adjusted 
R Square
Std. Error of 
the Estimate
R Square 
Change FChange df1 df2 Sig. FChange
1 .548a .301 .292 2.34400 .301 34.830 1 81 .000
2 .549b .302 .266 2.38674 .001 .042 3 78 .989
a. Predictors: (Constant),Time Pointl Physical Symptoms Inventory
b. Predictors: (Constant),Time Pointl Physical Symptoms Inventory, NegemChange, posemChange, CogmechChange
c. DependentVariable: Time Point 2 Physical Symptoms Inventory
ANOVAc
Model
Sum of 
Squares df Mean Square F Sig. ;
1 Regression 191.369 1 191.369 34.830 .000a
Residual 445.041 81 5.494
Total 636.410 82
2 Regression 192.082 4 48.020 8.430 ,000b
Residual 444.328 78 5.697
Total 636.410 82
a. Predictors: (Constant),Time Pointl Physical Symptoms Inventory
b. Predictors: (Constant),Time Pointl Physical Symptoms Inventory, NegemChange, 
posemChange, CogmechChange
c. DependentVariable: Time Point 2 Physical Symptoms Inventory
Coefficients3
Unstandardized Standardized
Coefficients Coefficients
Model B Std. Error Beta t Sig.
1 (Constant) 2.227 .548 4.061 .000
Time Point 1 Physical 
Symptoms Inventory .614 .104 .548 5.902 .000
2 (Constant) 2.267 .571 3.970 .000
Time Point 1 Physical 
Symptoms Inventory .610 .108 .544 5.672 .000
posemChange -.021 .180 -.011 -.115 .909
NegemChange .015 .130 .011 .115 .909
CogmechChange -.028 .092 -.030 -.310 .758
a. DependentVariable: Time Point 2 Physical Symptoms Inventory
A.12.1.2 Six week follow-up data
Descriptive Statistics
Mean Std. Devation N
Time Point 3 Physical 
Symptoms Inventory 4.4512 2.98619 82
Time Point 1 Physical 
Symptoms Inventory 4.5976 2.45382 82
posemChange .3962 1.49430 82
NegemChange -.2645 2.06196 82
CogmechChange .2940 2.92476 82
Variables Entered/Removed
Variables Variables
Model Entered Removed Method
1 Time Point
1 Physical
Enter
Symptorps
Inventory
2 posem
Change,
Negem
Change,
Cogmecji
Change
Enter
a. All requested variables entered.
b. Dependent Variable: Time Point 3 
Physical Symptoms Inventory
Model Summary6
Change Statistics
Model R R Square
Adjusted 
R Square
Std. Error of 
the Estimate
R Square 
Change FChange dfl df2 Sig. FChange
1 .552a .305 .297 2.50466 .305 35.139 1 80 .000
2 .554b .307 .271 2.54939 .002 .072 3 77 .975
a. Predictors: (Constant),Time Pointl Physical Symptoms Inventory
b. Predictors: (Constant),Time Pointl Physical Symptoms Inventory, posemChange, NegemChange, CogmechChange
c. Dependent Variable: Time Point 3 Physical Symptoms Inventory
ANOVAc
Model
Sum of 
Squares df Mean Square F Sig.
1 Regression 220.438 1 220.438 35.139 .000a
Residual 501.867 80 6.273
Total 722.305 81
2 Regression 221.850 4 55.463 8.533 .000b
Residual 500.454 77 6.499
Total 722.305 81
a. Predictors: (Constant),Time Pointl Physical Symptoms Invsntory
b. Predictors: (Constant),Time Pointl Physical Symptoms Inventory, posemChange, 
NegemChange, CogmechChange
c. DependentVariable: Time Point 3 Physical Symptoms Inventory
Coefficients3
Unstandardized Standardized
Coefficients Coefficients
Model B Std. Error Beta t Sig.
1 (Constant) 1.360 .590 2.305 .024
Time Point 1 Physical 
Symptoms Inventory .672 .113 .552 5.928 .000
2 (Constant) 1.367 .614 2.227 .029
Time Point 1 Physical 
Symptoms Inventory .666 .117 .547 5.700 .000
posemChange .083 .192 .042 .435 .665
NegemChange .020 .140 .014 .141 .889
CogmechChange -.020 .099 -.019 -.199 .842
a. DependentVariable: Time Point 3 Physical Symptoms Inventory
A.12.2 Intrusion (IES)
A.12.2.1 Two week follow-up data
Descriptive Statistics
Mean Std. Deviation N
Intrusion Time Point 2 9.1481 9.35696 81
Intrusion Time Point 1 10.3827 8.49642 81
posemChange .4015 1.49729 81
NegemChange -.2944 2.07835 81
CogmechChange .1465 2.90889 81
Variables Entered/Removed b
Model
Variables
Entered
Variables
Removed Method
1 Intrusion 
Tyne Point 
Enter
2 posem
Change,
Negem
Change,
Cogmec|i
Change
Enter
a. All requested variables entered.
b. DependentVariable: Intrusion Time Point2
Model Summary0
Change Statistics
Model R R Square
Adjusted 
R Square
Std. Error of 
the Estimate
R Square 
Change FChange df1 df2 Sig. FChange
1 .431a .186 .176 8.49497 .186 18.059 1 79 .000
2 .48 2b .232 .192 8.41306 .046 1.515 3 76 .217
a. Predictors: (Constant), Intrusion Time Point 1
b. Predictors: (Constant), Intrusion Time Point 1, posemChange, NegemChange, CogmechChange
c. DependentVariable: Intrusion Time Point2
ANOVAc
Model
Sum of 
Squares df Mean Square F Sig.
1 Regression 1303.222 1 1303.222 18.059 .000a
Residual 5701.000 79 72.165
Total 7004.222 80
2 Regression 1624.972 4 406.243 5.740 .000b
Residual 5379.250 76 70.780
Total 7004.222 80
a. Predictors: (Constant), Intrusion Time Point 1
b. Predictors: (Constant), Intrusion Time Point 1, posemChange, NegemChange, 
CogmechChange
c. DependentVariable: Intrusion Time Point2
Coefficients
Model
Unstandardized
Coefficients
Standardized
Coefficients
t Sig.B Std. Error Beta
1 (Constant) 4.216 1.496 2.818 .006
Intrusion Time Point 1 .475 .112 .431 4.250 .000
2 (Constant) 4.462 1.517 2.941 .004
Intrusion Time Point 1 .455 .111 .413 4.092 .000
posemChange .365 .634 .058 .576 .566
NegemChange .286 .461 .064 .622 .536
CogmechChange -.686 .329 -.213 -2.083 .041
a. Dependent Variable: Intrusion Time Point 2
A.12.2.2 Six week follow-up data
Descriptive Statistics
Mean Std. Deviation N
Intrusion Time Point 3 8.5823 9.48090 79
Intrusion Time Point 1 10.3165 8.52078 79
posemChange .4287 1.51233 79
NegemChange -.2842 2.09486 79
CogmechChange .1966 2.92729 79
Variables Entered/Removed b
Model
Variables
Entered
Variables
Removed Method
Intrusion 
Tyne Point 
posem
Change,
Negem
Change,
Cogmecfi
Change
Enter
Enter
a. All requested variables entered.
b. DependentVariable: Intrusion Time Point 3
Model Summary
Chanqe Statistics
Model R R Square
Adjusted 
R Square
Std. Error of 
the Estimate
R Square 
Change FChange df1 df2 Sig. FChange
1 .482a .232 .222 8.36293 .232 23.248 1 77 .000
2 .50 6b .256 .215 8.39800 .024 .786 3 74 .505
a. Predictors: (Constant), Intrusion Time Point 1
b. Predictors: (Constant), Intrusion Time Point 1, posemChange, NegemChange, CogmechChange
c. DependentVariable: Intrusion Time Point 3
ANOVAc
Model
Sum of 
Squares df Mean Square F Siq.
1 Regression 1625.940 1 1625.940 23.248 .000a
Residual 5385.275 77 69.939
Total 7011.215 78
2 Regression 1792.259 4 448.065 6.353 .000b
Residual 5218.957 74 70.526
Total 7011.215 78
a. Predictors: (Constant), Intrusion Time Point 1
b. Predictors: (Constant), Intrusion Time Point 1, posemChange, NegemChange, 
CogmechChange
c. DependentVariable: Intrusion Time Point3
Coefficients
Model
Unstandardized
Coefficients
Standardized
Coefficients
t Sig.B Std. Error Beta
1 (Constant) 3.054 1.483 2.059 .043
Intrusion Time Point 1 .536 .111 .482 4.822 .000
2 (Constant) 3.388 1.531 2.213 .030
Intrusion Time Point 1 .514 .113 .462 4.569 .000
posemChange .219 .637 .035 .343 .732
NegemChange .397 .460 .088 .861 .392
CogmechChange -.455 .332 -.140 -1.370 .175
a. Dependent Variable: Intrusion Time Point 3
A.12.3 Avoidance (IES)
A.12.3.1 Two week follow-up data
Descriptive Statistics
Mean Std. Deviation N
Avoidance Time Point 2 10.6914 10.22086 81
Avoidance Time Point 1 10.7073 8.44926 81
posemChange .4015 1.49729 81
NegemChange -.2944 2.07835 81
CogmechChange .1465 2.90889 81
Variables Entered/Removed b
Model
Variables
Entered
Variables
Removed Method
1 Avoidance 
Tyne Point 
Cogmech
Change,
posem
Change,
Negem a
Change
Enter
Enter
a. All requested variables entered.
b. DependentVariable: Abidance Time Point2
Model Summary0
Change Statistics
Model R R Squa re
Adjusted 
R Square
Std. Error of 
the Estimate
R Square 
Change FChange dfl df2 Sig. FChange
1 ,549a .301 .292 8.59720 .301 34.071 1 79 .000
2 ,576b .332 .296 8.57304 .030 1.149 3 76 .335
a. Predictors: (Constant), Avoidance Time Point 1
b. Predictors: (Constant), Avoidance Time Point 1, CogmechChange, posemChange, NegemChange
c. DependentVariable: Avoidance Time Point2
ANOVAc
Model
Sum of 
Squares df Mean Square F Sig.
1 Regression 2518.250 1 2518.250 34.071 .00 0a
Residual 5839.034 79 73.912
Total 8357.284 80
2 Regression 2771.515 4 692.879 9.427 .000b
Residual 5585.769 76 73.497
Total 8357.284 80
a. Predictors: (Constant), Avoidance Time Point 1
b. Predictors: (Constant), Avoidance Time Point 1, CogmechChange, posemChange, 
NegemChange
c. DependentVariable: Avoidance Time Point2
1 1 8
Coefficients
Model
Unstandardized
Coefficients
Standardized
Coefficients
t Sig.B Std. Error Beta
1 (Constant) 3.581 1.548 2.314 .023
Avoidance Time Point 1 .664 .114 .549 5.837 .000
2 (Constant) 3.787 1.584 2.391 .019
Avoidance Time Point 1 .624 .117 .516 5.341 .000
posemChange .897 .657 .131 1.366 .176
NegemChange .233 .476 .047 .490 .626
CogmechChange -.470 .336 -.134 -1.399 .166
a. Dependent Variable: Avoidance Time Point 2
A.12.3.2 Six week follow-up data
Descriptive Statistics
Mean Std. Deviation N
Avoidance Time Point 3 9.9114 9.17241 79
Avoidance Time Point 1 10.5353 8.37585 79
posemChange .4287 1.51233 79
NegemChange -.2842 2.09486 79
CogmechChange .1966 2.92729 79
Variables Entered/Removed b
Model
Variables
Entered
Variables
Removed Method
1 Avoidance 
Tyne Point 
Cogmech
Change,
Negem
Change,
posem a
Change
Enter
Enter
a. AI requested variables entered.
b. DependentVariable: Avoidance Time Point3
Model Summaryc
Change Statistics
Model R R Square
Adjusted 
R Square
Std. Error of 
the Estimate
R Squa re 
Change FChange df1 df2 Sig. FChange
1 .514a .264 .255 7.91914 .264 27.642 1 77 .000
2 .531b .282 .243 7.98018 .018 .609 3 74 .611
a. Predictors: (Constant), Avoidance Time Point 1
b. Predictors: (Constant), Avoidance Time Point 1, CogmechChange, NegemChange, posemChange
c. DependentVariable: Avoidance Time Point3
ANOVAc
Model
Sum of 
Squares df Mean Square F Sig.
1 Regression 1733.494 1 1733.494 27.642 .000a
Residual 4828.886 77 62.713
Total 6562.380 78
2 Regression 1849.812 4 462.453 7.262 .000b
Residual 4712.567 74 63.683
Total 6562.380 78
a. Predictors: (Constant), Avoidance Time Point 1
b. Predictors: (Constant), Avoidance Time Point 1, CogmechChange, NegemChange, 
posemChange
c. DependentVariable: Avoidance Time Point3
Coefficient^
Model
Unstandardized
Coefficients
Standardized
Coefficients
t Sig. B Std. Error Beta
1 (Constant) 3.982 1.437 2.770 .007
Avoidance Time Point 1 .563 .107 .514 5.258 .000
2 (Constant) 4.396 1.492 2.946 .004
Avoidance Time Point 1 .543 .112 .496 4.851 .000
posemChange -.096 .617 -.016 -.155 .877
NegemChange .580 .444 .132 1.306 .196
CogmechChange -.024 .316 -.008 -.075 .941
a. Dependent Variable: Avoidance Time Point 3
A .12.4 Depression (SL-90-R) 
A.12.4.1 Two week follow-up data
Descriptive Statistics
Mean Std. Deviation N
Depression Time Point 2 1.0053 .72176 83
Depression Time Point 1 1.0398 .76096 83
posemChange .3987 1.48533 83
NegemChange -.2878 2.06033 83
CogmechChange .2431 2.94362 83
Variables Entered/Removed b
Variables Variables
Model Entered Removed Method
1 Depressio 
n Timeg 
Point 1
Enter
2 Negem
Change,
posem
Enter
Change,
Cogmecji
Change
a. All requested variables entered.
b. DependentVariable: Depression Time Point2
Model Summary0
Change Statistics
Model R R Square
Adjusted 
R Square
Std. Error of 
the Estimate
R Squa re 
Change FChange df1 df2 Sig. FChange
1 .592a .350 .342 .58537 .350 43.662 1 81 .000
2 ,632b .400 .369 .57336 .049 2.143 3 78 .102
a. Predictors: (Constant), Depression Time Pointl
b. Predictors: (Constant), Depress ion Time Point 1, NegemChange, posemChange, CogmechChange
c. DependentVariable: Depression Time Point 2
ANOVAc
Model
Sum of 
Squares df Mean Square F Sig. i
1 Regression 14.961 1 14.961 43.662 ,000a
Residual 27.756 81 .343
Total 42.717 82
2 Regression 17.075 4 4.269 12.985 .000b
Residual 25.642 78 .329
Total 42.717 82
a. Predictors: (Constant), Depression Time Pointl
b. Predictors: (Constant), Depression Time Pointl, NegemChange, posemChange, 
CogmechChange
c. DependentVariable: Depression Time Point 2
Coefficients
Model
Unstandardized
Coefficients
Standardized
Coefficients
t Sig.B Std. Error Beta
1 (Constant) .422 .109 3.861 .000
Depression Time Point 1 .561 .085 .592 6.608 .000
2 (Constant) .472 .110 4.310 .000
Depression Time Point 1 .527 .084 .556 6.239 .000
posemChange .030 .043 .062 .696 .488
NegemChange .054 .031 .155 1.729 .088
CogmechChange -.046 .022 -.187 -2.078 .041
a. Dependent Variable: Depression Time Point 2
A.12.4.2 Six week follow-up data
Descriptive Statistics
Mean Std. Deviation N
Depression Time Point 3 .8350 .76075 83
Depression Time Point 1 1.0398 .76096 83
posemChange .3987 1.48533 83
NegemChange -.2878 2.06033 83
CogmechChange .2431 2.94362 83
1 2 2
Variables Entered/Removed b
Variables Variables
Model Entered Removed Method
1 Depressio 
nTim ea 
Point 1
Enter
2 Negem
Change,
posem
Change,
Cogmecjr
Change
Enter
a. All requested variables entered.
b. DependentVariable: Depression Time Point3
Model Summary0
Change Statistics
Model R R Square
Adjusted 
R Square
Std. Error of 
the Estimate
R Square 
Change FChange df1 df2 Sig. FChange
1 .709a .502 .496 .53999 .502 81.755 1 81 .000
2 .73 8b .544 .521 .52660 .042 2.390 3 78 .075
a. Predictors: (Constant), Depression Time Pointl
b. Predictors: (Constant), Depress ion Time Pointl, NegemChange, posemChange, CogmechChange
c. DependentVariable: Depression Time Point 3
ANOVAc
Model
Sum of 
Squares df Mean Square F Sig.
1 Regression 23.839 1 23.839 81.755 .000a
Residual 23.619 81 .292
Total 47.457 82
2 Regression 25.827 4 6.457 23.284 .000b
Residual 21.630 78 .277
Total 47.457 82
a. Predictors: (Constant), Depression Time Pointl
b. Predictors: (Constant), Depression Time Pointl, NegemChange, posemChange, 
CogmechChange
c. DependentVariable: Depression Time Point 3
Coefficient
Model
Unstandardized
Coefficients
Standardized
Coefficients
t Sig.B Std. Error Beta
1 (Constant) .098 .101 .976 .332
Depression Time Point 1 .709 .078 .709 9.042 .000
2 (Constant) .143 .101 1.423 .159
Depression Time Point 1 .676 .078 .676 8.712 .000
posemChange .040 .040 .077 .997 .322
NegemChange .065 .029 .176 2.257 .027
CogmechChange -.033 .020 -.129 -1.648 .103
a. Dependent Variable: Depression Time Point 3
A.12.5 Anxiety (SCL-90-R) 
A.12.5.1 Two week follow-up data
Descriptive Statistics
Mean Std. Deviation N
Anxiety Time Point 2 .5542 .58462 83
Anxiety Time Point 1 .6214 .59298 83
posemChange .3987 1.48533 83
NegemChange -.2878 2.06033 83
CogmechChange .2431 2.94362 83
Variables Entered/Removed b
Variables Variables
Model Entered Removed Method
1 Anxiety 
Tyne Point 
Negem
Change,
posem
Change,
Cogmec^
Change
Enter
Enter
a. All requested variables entered.
b. Dependent Variable: Anxiety Time Point2
Model Summary0
C h ange  S ta tis tics
A d jus ted S td . Error o f R Square
lybdel R R Square R Square the E stim ate C h ange F C h a n g e d f l df2 Sig. F C h a n g e
1 .616a .380 .372 .46325 .380 49 .595 1 81 .000
2 ,705b .498 .472 .42489 .118 6.095 3 78 .001
a. P red ic to rs : (C onstant), Anxiety T im e  P o in t l
b. P red ic to rs : (C onstant), Anxiety T im e  P o in t 1, N e gem C han ge , po se m C h a n g e , C o g m e ch C h a n g e
c. D e p e n d e n tV a ria b le : Anxiety T im e  P o in t2
ANOVAc
Model
Sum of 
Squares df Mean Square F Sig.
1 Regression 10.643 1 10.643 49.595 .000a
Residual 17.383 81 .215
Total 28.026 82
2 Regression 13.945 4 3.486 19.310 .000b
Residual 14.082 78 .181
Total 28.026 82
a. Predictors: (Constant), Anxiety Time Pointl
b. Predictors: (Constant), Anxiety Time Pointl, NegemChange, posemChange, 
CogmechChange
c. DependentVariable: Anxiety Time Point2
Coefficients
Model
Unstandardized
Coefficients
Standardized
Coefficients
t Sig.B Std. Error Beta
1 (Constant) .177 .074 2.391 .019
Anxiety Time Point 1 .608 .086 .616 7.042 .000
2 (Constant) .237 .070 3.398 .001
Anxiety Time Point 1 .574 .080 .583 7.162 .000
posemChange -.013 .032 -.033 -.407 .685
NegemChange .081 .023 .285 3.487 .001
CogmechChange -.045 .016 -.227 -2.753 .007
a. Dependent Variable: Anxiety Time Point 2
A.12.5.2 Six week follow-up data
Descriptive Statistics
Mean Std. Deviation N
Anxiety Time Point 2 .5009 .59178 83
Anxiety Time Point 1 .6214 .59298 83
posemChange .3987 1.48533 83
NegemChange -.2878 2.06033 83
CogmechChange .2431 2.94362 83
Variables Entered/Removed b
Variables Variables
Model Entered Removed Method
1 Anxiety 
Tyne Point 
Negem
Change,
posem
Change,
Cogme^i
Change
Enter
Enter
a. All requested variables entered.
b. Dependent Variable: Anxiety Time Point 3
Model Summary0
Change Statistics
Model R R Square
Adjusted 
R Square
Std. Error of 
the Estimate
R Square 
Change FChange df1 df2 Sig. FChange
1 .63 5a .403 .396 .45993 .403 54.757 1 81 .000
2 .709b .502 .477 .42816 .099 5.155 3 78 .003
a. Predictors: (Constant), ArudetyTime Pointl
b. Predictors: (Constant), Anxiety Time Pointl, NegemChange, posemChange, CogmechChange
c. DependentVariable: Anxiety Time Point3
ANOVAc
Model
Sum of 
Squares df Mean Square F Siq.
1 Regression 11.583 1 11.583 54.757 .000a
Residual 17.134 81 .212
Total 28.717 82
2 Regression 14.418 4 3.605 19.662 .000b
Residual 14.299 78 .183
Total 28.717 82
a. Predictors: (Constant), Anxiety Time Pointl
b. Predictors: (Constant), Anxiety Time Point 1, NegemChange, posemChange, 
CogmechChange
c. DependentVariable: Anxiety Time Point3
Coefficient^
Model
Unstandardized
Coefficients
Standardized
Coefficients
t Sig.B Std. Error Beta
1 (Constant) .107 .073 1.460 .148
Anxiety Time Point 1 .634 .086 .635 7.400 .000
2 (Constant) .158 .070 2.246 .028
Anxiety Time Point 1 .603 .081 .604 7.456 .000
posem Change .004 .032 .009 .109 .913
Negem Change .080 .023 .279 3.433 .001
CogmechChange -.039 .016 -.194 -2.361 .021
a. Dependent Variable: Anxiety Time Point 3
A.12.6 Psychological Distress (GSI; SCL-90-R) 
A.12.6.1 Two week follow-up data
Descriptive Statistics
Mean Std. Delation N
Global Severity 
IndexTime Point2 .7192 .51870 83
Global Severity 
IndexTime Point 1 .7528 .50553 83
posem Change .3987 1.48533 83
Negem Change -.2878 2.06033 83
CogmechChange .2431 2.94362 83
Variables Entered/Removed b
Variables Variables
Model Entered Removed Method
1 Global 
Severity 
IndexTime 
Point 1
Enter
2 Cogmech
Change,
posem
Change,
Negem
Change
Enter
a. All requested variables entered.
b. Dependent Variable: Global Severity Index Time Point2
Model Summaryc
C h a n g e  S ta tis tics
Model R R Square
A d justed 
R Square
S td . Error o f 
the E stim ate
R Squa re 
C h ange F C h ange d fl cH2 Sig. F C h a n g e
1 .65 2a .425 .418 .39579 .425 59.834 1 81 .000
2 .688b .473 .446 .38611 .048 2.370 3 78 .077
a. P red ic to rs : (C onstant), G loba l Severity In d e xT im e  P o in t 1
b. P red ic to rs : (C onstant), G loba l S everity In d e xT im e  P o in t 1, C o gm e chC ha nge , posem  C hange , N egem  C hange
c. D e pe n d e n t Variab le : G loba l Severity In d e xT im e  P o in t 2
ANOVAc
Model
Sum of 
Sq uares df Mean Square F Sig.
1 Regression 9.373 1 9.373 59.834 .00 0a
Residual 12.689 81 .157
Total 22.062 82
2 Regression 10.433 4 2.608 17.496 .00 0b
Residual 11.629 78 .149
Total 22.062 82
a. Predictors: (Constant), Global Severity IndexTime Point 1
b. Predictors: (Constant), Global Severity IndexTime Point 1, CogmechChange, 
posem Change, Negem Change
c. Dependent Variable: Global Severity IndexTime Point 2
Coefficients3
Unstandardized Standardized
Coefficients Coefficients
Model B Std. Error Beta t Sig.
1 (Constant) .216 .078 2.757 .007
Global Severity 
IndexTime Point 1 .669 .086 .652 7.735 .000
2 (Constant) .253 .078 3.246 .002
Global Severity 
IndexTime Point 1 .635 .086 .619 7.387 .000
posem Change .015 .029 .043 .509 .612
NegemChange .034 .021 .136 1.618 .110
CogmechChange -.035 .015 -.197 -2.346 .021
a. Dependent Variable: Global Severity IndexTime Point 2
A .1 2 .6 .2  S ix  w e e k  fo llo w -u p  d a ta
Descriptive Statistics
Mean Std. Deviation N 
Global Severity 
IndexTime Point 3 .6092 .54534 83
Global Severity 
IndexTime Point 1 .7528 .50553 83
posem Change .3987 1.48533 83
Negem Change -.2878 2.06033 83
CogmechChange .2431 2.94362 83
Variables Entered/Removed b
Variables Variables
Model Entered Removed Method
1 Global 
Severity 
IndexTime 
Point 1
Enter
2 Cogmech
Change,
posem
Change,
Negem a
Change
Enter
a. All requested variables entered.
b. Dependent Variable: Global Severity IndexTime Point 3
Model S u m m ary0
C h a n g e  S ta tis tics
Model R R Square
A d justed 
R Square
Std. Error o f 
the E stim ate
R Squa re 
C h ange F C h ange df1 df2 S ig . F C h a n g e
1 .6 9 1a .477 .470 .39688 .477 73.822 1 81 .000
2 .718 b .516 .491 .38909 .039 2.092 3 78 .108
a. Pred ic to rs : (C onstant), G loba l Severity In d e xT im e  P o in t 1
b. P redicto rs: (C onstant), G loba l S everity In d e xT im e  P o in t 1, C o gm e chC ha nge , pose m  C hange , N egem  C hange
c. D e p e n d e n tV a ria b le : G loba l Severity In d e xT im e  P o in t 3
ANOVAc
Model
Sum of 
Squares df Mean Square F Sig.
1 Regression 11.628 1 11.628 73.822 .000a
Residual 12.759 81 .158
Total 24.387 82
2 Regression 12.578 4 3.145 20.771 .000b
Residual 11.808 78 .151
Total 24.387 82
a. Predictors: (Constant), Global Severity IndexTime Point 1
b. Predictors: (Constant), Global Severity IndexTime Point 1, CogmechChange, 
posem Change, Negem Change
c. Dependent Variable: Global Severity IndexTime Point 3
Coefficients3
Unstandardized Standardized
Coefficients Coefficients
Model B Std. Error Beta t Sig.
1 (Constant) .048 .078 .617 .539
Global Severity 
IndexTime Point 1 .745 .087 .691 8.592 .000
2 (Constant) .088 .079 1.120 .266
Global Severity 
IndexTime Point 1 .718 .087 .665 8.280 .000
posem Change -.002 .030 -.006 -.081 .936
Negem Change .040 .021 .153 1.893 .062
CogmechChange -.028 .015 -.149 -1.849 .068
a. Dependent Variable: Global Severity IndexTime Point 3
A.13 Dem ographic Inform ation Q uestionnaire Page
Information About You
Thank you for agreeing to take part in this study. I would like to ask you som e general 
questions about you and your health. Please take the tim e to answ er each o f the questions  
before moving on to the next stage of the study.
1. Age
2. Gender
^  Female 
^  Male
3. Marital Status 
Married 
^  Single
V Separated 
Divorced 
^  Cohabiting 
^  Widowed
4. Ethnicity
^  White 
^  Mixed
Asian
Black
V  Chinese or other ethnic group
5. W hat is your nationality?
6. W hich of the following best describes your current occupational status?
c Full-time paid work (30 hours plus per week)
E Part-time paid work (under 30 hours per week)
E Full-time education at school, college or university
E Part-time education at school college or university
E Unemployed
E Permanently sick/disabled
E Fully retired from work
E Looking after the home
E Doing something else
7. Approxim ately how long do you spend on 
the internet a day? (in m inutes not including  
w ork related use)
8. A pproxim ately how often do you use Infertility related forum s?
e Less than once a week
E 1 or 2 times a week
E 3 or 4 times a week
E More than 4 times a week
E Every day
9. How m any infertility related forum s do
you use? 1
10. Do you tend to post on infertility forum s or just read the posts?
V Post on the forums 
Just read the posts
11. If you post on these forum s, w hat is 
your approxim ate post count (in total if you 
use different forum s)?
12. Do you have any children? E yes E ^
13. If you have children, how many?
14. How long have you been trying to 
conceive (in m onths)?
15. Have you been given a diagnosis by a p *  ip
doctor? Yes No
16. If Yes, who has received the diagnosis?
your partner
both of you
undetermined
17. W hat is the specific diagnosis for you?  
(if relevant)
18. W hat is the specific diagnosis for your 
partner? (if relevant)
19. Are you currently undergoing fertility  
treatm ent?
20. If yes, w hat treatm ent are your 
receiving?
A .14 Ethics Proform a and Letter o f Approval 
A.14.1 Ethics Proform a
Faculty o f  Development and Society 
Application for Research Ethics Approval 
Staff and Postgraduate Research Students
Section A
Important Note- If a previously submitted research proposal answers the methodology 
questions in this section, please include a copy of the proposal and leave those 
questions blank. You MUST however complete ALL of Section B
1. Nam e of principal investigator: Katie Cutts
Faculty: Development and Society 
Email address: katie.cutts@shu.ac.uk
2. Title of research: Efficacy of a Web-based expressive writing 
intervention for individuals experiencing infertility.
3. Supervisor if applicable: Maddy Arden (Director of Studies)
Email address: m.arden@shu.ac.uk
Keith Hurst
Email address: k.m.hurst@shu.ac.uk 
John Reidy
Email address: i.q.reidv@shu.ac.uk
4. ENT num ber if applicable: N/A
5. O ther investigators (within or outside SHU)
Title Name Post Division Organisation
6. Proposed Duration of Project:
Start date: June 2008 End Date: October 2008
7. Main purpose of Research:
X  Educational qualification
mailto:katie.cutts@shu.ac.uk
mailto:m.arden@shu.ac.uk
mailto:k.m.hurst@shu.ac.uk
mailto:i.q.reidv@shu.ac.uk
  Publicly funded research
  Staff research project
  Other (Please supply details)
8. Background to the Study and Scientific  Rationale (500 words)
Over the past fifteen years a number of researchers have examined the value of 
writing about emotional and traumatic experiences (e.g. Ullrich & Lutgendorf, 
2002; Pennebaker, 1997). Disclosing emotional reactions to stressful and 
traumatic experiences has been shown to have beneficial influences on 
physical health (Greenberg & Stone, 1992), improved psychological well-being 
(Paez, Velasco & Gonzalez, 1999) and changes in physiological markers such 
as immunological responses (Petrie, Booth, Pennebaker, Davison & Thomas, 
1995). The standard writing methodology developed by James Pennebaker 
(Pennebaker & Beall, 1986) involves participants being randomly assigned to 
one of two or more conditions, and being asked to write about either traumatic 
or stressful experiences (experimental group), or superficial topics (control 
group). Participants are typically instructed to write about their assigned topic 
for three to five consecutive days, for 15-20 minutes each day and are 
assessed on a number of psychological and physical well-being measures up to 
six months after the final writing session (Pennebaker & Seagal, 1999). In a 
review of 13 studies that have used a controlled writing paradigm to examine 
the associated benefits, Smyth (1998) reported that the overall effect size (a = 
.47) indicated an overall 23% improvement in long term health.
Expressive writing has been shown to have salutary effects in a number of 
patient groups, for example patients suffering from fibromyalgia saw 
improvements in psychological well-being, fatigue and pain after writing about 
past traumatic experiences (Broderick, Junghaenel, & Schwartz, 2005). Women 
who wrote about their experience of breast cancer reported fewer negative 
physical symptoms at three month follow-up than patients in the control group, 
distress levels also reduced in women who were low on cancer related 
avoidance (Stanton, Danoff-Burg, Sworowski et al., 2002). In cancer patients 
(gynaecological and prostrate) who reported a reluctance to express their 
negative thoughts and feelings relating to their cancer to family and friends, 
disclosure writing buffered the effects of social constraint on distress levels, 
suggesting that individuals who's environment precludes successful expression 
of emotion may benefit from emotional disclosure through writing (Zakowski, 
Ramati, Morton, Johnson & Flanigan, 2004).
Reproductive problems affect one in seven couples in the United Kingdom 
(Human Fertilization and Embryology Authority, HFEA, 2007). For most people 
having children is an essential part of adult life which is shaped by social, 
religious and cultural demands (Seibel, 1997). The negative psychological 
impact of infertility and resultant stress inherent in the treatment of fertility 
problems is well documented in the research literature (Greil, 1997). The social 
stigma associated with infertility means that this group of individuals often 
experience feelings of isolation (Andrews, Abbey & Halman, 1991) and whilst 
social relationships can be supportive for individuals experiencing fertility 
problems they can simultaneously be a source of stress (Wilson & Kopitzke,
2002). In consideration of the stressful nature of infertility, the HFEA (2004) 
specify that all patients seeking assisted reproductive treatments should be 
offered psychosocial counselling, however only eight to 12% of couples actually 
use the counselling services available to them, citing such reasons as time, cost 
and fear of being labelled as having a psychological problem for the poor 
utilization of these services (Boivin, Scanlan & Walker, 1999). Expressive 
writing could therefore be a useful medium through which individuals 
experiencing fertility problems can disclose their deepest feelings that is free 
from the social constraints and stigma that may deter infertile individuals from 
seeking face to face support from friends, family or counselling professionals.
9. Has the scientific  / scholarly  basis o f this research been approved?
(For exam ple by Research Degrees Subcom m ittee or an external
funding body.)
D  Yes
  No - to be submitted
  Currently undergoing an approval process
X  Irrelevant (e.g there is no relevant committee governing this
work)
10. Main Research Q uestions
Based on the above rationale the main aims of this study are to determine if
individuals experiencing infertility who write about the stress associated with 
their fertility problems and fertility related treatments exhibit improvements in 
physical and psychological well-being compared to controls?
Subsidiary research Questions:
F> Does the location of a diagnosis of compromised fertility status (i.e. male 
factor/female factor/mixed etc.) affect the efficacy of the writing task?
=> Do other moderating variables affect the efficacy of the writing task (e.g. 
socio-demographic variables, time trying to conceive, positive 
expectancies)?
Do self-reported coping efforts change across the study period as a function 
of the writing task?
^  Is emotional expression or cognitive reappraisal evident within the writing 
task content?
11. Sum m ary of M ethods including Proposed Data Analyses
Participation is voluntary. A number of infertility specific websites and 
discussion forums have been identified from which participants will be recruited 
by placing an advert on these sites (see Appendix A for advert).
The study is quasi-experimental; participants will be randomly assigned to one 
of four conditions, intervention/expectancy group (expressive writing with 
positive expectancies), standard intervention group (expressive writing), a 
writing control group (infertility specific factual writing) or the control group (no 
writing) in order to make comparisons on psychological and physical well-being 
measures. There is some evidence to suggest that having positive expectancies 
about the emotional effects of writing plays a role in the positive outcomes seen 
in the literature (Langens & Schuler, 2007) therefore one group 
(intervention/expectancy group) will be told that writing has been shown to be 
effective in helping people cope and adjust better to stressful situations in order 
to test this hypothesis. After giving consent and completing the registration 
procedure (username and password allocation) all participants will complete a 
general information questionnaire. In order to determine if disclosure writing has 
any salutary effects in individuals experiencing fertility problems a number of 
standardized measures will be administered in order to explore, 
comprehensively, a range of potential positive outcomes and moderating 
variables. The following outcome measures will be administered and take 
approximately 15-20 minutes to complete: Twenty-Item Toronto Alexithymia 
Scale (TAS- 20; Bagby, Parker & Taylor, 1994), Depression, Anxiety and Stress 
Scales (DASS-21; Lovibond & Lovibond, 1995), Physical Symptoms Inventory 
(PSI; Spector & Jex, 1998), Fertility Problem Inventory (FPI: Newton, Sherrard 
& Glavac, 1999), Impact of Event Scale (IES: Horowitz, Wilner & Alvarez, 1979) 
and the brief COPE (Carver, 1997).
On completion of the baseline outcome measures, individuals in the intervention 
groups and writing control group will be directed to the instructions for the first 
15 minute writing session. Prior to and after completion of the writing task, 
participants will complete the immediate version of the Positive and Negative 
Affectivity Scale (PANAS; Watson, Clark & Tellegan, 1988) to assess current 
mood, and two brief writing evaluation questionnaires the Event Appraisal 
Questionnaire, derived from a study by Paez et al. (1999) and Essay 
Evaluations Questionnaire which is adapted from Greenberg and Stone (1992). 
The writing conditions will complete two further writing session 24 hours apart. 
Participants will receive automated reminder e-mails with a link to take them 
directly to the writing pages.
Four weeks after completion of the baseline measures, all participants will be 
contact via automated e-mail to ask them to log back into the study site to 
complete the follow-up questionnaires (as described previously). Upon 
completion of these measures participants will be directed to a debriefing page 
and thanked for their continued participation. Participants have the option to 
provide feedback for the study if they wish. (See Appendix B for writing 
instructions and Appendix C for outcome measures).
Proposed Analysis
Response to questionnaires across time and between groups will be analysed 
to determine the efficacy of the writing task in reducing self-reported distress 
and improving psychological functioning and physical health over the study 
period (i.e. ANOVA, t-tests, or non-parametric equivalents). The influence of
other demographic variables (i.e. gender, location of diagnosis) and ability to 
freely express emotions (alexithymia) will be examined using univariate 
analysis. Multiple regression analysis will also be used to reveal important 
predictors of the outcome effects of written disclosure.
Data from the writing sessions will be analyzed using a computerized text 
analysis programme, the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC; 
Pennebaker, Francis & Booth, 2001). The LIWC searches text and calculates 
the proportion of words used that reflect such categories as negative emotions, 
positive emotions, causation and insight. The data generated from this analysis 
will then be subjected to univariate statistical analysis to determine the level of 
emotional expression and cognitive reappraisal that is evident across the writing 
sessions.
Section B
1. Describe the arrangem ents fo r selecting/sam pling and briefing  
potential participants. (This should include copies of any 
advertisements for volunteers or letters to individuals/organisations 
inviting participation.)
Participants will be recruited from internet forums specifically developed to 
provide emotional support and information for individuals who are experiencing 
infertility. Research has shown that a considerable proportion of individuals are 
making use of the internet to seek emotional support for their fertility problems 
(Haagen et al., 2003). The growth of internet resources over the last decade 
has provided a domain through which individuals who are experiencing fertility 
problems can access information about diagnosis and treatment, receive 
support and share their stories (Epstein, Rosenberg, Grant & Hemenway, 
2002). In a study by Haagen et al. (2003) of patients attending a fertility clinic 72 
couples of 134 couples questioned reported using the internet for fertility-related 
problems. Seventy-two percent of couples reported using the internet to gain 
information in order to understand their fertility problem better, whilst 41% used 
the internet to seek emotional support. The forums through which participants 
will be recruited are based within the United Kingdom, North America, Canada, 
Australia, New Zealand and South Africa although they vary in content and 
number of registered members they are all homogenous in that they are publicly 
accessible forums that provide both emotional support and information for 
individuals who are having difficulties conceiving, no matter what stage of their 
fertility career (i.e. newly diagnosed, undiagnosed but concerned and those 
receiving fertility treatment). All sites chosen are open to research requests.
The information provided to potential participants will direct them to click on the 
link if they are interested in taking part in the study. At the first information page, 
all participants will be provided details of the inclusion criteria for the study; (a) 
Have been trying to conceive for a period of no less than 12 months, (b) Able to
read and write in English, (c) over the age of 18 and (d) be willing to answer 
questions about their physical and emotional health and write about their 
experiences.
Participants are then instructed to click on another link to obtain the full study 
information. It is at this stage that participants are randomised into condition and 
the information they receive pertains to their specific involvement (condition) in 
the study. This allows them to give informed consent. (See Appendix D for 
information pages).
2. W hat is the potential for participants or third parties to benefit from  
the research?
Individuals who are assigned to the experimental intervention group have the 
potential to experience improvements in both their psychological and physical 
well-being after the implementation of the intervention. Whilst those in the 
control groups are not expected to receive any immediate benefits from their 
involvement in the study it is hoped that the results from the study will be useful 
for informing future written disclosure interventions that have the potential to be 
utilised within primary care settings for individuals experiencing infertility.
No monetary or material incentives will be offered for involvement in this 
research.
3. Describe any possible negative consequences o f participation in 
the research along w ith the ways in w hich these consequences will 
be lim ited.
Participants may find it distressing to write about their fertility problems and the 
treatments that they are undergoing. Participants will be advised of this at the 
time of recruitment. Participants will be informed that if at any stage of their 
involvement in the study they can withdraw, however they will be advised that 
any data they have previously submitted will not be removed from the study 
unless it has been submitted within the preceding week.
Contact details for the researcher are clearly stated on the participant 
information sheet which they will be advised to print off at the point of 
recruitment and they will be advised to contact the researcher if they feel that 
they need to discuss their involvement in the study. The information sheet also 
contains information on infertility specific support groups. In the event that 
participants contact the researcher and express that the study has caused then 
distress they will be advised to cease participation in the study and provided 
with the contact details of relevant support organisations.
4. Describe the arrangem ents fo r obtaining participants ' consent. (This 
should include copies of the information that they will receive & written 
consent forms where appropriate. If children or vulnerable people are to
be participants in the study details of the arrangements for obtaining 
consent from those acting in loco parentis or as advocates should be 
provided.)
After participants have read the detailed information page (in Appendix C). 
Potential participants have the option to give consent or refuse consent. 
Participants also have the option to ask for further information, if they choose to 
ask further questions they are directed to an e-mail page in which they can 
request further information form the researcher. If at this stage participants 
decide that they are happy to continue they can check the consent option and 
are then directed to the registration page.
5. Describe how participants will be made aware o f the ir right to 
w ithdraw  from  the research. (This should also include information 
about participants' right to withhold information.)
Information on the right to withdraw is included in the information 
sheet/consent form. Participants have the option to withdraw from the 
study at any time by choice of not returning to complete the writing 
sessions or questionnaires. They can also choose not to submit their 
question answers and close the internet browser at any time. In this case 
their data is not submitted.
6. If your data collection requires that you work alone with 
children or other vulnerable participants have you undergone 
Crim inal Records Bureau screening? Please supply details.
7. Describe the arrangem ents fo r debriefing the participants. (This 
should include copies of information that participants will receive where 
appropriate.)
Debriefing information will be presented to participants when they have 
completed the final stage of the study (See Appendix E).
8. Describe the arrangem ents fo r ensuring participant confidentiality .
(This should include details of how data will be stored to ensure 
compliance with data protection legislation and how results will be 
presented.)
When participants consent to participate they are directed to a 
registration page in which they provide their e-mail and choose a 
username. Participants are then sent, via e-mail, their registration details 
which include a self-selected username and a password that they must 
use to access the site each time they return. All their study data 
submitted to the website is retained under their chosen username so that 
future data points can be matched to previous data points. No 
usernames will be used in the presentation or publication of results.
9. Are there any conflicts o f interest in you undertaking this research?
(E.g. Are you undertaking research on work colleagues; or in an 
organisation where you are a consultant?) Please supply details.
10. W hat are the expected outcom es, im pacts and benefits o f the  
research?
It is anticipated that participants in the experimental intervention groups will 
experience improvements in their psychological and/or physical well-being as a 
result of their participation in the study. The potential impact of these findings is 
that a written emotional expression intervention could be useful for individuals 
experiencing fertility problems by reducing the stress associated with their 
fertility status and treatment. If the implementation of the intervention is 
successful the findings from this study could be used to inform the 
implementation of a writing intervention within primary care settings. The results 
from this study could provide support to further investigate the utility of a writing 
intervention that is relatively cost effective and can be used outside of the 
traditional clinical setting.
Please give details of any plans fo r d issem ination of the results o f the  
research
The results of the project will be submitted for publication to an appropriate 
peer-reviewed journal (e.g. Fertility and Sterility) and the completed PhD thesis 
will be placed in Sheffield Hallam University library.
SECTION C
RISK A SSESSM EN T FOR THE RESEA R C H ER
7. Will the proposed data collection take place on campus?
I I I Yes (Please answer questions 4 and 6 only)
X No (Please complete all questions)
8. Where will the data collection take place?
(Tick as many as apply if data collection will take place in multiple 
venues)
I I I Own house/flat   dResidence of participant
I I I School   Business/Voluntary
Organisation
I I 1 Public Venue (e.g. Youth Club; Church; etc)
X D  Other (Please specify) Via the Internet
9. How will you travel to and from the data collection venue?
m  On foot    By car    Public Transport 
X D  Other (Please specify) N/A - all data is collected online
Please outline how you will ensure your personal safety when travelling 
to and from the data collection venue:
10. How will you ensure your own personal safety whilst at the research 
venue? As the data is collected online there will be no face-to-face 
contact with participants.
11. If you are carrying out research off-campus, you must ensure that each 
time you go out to collect data you ensure that someone you trust knows 
where you are going (without breaching the confidentiality of your 
participants), how you are getting there (preferably including your travel 
route), when you expect to get back, and what to do should you not 
return at the specified time. Please outline here the procedure you 
propose using to do this:
12. Are there any potential risks to your health and wellbeing associated with 
either (a) the venue where the research will take place and/or (b) the 
research topic itself?
X None that I am aware of
I I I Yes (Please outline below)
7. Does this research project require a health and safety risk analysis for 
the procedures to be used? Yes /No
If YES current status of Health and Safety Risk Assessment.
I confirm that this research will conform to the principles outlined in the 
Sheffield Hallam University Research Ethics policy.
I confirm that this application is accurate to the best of my knowledge.
Principal Investigator's 
signature
Supervisor's signature 
(if applicable)
A.14.2 A pproval Letter
Our Ref AM/SW/18-2008
23 June 2008
Katie Cutts 
The Lodge 
Collegiate Cresecent
Dear Katie
Request for Ethical Approval of Research Project
Your research project entitled "Efficacy of a Web-based expressive writing 
intervention for individuals experiencing infertility" has been submitted for ethical 
review to the Faculty's rapporteurs and I am pleased to confirm that they have 
approved your project.
However, they have raised the following issues which you should address 
during the research project:
I no ethical problems with this research, it has the potential to find some results 
useful to individual/couples with fertility problems in the long term, and the 
proposers seem to have all the ethical bases covered (write to withdraw, referral 
to appropriate support and so on). I do have a methodological question however 
which I think needs addressing. Given that participants are being recruited from 
an Internet forum it suggests that at least some of these participants post to the 
forum. My question is to what extent variations in amount and type of posting to 
these forums might affect the experimental manipulation? For example, heavy 
posters might be writing expressively on the forum and thereby obtaining the 
benefits of the manipulation whichever experimental group they are assigned to. 
One solution might be to request that participants dont post for the duration of 
the study, but this brings its own problems. A person is gaining benefit from 
using Internet discussion by offloading their emotional baggage (as it were) and 
were assigned to the control condition and then asked to stop posting on the 
Internet one might find their well-being declined from baseline.
The questionnaire does have questions relating to how much each participant 
posts which could be used to partly control for this. But it only asks how many 
forums they use, whether they post or just read and how many posts they make 
(note, the questionnaire asks for no time frame is given for this last question: 
posts per week, per month, per day, etc. this should be fixed). Maybe an 
additional question could be added which asks to what extent their posts are 
generally factual or are emotional/expressive in content. This could be factored 
in as a variable as part of a multiple regression, or used as a criterion to allocate 
individuals to groups.
As I say this is a methodological question rather than an ethical one, I hope no 
one minds me raising it as I consider it to be important to the success of the 
study. My ethical approval is not conditional on this point being considered.
I wish you every success with your research project. 
Yours sincerely
Professor A Macaskill 
Chair
Faculty Research Ethics Committee
A.15 E-mail to Infertility Forum  A dm inistrators/L ist Owners
Dear {name of site or site contact},
I am a researcher from Sheffield Hallam University, as part of a PhD I am conducting a 
study looking at the experience of individuals coping with infertility and how this affects 
their physical and emotional well-being. I am currently conducting a web-based 
questionnaire study specifically focused on individuals who use infertility forums and 
would like to request your permission to place the following research request on (name 
of sub-forum) for participants. If you require any further information please do not 
hesitate to contact me at {e-mail address}.
Kindest Regards
Katie Cutts (BSc)
A.16 Advert Placed on Infertility Forums
Coping with Infertility
I would like to invite you to take part in a study currently being conducted that is looking 
at the experience of individuals coping with infertility and how this affects their physical 
and emotional well-being. The study is internet-based and is being conducted over a 
number of weeks.
If you would like to know more about taking part in the study please click the link below 
and you will be directed to the study site:
{Link to study site}
The project has received ethical approval from Sheffield Hallam University Faculty 
Ethics Committee and is being conducted as part of a PhD. Thank you in advance for 
your help with this project and please do not hesitate to contact me if you need 
additional information.
Regards
Katie Cutts
Psychology
Faculty of Development & Society 
Sheffield Hallam University 
England
e-mail: {address}
Tel: {number}
A.17 Inform ation and Consent Pages
A.17.1 Information and Consent for Writing Control Condition 
Study In form ation and C onsent Form
Project: W ell-Being and Infertility  
Researcher: Katie Cutts
You are invited to participate in a research study looking at personal experiences of 
infertility. Please read the following information carefully and ask any questions you 
may have before agreeing to be in the study.
Purpose of the Study: Health care professionals appreciate how stressful it can be for 
people who are experiencing difficulties in having a child. The experience of infertility 
can differ from person to person. For some, pregnancy is eventually achieved naturally 
but for others these difficulties can only be resolved through assisted conception. This 
study will investigate these different experiences and how this is related to physical and 
psychological well-being.
Procedure: The study has a number of stages and requires you to complete various 
questionnaires and to write about the facts relating to your fertility difficulties and 
treatment. If you agree to participate in this study you will be asked to complete a 
series of questionnaires on two separate occasions that ask questions about your 
personality, psychological well-being, physical symptoms and how you cope with your 
fertility experiences. It will take you approximately 15-20 minutes to complete the 
questionnaires. Today, you will be asked to complete the first set of questionnaires and 
then write about your own personal experience of infertility for a further 15 minutes.
You will be asked to write about your experiences again, tomorrow and the day after, 
each time for 15 minutes. In four weeks time you will be contacted again to complete 
the second set of questionnaires, again taking approximately 15-20 minutes. You will 
be contacted by e-mail at each stage to remind you to continue with the study and be 
provided with a link to take you directly to the study page that you need to complete.
Possible Advantages and Disadvantages of Participation: It is possible that some 
people may feel uncomfortable or distressed in writing about their personal 
experiences and answering some of the questions. There is support available for you if 
you feel distressed or just want to obtain further information. There are a list of names, 
addresses and phone numbers at the end of this information page showing the relevant 
support services available to you. You are advised to print this page if you decide to 
participate in the study and keep this contact information for future reference. The 
information gained from this study may help us to develop further the information and 
services provided for people experiencing reproductive difficulties and assisted 
reproductive intervention treatments.
Anonymity and Confidentiality: Your responses will be kept secure and private, 
using current Internet security technology. Your anonymity will be preserved; your 
name will not be associated with your responses or with any of the results of this study. 
In order to maintain anonymity you will be asked to devise a username and will be 
assigned a password that you will use to access the website when you return to 
complete the different stages. Only the researcher will have access to the data; any 
printouts or disks containing the data will be stored in a locked file. In any report that 
may be published, no information will be included that will make it possible to identify 
you individually. All information collected during the course of the study will be kept 
strictly confidential.
Voluntary Nature of the Study: Participation in the study is entirely voluntary. You 
may refuse to answer any question asked and may discontinue participation at any 
time. If you decide to take part you are still free to withdraw at any time without giving a 
reason. You have the right to withdraw any data up to a week after the data has been 
submitted.
Ethical Review of The Study: This study is being funded by Sheffield Hallam 
University and has been subject to ethical review by the Faculty Research Ethics 
Committee of Sheffield Hallam University to ensure that the study is conducted in an 
ethically appropriate manner.
Contacts and Questions: You may ask any questions you have now by checking the 
'I would like to ask the researcher a question?' box at the bottom of this page. If you 
have questions later, you may contact Katie Cutts at {e-mail address}
For support or advice:
Infertility Network: Web:http://www.infertilitynetworkuk.com or contact on Tel: 08701 
188 088:
Fertility Friends: Web: http://www.fertilitvfriends.co.uk 
Fertility Connect: Web: http://www.fertilitvconnect.com
Statem ent of Consent: (select one of the options below)
I I I consent to participate in the study. I a m  a t  l e a s t  1 8  y e a r s  o f  a g e .  I h a v e  r e a d  t h e  a b o v e  
i n f o r m a t i o n  a n d  u n d e r s t a n d  w h a t  I w i l l  b e  a s k e d  t o  d o  in  t h i s  s t u d y .  I f  I h a d  q u e s t i o n s ,  I h a v e  
a l r e a d y  a s k e d  t h e m  a n d  h a v e  r e c e i v e d  a n s w e r s .  I f  I w a n t e d  a  c o p y  o f  t h e  c o n s e n t  f o r m  f o r  m y  
r e c o r d s ,  I a l r e a d y  d o w n l o a d e d  o r  p r i n t e d  i t  f r o m  t h i s  w e b  p a g e .
I I I do not consent to participate in the study. I h a v e  r e a d  t h e  a b o v e  i n f o r m a t i o n ,  b u t  I d o  
n o t  w i s h  t o  p a r t i c i p a t e .  I u n d e r s t a n d  t h a t  m y  d e c i s i o n  w i l l  n o t  a f f e c t  m y  c u r r e n t  o r  f u t u r e  r e l a t i o n s  
w i t h  t h e  U n i v e r s i t y .  [ C l i c k  h e r e  i f  y o u  a r e  y o u n g e r  t h a n  1 8  y e a r s  o l d . ]
I I I would like to ask the researcher a question. I h a v e  r e a d  t h e  a b o v e  i n f o r m a t i o n ,  b u t  I 
h a v e  m o r e  q u e s t i o n s  a b o u t  t h e  r e s e a r c h  b e f o r e  I c o n s e n t  t o  p a r t i c i p a t e  in  t h e  s t u d y .  I w o u l d  l i k e  
t o  e - m a i l  t h e  r e s e a r c h e r  n o w  t o  g e t  m o r e  i n f o r m a t i o n .
If you wish to keep a copy of this form for your records, you can do so now by selecting  
the File ->Print option from  the pulldown menu on Netscape or Explorer.
http://www.infertilitynetworkuk.com
http://www.fertilitvfriends.co.uk
http://www.fertilitvconnect.com
A.17.2 Inform ation and Consent fo r Non-W riting Control Condition
Study Information and Consent Form
Project: W ell-Being and Infertility  
Researcher: Katie Cutts
You are invited to participate in a research study looking at personal experiences of 
infertility. Please read the following information carefully and ask any questions you 
may have before agreeing to be in the study.
Purpose of the Study: Health care professionals appreciate how stressful it can be for 
people who are experiencing difficulties in having a child. The experience of infertility 
can differ from person to person. For some, pregnancy is eventually achieved naturally 
but for others these difficulties can only be resolved through assisted conception. This 
study will investigate these different experiences and how this is related to physical and 
psychological well-being.
Procedure: The study requires you to complete questionnaires relating to your well
being and infertility on two separate occasions. If you agree to participate in this study 
you will be asked to complete the first series of questionnaires that ask questions about 
your personality, psychological well-being, physical symptoms and how you cope with 
your fertility experiences today and again in four weeks time. It will take you 
approximately 15-20 minutes to complete the questionnaires. You will be contacted by 
e-mail to remind you to complete the second series of questionnaire and be provided 
with a link to take you directly to the study page that you need to complete.
Possible Advantages and Disadvantages of Participation: It is possible that some 
people may feel uncomfortable or distressed in answering some of the questions.
There is support available for you if you feel distressed or just want to obtain further 
information. There are a list of names, addresses and phone numbers at the end of this 
information page showing the relevant support services available to you. You are 
advised to print this page if you decide to participate in the study and keep this contact 
information for future reference. The information gained from this study may help us to 
develop further the information and services provided for people experiencing 
reproductive difficulties and assisted reproductive intervention treatments.
Anonymity and Confidentiality: Your responses will be kept secure and private, 
using current Internet security technology. Your anonymity will be preserved; your 
name will not be associated with your responses or with any of the results of this study. 
In order to maintain anonymity you will be asked to devise a username and will be 
assigned a password that you will use to access the website when you return to 
complete the different stages. Only the researcher will have access to the data; any 
printouts or disks containing the data will be stored in a locked file. In any report that 
may be published, no information will be included that will make it possible to identify 
you individually. All information collected during the course of the study will be kept 
strictly confidential.
Voluntary Nature of the Study: Participation in the study is entirely voluntary. You 
may refuse to answer any question asked and may discontinue participation at any 
time. If you decide to take part you are still free to withdraw at any time without giving a 
reason. You have the right to withdraw any data up to a week after the data has been 
submitted.
Ethical Review of the Study: This study is being funded by Sheffield Hallam 
University and has been subject to ethical review by the Faculty Research Ethics 
Committee of Sheffield Hallam University to ensure that the study is conducted in an 
ethically appropriate manner.
Contacts and Questions: You may ask any questions you have now by checking the 
'I would like to ask the researcher a question?' box at the bottom of this page. If you 
have questions later, you may contact Katie Cutts at {e-mail address}
For support or advice:
Infertility Network: Web:http://www.infertilitynetworkuk.com or contact on Tel: 08701 
188 088:
Fertility Friends: Web:http://www.fertilityfriends.co.uk 
Fertility Connect: Web: http://www.fertilityconnect.com
Statem ent of Consent: (select one of the options below)
I I I consent to participate in the study. I am at least 18 years of age. I have read the above 
information and understand what I will be asked to do in this study. If I had questions, I have 
already asked them and have received answers. If I wanted a copy of the consent form for my 
records, I already downloaded or printed it from this web page.
I I I do not consent to participate in the study. I have read the above information, but I do 
not wish to participate. I understand that my decision will not affect my current or future relations 
with the University. [Click here if you are younger than 18 years old.]
I I I would like to ask the researcher a question. I have read the above information, but I 
have more questions about the research before I consent to participate in the study. I would like 
to e-mail the researcher now to get more information.
If you wish to keep a copy of this form for your records, you can do so now by selecting  
the File ->Print option from  the pulldown menu on Netscape or Explorer.
http://www.infertilitynetworkuk.com
http://www.fertilityfriends.co.uk
http://www.fertilityconnect.com
A .17.3 Inform ation and Consent fo r D isclosure Condition
Study Information and Consent Form
Project: W ell-Being and Infertility  
Researcher: Katie Cutts
You are invited to participate in a research study looking at personal experiences of 
infertility. Please read the following information carefully and ask any questions you 
may have before agreeing to be in the study.
Purpose of the Study: Health care professionals appreciate how stressful it can be for 
people who are experiencing difficulties in having a child. The experience of infertility 
can differ from person to person. For some, pregnancy is eventually achieved naturally 
but for others these difficulties can only be resolved through assisted conception. This 
study will investigate these different experiences and how this is related to physical and 
psychological well-being.
Procedure: The study has a number of stages and requires you to complete various 
questionnaires and to write about your feelings and thoughts relating to your fertility 
difficulties. If you agree to participate in this study you will be asked to complete a 
series of questionnaires on two separate occasions that ask questions about your 
personality, psychological well-being, physical symptoms and how you cope with your 
fertility experiences. It will take you approximately 15-20 minutes to complete the 
questionnaires. Today, you will be asked to complete the first set of questionnaires and 
then write about your own personal experience of infertility for a further 15 minutes.
You will be asked to write about your experiences again, tomorrow and the day after, 
each time for 15 minutes. In four weeks time you will be contacted again to complete 
the second set of questionnaires, again taking approximately 15-20 minutes. You will 
be contacted by e-mail at each stage to remind you to continue with the study and be 
provided with a link to take you directly to the study page that you need to complete.
Possible Advantages and Disadvantages of Participation: It is possible that some 
people may feel uncomfortable or distressed in writing about their personal 
experiences and answering some of the questions. There is support available for you if 
you feel distressed or just want to obtain further information. There are a list of names, 
addresses and phone numbers at the end of this information page showing the relevant 
support services available to you. You are advised to print this page if you decide to 
participate in the study and keep this contact information for future reference. The 
information gained from this study may help us to develop further the information and 
services provided for people experiencing reproductive difficulties and assisted 
reproductive intervention treatments.
Anonymity and Confidentiality: Your responses will be kept secure and private, 
using current Internet security technology. Your anonymity will be preserved; your 
name will not be associated with your responses or with any of the results of this study. 
In order to maintain anonymity you will be asked to devise a username and will be 
assigned a password that you will use to access the website when you return to 
complete the different stages. Only the researcher will have access to the data; any 
printouts or disks containing the data will be stored in a locked file. In any report that 
may be published, no information will be included that will make it possible to identify 
you individually. All information collected during the course of the study will be kept 
strictly confidential.
Voluntary Nature of the Study: Participation in the study is entirely voluntary. You 
may refuse to answer any question asked and may discontinue participation at any 
time. If you decide to take part you are still free to withdraw at any time without giving a 
reason. You have the right to withdraw any data up to a week after the data has been 
submitted.
Ethical Review of the Study: This study is being funded by Sheffield Hallam 
University and has been subject to ethical review by the Faculty Research Ethics 
Committee of Sheffield Hallam University to ensure that the study is conducted in an 
ethically appropriate manner.
Contacts and Questions: You may ask any questions you have now by checking the 
'I would like to ask the researcher a question?' box at the bottom of this page. If you 
have questions later, you may contact Katie Cutts at {e-mail address}
For support or advice:
Infertility Network: Web:http://www.infertilitynetworkuk.com or contact on Tel: 08701 
188 088:
Fertility Friends: Web:http://www.fertilityfriends.co.uk 
Fertility Connect: Web: http://www.fertilityconnect.com
Statem ent of Consent: (select one of the options below)
I I I consent to participate in the study. I am at least 18 years of age. I have read the above 
information and understand what I will be asked to do in this study. If I had questions, I have 
already asked them and have received answers. If I wanted a copy of the consent form for my 
records, I already downloaded or printed it from this web page.
I I I do not consent to participate in the study. I have read the above information, but I do 
not wish to participate. I understand that my decision will not affect my current or future relations 
with the University. [Click here if you are younger than 18 years old.]
I I I w ould like to ask the researcher a question. I have read the above information, but I 
have more questions about the research before I consent to participate in the study. I would like 
to e-mail the researcher now to get more information.
If you wish to keep a copy of this form for your records, you can do so now by selecting  
the File ->Print option from  the pulldown menu on Netscape or Explorer.
http://www.infertilitynetworkuk.com
http://www.fertilityfriends.co.uk
http://www.fertilityconnect.com
A .17.4 Inform ation and Consent for Expectancy Condition
Study Information and Consent Form
Project: W ell-Being and Infertility  
Researcher: Katie Cutts
You are invited to participate in a research study looking at personal experiences of 
infertility. Please read the following information carefully and ask any questions you 
may have before agreeing to be in the study.
Purpose of the Study: Health care professionals appreciate how stressful it can be for 
people who are experiencing difficulties in having a child. The experience of infertility 
can differ from person to person. For some, pregnancy is eventually achieved naturally 
but for others these difficulties can only be resolved through assisted conception. This 
study will investigate the stressful nature of infertility and how writing about the feelings 
and emotions associated with infertility can help people to better cope with their 
experience. This research will expand on previous research that has found writing to be 
effective in improving the way people feel.
Procedure: The study has a number of stages and requires you to complete various 
questionnaires and to write about your feelings and thoughts relating to your fertility 
difficulties. If you agree to participate in this study you will be asked to complete a 
series of questionnaires on two separate occasions that ask questions about your 
personality, psychological well-being, physical symptoms and how you cope with your 
fertility experiences. It will take you approximately 15-20 minutes to complete the 
questionnaires. Today, you will be asked to complete the first set of questionnaires and 
then write about your own personal experience of infertility for a further 15 minutes.
You will be asked to write about your experiences again, tomorrow and the day after, 
each time for 15 minutes. In four weeks time you will be contacted again to complete 
the second set of questionnaires, again taking approximately 15-20 minutes. You will 
be contacted by e-mail at each stage to remind you to continue with the study and be 
provided with a link to take you directly to the study page that you need to complete.
Possible Advantages and Disadvantages of Participation: It is possible that some 
people may feel uncomfortable or distressed in writing about their personal 
experiences and answering some of the questions. There is support available for you if 
you feel distressed or just want to obtain further information. There are a list of names, 
addresses and phone numbers at the end of this information page showing the relevant 
support services available to you. You are advised to print this page if you decide to 
participate in the study and keep this contact information for future reference. The 
information gained from this study may help us to develop further the information and 
services provided for people experiencing reproductive difficulties and assisted 
reproductive intervention treatments.
Anonymity and Confidentiality: Your responses will be kept secure and private, 
using current Internet security technology. Your anonymity will be preserved; your 
name will not be associated with your responses or with any of the results of this study. 
In order to maintain anonymity you will be asked to devise a username and will be 
assigned a password that you will use to access the website when you return to 
complete the different stages. Only the researcher will have access to the data; any 
printouts or disks containing the data will be stored in a locked file. In any report that 
may be published, no information will be included that will make it possible to identify 
you individually. All information collected during the course of the study will be kept 
strictly confidential.
Voluntary Nature of the Study: Participation in the study is entirely voluntary. You 
may refuse to answer any question asked and may discontinue participation at any 
time. If you decide to take part you are still free to withdraw at any time without giving a 
reason. You have the right to withdraw any data up to a week after the data has been 
submitted.
Ethical Review of the Study: This study is being funded by Sheffield Hallam 
University and has been subject to ethical review by the Faculty Research Ethics 
Committee of Sheffield Hallam University to ensure that the study is conducted in an 
ethically appropriate manner.
Contacts and Questions: You may ask any questions you have now by checking the 
'I would like to ask the researcher a question?' box at the bottom of this page. If you 
have questions later, you may contact Katie Cutts at {e-mail address}
For support or advice:
Infertility Network: Web:http://www.infertilitynetworkuk.com or contact on Tel: 08701 
188 088:
Fertility Friends: Web:http://www.fertilityfriends.co.uk 
Fertility Connect: Web: http://www.fertilityconnect.com
Statem ent of Consent: (select one of the options below)
I I I consent to participate in the study. I am at least 18 years of age. I have read the above 
information and understand what I will be asked to do in this study. If I had questions, I have 
already asked them and have received answers. If I wanted a copy of the consent form for my 
records, I already downloaded or printed it from this web page.
I I I do not consent to participate in the study. I have read the above information, but I do 
not wish to participate. I understand that my decision will not affect my current or future relations 
with the University. [Click here if you are younger than 18 years old.]
I I I would like to ask the researcher a question. I have read the above information, but I 
have more questions about the research before I consent to participate in the study. I would like 
to e-mail the researcher now to get more information.
If you wish to keep a copy of this form  for your records, you can do so now by selecting  
the File ->Print option from the pulldown menu on Netscape or Explorer.
http://www.infertilitynetworkuk.com
http://www.fertilityfriends.co.uk
http://www.fertilityconnect.com
A.18 Debrief Information
Study Debriefing
Thank you for your participation in this study we very much appreciate that you have 
taken the time to return to complete the series of questionnaires and writing tasks. I 
would like to take this opportunity to provide you with some information about the study 
and what we hope to find.
In order to make comparisons participants were assigned to complete different tasks. 
Some participants were asked to write about their feelings towards their difficulties 
trying to conceive, in addition to completing questionnaires; others were asked to write 
about their daily activities and others were asked only to complete the series of 
questionnaires.
It is widely understood that infertility can be a stressful experience and that couples 
have to deal not only with the psychological demands associated with fertility 
investigations and treatment procedures but also with the broader situation in which 
they find themselves -  that is, the inability to conceive, or cause conception.
Previous research has shown that writing about thoughts and feelings relating to 
distressing events can help alleviate the distress associated with the event and 
improve the general-well being of the individual. It is hoped that a writing intervention 
can also be effective for alleviating distress for individuals experiencing fertility 
problems. This study has sought to investigate this and it is hoped that participants who 
wrote about their experiences showed some improvement in the way they felt. If this 
type of writing intervention proves to be effective it could be a useful tool through which 
individuals can express their feelings in a way that is free from social constraints and is 
time effective.
These results will help to inform future research into the development of interventions 
that can help alleviate the distress associated with infertility and its associated medical 
interventions. Thank you again for participating in this study. If you have any questions 
about the study please do not hesitate to contact me at {e-mail address}
Thanks Again
Katie Cutts
A.19 SPSS Output for Hierarchical Regression Analysis -  LIWC Variables 
as Predictors
A.19.1 Physical Symptoms (PSI)
Descriptive Statistics
Mean Std. Deviation N
Physical Symptom 
InventoryTime Point2 6.4286 3.36759 14
Positive Symptom 
InventoryTime Point 1 6.6429 3.02826 14
NegemChange -.3693 1.59299 14
PosemChange .2157 .96681 14
CogmecChange 1.6643 1.99251 14
Variables Entered/Removed b
Variables Variables
Model Entered Removed Method
1 Positive 
Symptom 
Inventory 
Tyne Point 
Enter
2 Cogmec
Change,
Negem
Change,
Posem a
Change
Enter
a. /VI requested variables entered.
b. Dependent Variable: Physical Symptom 
InventoryTime Point 2
Model Summary0
C h a n g e  S ta tis tics
A d justed S td . Error o f R Square
Model R R Square R Square the E stim ate C h ange F C h ange df1 df2 Sig. F C h a n g e
1 .740a .548 .510 2 .35642 .548 14.551 1 12 .002
2 .80 3b .645 .488 2 .41043 .097 .823 3 9 .514
a. P red icto rs: (C onstant), P ositive  S ym ptom  Inven to ryT im e P o in t 1
b. Pred ic to rs : (C onstant), P ositive  Sym ptom  Inven to ryT im e  P o in t 1, C o gm e cC han ge , N e gem C han ge , P o se m C h a n g e
c. D e p e n d e n tV a ria b le : Physica l S ym ptom  In ve n to ryT im e  P o in t2
ANOVAc
Model
Sum of 
Squares df Mean Square F Sig.
1 Regression 80.796 1 80.796 14.551 .002a
Residual 66.633 12 5.553
Total 147.429 13
2 Regression 95.137 4 23.784 4.094 .03 7b
Residual 52.291 9 5.810
Total 147.429 13
a. Predictors: (Constant), Positive Symptom InventoryTime Point 1
b. Predictors: (Constant), Positive Symptom InventoryTime Point 1, CogmecChange, 
NegemChange, PosemChange
c. Dependent Variable: Physical Symptom InventoryTime Point2
Coefficients3
Unstandardized Standardized
Coefficients Coefficients
Model B Std. Error Beta t Sig.
1 (Constant) .960 1.566 .613 .551
Positive Symptom 
InventoryTime Point 1 .823 .216 .740 3.815 .002
2 (Constant) 1.311 1.814 .723 .488
Positive Symptom 
InventoryTime Point 1 .766 .231 .689 3.322 .009
NegemChange .048 .433 .023 .112 .914
PosemChange -.959 .753 -.275 -1.273 .235
CogmecChange .153 .358 .090 .427 .679
a. Dependent Variable: Physical Symptom InventoryTime Point 2
A.19.2 Intrusion (IES)
Descriptive Statistics
Mean Std. Deviation N
Intrusion Time Point 2 26.5714 5.70714 14
Intrusion Time Point 1 25.6429 6.82312 14
NegemChange -.3693 1.59299 14
PosemChange .2157 .96681 14
CogmecChange 1.6643 1.99251 14
Variables Entered/Removed b
Model
Variables
Entered
Variables
Removed Method
1 Intrusion 
Tyne Point 
Negem
Change,
Posem
Change,
Cogmec,
Change
Enter
Enter
a. All requested variables entered.
b. Dependent Variable: Intrusion Time Point2
Model Summary0
Chanqe Statistics
Model R R Square
Adjusted 
R Square
Std. Error of 
the Estimate
R Square 
Change F Change df1 df2 Sig. FChange
1 .306a .094 .018 5.65542 .094 1.239 1 12 .287
2 .452b .204 -.150 6.11917 .111 .417 3 9 .745
a. Predictors: (Constant), Intrusion Time Point 1
b. Predictors: (Constant), Intrusion Time Point 1, NegemChange, PosemChange, CogmecChange
c. Dependent Variable: Intrusion Time Point 2
ANOVAc
Model
Sum of 
Squares df Mean Square F Sig.
1 Regression 39.624 1 39.624 1.239 .287a
Residual 383.805 12 31.984
Total 423.429 13
2 Regression 86.430 4 21.608 .577 .687b
Residual 336.998 9 37.444
Total 423.429 13
a. Predictors: (Constant), Intrusion Time Point 1
b. Predictors: (Constant), Intrusion Time Point 1, NegemChange, PosemChange, 
CogmecChange
c. Dependent Variable: Intrusion Time Point2
Coefficients
Model
Unstandardized
Coefficients
Standardized
Coefficients
t Sig.B Std. Error Beta
1 (Constant) 20.010 6.086 3.288 .006
Intrusion Time Point 1 .256 .230 .306 1.113 .287
2 (Constant) 25.152 9.422 2.670 .026
Intrusion Time Point 1 .104 .332 .125 .314 .761
NegemChange -.739 1.076 -.206 -.687 .509
PosemChange .035 2.087 .006 .017 .987
CogmecChange -.923 1.029 -.322 -.897 .393
a. Dependent Variable: Intrusion Time Point 2
A.19.3 Avoidance (IES)
Descriptive Statistics
Mean Std. Deviation N
Avoidance Time Point 2 19.0000 8.15239 14
Avoidance Time Point 1 19.5714 5.03395 14
NegemChange -.3693 1.59299 14
PosemChange .2157 .96681 14
CogmecChange 1.6643 1.99251 14
Variables Entered/Removed b
Model
Variables
Entered
Variables
Removed Method
1 Avoidance 
Tyne Point 
Cogmec
Change,
Negem
Change,
Posem
Change
Enter
Enter
a. AJI requested variables entered.
b. Dependent Variable: Avoidance Time Point2
Model Summary0
C h a n g e  S ta tis tics
Model R R Square
4 d jus ted  
R Square
Std. Error o f 
the E stim ate
R S quare 
C h ange F C h ange d fl df2 S ig . F C h a n g e
1 .43 7a .191 .123 7 .63327 .191 2 .828 1 12 .118
2 .59 4b .353 .066 7 .87998 .162 .753 3 9 .548
a. P red icto rs: (C onstant), A vo idance T im e  Po int 1
b. P red icto rs: (C onstant), A vo idance T im e  Po int 1, C o g m e cC h a n g e , N e ge m C h a n g e , P o se m C h a n g e
c. D e p e n d e n tV a ria b le : Avo idance T im e P o in t2
1 6 0
ANOVAc
Model
Sum of 
Squares df Mean Square F Sig.
1 Regression 164.797 1 164.797 2.828 .118a
Residual 699.203 12 58.267
Total 864.000 13
2 Regression 305.153 4 76.288 1.229 .364b
Residual 558.847 9 62.094
Total 864.000 13
a. Predictors: (Constant), Abidance Time Point 1
b. Predictors: (Constant), Avoidance Time Point 1, CogmecChange, NegemChange, 
PosemChange
c. Dependent Variable: Avoidance Time Point2
Coefficients
Model
Unstandardized
Coefficients
Standardized
Coefficients
t Sig.B Std. Error Beta
1 (Constant) 5.157 8.480 .608 .554
Avoidance Time Point 1 .707 .421 .437 1.682 .118
2 (Constant) 4.917 9.081 .542 .601
Avoidance Time Point 1 .838 .451 .518 1.856 .096
NegemChange 1.830 1.393 .358 1.314 .221
PosemChange -1.948 2.508 -.231 -.777 .457
CogmecChange -.736 1.170 -.180 -.630 .545
a. Dependent Variable: Avoidance Time Point 2
A.19.4 Fertility Problem Stress (FPI)
Descriptive Statistics
Mean Std. Deviation N
Fertility Global Stress 
Time Point 2 (FPI) 133.1429 32.21767 14
Fertility Global Stress 
(FPI) Time Point 1 134.9286 36.29678 14
NegemChange -.3693 1.59299 14
PosemChange .2157 .96681 14
CogmecChange 1.6643 1.99251 14
Variables Entered/Removed b
Variables Variables
Model Entered Removed Method
1 Fertility 
Global 
Stress 
(FPI)Tipie 
Point 1
Enter
2 Negem
Change,
Posem
Enter
Change,
Cogmec^
Change
a. All requested variables entered.
b. Dependent Variable: Fertility Global 
Stress Time Point2 (FPI)
Model Summary0
C h ange  S ta tis tics
Model R R Square
Ad justed 
R Squa re
S td . Error o f 
the E stim ate
R Square  
C h a n g e F C h a n g e d fl df2 Sig. F C h a n g e
1 .90 4a .817 .802 14.34407 .817 53.582 1 12 .000
2 .92 2b .850 .783 15.01066 .033 .653 3 9 .601
a. P red icto rs: (C onstant), Fe rtilityG lo ba l S tress (F P I)T im e  P o in t 1
b. P red icto rs: (C onstant), Fertility  G loba l S tress (F P I)T im e  P o in t 1, N e g e m C h a n g e , P o se m C h a n g e , C o g m e cC h a n g e
c. D e p e n d e n t Variab le : Fertility G lobal S tress  T im e  P o in t2 (F P I)
ANOVAc
Model
Sum of 
Squares df Mean Square F Sig.
1 Regression 11024.686 1 11024.686 53.582 .000a
Residual 2469.028 12 205.752
Total 13493.714 13
2 Regression 11465.836 4 2866.459 12.722 .001b
Residual 2027.878 9 225.320
Total 13493.714 13
a. Predictors: (Constant), Fertility Global Stress (FPI) Time Point 1
b. Predictors: (Constant), Fertility Global Stress (FPI)Time Point 1, NegemChange, 
PosemChange, CogmecChange
c. DependentVariable: Fertility Global Stress Time Point2 (FPI)
Coefficients3
Unstandardized Standardized
Coefficients Coefficients
Model B Std. Error Beta t Sig.
1 (Constant) 24.888 15.278 1.629 .129
Fertility Global Stress 
(FPI) Time Point 1 .802 .110 .904 7.320 .000
2 (Constant) 32.667 17.406 1.877 .093
Fertility Global Stress 
(FPI) Time Point 1 .738 .132 .831 5.598 .000
NegemChange .015 2.674 .001 .006 .996
PosemChange -5.160 4.653 -.155 -1.109 .296
CogmecChange 1.240 2.447 .077 .507 .624
a. DependentVariable: Fertility Global Stress Time Point2 (FPI)
A.19.5 Depression (DASS21)
Descriptive Statistics
Mean Std. Deviation N
Depression Time 
Point 2 (DASS) 18.2857 13.14668 14
Depression Time 
Point 1 (DASS) 17.1429 12.76327 14
NegemChange -.3693 1.59299 14
PosemChange .2157 .96681 14
CogmecChange 1.6643 1.99251 14
Variables Entered/Removed b
Variables Variables
Model Entered Removed Method i
1 Depressio 
n Time
Enter
Point 1 a
(DASS)
2 Posem
Change,
Negem
Change,
Cogme^
Change
Enter
a. All requested variables entered.
b. DependentVariable: Depression Time Point2 (DASS)
Model Summary0
C h a n g e  S ta tis tics
Model R R Square
A d justed 
R Square
S td . Error o f 
the E stim ate
R Square 
C h ange F C h ange df1 df2 S ig. F C h a n g e
1 .89 3a .797 .780 6 .16456 .797 47.125 1 12 .000
2 .947b .896 .850 5 .08717 .099 2 .874 3 9 .096
a. P red icto rs: (C onstant), D e p re ss io n  T im e  Po int 1 (DASS)
b. P red icto rs: (C onstant), D e p re ss io n  T im e  Po int 1 (DASS), P o sem C hange , N e gem C han ge , C o g m e cC h a n g e
c. D e p e n d e n tV a ria b le : D e p re ss io n  T im e  P o in t 2 (DASS)
ANOVAc
Model
Sum of 
Squares df Mean Square F Sig.
1 Regression 1790.836 1 1790.836 47.125 ,000a
Residual 456.022 12 38.002
Total 2246.857 13
2 Regression 2013.943 4 503.486 19.455 .000b
Residual 232.914 9 25.879
Total 2246.857 13
a. Predictors: (Constant), Depression Time Point 1 (DASS)
b. Predictors: (Constant), Depression Time Point 1 (DASS), PosemChange, 
NegemChange, CogmecChange
c. DependentVariable: Depression Time Point 2 (DASS)
Coefficients3
Un standardized Standardized
Coefficients Coefficients
Model B Std. Error Beta t Sig.
1 (Constant) 2.521 2.826 .892 .390
Depression Time 
Point 1 (DASS) .920 .134 .893 6.865 .000
2 (Constant) 6.046 2.993 2.020 .074
Depression Time 
Point 1 (DASS) .801 .120 .778 6.677 .000
NegemChange -2.166 .946 -.262 -2.290 .048
PosemChange -2.250 1.565 -.165 -1.437 .184
CogmecChange -1.087 .773 -.165 -1.405 .194
a. DependentVariable: Depression Time Point 2 (DASS)
A.19.6 Anxiety (DASS21)
Descriptive Statistics
Mean Std. Deviation N
Anxiety Time 
Point2 (DASS) 8.7143 10.54243 14
Anxiety Time 
Point 1 (DASS) 8.7143 6.68441 14
NegemChange -.3693 1.59299 14
PosemChange .2157 .96681 14
CogmecChange 1.6643 1.99251 14
Variables Entered/Removed b
Variables Variables
Model Entered Removed Method
1 Anxiety 
Time Poigt 
1 (DASS)
Enter
2 Posem
Change,
Negem
Enter
Change,
Cogmeo,
Change
a. Al requested variables entered.
b. DependentVariable: Anxiety Time Point2 (DASS)
M odel S u m m a ry 0
C h a n g e  S ta tis tics
Model R R Square
A d justed 
R Square
S td . Error o f  
the E stim ate
R Square  
C h ange F C h ange df1 df2 S ig . F C h a n g e
1 .63 0a .396 .346 8 .52434 .396 7.884 1 12 .016
2 .79 7b .635 .473 7 .65392 .239 1.962 3 9 .190
a. P red icto rs: (C onstant), Anxiety T im e  Po in t 1 (DASS)
b. P red icto rs: (C onstant), Anxiety T im e  Po in t 1 (DASS), P o sem C hange , N e gem C han ge , C o g m e cC h a n g e
c. D e p e n d e n tV a ria b le : Anxiety T im e  P o in t 2 (DASS)
ANOVAc
Model
Sum of 
Squares df Mean Square F Sig.
1 Regression 572.885 1 572.885 7.884 .016a
Residual 871.972 12 72.664
Total 1444.857 13
2 Regression 917.614 4 229.404 3.916 .041b
Residual 527.243 9 58.583
Total 1444.857 13
a. Predictors: (Constant), Anxiety Time Point 1 (DASS)
b. Predictors: (Constant), Anxiety Time Point 1 (DASS), PosemChange, 
NegemChange, CogmecChange
c. DependentVariable: Anxiety Time Point 2 (DASS)
Coefficients3
Unstandardized Standardized
Coefficients Coefficients
Model B Std. Error Beta t Sig.
1 (Constant) .060 3.833 .016 .988
AixietyTime 
Point 1 (DASS) .993 .354 .630 2.808 .016
2 (Constant) 1.445 3.832 .377 .715
Anxiety Time 
Point 1 (DASS) 1.420 .369 .900 3.847 .004
NegemChange -.964 1.392 -.146 -.693 .506
PosemChange -1.934 2.355 -.177 -.821 .433
CogmecChange -3.029 1.272 -.573 -2.382 .041
a. DependentVariable: Anxiety Time Point 2 (DASS)
A.19.7 Stress (D A SS 21)
Descriptive Statistics
Mean Std. Deviation N
Stress Time 
Point2 (DASS) 21.2857 8.89623 14
Stress Time 
Point 1 (DASS) 18.7143 10.60064 14
NegemChange -.3693 1.59299 14
PosemChange .2157 .96681 14
CogmecChange 1.6643 1.99251 14
Variables Entered/Removed b
Variables Variables
Model Entered Removed Method
1 Stress 
Time Poigt 
1 (DASS)
Enter
2 Negem
Change,
Posem
Enter
Change,
Cogmeq,
Change
a. All requested variables entered.
b. Dependent Variable: Stress Time Point 2 (DASS)
Model Summary0
Change Statistics
Model R R Square
Adjusted 
R Square
Std. Error of 
the Estimate
R Square 
Change F Change df1 d(2 Sig. F Change
1 .756a .572 .536 6.05833 .572 16.032 1 12 .002
2 .80 7b .651 .495 6.32044 .079 .675 3 9 .589
a. Predictors: (Constant), Stress Time Point 1 (DASS)
b. Predictors: (Constant), Stress Time Point 1 (DASS), NegemChange, PosemChange, CogmecChange
c. DependentVariable: Stress Time Point2 (DASS)
ANOVAc
Model
Sum of 
Squares df Mean Square F Siq.
1 Regression 588.417 1 588.417 16.032 .002a
Residual 440.440 12 36.703
Total 1028.857 13
2 Regression 669.325 4 167.331 4.189 .035b
Residual 359.532 9 39.948
Total 1028.857 13
a. Predictors: (Constant), Stress Time Point 1 (DASS)
b. Predictors: (Constant), Stress Time Point 1 (DASS), NegemChange, 
PosemChange, CogmecChange
c. DependentVariable: Stress TimePoint2 (DASS)
Coefficients3
Un standardized Standardized
Coefficients Coefficients
Model B Std. Error Beta t Sig.
1 (Constant) 9.409 3.379 2.784 .017
Stress Time 
Point 1 (DASS)
.635 .159 .756 4.004 .002
2 (Constant) 10.770 4.652 2.315 .046
Stress Time 
Point 1 (DASS) .621 .179
.740 3.466 .007
NegemChange 1.387 1.118 .248 1.240 .246
PosemChange -1.595 1.946 -.173 -.819 .434
CogmecChange -.153 .993 -.034 -.154 .881
a. DependentVariable: Stress Time Point 2 (DASS)
A.20 Ethics Proform a and A pproval Letter 
A.20.1 Ethics Proform a
Faculty o f Development and Society
Application for Research Ethics Approval 
Staff and Postgraduate Research Students
Section A
Important Note- If a previously submitted research proposal answers the methodology 
questions in this section, please include a copy of the proposal and leave those 
questions blank. You MUST however complete ALL of Section B
1. Name of principal investigator: Katie Cutts 
Faculty: Development & Society
Email address: katie.cutts@shu.ac.uk
2. Title of research: A content analysis of message board posts on online 
forums for individuals experiencing unwanted childlessness: Emotional 
expression, advice and support.
3. Supervisor if applicable: Maddy Arden (Director of Studies)
Email address: m.arden@shu.ac.uk
Keith Hurst
Email address: k.m.hurst@shu.ac.uk 
John Reidy
Email address: i.q.reidv@shu.ac.uk
4. ENT num ber if applicable: N/A
5. O ther investigators (within or outside SHU)
Title Name Post Division Organisation
6. Proposed Duration of Project:
Start date: N/A End Date:
Data to be collected is archival and will be downloaded once approval is 
received.
mailto:katie.cutts@shu.ac.uk
mailto:m.arden@shu.ac.uk
mailto:k.m.hurst@shu.ac.uk
mailto:i.q.reidv@shu.ac.uk
7. Main purpose of Research:
X  Educational qualification
  Publicly funded research
  Staff research project
  Other (Please supply details)
8. Background to the Study and Scientific  Rationale (500 words)
Reproductive problems affect one in seven couples in the United Kingdom 
(Human Fertilization and Embryology Authority, HFEA, 2006/7). For most 
people having children is an essential part of adult life which is shaped by 
social, religious and cultural demands (Seibel, 1997). The negative 
psychological impact and resultant stress inherent in the treatment of fertility 
problems is well documented in the research literature (Greil, 1997). The social 
stigma associated with infertility means that this group of individuals often 
experience feelings of isolation (Andrews, Abbey & Halman, 1991) and whilst 
social relationships can be supportive for individuals experiencing fertility 
problems they can simultaneously be a source of stress (Wilson & Kopitzke, 
2002).
Research has shown that a considerable proportion of individuals are making 
use of the internet to seek emotional support for their fertility problems (Haagen 
et al., 2003). The growth of internet resources over the last decade has 
provided a domain through which individuals who are experiencing fertility 
problems can access information about diagnosis and treatment, receive 
support and share their stories (Epstein et al., 2002). In a study by Haagen et 
al. (2003) of patients attending a fertility clinic 72 couples of 134 couples 
questioned reported using the internet for fertility-related problems. Seventy-two 
percent of couples reported using the internet to gain information in order to 
understand their fertility problem better, whilst 41% used the internet to seek 
emotional support.
Epstein et al. (2002) surveyed users of an internet forum run by an international 
fertility organisation and found that for some the internet was the only source of 
outlet they had for talking about their fertility problems. Users reported that they 
found the internet forum valuable for sharing news about their treatment, 
receiving support and helpful when feeling depressed. Comparisons were made 
between internet users who identified themselves as having alternative outlets 
and those who identified the internet as their only outlet. Epstein et al. (2002) 
found that users without alternative outlets were significantly more likely to 
report these benefits than users who had other outlets. Both groups reported 
that they got a great deal of useful medical information from the forums.
Online groups provide a combination of information and emotional support and 
so can provide a medium through which individuals can interact with others who 
share common problems. It is evident from the findings of previous studies that 
individuals experiencing fertility problems are one such group of people that 
seek out information and support through this medium (Epstein et al., 2002;
Haagen et al., 2003). Whilst a few studies have utilised questionnaires to gain 
information on the internet usage of individuals experiencing fertility problems, 
to date no studies have reported analysing the content of infertility specific 
forums to examine the reasons for participation.
9. Has the scientific  I scholarly  basis of this research been approved?  
(For exam ple by Research Degrees Subcom m ittee or an external 
funding body.)
  Yes
  No - to be submitted
D  Currently undergoing an approval process 
X  Irrelevant (e.g there is no relevant committee governing this 
work)
10. Main Research Q uestions
Based on the findings of previous research relating to internet use 
amongst individuals experiencing fertility problems and the well 
documented negative psychological sequel of experiencing unwanted 
childlessness this study will examine the content of messages posted on 
online infertility forums in order to examine the reasons for posting 
messages on these forums (i.e. advice regarding treatment, symptoms or 
emotional support) and to also examine the extent to which messages on 
a infertility forum reflect the psychosocial challenges that this group of 
individuals face. The present study is also interested in examining the 
expression of emotions through this medium with the objective of 
implementing an emotional expression intervention in this group of 
internet users.
11. Sum m ary of Methods including Proposed Data Analyses
Archival data from nine internet forums will be downloaded and analysed. 
These specific sites have been selected as they are either specifically 
developed to provide support and advice for individuals experiencing 
unwanted childlessness or have a sub-forum within a larger site that 
relates to unwanted childlessness and are UK based.
Due to the dynamic nature of these message boards, data collection will 
involve downloading archived posts that have been posted within a one 
week period, though this time period may be extended depending on the 
available data on these sites.
Content analysis methods will be used to catalogue the range of topics in 
the threads with particular reference to the expression of emotions, 
seeking advice and seeking support. The content analysis programme, 
Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC: Pennebaker, Francis & Booth, 
2001) will be also be used to analyse individual levels of emotional and 
cognitive word usage.
Section B
1. Describe the arrangem ents fo r selecting/sam pling and briefing  
potential participants. (This should include copies of any 
advertisements for volunteers or letters to individuals/organisations 
inviting participation.)
Messages posted over a one-week period will be sampled from a nine 
internet forums specifically devoted to individuals experiencing fertility 
problems. These forums range in size from one that has just over 650 
users and 22 boards to one that has over 33,500 users and 47 boards.
All threads that have been started within the selected one-week time 
period will be included in the analysis along with any posts replying to 
these threads that are posted beyond this week period up to the day of 
data collection.
2. W hat is the potential for participants or third parties to benefit from  
the research?
There are no direct benefits for those participants whose posts are 
included in the analysis, however, the results of this study will inform the 
development of an intervention study that has the potential to improve 
the psychological well-being of individuals who are experiencing 
unwanted childlessness and who will be recruited from the internet 
forums from which the data in the present study will be taken.
3. Describe any possible negative consequences o f participation in 
the research along w ith the w ays in w hich these consequences will 
be lim ited.
There will be no direct contact with participants in the current study as 
data collection of archived material is non-reactive and therefore no 
negative consequences are anticipated.
4. Describe the arrangem ents fo r obtaining participants' consent. (This 
should include copies of the information that they will receive & written 
consent forms where appropriate. If children or vulnerable people are to 
be participants in the study details of the arrangements for obtaining 
consent from those acting in loco parentis or as advocates should be 
provided.)
The forums to be observed are all public forums and although 
registration is required to post messages, all posted messages are 
accessible by any person with access to the internet. In accordance with 
the guidelines of the Association of Internet Researchers 
(http://www.aoir.org/reports/ethics.pdf) it is suggested that "the greater 
the acknowledged publicity of the venue, the less obligation there may be
http://www.aoir.org/reports/ethics.pdf
to protect individual privacy, confidentiality, right to informed consent etc" 
(P- 5).
In the present study it is acknowledged that although the internet sites 
are accessible by the public without the need for registration, infertility is 
a socially sensitive topic and whilst the messages posted are publicly 
accessible the content is often sensitive and emotional. Therefore 
although consent will not be sought for the use of the data, the individual
privacy of the posters will be maintained.
5. Describe how participants will be made aware o f their right to  
w ithdraw  from  the research. (This should also include information 
about participants' right to withhold information.)
6. If your data collection requires that you work alone with 
children or other vulnerable participants have you undergone 
Crim inal Records Bureau screening? Please supply details.
7. Describe the arrangem ents fo r debriefing the participants. (This
should include copies of information that participants will receive where 
appropriate.)
8. Describe the arrangem ents fo r ensuring participant confidentiality .
(This should include details of how data will be stored to ensure 
compliance with data protection legislation and how results will be 
presented.)
Pseudo-names will be treated as real names for the purpose of the study 
and will be replaced with numbers to aid identification.
To maintain confidentiality and anonymity of the members of groups 
used in this study any details that may be used to identify members of 
the group will be removed from the posts prior to storing the data, these 
include headers, signatures, any citations of names or pseudo-names 
and any references to the type or name of the group.
No published documents will include specific reference to the location or 
name of the forums observed. Direct quotations will not be included in 
any published work in order to maintain anonymity of the individual 
posters. The data will be stored on a university password protected 
computer and any paper copies of the data will be stored in a locked 
filling cabinet in the office of the researcher.
9. Are there any conflicts of interest in you undertaking this research?
(E.g. Are you undertaking research on work colleagues; or in an 
organisation where you are a consultant?) Please supply details.
10. W hat are the expected outcom es, im pacts and benefits of the  
research?
The results of this study will inform a web-based intervention study that 
will recruit individuals from these forums. The future study is concerned 
with exploring the potential benefits of a written emotional disclosure 
intervention for individuals who are experiencing unwanted 
childlessness.
11. P lease give details of any plans for dissem ination of the results of 
the research
The results of the study will be used to inform the development and 
interpretation of findings from a future intervention study. The findings of 
the current study will be included as a chapter in a PhD thesis and it is 
anticipated that the findings will also be submitted for publication to an 
appropriate peer-reviewed journal.
SECTION C
RISK A SSESSM EN T FOR THE RESEA RCHER
13. Will the proposed data collection take place on campus?
X D  Yes (Please answer questions 4 and 6 only)
I I I No (Please complete all questions)
14. Where will the data collection take place?
(Tick as many as apply if data collection will take place in multiple 
venues)
I I I Own house/flat   [^Residence of participant
I I I School   Business/Voluntary
Organisation 
m  Public Venue (e.g. Youth Club; Church; etc)
XDOther (Please specify) Data collection is conducted via the internet
15. How will you travel to and from the data collection venue?
I I I On foot    By car I I I Public Transport 
m  Other (Please specify)______________________________
Please outline how you will ensure your personal safety when travelling 
to and from the data collection venue:
16. How will you ensure your own personal safety whilst at the research 
venue? N/A
17. If you are carrying out research off-campus, you must ensure that each 
time you go out to collect data you ensure that someone you trust knows 
where you are going (without breaching the confidentiality of your 
participants), how you are getting there (preferably including your travel 
route), when you expect to get back, and what to do should you not 
return at the specified time. Please outline here the procedure you 
propose using to do this:
18. Are there any potential risks to your health and wellbeing associated with 
either (a) the venue where the research will take place and/or (b) the 
research topic itself?
X Q  None that I am aware of 
I I I Yes (Please outline below)
7. Does this research project require a health and safety risk analysis for 
the procedures to be used? Yes /No
If YES current status of Health and Safety Risk Assessment.
I confirm that this research will conform to the principles outlined in the 
Sheffield Hallam University Research Ethics policy.
I confirm that this application is accurate to the best of my knowledge.
Principal Investigator's 
signature
Supervisor's signature 
(if applicable)
A.20.2 Letter of Approval
Our Ref AM/HE
Katie Cutts 
INTERNAL
45 Broomgrove Rd 
Collegiate Campus
Dear Katie,
Request for Ethical Approval of Research Project
Your research project entitled "A content analysis of message board posts 
on online forums for individuals experiencing unwanted childlessness:
Emotional expression, advice and support" has been submitted for ethical 
review to the Faculty's rapporteurs and I am pleased to confirm that they 
have approved your project.
However, they have raised the following issues which you should address 
during the research project:
Although users of such internet sites are making their concerns public, they 
may not be fully aware of who will use the information. It is suggested that 
you post your research intentions on the message boards in question.
You are reminded to ensure that participant anonymity is very thorough.
I wish you every success with your research project.
Yours sincerely
Professor A Macaskill Chair Faculty Research Ethics Committee
Office address:
Research Support Team  
Faculty of Development & Society 
Sheffield Hallam University 
Unit 1, Sheffield Science Park 
Howard Street Sheffield 
S12LX
Tel: 0114-2253670 
Fax: 0114-2253673  
E-mail: h.j.english@shu.ac.uk
mailto:h.j.english@shu.ac.uk
