Understanding what supports dementia-friendly 
environments in general hospital settings: a realist 
evaluation 
Melanie Jane Handley 
Submitted to the University of Hertfordshire in partial 
fulfilment of the requirements of the degree of PhD 
November 2017 
Acknowledgments 
I have numerous people to thank for their support throughout the completion of this PhD.  Firstly, 
my doctoral supervisors, Professor Claire Goodman and Professor Frances Bunn, for their unfailing 
encouragement and guidance.   
To my family who have supported me through the ups and downs of the last three years:  Michael, 
Lola, and Isaac, thank you for your understanding the many lost weekends; and my parents, Joyce 
and Kim, who have provided much practical support in the way of childcare. 
The study would not have been possible without the valuable contributions from all the participants.  
I would like to thank the stakeholders who contributed to theory development in the realist review 
by offering insights into their experience of implementing, using, and receiving interventions.  A 
special thank you to all the staff, patients, and patient representatives who generously allowed me 
to spend some time with them to understanding the complexities and dilemmas for dementia care 
in hospitals.   
I was lucky enough to have the support of members from two Patient and Public Involvement 
Groups.  The University of Hertfordshire Public Involvement in Research Group members, Diane 
Munday and Marion Cowe, who commented on the initial project proposal which helped define the 
focus of the study.  The Alzheimers Society Research Network Monitor Group; Paul Millac, 
Rosemary Phillips, and Jackie Whitting, whose insights and commitment to provide constructive 
critiques of interpretations ensured credibility in the research findings.   
Thank you to Steph for skilfully proofreading the document. 
Finally, thank you to the Alzheimers Society for providing the funding for the project which allowed 
me to commit to the research full-time. 
Abstract 
Background: Improving care for people living with dementia when they are admitted to hospital is a 
national priority.  Interventions have been designed and implemented to support staff to improve 
how they provide care to patients with dementia.  However, there is limited understanding of how 
these interventions work in practice and what the outcomes are for patients and their family carers. 
Objective: To develop, test, and refine a theory-driven explanation of what supports hospital staff to 
provide dementia-friendly care and with what outcomes for people living with dementia and their 
carers. 
Method: A two-phase study design employing realist methodology.  Phase one was a realist review 
which combined evidence from stakeholder interviews and literature searches.  Phase two used 
realist evaluation to analyse data collected from two NHS Hospital Trusts in the East of England to 
test the theory developed in phase one. 
Findings: Initial scoping in the realist review identified three candidate theories which structured the 
literature searches and analysis.  Six related context-mechanism-outcome configurations were 
identified and collectively made the initial programme theory.  The review found that single 
strategies, such as dementia awareness training, would not on their own change how staff provide 
care for patients with dementia.  An important context was for staff to understand behaviour as a 
form of communication.  Organisational endorsement for dementia care and clarity in staff roles was 
important for staff to recognise dementia care as a legitimate part of their work.   
The realist evaluation refined the programme theory.  While the study sites had applied resources 
for patients with dementia differently, there were crosscutting themes which demonstrated how key 
mechanisms and contexts influenced staff actions and patient outcomes.  When staff were allocated 
time to spend with patients and drew on their knowledge of the patient with dementia and 
dementia care skills, staff could provide care in ways that reassured patients and recognised their 
personhood.  However, accepted organisational and social norms for care practices influenced 
whether staff considered providing skilled dementia care was an important contribution to the work 
on the ward.  This impacted on how staff prioritised their work, which influenced whether they 
recognised and addressed patient needs such as pain or hunger, made attempts to reduce distress, 
and if patients and carers considered they were listened to.  Organisational focuses, such as risk 
management, influenced how patient need was defined and how staffing resources were allocated.   
Staff commitment to continuing in dementia care was influenced by whether or not they valued 
dementia care as skilled work.  
Discussion: Single strategies, such as the use of dementia awareness training, will not on their own 
improve the outcomes for patients with dementia when they are admitted to hospitals.  In addition, 
attention needs to be paid to the role of senior managers and their knowledge of dementia to 
support staff to provide care in ways that recognise the needs of the person.  The way dementia care 
is valued within an organisation has implications for how resources are organised and how staff 
consider their role in providing dementia care.  Evidence from observations demonstrated that when 
staff are supported to provide good dementia care, patients experienced positive outcomes in terms 
of their needs being addressed and reducing distress.  Dementia care needs to be recognised as 
skilled work by the staff and the organisation.       
Contents 
CMOC 1: Understanding behaviour as communication of an unmet need to support staff to 
CMOC 2: The role of experiential learning and creating empathy to encourage reflection for staff 
CMOC 4: Staff are confident they are supported to adapt working practices and routines for 
List of Appendices 
Appendix 6: Mapping of factors that support, or not, the implementation of a dementia-friendly 
Appendix 17: Protocol for establishing and dealing with bad practice and concerns for safeguarding
List of boxes and figures 
Figure 13: CMOC 3 Clinical experts and senior ward staff promoting practices that are patient-
Figure 17: Refined programme theory of what supports general hospital staff to provide dementia-
List of tables 
Table 9: Sampling framework for staff, patients with dementia, and family carers participating in 
Table 10: Sampling framework for staff, patients with dementia, and family carers participating in 
Table 30: Modifications to context-mechanism-outcome configurations from phase one to phase 
Table 35: Principles of good dementia care described by experts in dementia care at sites 1 and 2 181 
Glossary of terms 
1:1: Member of staff assigned to care for patients with dementia who need additional support. 
Bay: The area on a hospital ward where patients are cared for. 
Behaviours that challenge: A range of behaviours that patients with dementia can exhibit which 
complicates the delivery of care for their acute condition.  These behaviours are understood as a 
communication of an unmet emotional, social, physical, or medical need. 
Carer: A person who normally has responsibility for supporting the person living with dementia.  This 
can be a family member or friend who is not performing the role as the employee of an organisation. 
Change agent: A member of staff who supports the implementation of an intervention. 
Dual-frailty ward: A ward where staffing resources are organised to address both physical and 
mental health needs to deliver best-practice care for people living with dementia and/or delirium. 
General hospital: A type of hospital with an emergency department that can manage many types of 
acute and chronic conditions. 
Intervention: Term used to include initiatives, interventions, and programmes which aim to support 
staff work well with patients with dementia.  
Neuropsychiatric Inventory: A tool for recording behavioural and mood symptoms of people living 
with dementia, completed with a caregiver. 
Patient with dementia:  A person living with dementia who has been admitted to general hospital.  
It is recognised that this term can be contentious as it has implications for the persons role in their 
care and contribution in decision making.  However, in this study it is used as a concise way to 
express that the person living with dementia is being treated in a particular context for care, i.e. 
general hospital.  
Person-centred care: A model of care that places the person at the centre of care. 
Research network monitors: A group of volunteers from the Alzheimers Society who monitored the 
progress of the research and provided insight from their own experiences of caring for relatives with 
dementia. 
Stakeholder: In this study, a stakeholder was defined as a person with experience of designing, 
implementing, using, or receiving an intervention to improve dementia care. 
This is me: An Alzheimers Society booklet used across care settings which details biographical 
information about a persons interests, preferences, and routines that can be used to inform care 
planning. 
List of abbreviations 
4AT: Rapid assessment test for delirium 
AMTS: Abbreviated Mental Test Score 
CQUIN: The Commissioning for Quality and Innovation framework 
DoLS: Deprivation of Liberty Safeguards 
FN: Field note 
GP: General Practitioner  
HCA: Healthcare assistant 
MMSE: Mini-Mental State Examination 
NHS: National Health Service 
NICE: National Institute of Clinical Excellence 
PRN: Pro re nata (when necessary) 
RAMESES: Realist And Meta-narrative Evidence Syntheses: Evolving Standards 
RCN: Royal College of Nursing 
RN: Registered Nurse 
SN: Student Nurse 
VERA: Validation, emotion, reassurance, activity 
Introduction 
This study aimed to understand how dementia-friendly healthcare in general hospitals was 
supported, and with what outcomes for patients with dementia and their carers.  I was motivated to 
research this from a longstanding interest in mental health, experience in researching healthcare 
services for older people, and the growing area of work around dementia-friendly communities. In 
particular, I was interested in how notions to improve the inclusion and accessibility of healthcare 
for people living with dementia fitted with the values of complex, bureaucratic organisations which 
predominantly focus on physical and medical health concerns.  These seemingly conflicting interests 
highlight the context-dependent nature of influencing change to care practices and is compatible 
with realist inquiry as the research method for the study. 
My background is in psychology (BSc in Psychology and MSc in Mental Health Studies).  I have 
worked as a research assistant investigating healthcare service delivery for older people living in 
their own homes and in care homes.  My previous research experiences have focused on primary 
care.   
Rationale for the research question 
People living with dementia are more likely to experience complications during their admissions to 
general hospitals, which has implications for their independence and health at discharge 
(Alzheimer's Society, 2009).  These complications are considered to occur, in part, due to factors 
related to the general hospital environment, the way services are organised, and staffs ability to 
provide care that recognises the impact dementia has on a person (Cowdell, 2010).  The primary 
reason for hospital admission is often not related to the persons dementia, and as such dementia 
care is of a lower priority than caring for the persons acute medical and physical health needs 
(Clissett et al., 2013).  Limited understanding of dementia and how to work with patients with 
dementia can lead to inappropriate care or treatment, such as the use of antipsychotics for 
behaviours that challenge (White et al., 2016).  There has been a national drive to improve the 
quality of care for patients with dementia in general hospitals with the aim of improving their 
outcomes.  The increased focus on dementia care in general hospitals has resulted in the 
implementation of strategies and interventions that aim to create dementia-friendly healthcare 
environments in general hospitals (Department of Health, 2015; Health Education England, 2016).  
However, to date, there has been limited evaluation of these interventions, and even less 
understanding of how they encourage staff to provide care that is dementia-friendly, or what the 
outcomes are for people living with dementia and their families.  In understanding how context 
influences staff motivation to provide dementia-friendly care, and what the outcomes of this are for 
patients, it is possible to improve the design of interventions and the likelihood of their uptake in 
practice. 
Intervention 
Interventions, also known as programmes, initiatives, approaches, or tools, aim to influence a 
change in behaviour to achieve a desired outcome.  For the purposes of this study, they will be 
referred to under the rubric of intervention.  In realist inquiry, it is not the intervention itself that 
brings about a change in behaviour, rather it is how the inherent resources an intervention provides 
and how the context interventions are implemented into interact with the reasoning of those using 
the interventions that will affect outcomes (Pawson and Tilley, 1997).   
The concept of what constitutes an intervention in realist evaluations of healthcare has been applied 
broadly, covering interventions aimed at organisational level, service level, and patient level 
(Herepath et al., 2015).  For example, Greenhalgh et al. (2009) evaluated a modernisation 
intervention aimed at whole-scale transformation in healthcare services, Dalkin et al. (2016) 
investigated how palliative care registers are used when working with people with non-malignant 
diseases, and Clark et al. (2005) investigated patients experiences of cardiac rehabilitation.  In terms 
of what constitutes a dementia-friendly intervention for this study, these are understood as tools, 
approaches, and interventions designed to provide care in ways that address the dementia-related 
needs of people living with dementia when they are admitted to general hospital.  This includes the 
use of biographical tools, staff with expertise in dementia care, training and education, and 
modifications to the environment. 
For the purposes of this study the definition of an intervention does not include practice 
development, which is a methodology for transforming healthcare cultures through a continuous 
process of improvement that encourages the emancipation of individuals (McCormack and Garbett, 
2003), and has been the subject of a realist review (McCormack et al., 2007). 
Environment 
The environment of a general hospital ward can include the physical environment and the 
psychosocial environment.  The physical environment in general hospital wards refers to man-made 
structures and adaptations including; ward layout and how the space is organised, flooring, lighting, 
access, furniture, signage, and colour schemes and contrast (Day et al., 2000).  The psychosocial 
environment describes the social organisation and the emotional atmosphere of the ward 
(Edvardsson et al., 2012; Prato et al., 2018). This includes ward routines and activities, and whether 
the ambiance is inclusive, supportive, calm, and welcoming.  
In recent years, there has been financial support for some general hospitals to improve the physical 
environment of wards such as refurbishments, the use of wayfinding design and signage, and 
attention to colour and contrast (Waller et al., 2013).  Such adaptations to ward environments are 
recognised as influencing patient outcomes such as wellbeing, orientation, and safety (Day et al., 
2000; Waller et al., 2013).  However, studies also highlight the importance of the psychosocial 
environment on patient outcomes (Borbasi et al., 2006; Edvardsson et al., 2012; Prato et al., 2018).  
While improvements to the physical environment can help to reduce sensory overload and support 
independence, general hospital staff have an important role in maintaining a calm atmosphere 
where patients feel safe (Edvardsson et al., 2012; Porock et al., 2015; Scerri et al., 2015).   As such, 
the concept of environment for this study encapsulates the built environment, the psychosocial 
environment, and considers how activities within the ward impact on staff responses and patients 
outcomes. 
Flow of the thesis 
This dissertation is formed of five chapters.  Chapter one describes the development of dementia-
friendly concepts and how it can be applied in healthcare settings.  Some of the complexities for 
treating people living with dementia in general hospitals are set out, and there is discussion of 
implementing interventions with reference to change agents and social influence theory. 
Chapter two discusses realism as a research methodology and how the concepts are applied in this 
project.  It describes the methods of data collection and analysis for both the realist review and the 
realist evaluation.  The process for developing, testing, and refining the programme theory is 
explained.  A critical review of realist inquiry examines some of the strengths and limitations of the 
methodology.  Finally, I discuss research dilemmas I faced throughout the study, and the way data 
collection methods were designed to adhere to the principles of realist methodology. 
Chapter three sets out the evidence used in the realist review to develop the programme theory.  It 
describes the three stage process from initial exploration of current research supported by 
interviews with stakeholders, to the development of a programme theory consisting of six context-
mechanism-outcome configurations.  This work was taken forward in the realist evaluation, the 
findings from which are discussed in chapter four. 
Chapter four discusses evidence from the realist evaluation which tested and refined the initial 
programme theory developed in the review.  It explains how the context-mechanism-outcome 
configurations were modified from the evidence, and summarises the components of the refined 
programme theory. 
Chapter five discusses the thesis in light of the findings from this study and related literature.  It 
details this studys contribution to understanding what works, for whom, and in what circumstances, 
for staff to practice dementia-friendly healthcare, and how this influences outcomes for patients 
with dementia and their carers. 
Chapter one: Background 
In this chapter I will set out key considerations for people living with dementia when admitted to 
general hospital, the concept of dementia-friendly, and consider its application in general hospitals.   
A discussion of person-centred care, behaviours that challenge, pain, and managing risk in patients 
with dementia will provide an outline of some of the complex issues around providing good 
dementia care in general hospitals.  There will be a discussion about the implementing of 
interventions in general hospital settings, with reference to the use of education and training, 
change agents and social identity theory.  Finally, I will set out the aims of the research with 
reference to specific objectives and questions for both phases of the study. 
Admission to general hospital for people living with dementia 
Admission to general hospital is a difficult and frightening experience for people living with 
dementia.  Environments are busy and noisy, multiple staff are involved in patient care, ward 
routines can be inflexible, staff may not understand a persons needs, and restrictions on visiting can 
limit contact to people who provide them with reassurance and comfort.   Services and the staff 
providing care for patients with dementia are increasingly aware of the complexity in addressing an 
acute condition while meeting the specific needs of a persons dementia (Alzheimer's Society, 2009; 
Alzheimer's Society, 2016).  Wide recognition of the disparities in healthcare outcomes for people 
living with dementia admitted to general hospital has led to a national drive to prioritise dementia 
on the healthcare agenda (Department of Health, 2009).  In response to this, interventions have 
been developed and implemented with the aim of improving services for patients with dementia.   
Dementia 
Dementia is the umbrella term for a range of long-term conditions which include Alzheimers 
disease, vascular dementia, dementia with Lewy bodies, and frontotemporal dementia.  All are 
characterised by progressive cognitive decline in areas including, but not restricted to, memory, 
perception, language, and decision making.  These impairments impact on a persons ability to 
engage in social situations and perform day-to-day activities (World Health Organization, 2010).  In 
the UK, it is estimated there are currently around 850,000 people living with dementia (Alzheimer's 
Society, 2014).  While many factors have been suggested to contribute to the development of the 
condition, including genetic and life style influences (Livingston et al., 2017), age is recognised as a 
major risk factor: 80% of dementia occurs in people aged 75 or over (Carone et al., 2014). 
General hospital and dementia  
The prevalence of dementia in general hospital patients aged over 70 is high, with estimates ranging 
from 25% to 40% in this patient group (Alzheimer's Society, 2009; Royal College of Psychiatrists, 
2005; Sampson et al., 2009).  This variation reflects a lack of consistency in diagnosing dementia 
(Sampson et al., 2009) and recording dementia diagnoses in hospital notes (Burn et al., 2018).  
Dementia is rarely the primary reason for admission to general hospital, and patients with dementia 
commonly have co-morbid conditions (Alzheimer's Society, 2009; Alzheimer's Society, 2016; Bunn et 
al., 2014a; Poblador-Plou, 2014; Royal College of Psychiatrists, 2013).  As a result, dementia care is 
viewed as low priority and time consuming for hospital staff (Moyle et al., 2011). The quality of 
inpatient services for patients with dementia vary across the country and outcomes have been 
widely reported as inequitable when compared to outcomes for people without cognitive 
impairments (Royal College of Nursing, 2013; Royal College of Psychiatrists, 2017).  Patients with 
dementia are vulnerable to hospital-acquired complications, with higher rates of adverse incidents 
reported than in patients without cognitive impairment (Bail et al., 2013).  Falls, infections, poor 
nutrition and hydration, and the onset of delirium impact on the length of stay and functional 
abilities for patients with dementia, which may result in a care home admission (Bail et al., 2015; 
Bunn et al., 2014b; Orsitto et al., 2009).   
Studies have identified a number of reasons for the disparity in health outcomes for patients with 
dementia including:  
 a lack of leadership at both Trust level and senior clinician level for dementia has meant 
improvements in dementia care have been a low priority for general hospitals (Royal College 
of Psychiatrists, 2013);  
 inadequate knowledge and training in the healthcare workforce for dementia and dementia 
care (Elvish et al., 2014; Surr et al., 2016);  
 the complexity of assessing the risk and benefits of treatment options.  For example, issues 
around the inclusion of people living with dementia in the management of their co-morbid 
conditions (Bunn et al., 2014a);  
 widespread use of detrimental care practices, such as the use of antipsychotics for 
behavioural management (White et al., 2016);  
 negative attitudes, stigma, and discrimination towards patients with dementia (Benbow, 
2012; Cowdell, 2010; Swaffer, 2014);  
 environments which are confusing for patients with dementia (Waller and Masterson, 2015).   
The English National Dementia Strategy and subsequent Prime Ministers Challenges on dementia 
(Department of Health, 2009; Department of Health, 2012a; Department of Health, 2015) set out 
ambitions to improve the quality of care for people living with dementia across health and social 
care, with key objectives for general hospitals.  The focus of improvements were: education and 
training to develop a dementia aware healthcare workforce; leadership that supports quality 
improvements in dementia care; development of care pathways; and involvement of liaison mental 
health teams in assessments and care planning.  Organisations, such as the Dementia Action Alliance 
and The Kings Fund, have supported hospital commitments to improve their care provision and 
environment by sharing best practice and funding discrete projects (Dementia Action Alliance, 2014; 
Waller et al., 2013).  While hospitals are making progress in addressing organisational issues, such as 
leadership, training, and the use of mental health liaison services, staff and carers report variability 
in services at patient level (Royal College of Psychiatrists, 2017).  Areas highlighted for improvement 
included: food provision; the collection and use of personal information in care planning; access for 
staff to specialist dementia support, especially during out-of-hours; and involvement of patients with 
dementia in decision making. 
The increased focus on dementia care in general hospitals has resulted in the implementation of 
strategies and interventions that aim to create dementia-friendly healthcare environments in 
general hospitals (Department of Health, 2015; Health Education England, 2016).   
Dementia-friendly 
The concept of dementia-friendly has been applied to various aspects of physical and social 
environments that promote accessibility, inclusion, and acceptance for people living with dementia 
(Crampton, 2012; Keady et al., 2012; Lin and Lewis, 2015; World Health Organization, 2012).  
Programmes to develop dementia-friendly communities have included building awareness and 
understanding of the condition across generations, organisations, and the general public 
(Alzheimer's Society, 2017; Dementia Action Alliance, 2017), supporting the independence and 
safety of people living with dementia (Mitchell and Burton, 2010),  and encouraging involvement 
from people living with dementia to improve services in their local areas (Dementia Alliance 
International, 2017; Dementia Empowerment and Engagement Project, 2017).   The term, dementia-
friendly, is not without controversy, with some commentators highlighting this could distract from 
real investment in services for people living with dementia (Shakespeare et al., 2017) and side-line 
important issues such as rights (Rahman and Swaffer, 2018).  The developing language and impetus 
for improving inclusion and accessibility for people living with dementia as a social movement based 
on disability rights is gaining momentum (Mental Health Foundation, 2015). 
In evaluating what elements were important for creating dementia-friendly communities, The 
Joseph Rowntree Foundation developed the Four Cornerstones Model (Crampton, 2012).  The model 
identified the importance of place, people, networks, and resources, with the voice of the person 
with dementia at the centre of the model.  In health care, the SPACE model draws on similar 
principles but considers the specific context of health care.  It was developed by The Royal College of 
Nursing (RCN) for assessing whether general hospital environments were dementia-friendly (Royal 
College of Nursing, 2013).  A survey of healthcare professionals, people living with dementia, and 
their carers highlighted key areas for improving the caring environment of general hospitals, forming 
the five areas of focus for the SPACE principles:   
1. Staff who are skilled and have time to care 
2. Partnership working with carers, family and friends 
3. Assessment and early identification of dementia 
4. Care plans which are person centred 
5. Environments which are dementia-friendly 
(Royal College of Nursing, 2013) 
When considered at patient level, dementia-friendly healthcare is the practice and organisation of 
care that is aware of the impact dementia has on a persons ability to engage with services and 
manage their health. It promotes the inclusion of people living with dementia and their carer in 
treatments, care decisions, and discussions, with the aim of improving outcomes for the patient and 
carer (Department of Health, 2009; Department of Health, 2012a; Department of Health, 2015; 
Royal College of Nursing, 2013). 
Interventions to promote dementia-friendly healthcare environments have been diverse in terms of 
their design and application in practice (Dewing and Dijk, 2014; Mayrhofer et al., 2014a; Mayrhofer 
et al., 2014b).   Some were developed in response to the National Dementia Strategy (Department of 
Health, 2009), and The Prime Ministers Challenge (Department of Health, 2012a; Department of 
Health, 2015), but others predate these.  Examples of interventions include dementia awareness 
training of healthcare staff, and training in dementia appropriate care (Health Education England, 
2015), the development of resources to support staff in their assessments and care of people with 
dementia (Williams, 2011), and the modification of the environment to reduce confusion and 
increase orientation within the ward to promote independence (Waller, 2012).  Such schemes have 
drawn on a range of evidence sources including consensus methodologies and evidence on what 
supports person-centred care informed from studies in care homes.  They have been incentivised by 
policy driven imperatives, such as the Commissioning for Quality and Innovation (CQUIN) targets, to 
improve the identification of people living with dementia (Department of Health, 2012b).  
These interventions have been commissioned and implemented with the aim of improving outcomes 
for people living with dementia and their carers.  However, rigorous evaluations of the interventions 
are lacking (Dewing and Dijk, 2014).  Their success and sustainability is threatened by staff turnover, 
lack of coordination between health and social care organisations, funding restrictions, and 
inadequate management support (Dewing and Dijk, 2014).  Currently there are few studies 
evaluating interventions, but measures of effectiveness have been recorded. They have primarily 
focused on economic costs, length of admission, readmission rates, and place of discharge.  Evidence 
of effectiveness of interventions, as defined by these terms, has been limited, and, arguably, these 
measures may be inappropriate for this patient population (Goldberg et al., 2013).  Further 
encouraging results have been demonstrated in qualitative studies investigating patient, carer, and 
staff experiences of interventions (Clissett et al., 2013; Spencer et al., 2013), although opportunities 
for providing person-centred care were not always optimised and were not found to be standard 
practice across staff members (Clissett et al., 2013).   
There is a need to understand what it is about an intervention that will support awareness, 
understanding, and inclusion for people living with dementia when admitted to general hospital, 
what it is about the settings that influences staff use of best practice in dementia care, and how this 
influences outcomes for patients with dementia and their carers. Realist approaches (Pawson, 
2006b; Pawson and Tilley, 1997) recognise that the effectiveness of programmes to address the 
known problems of being a patient with dementia is contingent not only on specific training, for 
example, in being dementia aware, but also on contextually situated decision making (Rycroft-
Malone, 2008).  
Complexities in caring for patients with dementia in general hospitals  
Four key issues increase the complexity of caring for patients with dementia in general hospitals.  
These are the provision of person-centred care, behaviours that challenge staff and other patients, 
the recognition and management of pain, and managing risk in ways that recognise patient 
preferences.  These are discussed below. 
Providing person-centred care in general hospitals 
Person-centred practices for people living with dementia are recognised as best practice in the 
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines (2006) and can be considered a 
fundamental aspect of dementia-friendly healthcare provision.  Influenced by Carl Rogers work in 
developing person-centred therapy (Rogers, 1974), Kitwood (1997) developed a model for dementia 
care that promoted the importance of personhood.  He postulated that personhood is bestowed on 
a person by others.  His work has been highly influential, and further developed to incorporate the 
relational aspects that are important in dementia care to recognise the role of the caregiver, as well 
as the person with dementia (Brooker, 2007; McCormack, 2004; Nolan et al., 2004). 
Person-centred care, in terms of its use in dementia care, is broadly understood as placing the 
person with dementia at the centre of care provision, and recognising their individual needs and 
rights (Brooker, 2007).    However, understanding of person-centred care and its application in 
practice has been inconsistent (Dewing and McCormack, 2017; Moyle et al., 2013).  A lack of 
understanding of the concepts in person-centred care, or the ability to adequately articulate them, 
has led to different interpretations (Brooker, 2003).  Dementia Care Mapping (DCM) is an 
observational tool which records the processes of care and the outcome of those processes for 
people living with dementia in terms of wellbeing (Innes and Surr, 2001). It has provided a way of 
operationalising the concepts to evaluate and improve the quality of care.  Trials in care homes have 
demonstrated how the use of DCM or training in person-centred care, which they define as a holistic 
approach to care that supports the personhood of people living with dementia, has reduce agitation 
and anti-psychotic prescribing (Chenoweth et al., 2009; Fossey et al., 2006).  However, person-
centred care and the use of DCM in general hospitals has yet to be fully realised (Goldberg and 
Harwood, 2013).  The competing demands and values for care by professionals and the organisation 
they work for may conflict with person-centred practices that aim to support patient preferences 
(McCormack, 2004).  Studies have highlighted these issues, including: the high level of need and 
monitoring required to support patient safety which impacts on staffing resources and the ability to 
attend to other patients needs (Nolan, 2007); the complications of an acute illness combine with 
the persons dementia exacerbating the persons distress (Borbasi et al., 2006); care philosophies for 
acute care can conflict with those for dementia care (Clissett et al., 2013); and staff with limited 
knowledge or skills in dementia care (Turner et al., 2015). 
A number of studies in general and rehabilitation hospitals found that while staff profess to value 
person-centred approaches and considered them useful to their practice, there was limited evidence 
of the approach being used, with most care remaining task focused (Bolster and Manias, 2010; 
Goldberg et al., 2014; Innes et al., 2016).  Person-centred care has been observed to occur as 
discrete moments rather than being integral to staff practice (Clissett et al., 2013; Ekman et al., 
2011; McCormack et al., 2011).  For example, Innes et al. (2016) observed that caring interactions 
were generalised and rushed.  This was partially attributed to the challenges of caring for people 
living with dementia in a busy environment where there were competing patient needs, such as 
acute illness which was necessary to prioritise.  While staff wanted to provide good care to patients 
with dementia, their capacity to understand care from the patients perspective was limited by their 
knowledge of dementia and opportunities to reflect on care. The authors considered that kindness is 
not enough to work well with the individual and complex needs of patients with dementia. As 
McCormack et al. (2011) argue, developing and supporting a workforce to provide person-centred 
care requires sustained commitment from organisations to make person-centred care fundamental 
to professional practices, to thus ensure person-centred care is not confined to pockets of activity.  
They highlight workplace culture, a learning culture, and the physical environment as factors that 
influence person-centred care practices.   
Training in person-centred care practices with general hospital staff has demonstrated a change in 
attitudes to caring for patients with dementia (Surr et al., 2016).  However, a higher level of training 
was needed to increase staff confidence in their ability to care for patients with dementia, and 
satisfaction for working with patients with dementia (Surr et al., 2016).  Whether these outcomes 
were maintained after training, their impact on care provision, and influence on patient outcomes 
was not measured.  There is a need to understand how training in dementia care is supported within 
the work environment and encouraged as an essential part of staff work (Turner et al., 2015). 
Behaviours that challenge 
Neuropsychiatric symptoms, or behaviours that challenge, are common in people living with 
dementia (Steinberg et al., 2008), and 75% of those admitted to general hospital will exhibit 
behaviours that challenge staff during their stay (Sampson et al., 2015).  Onset of these behaviours is 
disruptive for staff and other patients, and are considered to be an expression of an unmet need 
(Stokes, 2000).  The term behaviours that challenge covers a wide range of behaviours that are 
broadly categorised as psychotic (e.g. hallucinations, delusions), affective (e.g. depression, anxiety), 
apathy (e.g. apathy, changes to appetite), and hyperactivity (e.g. agitation, irritability) (Livingston et 
al., 2017).  While some behaviours are more commonly linked to sub-types of dementia, such as 
hallucinations in dementia with Lewy bodies, they can occur across all dementias, and at all stages of 
the conditions progression (Kales et al., 2015).  Types of behaviours are not specifically linked to 
internal or external causes, but can represent a number of reasons and differ between individuals, 
which complicates identification and management of the patients unmet need (Sampson et al., 
2015).     
Previously considered a symptom of dementia and an inevitable part of the conditions progression,  
behaviours that challenge are now considered to be related to expressions of an unmet need 
(Stokes, 2000) and are exacerbated by the presence of an acute illness or condition such as pain 
(Closs et al., 2016; Fick et al., 2002).  It is now argued that when behaviours are framed as 
communication, staff can interpret the behaviour as meaningful, seek to understand the cause, and 
take action (Dupuis et al., 2012).  By not pathologising the behaviour, understanding and 
identification of the deficits within the care approach or the environment can be assessed and 
addressed.   
The recognition and treatment of pain in people living with dementia is acknowledged as difficult 
and often undetected (Ballard et al., 2011; Sampson et al., 2015).  Co-morbid conditions for people 
living with dementia are high (Bunn et al., 2014a) and pain as a symptom of these or acute 
complaints is common; for example, musculoskeletal conditions such as arthritis, and as the result of 
falls, pressure sores, and infections (Black et al., 2006).  Pain is considered a contributing factor in 
the onset of behaviours that challenge (Sampson et al., 2015), and can lead to inappropriate 
prescribing to address the behaviour rather than the pain (Ballard et al., 2011).  Where pain is not 
managed well, this can lead to complications in the treatment and recovery of acute conditions, 
including reduced functional abilities and reduced quality of life (Lichtner et al., 2015).   
For people living with dementia their ability to report pain might be compromised by their cognitive 
impairment.  As such, pain assessment tools which use observation as a method for determining 
whether or not pain is present have been developed.  A large number of tools to assess pain in 
people living with dementia are in existence (Lichtner et al., 2014).   These tools have been 
developed in specific care settings with specific populations, although their use in research and 
clinical settings can extend beyond the original context (Table 1).   
Table 1: Common pain assessment tools detailing their development by place and population 
Tool Setting originally 
developed in 
Population originally tested with 
Abbey Pain Scale  
(Abbey et al., 2004) 
Care Home Advanced dementia 
PAINAD  
(Warden et al., 2003) 
Inpatient dementia special 
care units (hospital) 
Advanced dementia 
Doloplus-2  
(Hlen et al., 2005) 
Care Home  Advanced dementia 
NOPPAIN 
(Snow et al., 2004) 
Care Home Not specified 
PACSLAC 
(Fuchs-Lacelle and 
Hadjistavropoulos, 2004) 
Care Home Advanced dementia 
(Villanueva et al., 2003) 
Care Home Advanced dementia 
(Feldt, 2000) 
Hospital Patients with dementia with hip 
fractures 
ADD Protocol 
(Kovach et al., 1999) 
Care Home  Advanced dementia 
DS-DAT 
(Hurley et al., 1992) 
Care Home Advanced dementia 
The Royal College of Nursing (2013) recommend the use of the Abbey Pain Scale (Abbey et al., 2004) 
or Dolphus-2 pain scale (Hlen et al., 2005) for assessing pain in patients with dementia, although 
neither were originally designed for use in hospitals.  A meta review of the psychometric properties 
and clinical utility of 28 pain assessment tools found insufficient evidence to recommend any one of 
the tools for use in particular care settings (Lichtner et al., 2014).  Closs et al. (2016), in their study of 
pain assessment and management in general hospitals, concluded that pain assessment tools had 
not been designed to consider the way patient care was organised on hospital wards.  As such, 
improving pain detection and treatment would require tools which better suited the 
multidisciplinary nature of the setting. 
Assessing and managing risk  
While patients with dementia are at risk of hospital-acquired complications common to other 
patients, such as pressure sores, there are specific risks which complicate their care, such as falls, 
leaving the treatment ward, and removing intravenous catheters and tubes (Cotter, 2005; Robinson 
et al., 2007; Victor et al., 2014).  Some strategies for addressing these risks can restrict patient 
movement, which has implications for maintaining a patients other abilities, such as mobility and 
continence, and can lead to further complications, such as infections and pressure sores (White et 
al., 2016).   Limited understanding of how risk management strategies impact on patient outcomes 
and competing demands on the ward could influence how risk is addressed.  Environmental 
adaptations can address some of these factors, such as the use of locked entrances to wards to 
reduce the risk of patients leaving (Zieschang et al., 2010).  Staffing resources can be used to monitor 
patients at risk, however whether this is an effective intervention is influenced by staff experience of 
working with patients with dementia, their interpretation of their role, and may be implemented 
without a thorough assessment and understanding of what the patients needs are (Dewing, 2013).   
Balancing the need to minimise harm while recognising the autonomy of the patient is difficult, and 
for staff in general hospitals caring for patients with dementia, it is complicated by concerns of the 
consequences of an incident to both the patient and the staff themselves.  The safety culture of an 
organisation can impact on how staff prioritise patient needs, which can lead to reduced attention 
on functional abilities and psychosocial needs (Dahlke et al., 2017). 
Implementing change 
As demonstrated in the above section, there are many considerations staff face when adapting care 
practices to be more dementia-friendly.  The organisation of general hospitals is often hierarchical, 
with policies which, while important to protect staff and patients, can limit staff autonomy to 
provide care in ways to meet the needs of patients with dementia.  Overcoming the organisational 
and social contexts to influence change is a complex process (Grol and Grimshaw, 2003).  A number 
of theories from different disciplines, such as adult-learning theories, social influence theories, and 
organisational theories provide the basis for how change can be addressed and will influence the 
design of interventions.  For example, in developing dementia care training interventions, the aim 
might be to provide staff with an experiential understanding of what it is like to live with dementia 
with the aim that they will recognise how they can adapt their work and apply it in practice. 
Education and training in dementia and dementia care skills has been a core focus of investment to 
improve the healthcare workforces knowledge in dementia care and address negative attitudes 
towards people living with dementia (Elvish et al., 2014; Mayrhofer et al., 2014a; Surr and Gates, 
2017).   In 2015, Health Education England published its Dementia Core Skills Education and Training 
Framework (Health Education England, 2015).  The document provided a comprehensive outline of 
the essential skills and knowledge for dementia care for staff working across health and social care 
sectors.  A three-tier structure aimed to support targeting training as appropriate to staff needs, 
defined by their anticipated contact and role in care with people living with dementia:  
 tier 1 focuses on developing awareness in dementia and dementia care and is recommended 
for all staff; 
 tier 2 addresses the basic skills for staff likely to have contact with people living with 
dementia; 
 tier 3 concentrates on enhanced knowledge for experts and staff with leadership roles. 
NHS Trusts across England have been encouraged to use the framework as a basis for staff 
development, while adapting the information to fit their local needs. 
Methods of training delivery for hospital staff vary and include class-based, experiential learning, 
online courses, workbooks, train-the-trainer models, and the use of experts to provide training on 
the ward.  A recent literature review of training methods found that training which had relevance to 
staff roles, had practical application, and included understanding the experience of the person with 
dementia and their carer were the most effective strategies for engaging staff (Surr and Gates, 
2017).  However, the review was unable to comment on how training influenced changes in practice 
as evidence for robust post-training follow-up of staff and patient outcomes was limited. 
In addition to education and training, charities, not-for-profit organisations, and NHS Trusts have 
developed tools for identifying patients with dementia and supporting the collection of biographical 
information which can inform care planning and working well with patients with dementia 
(Alzheimer's Society, 2013; The Butterfly Scheme, 2018).  While these tools have been well received 
by staff, patients, and family carers, to date there has been no evaluation of their impact on patient 
care or staff actions for care. 
Studies in the diffusion of best-practice recognise that passive processes, such as the use of 
guidelines, are limited in their ability to change practice (White, 2011).  In recognising that 
knowledge diffusion and change are social processes, general hospitals have used staff who support 
the implementation and uptake of interventions as change agents (Draper, 2009; Greenhalgh et al., 
2004; Thompson et al., 2006).   The term change agent encompasses a variety of roles which are 
sometimes theoretically interchangeable and sometimes conceptually distinct (Thompson et al., 
2006).  Terms have included change agent, opinion leader, champion, and resource nurses.  The use 
of change agents for improving dementia care in general hospitals has been promoted in strategy 
documents and reports.  For example, the National Dementia Strategy (Department of Health, 2009) 
recognised the importance of leadership for dementia care in hospitals to drive forward change and 
set the organisational agenda for quality improvements to care. To promote changes at ward level, 
the National Audit of Dementia Care in General Hospitals (Royal College of Psychiatrists, 2013) 
recommended the use of dementia champions from across the workforce skills mix.  Hospitals 
report incorporating these roles, although their impact on patient care has yet to be fully realised 
(Royal College of Psychiatrists, 2017).  In a review of change agents, McCormack et al. (2013) found 
that the characteristics of staff performing these roles were poorly described, limiting the ability to 
identify key features that would support their role.  However, they did recognise that the different 
characteristics would support different activities and different outcomes.   
As patients with dementia are admitted across many adult wards in general hospitals for a variety of 
acute needs (Alzheimer's Society, 2009; Royal College of Psychiatrists, 2017), it is important that 
staff across specialist disciplines are supported for working with patients with dementia.  Social 
identity theory recognises the influence of group membership on how people perceive themselves 
and others, and is considered a factor in influencing behaviour (Kreindler et al., 2012).  Studies of 
staff working with patients with dementia in hospitals have found professional groups define 
themselves in terms of their expertise in comparison with other groups, and maintain priorities for 
care through actions which reward or punish members compliance to group norms (Kessler et al., 
2010; Schneider et al., 2010).  A study of end-of-life care in care homes found that common goals for 
resident care, and a recognition of the expertise of each professional group involved, could improve 
collaborative working (Amador et al., 2016). 
Due to the complexity of the way that people respond in different situations to the resources 
inherent in interventions, it is unlikely that any one intervention or theory for change will work 
across settings.  Instead it is important to identify common mechanisms to understand how, and 
why, outcomes are influenced. 
Research Aims and Objectives 
The purpose of the study was to develop and test an evidence-based and context-relevant 
explanation of how interventions support staff to provide dementia-friendly healthcare in general 
hospitals.  This, in turn, would explain how outcomes for patients with dementia and their carers are 
influenced.  To address this aim, specific objectives were identified for the different phases of the 
study.  The realist review of dementia-friendly interventions was designed to build a programme 
theory of what supports staff to provide good dementia care in general hospitals.  The review 
protocol and review findings have been published (Handley et al., 2015; Handley et al., 2017) 
(Appendix 1 and Appendix 2).  The specific objectives for phase one were: 
1. To understand how and why dementia-friendly interventions in general hospital settings are 
thought to achieve the desired patient and carer outcomes 
2. To understand how and why context influenced the creation of dementia-friendly healthcare 
environments 
3. To develop evidence-based explanations to understand what it is about dementia-friendly 
interventions in general hospitals that works for people living with dementia and their 
carers, in what circumstances, and why. 
The aim of phase two was to test and refine the programme theory developed in phase one, based 
on evidence from the two case study sites.  The programme theory suggested that:  
If staff understand behaviour as communication of unmet needs, there is organisational 
endorsement of best-practice in dementia care, and clarity in staff responsibilities for 
patients with dementia (context), this will help reinforce the use of resources to provide 
good dementia care (mechanism resource).  Staff will understand why care needs to be 
adapted, and consider they have the capacity and capability to make a difference to patient 
care (mechanism reasoning), causing them to modify care provision (staff outcome) and 
leading to improved patient outcomes (patient outcome). 
Based on this programme theory, the objectives for phase two were: 
1. To understand how and why context influences the provision of dementia-friendly care 
practices  
2. To understand how resources to support good dementia care influence outcomes for 
patients with dementia and their carers 
3. To understand how the needs of patients with dementia and their carer are identified 
and addressed by staff 
4. To understand how hospital staff understand dementia-friendly healthcare and what 
they think supports them to provide good dementia care  
Chapter Summary 
The proportion of the hospital patient population with dementia, combined with the inequity of 
outcomes for this group, has made it a national imperative that improvements for dementia care in 
general hospitals are addressed.  Complicating factors involved in providing good care for patients 
with dementia include how person-centred care can be applied in general hospital settings, 
addressing behaviours that challenge through non-pharmacological interventions, improving the 
recognition and management of pain, and promoting positive risk management strategies.  
Interventions are being implemented to support staff with these, and other issues, in the care of 
patients with dementia to provide a service which can better meet their complex acute and 
psychosocial needs. The evidence-base for such interventions is limited, therefore it is important to 
understand how, why, and if at all, these resources are influencing practices in dementia care and 
improving patient and carer outcomes.    
Chapter two: Methodology and methods 
In this chapter I discuss the rationale for the study design, and the choice of methods I used for the 
realist review and realist evaluation.  I then provide an overview of realism and the key principles of 
the approach, including the concepts of context, mechanism, outcome, and programme theory.  
Following this, I describe in-depth how the concepts and methods used were applied for each phase, 
with reference to how these correspond with the principles of realist inquiry.  I debate the ethical 
issues that were addressed, and how members of Patient and Public Involvement groups supported 
the study throughout the process.  Finally, I provide a critical review of realist inquiry and discuss 
some of the decisions and dilemmas I faced using the methodology.   
Study design 
The study involved a two-phase study design, which incorporated a realist review in phase one to 
build a programme theory that was then tested in phase two using realist evaluation (Figure 1).  The 
aims and objectives were outlined in Chapter two (see Research Aims and Objectives, p30).   
Conceptual framework 
Interventions which aim to improve the care of patients with dementia in general hospitals are 
complex social programmes as they rely on staff volition for how resources of interventions are used 
which influences outcomes.  In order to understand why these interventions work, or not, it is 
important to understand how the reasoning of those using them is influenced by context.  The 
decisions staff make for care influence patient outcomes, therefore it was necessary for me to 
identify a research method that could inform this area of understanding.  Experimental design was 
not considered appropriate for this study as the approach understands the intervention as the cause 
of outcomes.   Additionally, contextual influences are, as far as possible, controlled for, and are not 
considered part of the explanation.  Realist evaluation recognises that interventions will have 
different degrees of success, which are influenced by the context and explained through 
mechanisms.   
The rationale for realist inquiry 
Pawson (2006b) describes social interventions as complex systems thrust amidst complex systems  
Figure 1: Overview of study design 
(Pawson, 2006b, p35).  Complexity is inherent in both design and implementation of interventions 
supporting dementia-friendly healthcare.  They are multicomponent and rely on human agency that 
is influenced by individual, service, and organisational pressures.  Realist inquiry acknowledges these 
features and incorporates them to develop a theory-driven account of how different aspects 
influence reasoning and outcomes. 
Evaluating interventions has often relied on research methods that allow the comparison of data 
before and after the introduction of an intervention, often also employing a control group.  
However, in most general hospitals, interventions to develop dementia-friendly healthcare are 
already in use.  While implementation is widespread, there is limited understanding of how 
interventions aimed at, for example improving staff knowledge of dementia, influences staff to 
adapt the way they provide care of patients with dementia, and whether this has an impact on 
patient outcomes.  These interventions are showing promise, however the evidence-base is largely 
qualitative or draws on service evaluations.  This would make a traditional systematic review 
problematic, as to provide a useful synthesis of evidence there needs to be sufficient high quality 
studies.  Realist review is useful when there is a paucity of evidence as, unlike systematic review 
where the intervention is the unit of analysis, in realist review the theory is the unit of analysis.  This 
allows for the inclusion of studies reporting findings from different interventions that are linked by 
theory to contribute to synthesis.   Interventions to improve dementia care in general hospitals are 
heterogeneous by the type of intervention used, such as education, environmental adaptations, and 
access to dementia experts, and how they have been locally adapted.  However, commonalities in 
the ambitions for their use, such as improved knowledge of working with patients with dementia, 
provide an understanding through theory to explore the relationship of the factors within the 
interventions and the circumstances they are being used in.  
Realism 
In developing realist evaluation, Pawson and Tilley (1997) drew on realist philosophy to counter the 
limitations of positivist-based approaches in addressing the black box problem to understand how 
and why change occurs for complex, social interventions (Astbury and Leeuw, 2010).  Realism is a 
methodological approach for research grounded in the realist philosophy of science (Bhaskar, 1978).  
As a philosophy of science, realism is broadly understood as positioned between positivism and 
relativism philosophies (Pawson, 2006b).   Ontologically, realism accepts that there is a reality that 
exists independent of our knowledge and that we understand reality through psychological and 
social processes (Pawson, 2006b; Sayer, 1984).  In applying this understanding to dementia care in 
general hospitals, the objective reality is that patients with dementia are admitted to the hospital, 
however their experience of this and related outcomes are dependent upon how staff approach 
their care, which will be influenced by many related factors.  For example: staff knowledge of 
dementia; the model of care they use for working with patients with dementia; how dementia care 
is prioritised within their working environment; and the way patients express unmet needs will all 
impact on how care is provided and influence the outcomes for the patient.  Therefore, in realist 
research evidence and analysis are not limited to observable events, but seek to understand how 
events are generated through mechanisms (Astbury and Leeuw, 2010).  As mechanisms are hidden, 
our knowledge of them can only ever be partial and therefore, a theory.  It is this internal potential 
of social interventions, the individuals using them, and their association with the circumstances they 
enter that leads to change (Pawson and Tilley, 1997).  Therefore, realist inquiry is concerned with 
understanding the causal powers and providing an explanation for them.   
Pawson and Tilley (1997) describe social interventions as theories incarnate (Pawson and Tilley, 
1997, p26).  By this, they understand that there will be a theory about what the intervention 
provides and how this is anticipated to lead to change.  This theory may or may not be explicitly 
expressed by those who have designed and implemented the intervention, and may not always 
reflect how the interventions work in reality (Marchal et al., 2012).  The theory should explain how 
the intervention or group of interventions are thought to encourage change, and then to test and 
refine the theory through empirical evidence. In terms of this study, a plausible theory, that 
articulated how the relationship between contexts and mechanisms influence outcomes for patients 
with dementia in general hospitals, was developed from the existing evidence base.  The theory was 
then tested through primary data.  In this way, my research has improved understanding for 
improving patient outcomes beyond input/output understandings of interventions, such as training, 
to understand why and how they work, or not (Astbury and Leeuw, 2010).   
Concepts in realist inquiry 
Key concepts in realist inquiry are described in Table 2 with references to their use in this study.  
Table 2: Key concepts in realist inquiry 
Context describes the pre-existing circumstances of an environment that an intervention is 
introduced to.  This can include, but is not limited to; psychological, social, organisational, 
geographical, economic, and political aspects that influence mechanisms and outcomes (Pawson 
and Tilley, 1997).  In this study, contexts included staff and patient characteristics, expectations 
for care, the ward environment, and organisational policies.    
Mechanism is key in realist inquiry to explaining why things work or not.  Mechanisms are not the 
interventions themselves, but the resource the intervention provides, (such as knowledge about 
dementia, skills for working with patients with dementia), and the reasoning of staff using the 
intervention (such as recognising the benefit of working differently).    
Outcomes can be the intended or unintended results of the context-mechanism association.  
Patient outcomes of interest for this study included; patient wellbeing, reduced distress, adverse 
incidents (such as falls or hospital acquired infection), reduction in the onset of behaviours that 
challenge, maintenance of functions (such as activities of daily living).  
Contextmechanism-outcome configuration (CMOC) is the unit of analysis in realist inquiry that 
specifies the relationship between the elements.  It supports the building, testing, and refining of 
the programme theory. CMOCs are abstracted to the middle-range to ensure they are useful for 
analysis (Wong, 2017).  Multiple CMOCs contribute to the overall programme theory.    
Demi-regularities Lawsons (1997) notion of demi-regularities describe the semi-predictable 
pattern of outcomes.  They are useful for understanding how context can affect outcomes.   
Detecting these patterns within the data was supported by the use of ifthen statements.  For 
example, if a patient has a high risk of falls, then this will influence the quantity and quality of 
interactions with staff. 
Middle range theory Pawson and Tilley (1997) promote the use of middle range theory as a way 
of making research findings generalisable across studies and settings.  Merton (1957) considered 
explanations should be produced that are sufficiently abstract to deal with different spheres of 
social behaviour and social structure so that they transcend sheer description (p67).  In this way, 
Merton was emphasising how middle range theories could support associations across broad 
phenomena to link descriptive evidence. 
Programme theory describes how the different components are related in an explanatory 
account of what works, for whom, in what circumstances (Pawson and Tilley, 1997).   
Phase one: the realist review 
Realist review is an iterative process; while there are defined stages to the study these did not 
necessarily follow a linear process.  This realist review was conducted in three overlapping, iterative 
stages:  
1. defining the scope of the review  
2. structured searches, screening, and data extraction  
3. analysis and synthesis  
Each of the stages informed and refined understanding, with sources identified and revisited 
throughout the review as new interpretations emerged to support theory building (Figure 2).   
Figure 2: Iterative stages of the realist review 
Stage one: Defining the scope of the review: concept mining and theory 
development 
This stage was used to refine the direction of the review though evidence-informed decisions that 
focused the stages that followed.  The objectives of stage one were to: 
1. identify national and international interventions and approaches to develop dementia-
friendly healthcare  
2. explore and define theoretical assumptions about how and why interventions were thought 
to work, (or not)  
3. clarify what were understood to be the significant mechanisms for change  
Two methods were employed for initial theory development; interviews with stakeholders and a 
scoping of the literature.   
Stakeholders  
Realist review guidelines (Wong et al., 2013) consider the involvement of stakeholders during the 
scoping stage of the review useful for making sense of the subject area.  Pawson (2006b) 
recommends the involvement of stakeholders throughout the review process.  For this study, 
stakeholders were interviewed once and were not further involved in the development of the 
emerging context-mechanism-outcome configurations (CMOCs) or building the programme theory.  
Testing of the programme theory was planned through an expert steering group workshop which did 
not happen.  This event did not occur due to time limitations, but the theory was shared and tested 
through two channels: 1) with the research network monitors group (see Public Involvement, p87); 
2) at a seminar for dementia-friendly healthcare (see AgeNet Seminar, p88).  At this preliminary 
stage, the stakeholders role was to help to identify, articulate, and formulate propositions.  By 
including stakeholders with different experiences of designing, implementing, using, or receiving 
interventions to improve dementia care, this helped to develop the theory from different 
perspectives that would take account of variations in contexts, responses, and outcomes.  For the 
purpose of this study, stakeholder interviews were used to develop insight for how dementia-
friendly interventions were thought to work and with what outcomes to complement evidence from 
the literature scoping (Manzano, 2016).  The interviews helped me identify gaps in the scoping of 
interventions, develop more understanding of how context influenced outcomes, and begin to 
conceptualise potentially important mechanisms.  These interviews supported the development of 
the candidate theories that would inform the review focus and process.  Ethics approval for the 
interviews was secured from the University of Hertfordshire Ethics Committee (HSK/PG/UH/00339, 
Appendix 3).   
Recruitment 
Stakeholders were defined as people with experience in designing, implementing, using, and 
receiving dementia-friendly interventions.  Stakeholders were purposively sampled from a range of 
settings and backgrounds for their ability to support theory building (Table 3 and Table 4).  It had 
been anticipated that more people living with dementia would be included in this stage of the 
review.  Agreement to introduce the study at an Alzheimers Society group for people living with 
dementia had been obtained with the aim of recruiting attendees for interview.  However, shortly 
after the group was informed funding had been cut, and due to the groups uncertain future, the 
meeting did not take place.   
Table 3: Stakeholder background and their contribution to theory building 
Background Contribution to theory building 
Academic (n=7) History and development of interventions, aims/theories of 
interventions 
Commissioners (n=2) Service motivations for implementing interventions. 
Intervention mechanisms and staff reasoning.  
Healthcare staff (n=5) Use of interventions in practice.  Context interventions are 
implemented into.  Motivations for using interventions.  
Outcomes for staff. 
Person living with dementia (n=1) Outcomes for patients with dementia and their carers 
Manzano (2016) emphasises the importance of knowing what each stakeholder will be able to 
contribute to theory development.  For example, stakeholders with experience of designing and 
implementing interventions helped provide some insight into the relationship between context and 
mechanism. These conversations led to understanding of some of the competing theories for 
developing dementia-friendly environments (Table 5).   
Interviews 
Interviews were semi-structured and took place as telephone, skype, or face-to-face interviews.  
With permission, interviews were digitally recorded and transcribed verbatim.  A topic guide was 
developed (Appendix 4), however, as each stakeholder contributed a different perspective to the 
interviews, this was broad to accommodate in-depth questioning of the different elements 
stakeholders could reasonably contribute to (Manzano, 2016).  Interviews were theory-driven in that 
they discussed emerging ideas from the literature, and whether these corresponded to the 
stakeholders experiences.  Specifically, interviews aimed to: clarify interpretations of dementia-  
Table 4: Sampling frame for stakeholders participating in the realist review 
Group Inclusion Criteria Recruitment 
process 
Number 
recruited 
Who was recruited 
Nursing Experience of 
developing, 
delivering, or using 
intervention 
Telephone, 
email, 
snowballing 
6 SK01  Academic and clinician in gerontological nursing 
SK04  Academic and clinician in gerontological nursing 
SK06  Clinical Quality Lead for nursing 
SK11  Academic and clinician in gerontological nursing 
SK14  Senior nurse with experience on specialist and general ward 
SK15  Dementia Lead for an NHS Trust 
GP Experience of 
developing, 
delivering, or using 
intervention 
Email, 
conference 
abstract 
2 SK05  GP who created a dementia-friendly practice 
SK13  Academic and GP 
Physiotherapist Experience of 
developing, 
delivering, or using 
intervention 
Email, 
telephone, 
snowballing 
3 SK09  Dementia Lead for an NHS Foundation Trust 
SK10  Clinical Quality Lead for physiotherapy 
SK12 - Physio technician and dementia champion in rehabilitation 
Social Work Experience of 
developing, 
delivering, or using 
intervention 
 2 SK07  Academic in social care 
SK08 -  Academic in social care 
Person living with 
dementia 
Experience of 
accessing 
healthcare services 
and hospital 
admission since 
diagnosis 
 1 SK03  diagnosed with vascular dementia three years prior to 
interview  
Education Experience of 
developing and 
delivering 
intervention 
Email 1 SK02  Nursing academic responsible for training healthcare 
professionals in dementia care 
Table 5: Competing theories for developing dementia-friendly environments in healthcare 
Theory Example 
Awareness of 
dementia and 
best practice 
to make it dementia-friendly, and Im talking really frontline here, you need 
education about what dementia is so you can get staff to understand that 
they might need a different approach (SK01) 
Improving the 
efficiency and the 
effectiveness of 
the services 
when you get a person with a physical health problem who has also got a 
mental health problem, like dementia, it can be a real challenge to manage 
them really well, and I suppose its that whole process of everything that we 
can do to be better at supporting and managing that group of people. (SK06) 
Valuing people 
living with 
dementia 
it should be connected to our values and beliefs about dementia, people 
with dementia, and what it means to be human, and sort of the spaces and 
places that we all need to flourish. (SK04) 
Addressing 
stigma 
its almost an assumption that that person gets categorised as having 
dementia, so theyre all going to be having the same problems and 
immediately that one-to-one supervision is put in place, so as soon as the 
person gets up, its very much sit down again, sit down, what do you want, 
without actually looking at what they need, what they want. (SK10) 
friendly healthcare; identify the range of interventions in use; explore how change in practice might 
be achieved; and understand the influence of context in staff use of resources in practice.   
Scoping the literature 
A broad scoping of the literature was performed to identify national and international initiatives 
(Box 1).  Searches were date restricted to 2000 to reflect the impact of Kitwood (1997) work on 
dementia care practices that promote the importance of person-centred care and personhood.   
Analysis 
Interview transcripts, along with papers from the scoping of the literature were uploaded into NVivo 
10 and were analysed using framework analysis (Ritchie and Spencer, 2002).   I considered 
framework analysis appropriate at this stage of the study, as the aim was to generate the initial 
theories from the competing accounts of the stakeholders and in the literature (Gale et al., 2013) 
from which the more detailed literature review would be based.  
Box 1: Stage 1 search terms and strategy  
Framework Analysis 
Framework analysis was developed by social policy researchers Ritchie and Spencer (2002) and is 
recognised as a pragmatic approach to analysis (Ward et al., 2013).  The method has been applied to 
healthcare research (Ward et al., 2013), dementia care research (Sampson et al., 2008; Smebye et 
al., 2012), and as part of theory development in realist reviews and realist evaluations (Abhyankar et 
al., 2013; Bhanbhro et al., 2016).  The method shares processes used in other qualitative analysis 
methods including data immersion, reduction, and the comparison between themes.  However, 
framework analysis is epistemologically diverse in that analysis can be shaped from the data and 
existing knowledge, unlike inductive, iterative methods such as grounded theory (Ward et al., 2013).  
As such, it aligns with the principles of realism and realist inquiry (Snape and Spencer, 2003). The 
method allows for a theme- or case-based analysis, displaying an abstracted representation of the 
evidence in charts which can be traced back to the source data. 
Framework analysis was used to analyse data from the stakeholder interviews and literature 
identified in stage one of the realist review to understand the concepts of dementia-friendly 
healthcare and to develop the three candidate theories that would structure the next stage of the 
review.  A five-step process is recommended for data analysis, which entails: 
1. familiarisation 
2. identifying a thematic framework 
3. indexing 
4. charting 
5. mapping and interpretation  
An unstructured search using PubMed, CINHAL, and Google Scholar databases to identify 
literature related to initiatives that support the development of dementia friendly 
environments in healthcare.   
Date restricted to 2000 - 2015 
Search terms: 
dementia friendly, dementia friendly AND health care, dementia appropriate AND health 
care, dementia awareness AND health care, dementia person-centred care AND health 
care, dementia champions, dementia AND liaison  
dementia AND ward, dementia education, dementia training, dementia nurse 
specialist, dementia lead* 
The five steps were applied to this study as follows: 
Familiarization 
The initial step focuses on the researcher becoming immersed in the data.  This was achieved by 
reading and re-reading the interviews and papers in an active way.  This included annotating 
documents to highlight areas of interest related to the research questions and making notes around 
themes in the data. 
Identifying a thematic framework 
Following familiarisation, an initial thematic framework was developed based on the emerging 
themes in the data and the objectives for the study (Table 6).   
Table 6: Developing a thematic framework based on the study objectives and emerging themes 
Research 
Objectives 
Emerging data themes  Initial thematic framework 
Defining 
dementia-
friendly 
healthcare 
Accessible 
Addressing mental health needs 
Awareness 
Background information (to 
dementia-friendly movement) 
Difficult to define 
Term problematic 
Responsive 
Staff can manage patients 
Valuing people living with dementia 
 Accessible 
Parity of esteem 
Awareness 
Background 
Problems with definition 
Improving management of 
patients 
Valuing people living with 
dementia 
Range of 
interventions 
Activities and therapies 
Volunteers  
Assessments 
Care plans 
Butterfly scheme 
Forget-me-not 
Care pathway 
Dementia champions 
Environmental adaptations 
Getting to know me 
This is me 
Involving carers 
Mental health teams 
Specialist nurses 
Person-centred care 
Specialist units 
Training 
 Activities, therapies, and 
volunteers 
Assessments and care 
planning 
Identification schemes 
Care pathway 
Dementia champions 
Environmental adaptations 
Biographical booklets 
Involving carers 
Specialist staff 
Person-centred care 
Specialist units 
Training 
Research 
Objectives 
Emerging data themes  Initial thematic framework 
Outcomes  Person living with dementia 
Carer 
Staff  
Organisation 
 Person living with dementia 
Carer 
Staff  
Organisation 
What supports 
change or not 
Conflicts with other priorities 
CQUIN/Financial incentives 
Deskilling 
Empathy 
Staff motivation  
Personal experience 
Top-down/Leadership 
Expertise 
Multidisciplinary working 
Flexibility versus restrictions to 
practice 
Staff turnover 
Group think 
Everybodys business 
Policies 
Reinforcement 
Role driven 
Training 
Understanding  
 Conflicting priorities 
National policy initiatives 
Motivation 
Leadership 
Experts 
Ability to be person focused 
Shared ethos 
Organisational policies and 
priorities 
Reinforcement and 
encouragement 
Role and responsibility 
Training 
These initial themes were tested using two interview transcripts and two papers (see Appendix 5).   
Indexing  
Interview transcripts and PDFs of papers were imported into NVivo 10.  A coding tree was developed 
based on the themes identified (see Table 6) where the Research objectives formed the parent 
nodes and the Initial thematic framework formed the child nodes.  Text was coded into these 
nodes and new nodes were created where themes had not previously been identified or as 
understanding developed and new themes emerged.  The coding context often included one or two 
sentences, but could comprise of a paragraph.  Where text was relevant to more than one theme, 
data were multiply coded.  A selection of coding was shared with my supervisors to debate and 
challenge interpretations.   
Charting 
Once all data had been coded, four framework matrices were created based on parent nodes of the 
coding tree.  These were Defining dementia-friendly healthcare, Range of interventions, 
Outcomes, and What supports change.  All cases (interviews and papers) were included in each 
matrix, however not all cells contained data.  For example, with the exception of references to 
person-centred care, most cells for the Defining dementia-friendly healthcare matrix were empty 
for papers as relevant data were not identified.  Cases were listed down the vertical axis and themes 
were displayed along the horizontal axis.  Charting involved abstraction and synthesis of the data 
that related to particular themes.  Data relating to each cell were read and distilled to summarise 
themes (Figure 3). 
Figure 3: Example of charting data within the framework matrices 
Mapping and interpretation 
Data were then mapped and interpreted to define the concepts, with the aim of identifying 
candidate theories (Figure 4).  To understand the complexity of factors that might support good 
practice in dementia care, a narrative account of the evidence was created  (see Stage 1: Defining 
the scope of the review: concept mining and theory development, p93).  All identified elements that 
might contribute, or not, to the uptake of an intervention and lead to change in staff practices which 
influenced patient and carer outcomes, were mapped diagrammatically to demonstrate the 
numerous organisational, service, interpersonal, and personal influences (Appendix 6).  Explanations 
and associations for the outcomes were set out using if then statements (see If then statements, 
p122).   These statements, based on the evidence, made explicit how resources or staff activities 
were thought to have influenced outcomes without a need to further categorise or define context 
and mechanisms at this stage (Pearson et al., 2015).  The focus of these statements was to 
understand: 1) staff outcomes, such as using best practice with patients with dementia; and 2) 
patient outcomes, such as reduced distress and improved wellbeing.  A conceptual framework 
(Pawson, 2006b) was developed based on discussion of the if then statements with supervisors 
which grouped the statements into three areas.  A key theme of the change agent was identified, 
along with the different conceptions of how and why a change agent might support dementia-
friendly healthcare.    Three overlapping theories of the role and influence of change agents were 
used to inform the next stage of literature searches and synthesis. 
Figure 4: Flow chart for mapping and interpreting data 
Decisions for the review from stage one 
A number of decisions were made in stage one of the review that refined the scope and inclusion 
criteria for stage two: 
 An early decision was made to not include interventions for end-of-life care with people 
living with dementia.  This care was considered to have a different focus to care that was 
aiming to maintain or return peoples health and function to their baseline.   
 Initially, interventions in both primary and secondary care were considered.  However, most 
activity was located in secondary care, and as such a decision was made to focus the review 
on dementia care in general hospitals.   
 A key context for implementing interventions was thought to be staff who supported the 
implementation and uptake of interventions, broadly understood as change agents.  Search 
terms were developed to recognise the potential importance of this. 
 Evidence largely reported the outcomes for staff from interventions, such as how training 
had improved knowledge in dementia and dementia care, and confidence for working with 
patients with dementia.  However, there appeared to be limited understanding of how 
interventions influenced patient and carer outcomes.  From this, a decision was made to 
focus the review on literature that reported patient and carer outcomes.   
Outcomes of interest were defined to include: 
 Reduced distress: Admission to hospital for people living with dementia is a frightening 
experience (Dewing and Dijk, 2014).  Distress can complicate care and treatment for acute 
conditions and influence staff decision making for managing the patient. 
 Onset of behaviours that are challenging for staff: This outcome is, in part, linked to 
distress.  It is also problematic for staff and can lead to inappropriate treatment to reduce 
the behaviour (White et al., 2016). 
 Changes in mobility: Patients with dementia are at risk of reduced functional abilities after 
admission to hospital (Alzheimer's Society, 2009).  Reduced mobility may have implications 
for discharge planning. 
 Use of medication: Patients with dementia have been found to have medication used 
inappropriately.  The focus for medication use was pain relief, as patients with dementia 
have been found to receive less pain relief than other patients (Closs et al., 2016), and anti-
psychotics use (White et al., 2016). 
 Adverse incidents: Patients with dementia are at high risk of adverse incidents during 
hospitals stays such as falls, infections, nutritional and hydration problems, and delirium 
(Alzheimer's Society, 2009).  These complicate their care, extend their length of stay, and 
may impact on place of discharge. 
 Improved wellbeing: The use of person-centred care has been recognised to improve the 
wellbeing of patients with dementia and has been measured using Dementia Care Mapping 
(Kitwood, 1997). 
 Patient and carer experience: Poor care impacts on both the patient and carers experience 
of hospital (Clissett et al., 2013). 
Stage two: retrieval and review 
Searching for relevant studies 
Search terms were revised to include elements of the theoretical assumptions from the three 
candidate theories derived during stage one. The inclusion/exclusion criteria were refined to reflect 
the decisions from stage one (see Decisions for the review from stage one, p46).  As with stage one, 
searches were date restricted to from 2000 to reflect the impact of Kitwood (1997) work on 
dementia care practices.   
Electronic database searches (Box 2), extensive lateral searching, including forward and backward 
citations, and contact with experts was used to identify relevant literature.  Emerging themes 
around the management of pain and behaviours that challenge led to additional, purposive searches 
that applied the same inclusion criteria.   Searches continued in an iterative manner until it was 
considered there was enough relevant evidence for theory development and saturation was 
achieved (Pawson et al., 2005; Wong et al., 2010).  
Study screening and data extraction 
Search results were downloaded into EndNote bibliographic software and duplicates deleted.  Titles 
and abstracts were screened according to selection criteria to identify potentially relevant papers.  
Full texts of these manuscripts were screened for relevance (the contribution the study could make 
to the theory building), and rigour (that studies were of sufficient quality to provide credible 
evidence to specific components of the proposition) (Pawson, 2006b; Wong et al., 2013).   
Considerations for the contributions and reliability of evidence continued throughout the synthesis 
as concepts developed and appraisals of the data were shared and debated with supervisors.  
A bespoke data extraction form was designed to reflect the theoretical propositions and organise 
relevant contributions and challenges to the theories (Appendix 7).  Study characteristics, such as 
discipline, design, and sample characteristics were recorded, along with implicit and explicit 
strengths and weaknesses of the studies (Wong et al., 2013).  A sample of the papers and their 
completed data extraction forms (6/28) were shared with supervisors to concur the relevance of 
data identified, agree the data extraction process, and reduce the potential for bias.  Data relating to  
Box 2: Stage two search terms and search strategy 
the change agents characteristics, the intervention resources, contextual factors (for example, 
workforce, knowledge of dementia), explicit and implicit theories for how interventions were 
anticipated to work, and patient and carer outcomes were extracted. Data were compiled into tables 
which detailed the contribution to theory development. These were discussed at length with 
supervisors, and challenges to interpretations were debated as a test of credibility.  Following these 
discussions, data were re-organised into tables by the theoretical proposition they addressed to 
support analysis (Appendix 8).   
Stage 3: analysis and synthesis 
A realist analysis of data adheres to a generative explanation of causation and looks for recurrent 
patterns of outcomes and their associated mechanisms and contexts (CMOC).  The focus of this 
study was to understand what had supported staff to take action to influence patient outcomes.  A 
Searches initially ran September 2015, search alerts scanned to February 2016 
Language restricted to English 
Date restricted 2000  2016 
Search terms: 
(dementia AND (friendly OR appropriate OR awareness OR champion OR liaison OR ward OR 
environment OR education OR training OR nurse specialist OR lead* OR person-centred care) 
AND (hospital OR acute care OR secondary care)) 
Additional search terms incorporating elements of the candidate theories from stage one: 
dementia AND (change agent OR champion OR knowledge transfer OR knowledge translation OR 
opinion leader)  
Additional search terms reflecting emerging themes in stage two.  Searches ran January 2016, 
search alerts scanned to February 2016 
(dementia AND (pain) AND (hospital OR acute care OR secondary care)) 
(dementia AND (behaviour* OR BPSD) AND (hospital OR acute care OR secondary care)) 
Databases: 
Cochrane Library (incl. CENTRAL, CDSR, DARE, HTA) (244), CINAHL (610), PubMed (4253), NHS 
Evidence (819) and Scopus (410)  
process of retroduction, where explanation for the causal process of an outcome is inferred (Sayer, 
1984), was used to identify possible mechanisms that might explain demi-regularities evident across 
the studies.  These explanations were discussed with supervisors and the Research Network 
Monitors (see Public Involvement, p87) to test their plausibility.  Discussions were grounded in the 
evidence and included debate around: the key characteristics change agents, i.e. what it was about 
change agents and what they were trying to achieve that influenced outcomes; how resources from 
interventions influenced staff reasoning; the impact of context and its relationship with implicit and 
explicit mechanisms; and possible undesired outcomes (such as potentially stigmatising practises 
and broad application of strategies to patients that might conflict with notions of person-centred 
care).  This led to the development of context-mechanism-outcome configurations (CMOCs) which 
aimed to explain what it is about an intervention that works, for whom, and in what circumstances.  
Together, these CMOCs made up the programme theory. 
Phase 2: Realist evaluation using a case study approach 
Realist evaluation is a method for understanding how and why interventions work or not (Pawson 
and Tilley, 1997).  When designing a realist evaluation, data collection methods are chosen based on 
their potential to contribute to theory testing and refinement (Pawson and Tilley, 1997).  For this 
study, a two-site case study design, using multiple methods of data collection, was considered 
appropriate as it provided the opportunity to investigate, in-depth, how two general hospitals had 
applied resources for patients with dementia differently.   Case study is an established research 
methodology (Stake, 1995; Yin, 2013a), however it can also be used, as I have, as a method for 
studying phenomena.  Using a naturalistic approach supported the evaluation of complex 
interventions within complex social settings (Baskarada, 2014).  Insights into how mechanisms were 
generated within particular contexts, with what outcomes, and for whom were developed from 
using both within and cross case comparisons (Pawson and Tilley, 1997).  
A criticism of case study design has been the generalisability of findings from one case study setting 
to another (Marchal et al., 2010; Yin, 2013b).  This is, in part, due to the way samples are selected, 
leading to questions around how representative cases are, and the level of inference that can be 
made from findings.  However, realist evaluation that employs a case study design is able to base the 
generalisability of the findings in the programme theory.  Where this is developed and tested from 
existing evidence, it can improve the external validity of the research (Marchal et al., 2012).  The 
programme theory for this realist evaluation was developed from published studies and service 
evaluations before testing at the case study sites.  This may have improved the transferability of the 
refined programme theory.  
Data collection methods 
Realist evaluation starts with a theory about how programmes work, which, through iterative testing 
based on evidence, results in a refined programme theory (Pawson and Tilley, 1997).  There have 
been guidelines for the reporting of systematic reviews, RCTs, and other research methods for some 
time to ensure researchers, commissioners, and readers have clarity in definitions of the quality and 
rigour of the research.  Reporting guidelines are now also available for realist review (Wong et al., 
2013) and realist evaluation (Wong et al., 2016).  In terms of the transparency and reliability of the 
conduct of the evaluation, the guidance states that methods for data collection should be theory 
driven, and their rationale and contribution to theory should be clearly explained (Wong et al., 2013; 
Wong et al., 2016).  Data collection methods for this study were selected for how they would 
provide evidence to uncover patterns and themes to contribute to theory testing (Table 7).  
Table 7: Contribution to theory testing by data collection method 
Data collection method Contribution and justification 
Semi-structured interviews:   
 Staff 
 Patients with dementia 
 Carers  
To understand the contexts and mechanisms that 
influence staff practice for dementia care.   
To understand patient and carer outcomes such as 
their experience of dementia care in hospitals, and 
how good outcomes were defined 
Non-participant observation  Evidence for the context of how things happen during 
patient and staff interactions and with what outcomes.  
Practice may be different to perception of practice.   
To provide evidence of the experience of patients who 
lacked the capacity to consent to interviews.   
Data collection method Contribution and justification 
Medical notes review Information on patient characteristics such as diagnosis 
of dementia, reason of admission, co-morbid 
conditions, prescribed medication, place of residence. 
Neuropsychiatric Inventory To understand the patient characteristics in terms of 
behaviour and mood.  
Different behaviours may lead to different staff 
responses and be prioritised in different ways. 
Organisational documentary review To understand how stated organisational policies 
might impact on staff practices and patient outcomes. 
Decisions for sample size in realist evaluation are based on the understanding that fragments of data 
will be used to build and test the theory (Manzano, 2016).  OReilly and Parker (2013) argue that the 
appropriate sample size should be grounded in the methodological and epistemological frameworks 
of the research.  In realist sampling it is important to consider how the data will be used to develop 
and test interpretations and explanations (Emmel, 2013).  As such, decisions for participant 
recruitment were adapted throughout the data collection process to address gaps in the evidence.  
In the original study design, the aim was to recruit up to 60 people for the study from across the 
sites (10 staff, 10 patients with dementia, 10 carers at each site).  However, it became apparent 
upon entering site 1 that it would be necessary to interview more members of staff to cover the 
range of skills and professions involved in supporting the provision of dementia care to adequately 
test the programme theory.  While recruitment of patients with dementia was achieved for medical 
notes review and the Neuropsychiatric Inventory, only two patients with dementia from each site 
participated in interviews.  Observation data was able to supplement theory testing around patient 
outcomes.  It was also difficult to recruit carers for interview, and this is recognised as a limitation of 
the study (see Strengths and limitations, p223).  
Decisions regarding how data collection informed theory testing also informed when it was 
considered enough data had been collected (Mukumbang et al., 2016).  As with the realist review, 
saturation was considered to be attained when it was thought there was enough evidence to 
robustly test the programme theory and improve the validity of the findings.   
Ethical approval 
Phase two of the study was reviewed by the East of England Essex Research Ethics Committee who 
made a favourable judgement on 11th August 2016, reference: 16/EE/0263 (Appendix 9).  Health 
Research Authority approval was received on 26th August 2016 (Appendix 10).  Research and 
development approval and access was obtained on 28th October 2016 at site 1, and on 9th January 
2017 at site 2. 
Recruitment of study sites 
Sites were purposively sampled for their financial investment into services for patients with 
dementia.  It was considered that due to the investment, they were likely to pay greater attention to 
training and care for working with patients with dementia.  By understanding the processes in these 
environments designed to use best practices with patients with dementia, the study could focus on 
testing the theoretical propositions against the evidence (Emmel, 2013).  
Three potential case study sites in the East of England were identified during phase one of the study. 
Initial discussions about the study took place with key staff at each site; Research and Development 
Manager (site 1), Dementia Lead (site 2), and Ward Manager (site 3).  These sites were contacted 
because they had implemented different approaches for supporting patients with dementia who 
had behaviours that were challenging for staff.  Site 1 had a dual-frailty ward that addressed 
patients acute and dementia needs.  The ward was purpose built, ward staff received regular input 
into patient care from the mental health team, and had a high ratio of healthcare staff to patients at 
all times of the day and night. At site 2 a team of healthcare assistants had been trained to provide 
1:1 support for patients with dementia who presented with a risk to themselves or others, or had 
behaviours that were challenging for staff.  They worked across the hospital providing support for 
patients personal care, ensuring their safety, and meeting psychosocial needs.  Site 3 had recently 
refurbished an elder care ward to improve the flooring, lighting, and signage.  While all sites 
expressed an interest in the study, further follow up with site 3 came to an end due to staff changes. 
The remaining two sites were taken forward for the study.   
Description of study sites 
Site 1 is a dual-frailty unit based in a general hospital.  The general hospital is one of three hospitals 
within this NHS Trust, situated in the East of England.  The Trust serves a population of between 
500,000 and 700,000.  While the population in general is more healthy and affluent than the England 
average, there are pockets of deprivation.  There are approximately 500 beds in the general hospital 
and the Trust employs over 4000 staff.  The general hospital is the core location for inpatient 
emergency care and for all patients who need the specialist emergency facilities, such as intensive 
care.  It also provides elective care for higher risk patients, together with a full range of outpatient 
and diagnostic services.  
The general hospital opened in the 1940s and is built on the site of a 19th century workhouse.  New 
buildings were added in the 1980s and in the last ten years there has been additional investment to 
modernise some of the facilities.  One area to benefit from this has been the Elder Care Wing, which 
houses the dual-frailty unit. 
Site 2 is a general hospital in an NHS Trust in the East of England.  The general hospital is one of four 
hospitals within the Trust and is the main hospital for emergency and inpatient care.  It provides 
general and specialist services to a population of around 600,000 people, covering both an urban 
and rural population.  As with site 1, in general the population is more healthy and affluent than the 
England average, but there are pockets of deprivation.  The general hospital has approximately 700 
beds and, across the Trust, has a workforce of around 5000 staff.  
Originally built in the 1970s, in recent years there has been substantial financial investment in new 
facilities and refurbishing some of the wards.  Not all wards that took part in the study had benefited 
from this investment. 
A description of ward layouts and the organisation of staff at both sites are included in Chapter four 
(p155-159, Appendix 18 and 19).  
Introducing the study to the sites 
Research and Development staff at each site identified a local investigator to support the study by 
acting as my point of contact to support the study by; helping to identify relevant policies and 
paperwork, and helping to identify study participants.  At site 1 this was a band 6 nurse who worked 
on the ward.  At site 2 this was the Dementia Lead for the Trust.  At site 2, the local investigator was 
the main point of contact for negotiating and coordinating my access throughout the data collection 
period.  At site 1, the local investigator had a period of leave after our initial meetings about the 
study.  During their absence, their role to support the study was facilitated by other senior staff on 
the ward. The local investigators supported introduction of the study to staff, and provided 
information about regular staff meetings of interest, such as the Dementia Strategy Group meetings, 
negotiating my access to attend these in an observer capacity.   I attended two staff handovers at 
each site in the first week of data collection and maintained a high visibility on the wards throughout 
the data collection period.  In this way I was able to introduce myself and the study to staff, patients, 
and visitors to the wards to answer any questions they had.  This helped to build familiarity for 
myself of their roles and work, and for them with me to help gain their trust.     
Staff recruitment 
Staff approached for interviews were identified during the data collection period for their ability to 
provide evidence that could be used to test the programme theory.  Manzano (2016) highlights that 
different participants will contribute different evidence to different parts of the theory being tested.  
She states that a variety of perspectives are needed to investigate informal patterns and 
unintended outcomes.  For this reason, staff working in different roles were identified and invited 
to be interviewed for their contribution to theory testing. (Table 8, Table 9, Table 10). 
Table 8: Staff interviews by role and contribution to theory testing 
Staff role Contribution to theory testing 
Housekeepers, healthcare assistants, and 
nurses 
How apply training and other resources for care 
of patients with dementia, how and why 
prioritise work with patients 
Nurses band level 6+, managers  Expectations of staff working with patients with 
dementia, how to support staff  
Dementia Leads, doctors, psychiatrists, and 
allied health professionals 
Contribution of role to patient with dementia, 
how to support ward staff (e.g. training, 
advice), theories for use of different resources 
Patient Recruitment 
Patients at both sites were subject to the same criteria for participation in the study:  
Inclusion criteria 
 Have a diagnosis of dementia 
 Do not have a formal diagnosis of dementia but have been identified by staff (or family 
members) as having dementia or cognitive impairment 
Exclusion criteria 
 Do not have dementia  
 Are not thought to have a cognitive impairment 
 Patient is receiving palliative care  
 Patient does not speak English 
 (for interviews only) Lacks capacity to consent 
Eligible patients were identified differently at the two sites.  At site 1, due to the referral criteria for 
being transferred to the ward, all patients on the ward were eligible unless they were receiving end-
of-life care.  This was because the priorities and focus for end-of-life care were different to those for 
patients anticipated to return to their previous level of function and place of residence.  At site 2, 
eligible patients were identified by the Dementia Lead who was responsible for checking patients 
had a formal diagnosis of dementia.   
Carer recruitment 
Carers were recruited separately from patients with dementia.  They were identified through their 
visits to the wards and from discussions with staff about patients visitors.  Despite efforts to make 
myself available at popular visiting times and discuss the study with visitors, only two carers were 
recruited for interview.  Small recruitment numbers for carers have been reported in other studies 
of patients with dementia in hospitals, even though researchers made themselves available (Lichtner 
et al., 2015).  Staff were not able to provide information about family members who were not 
regular visitors to the ward.  Attempts to contact family members involved conversations on the 
ward, or leaving participant information sheets by patients bedsides, or with staff.  This method was 
unsuccessful and checks on paperwork showed information had been put to one side by staff when 
tidying up bedside tables, or not collected.  Where staff had been given the information sheets to 
pass on to carers, it was unclear if this was passed on unless a reply was received.  For those carers 
who were spoken to, many were happy to talk informally during discussions of the study.  However, 
committing to formal interviews were problematic as carers were concerned for their relative during 
a time of crisis, were often looking into alternative living arrangements for their relative, and had 
practical concerns around the time they spent at the hospital.  
Table 9: Sampling framework for staff, patients with dementia, and family carers participating in interviews at site 1 
Professional 
group 
Inclusion criteria Recruitment 
process 
Number 
recruited 
Who was recruited 
Nursing Experience of working on 
the ward, role in 
developing Dementia 
Strategy and policies for 
the Trust 
Face-to-face 7 ST0101  Acting ward manager for 6 months, grade 6 on 
ward since opened, previously elder care ward 
ST0102  Grade 5, one year on ward 
ST0104  Grade 5, one year on ward 
ST0105  Grade 6, since opened, previously elder care ward 
ST0112  Grade 6, since opened, previously elder care ward 
ST0113  Grade 7, ward manager for frailty unit, previous 
unit manager 
ST0114  Dementia Lead 
Healthcare 
Assistants 
Work on ward Face-to-face 3 ST0103  Since ward opened, previously elder care ward, 
experience of caring for relative with dementia 
ST0107  Since ward opened, first healthcare assistant role 
ST0108  One year, previously in community, experience of 
caring for relative with dementia 
Medical staff Work on ward, role in 
developing Dementia 
Strategy and policies for 
the Trust 
Face-to-face, 
email 
4 ST0109  Geriatrician 
ST0110  Senior House Officer (SHO) 
ST0115  Registrar 
ST0116 - Psychiatrist 
Therapy staff Work on ward, role in 
developing Dementia 
Strategy and policies for 
the Trust 
Face-to-face 2 ST0106  Activities co-ordinator, 3 months, previously 
worked in community 
ST0111  Occupational therapist, grade 7 
Patients with 
dementia 
Cared for on the ward Face-to-face 2 PT0101  Diagnosed with dementia with Lewy Bodies and  
delirium 
PT0102 -  Diagnosed with Alzheimers Disease 
Family Carer Family carer for a patient 
with dementia cared for 
on the ward 
Face-to-face 1 CA0101  Family member was transferred to ward after 
several weeks on Care of the Elderly ward, they were 
discharged to new care home 
Table 10: Sampling framework for staff, patients with dementia, and family carers participating in interviews at site 2 
Professional 
group 
Inclusion criteria Recruitment 
process 
Number 
recruited 
Who was recruited 
Nursing Experience of working on 
the ward, role in 
developing Dementia 
Strategy and policies for 
the Trust 
Face-to-face 5 ST0201  Dementia Lead, four months in role, previous 
experience in the community 
ST0210  Grade 5, one years experience on elder care ward 
ST0218  Carers Lead 
ST0219  Grade 6, orthopaedic ward 
ST0220  Ward manager, elder care ward 
Healthcare 
assistants 
(ward) 
Work on ward Face-to-face 2 ST0202  Seven years experience on elder care ward 
ST0205  Orthopaedic ward for 12 years, brief time working 
on 1:1 team before returned to ward, dementia champion 
1:1 team  Work in 1:1 team, role in 
developing Dementia 
Strategy and policies for 
the Trust 
Face-to-face 7 ST0203  HCA, since team started, previous experience in 
community 
ST0204  Matron, one of responsibilities is 1:1 team 
ST0206  Team lead, over 10 years nursing experience, 
dementia champion 
ST0209  HCA, since team started, previously emergency 
department, dementia champion 
ST0211  HCA, six months, previously in community 
ST0212  HCA, one month, previously in community 
ST0215  HCA, one year, previously in community 
Medical staff Work on ward Face-to-face, 
email 
3 ST0213  SHO 
ST0214  Consultant in Elder Care Medicine 
ST0217 - Psychiatrist 
Therapy staff Work on ward Face-to-face 1 ST0216  Occupational therapist, dementia champion 
Housekeepers Work on ward Face-to-face  2 ST0207  Previous experience as HCA, part-time on elder 
care ward 
ST0208  Full-time on elder care ward 
Patients with 
dementia 
Cared for on ward Face-to-face 2 PT0201  Diagnosed with Alzheimers disease, admitted to 
orthopaedic ward 
PT0202  Diagnosed with Alzheimers disease, admitted to 
orthopaedic ward 
Family carer Family member of patient 
cared for on ward 
Face-to-face 1 CA0201  Family member was admitted to a Care of the 
Elderly ward, they were discharged to a care home  
Non-participant observation 
Observation has been used as a method for research in hospitals with patients with dementia (Closs 
et al., 2016; Goldberg et al., 2014; Schneider et al., 2010) and in realist evaluations in hospital 
settings (McGaughey et al., 2017; Rycroft-Malone et al., 2010).   Both structured and unstructured 
methods have been used to record activities.  Structured approaches for observation, such as 
Dementia Care Mapping (Kitwood and Bredin, 1997), have been used in studies in care homes and 
hospitals (Chenoweth et al., 2009; Goldberg et al., 2013).  However their use in another hospital-
based study found the tools to be insensitive to patient mood and not appropriate for recording the 
experience of acutely ill patients (Goldberg and Harwood, 2013). For this study, non-participant 
observation was structured in that it was organised to reflect the different routines of the ward.  A 
topic guide developed from the literature review helped to focus important aspects to record 
(Calnan et al., 2013).  Observations recorded the way space within the ward was used, movements, 
and verbal and non-verbal communications.   
Observation is useful for understanding how things happen in the real world (Mays and Pope, 1995).  
Interventions are conceptualised to work in a particular way to produce a desired outcome, but the 
way they are interpreted and put into practice will vary (Pawson and Tilley, 1997).  One of the 
advantages of using observation is to overcome potential biases of what people might report in 
interviews where there may be selective recall and be influenced by how people what to present 
themselves (Mays and Pope, 1995).  Observations in this study complemented data from interviews 
and provided insight into: 1) how interventions were used in practice; 2) how staff recognised and 
address patient needs; and 3) how context influenced staff actions or routines they may have been 
unaware, for example around risk management. 
Gold (1958) identifies four types of role for researchers undertaking observation; from complete 
participant to complete observer.  However, it is acknowledged during observation periods the 
researcher may move between the roles as appropriate to the events as they occur.  For example, 
while my research role was defined as non-participant observer, there were times when I became a 
participant in the observation, such as making drinks for patients and joining in activities sessions. 
Observation is useful for recording events, but is heavily reliant on the researcher as a method for 
data collection and several factors need to be acknowledged for their influence on the data 
produced.  When using observation, the researcher takes an active role in the research process, 
from deciding what to record, how it is recorded, and interpreting the data (Hammersley and 
Atkinson, 2007; Mays and Pope, 1995; Mulhall, 2003).  It is impossible to record everything occurring 
in an area of observation.  Therefore, the process is inevitably selective and relies on the researcher 
to document what they observe.   
While researchers may attempt to represent the events they record as an objective account, it is 
important to acknowledge the researchers perception of reality is influenced by their interpretation 
of it (Sayer, 2000).  As an outsider with no clinical background, I was aware that I would not 
necessarily understand all the choices staff made for patient care and attempted to clarify the 
purpose of actions when this occurred. 
Writing  field notes is recommended as soon as possible to the observed action to retain the quality 
and faithfulness of events, ideally during the observation period (Hammersley and Atkinson, 2007).  
However, this may not always be possible due to researcher concerns regarding their influence 
activities or the impact of overtly recording events which might lead participants to feel they are 
being scrutinised and take offence (Hammersley and Atkinson, 2007).  Researchers using 
observation as a method need to be sensitive to their influence on the setting and participants and 
adjust the way they approach data collection accordingly (Holloway and Galvin, 2016).  In the case of 
this study, where situations appeared inappropriate to overtly record, for example if when there 
were disagreements about patient care, I chose not to write notes in situ, and instead waited until I 
had left the area to make notes. 
While overt observation aims to inform all potential participants of the purpose and conduct of the 
research, there are a number of factors that might impact how informed participants are.  Firstly, 
they may have unexpectedly entered the area of observation.  Secondly, there may be 
misunderstanding of the purpose of the research or clarity in what people have consented to 
participate in (Holloway and Galvin, 2016).  In the case of this study with patients with dementia, it is 
highly likely a number of participants had limited recall around discussions of the research.  I made 
efforts to remind participants of my role and the research as appropriate and used posters to 
highlight the research to people who entered the field of observation.   
There has been limited reporting of the experience and outcomes for patients with dementia where 
interventions to improve their care have been implemented. Previous research in older care hospital 
wards with patients with dementia suggested their ability to express their experiences of care may 
be limited, and their carers may only have a partial insight into the care they have received 
(Goldberg and Harwood, 2013).  The use of observation ensured the experiences of care of patients 
with dementia who may have had limited ability to recall or verbalise their experiences were 
represented in the study.   
The process of non-participant observation for this study 
The length of time for observations were negotiated with the ward manager during initial meetings, 
and a timetable for observations was agreed.  Observation periods ranged from two to six hours.  
Previous research reported that observation periods of at least two hours ensured that researcher 
effect on behaviour was minimised (Clissett et al., 2013; Mulhall, 2003).  While data collected 
suggest staff did not alter their behaviour due to my presence, staff and patients regularly 
acknowledged me by starting conversations and offering explanations of what they were doing.  
Some valuable insights were gained during these conversations from both staff and patients that 
helped the analysis process and contributed to theory testing.  For example, one patient expressed 
their displeasure at having to participate in an activity despite spending considerable time engaged 
in it, suggesting that occupation was not always for the benefit of the patient.  
Two observation periods were arranged each week for up to six weeks at each site.  The location of 
the observation, i.e. which bay observations took place in, was decided on the day.  This was 
informed by information about how patients had been earlier in the day or overnight, from 
observations during walks round the ward, and, at site 2, whether or not patients were receiving 
additional staffing input (Table 11, Table 12). These decisions were based upon the potential for 
observations to contribute to theory testing and for identifying where observations would not be 
appropriate.  For example, at site 2 in one bay, two patients with dementia were receiving end of life 
care.  As this was part of the exclusion criteria, and out of respect for the patients and their families, 
observations took place in a different bay.  Observations were performed in bays following 
negotiation with the ward manager, staff working in the bay, and with patients in the bay.  I did not 
directly observe personal care, toileting, or consultations performed behind curtains, although 
information heard from behind curtains, such as the detail of conversations, were recorded when 
considered relevant to the study (Goldberg et al., 2014).   
Observations were hand written at the time of observation.  Sketches of the bay and positions of 
staff and patients were used to help inform how the space was being used and positions of staff in 
their interactions with patients.  In the literature, researchers employing observation methods 
discuss taking regular breaks to develop notes, and inform notes where there are concerns for 
recording information that might be seen by participants and cause concern or upset (Hammersley 
and Atkinson, 2007).  Breaks were taken to write up where such issues were a concern, and a private 
area away from the ward was found to do this.  Transcription was performed at the earliest 
opportunity following observations: from within a couple of hours to up to three days later.   
While attempts were made to record broadly the activities in the bays, I acknowledge that the 
information recorded was limited by one observer making notes and that there was a potential for 
bias in the recordings (Hammersley and Atkinson, 2007).  Hospital wards can be busy places and 
decisions needed to be made around what to record.  This study was interested in what supported 
dementia-friendly care and as such focused recordings on interactions between staff and patients.  
This may have privileged interactions between more physically disruptive and demanding patients at 
the expense of less challenging patients.  However, as Pawson and Tilley (1997) acknowledge, 
knowledge can only ever be partial and evidence from studies are contributions to the wider 
understanding of circumstances rather than a complete picture. 
It did not appear that my presence on the ward made staff feel uncomfortable or conscious of 
having to adapt their work accordingly. Many staff working outside of the wards were observed 
visiting and spending time with patients, and staff appeared used to people visiting. At both sites, 
open visiting had been running for a length of time and staff had become accustomed to their work 
being more visible and transparent to visitors on the wards.  Additionally, observation is a method  
that is commonly used in hospital wards to assess patients, for teaching practices, and for audits, so 
it is likely that it would not be an unusual practice within the ward. 
The literature discusses the importance of the relationship between the researcher and participants 
(Hammersley and Atkinson, 2007).  Developing a rapport with staff and patients to gain their trust in 
me and the research was important.  As someone without a clinical background, I was only able to 
be involved in activities that a visitor might attend to. This allowed me some freedom to retain a 
distance from participating in some areas of the ward activity.  Staff, volunteers, and patients 
performing activities would at times involve me in the activities.  I engaged in discussions with 
patients and sometimes was asked for drinks, which, after checking there were no dietary issues 
such as the use of sweeteners, I would get for them.   
Table 11: Sampling frame for observations at site 1 
Observation 
Time of day Number of 
hours 
Number of 
patients on bay 
Description of main staff during 
observation 
Main activities taking place 
OB0101 07.00  11.00 
4 Female bay = 8 
Male bay = 8 
(07.00  10.00) Two registered 
nurses (RN), two healthcare 
assistances (HCA), volunteer, doctor, 
psychiatrist, physiotherapist 
(10.00  11.00) Two RNs, two HCAs 
Handover, food and drinks, medications, 
personal care, clinical observations, 
doctors ward round.   
HCA supports with one patient with a 
puzzle, personal care. 
OB0102 10.30  13.30 3 Male bay = 8 
Female bay = 8 
 (10.30  12.00).  Two RNs, two HCAs 
(one is bank who regularly helps on 
the ward), two doctors 
(12.00  13.30) Two RNs, two HCAs, 
and activities co-ordinator.   
Doctors ward round, drinks for patients, 
film on the TV, clinical observations, 
personal care. 
Lunch with a singer from a charity. 
OB0103 07.00  13.30 6.5 Male bay = 8 Two RNs, two HCAs, occupational 
therapist, two phlebotomists, 
activities co-ordinator, two doctors, 
psychiatrist, ward manager. 
Breakfast, medications, blood samples, 
clinical observations, personal care, 
doctors ward round, food and drinks, 
puzzle, painting. 
OB0104 14.00  19.00 5 Female bay = 8 Two RNs, two HCAs, ward sister. Clinical observations, food and drinks, 
medications, TV, personal care, visitors. 
OB0105 16.00  22.00 6 Female bay = 8 Two RNs (one is bank), two HCAs, 
doctor, psychiatrist, pharmacist. 
Following handover; two RNs, two 
HCAs (one is bank who regularly 
works on ward) 
Food and drinks, personal care, clinical 
observations, PRN for agitation, visitors, 
handover, TV. 
OB0106 18.00  21.00 3 Male bay = 8 Two RNs (one bank), student nurse 
(SN), two HCAs, two security staff 
Following handover; two RNs, two 
Visitors, food and drinks, personal care, 
medication, handover. 
Observation 
Time of day Number of 
hours 
Number of 
patients on bay 
Description of main staff during 
observation 
Main activities taking place 
OB0107 07.00  11.30 4.5 Male = 8 Two RNs, SN, two HCAs, doctor, 
ward manager, phlebotomist, 
activities co-ordinator, social worker  
Handover, doctors ward round, 
medication, personal care, clinical 
observation, TV, newspaper activity, blood 
samples, fall. 
OB0108 07.00  12.00 5 Male = 8 Two RNs, three HCAs (one new, one 
bank), ward manager, two doctors, 
phlebotomists, member of mental 
health team  
Handover, personal care, medication, 
clinical observations, doctors ward round, 
fall. 
OB0109 08.00  10.00 
11.00  13.00 
4 Female = 8 Two RNs, two HCAs, two doctors, 
psychiatrist, pastoral care,  
Medication, personal care, food and 
drinks, colouring and picture activities. 
Table 12: Sampling frame for observations at site 2 
Observation 
Time of day Number of 
hours 
Number of 
patients on bay 
Description of main staff during 
observation 
Main activities taking place 
OB0201 10.00  13.30 3.5 Male = 4 (1 with 
diagnosis of 
dementia) 
HCA, phlebotomist, wound care 
specialist nurse, RN, two doctors, 
two physiotherapists, housekeeper  
Food and drink, personal care, blood 
sample, clinical observations, doctors 
ward round 
OB0202 10.00  11.00 
11.30 -13.30  
3 Female = 4 (2 
with diagnosis of 
dementia) 
HCA, 1:1, RN, phlebotomist, 
housekeeper 
Medications, clinical observations, food 
and drinks, visitor, personal care, blood 
sample, 
OB0203 07.30  09.30 
10.30 -12.00  
3.5 Female = 4 (2 
with diagnosis of 
dementia) 
HCA, 1:1, RN, housekeeper, doctor, 
Handover, medications, clinical 
observations, food and drinks, visitor, 
personal care, doctors ward round 
OB0204 12.00  15.00 3 Female = 3 (3 
with diagnosis of 
dementia) 
HCA, housekeeper, RN, volunteer, 
phlebotomist, 1:1 
Food and drinks, medication, clinical 
observations, visitor, blood sample, 
personal care 
OB0205 10.30  14.00 3.5 Female = 4 (3 
with diagnosis of 
dementia) 
HCA, housekeeper, RN (bank staff), 
pastoral care 
Personal care, food and drink, 
wordsearch, medication, clinical 
observations 
Observation 
Time of day Number of 
hours 
Number of 
patients on bay 
Description of main staff during 
observation 
Main activities taking place 
OB0206 13.30  17.00 3.5 Female = 3 (3 
with diagnosis of 
dementia) 
HCA, doctor, SN, housekeeper, RN, 
member of discharge team 
Food and drink, personal care, 
conversations at length, medication, 
clinical observations,  
OB0207 09.30  12.00 2.5 Female = 4 (2 
with diagnosis of 
dementia)  
HCA, 1:1, RN, two doctors, 
pharmacist, housekeeper 
Medication, food and drink, personal care, 
clinical observation, doctors ward round 
OB0208 17.30  22.00 4.5 Female = 4 (1 
diagnosis of 
dementia) 
HCA, 1:1, RN, SN, housekeeper, 
doctor 
Following handover Two HCAs (one 
agency), RN 
Food and drink, clinical observations, 
personal care, medication, handover, 
visitors 
OB0209 11.30  13.30 2 Female = 4 (1 
diagnosis of 
dementia) 
HCA, RN, volunteer (mostly no staff 
during observation) 
Food and drink, clinical observations, 
personal care, medication 
OB0210 19.00  21.00 2 Female = 4 (1 
diagnosis of 
dementia) 
Two HCAs, RN Handover, personal care, medication, 
clinical observations 
OB0211 09.30  12.30 3 Female = 4 (2 
diagnosis of 
dementia) 
Two HCAs (one agency), 
housekeeper, doctor, RN, two 
phlebotomists, social worker 
Personal care, food and drink, doctors 
ward round, medication, clinical 
observations, blood sample, visitor 
OB0212 14.00  16.00 2 Female = 4 (1 
diagnosis of 
dementia) 
1:1, RN, physiotherapist, pet 
therapy, housekeeper 
Book activity, visitors, clinical 
observations, physiotherapy, pet therapy, 
food and drink 
OB0213 09.30  12.30 3 Male = 6 (3 
diagnosis of 
dementia) 
Activity room 
from (2 patients 
with dementia) 
Female = 4 (1 
diagnosis of 
dementia)  
(09.30  11.00) Two 1:1s, HCA, RN, 
doctor 
(11.00  12.00) Dementia Lead, 
Matron, 1:1 Team lead 
(12.00  12.30) HCA 
Personal care, medication, prep for 
theatre 
Reminiscence activity, make-up, 
colouring, drinks 
Food and drink 
Researcher role 
Development of the study protocol included discussions about the nature of my role in the case 
study sites.  It defined my role as equivalent to that of an unqualified visitor to the ward, such as a 
family member.  As such, judgements on what to be involved in were made on a case-by-case basis 
that considered balancing the needs of the research with moral concerns for patients and staff, and 
in relation to my abilities to address a situation.  I do not have a clinical background, and as such am 
not bound by a clinical code of ethics to intervene in patient situations, only researcher ethics.  I 
have no training in health care and have spent little time in general hospitals.   As such, I have no 
biases around ward routines, concerns for risk, or prioritising physical over psychological needs.  A 
member of the research network monitor group commented they saw this as an advantage to be 
free of the inevitable conditioning from training as a healthcare professional (Comments during 
Research Network Monitors meeting, 4th July 2017).   
While I wanted staff to recognise I was on the ward to carry out research, I also did not want to 
appear threatening.  In my first visit to the ward at site 1, I dressed professionally in a trouser suit. 
However, due to the informal nature of the ward and the dress code I observed in other 
professionals not wearing uniforms, this felt too formal and I considered it might be a barrier to 
developing relationships with staff and patients.  In my next visit to the ward I exchanged the jacket 
for a cardigan, maintaining a professional but more approachable look.  At all times I wore my 
lanyard to help staff and patients quickly recognise my official capacity on the wards.  As all staff 
wear lanyards, at first glance it was difficult to distinguish that I was not a member of staff, and I was 
sometimes mistaken as a member of staff.  Each time I explained my role on the ward.  However, 
these encounters did make me consider if more obvious clothing was necessary.  Other researchers  
have described the difficulties in choice for what to wear to balance blending in but not being covert 
(Allen, 2004; Dewing, May 2013).  In the case of Dewing (May 2013), her focus was to support 
people living with dementia to recall her, resulting in use of a bright orange top.  I did not consider 
this would be useful in the setting as drawing attention to myself during observations might be 
distressing for patients or encourage more attention from them, therefore disrupting data 
collection.  Instead I wore black or grey trousers, and a green or black shirt with black cardigan.   
Allen (2004) also speaks of the uncomfortable feeling that researchers have when observing 
overstretched staff and the conflicting desire to support them.  Often I struggled with my role as 
researcher where staff were busy and attending to the competing needs of patients.  At times I 
needed to resist the urge to sit with distressed patients and talk with them, as this would have 
reduced opportunities to collect data for how staff worked with these patients and made choices for 
prioritising needs.  This was particularly difficult during one observation period where a patient 
frequently calling out in distress did not receive attention from staff.  At other times, there was no 
choice but to be involved.  A late evening observation period resulted in me sitting and talking with a 
patient with dementia at high risk of falls, as staffing shortages meant no one else could support 
them.   When I left the observation I felt frustrated for the staff that they regularly had to cope with 
such situations, and sadness for the patients that they were put at risk due to minimal staffing. This 
experience reinforced the difficult decisions staff had to make, their responsibilities for patient care, 
and made it clear that there are times when patient needs cannot be met.  This also reinforced my 
feeling that overnight observations were not appropriate for someone without a background in 
healthcare.  While there was an opportunity to highlight the deficiencies in the service, my presence 
may have been more of a hindrance.  Originally, the design of the study had included observations 
overnight.  However, on entering the field it quickly became apparent this would not be practical or 
welcomed by night staff.  Additionally, as situations could not be predicted in advance, it would be 
unclear if I would have anything to record that would contribute to theory testing, if I would disturb 
sleeping patients, or if my presence might influence the development of an aggressive and violent 
situation.   
There is some suggestion in literature pertaining to the insider/outsider role that staff are more 
willing to disclose areas of concern or sensitive material to outsiders (Allen, 2004; Hammersley and 
Atkinson, 2007).  Whether or not I would have elicited the same comments from staff as an insider 
are difficult to ascertain.  However, many staff appeared to provide candid accounts of their 
experiences, and some would seek me out during visits to discuss further their experiences and 
annoyances. 
Interviews 
Interviews are a popular method for data collection in qualitative studies and are useful for 
investigating phenomena that cannot directly be observe (Patton, 2002).  The purpose of Interviews 
in qualitative research is varies in relation to the research questions being investigated.  They can be 
used to improve understanding by exploring peoples perspectives (Patton, 2002) and, specifically in 
realist research, to develop and test theoretical propositions (Manzano, 2016). 
Traditionally, interviews fall into three categories; structured, semi-structured, and unstructured 
(Patton, 2002).  The choice of category will be driven by epistemological stance of the research 
(Fielding and Thomas, 2015).  Each category has advantages and disadvantages associated with bias, 
flexibility, and the organisation of data.  For example, structured interviews, while reducing the 
potential for interviewer effect, restricts the opportunity for interviewees to expand on explanations 
for their answers.   
Interviews, while useful for accessing participant feelings, emotions, or testing theories, are subject 
to potential bias accounts, for example that what someone says they do may differ from what they 
actually do (Holloway and Galvin, 2016). For some researchers, interviews are considered 
complementary to other forms of data collection and the robustness of the data collected from 
interviews can be enhanced with additional methods, such as observation, which can support 
triangulation during analysis (Hammersley and Atkinson, 2007; Pawson and Tilley, 1997).  Interviews 
aimed to gather data that could inform the context of staff roles, the ward setting, and to explore 
potential mechanisms that would influence staff and patient outcomes.  
When conducting interviews, the qualitative interviewer will often be knowledgeable about the 
topic area, but to restrict contaminating the data are generally advised to adopt a nave position 
(Kvale and Brinkmann, 2009) and neutral stance (Fielding and Thomas, 2015).  In opposition to this, 
Pawson (2002) suggests that as realist interviewers are testing a theory, the theory should be made 
explicit to the interviewee for them to confirm or refute the ideas based on their experience.  This 
has the advantage of being open about the purpose of the interview and allowing an equal exchange 
of ideas based on a teacher-learner cycle (Pawson, 1996).  However, the effectiveness of the cycle 
will be dependent upon the interviewees knowledge and understanding of the theory being tested, 
and their confidence in challenging ideas that do not reflect their own experiences (Davey et al., 
2014). 
Setting  
The original intention had been to arrange interviews in advance, and to identify a mutually 
beneficial time and place that would support privacy and confidentiality.  In reality, the majority of 
interviews with healthcare assistants and nurses took place on the wards in the bay they were 
working during quieter periods in the day.  This had an impact on the length of the interviews as 
often they were paused or stopped for staff to attend to patient and other ward needs.  For 
example, one interview with a healthcare assistant was interrupted three times: once for training in 
the use of support stockings, once to answer questions from another member of staff related to a 
patient, and once to attend to a patient at high risk of falls.  Gerrish and Lacey (2013) acknowledge 
that at times there is a trade-off between the ideal environment for conducting an interview and 
maximising the inclusion of certain groups.  In this case, to involve patients, nurses, and healthcare 
assistants it was often necessary to perform interviews in the bays.  While it is acknowledged this 
was less than ideal, participants did not appear to be concerned for hiding their feelings.  For 
example, patients described care they had found difficult or upsetting, and some staff discussed 
dissatisfaction with procedures and roles.    
Interviews on the ward might have inhibited some discussions with staff that could be sensitive 
about their work with colleagues, although most interviews were fairly candid.  While this was not 
ideal, interviews on the wards were appropriate for these members of staff; healthcare assistants 
and nurses worked long shifts, often 12 hours, with two thirty minute breaks.  The additional burden 
of an interview outside of working hours or during breaks would have reduced the recruitment of 
these staff members to the study.  To counter this, more interviews with healthcare assistants and 
nurses were conducted to ensure adequate data for theory testing.  Additionally, these staff often 
worked in areas of the ward where observations were being performed, allowing for opportunities 
to have conversations around theory areas being tested.   
Interviews with consultants, psychiatrists, allied health professionals, and dementia leads were 
planned and took place in their office spaces, allowing for privacy and uninterrupted time.  These 
interviews typically took longer and were more able to explore the theories developed in phase one. 
With participants consent, interviews were audio recorded and transcribed verbatim.  Two 
interviewees declined to the recording but agreed to detailed notes being taken and transcribed. 
The realist interview 
The purpose of the interview was to test elements of the programme theory (Manzano, 2016; 
Pawson, 1996).  As such, interviews took a particular focus depending upon the participant and their 
ability to contribute to areas of the theory. Pawson (1996) describes the role of the interviewer in 
the realist interview as that of teacher-learner. In this he suggests that the role of the interviewer is 
to lay out the theory to the participant and then ask them to comment or provide detail related to 
this.   
Staff were first asked to explain their role at the hospital and experience of working with patients 
with dementia to establish their personal and professional context, before discussing their use and 
experience of different resources for supporting patients with dementia, and asking them for their 
perspective of elements of the programme theory. A guide for interviews was used but adapted to 
recognise each participants insight that would contribute to theory testing and to acknowledge 
emerging themes during data collection.  Interviews broadly covered areas in Table 13. 
Table 13: Example interview questions and contribution to theory testing 
Question Function / Contribution to theory testing 
Role, length of service, experience of working 
with patients with dementia 
Staff characteristics (context) 
What resources do you use (with examples) and 
what are the benefits to your work with 
patients with dementia? 
Exploratory: Staff use of resources, such as This 
is me, and how they use them in practice 
(potential outcomes) 
What do you think it is about x resource that 
supports good care, can you give me an 
example? 
Exploratory: Understanding what is important 
to staff about a resource that supports their 
care (potential mechanism) 
If x resource was not available, what do you 
think would be the impact to patients/staff? 
Exploratory: looking for negative examples, 
(potential mechanism) 
What are the characteristics of patients who 
receive this intervention? 
Theory testing: Patient characteristics 
(context), and organisational priorities 
(context) 
When there are competing demands, how do 
you make decisions for priorities for patient 
care? 
Theory testing: Understanding how staff 
interpret their role and patient priorities 
(mechanism) 
Testing theory around behaviour: The review 
suggested that if staff understand behaviour 
that challenges as an unmet need they would 
be more likely to address the need. 
Theory testing: do staff recognise the concept, 
why do they think it is important or what do 
they think is important about it, or not 
(mechanisms/CMOC) 
Testing theory around training:  The review 
suggested that developing empathy for patients 
with dementia was an important part of 
training to motivate staff to adapt their care. 
Theory testing: do staff recognise the concept, 
why do they think it is important or what do 
they think is important about it, or not 
(mechanisms/CMOC) 
Question Function / Contribution to theory testing 
Testing emerging theory: Some of my research 
suggests that staff have a concern that working 
with patients with dementia can might lead 
them to be deskilled in other areas, do you have 
any thoughts about that? 
Testing emerging theory: staff understanding 
or recognition of the theory to 1) confirm or 
refute theory, 2) suggestions for emergence 
and building of theory (mechanism/CMOC) 
Anything to add Opportunity to give information consider 
important but not covered in the interview 
The teacher-learner cycle of the realist interview involves the interviewer explaining the parts of the 
programme theory being tested to participants and asking them to consider if this matched their 
experience (Manzano, 2016).  Not all staff appeared to have the confidence to engage with this 
method and some appeared to agree without critique of the ideas suggested.  Where I considered 
this to be the case I asked staff what they thought would be the impact of not having the 
intervention.  Staff were able to engage well with this question and provided rich answers.  Other 
staff engaged well with the teacher-learner principles of the realist interview and were able to 
dispute claims and put forward examples of why they considered theories to be wrong or 
incomplete.  This was particularly useful around the emerging CMOC for valuing dementia care and 
preoccupations with losing skills. 
Patient interviews   
Four patients consented to be interviewed, two at each site.  Dewing (2002) describes the 
importance of the setting of the interview being contextually relevant for people living with 
dementia to be able to use environmental cues to support the interview.  As such, I decided 
interviews with patients in the ward during their admission was appropriate rather than after 
discharge.   However, this meant there were additional considerations.  It was difficult to identify 
private areas for interviews: site 1 had a treatment room on the ward but this was often in use; at 
site 2 both patients interviewed needed support to be moved to a private area, for one patient they 
agreed to be interviewed at their bedside.  The other patient was able to make use of the staff room.  
However, arranging their transfer to the staff room took 45 minutes from the initial agreement to 
participate as staff were involved in supporting other patients needs.  While there were concerns 
for privacy and confidentiality, three of the four patient interviews were conducted at the patients 
bedside following agreement of the patients.  This may have inhibited some conversations as all 
three had a level of criticism for the care they had received.   
For all patients who participated, there was no need to use additional materials, such as pictures, to 
support their interviews.  The interview explored outcomes related to their care as an inpatient.  The 
interview provided patients with the opportunities to explain what was important to them in terms 
of hospital care. 
Carers interviews 
Carers were identified from their visits to see the patient.  Recruitment of carers was difficult.  Only 
two carers out of a possible 21 were recruited to the study, one from each site.  For those who did 
participate, one agreed to be interviewed at their home following the discharge of their relative, and 
one agreed to be interviewed on the ward during their visit while their relative was resting.  These 
carers spoke positively of both theirs, and the patients experience of care. 
Documentary review  
Documentary review is a useful data collection method for providing organisational context at the 
time of the research and for triangulating evidence from other sources (Yin, 2013a).  Documents can 
provide information that it would not be possible to access through interviews or observations 
(Hammersley and Atkinson, 2007).  Pawson and Tilley (1997) highlight that the initial programme 
theories for interventions may be evident in policy and strategy documents. 
Documentary review can include primary and secondary data sources (Hammersley and Atkinson, 
2007).  For the purposes of this study, documents included for the documentary review (Table 14) 
are considered secondary data sources, in that the material they contained were not developed for 
the purposes of the research (Appleton and Cowley, 1997). 
While using documents as a data source can have the advantage of being readily available and 
relatively easy to collect, there are disadvantages related to biases in the information they contain 
(Appleton and Cowley, 1997).  When using documents as a data source, Scott (1990) suggests four 
domains for determining their quality; authenticity, credibility, representativeness, and meaning.  
These domains address the intentions of the writer and the document, and support the researcher 
to interpret the data within the context the document has been written (Holloway and Galvin, 2016).    
Table 14: Documents reviewed and their contribution to theory testing 
Document type Description  Contribution to theory testing 
Annual report and 
accounts 
Trusts annual reports Data for Trust context. 
Information relating to initiatives 
for patients with dementia 
Dementia Strategy How improvements to care of 
patients with dementia will be 
achieved 
Trusts approved plan for patients 
with dementia 
Care planning documents Documents specifically used for 
the care planning of patients with 
dementia 
Focus of care planning 
information.  How good care for 
dementia was defined 
Referral forms Referral forms for the ward (site 
1) and the 1:1 team (site 2) 
Patient characteristics that were 
service priorities.   
In analysing documents, data are coded and categorised as data from interviews (Holloway and 
Galvin, 2016).  The research method will inform decisions for analysis.  In realist inquiry, it is 
recognised that nuggets of evidence contribute to analysis (Pawson, 2006a).  Unlike grounded 
theory, where all data within the document would be coded, a realist analysis would only code 
evidence which contributes to the testing and refining of the programme theory.  For example, in 
this study evidence gathered from the NHS Trusts Annual Reports, only data relating to the provision 
of care for patients with dementia was entered into NVivo, coded, and analysed. 
Medical notes review 
Patient medical notes are a form of documentary analysis that can be accessed with consent from 
the patient or a representative of the patient (Scott, 1990).  For this study the representative was 
referred to as a consultee (see Patient Recruitment, p55).   
While a useful source of information about the patients historical and current medical status, the 
use of data collected in this way as a single method is cautioned.  Prior (2003) highlights medical 
records are highly selective in what information is recorded, with many omissions in regard to a 
patients care, for example in recording exchanges between staff and patients.  Whether medical 
records can be considered a good representation of events during a persons admission to hospital 
needs to be considered, as does their importance for organising medical and nursing work (Berg, 
1996).  As such, it is important to combine data collected from patient records with additional data 
sources that relate to other aspects of organisational life (Prior, 2008).   
A number of studies have suggested that the use of medical notes goes beyond recording activities 
in patient care to be a mechanism for the provision of particular patient activities.  For example, in 
Zerubavels (1979) study of time and its influence on hospital activities, he demonstrated how 
medical notes were key to the organisation of routines, patient priorities, particularly for prompting 
staff to regularly monitor patients.  Berg (1996) found medical records were important for defining 
staff actions for patient care, for example what medication should be administered and when.  In 
this study, I used medical records to describe the characteristics of the recruited patients, to 
understand what staff recorded and if the persons dementia was acknowledged, and how that 
might inform their actions for patient care.   
Data collected from medical notes gave an indication of the level of impairment, disability, acute 
needs, and behaviour that challenges for those recruited for medical notes review at the case study 
sites.  A data collection form (Appendix 11) was used to extract minimum anonymised data from 
medical notes.  Information recorded the reason for admission, dementia diagnosis, health (co-
morbid conditions), medication use, care plans and discharge destination.  Some areas of the form 
were difficult to complete, such as evidence of person-centred care, as there was limited recording 
and reference to this in the medical and nursing notes, and often only referred to known incidents, 
such as when patients became upset at male carers providing personal care.  At both sites there 
were multiple places for recording care.  At site 1, there were medical and nursing notes.  At site 2, 
there were medical notes, nursing notes, separate nursing notes, and notes kept by the 1:1 team. 
Notes from the 1:1 team were not reviewed as they were not readily accessible and were kept 
within the team. 
The Neuropsychiatric Inventory 
Many tools have been developed to assess the neuropsychiatric symptoms associated with 
dementia (van der Linde et al., 2014b).  Some cover the broad range of behaviours, such as BEHAVE-
AD tool (Sclan et al., 1996) and Neurobehavioral Rating Scale (NBRS) (Sultzer et al., 1992), while 
others focus on one domain, such as the Cohen-Mansfield Agitation Inventory (CMAI) (Cohen
Mansfield, 1986) for agitation.  The behaviour and mood of patients is an important factor that 
influences decisions for care and staff actions, as such it was important to capture this information.  
A review of instruments used to measure neuropsychiatric symptoms found the Neuropsychiatric 
Inventory (NPI) to be the most widely used tool (van der Linde et al., 2013).  The NPI has been used 
in clinical trials to determine responses to treatments (Ballard et al., 2018; Geda et al., 2013; 
Goldberg et al., 2013) and in research to provide a description of the behaviour and mood 
characteristics of people living with dementia (Glover et al., 2014; Travers et al., 2013). 
Cummings et al. (1994) developed the NPI to assess behaviours and mood in people living with 
dementia.  Originally assessing 10 behavioural domains (delusions, hallucinations, dysphoria, 
anxiety, agitation/aggression, euphoria, disinhibition, irritability/lability, apathy, and aberrant motor 
activity), an additional two domains were added (night-time behaviour disturbances, and appetite 
and eating abnormalities) in recognition of common behavioural changes in people living with 
dementia (Cummings, 1997).  The NPI can be administered quickly through an interview with an 
informant, often the family carer or healthcare professional involved in the persons care. This 
confirms the presence of behaviours, their frequency, and severity.  The use of an informant to 
report neuropsychiatric symptoms in the person living with dementia is common for most tools in 
recognition that self-report of these symptoms may be difficult or inaccurate (van der Linde et al., 
2014a). However, a reliance on proxy reports of symptoms was considered to be a limitation of the 
tool (Geda et al., 2013).  In response, the Neuropsychiatric Inventory-Clinician rating scale (NPI-C) 
(de Medeiros et al., 2010) was developed, allowing the clinician to use their clinical judgement to 
assess information from both the patient and the informant to score the occurrence and severity of 
symptoms.  Additional versions of the NPI have been developed in recognition of the different 
settings and uses, for example the Neuropsychiatric Inventory-Nursing Home Version (NPI-NH) 
(Wood et al., 2000) for use in long-term care facilities, and the Neuropsychiatric Inventory 
Questionnaire (NPI-Q), a briefer version of the NPI for use in clinical practice and research.  For this 
study I used the NPI-Q. 
Analysis 
Data from the Neuropsychiatric Inventory and medical notes were entered into SPSS to provide 
descriptive characteristics of the patient population at both sites. 
Thematic Analysis 
Thematic analysis is a widely used method for identifying and analysing patterns in qualitative data 
(Clarke and Braun, 2013).  It is not tied to a specific epistemology and is, therefore, theoretically 
flexible.  Both theory-driven and data-driven methods for data analysis adhere to the principles of 
thematic analysis (Clarke and Braun, 2013).  The method for analysis has been used in qualitative 
studies of people living with dementia admitted to hospital (Brooke and Semlyen, 2017; Lichtner et 
al., 2015) and in realist evaluations (McConnell et al., 2015; Williams et al., 2013).  In realist 
evaluation, analysis is consciously theory-driven and draws on deductive, inductive, and retroductive 
strategies.  A realist thematic analysis acknowledges the role of existing literature to support the 
identification of contexts, mechanisms, and outcomes that feed into the explanatory account.  
Boyatzis (1998) highlights one reasons for using theory-driven thematic coding is to extend or refute 
previous work by the researcher.  For phase two of the study, I was testing the programme theory 
from the realist review (Handley et al., 2017).   
The unit of analysis in realist inquiry is the CMOC (Dalkin et al., 2015), however there is no standard 
approach to how this is operationalised in thematic analysis.  Some researchers separately identified 
contexts, mechanisms, and outcomes before linking these components together (Par, 2016, July 
14).  Other researchers have identified dyads or triads of data (combinations of the context, 
mechanism, and/or outcome elements) as a basis for coding data (Jackson and Kolla, 2012).  While 
not endorsing a specific technique, Pawson and Manzano-Santaella (2012) highlight that analysis 
should lead to explanations which configure the components of a realist explanation.  As such, I used 
a theory-driven thematic analysis approach influenced by Rycroft-Malone et al. (2016), who mapped 
interview data onto CMOCs developed during the theory building stage of their review to test and 
refine the programme theory. Appendix 12 demonstrates a worked example of how data from a 
transcript was coded to the different areas of the programme theory.  Appendix 13 illustrates how 
NVivo was utilised to organise data.   
The analytic process is dependent upon the associations and the connections the researcher makes 
from the data to test the CMOCs (Jackson and Kolla, 2012).  To ensure rigour during data analysis, I 
wrote memos to record my thoughts and reflections on the data and used meetings with my 
supervisors to challenge these interpretations and explore alternative explanations.  Data were 
further interrogated and findings discussed, and verified with the Research Network Monitors.  
Additionally, data from different sources (interviews, observations, medical notes, organisational 
documents) were used to support the rigour of the analysis by providing means of triangulation 
(Tolson et al., 2007).  To further test assumptions, I looked at negative cases to improve 
understanding.  For example, data from an observation session where there was less staff contact 
with patients (OB0209) supported the interpretation of how a preoccupation with risk management 
was driving staff and patient interactions. 
Braun and Clarke (2006) identify five phases in thematic analysis: 
 Familiarisation 
 Generating initial codes 
 Searching for themes 
 Reviewing themes 
 Defining and naming themes 
In this study, I have operationalised these phases using a realist approach as follows: 
Familiarisation 
This phase, like framework analysis (see Framework Analysis, p42) involved immersion in the data.  
Familiarisation began during data collection and continued through the transfer of data into 
electronic documents.  Word documents of interview transcripts, field notes from observations, 
summaries of relevant material from medical notes, such as recordings of written evidence of 
person-centred care, and relevant data from organisational documents, such as expectations for 
care standards from the dementia strategies, were entered into NVivo 11.   
I deepened my understanding of the data through reading, re-reading, and recording memos of my 
initial interpretations of how data related to the theory being tested. 
Generating initial codes 
I used NVivo 11 to support the organisation and analysis of data.  Before commencing coding, parent 
nodes were created from the six CMOCs of the realist review.  Two additional parent codes were 
created, one around the emerging theme of valuing dementia care, and one which classified data as 
unrelated (Table 15).  This ensured all data was initially coded to at least one parent node to support 
the review and retrieval of data, and refining categories as analysis continued.   
Following this deductive approach to coding, data in each parent node were then read and coded 
inductively to identify themes and patterns within the data.  At this stage codes were extensive and 
the context of the codes were kept, often consisting of one or two sentences. 
Table 15: Initial parent nodes created for a theory-driven thematic analysis 
CMOC 1: Understanding behaviour as communication to improve staffs ability to respond 
CMOC 2: The role of experiential learning and creating empathy to encourage reflection for 
responsibility for care 
CMOC 3: Clinical experts who legitimise priorities for care 
CMOC 4: Staff with confidence to adapt working practices and routines to individualise care 
CMOC 5: Staff with responsibility to focus on psychosocial needs 
CMOC 6: Building staff confidence to provide person-centred risk management 
CMOC New: Valuing dementia care 
Content not CMOC related 
Searching for themes 
Time was spent comparing data within and across the extensive child nodes developed.  A process of 
reducing and refining the codes took place where codes containing similar data were merged, 
combined, and renamed.  For some codes, grandchild nodes were used to retain the detail of the 
themes.  For example, while the range of responses staff used to work with patients became an 
abstracted term for a child node, grandchild nodes were kept to retain the detail of the techniques 
used (Figure 5). 
Figure 5: Example of the use of a coding tree 
Memos were used to track of challenges and refinements to coding, as well as expanding 
information from the data to highlight additional contextual factors that may not be apparent (Table 
Table 16: Examples of data with linked memos 
Data Linked memo 
Another HCA asks what 9 would like for breakfast.  9 replies that 
she has already had breakfast and it is approaching lunch time [FN: 
9 has not eaten well during her stay, but may have eaten 
something earlier as had been up since 5am].  The HCA says to her, 
no it is breakfast time, how about some porridge with banana? 9 
smiles at her and nods, the HCA says I remember you like that.  
The HCA goes and prepares 9s breakfast. [OB0109] 
Patient has infection/delirium 
and is not orientated to time and 
place.  This quote could 
demonstrates that HCA 
recognises the importance of 
nutrition and orientation, or that 
the HCA is prioritising the task of 
handing out breakfast.  
When the 1:1 is happy that 2 is comfortable she goes over to 5 and 
checks that she is okay.  5 says that she would like some egg and 
bacon.  The 1:1 says to her that if thats what she wants, then that 
is what she can have [FN egg and bacon is offered as a breakfast 
only if it is ordered].  The 1:1 then says to 5 that she thinks tea is at 
6 [FN tea on this ward is at 5].  
[OB0208] 
1:1 does not recognise that this 
might indicate the patient is 
hungry, also giving the patient 
false information. 1:1 has had 
training in dementia care, so is 
the ward routine influencing 
interpretation of patient need? 
The job itself I didnt find challenging enough.  Im quite an active 
person, so the job does consist, I mean its one-to-one. Or even if 
you have a bay that you cant leave the bay.  Youre sitting around, 
I like to be a little bit more active and I found that I was losing 
other skills which I didnt want to lose. [Site 2, ST0205, HCA] 
HCA spent time on the 1:1 team. 
Is dementia care recognised as 
skilled work?  What contributes 
to this? 
[ward] It was for dementia, because dementia requires a specific 
time with patients.  Sometimes its really hard to manage a 
dementia patient on another ward so when I have been to another 
ward and the patient is being really difficult because its hard to 
manage.  Here we are two health care and two nurses and at any 
time there is someone in the bay.  In other wards it is difficult to do 
that because you have one nurse, one health care, so if one is 
busy, the other one is busy there is no one who can keep an eye on 
the patients, they can fall anytime. [Site 1, ST0103, Nurse] 
A recognition that working with 
patients with dementia can be 
challenging (mechanism?).   
Is the context of patient risk key 
for organising resources and staff 
time? Does this influence how 
patient needs are defined? 
Reviewing themes 
At this stage, I looked for clear, identifiable distinctions between the themes by reviewing all the 
data in each theme, considering the contribution of the data to that theme, re-coding data where 
necessary, and refining definitions.    
As coding continued, it became apparent that a considerable amount of data had been double coded 
to CMOCs 4 and 5.  Data were reviewed and as a result, CMOCs 4 and 5 were merged and renamed 
to CMOC 4/5b: Engaging with opportunities to spend time with patients.   
Defining and naming themes 
A narrative account of the data under each theme was created.  Accounts were shared with 
supervisors for comment and further challenges to interpretation.  Themes continued to be 
redefined and names were adapted to reflect the ongoing analytic process. 
Ethical Considerations 
As with all studies, there were ethical considerations that needed to be addressed, these are 
discussed below. 
Consent 
Consent to participate by all participants (patients with dementia, carers, and staff), or assent from 
their consultees where patients were considered to lack capacity to consent, was informed, 
voluntary, and ongoing.  All participants and consultees were made aware that it was their choice to 
take part in the study.  For patients, they were informed that if they chose not to take part this 
would not affect clinical care.  For staff, they were assured that if they chose not to take part this 
would not affect their working relationships with colleagues or other aspects of their employment.  
Participants were also made aware they could withdraw from the study at any point and that their 
decision would be respected, this was not something that happened after commencing data 
collection.  Additional considerations for consent are discussed below in relation to the participant 
group. 
Patients with dementia 
This patient group is particularly vulnerable due to their declining health, declining cognitive abilities, 
and age related difficulties.  The consent process for patients with dementia complied with 
requirements of the Mental Capacity Act (Department of Health, 2005) in that capacity to consent 
was assumed unless there was evidence to the contrary.  Patients were considered to have the 
capacity to consent when: 
 the person understood the purpose of the research 
 the person understood what their involvement in the study entailed  
 the person understood they had the right to not participate and this decision would not 
affect their care 
 the person was able to retain the information about the study and use it to inform their 
decision of whether or not to take part   
Where capacity was lacking, a consultee process was followed (Figure 6). 
Assessing capacity 
I was responsible for assessing the capacity of potential participants.  This was informed by my 
observations of patients, conversations with patients, and the perceptions of staff regarding a 
patients ability to understand the study information.  Staff were also asked if they were aware of 
information about the patient that would support conversations, such as the person being hard of 
hearing or personal interests.  Eligible patients were assessed to have capacity though: 
 initial conversations to explore their communication abilities so information could be 
adapted accordingly 
 introducing and explaining the research and their potential involvement 
 checking their understanding and retention of the research and general acceptability of the 
study 
Dewing (2007) suggests that the researcher engages in critical reflection where there is uncertainty 
regarding consent.  The researcher should be confident that the person is consenting before they 
are considered recruited to the study.  For some patients initially thought to have capacity and who 
were able to engage in general conversations, it became clear more complex discussions around the 
research were difficult, and clarity to obtain informed consent was uncertain.  For example, one 
patient spoke at length about their family and life experiences, but they had limited ability to 
understand and retain information about the study.  In this instance, further advice was sought from 
a personal consultee. 
Once capacity and interest in the study were established, I began the formal process of consent.  
Patients were given an Information Sheet (Appendix 14) which I talked them through page by page.  
After which, this information was left with patients to have time to consider their participation.  
Some patients agreed or declined immediately.  Where the patient declined this was respected.  
Where patients agreed, due to the speed of their agreement I spent time confirming their 
understanding.  In some cases this was achieved quickly, in other cases this took more time.  For 
example, one patient appeared to agree to participate quickly and then went on to talk about other 
topics.  Attempts to revisit consent were met with further unrelated conversations.  However, at the  
end of a conversation another attempt was made to confirm consent.  The patient said Yes, yes, 
yes, while waving his hand in a dismissive gesture towards the paperwork.  This was interpreted as 
consent but that the patient was more interested in using the opportunity to talk about other 
subjects.  Written consent was later obtained. 
For all patients judged to have capacity who consented, this was recorded appropriate to their 
abilities: either as written consent or as verbal consent that was observed by a member of staff who 
signed a witness document.   
Consultee process 
A large proportion of eligible patients were too ill or too cognitively impaired to be able to provide 
informed consent.  In line with the Mental Capacity Act (Department of Health, 2005), for patients 
who lack capacity to consent, a personal consultee was identified to give assent to the study (Figure 
6). The personal consultee was asked for their opinion, based on their prior knowledge of the person 
before they lost capacity, whether they would have wanted to participate or not.  In one instance a 
personal consultee was not identified and so a nominated consultee was contacted for assent.  A 
nominated consultee was defined as a senior member of the clinical care team who was not directly 
involved in the research or patient's care (Scott et al., 2011).  In this case, they considered it was not 
appropriate for the patient to participate in the study.  
Figure 6: Process for consenting patients 
Consent in the moment  
For people living with dementia consent is not necessarily a single remembered decision and was 
revisited throughout data collection. For patients who consented to be interviewed, I ascertained 
ongoing consent in the moment (Dewing, 2007).  During interviews I was sensitive to the patients 
mood, verbal and non-verbal communication that might suggest a decision to consent had changed.  
For two interviews, changes in patients mood or needs related to their acute condition led to my 
decision to bring the interviews to an end.  These patients did not withdraw their consent to use the 
interview.   
Consent for non-participant observations 
Observations on the ward operated an opt-out process for recruitment.  Opt-out approaches for 
non-participant observations have been used in other studies with patients with dementia in 
hospital settings (Caswell et al., 2015). Patients received written information about the purpose of 
the study in advance of observations.  On the day of an observation period, I aimed to advise 
patients prior to the start, or during if this had not been possible, because, for example, they had 
been sleeping, that I would be making notes about their interactions with staff.  I informed them 
that they could choose to participate or not, and that their choice would be respected (Cardona-
Morrell et al., 2015).  No patients objected to being included in observations.  Ongoing consent was 
used throughout observations.  If, during observations, a patient exhibited distress due to my 
presence, observations would stop.  However, the observations did not stop due to general distress, 
as distressed behaviour can be expected from patients with dementia in hospital wards for a variety 
of reasons; they may not understand where they are, why they are there, or the need for treatments 
and care that are being delivered (Goldberg et al., 2014).  It was not necessary to stop any 
observations due to patient distress as a result of the research. 
Staff who regularly worked in areas where observations took place received information packs at the 
start of the study.  Included in the pack were participant information sheets (Appendix 15), consent 
forms for observation, opt-out forms for observation, and a pre-paid envelope.  A total of four opt-
out forms (two from each site) were returned prior to the start of observations.  These staff were 
reassured that their decision was recognised and that no information would be collected about their 
work with patients.  On the few occasions where these staff were working on the ward, observations 
took place in other bays.  During one observation period one member of staff who had opted-out 
began working in the bay sometime after the start of observations.  I discussed with them that I 
would not record information about them.  However, after this discussion the member of staff 
agreed to participate.   
Staff affected by observations were informed on the day before the start of data collection and were 
given the opportunity to opt-out of observations.  No staff verbally opted-out. 
Visitors to the ward 
Hospital wards are busy places and it was not possible to anticipate all people who may enter an 
area (Hammersley and Atkinson, 2007; Mulhall, 2003; Pollock, 2012). When observations were 
taking place, efforts were made to draw attention to my purpose on the ward through posters 
explaining the study (Appendix 16).  No visitors objected to the research. 
Confidence in informed consent 
Mulhall (2003) discusses how confidence in informed consent of those being observed is difficult.  
While every effort was made to inform patients of the purpose of the study and my role, it is 
acknowledged that some patients would have lacked understanding, or the ability to retain the 
information.  Ongoing consent was used to assess patient consent to observations.  Observations 
were also acknowledged to be a positive experience for patients, there were times where patients 
actively engaged with the research process. For example in one observation period, a patient choose 
to sit with me and started to talk through the events going on in the ward, pointing out what was 
happening with different patients.   
Pressure to consent due to concerns about the impact on care were minimised as I was not involved 
in patient care.  However, a few consultees commented that they considered my presence would 
give them an extra pair of eyes on their family member.    
It was made clear to staff that they did not have to participate in the research; that their 
participation was voluntary and would not impact on their role or the patients that they cared for.  It 
was unclear if there were staff who felt unable to voice their reluctance to participate.  A minority of 
staff did appear avoidant.  For example, one staff member approached for interview who initially 
indicated interest but then maintained a distance from me.  After reassuring them they did not have 
to participate, they confirmed they had felt guilty and had been avoiding me.  
Anonymity 
While anonymity was guaranteed for all participants, in some cases this would be difficult.  For 
example, some participants hold positions which are unique in the Trust and represent a small 
number of professionals across the country.  Efforts have been made to ensure participants are not 
identifiable in the write up of this report by collapsing the categories of staff roles, and when 
necessary, not providing site information.  Participants from the sites were allocated a code upon 
recruitment to the study and these codes were used to replace their names in any data collected, 
such as interview transcripts.  Additionally, any names of individuals or places mentioned during 
interviews were anonymised when recordings were transcribed.  During data collection for 
observations no identifiable data was collected.  Recording of information in field notes and during 
transcription ensured this by: staff only being referred to by their role; patients being assigned a 
number that was used throughout the observation period; and reference to visitors did not record 
their relationship to patients. 
Confidentiality 
Steps were taken to protect the confidentiality of participants. However, it was highlighted in 
participant information documents that where there were concerns around harm and safeguarding 
issues, confidentiality could not be guaranteed.  Further guidance for the steps to be taken were laid 
out in the Bad Practice Protocol (Appendix 17) that was reviewed as part of the ethics submission. 
During data collection, I was informed of a potential incident of harm where these processes needed 
to be followed.  While I did not observe the incident myself, I did seek permission from the 
informant to raise the issue further.   In the literature on nursing research there are few examples of 
ethical dilemmas relating to addressing concerns for harm.  However, Pollock (2012) argues that 
there needs to be acknowledgement and acceptance of the intrinsically difficult nature of ethical 
issues adding that is not always evident what is the right thing to do (Pollock, 2012, p19). She 
proposes a process that supports the discussion and reflection of the situation to agree the course of 
action.  This process was followed and discussion with my supervisors, informed by guidance in the 
protocol, led to an agreed appropriate course of action.  I raised concerns with a senior member of 
staff who complied with our protocol requirements and sent written confirmation of how the 
incident was addressed.  This occurred in the first week of data collection at the site, and while I had 
concerns this would impact access and relationships with key informants, the quantity of data 
collected was comparable to the other site and it did not appear to inhibit conversations with staff.   
Public Involvement 
Members from two public involvement groups were involved in the study; a Research Network 
Monitor group from Alzheimers Society and members from the University of Hertfordshire Public 
Involvement in Research Group.  Members from both groups appointed to the study had experience 
of caring for a family member with dementia.  Members from the University of Hertfordshire 
advised on the initial draft of the study design, which influenced the focus of the study to evaluate 
interventions from the perspective of those using the service rather than those designing 
interventions.  Members from both groups were involved in discussions about the studys progress 
and commented on information sheets and interview schedules for use in the realist review (phase 
one), and the evaluation (phase two), offering advice for improving understanding of the 
information.  
Twice yearly meetings were held with members from the Alzheimers Society research network 
monitors to share emerging findings and the progress of the research.  They commented on findings 
and analysis which helped to ensure inferences resonated with their experience and were relevant.  
For example, at the June 2016 meeting the findings from the realist review were presented to the 
members.  At the time, the context-mechanism-outcome configurations were understood to 
contribute to two programme theories: 1) reframing of dementia care and the priorities for work; 2) 
staff responsibilities for psychosocial care and risk management.  The research network monitors 
considered that the two programme theories were not distinct enough to merit being defined 
separately.  This promoted me to revisit the theories and the evidence that had contributed to their 
development to consider a programme theory which combined the overlapping elements.   
The challenge of recruiting carers to the study was potentially limiting. The research network 
monitors were able to offer insights from their experiences of family members admission to hospital 
and provide comment on what they considered important.  One member highlighted that although 
carers were able to visit any time during the day, gaining information about decisions for treatment 
and care was difficult and required strategies from carers to ensure they were in the right place at 
the right time.  
[hospital] ward round process meant that they [medical team] could turn up any time 
between 9am and 4pm, so it really meant camping out during the day (which I did) to make 
sure that happened. (Research network monitor, email communication, January 17, 2017) 
This member also contributed their thoughts on how they viewed positive and negative aspects of 
care.  The admission of their relative coincided with a meeting to discuss the development of the 
programme theory following previous comments and the member was able to confirm that the 
findings were consistent with their experience. 
In the final meeting, findings from the evaluation were shared, and there was consensus amongst 
the research network monitors that the study had produced interesting findings that could inform 
further research and practice development.  For example, they agreed that verbal agitation was a 
key area of concern for patients, carers, and staff.   
AgeNet Seminar  
On 19th July 2016, review findings were presented and discussed at an AgeNet Seminar on dementia-
friendly healthcare.  A total of 75 participants were present and represented a range of academics, 
the general public, and practitioners from across social care, and primary and secondary health care.  
Nineteen attendees worked in hospital settings.  Attendees were encouraged to comment on the 
findings and agreed the interpretation of the evidence resonated with their experience.  For 
example, in a discussion around implementing learning from training, attendees confirmed how 
their reasoning for applying the new knowledge to their practice was influenced by contextual 
factors such as the priorities of the organisation. 
A critical review of realist evaluation 
Realist inquiry is a methodology that is flexible in terms of the methods employed, and has been 
widely applied to investigate interventions in healthcare research (Marchal et al., 2012).  Realist 
evaluation can draw useful lessons about how particular conditions are more conducive to certain 
outcomes, although it cannot provide predictive guidance or a simple formula for success it is 
interested in causality (Pawson and Tilley, 1997).  Studies have covered macro, meso, and micro 
levels of analysis including: evaluating national organ donation policies (Manzano and Pawson, 
2014); organisation-wide processes supporting change and good practice (Greenhalgh et al., 2009; 
Marchal et al., 2010); interventions aimed at service level change, such as the use of protocols and 
care pathways (Dalkin et al., 2016; Rycroft-Malone et al., 2010); supporting staff development 
through education and training (Rycroft-Malone et al., 2014; Wong et al., 2010); and understanding 
patient fidelity to treatment regimens (Clark et al., 2005).  The diversity of application of the 
methodology is a strength, but has also led to varying interpretations of the key concepts (context, 
mechanism, outcome) (Marchal et al., 2012) accounted for, in part, by the level of analysis (Byng, 
2005). 
Previous research has cited limited methodological guidance as problematic in applying realist 
principles to study design, data collection, and data analysis (Greenhalgh et al., 2009; Rycroft-
Malone et al., 2012).  Since these earlier studies, reporting standards have been published for both 
realist review (Wong et al., 2013) and realist evaluation (Wong et al., 2016) to provide clarity in 
applying realist methodology.  Published research continues to evolve the method by describing how 
processes have been operationalised, providing useful source materials that can be adapted for new 
studies (Goodman et al., 2017; Rycroft-Malone et al., 2016).  
Bias is of concern when using realist evaluation, with key aspects of the research process at risk of 
introducing bias; specifically during selection of data, analysis, and reporting findings (Greenhalgh et 
al., 2009; Rycroft-Malone et al., 2014).  Data collection involves digging for nuggets of evidence that 
will contribute to building and testing the programme theory (Pawson 2006).  This is a consciously 
selective process directed by the researcher who must reduce concerns of bias by exploring rival 
theories and looking for negative instances where the same mechanism or context may lead to 
different, unintended results.  In positivist approaches to research, care is taken to address the 
potential of researcher introducing bias through activities such as blinding to intervention allocation 
and controlling for external factors.  In realist inquiry, as data collection focuses on theory-testing 
this could be considered as contributing to the preconceptions of the researcher.  For example, the 
use of the teacher-learner cycle may influence interviewees to replicate what the interviewer has 
proposed (Davey et al., 2014). However, in explicitly outlining their theory, researchers provide 
interviewees the opportunity to challenge their assumptions and contribute to refining the theory  
(Manzano, 2016).  Realist analysis is not purely a deductive or inductive exercise, but involves 
interpretation, discussion, debate, and challenges (Greenhalgh et al., 2009).  Triangulation of data 
and debate within research teams are used to refute or develop explanations for how the 
interventions lead to outcomes. A transparent account of the process and findings, which explains 
the decisions taken at each point in the research are used to address concerns of bias (Goodman et 
al., 2017; Pawson, 2006b). 
Realist evaluation has been criticised for its rejection of critical theory as part of the explanatory 
account (Porter, 2012).   Porter (2015b) considers it important that researchers are explicit in their 
values, and recognise power imbalances to understand how context can oppress (de Souza, 2013). 
By underplaying the role of agency and structure and conflating these factors under the rubric of 
mechanisms, Porter (2015b) suggests realist evaluation has rejected the critical aspect of Bhaskars 
(1978) realism, which may lead to a technocratic interpretations of human problems (Porter, 2012, 
p18).  This claim is dismissed by Pawson (2015), who cites his endorsement of Archers (1995) theory 
of morphogenesis for explaining the temporal sequencing of change as evidence to the contrary 
(Pawson, 2013).  Context-mechanism-outcome configurations provide the explanatory apparatus for 
how peoples choices and capacity for action are influenced by the circumstances they are operating 
in (Marchal et al., 2012; Pawson, 2015).  By investigating what works, for whom, in what 
circumstances, realist evaluation recognises there will be multiple perspectives and outcomes for 
how, why, and whether, or not, an intervention works.   As such, the conclusions from realist 
evaluation are often modest and nuanced.  
Difficulties experienced in the application of realist inquiry 
I encountered a number of difficulties in applying the concepts of realist inquiry.  Through the 
support of my supervisors, and referring to the literature on realist methods, I found strategies to 
address them.  For example, identifying the elements of the programme theory as their component 
parts was initially problematic. This is not an unusual problem, and has been reported by others 
when differentiating elements of the programme theory as mechanisms or contexts (Marchal et al., 
2012; Rycroft-Malone et al., 2010).  In part, this confusion has been attributed to how practical 
guidance for operationalising the method from Pawson and Tilley (1997) original text was limited 
(Porter, 2015a).  As an evolving method which is growing in popularity, the terms have been further 
clarified and guidelines developed to help reduce the confusion (Wong et al., 2013; Wong et al., 
2016).  However, despite repeated reference to these guidelines and other realist literature, I 
experienced difficulty in differentiating between the concepts.  I was able to resolve this by 
understanding context as the factors that existed prior to the introduction of the intervention, and 
mechanism as factors that related to the intervention and staff responses (Marchal et al., 2012).  
This was of particular importance when clarifying whether allocated time with patients was a 
context or a mechanism.  For this study, as allocated time with patients was identified as part of the 
resources inherent in the interventions and therefore additional to context, it was conceptualised as 
a mechanism.   
Additionally, I explored a number of approaches for understanding mechanisms for developing 
CMOCs.  While approaches recommend further splitting mechanisms into resources and reasoning, 
which is in keeping with Pawson and Tilley (1997) original concept, they proposed different 
strategies.  Punton et al. (2016) promote the use of intervention-context-mechanism-outcome 
(ICMO), which can be used to explicitly identify the features of the intervention, separating out the 
resources it supplies from the reasoning that it generates. Porter (2015b) argues that agency needs 
to be thought of as separate to social mechanisms.  Dalkin et al. (2015) propose that mechanisms 
can be thought of as the resources an intervention provides, and the reasoning that their addition 
prompts in people.  For operationalising mechanisms in this study, I used Dalkin et al. (2015) formula 
of M (Resources) + C  M (Reasoning) = O.  This helped me to understand mechanisms as different 
from context, and identify mechanisms in terms of the cognitive and emotional responses of staff 
(mechanism reasoning), and the resources inherent in the intervention (mechanism resources).   
During the realist review, it became apparent that developing CMOCs with a focus on explaining 
patient outcomes as a result of staff responses to resources in interventions gave only a partial 
understanding of the processes that led to patient outcomes.  For some CMOCs it was necessary to 
introduce staff outcomes as an intermediate outcome which could then explain how patient 
outcomes were generated.  For example:  
Access to training (context) which promotes empathy towards people living with dementia 
(mechanism resource) can encourage reflection which identifies deficiencies in current 
working practices, helping staff to understand their responsibilities for care (mechanism 
reasoning), leading them to take more time with patients with dementia (outcome), and 
improving the experience of care for patients with dementia (outcome). 
This additional consideration strengthened the CMOCs to explain what staff did as a result of the 
mechanisms interacting with context to influence patient outcomes. 
During data collection and analysis, numerous CMOCs were identified.  For example, there were 
possible CMOCs around staff opting-in to work in dementia care, however this was not developed 
as a CMOC as it was not considered specific to dementia care.  Pragmatic decisions to drive forward 
the research were important to recognise what could reasonably be investigated within the 
constraints of the project, while retaining a credible and plausible explanation (Pawson and Tilley, 
1997; Punton et al., 2016).   
I used realist review to develop an explanatory account of what supports staff working in general 
hospitals to provide good dementia care for inpatients with dementia, and with what outcomes. 
Originally, the review had also aimed to test this programme theory.  Due to the limits of the 
available evidence, in terms of the descriptions of contexts and mechanisms and the quality of the 
evidence, I was only able to build the theory.  This was tested and refined in the realist evaluation. 
Chapter summary 
Realist evaluation is a useful methodology for investigating complex interventions implemented into 
complex settings.  In considering how context impacts on human volition, it is able to account for 
multiple outcomes through an explanatory account of how interventions work, or not, in different 
circumstances, and for whom.  Realist inquiry was appropriate for this study as there has been a 
large amount of activity around improving dementia care in general hospitals, with limited evidence 
of interventions effectiveness on staff practices or patient outcomes.  I have justified how the choice 
of study sites, participant recruitment, data collection methods, and analysis in relation to the 
research aims and objectives of this study.   While there are methodological issues related to the 
concepts and application of realist inquiry, I have attempted to minimise these through debate, 
triangulation, and transparency in analysis and the presentation of findings.  
Chapter three: Realist review findings 
In this chapter I will present the findings from phase one of the study, the realist review.  The review 
was complete in three iterative stages which utilised data from interviews with stakeholders and 
from the current evidence-base.  Stage one culminated in the development of three candidate 
theories based around the work of change agents.  The evidence that informed the development of 
these theories are set out below.  The candidate theories refined the search terms and focus of the 
study.  Further evidence collected from the literature challenged and developed these concepts to 
produce six context-mechanism-outcome configurations, which together make up the programme 
theory.   
The review process (Figure 7) demonstrates how decisions were informed by understanding from 
the evidence and identification of gaps in knowledge. 
Stage 1: Defining the scope of the review: concept mining and theory development 
Stakeholder interviews 
Semi-structured interviews with 15 stakeholders explored their interpretation of dementia-friendly 
healthcare (Table 17). Interviews lasted an average of 37 minutes (range 19 to 55 minutes).  Nine 
were conducted on the telephone, four were face-to-face, and two were through Skype. 
Stakeholders discussed their experiences of designing, implementing, and/or receiving initiatives for 
improving dementia care and services in healthcare, and what they thought was key to supporting 
the development of dementia-friendly healthcare services and care practices. 
Table 17: Stakeholder characteristics 
Professional Background Number  
Nursing 6 
Physiotherapist 3 
Social work 2 
Education 1 
Community 1 
Figure 7: The review process 
The stakeholders provided insight into how staff practices are likely to affect patient and carer 
outcomes, how dementia-friendly healthcare is defined, the range of interventions that have been 
used, and how stakeholders thought they worked, or not.  Interviews were not specific to hospital 
settings at this stage in the review, but cross-cutting themes were identified which were transferable 
and are reported below. 
Working in ways that consider the patient with dementias needs 
All stakeholders highlighted that healthcare staff needed to consider the needs of patients with 
dementia and adapt their work accordingly.  Routine hospital practices, noisy and confusing 
environments, and staff under pressure to perform care tasks quickly with limited explanation, were 
all recognised as difficult for patients with dementia.  Patients may not understand why they were in 
hospital and find the experience overwhelming, causing them anxiety which might be expressed in 
behaviours that challenge staff, as this quote demonstrates:    
you cannot just expect a person, particularly a person with, you know, more advanced 
changes to simply sit and toe the line and be able to be at the speed and process everything 
at the speed that needs to happen., A lot of older people without cognitive impairments find 
the acute hospital experience disorientating taking them to A&E, then theyve gone to 
medical assessment, then theyve gone to a ward, you know, theyre moved again at some 
point during a very short stay, its challenging for the best willed people, let alone somebody 
who has got a significant cognitive impairment. (SK04, Nursing) 
Excessive sensory stimulation can overwhelm people living with dementia and lead to difficulties, 
something that was identified by the stakeholder living with dementia: 
it is a sense of overload, Im aware of these things now and again, too many lights and 
things like that, steps, following this, people, noise at times can be overloading, so the 
awareness, and those are changes [to cognitive processes] (SK03, person living with 
dementia) 
Being overwhelmed by a situation is one reason that can lead patients with dementia to behave in 
ways staff find challenging.  This might be misinterpreted, leading to practices that address the 
behaviour rather than the underlying need, such as anxiety or distress.  One stakeholder gave a 
detailed account of the consequences of when a patient with dementia attempts to leave the ward, 
leading to them being put on special observation, rather than staff trying to discover why they 
wanted to leave. They observed: 
these things just are common now and nobody is saying, hang on a minute here, we need 
to step back and review this and we need to know why have we got into this step in the first 
place (SK04, Nursing) 
Stakeholders identified ways of working with patients with dementia that would accommodate their 
difficulties.  Two stakeholders (SK05 and SK13) addressed how difficulties with memory were 
overcome by staff taking responsibility for reminding the patient of appointments and including the 
carer in the communication.  Other stakeholders (10/15) raised the issue of not rushing during 
interactions:   
so this person who wasnt aggressive became aggressive in the mornings when he was 
getting washed and dressed, no surprise there... But she, the nurse went in and spoke to the 
[care home] staff and did it with them, saying you know, if you do this much more slowly 
and more carefully and showed them how if they took much more time and didnt... That he 
could actually get in and out of bed without becoming aggressive. (SK02, Education) 
This demonstrates how recognising the needs of people living with dementia and providing care in 
ways which consider those needs can influence patient outcomes of care. 
Defining dementia-friendly healthcare 
All stakeholders were asked what they understood by the term dementia-friendly healthcare, and 
how they thought it could be achieved.  For eight stakeholders, dementia-friendly healthcare was 
about an awareness of dementia across the workforce; that staff understood what dementia is, the 
effect on the person, and the implications for accessing healthcare services:  
to make it dementia-friendly, and Im talking really frontline here, you need education 
about what dementia is so you can get staff to understand that they might need a different 
approach. (SK01, Nursing) 
Linked to awareness was the idea of developing a workforce that had the confidence to work with 
people living with dementia.  It was thought by three stakeholders that this would improve staff 
ability to manage patients and, therefore, improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the services: 
I think its something that weve struggled with for a long time in physical healthcare is 
when you get a person with a physical health problem who has also got a mental health 
problem, like dementia, it can be a real challenge to manage them really well and I suppose 
its that whole process of everything that we can do to be better at supporting and 
managing that group of people. (SK06, Nursing) 
Not all stakeholders thought that dementia-friendly healthcare was achieved when staff were aware 
and confident working with people living with dementia. They saw it as something more ingrained in 
how the person was perceived. Three stakeholders thought that for healthcare to be dementia-
friendly, staff needed to have different values about people living with dementia, to treat them with 
humanity and to be able to see them as people who had difficulties rather than as a burden: 
I understand this is good because that maybe some quick wins is a good thing, but I think 
that people on the whole are missing the challenge that theyre talking about here have met 
just superficial fixes, where, you know, its a bit like adding a few accessories to a room and 
then theyll be fine, and actually its much more substantial than that and it should be 
connected to our values and beliefs about dementia, people with dementia and what it 
means to be human and sort of the spaces and places that we all need to flourish. (SK04, 
Nursing) 
Some characterised dementia-friendly healthcare about addressing the stigma people living with 
dementia face and the need to challenge assumptions that they do not have the same rights or 
feelings as people without dementia.  Stigma, along with discrimination, was recognised as leading 
to inequitable access to services:  
they [people living with dementia] get excluded [from services] because of attitudes towards 
dementia, because of stigma, because of a whole lot of things (SK01, Nursing) 
Negative assumptions about people living with dementia affected the way staff provided care. For 
example, restricting care choices, failing to properly assess needs, or involve them and/or their 
family carers in decision-making about care and treatment provision: 
its almost an assumption that that person gets categorised as having dementia, so theyre 
all going to be having the same problems and immediately that one-to-one supervision is 
put in place, so as soon as the person gets up, its very much sit down again, sit down, what 
do you want, without actually looking at what they need, what they want, you know, if they 
want to go for a walk or do they want to go off the ward, just have a chat with them and, 
you know, its those kinds of things. (SK10, Occupational Therapist) 
For these stakeholders interventions needed to address issues of stigma and discrimination by 
tackling the way people living with dementia were viewed by staff.   Promoting an understanding of 
the abilities people living with dementia had, the difficulties they faced, and not seeing dementia as 
a reason to exclude them from participating in decisions in care or gaining access to services. 
Range of interventions  
Stakeholders identified, and were asked about, a range of initiatives that aimed to improve care and 
services for patients with dementia.   The interventions and the way stakeholders understood how 
they might work are described below. 
Education and training to improve awareness in dementia and understanding towards patients with 
dementia 
Stakeholders (12/15) discussed the importance of dementia awareness training and education to 
help staff understand what dementia is, and how they could improve their communication with 
patients with dementia.  It was seen as necessary to compensate for the lack of focus on dementia 
care skills during professional training and a shortage of staff with dementia expertise:  
[FN: informed by conversations with colleagues who train nurses] actual input about 
dementia on a nurse qualifying programme is really actually quite minimal, so people can 
qualify without knowing a huge amount about dementia, and so you, it then means that you 
become very, you know, continuing professional development and training opportunities 
become really important. (SK07, Social Work) 
Training was also designed to help staff understand the difficulties patients with dementia faced, to 
get them to think about the way they worked with them in an attempt to make their care practices 
more appropriate; for example that more time was taken, and simple, clear explanations were given.  
Fast-paced, confusing tasks were used to simulate the experience people living with dementia 
commonly faced in everyday situations to trainees.  They were invited to reflect on this and consider 
how they might improve completing care tasks with people living with dementia.  
The active process of reflection was considered important for deepening the learning experience.  
However, six stakeholders identified that for training to be effective and used in practice it needed 
to be supported by managers and dementia champions:   
we can do quite a lot of work around training in dementia awareness, I think thats got to 
be one of the big strategies, just about trying to help the staff understand and feel more 
confident about reaching people with a cognitive impairment but I suppose training is only a 
bit of the story, that just because somebody knows something is true because theyve been 
taught it doesnt mean they necessarily put it into practice so I think theres a lot around 
leadership and around challenging poor practice to try and embed the sort of skills that 
theyre teaching in the training setting. (SK06, Nursing) 
Linked to this reinforcement of learning from managers and peers was the importance of developing 
group consensus.  One stakeholders experience of changing care practices to provide better care for 
patients with dementia highlighted how there needed to be a shared commitment from all staff for 
changes to be accepted and sustained: 
I've tried to, you know, educate people around me about what person-centred care looks 
like and Ive done some training with staff, just what I can, with the new ward team that I had. 
But Ive realised very quickly its very limited what you can achieve, it has to be a whole culture 
of change one person cant change a whole team ethos. Even if there was somebody who 
was a really strong leader it has to be a fundamental commitment to changing the kind of 
approach. (SK14, Nursing) 
There were differing views on the benefits of dementia awareness training.  Some stakeholders felt 
that it was important for everyone in the hospital to be included while others were more sceptical of 
the value of current training, considering it to be too superficial and would not lead to the 
anticipated changes in practice.   
Dementia champions to support staff to work well with patients with dementia and role model good 
dementia care 
Dementia champions were discussed by 11 of the stakeholders.  The roles of dementia champions 
were identified as bridging gaps in knowledge about dementia where training and expertise was 
lacking, helping to embed new practices, addressing poor practices and role modelling good care, 
and identifying environmental changes that would be beneficial to patients with dementia. 
Stakeholders acknowledged the difficultly faced by dementia champions, that they needed to 
balance the demands of their paid role with those of the dementia champion role.  The dementia 
champion role required creative thinking about how dementia care could be improved in their 
locality without receiving any additional support, such as time off the rota, or time to attend group 
meetings.   
Stakeholders conceptualised dementia champions purpose differently.  Some saw dementia 
champions as proactive, autonomous agents, with a role in streamlining practices for the benefit of 
patients with dementia:   
I guess thats what theyre put in place to galvanise things arent they, to make things 
happen, to stir it up a little bit so that the appropriate responses are made, that ward nurses 
know what to do with the very confused and distressed person with dementia, that medical 
specialists dont hang on to them for too long, but transfer their care to somebody who is 
better skilled to manage the problems that are created and so on, so that I would see the 
dementia champion as having a political, with a small p, job of making a system work. 
(SK13, GP) 
Others thought they were a positive way to address deficits in staff knowledge about dementia and 
help to bring all staff up to a level of knowledge in dementia and dementia care. Two stakeholders 
described their role as disseminating information and implementing new practices that more senior 
colleagues had identified as important. This suggested the autonomy and initiative of dementia 
champions to instigate change is limited, and that their role is to disseminate management plans 
through peer-to-peer communication strategies: 
Well the dementia champions I have to say are very keen and very good at implementing 
what is being asked of them at meetings and that kind of thing. (SK10, Occupational 
Therapist) 
One stakeholder saw them as a negative strategy that created a skills gap in other staff, limiting the 
probability all staff would take responsibility for working with patients with dementia and isolating 
the dementia champion from the staff group:   
We found that actually it created a bit of a skills gap between myself, whos managing 
things with all of the very, very complex patients with dementia, and the ward staff who 
were sending the complex patients my way because they didnt feel that they had the 
confidence and the skills to manage them and it meant that we had a group of therapists 
who actually didnt feel confident and so if I was off for whatever reason those patients 
werent picked up its good to have specialist staff who know what theyre talking about 
and who can advocate and liaise, but we also have to make sure that there is up-skilling of 
all of the staff who would be involved with that so that isnt this culture of Oh thats not my 
job because Im not that champion. (SK09, Occupational Therapist) 
Another stakeholder felt there were inherent weaknesses in the use of dementia champions if 
people who volunteered were not in a position of authority, adequately prepared, or had an 
influence over other staff members to implement changes:   
[dementia champions] theyre expected to be able to work in very complex cultures, work 
as an insider change agent, or a practice developer when theyre not always in a position of 
management or leadership position, and implement a huge amount of change as a practice, 
and routine, and ritual, with people whove still... still for the large part still do have a mind- 
set that they dont like people with dementia, frightened of dementia, they dont think 
people with dementia should be in their service, and these... how can you adequately expect 
people to change a system, to change ways of thinking, deep rooted values and behaviours 
with, you know, a half day or one day or a two day preparation? (SK04, Nursing) 
The role of leadership in prioritising quality dementia care  
Eleven stakeholders discussed the role of leadership in enabling change and improving provision for 
patients with dementia. One stakeholder identified that hospital management would need to be 
convinced of the problems and solutions for dementia care for dementia to become a priority when 
set against competing concerns, such as diabetes and cardiac problems within a general hospital.  
The motivation for hospital management to focus on dementia, either through passionate senior 
clinical staff or incentive schemes such as CQUINs, was discussed.  One stakeholder identified how 
clinical leaders with a clear vision for the way in which services should be organised for patients with 
dementia could influence the way training was designed and delivered: 
they [clinical management at hospital] have a real clear view about their community and 
what they want it to look like and theyve got a specialist ward in [hospital] so they are 
doing, I mean theyre approaching this diversity of knowledge problem by deciding what it is 
they want and then theyre skilling their group up in that way. (SK02, Education) 
A key factor of clinical or organisational leadership was that they could make changes happen; they 
could access funding or resources for change and set the priorities of care for staff work. 
However this top-down approach was not something accepted by all stakeholders.  While one 
stakeholder accepted that resources became available when clinical leadership understood the need 
for change, they believed that it was only frontline staff who could implement the changes through 
understanding why they needed to adapt their ways of working.  Another stakeholder identified the 
negative consequences of a top-down approach to change; that staff could become sceptical of the 
messages and disengage with the process of change: 
I think that there is often a lot of cynicism about management and leadership and that 
sometimes things that you impose from above, people get angry about. (SK07, Social Work) 
Identification schemes to signal to staff a person has dementia  
Three stakeholders discussed the use of identification schemes, where a symbol is place above a 
persons bed or on the patient notice board next to their name to highlight to staff that the person 
has dementia.  Such schemes are often linked to staff training and resources that gather biographical 
information about a patient, such as a family carers booklet, to help inform care planning.  One 
stakeholder articulated the theory behind schemes, such as the Butterfly Scheme or the use of 
forget-me-not symbols, was that staff would recognise the person has additional needs and they 
would be prompted to adapt their typical care practices appropriately.   
Another stakeholder explained how the identification scheme made it easier for staff to recognise 
patients who would benefit from other resources provided by hospitals, removing the need for a 
lengthy referrals process: 
somebody whos got a diagnosis of dementia there will be forget-me-not flower [on the 
patient board] which means its easy reference that whether its phlebotomist, a security, or 
a porter, or a volunteer.  They can easily see who has got an existing diagnosis of dementia 
and for the volunteers it means that they can identify who has a dementia diagnosis and 
they can then identify the correct nurse to speak to. (SK09, Occupational Therapist) 
Computer systems were also being adapted to capture diagnosis status information, share the 
information with the clinical team, and flag the diagnosis at subsequent admissions. 
Volunteers and activities coordinators to provide activity and distraction with patients with dementia 
Seven stakeholders discussed the benefits of using volunteers and activities coordinators for 
patients with dementia.  Benefits included reducing boredom and the onset of behaviours that 
challenge, improving the patient experience, finding out more about the patient with dementia, and 
freeing up time for clinical staff to focus on physical and medical needs:   
getting somewhere away from the ward, somewhere where its not all medical, where the 
personality of the patient could come out really strongly.  And it was amazing, the quality of 
what we told was amazing.  The amount the patient enjoyed it was lovely to see and how 
you could see much more people than patient.  It meant that people who could get quite 
agitated really had a place where they could go and be occupied and included and 
respected, those person-centred things.  It meant the nurse didnt have to do that. (SK11, 
Nursing) 
When introducing activities for patients with dementia, stakeholders highlighted that biographical 
information about the person, either through close contact with the family, talking with the person, 
or use of documents designed to gather this information, would help to ensure activities were 
appropriate and supported the interests of the person:  
There was, again, another elderly lady on a ward who was quite unsettled and when the 
staff did the This is Me process and talked to the ladys family, shed always been a 
homemaker this lady, shed always been very house proud and very busy with her 
housework and what have you, so they just kept bringing her piles of laundry to fold and it 
kept her very settled because she was quite happy with the idea that theres half a dozen 
pillowcases and when they were folded they went away and another half a dozen came. 
(SK06, Nursing) 
However, one stakeholder highlighted how, even with some background knowledge, it was still 
possible to make mistakes with distraction therapies, highlighting the importance that activities are 
individualised rather than becoming part of a toolkit that is applied to all patients with dementia: 
I remember being on this ward and Id been told that this particular patient had been, had 
been a nurse and so one morning I got her, I tried to get her to make the bed, help me make 
the bed, and anyway, she didnt really do much, she sort of would pat down, you know, Id 
make the bed and then shed pat it down and sort of check the pillows plumped up nicely, 
and I thought to myself oh dear, you know, shes obviously forgotten how to make a bed, 
shes not very good, and then I just discovered that she wasnt a nurse at all, she was an 
extremely senior midwife and the idea, the idea that she would be making a bed...and Id 
just assumed that she couldnt but actually I think it was cos she thought it was beneath 
her (SK07, Social Work) 
Working with family carers in ways that recognise their desired level of involvement and their own 
needs 
Six stakeholders discussed the role and needs of carers.  They recognised the importance of the 
family carers knowledge of their relative which could help inform treatment and care plans.  One 
stakeholder discussed the importance of involving carers to help manage their relatives health by 
including them in the communication for appointments and referrals. Stakeholders discussed the 
importance of understanding the level of involvement a carer might like, such as assisting with 
feeding, and encouraging their involvement, while also being aware that the carers had their own 
needs and were a diverse group.  This could be assisted by improving access for carers, although two 
stakeholders highlighted that staff attitudes to the unrestricted presence of carers might need to be 
addressed.  It was thought that improved relationships between staff and carers could be achieved 
through better communication and information for carers relating to their relatives care.  
Biographical booklets to get to know the person living with dementia 
Five stakeholders discussed This is Me booklets.  They thought they were a good way for staff with 
limited time to sit with patients, to get a good history about the person and to identify how to 
support and manage them well, by providing ideas for distraction therapies that might work.  Two 
stakeholders identified that their implementation had been supported by dementia champions.  This 
suggests that for staff to use new interventions they will need to be promoted by colleagues and 
managers. However, if an intervention is perceived as beneficial to staff their acceptance into 
practice may develop more organically.  One stakeholder identified how they were beneficial to 
therapists as they complemented their way of working and the goals of their work:  
theyve [dementia champions] implemented the This Is Me initiative, you know, to actually 
have a booklet and background of who the person is, what they want to do, what their 
occupation was and all those kinds of things and they, you know, try to bring that into the 
occupational therapy sessions. (SK10, Occupational Therapist) 
Stakeholders thought interventions such as This is me booklets were useful for staff to understand 
the triggers for behaviour that challenged and strategies to alleviate them or reduce their incidents. 
One stakeholder suggested that prior to the booklets introduction to wards, and staff training in 
dementia, there was a tendency to treat the behaviour:   
Theres less medication that goes on I just hear from nurses and from our dementia 
champions that the visiting doctors will advise say are they involved in any activity during 
the day, could they go, you know, to the day... what about the family, can they come in and 
take them out for a walk, you know, that distracting techniques that youve got for that 
person. (SK10, Occupational Therapist) 
Specialists wards and dementia specialists to address the mental and physical healthcare of patients 
with dementia 
Six stakeholders discussed the use of specialist wards for caring for patients with dementia in 
general hospitals, with five identifying the importance of bringing together expertise in mental and 
physical health in order to manage people with high levels of physical needs and cognitive 
impairments. However, they did identify challenges for specialist wards being rolled out more 
widely; they are expensive, can reduce number of beds available, and have higher staff ratio.  One 
stakeholder identified the disparity that such wards could cause across a hospital by focusing 
resources in one ward and not addressing the needs of the wider hospital staff and patient 
population: 
the fact that one Trust can have one ward thats this area of clinical expertise and nationally 
acclaimed, and then theres nine of the other wards within the Trust, and the patients on the 
other wards still get I think its about 40, 50% of people with cognitive impairment on the 
normal wards, and theyre receiving a totally different model of care, than that one youve 
worked on where you know whats needed and you know what works. (SK14, Nursing) 
Four stakeholders discussed the benefits of mental health and specialist dementia care staff.  One 
stakeholder identified that there was access to more information about the patient from a mental 
health and community perspective.  This allowed staff to have a better understanding of the 
patients needs and what provision they had access to in the community: 
we suddenly had a background, information where people asked what point in the process 
they were, what support they had, what community services had been over to assess them 
already, so instantly youve got information. (SK14, Nursing) 
Specialist staff were also able to role model appropriate care for patients with dementia, providing 
staff with reassurance they are doing the right thing.  Where there were more serious behaviours 
that challenged, specialist staff were able to use their expertise to de-escalate violent situations.   
However, there was a potential for deskilling other staff, as staff with nursing and medical roles were 
unable to spend the time with patients and had tasks to perform, leaving specialist teams to care for 
a patients psychological and emotional needs.  The impact of a time-pressured hospital 
environment could create a divide in how work was allocated between nursing staff and mental 
health staff. 
Adaptations to the physical environment that support independence and safety 
Seven stakeholders discussed the role of environmental changes in dementia-friendly healthcare, for 
example using reminiscence rooms or areas that accommodated social interaction.  The 
environment also helped maintain the safety of patients with dementia.  This was through locked 
doors, removal of clutter that was a potential trip hazard, improvements to flooring and lighting, and 
noise reduction that made environments calmer.  
Staff motivation to utilise resources from interventions and adopt new ways of working 
Stakeholders understood that there were different reasons for staff motivation and engagement 
with the interventions. Staff who are already persuaded of the need to change practice, regardless 
of how they arrived at this acknowledgement, would engage well with initiatives. Sometimes staff 
were already aware of the difficulties that patients with dementia faced when admitted to general 
hospital and were keen to adopt new practices, such as volunteering to be dementia champions. 
Enthusiasm was often located in people who had personal experience of a relative with dementia: 
[dementia champions] its the people whove had the personal experience, the people who 
have volunteered to come (SK02, Education) 
Some staff recognised that current practices were not working for patients with dementia and that 
gave them the impetus to engage with education: 
they [staff] were very receptive to the model of care because they were feeling so deskilled 
that they, you know, wanted to really know what can we do thats going to help make a 
difference to the patient and so they were interested to it. (SK14, Nursing) 
One stakeholder suggested that some interventions have a better synergy with particular roles.  
Where this is the case, staff were thought to be more likely to incorporate the new practices into 
their daily work. The example below demonstrates how biographical information can inform and 
individualise the work of therapists who are working to prepare a patient to return to their place of 
residence: 
the therapy staff I think tend to be kind of leading more on this because they do... Im not 
saying they have more time, but they do have the facility when theyre doing the rehab to do 
activities, you know, for instance occupational therapy do some of the activities with all 
patients, but make sure they encourage people with dementia, that maybe sitting in the bay 
in some way feeling confused and then thats when they start to wander and get anxious, so 
trying to do occupational therapy with them really. (SK10, Occupational Therapist) 
However, one stakeholder identified that if staff perceived new ways of working were not of benefit 
to their work, that it involved more effort, or took more time, then practices already in use would be 
maintained: 
were trying to encourage people to offer everyone and encourage them to come and have 
dinner in the dining room, so depending on which staff they have on they would be really 
on-board and they will help us, sometimes theyre too busy and the patients end up having 
lunch on the chair next to the bed in the room... sometimes some patients they prefer to 
stay there, but because they havent been offered since the beginning, they think thats the 
normal thing to have it in the room. (SK12, Occupational Therapist) 
Stakeholders did not discuss how staff who did not understand the effects of dementia and the 
needs of patients with dementia would respond to the different interventions.  There was 
suggestion from three stakeholders that encouragement from colleagues and line managers would 
be necessary to push for the use of new resources and ways of working. 
Balancing competing demands 
Stakeholders spoke of the choices that healthcare staff had to make regarding the balancing the 
competing demands of their work.  They agreed that medical emergencies and physical needs would 
take priority over psychological and emotional needs: 
you have a lot of patients to look after as a nurse and you cant look after everybody so 
somebody might not be an emergency, might be being ignored and we cant always meet their 
needs, you know there are people who call out repeatedly, of which there are a lot in hospital 
wards, you know they call out help me, help me, help me all day and they will be ignored a 
lot.  But there are a whole load of other patients who also have needs, who are critically ill 
and its balancing those needs is very difficult. (SK11, Nursing) 
In the above example, part of the difficulty for staff to address behaviours such as repeated calling 
out might not just be due to prioritisations of care, but also to a lack of awareness that the 
behaviour is a communication of some unmet physical or psychological need.  If staff recognised that 
the person was communicating an important need to be met they might be more inclined to 
respond. 
One stakeholder spoke of how options that might provide comfort for a patient might be viewed as 
a risk to the ward environment, causing a conflict of meeting the needs of that patient and the 
requirements of the clinical environment: 
in physical health, in that particular environment whenever you add in dementia-friendly 
elements you risk compromising the physical healthcare and something as simple as 
infection control is a really good example of that, so to give you an example, weve had a 
conversation fairly recently about a patient on our bed bays who was really unsettled and 
we were talking a lot about trying to be very creative about how we better manage this 
person to make her feel perhaps shes got more familiar things around her shed be more 
settled and someone made, what I thought was a lovely suggestion of shes got this 
favourite blanket that she uses at home, can that come in and be on her bed or on her chair 
and maybe that will give her that familiarity but of course the infection control was, no. 
(SK06, Nursing) 
Where there were concerns of risk, one stakeholder suggested that pragmatic decision-making by 
staff which was supported by the appropriate assessments of a patients needs could lead to a 
rational appraisal of the risk and subsequent action.  However, another stakeholder highlighted this 
was vulnerable to the fear staff had of getting it wrong, meaning there would be a reliance on 
protocols which impacted on supporting patient choice and personal preference:   
how much you allow people to walk around and how much they are in bed, but when the 
staff are worried about their falls they will keep people in bed, they wont allow them to 
walk around and I think there is a massive issue about how the whole governance process is 
going on and how it is stifling, and peoples fear of getting into trouble for doing things 
wrong.  Something might be the wrong thing to do, but it wont go against the protocol. 
(SK11, Nursing)   
The same stakeholder went on to explain how organisational concerns combined with the limited 
capacity of some patients with dementia to make decisions meant that organisational concerns were 
prioritised, to the detriment of patient dignity, choice, and their health:  
so we screen for risk of developing pressure ulcers if you have dementia you will be in a risk 
group for developing pressure ulcers and so then you are having to turn a person every two 
hours through the night.  And so anybody who has capacity can say no Im not prepared to do 
that, but if you havent got capacity you cant say that and so your sleep is disturbed and you 
might get delirium. (SK11, Nursing)  
Organisational leadership to permit change 
For changes to happen to services they needed sign-off at a board level, as implementing change could 
impact on how staff time was allocated, the way staff roles interacted and the responsibility of the 
roles.  For board level agreement to make the changes, there needed to be recognition at this level 
that there was a need to adapt services, and that there would be a measurable benefit: 
I think you need to have some kind of buy-in at both those levels, otherwise however good 
peoples ideas are, if they dont have some kind of sign-off at a fairly senior level then 
theyre not really going to have it cos theyll never be a priority and because there are so 
many targets to be met in general, unless theres some kind of strategy or policy in writing I 
dont think it can change much really. (SK08, Social Work) 
By gaining organisational support for initiatives, changes to systems and expectations of work could 
accommodate new practices and models of care, as discussed in this example of implementing daily 
multidisciplinary team meetings: 
[to implement the daily meetings] we approached the Director [of operations] in this, said if 
we can get this and we can work towards getting a team together and you support us then we 
can probably audit and see how we can reduce length of stay and patient experience and 
getting, and its really important for any Trust or any organisation, to get genuine buy-in. 
(SK15, Nursing) 
Board members of organisations will not always recognise the value of changes suggested by a senior 
staff member.  Further encouragement to make changes comes from national policy and strategies 
such as incentive schemes have been developed help focus the priorities of organisations. However, 
stakeholders were hesitant to suggest such schemes worked in isolation to influence organisational 
changes, as with frontline staff, the experiences and priorities of board members were also influential: 
[Commissioning for Quality and Innovation (CQUINs, a payment framework rewarding the 
achievement of quality goals)] I think that can make a big difference, and certainly in the 
RCN programmes they were working with nine different Trusts from around the country 
who had applied to take part in this programme, and for them it wasnt particularly around 
CQUIN targets, it was about someone within the organisation being a champion I suppose 
for dementia care, so a lot does come down to, you know, individuals and what their own 
experiences are, what they want to focus on I guess. (SK08, Social Work) 
Anticipated outcomes of interventions for staff and patients with dementia 
The anticipated outcomes of interventions were mostly discussed by stakeholders in relation to their 
benefit for staff: that they would develop staff confidence for talking to, and working with, patients 
with dementia; that they would enable staff to gain an understanding about the person; and that 
they would help staff to support them.  The benefits for patients with dementia were generally 
implicit; for example, an increase in staff confidence in working with patients with dementia will lead 
to staff working better with patients by recognising their needs and taking action to meet them.   
There were exceptions to this. When stakeholders discussed environmental adaptations, they were 
largely discussed in terms of the perceived benefits to patients with dementia; they aided 
orientation and independence which helped to maintain a persons abilities, allowed patients with 
dementia to move around the wards safely and without restriction so reducing experiences of 
distress and frustration, or gave them the ability to control their environment.   
With the exception of specialist care wards that addressed both the physical and mental health 
needs of patients with dementia, which were identified as catering for people in the more advance 
stages of dementia, interventions were not discussed in terms of the stage of dementia or particular 
types of dementia.  This question was not asked during the interviews, however within the literature 
this detail was also absent, suggesting that interventions have been designed to give staff a broad 
understanding of dementia and its related difficulties, encompassing all dementias and severities 
within each intervention.   
Summary of stakeholder interviews 
In summary, stakeholders agreed that interventions did not work in isolation but that they needed 
the support of a change agent, who was dedicated to improving the quality of services and care for 
patients with dementia.  For staff to adapt practices to improve care for patients with dementia, 
they needed a level of awareness of what dementia is, and how it impacted on a persons ability to 
communicate and engage with their situation.   For some stakeholders this awareness needed to be 
at a deeper level of learning that addressed the values and beliefs staff held about people living with 
dementia, for them to recognise and treat them with humanity and respect.  Stakeholders 
recognised staff and organisational management would engage and promote interventions 
differently, depending on whether they had been persuaded of the need for change and if they 
could identify a benefit to their work.  A key theme across interventions was to support staff to 
recognise behaviours that challenge as a form of communication by the person with dementia, and 
to interpret and address the underlying need in a way that was not detrimental to the person.   
Scoping Review Findings 
Papers included in Stage One  
Twenty-two papers were identified that described interventions that aimed to improve health care 
for people living with dementia (Figure 7, Table 18, Table 19).   Interventions included: schemes for 
identifying patients with dementia (such as the butterfly scheme), staff training and education, the 
use of roles such as dementia champions and dementia nurse specialists, specialist teams such as 
liaison mental health teams, adaptations to the environment, and the creation of specialist units for 
patients with dementia. 
Table 18: Literature by intervention for stage one 
Intervention Papers 
Schemes to identify patients with dementia in hospital 
settings: e.g. use of a symbol, such as a butterfly or 
forget-me-nots, above the patients bed for staff to 
recognise they have dementia.  Supplemented with 
training and resources that record biographical history 
from the carer 
(Williams, 2011) 
Intervention Papers 
Dementia champion: healthcare staff (mainly nursing 
staff) trained to champion dementia care issues with 
colleagues 
(Banks et al., 2014; Crabtree and Mack, 
2010; Ellison et al., 2014; Mayrhofer et 
al., 2014b; Waugh et al., 2011; 
Wilkinson et al., 2015) 
Dementia Specialist Nurse: senior nurse working as a 
dementia care expert across the hospital to provide 
advice to staff on treatment, care planning, and liaising 
with community services 
(Elliot and Adams, 2011; Griffiths et al., 
2014) 
Training and education in dementia awareness (Elvish et al., 2014; Galvin et al., 2010; 
Mayrhofer et al., 2014a) 
Liaison psychiatry and mental health teams: Complete 
assessments of mental health, provide advice for staff 
on treatments and care plans across a hospital 
(Baldwin et al., 2004; Holmes et al., 
2010) 
Environmental adaptations: changes to clinical areas 
ranging from signage to new furniture, flooring, and 
lighting 
(Waller, 2012; Waller and Masterson, 
2015) 
Specialist units for patients with dementia:  
designed to meet the needs of patients through 
physical adaptations and specialist staff that can 
address the medical and psychological needs  
(Goldberg et al., 2013; Goldberg et al., 
2014; Nichols and Heller, 2002; Spencer 
et al., 2013; Zieschang et al., 2010) 
Use of person-centred care: best practice model for 
dementia care that priorities the needs of the person 
(Scerri et al., 2015) 
Table 19: Characteristics of papers included in the scoping review 
Reference Intervention/focus of 
study 
Study Type Setting Country 
Baldwin et 
al. (2004) 
Liaison mental health 
service 
RCT Hospital wide UK 
Banks et al. 
(2014) 
Dementia champion 
(training programme) 
Evaluation of 
training 
Hospital wide  UK 
Crabtree 
and Mack 
(2010) 
Dementia champion Description of role Hospital wide UK 
Reference Intervention/focus of 
study 
Study Type Setting Country 
Elliot and 
Adams 
(2011) 
Dementia Nurse 
Specialist 
Description of role Hospital wide UK 
Ellison et 
al. (2014) 
Dementia nurse 
consultants and dementia 
champions 
Mixed method 
evaluation 
Hospital wide UK 
Elvish et al. 
(2014) 
Dementia awareness 
training 
Evaluation of 
training 
Hospital wide UK 
Galvin et al. 
(2010) 
Staff training Pre-, post- and 
delayed post-test 
evaluation 
Hospital wide USA 
Goldberg 
et al. 
(2013) 
Medical and mental 
health unit 
RCT, reporting 
quantitative findings 
Ward  UK 
Goldberg 
et al. 
(2014)  
Medical and mental 
health unit 
RCT, reporting 
qualitative findings 
from observations 
Ward  UK 
Holmes et 
al. (2010) 
Liaison mental health 
services 
Service evaluation  Wards (various) UK 
Mayrhofer 
et al. 
(2014a) 
Dementia awareness 
training 
Evaluation of 
training provision 
Hospital wide UK 
Mayrhofer 
et al. 
(2014b) 
Dementia champions Description of 
developing a 
community of 
practice  
Hospital wide UK 
Nichols and 
Heller 
(2002) 
Acute care dementia unit Description of 
changes 
Ward  USA 
Scerri et al. 
(2015) 
Person-centred care Appreciative inquiry Ward Malta 
Reference Intervention/focus of 
study 
Study Type Setting Country 
Spencer et 
al. (2013) 
Medical and mental 
health unit 
RCT, reporting 
qualitative findings 
from interviews with 
carers 
Ward  UK 
Waller 
(2012) 
Environmental 
adaptations 
Discussion of 
environmental 
adaptations  
Ward (various) UK 
Waller and 
Masterson 
(2015) 
Environmental 
adaptations 
Summary of 
Evaluation of 
environmental 
adaptations in 
healthcare settings 
Ward (various) UK 
Waugh et 
al. (2011) 
Dementia champion Description of 
background to 
development of 
Dementia 
Champions 
Ward (various) UK 
Wilkinson 
et al. 
(2015) 
Dementia champion Qualitative study  Ward (various) UK 
Williams 
(2011) 
Butterfly Scheme Description of 
Butterfly Scheme 
Hospital wide UK 
Zieschang 
et al. 
(2010) 
Special care unit Pilot study of a 
dementia specialist 
care unit 
Ward  Germany 
Types of interventions 
Staff training and education  
Dementia awareness training (Elvish et al., 2014; Galvin et al., 2010; Mayrhofer et al., 2014a) was 
aimed at staff across disciplines, professional levels, and clinical and non-clinical roles.  The three 
papers reported a lack of focused dementia care education during training for professional 
qualifications and from continuing professional development.  The papers described training with 
staff across the workforce, with ambitions to raise awareness across staff from all areas of the 
hospital who were likely to have contact with patients with dementia, either as patients or visitors.  
The training addressed what dementia is, what the signs and symptoms might be, the impact 
dementia has on a person, and ways that staff might better communicate with patients with 
dementia.   Elvish et al. (2014) and Galvin et al. (2010) reported training sessions that used didactic 
methods, along with group learning activities that were grounded in practice. Evaluation of training 
was considered successful in terms of increased staff knowledge about dementia and confidence in 
working with patients with dementia (Galvin et al., 2010; Elvish et al., 2014). These measures were 
considered important as previous studies had found a link between level of knowledge and 
confidence.  Staff confidence is thought to be an influential factor in the level of effort made, and 
ability to cope in challenging situations, both useful attributes for working with patients with 
dementia (Elvish et al., 2014).   
However, Elvish et al. (2014) and Galvin et al. (2010) were evaluating training that had been 
designed as part of the study.  Mayrhofer et al. (2014a) reported that the reality of training provision 
in one area of England was variable in training methods, duration, and quality (defined by a course 
being accredited and counting towards professional development).  Benefits to staff for these 
courses had not been measured making it difficult to know if training had improved the ability of 
staff to understand and recognise the symptoms of dementia, and what the implied benefits to 
patients with dementia might be. 
Dementia champions  
Five papers reported the use of dementia champions to work as change agents in hospitals (Banks et 
al., 2014; Crabtree and Mack, 2010; Ellison et al., 2014; Mayrhofer et al., 2014b; Waugh et al., 2011).   
They described the idea that dementia champions would be trained to have an expert knowledge of 
working with patients with dementia, to advocate on their behalf, to role model good practice and 
challenge poor practices, to identify areas within their working locality that could be better and 
implement changes, to understand the legal implications of addressing capacity issues, and to work 
as change agents to develop the dementia care skills of staff they work with.  Using champions is 
based on the premise that interventions have limited impact when they are passively implemented 
into a workplace, they require the support and reinforcement of a change agent. In the case of 
dementia champions, Banks et al. (2014) reported that these change agents needed to have a level 
of authority within their working locality that would allow them to make any changes needed and to 
be able to influence staff.  To help them with this process, dementia champions received an 
enhanced level of training in dementia care (Crabtree and Mack, 2010; Waugh et al., 2011; Banks et 
al., 2014; Ellison et al., 2014), and had ongoing support in their role through dementia champion 
networks and the support of senior colleagues (Banks et al., 2014; Ellison et al., 2014; Mayrhofer et 
al., 2014). 
Reporting of dementia champion roles focused on reporting staff outcomes of the training (Waugh 
et al., 2011; Banks et al., 2014), the value of a community of practice for dementia champions 
(Mayrhofer et al., 2014), and the experiences and outcomes of dementia champions in practice 
(Ellison et al., 2014).   
Dementia and mental health care specialists 
Dementia nurse specialists (Elliot and Adams, 2011; Ellison et al., 2014) and liaison mental health 
staff (Baldwin et al., 2004; Holmes et al., 2010) supported staff to assess patients, develop care plans 
and address issues around capacity.  Again, they were seen as a strategy to compensate for limited 
dementia care knowledge within general nursing and medical staff.  However, this time the strategy 
was to bring in experts who would complete work that general staff did not understand and then 
advise them of the way forward.   
Literature pertaining to specialist roles, such as nurse dementia specialists, and teams such as liaison 
mental health teams, were more specific about how particular elements of support provided to 
healthcare staff, or directly to the patient, had an impact on particular outcomes for patients with 
dementia.  For example, in supporting staff to use pain assessment tools specifically designed for 
patients with dementia, staff were able to recognise when a person was experiencing pain and 
administer the appropriate pain relief (Elliot and Adams, 2011).   
Dementia specialist care wards 
Dementia specialist care wards (Goldberg et al., 2013; Goldberg et al., 2014; Nichols and Heller, 
2002; Spencer et al., 2013; Zieschang et al., 2010) cared for patients with dementia in environments 
that had been especially adapted to cater for their needs.  This included: allowing patients to walk 
around the ward; access to specialist mental health care staff to address their psychological and 
emotional needs; and activities coordinators who provided meaningful activities that were 
appropriate to their skills level and interests. It was thought that if care was provided in an 
environment that addressed both the physical and mental health of patients with dementia, this 
would: improve healthcare outcomes; reduce patient distress; it would be easier for staff to work 
with patients; and would reduce the length of stay in hospital.  While studies demonstrated 
improvements to patient experience and carer satisfaction, the impact on health status outcomes 
was less clear, and there was no evidence that length of stay was reduced. 
Identification schemes 
The Butterfly Scheme (Williams, 2011) used an identification system for patients with dementia. This 
aimed to make staff aware that the person had dementia and that staff needed to work differently 
with the person.  The scheme was supported with training in dementia care that was specifically 
tailored for different staff groups across the workforce of a hospital, both clinical and non-clinical.  A 
booklet for gathering biographical information from the carer aimed at providing better care for 
patients with dementia by identifying the meanings behind behaviours that challenge, ways of 
working that reduced distress, and knowing about the person to be able to provide meaningful 
interactions and activities. 
The use of person-centred care 
The use of person-centred care (Scerri et al., 2015) is promoted as best practice for patients with 
dementia, but staff are unclear what person-centred care means or looks like.  The use of person-
centred care improves the experience of care for patients with dementia, and reduces distress and 
incidents of behaviours that challenge.  The paper provides examples of person-centred care in 
practice. 
Environmental adaptations 
Environmental adaptations (Waller, 2012; Waller and Masterson, 2015) were designed to 
accommodate the difficulties patients with dementia experience due to the changes in their brain.  
Their altered perception, ability to recognise items and their use, difficulties in navigating an 
environment, and ability to make decisions about an environment were addressed through 
environmental changes.  Improved signage, better lighting and flooring, furniture that supported 
patient mobility and resting needs, and items that would orientate them in time and place were 
thought to improve the safety of patients with dementia, and their experience of a place by being 
less confusing and maintaining their independence.  These changes were suggested to reduce 
distress and the development of behaviours that challenged, or in the case of wandering, allowed 
for safe mobilisation which did not need to be interpreted as a risk by staff. 
Reporting environmental changes focused on benefits for patients with dementia (Waller, 2012; 
Waller and Masterson, 2015) and participating sites recorded measures to demonstrate 
improvements.  Outcomes for patients with dementia included measures of improved safety (from 
reduction in falls and reduce use of antipsychotics), and reduction in aggression and violence 
(measured in number of incidents pre- and post-environmental adaptations).   
Who instigates change 
The papers gave information about the way change had been implemented.  Some identified a 
person in the organisation with clinical and organisational authority driving new visions for care, 
while others identified partnership working with carers and agencies, with an interest in improving 
care for patients with dementia (such as the Alzheimers Society and carers charities), in identifying 
problems in hospital provision and working on solutions for change.   
Scerri et al. (2015) stated that person-centred care training had been delivered by the consultant 
geriatrician in charge.  Examples of person-centred practices from interviews with staff working on 
the wards also suggests that staff influenced each other in the way they work by role modelling good 
practice to each other, and seeing the differences these practices make to patients with dementia. 
In Goldberg et al. (2014) and Goldberg et al. (2013), the specialist unit had been designed from 
evidence of best practice with patients with dementia and the experience of locating care for people 
after a stroke within a specialist unit (Harwood et al., 2011).  Discussions with Trust management 
secured funding and additional resources, and a multidisciplinary group met monthly to keep the 
project on track. The unit was based on units that had been set up by enthusiasts from outside 
England, as the split of physical and mental health in the NHS system had only led to the 
development of two such units in England, which had not evaluated their provision.  
Carers were highlighted as the catalysts for the development of dementia champions and the related 
training programme (Crabtree and Mack, 2010; Waugh et al., 2011).  Discussions about their 
relatives experiences of hospital care with the User and Carer Involvement charity, and Alzheimers 
Scotland, led to the commissioning of the dementia champion programme.  The carers contributed 
to the design and content of the programme throughout the development process, and described 
their experiences to trainees as part of the training programme (Waugh et al., 2011; Banks et al., 
2014).  The Butterfly Scheme (Williams, 2011) was developed by a family carer (Barbara Hodkinson) 
after observing the experience of her mothers care in hospital.   
The Kings Fund Enhancing the Healing Environment programme promotes consultation and 
engagement with patients and carers for designing dementia-friendly healthcare environments 
(Waller, 2012; Waller and Masterson, 2015).  This helped ensure changes met the needs of patients 
with dementia.  Multidisciplinary teams led by senior personnel from the participating organisations 
implemented changes that met the needs of patients with dementia, while adhering to 
organisational requirements such as health and safety. 
Changes to a hospital ward (Nichols and Heller, 2002) were also driven by involvement of a carers 
group in discussions with the Director of Geriatrics.  The experiences carers described and their ideas 
for service improvements were taken forward during the development of the specialist unit. 
The role of those instigating change did not necessarily mean that interventions would be successful 
and the papers were limited in the evidence they provided to demonstrate their impact on practice.   
Where interventions replicated previous designs, for example the use of dementia champions 
(Mayrhofer et al., 2014b; Wilkinson et al., 2015) or specialist ward (Goldberg et al., 2014), studies do 
not report the involvement of people living with dementia or carers.  This suggests that once an 
intervention has been developed and shown to have a positive effect in practice that roll out in 
other areas does not require the level of input for development; rather it becomes a management 
decision around implementation.  At this stage of implementation, some of the elements may be 
adapted.  In the case of dementia champions, a comprehensive training programme was undertaken 
by would-be champions (Waugh et al., 2011; Banks et al., 2014), in later incarnations the strategy 
was more variable with differences in how organisations conceptualised and supported the role 
(Mayrhofer et al., 2014b). 
Practicalities for change 
Elvish et al. (2014) highlights some of the obstacles for implementing dementia awareness training 
to all staff across organisations.  The Getting to Know Me training programme was split across four 
sessions, there was an attrition rate of 37% between the first and the last session, this was 
attributed to difficulties in releasing staff for training.  Mayrhofer et al. (2014a) also reported 
difficulties of dementia champions being released for meetings, impacting on the success of 
communities of practice programme.  
Elvish et al. (2014) found 52% of staff attending training had not received any formal training in 
dementia care.  The authors argue where knowledge in dementia care across staff is limited, a 
strategy that addresses training needs of the workforce as a whole is likely to be most successful in 
changing staff practice with patients with dementia.  They suggest this is supported with supervision 
to reinforce learning.  The paper did not report whether gains from training were maintained, and if 
training had impacted on staff practices with patients with dementia.  
Galvin et al. (2010) did report that staff training was maintained at 4 month follow up, and that there 
had been some impact on staff practices.  Staff reported that they had organised activity packs for 
patients with dementia and created a team of volunteers to spend time with patients during their 
admission to hospital. 
Influencing practices 
Elliot and Adams (2011) highlighted that staff in specialist roles that are not based on the wards can 
have limited impact on ward staff.  Holmes et al. (2010) found that staff identified better with liaison 
staff from the same professional group; this was evidenced through referrals received, for example, 
from nurses to nurses.  Holmes et al. (2010) did find that staff with access to liaison teams were 
more familiar with conducting mental health assessments, suggesting there had been some transfer 
of knowledge from liaison staff to general ward staff.  However, the influence of liaison staff relied 
on ward staff being aware of the service, how to access it, and the procedure for referring patients.   
If staff using the service perceived the provision to be slow to respond, or that the advice and 
support they offered was not of good quality, this would impact on future use of the service.  An 
additional difficulty was if staff misinterpreted the level of involvement the service offered.  For 
example, if staff anticipated liaison services would support the daily care of patients with dementia 
they would be disappointed, their role was to assess the person, facilitate access to psychiatric 
facilities, and support the discharge process. 
Mapping the data 
As part of the theory development, potential factors that influenced the acceptance of a dementia-
friendly intervention into a hospital environment were mapped from the interview and the literature 
evidence.  This visual representation of the data demonstrated the numerous areas where further 
investigations could be focused, for example at organisational level, service level, or patient level, 
and where there were potential gaps in evidence and understanding (Appendix 6).  This exercise 
suggested there was limited understanding of how interventions worked at the point of interaction 
between staff and patients, but all required extra support from one or more individuals committed 
to the promotion of a dementia-friendly hospital environment.  
If then statements 
Informed by emerging evidence from the interviews and the literature, if then statements 
(Pearson et al., 2015) were developed and refined through discussions with the supervisory team to 
understand how outcomes were thought to occur (Table 20).   
Table 20: If... then statements 
If Then Evidence / theory 
Expert support 
If assessments are conducted for the needs of 
patients with dementia (nutrition and hydration, 
pain, falls, delirium), supported by a member of 
staff with expertise in dementia care (either as a 
dementia or mental health specialist or as a 
dementia champion who has received additional 
training) and a care plan is devised, shared with 
staff and followed 
Then patients will receive appropriate and timely 
treatment which will relieve their discomfort, 
reduce the occurrence of adverse incidents, 
which will minimise the time spent in hospital  
Stakeholders: SK09, SK11, SK15 
Literature: Baldwin et al. (2004); Banks et al. 
(2014); Elliot and Adams (2011); Goldberg et al. 
(2014); Griffiths et al. (2014); Holmes et al. 
(2010); Williams (2011); Zieschang et al. (2010) 
If assessments are carried out to understand the 
persons level of functioning (e.g. activities of 
daily living) 
Then support to maintain their abilities can be 
planned for with the aim of returning them to 
their pre-admission status 
Stakeholders: SK09 
Literature: Goldberg et al. (2014); Zieschang et al. 
(2010)  
If Then Evidence / theory 
Knowledge of patient 
If biographical information is gathered,  
completed by staff with the family carer and the 
information is accessible (by being in a 
convenient place and in a useful format) to all 
staff and they are aware that the information is 
of benefit such as providing strategies for 
working with the patient (e.g. how behaviour 
represents a need in the person that staff can 
recognise and address)  
Then the information can be used by staff (e.g. 
occupational therapists) as part of their 
rehabilitation and the patient with dementia is 
occupied in an activity that is of meaning to them 
(has relevance, is something they enjoy). Staff 
will be able to have conversations that are of 
interest to the patient 
Stakeholders: SK06, SK10,SK12, SK15 
Banks et al. (2014); Nichols and Heller (2002); 
Williams (2011)  
If family carers are consulted about the patient 
with dementia (what has led to their admission, 
normal way of being, decisions regarding care 
and discharge) and staff work closely to gain a 
good understanding of the patient (their 
likes/dislikes, important routines, behaviours in 
different situations) 
Then care will be safer (less adverse events due 
to accurate history taking) and staff will be able 
to respond appropriately to the patients needs 
(i.e. by recognising pain, being able to comfort 
them when appearing distressed, understand 
why they have not eaten) 
Stakeholders: SK03, SK05, SK11, SK12, SK15 
Literature: Nichols and Heller (2002); Scerri et al. 
(2015); Spencer et al. (2013); Williams (2011)  
If Then Evidence / theory 
Defined roles in patient care 
If patients with dementia are provided with an 
appropriate activity (something they can do, 
enjoy) by a person with a role for providing 
activity (activities co-ordinators, therapist 
assistants) 
Then patients with dementia will have some 
structure to their day, reduced boredom, 
reduced daytime sleeping, and increased social 
interactions, which will then reduce behaviours 
that challenge, reduce sleep disturbances, and 
help rehabilitation and recovery 
Stakeholders: SK08, SK11, SK14, SK15 
Literature: Goldberg et al. (2014); Zieschang et al. 
(2010)  
If there is provision for addressing mental health 
needs in hospitals (liaison mental health teams, 
mental health staff on ward, dementia 
champions) 
Then emotional and psychological needs of the 
patients with dementia will be assessed, 
monitored and appropriate plans made to care 
for their needs 
Then staff will feel supported, be able to learn 
from the way care is role modelled by those with 
a specialist focus, be able to check their own 
practices leading to increased confidence and 
more effective working with patients with 
dementia 
Stakeholders: SK04, SK11, SK12, SK13, SK14 
Literature: Banks et al. (2014); Elliot and Adams 
(2011); Ellison et al. (2014); Goldberg et al. 
(2014); Griffiths et al. (2014) 
If Then Evidence / theory 
If there are clearly defined roles and 
responsibilities across disciplines and 
organisational boundaries (through service 
agreements, job descriptions, protocols, care 
pathways, care plans) 
Patients will receive appropriate, timely care that 
is not delayed by staff disputes about who has 
the responsibility and what that responsibility is, 
leading to quicker treatment and recovery. 
Stakeholders: SK13 
Literature: Elliot and Adams (2011) 
Peer support to embed practice changes 
If there is a dementia champion in place who is 
working to improve awareness and 
understanding in staff about dementia and the 
difficulties patients with dementia have, using 
training and reinforcing learning by addressing 
concerns staff express when working with 
patients with dementia or by addressing negative  
behaviour they may exhibit towards patients 
with dementia 
Then they can help to breakdown the stigma 
(assumption patients with dementia do not 
belong in the service, assumptions that nothing 
can be done to improve the patients situation, 
assumptions that people living with dementia are 
lesser persons) within staff and help them to see 
patients with dementia as they see other 
patients with needs that should be met 
Stakeholder: SK04, SK06, SK10 
Literature: Banks et al. (2014); Crabtree and 
Mack (2010); Ellison et al. (2014); Mayrhofer et 
al. (2014b); Waugh et al. (2011); Wilkinson et al. 
(2015) 
If there is a dementia champion in place to help 
embed knowledge and practices demonstrated in 
training  
Then learning in staff will be retained and 
sustained, staff will have a resource to consult, 
which will lead to best practice in dementia care 
being used  
Stakeholders: SK06 
Literature: Banks et al. (2014); Ellison et al. 
(2014)  
If Then Evidence / theory 
If staff have the opportunity to be reflexive about 
their work with patients with dementia (discuss 
things that went well, went wrong, what could 
have gone better) 
Then they will understand what good practice 
looks and feels like and how it can be achieved  
leading to an improvement in their skills for 
working with patients with dementia  
Stakeholders: SK04, SK11, SK14 
Literature: Banks et al. (2014); Mayrhofer et al. 
(2014b) 
If staff who become dementia champions are 
empowered through appropriate education (that 
gives them in depth knowledge about the causes 
and effects of dementia on the brain and the 
impact this has on the person and how care 
practises and services can be adapted to 
compensate for impairments), and access to 
experts in dementia (through formal working 
relationships) and are given time to develop the 
role during their working day (e.g. time off rota) 
Then they will be able to influence their peers in 
the way they work with patients with dementia, 
(for example pacing care to a persons needs,  
ensuring communication is appropriate for the 
person) and promote empathy  
Stakeholders: SK02, SK11 
Literature: Banks et al. (2014); Crabtree and 
Mack (2010); Ellison et al. (2014); Waugh et al. 
(2011) 
If Then Evidence / theory 
Level of authority for change 
If you have a dementia champion who is 
motivated (understands why practice needs to 
adapt for patients with dementia and wants to 
influence practice in their colleagues), has 
received adequate training (about dementia and 
acting as a change agent), has a level of authority 
(the ability to identify what needs to change and 
implement those changes), and is supported 
within the organisation by management (ward 
management, dementia specialists) 
Then they will be able to develop strategies for 
making changes (training, role modelling, 
developing tools that fit with current work 
practices) and persuade staff of the benefits and 
needs to make the changes. 
Stakeholders: SK02, SK06, SK10, SK12 
Literature: Banks et al. (2014); Ellison et al. 
(2014)  
Dementia awareness and empathy for people living with dementia 
If staff are able to recognise a person has 
dementia (through their own training in 
recognising the signs of dementia or from a 
system that alerts them to someone having 
dementia) 
Then staff will know there are cognitive 
difficulties and be able to adapt their care to 
compensate for the needs a person has. E.g. 
where there are memory difficulties, 
communication difficulties, behaviour appears 
unusual 
Stakeholders: SK01, SK03, SK06, SK07, SK09, 
SK10, SK13, SK15 
Literature: Elvish et al. (2014); Galvin et al. 
(2010); Nichols and Heller (2002); Scerri et al. 
(2015); Spencer et al. (2013); Williams (2011)  
If Then Evidence / theory 
If staff have a positive attitude to patients with 
dementia which respects their personhood (an 
understanding of what it means to be a person as 
an individual, as part of relationships and as part 
of society) 
They will better recognise their needs and 
address them appropriately e.g. will understand 
that behaviour that challenges is a 
communication of an unmet need and will work 
to understand and address the need rather than 
treat the behaviour 
Stakeholders: SK01, SK02, SK04, SK07, SK08, SK11 
Literature: Goldberg et al. (2014); Nichols and 
Heller (2002); Scerri et al. (2015); Spencer et al. 
(2013); Zieschang et al. (2010)  
If staff develop empathy for patients with 
dementia through training, support from staff 
with experience in working with patients with 
dementia or through personal experience 
They will be able to see them as the person first 
rather than the diagnosis, they will consider 
alternative reasons for particular behaviours and 
not attribute them to dementia, which will help 
to ensure health problems are not overlooked by 
the member of staff (e.g. not recognising pain) 
Stakeholders: SK02, SK04, SK10, SK11, SK12  
Literature: Banks et al. (2014); Elvish et al. 
(2014); Galvin et al. (2010); Scerri et al. (2015); 
Williams (2011)  
Trained workforce 
If the majority of hospital staff (clinical and non-
clinical) receive dementia awareness training 
(tier 1)  
Then there will be a critical mass of staff able to 
recognise the signs and symptoms of dementia 
and offer appropriate support when working 
with patients with dementia (e.g. helping them 
find their way, giving them assistance when 
appropriate to their needs for meals and drinks, 
taking medical histories, developing a care plan) 
Stakeholders: SK01, SK06, SK09, SK10 
Literature: Mayrhofer et al. (2014a); Williams 
(2011) 
If Then Evidence / theory 
If staff increase their confidence in working with 
patients with dementia and their knowledge 
about dementia and how it can impact on a 
person and their care needs through training and 
team support 
Then attitudes towards dementia and patients 
with dementia will be more positive (i.e. reduce 
stigma and discrimination), staff will be more 
competent (be better able to work appropriately 
with patients with dementia) and better able to 
cope with situations and behaviours that 
challenge 
Stakeholders: SK01, SK02, SK11, SK12, SK14 
Literature: Elvish et al. (2014); Galvin et al. (2010)  
If staff are trained in appropriate communication 
skills to use with patients with dementia (pacing, 
use of non-verbal communication, eye contact, 
touch, awareness of non-verbal communication, 
tailored to the patients individual abilities) 
Then staff will develop a therapeutic relationship 
with patients with dementia which can support 
their choices, needs, abilities and inform care 
plans and treatments 
Stakeholders: SK02, SK03 
Literature: Scerri et al. (2015) 
If Then Evidence / theory 
Environment and risk management 
If the environment is adapted to consider the 
needs of the patients with dementia 
(decluttered, less clinical, clear signage, use of 
colour for wayfinding (coloured bays, areas 
should not to attract attention such as exits are 
disguised, keypad entrance/exit, reduced 
confusion on notice boards but points of interest 
such as art, furniture that assists mobilisation 
such as handrails and seating, clocks for 
orientation to time and date)) 
Then patients with dementia will be orientated, 
able to understand their environment (the 
purpose of different areas) and move round the 
environment safely with minimal restrictions 
from staff.  This will reduce distress and foster a 
calmer atmosphere that can aid patient 
wellbeing 
Stakeholders: SK01, SK08, SK11 
Literature: Waller (2015); Goldberg et al. (2014) 
If patients with dementia are given opportunities 
to mobilise when they choose in an environment 
that is safe (e.g. no tripping hazards, ability for 
staff to observe from a distance) 
Then there will be reduced incidents of distress 
from restricting the patient to bed and functional 
abilities will be maintained 
Stakeholders: SK01, SK09, SK11 
Literature: Goldberg et al. (2014); Nichols and 
Heller (2002); Spencer et al. (2013); Waller 
(2012); Waller and Masterson (2015); Zieschang 
et al. (2010)  
Candidate theories 
Organising findings into if then statements highlighted the influence of change agents, staff who 
supported the implementation and uptake of interventions, as a key theory area.  As such, three 
candidate theories based around the work of change agents were developed which incorporated the 
prominent ideas of what would support the development of dementia-friendly healthcare (Box 3).  
The theories set out how different change agent roles were thought to support staff and influence 
patient outcomes.  The candidate theories provided a framework to guide subsequent searches of 
relevant sources of evidence, and a more in depth, theory-driven analysis of the evidence. 
Box 3: Candidate theories 
Stage two: retrieval and review 
The search and selection process was set out in chapter two (see Searching for relevant studies, p48) 
and is detailed in Figure 7. Twenty-eight papers were included in the review.  Their characteristics 
are described in Table 21.   
If a change agents activities or resources of an intervention supports staff to understand 
how to interpret and respond to a patients behaviour that uses person-centred care 
approaches, challenges poor practice by using experiential learning and reflection, then staff 
will be more likely (through mechanisms of confidence, awareness, the ability to prioritise) 
to engage and assess patient pain or distress and involve patients with dementia and their 
carer in planning their care 
If a change agent has organisational and clinical authority to introduce learning and credible 
resources that prioritise the identification and care of patients with dementia and addresses 
concerns around risk and workplace disruption within a person-centred care framework 
then staff will feel they have permission to do the right thing becoming less risk averse 
If a change agent works as a clinical expert to identify and resolve the care needs of patients 
with dementia then staff will feel supported and be more willing to care for patients with 
dementia 
Table 21: Papers included in stage two of the realist review 
Reference Country Type of item Focus Method of study or 
type of paper 
Data collection Patient and /or 
carer outcomes  
Baillie (2015) UK Published report Evaluation of training Qualitative  Written responses and focus 
groups 
Patient satisfaction, 
patient safety 
Baldwin et al. 
(2004) 
UK Published paper RCT of mental health 
liaison team 
Quantitative Validated tools Depression, 
cognitive 
impairment, 
referrals 
Banks et al. 
(2014) 
UK Published paper Evaluation of 
dementia champion 
training programme 
Evaluation  Questionnaires of trainee 
knowledge and confidence in 
dementia, qualitative analysis of  
trainee reports 
Staff reported 
patient outcomes for 
changes in practice 
Bray et al. 
(2015) 
UK Published paper The use of bay nursing 
and activities with 
patients with 
dementia 
Description of the use 
of bay nursing and 
activities co-ordinators 
Dementia care mapping, Patient 
experience questionnaires 
Patient experience 
Brooker et al. 
(2014) 
UK Published report Evaluation of Royal 
College of Nursing 
development training 
programme 
Evaluation report Online survey, site evaluation 
(including locally determined 
methods such as dementia care 
mapping, incident reporting and 
patient satisfaction survey) 
Patient satisfaction, 
carer engagement, 
reduced distress 
Dowding et al. 
(2016) 
UK Published paper Development of pain 
management tool for 
patients with 
dementia 
Ethnographic study Interviews, non-participant 
observation, medical notes 
review, documentary analysis 
The identification 
and management of 
Duffin (2013) UK Published paper Description of 
interventions to 
improve care for 
patients with 
dementia 
Discussion paper n/a Patient experience, 
patient safety 
Reference Country Type of item Focus Method of study or 
type of paper 
Data collection Patient and /or 
carer outcomes  
Edvardsson et 
al. (2012) 
Sweden Published paper Understanding the 
psychosocial ward 
environment 
Qualitative  Observation Patient experience 
Elliot and 
Adams (2011) 
UK Published paper The role of Dementia 
Nurse Specialist 
Discussion paper n/a Patient experience, 
patient safety, needs 
assessments, patient 
involvement in 
decision-making 
Ellison et al. 
(2014) 
UK Published report Evaluation of 
Dementia Champions 
and Dementia Nurse 
Consultants 
Evaluation Interviews, staff survey Patient experience, 
assessment of needs, 
reduced distress, 
reduced behaviours 
that challenge 
Enns et al. 
(2014) 
Canada Published paper Quality improvement 
trial to reduce the use 
of physical restraints 
in hospital 
Step wedged trial Medical notes review Use of restraints 
Galvin et al. 
(2010) 
USA Published paper Evaluation of 
dementia awareness 
training programme 
Pre-, post-, and delayed 
post test  
Questionnaires of staff 
knowledge and confidence in 
dementia, interviews with 
trainees 
Patient experience  
Goldberg et al. 
(2014) 
UK Published paper Patient experience 
and care on a Medical 
and Mental Health 
Unit compared with 
care on general wards 
Qualitative findings 
from RCT 
Non-participant observation 
(structured (dementia care 
mapping) and unstructured) 
Patient experience, 
reduced distress, 
reduced behaviours 
that challenge, 
supporting patient 
choice (walking 
about the ward, food 
outside of 
mealtimes) 
Reference Country Type of item Focus Method of study or 
type of paper 
Data collection Patient and /or 
carer outcomes  
Goldberg et al. 
(2013) 
UK Published paper Patient outcomes on a  
Medical and Mental 
Health Unit compared 
with general wards 
Quantitative findings 
from RCT 
Interviews, medical notes review, 
used of validated tools, non-
participant observation 
(dementia care mapping) 
Days spent at home, 
health status 
outcomes, 
behavioural and 
psychological 
symptoms, physical 
disability, cognitive 
impairment, carer 
strain, carer 
psychological 
wellbeing, carer 
satisfaction, patient 
mood and 
engagement 
Gonski and 
Moon (2012) 
Australia Published paper Outcomes of patients 
treated on a 
behavioural unit in a 
hospital 
Retrospective review of 
medical records 
Medical notes review, interviews 
with staff and carers 
Carer satisfaction, 
Patient health care 
outcomes, 
behaviours that 
challenge, 
mediation, falls 
Reference Country Type of item Focus Method of study or 
type of paper 
Data collection Patient and /or 
carer outcomes  
Harwood et al. 
(2010) 
UK Unpublished 
report 
Development of 
Medical and Mental 
Health Unit  
Discussion paper n/a Patient experience, 
patient orientation 
to time, supporting 
patient abilities, 
patient safety, 
supporting patient 
choice (walking 
about the ward), 
patient referrals, 
behaviours that 
challenge, 
medication review, 
carer satisfaction, 
carer involvement 
Luxford et al. 
(2015) 
Australia Published Paper Clinician-carer 
communication tool 
Survey Survey with staff and carers Acceptability and 
perceived benefits 
for patients 
Moyle et al. 
(2011) 
Australia Published paper Best practice, the use 
of specials  
Qualitative Interviews Interviews with staff Patient experience 
Nichols and 
Heller (2002) 
USA Published paper The development of a 
specialist dementia 
care unit 
Discussion paper n/a Improved 
communication with 
carers, improved 
patient experience 
Rsler et al. 
(2012) 
Germany Published paper Care of patients with 
dementia with hip 
fractures on specialist 
ward compared with 
general ward 
Matched pair analysis Validated scales Functional status, 
use of antipsychotic 
medication, length 
of stay 
Scerri et al. 
(2015) 
Malta Published paper Person-centred care in 
hospital wards  
Appreciative Inquiry / 
Qualitative interviews 
Interviews Family carer 
satisfaction, patient  
experience 
Reference Country Type of item Focus Method of study or 
type of paper 
Data collection Patient and /or 
carer outcomes  
Schneider et al. 
(2010) 
UK Published report The role of health care 
assistants in caring for 
people living with 
dementia 
Ethnographic study Participant observations, 
Interviews 
Patient experience 
Spencer et al. 
(2013) 
UK Published paper Family carer 
perceptions of care on 
Medical and Mental 
Health Unit compared 
with general wards 
Qualitative findings Interviews with family carers Carer satisfaction, 
carer perception of 
Upton et al. 
(2012) 
UK Published report Multi-component 
bundle of evidence-
based interventions 
Qualitative and 
quantitative findings 
Interviews, survey, medical 
records 
Ward moves, 
infections, weight, 
catheter use, falls, 
mobility, place of 
discharge, use of 
antipsychotics, 
patient and carer 
satisfaction 
Waller and 
Masterson 
(2015) 
UK Published paper Dementia-friendly 
environmental 
adaptations in 
healthcare settings 
Summary of findings of 
evaluations  
Pre and post audit and locally 
determined data collection 
(observations, incident forms and 
falls data, medication review, 
interviews)  
Behaviour that 
challenges, falls, 
patient engagement 
in activity, reduced 
agitation and 
distress, reduced use 
of antipsychotics 
Reference Country Type of item Focus Method of study or 
type of paper 
Data collection Patient and /or 
carer outcomes  
White et al. 
(2016) 
UK Published paper Management of 
behavioural and 
psychological 
symptoms of 
dementia in hospitals 
Longitudinal cohort 
study 
BEHAVE-AD scale 
Non-participant Observation 
Medical notes review 
Behaviours that 
challenge and the 
use of  
pharmacological and 
non-pharmacological 
interventions for 
behavioural 
management  
Williams (2011) UK Published paper Development of the 
Butterfly Scheme 
Discussion paper Staff self-report for use of the 
scheme  
Patient experience, 
identification and 
interpretation of 
behaviours that 
indicate a need 
(managing pain and 
continence), 
reducing patient 
distress, patient 
safety, carer 
satisfaction 
Zieschang et al. 
(2010) 
Germany Published paper Feasibility study of 
dementia care 
specialist unit 
Feasibility study Staff survey, validated tools  Patient function, 
patient mobility, 
behaviours that 
challenge, length of 
stay, falls, use of 
restraints, use of 
antipsychotics 
Stage three: analysis and synthesis 
Data from the papers were extracted using the bespoke data extraction forms (Appendix 7).  This 
evidence was then organised into tables to display the contribution to each theory area and support 
analysis across studies (Appendix 8). Reoccurring patterns, or demi-regularities, detectible across the 
studies were identified and debated with supervisors and the research network monitors group.  
Distinct but related concepts were identified which were expressed through six context-mechanism-
outcome configurations (CMOC) (Table 22) 
Table 22: Development of theoretical propositions into CMOCs 
Candidate theory tested: If a change agents activities or resources of an intervention supports staff 
to understand how to interpret and respond to a patients behaviour that uses person-centred care 
approaches, challenges poor practice by using experiential learning and reflection, then staff will be 
more likely (through mechanisms of confidence, awareness, the ability to prioritise) to engage and 
assess patient pain or distress and involve patients with dementia and their carer in planning their 
CMOC developed: CMOC 1 Evidence from 
Where staff are supported to understand behaviours that 
challenge as communication of an unmet need (context) 
through access to experts, training, resources that help to get 
to know the person (mechanism resource) staff will recognise 
they have improved capacity and capability to influence the 
patient situation (mechanism reasoning) making it more likely 
they will identify and address the need (outcome). 
However, workload, patient characteristics (context) and 
staffing resources (mechanism resources) may cause staff to 
doubt their ability to make a difference (mechanism reasoning) 
leading to the patient need not being identified, assessed, or 
addressed (outcome).  
(Baillie, 2015; Banks et al., 2014; 
Bray et al., 2015; Brooker et al., 
2014; Dowding et al., 2016; Duffin, 
2013; Edvardsson et al., 2012; 
Elliot and Adams, 2011; Ellison et 
al., 2014; Galvin et al., 2010; 
Goldberg et al., 2014; Gonski and 
Moon, 2012; Luxford et al., 2015; 
Moyle et al., 2011; Nichols and 
Heller, 2002; Rsler et al., 2012; 
Scerri et al., 2015; Schneider et al., 
2010; Spencer et al., 2013; Upton 
et al., 2012; Waller and 
Masterson, 2015; Williams, 2011; 
Zieschang et al., 2010) 
Candidate theory tested: If a change agents activities or resources of an intervention supports staff to 
understand how to interpret and respond to a patients behaviour that uses person-centred care 
approaches, challenges poor practice by using experiential learning and reflection, then staff will be 
more likely (through mechanisms of confidence, awareness, the ability to prioritise) to engage and assess 
patient pain or distress and involve patients with dementia and their carer in planning their care 
CMOC developed: CMOC 2  Evidence from 
Access to training (context) that gives staff an experiential 
understanding of impact of  dementia on a person and promotes 
empathy towards people living with dementia (mechanism resource) 
can encourage staff to reflect on the deficiencies of current working 
practices (mechanism reasoning) leading them to take more time with 
patients with dementia (outcome). 
However, where good dementia care practices (mechanism resource) 
are not recognised as legitimate working practices (context) staff may 
interpret dementia care practices as additional to their workload 
(mechanism reasoning) leading to inconsistencies in care provision 
(outcome) 
(Baillie,  2015; Banks et al., 
2014; Bray et al.,  2015; Brooker 
et al., 2014; Duffin, 2013; Galvin 
et al., 2010; Scerri et al., 2015; 
Williams, 2011) 
Candidate theory tested: If a change agent works as a clinical expert to identify and resolve the care 
needs of patients with dementia then staff will feel supported and be more willing to care for patients 
with dementia 
CMOC developed: CMOC 3 Evidence from 
Experts with clinical and organisational authority to legitimise the 
priorities and standards for dementia care (context), and support staff 
development in dementia care skills (mechanism resource) encourage 
staff to feel confident they understand the expectations of their role 
in patient care (mechanism reasoning) and will adapt care practices 
(outcome) 
However, where the responsibility for dementia care is focused in 
select staff (context/mechanism resource), this may reduce the sense 
of responsibility the wider workforce has for dementia care 
(mechanism reasoning) and reduce embedding good dementia care 
practices across the organisation (outcome). 
(Baillie, 2015; Baldwin et al., 
2004; Banks et al., 2014; Bray et 
al., 2015; Brooker et al., 2014; 
Duffin, 2013; Elliot and Adams, 
2011; Ellison et al., 2014; Enns 
et al., 2014; Goldberg et al., 
2014; Nichols and Heller, 2002; 
Rsler et al., 2012; Scerri et al., 
2015; Schneider et al., 2010; 
Upton et al., 2012; Zieschang et 
al., 2010)  
Candidate theory tested: If a change agent has organisational and clinical authority to introduce learning 
and credible resources that prioritise the identification and care of patients with dementia and addresses 
concerns around risk and workplace disruption within a person-centred care framework then staff will 
feel they have permission to do the right thing becoming less risk averse 
CMOC developed: CMOC 4 Evidence from 
Where staff are supported to be flexible and autonomous in their role 
and working environment (context) with clarification of their 
responsibilities for patient care (mechanism resource) staff will feel 
confident to adapt care provision (mechanism reasoning) responding 
to the care needs of the person in a timely, individualised manner 
(outcome). 
However, considerations of the influence of environmental factors 
and staff capacity (context) may need to be recognised and addressed 
by management (mechanism resource) for staff to feel confident a 
flexible, autonomous way of working is accepted by colleagues and 
senior staff (mechanism reasoning) for them to provide responsive 
care (outcome). 
(Bray et al., 2015; Goldberg et 
al., 2014; Rsler et al., 2012; 
Scerri et al., 2015; Schneider et 
al., 2010) 
Candidate theory tested: If a change agent has organisational and clinical authority to introduce learning 
and credible resources that prioritise the identification and care of patients with dementia and addresses 
concerns around risk and workplace disruption within a person-centred care framework then staff will 
feel they have permission to do the right thing becoming less risk averse 
CMOC developed: CMOC 5 Evidence from 
Where there is provision of activities and therapies for patients with 
dementia which are designed to support their interests and abilities 
(context) by staff allocated to this role (mechanism resource), they 
will take responsibility to address patients social, emotional, and 
psychological need (mechanism reasoning) and take action to 
maintain patient functional and cognitive abilities (outcome) which 
can provide time for other staff to focus on physical and medical 
needs (outcome). 
However, where staffing resources are limited (context) allocation of 
staff may be focused on maintaining patient safety (mechanism 
resource) which requires these staff to prioritise safety concerns over 
the provision of activities and therapy (mechanism reasoning) limiting 
how psychosocial needs are met (outcome) 
(Bray et al., 2015; Duffin, 2013; 
Edvardsson et al., 2012; Galvin 
et al., 2010; Goldberg et al., 
2013; Goldberg et al., 2014; 
Harwood et al., 2010; Moyle et 
al., 2011; Scerri et al., 2015; 
Upton et al., 2012; Zieschang et 
al., 2010)  
Candidate theory tested: If a change agent has organisational and clinical authority to introduce 
learning and credible resources that prioritise the identification and care of patients with dementia 
and addresses concerns around risk and workplace disruption within a person-centred care 
framework then staff will feel they have permission to do the right thing becoming less risk averse 
CMOC developed: CMOC 6 Evidence from 
Where risk management procedures and expectations 
are defined through the use of person-centred 
approaches (context) and ward leadership encourages 
and reinforces these practices (mechanism resource) 
staff may feel confident they are supported to address 
risk proportionately (mechanism reasoning) and they 
may support the safety of patients with dementia in 
ways which help maintain their abilities and accept 
their choices. 
However, resources for risk management will need to 
be compatible (mechanism resource) with 
environmental features and staff capacity (context) or 
staff may feel the changes are inappropriate 
(mechanism reasoning) making it unlikely they will 
adapt care practices (outcome) 
(Duffin, 2013; Enns et al., 2014; Galvin et 
al., 2010; Goldberg et al., 2013; Goldberg 
et al., 2014; Gonski and Moon, 2012; 
Luxford et al., 2015; Moyle et al., 2011; 
Nichols and Heller, 2002; Upton et al., 
2012; Waller and Masterson, 2015; 
Williams, 2011; Zieschang et al., 2010) 
CMOC 1: Understanding behaviour as communication of an unmet need to support 
staff to respond   
Awareness in staff that behaviour is a form of communication is an important contextual factor to 
trigger staff to go on to perform assessments, put in place care plans and treatment regimens, and 
respond appropriately to better meet the persons care needs. Studies reported where staff 
understood behaviours that challenge from patients with dementia as a form of communication of 
an unmet need, rather than as a symptom of their dementia, they were more likely to recognise and 
respond appropriately; for example by addressing the cause, rather than the behaviour (Banks et al., 
2014; Dowding et al., 2016; Ellison et al., 2014; Gonski and Moon, 2012; Nichols and Heller, 2002; 
Upton et al., 2012; Waller and Masterson, 2015).  This improved patient outcomes in terms of 
reducing patient distress (Baillie, 2015; Bray et al., 2015; Brooker et al., 2014; Goldberg, et al., 2014; 
Edvardsson et al., 2012; Scerri et al., 2015; Upton et al., 2012) and maintaining independence by 
supporting mobility and continence (Duffin, 2013; Rsler et al., 2012; Williams, 2011; Zieschang et 
al., 2010).   
Training in dementia and dementia care (Baillie, 2015; Bray et al., 2015; Galvin et al., 2010; Scerri et 
al., 2015; Waller and Masterson, 2015), access to dementia care experts, such as dementia 
champions, dementia nurse specialists, and mental health experts (Banks et al., 2014; Elliot and 
Adams, 2011; Ellison et al., 2014; Goldberg et al., 2014; Upton et al., 2012; Zieschang et al., 2010), 
biographical knowledge of the patient (Banks et al., 2014, Luxford et al., 2015; Nichols and Heller, 
2002; Upton et al., 2012; Williams, 2011), and assessments of cognitive abilities, and psychological 
and physiological needs (Dowding et al., 2016; Goldberg et al., 2013; Goldberg et al., 2014; 
Zieschang et al., 2010) helped staff to reframe how they interpreted behaviours; moving from 
something to control and manage, to something that could inform how to work with the patient.  
The negative impact of staff who did not understand the difficulties associated with dementia were 
identified in interviews with carers (Spencer et al., 2013).  They reported staff misinterpreting 
behaviours that challenge as patients being deliberately difficult.  This led staff to respond 
inappropriately: 
Participants [family carers] felt that staff had little understanding and limited training in 
dementia care, which carers felt resulted in patients being ignored, shouted at or threatened 
when staff were faced with uncooperative or challenging situations. (Spencer et al., 2013, 
However, even when staff understood how to work with patients with dementia with behaviours 
that challenged, their ability and willingness to address these needs were limited by contextual 
factors. Goldberg et al. (2014) highlighted the impact of conflicting work demands, staff fatigue, long 
shifts, and difficulty in identifying and resolving patient issues that resulted in staff responding to 
behaviours by ignoring and disengaging from the patient:   
Staff would try to comfort or distract themBut the calling out would resume once the staff 
member left the patient and the conflicting demands on time meant staff would sometimes 
ignore their cries and attend to other patients, staff or documentation. Delivering care to 
patients with these behaviours could be exhausting and sometimes, particularly towards the 
end of a long day (12 1/2 h shift), staff would ignore patients. (Goldberg et al., 2014, 
p1338) 
Personalisation of practices appeared to occur in pockets of activity rather than as an ethos of care 
provision that was integral to staffs work.  This is discussed further in CMOC 2.   
CMOC 2: The role of experiential learning and creating empathy to encourage 
reflection for staff responsibilities for care 
Interventions to raise staff awareness in dementia and reframed behaviours as communication were 
considered fundamental to supporting the provision of good dementia care.  However, while studies 
reported improved knowledge in dementia and confidence in staff working with patients with 
dementia, there was limited understanding of how this influences staffs caring practices or the 
impacts on patient outcomes (Baillie, 2015; Banks et al., 2014; Galvin et al., 2010; Williams, 2011). 
Training strategies which enabled staff to understand the experience of having dementia through 
experiential learning techniques were reported to help staff empathise with the patients situation, 
and consider how they could improve the way they provided care for patients with dementia (Baillie, 
2015; Banks et al., 2014; Duffin, 2013).   Staff reported suddenly understanding the problems 
patients with dementia faced which had not occurred to them before: 
Lack of understanding dementia is evident as we ask family, friends or carers to leave while 
we take the patient through the admission process. Not only is the person with dementia in 
an unfamiliar environment, but we also isolate them from the people who truly know them. 
(Banks et al., 2014, p724)  
Evidence from one evaluation of training found that triggering emotional responses in staff, and 
supporting them to make personal connections to patient situations, encouraged staff to see 
patients with dementia as individuals and understand that being in hospital was confusing and 
caused anxiety (Baillie, 2015).  Additionally, the use of examples of good care in familiar situations 
gave staff a framework for what good dementia care looked like in their own practice.  Staff 
reported that this motivated them to take responsibility for making changes to how they provided 
care for patients with dementia:   
Staff discussed how their own interactions with patients and behaviour had changed since 
watching Barbaras Story, and they often referred to changes they had observed in other 
staff too. Changes included: giving more time to patients, improved communication, giving 
more information, and assisting patients who are looking lost. Staff also discussed how 
Barbaras Story had highlighted their professional responsibilities. (Baillie, 2015, p28) 
Training that had relevance to staff work was considered important for staff to identify how their 
role contributed to improvements in care for patients with dementia (Baillie, 2015; Duffin, 2013; 
Williams, 2011).  However, these care practices, such as spending time with a patient to reassure 
them, were not considered integral to staff responsibilities and were understood as additional to 
their work: 
Care worker (S33): Not just as part of a chore or duties [but] as part of being really 
interested in the patients needs... Going out of your way, going out of your duty ... because 
sometimes I go to patients who do not need a speech therapist... but if they ask for 
something I go out of my way. (Scerri et al., 2015, p6)  
This suggests that, in addition to training in dementia care, staff needed to feel able to spend time 
with patients without it being viewed negatively by colleagues, or impact on the effective running of 
the ward (Baillie, 2015; Scerri et al., 2015). 
CMOC 3: Clinical expert who legitimise priorities for care  
Staff who were experts in dementia care were employed to support other clinical staff to develop 
their skills in caring for patients with dementia (Baldwin et al., 2004; Banks et al., 2014; Bray et al., 
2015; Brooker et al., 2014; Elliot and Adams, 2011; Ellison et al., 2014; Goldberg et al., 2014; Upton 
et al., 2012; Zieschang et al., 2010).  A number of roles were identified including: supporting the use 
of assessments and person-centred care plans related to the persons psychological, social, and 
functional needs (Baldwin et al., 2004; Zieschang et al., 2010); role modelling how to communicate 
and work well with patients with dementia (Banks et al., 2014; Goldberg et al., 2014); and providing 
professional advice for complex situations, such as legal and ethical decisions around best interests 
(Elliot and Adams, 2011; Ellison et al., 2014).  Experts with clinical and organisational authority 
communicated the expectations for dementia care practices, and were found to legitimise changes 
at both ward level (Baillie, 2015; Bray et al., 2015; Enns et al., 2014; Scerri et al., 2015; Zieschang et 
al., 2010) and across the organisation (Baillie, 2015; Brooker et al., 2014; Nichols and Heller, 2002). 
Staff concerns about the impact of the changes on their work were addressed in relation to how 
psychological and emotional needs were prioritised in relation to medical and physical needs, 
making adequate modifications to ward routines to accommodate patients preferences, and 
clarifying expectations around managing patient safety and documentation (Bray et al., 2015; 
Brooker et al., 2014; Enns et al., 2014; Nichols and Heller, 2002; Zieschang et al., 2010).  However, 
supporting ward staff to adopt and integrate these changes was dependent upon addressing any 
skills gaps for new care practices, such as supporting and encouraging mobility in patients who are at 
risk of falls (Enns et al., 2014; Zieschang et al., 2010), and a recognition from managers that this 
would impact the number of patients staff could be allocated to work with (Bray et al., 2015; Nichols 
and Heller, 2002; Rsler et al., 2012).  The example below demonstrates how an intervention, 
introduced by a senior nurse with ambitions to improve dementia care, had implications for staffing 
resources: 
Although the cost of bay nursing is higher because additional nurses had to be recruited to 
ensure a constant nursing presence in each bay, this has been offset, at least in part, by 
lower costs as a result of the reduction in one-to-one nursing. (Bray et al., 2015, p24)  
While it was considered support from clinical experts would upskill staff in dementia care practices 
and influence how they worked with patients with dementia, there was limited evidence to support 
that new practices were being adopted and embedded into staffs daily practice.  Instead it 
appeared that the experts maintained responsibility for dementia care, either personally or by 
providing direction.  It is possible that a reliance on staff with expertise for dementia care could 
result in responsibility for the care of patients with dementia being located in a small group of staff 
rather than creating a culture where dementia care is everybodys business.  Evidence from one 
paper (Goldberg et al., 2014) suggested that while ward staff as a whole were better able to work 
with patients with dementia, they would direct issues unrelated to medical or physical needs to 
dementia experts: 
Lisa walks down the walkway. The staff say Morning Lisa Morning as they walk past. . . 
Lisa says that this is a strange hospital. The auxiliary says If you want to go down that way 
with [the mental health nurse], shes lovely. Lisa says Youre all lovely. The mental health 
nurse then talks to Lisa for some time. MMHU55. (Goldberg et al., 2014, p1339) 
This suggests that the use of experts in dementia care will not, on their own, engage staff to take 
responsibility for patient needs which staff do not consider part of their role.  Other contextual 
factors and mechanisms that influence healthcare staff to move beyond focusing on physical and 
medical needs need to be considered and are discussed in the next CMOC. 
CMOC 4: Staff are confident they are supported to adapt working practices and 
routines for individualising care 
The provision of person-centred care was linked to staffs ability to organise their work around the 
needs of patients with dementia which, while recognising the constraints of the ward routine, were 
not restricted by them (Bray et al., 2015; Edvardsson et al., 2012; Goldberg et al., 2014; Rsler et al., 
2012; Scerri et al., 2015; Schneider et al., 2010).  One study on a rehabilitation ward, where training 
in person-centred practices had been provided by the consultant geriatrician, explored what made 
quality dementia care possible (Scerri et al., 2015).  Evidence from staff interviews suggested that 
quality dementia care required staff to recognise the benefit of getting to know patients by spending 
time with them outside of essential care tasks: 
Results from the interviews with staff denoted that positive experiences could only be 
possible if staff engaged with dementia patients by spending some time out of their busy 
schedule to get to know them better. According to a number of care workers, this does not 
mean solely spending time next to the patient, but engaging with the patient and showing 
genuine interest. This has been referred to by two members of staff as the provision of 
quality time that sustains this relationship through the use of appropriate communication 
skills. (Scerri et al., 2015, p5) 
Evidence demonstrated that staff knowledge of the person, combined with the ability to act 
responsively to patients expressing distress or unmet needs, improved patient wellbeing (Bray et al., 
2015; Edvardsson et al., 2012; Scerri et al., 2015; Schneider et al., 2010).  Staff with a clear 
understanding of their responsibilities in patient care was linked to actions which demonstrated 
their autonomy by responding in timely, creative ways that met individual patient needs (Bray et al., 
2015; Scerri et al., 2015; Schneider et al., 2010). 
Working practices which were flexible and that prioritised the needs of the patient were suggested 
to be beneficial for patients functional outcomes.  One study (Rsler et al., 2012) suggested that 
improved mobility in patients with dementia were linked to physiotherapists managing their 
caseload according to the patient preferences.  Using professional judgement to take into account 
patient mood, therapy staff were able to identify optimal times for individual patients to engage 
with physiotherapy sessions, which reduced the number of sessions that were rejected:    
In the CGU described here, physiotherapists and nurses tried to activate patients more 
individually by catching the right moment rather than working according to strict time 
schedules (Rsler et al., 2012, p401) 
There were additional factors supporting staff to work flexibly, including reduced caseloads, training 
in dementia care, and access to treatment rooms which were located on the ward (Rsler et al., 
2012).   
CMOC 5: Staff allocated to the provision of care focusing on psychosocial needs  
The ability of staff to provide good dementia care was influenced by time constraints and the 
availability of staffing resources.  This was addressed through the use of mental health care staff, 
activities co-ordinators, and volunteers who had specific roles to prioritise emotional, social, and 
psychological needs.   These staff assessed cognitive abilities and psychosocial needs, provided 
individualised therapeutic activities, supervised mealtimes, and managed risk (Bray et al., 2015; 
Edvardsson et al., 2012; Galvin et al., 2010; Goldberg et al.. 2014; Moyle et al., 2011; Spencer et al., 
2013; Zieschang et al., 2010).   The reported patient outcomes were improved patient experience 
(Bray et al., 2015), orientation to time and place (Edvardsson et al., 2012), reduced distress (Bray et 
al., 2015; Edvardsson et al., 2012; Goldberg et al., 2014), and a reduction in behaviours that 
challenged staff (Goldberg et al., 2014).     
Activities and therapies with patients with dementia were also reported to benefit healthcare staff.  
By working with some of the ward patients, this provided additional time for healthcare staff to 
focus on the physical and medical needs of other patients on the ward (Edvardsson et al., 2012; 
Galvin et al., 2010; Goldberg et al., 2014; Spencer et al., 2013; Zieschang et al., 2010).  Studies 
reported that some activities were deliberately scheduled to cover known times where there would 
be a high need within the patient population such as supporting mealtimes (Bray et al., 2015; 
Edvardsson et al., 2012; Goldberg et al., 2014; Upton et al., 2012), or during times known to cause 
patients with dementia increased anxiety:  
Daytime activities are conducted especially during the afternoon when staffing by the 
nurses is reduced and the sun-downing phenomenon might occur. (Zieschang et al., 2010, 
p144) 
The effectiveness of staff providing activities and therapies was linked to patient characteristics.  Not 
all patients could benefit from a programme of activities and participation was dependent on 
severity of physical illness, level of cognitive impairment, and personal preference of the patient 
(Goldberg et al., 2014; Spencer et al., 2013).   However, these patients may have indirectly benefited 
as healthcare staff had more time to address their physical and medical needs.  This was not 
explored in any of the papers. 
The ability of activities and mental healthcare staff to prioritise emotional and psychological issues 
was impacted on by ward-wide staffing levels.  In this context, ward management prioritised safety 
and risk management over other non-medical needs and allocated roles accordingly (Bray et al., 
2015; Goldberg et al., 2014).  While allocation to risk management roles could also incorporate 
meeting patients psychosocial needs by staff using the opportunity to engage with the patients in 
conversations and activities, this was not always the case.  Moyle et al. (2011) highlight that often 
risk management is allocated to junior staff members who have not been trained in dementia care, 
and do not have an understanding of the purpose of their role beyond monitoring the patient.  As a 
result, staff did not engage with patients and their close proximity increased patient distress. 
CMOC 6: Supporting staff to be confident in providing person-centred risk 
management 
Studies reported addressing risk in ways that supported a persons abilities, choices, and 
independence improved mobility (Duffin, 2013; Zieschang et al., 2010), reduced adverse incidents 
(Upton et al., 2012), and improved patient experience and carer satisfaction (Goldberg et al., 2014; 
Luxford et al., 2015; Nichols and Heller, 2002).  To support staff to have confidence to use more 
person-centred approaches to risk, they received training which developed their skills and helped 
them understand how different approaches benefitted patients (Enns et al., 2014; Luxford et al., 
2015; Zieschang et al., 2010).  Environmental factors influenced the way risk was addressed. In 
wards with locked door access, patients could be monitored at a distance which allowed them to 
walk around the ward with minimal restrictions (Goldberg et al., 2014; Gonski and Moon, 2012; 
Nichols and Heller, 2002; Zieschang et al., 2010).  This was linked to reductions in behaviours that 
challenge, but may also reflect staff reframing behaviours such as wandering as no longer 
problematic: 
The fact that patients cannot leave the unit unaccompanied not only ensures the safety of 
the patients but also relieves the staff of the necessity to observe them constantly.  It also 
spares patients being repeatedly admonished for not staying in the room, which can evoke 
aggressive behaviour. (Zieschang et al., 2010, p143) 
In open wards, where patients were at risk of leaving the ward, alternative methods were used to 
identify these patients, such as the use of wrist bands and different coloured hospital clothing.  This 
helped staff to monitor patients from a distance and intervene as necessary (Baillie, 2015; Duffin, 
2013; Galvin et al., 2010):   
People with dementia also wear a blue wristband with their name on. This is another 
means of alerting staff to patients needs, and it can be beneficial if a patient wanders off a 
ward to walk around other parts of the hospital. It means that staff know the patient is 
vulnerable and can find out if they need help and also let staff on the older peoples wards 
know where they are. (Duffin, 2013, p17) 
Staff training and protocols supported staff to use appropriate methods to encourage a patient to 
return to their ward (Duffin, 2013; Galvin et al., 2010), although there was no detail of what this 
training involved and who it was aimed at.  While the theory for the process was explained, there 
was no evidence to support how the intervention worked in practice. 
Programme theory 
Work in stage one of the review led to the development of three candidate theories.  These theories 
were tested against evidence from 28 papers from CMOCs evident across data from the studies.  
They suggest that relying on single initiatives, such as a change agent, is not enough to encourage 
staff to change working practices in ways that are dementia-friendly.  There also needs to be 
attention to contextual factors that will make staff more likely to make use of the resources 
interventions. Figure 8 presents the programme theory which incorporates the six context-
mechanism-outcome configurations.  This suggests what needs to be in place to encourage best 
practice for dementia care in hospitals (Figure 8).   
The preliminary CMOC represents a context where staff have limited understanding of what the 
needs are of patients with dementia, and how care can be provided to meet their needs.  It is 
recognised that resources which promote dementia awareness and an understanding of what 
constitutes good dementia care are often initially implemented into these contexts.  A preliminary 
outcome of this is that there is a change in the context in that staff can have a common 
understanding of what good dementia care looks like, and how this is beneficial to their work and for 
patients with dementia. Additional contextual factors in the intermediate CMOC, such as how 
organisations and managers legitimise dementia care practices, and the clarity staff have in their 
responsibilities for patients with dementia, will influence how they engage with resources and make 
changes to the care they provide. These changes by staff are anticipated to lead to improved patient 
outcomes, although evidence related to patient outcomes was limited.  
Chapter summary 
This chapter has presented evidence from stakeholder interviews and the literature which has 
contributed to building a programme theory of what supports hospital staff to provide dementia-
friendly healthcare, and with what outcomes for patients with dementia.  The realist review 
demonstrated that single initiatives which lack the support of senior hospital staff members are 
unlikely to change the way hospital staff provide care for patients with dementia.  Instead, 
organisational endorsement is a key context that will influence whether or not staff modify care 
practices with patients with dementia and draw on resources which can enhance their work, helping 
them to recognise they have the capability and capacity to improve outcomes for patients with 
dementia and their carers.  A key finding was that hospital staff understand behaviour as a 
communication of an unmet need in order to assess and address the underlying cause.   
Figure 8: Programme theory for supporting dementia-friendly healthcare in general hospitals 
Chapter four: Realist evaluation findings 
The realist evaluation aimed to test the programme theory developed from the realist review in two 
case study sites.  In this chapter I report the findings from the study sites, starting with a description 
of the two sites and participants.  I then demonstrate how the findings refined the programme 
theory with examples of evidence that contributed to developing the context-mechanism-outcome 
configurations.   
Case study sites 
Study sites 1 and 2 were general hospitals in two NHS Trusts in East of England (Table 23). They had 
taken different approaches to how they used resources to provide care for patients with dementia.  
Site 1 had a dual-frailty ward with 16 beds.  Site 2 had a team providing 1:1 care for patients with 
dementia across the general hospital.  It was not possible to identify the number of patients 
admitted to each general hospital who had a diagnosis of dementia, as at the time of the study 
computer systems were not organised to automatically record this information.  At admission, 
patients were recorded as having dementia, or not, but this did not necessarily agree with whether a 
formal diagnosis had been made. At site 2, the Dementia Lead had a responsibility to cross check 
diagnosis for patients identified as having a dementia with their primary care and mental health 
records.  Case finding patients recorded as having a dementia was complex.  The computer system 
did not support an automatic search for dementia diagnosis and staff who completed patient 
records recorded dementia diagnosis across a number of different fields.  Additionally, the Dementia 
Lead had recently joined the general hospital and there had been a gap in recording data related to 
patient numbers with dementia.   
Table 23: Study site characteristics 
Site Number of Beds Type Number of emergency 
inpatients per year* 
(Trust wide) 
Site 1 Over 500 General Hospital Approximately 40,000 
Site 2 Over 700 General Hospital Approximately 45,000 
*HES data 2015/16 
Observations 
A total of 80 hours of observation were completed over three months, comprising of seven weeks at 
each site.  At site 1, 41 hours of observation were performed covering the hours of 7.00am to 
10.00pm (see Table 11, p63). At site 2, 39 hours were completed covering the hours of 7.00am to 
10.00pm (see Table 12, p64).  Observations were carried out in patient bays on the wards. At site 1 
they were conducted in one ward, the dual-frailty ward.  At site two, observations took place across 
four wards as follows: Ward A: 25 hours, Ward B: 9 hours, Ward C: 2 hours, Ward D: 3 hours.  
Observations in Wards A and B looked at the work of ward staff and 1:1 staff with patients with 
dementia.  Observations in Wards C and D focused primarily on the work of the 1:1 team with 
patients with dementia.   
Staff interviews 
At total of 36 staff participated in interviews, covering domestic staff, nurses, healthcare assistants, 
doctors, allied health staff, psychiatrists (Table 24).  Thirty staff participants had English as their first 
language. 
Table 24: Staff interviews by site 
Role/Position Site 1 Site 2 
Heath care worker 3 7 (2 ward, 5 from 1:1 team) 
Nurses 4 3 
Allied Health Staff 2 1 
Doctors 3 2 
Senior Nurse Leads 3 4 
Consultant Psychiatrist 1 1 
Housekeepers 0 2 
Total 16 20 
Patient Recruitment 
Across the sites, 28 patients were recruited for medical notes review and the Neuropsychiatric 
Inventory (NPI) assessment, four of these patients participated in interviews (Table 25). 
Table 25: Patient recruitment 
Site Number 
eligible 
patients 
Capacity 
consent 
Capacity to  
consent 
recruited 
(interviewed) 
Without 
capacity  
Without 
capacity 
recruited 
Without 
capacity 
consultee 
decline 
Without 
capacity 
no reply 
Site 1 40 9 3 (2) 31 15 5 11 
Site 2 29 10 4 (2) 19 6 4 9 
Total 69 19 7 (4) 50 21 9 20 
Carers 
Across the sites, 21 carers were approached for interview during their visits to the hospital, either 
through face-to-face discussions or by letter (see Carer recruitment, p56).  Only two carers, one from 
each site, were recruited. Reasons for declining interviews included the burden of a formal interview 
when their relative or friend was in crisis, other commitments such as looking into alternative living 
arrangements for their relative or friend, and practical concerns around time spent at the hospital. 
Ward and team characteristics 
Ward characteristics differed in the sites, these are detailed below (Table 26 and Table 27).  Floor 
plans for the ward at site 1 and ward A at site 2 show how the physical environments differed 
(Appendix 18 and Appendix 19). 
Table 26: Ward characteristics by site 
Site  Ward Specialism Beds Bay/bed Side rooms Staff to patient ratio 
1 A Dual-frailty 16 8/2 0 1:2 
2 A Elder care 30 4/6 6 1:6/1:7/1:7 
2 B Orthopaedic 30 4/6 6 1:6/1:7/1:7 
2 C Elder care 30 4/6 6 1:6/1:7/1:7 
2 D Elder care 33 6/5 3 1:5/1:6/1:8 
Ward A at site 1 differed from the wards at site 2 by having fewer beds, fewer bays, more beds per 
bay, no side rooms, and a higher staff to patient ratio (1:2 versus 1:5). 
Table 27: Ward characteristics for site 1 and 2 
Ward Characteristic Site 1 Site 2 
Reason for admission Physical and mental health need Ward A, B and D multiple physical 
and medical needs, Ward C 
orthopaedic 
Environment Wood effect laminate flooring 
Locked keypad entrance/exit 
Temperature locally controlled 
Red door frames and white doors 
for toilets and showers 
TV in each bay 
Tea, coffee and snack facilities for 
patients and visitors  
Tables for patients, staff and 
visitors in middle and front of bay 
Shiny white tiled flooring 
Locked keypad entrance/exit 
(Wards A, C, and D) 
Temperature remotely controlled 
Red frames, white doors, and 
photographic signage for toilets 
and showers 
Reminiscence room on Ward A 
and C 
Visiting professionals 
to ward 
Psychiatrist, occupational 
therapist, physiotherapist, 
specialist nurses (e.g. Macmillan 
nurse, continence nurse, infection 
control) mental health team, social 
worker, pastoral care, dietitian, 
phlebotomist 
Enhanced Dementia Care Team 
(1:1 team), psychiatrist, 
occupational therapist, 
physiotherapist, specialist nurses 
(e.g. Macmillan nurse, continence 
nurse, infection control, wound 
care) mental health team, social 
worker, pastoral care, dietitian, 
phlebotomist 
Ward rounds Daily between 9am and 12pm with 
doctors, sometimes joined by 
psychiatrist, physiotherapist 
(Ward A) Daily between 9am and 
10am with doctors, sometimes 
joined by senior nurse  
Multidisciplinary Team 
Meeting 
Daily between 12pm and 1pm 
Includes doctors, nurses, social 
worker, discharge nurse, allied 
health professionals and are joined 
twice a week by the psychiatrist 
Daily between 10am and 11am 
Includes doctors, nurses, social 
worker, discharge nurse, allied 
health professionals 
The environment of Ward A at site 1 was noticeably different from the wards at site 2.  The bay 
space was bigger, allowing for tables in the centre that were used for communal dining and 
activities; often this space would be shared by staff and patients.  At site 2, space in the bays was too 
small to accommodate tables, instead staff used small, portable desks when working in the bays.  
The bays in ward A at site 1 were well lit and had windows on three sides allowing for plenty of 
natural light.  At site 2, strip lighting in the middle of the ceiling meant that areas were unevenly lit, 
and at night time this could lead to shadows and dark areas of the bay when curtains were drawn 
around beds. At site 1, a wood effect laminate flooring had a matt finish which reduced glare, 
whereas at site 2 floor tiles were shiny.  Other wards at site 1 outside of the unit were similar to 
those at site 2.   
There was more focus on assessing and addressing mental health at site 1 than site 2.  Staff from the 
mental health team visited the ward daily, assessment of cognitive abilities and mental health, such 
as depression, were carried out with all patients, an activities co-ordinator provided daily activities, 
and the occupational therapist assessed and developed plans for mental as well as physical needs. 
Staff characteristics and responsibilities 
Nurses and healthcare assistants at site 1 work 12  hour shifts, either night or day.  They had two 
30-minute breaks per shift which were timed mid-morning and mid-afternoon to ensure all staff 
were available at meal times.  Each shift allocated four healthcare assistants and four nurses across 
two eight-bedded bays. A senior nurse was on duty during the day.  
At site 2, there were three shifts patterns of early (7am  2pm), late (2pm  7pm), and night (7pm  
7am).  Staffing numbers differed according to the shift and represented total staff allocation for 30-
bedded wards (Ward A, B, C) and a 33-bedded ward (Ward D) (Table 28).  A senior nurse was on duty 
during the day shift.   
Table 28: Staff characteristics 
Site  Ward Shifts per 24 hours Qualified staff by shift Non-qualified staff by shift 
1 A 2 4/4 4/4 
2 A 3 5/4/4 4/4/2 
2 B 3 5/4/4 4/3/2 
2 C 3 5/4/4 4/4/2 
2 D 3 5/4/3 4/3/2 
Dementia Enhancement Team (1:1 team) Site 2 
The Dementia Enhancement Team at site 2 provided 1:1 care for patients with dementia who were 
at risk of falls or had behaviour that challenged staff.  The team consisted of 17 full-time staff at 
band level 3, a team manager, and a matron for the team. They worked 12  hour shifts, spending 3 
hours with each patient and were generally assigned 4 different patients per shift.  They had fixed 
breaks and shared a staff room with one of the wards. The team used their own care notes and a 
Whatsapp group to share information on patient interests, activities that have worked, and for 
general support between the team members.  
Admission to ward  
At site 1, patients were not directly admitted to the ward.  Transfer to the ward was through a 
referral process completed by a senior nurse on the admitting ward and assessed by Rapid 
Assessment Interface and Discharge (RAID) team.  Patients were transferred to the ward because 
they were both medically unwell and had behaviour that challenged due to dementia, delirium, or a 
combination of the two. When a bed became available, transfer was arranged through the senior 
nurse on duty.   Patients recruited to the study at site 1 (n=18) had a median of 4 (1  36) days from 
hospital admission to being transferred to the dual-frailty ward.  
At site 2, patients were admitted and treated in the same way as patients without dementia with the 
expectation that they remained there until discharge.  Some patients with dementia were observed 
being moved to different beds within the ward according to their, or other patients, level of risk and 
need to be monitored.  The Trust policy for patients with dementia stated that patient moves within 
or between wards must not occur unless necessary, although there was no guidance where patients 
with dementia should be admitted to on the ward.  However, it was acknowledged by staff that 
patients with dementia who were at risk of falls were cohorted into the bays that were most visible 
to the nurses station.  
Recognising additional staff support needs 
At site 1, due to the higher staff to patient ratio on the ward compared to other areas of the general 
hospital, additional staff support was not available.  Staff on the ward provided additional support to 
patients as required. 
At site 2, all requests for 1:1 support went through the 1:1 Team Manager who was responsible for 
allocation of patients to the 1:1 team and use of agency staff.  A referral form set out a Red, Amber, 
Green (RAG) status for prioritising patients considered to need 1:1 support.  Those who presented a 
high risk to themselves or others from confusion, wandering, and aggressive and violent behaviour 
were allocated support from the team, and their changing needs were assessed daily.   
Patient characteristics 
Across the sites, 28 patients were recruited for medical notes review and NPI (18 at site 1 and ten at 
site 2).  Four of these patients participated in interviews, (see above, Table 25). 
At site 1, due to the ward admission criteria, all patients admitted to the ward were eligible for 
recruitment unless they were identified as end of life.  At site 2, identification of eligible patients was 
supported by the Dementia Lead who was responsible for checking that a formal diagnosis of 
dementia had been made. This explains the difference between the proportion of patients recruited 
with a formal dementia diagnosis at site 1 and site 2 (Table 29). 
Table 29: Patient characteristics 
 Site 1 Site 2 
 (n=18) (n=10) 
Median Age years (range) 77 (range 62  92) 88 (72  99) 
Gender Male / Female 11 / 7 4/6 
Length of stay days 21 (4  106) 23 (12  42) 
Place of admission:    
Own home 11 8 
Residential Home 2 2 
Nursing Home 3 0 
Sheltered Housing 1 0 
Other Hospital 1 0 
Place of discharge:   
Own Home 4 1 
Residential Home 4 4 
Nursing Home 6 3 
Sheltered Housing 1 0 
 Site 1 Site 2 
Hospital (rehabilitation) 0 1 
Mental health  2 0 
RIP 1 1 
Number returning to same place of residence 
yes/no/RIP 
9/8/1 3/6/1 
Reason for admission   
Fall 4 3 
Confusion 6 0 
Infection 5 3 
Fracture 0 4 
Cardiac/respiratory 3 0 
General decline 0 2 
Dementia Diagnosis Yes/No 9/9 10/0 
Dementia Type   
Alzheimers Disease 4 1 
Vascular Dementia 3 3 
Mixed Dementia 0 2 
Lewy Bodies 1 0 
Unspecified 1 4 
Delirium Yes/No 8/10 1/9 
Comorbid conditions Median 5 (1  13) 4.5 (1  11) 
Number of medications on admission Median 9 (3  15) 11 (4  26) 
Recorded adverse incident during stay Yes/No 12/7 3/7 
NPI median number (range) 3 (0  7) (n=17) Median 2 (0  5) 
Delusions 5 1 
Hallucinations  5 2 
Agitation or aggression 14 6 
Depression or dysphoria 5 2 
Anxiety 3 4 
Elation or euphoria 0 0 
Apathy 1 0 
Disinhibition 1 0 
 Site 1 Site 2 
Irritability or Lability 2 2 
Motor disturbance 8 1 
Night time behaviours  9 2 
Appetite or eating 0 2 
The patients recruited at site 1 were younger than those at site 2.  Overall, they had a similar length 
of stay, although nine patients at site 1 did have longer than the median.  Nine patients from site 1 
returned to their original place of residence, eight had delirium and 12 experienced an adverse 
incident during admission.  The number of incidents possibly reflected the reasons for transfer to the 
ward, as five of these incidents occurred on other wards and were related to falls or violence.  As 
results from the NPI data demonstrate, patients recruited from site 1 were reported as having a 
higher number of behaviours that challenged than those at site 2. 
Theory testing 
The purpose of the study has been to develop an explanatory account of what supports dementia-
friendly healthcare, in what circumstances, and with what outcomes for staff and patients.  Evidence 
from the realist review (see Chapter three: Realist review findings) led to the development of a 
programme theory consisting of six interrelated context-mechanism-outcome configurations 
(CMOCs) (Table 30). 
Refined programme theory  
The six CMOCs make up the programme theory, which is summarised below. 
Table 30: Modifications to context-mechanism-outcome configurations from phase one to phase two 
Initial CMOCs developed during the realist review   Revised CMOCs from realist evaluation 
1) Understanding behaviour as communication 
improves staffs ability to respond   
1)  Knowledge and authority to respond to an 
unmet need 
2) Experiential learning and empathy encourages 
reflection on responsibilities of care 
2)  Role relevant training and opportunities for 
reflection 
3) Clinical experts who legitimise priorities for 
3)  Clinical experts and senior staff promoting 
practices that are patient-focused 
4)  Staff with confidence to adapt working 
practices and routines to individualise care 
4/5b)  Engaging with opportunities to spend 
time with patients 5) Staff with responsibility to focus on 
psychosocial needs 
6)  Building staff confidence to provide person-
centred risk management  
6)   Risk management as an opportunity for 
dementia care 
 7)   Valuing dementia care as skilled work 
CMOC 1: Responding to unmet needs: Systematic approaches to understanding patient needs are 
useful for a consistent and continued approach to patient care.  However, they are only as useful as 
the information that is collected; for these documents to support dementia care, staff need to 
understand what is important to record.  A context not identified in the review was the use of tacit 
knowledge that staff had developed from training and experience.  In recognising that staff draw on 
this knowledge for many of their interactions with patients when responding to their behaviours, 
providing opportunities that can develop this knowledge could support staff to improve how they 
interpreted behaviours that were challenging.  Important mechanisms were that staff had time to 
spend with patients, combined with their capacity and capability to engage with the patient, and 
their authority to approach senior team members.  This was thought to influence whether staff 
believed they could make a difference and take action that would result in the patients unmet 
needs being addressed. 
CMOC 2: Relevant training: Training in dementia care skills that had relevance to staff and could be 
applied to their work was reported to resonate with them and influence their practice.  However, 
staff were only required to attend dementia awareness training once and the training was delivered 
in a concise format.  Thus, it was important to provide opportunities for staff to share their 
experiences with other colleagues and develop their ability to work well with patients with 
dementia.  This could widen the range of responses they could draw on in different patient 
situations, such as helping to reduce patient distress.    
CMOC 3: Experts and senior staff: Clinical experts legitimised and defined best practice for dementia 
care.  However, if staff could not identify a benefit to themselves for changing practices they were 
unlikely to adopt new practices regardless of the benefit to the patient. Credible experts appeared to 
have less impact on staff practices than immediate line managers, suggesting a need to focus 
developing dementia expertise at ward manager level, who could then communicate the priorities 
for patient care to ward staff. 
CMOC 4/5b Time to spend with patients: Themes from CMOCs 4 and 5 were combined.  Biographical 
knowledge of the patient was used by staff to support their work with patients, but only where 
information was relevant to their work.  Social influences, such as norms for patient care and 
concerns around contribution of work to the wider ward, could inhibit staff from working well with 
patients, leading them to focus on their role rather than on the interaction with the patient.  
Organisational endorsement to spend time with patients, through either policies that required staff 
to remain in the bay, or the role of a member of staff held in relation to patient care, could 
encourage staff to work in more person-centred ways.  However, this was dependent upon the 
member of staff engaging with the opportunity rather than resenting and rejecting it. This influenced 
whether patients and their carers felt they were listened to. 
CMOC 6: Opportunities in risk management: The ethos of care for managing patient risk did impact 
on how staff worked with patients at risk of falls.  However, this was also influenced by the 
characteristics of the patient, additional staffing resources, and the ward environment.  
Organisational concerns and priorities, not patient need, dictated how staffing resources were 
allocated leading to patients at high risk of falls receiving more time with staff than patients 
expressing distress who did not pose the same risk.  Staff concerns for the consequences of an 
incident impacted on the way they addressed patient risk, which while supporting patient safety, 
impacted on patient choice and limited movement.  Where dementia care was given a higher 
priority and understanding of dementia was more consistently reported amongst ward staff, staff 
were able to approach patient needs calmly, creating an environment where behaviours that 
challenge were monitored and accepted rather than controlled.  This reduced carer concerns that 
patients should be restricted and reduced patient frustration as behaviours related to understanding 
the ward where not curbed where they were not a risk to themselves or others.    
CMOC 7: Valuing dementia care: Whether staff recognised dementia care as skilled work influenced 
their engagement with resources that could develop their skills.  There was limited formal 
recognition of the expertise in dementia care by the staff (healthcare assistants) who spent the 
majority of their time with patients with dementia.  Time spent with patients attending to needs 
related to dementia was not considered as worthy as time spent attending to clinical needs.  Work 
with patients with dementia was prioritised according to risk rather than need and influenced the 
nature of the work staff were involved with, limiting their opportunities to use dementia care skills 
and leading them to believe they were losing skills.  This could impact their long-term commitment 
to stay in dementia care. 
CMOC 1: Knowledge and authority to respond to an unmet need 
Table 31: Evidence informed revisions to CMOC 1 
Original CMOC 1 from review Revised CMOC 1 
Where staff are supported to understand 
behaviours that challenge as communication 
of an unmet need (context), through access to 
experts, training, resources that help them to 
get to know the person (mechanism 
resource). Staff will recognise they have 
improved capacity and capability to influence 
the patient situation (mechanism reasoning) 
making it more likely they will identify and 
address the need (outcome). 
However,  
workload, patient characteristics (context) and 
staffing resources (mechanism resources) may 
cause staff to doubt their ability to make a 
difference (mechanism reasoning) leading to 
the patient need not being identified, 
assessed, or addressed (outcome).  
Where behaviours that challenge are understood as 
communication of an unmet need through staff 
training, experience, access to experts, and the use of 
care planning documents to support the assessment 
of possible causes of behaviour (including medical, 
physical, psychological, emotional) (Context), shared 
information about patient care and a range of 
responses for meeting patient needs (mechanism 
resource), will support staff to feel they have the 
capacity, capability, and authority to influence the 
situation (mechanism reasoning) and will be more 
likely to identify and address the need (outcome). 
However, 
conflicting work demands, patient characteristics, and 
organisation of the ward (context) will influence how 
staff respond to patient need, the time they spend 
with patients (mechanism resource) and if they 
consider they have the authority to request action 
from senior colleagues (mechanism reasoning) 
influencing if patient need is investigated, addressed, 
or raised with colleagues (outcome). 
Findings from the review suggested that staff understanding behaviour as communication of an 
unmet need is an important context for the provision of good dementia care.  Evidence from the 
case study supports this as an important prerequisite of good care. Staff reported how training and 
their own experience (CMOC 2), access to expert advice (CMOC 3), and assessment documents were 
important contexts for developing their ability to identify and respond to patient needs. This was 
most evident when there were competing demands on staff time. In these situations, it was staffs 
underlying competence in working with patients with dementia expressing distress and anxiety, and 
knowing how to respond and take action to address a patients need, that made a difference.  
Additionally, a level of authority to raise patient needs with more senior staff and ensure 
recommendations were acted upon was important for staff to believe they could make difference to 
the patient, leading them to take action.   
The following section explores these elements of the CMOC, drawing on evidence from interviews 
and observations at both sites. 
Methods for identifying and addressing need: the use of systematic and tacit approaches  
Use of systematic approaches for understanding behaviour as communication of an unmet need was 
identified in the review.  Interviews with senior staff identified systematic approaches as key to 
supporting a thorough assessment of possible underlying causes of behaviour and developing 
strategies that would address the need. At both sites, staff involved in dementia strategy groups 
discussed the development and use of dementia care bundles.  These set out evidence-based 
assessments and practices that are considered to improve patient outcomes when used together in 
a consistent and continuous way, and detailed procedures for identifying causes of distressed 
behaviour, recommending actions for staff.  They were also thought to help staff develop their 
awareness and help them acquire techniques for addressing patient needs. This quote provides an 
example of how this learning was supported by ward-based resources to reinforce alternatives to 
medication for patients with behaviour that challenge: 
And then obviously had some input into the [ward] behaviour chart which has then gone 
round the hospital.  Which of the 17 / 18 interventions listed, only one is medication.  You 
know, one is calling a doctor, one is around one-to-oneing someone, but pretty much there 
is around 14 interventions on there which are non-pharmacological interventions, which 
arent about medicines; do they need the toilet, do they need something to do because its 
boring being in hospital, those sorts of things. (Site 1, ST0116, Psychiatrist) 
There was evidence from observations, interviews, and review of medical notes, that doctors, 
psychiatrists, and allied health professionals were using these systematic approaches to understand 
possible causes of behaviours that were challenging for staff, although most of this evidence was 
identified at site 1.  Evidence suggested, however, there were limitations to systematic approaches 
currently in use.  The ability to understand and interpret behaviours was linked to what kind of 
information ward staff recorded.   Variability in the recording suggested ward staff awareness for 
understanding behaviour as communicating an unmet need did not extend to assessment, use of 
language, and documenting care.  While staff spent a considerable amount of their time 
documenting patients care in medical and nursing notes, such as their fluid intake and bowel 
movements, descriptions related to behaviours expressing needs and how staff addressed them 
were limited and lacked depth or possible explanations.  This observation demonstrates how pain 
was recognised as a possibility for a patients behaviours but the notes do not explain what had been 
attempted to improve the situation:  
The doctor continues to set out 5s situation; that he is in pain, that he has an infection, and 
is agitated.  They mention that the notes report that he is shouting, but comment that they 
would want to know why he is shouting, not just that he is shouting.  The doctor suspects 
that it might be because of pain. (Site 1, OB0103) 
Motivations for recording behaviours may have influenced what was recorded.  For example, staff 
may have been recording the behaviour to assist assessment, alternatively they may have been 
recording the behaviour to ensure there was a record of the incident.  This might, in part, explain 
why more disruptive behaviours, such as violence, aggression, or trying to leave the ward, were 
more likely to be recorded.  When information was more detailed, considered possible causes of the 
behaviour, and documented what staff had done to try and address them, patient records provided 
opportunities for learning to identify deficits in care provision and how it could be improved:  
[FN: 4 earlier reacted badly to being supported with care by a male 1:1 and had hit out.  The 
family member confirmed 4 did not like support from male staff] The HCA ward and the 1:1 
are talking about the support needs for patient 4.  The HCA ward says to the 1:1 that she will 
go and update the RN and ward manager and put it in the patient notes that 4 is not to 
have male support.  The 1:1 then comes over to me and explains that they now know why 4 
cannot have a male 1:1 and that everyone is being updated to change the care plan. (Site 2, 
OB0202) 
Some behaviours, for example calling out, were often not recorded, even though staff recognised 
this as disruptive and indicative of patient distress.  This might have been linked to whether staff 
considered the behaviour to be inevitable, unsolvable, and to be tolerated by staff and patients, or if 
they perceived they had the ability to address the cause of the behaviour.  
An alternative method of understanding patient behaviour was described by some staff who 
explained how they drew on knowledge and skills developed from a combination of training and 
experience.  Tacit knowledge led these staff to consider causes, such as pain and hunger, helping 
them to resolve the patients need: 
She [1:1] then goes on to tell me about how pain is always one of the first things she 
considers when a person is agitated or aggressive  She said since that training she has been 
on it looking out for evidence of pain.  She then gives the example that 13 has been 
complaining of headaches since she has been working with him and suggested that possibly 
it is because he is used to wearing glasses but he does not have them with him.  She also 
explains that 14 had been very agitated this morning and was constantly trying to get out of 
bed and pulling his catheter, but since he has had the pain relief he has been much calmer.  
(Site 2, OB0213) 
Observations recorded staff checking and clarifying their understanding of behaviours by asking the 
patient about their needs.  Where verbal communication abilities were limited, staff addressed the 
need based on their interpretation of the behaviour:   
The HCA walks back down the bed bay towards the front desk.  She looks over at 7 and 
notices that he is eating the cardboard packaging from the sandwich. She goes over and 
gently takes it out of his mouth saying to him 7, you dont want to eat cardboard.  She 
then says to him would you like a biscuit?  He does not respond, but HCA turns and says Ill 
get you a biscuit.  As she goes to get the biscuit she looks over at 6, 6 does not appear 
happy with his tea.  He sees she is looking and asks about the sugar, HCA replies there is 
sugar, it probably just needs a stir, Ill get you a spoon. She goes to get a spoon. (Site 1, 
OB0106) 
However, once staff understood the reason for the behaviour, they would sometimes attempt to 
address it in ways which might not be reflective of the patients preference, in part this was linked to 
the available resources.  For example, where staff recognised patients were hungry but did not have 
access to patients food choices, persistent offers of alternatives could lead to increased agitation 
and frustration: 
[FN: 4 has been asking for a particular food, but has run out of her own supply which the 
family bring in. Staff do not have access to an equivalent alternative and have been offering 
different options which have been met by anger and frustration from 4.]  The agency HCA 
asks 4 Do you want a banana? 4 screws up her face and says in a loud, annoyed voice, I 
dont want a fucking banana [FN: offers of food continue regularly for two hours and are 
met with hostility.] (Site 2, OB0211) 
The above example demonstrates the limited responses staff had for addressing patient needs.   
Developing alternative strategies for addressing patient needs depended on being able to attend 
training, or working closely with other, more experienced colleagues who could reflect on whether 
strategies were working, provide explanations, and demonstrate alternative ways of how to address 
a patients needs (see CMOC 2).  At site 1, the layout of the ward and the higher number of staff 
working in the bay meant there were more opportunities for staff to share how they worked with 
patients to reduce distress.   
Range of responses and time with patients influencing patient outcomes 
An analysis of the types of responses to address different patient behaviours (Appendix 20) 
demonstrated that while staff were observed as attempting to reduce patient distress, they had a 
limited range of responses.  Some staff were observed to rely mostly on distraction methods, such as 
offers of drink or food.  Other staff were more likely to draw on techniques that had biographical 
relevance to the patient, such as talking with them about family and jobs.  Whether or not these 
methods were able to address the patients need depended upon the level of distress the patient 
was experiencing and the amount of time the member of staff could spend with them.  For example, 
where staff engaged with a patients distress by making time to focus on their needs, and provide 
comfort in ways that were acceptable to the patient, this could help calm patients:  
The HCA walks over to 9.  The HCA asks her if she is okay.  9 looks up at the HCA, she has 
tears in her eyes.  The HCA walks over to her right-hand side, reassures her she is okay and 
gives her a big hug.  She then releases her a little and checks she is okay, 9 nods and smiles.  
  The HCA has her left hand behind 9s back and speaks into her ear.  9 looks at her and 
nods.  The HCA then comes over to the front desk, takes a spare chair, looks at me and says, 
she needs a chat.  (Site 1, OB0109) 
However, observations recorded a number of occasions where staff spent only brief periods of time 
with patients expressing distress.  These were due to: competing demands which were prioritised 
over spending time to reduce distress; staff considering that the immediate need had been met, 
such as observing the patient have a drink; or techniques not being immediately successful in 
reducing distress. These short exchanges rarely appeared to lead to a reduction in distress, resulting 
in repeated, brief interactions with staff:   
Patient 4 was calling out repeatedly over a three-hour period.  Patient 4 expressed 
discomfort and concern about her drip until it was completed and removed, and feeling hot 
and uncomfortable requesting to remove clothing.  Each time staff explained why she 
needed to keep the drip in or keep clothes on and then distracted her by encouraging her to 
have something to drink.  After watching her take a sip, they would leave her, returning to 
other work. (Site 2, Summary of OB0207) 
Decisions around whether staff spent time with patients appeared to be linked to whether they had 
the capacity and capability to reduce distress.   
Staff capacity, capability, and authority to request action from senior staff 
Staff capacity to understand and respond appropriately to behaviours were conditional to contextual 
factors such as conflicting tasks and competing patient needs. Staff at site 1 commented that 
increased staff support allowed them time to spend with patients who were anxious or distressed.  
In contrast, in situations where there were reduced staff numbers, staff were less able to respond to 
behavioural and emotional needs such as anxiety.  In these situations, staff attempted to provide 
comfort to distressed patients through verbal reassurances and, where possible, visually monitoring 
them:  
[FN: 2 has been saying she is lost since the beginning of the observation.  The HCA is working 
with 4 behind curtains] After a moment 2 turns to me and says, I dont know my address.  
The HCA calls out from behind the curtain 2 your address is on the note, what does it say 
2?  2 looks at the note and says the address.  The HCA says, yes, thats right.  (Site 2, 
OB0205) 
Addressing patients emotional needs was secondary at times of conflicting demands, such as other 
patient needs and ward routines.  This appeared to be partly influenced by whether staff considered 
they could make a difference or were able to stop the task they were involved with to address the 
patient needs.  For example, taking clinical observations, such as blood sugar level readings in the 
lead up to mealtimes, was prioritised over addressing emotional and psychological needs of patients 
who were visibly sad or repeatedly calling out:    
13 has been repeated calling out for help over the past hour of observations.  The bay is not 
visible from the nurses station and staff have briefly popped in to see other patients.  It is 
now approaching lunch time and the HCA takes blood sugars for 14 and 15.  During this time 
13 continues to call out but the HCA does not go over to ask about her needs. (Site 2, 
Summary of OB0209) 
At site 2 the ward culture was more hierarchical and staff appeared to need a level of authority to 
make requests and follow-up with senior staff.  This could impact how patient needs were 
addressed.  For example, when staff recognised patient behaviours as an expression of pain but 
were not qualified to administer pain relief, they needed to make requests for medication to senior 
staff on behalf of patients:   
The 1:1, in the moments when 2 is not needing support, has been looking around the bay 
and checking on the other patients. The RN comes in and the 1:1 gets her attention, sister. 
The RN goes over to the 1:1, the 1:1 continues, pointing towards 4, that lady in bed 4 is in a 
lot of pain.  The RN nods and goes over to the medication chart and picks up 4s then goes 
and stand over to 4s left-hand side.  She asks 4 where the pain is. (Site 2, OB0208) 
Ward staff who appeared reluctant to make these requests, or follow-up requests, were observed 
instead repositioning patients and distracting them with drinks rather than approaching the senior 
colleague. This could lead to a delay in patients receiving pain relief.   
Figure 9: CMOC 1 Knowledge and authority to respond to an unmet need 
CMOC 2: Role relevant training and opportunities for reflection  
Table 32: Evidence informed revisions to CMOC 2 
Original CMOC 2 from review Revised CMOC 2 
Access to training (context) that gives staff an 
experiential understanding of the impact of 
dementia on a person and promotes empathy 
towards people living with dementia (mechanism 
resource) can encourage staff to reflect on the 
deficiencies of current working practices 
(mechanism reasoning) leading them to take more 
time with patients with dementia (outcome). 
However, 
where good dementia care practices (mechanism 
resource) are not recognised as legitimate working 
practices (context) staff may interpret dementia 
care practices as additional to their workload 
(mechanism reasoning) leading to inconsistencies 
in care provision (outcome) 
Access to training, support from experts and 
colleagues with experience in dementia care 
(context) develops skills and techniques 
(mechanism resource) that are relevant to staff 
work (mechanism reasoning) and lead staff to apply 
the methods in their work (outcome) reducing 
patient episodes of distress (outcome). 
However, 
dementia care is complex and it is not always 
possible to resolve patient distress (context), staff 
need to have opportunities to share their 
experiences to develop their skills (mechanism 
resource) and be reassured they have tried to make 
a difference (mechanism reasoning) to improve their 
ability to cope with patient distress (outcome). 
Findings from the review suggested developing empathy and understanding of how patients with 
dementia experience care was important for staff to recognise why some practices might have a 
detrimental effect.  Evidence from the case study suggests that while staff with a responsibility for 
training felt this was an important element, staff in receipt of training reported they valued learning 
specific skills relevant to their daily work.  This demonstrates that the priorities for training were 
different between ward staff and those training staff.  Staff ability to implement learning was 
influenced by previous experience of working with patients with dementia, and concerns for their 
contribution to ward activities.  This evidence will now be discussed. 
Training that encourages reflection of care practices 
Staff responsible for dementia training discussed using techniques to encourage staff to consider 
their practice from the patients point of view.  They believed that by understanding how dementia 
could affect a patients experience of care, staff would recognise why some approaches might be 
detrimental.  This in turn could help them to consider how to improve their care to meet the 
patients needs.  For example, by understanding that patients who are confused by their 
surroundings will be frightened and need reassurance, the staff might be prompted to comfort 
them: 
And it is looking at things from a very simple point of view, so looking at [consultant] talking 
about try as hard as possible to put yourself into the patients position, and if you could see 
what they were seeing, if you could understand what they were seeing, that sort of thing.  
(Site 1, ST0116, Psychiatrist) 
Staff providing training reported covering a range of topics and skills (Table 33).  Mandatory tier 1 
dementia awareness training ran at both sites.  Additional training was dependent upon staff role 
and their level of contact with patients with dementia.   
The two-hour slot allocated to dementia awareness training suggests there was limited time on the 
course to reflect on care practices, and the breadth of the course might have led staff to only retain 
information of relevance to their work.  For example, staff who had only received dementia 
awareness training spoke of how dementia impacted the person from the physical support they 
might need. This related to how they might adapt care provision but had limited reference to the 
patients emotional needs.  Staff with additional training and experience in dementia care reported a 
deeper insight of how care practices might be detrimental, and considered the impact on the 
Table 33: Topic areas for training and type of training delivery 
Training delivery Topic area Teaching format 
Dementia 
awareness 
Dementia Aetiology  
Signs and symptoms 
Impact on abilities such as eating and balance  
Person-centred care: seeing the person not 
the dementia 
Causes of distress 
Rights and dementia 
Communication skills: how to communicate 
well with people living with dementia 
Supporting carers: resources in the hospital 
and the community 
Class-based 
Lecture 
Facilitated by dementia lead 
Ward-based 
training / case by 
case advice 
Adapting care to benefit the person Ad hoc 
Ward-based 
By senior staff/clinical 
experts 
One day 
breakaway training 
(site 1 staff and 1:1 
staff at site 2) 
How to work with patients who are violent 
and aggressive in ways that will maintain their 
safety and staff safety.  For example, 
techniques for getting out of holds and 
knowing when to call for help 
Class-based 
Hands on 
Delivered by mental health 
experts 
Ward training (site 
1) Enabling patient 
abilities 
Identifying patient abilities and helping 
patients maintain them e.g. ability to self-care, 
continence, mobility 
Ad hoc, needs based 
Ward-based 
By allied health professional 
Ward training (site 
1) expert 
facilitating 
reflection of care 
practices  
Reflection of care practices e.g. examples of 
what has worked, or not, to encourage 
someone to be washed when they are 
refusing care 
Planned 
Ward-based 
Facilitated by allied health 
professional 
One week 
induction to 1:1 
team (site 2) 
Training in dementia care and training from 
other specialist nurses such as pain and 
palliative care 
Class-based 
Lectures Group Activities 
By clinical experts 
One day dementia 
champion training 
(Site 2) 
Use of patient biographical information for 
care planning.  Sharing experiences and 
reflecting on how would approach situations 
differently.  Carer experiences of hospital. 
Class-based 
Lectures 
Reflection 
Activities 
External educator 
patient.  For example, these staff spoke of how admission to hospital for patients with dementia was 
a frightening experience and understood the importance of providing emotional comfort and 
support:   
When they first come on the ward, it is very frightening, they get very scared.  Weve had 
people that have been here from, come back from a ward and they are very anxious and 
scared.  And then we tell them and funnily enough so people remember you, you say youre 
on [ward], you say youre okay youre with us, well look after you.  Once you gain their trust 
and they feel settled and calm (Site 1, ST0103, HCA)  
Areas staff considered training should cover were linked to their concerns for providing care in the 
right way.  For example, some staff commented that they wanted to develop communication skills 
for working with patients with dementia.  They relayed the importance of having examples for what 
to do in different situations:   
we had the dementia training.  It was a couple of hours, talk, video, which I think is great. 
I think that it is good to have an insight, watching it, discussing it.  The different types of 
dementia, signs to look out for.  I think we could maybe do more.  Some people, just how to 
act around a dementia patient, you know, when they are asking for their parents, you know, 
just to give them tips.  (Site 2, ST0205, HCA) 
These comments from staff suggest that the complexity in caring for patients with dementia was 
recognised.  Wanting more examples of how to address patient situations suggests staff were aware 
that there was more to learn and they were not confident working with patients with dementia.  
Some staff spoke of the difficulties they faced when providing care for distressed patients with 
dementia, particularly when they were unsuccessful in their attempts to recognise or meet the 
patients needs.  This fits with observation data related to the limited range of responses (Range of 
responses and time with patients influencing patient outcomes, Appendix 20), and indicates that 
staff had an awareness that they did not always have the right skills.  Where staff acknowledged this, 
they reported a willingness to learn.  This suggests an important mechanism for engaging with 
development opportunities was recognising where knowledge and skills were limited:   
when someone has more experience, and so you can understand how, for example, a 
colleague is able to manage medication with the patient.  It is interesting to learn, something 
like trying to get more knowledge. (Site 1, ST0102, Nurse) 
There were suggestions from staff with more experience that training opportunities were limited in 
furthering their development:   
[breakaway training] that did help although I think Id put a lot of those things into practice 
already so you know even though it was good to have it confirmed professionally, Id already 
put that into practice. (Site 1, ST0108, HCA) 
it was a weeks training.  I think two of those days were specifically on dementia.  But I 
already knew that training anyway, I didnt really feel like I learnt much more than Id 
already learnt on my previous job.  (Site 2, ST0203, 1:1) 
These opportunities were recognised as useful for reaffirming confidence in their professional 
practices, but they offered little in the way of broadening their knowledge and skills. 
Access to staff with dementia expertise 
Senior staff with expertise in dementia care were available at both sites.   The mental health teams 
at both sites provided support across the general hospital for adults with mental health concerns 
which included patients with dementia.  The teams were not funded by the Trusts and had their own 
separate office away from the ward. However, levels of contact varied between the sites. At site 1 
these staff worked in close collaboration with the ward team (Figure 10).  This included shared ward 
rounds and multidisciplinary meetings between consultants, psychiatrists, allied healthcare 
professionals, and nursing staff.  Assessments for cognitive abilities and mental health, such as the 
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and depression scales, were observed being conducted with 
patients as a routine part of patient history taking.  These staff provided input for patient care 
planning around supporting patient wellbeing and maintaining functional abilities.  They also 
reported providing ward-based training around care provision, such as providing personal care that 
met patients preferences and abilities.    
At site 2 the mental health team and dementia lead were not integrated into the work of specific 
wards but provided input to patient care as required (Figure 11).  The dementia lead made daily 
visits to wards where patients with dementia were admitted, assessing them and discussing their 
situation with ward staff and doctors.   Advice from the mental health team was on a case-by-case 
basis for specific concerns, such as assessments of behaviours that challenge to assist their 
management.  Neither the dementia lead, nor members of the mental health team, attended ward 
rounds or the daily multidisciplinary meetings.  Occupational therapists and physiotherapists 
provided support to wards across the hospital, usually designated to the same ones. They did not 
provide input on ward rounds but did attend the daily multidisciplinary meetings.     
Figure 10: Staff proximity and input with patients and ward at site 1 
Figure 11: Staff proximity and input with patients and ward at site 2 
At site 1, the regular presence of the mental health team on the ward supported informal contact 
and dialogue with ward staff.  Ward staff of all levels were observed being asked about the patients 
situation by these professionals during their visits to the ward.  At site 2, the dementia lead 
discussed patient care during visits to patients on the wards with nursing staff.  While staff with 
expertise reported the type of input they provided, it was not possible to track whether different 
levels of contact with these staff influenced how advice was followed, or the influence on patient 
outcomes.  
Developing skills from peers and senior staff 
At site 1, nursing staff and healthcare assistants reported how their practice was improved by seeing 
good examples of working from colleagues. This helped develop their knowledge of alternative 
approaches they could incorporate in their care.  Observations of practices demonstrated how staff 
learned from each other. For example, staff were observed sharing information about patient 
preferences and abilities, such as patients eating well when given finger food:   
An HCA goes over to her [12], hello 12, how are you today?  They have a brief chat, then 
the HCA walks away from the bed and speaks to another HCA saying, Im going to get her 
some finger food for breakfast.  She ate that well yesterday. (Site 1, OB0109) 
At site 2, the 1:1 management team considered one of the roles of the team was to influence ward 
staff to provide good dementia care.  Staff in the 1:1 team discussed how they had made suggestions 
to ward staff for the care of some patients, for example by informing them of an activity that helped 
to calm someone.  However, observations suggested that the influence of 1:1 staff on ward staff 
practices was limited as they often worked in isolation rather than collaborating in patient care.  
Some 1:1 staff reported times where they had lacked support from ward staff suggesting that their 
influence on ward staff might be limited:   
When we are looking after somebody, that gives the staff on the ward confidence that they 
cannot watch over that area so much and they may do all their washes, or their pad changes 
in the other bays and I kind of, and not just me, the others, sometimes we feel like we are 
left on our own. (Site 2, ST0203, 1:1)  
Healthcare assistants and nurses at both sites were observed informally sharing practices that 
supported patients, although there were more examples of this at Site 1.  A more formal approach 
to sharing practices was used by managers and senior nurses who were observed explaining and 
reinforcing care practices:   
7 had asked to have a cigarette.  The HCAs and RNs were discussing this and telling him they 
were just arranging for someone to take him for a cigarette.  Later in the corridor the ward 
manager was talking to one of the nurses explaining that they did not know if 7 was a 
smoker or if he had quit and was using patches.  She explained that the previous day he had 
asked another nurse for a cigarette and the nurse had managed to distract him with 
conversation while they attempted to contact his family and find out if he was smoking.  She 
told the nurse that the difficulty was that if he had quit smoking six months ago and they 
took at face value his request to smoke then they would be setting back his giving up. (Site 1, 
OB0102) 
There were few observed examples of these exchanges.  Those which were recorded, like the above 
example, suggest that while there were attempts to inform and develop staff awareness of patient 
difficulties related to their dementia, the focus was on ensuring the correct procedures and 
processes were followed. 
Figure 12: CMOC 2 Role relevant training and opportunities for reflection 
CMOC 3: Clinical experts and senior staff promoting practices that are patient-focused 
Table 34: Evidence informed revisions to CMOC 3 
Original CMOC 3 from review Revised CMOC 3 
Experts with clinical and organisational 
authority to legitimise the priorities and 
standards for dementia care (context), and 
support staff development in dementia care 
skills (mechanism resource) encourage staff to 
feel confident they understand the expectations 
of their role in patient care (mechanism 
reasoning) and will adapt care practices 
(outcome). 
However, 
Where the responsibility for dementia care is 
focused in select staff (context/mechanism 
resource), this may reduce the sense of 
responsibility the wider workforce has for 
dementia care (mechanism reasoning) and 
reduce embedding good dementia care 
practices across the organisation (outcome). 
Where standards for dementia care are 
defined through policies and care planning 
documents which are monitored and 
reinforced by experts and managers to support 
implementation of new practices (context) 
staff will understand what is expected of them 
and how care is to be prioritised (mechanism 
resource) and consider the benefits and 
consequences to themselves for new ways of 
working (mechanism reasoning) leading them 
to make choices about the way they provide 
care (outcome). 
However, 
A clinical experts ability to engage with staff 
and embed best practice for patients with 
dementia (context) will depended on their 
working proximity to staff (mechanism 
resource) and perceived benefit of new 
practices (mechanism reasoning) influencing 
whether staff adopt new ways of working 
(outcome) 
The review suggested that experts helped to legitimise care practices by clarifying expected 
standards for care and developing linked resources and staff skills to reflect these standards.  In the 
study sites, clinical experts reported their involvement in developing care pathways and care 
planning documents which set out processes and procedures for the provision of care for patients 
with dementia.  Experts in dementia care provided advice for care practices with patients with 
dementia and promoted patient-focused care.  Senior staff reported that some essential care 
practices were not recognised as important by more junior staff and required repeated reminders.  
While some staff considered the credibility of the expert was important, evidence suggested that it 
was the proximity of senior staff that influenced care practices, suggesting the importance of senior 
ward staff having expert knowledge in dementia care.  These ideas will now be discussed in relation 
to evidence from the sites. 
Developing documents that are acceptable and useful to staff to promote consistency in care 
practices  
In both sites, standards of practice for dementia care had been developed by strategy groups that 
involved staff across a range of disciplines who had responsibilities for working with patients with 
dementia.  They contributed to the development of policies, care pathways, and documents for care 
planning that ensured compliance with national guidance.  These documents detailed:  
 Use of validated assessment tools, such as the Abbreviated Mental Test Score (AMTS), 4AT 
assessment for delirium  
 Quality indicators relating to dementia screening and follow-up, completion of This is me 
booklets, and patient experience 
 Resources available in the general hospital for staff use to identify that the patient had 
dementia, such as forget-me-not magnets and coloured wristbands 
 Options for enhancing patient care, for example use of the Tiptree box which contained 
materials for activities such as colouring 
 Recommended the use of communication frameworks, such as the validation, emotion, 
reassurance, activity (VERA) framework 
 Highlighted paperwork that might need completing, such as Deprivation of Liberty 
Safeguards (DoLs) or behaviour care plans 
 Advice on the use of antipsychotics  
 Mandatory expectations, such as Tier 1 Dementia Awareness training, completion of This is 
me booklets.   
The collective knowledge of members of the Dementia Strategy Groups had contributed to their 
development and complied with national guidance.  Use of the documents aimed to: ensure 
consistency in the service by communicating best practice procedures; encourage the integration of 
biographical information in care planning; highlight resources and practices that might be unfamiliar 
to staff; and evidence the effectiveness of care practices:  
So we are trying to set up a bundle [document detailing best practice procedures and range 
of interventions] that can then be carried over to some of the other wards.  Something 
practical that kind of evidences what they are doing but also gives them tips about what 
they can do to make that situation better for the person (Site 1, ST0111, Occupational 
Therapist) 
I know in the dementia strategy group the consultant was speaking about what was good 
dementia care, what makes good dementia care.  I suppose at the moment there is no 
physical, no way to show that we are giving good care.  We have the care plan about the 
standards we have to follow that could be one of the best ways to measure it.  (Site 2, 
ST0201, Dementia Lead) 
The above quote demonstrates the difficulty for staff to measure good practice in dementia care.  
Experts in dementia care discussed the principles around good practice in dementia care, giving 
examples of how these might be applied in practice (Table 35). 
Table 35: Principles of good dementia care described by experts in dementia care at sites 1 and 2 
Area of good 
practice in 
dementia care 
What it included Example By who (site and 
role) 
Addressing both 
mental and 
physical health 
needs 
Making provision to 
support patients 
mental wellbeing as 
well as physical and 
medical health needs  
History taking and care 
planning that addresses not 
just the acute reason for 
admission, but a persons 
abilities and biography to 
inform care planning.  
Site 1: 
Psychiatrist, 
Doctors, Allied 
Health 
Professional 
Site 2: 
Psychiatrist 
Maintaining 
current abilities 
Enabling patients to 
perform personal care 
appropriate to their 
abilities, supporting 
mobility, supporting 
continence 
Allowing patients to shave 
themselves. 
Where some support is 
needed for personal care, staff 
allow the time to support the 
patient rather than providing 
the care because it is quicker.   
Encouraging mobility to 
reduce loss of function. 
Understanding how to support 
continence related to the 
persons abilities and 
preferences, such as 
supporting them to find the 
toilet. 
Site 1: 
Psychiatrist, 
Allied Health 
Professional 
Site 2: 
Psychiatrist, 
Allied Health 
Professional 
Area of good 
practice in 
dementia care 
What it included Example By who (site and 
role) 
Use of biography in 
care and care 
planning 
Using knowledge of 
patient likes and 
dislikes, their routine, 
and things that are 
important to them 
Providing food they like; 
reducing likelihood of distress 
from attempts to feed 
unwanted food, and rejected 
food being interpreted 
negatively (e.g. such as patient 
unable to self-feed, aggression 
from trying to resist food 
being treated with 
medication).  
Recognising habits, such as 
bedtime routines, and 
ensuring care provision and 
medication administration 
accommodates these 
preferences. 
Site 1: Dementia 
Lead, Psychiatrist, 
Doctors, Allied 
Health 
Professional, 
Dementia Lead 
Site 2: Dementia 
Lead, Psychiatrist, 
Allied Health 
Professional 
Provision of 
activities 
Providing activities 
that patients can 
complete by 
themselves or with 
support from others 
Using activities to stimulate 
the patient, providing them 
with opportunities to socialise 
and relieve boredom which 
might otherwise lead to 
behaviours that challenge. 
Site 1: Dementia 
Lead, Psychiatrist, 
Allied Health 
Professional 
Site 2: Dementia 
Lead, Psychiatrist 
Supporting patient 
identity 
Encouraging patients 
to dress in their own 
clothes, using the 
patients favoured 
name in interactions 
Patients are supported to be 
orientated by things that are 
familiar to them. 
Site 1: Dementia 
Lead, Psychiatrist, 
Doctors, Allied 
Health 
Professional 
Site 2: Dementia 
Lead, Psychiatrist, 
Allied Health 
Professional 
Involving the carer 
in history taking 
Checking the history 
of the medical 
condition and 
personal needs with 
the carer 
Ensuring that information 
from the patient is checked 
with their carer.   
Site 1: Dementia 
Lead, Psychiatrist, 
Doctor 
Site 2: Dementia 
Lead, Psychiatrist, 
Doctor 
Communication 
with the patient 
Staff are aware of 
their approach, 
recognise that a 
patient might have 
difficulties in 
understanding and 
adapt communication 
to the patients 
abilities  
Staff use voice tone, body 
language, eye contact, clear 
language to support patient 
understanding of situations 
and reduce distress during 
tasks such as personal care or 
clinical observations. 
Ensure sensory aids are worn. 
Site 1: Dementia 
Lead, Psychiatrist, 
Doctor, Allied 
Health 
Professional 
Site 2: Dementia 
Lead, Psychiatrist 
Area of good 
practice in 
dementia care 
What it included Example By who (site and 
role) 
Orientating to 
environment and 
situation 
Helping patients to 
navigate the 
environment  
Support for wayfinding.   
Supporting orientation to time 
and place for reassurance. 
Site 1: Dementia 
Lead, Psychiatrist, 
Doctor, Allied 
Health 
Professional 
Site 2: Dementia 
Lead, Psychiatrist 
Managing risk Using methods of least 
restrictive practice for 
managing risk 
Managing risk of falls in ways 
which do not impact on other 
abilities. 
Site 1: 
Psychiatrist, 
Allied Health 
Professional 
Site 2: 
Psychiatrist, 
Allied Health 
Professional 
Involving patient 
and carer in 
decisions and care 
planning 
Supporting decisions 
by offering 
opportunities for 
patients and carers to 
discuss what is 
important to them 
and considering the 
implications of care 
practices and 
medication regimens 
Understanding what is 
important to patients when 
planning how to address care 
needs, such as knowing when 
they like to get up. 
Agree how care is to be 
provided by understanding the 
implications e.g. that 
encouraging mobility might 
lead to a fall but might be less 
debilitating then restricting 
movement. 
Site 1: Dementia 
Lead, Psychiatrist, 
Doctor, Allied 
Health 
Professional 
Site 2: Dementia 
Lead, Psychiatrist 
While there were similarities in definitions of good dementia care across the sites, site 1 had more 
alignment across professions (nursing, medical, mental health, allied health) in all areas, whereas in 
site 2 professionals focused more on areas related to their own responsibilities. 
Ward staff at site 1 identified good care practices as related to reductions in anxiety and distress and 
maintaining a calm atmosphere.  Ward staff at site 2 defined good practice in ways that were 
applicable to all patient groups, few were dementia specific.  For example, staff were able to identify 
actions, such as ways to reduce risk of falls through monitoring patients, and general outcome 
measures, such as pressure sores.  At both Trusts, annual reports detailed objective measures, such 
as number of falls and pressure sores, as well as reporting improvements to services and patient 
experience as measures of service quality.  However, while service improvement measures, such as 
training and links with charity groups, were reported, specific patient outcome measures for 
dementia care were not reported.   
Experts at both sites discussed how the complexity of caring for patients with dementia required a 
holistic approach to ensure that in addressing one area of concern, another of the patients abilities 
was not neglected or negatively affected.  For example, mitigating one area of risk, such as falls 
through restricting patient movement, could impact on other abilities, such as continence by not 
supporting a patient to use the toilet.  Care plans were being developed to help staff identify these 
potential impacts.  However, while there was a need to recognise multiple concerns for care, it was 
recognised documents had to be acceptable and useful to staff.  Addressing all issues would result in 
lengthy documents that risked being rejected by staff. 
Promoting practices that are patient-focused 
Experts in dementia care reported promoting practices that were patient-focused.  At site 1, 
supporting personal care that recognised the patients preferences and abilities, and that was not 
restricted by ward routine, had been encouraged by experts through training and support on the 
ward.  Staff were observed respecting patients preferences in relation to timings for personal care.  
However, when staff felt under pressure to provide personal care to patients within a particular 
time-frame this could lead to care that frustrated and annoyed patients: 
Staff normally allow 2 to get up when he is ready. At 7.45am the new HCA approached 2 to 
get him up for a shower. 2 swore at the HCA.  Thirty minutes later the HCA tried again and is 
advised by other staff to wait until 2 is ready.  After another twenty minutes the HCA tries 
again and is joined by a colleague from the discharge lounge who is providing early morning 
support.  This time 2 gets up and angrily goes to the toilet while the two staff change his 
bed. (Site 1, Summary of OB0103)  
At site 2, experts in dementia reported making ward staff aware of preferences of patients written in 
This is me documents, such as going to bed early.  They suggested how these preferences might be 
incorporated, such as adapting timings of medications to suit patient normal routine.   Observed 
practices that were patient-focused, such as engaging patients in activities and conversations of 
interest, or ensuring patient comfort, had been instigated by individual members of staff who had 
experience of working with patients with dementia.  This suggests staff insight into dementia 
influenced how care was provided.  Where insight was limited, support from senior staff with 
expertise was required.   
Comments from ward managers indicate staff might not take the initiative to provide care in ways 
that consider the needs of patients and suggests that understanding how dementia impacts patients 
was not clear.  At site 1, while healthcare assistants and nurses discussed the impact of the 
psychosocial ward environment on patient experience, this did not appear to influence their use of 
the entertainment system.   
The ward manager said they used to make sure that patients were all in their own clothes in 
the day time and up and doing activities.  She said that standards had slipped and she 
needed to work on it Capital radio was playing on the TV and this annoyed her, simple 
stuff that staff should consider.  She then turned to the two patients at the table and asked 
them what they would like to watch. (Site 1, OB0104) 
We have music that is calm and helps to improve patient experience.  Not all the patients 
will like the music that is being played, but in general it helps to create a calm atmosphere.  
There are times I have to check that staff have not put on their own music because it is not 
always appropriate for the patients we are looking after. (Site 2, ST0220, Ward Manager) 
Despite their efforts, managers reported little evidence of consistent changes and appeared to 
concede these practices would require constant reinforcement.  Observations of their dealing with 
these practices showed the ward managers making the change, but not encouraging staff to 
recognise why attention to these practices was important, perhaps because managers considered 
them quick to address in the moment.   
Credibility of Experts in dementia care 
At both sites, experts and senior staff with expertise in dementia care considered how their 
credibility as an expert impacted on whether they were able to persuade staff to adopt new 
practices.  Credibility and trust were thought to be established through extensive experience, or 
conveyed when staff could identify with the senior member of staff:   
We did a training session on dementia and challenging behaviour that was run mainly by 
myself and one of our more experienced nurses who used to run one of our inpatient 
psychiatric wards.  And so, when shes talking [experienced mental health nurse], because 
again the doctors tend to come along and say, oh, do this and then we walk off.  The 
nurses are the ones having to deal with the patient for the next six hours of their shift. So 
one of our nurses who has been there and done that as an inpatient nurse, looked after 
effectively, is telling them, you know that patient you look after whos challenging, imagine 
the whole ward just of those patients.  Thats who she was looking after.  So when she tells 
you to do X she is doing it from experience.  (Site 1, ST0116, Psychiatrist) 
However, clinical experts advising and promoting new ways of working were observed to have 
variable levels of contact with the wards; at site 1 there was regular support and experts had 
frequent contact with staff, at site 2 contact was more limited (see Access to staff with dementia 
expertise, p175).  This appeared to influence how staff engaged with their advice.  Staff with 
professional experience, but who were contract-based and provided time-limited input into the 
priorities for care, might have limited impact for changing practises:  
I think one of the things that I was asked to do was to get the uniform. So again, whether 
its hierarchical, and occasionally I do put on a uniform so that people realise that I am a 
nurse [laughs]. Because there was this general feeling, you know, who is this person on the 
ward with a note pad and says these are the stuff you have to do. (Site 2, ST0218, Carers 
Lead) 
Informal conversations with staff at site 2 suggested the use of outside staff to provide advice that 
focused on long-term changes to care practices might result in their advice being rejected if it 
conflicted with advice from senior ward staff, such as the ward manager.  This suggests that senior 
staff proximity plays a part in defining care priorities and has important implications for considering 
how to organise expertise.  Depending upon how much understanding of dementia care senior staff 
have will influence whether care practices improve.  At site 1, the Dementia Lead highlighted the 
importance of Ward Managers being highly trained in dementia care to influence practice: 
I think the ward managers are people, and people who look after a lot of people with 
dementia should also be trained up to that level personally, but it is something that we need 
to look into and make sure that they can then transfer their knowledge down to their staff 
by practice.  Because a lot of dementia I think still needs to be transferred from the top.  I 
feel that very passionately that the ward sisters that are dealing with dementia should be 
trained. (Site 1, ST0114, Dementia Lead) 
While the ward manager at site 1 had received training as part of the development of the ward, 
further formal training in dementia care had not been attended.  The ward manager was supported 
with regular input from medical and mental health dementia experts.  At site 2 the ward manager 
had not received dementia care training.  This might, in part, explain why knowledge transfer of 
essential care practices, such as paying attention to the ward environment (see Promoting practices 
that are patient-focused, p184), were difficult for managers as they were limited in their own 
understanding. 
Figure 13: CMOC 3 Clinical experts and senior ward staff promoting practices that are patient-focused 
 CMOC 4/5b:  Engaging with opportunities to spend time with patients 
During analysis of evidence from the case study, it became apparent that CMOCs 4 and 5 from the 
review had a number of overlapping themes.  Knowledge of the patient was used by staff in ways 
that were of benefit to their roles.  Staffs experience of working with patients with dementia, and 
their understanding of their responsibilities for care, influenced how they recognised the 
contribution of their work and impacted on the focus of care provision.  Patients ability to engage 
influenced the quality of interactions with staff.  Additionally, how staff engaged with service 
directives that enforced their presence in bay areas, influenced how opportunities to spend time 
with patients were utilised. Therefore CMOCs 4 and 5 from the review were combined into CMOC 
4/5b (Table 36).   
Table 36: Evidence informed revisions to CMOC 4 and 5 to create CMOC 4/5b 
Original CMOC 4 from review Original CMOC 5 from review 
Where staff are supported to be flexible and 
autonomous in their role and working 
environment (context) with clarification of their 
responsibilities for patient care (mechanism 
resource) staff will feel confident to adapt care 
provision (mechanism reasoning) responding to 
the care needs of the person in a timely, 
individualised manner (outcome). 
However,  
considerations of the influence of 
environmental factors and staff capacity 
(context) may need to be recognised and 
addressed by management (mechanism 
resource) for staff to feel confident a flexible, 
autonomous way of working is accepted by 
colleagues and senior staff (mechanism 
reasoning) for them to provide responsive care 
(outcome). 
Where there is provision of activities and 
therapies for patients with dementia which are 
designed to support their interests and abilities 
(context) by staff allocated to this role 
(mechanism resource), they will take 
responsibility to address patients social, 
emotional, and psychological need (mechanism 
reasoning) and take action to maintain patient 
functional and cognitive abilities (outcome) 
which can provide time for other staff to focus 
on physical and medical needs (outcome). 
However, 
where staffing resources are limited (context) 
allocation of staff may be focused on 
maintaining patient safety (mechanism 
resource) which requires these staff to 
prioritise safety concerns over the provision of 
activities and therapy (mechanism reasoning) 
limiting how psychosocial needs are met 
(outcome). 
Revised CMOC 4/5b 
Staff with a clear understanding of their responsibilities and the priorities for patient care 
(context), have knowledge of the patient they can use in their interactions (mechanism 
resource) and recognise the benefit to the patient (mechanism reasoning) can provide care that 
enhances patient experience and maintains their identity (outcome). 
However, 
Organisational endorsement, social norms for patient care, and patient characteristics (context) 
can influence the time staff spend with patients (mechanism resource) and whether feel they 
have a level of authority to resist competing demands for their time (mechanism reasoning) 
influencing how staff prioritise patient needs (outcome).  
Knowledge of the patient and relevance to staff roles  
Access to biographical information about patients was considered important by staff to support their 
work with patients with dementia.  This information was obtained through discussions with their 
carer, and from information in This is me booklets.  It was reported as useful for: supporting 
conversations and activities of interest to the patient; knowing about their preferences for food and 
drinks; understanding the patients routine so that could be incorporated into care plans; and for 
strategies that might help reduce distress and anxiety.   
This information was applied differently by staff according to their role.  For staff who had a role in 
patient care which specified providing occupation through activities and conversations, they valued 
this information for guiding activities.  Drawing on this knowledge to inform activities improved 
patient engagement and experience:   
I depend upon what the patients family say about the patients, what they enjoy doing, 
what their careers were and things like that because I do think it is important for them to 
remember who they were, remember what they did and its nice to be remembered by 
other people and its nice to be recognised for what you used to do.  Because I think when 
the patients they only see themselves as patients they forget that they were somebody, that 
they did something to make a difference.  For example, we had someone who was an opera 
singer here and even though she was not mobile, she was very bad, we used to play some of 
her favourite opera music that she used to actually perform and that made her smile so 
much and she was singing along and everything.   So it was a simple things that you can do 
for the patient that can really make a big difference. (Site 1, ST0106, Activities co-ordinator) 
Healthcare assistants at both sites reported, and were observed, referring to the information at 
times of patient distress and anxiety to see if carers had recommended particular strategies.  This 
demonstrates that staff engaged with the information according to how it could support their work 
with the patient. 
Experience and responsibility for care influencing capability to adapt to patient needs 
Providing activities for patients with dementia were observed to be complex, requiring a high level 
of interpersonal skills.  Staff needed to: 1) understand the abilities of the patient and provide 
support appropriate to these abilities, and; 2) be able to interpret the patients non-verbal 
behaviour, recognise their changing needs, and appropriately respond.  To do this adequately, staff 
needed to be able to spend the time engaged with the patient and resist competing demands, or 
address them while maintaining the patients engagement:  
The HCA looks at 2 and rubs her left arm with her right hand.  She then looks at what else is 
on 2s table and sees a word search book.  She encourages 2 to do a word search by starting 
to look through the book and then sitting close to 2 saying, lets find this word together. 
She hands 2 the book and starts to help her look for the word.  When 2 finds the word she 
congratulates her (although not in a patronising way) and helps her to cross the word out to 
the right point by holding her finger to the end of the word. She continues to sit and help 2 
to look for words, talking through the strategies, this word has a z so we are looking at the 
letters around the z.  2 and the HCA are both focused on the activity for some time, 2 does 
not appear distressed at all during this and has a lot of concentration on the activity.  (Site 2, 
OB0205)  
However, there were times where staff were not responsive to cues from the patient.  This appeared 
to influence how they engaged with a patient.  Their ability to recognise and respond to a patients 
changing needs became secondary to maintaining the interaction.  This led staff to miss behaviours 
from the patient that suggested they were becoming tired, or were no longer interested in the 
activity:   
The 1:1 comes back in, picks up the book and starts to go through it again.  Initially 17 
appears to look annoyed at this but then as the 1:1 picks a page and starts to talk through it 
17 starts to smile more.  Then 17 puts her left elbow on the left arm rest and rest her head 
into her fist.  The 1:1 continues to point out things of interest in the book and laughs which 
17 joins in laughing with.  She engages her in a conversation once more and the 1:1 moves 
closer so she and 17 have their foreheads close and are sharing a moment.  But then 17 
starts to look round the room a little more and at the bed. While the 1:1 continues to look 
for more pictures, 17 picks up the menu off her table and looks at that.  (Site 2, OB0212) 
As the above quote demonstrated, there were times when patients had reduced engagement with 
activities.  At both sites, activities were often observed to continue beyond the patients initial 
interest, this was explained during one activity as a strategy to regain a patients interest: 
The activities co-ordinator had set up a painting activity at the middle table.  Originally four 
patients had joined in but after a few minutes all but 1 had left. I was sat painting with the 
activities co-ordinator and patient 15.  15 had stopped painting for several minutes and said 
that she had finished.  The activities co-ordinator attempted to encourage her to continue.  
15 continued to sit at the table but was not painting.  The activities co-ordinator continued 
painting and said to me that sometimes if you continue with an activity it will help the 
patient to resume their interest. (Site 1, Summary of OB0103)  
However, this and other examples demonstrated the difficulty in getting the right balance for the 
length, level, and focus of activities in ways that would benefit the patient.  At times, it appeared 
staff providing these activities were concerned with demonstrating their contribution to other staff 
members rather than attending to the patients changing interest.    
Patient ability for engagement and the influence on staff interactions 
Evidence from observations showed a patients ability to engage with staff could influence the time 
staff spent with the patient and the quality of those interactions (Table 37).  Where the ability of the 
patient to engage was limited, or their verbal abilities were poor, it was difficult to identify the 
direction of influence: whether patients limited abilities influenced staff interaction, or whether the 
way staff interacted limited patient engagement.   
Table 37: Patient ability to engage and observed interactions with staff 
Patient ability to engage Types of interactions observed 
Good engagement Conversations that developed around a patients interest, 
were enjoyed by patient and staff.  Supported in 
activities.   
Examples of camaraderie. Reciprocal interactions 
Limited engagement; preoccupations 
of where are and where family 
members are 
Reassured and distracted.  Explanations to orientate 
patient, offers of food and drink. Containing interactions 
Limited or no verbal abilities; e.g. 
reduced communication abilities due 
to their dementia or not English 
speaking 
Interactions focused around tasks and treatments. 
Functional interactions 
Patients whose abilities to engage appeared lacking, either because they appeared unable to speak 
or because they spoke another language to the staff, were observed only receiving interactions 
around task-based care, or to address behaviours around risk, such as attempting to stand up.  Staff 
used body language and hand gestures to support their verbal instructions and question patients 
about their needs.  The few examples of more in-depth, non-task related interactions with patients 
with limited verbal abilities were from staff with more experience in dementia care.  They guided the 
interactions by involving patients in conversations through their use of body language and props:   
One of the HCAs has passed 12 laminated pictures of cities round the world.   She starts to 
talk about her travels to different countries.  The other staff sat round the table join in.  The 
HCA continues to talk to 12 making eye contact and using touch to involve her in the 
discussion. (Site 1, OB0109) 
An important element that appeared to determine the success of these interactions was the staff 
members ability to maintain the interest of the person with dementia, and to recognise from the 
persons body language when they were no longer engaged or enjoying the activity.  Additionally, 
during these interactions staff were observed to have the authority to resist other ward demands 
and devote their attention to the patient.   
Policies and strategies that permit staff to work for the patients benefit 
At site 1, staff were expected to stay in their allocated bay on the ward. This was supported through 
training and reinforcement from senior staff.   An observed outcome of this requirement was that it 
encouraged patient and staff interactions that were not task focused.  Environmental design 
promoted staff and patients to share spaces, such as tables.  This supported impromptu 
conversations and provide social dining opportunities.  While staff did not eat with patients, they did 
join them to supervise meals and support conversations:   
Both 11 and 16 have now moved to have lunch at the middle tables with 9, 12 and 15.  Two 
HCAs are sat at the middle desks.  One is supporting 12 to eat (she is not independent with 
her food), the other is sat next to 9. The HCAs talk to patients in the group, prompt them to 
eat, and stop patients taking food from each others plates. (Site 1, Summary from OB0102) 
Ward staff at site 2 reported concerns that they did not feel they had time to spend with patients 
with dementia.  In part this appeared to be influenced by social and internal pressures to contribute 
to work on the ward, which impacted on their capacity to work with patients and the priority they 
placed on sitting with patients:   
because they are high risk, its the constant vigilance and you are usually given eight 
patients.  And so theres the dementia team, but they are not always here. They are not here 
today.  So that means that the nurses are put upon, because Im not free to care for the 
other patients. (Site 2, ST0202, HCA) 
1:1 staff also commented there were social pressures for them to contribute to work on the ward 
that was additional to their remit: 
I do want to help out and look after the patients and keep everybody happy and help the 
ward but you cant do everything.  You are there for a specific job and purpose and that got 
to, because otherwise once you start doing too much, they [ward staff] will give you other 
jobs to do. (Site 2, ST0203, 1:1)   
Organising care in ways that addressed organisational considerations for patient safety appeared to 
counter these concerns, or at least permitted staff to sit with patients. At the time of data collection, 
a falls prevention policy, involving bay nursing, was being implemented to improve patient safety.  
Interviews and observation suggested that staff often resented this practice because they felt they 
were not contributing to the collective care of patients.  
Ive got a bay like Im in today, I cant nurse other patients in another bay. (Site 2, ST0205, 
Data suggested that they did not recognise this as valuable work (see CMOC 7: Valuing dementia 
care as skilled work, p202):  
The SN comes in and tells the HCA that one of the other patients had been pulling out their 
catheter.  They have a brief conversation about this then the SN leaves, the HCA then turns 
to me and explains that normally she would have been assisting with that sort of situation 
but as 2 is at high risk of falls she cannot leave the bay. (Site 2, OB0206) 
Despite staff resistance, the enforcement was observed to encourage more contact with patients 
that was not task focused.
Figure 14: CMOC 4/5b Engaging with opportunities to spend time with patients 
CMOC 6: Risk management as an opportunity for dementia care 
Table 38: Evidence informed revisions to CMOC 6 
Original CMOC 6 from review Refined CMOC 6 
Where risk management procedures and 
expectations are defined through the use of person-
centred approaches (context) and ward leadership 
encourages and reinforces these practices 
(mechanism resource) staff may feel confident they 
are supported to address risk proportionately 
(mechanism reasoning) and they may support the 
safety of patients with dementia in ways which help 
maintain their abilities and accept their choices. 
However,  
resources for risk management will need to be 
compatible (mechanism resource) with 
environmental features and staff capacity (context) 
or staff may feel the changes are inappropriate 
(mechanism reasoning) making it unlikely they will 
adapt care practices (outcome) 
Patient abilities, staffing resources, 
environmental design, and encouragement to 
manage risk in a person-centred way (context), 
combined with staff capacity, knowledge for 
addressing risk (mechanism resource) and their 
concerns for the potential consequences to 
themselves and the patient (mechanism 
reasoning) informed whether staff used more or 
less restrictive practices (outcome). 
However, 
allocation of staffing resources was based on 
organisational concerns rather than patient 
needs (context) and gave staff permission to 
spend time with patients identified as high risk 
(mechanism resource) reinforcing priorities for 
patient care (mechanism reasoning) informing 
choices for how they allocate their time with 
different patients (outcome) 
Evidence supported the review finding that where senior staff promoted risk management 
approaches that helped maintain patients functions and abilities, staff would adopt ways of working 
to support patient choice and identity.  Additional factors, such as patient abilities, staffing resources 
and the ward environment, also influenced how risk was managed.  At site 2, a patients level of risk 
and the availability of staffing resources influenced how, and if, staff were allocated to individual 
patients.  How staff engaged with these opportunities, their experience of working with patients 
with dementia, and their concerns for maintaining patient safety impacted on how patient choice 
and restrictions on movement were addressed.  In environments where there was more 
understanding of dementia amongst staff and family carers, behaviours that challenge and their 
associated risks were monitored and accepted, rather than controlled.  However, learning 
opportunities for working differently with patients with dementia who had risks were missed. 
Permission to approach risk management in ways that prompted patient choice and the impact of 
patient dependency 
Clinical staff with expertise in dementia at site 1 discussed how they encouraged staff to approach 
patient risk differently, for example by supporting and encouraging patients to mobilise around the 
ward.  Ward staff at site 1 also reported that they were comfortable with patients walking around 
the ward.  This was supported by evidence from observations where patients able to mobilise 
independently walked around the ward, spending time on either bay, or round the nurses station.  
Patients who could mobilise with aids and staff support were assisted to walk round when staff had 
the capacity to help them. 
At site 2, no patients appeared able to mobilise without the support of staff.  Their level of 
dependency meant they were more likely to be chair or bed bound.  While staff at site 2 were 
observed supporting mobility with the use of mobility aids, opportunities for patients to mobilise 
were mostly limited to times where patients needed the toilet.  Mobility was sometimes restricted 
because staff were concerned about the consequences they would face if an adverse incident, such 
as a fall, occurred.  However, as this quote demonstrates being risk averse with frail patients could 
have unintended consequences:  
What I see again and again is if people come in with a urine infection or a chest infection 
they are more confused than their baseline and they are brought into a very unfamiliar 
environment which makes them even more confused. And if they are at risk of falls you try 
to restrict them to the bed or the chair, not allowing them to walk very much so they lose 
their muscle power very quickly, and we make them bedbound, unfortunately, and perhaps 
the first couple of days they may have quite significant delirium that they cant walk, but we 
dont encourage them to walk as quickly as possible and mobilise as quickly as possible 
because we are struggling with our resources.  Its not because people dont want to do it, 
its because we dont have the capacity. (Site 2, ST0217, Psychiatrist) 
This quote suggests that there was a link between how risk was managed and staff capacity to 
address the needs of the patients they were caring for.  While there was an ethos for encouraging 
mobility at site 1 which may have influenced staff practices, environmental design, patient 
characteristics, and a higher staff to patient ratio (1:2 rather than 1:4/1:5) may have also facilitated 
the different approach to supporting mobility.    
Staff capacity and their awareness of patient risk was observed to influence how risk was managed, 
with unintended consequences for patients.  For example, at times where staff ability to monitor 
patients was limited due to other work priorities, more restrictive practices were observed to ensure 
patient safety.  This could reduce patient movement and lead to frustration and increased distress: 
The HCA is about to support 5 with a toileting need.  She walks over towards 5 and then 
turns to me and says that she feels unhappy that 4 is so close to the edge of the bed without 
the bedrails up.  She reports that 4 had said earlier that she does not want the bedrails up 
and while the HCA understands this is her choice she is still not comfortable with it.  She 
goes over to 4s left hand side, 4 is sleeping, she apologises to 4 but says that she is going to 
put the bedrails up for safety.  She puts them up and then pulls the curtains around 5 to help 
her. 4 has woken up and is holding on to the bedrails and shaking them, looking at me and 
shouting, will you put the side down for me?  The HCA says, yes, I will from next to 5 
explaining, but I just need to be here at the moment.  (Site 2, OB0211) 
Potential consequences of incidents, such as falls, for both staff and patients were used to justify 
more restrictive approaches to ensuring patient safety. When incidents had occurred, this appeared 
to reinforce staff belief that more restrictive practices were better for the patient: 
[Summary: Following a patient fall.  The patient had been supported to walk around the 
ward and then continued to stand without support for some time].  As the HCA comes into 
the room she says to the RN, thats why I was sat with him.  She looks annoyed, and I get 
the impression her annoyance is with the other HCA who had not encouraged 3 to take a 
seat, which might have prevented the fall. (Site 1, OB0107) 
Staff ability to consider alternative methods for maintaining patient safety and reassuring patients 
may have influenced how risk was addressed.  Where staff did not have experience of using different 
methods for maintaining safety, such as allowing the patient to sit with them in a different area of 
the ward, they might not consider this an option:   
They were too scared do anything different even though it might make it better. Just 
changing where the patient sits, if they havent done that before they might not think about 
it.  They are just worried about the implications of them falling and getting aggressive with 
them. (Site 2, ST0201, Dementia Lead) 
How staff developed a knowledge of these techniques was not apparent as there appeared to be 
limited learning at either site following incidents. Senior staff were observed addressing immediate 
concerns that might have prevented an incident, rather than considering how wider working 
practices that might have led to different outcomes:   
[FN: following a patient fall] The sister asks if he banged his head, the AC replies no, he did 
hit his arm though.  The sister turns to the team and says, this is why the door to the 
cupboard must be locked.  She then demonstrates that if the door is on the latch it will just 
open if pushed. (Site 1, OB0107)  
However, there was limited evidence that incidents were used as opportunities to assess the 
environment or staff training needs that might reduce similar situations happening: 
(Summary from OB0106) During OB0106 a patient mistook a cupboard as a toilet.  For the 
remaining period of data collection at this site, there were no changes to signage that might 
improve patient wayfinding. (Site 1, OB0106) 
Organisational priorities for care influencing how patient need is recognised 
Patients who frequently called out but were at low risk of falls were considered less in need of 
resources that would support their dementia care.  Referral forms at both sites for transfer to the 
ward (site 1), or 1:1 team input (site 2), highlighted calling out without additional identified risks as a 
low priority for allocating additional staff resources, and was considered something that could be 
addressed or tolerated through current provision:  
patients get referred because they are shouting out at night and disturbing the other 
patients, but they are not appropriate for the ward as there is nothing else we can do for the 
patient that is not already being done on the other ward. (Site 1, ST0101, Ward Manager) 
This suggests that for non-risk related behaviours, despite being a known expression of distress, 
there were no known strategies for reducing their occurrence, and attempts to understand 
underlying causes were not valued or supported.  Instead other patients and staff were expected to 
tolerate the disruptive noise, and reasons for the patient calling out were not investigated or 
addressed.  At both sites, a solution to complaints about noise on wards at night from other patients 
was to offer these patients ear plugs.   
Patients who presented with low risk and calling out received less time with staff at both sites in 
comparison to patients with dementia who had a high risk of falls (Table 39).  
Table 39: How risk and disruption to the ward influenced patient and staff interactions 
Type of disruption Low risk of falls High risk of falls 
Audible disruption to ward, 
e.g. calling out 
Low levels of staff contact, 
mostly task focused e.g. 
mealtimes and personal care 
High levels of staff contact, task 
and behaviour focused e.g. 
mealtimes, personal care, safety 
Physical disruption to 
ward, e.g. walking about 
ward, trying to stand up 
Mixed levels of staff contact High levels of staff contact 
Patient risk level might also influence how staff interactions took place. Patients at low risk were 
rarely observed receiving staff attention outside of task or behaviour related interactions.  This 
compared with interactions observed with higher risk patients.  Conflicting tasks influenced how 
staff were able to prioritise patient needs, with the level of risk a patient presented being an 
important consideration: 
I can stay here looking after the patient.  You know, in here they have high risk of falls, so at 
the same time if my colleagues are changing the patient, on other wards that was 
impossible. (Site 1, ST0104, Nurse) 
At times where there were no conflicting tasks, staff were observed spending time talking with these 
patients about their interests and engaging patients in activities. This suggests that how services 
define patient need influences how staff consider their time with patients should be allocated. 
Acceptance of risk and behaviours that challenge reducing patient frustration 
Acceptance of behaviours that challenge and their associated risks and disruptions within the ward 
were observed at site 1, at site 2 this was less evident due to limited mobility in the patient 
population.  At site 1, staff reported, and were observed, to approach potential risks or conflicts 
within the patient group in a calm manner that respected patient choice and monitored how 
situations were developing, rather than immediately restricting patient behaviour or movement.  
This quote demonstrates how a patient spending time in another patients bed area was managed: 
[FN: 7 has attempted to leave the ward several times during this observation period using 
the emergency exit, each time being encouraged to close the door and come back inside as 
it is cold.  12 is sat at the middle table] 7 is looking around at 12s bed area.  The HCA sits in a 
chair at the end of the bay in front of the emergency exit.  7 continues to look round 12 bed 
bay area and then sits in 12s bedside chair.  The HCA sits and watches for 5 minutes.  7 then 
tries to lie down on 12s bed (12 is sat at the middle table).  The HCA gets out of the chair, 
walks a few steps to the bed, says in a calm tone, 7, that is somebody elses bed.  Ill take 
you back to your bed.  The HCA holds out her right hand.  7 walks to the end of the bed 
takes her hand with his left hand and they walk down the bed bay and back to the mens 
bay. (Site 1, OB0102) 
Senior staff at site 1 noted that the understanding of dementia amongst staff and relatives allowed 
for a more accepting environment of patient behaviours: 
I think because all the patients and the patients relatives, especially the patients relatives, 
understand dementia and they are not so, oh Fred keeps interfering with my fathers 
locker you know they all sort of know what dementia is like so they are not so tetchy as 
they are those who perhaps dont understand what dementia really entails and they dont 
get quite so cross in a ward setting. (Site 1, Dementia Lead, ST0114) 
The carer who was interviewed at this site also expressed appreciation of this.  This acceptance was 
observed when one patient required PRN medication to address their increasing agitation and 
aggression, and visiting carers and family members supported their relatives concerns related to the 
situation: 
[FN: 15 has become increasingly agitated and the staff make a decision to administer her 
PRN of Lorazepam, the atmosphere of the ward changes to a level of distress amongst all the 
patients] 9 is getting distressed and crying, her husband is with her and talking to her calmly 
saying that the staff are helping 15, they are going to give her something to make her better. 
(Site 1, OB0105) 
However, while aggressive behaviour was discussed and staff had a level of acceptance of this, there 
were times where aggressive behaviours were observed to impact on staff and patient relationships, 
leading patients to feel they were not understood or listened to: 
4 had been aggressive overnight and security called.  During handover the situation was 
discussed and the RN stated that he should be discharged today, then mouthed silently 
fingers crossed.  4 told me that he had been frightened from visual hallucinations he had 
experienced and did not feel staff understood.  (summary of OB0107) 
While an expert in dementia was observed in discussion with the staff member affected by the 
incident, it was unclear how this was addressed in terms of support for the member of staff, and 
whether the opportunity to develop understanding of the patients situation was acted upon.  
Interviews suggested staff anticipated there was a risk of aggressive and violent behaviours, and 
repeated exposure was acknowledged as a potential factor in staff burnout, but there was no 
discussion of how this was addressed:  
[FN: discussion of the impact of patients with dementia experiencing hallucinations or 
agitation during the night] you hear overnight how awful its been and staff have been 
physically hurt by patients.  And then you look at them and you think but theyre so frail and 
they are in their late 80s how can they hurt anybody, or theyve been absolutely lovely 
during the day, no bother at all and then obviously they are doing things, really distressing 
things, and you cant reason with them, there is no reasoning with them at all and so you are 
primarily feeling quite useless.  So I think when people have worked in the role for a long 
time that can be quite a burnout for them and that can be quite difficult for them to 
understand. (Site 1, ST0111, Occupational Therapist) 
[FN: discussion of commitment to working on the ward]  they [patients on the ward] are 
more physically aggressive which you dont want to come to work and get kicked and 
punched all the time depending upon how many patients we have and how physically 
aggressive they are and that can have me to rethink [about continuing to work on the 
ward] (Site 1, ST012, Nurse) 
Figure 15: Risk management as an opportunity for dementia care 
CMOC 7: Valuing dementia care as skilled work  
Table 40: Evidence informed development of CMOC 7 
New CMOC 7 
Where staff understand the complexity of working with patients with dementia (context) they 
will engage with resources that support their development (mechanism resource) and recognise 
dementia care as skilled work (mechanism reasoning) to continue to develop their skills and 
expertise in dementia care (outcome). 
However, 
where staff do not have opportunities to use dementia care skills and they see dementia care 
being provided by staff across the workforce (context) this impacts on the way care is prioritised 
and what staff consider to be skilled care (mechanism resource) they may become preoccupied 
with concerns around losing other clinical care skills (mechanism reasoning) which may 
influence their commitment to working in dementia care (outcome). 
In phase 1, there were discussions from stakeholders that dementia care skills were not valued.  
While evidence in the literature touched on this issue there was not sufficient evidence to develop 
the theme into a CMOC.   In phase 2, evidence of this theme emerged during data collection at both 
sites.  Positive and negative examples of the value staff placed on dementia care skills and staff who 
worked with patients with dementia was gathered.  How skills were valued was apparent in 
discussions of training, decisions for balancing and attending to multiple patient needs, the 
expectations of their role, career choices, and the priorities of services and the organisations. This 
evidence is now considered and developed as a separate CMOC. 
Understanding dementia care as complex and difficult, and how expertise is recognised 
Ward staff at site 1 recognised their work with patients as complex and difficult.  Comments from 
nurses and healthcare assistants acknowledged the physical and emotional effort involved to 
support anxious and distressed patients: 
You try to stay with them, try to speak with them all the time, because for example that 
lady, she is quite anxious all the time.  You try to sooth her, so she is asking for her husband 
and she is asking all the time the same question and then you try to explain to her but she 
forgets in one minute so you try to have some activities for them. (Site 1, ST0104, Nurse) 
Healthcare assistants at site 1 had been supported by experts in dementia care to spend time 
reflecting and recognising their abilities in dementia care, which led to them contributing to the 
development of care planning tools.  However, it was acknowledged that staff might find it difficult 
to recognise their contribution as their dementia care skills were additional to expectations of other 
healthcare assistants in the hospital:   
I think a lot of the time they [healthcare assistants on ward] do a lot of really good work, 
but they dont really realise that theyve got of skills that a lot of other healthcares dont 
(Site 1, ST0111, Occupational Therapist) 
This comment was also evident for staff in the 1:1 team at site 2: 
And they do the same job as the other care assistants, but they just have that time to do 
things with them and theyve probably had a bit more training for how to calm people down, 
how to talk to people. (Site 2, ST0204, Matron) 
There was no formal acknowledgement of expertise in dementia care for these staff.  The difference 
between staff experienced in dementia care, and those who were not, was most evident when 
compared with bank and agency staff.  While bank and agency staff were observed to be skilled in 
performing clinical tasks, they appeared uncomfortable or unable to engage with patients with 
dementia at other times:   
The bank staff nurse comes into the room and stands between the middle and the front 
desk watching the TV.  9 and the HCA come out of the toilet.  9 goes and stands near the 
bank staff nurse, the HCA goes back to the table and to her notes.  The bank staff nurse is 
stood some distance from 9. 9 says something to him.  He looks over at me and raises his 
eyebrows.  9 continues to talk some more but the bank staff nurse does not respond.  (Site 
1, OB0105) 
Attitudes towards dementia care and concerns about staff contribution to work 
An emphasis on being busy and to be seen to be doing things impacted on the value placed on 
dementia care work.  Spending time with patients to provide reassurance, reduce anxiety and 
distress, enhance patient experience of care, and maintain safety was understood by some staff at 
site 2 as just sitting there.  This view of their work could influence how they provided care and 
responded to patients needs:    
[FN: HCA has been assigned to maintain the safety of a patient with dementia who is at risk 
of falls] I ask her [HCA] how she is and she nods and says, okay, I need to stay here with this 
lady as she is not to stand.  As she is saying this the patient tries to stand the HCA puts her 
hand out to encourage her to sit down.  The patient bats the hand away and complains 
about not being allowed to get up. [FN: the HCA continues to sit with the patient, 
encouraging her to stay sat in the chair but having no other interaction with her] The patient 
continues to complain about the HCA and the HCA rolls her eyes. (Site 2, OB0213) 
At site 2, concern staff had for their contribution to work on the ward influenced how staff 
understood the value of their work.  Evidence from interviews suggested that 1:1 staff were 
characterised as good when they contributed more widely, and bad where their work focused on 
the patient they had been assigned.  These characterisations suggest a lack of understanding of their 
role, and limited insight into good care provision:    
Some 1:1s come on to shift and are very good, they help out with other patients in the bay 
if the patient they are working with is resting or calm.  Other members of the 1:1 team only 
work with the person they are assigned to. (Site 2, ST0220, Ward Manager) 
In site 1, ward staff did not express concern at spending time with individual patients.  However, 
interviews with ward staff and allied health professionals highlighted an awareness that staff 
working in other areas of the hospital considered working on the ward was easy.  This was partly 
attributed to the increased level of staffing and a lack of understanding of the complexities involved 
in their work: 
I know that when its good here its really good and when its bad its horrible and I think 
that when people see it being good I think that people see it as an easy ward to work on and 
I think it is that lack of understanding that it takes a lot for the ward to be good.  And you do 
get lots of benefits from it when it is good but it takes a lot of work from the staff for it to 
be, settled shall we say.  And that can cause a bit of ill feeling from my experience of other 
wards not really understanding that the guys down here work incredibly hard and they have 
a lot of challenges with patients which are really poorly from a mental health point of view, 
not just a physical health point of view. (Site 1, ST0111, Occupational Therapist) 
While staff at site 1 were able to continue their work in ways that were accepted within the ward, 
these external pressures to be seen to be contributing for staff at site 2 in the 1:1 team may have 
influenced how they worked with patients. 
Opportunities to apply dementia care skills and preoccupations with losing clinical skills 
Where staff considered they did not have the opportunity to apply dementia care skills, or did not 
recognise the care they were providing as skilled work, they express concerns at losing clinical skills:   
Id been hoping actually that Id be learning new things, but I feel like Ive lost a lot of my 
skills. for example, in the hospice I changed a lot of stoma bags, and things like that. In fact, 
it was funny because I did one yesterday.  But Im worried, Im worried that Im going to lose 
my skills. 
Do you feel there are different skills that you have learnt with this job? 
No, not really, not really.  Maybe to learn how to deal with, I mean Ive worked with 
aggressive patients before, but on a different level sometimes.  Ive sort of learnt skills like 
that, but any practical skills, no. (Site 2, ST0211, 1:1)  
The above quote demonstrates that healthcare assistants valued opportunities to develop skills and 
become expert in their role.  However, for some staff satisfaction in their role was related to 
evidence they had applied skills and completed tasks.  One member of staff who did recognise the 
value of their role explained: 
Chatting to them, talking to them, giving reassurance.  Most of the time it is giving 
reassurance.  They might not know where they are, they might be confused, wheres my 
husband, wheres my wife.  They just want to hear somebodys voice to say there is 
somebody on the way, that kind of thing.  You can look after somebody and youll think 
they are asleep and then theyll put their hand out, feel your hand there and then go back to 
sleep.  So somebody is there, okay. So you think, you may think that you are being wasted by 
sitting there but actually youre not. (Site 2, ST0203, 1:1) 
The above quote demonstrates how interpersonal skills can be valued and lead to job satisfaction.  
However, observations suggest it might be difficult for staff to recognise they were using dementia 
care skills, which contributed to their concerns for lost skills.   At site 2, staff in the 1:1 teams main 
objective was to maintain patient safety, and patients they worked with were often acutely unwell, 
who struggled to engage, and were disorientated in relation to time and place.  In these situations, 
staff were mainly involved in retaining the patient in their bed or chair through instruction and 
persuasion, rather than providing reassurance and occupation through conversation or activities. 
Where staff spent the majority of their shift in this type of provision, they reported finding the 
experience unsatisfying and were left questioning their contribution to care.   
At site 1, concern of losing clinical skills was not reported by healthcare assistants, but by nurses.  
Patients were moved to the ward after the initial treatment of their acute condition and many were 
awaiting care home placements.  There were limited opportunities for nurses to be involved in more 
clinically technical tasks, such as inserting intravenous cannulas. At the time of the study, this was 
considered to be a factor in a number of nurses pursuing opportunities in more clinically and 
medically focused departments:     
The ward manager sat down with me and said what a difficult time she was having.  She was 
facing losing 7 members of nursing staff by the end of the year, 2 through pregnancy and the 
others through new jobs.  Some were moving to jobs in A&E and the ward manager 
accepted that for nurses who had recently qualified that they wanted to be in a more 
clinically focused area so they would not lose their clinical skills. (Site 1, OB0104) 
While nurses at site 1 did spend time in conversations with patients and care that were not based 
around tasks, their role in dementia care appeared unclear as this was predominantly the domain of 
the healthcare assistants.   
Figure 16: CMOC 7 Valuing dementia care as skilled work 
 Chapter Summary 
Phase two findings support the phase one finding that a fundamental context to developing 
dementia-friendly approaches to healthcare in general hospitals is that there is an understanding of 
behaviour that challenges as a communication of an unmet need. 
Key mechanisms of allocated time with patients, and knowledge of patients with dementia and 
dementia care were related to contexts of organisational and staff acceptance of dementia care 
practices.  This influenced whether or not staff believed they were able to make a difference and 
would go on to take action to address patient needs.  Staff responses affected outcomes for 
patients, for example where staff engaged with patients expressing distress using their knowledge of 
the patient to talk about topics of interest, this could calm patients leading to positive experiences 
through inclusion and recognition of their personhood.  However, where staff were did not consider 
addressing the patients need as important in comparison to other tasks, staff could resent spending 
time with the patient resulting in generalised interactions, often using methods of distraction.  This 
could lead to more patient frustration.   
Opportunities for developing staff skills in dementia care were limited and relied on staff engaging 
with support from co-workers, such as role-modelling or observing colleagues working well with 
patients.  Staff expressed interest in training which would improve their practice with patients, for 
example achieving patient compliance with medications.  However, reference to person-centred 
approaches was limited to staff who had more personal or professional experience in working with 
people living with dementia outside of the general hospital setting.   
Priorities for care were defined at ward level and influenced by the organisations concerns, such as 
managing risk.  This impacted on how staffing resources were allocated, and which patients received 
increased staff input.   The result of this was some distressed patients who did not pose a risk 
received less attention from staff.   Where there were more staff to support patients, and the 
environments were designed to encourage mobility and socialising, patients choices for moving 
around the ward, options for essential care such as toileting needs and washing, and sitting in 
different areas were promoted and listened to by staff. 
The influence of how dementia care was valued and prioritised was found to be located at ward 
manager and senior ward staff level.  This suggests support and education is needed to develop 
dementia expertise in these staff, which is important to develop their confidence in communicating 
and direct changes to practices.  Where dementia care was understood as an integral part of staff 
roles, staff were less likely to express concern about the contribution of their work to wider ward 
activities and focused more on their contribution with individual patients.  Recognising dementia 
care as skilled work influenced how staff considered the importance of their work with patients with 
dementia, and their commitment to dementia care.  
The programme theory is demonstrated in Figure 17.   
Figure 17: Refined programme theory of what supports general hospital staff to provide dementia-friendly healthcare and with what outcomes for patients with dementia 
Reflection on data collection 
There were specific challenges I faced during data collection and analysis which related to my 
personal and professional experiences.  I do not have a clinical background and have spent limited 
time in hospital.  As such, I entered the field from a nave, outsider position.  The challenges, how I 
overcame these, and advantages of this are discussed below.   
A recent Guardian article reported findings from a study of the changing roles of those providing 
care, which includes healthcare assistants, specialist nurses, and registered nurses, led to confusion 
for patients, visitors, and other staff related to the specific responsibilities of staff in patient care 
(Leary et al., 2017).   This was also my initial experience on entering the field.  At first, it was unclear 
what role different staff played in the delivery of patient care.  At times, and particularly in site 1, 
registered nurse roles and healthcare assistant roles appeared interchangeable.  I clarified staff 
responsibilities by asking different members of the team to explain their role in patient care and 
their expectations of other members of the team.  This helped me to understand that tasks like 
medication, wound dressing, telephone communication with family members, and contact with 
service providers external to the hospital were the role of registered nurses.  While registered nurses 
were involved with essential care tasks, this was predominantly the domain of healthcare assistants.   
Proctor and Reed (1995) describe how their experience as nurses allowed them insight and 
understanding in situations which might not always apparent to nave researchers. In contrast I did 
not start with this insight but had to develop it.  I did this through asking questions about ward 
routines and common practices and by joining the morning and evening handovers.  This enabled 
me to gain insight into patient situations and what staff considered the priorities for care.  For 
example, at handover, staff would go through the reasons for admission, treatments, updated on 
nutrition, hydration, and toileting, and detailed any booked investigations such as CT scans. I was 
able to ask clinically stupid questions.  Staff were often willing to provide explanations for different 
routines, however, there were times where I wondered if my position as an outsider researcher 
was a surprise to some staff.  For example, when asking about the details of an intravenous 
medication to calm a patient, the member of staff was surprised at my lack of knowledge and my 
need to clarify the situation.  At times such times, I felt disadvantaged by not having a nursing 
background.   
Practitioner researchers have discussed how decisions during the research process were driven by 
their experiences in practice (Proctor and Reed, 1995).  Conversely, my decisions during the research 
were driven by questions related to the theory.  For example, I was interested in the influence of risk 
management on staff resource allocation and staff responses to patients expressing unmet needs.  
This influenced some choices for the location of observations and interview questions around how 
patients were identified for needing additional staff input.  This may have been an advantage, as a 
practitioner researcher may not have questioned the allocation of staff to monitor patients at high 
risk of falls. 
An advantage of being a nave researcher without a professional background in healthcare was that 
it allowed me to observe situations, without conflicting concerns of my responsibilities for patient 
care (Allen, 2004).  This did not alleviate feelings of discomfort at observing busy staff and patients 
with unmet needs, but it did allow me to record events knowing that I was not qualified to intervene 
in while maintaining a duty to report bad practice. 
Not having a clinical background or familiarity with hospital settings meant I did not have a view of 
what good nursing care looked like or how this might differ from good dementia care.  This may 
have meant I was less critical initially of what was being described as good practice than relying on 
evidence from the data and observed outcomes. As such, feedback and discussions on observation 
transcripts with my supervisors helped me to consider this.  While some practices appeared to be 
person-centred, further analysis of the data suggested there were times when learnt techniques for 
interactions that were used across the patient population rather than adapting for each patient.   
Chapter five: Discussion 
The aim of this study was to use a theory-driven realist approach to understand how dementia-
friendly healthcare in general hospitals works, in what circumstances, and with what outcomes for 
patients with dementia and their carers. The study comprised of two phases which were guided by 
the Realist and Meta-narrative Evidence Syntheses: Evolving Standards (RAMESES) criteria for realist 
review (Wong et al., 2013) and realist evaluation (Wong et al., 2016).   This chapter will discuss the 
thesis and its contribution to how dementia-friendly care in general hospitals can be supported by 
presenting: an overview of the findings from phase one and two; the contribution of the findings to 
current knowledge; the strengths and limitations of the study; and the implications for further 
practice and research.   
Overview of findings 
This section draws together the findings from phase one and two in relation to the aims of the study, 
which were: 
1. To understand how and why dementia-friendly interventions in hospital settings are thought 
to achieve the desired patient and carer outcomes 
2. To understand how and why context influenced the creation of dementia-friendly healthcare 
environments 
3. To develop evidence-based explanations to understand what it is about dementia-friendly 
interventions in general hospitals that works for people living with dementia and their 
carers, in what circumstances and why. 
These aims were addressed through a realist review of the evidence (Handley et al., 2017, Appendix 
2) (phase one) and a realist evaluation (phase two) that was designed to test the programme theory 
developed in the review.   
In phase one, interviews with stakeholders and an initial scoping of the evidence identified the range 
of interventions and developed ideas for how dementia-friendly healthcare was conceptualised. 
From this work, three candidate theories were proposed that described the role of change agents 
and defined the focus of the review.  A structured, iterative review process identified that the 
majority of evidence reported staff outcomes for interventions, with limited attention to patient and 
carer outcomes.  Evidence from 28 papers contributed to the building of a programme theory, 
comprising of six interrelated context-mechanism-outcome configurations (CMOCs).  They set out 
the context-dependent nature of staff responses to resources from interventions which influenced 
staff and patient outcomes.  While the English National Dementia Strategy (Department of Health, 
2009) and Royal College of Nursing (Royal College of Nursing, 2013) assert the importance of a 
skilled workforce, the link between interventions that support this development and improvements 
to care provision were found to be complex.  Single strategies, such as raising workforce awareness 
of dementia, on their own were limited.  Additionally, contextual factors, such as how organisations 
and managers supported and legitimised practices for dementia care, impacted on how staff 
prioritised care and if dementia care work was valued.  This influenced hospital staffs approach to 
care and patient outcomes. 
This theory, and its component parts, were tested and refined by expanding and challenging the 
concepts during phase two at two case study sites.  To maximise the opportunities for learning and 
theory development, two sites were selected for applying different approaches to their provision of 
support for patients with dementia.  This study was able to identify common issues in two different 
cultures of dementia care around: how dementia care skills and dementia knowledge were 
perceived and understood as a core component of patient care; the resources staff drew on to 
inform care practices; and how the seniority of staff versus staff experience and interest in dementia 
care influenced practices and patient outcomes.  The programme theory was further refined in light 
of data collected in phase two.   
Evidence from phase two was used to test and refine the context-mechanism-outcome 
configurations which collectively make up the programme theory (Figure 17).  The key features of 
the programme theory are now considered.  
Context  
Understanding behaviours that challenge as communication of an unmet need was found to be a 
prerequisite context for how resources that support staff to identify and address patient needs were 
used.  Additional contexts were identified that influenced how staff provided care to patients with 
dementia and the outcomes for patients.   
 Staff experience in relation to dementia care.  This was developed through continuing 
professional development opportunities, from personal experience in caring for a family 
member, or a combination of both.   Experience gained outside the general hospital 
provided staff with a wider understanding of patient needs and implications for dementia 
care. 
 Organisational endorsement. Practices were supported by the organisation through staff 
role or policies which dictated how staff were allocated to patients and their priorities for 
patient care.  
 The social norms and expectations for patient care.  These were set by ward managers, 
managers of the 1:1 team, and informally sustained by staff within the ward teams.  
 Clarity in responsibilities for patient care. Linked to accepted practices for patient care was 
recognition of who provided what aspects of care, for which patients. 
 Patient characteristics. Patients level of risk to themselves or others, their verbal 
communication abilities, and the onset of behaviours that challenge.  These characteristics 
impacted on care provision and staffing resources, for example patients at risk to 
themselves or others received more time and attention from staff than those who were not.  
Similarly, how behaviours that challenge manifested influenced how staff recognised patient 
needs and prioritised them. For example, staff were more likely to address and record in 
care notes instances of physical agitation, such as pacing or hitting, than verbal expressions 
of agitation, such as calling out. 
Mechanisms 
Pawson and Tilley (1997) posit that to understand why an intervention works, it is important to 
understand how mechanisms interact with context.  Mechanisms are the resources inherent in 
interventions and the responses or reasoning of people using the interventions (Dalkin et al., 2015).  
Key mechanisms thought to interact with the context and influence patient outcomes were: 
 Understanding dementia care as skilled work.  This was evident in individual staff, within 
staff groups, and at organisational levels, however often dementia care was not recognised 
as skilled work by staff themselves and by the wider organisation. 
 That staff consider they had the authority to resist other demands in the ward and to act on 
behalf of the patient.  This mechanism was linked to contexts of staff experience, 
organisational endorsement, and social norms. 
 That staff had allocated time to spend with patients.  This was found to be a resource that 
some organisational interventions around risk management and roles held by staff were 
able to use as opportunities to focus on the needs of patients with dementia. How staff 
engaged with this resource was linked to staff experience and knowledge of the patient. 
 Knowledge of the patient and dementia care.  An important mechanism that interacted with 
the mechanism of time and the context of organisational endorsement to influence how 
staff interacted with patients. 
 That staff believed they could make a difference to the patients situation.  This influenced 
the way staff prioritised care and was linked to patient characteristics and social norms for 
care. 
Outcomes 
Outcomes were identified as staff outcomes that had been influenced by the relationship of the 
contexts and mechanisms, and patient outcomes as a result of staff actions and outcomes.  These 
are detailed below. 
Staff outcomes: 
 Whether staff took action to address patient needs using person-centred approaches 
(outcome) was influenced by their knowledge of dementia care and the patient (mechanism 
resource), the time they had available to spend with patients (mechanism resource), 
whether the approach and the importance of addressing the patients needs was recognised 
by colleagues and the organisation (context), and whether staff considered they had the 
authority to address the issue (mechanism reasoning).   
 Staff understand the priorities for patient care and are confident in balancing individual 
patient needs in relation to other patients and the ward routine (outcome).  The value of 
dementia care (mechanism resource) and encouragement from senior ward staff (context) 
influenced whether staff recognised dementia care as an important part of their work 
(mechanism reasoning). 
 Commitment to work in dementia care (outcome) was influenced by how dementia 
expertise was valued (mechanism resource), dementia care practices were legitimised by 
colleagues and the organisation (context), and whether staff recognise dementia care as 
skilled work (staff reasoning). 
The actions of staff influenced patient and carer outcomes.  
 Patients and carers considered they were listened to by staff when staff recognised the 
importance of changes to care plans, and approaches to care that promoted patient 
preferences.  This was evident were patients were supported with essential care and 
mobility in ways that accounted for their choices and abilities, such as support to use the 
toilet rather than a commode or bedpan.  
 Patient needs, such as pain, hunger, or feeling anxious at being in hospital, were recognised 
by staff and action was taken to address them. 
 Reduced distress was demonstrated when staff were able to balance the competing 
demands in the ward and engage with patients in person-centred way. 
Implications of findings 
This section considers the findings of this study in relation to other research and the contribution it 
adds to current knowledge.  Some reference is made to evidence from care home studies where 
there is a potential for transferrable learning.  However, it is important to recognise that residents in 
care homes tend to not be in acute crisis, and the focus is to support residents to live well. In 
contrast, care in general hospitals aims to treat an acute need and discharge patients when they are 
considered medically fit. 
The study findings demonstrated the heterogeneity of people living with dementia admitted to 
hospital with different acute needs, and needs related to their dementia, corresponding with 
findings from other research (Glover et al., 2014; Sampson et al., 2009).  Site 1 differentiated 
between patients with dementia who could be supported on the main wards and those who could 
not.  While the admission process was opaque, patients on the ward were not in the acute phase of 
conditions such as myocardial infarction or stroke, and with the exception of one patient who was 
well known to the ward, were not surgical patients.  It is possible that observations on other wards 
at site 1 would have been similar to those at site 2.  Allocation of resources to support patients with 
dementia were determined by the concerns of the organisation rather than through a thorough 
assessment of the patients needs.  For those patients who were not at risk to themselves or others, 
and were not a physical disruption to the ward, their needs could be overlooked and their behaviour 
tolerated by staff.  Goldberg et al. (2014) reported similar findings in particular circumstances. In 
situations where the patients dementia related symptoms, for example repeatedly calling out, did 
not represent a risk to themselves or the other patients, they were ignored. Where staff were 
unable to identify the patients need or reduce the expression of verbal agitation they would focus 
on other tasks.  Evidence from my study suggests this was due to unsuccessful attempts to identify 
the need, a limited repertoire of responses to draw from, and ranking other needs, such as safety 
and essential care, as more important. 
The review had identified a prerequisite for dementia-friendly healthcare was that staff understand 
behaviour as communication of unmet need.  Behaviours that challenge have reportedly been 
recorded in three-quarters of patients with dementia admitted to hospital, with aggression and 
activity disturbance found to be the most common (White et al., 2016).  Assessments of behaviours 
can support identification of possible causes, promote effective strategies for management, and are 
recommended as part of national guidelines and best practice documents (Alzheimer's Society, 
2011; NICE, 2006).  In this study, evidence from observations and medical notes review found 
inconsistent recording of patient behaviours and few strategies to address them.  This was 
influenced by staff understanding of how the information could be used to improve patient care, a 
limited range of strategies for reducing patient distress which relied on the individual actions of staff 
members, and that this information was not valued in the way recording aspects of physical care 
were.  Studies have found limited evidence of systematic monitoring and management behaviours 
that challenge through non-pharmacological strategies, despite evidence of their use in practice 
(Inkley and Goldberg, 2016; White et al., 2016; Wilkes et al., 2010).   This was influenced by the fact 
that the information was not used to inform, plan, or review care.   Nor was this valued as core work 
in the same way that aspects of physical care were.  Findings from this study suggest information 
was only recognised as important when related to service concerns such as incident reporting or 
resource allocation, for example ensuring care was only provided by female staff.  However, when 
this information was recognised as important, changes to care plans were communicated within the 
team, both verbally and in written notes.  This led staff to act on the information to provide care in 
ways that recognised patients preferences, and thus reduced patient distress. 
Literature pertaining to managing patients with dementia in general hospitals predominantly 
discusses risk management as a task that is incompatible with person-centred practices (Dewing, 
2013; Moyle et al., 2008), by encouraging the prioritisation of physical rather than psychological 
wellbeing (Goldberg et al., 2014).  The allocation of monitoring duties to junior staff who lack 
training in dementia care, and guidance for their role, contribute to negative patient experiences of 
these risk management strategies (Moyle et al., 2008).  However, managing risk in all patients is an 
important element of patient care.  In managing risk in the everyday lives of people living with 
dementia, Bailey et al. (2013) highlight how a practice narrative of vulnerability, protection, and 
concerns for the consequences of adverse events can lead to a strategy of avoidance.  Clarke and 
Mantle (2016) suggest that by refocusing the vulnerability to situations, rather than locating it in the 
person, can provide a more supportive environment. In terms of applying this to ward settings this 
might include attending to clutter, and considering how the environment can be improved, for 
example through signage, to help patients with dementia make sense of their surroundings (Waller 
and Masterson, 2015).  A recent study in Canada with patients with dementia explored their views 
for improving ward environments (Hung et al., 2017).  Important factors were environments that 
supported their independence, and that the environment created a sense of physical and 
psychological safety.  Evidence from my study found where environmental adaptations were used to 
reduce risk, for example through the use of locked doors, this could make a difference to how staff 
supported patient independence.  However, in ward situations where there was constrained space 
and staffing resources, this could overwhelm attempts to provide choice and movement.    
Allocated time with patients was an important mechanism observed at both sites.  This supported 
staff to resist other demands on the ward and engage with the patient, making risk management a 
positive experience.  However, an overriding concern for contributing to work within the ward could 
impact on how staff interpreted and responded to maintaining patient safety.  Staff confidence in 
applying positive risk strategies, such as encouraging mobility, were influenced by the level of 
involvement of experts in dementia care at ward level, and the priorities set by senior ward staff.  
Additionally, the value staff and their ward colleagues placed on providing psychosocial support to 
patients with dementia influenced how they interpreted their contribution; either as enhancing 
patient care or just sitting there.   The wider nursing literature outside of dementia care recognises 
that staff measure their contribution in terms of the tasks they complete (Bone, 2002).  This has 
been attributed to the utilitarian nature of nursing in practice, which while staff report a desire to 
work holistically for the benefit of the patient, they also have to balance this with the reality of 
providing care that meets organisational concerns for getting the work done, costs, and meeting 
deadlines and targets (Bridges et al., 2013).  This focus for care is not only encouraged by 
organisations, but also how staff become indoctrinated in to the accepted practices and values 
within the ward (Melia, 1987).  In a study of healthcare assistants on wards caring for dementia 
patients, Schneider et al. (2010) found staff maintained their professional group identity by 
efficiently performing care tasks and behaving negatively towards colleagues considered not to be 
contributing.  Such actions were observed during this study and has implications for how the culture 
of the ward and staff conceptualisations of their role impact on the development of positive 
dementia care environments.   
Phases one and two identified the different elements that need to be in place to support a positive 
culture of dementia care.  While resources were available for staff, how resources were used was 
influenced by contextual factors.  Dewing and McCormack (2017) assert that interventions, such as 
the use of This is me booklets, are not enough for person-centred care to be valued or become the 
dominant model of care provision.  They contend that a person-centred culture needs to be evident 
throughout the processes of an organisation, extending beyond specific care activities to include 
valuing patients, carers, and staff (Brooker, 2007; Dewing and McCormack, 2017).   McCormack et al. 
(2011) argue that the development of person-centred cultures in organisations needs a sustained 
commitment from experts and managers to facilitate change.  Research suggests that person-
centred approaches can be cost effective and have positive outcomes for both the patient and their 
carer (Milne et al., 2011).  However, embedding person-centred care as a systemic approach to care 
requires commitment, understanding of dementia, and processes that recognise the expertise of the 
person living with dementia, and their carer, related to care needs.  Findings from my study 
demonstrate a current reliance on individual staff who were motivated to work in person-centred 
ways, with limited acknowledgement of the effort involved.  Incentives for staff to provide such care 
were limited to gaining personal satisfaction from the time spent working with patients and 
observing the positive effects of their work. 
Evidence from this study suggests that staff are keen to develop skills that will support them to work 
well with patients with dementia, however these may not necessarily adhere strictly to person-
centred approaches.  Learnt skills for communication and consent for clinical observations and care 
activities were observed to be broadly applied.  A similar finding was reported by OBrien (2017), 
who developed an intervention aimed at to reducing patient refusal of care by improving hospital 
staffs communication techniques.  There was an observed difference between learning new skills in 
talking to and working with patients with dementia and adopting a person-centred philosophy.  
Experts in dementia care raised concerns that the approach may not encourage person-centred 
approaches to care, but instead provide staff with a way to address refusal that focuses on gaining 
patient compliance.  This criticism can further complicate whether or not staff understand if they are 
providing care well.  An action research study highlighted how staff wanted to know the approach 
they were using was the right thing to do, demonstrating the uncertainty of staff in working with 
patients with dementia (Harrison and Brandling, 2009).  Training for staff which demonstrates how 
to work with patients in particular situations, while addressing staff uncertainty, may lead to the 
application of care practises that ignore the personhood of the patient and lead to situations where 
dementia care is considered as a series of tasks to complete.   
Staff capacity to balance the needs of individual patients with those of other patients on the ward, 
together with ward routines, was influenced by organisational priorities, and the priorities for care 
set by senior ward staff.  At times where there were conflicting needs, staff prioritised medical, 
physical and personal care needs.  Studies of nurse time with patients has been found to be brief 
and often interrupted (Bail and Grealish, 2016).   As such, they identify that time-consuming, non-
urgent (least life-threatening) care tasks are more likely to be a low priority and overlooked.  For 
patients with dementia these care activities are not straightforward, but as this work may be 
considered of low importance, there is a risk that their needs will be disregarded and not met (Bail 
and Grealish, 2016).  The literature recognises that patients with dementia often receive care from 
the least experienced, non-qualified staff (Scales et al., 2017; Schneider et al., 2010) and my study 
corroborated that.  However, some healthcare assistants were observed to be more skilled in 
dementia care than others.  While this expertise was recognised locally, it was not systematically 
used or developed.  The findings suggest there is potential to develop further how non-qualified and 
qualified staff work and learn together, combining experiential and professional knowledge.  
Developing staffs dementia care skills requires opportunities to attend training, have on-going staff 
development, and exposure to good examples of care practice.  Informal opportunities for 
development were supported by ward environments that allowed for observation of colleagues 
strategies for working with patients, and when there was regular guidance from experts in dementia 
care.  At both sites, the implication was staff development was the responsibility of individual staff 
recognising the limits of their abilities and identifying and engaging with opportunities, rather than 
being led and encouraged by their managers.  As a result, few staff reported exploring development 
opportunities that consisted of more than building experience on the job.  Previous studies found 
that healthcare assistants were unable to access training to develop dementia care skills and so 
become reliant on their own experiences to manage patients.  This could lead to practices that 
makes care inequitable, as staff focus on patients they find easier to manage and gain job 
satisfaction from (Maben et al., 2012; Schneider et al., 2010).   Evidence from this study suggests 
limited development opportunities will lead to a broad application of a small range of techniques 
used indiscriminately with all patients.  An assumption that staff will develop skills through exposure 
to particular patient characteristics and strategies to address their needs, and through unstructured 
peer-to-peer support may not build capacity in the dementia care workforce.  Where the impetus 
for development is placed on non-qualified staff who consider they have limited influence in making 
changes to wider working practices (Schneider et al., 2010) , there may be limited incentive to 
further knowledge.    
That dementia care was not seen as important as clinical work had implications for what nurses 
valued and saw as complex.  This impacted on their commitment to remain in dementia care and 
raises questions about how workforce capacity can be built.  It may be that nurses working 
predominantly in dementia care who have trained as adult nurses, rather than mental health nurses, 
find it difficult to define their expertise and technical competence in care when there are limited 
opportunities to differentiate their work from healthcare assistants.  This was particular to site 1 
where patients, in general, had less medically acute needs.  In nursing literature, there are 
discussions of how the crossover of roles between nurses and healthcare assistants can cause nurses 
to feel their role in patient care is threatened (Daykin and Clarke, 2000; Workman, 1996).  While 
some argue these tensions are exaggerated (Kessler et al., 2010) studies have found nurses and 
healthcare assistants define themselves as part of their professional group in opposition to each 
other (Kessler et al., 2010; Schneider et al., 2010).  An appreciative inquiry study of end-of-life care 
in care homes found that developing a group identity between all professionals, through common 
goals in residents care which recognised the expertise of each group, supported staff to value each 
professional groups contribution to care (Amador et al., 2016).  However understanding what 
motivates staff to commit to working in dementia care is complex and needs further research 
(Chenoweth et al., 2014).  In order to build nursing capacity in dementia care, one factor to address 
will be to clearly define their role and expertise in dementia care. 
It is recognised that there were notable gaps in the findings, for example what needs to be in place 
to involve family carers as partners in care.  While family carers were observed with patients 
providing social interactions and supporting some activities during their visits, such as feeding, a 
partnership relationship with hospital staff was less clear.  For example, biographical information 
was collected for some patients, however its use in care planning was inconsistent, and at times 
observed to be underutilised.  Previous studies have reported carers frustration that their 
knowledge of patients is not recognised, listened to, or communicated within the team (Harrison 
and Brandling, 2009).  Jurgens et al. (2012) consider that a recognition of carer needs during the 
stress of an admission, by providing information and providing opportunities for involvement in care 
in care activities, would improve carer satisfaction.  Interventions such as John's Campaign (2015), 
the use of This is me booklets (Alzheimer's Society, 2013), and guidance from The Triangle of Care 
(Carers Trust, 2013) aim to improve carer involvement and inclusion during the patients admission.  
However, there is a lack of empirical evidence to understand what partnership working in acute 
settings might look like.  Data from this study suggests that while carer input is appreciated, their 
support is viewed as substituting the work of staff, rather than being understood as a collaborative 
undertaking.  Comments from one of the Research Network Monitors suggested that there was an 
opportunity for more research with a focus on developing a best practice for family (or spouse) 
involvement in patients with dementia, in a way that worked for the medical staff and which didnt 
leave the family feeling isolated, uninformed and helpless. (Research Network Monitor, email, 17th 
January 2017). 
Wider implications for dementia care in hospitals 
This study identified how changes to practices to improve care for patients with dementia in 
hospitals was context-dependent, requiring organisational, ward, and individual staff support.  
Important mechanisms for change were; allocated time with patients, knowledge of the patient with 
dementia and dementia care, valuing dementia care as skilled work, and understanding how to 
balance other work demands.  For example, where there was understanding that supporting an 
anxious patient was as important as other patient needs, such as providing essential care, staff did 
not express concern at spending time with patients and engaged with their emotional, psychological, 
and social needs.  This was observed at site 1 where priorities for patient care had been defined by 
experts and embedded in practices as part of the development of the ward, and at site 2 with 
members of the 1:1 team prioritised the needs of the patients they were allocated to.  This 
highlights the need to address how staff are supported to balance conflicting needs within the ward 
population, and communication of the priorities in patient care when contending with limited 
resources. 
Contextual factors such as organisational priorities for patient care and staff to patient ratios 
influenced how staff recognised and prioritised patient needs.  Identifying and addressing patient 
needs not related to medical, physical, or safety concerns were not undertaken in a systematic way.  
A clustered, randomised trial in care homes, which assessed the use of person-centred care 
approaches or Dementia Care Mapping (DCM) for improving care processes and influencing resident 
outcomes, suggested different mechanisms were triggered in staff to take action (Chenoweth et al., 
2009).  The use of DCM promoted feedback and suggestions for changes to care planning, while the 
use of person-centred care promoted the autonomy of staff to initiate action.  While both 
approaches recorded reduced agitation in residents, they found the systematic approach of using 
DCM provided a more comprehensive assessment of resident needs, which were incorporated into 
care planning.  However they recognise that the use of DCM is more expensive than training in 
person-centred care, which may limit its applicability for general hospital care.  
This study has highlighted some of the difficulties in applying the principles of person-centred care 
when faced with the practical realities of working in general hospital environments.  While valuing 
dementia care is recognised as an important context, it is often at odds with organisational concerns 
for reducing costs and risk.  However, there was some evidence from this study that it might be 
possible to align organisational concerns with good dementia care.  Opportunities that arise from 
service directives to reduce patient risk could be utilised by staff to provide care that can address 
patients emotional and social needs.  To achieve this staff need to understand what good dementia 
care is and recognise that it is part of their role to provide it. 
Strengths and limitations 
A strength of this study is that using a realist approach allowed me to develop and test a theory-
driven account of why dementia-friendly healthcare interventions influence patient outcomes.  
Realist approaches go beyond identifying a list of enablers and barriers to demonstrate the 
relationship between contexts and mechanisms to describe what works, for whom, and in what 
circumstances.   In this way, the research is able to identify factors that will be useful to address 
when interventions are designed and implemented into different settings.   Interventions for 
supporting dementia-friendly healthcare are complex, context-dependent, and rely on how staff 
engage with the resources they provide.  By developing the theory from the current evidence base 
and testing it in two distinct case study sites, the study was able provide a nuanced account of how 
shared mechanisms were influenced in different settings and how these impacted on patient and 
carer outcomes.   
This study aimed to identify how and why interventions with a common aim, i.e. improving dementia 
care in general hospitals, supported staff to provide care that met the needs of patients with 
dementia (or not).  This is useful as interventions are rarely introduced into settings as standalone 
schemes.  Theory was used to understand commonalities across diverse approaches and unpick the 
relationship between context and mechanism that influenced outcomes.  By focusing on patient and 
carer outcomes, the realist review was able to move understanding beyond evidence that 
interventions could, for example increase staff confidence and knowledge of dementia and 
dementia care.  Instead it explained how context influenced staff responses to resources from 
interventions, and how this affected outcomes for patients and carers.   
While the realist review was originally designed to test as well as build the programme theory, the 
available evidence was mostly weak and the contribution of information to the component parts of 
the CMOCs constrained inferences that could reasonably be made. The decision to exclude papers 
not reporting patient outcomes might have limited evidence for context and mechanisms in the 
design and implementation of interventions.  However, there has been a focus on staff outcomes for 
interventions with limited understanding of how these translate at patient level. The review 
addressed this knowledge gap to explain how interventions and approaches to dementia-friendly 
healthcare influence patient outcomes and informed study design and analysis for phase two.   
In phase 2, the use of observation allowed for a detailed account of patient experience and their 
interactions with staff, particularly for patients who were unable to participate in interviews.  
However, it is recognised that observation data is an interpretation of patient experience and may 
be limited in the extent to which it reflects patients' reality of their time in hospital.   Collecting data 
at different time points throughout the day and in different ward settings offered a unique 
understanding of how demands on staff time and the ward routine could influence their interactions 
with patients and priorities for care to impact on patient outcomes.  As data collection at site 1 was 
confined to one ward, this study was unable to determine how dementia care was applied in the 
wider general hospital or how focusing resources in one area influenced the support patients with 
dementia on other wards received. 
Recruitment of patients for interview was low.  Nineteen patients across the sites were considered 
to have capacity to consent, representing 28% of eligible patients.  Only seven (37%) of these 
patients agreed to participate, three of whom were discharged before interviews could be 
completed.  From the remaining patients who did not consent, reasons included: they did not 
consider the study relevant to them (they reported not having dementia despite confirmation of a 
diagnosis), that it was not something wanted to take part in, or that they did not feel their 
experience would contribute to the study.  As with previous studies (Porock et al., 2015) the 
additional difficulties of an acute need impacted on patients ability to participate in an interview; 
two of the interviews were stopped due to the burden the interview was causing and the effects of 
their acute illness.   
Recruitment of carers was also problematic.  Only two carers participated in interviews.  Other 
studies of patients with dementia in general hospital have reported difficulty recruiting carers 
(Clissett et al., 2013; Closs et al., 2016).  As recognised in these studies, competing demands for 
carers time, emotional distress, and changes to the patients living circumstances meant that 
participating in the study, while they considered the study to be a valuable contribution, was not a 
priority for them.  This highlights that when a relative or friend is admitted to hospital, it may be a 
particularly difficult time to engage carers because of other priorities.  Additional insight about the 
experience of family carers was provided by members of the research network group.   
The use of realist interview methods (Manzano, 2016) was challenging in that it asked staff to 
respond to propositions of how dementia-friendly interventions might work.  However, some staff 
engaged well and contested the assumptions from the initial programme theory providing clear 
explanations and examples that could be used to test the theory.  Other staff appeared acquiescent 
and may have lacked the confidence to disagree or debate with theories.  This has been highlighted 
as an issue in other realist evaluations (Davey et al., 2014).  Additionally, while there were some less 
positive comments identified in staff at site 1, it was difficult to engage staff who might have 
provided a different perspective of the negative instances of the way the site had applied dementia-
friendly interventions.   
The use of a two-phased approach including a realist review and realist evaluation enabled the 
development of a more robust programme theory.  For example, evidence around valuing dementia 
care and recognising the complexity involved had not been developed as part of the initial 
programme theory.  When this emerged during phase two of the study it was incorporated into the 
revised programme theory.  While consecutive site recruitment was logistically beneficial and 
supported my gaining a familiarity of the sites, concurrent recruitment would have ensured 
emerging themes received equal consideration at both sites.  However, in this study, early 
identification of the emerging theme ensured data were collected in both sites to allow for the 
incorporation of a new CMOC which further refined the programme theory.   
Implications for practice and research 
Healthcare assistants vast contribution to the care of patients with dementia needs to be 
acknowledged and valued.  As the majority of essential care for the most complex and vulnerable 
patients is provided by this group, proper recognition of the skills required must be a priority.  This 
staff group should have access to ongoing development in dementia care skills, such as 
communication skills and person-centred care, which is accredited and provides a clear career 
progression, along with opportunities to reflect with colleagues on what has worked well.  There 
were examples at both sites that healthcare assistants skills were valued by the healthcare team, 
although opportunities for discussion and reflection were not routinely scheduled.  For example, at 
site 1 healthcare assistants had worked with allied healthcare professionals to develop a guide for 
working with patients with dementia who were expressing distress that was distributed across the 
hospital.  This work supported the healthcare assistants to recognise their specific knowledge and 
skills in dementia care in comparison to other healthcare assistants in the general hospital.  
Organisations or senior clinicians need to consider how resources are implemented and discussed 
with staff to promote their value in supporting good dementia care and to help staff to assimilate 
them into practice.  Ward managers are an important resource for supporting changes to current 
practices, helping staff to understand the priorities for care, and how to address multiple competing 
needs in the patient population.  Support for ward managers to develop their own understanding of 
good dementia care practices from dementia care experts is important for developing their 
knowledge, skills, and confidence in promoting practices with ward staff.  Finding ways to encourage 
closer working of dementia care experts and ward managers will help dementia care become a 
fundamental consideration for care planning with patients with dementia.   
For some time, risk aversion in dementia care has been viewed negatively.  However, this study 
demonstrated that if staff recognise the opportunities to use risk management to engage with 
patients social and emotional needs, they can improve patient experience while addressing safety 
concerns.  For example, when staff are allocated to monitor a patient they can use the opportunity 
to initiate conversations or activities of interest to the patient.  For this to happen, staff need to 
understand all patient needs as equally important and be confident that their contribution to work 
on the ward is recognised.  Again, reinforcement from line managers and opportunities to reflect on 
what has worked well could help staff to move to an improved understanding of this. 
Understanding the complex needs of patients and how they might experience admission to hospital 
needs to be extended beyond focusing on risk and behaviours that challenge.  Strategies that have 
been demonstrated to work in care homes should be tested and adapted to build an evidence base 
of transferrable strategies in hospitals. 
Recommendations for training and education 
Several factors influenced whether or not staff drew on their knowledge of dementia care during 
interactions with patients, including: how they considered the priorities for patient care within their 
working environment; how they engaged with opportunities to spend time with patients; and 
whether staff valued dementia care as core to their role in patient care.  As such, this study has 
concluded that interventions, such as training, will not on their own lead to change.  However, 
training does contribute to improving staff capability and confidence for working with patients with 
dementia.  Evidence from this study suggests that not all staff involved in the day-to-day care of 
patients with dementia were confident in their abilities and required confirmation that they were 
addressing patient needs correctly.  Training which addressed the specific difficulties staff 
encountered and gave them strategies that they could apply in their work was considered beneficial 
and reportedly used.  As such, more targeted training, informed by co-production methods that 
involve staff, patients with dementia, and carers, will improve the relevance and value of dementia 
care training to staff.  Training opportunities on the ward which are scenario-based and delivered by 
staff with expertise in dementia care are likely to be most helpful.  In this way, experts can role 
model techniques for specific issues and demonstrate how those techniques can be personalised to 
meet the individual needs of each patient.  This may also improve relationships between experts in 
dementia care and ward staff where there is limited contact, and increase the likelihood that advice 
is applied. 
A realist review of workforce development strategies aimed at improving standards of care in 
support workers working with older people identified a number of mechanisms which would 
improve the outcomes of education and training (Rycroft-Malone et al., 2016).  Similar to the 
findings of this study, they included: training which is relevant and has resonance to staff roles; and 
the alignment of best practice principles in dementia care with organisational goals and priorities.   
My study suggested that senior ward staff have a pivotal role in defining the priorities for patient 
care.  Education and training with these staff could lead to a greater emphasis on addressing the 
psychosocial needs of patients with dementia, permitting staff to spend time with these patients.  To 
support senior ward staff to recognise the value of dementia care as a core part of activities on the 
ward, they should be encouraged to undertake tier three dementia care skills training (Health 
Education England, 2015).  Through attaining this level of knowledge in dementia and dementia care 
skills, senior ward staff might better understand the benefit of best practice for patients with 
dementia and transfer this knowledge to the staff they work with, promoting and reinforcing the 
importance of these skills. 
Recommendations for policy 
This study demonstrated that good dementia care in general hospitals is possible but is often applied 
inconsistently and is driven by the actions of individual staff members.  Regular support from experts 
in dementia care and a shared ethos which promoted patient choice and support for functional 
abilities was more likely to influence staff to prioritise dementia care.  However, conflicting demands 
and the focus on medical and physical needs could lead to preoccupations around losing clinical skills 
and how staff had personally contributed to the collective workload on the ward.  This impacted on 
the quality of staff interactions with patients.  Senior ward staff had a role in directing priorities for 
care, but additional work will be needed to address what staff define as important work.  An 
alignment of the principles of best practice in dementia care with organisational priorities is one 
possible option for addressing this.  Concerns around patient safety was observed to mobilise 
staffing resources, however these were not always utilised in ways that benefitted patients or 
considered their priorities for care.  Organisational and service directives that require staff to closely 
monitor patients with dementia need to be properly supported by: 1) defining the expectations for 
this work beyond keeping the patient safe; and 2) providing access to development opportunities for 
staff tasked with this role who are not confident they have the necessary skills to enhance patient 
experience and wellbeing.   
Evidence from care planning documents for patients with dementia suggested that while medical 
and physical needs are often recorded and may include written strategies for care, needs related to 
the persons dementia were not consistently documented.  One way to address this may be to 
develop documents that allow for the recording of psychological, emotional, and social needs along 
with recording physical and medical needs.  Collection and recording of this information should be 
informed by conversations with the patient, observations of their behaviour and mood during their 
admission, and from information gathered from people involved in the daily care of the person 
outside of hospital.  Reference to this information could inform decisions for how to support and 
maintain functional abilities and provide care in ways that recognises the patients preferences.  This 
may help staff to identify strategies for working with patient whos needs can be overlooked, such as 
patients with verbal agitation.   The information could also be used to build an evidence base for 
strategies linked to addressing patients needs.   
The retention of healthcare staff skilled in dementia care is a key concern, impacting on workforce 
capacity within general hospitals (Alzheimer's Society, 2018).  This study identified whether or not 
staff recognised dementia care as skilled, valuable work influenced their commitment to stay in the 
specialism.  Finding ways to promote dementia care as complex, rewarding work, and offering career 
development opportunities across grades and disciplines, could help reframe dementia care as 
skilled work when considered against other clinical specialities.   
Conclusion 
This thesis has addressed an important issue of how general hospitals are using resources to 
improve care for patients with dementia.  Numerous interventions have been implemented with 
limited empirical evidence of their effectiveness (Dewing and Dijk, 2014).  By using theory to 
understand what works, for who, in what circumstances, this study has provided an account of how 
causal mechanisms influence staff and patient outcomes.  In both study sites common factors 
impacted on whether patients with dementia were listened to, experienced reduced distress, and 
influenced how their needs were recognised and addressed.  Allocated time with patients, and how 
staff engaged with this opportunity by drawing on their knowledge of the person and dementia, 
were important mechanisms that were influenced by organisational priorities and social norms for 
care.  Support from ward managers and experts in dementia care was an important context for how 
risk management strategies were applied and how patient needs were prioritised.  This supported 
staff to understand how to balance competing needs in the ward and gave them confidence that 
their work with patients with dementia which was not focused on essential care tasks, ward routine, 
or physical needs, was important. 
Patients with dementia can have complex needs related to the difficulties they experience as a result 
of their dementia, such as reduced verbal communication abilities and their ability to cope with 
admission to general hospital.  These are additional to the needs that patients without cognitive 
impairments experience and may require more resources, such as skilled staff with time to spend 
with patients, to adequately address them (Clissett et al., 2013).   Healthcare assistants are a 
valuable contribution to the care of patients with dementia, but their skills and knowledge of 
individual patients needs to be recognised and valued, and their professional development 
supported.  To further build capacity in the dementia care workforce, the role and expertise of 
nurses needs to be clearly defined.     
This study has demonstrated that for interventions to have a positive influence on patient and carer 
outcomes, it is important for staff to be supported to understand the interventions utility in their 
work.  With guidance from senior ward staff who have themselves received adequate training and 
support in dementia care, it is possible that dementia care could be valued equal to that of clinical 
care.  By recognising the complexity involved in the provision of good dementia care, allowing staff 
the time to work with patients with dementia, and asserting the importance of care that uses 
knowledge of the patient and dementia throughout a persons admission, staff may feel they are 
able to make a difference.  This can lead to staff to take the appropriate cause of action to address a 
patients unmet needs, improving outcomes for patients with dementia and their carers.   
References 
Abbey, J., Piller, N., Bellis, A. D., Esterman, A., Parker, D., Giles, L. & Lowcay, B. (2004). The Abbey 
pain scale: a 1-minute numerical indicator for people with end-stage dementia. International 
Journal of Palliative Nursing, 10(1), 6-13. doi: 10.12968/ijpn.2004.10.1.12013 
Abhyankar, P., Cheyne, H., Maxwell, M., Harris, F. M. & McCourt, C. (2013). A realist evaluation of a 
normal birth programme. Evidence Based Midwifery, 11(4), 112-119.Retrieved from 
https://dspace.stir.ac.uk/bitstream/1893/17839/1/Abhyankar%20et%20al%20EBM%202013
Allen, D. (2004). Ethnomethodological insights into insideroutsider relationships in nursing 
ethnographies of healthcare settings. Nurs Inq, 11(1), 14-24. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-
1800.2004.00201.x 
Alzheimer's Society (2009). Counting the cost: Caring for people with dementia on hospital wards. 
London: Alzheimer's Society. 
Alzheimer's Society (2011). Optimising treatment and care for people with behavioural and 
psychological symptoms of dementia: A best practice guide for health and social care 
professionals. London: Alzheimer's Society. 
Alzheimer's Society (2013). This is me booklet: Alzheimer's Society. 
Alzheimer's Society (2014). Dementia UK Update. London: Alzheimer's Society. 
Alzheimer's Society (2016). Fix Dementia Care: Hospitals. London: Alzheimer's Society. 
Alzheimer's Society. (2017). Dementia friendly communities. Alzheimer's Society Retrieved 
September, 19, 2017, from 
https://www.alzheimers.org.uk/info/20079/dementia_friendly_communities. 
Amador, S., Goodman, C., Mathie, E. & Nicholson, C. (2016). Evaluation of an organisational 
intervention to promote integrated working between health services and care homes in the 
delivery of end-of-life care for people with dementia: Understanding the change process 
using a social identity approach. International journal of integrated care, 16(2), 14. doi: 
10.5334/ijic.2426 
Appleton, J. V. & Cowley, S. (1997). Analysing clinical practice guidelines. A method of documentary 
analysis. J Adv Nurs, 25(5), 1008-1017. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2648.1997.19970251008.x 
Archer, M. S. (1995). Realist social theory: The morphogenetic approach: Cambridge University Press. 
Astbury, B. & Leeuw, F. (2010). Unpacking black boxes: mechanisms and theory building in 
evaluation. Am J Eval., 31(3), 363-381. doi: 10.1177/1098214010371972 
Bail, K., Berry, H., Grealish, L., Draper, B., Karmel, R., Gibson, D. & Peut, A. (2013). Potentially 
preventable complications of urinary tract infections, pressure areas, pneumonia, and 
delirium in hospitalised dementia patients: retrospective cohort study. BMJ Open, 3(6), 
e002770. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2013-002770 
Bail, K., Goss, J., Draper, B., Berry, H., Karmel, R. & Gibson, D. (2015). The cost of hospital-acquired 
complications for older people with and without dementia; a retrospective cohort study. 
BMC Health Serv Res, 15(1), 91. doi: 10.1186/s12913-015-0743-1 
Bail, K. & Grealish, L. (2016). Failure to Maintain: A theoretical proposition for a new quality 
indicator of nurse care rationing for complex older people in hospital. International journal 
of nursing studies, 63, 146-161. doi: 10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2016.08.001 
Bailey, C., Clarke, C. L., Gibb, C., Haining, S., Wilkinson, H. & Tiplady, S. (2013). Risky and resilient life 
with dementia: Review of and reflections on the literature. Health, Risk & Society, 15(5), 
390-401. doi: 10.1080/13698575.2013.821460 
Baillie, L. (2015). An Evaluation of Barbara's Story: Final Report. London: Guy's and St Thomas' NHS 
Foundation Trust and London South Bank University. 
https://dspace.stir.ac.uk/bitstream/1893/17839/1/Abhyankar%20et%20al%20EBM%202013.pdf
https://dspace.stir.ac.uk/bitstream/1893/17839/1/Abhyankar%20et%20al%20EBM%202013.pdf
https://www.alzheimers.org.uk/info/20079/dementia_friendly_communities
Baldwin, R., Pratt, H., Goring, H., Marriott, A. & Roberts, C. (2004). Does a nurse-led mental health 
liaison service for older people reduce psychiatric morbidity in acute general medical wards? 
A randomised controlled trial. Age Ageing, 33(5), 472-478. doi: 10.1093/ageing/afh154 
Ballard, C., Corbett, A., Orrell, M., Williams, G., Moniz-Cook, E., Romeo, R., . . . Woodward-Carlton, B. 
(2018). Impact of person-centred care training and person-centred activities on quality of 
life, agitation, and antipsychotic use in people with dementia living in nursing homes: A 
cluster-randomised controlled trial. PLoS medicine, 15(2), e1002500. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pmed.1002500 
Ballard, C., Smith, J., Corbett, A., Husebo, B. & Aarsland, D. (2011). The role of pain treatment in 
managing the behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD). International 
Journal of Palliative Nursing, 17(9), 420-424. doi: 10.12968/ijpn.2011.17.9.420 
Banks, P., Waugh, A., Henderson, J., Sharp, B., Brown, M., Oliver, J. & Marland, G. (2014). Enriching 
the care of patients with dementia in acute settings? The Dementia Champions Programme 
in Scotland. Dementia (London), 13(6), 717-736. doi: 10.1177/1471301213485084 
Baskarada, S. (2014). Qualitative Case Study Guidelines. The Qualitative Report, 19(40), 1-
25.Retrieved from https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2559424 
Benbow, S. M. J., David (2012). Dementia: stigma and its effects. Neurodegenerative Disease 
Management, 2(2), 165-172. doi: 10.2217/nmt.12.7 
Berg, M. (1996). Practices of reading and writing: the constitutive role of the patient record in 
medical work. Sociology of health & illness, 18(4), 499-524. doi: 10.1111/1467-
9566.ep10939100 
Bhanbhro, S., Gee, M., Cook, S., Marston, L., Lean, M. & Killaspy, H. (2016). Recovery-based staff 
training intervention within mental health rehabilitation units: a two-stage analysis using 
realistic evaluation principles and framework approach. BMC psychiatry, 16(1), 292. doi: 
10.1186/s12888-016-0999-y 
Bhaskar, R. (1978). A realist theory of science  Hassocks: Harvester Press. 
Black, B. S., Finucane, T., Baker, A., Loreck, D., Blass, D., Fogarty, L., . . . Rabins, P. V. (2006). Health 
problems and correlates of pain in nursing home residents with advanced dementia. 
Alzheimer Disease & Associated Disorders, 20(4), 283-290. doi: 
10.1097/01.wad.0000213854.04861.cc 
Bolster, D. & Manias, E. (2010). Person-centred interactions between nurses and patients during 
medication activities in an acute hospital setting: qualitative observation and interview 
study. International journal of nursing studies, 47(2), 154-165. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2009.05.021 
Bone, D. (2002). Dilemmas of emotion work in nursing under market-driven health care. 
International Journal of Public Sector Management, 15(2), 140-150. doi: 
10.1108/09513550210419564 
Borbasi, S., Jones, J., Lockwood, C. & Emden, C. (2006). Health Professionals' Perspectives of 
Providing Care to People with Dementia in the Acute Setting: Toward Better Practice. 
Geriatric Nursing, 27(5), 300-308. doi: 10.1016/j.gerinurse.2006.08.013 
Boyatzis, R. E. (1998). Transforming qualitative information: thematic analysis and code development  
London: Sage Publications. 
Braun, V. & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative research in 
psychology, 3(2), 77-101. doi: 10.1191/1478088706qp063oa 
Bray, J., Evans, S., Bruce, M., Carter, C., Brooker, D., Milosevic, S., . . . Hutt, L. (2015). Improving 
activity and engagement for patients with dementia. Nursing Older People, 27(8), 22-26. doi: 
10.7748/nop.27.8.22.e700 
Bridges, J., Nicholson, C., Maben, J., Pope, C., Flatley, M., Wilkinson, C., . . . Tziggili, M. (2013). 
Capacity for care: metaethnography of acute care nurses' experiences of the nursepatient 
relationship. J Adv Nurs, 69(4), 760-772. doi: 10.1111/jan.12050 
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2559424
Brooke, J. & Semlyen, J. (2017). Exploring the impact of dementia-friendly ward environments on the 
provision of care: A qualitative thematic analysis. Dementia, 0(0), 1471301216689402. doi: 
doi:10.1177/1471301216689402 
Brooker, D. (2003). What is person-centred care in dementia? Reviews in clinical gerontology, 13(03), 
215-222. doi: 10.1017/S095925980400108X 
Brooker, D. (2007). Person-centred dementia care: making services better  London: Jessica Kingsley 
Publishers. 
Brooker, D., Milosevic, S., Evans, S., Carter, C., Bruce, M. & Thompson, R. (2014). RCN Development 
Programme: Transforming Dementia Care in Hospitals Evaluation Report. University of 
Worcester and Royal College of Nursing. 
Bunn, F., Burn, A.-M., Goodman, C., Rait, G., Norton, S., Robinson, L., . . . Brayne, C. (2014a). 
Comorbidity and dementia: a scoping review of the literature. BMC Med, 12(1), 192. doi: 
10.1186/s12916-014-0192-4 
Bunn, F., Dickinson, A., Simpson, C., Narayanan, V., Humphrey, D., Griffiths, C., . . . Victor, C. (2014b). 
Preventing falls among older people with mental health problems: a systematic review. BMC 
nursing, 13(1), 4. doi: 10.1186/1472-6955-13-4 
Burn, A.-M., Fleming, J., Brayne, C., Fox, C. & Bunn, F. (2018). Dementia case-finding in hospitals: a 
qualitative study exploring the views of healthcare professionals in English primary care and 
secondary care. BMJ Open, 8(3). doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-020521 
Byng, R. N., Ian; Redfern, Sally (2005). Using Realistic Evaluation to Evaluate a Practice-level 
Intervention to Improve Primary Healthcare for Patients with Long-term Mental Illness. 
Evaluation, 11(1), 69-93. doi: 10.1177/1356389005053198 
Calnan, M., Tadd, W., Calnan, S., Hillman, A., Read, S. & Bayer, A. (2013). I often worry about the 
older person being in that system: exploring the key influences on the provision of dignified 
care for older people in acute hospitals. Ageing and Society, 33(03), 465-485. doi: 
10.1017/S0144686X12000025 
Cardona-Morrell, M., Prgomet, M., Lake, R., Nicholson, M., Harrison, R., Long, J., . . . Hillman, K. 
(2015). Vital signs monitoring and nursepatient interaction: A qualitative observational 
study of hospital practice. International journal of nursing studies, 56, 9-16. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2015.12.007 
Carers Trust (2013). The Triangle of Care Carers Included: A Guide to Best Practice for Dementia Care. 
London: Carers Trust. 
Carone, M., Asgharian, M. & Jewell, N. P. (2014). Estimating the lifetime risk of dementia in the 
Canadian elderly population using cross-sectional cohort survival data. Journal of the 
American Statistical Association, 109(505), 24-35. doi: 10.1080/01621459.2013.859076 
Caswell, G., Pollock, K., Harwood, R. & Porock, D. (2015). Communication between family carers and 
health professionals about end-of-life care for older people in the acute hospital setting: a 
qualitative study. BMC palliative care, 14(1), 1. doi: 10.1186/s12904-015-0032-0 
Chenoweth, L., King, M. T., Jeon, Y.-H., Brodaty, H., Stein-Parbury, J., Norman, R., . . . Luscombe, G. 
(2009). Caring for Aged Dementia Care Resident Study (CADRES) of person-centred care, 
dementia-care mapping, and usual care in dementia: a cluster-randomised trial. The Lancet 
Neurology, 8(4), 317-325. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(09)70045-6 
Chenoweth, L., Merlyn, T., Jeon, Y. H., Tait, F. & Duffield, C. (2014). Attracting and retaining qualified 
nurses in aged and dementia care: Outcomes from an Australian study. Journal of Nursing 
Management, 22(2), 234-247. doi: 10.1111/jonm.12040 
Clark, A. M., Whelan, H. K., Barbour, R. & MacIntyre, P. D. (2005). A realist study of the mechanisms 
of cardiac rehabilitation. J Adv Nurs, 52(4), 362-371. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2648.2005.03601.x 
Clarke, C. & Mantle, R. (2016). Using risk management to promote person-centred dementia care. 
Nursing Standard, 30(28), 41-46. doi: 10.7748/ns.30.28.41.s47 
Clarke, V. & Braun, V. (2013). Teaching thematic analysis: Overcoming challenges and developing 
strategies for effective learning. The psychologist, 26(2), 120-123.Retrieved from 
http://eprints.uwe.ac.uk/21155 
Clissett, P., Porock, D., Harwood, R. H. & Gladman, J. R. F. (2013). The challenges of achieving person-
centred care in acute hospitals: A qualitative study of people with dementia and their 
families. International journal of nursing studies, 50(11), 1495-1503. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2013.03.001 
Closs, S. J., Dowding, D., Allcock, N., Hulme, C., Keady, J., Sampson, E. L., . . . Holmes, J. (2016). 
Towards improved decision support in the assessment and management of pain for people 
with dementia in hospital: a systematic meta-review and observational study. Health Serv 
Deliv Res, 4(30). doi: 10.3310/hsdr04300 
CohenMansfield, J. (1986). Agitated behaviors in the elderly: II. Preliminary results in the cognitively 
deteriorated. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 34(10), 722-727. doi: 
10.1111/j.1532-5415.1986.tb04303.x 
Cotter, V. T. (2005). Restraint free care in older adults with dementia. The Keio journal of medicine, 
54(2), 80-84. doi: 10.2302/kjm.54.80 
Cowdell, F. (2010). The care of older people with dementia in acute hospitals. International journal 
of older people nursing, 5(2), 83-92. doi: 10.1111/j.1748-3743.2010.00208.x 
Crabtree, J. & Mack, J. (2010). Developing champions to enhance the care of people with dementia 
in general hospitals. Nurs Times, 106(48), 13-14.Retrieved from 
http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=jlh&AN=2010890255&site=ehost-
Crampton, J., Dean, J., Eley, R. (2012). Creating a dementia-friendly York. York: Joseph Rowntree 
Foundation. 
Cummings, J. L. (1997). The Neuropsychiatric Inventory Assessing psychopathology in dementia 
patients. Neurology, 48(5 Suppl 6), 10S-16S. doi: 10.1212/WNL.48.5_Suppl_6.10S 
Cummings, J. L., Mega, M., Gray, K., Rosenberg-Thompson, S., Carusi, D. A. & Gornbein, J. (1994). 
The Neuropsychiatric Inventory comprehensive assessment of psychopathology in dementia. 
Neurology, 44(12), 2308-2308. doi: 10.1212/WNL.44.12.2308  
Dahlke, S., Hall, W. A. & Baumbusch, J. (2017). Constructing definitions of safety risks while nurses 
care for hospitalised older people: Secondary analysis of qualitative data. International 
journal of older people nursing, 12(3), e12148-n/a. doi: 10.1111/opn.12148 
Dalkin, S., Greenhalgh, J., Jones, D., Cunningham, B. & Lhussier, M. (2015). What's in a mechanism? 
Development of a key concept in realist evaluation. Implement Sci., 10(49). doi: 
10.1186/s13012-015-0237-x 
Dalkin, S., Lhussier, M., Philipson, P., Jones, D. & Cunningham, W. (2016). Reducing inequalities in 
care for patients with non-malignant diseases: Insights from a realist evaluation of an 
integrated palliative care pathway. Palliat Med. doi: 10.1177/0269216315626352  
Davey, C. J., McShane, K. E., Pulver, A., McPherson, C. & Firestone, M. (2014). A realist evaluation of 
a community-based addiction program for urban aboriginal people. Alcohol Treat Q., 32(1), 
33-57. doi: 10.1080/07347324.2013.831641 
Day, K., Carreon, D. & Stump, C. (2000). The therapeutic design of environments for people with 
dementia a review of the empirical research. Gerontologist, 40(4), 397-416. doi: 
10.1093/geront/40.4.397 
Daykin, N. & Clarke, B. (2000). 'They'll still get the bodily care'. Discourses of care and relationships 
between nurses and health care assistants in the NHS. Sociology of Health and Illness, 22(3), 
349-363. doi: 10.1111/1467-9566.00208 
de Medeiros, K., Robert, P., Gauthier, S., Stella, F., Politis, A., Leoutsakos, J., . . . Lyketsos, C. (2010). 
The Neuropsychiatric Inventory-Clinician rating scale (NPI-C): reliability and validity of a 
revised assessment of neuropsychiatric symptoms in dementia. Int Psychogeriatr, 22(6), 984-
994. doi: 10.1017/s1041610210000876 
http://eprints.uwe.ac.uk/21155
http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=jlh&AN=2010890255&site=ehost-live
http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=jlh&AN=2010890255&site=ehost-live
de Souza, D. E. (2013). Elaborating the Context-Mechanism-Outcome configuration (CMOc) in realist 
evaluation: a critical realist perspective. Evaluation, 19(2), 141-154. doi: 
10.1177/1356389013485194  
Dementia Action Alliance (2014). National Dementia Declaration for England: Dementia Action 
Alliance. 
Dementia Action Alliance. (2017). Dementia Action Alliance.  Retrieved 19th September,, 2017, from 
http://www.dementiaaction.org.uk/. 
Dementia Alliance International. (2017). Dementia Alliance International.  Retrieved 19th 
September,, 2017, from https://www.dementiaallianceinternational.org/. 
Dementia Empowerment and Engagement Project. (2017). Dementia Empowerment and 
Engagement Project.  Retrieved 19th September, , 2017, from www.dementiavoices.org.uk. 
Department of Health (2005). Mental Capacity Act and consent for research. London: Department of 
Health. 
Department of Health (2009). Living Well with Dementia: a national dementia strategy. London: 
Department of Health. 
Department of Health (2012a). Prime Minister's challenge on dementia: Delivering major 
improvements in dementia care and research by 2015. London: Department of Health. 
Department of Health (2012b). Using the Commissioning for Quality and Innovation (CQUIN) 
payment framework: Guidance on new national goals for 2012 - 13. London: Department of 
Health. 
Department of Health (2015). Prime Ministers challenge on dementia 2020. London: Department of 
Health. 
Dewing, J. (2002). From Ritual to Relationship A person-centred approach to consent in qualitative 
research with older people who have a dementia. Dementia, 1(2), 157-171. doi: 
10.1177/147130120200100204 
Dewing, J. (2007). Participatory research A method for process consent with persons who have 
dementia. Dementia, 6(1), 11-25. doi: 10.1177/1471301207075625  
Dewing, J. (2013). Special observation and older persons with dementia/delirium: a disappointing 
literature review. International journal of older people nursing, 8(1), 19-28. doi: 
10.1111/j.1748-3743.2011.00304.x 
Dewing, J. (May 2013). Dementia Workshop: Training in communication and consent with people 
living with dementia. University of Hertfordshire. 
Dewing, J. & Dijk, S. (2014). What is the current state of care for older people with dementia in 
general hospitals? A literature review. Dementia, 15(1), 106-124. doi: 
10.1177/1471301213520172 
Dewing, J. & McCormack, B. (2017). Tell me, how do you define personcentredness? J Clin Nurs, 
26(17-18), 2509-2510. doi: 10.1111/jocn.13681 
Dowding, D., Lichtner, V., Allcock, N., Briggs, M., James, K., Keady, J., . . . Closs, S. J. (2016). Using 
sense-making theory to aid understanding of the recognition, assessment and management 
of pain in patients with dementia in acute hospital settings. International journal of nursing 
studies, 53, 152-162. doi: 10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2015.08.009 
Draper, B. L., Lee-Fay; Withall, Adrienne; Vickland, Victor; Ward, Tanya (2009). Translating dementia 
research into practice. International psychogeriatrics, 21(S1), S72-S80. doi: 
10.1017/S1041610209008709 
Duffin, C. (2013). Raising awareness to support people with dementia in hospital: A film produced to 
train staff at one trust has had such a positive effect that it is to be used nationwide. 
Christian Duffin reports on this and other measures to improve care. Nursing Older People, 
25(5), 14-17.Retrieved from 
http://journals.rcni.com/doi/abs/10.7748/nop2013.06.25.5.14.e470 
Dupuis, S. L., Wiersma, E. & Loiselle, L. (2012). Pathologizing behavior: Meanings of behaviors in 
dementia care. Journal of Aging Studies, 26(2), 162-173. doi: 10.1016/j.jaging.2011.12.001 
http://www.dementiaaction.org.uk/
https://www.dementiaallianceinternational.org/
http://www.dementiavoices.org.uk/
http://journals.rcni.com/doi/abs/10.7748/nop2013.06.25.5.14.e470
Edvardsson, D., Sandman, P. O. & Rasmussen, B. (2012). Forecasting the ward climate: a study from 
a dementia care unit. J Clin Nurs, 21(78), 1136-1114. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-
2702.2011.03720.x 
Ekman, I., Swedberg, K., Taft, C., Lindseth, A., Norberg, A., Brink, E., . . . Kjellgren, K. (2011). Person-
centered careReady for prime time. European Journal of Cardiovascular Nursing, 10(4), 
248-251. doi: 10.1016/j.ejcnurse.2011.06.008 
Elliot, R. & Adams, J. (2011). The creation of a Dementia Nurse Specialist role in an acute general 
hospital. J Psychiatr Ment Health Nurs, 18(7), 648-652. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-
2850.2011.01771.x 
Ellison, S., Watt, G. & Christie, I. (2014). Evaluating the impact of the Alzheimer Scotland Dementia 
Nurse Consultants/Specialists & Dementia Champions in bringing about improvements to 
dementia care in acute general hospitals. Edinburgh: NHS Education for Scotland. 
Elvish, R., Burrow, S., Cawley, R., Harney, K., Graham, P., Pilling, M., . . . Keady, J. (2014). Getting to 
Know Me: the development and evaluation of a training programme for enhancing skills in 
the care of people with dementia in general hospital settings. Aging & mental health, 18(4), 
481-488. doi: 10.1080/13607863.2013.856860 
Emmel, N. (2013). Sampling and choosing cases in qualitative research: A realist approach  London: 
Sage. 
Enns, E., Rhemtulla, R., Ewa, V., Fruetel, K. & Holroyd-Leduc, J. M. (2014). A controlled quality 
improvement trial to reduce the use of physical restraints in older hospitalized adults. 
Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 62(3), 541-545. doi: 10.1111/jgs.12710 
Feldt, K. S. (2000). The checklist of nonverbal pain indicators (CNPI). Pain Management Nursing, 1(1), 
13-21. doi: 10.1053/jpmn.2000.5831 
Fick, D. M., Agostini, J. V. & Inouye, S. K. (2002). Delirium superimposed on dementia: a systematic 
review. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 50(10), 1723-1732. doi: 10.1046/j.1532-
5415.2002.50468.x 
Fielding, N. & Thomas, H. (2015). Qualitative interviewing. In G. N. Gilbert and Stoneman, P. (Eds.), 
Researching social life. (pp.  Los Angeles: SAGE. 
Fossey, J., Ballard, C., Juszczak, E., James, I., Alder, N., Jacoby, R. & Howard, R. (2006). Effect of 
enhanced psychosocial care on antipsychotic use in nursing home residents with severe 
dementia: cluster randomised trial. Bmj, 332(7544), 756-761. doi: 
10.1136/bmj.38782.575868.7C  
Fuchs-Lacelle, S. & Hadjistavropoulos, T. (2004). Development and preliminary validation of the pain 
assessment checklist for seniors with limited ability to communicate (PACSLAC). Pain 
Management Nursing, 5(1), 37-49. doi: 10.1016/j.pmn.2003.10.001 
Gale, N. K., Heath, G., Cameron, E., Rashid, S. & Redwood, S. (2013). Using the framework method 
for the analysis of qualitative data in multi-disciplinary health research. BMC Med Res 
Methodol, 13, 117-117. doi: 10.1186/1471-2288-13-117 
Galvin, J., Kuntemeier, B., Al-Hammadi, N., Germino, J., Murphy-White & Maggie; McGillick, J. 
(2010). "Dementia-friendly hospitals: care not crisis" An educational program designed to 
improve the care of the hospitalized patient with dementia. Alzheimer disease and 
associated disorders, 24(4), 372-379. doi: 10.1097/WAD.0b013e3181e9f829 
Geda, Y. E., Schneider, L. S., Gitlin, L. N., Miller, D. S., Smith, G. S., Bell, J., . . . Lyketsos, C. G. (2013). 
Neuropsychiatric symptoms in Alzheimer's disease: Past progress and anticipation of the 
future. Alzheimer's & Dementia: The Journal of the Alzheimer's Association, 9(5), 602-608. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2012.12.001 
Gerrish, K. & Lacey, A. (2013). The Research Process in Nursing 6th ed. Chicester: Wiley. 
Glover, A., Bradshaw, L. E., Watson, N., Laithwaite, E., Goldberg, S. E., Whittamore, K. H. & Harwood, 
R. H. (2014). Diagnoses, problems and healthcare interventions amongst older people with 
an unscheduled hospital admission who have concurrent mental health problems: a 
prevalence study. BMC Geriatr, 14(43). doi: 10.1186/1471-2318-14-43 
Gold, R. L. (1958). Roles in sociological field observations. Social forces, 217-223. doi: 
10.2307/2573808 
Goldberg, S., Bradshaw, L. E., Kearney, F. C., Russell, C., Whittamore, K. H., Foster, P., . . . Lewis, S. A. 
(2013). Care in specialist medical and mental health unit compared with standard care for 
older people with cognitive impairment admitted to general hospital: randomised controlled 
trial (NIHR TEAM trial). Bmj, 347. doi: 10.1136/bmj.f4132 
Goldberg, S., Whittamore, K. H., Pollock, K., Harwood, R. H. & Gladman, J. R. (2014). Caring for 
cognitively impaired older patients in the general hospital: a qualitative analysis of 
similarities and differences between a specialist Medical and Mental Health Unit and 
standard care wards. Int J Nurs Stud, 51(10), 1332-1343. doi: 10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2014.02.002 
Goldberg, S. E. & Harwood, R. H. (2013). Experience of general hospital care in older patients with 
cognitive impairment: are we measuring the most vulnerable patients experience? BMJ 
quality & safety, 22(12), 977-980. doi: 10.1136/bmjqs-2013-001961 
Gonski, P. N. & Moon, I. (2012). Outcomes of a behavioral unit in an acute aged care service. 
Archives of gerontology and geriatrics, 55(1), 60-65. doi: 10.1016/j.archger.2011.06.013 
Goodman, C., Norton, C., Buswell, M., Russell, B., Harari, D., Harwood, R., . . . Fader, M. (2017). 
Managing Faecal INcontinence in people with advanced dementia resident in Care Homes 
(FINCH) study: a realist synthesis of the evidence. Health Technology Assessment, 21(42). 
doi: 10.3310/hta21420 
Greenhalgh, T., Humphrey, C., Hughes, J., Macfarlane, F., Butler, C. & Pawson, R. (2009). How do you 
modernize a health service? A realist evaluation of whole-scale transformation in London. 
Milbank Q., 87. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-0009.2009.00562.x 
Greenhalgh, T., Robert, G., Macfarlane, F., Bate, P. & Kyriakidou, O. (2004). Diffusion of innovations 
in service organizations: systematic review and recommendations. Milbank Quarterly, 82(4), 
581-629. doi: 10.1111/j.0887-378X.2004.00325.x 
Griffiths, P., Bridges, J., Sheldon, H. & Thompson, R. (2014). The role of the dementia specialist nurse 
in acute care: a scoping review. J Clin Nurs, 24(9-10), 1394-1405. doi: 10.1111/jocn.12717 
Grol, R. & Grimshaw, J. (2003). From best evidence to best practice: effective implementation of 
change in patients' care. The Lancet, 362(9391), 1225-1230. doi: 10.1016/S0140-
6736(03)14546-1 
Hammersley, M. & Atkinson, P. (2007). Ethnography : Principles in Practice 3rd ed. London: 
Routledge. 
Handley, M., Bunn, F. & Goodman, C. (2015). Interventions that support the creation of dementia 
friendly environments in health care: protocol for a realist review. Syst Rev, 4(180). doi: 
10.1186/s13643-015-0168-2 
Handley, M., Bunn, F. & Goodman, C. (2017). Dementia-friendly interventions to improve the care of 
people living with dementia admitted to hospitals: a realist review. BMJ Open, 7(7), 
e015257. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-015257 
Harrison, A. & Brandling, J. (2009). Improving mental health care for older people within a general 
hospital in the UK. Nursing & health sciences, 11(3), 293-300. doi: 10.1111/j.1442-
2018.2009.00462.x 
Harwood, R., Porock, D., King, N., Edwards, G., Hammond, S. & Howe L (2010). Development of a 
Specialist Medical and Mental Health Unit for Older People in an Acute General Hospital. 
MedicalCrises in Older People Discussion Paper Series. Issue 5, November 2010. Nottingham: 
University of Nottingham. 
Harwood, R. H., Goldberg, S. E., Whittamore, K. H., Russell, C., Gladman, J. R., Jones, R. G., . . . Elliot, 
R. A. (2011). Evaluation of a Medical and Mental Health Unit compared with standard care 
for older people whose emergency admission to an acute general hospital is complicated by 
concurrent 'confusion': a controlled clinical trial. Acronym: TEAM: Trial of an Elderly Acute 
care Medical and mental health unit. Trials, 12, 123. doi: 10.1186/1745-6215-12-123 
Health Education England (2015). Dementia Core Skills Education and Training Framework. London: 
Skills for Health and Health Education England and Skills for Care. 
Health Education England. (2016). Dementia: Improving dementia care through effective basic 
training and continuous professional and vocational development.  Retrieved 8th February, 
2016, from https://www.hee.nhs.uk/our-work/hospitals-primary-community-care/mental-
health-learning-disability/mental-health/dementia. 
Herepath, A., Kitchener, M. & Waring, J. (2015). A realist analysis of hospital patient safety in Wales: 
applied learning for alternative contexts from a multisite case study. Health Serv Deliv Res, 
3(40). doi: 10.3310/hsdr03400 
Hlen, J. C., Saltvedt, I., Fayers, P. M., Bjrnnes, M., Stenseth, G., Hval, B., . . . Kaasa, S. (2005). The 
Norwegian Doloplus-2, a tool for behavioural pain assessment: translation and pilot-
validation in nursing home patients with cognitive impairment. Palliat Med, 19(5), 411-417. 
doi: 10.1191/0269216305pm1031oa  
Holloway, I. & Galvin, K. (2016). Qualitative Research in Nursing and Healthcare 4th ed. Newark: 
Wiley. 
Holmes, J., Montaa, C., Powell, G., Hewison, J., House, A., Mason, J., . . . Gilbody, S. (2010). Liaison 
Mental Health Services for Older People: A Literature review, service mapping and in-depth 
evaluation of service models. London: National Institute for Health Research Service Delivery 
and Organisation programme. 
Hung, L., Phinney, A., Chaudhury, H., Rodney, P., Tabamo, J. & Bohl, D. (2017). Little things matter 
Exploring the perspectives of patients with dementia about the hospital environment. 
International journal of older people nursing, 12(3), e12153. doi: 10.1111/opn.12153 
Hurley, A. C., Volicer, B. J., Hanrahan, P. A., Houde, S. & Volicer, L. (1992). Assessment of discomfort 
in advanced Alzheimer patients. Research in nursing & health, 15(5), 369-377. doi: 
10.1002/nur.4770150506 
Inkley, F. & Goldberg, S. (2016). Managing verbal agitation in people with dementia and delirium: 
Francesca Inkley and Sarah Goldberg report on a service evaluation to discover how staff 
support patients in these challenging situations. Nursing Older People, 28(2), 33-
37.Retrieved from http://journals.rcni.com/doi/abs/10.7748/nop.28.2.33.s22 
Innes, A., Kelly, F., Scerri, C. & Abela, S. (2016). Living with dementia in hospital wards: a comparative 
study of staff perceptions of practice and observed patient experience. Int J Older People 
Nurs, 11(2), 94106. doi: 10.1111/opn.12102 
Innes, A. & Surr, C. (2001). Measuring the well-being of people with dementia living in formal care 
settings: The use of Dementia Care Mapping. Aging & mental health, 5(3), 258-268. doi: 
10.1080/13607860120065023 
Jackson, S. F. & Kolla, G. (2012). A New Realistic Evaluation Analysis Method Linked Coding of 
Context, Mechanism, and Outcome Relationships. American Journal of Evaluation, 33(3), 
339-349. doi: 10.1177/1098214012440030 
John's Campaign. (2015). John's Campaign.  Retrieved 19th September, , 2017, from 
http://johnscampaign.org.uk/#/. 
Jurgens, F. J., Clissett, P., Gladman, J. R. & Harwood, R. H. (2012). Why are family carers of people 
with dementia dissatisfied with general hospital care? A qualitative study. BMC geriatrics, 
12(1), 57. doi: 10.1186/1471-2318-12-57 
Kales, H. C., Gitlin, L. N. & Lyketsos, C. G. (2015). Assessment and management of behavioral and 
psychological symptoms of dementia. The BMJ, 2(350), h369. doi: 10.1136/bmj.h369 
Keady, J., Campbell, S., Barnes, H., Ward, R., Li, X., Swarbrick, C., . . . Elvish, R. (2012). 
Neighbourhoods and dementia in the health and social care context: a realist review of the 
literature and implications for UK policy development. Reviews in clinical gerontology, 22(2), 
150-163. doi: 10.1017/S0959259811000268 
https://www.hee.nhs.uk/our-work/hospitals-primary-community-care/mental-health-learning-disability/mental-health/dementia
https://www.hee.nhs.uk/our-work/hospitals-primary-community-care/mental-health-learning-disability/mental-health/dementia
http://journals.rcni.com/doi/abs/10.7748/nop.28.2.33.s22
http://johnscampaign.org.uk/#/
Kessler, I., Heron, P., Dopson, S., Magee, H., Swain, D. & Askham, J. (2010). The nature and 
consequences of support workers in a hospital setting. Final report. London: NIHR Service 
Delivery and Organisation programme. 
Kitwood, T. (1997). Dementia Reconsidered. The Person Comes First: Open University Press, 
Buckingham, Philadelphia. 
Kitwood, T. & Bredin, K. (1997). Evaluating dementia care the DCM method: Bradford, England: 
Bradford Dementia Research Group, Bradford University. 
Kovach, C. R., Weissman, D. E., Griffie, J., Matson, S. & Muchka, S. (1999). Assessment and treatment 
of discomfort for people with late-stage dementia. J Pain Symptom Manage, 18(6), 412-419. 
doi: 10.1016/S0885-3924(99)00094-9 
Kreindler, S. A., Dowd, D. A., Dana Star, N. & Gottschalk, T. (2012). Silos and social identity: the social 
identity approach as a framework for understanding and overcoming divisions in health 
care. Milbank Q, 90(2), 347-374. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-0009.2012.00666.x 
Kvale, S. & Brinkmann, S. (2009). InterViews: learning the craft of qualitative research interviewing 
2nd. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications. 
Lawson, T. (1997). Economics and Reality  London: Routledge. 
Leary, A., Maclaine, K., Trevatt, P., Radford, M. & Punshon, G. (2017). Variation in job titles within 
the nursing workforce. J Clin Nurs, 26(23-24), 4945-4950. doi: 10.1111/jocn.13985 
Lichtner, V., Dowding, D. & Closs, S. J. (2015). The relative meaning of absolute numbers: the case of 
pain intensity scores as decision support systems for pain management of patients with 
dementia. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making, 15(1), 1. doi: 10.1186/s12911-
015-0233-8 
Lichtner, V., Dowding, D., Esterhuizen, P., Closs, S. J., Long, A. F., Corbett, A. & Briggs, M. (2014). Pain 
assessment for people with dementia: a systematic review of systematic reviews of pain 
assessment tools. BMC Geriatr, 14, 138. doi: 10.1186/1471-2318-14-138 
Lin, S.-Y. & Lewis, F. M. (2015). Dementia Friendly, Dementia Capable, and Dementia Positive: 
Concepts to Prepare for the Future. Gerontologist, 55(2), 237244. doi: 
10.1093/geront/gnu122 
Livingston, G., Sommerlad, A., Orgeta, V., Costafreda, S. G., Huntley, J., Ames, D., . . . Mukadam, N. 
(2017). Dementia prevention, intervention, and care. The Lancet. doi: 10.1016/S0140-
6736(17)31363-6 
Luxford, K., Axam, A., Hasnip, F., Dobrohotoff, J., Strudwick, M., Reeve, R., . . . Viney, R. (2015). 
Improving cliniciancarer communication for safer hospital care: a study of the TOP 
5strategy in patients with dementia. International Journal for Quality in Health Care, 27(3), 
175-182. doi: 10.1093/intqhc/mzv026 
Maben, J., Adams, M., Peccei, R., Murrells, T. & Robert, G. (2012). Poppets and parcels: the links 
between staff experience of work and acutely ill older peoples experience of hospital care. 
International journal of older people nursing, 7(2), 83-94. doi: 10.1111/j.1748-
3743.2012.00326.x 
Manzano, A. (2016). The craft of interviewing in realist evaluation. Evaluation., 22(3), 342-360. doi: 
doi.org/10.1177/1356389016638615 
Manzano, A. & Pawson, R. (2014). Evaluating deceased organ donation: a programme theory 
approach. J Health Organ Manag., 28. doi: 10.1108/jhom-07-2012-0131 
Marchal, B., Belle, S., Olmen, J., Hoere, T. & Kegels, G. (2012). Is realist evaluation keeping its 
promise? A review of published empirical studies in the field of health systems research. 
Evaluation., 18(2), 192-212. doi: 10.1177/1356389012442444 
Marchal, B., Dedzo, M. & Kegels, G. (2010). A realist evaluation of the management of a well-
performing regional hospital in Ghana. BMC Health Serv Res., 10(1), 1-14. doi: 10.1186/1472-
6963-10-24 
Mayrhofer, A., C, G., R, S. & H, D. (2014a). Dementia Education in Hertfordshire and Bedfordshire: An 
organisational audit commissioned by Health Education East of England. Hatfield: Centre for 
Research in Primary and Community Care (CRIPACC) University of Hertfordshire. 
Mayrhofer, A., Goodman, C. & Holman, C. (2014b). Establishing a community of practice for 
dementia champions (innovative practice). Dementia (London), 14(2), 259-266. doi: 
10.1177/1471301214542534 
Mays, N. & Pope, C. (1995). Qualitative research: Observational methods in health care settings. 
BMJ: British Medical Journal, 311(6998), 182184.Retrieved from 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2550229/pdf/bmj00601-0048.pdf 
McConnell, T., O'Halloran, P., Donnelly, M. & Porter, S. (2015). Factors affecting the successful 
implementation and sustainability of the Liverpool Care Pathway for dying patients: a realist 
evaluation. BMJ supportive & palliative care, 5(1), 70-77. doi: 10.1136/bmjspcare-2014-
000723 
McCormack, B. (2004). Personcentredness in gerontological nursing: an overview of the literature. J 
Clin Nurs, 13(s1), 31-38. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2702.2004.00924.x  
McCormack, B., Dewing, J. & McCance, T. (2011). Developing person-centred care: addressing 
contextual challenges through practice development. Online J Issues Nurs, 16(2), 3. doi: 
10.3912/OJIN.Vol16No02Man03 
McCormack, B. & Garbett, R. (2003). The meaning of practice development: evidence from the field. 
Collegian, 10(3), 13-16. doi: 10.1016/S1322-7696(08)60060-8 
McCormack, B., Rycroft-Malone, J., Decorby, K., Hutchinson, A. M., Bucknall, T. K., B., Schultz, A., . . . 
Wilson, V. (2013). A realist review of interventions and strategies to promote evidence-
informed healthcare: a focus on change agency. Implement Sci, 8, 107. doi: 10.1186/1748-
5908-8-107 
McCormack, B., Wright, J., Dewar, B., Harvey, G. & Ballantine, K. (2007). A realist synthesis of 
evidence relating to practice development: findings from the literature analysis. Practice 
Development in Health Care, 6(1), 25-55. doi: 10.1002/pdh.211 
McGaughey, J., O'halloran, P., Porter, S., Trinder, J. & Blackwood, B. (2017). Early warning systems 
and rapid response to the deteriorating patient in hospital: A realist evaluation. J Adv Nurs. 
doi: 10.1111/jan.13367 
Melia, K. M. (1987). Learning and working: the occupational socialization of nurses  London: 
Tavistock Publications. 
Mental Health Foundation (2015). Dementia, rights, and the social model of disability. A new 
direction for policy and practice? London: Mental Health Foundation. 
Merton, R. K. (1957). Social theory and social structure Rev & enlarged ed. New York: Free Press. 
Milne, A., Hibberd, P. & Webster, J. (2011). Improving care for people with dementia in acute 
hospital: the role of person-centred assessment. Quality in Ageing and Older Adults, 12(2), 
86-94. doi: 10.1108/14717791111144696 
Mitchell, L. & Burton, E. (2010). Designing dementia-friendly neighbourhoods: helping people with 
dementia to get out and about. Journal of Integrated Care, 18(6), 11-18. doi: 
10.5042/jic.2010.0647 
Moyle, W., Borbasi, S., Wallis, M., Olorenshaw, R. & Gracia, N. (2011). Acute care management of 
older people with dementia: a qualitative perspective. J Clin Nurs, 20(34), 420-428. doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-2702.2010.03521.x 
Moyle, W., Olorenshaw, R., Wallis, M. & Borbasi, S. (2008). Best practice for the management of 
older people with dementia in the acute care setting: a review of the literature. International 
journal of older people nursing, 3(2), 121-130. doi: 10.1111/j.1748-3743.2008.00114.x 
Moyle, W., Venturato, L., Cooke, M., Hughes, J., van Wyk, S. & Marshall, J. (2013). Promoting value in 
dementia care: staff, resident and family experience of the capabilities model of dementia 
care. Aging & mental health, 17(5), 587-594. doi: 10.1080/13607863.2012.758233 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2550229/pdf/bmj00601-0048.pdf
Mukumbang, F. C., van Belle, S., Marchal, B. & van Wyk, B. (2016). Towards Developing an Initial 
Programme Theory: Programme Designers and Managers Assumptions on the Antiretroviral 
Treatment Adherence Club Programme in Primary Health Care Facilities in the Metropolitan 
Area of Western Cape Province, South Africa. PloS one, 11(8), e0161790. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0161790 
Mulhall, A. (2003). In the field: notes on observation in qualitative research. J Adv Nurs, 41(3), 306-
313. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2648.2003.02514.x 
NICE (2006). NICE clinical guideline 42. Dementia: Supporting people with dementia and their carers 
in health and social care. Manchester: National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. 
Nichols, J. N. & Heller, K. S. (2002). Windows to the heart: Creating an acute care dementia unit. 
Journal of palliative medicine, 5(1), 181-192. doi: 10.1089/10966210252785187 
Nolan, L. (2007). Caring for people with dementia in the acute setting: a study of nurses views. 
British Journal of Nursing, 16(7), 419-422. doi: 10.12968/bjon.2007.16.7.23245 
Nolan, M. R., Davies, S., Brown, J., Keady, J. & Nolan, J. (2004). Beyond personcentredcare: a new 
vision for gerontological nursing. J Clin Nurs, 13(s1), 45-53. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-
2702.2004.00926.x 
OBrien, B., Allwood, R., Beeke, S., Pilnick, A., Goldberg, S., Harwood, R. (2017). What do healthcare 
professionals do when the patient with dementia says no to a healthcare procedure? 27th 
Alzheimer's Europe Conference. Berlin. Retrieved from http://www.alzheimer-
europe.org/Conferences/Previous-conferences/2017-Berlin/Detailed-programme-and-
abstracts/P24.-Treatment-and-management-of-dementia. 
OReilly and Parker (2013). Unsatisfactory Saturation: a critical exploration of the notion of 
saturated sample sizes in qualitative research. Qualitative research, 13(2), 190-197. doi: 
10.1177/1468794112446106 
Orsitto, G., Fulvio, F., Tria, D., Turi, V., Venezia, A. & Manca, C. (2009). Nutritional status in 
hospitalized elderly patients with mild cognitive impairment. Clinical Nutrition, 28(1), 100-
102. doi: 10.1016/j.clnu.2008.12.001 
Par, M.-H. (2016, July 14). Re: NVivo in RE. Message posted to free realist and metanarrative review 
mailing list, archived at https://www.jiscmail.ac.uk/cgi-bin/webadmin?A0=RAMESES 
Patton, M. Q. (2002). Qualitative research & evaluation methods 3rd ed. Thousand Oaks: Sage. 
Pawson, R. (1996). Theorizing the interview. British Journal of Sociology, 47, 295-314. doi: 
10.2307/591728 
Pawson, R. (2006a). Digging for nuggets: How badresearch can yield goodevidence. International 
Journal of Social Research Methodology, 9(2), 127-142. doi: 10.1080/13645570600595314 
Pawson, R. (2006b). Evidence-based policy: a realist perspective  London: Sage Publications. 
Pawson, R. (2013). The Science of Evaluation: A Realist Manifesto  London: Sage. 
Pawson, R. (2015). The ersatz realism of critical realism: A reply to Porter. Evaluation, 22(1), 49-57. 
doi: 10.1177/1356389015605206 
Pawson, R., Greenhalgh, T., Harvey, G. & Walshe, K. (2005). Realist review--a new method of 
systematic review designed for complex policy interventions. J Health Serv Res Policy, 10(1), 
21-34. doi: 10.1258/1355819054308530 
Pawson, R. & Manzano-Santaella, A. (2012). A realist diagnostic workshop. Evaluation., 18(2), 176-
191. doi: 10.1177/1356389012440912 
Pawson, R. & Tilley, N. (1997). Realistic evaluation  London: Sage. 
Pearson, M., Hunt, H., Cooper, C., Shepperd, S., Pawson, R. & Anderson, R. (2015). Providing 
effective and preferred care closer to home: a realist review of intermediate care. Health & 
social care in the community, 23(6), 577-593. doi: 10.1111/hsc.12183 
Poblador-Plou, B. C.-L., Amaia; Marta-Moreno, Javier; Hancco-Saavedra, Jorge; Sicras-Mainar, 
Antoni; Soljak, Michael; Prados-Torres, Alexandra (2014). Comorbidity of dementia: a cross-
sectional study of primary care older patients. BMC psychiatry, 14(84). doi: 10.1186/1471-
244X-14-84 
http://www.alzheimer-europe.org/Conferences/Previous-conferences/2017-Berlin/Detailed-programme-and-abstracts/P24.-Treatment-and-management-of-dementia
http://www.alzheimer-europe.org/Conferences/Previous-conferences/2017-Berlin/Detailed-programme-and-abstracts/P24.-Treatment-and-management-of-dementia
http://www.alzheimer-europe.org/Conferences/Previous-conferences/2017-Berlin/Detailed-programme-and-abstracts/P24.-Treatment-and-management-of-dementia
https://www.jiscmail.ac.uk/cgi-bin/webadmin?A0=RAMESES
Pollock, K. (2012). Procedure versus process: ethical paradigms and the conduct of qualitative 
research. BMC medical ethics, 13(1), 25. doi: 10.1186/1472-6939-13-25 
Porock, D., Clissett, P., Harwood, R. H. & Gladman, J. R. (2015). Disruption, control and coping: 
responses of and to the person with dementia in hospital. Ageing and Society, 35(01), 37-63. 
doi: 10.1017/S0144686X13000561 
Porter, S. (2015a). Realist evaluation: an immanent critique. Nursing Philosophy, 16(4), 239-251. doi: 
10.1111/nup.12100 
Porter, S. (2015b). The uncritical realism of realist evaluation. Evaluation, 21(1), 65-82. doi: 
10.1177/1356389014566134 
Porter, S. O. H., P. (2012). The use and limitation of realistic evaluation as a tool for evidence-based 
practice: a critical realist perspective. Nurs Inq, 19(1), 18-28. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-
1800.2011.00551.x 
Prato, L., Lindley, L., Boyles, M., Robinson, L. & Abley, C. (2018). Empowerment, environment and 
person-centred care: A qualitative study exploring the hospital experience for adults with 
cognitive impairment. Dementia, 0(0), 1471301218755878. doi: 
10.1177/1471301218755878 
Prior, L. (2003). Using documents in social research. In D. Silverman (Eds.), Qualitative research. (pp.  
London: Sage. 
Prior, L. (2008). Repositioning Documents in Social Research. Sociology, 42(5), 821-836. doi: 
10.1177/0038038508094564 
Proctor, S. & Reed, J. (1995). Practitioner research in health care Ed. London: Chapman and Hall. 
Punton, M., Vogel, I. & Lloyd, R. (2016). Reflections from a realist evaluation in progress: scaling 
Ladders and Stitching Theory. CDI Practice Paper 18, Brighton: IDS.Retrieved from 
http://opendocs.ids.ac.uk/opendocs/handle/123456789/11254  
Rahman, S. & Swaffer, K. (2018). Assets-based approaches and dementia-friendly communities: SAGE 
Publications Sage UK: London, England. 
Ritchie, J. & Spencer, L. (2002). Qualitative data analysis for applied policy research. In M. A. 
Huberman & M. B. Miles (Eds.), The qualitative researchers companion. (pp. 305-329). 
London: Sage. 
Robinson, L., Hutchings, D., Corner, L., Finch, T., Hughes, J., Brittain, K. & Bond, J. (2007). Balancing 
rights and risks: Conflicting perspectives in the management of wandering in dementia. 
Health, Risk & Society, 9(4), 389-406. doi: 10.1080/13698570701612774  
Rogers, C. R. (1974). On becoming a person  London: Constable. 
Rsler, A., von Renteln-Kruse, W., Mhlhan, C. & Frilling, B. (2012). Treatment of dementia patients 
with fracture of the proximal femur in a specialized geriatric care unit compared to 
conventional geriatric care. Zeitschrift fr Gerontologie und Geriatrie, 45(5), 400-403. doi: 
10.1007/s00391-012-0299-1 
Royal College of Nursing (2013). Dementia: Commitment to the care of people with dementia in 
hospital settings. London: Royal College of Nursing. 
Royal College of Psychiatrists (2005). Who Cares Wins: Improving the outcome for older people 
admitted to the general hospital: Guidelines for the development of Liaison Mental Health 
Services for older people. London: Healthcare Improvement Quality Partnership. 
Royal College of Psychiatrists (2013). Report of the national audit of dementia care in general 
hospitals 2011. London: Healthcare Improvement Quality Partnership. 
Royal College of Psychiatrists (2017). National Audit of Dementia Care in General Hospitals 2016 - 
2017: Third Round of Audit Report. London: Royal College of Psychiatrists' Centre for Quality 
Improvement. 
Rycroft-Malone, J. (2008). Evidenceinformed practice: from individual to context. Journal of Nursing 
Management, 16(4), 404-408. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2834.2008.00859.x 
http://opendocs.ids.ac.uk/opendocs/handle/123456789/11254
Rycroft-Malone, J., Burton, C., Hall, B., McCormack, B., Nutley, S., Seddon, D. & Williams, L. (2014). 
Improving skills and care standards in the support workforce for older people: a realist 
review. BMJ Open, 4(5), e005356. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2014-005356 
Rycroft-Malone, J., Burton, C. R., Williams, L., Edwards, S., Fisher, D., Hall, B., . . . Williams, R. (2016). 
Improving skills and care standards in the support workforce for older people: a realist 
synthesis of workforce development interventions. Southampton (UK): NIHR Journals Library. 
Rycroft-Malone, J., Fontenla, M., Bick, D. & Seers, K. (2010). A realistic evaluation: the case of 
protocol-based care. Implement Sci, 5(38). doi: 10.1186/1748-5908-5-38 
Rycroft-Malone, J., McCormack, B., Hutchinson, A. M., DeCorby, K., Bucknall, T. K., Kent, B., . . . 
Wilson, V. (2012). Realist synthesis: illustrating the method for implementation research. 
Implement Sci, 7, 33. doi: 10.1186/1748-5908-7-33 
Sampson, E. L., Blanchard, M. R., Jones, L., Tookman, A. & King, M. (2009). Dementia in the acute 
hospital: prospective cohort study of prevalence and mortality. The British Journal of 
Psychiatry, 195(1), 61-66. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.108.055335 
Sampson, E. L., Thun-Boyle, I., Kukkastenvehmas, R., Jones, L., Tookman, A., King, M. & Blanchard, 
M. R. (2008). Palliative care in advanced dementia; A mixed methods approach for the 
development of a complex intervention. BMC palliative care, 7(8). doi: 10.1186/1472-684X-
Sampson, E. L., White, N., Lord, K., Leurent, B., Vickerstaff, V., Scott, S. & Jones, L. (2015). Pain, 
agitation, and behavioural problems in people with dementia admitted to general hospital 
wards: a longitudinal cohort study. Pain, 156(4), 675-683. doi: 
10.1097/j.pain.0000000000000095 
Sayer, A. (1984). Method in social science: a realist approach  London: Hutchinson. 
Sayer, A. (2000). Realism and social science: Sage. 
Scales, K., Bailey, S., Middleton, J. & Schneider, J. (2017). Power, empowerment, and personcentred 
care: using ethnography to examine the everyday practice of unregistered dementia care 
staff. Sociology of health & illness, 39(2), 227-243. doi: 10.1111/1467-9566.12524 
Scerri, A., Innes, A. & Scerri, C. (2015). Discovering what works well: exploring quality dementia care 
in hospital wards using an appreciative inquiry approach. J Clin Nurs, 24(13-14), 1916-1925. 
doi: 10.1111/jocn.12822 
Schneider, J., Scales, K., Bailey, S. & Lloyd, J. (2010). Challenging care: the role and experience of 
health care assistants in dementia wards. Southampton: National Institute for Health 
Research Service Delivery and Organisation programme. 
Sclan, S. G., Saillon, A., Franssen, E., Hugonot-Diener, L., Saillon, A. & Reisberg, B. (1996). The 
behavior pathology in Alzheimer's Disease rating scale (BEHAVE-AD): Reliability and analysis 
of symptom category scores. International journal of geriatric psychiatry, 11(9), 819-830. 
doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1099-1166(199609)11:9<819::AID-GPS389>3.0.CO;2-S 
Scott, J. (1990). A matter of record: documentary sources in social research  Cambridge: Polity Press. 
Scott, S., Jones, L., Blanchard, M. R. & Sampson, E. L. (2011). Study Protocol: The Behaviour and Pain 
in Dementia Study (BePAID). BMC geriatrics, 11(1), 1-8. doi: 10.1186/1471-2318-11-61 
Shakespeare, T., Zeilig, H. & Mittler, P. (2017). Rights in mind: Thinking differently about dementia 
and disability. Dementia. doi: 10.1177/1471301217701506 
Smebye, K. L., Kirkevold, M. & Engedal, K. (2012). How do persons with dementia participate in 
decision making related to health and daily care? A multi-case study. BMC Health Serv Res, 
12(1), 241. doi: 10.1186/1472-6963-12-241 
Snape, D. & Spencer, L. (2003). The foundations of qualitative research In e. Ritchie J. & Lewis J. 
(Eds.), Qualitative Research Practice: A Guide for Social Science Students and Researchers. 
(pp. 1-23). London: Sage Publications. 
Snow, A. L., Weber, J. B., OMalley, K. J., Cody, M., Beck, C., Bruera, E., . . . Kunik, M. E. (2004). 
NOPPAIN: a nursing assistant-administered pain assessment instrument for use in dementia. 
Dementia and geriatric cognitive disorders, 17(3), 240-246. doi: 10.1159/000076446  
Spencer, K., Foster, P., Whittamore, K. H., Goldberg, S. & Harwood, R. H. (2013). Delivering dementia 
care differently--evaluating the differences and similarities between a specialist medical and 
mental health unit and standard acute care wards: a qualitative study of family carers' 
perceptions of quality of care. BMJ Open, 3(12), e004198. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2013-
004198 
Stake, R. E. (1995). The art of case study research  Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications. 
Steinberg, M., Shao, H., Zandi, P., Lyketsos, C. G., WelshBohmer, K. A., Norton, M. C., . . . Tschanz, J. 
T. (2008). Point and 5year period prevalence of neuropsychiatric symptoms in dementia: 
the Cache County Study. International journal of geriatric psychiatry, 23(2), 170-177. doi: 
10.1002/gps.1858  
Stokes, G. (2000). Challenging behaviour in dementia: a person-centred approach  Bicester: Winslow. 
Sultzer, D. L., Levin, H. S., Mahler, M. E., High, W. M. & Cummings, J. L. (1992). Assessment of 
cognitive, psychiatric, and behavioral disturbances in patients with dementia: the 
Neurobehavioral Rating Scale. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 40(6), 549-555. 
doi: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.1992.tb02101.x 
Surr, C., Smith, S., Crossland, J. & Robins, J. (2016). Impact of a person-centred dementia care 
training programme on hospital staff attitudes, role efficacy and perceptions of caring for 
people with dementia: a repeated measures study. International journal of nursing studies, 
53, 144-151. doi: 10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2015.09.009 
Surr, C. A. & Gates, C. (2017). What works in delivering dementia education or training to hospital 
staff? A critical synthesis of the evidence. International journal of nursing studies, 75, 172-
188. doi: 10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2017.08.002 
Swaffer, K. (2014). Dementia: Stigma, Language, and Dementia-friendly. Dementia, 13(6), 709-716. 
doi: 10.1177/1471301214548143 
The Butterfly Scheme. (2018). The Butterfly Scheme.  Retrieved 18 February 2018, from 
http://butterflyscheme.org.uk/. 
Thompson, G. N., Estabrooks, C. A. & Degner, L. F. (2006). Clarifying the concepts in knowledge 
transfer: a literature review. J Adv Nurs, 53(6), 691-701. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-
2648.2006.03775.x  
Tolson, D., McIntosh, J., Loftus, L. & Cormie, P. (2007). Developing a managed clinical network in 
palliative care: a realistic evaluation. International journal of nursing studies, 44(2), 183-195. 
doi: 10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2005.11.027 
Travers, C., Byrne, G., Pachana, N., Klein, K. & Gray, L. (2013). Prospective observational study of 
dementia and delirium in the acute hospital setting. Internal medicine journal, 43(3), 262-
269. doi: 10.1111/j.1445-5994.2012.02962.x 
Turner, A., Eccles, F. J., Elvish, R., Simpson, J. & Keady, J. (2015). The experience of caring for patients 
with dementia within a general hospital setting: a meta-synthesis of the qualitative 
literature. Aging & mental health, 21(1), 66-76. doi: 10.1080/13607863.2015.1109057 
Upton, D., Krishnan, N., Bray, J., Owen, T. & Foote, C. (2012). An evaluation of quality and cost 
effectiveness of a newly defined suite of care interventions for patients with dementia and 
their carers in the acute hospital setting developed by the Royal Wolverhampton Hospitals 
NHS Trust Report phase 2 (1). Worcester: University of Worcester. 
van der Linde, R. M., Dening, T., Matthews, F. E. & Brayne, C. (2014a). Grouping of behavioural and 
psychological symptoms of dementia. International journal of geriatric psychiatry, 29(6), 
562-568. doi: 10.1002/gps.4037 
van der Linde, R. M., Stephan, B., Dening, T. & Brayne, C. (2014b). Instruments to measure 
behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia. International journal of methods in 
psychiatric research, 23(1), 69-98. doi: 10.1002/mpr.1414 
van der Linde, R. M., Stephan, B. C. M., Dening, T. & Brayne, C. (2013). Instruments to measure 
behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia: changing use over time. International 
journal of geriatric psychiatry, 28(4), 433-435. doi: 10.1002/gps.3856 
http://butterflyscheme.org.uk/
Victor, C., Dickinson, A., Narayanan, V., Simpson, C. M., Griffiths, C. & Humphrey, D. (2014). Falling in 
acute mental health settings for older people: who falls, where, when and why? Journal of 
Gerontology & Geriatric Research, 13(173). doi: 10.4172/2167-7182.1000173 
Villanueva, M. R., Smith, T. L., Erickson, J. S., Lee, A. C. & Singer, C. M. (2003). Pain assessment for 
the dementing elderly (PADE): reliability and validity of a new measure. Journal of the 
American Medical Directors Association, 4(1), 1-8. doi: 
10.1097/01.JAM.0000043419.51772.A3 
Waller, S. (2012). Redesigning wards to support people with dementia in hospital: Sarah Waller 
describes a programme that is bringing staff and patients together to create more 
welcoming and inspiring therapeutic environments. Nursing Older People, 24(2), 16-
21.Retrieved from http://journals.rcni.com/doi/abs/10.7748/nop2012.03.24.2.16.c8953 
Waller, S. & Masterson, A. (2015). Designing dementia-friendly hospital environments. Future 
Hospital Journal, 2(1), 63-68. doi: 10.7861/futurehosp.15.017  
Waller, S., Masterson, A. & Finn, H. (2013). Improving the patient experience: developing supportive 
design for people with dementia: the Kings Funds Enhancing the Healing Environment 
Programme 20092012. London: The Kings Fund. 
Ward, D. J., Furber, C., Tierney, S. & Swallow, V. (2013). Using framework analysis in nursing 
research: a worked example. J Adv Nurs, 69(11), 2423-2431. doi: 10.1111/jan.12127 
Warden, V., Hurley, A. C. & Volicer, L. (2003). Development and psychometric evaluation of the Pain 
Assessment in Advanced Dementia (PAINAD) scale. J Am Med Dir Assoc, 4. doi: 
10.1097/01.jam.0000043422.31640.f7 
Waugh, A., Marland, G., Henderson, J., Robertson, J. & Wilson, A. (2011). Improving the care of 
people with dementia in hospital. Nurs Stand, 25(32), 44-49.Retrieved from 
http://www.scopus.com/inward/record.url?eid=2-s2.0-
79958784495&partnerID=40&md5=8168e34bcf203ca1023beb5a12fae3ed 
White, C. L. (2011). Nurse champions: A key role in bridging the gap between research and practice. 
Journal of Emergency Nursing, 37(4), 386-387. doi: 10.1016/j.jen.2011.04.009  
White, N., Leurent, B., Lord, K., Scott, S., Jones, L. & Sampson, E. L. (2016). The management of 
behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia in the acute general medical hospital: 
a longitudinal cohort study. International journal of geriatric psychiatry, 32(3), 297-305. doi: 
10.1002/gps.4463 
Wilkes, L., Jackson, D., Mohan, S. & Wallis, M. (2010). Close observation by specials to promote the 
safety of the older person with behavioural disturbances in the acute care setting. 
Contemporary Nurse, 36(1-2), 131-142. doi: 10.5172/conu.2010.36.1-2.131 
Wilkinson, I., Coates, A., Merrick, S. & Lee, C. (2015). Junior doctor dementia champions in a district 
general hospital (innovative practice). Dementia (London), 15(2), 263-272. doi: 
10.1177/1471301215584083 
Williams, L., Burton, C. & RycroftMalone, J. (2013). What works: a realist evaluation case study of 
intermediaries in infection control practice. J Adv Nurs, 69(4), 915-926. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-
2648.2012.06084.x 
Williams, R. (2011). Hospital programme for dementia-specific care: Using detailed observations of 
patients experiences, Barbara Hodkinson developed the Butterfly Scheme to identify people 
with memory impairment and improve their care. She tells Ruth Williams how it works. 
Nursing Older People, 23(7), 14-17.Retrieved from 
http://journals.rcni.com/doi/abs/10.7748/nop2011.09.23.7.14.c8677 
Wong, G. (2017). Getting to grips with context and complexity  the case for realist approaches. 
Gaceta Sanitaria. doi: 10.1016/j.gaceta.2017.05.010 
Wong, G., Greenhalgh, T. & Pawson, R. (2010). Internet-based medical education: a realist review of 
what works, for whom and in what circumstances. BMC Med Educ, 10(12). doi: 
10.1186/1472-6920-10-12 
http://journals.rcni.com/doi/abs/10.7748/nop2012.03.24.2.16.c8953
http://www.scopus.com/inward/record.url?eid=2-s2.0-79958784495&partnerID=40&md5=8168e34bcf203ca1023beb5a12fae3ed
http://www.scopus.com/inward/record.url?eid=2-s2.0-79958784495&partnerID=40&md5=8168e34bcf203ca1023beb5a12fae3ed
http://journals.rcni.com/doi/abs/10.7748/nop2011.09.23.7.14.c8677
Wong, G., Greenhalgh, T., Westhorp, G., Buckingham, J. & Pawson, R. (2013). RAMESES publication 
standards: realist syntheses. BMC Med, 11(21). doi: 10.1186/1741-7015-11-21 
Wong, G., Westhorp, G., Manzano, A., Greenhalgh, J., Jagosh, J. & Greenhalgh, T. (2016). RAMESES II 
reporting standards for realist evaluations. BMC Med, 14(1), 96. doi: 10.1186/s12916-016-
0643-1 
Wood, S., Cummings, J. L., Hsu, M.-A., Barclay, T., Wheatley, M. V., Yarema, K. T. & Schnelle, J. F. 
(2000). The use of the neuropsychiatric inventory in nursing home residents: 
characterization and measurement. The American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 8(1), 75-
83. doi: 10.1097/00019442-200002000-00010 
Workman, B. A. (1996). An investigation into how the health care assistants perceive their role as 
support workers to the qualified staff. J Adv Nurs, 23(3), 612-619. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-
2648.1996.tb00026.x 
World Health Organization (2010). International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related 
Health Problems, 10th Revision, Version for 2010  Geneva: World Health Organization. 
World Health Organization (2012). Alzheimers Disease International (2012) Dementia: a public 
health priority. Geneva: World Health Organization. 
Yin, R. K. (2013a). Case study research: design and methods 5th ed. Los Angeles, California: SAGE. 
Yin, R. K. (2013b). Validity and generalization in future case study evaluations. Evaluation, 19(3), 321-
332. doi: 10.1177/1356389013497081 
Zerubavel, E. (1979). Patterns of Time in Hospital Life. A Sociological Perspective: University of 
Chicago Press. 
Zieschang, T., Dutzi, I., Mller, E., Hestermann, U., Grnendahl, K., Braun, A. K., . . . Oster, P. (2010). 
Improving care for patients with dementia hospitalized for acute somatic illness in a 
specialized care unit: a feasibility study. International psychogeriatrics, 22(01), 139-146. doi: 
10.1017/S1041610209990494 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Published protocol for realist review 
Appendix 2: Published realist review 
Appendix 3: University of Hertfordshire Ethics Approval Phase One: Stakeholder interviews 
Appendix 4: Interview schedule for stakeholders 
1. Introduction and gaining consent: 
Check Information Sheet has been read and consent form completed.  
Thank you for agreeing to take part in this interview. I am interested to find out how different 
initiatives designed to improve services and care for people with dementia when they access health 
care have been implemented and received by staff and service users. This will inform the focus and 
framework of a review of literature that I am conducting of interventions for designed to improve 
health care for people with dementia. 
I would like your permission to record this discussion as it is very difficult to take detailed written 
notes as we go along. Everything you say will be confidential to myself and my supervisors. The 
recording will be transcribed and anonymised, ensuring that no one can be identified. I can stop the 
recording at any time, just say. This interview should take about an hour. Do you have any questions 
before we start? 
2. Professional background 
What is your background? 
 Organisation 
 Role 
 How long have you worked in x area? 
3. Experience of dementia-friendly interventions 
Have you been involved in any initiatives to improve services for people with dementia?  Can you 
give me some details about how the initiative was implemented. 
 Who was responsible for deciding on the initiative 
 What was your role in delivering / receiving the initiative 
 Why do you think the initiative was implemented  what was it trying to achieve? 
 Do you think it achieved its goals 
 Why / why not 
4. How could it work better? 
Do you think there were things that might have worked better if the initiative had been different? 
 In what way? 
 Would more time / different person responsible / different approach /etc. been better / 
worse? 
Do you think there were any barriers, or can you think of any potential barriers to the initiatives 
implementation? 
The initiative was trying to [x], do you think there would have been a better way of achieving this? 
Has the initiative worked for everyone that you have worked with (colleagues / patients /carers) if so 
who and why, if not who and why?
Appendix 5: Example of coding a transcript using framework analysis 
Extract from SK14 from 03.00 to 17.45 
(Colour coding denotes where themes change during passages) 
Transcript Themes Initial thematic framework 
I was just wondering with the change in the model of care, so was that 
moving from task focused to more person-centred? 
Yes, yeah, so at first there was people being deskilled and feeling a bit... 
but they were very receptive to the model of care because they were 
feeling so deskilled that they, you know, wanted to really know what can 
we do thats going to help make a difference to the patient and so they 
were interested to it, but that we kind of we ran these days which had, you 
know, a strong educational element and like I was saying a vital part of the 
whole training process was bringing people together as a team and 
developing a real shared ethos and shared approach to the model rather 
than saying, this is what it is, this is how to do it, and then it was in addition 
to the taught element we had mental health nurses came to work with us 
and they had a really important part in role-modelling how it looked, how 
to approach things. And so yeah, people were receptive to it cos I think 
that was unique to our ward, I think across... cos I work on another ward 
so Im on a standard healthcare ward now, and staff are desperate for, you 
know, so they want the skills to deal with things properly. 
So is it more about just understanding the best ways to approach a 
person who has dementia and the difficulties that they have, so whether 
its learning a better way to communicate with the person or to 
understand the behaviour theyre presenting with might have a meaning 
behind it? 
Yes, yeah, basically [both laugh], so its refocusing your efforts so that your 
emphasis is on their experience, rather than what youre trying to do to 
Unfamiliar with 
approach, deskilled 
Feeling deskilled as 
motivation for 
engaging with training 
Importance of 
training being whole 
team/shared ethos 
addressing culture 
Experts role 
modelling approach 
Not standard across 
hospital 
Motivation for change 
What change was to 
care practices: 
What supports change/Motivation 
What supports change/Motivation 
What supports change/Training 
What supports change/Training 
What supports change/Shared 
ethos 
Range of interventions/Specialist 
staff 
What supports change/Conflicting 
priorities 
What supports change/Motivation 
Outcomes/Staff 
Outcomes/Patients 
them and its all about the relationship that you can build with that person, 
and often its a bit... very much centred in that, just in that moment in 
time, you know, so you have... 
Of course. So when it comes to things that need, so say for example 
theres a particular treatment thats needed to be given to a person with 
dementia, is it that the nurses understand how to include the person in 
those discussions? 
I think the biggest change for that element is that we introduced the 
concept of being much more flexible, with your approach and much more 
flexible with timings, and much more aware of actually what needs to be 
done, what doesnt need to be done, can it wait. 
Yeah, that sounds quite a big culture shift actually, so moving away from 
these tasks need to be done in this time for the rest of the day to work 
and I dont know, did people struggle with that at all? 
It was one of the biggest challenges and you cant overcome it completely, 
so because you still have to, also have to... the ward has to move, so you 
know, you just do it as best you can but at least you go through a process 
of having to think about it. 
Absolutely. So was the first process an education and an awareness of 
dementia? 
Yes, it was what is dementia, what... how might it be affecting you, how 
does this impact just relating to behavioural changes, and then we 
explored how things might look from the perspective of someone with 
dementia, what their experience is and how reality might look for them 
and about how we can go to their reality rather than trying to bring them 
to ours all the time. 
Relationship with 
patient 
Flexible approach, not 
restricted by ward 
routine 
Flexible within the 
constraints of ward 
routine 
Training: 
understanding 
persons perspective 
What supports change/ability to 
be person focused 
What supports change/Ability to 
be person focused 
Range of interventions/training 
Yeah, so were any people with dementia involved in the development of 
the ward? 
I dont know what work [PI] did, I know that theyve got... a lot of their, 
and I read about it, did a literature search and things to get an idea what 
work has been done before to implement what we were going to do and 
then liaise with people like [other University group], but I wasnt involved 
in that element. 
No, of course. 
So you know, Im trying to think, we did... we introduced certain things like 
[laughs], you know, about the Alzheimers, about This Is Me document and 
we produced our own version for hospital use, and I also worked with one 
called Caring Together that was focusing on carer involvement and 
welcoming their involvement, so we involved patients and relatives in that, 
by just doing this little questionnaire on the ward, so that was the only bit 
I was involved in that looked at the patients element. 
And did that work quite well then, did they... those documents help the 
change to a more person focused? 
The documents we produced? 
Yeah. 
Yeah, definitely, yeah, they were quite fundamental cos they introduced 
information that wasnt clinical, or you know, wasnt medical history 
taking, it was just about patients biography, patients experience, what 
worked for them, and so it was refocusing you on the importance, to think 
about the person. 
Yes, so understanding their life outside of a healthcare setting really? 
Development and 
implementation of 
This is me: involving 
carer, welcoming 
involvement 
Importance of 
biography in changing 
way work with 
patients 
Range of interventions/Specialist 
units 
Range of 
interventions/biographical 
booklets 
Range of interventions/involving 
carers 
Range of 
interventions/biographical 
booklets 
Yes, yeah, and the importance of, you know, maintaining their routines 
and functions and what works for them and what works for the relatives 
and recognising that the carers knowledge and the carers input, how vital 
it is in nursing them just as much as the patient. 
Yeah. And with the assistance of the... well the integration of the mental 
health team, so you say that was quite fundamental as well to the 
working of the ward? 
What sort of changes did you notice with their input? 
Well massive changes [laughs], they could access mental health records 
which in physical health like youd never been able to. 
Yes, not getting the whole story then? 
Yeah, youre feeling, yeah, its just, yeah, so that was a massive bonus, we 
suddenly had a background, information where people asked what point 
in the process they were, what support they had, what community services 
had been over to assess them already, so instantly youve got information. 
They were able to role model person-centred care to us, to... a lot of the 
time we were doing it right but we just needed that reassurance that the 
approach was the right thing, so they were able to provide that. They had 
expertise in situations that theyre escalating that may have potentially led 
to, you know, encounters, or violent encounters, and able to do some de-
escalation techniques, and that they were also more used to a more 
person-centred approach and had more time as well, so we still had to 
plough on with the work whereas they were able to, if you have a situation 
were able to come into that situation, just spend time in presence and 
looking to just be with patients. 
Biography to support 
patient abilities and 
interests.  Carers 
expertise, carers 
needs 
Mental health team: 
access to other 
patient information 
Information to 
understand more 
about the patient 
beyond medical need 
Mental health team 
role modelling care, 
reassured in skills 
Mental health team 
expertise in patient 
care, de-escalation, 
person-centred 
approach 
Issue of time to spend 
with for nursing staff 
Range of 
interventions/biographical 
booklets 
Range of interventions/involving 
carer 
Range of interventions/Specialist 
staff 
Range of interventions/Specialist 
staff 
Range of interventions/Specialist 
staff 
Range of interventions/Specialist 
staff 
Range of interventions/Specialist 
staff 
Absolutely. So in general terms this was an additional resource for the 
ward? 
Yes, yeah. 
And so are you still working on the ward? 
No, Im not, Ive moved to a standard healthcare ward now. 
And how do you feel with the difference? 
Im ashamed to say that the fact that one Trust can have one ward thats 
this area of clinical expertise and nationally acclaimed, and then theres 
nine of the standard wards within the Trust, and the patients on the other 
wards still get I think its about 40, 50% of people with cognitive 
impairment on the normal wards, and theyre receiving a totally different 
model of care, than that one youve worked on where you know whats 
needed and you know what works, I mean you know what the minimum 
standards should be and youre somewhere else and you cant offer this, 
you know, literally next door sometimes to the ward, so Im working with 
the dementia lead for the hospital to see if theres anything we can do 
within resources that are available. 
So for staff to work differently, do you think that comes down to the 
specialists being on a particular ward or is it more of a, its a culture 
change that needs to happen across the hospital? 
Yeah, so its a Trust... theres talk of opening a second ward but theres 
much too many constraints so I don't think anything has come of this, but 
even then you wouldnt accommodate everybody so its a Trust decision 
and a resource decision. Cos it costs a lot more to fund [specialist ward] 
in comparison to 
mental health team 
Specialist unit has 
implications for 
equality of service 
across the hospital 
Frustration, 
limitations even when 
have knowledge of 
what works 
Clinical lead and 
access to resources 
Problems with 
specialist ward, 
finance, cannot 
support all patients 
with need.  
What supports change/Conflicting 
priorities 
What supports change/Conflicting 
priorities 
What supports change/training 
What supports change/Leadership 
What supports change/Conflicting 
priorities 
and in terms of outcome, patient experience improved, theres no cost 
saving outcomes. 
No, and I think thats quite difficult isnt it to get across to the Board who 
are making those decisions that actually thats an important factor. 
They pay lip service to patient experience, thats not fair, they value 
patient experience greatly, but they dont... I dont think theres an 
understanding of exactly what that means for somebody with dementia, 
and what that actually takes to make a good experience. 
No, exactly, alright, thats quite hard I imagine, yeah. 
Yeah, its interesting and its a challenge, and I don't think Im going to get 
very far with it [both laugh]. 
No, I suppose in a way having your experience you could take a role like 
a dementia champion, and recognise where things might need to change 
in your ward but you need someone a bit higher up to also push that 
message. 
It has to be, because I've tried to, you know, educate people around me 
about what, you know, what the person-centred care looks like and Ive 
done some training with staff, just what I can, with the new ward team 
that I had and but Ive realised very quickly its very limited what you can 
achieve, it has to be a whole culture of change. And a massive cultural 
change took place on [specialist ward] around risk taking and all sorts of 
things, you have to have a whole momentum and investment and 
commitment. 
Yeah, so in general do you think the ward staff are quite, would be quite 
open to it but because theyve other focuses that inhibits them a bit to... 
Outcomes need to 
demonstrate board 
level concerns 
Patient experience 
What does good look 
like for patients with 
dementia? 
Problems of one 
person influencing 
change in team. 
Needs to be whole 
culture change 
Outcomes/Organisation 
Outcomes/Person living with 
dementia 
Outcomes/Organisation 
Outcomes/Person living with 
dementia 
What supports change/Shared 
ethos 
What supports change/Shared 
ethos 
They were... staff are desperate for their skills and knowledge to help them 
and I think its wrong and injustice to the staff that theyre not give... well 
now I know that the tools are available, theyre imperfect tools but theyre 
something, to... with, you know, you wouldnt put a nurse to work in ITU 
and not tell them how to use a ventilator, nurses working with people with 
dementia are not educated in what they need, so there are training 
programmes available and the dementia lead runs day, like two day 
courses and they get very good feedback but its not enough by any means. 
Yeah. 
It just looks a bit periphery and you have to train people as a whole team. 
Yes, Ive seen some educational models where they will take one person 
and then they diffuse that to the rest of the team, but I dont know how 
that works with the dynamics of the team and things, its possibly 
dependent on who they select 
Yeah, but its even if you do that, that its one person cant change a whole 
team ethos. Even if there was somebody who was a really strong leader, 
youve still got to it has to be a fundamental commitment to changing 
the kind of approach. 
Staff motivation for 
training (feeling 
deskilled) 
Valuing dementia 
care in comparison to 
clinical skills 
Clinical expert lead 
training.  On own not 
enough 
Whole team ethos 
Commitment to 
change from 
organisation and 
What supports change/Motivation 
Range of interventions/Training 
What supports change/Conflicting 
priorities 
Range of interventions/Training 
What supports change/Training 
What supports change/Shared 
ethos 
What supports change/Shared 
ethos 
Appendix 6: Mapping of factors that support, or not, the implementation of a dementia-friendly intervention 
Intervention 
Factor more supportive  
Factor less supportive 
Outcome 
Appendix 7: Data extraction form 
Theory Areas 
1. If a change agent supports staff to understand how to interpret and respond to 
PLWD behaviour that uses PCC approaches, challenges poor practice by using 
experiential learning and patient centred resources and reflection, then staff will 
be more likely (mechanism confidence, awareness, prioritise) to engage and assess 
patient pain / distress and involve PLWD and carer in planning their care 
2. If a change agent has organisational and clinical authority to introduce learning and 
credible resources that prioritise the identification and care of PLWD and addresses 
concerns around risk and workplace disruption within a PCC framework then staff 
will feel they have permission to do the right thing becoming less risk averse 
3. If a change agent works as a clinical expert to identify and resolve the care needs of 
PLWD then staff will feel supported and be more willing to care for PLWD 
Source(ref):  
Author lens  
Country  
Type of study/paper  
Intervention  
Relevance:  
Are the contents of a section of text within an included document referring to data that 
might be relevant to our mid-range theories? Which ones? 
2. Outcomes of interest 
Are the outcomes of interest referred to in the paper? Which ones? 
1) Patient and carer involvement in decision making 
2) Length of hospital admission 
3) Occurrence of adverse incidents (falls, nutrition, delirium) 
4) Use of antipsychotic medication 
5) Needs assessment 
6) Patient and carer satisfaction 
7) Other not specified 
What are the characteristics of the change agent 
What are the characteristics of person-centred care 
What is the change agent trying to do 
What resources are in place to help them achieve their aims 
To what extent are their aims achieved, what is the evidence? 
In what context is the change agent working?  
3. Interpretation of meaning: 
If it is relevant, do the contents of a section of text provide data that may be interpreted 
as being context, mechanism (resource/response) or outcome? 
4. Judgements about Context-Mechanism-Outcome-Configurations:  
What is the Mechanism (resource)-Context-Mechanism (response)-Outcome 
Configuration (CMOC) (partial or complete) for the data? 
Resource/Intervention Context  Mechanism Outcome 
5. Judgements about mid-range theory: 
 How does this (full or partial) CMOC relate to the mid-range theory? 
 Within this same document are there data which informs how the CMOC 
relates to the mid-range theory? 
 If not, are these data in other documents? Which ones? 
 In light of this CMOC and any supporting data, does the mid-range theory 
need to be changed? 
6. Rigour: 
 Are the data sufficiently trustworthy and rigorous to warrant making 
changes to the CMOC? 
 Are the data sufficiently trustworthy and rigorous to warrant making 
changes to the mid-range theory? 
7. Population 
Questions raised not captured elsewhere 
Notes 
Appendix 8: Evidence for theory area 1: To support staff awareness and learning 
Paper Example Evidence Key Points and emerging CMOs 
Baillie 
(2015)  
I think the Barbaras Story made me more aware of them so I go to help them where 
perhaps I may not necessarily have noticed them before. (Therapists1) (p26) 
After seeing the video it makes those kinds of patients easier to speak with and it also 
reassures you, so for example in the video it talks about not taking them out of their 
own reality, and I think that just reassures people that you can distract them and not 
lie to them and thats okay, and I think thats reassuring to people that dont know that 
much about dementia. (p46) 
 Staff remembered Barbara being lost, confused, vulnerable, scared and worried. 
They engaged with her as a person who could be a family member Some staff 
specifically related Barbaras Story to a family member, which personalised the films 
story There was also acknowledgement that any of us could find ourselves in a similar 
situation. (p24) 
Barbaras Story enabled staff to see her healthcare experience from her perspective 
and the behaviour shown in the film prompted staff to reflect on their own behaviour 
and that of colleagues. (p23) 
In most focus groups, staff discussed how their own interactions with patients and 
behaviour had changed since watching Barbaras Story, and they often referred to 
changes they had observed in other staff too. Areas discussed included: giving more 
time to patients, improved communication, giving more information, and assisting 
patients who are looking lost. (p25) 
Some participants considered that Barbaras Story had raised the profile of initiatives 
and other work that was already in place for people with dementia, further reinforcing 
Raising awareness to recognise signs and symptoms of 
dementia 
Training to improve confidence in working with 
people living with dementia 
Reassurance from examples in training of how to work 
well with people living with dementia 
Training that developed empathy helped staff relate 
to people living with dementia as family members 
Shown experience from patients viewpoint to 
understand how need to adapt care practices 
Changes staff implemented after training; time for 
patients, better communication, information, 
recognising and acting upon distress and confusion. 
Training supporting and promoting the use of other 
resources.  
and helping developments to embed in the Trust, such as dementia study days and 
dementia champions and use of the forget-me-not. (p29) 
Staff related how they listened to patients with a history of dementia, taking their 
physical symptoms more seriously, rather than attributing them to their dementia: we 
will now investigate it a little bit more [...] any physical symptoms we will take seriously 
[rather than attributing it to their dementia or mental health condition (Nurse10). 
Similarly, in relation to behaviour, another nurse said: 
I think its really important for staff to remember not to play a part in that stigma and 
not to make excuses if theyre upset or aggressive, not to put it down to their condition, 
sometimes they are just genuinely wanting something or upset. (Nurses8) (p51) 
Those who had used This is me were great advocates for the tool and the difference it 
made in practice: 
I saw it once in practice and I thought to myself, this is the best thing that anyone has 
ever done because it just made the care you gave so personalised and I remember the 
patient and it said in the notes, loves Coronation Street and EastEnders. So at 7.30pm 
Id go and put on Coronation Street, just because I knew about it. (Nurses4)  
 Its nice to know a bit more about them, what they like and dont like, even if its just 
down to how they like their tea or they dont like tea. (Nurses6) p53 
In one focus group, an example of the benefits of This is me was explained: 
She [patient with dementia] was in for less than three days, got home, she wasnt a 
delayed discharge but my point had been if This is me hadnt been filled in and she 
was distressed and constantly calling, theyd have given her [medication], shut her 
up, then shed have been over-sedated, she wouldn't have been eating and drinking, 
her delirium would have been worse. (Nurses4)  
Staff reported changes to practices following training. 
Understanding behaviours as communication of other 
needs rather than symptoms of dementia. 
Use of biographical tool to understand the 
preferences and routines of the patient. 
How not knowing about the patient leads to 
distressed behaviours that might have adverse results 
such as inappropriate medication, poor nutrition and 
hydration, and increased severity of delirium. 
Banks et al. 
(2014)  
[This is me] By having this document we have reduced the amount of medication the 
patient receives in hospital. Staff are much more likely to look into why the patient is 
behaving this way rather than get them prescribed medication. This in turn has reduced 
the number of falls during the day, therefore reducing the number of fractures and 
increased stays in hospital. P727 
The first change we made was to stop separating the patient with dementia from the 
relative during the admission process. ... I think the relatives feel more valued as a carer 
and the importance of their role in looking after their relative with dementia is 
recognised. The patients are also much more relaxed to have familiar faces around so 
the admission process has become much smoother for everyone including the staff 
I have tried to take back to the ward with me topics that I have learned and shared with 
other members of staff. This has been an eye opener as some staff are not keen to 
accept change and question everything that I have tried to do and dont seem to see the 
need for change. P728 
Resources that support knowledge of the patient 
reduce adverse events such as inappropriate 
medication, falls, and increased length of stay. 
Resources that support knowledge of the patient 
encourage staff to understand behaviour as a form of 
communication. 
Changing processes and procedures that understand 
the needs of people living with dementia to reduce 
patient distress and improve carer satisfaction. 
Difficulty in getting staff to change practices if they do 
not recognise the need to change practices. 
Brooker et 
al. (2014)  
[Dementia awareness training] It has made a big difference to how staff respond to the 
behaviour of patients with dementia, as it has increased understanding and awareness. 
For example, there is now a greater focus on occupying patients with activities to 
reduce behaviour that challenges, and staff are now seen to be walking around with 
patients with dementia who are wandering when previously they would have told them 
to sit back down. P48 
Dementia awareness training improves staff 
understanding of how to better support people living 
with dementia.  Understand the need for providing 
activities to reduce onset of behaviours that challenge 
and adapting way of working. 
Dowding 
et al. 
(2016)  
Participants discussed how pain may be intermittent and fluctuate, often only being 
present when patients are engaged in certain activities. often the doctors will go round 
and theyll ask the patient in their bed or in their chair, Oh, are you alright? Any pain 
anywhere?, No, Im fine. As soon as we [physiotherapists] come, get them up on it, 
Oh, oh, that really hurts.[H1, physiotherapist] p156  
Need to understand people living with dementia have 
difficulty communicating their needs (e.g. pain relief) 
and will have problems recalling and describing 
experiences of pain. 
As with other patients, one of the challenges faced by clinicians is the initial recognition 
of whether or not a patient may be in pain at all; for a variety of reasons patients 
(including those with cognitive impairment) may not be able to verbally express they 
have pain, and clinicians often find it challenging to interpret behavioural signals which 
may be atypical in nature. p157 
One of the key factors in assessing and managing pain is the ability to build a picture or 
narrative of the patient case; which is used as the basis for the interpretation of cues, to 
try and make sense of a situation. Participants highlighted the importance of building 
patterns of information cues and patient behaviour, to help inform their decision 
making. This narrative occurred over time (an issue which arose in other themes from 
the data), trying to link different events over the trajectory of a patient stay, to help test 
guesses and form the basis of trial and error approaches to management. p157 
From the observations it appeared that pain recognition, assessment and management 
was carried out over time, by many individuals. Rather than being under the control of 
one specific nurse or other health care professional, it could be characterized more as a 
process of distributed work, which is time dependent. This is reflected in the comments 
in interviews, which highlight how there is a division of labour in the hospital ward; 
there numerous people with different professional roles who are all involved in the care 
of each patient, each with specific duties, responsibilities and powers. In turn, these 
roles often governed which part of the pain recognition, assessment and management 
process they participated in, and how they communicated their findings. p158 
Challenges for staff to understand patient needs. 
Getting to know the needs of the patient through time 
and continuity in their care. 
Context of ward where responsibilities for the 
patients needs are across a number of staff; those 
who recognise the need may not be able to directly 
address the need.  Importance of communication with 
colleagues. 
Duffin 
(2013)  
Some people have been moved to tears by the DVDs,(outcome) says Ms Karasu. The 
films resonate with them. Sometimes you see a look on their face and you can tell they 
are thinking: I never thought of that. (reasoning) P16 
Emotional engagement with training and realisation of 
the patients experiences of care. 
In one training session nurses, doctors and other staff wear specially designed goggles 
that restrict their vision, and put on a jacket which has small splints inserted in the arms 
to restrict movement of their upper body. This is to help staff understand the physical 
constraints faced by some older people. Darlene Romero, a matron across the trusts 
three older peoples wards, who delivers the training, says: Its a real eye opener, and 
makes you realise how difficult it can be to go to the toilet. P16 
A laminated symbol of a forget-me-not is placed above the beds of all patients with 
dementia, and a similar motif is put on their casenotes, so that any health worker who 
comes into contact with them is aware of their condition. Ms Wood says: It shows our 
team that they need to adapt because the person with them has a cognitive 
impairment. If someone goes to have an X-ray, for example, the team would see the 
forget-me-not symbol and they would know that this person may not just jump up onto 
the couch and be ready.  They will need to provide more explanation and 
perhaps to stay a bit calmer than they would with other patients to show extra 
sensitivity. P17 
Experiential learning triggering realisation of patient 
needs. 
Identifying a patient has dementia, staff recognising 
they need to adapt care to be appropriate to the 
needs of the patient. 
Edvardsson 
et al.  
(2012)  
The subtle initial expression of emerging needs were not picked up by staff as they were 
absent and the expression of unmet needs could escalate to become behavioural 
alterations as the need remained unsatisfied. When staff finally came about, they were 
observed to interpret the behaviour as disruptive or disturbing as they lacked the 
initial interpretative cues that could explain the behaviour. As a consequence, care 
became very much reactive, as staff had to come up with acute solutions to full-blown 
situations for which they lacked the insight and an interpretative framework. P6 
Care becomes reactive when behaviour is 
misinterpreted.  Underlying causes not investigated. 
Ellison et 
al. (2014)  
Colleagues reported improved skills, knowledge and understanding as well as improved 
confidence in caring for people with dementia as a result of the training and working 
alongside a Champion. Colleagues also reported changes in their practice as a result of 
training, for example: 
spending more time with people with dementia on a one-to-one basis to provide more 
Training supported by a Champion to improve 
knowledge and understanding of dementia and 
confidence to work well with people living with 
dementia.  Staff reported changes to care practices. 
individualised care; more effective communication as a result of a better understanding 
of the needs of people with dementia; involving carers more proactively; understanding 
the importance of personal care plans and documentation; being more aware of the 
impact of the environment on people with dementia; being more proactive in providing 
additional assistance to people with dementia; being prepared to challenge bed moves 
involving people with dementia when there was no clinical need; increased awareness 
of signs of stress and distress and seeking to identify the cause rather than resort to use 
of sedatives. p51 
The primary actions undertaken in this respect have been the implementation of 
person-centred care planning through use of the This is me document initially, and 
subsequent development and implementation of Getting to Know Me. Many DCs have 
played a key role in implementing and trying to embed these documents through 
introducing it to their team and training staff in its application.  Use of GTKM allows 
staff to find out more about the patient and their preferences and is generally 
considered a useful tool in supporting improved person-centred care for people with 
dementia. Comments from Champions and their colleagues working in acute settings 
suggest that use of person-centred plans like this represents a departure from the norm 
for them in terms of the information they are used to collecting and the conversations 
they are used to having with patients. Examples were cited where staff have used GTKM 
more effectively minimise stress and distress, reporting how the information they 
gained about the patient through the assessment had supported them to recognise and 
respond more effectively to distressed behaviour. p53 
In interviews DCs frequently cited the role they have played in influencing the behaviour 
of colleagues, for example by challenging inappropriate use of language when speaking 
to or speaking about people with dementia. p54 
Staff seeking to address underlying need of people 
living with dementia rather than treating behaviour 
with medication. 
Use of biographical tools to support person-centred 
care practices that reduce distress. 
Role of champions in supporting implementation of 
tool. 
Champions role in addressing negative staff attitudes 
towards people living with dementia. 
Staffs attitudes have changed hugely in A&E [as a result of DCs awareness raising of 
how noise and activity can cause distress]  you used to see someone with dementia 
and there would be 2 or 3 nurses with the one patient, each doing something else and 
the poor patient... now you see them going in one person at a time, calmer more 
quietly.p56  
Champion supports staff to understand difficulties 
faced by people living with dementia.  Staff adapt 
practices to recognise and support difficulties.  
Galvin et 
al. (2010)  
[post training] The staff also recognized the need for improved communication skills 
with the patient, such as sitting and talking clearly, using nonverbal clues, and asking 
permission to touch the patient in order to improve care. 
Training for staff to recognise the need to change 
practices. 
Additional evidence of how training encouraged staff 
to implement new resources to improve care of 
people living with dementia (activity packs, 
volunteers, identification method for patients at risk 
of leaving the ward). 
Goldberg 
et al. 
(2014)  
Staff also appeared more accepting and understanding of mental health problems and 
patients on the Unit were more likely to raise concerns about their mental health and 
these would be responded to by staff. This could be because staff were more aware of 
mental health needs, because they had more conversations with staff in general 
(and thus the opportunity to raise such concerns) or it could be because they were 
cared for on a ward where all patients were cognitively impaired. (p1337) 
The Unit provided a greater focus on the mental health needs of patients. Staff were 
more often observed assessing patients cognitive abilities (using standardised tools and 
by questioning) than on standard care. P1337 
Sometimes, skilled care on the Unit was not evident to observers, as patients who had 
the potential to exhibited distress behaviour were calm. In this observation Alex has 
been calmly walking up and down the ward for over an hour. A member of staff has 
always been walking with him and talking to him. Alexs aggression was only evident 
when something unexpected happened. P1337 
Awareness and understanding of dementia led staff to 
address patient psychological and mental health 
needs. 
Use of assessment tools to understand patients 
cognitive abilities. 
Supporting patient choice and independence to 
reduce distress and the onset of behaviours that 
challenge. 
Individual attention was given to patients at other times on the Unit with staff getting 
patients drinks or snacks outside of the meal and drink rounds and using touch when 
interacting with patients. P1338 
However, the psychological needs of the patients on the Unit were high and a minority 
of patients would call out persistently for long periods of time. Staff would try to 
comfort or distract them But the calling out would resume once the staff member 
left the patient and the conflicting demands on time meant staff would sometimes 
ignore their cries and attend to other patients, staff or documentation Delivering care 
to patients with these behaviours could be exhausting and sometimes, particularly 
towards the end of a long day (12 1/2 h shift), staff would ignore patients. P1338 
Staff working outside of ward routine to meet 
individual needs. 
Constraints to addressing patient needs when unable 
to find out the cause, conflicting demands on staff 
time, and staff fatigue. 
Gonski and 
(2012)  
Staff members stated that they were sufficiently trained and a majority (n = 11) were 
able to confidently manage the behavioral problems. The respondents reported that 
they were able to build therapeutic relationships with both the patients and the carers 
and were also happy to provide help for both parties. In terms of communication, the 
nurses were very confident they could communicate with the patients, and therefore 
were able to interpret individuals needs. P62 
Training supports staff confidence to work with 
people living with dementia who have behaviours that 
challenge.  Staff ability to communicate well with 
patients helps them build relationships with patients 
and understand their needs.   
Luxford et 
al. (2015)  
Early in the implementation period, a few clinicians reported difficulty in translating the 
carers tips into a workable strategy for the hospital environment as they lacked 
confidence to write strategies based on non-clinical tips. This issue was addressed 
through further training and the development of lanyards for clinicians to use which 
demonstrated how to write an effective TOP 5. P5 
After implementing TOP 5, the majority of clinicians reported agreeing or strongly 
agreeing that TOP 5 was easy to use (91%), not time consuming (70%), decreased 
patient agitation and distress (74%), resulted in decrease use of restraintphysical or 
chemical (61%)and made it easier to relate to carers (89%). P5 
Use of biographical tool supported by champions, 
training, and examples of how to implement 
information into care plan. 
Use of biographical tool perceived to reduce patient 
agitation and distress and the use of restraints. 
Nichols 
and Heller 
(2002)  
We built an interdisciplinary team that looks at the patient and the caregiver as a unit, 
works with them, and responds to the patients behaviour as meaningful behaviour that 
needs to be understood. We understand that dementia patients have special needs.  
Using a team approach has allowed us to meet those needs in an acute care hospital. 
Working with carer to understand patients needs.  
Understanding that behaviour is a communication of 
an unmet need. 
Scerri et al. 
(2015)  
Care worker (S32): I was thinking about this particular patient who did not need 
physiotherapy because he was here for respite care. He used to turn to all the staff to 
ask questions .. So every time I used to engage in a conversation with him and try to 
first calm him and reassure him because he was panicking and living in a situation as if it 
is real for him. P6 
Recognising patient needs and addressing them to 
reassure.  Understanding from patient perspective. 
Schneider 
et al. 
(2010)  
We found that HCAs continuously ensured that patients were as comfortable as 
possible, some going out of their way to achieve this. One worker was even known 
to have sewed and adapted patients clothing to maximise their comfort (and staff 
convenience, because this prevented frequent changes of clothing). Efforts were made 
to overcome language barriers between staff and non-English speaking patients and, 
when patients were distressed, HCAs often comforted them with actions as well as 
words: The male patient who becomes very distressed and cries was comforted 
greatly by H/CO who warmly cuddled up next to him, whilst on his observation, putting 
her arm around him and letting him snuggle into her, putting his head on her chest. 
(Fieldnote, Ward C) p28 
We concentrate more, as you get to know the patients, the more you know their ways, 
you know their habits and if theyve got a bad tummy and things like that and you get to 
know them; the job comes easier when you get to know them. It doesnt stop you 
getting hit sometimes, but youre aware of, you just get to know them and understand 
them a bit more. P47 
Invoking their practical autonomy, the HCAs also made minor adaptations within 
routines to suit individual patients. For example, medications were administered to all 
Recognising and addressing patient needs to improve 
comfort for patients and benefit staff workload. 
Importance of getting to know patients and benefits 
to workload. 
Personalising tasks for needs of patients. 
patients at approximately the same times every day on each ward, rather than being 
doled out individually; this ensured that every patient received his or her medication, as 
well as conserving staff time. However, within this routine, HCAs who were running 
the medications would often make small concessions, for example by taking extra time 
to gain the trust of individual patients. P 49 
Spencer et 
al. (2013)  
Carers of patients with MMHU described staff as being well prepared for dealing with 
confused patients, displaying patience and compassion. Respondents noted that 
patients who liked to wander were guided by staff when walking up and down rather 
than constantly being returned to their bed space, a behaviour observed by carers on 
standard care wards. p3 
Participants felt that staff had little understanding and limited training in dementia 
care, which carers felt resulted in patients being ignored, shouted at or threatened 
when staff were faced with uncooperative or challenging situations. P3 
Staff who have understanding of dementia and 
dementia care can meet the needs of patients. 
Where staff lack understanding of behaviours that 
challenge they misinterpret them and attribute the 
problem to the patient, leading to poor care. 
Waller and 
Masterson 
(2015)  
Many of the environmental changes appear to have occurred as a consequence of the 
training that teams received before they started planning their projects. For example 
changes in staff attitudes such as investing in table cloths, laying tables, and purchasing 
coloured crockery, as well as increases in activities for patients such as the provision of 
newspapers or implementation of therapy hours, were reported; in the words of one 
team member, it is not just about the colour of the paint. P64 
Making spaces seem smaller and more familiar, and reducing the numbers of decisions 
that have to be made by patients in finding their way to places such as the toilet, the 
dining room or their own bed space, seems to significantly reduce agitation. P65 
Staff training helps staff recognise the needs of people 
living with dementia and make adaptions. 
Changes that recognise the difficulties of people living 
with dementia will help reduce distress. 
White et 
al. (2016)  
Patients with any form of BPSD during their admission were five times more likely to 
have an antipsychotic prescribed during the admission (OR 4.99, 95% CI 1.15, 21.70, 
p=0.032). Antipsychotic prescription was five times more likely in people who 
Behaviours that challenge increase likelihood of 
antipsychotic prescription. 
experienced hallucinations (OR 5.04, 95% CI 2.10, 12.06, p0.001) or activity 
disturbances (OR 5.71, 95% CI 2.22, 14.70, p0.001) and seven times more likely with 
aggressive behaviours (OR 7.70, 95% CI 2.25, 26.31, p=0.001). Patients were three times 
more likely to have an antipsychotic prescribed when they experienced sleep 
disturbance (OR 3.35, 95% CI 1.45, 7.79, p=0.005). 
In total, 55% of participants received non-pharmacological management during their 
admission. The most commonly used techniques were psychosocial interventions (36%) 
and staffing (17%) (Table 2). We found no evidence in the nursing or medical notes of 
ongoing monitoring or review of the effectiveness of these non-pharmacological 
interventions, or of a systematic way of using these techniques. 
Lack of monitor of non-pharmacological management 
of behaviours that challenge so difficult to know 
effectiveness. 
Williams 
(2011)  
We are testing a REACH education programme for domestic assistants and 
housekeepers They had not considered the positive impact they could have in 
contributing to care and, without exception, were delighted to support the initiative. 
REACH helps all staff to understand the cognitive difficulties experienced by people with 
dementia.  It enables them to contribute in their role and promotes pride in the part 
they play in care. p15 
Carers feel relieved that their loved ones condition is recognised and that hospital staff 
know how to respond to them, while the carers sheet allows families to pass on crucial 
information and tips that will keep patients safe and improve their care. P17 
Understanding the problem, knowing how can make a 
difference to patient experience and being able to 
take pride in work. 
Working with carers to get to know the patient and 
know strategies that work well to improve patient 
safety. 
Appendix 9: Favourable opinion letter from East of England - Essex Research Ethics Committee
Appendix 10: HRA Approval letter 
Diagnosis of dementia Yes / no*  If yes state 
Current delirium status 
Medications (list) 
Evidence of person centred care plan, if yes details 
Evidence of pain / treatment for pain 
Place of admission and discharge (e.g. home, care home, nursing home) 
Appendix 11: Medical notes data collection form 
Understanding what supports dementia-friendly hospital 
environments 
Date:                                                                       Participant Identifier:                                                         . 
Age:                                                                         Male / Female 
Length of stay:                                                                                                                                     . 
Reason for admission and route of admission (e.g. transfer from A&E, transfer from another ward) 
Co-morbid conditions (list) 
Evidence of adverse incidents in hospital, if yes details 
Appendix 12: Worked example of coding for thematic analysis 
Appendix 13: Example of using NVivo for thematic analysis 
Example of CMOC 1: Understanding behaviour as a communication to improve staffs ability to 
respond 
Example data in Range of staff responses to patient needs 
OB0102 
9 has not left the bed bay but is stood in the entrance, she then turns and walks over to the front 
desk where three patients are sat.  She stands at the desk and suddenly shouts I cant get out  The 
AC enters the room and walks over to 9 and asks if she would like to help wipe down the tables as 
they are getting ready for lunch.  9 says no, I must leave.  She walks out of the bed bay with the AC 
walking with her.  The patients at the front desk look bemused.  From the corridor I can hear 9 
shouting I cant get out  She walks back into the bay with the AC, the AC has her hand placed her 
right hand gently on 9s left shoulder.  She talks in a calm manner 9, we are having lunch now.  Her 
hand moves to be supportively round her back.  The AC escorts 9 back to the middle table. 
OB0104 
16 is crying, she has her face in her hands, then she stops, looks up and round the ward and mutters.  
The HCA is now at 15s bed on the left hand side taking her blood pressure (FN: early 15 had 
apparently been aggressive and had been administered some medication to calm her down). The 
HCA looks over at 16 and says ah, dont get upset, youve got 15 in the next bed, shell look after 
you.  The HCA has finished taking 15s blood pressure, looks over at 16 and sees she is still teary, 
then she walks over to 11 sat at the front desk and turns to me as she does saying in a low voice I 
might wait a bit. 
ST0203 
I chatted to a gentleman the other day and he looked really bored and a bit restless and I said can I 
do anything to help? and he said my radios missing and I said okay, Ill look for it and I looked for 
it and I couldnt find his radio in any of his belongings and I said well I havent got your radio, but 
Ive got the ward radio, can I put the ward radio on? and he said oh yes that would be lovely. And 
straight away he calmed right down after the music went on.  So he just wanted some music on, he 
just wanted something to listen to.  
OB0206 
3 has her head in her hands.  The CSW gets up to her, stands to her left hand side and says to 3 
youve got to eat something.  3 turns to her and has a worried look in her eyes, she asks but what 
about the children? The CSW says to her softly I think theyve all been fed, dont you worry and 
she rubs 3s left upper arm gently with her right hand. She stands with 3 for a moment. 
OB0207 
4 is pulling at her pipes and some of the dressing around the cannula and is saying (to no one) can 
you get this off my wrist please.  The CSW has just come back in and goes over to 4.  She puts her left 
hand gently on 4s right hand and says to her firmly no, this one well take it off when the drip has 
finished.  She then picks up the cup of tea off the table and says to 4 have some more tea. 
Example data in Staff capacity to understand and respond to behaviours 
ST0116 
often what is happening is the patient is frightened, its whats going on.  This is a person who, they 
are reacting in a way because something is going on, something that is quite scary to them.  And if 
we can make them less scared and less distressed then we can manage them. 
OB0103 
6 has been walking round the ward.  He is back at his bed, the bed rails are up, he is leaning over the 
bedrails pulling his blankets straight.  HCA [1] has pushed the breakfast trolley round to the other 
side of the room close to 6s bed, he goes over to 6, stands behind him, and asks what he wants for 
breakfast.  6 answers, still straightening the bedding.  The HCA [1] walks back to the trolley and 
makes up his order.  The HCA then places the food on the bedside table and goes to move the table, 
however instead it blocks 6s pathway to his bedside chair (7s curtains are drawn).  6 is currently 
standing on the other side of the bed, sees that breakfast is ready and he starts to walk round his 
bed.  The HCA [2] goes up to 6 and asks if he would like a cup of tea. 6 smiles at this.  HCA [2] goes to 
get a cup of tea.  6 navigates past the table to his chair.  When HCA [2] returns with the cup of tea 
she sets the cup down on the table and then moves the table into position for 6. 
ST0201 
What makes it difficult for staff to provide good care? 
I think staffing and awareness of dementia and tolerance and people not understanding that they 
might be able to take it [being in hospital] because of unmet needs; if theyve got pain, constipation, 
they might be hungry and they might be tired, those areas.  So making people aware that it might 
not be the dementia that is causing these things but it might be these needs.  They [patients with 
dementia] cant express their need, I think thats a big area that needs to be, so some more 
education needs to be put into the staff. 
Example data in Systematic approaches to understanding behaviour 
ST0107 
We always get briefed every day, in the morning we have handover when we start and at the end of 
the shift, we always get informed every day of any new plans for the patients and if we have to be 
careful if any patient is ill or any kind of special foods or things and if they are nil by mouth. 
ST0116 
And then obviously had some input into the [ward] behaviour chart which has then gone round the 
hospital.  Which of the 17 / 18 interventions listed, only one is medication.  You know, one is calling 
a doctor, one is around one-to-oneing someone, but pretty much there is around 14 interventions 
on there which are non pharmacological interventions, which arent over medicines, do they need 
the toilet, do they need something to do because its boring being in hospital, those sorts of things.  
So that is the sort of thing we go through with the nurses when we are doing that training.  And with 
the doctors as well, sometimes as well. 
OB0107 
The 2 Drs are at the middle table discussing the behaviour chart of 4, they are trying to understand 
the pattern of his aggressive and violent behaviour and mention sundowning as a possible 
explanation. 
OB0109 
The consultant on the bed gets 9s attention and begins to ask her about her hallucinations.  She 
asks when she started seeing the insects and animals.  9 looks confused for a moment.  The 
consultant continues by asking if it started in hospital or at home.  9 confirms it had started at home.  
The consultant says to 9 that was what she wanted to know, if she had been seeing them before or 
after she came to hospital.  9 nods.  The consultant then begins to ask her a little about her living 
arrangements and begins to discuss the possibility of getting her home with some support. 9 nods.  
The consultant then wraps up the meeting and the doctors go back to the medications table.  The 
consultant talks about the possibility of some sort of dopamine medication. 
ST0201 
I think how dementia patients communicate, making staff aware of how they might communicate 
through aggression and agitation, that side of communication, make them think it is not the 
dementia and assuming something is wrong.  But then making sure staff are filling out the right 
charts, so food charts, stool charts, and keeping a record, so they might be constipated, so making 
sure people fill in the forms and help people communicate.  Especially with the turnover of staff, the 
shift patterns, if it is all documented and the communication will help as well.  The hands on of 
speaking to the patient, and speak the families as well and not communicating, so asking them 
questions about how they are managing at home, making them more aware of the person for 
personalised care. 
ST0202 
I mean the dysphasia with dementia, being assessed by the SALT teams, as you know is very 
common.   
OB0202 
1.20 The CSW ward and CSW 1:1 are talking about the support needs for patient 4.  The CSW ward 
says to the CSW 1:1 that she will go and update the RN and ward manager and put it in the patient 
notes that 4 is not to have male support.  The CSW 1:1 then comes over to me and explains that they 
now know why 4 cannot have a male CSW 1:1 and that everyone is being updated to change the 
care plan.   
Appendix 14: Patient information sheet 
Understanding what supports dementia-friendly hospital environments 
Invitation: Would you like to take part in some research? 
By research I mean finding answers to questions that can help to improve hospital 
services for people like yourself.  
You do not have to take part in the research  
Before deciding whether to take part, please read this or ask someone to help you 
read it. 
This will tell you what the research is about and what I would like you to do.  
I would like to find out about your experience of hospital.   
Who is involved in this study? 
The study is part of a PhD that is being funded by the Alzheimers Society. 
The study is based at the University of Hertfordshire. 
Claire Goodman and Frances Bunn are supervisors on the study.  
Melanie Handley is the student. 
What is this study about?  
People living with dementia are admitted to hospital for many reasons.   
Hospitals are trying to improve their services for people living with dementia.  
I would like to know about your stay in hospital.  
Why have you been approached about the study? 
As someone living with dementia, I would like you to contribute your 
experiences so I can understand what is important to you.   
What is involved? 
I would like to learn from your experiences to improve hospital care for people 
like you. 
With your permission I will 
 Make notes of what I see and hear happen between yourself and other 
people on the ward during mealtimes, clinical rounds, assessments, care, 
and activities.   
 I will talk with staff, patients and visitors about what I see and hear so I 
understand what is happening and why.  
 I will not see personal care or consultations behind curtains, but will I be 
able to hear what takes place and might make a note of this. 
 I will be typed up notes from what I see and hear.  
 I will look at your medical notes about why you were admitted, your 
dementia diagnosis, your health, medication use, care plans and 
discharge destination  
 I will use the Neuropsychiatric Inventory Questionnaire to collect 
information about your mood and behaviour.  This will be completed with 
a member of staff  
 I will interview patients, carers and hospital staff about how care for 
people living with dementia is provided in ways that recognise the 
difficulties they experience due to their dementia.  
The study will use this information to understand what good care looks like in 
hospital settings for people like you and how it can be provided.   
If you are happy for me to make notes about your hospital stay  
I will make notes for between 2 to 6 hours. 
I will not write down information that identifies you. 
You can decide to stop at any time. 
If you decide to take part you will still be free to withdraw at any time and without 
giving a reason and any information related to you will not be used in this study. 
I will type up the notes. 
I may use some of the things in a report of the research. 
I will not use your name in the report. 
Will taking part be confidential?  
All data will be stored securely in password protected computers and secure 
University computer systems.   
At the end of the study, anonymised data (data which does not identify any one who 
has taken part) will be archived for up to 15 years. 
You will not be identifiable in any written reports. 
Your name will only be on the consent form you sign. 
The consent form will be stored in a locked cabinet which can only be 
accessed by the study researchers.  
All information about you for the research will be confidential.  But, if, during 
the observations, you see or am told about something where you, or someone 
else is at risk of harm I may need to tell someone as required by the rules on 
safeguarding, and your identity may have to be passed on.   I will explain what 
has happened to [insert name], the Lead Nurse Adult Safeguarding in the 
Trust, or to another person depending on the circumstances.  I may need to 
complete a form, if advised to do so, or involve others.  If this happens I will 
keep you informed. 
What will happen to the study findings? 
The study will report its findings to help improve hospital services for people 
living with dementia and their carers.  
Are there any risks in taking part? 
There are no risks in taking part in the study. 
Do I have to take part? 
You do not have to take part if you do not want and need not give a reason.   
I would like to take part, what should I do next? 
If you wish to take part, please contact Melanie Handley, she will be visiting 
the ward shortly.   
Tel: [x]    Email:  [x] 
Who has reviewed the study? 
Research projects are scrutinised by ethics committees whose job is to protect 
the interests of everyone who takes part. 
This study has been reviewed by the East of England  Essex Research Ethics 
Committee which has made a favourable judgement. 
How do I contact the researchers? 
You can contact us directly: 
Melanie Handley, PhD Student 
Tel: [x] Email:  [x] 
Claire Goodman, Professor of Health Care Research, 
Tel: [x]  Email: [x] 
Frances Bunn, Reader in Evidence Based Health Care 
Tel: [x] Email: [x] 
Address: 
Centre for Research in Primary and Community Care 
University of Hertfordshire,  
College Lane, Hatfield, Herts. AL10 9AB   
mailto:m.j.handley@herts.ac.uk
mailto:m.j.handley@herts.ac.uk
mailto:c.goodman@herts.ac.uk
mailto:f.bunn@herts.ac.uk
Appendix 15: Staff information sheet: observation 
Understanding what supports dementia-friendly hospital environments 
Information for staff: Observation 
Invitation 
A PhD student from the University of Hertfordshire is undertaking a study to 
understand dementia-friendly environments in hospitals and identify what 
factors might lead to positive outcomes for patients and their carers.   
Your ward [insert ward name] is participating in the study and as part of the 
study we will be observing patient and staff interactions on the ward [insert ward 
name] to understand the patient experience of care. 
We would like to invite you to take part in an interview for the study.  It is 
important to understand why the study is being undertaken and what it will 
involve. This leaflet explains how you can take part, and what this would mean 
for you. Please read the following information carefully and discuss it with 
colleagues or family if you wish. You can ask Melanie Handley, the research 
student, or Claire Goodman or Frances Bunn, the research supervisors, about 
anything else you would like to know, or for further information if you require it. 
Contact details for the research team can be found at the end of the leaflet. 
Who is involved in this study? 
This study is part of a PhD that is being funded by the Alzheimers Society. 
Claire Goodman and Frances Bunn are supervisors on the study based at the 
University of Hertfordshire. Melanie Handley is the research student who is 
conducting the study for the University of Hertfordshire. All members of the team 
have extensive experience of research in health care with particular focus on 
issues affecting older people who have cognitive impairment.  
What is this study about? 
People living with dementia often have multiple health care needs and may 
need an admission to hospital.  Hospitals are recognising the complexity of caring 
for people with dementia.  Interventions have been developed to make hospitals more 
dementia-friendly. By this we mean that the care provided and the environment are 
appropriate for people living with dementia.  Examples of dementia-friendly initiatives 
include adaptions to physical environments to assist orientation and engagement, 
schemes which raise staff awareness of issues in dementia care, staff training, and 
the involvement of family carers in care discussions. However, research to understand 
what it is about these interventions that produce successful outcomes for patients and 
family carers is lacking.  The study aims to understand these features and 
develop a framework to help commissioners consider what kind of service 
provision and initiatives are likely to be most useful in hospital settings and for 
which patient groups 
Why have you been approached about the study? 
As a staff member working on ward [insert ward name], we would like observe 
the way care is delivered to people living with dementia in hospitals.  We would 
like to understand how care has been adapted to allow for the difficulties they 
have due to their dementia.  This information will help us to highlight the most 
important features that support the implementation of dementia-friendly 
interventions in hospitals. 
What is the study going to do? 
The study is in two parts. In the first part of the study, we looked at the range of 
dementia-friendly interventions in hospitals and the research studies on their 
effectiveness. We also talked to commissioners, hospital staff, people living with 
dementia and carers, and academics, to ask them how different interventions 
were thought to work and why. We have combined the information from the 
interviews and research, to highlight different ways that dementia-friendly 
hospitals can be achieved.  
For the second part of the study we have identified hospitals that work in 
different ways to support people who are admitted to hospital and have 
dementia.  We will test how the different ways of working impacts on patient 
and carer outcomes. The outcomes are; patient and carer inclusion in decision 
making, length of stay and destination of discharge, adverse incidents (such as 
infections, falls), medication use, assessment of needs, patient and carer 
satisfaction. With the permission from people recruited to the study, we will  
 Observe patients and staff in the ward; making notes of what is seen and 
heard from conversations and interactions during mealtimes, clinical 
rounds, assessments, care, and activities.  The researcher will not see 
personal care and consultations performed behind curtains, but will be 
able to hear conversations that take place and these might be included if 
relevant to the study.  During observations the researcher will talk with 
staff, patients and visitors to make clear her understanding what 
happening and why.  Notes from observations will be typed up by the 
researcher.  Observations will be between 2 and 6 hours. 
 Recording information from patients medical notes about their reason for 
admission, dementia diagnosis, their health, medication use, care plans 
and discharge destination  
 The Neuropsychiatric Inventory Questionnaire will be completed with a 
member of staff to collect information about the mood and behaviour of 
patients 
 Interviewing patients, carers and hospital staff about how care for people 
living with dementia is provided in ways that recognise the difficulties they 
experience due to their dementia.  
The study will use this information to understand what dementia-friendly health 
care looks like in hospital settings and how it can be provided.  This will be used 
to explain what needs to be in place to support staff to provide good dementia 
care. 
What will happen to me if I take part in the study? 
Melanie will observe interactions with staff, patients and visitors on the ward 
and make notes of what she sees and hears, for example during mealtimes, 
medication rounds and other times of contact.  Melanie will not observe 
personal care, but will be able to hear interactions that occur behind drawn 
curtains.  She may make notes of what she hears if it is of relevance to the 
study.  Observations will last between 2 and 6 hours. 
Are there any risks in taking part? 
We do not envisage any risks for staff who agree to take  part in the study.  
Do I have to take part? 
Taking part is voluntary and is entirely up to you.  You do not have to take part 
if you do not want and need not give a reason; the research team will respect 
your wishes whatever you decide.  If you decide to take part you will still be 
free to withdraw at any time and without giving a reason and any information 
related to you will not be used in this study. 
Will taking part be confidential?  
All information relating to you as a result of this research will be confidential. 
All data will be stored securely in password protected computers and secure 
University computer systems.  At the end of the study, anonymised data (data which 
does not identify any one who has taken part) will be archived for up to 15 years.  
You will not be identifiable in any written reports. Your name will only appear 
on the consent form you sign.  The consent form will be stored in a locked 
cabinet which is only accessible to the study researchers. All information 
about you for the research will be confidential.  But, if, during observations, the 
researcher witnesses something that suggests someone else is at risk of harm 
I may need to tell someone as required by the rules on safeguarding, and your 
identity may have to be passed on.   I will explain what has happened to 
[insert name], the Lead Nurse Adult Safeguarding in the Trust, or to another 
person depending on the circumstances.  I may need to complete a form, if 
advised to do so, or involve others.  If this happens I will keep you informed. 
Although every effort will be made to anonymise published information, there 
is a small chance staff may be identifiable due to the nature of interactions or 
their role.  To minimise this risk we will ensure: 
 Any contribution you make will not be identifiable in the study reports, 
we will not use names.   
 Where staff could be identifiable from their job title, band groupings (e.g. 
Band 1  4, Band 5  6, Band 7+) or generic job titles such as Senior 
Manager will be used rather than specific job titles.    
 Where necessary, changes will be made to characteristics that might 
make staff identifiable, for example for a persons gender. 
What will happen to the study findings? 
A report will be provided to the Alzheimers Society funding the study. All 
participants will receive a summary of the main findings; they will also be 
presented to NHS providers, conferences and published in journals.  
I would like to take part, what should I do next? 
If you wish to take part, Melanie Handley will be your main contact for this study. 
Please email or call Melanie Handley (contact details below). She will be in 
touch with you soon to arrange an appointment and to discuss any questions 
you might have and ask you to complete a consent form.  
I would not like to take part, what should I do next? 
Enclosed with this information leaflet is a reply slip to opt out of the study, this 
should be completed and returned to Melanie either by hand or using the 
enclosed stamp addressed envelope. 
Who has reviewed the study? 
Before they can go ahead, research projects are scrutinised by ethics 
committees whose job is to protect the interests of everyone who takes part. 
This study has been reviewed by the East of England  Essex Research Ethics 
Committee which has made a favourable judgement. 
How do I contact the researchers? 
You can contact us directly: 
Melanie Handley, PhD Student 
Centre for Research in Primary and Community Care 
University of Hertfordshire,  
College Lane, Hatfield, Herts. AL10 9AB   
Tel: [x] 
Email:  [x] 
Claire Goodman, Professor of Health Care Research, 
Centre for Research in Primary and Community Care 
University of Hertfordshire,  
College Lane, Hatfield, Herts. AL10 9AB   
Tel: [x]  
Email: [x] 
Frances Bunn, Reader in Evidence Based Health Care 
Centre for Research in Primary and Community Care 
University of Hertfordshire,  
College Lane, Hatfield, Herts. AL10 9AB   
Tel: [x] 
Email: [x] 
mailto:m.j.handley@herts.ac.uk
mailto:c.goodman@herts.ac.uk
mailto:f.bunn@herts.ac.uk
Appendix 16: Study poster 
Appendix 17: Protocol for establishing and dealing with bad practice and concerns for safeguarding 
Protocol for establishing and dealing with bad practice and concerns for 
safeguarding  
Who is this protocol aimed at?  
 Research staff involved in data collection in hospitals. 
What is the purpose of this document? 
 The aim of this document is to rationalise a procedure for dealing effectively 
and sensitively with bad practice or concerns for safeguarding uncovered in 
hospitals during the research.  
What constitutes bad practice or concerns for safeguarding?  
 Any concerns a researcher has relating to the care that could impact on the 
well-being of hospital patients or staff. The research team will be concerned 
with issues of a serious nature, more specifically issues of abuse, neglect, 
unreported criminality, unethical practice and serious misconduct. It is 
essential for the research team to focus on factual information, refraining 
from becoming emotionally involved in a given situation. 
When an adult at risk who is making a disclosure (or the person raising the 
concerns) the researcher will: 
 Assure them that they are being taken seriously.  
 Listen carefully to what they saying, stay calm, get as clear a picture as 
possible but avoid asking too many questions at this stage.  
 Not give promises of complete confidentiality.  
 Explain that there is a duty to tell the study supervisors and other designated 
people within the Trust, and that their concerns may be shared with others 
who could have a part to play in protecting them.  
 Reassure the adult at risk that they will be involved in decisions about what 
will happen, wherever possible and providing that it is safe and appropriate to 
do so.  
 Not be judgemental or jump to conclusions.  
What action should be taken when bad practice is observed and identified? 
 For those issues considered by the research team as bad practice, initial 
discussions will take place with the Supervisors, Professor Claire Goodman and 
Dr Frances Bunn. Together a judgement can be made about whether an issue 
constitutes bad practice and whether action to pursue the issue further is 
necessary. Where it is considered that the witnessed or reported incident, or 
suspected incident, is of a serious nature that a patient is at risk of immediate 
harm, the researcher will raise concerns immediately with the appropriate 
member of Trust staff, either the Ward Manager or, where this is not 
appropriate, the Safeguarding Team. 
Actual or suspected abuse, neglect, risk of harm, or unreported 
criminality 
Where the researcher witnesses or is told about actual or suspected abuse or 
neglect, risk of harm, or unreported criminality, the researcher has a responsibility to 
report their concerns immediately to the Ward Manager, or if this is not appropriate 
(e.g. the incident involves them) to the Trust Safeguarding team.  
 All cases of suspected or actual abuse will be treated seriously from minor to 
serious incidents. If the researcher has concerns, these will be raised and 
reported.  
 The researcher will act promptly and report concerns. This will allow staff 
involved in the care of the patient, or the safeguarding teams within the Trust 
to address the concerns and follow the Trust protocols to protect the patient. 
Informing the study supervisors, ward manager and/or Safeguarding teams  
 The researcher will inform the study supervisors and, if appropriate, the nurse 
in charge of the ward/department/shift immediately about the safeguarding 
concerns.  The Trust staff will then follow Trust safeguarding procedures.  
 If it is not appropriate to inform the nurse in charge of the ward, for example 
the concern involves them, the researcher will inform the Lead Nurse for 
Adult Safeguarding.  
 The research team must also request that the hospital provides feedback, 
stipulating how the issue has been resolved. However, the research team 
should not allow the organisation to delay or detract them from making a 
formal complaint if necessary.  
Formal Complaints Procedure 
 If the research team are dissatisfied with the way that their concerns have 
been dealt with they should move to a formal stage.  NHS trusts have their 
own formal complaints procedures and these will be followed accordingly. 
 A record of telephone conversations must be kept concerning formal 
complaints, and information provided to the researcher verbally should also 
be requested in a written format.  
Trust Safeguarding Team Contact details: 
Contact: [x] 
mailto:m.j.handley@herts.ac.uk
Appendix 18: Floorplan for site 1 
Appendix 19: Floorplan for site 2 
Appendix 20: Range of responses used by staff 
Behaviour / 
concern 
Approach Types of 
interactions 
By whom With what affect 
Risk of falls Monitoring Watching from a 
distance  
Going to patient 
when attempt to 
move and asking 
about 
need/behaviour  
Nurses (site 1), HCA, 
CSW, 1:1 
Variable; calm, compliance, 
frustration 
 Restricting 
movement 
Sitting with patient 
and explaining 
where they are and 
that they need to 
sit down 
Restricting 
movement using 
barriers (bedrails, 
furniture, own 
body) 
HCA, CSW, 1:1 
HCA, CSW, 1:1 
Variable; compliance, 
reduced distress, annoyance 
Frustration, increased 
distress 
 Supporting mobility Walking with and 
talking to 
Supporting with 
mobility aid use 
HCA, CSW, 1:1 Patient wellbeing, 
maintaining mobility 
 Spending time with 
patient  
Engage in 
conversation or 
activity 
HCA, CSW, 1:1, AC Patient wellbeing 
Distressed patient 
/ physically 
disruptive to the 
(pacing round 
ward (site 1 only), 
high anxiety 
communicated 
through expressed 
worries) 
Distraction Distract with offer 
of food or drink  
Visual prompt for 
distraction (leave 
something in front 
of patient) 
Involve in ward 
activities (such as 
laying the table) 
Nurses, HCA, CSW, 
1:1, AC 
Nurse (site 1), AC 
Variable; brief respite from 
distress to increased distress 
Brief respite from distress 
Variable; calm to no 
difference 
 Reassure Explain where are 
and why there 
Nurses, HCA, CSW, 
1:1, AC 
Variable; calm to brief 
respite from distress 
 Biography Biographical (ask 
about interests, 
family, job) 
Doctors, Nurses, 
HCA, CSW, 1:1, AC 
Variable; calm and focused 
to more distress 
Distressed patient 
/ not physically 
disruptive to ward 
(e.g. calling out 
from bed) 
Find out why calling 
Ask patient about 
their need 
Doctors, Nurses, 
HCA, CSW, 1:1 
Variable; sometimes calm 
where need identified and 
addressed, sometimes 
unchanged when need 
identified and addressed, 
sometimes need not 
identified 
 Ignore / not address Do not go to 
patient 
Doctors, Nurses, 
HCA, CSW, 1:1, AC 
Calling out continues 
Physical 
aggression and 
violence 
De-escalate If patient and staff 
safe, step away 
from interaction 
and monitor at 
distance 
Nurses, HCA Reduced patient distress 
 Security If patient 
dangerous security 
called 
Nurses, HCA, CSW (not observed but reported) 
Unclear 
 Medication If patient 
aggression not 
reducing, staff use 
of PRN medication 
Nurses Reduced distress  
 Assess (following 
incident) 
Refer to patient 
notes, consult with 
patient and other 
staff 
Doctors and 
psychiatrists 
Attempt to understand 
causes and ways to reduce 
incidents   
Verbal aggression Ignore  Where not directed 
at anyone 
Nurses, HCA, CSW, 
1:1, AC 
Variable; could reduce, could 
continue 
 Address  Explain to patient 
behaviour is 
unacceptable 
Nurse Stops, length of time variable 
 Diffuse Use humour to 
diffuse 
HCA Stops one off verbal 
aggression, unclear in 
persistent 
 Empathise and 
explain 
States understands 
why patient is 
angry and explains 
options to help 
1:1 Variable 
Sadness Concern and 
comfort  
Touch, eye contact, 
Nurse, HCA, CSW, 
1:1, AC 
Variable 
 Biography Distract with 
interests  
Nurse, HCA Brief respite 
Expressions of 
concern for family 
(who may or may 
not be alive) 
Distraction and 
deception 
Explain they will be 
in later (without 
knowledge if they 
will) and offer drink  
Nurses, HCAs, CSWs, 
Brief respite, but may return 
to asking 
 Validate and 
comfort 
Explain family 
know they are 
HCA, CSW, 1:1 Some respite, but may return 
to asking 
being looked after 
by staff and 
comfort with 
touch/hug 
 Biography Ask or engage in 
chat about family 
member  
HCA, CSW, 1:1 Dependent upon time spent 
Walking round 
ward (site 1 only)  
Restrict to area Keep in a bay, 
return to seat 
Nurse, HCA, AC Patient safety but may cause 
frustration 
  Walk and talk with 
patient 
Nurse, HCA, AC Patient wellbeing 
Trying to leave 
(site 1 only) 
Distract Offer drink or food Nurse, HCA Limited affect, might stop 
briefly 
 Monitor Observed from a 
distance and 
intervene if 
necessary 
Nurse, HCA Maintains patient safety 
 Stop from leaving Speak to patient 
calmly, encourage 
to return to ward 
Block path 
Nurse, HCA 
Nurse 
Returns to safer area, may 
try to leave again 
Returns to safer area, may 
try to leave again  
