DIVERSIFICATION OF LEGUME-FEEDING PSYLLIDS 
(HEMIPTERA, PSYLLOIDEA) AND THEIR HOST 
PLANTS (LEGUMINOSAE, GENISTEAE)
Diana M. Percy
UNIVERSITY 
GLASGOW
A thesis submitted for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy to the
University of Glasgow
Division of Environmental and Evolutionary Biology 
Institute of Biomedical and Life Sciences
February 2001
ProQuest Number: 13818795
All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS 
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a com p le te  manuscript 
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.
ProQuest 13818795
Published by ProQuest LLC(2018). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.
All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States C ode
Microform Edition  ProQuest LLC.
ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway 
P.O. Box 1346 
Ann Arbor, Ml 48106- 1346
GLASGOW
UNIVERSITY
UBRAKY
12113- O p t  \
Declaration
I declare that the work recorded in this thesis is entirely my own, unless otherwise stated, 
and that it is my own composition. No part of it has been submitted for any other degree to 
any institution.
Diana M. Percy 
University of Glasgow 
February 2001
DIVERSIFICATION OF LEGUME-FEEDING PSYLLIDS 
(HEMIPTERA, PSYLLOIDEA) AND THEIR HOST PLANTS 
(LEGUMINOSAE, GENISTEAE)
Diana M. Percy, Division of Environmental and Evolutionary Biology, Glasgow.
Submitted for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy, University of Glasgow, 2001.
Abstract
Psyllids ( jumping plant lice) are small phytophagous insects that are related to aphids, 
scales and whiteflies (Hemiptera, Stemorrhyncha). Psyllids are highly host specific, 
occurring on one or a few closely related hosts, and they predominantly feed on 
dicotyledonous angiosperms. In the subfamily Arytaininae (Psylloidea, Psyllinae) there are 
five psyllid genera that feed exclusively on shrubby legumes in the Genisteae 
(Leguminosae, Papilionoideae), and the species diversity for both plant and insect groups 
is highest in the Mediterranean. I made a detailed field survey of psyllids on Genisteae 
hosts in the western Mediterranean, including southern Iberia, NW Africa and two of the 
Macaronesian archipelagos (Canary Islands and Madeira). These collections (over 300) of 
both psyllids and legumes provided the basis for the taxonomic, phylogenetic and co
diversification analyses presented in this study.
I have reassessed the classification of the legume-feeding psyllids native to 
Macaronesia, and I have revised the taxonomy of one genus (Arytainilla). I present 
evidence that the largest Macaronesian group has a unique island origin distinct from the 
predominantly continental genera. This Macaronesian group, which also has three 
continental members, is described as a new genus in order to clarify the monophyly and 
placement of this group within the Arytaininae. Seventeen new psyllid species in four 
arytainine genera, discovered in continental and Macaronesian regions, are proposed.
I constructed phylogenies for both the arytainine psyllids and their legume host 
plants, in order to compare colonization, biogeographic patterns and island radiations. I 
present a phylogenetic study of the Palaearctic arytainine psyllids that incorporates both 
morphological data (adult and nymphal characters) and molecular data (mitochondrial 
genes: cytochrome oxidase I and II, including the intervening tRNA leucine; and the small 
ribosomal subunit rRNA). To investigate the evolution of the island legumes and to 
establish the relationships between continental and island host plants, a molecular
phylogeny of part of the Genisteae was generated from sequences of the nuclear region: 
ITS1-5.8S-ITS2. The legume phylogeny shows a Mediterranean origin for the Canarian 
Genisteae (Adenocarpus, Genista and Teline), and a diphyletic origin for Teline -  with two 
distinct island groups nested within Genista. The psyllid phylogeny shows that the two 
largest genera are paraphyletic, but there is some evidence that the Genisteae-feeders, as a 
whole, are monophyletic. The phylogenetic analyses for both psyllids and legumes 
highlight the problems of establishing host-parasite interactions using traditional 
morphological classifications alone. Colonization and biogeographic patterns among the 
island psyllid species implies a close correlation between the radiation of psyllids and the 
diversity of their host plants.
Psyllid and legume phylogenies are compared in order to establish the extent of 
phylogenetic congruence between the insects and their host plants. To test assumptions of 
cospeciation, an absolute time scale is applied to both plant and insect phylogenies. A 
comparison of psyllid and legume phylogenies suggests that, whilst rare cospeciation 
events may play a significant role in promoting diversification, historical reconstructions of 
psyllid-legume interactions are complicated by systemic host switching. Psyllids appear to 
be opportunistic specialists with host switching occurring when the plant lineage fluctuates 
in geographical abundance, population structure or through dispersal. However, 
preadaptation is evident in many cases where selection of a new host may be constrained 
by plant chemistry and architecture. Successful establishment by a psyllid colonist is more 
likely when available hosts are phylogenetically and ecologically related to the original 
host. A history of parallel cladogenesis between psyllid and legume lineages is rejected in 
favour of a fluctuating lineage model of co-diversification which presents a more realistic 
interpretation of the present day pattern of host associations.
Acknowledgements
I have received encouragement and support from many people over the past three years. 
Firstly, I would like to thank Quentin Cronk for introducing me to islands, and Ian 
Hodkinson for suggesting I consider the legume-feeding psyllids as a study group.
Together these ideas led to the inception of this project.
During fieldwork I received much support and advice. Foremost, I would like to 
acknowledge Pedro Oromf at the Universidad de La Laguna (Tenerife), for unflagging 
support and encouragenment during several trips to the Canary Islands. Many other people 
contributed to the success of my field trips, especially Meme Zurita Perez, and her mother, 
Concepcion Perez Abreu -  who made my first robust collecting net, and Estrella 
Hernandez Suarez showed me the best juice bars. Several botanists from the Universidad 
de La Laguna -  Alfredo Reyes Betancort, Marcelino del Arco Aguilar and Juan Ramon 
Acebes Ginoves -  generously provided advice on plants. Support and advice during field 
work in Spain and Morocco was provided by Benito Valdes and Salvador Telavera 
(Universidad de Sevilla). Invaluable advice and help on how to produce a taxonomic 
treatment of the insects was provided by David Hollis (Natural History Museum, London) 
and Daniel Burckhardt (Naturhistorisches Museum, Basel). The systematic work on the 
plants would not have been possible without the supervision and advice of Quentin Cronk 
(University of Edinburgh).
In Glasgow, Rob Cruickshank patiently introduced me to molecular techniques, and 
assistance with sequencing was provided by Michelle Hollingsworth (Royal Botanic 
Garden Edinburgh) and Giorgia Riboldi-Tunnicliffe (University of Glasgow). I thank 
Margaret Mullin for showing me how to produce SEMs and Alan McGregor for making 
the frames of my collecting nets. Fellow students, James Cotton, Isabel Marshall and Vince 
Smith were always willing to supply help and criticism when needed. Martyn Kennedy 
generously covered everything I wrote with red ink. Kate Orr, Aileen Adam and Richard 
Griffiths kept a mindful eye on my mental barometer and provided the necessary sympathy 
and unfailing cheer. Finally, my greatest debt is owed to Rod Page who supervised this 
project with extreme patience and discretion, allowing me to sequence everything I could 
get my hands on, but giving me gentle prods towards completing analyses and writing it all 
down.
Funding for this project was provided by the Natural Environment Research 
Council (NERC GT04/97/109/TS). I am grateful for additional funding for fieldwork 
provided by the Carnegie Trust for the Universities of Scotland and the Louise Hiom
Award (University of Glasgow) which together supported two expeditions to Morocco. For 
permits to work and collect I thank the following people and organizations: in the Canary 
Islands -  the Viceconsejerfa de Medio Ambiente (Gobiemo Autonomo de Canarias), 
Parque Nacional del Teide (Tenerife), Parque Nacional de Garajonay (La Gomera) and 
Parque Nacional de la Caldera de Taburiente (La Palma); in Madeira -  Henrique Costa 
Neves (Parque Natural da Madeira); and in Morocco -  Moh. Rejdali (Institut Agronomique 
et Veterinaire Hassan II, Rabat).
Table of Contents
1.2.3 Relative endemic diversity o f legume-feeding psyllids and their
CHAPTER TW O -  TH E LEGUM E-FEEDING PSYLLIDS (HEM IPTERA, 
PSYLLOIDEA) OF TH E CANARY ISLANDS, M ADEIRA AND ADJACENT 
2.3.1 Key to adults o f the legume-feeding genera in the Canary Islands
2.3.2 Key to 5th instar nymphs o f the legume-feeding genera in the 
Key to adults of the three Canary Island species of Arytaina 126 
Key to 5th instars nymphs of the three Canary Island species
Pseudacanthopsylla improvisa (Loginova) comb, nov  146
CHAPTER TH REE -  ORIGINS AND BIOGEOGRAPHY OF
3.3.5 The arytainine psyllids in the Canary Islands and M adeira  206
3.4.4 Anthropogenic effects on host populations and host hybridization 213
CHAPTER FOUR -  DIFFERENT FATES O F ISLAND BROOM S: CONTRASTING
EVOLUTION IN ADENOCARPUS, G ENISTA  AND TELIN E  (GENISTEAE,
LEGUMINOSAE) IN THE CANARY ISLANDS AND
4.1.1 The tribe Genisteae and its representatives in the Canaries
4.1.2 Molecular approaches to plant bio geography in the 
4.4.1 The Mediterranean element in the Canarian and Madeiran flora  .. 269
CHAPTER FIVE -  LINEAGE CO-DIVERSIFICATION: ARYTAININE PSYLLIDS 
x i i i
Azores 
(9 islands) 4-8 Myr
Madeiras / 
(3 islands) 30 Myr -J:
Salvagens  
(2 islands) 10 Myr
Canaries 
(7 islands) 1-21 Myr
Cape Verdes v, 
(10 islands) 6-20 Myr
MACARONESIAN ISLANDS
Above: The Macaronesian region showing the five 
archipelagos (north to south: Azores, Madeiras, 
Salvagens, Canaries, and Cape Verdes) which lie off 
the west coast of North Africa and southern Europe, 
between 15 and 40N latitude. The geological ages 
of individual islands range from 1-30 Myr.
Right: The centrally positioned Canary Islands (27- 
29N) and Madeira (33N) are the focus of this study. 
Only the five central and western Canary Islands (east 
to west: Gran Canaria, Tenerife, La Gomera, La 
Palma and El Hierro) support the habitat type in 
which the insects and host plants in this study occur.
Madeira _ ^
Salvagens 
CANARY ISLANDS
La Palma
a, Lanzarote
P Tenerife 
El H ie r r o
La Gomera
Luerteventura
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER ONE 
INTRODUCTION
1.1 Ocean island research
By studying clusters of islands, biologists view a simpler 
microcosm of the seemingly infinite complexity of continental and
shape, size, degree of isolation, and ecology, provide the necessary 
replications in natural experiments by which evolutionary 
hypothesis can be tested. (MacArthur & Wilson, 1967)
Island biogeography has influenced a broad range of biological investigation, including 
systematics, ecology and conservation (Grant, 1998). The science of island, or insular 
biogeography was made popular by MacArthur & Wilson (1967). It has since contributed 
significantly to the study of biotas on oceanic islands as well as those in habitat fragments 
on continents (Pickett & Thompson, 1978; Hanski & Gilpin, 1997). As MacArthur & 
Wilson (1967) pointed out, the inherent appeal of islands is the visibly discrete object that 
can be labelled with a name and its resident populations identified.
Volcanic ocean archipelagos have presented biologists since Darwin and Wallace 
with natural laboratories in which to observe discreet and speciose systems. The most 
famous example is Darwins Galapagos finches (Grant, 1986), but more recently the 
Hawaiian Drosophila with more than 1000 species (Kambysellis & Craddock, 1997) and 
island plant groups such as the woody composites of the Atlantic and Pacific archipelagos 
(Wagner & Funk, 1995; Givnish & Sytsma, 1997) have become model groups for the study 
of speciation processes. Understanding the mechanisms at work in ocean islands has been 
invaluable to a broader understanding of pattern and process in biogeography and 
evolution. Ideas that have germinated in the laboratories of ocean islands have proven 
applicable to continental land masses, where equivalent patchiness in ecosystem patterns 
has resulted in equivalent island dynamics or stepping stone processes (e.g. the cichlid 
fish of Africas Great Lakes, Ruber et al., 1998), but these are often more subtle and less 
easily studied than those found on real islands (Wu & Levin, 1997; Holt & Keitt, 2000).
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION - 2
1.2 Insect-plant interactions
1.2.1 Introduction
Insect-plant interactions have played an important role in defining models of interactive 
evolution such as coevolution and cospeciation (Futuyma & Slatkin, 1983). Although 
stricter terms of coevolution may be appropriate for some insect pollination and floral 
syndromes (Thompson, 1994), it is widely believed that herbivorous insect speciation is 
sequential in relation to the host plant (Jenny, 1976; Menken, 1996). Once insect host 
specificity is established, close tracking of ecological, phenotypic and chemical changes in 
closely related host plants may result in phylogenies similar to those arising from 
cospeciation or parallel cladogenesis. Determining the history of insect-plant associations 
is crucial to evaluating the cause and extent of associated evolution. Comparing host 
associations on the mainland with those found on islands provides an insight into 
preadaptation and the changes in host association that result from island colonization, 
radiation and ecological specialization.
1.2.2 The role o f insect and plant taxonomy
Different approaches to the concept of species in the taxonomic treatment of plants and 
insects can present difficulties when comparing host and parasite phylogenies. Psyllids or 
jumping plant-lice (Hemiptera, Psylloidea) are small, phytophagous, phloem feeding 
insects that are typically monophagous or oligophagous (i.e. specific to one or a few closely 
related hosts). They feed on a wide variety of dicotyledonous and a few monocotyledonous 
plants. Within the Psylloidea, six families are recognized (Burckhardt, 1987; White & 
Hodkinson, 1985) and within all families, a high degree of host specificity is typical. This 
study focuses on psyllids that feed on legumes in the tribe Genisteae (Leguminosae), a tribe 
which includes the common broom, gorse and related shrubs. The Genisteae has a complex 
taxonomic history that is littered with synonomy as a result of numerous taxonomic 
revisions. In contrast, the genistoid-feeding psyllids have been investigated by fewer 
workers and have been the subject of a limited number of taxonomic revisions. In addition, 
the legume host classification has numerous intraspecific taxa, while there is only one 
subspecific taxon among the entire 96 species of Palaearctic arytainine psyllids.
All of the 12 native Leguminosae genera represented in the Canarian archipelago 
are in the subfamily Papilionoideae, which is considered more evolutionarily advanced 
than the other two subfamilies, Mimosoideae and Caesalpinoideae (Kass & Wink, 1996).
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION -3
Six of the Canarian legume genera (50%) are in the tribe Genisteae, which is one of four 
tribes retained by Bisby (1981) or six tribes delimited by Hutchinson (1964), after the 
subdivision of the Genisteae sensu lato of Bentham (1865).
The Canary Islands, with a history of discovery possibly stretching as far back as 
Phoenecian navigation of the African coast in 610 BC (Kriiss, 1976), experienced a boom 
of scientific exploration in the late 18th and 19th centuries. Floristically, Macaronesia (with 
the exception of the Cape Verde Islands) is associated with a circum-mediterranean flora 
that would have been familiar to the creators of our present system of plant classification. 
Modem botany took shape in Europe (Walters, 1961) and is largely based on Eurocentric 
plant distributions. Approximately two thirds of all the genera in Linnaeuss Species 
Plantarum (1753) are European. These beginnings, it has been proposed, are the root of 
the artifice constraining current plant taxonomy within a psychological and historical 
framework resulting in the psychohistorical process of chaining (Cronk, 1989).
Chaining arises when taxonomic groups named by Linnaeus, or associated with pre- 
Linnaeun Medieval classifications have acted as nuclei or sinks for subsequently 
discovered taxa. This results in falsely skewed, large heterogeneous groups such as the 
genera Rosa (Rosaceae) and Cassia (Caesalpinioideae), and the subsequent splitting off of 
small anamolous taxa that can no longer be satisfactorily circumscribed within the larger 
group (e.g. the Canary Island genera Dendrosonchus, Teline and Spartocytisus). The result 
is a pattern of a few very large groups and many small groups.
Within the Leguminosae, the three subfamilies recognised today were known to 
Linnaeus but each was given a very different treatment according to the number and 
distribution of species familiar to Linnaeus. Hence Mimosa (mainly tropical) was 
established as a single genus to incorporate all of the then known species (39) of todays 
Mimosoideae (c. 2,820 species); the Caesalpinoideae was created for 19 genera, with the 
majority of species in the single genus Cassia, while the remaining majority of species 
(378) were placed in 45 genera under the Papilionoideae.
The historical legacy of this early bias is that the Leguminosae contains 18,000 
species in 650 genera, and nearly a third of these taxa are in just six genera: Astragalus, 
Crotalaria, Indigofera (Papilionoideae), Mimosa, Acacia (Mimosoideae), and Cassia sensu 
lato (Caesalpinoideae).
However, taxonomic artifice alone is not the sole cause of this pattern, which 
though distorted in shape by human classification, is nevertheless reflective of biological 
trends within the Leguminosae. Namely, 1) the Caesalpinoideae is an ancient group,
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION -4
primarily of relict species which have undergone little recent speciation, 2) the 
Mimosoideae are an ancient group which has undergone a massive bloom of recent 
speciation and 3) the Papilionoideae are a comparitively recently evolved group, resulting 
in large, poorly differentiated segregates with complex patterns of variation (Cronk, 1990).
The classification of the Canarian Leguminosae can be explained in the light of 
both taxonomic artifice and evolutionary trends in the Papilionoideae, with the additional 
component of adaptive radiation. Members of the Canarian Genisteae have all been 
incorporated in the large amorphous Genista-Cytisus generic group, probably due equally 
to the process of historical chaining, as to recent evolution in the Papilionoideae, resulting 
in poorly divisible genera. Both of these genera, Genista and Cytisus have acted as linked 
nuclei for a huge complex of species (c. 230 species). Amongst the Canary Island genera, 
two groups are an example of the budding off of morphologically anomalous taxa -  Teline 
and Spartocytisus -  which have been recognised by some but not all workers as distinct 
from the Genista-Cytisus group, but which molecular data have clearly shown, belong 
within one or other group (Kass & Wink, 1997; Chapter 4)
Compounding the problems of artifice in plant classification is the dilemma of 
regional research by many different workers (often lacking communication with one 
another), versus monographic work done by a few co-workers. This problem is evident in 
the tropics today and was faced by Linnaeus with access to only a part of the worlds 
floristic diversity. It is alluded to by Bentham (1875) in discussing Linnaeuss treatment of 
the Leguminosae a disproportionate treatment probably aggravated by the circumstances 
of the small number of botanists who have access to good working materials in Cassia and 
Mimoseae. In assessing the amount of synonymy that accumulated during the 18th and 19th 
century exploration of Macaronesia, it is apparent that a certain degree of buccaneer 
taxonomy by those working in isolation resulted in a somewhat lawless classification.
It is also possible to examine the reliability of the host plant taxonomy from the 
perspective of phytophagous insects. Incorporating phytophagous insect preferences into 
the systematic treatment of plants may prove to be useful, especially in the case of complex 
species groups. In the Canarian Genisteae, as might be expected, the phytophagous insect 
taxonomy has tended to lump where human taxonomy has tended to split. The psyllid 
taxonomy supports many of the species delimitations in the present classification but 
frequently does not recognise intraspecific taxa which are more likely to be a product of 
human artifice. The psyllid fauna supports the Cytisus-Genista split but suggests that 
Adenocarpus should be sister to the Genista group, which contradicts the placement of
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION -5
Adenocarpus as an outlier of a monophyletic Cytisus-Genista group. However, using 
molecular data (Kass & Wink, 1997) there is insufficient resolution at the base of the 
Genisteae, to contradict or confirm either placement. In another example, psyllid 
preference appears to contradict all other data -  according to the psyllid fauna, 
Chamaecytisus has an intermediate position between the Cytisus and Genista groups, but 
the morphological (Cristofolini, 1991) and molecular (Kass & Wink, 1997) data place this 
genus unequivocally in the Cytisus group. Characteristics determining host preference may 
not reflect phylogeny, i.e. convergences in chemistry and plant architecture, and the 
plasticity of such characters within the plant group is likely to determine the usefulness of 
phytophagous insects to plant taxonomy.
1.2.3 Relative endemic diversity o f  native legume-feeding psyllids and their host plants 
Comparative numbers for endemic insect diversity in the Canary Islands indicate that 
psyllids (Psylloidea) have a relatively high endemic diversity when compared, either to the 
Homoptera as a whole (in which psyllids are included) or to other insect groups. Endemism 
is even higher (100%) for the native legume-feeding psyllids (Arytaininae) (Table 1). A 
similar comparison for the host plant group indicates that the genistoid legumes also have a 
high degree of endemism when compared to the angiosperms or dicotyledons as a whole 
(Table 2).
There is an association between the number of habitat zones per island and the 
diversity of native legume-feeding psyllids and genistoid legumes on each island (Tables 3, 
4 & 5 and Table 1 Chapter 3). However, the number of endemic species is more closely 
associated with the proximity of the island to the African continent, although there is a 
need for caution in interpreting associations, given the small number of islands. The 
relative paucity of both legume-feeding psyllids and their hosts on Madeira is probably due 
to the more uniform habitat and climate on this island, and to the greater isolation of 
Madeira from large neighbouring islands or from a continental landmass (which could 
serve as sources of immigrants). The greater richness in psyllid fauna within the Canarian 
archipelago reflects the greater diversity of habitat, climate and variety of ecological 
niches, as well as greater diversity in host plant genera and species.
The isolation of Madeira increases the likelihood that species on this island will be 
endemic, and indeed endemism is 100% for the arytainine psyllids and their native hosts. 
Within the Canary Islands psyllid endemism is also 100% (all 21 species are endemic), but
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION -6
for each of the five islands endemism is consistently less than 50% (Gran Canaria 43%, 
Tenerife 36%, La Gomera 29%, La Palma 14%, and El Hierro 0%). This scale shows some
TA BLET
no. endemic sp. % endemic
Orthoptera 31 37
Dermaptera 16 66
Homoptera 160 40
Heteroptera 107 27
Coleoptera 1160 59
Diptera 331 31
Lepidoptera 190 31
Hymenoptera 194 23
Psylloidea 25 62.5
Arytaininae 21 100
TABLE 2.
no. endemic sp. % endemic 
Angiospermae 519 27
Dicotyledonae 497 31.4
Genisteae 17 94.1 -  genistoid legumes
Adapted in part from Baez et al. (2000) and Oromf & Baez (in press)
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION -7
association with the distance of each island from the African continent, and its geological 
age. The highest level of endemism is found on Gran Canaria which is the oldest (14.5-16 
Myr) and closest island to the African continent (245 km), while there are no endemic 
species on El Hierro which is the youngest (1.1 Myr) and furthest island from the continent 
(489 km) (Table 3).
In comparison, species richness -  the total number of psyllid species present on 
each island -  shows some association with island area: 11 species on the largest island of 
Tenerife (2058 km2), seven species each on the islands of Gran Canaria (1534 km2), La 
Palma (728 km2) and La Gomera (378 km2), and four species on the smallest island of El 
Hierro (277 km2) (see Table 1 Chapter 3). However, a simple regression analysis using data 
from the five central and western Canary Islands (Table 1 Chapter 3) indicates that only 
two components are significantly correlated with species richness per island: altitude 
(which also dictates the variety of ecological niches, r2 = 78.6%, P  = 0.045, d.f. = 4) and 
the number of potential host plants in the Genisteae (r2 = 79.6%, P  = 0.042, d.f. = 4). Yet, 
the latter component is not a functional correlate, as up to one third (17-33%) of potential 
host plants (i.e. host congenerics) on an island may not be utilized as hosts. When species 
richness in the host plant group is assessed using the same predictors, there is a significant 
correlation with altitude only (r2 = 92.8%, P  = 0.008, d.f. = 4), implying that habitat 
diversity may operate independently on host plant and psyllid groups to promote 
speciation.
Classification of habitat zones which are primarily determined by altitude and leeward 
(southern) or windward (northern) locations:
1 -  xerophytic lowland, 0-600 m, typically a southern zone
2 -  lowland scrub and sabinar (Juniperus phoenicea), 100-600 m, northern regions
3 -  laurel forest, 600-1000 m, northern regions
4 -  fayal-brezal (Erica arborea and My rica fay  a), 800-1200 m, northern regions
5 -  pine forest, 600-1900 m
6 -  sub-alpine 1900-3700 m
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION
Opposite page:
HABITATS
Top -  high altitude subalpine zone on Tenerife, showing El Teide (3717m) in 
the background and the host plant Spartocytisus supranubius in the foreground.
Centre left -  cloud sea on the northern slopes of Tenerife
Centre right -  pine forest on La Palma
Bottom left -  mesic laurel forest on Madeira
Bottom right -  lowland xeric scrub on Tenerife, with the host plant Retama 
monosperma.
HOST PLANTS: Teline splendens (La Palma) and Teline stenopetala (La Gomera)
Chamaecytisus proliferus, flowers (Tenerife) and fruit (Gran Canaria)
Cytisus grandiflorus (Andalusia) and Adenocarpus anagyrifolius (Moroccan High Atlas)
PSYLLIDS: Adults are usually 2-4 mm in length, left, the largest Canary Island 
species, Livilla monospermae on the host plant Retama monosperma. Right, 
ovipositing female of Arytinnis proboscidea on the host Adenocarpus viscosus.
NYMPHAL FEEDING SITES: above left and below, eggs and nymphs are usually 
found on leaves and leaf buds of Chamaecytisus proliferus, but above right, nymphs of 
psyllid species feeding on Teline hosts are usually found on the flowers.
The terrain of volcanic islands is often steep and many of the places in which the host 
plants grow are difficult to access. Top: La Gomera. Centre left: Tenerife, centre right. 
La Palma. Bottom left: La Palma, bottom right: Madeira.
- 12-
ANTHROPOGENIC EFFECTS: Cultivation of the native host plant Chamaecytisus 
proliferus increases host abundance (e.g. on El FFierro, top photo) and may promote 
psyllid abundance on cultivated and wild populations. Above, a large number of 
psyllids collected from a single wild individual.
Genista benehoavensis (top) and Spartocytisus supranubius (above) on La Palma where they are 
critically endangered from overgrazing by introduced rabbits and goats. In recent years, successful 
conservation programs have promoted the regeneration of these species in fenced off areas.
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION - 13-
TABLE 3. Relative diversity of psyllids and legumes for each island:
no. of no. of no. of no. of no. of
island habitat Genisteae psyllid endemic endemic
zones sp. sp. Genisteae psyllids
Gran Canaria 5 7 7 3 (43%) 3 (43%)
Tenerife 6 11 11 2 (18%) 4 (36%)
La Gomera 4 6 7 1 (17%) 2 (29%)
La Palma 6 9 7 2 (22%) 1 (14%)
El Hierro 5 5 4 1 (20%) 0
TABLE 4. Distribution of legume plant species (Genisteae) per island:
host plant genera Gran Canaria Tenerife La Gomera La Palma El Hierro
Genista 0 0 0 1 0
Retama 1 1 1 1 1
Teline 4 5 2 2 1
Chamaecytisus 1 1 1 1 1
Spartocytisus 0 2 1 2 1
Adenocarpus 1 2 1 2 1
TABLE 5. Distribution of psyllid species (Arytaininae) per island:
psyllid genera Gran Canaria Tenerife La Gomera La Palma El Hierro
Arytainilla 0 0 0 1 0
Livilla 0 1 1 1 1
Arytaina 1 2 2 2 1
Arytinnis gen. nov. 6 8 4 3 2
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION - 14-
1.2.4 Host plant specificity
Strict cospeciation (matching phylogenies) would predict a single psyllid species to be 
present on each legume species, and in fact the total number of psyllid species in the 
Canary Islands (21) is only marginally greater than the total number of Genisteae (18) and 
remains comparable when each island is taken separately (Table 3). However, as 
mentioned earlier, the number of species in each group are subject to different species 
concepts and different approaches to taxonomic treatments. The situation is further 
complicated by the presence of many psyllid species on some legumes, while other 
legumes do not appear to have a psyllid fauna. In some cases, where a single plant species 
appears to host many psyllids, these may be associated with intraspecific host taxa.
A more flexible and ultimately more realistic approach to the interactive evolution 
of plants and insects was championed by J. N. Thompson (1994) in his book The 
Coevolutionary Process. Thompson (1994) challenged the conventional cospeciation 
model, pointing out that interactions between plants and insects may not result in 
prolonged historical associations that can then be mapped onto a phylogenetic tree; but 
instead there may be a shifting geographic mosaic of transient associations, as a result of 
differences in the physical environment and the local genetic and demographic structure of 
populations.
Differential speciation rates of interacting taxa, differential extinction rates, 
differences in geographic ranges among interacting species, novel mutations, and new 
ecological opportunities together prevent complete concordance in almost all comparisons. 
A run of parallel speciation is soon broken by a shift in one or more parasite populations 
onto a phylogenetically unrelated host. The larger the number of species in the group, the 
lower the chance of sustained phylogenetic tracking. (Thompson, 1994)
Thompson (1994) suggested that localized coevolution could take place within a 
shifting landscape, as part of the fluctuating nature of plant and insect metapopulations; 
and the history of these transient interactions would not be detected by a strict model of 
pairwise species for species coevolution.
Primitively, insects were probably saprophagous with a shift to the more complex 
lifestyle of herbivory, a secondary adaptation (Mitter, Farrell & Wiegmann, 1988). Psyllid 
fossils have been found from the early Permian before the angiosperms evolved. Thus, 
psyllids may have primitively fed on gymnosperms, or even lycopods (Hodkinson, 1980).
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION - 15-
The explosive radiation of the angiosperms in the Cretaceous was paralleled by a massive 
radiation of associated insects, and many of the morphological and metabolic characters 
that the angiosperms exhibit may have evolved as defenses against herbivorous insects 
(Ehrlich & Raven, 1964; Jermy, 1984).
Allocation of resources in plants can vary seasonally, within an individual plant, 
between individuals, and from species to species. An example of this is evident in the 
phenological changes in chemical profile of flowers, leaves, stems, and fruit of the legume 
genus, Adenocarpus (Greinwald et al., 1992) -  a genus that is host to several Canarian and 
continental psyllid species. The changing character of an individual plant is a complex and 
challenging landscape to herbivorous insects (Wink, 1992). An insect that attains an 
adaptive peak on one plant species is likely to be in an adaptive trough on another species 
(Janzen, 1979).
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION - 16-
1.3 The Macaronesian region
1.3.1 Introduction
Macaronesia encompasses the five Atlantic Ocean archipelagos of the Azores, Madeiras, 
Salvage Islands, Canary Islands and Cape Verde Islands, comprising aproximately 14,400 
km2 lying between 15-40N latitude. Of all the archipelagos, the most easterly point of the 
Canary Islands approaches closest to a continental landmass (only 115 km), with 
successively greater distances to the Salvage Islands (360 km), Cape Verde Islands (500 
km), Madeira (630 km), with the Azores the most isolated at 1600 km from a continental 
landmass. A broad range of geological ages, from 1-30 Myr has been established for these 
islands (Table 6).
On oceanic islands the combination of altitude and climatic conditions are 
particularly important in the development of island biodiversity. A comparison of species 
richness and endemism for the flora of Macaronesia reflects the diversity of habitats in 
each archipelago (Table 7).
1.3.2 The Canary Islands
The Canary Islands occupies a central position within the Macaronesian region, extending 
over more than 500 km between 2737' and 2923'N, and 1320' and 1816'W. The 
Canaries are 1400 km north of the Cape Verdes and 170 km south of the Salvagens. These 
islands are exceptional in several respects: the greatest diversity of island ages, altitudes, 
habitat zones and species richness within Macaronesia are all to be found in the Canary 
Islands.
The two large, eastern islands, together with the small archipelago of La Graciosa, 
combine the largest land area in Macaronesia with the lowest altitudes (Table 10). This 
highly eroded profile and the geological dating of these land masses indicate a far greater 
age for the eastern islands than that extrapolated for the western islands, which some have 
taken to imply a continental origin and a rift from the bulge of Africa during the Cretaceous 
(Schmincke, 1976).
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION - 17-
TABLE 6. Characteristics of the five archipelagos:
archipelago
no. of 
islands
total
highest 
altitude (m)
latitude
distance to 
mainland
distance to 
closest 
archipelago
origin 
Myr BP
Azores 9 2235 2351 37 1600 900 4-8
Madeiras 3 796 1861 33 630 260 30
Salvagens 2 14 183 31 360 170 10
Canaries 7 7273 3718 28 115 170 1-21
Cape Verdes 10 4033 2829 16 500 1400 6-20 (45)
TABLE 7. Data for angiosperms:
archipelago
no. of endemic 
species % endemic
no. of endemic 
genera
Azores 44 5 0
Madeiras 120 11 1
Salvagens 1 1 0
Canaries 520 27 17
Cape Verdes 92 14 0
Adapted from Humphries (1979), Press & Short (1994), Baez, Martin & Oromf (2000).
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION - 18-
Geology
The geological origins of the Canaries are still unresolved with a number of contradictory 
hypothesis still under debate. Largely disputed now as a piece of parascience, which 
nevertheless was contested academically during the first half of the 20th century, is the 
Atlantis or sunken continent theory. It was proposed that all five of the Macaronesian 
archipelagos were part of a single landmass -  Platos Atlantis -  which, having sunk, left 
exposed only the tips of the mountain ranges as aerial islands. Remaining theories still 
contested seriously are discussed below, and due in part to the variety of questions and 
resolutions sought, none appear to convince all workers.
It was proposed by Raven & Axelrod (1974) that the break up of the Pangean 
landmass, approximately 180 Myr BP set in motion the tectonic forces that would 
eventually result in the formation of the Macaronesian islands. Within the framework of 
these macrogeological events, the real debate surrounds the source and temporal origin of 
the individual islands. It is now widely accepted that all the Atlantic islands, with the 
possible exception of the eastern Canary Islands, are oceanic in origin (Ancochea et al., 
1990; Carracedo et al., 1998). However, there remain some mystifying factors that would 
be explained more easily if some islands were fragments of the Old W orlds continental 
edges, which became isolated with the disappearance of earlier land-bridges and 
subsequent continental movements. Geologically it appears that the majority of the 
Macaronesian islands were formed de novo during ocean crust volcanism. Although this 
allows for no direct contact with neighbouring continents, current island size may not be 
equivalent with historical size. Islands may have been larger or smaller, sediment 
accumulation and uplifting may have resulted in inter-island or even mainland connections 
in the case of the eastern Canary Islands (Schmincke, 1976).
Several biological and palaeontological factors are at odds with the geological 
probabilities. These include the presence of fossil ostrich eggs of Miocene age in Lanzarote 
and fossils of terrestrial turtles of Pliocene and Pleistocene age in Tenerife. Biologists have 
found it difficult to come up with dispersal methods for flighless birds and giant land 
turtles required to explain their presence on ocean islands with no historic link to the 
mainland. Nor are the striking floristic and faunistic links between Macaronesia, the 
Mediterranean, Africa, Arabia and America easily explained by the evocation of long 
distance dispersal alone (Bramwell, 1976; Sunding, 1979).
The proximity of the eastern Canary Islands to the African Continent (only 111 km) 
(Table 10) combined with the shallowness of the intervening ocean shelf 1000-1500 m, as
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION - 19-
opposed to 1500-4000 m around the western Canaries, has favoured the hypothesis that the 
eastern islands of Fuerteventura and Lanzarote are continental in origin. This is supported 
by the phytogeographical evidence, with a major split in the floristic element between the 
eastern and western Canaries (Humphries, 1979). Seismic and gravimetric studies reveal 
the presence of oceanic crust in the west becoming transitional under Gran Canaria, and 
possibly continental farther east. It is extremely difficult to determine the origin of the 
basal crust and the accuracy of these results may be compromised by the accumulation of 
sediment, hence most studies have focused on the historical development and geodynamics 
of individual islands (Ancochea et al., 1990; Guillou, Carracedo & Day, 1998; Carracedo 
et al., 1999) (Table 8).
There have been three volcanic eruptions this century -  on Tenerife (1909) and on 
La Palma (1949 and 1971) (Table 9). The Canaries are the second most volcanically active 
archipelago in Macaronesia, and in the Atlantic Ocean region only Iceland and the Azores 
are more active. Volcanic activity produces stochastic environmental changes that are 
likely to have a critical influence on the evolution of the flora and fauna, effecting both 
extinction and creating new environments for colonization (Brown & Pestano, 1998; 
Emerson, Oromf & Hewitt, 1999).
The ocean floor around the Canaries is estimated to be around 180 Myr old, while 
the islands are considered to be much younger structures (1-21 Myr) (Table 10). The oldest 
sedimentary rocks are Cretaceous, from Fuerteventura. While some believe volcanic 
activity may have begun in the Canaries as early as the late Cretaceous, others believe there 
is no evidence for volcanism before the Oligocene (Schmincke, 1976).
The Atlas structural trend or African trend is thought to be associated with the 
orogenesis of the Atlas mountains, running NE-SW, which is reflected in the alignment of 
Fuerteventura and Lanzarote and the alignment of Hierro-Gomera-Tenerife. What is 
termed the Atlantis fracture zone system or Atlantic trend, from which the islands may 
have arisen, runs NW-SE, and is reflected in the alignment of Gran Canaria-Tenerife- 
Palma (Schmincke, 1976). However, Carracedo et al. (1998) have proposed a hot spot 
model unrelated to the Atlas tectonism, whereby the Canaries originated by an 
asthenospheric plume.
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION - 2 0 -
TABLE 8. TABLE 9.
Ages of the shield-building lavas: Dates of volcanic eruptions in the Canaries:
island date Myr BP island date
Fuerteventura 12-17(20) Fuerteventura c. 3000 BP
Lanzarote 5-11(19) Lanzarote 1730, 1824
Gran Canaria 10-16 Gran Canaria c. 3075 BP
La Gomera 8-12
Tenerife 4-8 Tenerife 1704, 1705, 1706, 1798, 1909
La Palma 0-2 La Palma 1585,1646,1677, 1712, 1949, 1971
El Hierro 1 El Hierro c. 2900 BP
Adapted from: Schmincke (1976), Ancochea et al. (1990), Carracedo et al. (1998).
TABLE 10. Characteristics of the Canary Islands:
island
altitude
distance from 
mainland
distance to 
closest island
origin 
Myr BP
Tenerife 3717 2058 303 km 27 km -  Gomera 7.5-11.5
La Palma 2426 728 489 km 54 km -  Gomera 2
Gran Canaria 1950 1534 245 km 57 km -  Tenerife 14.5-16
El Hierro 1501 277 489 km 61 km -  Gomera 1-1.1
La Gomera 1487 378 417 km 27 km -  Tenerife 10-12
Fuerteventura 807 1731 111 km 11 km -  Lanzarote 16-20.6
Lanzarote 670 796 112 km 11 km -  Fuerteventura 15.5-19
TABLE 11. Canary Island endemism
group no. endemic sp. % endemic
Plants 528 21.1
Invertebrates > 3,054 51
Vertebrates 20 16.1
Adapted from Humphries (1979), Baez et al. (2000) and Oromf & Baez (in press)
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION -21 -
History
There are several parallels between the anthropological history and the biogeographic 
history of other fauna and flora groups in the Canary Islands, such as repeated 
colonizations from the continent, patterns of inter-island colonization and genetically 
isolated island lineages. The arrival and settlement of humans on these islands is likely to 
have altered the ecology, with mostly negative effects on the biodiversity (especially the 
endemic element) evident today (Baez, 1988).
It is thought that the pre-hispanic, aboriginal Canary Island population stemmed 
from northwest Africa, but was early isolated through founder effect and genetic drift in 
small colonizing populations which then became distinct, both from the mainland and from 
populations on other islands. At least three waves of immigration have been proposed to 
account for the diversity of anthrolpological remains (Schwidetzky, 1976). The first wave 
of immigrants arrived around 2000 BC and the most recent in early Christian times, around 
the 1st century AD. Cultural differences between islands is explained by the failure of the 
most recent immigrants to reach all the islands. There is a distinct gradation from the oldest 
populations to the most recent, with La Gomera and Tenerife only inhabited by the oldest 
immigration group, the Guanches. The patchy diaspora is established from skull 
characters with the extremes represented by the broad, prominent browed cromagnoid type 
found in La Gomera to the slim, gracile type found in the coastal regions of Gran Canaria. 
Prevailing winds and ocean currents from north to south combined with the levant winds 
from the Sahara would have made ocean travel from the continent to the islands far easier 
than the reverse journey from the islands back to the continent.
Scriptorially (the cave inscriptions of El Hierro) and linguistically there are links 
to North Africa, with Berber, Egyptian and Libyc associations (Schwidetzky, 1976).
Further cultural links are to be found in the ceramics, jewellery, leatherwork, obsidian 
knives and particularly the ancient Canarian custom of mummifying the dead. Despite 
associations with developing continental cultures, a lack of basic technological 
advancement has puzzled investigators. At the time of the Spanish Conquista in the 15th 
century, there was no use of metals. This led to the belief that the culture was neolithic and 
estimates of latest immigrations were much earlier than is believed today. Also puzzling is 
the lack of ship building in the archaeological record. This is strange in a people whose 
initial colonization must have been by boat, but contributes towards the explanation of the 
marked isolation of the different island populations.
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION - 2 2 -
A more tentative historical record can be found in ancient mythology. It has been 
suggested that several ancient names refer to the Canary Islands. The Elysian Fields from 
Homer (c. 800 BC), the three Gorgones and the three hesperides from Hesiod (c. 800 
BC), and the Atlantides from Plato (c. 400 BC). It is thought unlikely that any of these 
authors knew of the Canary Islands, but it is certain that they were known of by Ptolemy 
(200 BC) as he placed his 0  meridian through the islands, and until the discovery of the 
New World, the Canaries were considered the most westerly point on earth. In later 
mythology, the Canaries were widely alluded to as the Happy Islands due to the absence 
of snakes and abundance of wild fruit, wine and honey (Virgil, Horace and Pliny 70 BC-70 
AD). The Phoenicians knew of the island of Madeira but it is still doubtfull as to whether 
they visited the Canarian archipelago in their navigation of the African coast (c. 610 BC). It 
has been suggested that they were responsible for locating Homers Islands of the 
Cyclops with the associated idea of barbarism somewhere in the Atlantic, possibly in the 
Canary Islands. The first incidence of the current archipelago name is Canariae Insulae 
from Anobius (330 AD) (Kriiss, 1976).
Origin of the flora and fauna
The Macaronesian concept was first introduced, not for a geographical or political region, 
but as a phytogeographical term by the botanist Philip Barker Webb in the 19th century.
The diversity of habitats appears to be one of the main factors responsible for the rich 
Macaronesian flora, which includes c. 780 endemic species, while the diversity and 
endemism of the invertebrates is even more impressive (Table 11).
The Canary Island biota has the greatest affinity with the biotas of adjacent 
continental regions (Mediterranean and NW Africa) (Kunkel, 1976). However, there are 
several groups (both animal and plant) that show remarkable disjunctions, with the closest 
relatives of the island species found in Australasia, SE Asia, South Africa and South 
America (Bramwell, 1976; Baez, 1987). Fossil evidence indicates that the present day 
Macaronesian laurel forest was once the dominant element of a widespread subtropical 
Tertiary flora, remnants of which still survive around the Mediterranean as well as in 
southern Africa, Asia and the Americas (Bramwell, 1976; Sunding, 1979). The presence of 
species associated with the laurel forest ecology in Macaronesia suggests that these islands 
have acted as refugia, buffered by a relatively temperate oceanic climate, from the massive 
extinction and migration of plants and animals during periods of glaciation and 
desertification on the continent (Bramwell, 1976; Sunding, 1979). However, the relictual
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION - 2 3 -
status of certain plant groups has been controversial. Bramwell (1976) argued that a 
number of woody island plant groups, based on cytological and morphological evidence, 
were relictual (e.g. Bencomia, Echium, and Senecio), but these have been shown by 
molecular analyses to be recently derived from herbaceous, Mediterranean ancestors (Kim 
et al., 1996; Bohle, Hilger & Martin, 1996; Helfgot et a l ,  2000). These neoendemic groups 
are examples of spectacular and speciose adaptive radiations, and partly for this reason 
have been preferentially selected for molecular studies. However, genuine palaeoendemic 
elements in the Canary Islands may be less amenable to molecular studies because of a lack 
of suitable outgroups still living today.
The uniqueness of island biotas is partly attributed to adaptations (or loss of 
adaptations) to features that are peculiar to islands, such as the absence of predators, 
competitors or specialist pollinators. The diversity of these adaptations may be preserved 
by the insularity of each island and reinforced following an adaptive reduction in dispersal 
mechanisms (Carlquist, 1974). However, islands, which are therefore a nursery for 
evolution and diversity, have proven to be drastically susceptible to aggressive competition 
and predation from introduced continental elements. This has led to a stability paradox on 
islands -  there is long term stability protecting the diversification and the survival of 
palaeoendemics, but there is extreme instability when confronted with foreign invasions 
from recently introduced elements (Cronk, 1997). Thus, isolation may be the cause of a 
rich and unusual diversity, but also of great vulnerability. As islands are avenues for 
evolution they can also be cul-de-sacs of extinction.
Effects of seasonality and climate on the flora and fauna
Climate is one of the key features determining the floristic and faunistic character of the 
Canary Islands. As with other ocean archipelagos, the islands are subject to a relatively 
milder climate than the continental landmasses due to a temperate oceanic influence. 
However, the Canary Islands have a far from uniform climatic profile. There are certain 
prevailing conditions that result in a somewhat predictable pattern but the Canaries also 
come under the influence of more unpredictable weather systems.
The principle air masses blowing over the Canaries are associated with the Azores 
anticyclone over the North Atlantic region. Winds blowing outward and eastward from this 
region acquire a northeasterly direction as they turn towards the south under the influence 
of equatorial and continental low pressure zones. These winds from the north and northeast
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION - 2 4 -
form the prevailing trade winds that blow throughout the year and are the most consistent 
influence of climatic factors in the Canaries (Femandopulle, 1976).
The lower layer of the trades is thin, usually only 1000-1500 m, and humidity is 
acquired during traversion of the cool ocean waters resulting in a characteristic formation 
of extensive strato-cumulus clouds. These winds also attain the highest mean wind speeds, 
27 km/hr (Lanzarote) to 14 km/hr (Tenerife) according to the shape and size of the 
geographic wind break features.
Less prevalent winds blow from the NW, W and SW in association with winter 
depressions over the Atlantic. Anti-trade winds associated with hot, dry Saharan winds 
blow from the SE and sometimes E. The effect of the hot, dry anti-trades above the lower 
humidified trade layer results in a temperature inversion often forming at about 1000 m 
around the higher islands and resulting in the characteristic and dramatic cloud seas. The 
inversion layer shifts seasonally, being lower in summer and higher in winter. The winter 
cloud bank is therefore thicker but it is less persistent, while the summer cloud bank is 
permanent during the summer months of June and July.
Differences in climate between individual islands are determined primarily by the 
altitude of the island and by its proximity to the African continent. Mean monthly 
temperature varies with altitude from 27C at sea level to 7.5C above 3200 m. Local 
variation within islands becomes increasingly pronounced with altitude, and the higher 
islands rising above the inversion zone are subject to dramatic variation in temperature and 
precipitation between the northern (windward) slopes and the southern (leeward) slopes. 
Local land and sea breezes also effect the formation of the cloud banks. Clouds that are 
widespread over the sea, arrive on the windward side and pile up on the mountain slopes 
aided by sea breezes during the day, at night land breezes push the cloud bank offshore. In 
contrast, on the leeward slopes cloud banks may form 10-15 km offshore but do not form 
over land because of the heating effect produced by descent over the dry slopes 
(Femandopulle, 1976).
Two forms of precipitation occur in the Canaries. Winter rains are the result of 
cyclonic depressions associated with North Atlantic air masses and northerly or north 
westerly polar maritimes. Occasional heavy precipitation results from humid tropical 
maritime air masses from the SW, and tropical cyclones originating over the African 
continent and arriving from the E. Sixty per cent of the yearly rainfall occurs between 
December-January, and in most cases the total annual precipitation occurs within 10-40 
days of rainfall. The intensity of these rains is similar for northern and southern slopes but
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION - 2 5 -
the number of rain days is higher in the north. Daily intensities vary with between 25-300 
mm/24hr, indicating that 25-40% of the total yearly rainfall can occur in 24 hours. A 
second source of precipitation results from orographic uplift of the humid winds and 
horizontal precipitation from condensation by fog and mist associated with the cloud bank. 
Unlike the cyclonic winter rains, these forms of precipitation are exclusive to the northern 
slopes. Horizontal precipitation is believed by local people to be an important source of 
water and there is a famous story of the arbol de lluvia or rain tree of El Hierro. The 
story relates how large cisterns (of which remnants survive today) were carved out of rocks 
beneath the tree, and collected sufficient water dripping from the foliage to meet the needs 
of the local people. On arrival of the Spanish Conquista this valuable resource was kept 
secret. However, a local girl who was enamoured of a Spanish soldier was persuaded by 
her lover to give the secret away, for which she was condemned to death by the islanders 
(Bramwell & Bramwell, 1990).
Orographic factors are the most important general distributors of rain in the islands, 
and as these factors are a result of altitudinal gradients, low islands such as Lanzarote and 
Fuerteventura lack the high relief barriers to catch the humid winds. Islands of medium 
height (El Hierro and La Gomera) are high enough to accumulate a large amount of cloud 
cover over the whole island, while the high islands (Gran Canaria, Tenerife and La Palma) 
rising above the cloud layer act as barriers which result in dramatically different climatic 
zones above and below the inversion zone. Thus low islands (Lanzarote and Fuerteventura) 
near the African coast have a semi-desert climate, while the central and western islands 
range from semi-arid southern areas to sub-tropical northern areas, and sub-alpine peaks 
with snow caps of 30-40 cm recorded for El Teide (Tenerife).
The summer is relatively quiescent compared to winter weather systems. The dry 
season lasts from May to August and in the height of the summer during July and August, 
heat waves from the Sahara influence weather conditions in the Canaries for up to 20-25% 
of the time. There is a clear pattern of increasing rainfall in a westerly direction away from 
continental Africa (Table 12).
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION - 2 6 -
TABLE 12. Mean rainfall for the period 1949-1967:
island mean rainfall mm/yr
Lanzarote 135
Fuerteventura 147
Gran Canaria 325
Tenerife 420
La Gomera 410
El Hierro 426
La Palma 586
Adapted from Femandopulle (1976).
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION - 2 7 -
1.4 Genesis and rationale for this study
The initial aim of this study was to select a plant-insect system that could be investigated 
against the backdrop of island biogeography. Preferably, a highly host specific insect group 
that was associated with one of the famously speciose plant groups, arisen from a dramatic 
adaptive radiation. The Macaronesian region, and in particular the Canary Islands, was 
selected primarily because these islands had been the focus of a number of exciting 
evolutionary studies in the last decade, but also important was the element of a logistically 
feasible field site (i.e. travel, expense, and facilities).
There had been several phylogenetic studies of independent plant and insect groups 
from Macaronesia, but there were no studies dealing specifically with interactions between 
native plants and insects. Selecting the plant and insect groups was the first step. I had 
narrowed the possibilities down to a hemipteran insect group, but I had little idea of which 
group would be suitable until the end of my first week collecting in the Canary Islands 
(1997). I noticed the legume-feeding psyllids quickly because I always found a member of 
this group on every legume I sampled, while there appeared to be less consistency (to my 
inexperienced eye at least) in the mixed assemblage of insects gathered from other target 
plant groups. However, it was not until sorting through these collections under a 
microscope at the University of La Laguna, that I began to realize that each psyllid from the 
different legumes sampled was a different species. In fact, this was the first major hurdle -  
learning how to identify psyllids, predominantly by characters of the genitalia. By the end 
of my first visit to the Canary Islands, I was convinced I had the right system and I had 
begun to sample systematically from every legume species/subspecies and population I 
could find, in the five central and western islands. The collecting I did in this first year 
produced five of the 10 new species discovered on the Canary Islands. A broader and more 
detailed survey in my second year included the Canary Islands, Madeira and continental 
regions -  especially the Moroccan Atlas mountain ranges; and an additional twelve new 
species were discovered. This brought the number of new species I would need to name 
and describe to 17.
Although the focus throughout this study has been predominantly on the Canary 
Islands, the sampling in adjacent regions has provided a vital phylogenetic and 
biogeographic framework in which to view the evolution of the Canary Island psyllids. By 
far the most detailed sampling was undertaken in the Canary Islands, including repeated 
sampling of the same host populations at different times of the year and in different years,
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION - 2 8 -
in order to monitor fluctuations in psyllid populations. A series of pilot host transplant 
experiments in the field showed a high level of mortality among psyllids transplanted to 
foreign hosts, as well as an association in the rate and extent of mortality with the 
phylogenetic distance of the foreign host. Unfortunately, further research following up 
these preliminary hosts transplant experiments was beyond the scope of this PhD.
The taxonomy of the legume-feeding psyllids in this study was unsatisfactory when 
I started, and the need to describe and classify the new species I had collected led me 
undertake the revision of the genus Arytainilla presented in Chapter 2. As my work on the 
alpha taxonomy of the psyllid group progressed contemporaneously with the construction 
of the molecular phylogenies, I was able to cross reference between the two approaches, 
which I feel was advantageous to the interpretation and results of both. Molecular data 
provides an important contribution towards interpreting the monophyly or paraphyly of 
morphologically determined groups (particularly where there may be a high level of 
morphological homoplasy). Paraphyletic genera and taxonomic ambiguity in both insect 
and plant groups may reflect periods of rapid and, in some cases, recent diversification, 
resulting in poor differentiation of groups using either morphological or molecular data. In 
order to analyse the patterns of island and host plant colonization, I needed to resolve sister 
taxon relationships within groups. I determined that this would be best achieved by 
comparing and combining phylogenetic information from both morphological and 
molecular characters. In Chapter 3 ,1 present the first phylogenetic analysis for the psyllid 
group. I compare and contrast molecular and morphological phylogenies, and I use both 
types of data to investigate the psyllid classification and evolutionary patterns in 
continental and island species.
An extremely confused taxonomy characterizes the legume classification (based on 
morphological data) and previous molecular phylogenies have inadequately sampled the 
major Canary Island host plant groups. Early on, it became apparent to me that accurate 
assessment of psyllid-legume interactions would be hindered without a detailed molecular 
phylogeny for the host plants. This led me to produce the molecular legume phylogeny, 
presented in Chapter 4, which has proved essential for interpreting the patterns of host 
preference and host switching in psyllids. For instance, the most polyphagous psyllid in the 
Canary Islands feeds on three legumes, but these three legume species have near identical 
sequences for the nuclear region sampled, suggesting that this psyllid, based on molecular 
evidence, is in fact monophagous. The construction of accurate phylogenies for both
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION - 2 9 -
psyllids and legumes was the only way to address the question of cospeciation in Chapter 
5, and to undertake the analyses required to test assumptions of parallel cladogenesis.
In many respects each aspect of this thesis, field surveys, taxonomy, morphological 
and molecular phylogenies as well as the combined synthesis, would all benefit from 
another three years study. However, in the past three years, I believe I have made some 
inroads into the complex and multilayered dimensions of insect-plant interactions. Perhaps 
my only regret is that I did not spend the entire three years of this study in the field, as there 
remains a great wealth of evidence to be gathered.
1.5 References
Ancochea E, Fuster JM, Ibarrola E, Cendrero A, Coello J, Hernan F, Cantagrel JM, 
Jamond C. 1990. Volcanic evolution of the island of Tenerife (Canary Islands) in 
the light of new K-Ar data. Journal o f Volcanic and Geothermal Research 44: 231- 
Baez M. 1987. Caracteres lies a l'insularite de la faune de l'archipel des Canaries. Bulletin 
de la Societe Zoologique de France 112: 143-152.
Baez M. 1988. Analisis faunfstico de los dipteros de la laurisilva de Tenerife, Islas
Canarias (Insecta, Diptera). Boletm de la Asociacion Espahola de Entomolgia 12: 
181-208.
Baez M, Martin JL, Oromf P. 2000. Diversidad taxonomica terrestre. In: Fernandez
Palacios JM, Martin Esquivel JL, eds. Naturaleza de las Islas Canarias. Sta. Cruz 
de Tenerife: Editorial Turquesa.
Bentham G. 1865. Ordo LVII Leguminosae. In: Bentham G, Hooker JD, eds. Genera 
Plantarum. London: Reeve, 434-600.
Bentham G. 1875. Revision of the suborder Mimoseae. Transactions o f  the Linnean 
Society 20: 335-664.
Bisby FA. 1981. Genisteae (Adans.) Benth. (1865). In: Polhill RM, Raven PH, eds.
Advances in Legume Sytematics. Kew, Royal Botanic Gardens, 409-425.
Bohle U-R, Hilger HH, Martin WF. 1996. Island colonization and evolution of insular
woody habit in Echium L. (Boraginaceae). Proceedings o f  the National Academy o f 
Science, USA 93: 11740-11745.
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION - 3 0 -
Bramwell D. 1976. The endemic flora of the Canary Islands; distribution, relationships and 
phtogeography. In: Kunkel G, ed. Biogeography and Ecology in the Canary 
Islands. The Hague: Dr. W. Junk Publishers, 207-240.
Bramwell D, Bramwell ZI. 1990. Flores Silvestres de las Islas Canarias. Madrid: 
Editorial Rueda.
Brown RP, Pestano J. 1998. Phylogeography of skinks (Chalcides) in the Canary Islands 
inferred from mitochondrial DNA sequences. Molecular Ecology 7: 1183-1191.
Burckhardt D. 1987. Jumping plant lice (Homoptera: Psylloidea) of the temperate
neotropical region. Part 1: Psyllidae (Subfamilies Aphalarinae, Rhinocolinae and 
Aphalaroidinae). Zoological Journal o f the Linnean Society 89: 299-392.
Carlquist S. 1974. Island Biology. Columbia: Columbia University Press.
Carracedo JC, Day S, Guillou H, Gravestock P. 1999. Later stages of volcanic evolution 
of La Palma, Canary Islands: rift evolution, giant landslides, and the genesis of the 
Caldera de Taburiente. Geological Society o f  American Bulletin 111: 755-768.
Carracedo JC, Day S, Guillou H, Rodriguez Badiola E, Canas JA, Perez Torrado FJ. 
1998. Hotspot volcanism close to a passive continental margin: the Canary Islands. 
Geological Magazine 135: 591-604.
Cristofolini G. 1991. Taxonomic revision of Cytisus Desf. sect. Tubocytisus DC. 
(Fabaceae). Webbia 45: 187-219.
Cronk QCB. 1989. Measurement of biological and historical influences on plant 
classification. Taxon 38: 357-370.
Cronk QCB. 1990. The name of the pea: a quantitative history of legume classification. 
New Phytologist 116: 163-175.
Cronk QCB. 1997. Islands: stability, diversity, conservation. Biodiversity and 
Conservation 6: 477-493.
Fhrlich PR, Raven PH. 1964. Butterflies and plants: a study in coevolution. Evolution 18: 
586-608.
Emerson BC, Oromi P, Hewitt GM. 1999. Mt DNA phylogeny and recent intra-island 
diversification among Canary Island Calathus beetles. Molecular Phylogenetics 
and Evolution 13: 149-158.
Femandopulle D. 1976. Climatic characteristics of the Canary Islands. In: Kunkel G, ed. 
Biogeography and Ecology in the Canary Islands. The Hague: Dr. W. Junk 
Publishers, 185-206.
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION -31 -
Futuyma JD, Slatkin M. 1983. Coevolution. Sunderland, Massachusetts: Sinauer 
Associates.
Givnish TJ, Sytsma KJ. 1997. Molecular Evolution and Adaptive Radiation. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Grant PR. 1986. Ecology and Evolution o f Darwins finches. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press.
Grant PR. 1998. Evolution on Islands. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Greinwald R, Bachmann P, Witte L, Acebes-Ginoves JR, Czygan F-C. 1992. 
Taxonomic significance of alkaloids in the genus Adenocarpus (Fabaceae- 
Genisteae). Biochemical Systematics and Ecology 20: 69-73.
Guillou H, Carracedo JC, Day SJ. 1998. Dating of the upper Pleistocene-Holocene 
volcanic activity of La Palma using the unspiked K-Ar technique. Journal o f 
volcanology and geothermal research 86: 137-149.
Hanski IA, Gilpin ME. 1997. Metapopulation Biology: Ecology, Genetics, and Evolution.
San Diego: Academic Press.
Helfgott DM, Francisco-Ortega J, Santos-Guerra A, Jansen RK, Simpson BB. 2000. 
Biogeography and breeding system evolution of the woody Bencomia alliance 
(Rosaceae) in Macaronesia based on ITS sequence data. Systematic Botany 25: 82- 
Hodkinson ID. 1980. Present-day distribution patterns of the holarctic Psylloidea
(Homoptera: Insecta) with particular reference to the origin of the nearctic fauna. 
Journal o f Bio geography 7: 127-146.
Holt RD, Keitt TH. 2000. Alternative causes for range limits: a metapopulation 
perspective. Ecology Letters 3: 41-47.
Humphries CJ. 1979. Endemism and evolution in Macaronesia. In: Bramwell D, ed.
Plants and Islands. London: Academic Press, 171-199.
Hutchinson J. 1964. The Genera o f Flowering Plants. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Janzen DH. 1979. New horizons in the biology of plant defences. In: Rosenthal GA,
Janzen DH, eds. Herbivores. Their Interaction with Secondary Plant Metabolites. 
New York: Academic Press, 331-350.
Jermy T. 1976. Insect-host-plant relationship -  coevolution or sequential evolution?
Symposia Biologica Hungarica 16: 109-113.
Jermy T. 1984. Evolution of insect/host plant relationships. American Naturalist 124: 
609-630.
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION - 3 2 -
Kambysellis M P, Craddock EM . 1997. Ecological and reproductive shifts in the
diversification of the endemic Hawaiian Drosophila. In: Givnish TJ, Sytsma KJ, 
eds. Molecular Evolution and Adaptive Radiation. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Kass E ,W ink M. 1996. Molecular evolution of the Leguminosae: phylogeny of the three 
subfamilies based on r^cL-sequences. Biochemical Systematics and Ecology 24: 
365-378.
Kass E, W ink M. 1997. Phylogenetic relationships in the Papilionoideae (family
Leguminosae) based on nucleotide sequences of cpDNA (rbcL) and ncDNA (ITS 1 
and 2). Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 8: 65-88.
Kim S-C, Craw ford DJ, Francisco-Ortega J , Santos-G uerra A. 1996. A common origin 
for woody Sonchus and five related genera in the Macaronesian Islands: molecular 
evidence for extensive radiation. Proceedings o f the National Academy o f Science, 
USA 93: 7743-7748.
Kriiss J . 1976. The names of the Canarian Islands and their verification. In: Kunkel G, ed. 
Bio geography and Ecology in the Canary Islands. The Hague: Dr. W. Junk 
Publishers, 37-65.
Kunkel G. 1976. Biogeography and Ecology in the Canary Islands. The Hague: Dr. W. 
Junk Publishers.
Linnaeus C. 1753. Species Plantarum. Stockholm: L. Salvus.
M ac A rth u r RH, Wilson EO. 1967. The Theory o f Island Biogeography. Princeton, N.J.: 
Princeton University Press.
M enken SBJ. 1996. Pattern and process in the evolution of insect-plant associations:
Yponomeuta as an example. Entomologia Experimentalis etApplicata  80: 297-305.
M itter C, Farrell B, W iegmann B. 1988. The phylogenetic study of adaptive zones: has 
phytophagy promoted insect diversification? The American Naturalist 132: 107- 
Oromf P, Baez M. (in press). Fauna invertebrada nativa terrestre. In: Fernandez Palacios 
JM, Martin Esquivel JL, eds. Naturaleza de las Islas Canarias. Sta. Cruz de 
Tenerife: Editorial Turquesa, chapter 12.
Pickett STA, Thom pson JN. 1978. Patch dynamics and the design of nature reserves. 
Biological Conservation 13: 27-37.
Press JR , Short M J. 1994. Flora o f Madeira. London: HMSO.
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION - 3 3 -
Raven PH, Axelrod DI. 1974. Angiosperm biogeography and past continental 
movements. Annals o f the Missouri Botanic Garden 61: 539-673.
R uber L, Verheyen E, S turm bauer C, M eyer A. 1998. Lake level fluctuations and
speciation in rock-dwelling cichlid fish in Lake Tanganyika, East Africa. In: Grant 
PR, ed. Evolution on Islands. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 225-240.
Schmincke H-U. 1976. The geology of the Canary Islands. In: Kunkel G, ed.
Biogeography and Ecology in the Canary Islands. The Hague: Dr. W. Junk 
Publishers, 67-184.
Schwidetzky 1 .1976. The prehispanic population of the Canary Islands. In: Kunkel G, ed. 
Biogeography and Ecology in the Canary Islands. The Hague: Dr. W. Junk 
Publishers, 15-36.
Sunding P. 1979. Origins of the Macaronesian flora. In: Bramwell D, ed. Plants and 
Islands. London: Academic Press, 13-40.
Thom pson JN. 1994. The Coevolutionary Process. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
W agner W L, Funk VA. 1995. Hawaiian biogeography: evolution on a hot spot 
archipelago. Washington D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press.
W alters SM. 1961. The shaping of angiosperm taxonomy. New Phytologist 60: 74-84.
W hite IM , Hodkinson ID. 1985. Nymphal taxonomy and systematics of the Psylloidea 
(Homoptera). Bulletin o f the British Museum (Natural History) (Entomology) 50: 
153-301.
W ink M. 1992. The role of quinolizidine alkaloids in plant-insect interactions. In: Bemays 
EA, ed. Insect Plant Interactions. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 131-165.
W u J , Levin SA. 1997. A patch-based spatial modeling approach: conceptual framework 
and simulation scheme. Ecological Modelling 101: 325-346.
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 3 4 -
CHAPTER TWO
THE LEGUME-FEEDING PSYLLIDS (HEMIPTERA, PSYLLOIDEA) OF THE 
CANARY ISLANDS, MADEIRA AND ADJACENT AREAS
[Part of this chapter has been submitted as a paper to the Journal o f Natural History] 
Abstract
A detailed survey of the legume-feeding jumping plant-lice, or psyllids (subfamily Arytaininae) 
in the Canary Islands and Madeira indicates a high level of endemism and diversification in this 
region. An additional survey in possible continental source areas provides a comparison of 
continental and island species diversity. The taxonomy of the genus Arytainilla is revised to 
reflect a distinct origin for the predominantly Macaronesian group. The position of this island 
group is clarified in relation to the mainly continental Arytainilla sensu stricto. One new genus 
and 17 new species are described. Descriptions of previously undescribed 5th instar nymphal 
stages for 31 species are also included. Nine of the new species are described in Arytinnis gen. 
nov., four in Arytainilla, three in Livilla and one new species in Arytaina. In addition, 14 new 
combinations are proposed including the transfer of Psylla improvisa to Pseudacanthopsylla. A 
high degree of host specificity is typical and information is given on host plant associations, 
biology and geographic distribution. Separate keys for adults and nymphs are provided for 
Arytinnis gen. nov., Arytainilla and the remaining Canary Island species.
2.1 Introduction
The psyllid subfamily Arytaininae comprises 14 genera, five of which feed exclusively on 
genistoid legumes (Genisteae, Leguminosae). Hodkinson and Hollis (1987) examined two of 
the genistoid-feeding genera, Arytaina and Livilla, but observed that the genus Arytainilla was 
certainly not a monophyletic group and required further collecting. A survey of genistoid 
hosts in the Canary Islands, Madeira, Southern Iberia and North Africa has provided additional 
material for a revision of Arytainilla sensu Loginova, 1972. The predominantly Macaronesian 
species are here placed in a separate genus, Arytinnis gen. nov., to reflect the monophyly of this
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 3 5 -
group and its origins as distinct from Arytainilla sensu stricto represented by the type species 
Arytainilla delarbrei. As defined here, Arytainilla sensu stricto returns to a concept closer to 
the original for this genus {sensu Ramirez Gomez, 1956) before the inclusion of the 
Macaronesian species by Loginova (1972). However, the present inclusion of A. sulci, A. gredi 
and A. montivaga sp. nov. in this genus is problematic, nevertheless it seems best to retain these 
species in Arytainilla until further work resolves their placement within Arytaininae.
None of the five genera of legume-feeding psyllids represented in the Canary Islands are 
exclusively endemic. However, all 21 Canary Island species in the four Arytaininae genera, 
Arytaina, Arytainilla, Arytinnis gen. nov. and Livilla are endemic, while a single Acizzia 
(Acizziinae) species is introduced. There are 21 species in Arytinnis gen. nov., 16 of which are 
endemic to the Canary Islands and half of these are newly described species. In addition, one 
Arytinnis species is described from Morocco. Of the remaining five non-Canarian species, two 
are endemic to Madeira, one to the Moroccan Anti-Atlas mountains, one to the Moroccan High 
Atlas mountains and one, A. hakani, is the only widespread species occurring throughout the 
western Mediterranean.
Within the Hemiptera the morphological transformation between immature and adult is 
particularly dramatic in the Psylloidea. The term larvae for immature stages has been used to 
emphasise the absence of shared characteristics between nymph and adult, and indicates the 
importance of descriptions for both immature and adult stages. Previous descriptions of the last 
(5th instar) nymphal stage for Arytinnis gen. nov. have been limited to one species (A. hakani, 
Rapisarda, 1987). With the addition here of a further 19 descriptions of 5th instar nymphs, only 
one species remains with the nymph undescribed (A. canariensis). In contrast to the relative 
homogeneity of nymphal forms in Arytinnis gen. nov., differences in nymphal morphology are 
pronounced in the remaining Arytainilla species. This divergence reflects a similar 
heterogeneity in the adult form, perhaps indicating the greater age of this lineage and possibly 
extinct intermediates.
All native legume-feeding psyllids in the Canary Islands feed on hosts in the tribe 
Genisteae (Papilionoideae, Leguminosae). These papilionoid legume shrubs include the 
common brooms and gorse, and are most diverse in the Mediterranean and North African 
regions. Macaronesian representatives from the Canary Islands and Madeira have clear 
affinities to Mediterranean taxa. However, within the islands species affiliations have been 
controversial, particularly in the genus Teline (Gibbs & Dingwall, 1972; Gibbs, 1974; Arco 
Aguilar, 1983, 1993). Of the 16 species currently recognized for Teline, 10 are endemic to the
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 3 6 -
Canary Islands, one to Madeira and five species are continental, occurring in the Mediterranean 
and North Africa (Gibbs & Dingwall, 1972; Talavera & Gibbs, 1999). The extensive ecological 
radiation of this group in the Canary Islands contrasts with other genistoid genera present in the 
Canaries: Chamaecytisus and Genista are each represented by a single species, while 
Adenocarpus and Spartocytisus exhibit limited diversification with a high and low altitude 
species in each genus. The Genisteae are considered to be a monophyletic tribe but the 
delimitation of genera has proved problematic (Polhill, 1976; Bisby, 1981; Kass & Wink,
1997). There are three generally accepted groups: a Genista group, a Cytisus group and various 
outliers. Of the genera that occur in the Canary Islands, Teline and Retama are in the Genista 
group, Chamaecytisus and Spartocytisus are in the Cytisus group while Adenocarpus is 
considered an outlier. Although some members of Arytinnis gen. nov. feed on hosts in 
Adenocarpus (two species), Genista (three species) and Chamaecytisus (two species); Teline, 
on which 15 species feed, is the primary host group for this genus. In the Canary Islands there 
has been considerable diversification of the 7e/me-feeding psyllids that reflects the 
diversification in the host genus.
2.2 Materials, methods and terminology
Field collections were made during June-July and December 1997, March-July 1998, March- 
May 1999 and July-August 2000. Adults and nymphs were collected by sweeping host plants 
with a canvas net and stored in 100% ethanol. Host plant material was examined in the field 
and in the laboratory for presence and placement of eggs and l st-2nd instar nymphs. 
Identifications were made from alcohol, slide mounted (method in Hodkinson & White, 1979) 
and capillary mounted (method in Ossiannilsson, 1992) material. Geographical and host 
preference ranges were determined by sampling from several different host populations and by 
sampling from the same populations in different years (details of hosts and host populations 
sampled in the Canary Islands are given in Appendices 1 & 2). Pressed plant specimens 
(deposited at Glasgow University Herbarium (GL) and Royal Botanic Garden Edinburgh (E)) 
were made of all host plants including intraspecific taxa for confirmation of host plant 
identification. The methods used to assess host specificity were a) the presence of nymphs -  
immature stages are mobile but typically sedentary, particularly in l st-3rd instar stages, 4th-5th 
instars can move rapidly but are unlikely to travel far from feeding sites or to disperse from one 
plant to another; b) comparison of adult distribution in locations where the host plant is
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 3 7 -
isolated, with locations where the host plant grows sympatrically with other genistoid legume 
species. In the latter situation transient adults are frequently found on legumes other than the 
host or, at high densities, on non-leguminous plants. Material was collected by the author unless 
otherwise stated. Terminology and measurements used in some adult characters are illustrated 
in Figs 1 and 2 and the treatment of setal placement in nymphal descriptions and keys is 
indicated in Fig. 2. All other terminology and measurements follow Hodkinson & White (1979) 
and White & Hodkinson (1982, 1985). In the type and other material examined the host plant is 
only listed when the species is oligophagous on more than one host plant or when adults, as 
transients, were collected from hosts other than the specified host plant for that species. The 
following abbreviations are used to indicate institutions in which type material is deposited:
The Natural History Museum, London (BMNH); Departamento de Biologfa Animal (Zoologfa), 
Universidad de La Laguna, Tenerife (DZUL); Naturhistorisches Museum Basel (NHMB).
Other material is in the collection of the author indicated by DP and a collection number. 
Numbers in parenthesis after new species names will represent that species in a current 
molecular analysis.
Abbreviations used in the descriptions are as follows (all measurements are recorded in mm):
Adults
WLPT = ratio
ALHW = ratio
GCVL = ratio
WLHW = ratio
VLW = ratio
WLW = ratio
CUR = ratio
MR = ratio
RMCU = ratio
TLFL = ratio
TLHW = ratio
SCHW = ratio
ATIB = ratio
MTIB = ratio
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 3 8 -
PBHW = ratio distal proboscis segment length : head width
ATMT = ratio hind leg apical tarsus length : metatarsus length
Adult genitalia d
MP = proctiger length
PL = paramere length
AEL = distal aedeagus segment length
AEH = aedeagus hook length
MPHW = ratio proctiger length : head width
PLHW = ratio paramere length : head width
MPPL = ratio proctiger length : paramere length
AEPL = ratio distal aedeagus segment length : paramere length
MSLH = ratio subgenital plate length : height
AHS = ratio distal aedeagus segment length : aedeagus hook length
PLSH = ratio paramere length : subgenital plate height
Adult genitalia 9
FP = proctiger length
FSP = subgenital plate length
RL = anal ring length
OV = ovipositor valvulae dorsalis length
EL = egg length
FPHW = ratio proctiger length : head width
FPSP = ratio proctiger length : subgenital plate length
FPCR = ratio proctiger length : anal ring length
OLSP = ratio ovipositor valvulae dorsalis length : subgenital plate length
FEOL = ratio mean egg length : mean ovipositor valvulae dorsalis length
Nymphs
BL = body length
BW = body width
WL = forewing pad length
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 3 9 -
CPL = caudal plate length
CPW = caudal plate width
RW = circumanal ring width
RL = circumanal ring length
HW = head width
AL = antennal length
AL3 = length of 3rd antennal segment
WBL = ratio body width : length
ALHW = ratio antennal length : head width
ALWL = ratio antennal length : forewing pad length
WLHW = ratio forewing pad length : head width
WCPL = ratio caudal plate width : caudal plate length
CPRW = ratio caudal plate width : circumanal ring width
2.3 Taxonomic treatment
[Figures, where appropriate, are referenced in the keys and presented at the end of the chapter. 
Terminology and measurements are illustrated in Figs 1 and 2]
2.3.1 Key to adults o f the legume-feeding genera in the Canary Islands and Madeira.
1 Body colour predominantly orange-brown; forewing membrane with apical, orange-brown 
pattern of clouds and spots, cell m 2 narrow and long (MR < 0.37) and cell cui narrow and 
high (CUR < 1.38); antennae shorter than 1 mm; male paramere shorter than 0.25 mm; 
distal aedeagus segment (< 0.22 mm) appearing jointed, apex without a hook but with a 
sharp point and dorsal blade; male proctiger with a pronounced basal posterior lobe and 
subsidiary projection, the apical portion slender; male subgenital plate elongate, length 
greater than 1.55 x height; female genitalia truncated, proctiger (< 0.5 mm) shorter than 0.7 
x head width, circumanal ring relatively long -  proctiger length less than 2.6 x ring length, 
subgenital plate shorter than 0.3 mm; ovipositor valvulae dorsalis short (< 0.12 mm) and
[a single introduced species, Acizzia uncatoides (Ferris & Klyver), on Acacia spp.]
 Body colour predominantly green or dark brown to grey; forewing membrane either clear, 
or more darkly pigmented (often towards the apex), or with distinct dark brown apical 
banding, cell m 2 broader and shorter (MR > 0.37) and cell cui broader and lower (CUR >
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 4 0 -
1.38); antennae longer than 1 mm; male paramere longer than 0.25 mm; distal aedeagus 
segment (> 0.22 mm) either straight or curved, apex with a hook or bluntly rounded; male 
proctiger either not, or only gradually becoming inflated posteriorly towards the base; male 
subgenital plate more orbicular, length less than 1.55 x height; female genitalia longer, 
proctiger (> 0.5 mm) greater than 0.7 x head width, circumanal ring relatively short -  
proctiger length greater than 2.6 x ring length, subgenital plate longer than 0.3 mm; 
ovipositor valvulae dorsalis relatively long (> 0.12 mm) and slender, without anterio-dorsal 
2 Forewing membrane with distinct pattern of dark brown transverse bands and clouds, 
pterostigma rudimentary, vein Rs distinctly curved upwards at the apex towards the costal 
margin, vein M sinuous, cell m2 almost as wide as long (MR > 0.8), surface spinules dense 
(> 100 per 0.1 mm2); genal cones longer (> 0.3 mm) than the vertex; male subgenital plate 
dorsal posterior margin with a pair of long (more than half the length of the paramere) stout
[a single species, Livilla monospermae Hodkinson, on Retama monopserma]
 Forewing membrane either clear or more darkly pigmented, often with darker patches in
the apical cells, but without a distinct pattern, pterostigma either absent or long (about lA or 
greater the wing length), vein Rs not, or only weakly, curving upwards at the apex towards 
the costal margin, vein M evenly curved, cell m 2 significantly longer than wide (MR < 0.7), 
surface spinules less dense (< 100 per 0.1 mm2); genal cones shorter (< 0.25 mm) than the 
vertex; male subgenital plate dorsal posterior margin without a pair of long, stout setae; one 
3 Forewing coriaceous, yellow-brown becoming darker at the margins, cell T\ narrow with 
vein Rs running close to the costal margin, cell cui broad and low (CUR > 2.3); lindwing 
costal margin straight; genal cones longer than 0.75 x vertex length; male paramere slender 
and sinuous, as long, or longer than 0.9 x head width; male proctiger slender, longer than 
0.7 x head width; distal aedeagus segment longer than 0.45 mm, apex relatively small, less 
than 0.15 x segment length, and bluntly rounded without a hook; female genitalia robust, 
the proctiger apex arched and tip upturned; ovipositor massive, valvulae dorsalis longer (>
[a single species, Arytainilla serpentina sp. nov., on Spartocytisus filipes]
 Forewing not coriaceous, either clear or with darker patches in the apical cells, cell t \  
relatively wide, cell cui relatively high (CUR < 2.3); hindwing costal margin comave;
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY -41 -
genal cones shorter than 0.75 x vertex length; male paramere shorter than 0.9 x head width; 
male proctiger relatively broad and short, less than 0.6 x head width; distal aedeagus 
segment shorter than 0.45 mm, apex relatively large, greater than 0.2 x segment length, and 
with a shallow or well rounded hook; female genitalia more slender, the proctiger apex 
straight or slightly upturned; ovipositor slender, valvulae dorsalis shorter (< 0.3 mm) than 
4 Body colour predominantly dark brown or grey (recently emerged adults may be green); 
forewing costal break and pterostigma absent; head not, or only weakly, deflexed 
downwards with genal cones in approximately the same plane as the vertex; male paramere 
shorter than the proctiger, length less than 0.4 x head width; distal aedeagus segment longer 
 Body colour predominantly green (mature adults sometimes develop brown colouration); 
forewing with costal break and long pterostigma; head deflexed downwards with genal 
cones directed downwards relative to the plane of the vertex; male paramere longer than 
the proctiger, length > 0.4 x head width; distal aedeagus segment shorter than 0.95 x 
paramere leng th  Arytinnis gen. nov.
2.3.2 Key to 5th instar nymphs o f the legume-feeding genera in the Canary Islands and 
Madeira.
2 Antennae with nine segments (including scape and pedicel) and with a capitate seta on 3rd
and 5th segments; anterior head and ocular setae distinctly capitate; total body length less 
than 1.5 mm; antennae shorter than 0.7 mm, less than 1.5 x forewing pad length, or 1.2 x 
head width; width of caudal plate greater than 1.7 x length, and greater than 5 x anal ring
[a single introduced species, Acizzia uncatoides (Ferris & Klyver), on Acacia spp.]
 Antennae with seven segments (including scape and pedicel) and with simple setae only; 
ocular seta simple and anterior head setae simple or narrowly capitate; total body length 
greater than 1.5 mm; antennae longer than 0.7 mm, greater than 1.5 x forewing pad length, 
or 1.2 x head width; width of caudal plate less than 1.7 x length, and less than 5 x anal ring 
width (Figs 24B-D)  Arytaina Foerster
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 4 2 -
3 Distinctly capitate setae present on anterior margin of the head, and distally on 3rd and 5th 
antennal segments; numerous small, pale, capitate setae present dorsally on the wing pad
[a single species, Livilla monospermae Hodkinson, on Retama monopserma]
 Anterior margin of the head with simple or narrowly capitate setae, antennae with simple
setae only; wing pad surfaces usually without capitate setae or where present on the wing 
4 Forewing pad and abdomen acutely rounded apically; marginal abdominal setae (other than 
sectasetae) two pairs; wing pads with minute simple setae only; antennae shorter than 
forewing pad length, or head width; head width less than forewing pad length; forewing 
pad longer than 0.7 mm; caudal plate length (> 0.8 mm) greater than width (Fig. 22C) 
Arytainilla Loginova
[a single species, Arytainilla serpentina sp. nov., on Spartocytisus filipes]
 Forewing pad and abdomen broadly rounded apically; marginal abdominal setae (other
than sectasetae) one, three or four pairs; wing pads with one or more prominent setae; 
antennae longer than forewing pad length, or head width; head width as great or greater 
than forewing pad length; forewing pad shorter than 0.7 mm; caudal plate length (< 0.6 
2.3.3 SUBFAMILY ARYTAININAE
Genus Arytainilla Loginova 
Spartina Heslop-Harrison, 1951: 443; 1961a: 417. Type species Psylla spartii Guerin, by 
monotypy [Homonym of Spartina Harris and Burrows, 1891]
Lindbergia Heslop-Harrison, 1951: figures 2 a, b, nomen nudum [no included species] (nec 
Lindbergia Riedel, 1958)
Lindbergiella Heslop-Harrison, 1961b: 509, nomen nudum [type species not designated] 
Arytaina subgenus Arytainilla Ramirez Gomez, 1956: 76, nomen nudum [type species not 
designated]
Alloeoneura subgenus Hispaniola Ramirez Gomez, 1956: 91, in part, nomen nudum [type 
species not designated]
Arytainilla Loginova, 1972: 17; 1977: 64. Type species: Psylla delarbrei Puton, designated by 
Loginova, 1972: 17
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 4 3 -
Adult Description: Variable in colour, from bright green or grey-green, to yellow or dark 
brown; lacking distinct forewing patterns. Forewing membrane may be transparent or opaque, 
or more rarely coriaceous and sometimes darkly pigmented; veins uniformly pigmented, pale or 
mid-brown. Fore wing widest in the apical third with a broadly rounded apex, or in the middle 
third with a more acutely rounded apex; costal break and pterostigma present, pterostigma 
varying from rudimentary to long, typically less than one quarter the wing length; vein Rs may 
be slightly curved in the middle, but not, or only weakly curved at the apex, towards the costal 
margin. Hindwing costal margin straight. Antennae typically short, with eight or ten segments. 
Head deflexed downwards with genal cones directed downwards relative to the plane of the 
vertex; genal cones varying from short to long. Distal proboscis segment short to mid-length. 
Number of basal tibial spurs variable, typically four to five (2/3+1+1), though individuals may 
have as few as three; one metatarsal spur. Paramere longer or shorter than the proctiger, often 
slender, elongate and simple, or shorter and broader, with or without a small or more 
pronounced anteriorly directed hook at the apex. Female genitalia large to massive with a 
robust ovipositor, or smaller with a slender ovipositor.
Nymphal Description: Forewing pads and abdomen broadly or acutely rounded apically. 
Antennae with seven segments. Tergites varying from barely reduced to extensively reduced. 
Circumanal ring variable in shape, outer ring with a single, or multiple rows of pores; 
contiguous or not with the apical abdominal margin. Head and antennae with or without distinct 
capitate or club setae. Wing pads with or without prominent setae. Sectasetae absent or present 
(one to four pairs). Legs with or without capitate setae.
Comment: This is a heterogeneous group of 12 species. Arytainilla sensu stricto is a 
monophyletic group of 9 species that can be distinguished most notably by the large female 
genitalia and robust ovipositor. The three remaining species, A. gredi, A. sulci and A. montivaga 
sp. nov. are not included in this group and their correct placement within the Arytaininae is not 
clear. Thus, they are retained in Arytainilla for the present and are treated here as residual 
species. Arytainilla is a predominantly continental genus with only one species occurring in the 
Canary Islands. Useful biological notes for species occurring in Italy can be found in Conci, 
Rapisarda & Tamanini (1993, 1996).
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 4 4 -
Key to adults of Arytainilla.
1 Female ovipositor large (often with serrations or projections), valvulae dorsalis longer than 
0.25 mm and greater than 0.5 x subgenital plate length, valvulae ventralis higher than 
valvulae dorsalis at least in part, valvulae dorsalis dorsally more or less straight (either 
slightly concave/convex, or bearing tooth-like processes) or markedly concave with an 
 Female ovipositor small (not toothed or serrated), valvulae dorsalis shorter than 0.25 mm
and less than 0.5 x subgenital plate length, valvulae ventralis slender, not higher than 
2 Male paramere shorter than 0.5 x head width, in lateral view with a terminal blade present
laterally exterior to the apex and the sclerotized apex with a large, anteriorly directed hook; 
aedeagus distal segment longer than 0.9 x paramere length, with a relatively large apical 
hook -  the length about 0.25 x segment length; male subgenital plate dorsal profile raised 
anteriorly with a distinct step; female proctiger apex squarely truncated; ovipositor 
valvulae dorsalis concave dorsally and distinctly inflated anteriorly at the base; ovipositor 
valvulae ventralis relatively slender, apex rounded with minute serrations that extend along 
 Male paramere longer than 0.5 x head width, in lateral view without a terminal blade and
the sclerotized apex with or without a small hook or projection; aedeagus distal segment 
shorter than 0.9 x paramere length, apex not developed into a hook or with a relatively 
small hook -  the length less than 0.25 x segment length; male subgenital plate dorsal 
profile more or less straight or slightly curved, but without a distinct step; female proctiger 
apex bluntly rounded or acute; ovipositor valvulae dorsalis more or less straight dorsally 
(either slightly concave/convex or bearing tooth-like processes); ovipositor valvulae 
ventralis extremely robust, apex either round or square, ventral margin either smooth or 
3 Antennal segments eight (including scape and pedicel); head wider than 0.86 mm; distal
proboscis segment longer (>0.14 mm); male paramere (in lateral view) with lower part 
curvaceous, bulging rearward at the base and forward in the middle, but with the upper part 
straight and more or less parallel sided, interior surface with numerous stout setae on the 
lower part and densest on the anterior and posterior protrusions; aedeagus distal segment 
longer than 0.85 x paramere length; female subgenital plate ventral profile with 
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 4 5 -
 Antennal segments ten (including scape and pedicel); head narrower than 0.86 mm; distal 
proboscis segment shorter (< 0.14 mm); male paramere (in lateral view) more slender, 
either curvaceous or straight, tapering or expanding towards the apex, interior surface 
either with fewer, slender setae, or with stout setae more evenly distributed; aedeagus distal 
segment shorter than 0.85 x paramere length; female subgenital plate ventral profile 
4 Forewing coriaceous, long and narrow, length greater than 2.65 x width, with an acutely 
rounded apex, cell ri narrow with vein Rs running close to the costal margin; pterostigma 
long, about 0.25 x wing length; genal cones long (> 0.16 mm), longer than 0.75 x vertex 
length; male paramere and proctiger extremely long and slender -  paramere (> 0.7 mm) 
longer than 0.85 x head width, proctiger (> 0.5 mm) longer than 0.7 x head width; aedeagus 
distal segment longer than 0.45 mm; female proctiger dorsal profile anteriorly more or less 
straight but with the apex arched and the tip upturned, proctiger longer than 1.12 mm; 
female subgenital plate ventral profile angled medially (on Spartocytisus filipes; La Palma) 
 Forewing not coriaceous and relatively short and broad, length less than 2.65 x width, with 
a broadly rounded apex, cell ri not narrow; pterostigma short or rudimentary; genal cones 
short (< 0.16 mm), equal to, or shorter than 0.75 x vertex length; male paramere and 
proctiger shorter -  paramere (< 0.7 mm) shorter than 0.85 x head width, proctiger (< 0.5 
mm) shorter than 0.7 x head width; aedeagus distal segment shorter than 0.45 mm; female 
proctiger dorsal profile anteriorly more or less straight, or slightly concave with the tip 
upturned, proctiger shorter than 1.12 mm; female subgenital plate ventral profile shallowly 
5 Body colour bright green to grey green, forewing membrane clear or faintly yellow; female
proctiger robust, dorsal profile more or less straight from anus to apex, apex blunt, 
circumanal ring length less than 0.25 x proctiger length, proctiger length not greater than 
 Body colour yellow to brown (genitalia typically dark brown), forewing membrane with
yellow-brown or brown pigmentation in part or all of the wing; female proctiger more 
slender, dorsal profile concave, the apex acute and upturned, circumanal ring length about 
6 Genal cones shorter, terminal setae often longer than the vertex; male paramere length <
1.5 x subgenital plate height, in dorsal view lacking long stout seta on interior underside of
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 4 6 -
apex; female genitalia smaller -  female proctiger shorter than 0.85 mm, less than 1.2 x 
head width and less than 1.35 x subgenital plate length; ovipositor valvulae dorsalis shorter 
than 0.43 mm, less than 0.65 x subgenital plate length, dorsally slightly concave, the base 
not extending downwards to overlap the valvulae ventralis (on Cytisus albidus;
Continental) (Fig. 4)   atlantica sp. nov.
 Genal cones longer, terminal setae often shorter than the vertex; male paramere longer than
1.5 x subgenital plate height, in dorsal view with long stout seta on interior underside of 
apex; female genitalia larger -  female proctiger longer than 0.85 mm, greater than 1.2 x 
head width and greater than 1.35 x subgenital plate length; ovipositor valvulae dorsalis 
longer than 0.43 mm, greater than 0.65 x subgenital plate length, dorsally slightly convex 
or with distinct tooth-like processes, the base extending downwards to overlap the valvulae 
7 Antennal length > 1.25 mm; male paramere longer (> 0.5 mm) and broader, greater than 
0.7 x head width, interior surface with numerous stout setae; male proctiger longer than 0.4 
mm, greater than 0.53 x head width, but less than 0.75 x paramere length; distal aedeagus 
segment longer than 0.35 mm, but less than 0.7 x paramere length; female proctiger longer 
(0.98-1.11 mm); ovipositor valvulae dorsalis longer than 0.5 mm, with distinct dorsal 
 Antennae shorter than 1.25 mm; male paramere relatively short (< 0.5 mm) and slender, 
less than 0.7 x head width, interior surface with fewer, slender setae; male proctiger shorter 
than 0.4 mm, less than 0.53 x head width, but greater than 0.75 x paramere length; distal 
aedeagus segment shorter than 0.35 mm, but greater than 0.7 x paramere length; female 
proctiger shorter (0.92-0.98 mm); ovipositor valvulae dorsalis shorter than 0.5 mm, without
 telonicola sp. nov.
8 Antennae shorter than 0.96 mm, < 1.65 x head width; male paramere (in lateral view) 
slightly constricted medially, expanding into a bulbous apex with the sclerotized tip 
displaced to the rear of the top of the paramere and with a slight posterior projection; 
aedeagus distal segment strongly curved, apex blunt, not developed into a hook; ovipositor 
valvulae ventralis with two small projections ventrally towards the apex (on Genista 
 Antennae longer than 0.96 mm, > 1.65 x head width; male paramere (in lateral view) 
simple, parallel sided or tapering towards the apex; aedeagus distal segment more or less
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 4 7 -
straight, apex with a shallow hook; ovipositor valvulae ventralis without ventral projections 
9 Forewing pterostigma rudimentary; aedeagus distal segment with a poorly developed hook; 
ovipositor valvulae dorsalis not, or only slightly tapering anteriorly at the base (on Cytisus;
 Fore wing pterostigma more developed but short; aedeagus distal segment with a more 
developed hook; ovipositor valvulae dorsalis triangular in shape, tapering both to the apex 
10 Male paramere longer (> 0.35 mm), greater than 1.3 x subgential plate height; aedeagus 
longer than 0.27 mm; female proctiger length less than 1.75 x subgenital plate length, apex 
more elongate; female subgenital plate ventral profile deeply curved (on Cytisus; 
 Male paramere shorter (< 0.35 mm), less than 1.3 x subgenital plate height; aedeagus 
shorter than 0.27 mm; female proctiger longer than 1.75 x subgenital plate length, apex less 
elongate; female subgenital plate ventral profile more shallowly curved (on Cytisus; 
11 Surface forewing spinules relatively dense (40-60 per 0.1mm2) with 50% or more coverage 
in all cells; pterostigma rudimentary; head narrower than 0.7 mm, genal cones long (> 0.11 
mm), greater than 0.65 x vertex length; male paramere (in lateral view) slender and simple 
with more or less parallel sides, longer than 1.3 x subgential plate height, sclerotized apex 
dorsally rounded with a small, anteriorly and interiorly directed hook; aedeagus distal 
segment apex blunt, not developed into a hook and short (< 0.08 mm), less than 0.25 x 
segment length; male proctiger longer than 0.5 x head width; male subgenital plate longer 
than 1.3 x height; female proctiger length greater than head width, dorsal profile concave 
with an upturned, acute apex; female subgenital plate ventral profile with a slight medial 
bulge; ovipositor valvulae dorsalis longer than 0.2 mm (on Genista; Continental) (Fig. 1C) 
 Surface forewing spinules sparse (less than 40 per 0.1mm ) and either absent or reduced 
coverage in most cells; pterostigma well developed; head wider than 0.7 mm, genal cones 
short (< 0.11 mm), less than 0.65 x vertex length; male paramere (in lateral view) broader 
and shorter than 1.3 x subgential plate height, with a shallow blade on the external anterior 
margin, sclerotized apex dorsally flattened with, or without, a slight anterior projection; 
aedeagus distal segment apex with a relatively large hook (> 0.08 mm), about 0.33 x
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 4 8 -
segment length; male proctiger shorter than 0.5 x head width; male subgenital plate shorter 
than 1.3 x height; female proctiger length less than head width, dorsal profile more or less 
straight from anus to apex, or with a post anal depression, apex bluntly rounded; female 
subgenital plate ventral profile angled medially; ovipositor valvulae dorsalis shorter than
Key to 5th instar nymphs of Arytainilla.
1 Abdominal sectasetae either absent or with one apical pair with indistinct medial bisection;
2 Abdominal sectasetae absent; tergite structure extensively reduced on the thorax and 
typically, not extending to the lateral margin on the abdomen; circumanal ring broadly 
crescent-shaped with well rounded margins; ocular seta long; marginal abdominal capitate 
setae four pairs; tibiae with between two to five capitate setae; forewing pad shorter than 
0.7 mm, anntenal length greater than 1.3 x wing pad length; caudal plate shorter than 0.5 
 Abdominal sectasetae one apical pair with indistinct medial bisection; tergite structure not
extensively reduced on the thorax and extending to the lateral margin on the abdomen; 
circumanal ring narrowly crescent-shaped with lateral margins either straight or slightly 
concave; ocular seta absent or minute; marginal abdominal capitate setae numerous; tibiae 
with numerous capitate setae; forewing pad longer than 0.7 mm, antenal length less than 
1.3 x wing pad length; caudal plate longer than 0.5 mm (on Retama; Continental) (Fig. 
4 Total body length greater than 2.2 mm, body narrower than 0.55 x length; antennae, thorax, 
forewing and hindwing pads with minute simple setae only; marginal abdominal setae 
(other than sectasetae) two pairs, simple or slightly spathulate; legs with simple setae only; 
caudal plate length (> 0.8 mm) greater than width (on Spartocytisus filipes; La Palma) (Fig. 
 Total body length less than 2.2 mm, body wider than 0.6 x length; head, antennae, thorax, 
forewing and hindwing pads with numerous, small, club-shaped setae; marginal abdominal 
setae (other than sectasetae) numerous small club setae, with 2-4 pairs more prominent;
0.2 mm (on Adenocarpus decorticans, Continental) (Fig. 6) montivaga sp. nov.
Abdominal sectasetae three or four pairs; antennae shorter than 0.8 mm
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 4 9 -
legs with numerous, small, club-shaped setae; caudal plate length (< 0.8 mm) less than 
5 General body colour bright green; larger species (total body length 1.6-2.11 mm); forewing 
pad longer than 0.6 mm; antennae longer (> 0.65 mm) than forewing pad length; circum
 General body colour yellow and brown; smaller species (total body length 1.3-1.6 mm); 
forewing pad shorter than 0.6 mm; antennae shorter (< 0.55 mm) than forewing pad length;
6 Forewing pad and abdomen apically more acute; head, thorax, abdomen, wing pads and 
 Forewing pad and abdomen apically broadly rounded; head, thorax, abdomen, wing pads 
7 Caudal plate wider (> 0.7 mm) than 1.2 x length; circum-anal ring wider (0.14-0.19 mm) 
(on Calicotome; Continental)  cytisi (Puton)
 Caudal plate narrower (< 0.7 mm) than 1.2 x length; circum-anal ring narrower (0.12-0.14 
8 Forewing pad and hindwing pads with numerous capitate setae on the surface and margins; 
arolium pad with a relatively long petiole; circumanal ring shape narrowly crescent-shaped, 
with acutely rounded anterior lobes; antennae with small capitate setae distally on 3rd and 
5th segments; secondary post-ocular seta narrowly or distinctly capitate; capitate setae
 Forewing and hindwing pads with capitate setae present only on the outer margins; arolium 
pad with a short petiole; circumanal ring shape broadly crescent-shaped, with well rounded 
anterior lobes; antennae without capitate setae; secondary post-ocular seta simple or 
9 Forewing pad with one prominent apical seta, or if more then five or less marginal setae, 
lacking distinct surface or proximal setae; circumanal outer ring not contiguous with the 
apical abdominal margin, outer ring with multiple rows of pores, width about 0.3-0.35 x 
caudal plate width; head with simple and distinctly capitate setae; primary post-ocular seta 
distinctly capitate; secondary post-ocular seta indistinct; dorsal abdominal pre-caadal 
tergites and caudal plate without prominent setae; marginal abdominal setae (other than
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 5 0 -
sectasetae) short, distinctly capitate; marginal abdominal pleurites with capitate setae only;
[also algeriensis Burckhardt and spartiicola (Sulc), the latter may be distinguished by the 
presence of more than one capitate seta on the fore wing pad, but see Conci & Tamanini 
(1986)]
 Forewing pad with more than five prominent setae, and with a few distinct surface and 
proximal setae; circumanal outer ring contiguous with the apical abdominal margin, outer 
ring with a single row of pores, width less than 0.25 x caudal plate width; head setae 
simple; primary post-ocular seta simple or narrowly capitate; secondary post-ocular seta 
simple; dorsal abdominal pre-caudal prominent setae on all tergites and dorsal caudal plate 
prominent setae present; marginal abdominal setae (other than sectasetae) long and 
narrowly capitate; marginal abdominal pleurite setae paired simple or paired capitate and
Arytainilla sensu stricto 
Arytainilla delarbrei (Puton)
Psylla delarbrei Puton, 1873: 21
Arytainilla delarbrei (Puton) Ramirez Gomez, 1956: 77
Arytainilla delarbrei (Puton) Loginova, 1972: 17
Adult Colour: Generally dark grey to brown, abdominal intersegments green; forewing 
membrane dirty yellow, veins uniform light brown.
Adult Description: Ramirez Gomez (1956)
Nymph Unknown
Host plant: Cytisus purgans.
Distribution: Continental: Moroccan High Atlas north throughout the Iberian peninsula to 
southern France.
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY -51 -
Comment: Although recorded as having a wide geographic distribution it is uncommon. A 
survey of the host plant in a previously recorded location for A. delarbrei, in the Middle Atlas 
(BMNH), was not successful in finding this species. The host plant was, as in other Moroccan 
locations severely over grazed with no individuals gaining more than half a metre of growth 
above ground level. An unusual species in the atypical number of adult antennal segments.
Material examined: PORTUGAL: 1 9, Serra da Estrela, btw Seia and Loriga, 4015'N 745'W, 
c. 800 m, ex Cytisus striatus, 27.vi. 1998 (DP 265.1). 1 d , 7 9, as for previous except, ex Cytisus 
purgans (DP 265.2). FRANCE: 2 d , 29 (BMNH).
Arytainilla spartiophila (Foerster)
(Fig. 1A)
Psylla spartiophila Foerster, 1848: 75
Psylla spartii Guerin, 1843: 370, homonym of Psylla spartii Hartig, 1841 
Arytainilla spartii (Guerin) Ramirez Gomez, 1956: 82 
Arytainilla spartiophila (Foerster) Loginova, 1972: 17
Adult Colour: Brown or red-brown, to grey, with abdominal intersegment colour yellow-green; 
genitalia dark brown; forewing membrane pale yellow-brown, veins uniform light brown. 
Nymphal Colour: 5th instars yellow-green with black tergites; other sclerites, wing pads, legs 
and terminal antennal segments darker brown.
Adult and Nymphal Descriptions: Ramirez Gomez (adult, 1956), Hodkinson & White (adult, 
1979), White & Hodkinson (5th instar nymph, 1982), Conci & Tamanini (adult, 1986), 
Ossiannilsson (adult and 5th instar nymph, 1992).
Host plant: Cytisus scoparius, C. striatus, C. grandiflorus (= Sarothamnus lusitanicus), Cytisus 
baeticus (= Cytisus arboreus, Sarothamnus baeticus), C. fontanesii (= Chronanthus biflorus). 
Distribution: Continental: Europe and North Africa.
Notes: Common and widespread on several Cytisus species, from the Moroccan High Atlas 
north throughout Europe (Conci & Tamanini, 1986). As with Arytaina genisteae and Artyaina 
adenocarpi, this species is somewhat polyphagous on several closely related host species. A.
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 5 2 -
spartiophila is sympatric throughout much of its distribution with Arytaina genisteae and the 
asynchronous development of these two species has been well documented (Watmough, 1968). 
Biology: Up to five nymphs were found inside the anther tubes of individual flowers of Cytisus 
grandiflorus. The majority of these were 5th instars, suggesting that eggs are laid elsewhere 
with subsequent migration to feed on the developing ovary.
Comment: This species is similar to A. spartiicola and A. algeriensis in both adult and nymphal 
characteristics.
Material examined: MOROCCO: 1 d , 3 $, Middle Atlas, rd Khenifra to Azrou, N of Mrirt, 
3315'N 535'W, c. 1200 m, ex Cytisus arboreus ssp. baeticus, 29.iii.1998 (DP 147). l i d ,  9$ ,  
Middle Atlas, btw Khenifra and Azrou, S of Mrirt, 3300rN 545'W, c. 1000 m, ex Cytisus 
arboreus ssp. catalaunicus, 29.iii.1998 (DP 148). 5 d , 2 $ , Central Rif Mountains, S of Ketama, 
3455'N 440'W, c. 1400 m, ex Cytisus striatus, 22.vi.1998 (DP 251). 60d , 57 9, 6 nymphs, 
High Atlas, c. 8 km S of Asni, 3102rN 810'W, c. 2000 m, ex Cytisus fontanesii, l.v.1999 (DP 
327). SPAIN: 19 d , 26 9, 10 nymphs, Andalusia, blw Otivar, rd up Rio Verde valley, 3647rN 
340'W, c. 400 m, ex Cytisus malacitanus, 20.iii.1998 (DP 121). 11 d , 9 9, as for previous 
except, c. 450 m, ex Cytisus fontanesii (DP 123). 11 d , 7 9, 59 nymphs, Andalusia, rd Atequera 
to Algodonales, W of Olvera, 3654'N 516'W, c. 500 m, ex Cytisus grandiflorus, 23.iii.1998 
(DP 133). I d ,  Andalusia, Parque Natural Sierra de Grazalema, 3645rN 520'W, c. 600-700 m, 
ex Cytisus arboreus ssp. baeticus, 23.iii.1998 (DP 138). 4 d , 6 9, Andalusia, c. 5 km S of 
Ubrique, 3637rN 525'W, c. 600-700 m, ex Calicotome villosa, 24.iii.1998 (DP 141). 19, 
Andalusia, Sierra del Pedroso, E of El Pedroso, 3750rN 545'W, c. 450 m, ex Cytisus striatus, 
15.vi.1998 (DP 231). PORTUGAL: 19, Coimbra, rd Coimbra to Viseu, at Santa Comba Dao, 
4015'N 815'W, c. 300 m, ex Cytisus grandiflorus, 26.vi. 1998 (DP 261). 6 d , 4 9 , Serra do 
Caramulo, N of Caramulo, 4030'N 815'W, c. 900 m, ex Cytisus striatus, 26.vi. 1998 (DP
263.1). 2 9, as for previous except, ex Cytisus grandiflorus (DP 263.2). 4 d , 13 9, Serra da 
Estrela, btw Seia and Loriga, 40 1 5 ^  745'W, c. 800 m, ex Cytisus striatus, 27.vi. 1998 (DP
265.1). 2 d , 5 9, as for previous except, ex Cytisuspurgans (DP 265.2). 1 d , 5 9, 1 nymph, as 
for previous except, ex Cytisus striatus (DP 266.2).
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 5 3 -
Arytainilla spartiicola (Sulc)
Psylla spartiicola Sulc, 1907: 5
Arytainilla spartiicola (Sulc) Loginova, 1972: 17
Adult Colour: Red-brown with darker brown markings; genitalia dark brown; fore wing 
membrane distally yellow-brown, veins uniform light brown.
Nymphal Colour: Pale green with brown sclerites; antennae and legs darker brown.
Adult and Nymphal Descriptions: Sulc (adult, 1907), Conci & Tamanini (adult and 5th instar 
nymph, 1986).
Host plant: Cytisus scoparius, C. decumbens.
Distribution: Continental: France, Germany, Italy and Switzerland (Burckhardt, 1983). 
Comment: An uncommon species similar in adult and nymphal characteristics to A. 
spartiophila.
No material was examined and the diagnostic characters used in the keys were extracted from 
descriptions in Conci & Tamanini (1986).
Arytainilla algeriensis Burckhardt 
Arytainilla algeriensis Burckhardt, 1989a: 406
Adult Colour: Brown or red-brown, to grey; genitalia dark brown; forewing cells with faint 
brown patches, veins uniform mid-brown.
Adult Description: Burckhardt (1989a).
Nymph Undescribed, 5th instars examined were very similar to A. spartiophila.
Host plant: Cytisus baeticus (= Cytisus arboreus, Sarothamnus baeticus)
Distribution: Continental: Algeria and Morocco.
Comment: A relatively uncommon species.
Material examined: MOROCCO: 5 d , 4 ? ,  14 nymphs, Col de Jerada, 45 km S of Oujda, c. 
1150 m, ex Cytisus baeticus, 23.iv.1992 (BMNH).
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 5 4 -
Arytainilla barbagalloi Rapisarda 
Arytainilla barbagalloi Rapisarda, 1989: 24
Adult Colour: Cream or yellow with brown markings, genitalia dark brown; forewing 
membrane yellow-brown, veins uniform light brown.
Nymphal Colour: Cream to yellow with brown sclerites; terminal antennal segments darker 
brown.
Adult and Nymphal Descriptions: Rapisarda (adult and l st-5 th instar nymphs, 1989).
Host plant: Genista aetnensis.
Distribution: Continental: Italy.
Comment: Known only from the island of Sicily where it is locally common. The adult form of 
this species shares characteristics, particularly in the female genitalia, with A. spartiophila; 
although it is unique in the presence of ventral tooth-like processes on the ovipositor. The 
nymph however, is more similar to A. cytisi and A. telonensis sp. nov. in body shape and 
chaetotaxy.
Material examined: Paratypes (slide mounted), ITALY. SICILY: 1 d , 3 9, Catania, c. 15 km 
SW of Rondazzo, c. 900 m, l.vi.1979 (BMNH). 2 d , 6 nymphs, Catania, c. 15 km E  of 
Rondazzo, c. 550 m, 3.vi.l979 (BMNH). 1 d , 2 9, Catania, c. 2 km NE of Nicolosi on Mt Etna, 
c. 700 m, 4.vi.l979 (BMNH).
Arytainilla cytisi (Puton)
Psylla cytisi Puton, 1876: 284
Arytainilla cytisi (Puton) Ramirez Gomez, 1956: 79
Arytainilla cytisi (Puton) Loginova, 1972: 17
Adult Colour: Bright green, sometimes with darker abdomens; fore wing membrane clear or 
faintly yellow, veins uniformly pale or light brown.
Nymphal Colour: l st-3rd instars orange with or without black tergites, 5th instars bright green to 
yellow-green; sclerites, wing pads, legs and antennae yellow-brown; terminal antennal segment 
darker brown.
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 5 5 -
Adult and Nymphal Descriptions: Sulc (adult, 1911), Rapisarda (adult and l st-5th instar nymphs, 
1990, 1991).
Host plant: Calicotome spinosa, C. villosa.
Distribution: Continental: Widespread from the Moroccan Middle Atlas and Algeria north 
throughout southern Europe and the eastern Mediterranean (Halperin, Hodkinson &
Burckhardt, 1988; Burckhardt & Onu^ar, 1993; Conci et al., 1993; Zeidan-Geze & Burckhardt, 
1998).
Biology: Large nymphs (4^-5^ instars) were found under the bracts of floral buds (see also 
Rapisarda, 1990).
Comment: This species is most similar to A. telonicola sp. nov. in both adult and nymphal 
characteristics, but it is unique in the presence of dorsal tooth-like processes on the ovipositor.
Material examined: MOROCCO: 11 nymphs, Middle Atlas, nr Ifrane, 3325TS1 5o10rW, c. 1800 
m, 31.iii.1999 (DP 316). I d ,  19, 18 nymphs, Taza, c. 5 km S of Taza, Jbel Tazzeka, rd to Bab- 
Bou-Idir, 3351rN400'W, c. 1100 m, 31.iii.1999 (DP 317). 5 d , 1 9, 33 nymphs, Rif 
Mountains, rd Aknoul to Taza, c. 15 km N of Taza, 3420'N 358'W, c. 800 m, l.iv.1999 (DP 
319). SPAIN: 19 , 11  nymphs, Gerona, 3 km from La Bisbal on Calonge rd, l.vi.1975 
(BMNH). I d ,  as for previous except, 14. vi. 1976 (BMNH). ITALY. SICILY: I d ,  1 9 , Messina, 
c. 5 km S of San Fratello, 650 m, 31.V.1979 (BMNH).
Arytainilla serpentina sp. nov. (1)
(Figs 3, 22C, IF  & II)
Adult
Colour: Abdomen and head bright geen or yellow-green, thorax, genal cones and legs yellow; 
forewing membrane yellow-brown, becoming darker brown apically, veins uniformly pale. 
Structure: Forewing coriaceous and narrow, margins more or less parallel or slightly wider in 
the middle third, with an acutely rounded apex; cells cui and m 2 relatively broad and low and 
cell ri narrow with vein Rs running close to the costal margin; pterostigma well developed, up 
to one quarter the wing length; surface fore wing spinules present in all cells but reduced in cell 
c+sc; distribution of spinules non-uniform, dense: 60-100 per 0.1mm2; apical spines in wing
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 5 6 -
cells cui, mi and m2 but absent or occasionally few present in cell r2 . Antennae relatively short, 
with ten segments; genal cones long, commencing dorsally from more or less the same level as 
the vertex, terminal setae shorter than the vertex. Paramere long, in lateral view slender and 
simple, tapering towards the apex, sclerotized apex dorsally rounded with small, anteriorly and 
interiorly directed hook, in dorsal view contiguous anteriorly and rounded with an acute point; 
paramere longer than the proctiger; proctiger not inflated posteriorly towards the base; 
aedeagus distal segment bluntly rounded, not developed into a hook; male subgenital plate 
dorsal profile more or less straight and horizontal. Female proctiger dorsal profile anteriorly, 
more or less straight but the apex is darkly pigmented and arched with an upturned bluntly 
rounded tip; subgenital plate ventral profile angled medially; ovipositor valvulae ventralis 
robust, apex rounded and minutely serrated; height of valvulae dorsalis less than valvulae 
ventralis, dorsal margin more or less straight or slightly convex. Egg slender with stout pedicel 
at the base.
Adult measurements and ratios: (3d,  4 ? )  total length: d 3.24-3.56, 9 3.64-3.88; forewing: d 
length 2.6-2.7 width 0.91-0.99, 9 length 2.96-3.19 width 1.01-1.1; pterostigma length d 0.58- 
0.67, 9 0.66-0.8; hindwing length d 2.15-2.25, 9 2.48-2.68; head width: d 0.76-0.8, 9 0.8- 
0.85; antennal length: 1.3-1.53; genal cone length: 0.18-0.2; distal proboscis segment length: 
0.09-0.1. WLPT: 3.7-4.79; ALHW: 1.7-1.87; GCVL: 0.78-0.91; WLHW: 3.35-3.89; VLW: 
0.43-0.49; WLW: 2.71-2.93; CUR: 2.33-2.71; MR: 0.47-0.69; RMCU: 5.96-8.26; TLFL: 1.02- 
1.09; TLHW: 0.63-0.71; SCHW: 0.85-0.94; ATIB: 0.33-0.37; MTIB: 0.29-0.33; PBHW: 0.12- 
0.13; ATMT: 1.06-1.19. Adult genitalia d : MP: 0.56-0.6; PL: 0.72-0.74; AEL: 0.5-0.51; AEH: 
0.06-0.07. MPHW: 0.73-0.76; PLHW: 0.9-0.96; MPPL: 0.77-0.81; AEPL: 0.68-0.71; MSLH: 
1.24-1.27; AHS: 0.13; PLSH: 1.74-1.76. 9: FP: 1.13-1.28; FSP: 0.96-0.99; RL: 0.23-0.25; OV: 
0.54; EL: 0.2-0.28. FPHW: 1.38-1.56; FPSP: 1.18-1.29; FPCR: 4.71-5.12; OLSP: 0.55-0.56; 
FEOL: 0.44.
Nymph
Colour: 5th instars bright green with thorax and head more yellow, wing pads and ventral 
abdomen pale orange, anal ring pale grey; terminal antennal segments darker brown.
Structure: Forewing pads and abdomen acute apically. Tergites extensively reduced on the 
thorax, typically not, or only posteriorly extending to the lateral margin on the abdomen. 
Arolium pad long, broadly expanded apically, with a distinct medial groove and short petiole.
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 5 7 -
Circumanal ring broadly crescent-shaped with well rounded anterior lobes, outer ring not 
contiguous with the apical abdominal margin and with a single row of pores.
5th instar measurements and ratios: (specimens 4) BL: 2.3-2.63; BW: 1.23-1.3; WL: 0.81-0.85; 
CPL: 0.84-0.87; CPW: 0.75-0.85; RW: 0.18-0.18; RL: 0.09-0.1; HW: 0.72-0.76; AL: 0.65-0.69; 
AL3: 0.15-0.16. WBL: 0.47-0.54; ALHW: 0.9-0.91; ALWL: 0.8-0.84; WLHW: 1.11-1.13; 
WCPL: 0.89-0.99; CPRW: 4.17-4.72.
5th instar chaetotaxy: Head setae simple (max length at anterior margin 0.05-0.06); antennal 
setae simple; ocular seta simple, small (max length 0.01); primary post-ocular seta simple or 
slightly spathulate (max length 0.07); secondary post-ocular seta indistinct. Dorsal thoracic 
setae very short simple (max length 0.02). Prominent wing pad setae absent; forewing and 
hindwing pads with minute simple setae only. Dorsal abdominal prominent pre-caudal and 
caudal plate setae absent (only minute simple); sectasetae three pairs; marginal abdominal setae 
(other than sectasetae) two pairs, simple, or slightly spathulate (max length 0.07-0.09); pleurite 
setae paired simple. Legs with simple setae only (max length 0.04).
Host plant: Spartocytisus filipes.
Distribution: Canary Islands: La Palma.
Notes: This is the only representative of Arytainilla sensu stricto in the Canary Islands. It is 
sympatric with Arytaina vittata sp. nov., but unlike the latter species it is restricted to the 
laurisilva habitat of the host, and in these locations on La Palma it was found to be more 
common than A. vittata sp. nov.
Etymology: Named for the long and sinuous male paramere.
Comment: This species is unique within Arytainilla in the narrow, coriaceous forewing and the 
shape of the genitalia, particularly in the female.
Type material: Holotype d  (slide mounted), CANARY ISLANDS. LA PALMA: NE, from El 
Granel to Barlovento and Roque Faro, 2 0 0 - 5 0 0  m, 1 9 .V .1 9 9 8  (BMNH). Paratypes 1 d ,  2 9 , 4  
nymphs, as for holotype (BMNH). I d ,  1 9, nr Los Galguitos, Barranco de la Fuente, 2 8  4 6 rN  
1 7  4 6 'W , 3 5 0  m, 1 7 .V .1 9 9 8  (DZUL). 2 d ,  1 9, as for previous (NHMB).
Other material examined: CANARY ISLANDS. LA PALMA: 7 d , 2 9, nr Los Galguitos, 
Barranco de la Fuente, 2846rN 1746'W, 350 m, 17.V.1998 (DP 191). lOd,  6 9, as for holotype 
(DP 198).
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 5 8 -
Arytainilla atlantica sp. nov. (2)
(Figs 4 & 22A)
Adult
Colour: Pale grey-green to blue-green, head, thorax and legs yellow or orange; forewing 
membrane clear or faintly yellow, veins uniform light brown.
Structure: Fore wing widest in the middle third with more acutely rounded apex; pterostigma 
less than one quarter the wing length; surface forewing spinules present in all cells, but reduced 
in one or more cells; distribution of spinules non-uniform, density medium: 40-60 per 0.1mm ; 
apical spines in wing cells cui, mi and m 2 , but absent, or occasionally few present in cell r2 . 
Antennae short, with ten segments; genal cones very short, commencing ventrally relative to 
the vertex, with a distinct depression between the vertex and the genal cones, terminal setae as 
long as, or typically longer than the vertex. Paramere mid-length, in lateral view slender, 
simple, with sides tapering towards the apex, sclerotized apex dorsally rounded with small, 
anteriorly and interiorly directed hook, in dorsal view contiguous anteriorly, with inner margin 
straight edged; paramere longer than the proctiger; proctiger not inflated posteriorly towards the 
base; aedeagus distal segment with a shallow hook, tip of aedeagus hook acute; male subgenital 
plate dorsal profile more or less straight and horizontal. Female proctiger dorsal profile more or 
less straight from anus to apex, apex bluntly rounded; subgenital plate ventral profile shallowly 
curved, without a medial bulge; ovipositor valvulae ventralis robust, apex stepped with square 
tip; height of valvulae dorsalis less than valvulae ventralis, dorsal margin more or less straight 
or slightly concave.
Adult measurements and ratios: (3 d , 3 9) total length: d 2.28-2.6, 9 2.56-2.92; forewing: d 
length 1.76-1.9 width 0.72-0.76, 9 length 2.1-2.26 width 0.87-0.93; pterostigma length d 0.25- 
0.3, 9 0.3-0.35; hindwing length d 1.4-1.53, 9 1.68-1.8; head width: d 0.64-0.66, $ 0.68-0.7; 
antennal length: 0.99-1.16; genal cone length: 0.06-0.1; distal proboscis segment length: 0.1- 
0.11. WLPT: 6-7.6; ALHW: 1.55-1.81; GCVL: 0.3-0.53; WLHW: 2.75-3.23; VLW: 0.45-0.53; 
WLW: 2.41-2.52; CUR: 1.84-2.05; MR: 0.46-0.57; RMCU: 4.95-6.74; TLFL: 1.09-1.2;
TLHW: 0.69-0.74; SCHW: 0.78-0.87; ATIB: 0.28-0.3; MTIB: 0.27-0.3; PBHW: 0.14-0.16; 
ATMT: 1-1.08. Adult genitalia d: MP: 0.38-0.41; PL: 0.5-0.51; AEL: 0.35-0.36; AEH: 0.07- 
0.09. MPHW: 0.59-0.62; PLHW: 0.77-0.78; MPPL: 0.76-0.8; AEPL: 0.69-0.72; MSLH: 1.21- 
1.26; AHS: 0.22-0.23; PLSH: 1.47-1.52. $: FP: 0.76-0.82; FSP: 0.62-0.64; RL: 0.16-0.18; OV:
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 5 9 -
0.39-0.41; EL: 0.19-0.23. FPHW: 1.09-1.17; FPSP: 1.23-1.28; FPCR: 4.33-5.13; OLSP: 0.62- 
0.64; FEOL: 0.53.
Nymph
Colour: l st-3rd instars orange or red, 4th-5th instars pale grey-green or yellow with pale orange 
wing pads and thorax; sclerites, wing pads, legs and terminal antennal segments usually darker 
brown.
Structure: Forewing pads and abdomen broadly rounded apically. Tergites extensively reduced 
on the thorax, typically not extending to the lateral margin on the abdomen. Arolium pad long, 
broadly expanded apically with a slight medial groove and long petiole. Circumanal ring 
narrowly crescent-shaped with acutely rounded anterior lobes, outer ring not contiguous with 
the apical abdominal margin and with a single row of pores.
5th instar measurements and ratios: (specimens 8) BL: 1.43-1.7; BW: 0.88-1.1; WL: 0.44-0.61; 
CPL: 0.44-0.55; CPW: 0.67-0.81; RW: 0.14-0.17; RL: 0.09-0.11; HW: 0.55-0.63; AL: 0.49- 
0.62; AL3: 0.1-0.15. WBL: 0.59-0.66; ALHW: 0.86-1.09; ALWL: 0.98-1.15; WLHW: 0.77- 
1.05; WCPL: 1.29-1.55; CPRW: 4.18-5.06.
5th instar chaetotaxy: Head setae simple and narrowly capitate (both present on anterior 
margin) (max length at anterior margin 0.09-0.1); antennal setae simple and capitate (small 
capitate present distally on 3rd and 5th segments); ocular seta simple, small, inconspicuous (max 
length 0.03-0.05); primary post-ocular seta distinctly capitate (max length 0.06-0.07); 
secondary post-ocular seta distinctly or narrowly capitate, rarely simple (max length 0.04-0.06). 
Dorsal thoracic setae short simple and capitate or rod (max length 0.03-0.04). Prominent wing 
pad setae max length 0.08-0.09; forewing and hindwing pads with capitate and minute simple 
setae; forewing pad prominent setae 8-9, distinctly capitate, surface and marginal (larger 
marginal, few smaller scattered on surface), proximal seta typically present, occasionally 
reduced or absent, narrowly or distinctly capitate; hindwing pad prominent setae 2-3, distinctly 
capitate, surface and marginal (larger apical, few smaller scattered on surface), proximal seta 
absent or if present, distinctly or narrowly capitate; small capitate and simple setae scattered on 
the wing pad surfaces. Dorsal abdominal prominent pre-caudal setae present on all tergites, 
short simple and capitate (max length 0.05-0.06), prominent caudal plate setae preseni, 15-21 
larger, with the most posterior centrally placed, distinctly capitate; sectasetae four pahs; 
marginal abdominal setae (other than sectasetae) four pairs, distinctly capitate (max length 0.1- 
0.12); pleurite setae paired capitate and simple or capitate only (anterior pleurites wit three
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 6 0 -
capitate). Legs with capitate setae present (max length 0.06-0.08); capitate foreleg setae present 
on femur and tibia, on the tibia 1-3 (1 proximal, 1-2 distal); capitate middle leg setae present on 
femur and tibia, on the tibia 3-5 (1 larger proximally and distally); capitate hind leg setae 
present on femur and tibia, on the tibia 5-6 (1 larger proximally and distally).
Host plant: Cytisus albidus (= Chamaecytisus mollis).
Distribution: Continental: Locally widespread in central Morocco, occurring on the lower 
slopes of the High Atlas and along the Atlantic coast.
Notes: It is typically sympatric with Livilla blandula, but probably developing earlier than the 
latter species, being both present and more common on the host in March, but absent from a 
collection made in June.
Biology: Nymphs (2nd-5th instars) were observed on leaf buds.
Etymology: Named for the geographic distribution in the lowland Atlas mountains and the 
Atlantic coast of Morocco.
Comment: The adult form is generally similar to A. cytisi and A. telonicola sp. nov., but the 5th 
instar nymph in body shape and chaetotaxy, is more similar to a Livilla-type.
Type material: Holotype d (slide mounted), MOROCCO: Atlantic Coast, c. 15 km E of 
Azemmour, 3312TM 818'W, c. 100 m, 2.iii.l999 (BMNH). Paratypes 3 d , 4 9 , 10 nymphs, as 
for holotype (BMNH). 3 d , 3 9, as for holotype (NHMB). 6 nymphs, Atlantic Coast, c. 35 km S 
of Essaouira, just N of Smimou, 3108'N 942'W, c. 100 m, 22.iii.1999 (BMNH). 8 nymphs, as 
for previous (NHMB).
Other material examined: MOROCCO: 15 d , 29 9, 3 nymphs, as for holotype (DP 296). 1 9 , 2  
nymphs, Atlantic Coast, c. 10 km SE of Essaouira, 313 ITS 937'W, c. 100 m, 22.iii.1999 (DP 
298). l i d ,  109,  19 nymphs, Atlantic Coast, c. 35 km S of Essaouira, just N of Smimou, 
3108'N 942'W, c. 100 m, 22.iii.1999 (DP 300). 1 9, Atlantic Coast, Jbel Amsittene, c. 6 km on 
rd to Sebt-des-Ait-Daoud, 3110TSf 938'W, c. 850 m, 29.iv.1999 (DP 322). 28d,  13 9, 1 
nymph, High Atlas, c. 10 km N  of Asni, 31015TST 758'W, c. 1800 m, l.v.1999 (DP 326). 19, 
High Atlas, S of Tizi n Test, 3045N 830W, c. 1500 m, 2.V.1999 (DP 330).
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY -61 -
Arytainilla telonicola sp. nov. (3)
(Figs 5 & 22D)
Adult
Colour: Bright green to yellow-green, genal cones and legs blue-green, head and thorax ochre; 
forewing membrane clear or faintly yellow, veins uniform light brown.
Structure: Forewing widest in the apical third with a broadly rounded apex; pterostigma less 
than one quarter the wing length; surface forewing spinules typically present in all cells but 
reduced in one or more cells, occasionally absent or few in cells cui, m 2 and c+sc; distribution 
of spinules both non-uniform and uniform, medium density: 40-60 per 0.1mm2; apical spines in 
wing cells cui, mi and m 2 , but absent, or occasionally few present in cell r2 . Antennae short, 
with ten segments; genal cones short, commencing ventrally relative to the vertex, with a 
distinct depression between the vertex and the genal cones, terminal setae typically shorter than 
the vertex, occasionally as long. Paramere mid-length, in lateral view slender, simple, tapering 
towards the apex, sclerotized apex dorsally rounded with small anteriorly and interiorly directed 
hook, in dorsal view contiguous anteriorly, with inner margin straight edged; paramere longer 
than the proctiger; proctiger slightly inflated posteriorly towards the base; aedeagus distal 
segment with a flattened, shallow hook, tip of aedeagus hook blunt; male subgenital dorsal 
profile more or less straight and horizontal. Female proctiger dorsal profile more or less straight 
from anus to apex, apex bluntly rounded; subgenital plate ventral profile shallowly curved, or 
slightly angled medially; ovipositor valvulae ventralis robust, apex stepped with square tip; 
height of valvulae dorsalis less than valvulae ventralis, dorsal margin more or less straight or 
slightly convex.
Adult measurements and ratios: (4d,  4 ? )  total length: d 2.28-2.6, 9 2.76-3; forewing: d 
length 1.88-2 width 0.78-0.9, 9 length 2.28-2.4 width 0.93-1.01; pterostigma length d 0.28- 
0.35, 9 0.3-0.42; hindwing length d 1.5-1.6, 9 1.85-1.9; head width: d 0.68-0.7, 9 0.72-0.77; 
antennal length: 1.12-1.22; genal cone length: 0.09-0.12; distal proboscis segment length: 0.11- 
0.12. WLPT: 5.55-8; ALHW: 1.49-1.74; GCVL: 0.47-0.6; WLHW: 2.76-3.24; VLW: 0.42- 
0.51; WLW: 2.22-2.51; CUR: 1.83-2; MR: 0.51-0.63; RMCU: 4.12-6.5; TLFL: 1.13-1.23; 
TLHW: 0.72-0.78; SCHW: 0.79-0.88; ATIB: 0.26-0.31; MTIB: 0.26-0.29; PBHW: 0.15-0.16; 
ATMT: 1-1.07. Adult genitalia d : MP: 0.34-0.35; PL: 0.43-0.44; AEL: 0.32-0.34; AEH: 0.06- 
0.08. MPHW: 0.5-0.51; PLHW: 0.63-0.65; MPPL: 0.79-0.81; AEPL: 0.73-0.77; MSLH: 1.26-
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 6 2 -
1.35; AHS: 0.21-0.22; PLSH: 1.63-1.65. ?: FP: 0.92-0.98; FSP: 0.63-0.7; RL: 0.15-0.2; OV: 
0.45-0.49; EL: 0.19-0.23. FPHW: 1.23-1.32; FPSP: 1.4-1.51; FPCR: 4.75-6.13; OLSP: 0.68- 
0.73; FEOL: 0.45.
Nymph
Colour: 4th-5th instars bright blue-green to yellow-green; terminal antennal segment darker 
brown.
Structure: Forewing pads and abdomen apically acute. Tergite structure extensively reduced on 
the thorax, typically not, or only posteriorly extending to the lateral margin on the abdomen. 
Arolium pad short, expanded apically with slight medial groove and fairly short petiole. 
Circumanal ring narrowly crescent-shaped with acutely rounded anterior lobes, outer ring not 
contiguous with the apical abdominal margin and with a single row of pores.
5th instar measurements and ratios: (specimens 3) BL: 1.75-1.78; BW: 1-1.13; WL: 0.63-0.66; 
CPL: 0.57-0.62; CPW: 0.62-0.68; RW: 0.12-0.14; RL: 0.08-0.09; HW: 0.62-0.68; AL: 0.7-0.75; 
AL3: 0.16-0.18. WBL: 0.53-0.63; ALHW: 1.09-1.15; ALWL: 1.06-1.19; WLHW: 0.93-1.03; 
WCPL: 1.03-1.12; CPRW: 4.43-5.33.
5th instar chaetotaxy: Head setae simple and club-shaped (max length at anterior margin 0.07- 
0.08); antennal setae simple and club-shaped (small club setae on 1st and 2nd segments and 
occasionally present distally on 3rd); ocular seta small rod (max length 0.01-0.02); primary post
ocular seta club-shaped (max length 0.03-0.04); secondary post-ocular seta indistinct. Dorsal 
thoracic setae short club-shaped (max length 0.02). Prominent wing pad setae max length 0.03- 
0.04; forewing and hindwing pads with club-shaped setae, each with one prominent seta 
apically and with numerous small club-shaped setae on the wing pad surfaces, proximal setae 
indistinct. Dorsal abdominal prominent pre-caudal setae present on all tergites, short club- 
shaped (max length 0.02), prominent caudal plate setae present, one club-shaped positioned 
centrally and posteriorly with numerous smaller club setae; sectasetae four pairs (1st reduced); 
marginal abdominal setae (other than sectasetae) four pairs (1st and 2nd reduced), club-shaped 
(max length 0.06-0.07); pleurite setae paired club and simple, or club only (anterior pleurites 
with three club setae). Legs with numerous small, club-shaped setae on the dorsal surface of 
femora and tibiae (max length 0.03-0.04).
Host plant: Adenocarpus telonensis.
Distribution: Continental: Spain, southern Andalusia.
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 6 3 -
Notes: Occurs sympatrically with Arytaina adenocarpi. A. telonicola sp. nov. appears to 
develop earlier than Arytaina adenocarpi judging from the greater abundance, particularly of 
nymphs, of this species in March and absence from collections made in June, when Arytaina 
adenocarpi was abundant.
Etymology: Named for the host plant.
Comment: This species is most similar to A. cytisi in both adult and nymphal characteristics, but 
notably lacks the dorsal tooth-like processes on the ovipositor of A. cytisi.
Type material: Holotype d (slide mounted), SPAIN: Andalusia, N of Ronda on rd to 
Algodonales, S tip of Lake Zahara, 3650rN 520'W, c. 500 m, 23.iii.1998 (BMNH). Paratypes 
1 d , 2 $, as for holotype (BMNH). 1 d , as for holotype (NHMB). 2 d , 2  9, Andalusia, Parque 
Natural Sierra de Grazalema, 3645'N 520'W, c. 600-700 m, 23.iii.1998 (BMNH). 1 d , 2 9, as 
for previous (NHMB). 5 nymphs, as for previous except, 3645fN 518'W (BMNH). 4 nymphs, 
as for previous (NHMB).
Other material examined: SPAIN: 45 d , 25 9, as for holotype (DP 134). 1 d , 6 ? , 31 nymphs, 
Andalusia, Parque Natural Sierra de Grazalema, 3645rN 518'W, c. 600-700 m, 23.iii.1998 (DP 
135). 8 d , 7 9 ,32  nymphs, as for previous (DP 136). 19d,  30 9, 61 nymphs, as for previous 
except, 3645'N 520'W (DP 137). 6 d , 8 $ , 1 nymph, Andalusia, c. 5 km S of Ubrique, 3637rN 
525'W, c. 600-700 m, 24.iii.1998 (DP 140).
Arytainilla residual species
Arytainilla gredi (Ramirez Gomez)
(Figs 1C & 23A)
Alloeoneura (subgenus Hispaniola) gredi Ramirez Gomez, 1956: 92 
Arytainilla gredi (Ramirez Gomez) Hodkinson & Hollis, 1987: 42
Adult Colour: Yellow-green to yellow-brown, genitalia darker brown; forewing membrane 
dirty yellow, veins uniform light brown.
Adult Description: Ramirez Gomez (1956)
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 6 4 -
Nymph
Colour: 5th instars with sclerites, wing pads, legs and terminal antennal segments darker brown. 
Structure: Forewing pads and abdomen broadly rounded apically. Tergites extensively reduced 
on the thorax, typically not extending to the lateral margin on the abdomen. Arolium pad short, 
expanded apically, without medial groove and with a short petiole. Circumanal ring broadly 
crescent-shaped with well rounded anterior lobes, outer ring contiguous with the apical 
abdominal margin and with a single row of pores.
5th instar measurements and ratios: (specimens 6) BL: 1.65-1.85; BW: 1.05-1.2; WL: 0.56- 
0.62; CPL: 0.45-0.53; CPW: 0.87-0.95; RW: 0.19-0.23; RL: 0.1-0.12; HW: 0.58-0.69; AL: 
0.63-0.71; AL3: 0.15-0.17. WBL: 0.63-0.71; ALHW: 0.97-1.18; ALWL: 1.11-1.16; WLHW: 
0.86-1.02; WCPL: 1.79-1.93; CPRW: 4.13-4.79.
5th instar chaetotaxy: Head setae simple (max length at anterior margin 0.08-0.09); antennal 
setae simple; ocular seta simple, inconspicuous (max length 0.03); primary post-ocular seta 
simple or narrowly capitate (max length 0.08-0.11); secondary post-ocular seta simple (max 
length 0.04-0.07). Dorsal thoracic setae short and long simple (max length 0.05-0.06). 
Prominent wing pad setae max length 0.1-0.11; forewing and hindwing pads with simple and 
capitate setae; forewing pad with 10 prominent marginal setae, narrowly or distinctly capitate; 
hindwing pad prominent setae 2-4, distinctly capitate, marginal (2 apical and 0-2 on the outer 
margin, occasionally few more prominent setae on the surface); proximal setae simple 
(sometimes small); small simple setae scattered on the wing pad surfaces. Dorsal abdominal 
prominent pre-caudal setae present on all tergites, long simple and narrowly capitate (max 
length 0.07-0.12), prominent caudal plate setae present, 18,  narrowly or distinctly capitate; 
sectasetae four pairs; marginal abdominal setae (other than sectasetae) four or more pairs, 
narrowly capitate (max length 0.19-0.22); pleurite setae paired simple, or paired narrowly 
capitate and simple. Legs with capitate setae present (often very narrow, max length 0.11-0.15); 
capitate foreleg setae absent; capitate middle leg setae present on femur and tibia, on the tibia 1- 
2 (typically 1 proximal and 1 distal, occasionally only distal present); capitate hind leg setae 
present on femur and tibia, on the tibia 1-2 (typically 1 proximal and 1 distal, occasionally only 
distal present).
Host plant: Genista hispanica, G. florida, G. cf. pilosa.
Distribution: Continental: Spain.
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY -65  -
Comment: Apparently widespread in Spain but restricted to montane regions, this species has 
been recorded from the Sierra Nevada in the south to the Picos de Europa in the north. It is 
uncommon and was not collected by this author. There is a superficial similarity in the male 
and female genitalia to A. spartiophila. However, in many respects, notably the shape of the 
ovipositor and the nymph, this species is closer to a Lzvi/Za-type. The original description by 
Ramirez Gomez (1956) cites two basal metatarsal spurs. As all material examined has one spur 
there is the possibility that these specimens are not the same as the type species. However, no 
material from which the original description was made still exists, and so this discrepancy will 
likely remain unresolved.
Material examined: SPAIN: 1 $, Huelva, 20 km S of Almonte, ex Genista sp., 13.vi.1977 
(BMNH). 2 d \ l  9, Sierra Nevada, Pico Veleta rd, 2500 m, ex Cytisuspurgansl, 5.viii.l978 
(BMNH). 3 d ,3 9, 9 nymphs, Picos de Europa, Pena Romana, abv Santa Marina de Valdeon, 
1700 m, ex Genista cf. pilosa , 9.viii.l993 (BMNH). 1 d ,1 9, 2 nymphs, as for previous except, 
1800 m, ex Genista hispanica (BMNH).
Arytainilla sulci (Vondracek)
(Figs IB & 22B)
Psylla sulci Vondracek, 1954: 81
Arytainilla egena Loginova, 1972: 18 [synonymized by Burckhardt, 1989b: 318]
Arytainilla sulci (Vondracek) Burckhardt, 1989b: 318
Adult Colour: Yellow-green to yellow-grey, sometimes with bright green or brown abdomen; 
legs ochraceous to brown; forewing membrane yellowish, veins uniformly pale.
Adult Descriptions: Vondracek (1954), Loginova (1972).
Nymph
Colour: Bright green to yellow-green, abdomens sometimes orange or wings and abdomen 
tinged with black; terminal antennal segments darker brown.
Structure: Fore wing pads and abdomen broadly rounded apically. Tergites not extensively 
reduced on the thorax and extending to the lateral margin on the abdomen. Arolium pad short, 
expanded apically, without medial groove and with a long petiole. Circumanal ring narrowly
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 6 6 -
crescent-shaped with well rounded anterior lobes but with lateral margins either straight or 
slightly concave, outer ring not contiguous with the apical abdominal margin and with a single 
row of pores.
5th instar measurements and ratios: (specimens 10) BL: 2.2-2.53; BW: 1.48-1.6; WL: 0.72- 
0.81; CPL: 0.67-0.76; CPW: 0.97-1.1; RW: 0.16-0.2; RL: 0.11-0.12; HW: 0.83-0.92; AL: 0.85- 
0.95; AL3: 0.19-0.22. WBL: 0.62-0.66; ALHW: 0.98-1.09; ALWL: 1.09-1.22; WLHW: 0.85- 
0.9; WCPL: 1.36-1.52; CPRW: 5.21-6.56.
5th instar chaetotaxy: Head setae simple and narrowly capitate (anterior margin typically 
simple, occasionally capitate, max length at anterior margin 0.09-0.12); antennal setae simple 
and capitate (capitate setae typically present on all segments except 1st, 1-2 larger apically on 
the 3rd and 5th segments, smaller present on the remainder); ocular seta absent (possibly very 
small, but undetected in specimens examined); primary and secondary post-ocular seta 
distinctly, or occasionally narrowly capitate (max length 0.08-0.11). Dorsal thoracic setae short 
simple and long frequently narrowly capitate (max length 0.1-0.12). Prominent wing pad setae 
max length 0.1-0.12; forewing and hindwing pads with capitate setae only, prominent setae 
numerous, distinctly capitate, surface and marginal, proximal setae distinctly capitate. Dorsal 
abdominal prominent pre-caudal setae present on all tergites, long frequently narrowly capitate 
(max length 0.12), prominent caudal plate setae numerous, distinctly capitate; sectasetae one 
pair in the 4th position (as the medial bisection is indistinct these may appear as lanceolate 
setae); marginal abdominal setae (other than sectasetae) numerous, typically narrowly or 
distinctly capitate (apical pairs are longer and darkly pigmented, often narrowly capitate or 
simple) (max length 0.16-0.21); pleurite setae paired capitate and simple. Legs with capitate 
setae present on femora, tibiae and tarsi (max length 0.1-0.12), one distally on the femora and 
numerous on the tibiae.
Host plant: Retama raetam.
Distribution: Continental: Morocco, northern Libya, Israel and Jordan.
Notes: Occurs along the southern Atlantic coast and Anti-Atlas mountains of Morocco. It is 
sympatric with Livilla retamae and Pseudacanthopsylla spp. in Morocco and Jordan. A. sulci 
appears to develop earlier than either of these latter species in Morocco. It was the most 
abundant species on the host in March and was absent from collections made in June, when 
Livilla retamae and Pseudacanthopsylla (officially Psylla improvisa) were more common. 
Biology: Nymphs were observed on the inner surface of the corolla.
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 6 7 -
Comment: Both adult and nymphal forms are unique within the Arytaininae.
Material examined: (ex Retama raetam unless otherwise stated) MOROCCO: 66 d , 46 9, 85 
nymphs, Atlantic Coast, c. 15 km S of El Jadid, 3255rN 835'W, c. 100 m, 21 .iii.1999 (DP 
297). 18 c ? ,  19?,  19 nymphs, Atlantic Coast, c. 10 km SE of Essaouira, 3131'N 937W, c. 100 
m, 22.iii. 1999 (DP 299). 3 d , 3 9, as for previous except, ex Cytisus albidus (DP 298). 2 d , 4 9, 
4 nymphs, Southern Atlantic coast, E side of Agadir, 3025rN 930'W, s.l. 23.iii.1999 (DP 301). 
I d ,  1 9, as for previous except, 29.iv.1999 (DP 321). 1 9, Anti-Atlas, SE slopes of Jbel Lekst, 
2942'N 905'W, c. 2000 m, 25.iii.1999 (DP 303). LIBYA: 4 nymphs, Fezzan, W of Fiqzah, 
29.i. 1982 (BMNH).
Arytainilla montivaga sp. nov. (4)
(Figs 6 & 23B)
Adult
Colour: Generally bright green to mid-green or yellow-green, more mature specimens with 
darker abdomens; forewing membrane clear or faintly yellow, veins uniform light brown. 
Structure: Forewing widest in the apical third with a broadly rounded apex; pterostigma less 
than one quarter the wing length (shorter in the Moroccan specimens -  one half to two thirds as 
long as the Spanish specimens); surface fore wing spinules present in all cells (or if absent, only 
from cell c+sc) but reduced, confined mostly to the margin of the wing; distribution of spinules 
uniform, density sparse: less than 40 per 0.1mm2; apical spines in wing cells cui, mi and m 2 , 
but absent, or occasionally few present in cell r2 . Antennae short, with ten segments; genal 
cones very short, commencing ventrally relative to the vertex, with a distinct depression 
between the vertex and the genal cones, terminal setae as long as, or typically longer than the 
vertex. Paramere mid-length, in lateral view simple with sides parallel, narrowing at the apex 
and with rudimentary development of an apical blade, sclerotized apex flattened dorsally with 
slight anterior projection, in dorsal view contiguous anteriorly with inner margin straight edged; 
paramere shorter or slightly longer than the proctiger; proctiger not inflated posteriorly towards 
the base; aedeagus distal segment with a flattened, shallow hook and, in Moroccan specimens, 
with a pronounced heel at the rear of the hook, tip of aedeagus hook acute; male subgenital 
plate dorsal profile more or less straight and horizontal or slightly raised anteriorly. Female
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 6 8 -
proctiger dorsal profile more or less straight from anus to apex (Spanish specimens) or with a 
post-anal depression but subsequently more or less straight (Moroccan specimens), apex bluntly 
rounded; subgenital plate ventral profile angled medially, apex acute; ovipositor valvulae 
ventralis slender, apex acute; height of valvulae dorsalis greater than valvulae ventralis, 
dorsally convex, wedge-shaped and tapering to the apex. (The specimens from Morocco are in 
all respects considerably smaller than those from Spain.)
Adult measurements and ratios: (4d\ 6 ? )  total length: d 2.44-3.12, $ 2.88-3.4; forewing: d 
length 1.9-2.4 width 0.81-1.05, ? length 2.43-2.8 width 1.06-1.2; pterostigma length d 0.33- 
0.5, $ 0.3-0.6; hindwing length d 1.56-1.95, $ 1.98-2.21; head width: d 0.73-0.8, $ 0.79- 
0.88; antennal length: 1.25-1.49; genal cone length: 0.09-0.11; distal proboscis segment length: 
0.15-0.17. WLPT: 4.6-8.3; ALHW: 1.52-1.84; GCVL: 0.4-0.55; WLHW: 2.6-3.29; VLW: 0.4- 
0.46; WLW: 2.29-2.38; CUR: 1.5-1.76; MR: 0.46-0.63; RMCU: 4.5-6.22; TLFL: 1.16-1.25; 
TLHW: 0.76-0.88; SCHW: 0.89-1; ATIB: 0.23-0.3; MTIB: 0.26-0.3; PBHW: 0.19-0.22; 
ATMT: 0.83-1. Adult genitalia d: MP: 0.29-0.38; PL: 0.28-0.42; AEL: 0.23-0.3; AEH: 0.08- 
0.10. MPHW: 0.4-0.48; PLHW: 0.38-0.53; MPPL: 0.9-1.04; AEPL: 0.71-0.82; MSLH: 1.12- 
1.22; AHS: 0.32-0.37; PLSH: 1.17-1.24. ?: FP: 0.66-0.79; FSP: 0.42-0.57; RL: 0.2-0.23; OV: 
0.13-0.16; EL: 0.24-0.28. FPHW: 0.83-0.93; FPSP: 1.34-1.6; FPCR: 3.3-3.55; OLSP: 0.25- 
0.31; FEOL: 1.84.
Nymph
Colour: l st-3rd instars cream and orange, 4th-5th instars bright mid- to light green or yellow- 
green, with or without black tergites; sclerites, wing pads, legs and terminal antennal segments 
darker brown.
Structure: Forewing pads and abdomen broadly rounded apically. Tergites extensively reduced 
on the thorax, typically not extending to the lateral margin on the abdomen. Arolium pad short, 
expanded apically, with slight medial groove and short petiole. Circumanal ring broadly 
crescent-shaped with well rounded anterior lobes, outer ring not contiguous with the apical 
abdominal margin and with a single row of pores.
5th instar measurements and ratios: (specimens 6) BL: 1.28-2.03; BW: 0.95-1.28; WL: 0.49- 
0.62; CPL: 0.35-0.44; CPW: 0.61-0.74; RW: 0.15-0.17; RL: 0.1-0.12; HW: 0.62-0.79; AL: 
0.81-0.84; AL3: 0.18-0.2. WBL: 0.61-0.74; ALHW: 1.06-1.34; ALWL: 1.35-1.65; WLHW: 
0.74-0.92; WCPL: 1.39-1.97; CPRW: 4.06-4.63.
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 6 9 -
5th instar chaetotaxy: Head setae simple and distinctly capitate (simple anteriorly, with few 
capitate posteriorly, max length at anterior margin 0.11-0.16); antennal setae simple and 
capitate (1-2 capitate on the distal end of 3rd and 5th segments); ocular seta simple, long (max 
length 0.07-0.12); primary and secondary post-ocular seta distinctly capitate (primary max 
length 0.1-0.12, secondary max length 0.13-0.18). Dorsal thoracic setae long capitate (max 
length 0.13-0.17). Prominent wing pad setae max length 0.12-0.18; forewing pad with simple 
and capitate setae, prominent setae 12-16, distinctly capitate, surface and marginal ( 8 on the 
outer margin, 2-4 proximal, 2-4 surface) with small, simple setae scattered on the surface; 
hindwing pad with capitate setae only, prominent setae 5-7, distinctly capitate, surface and 
marginal (2 apical, 2 proximal, 1-3 surface); proximal setae distinctly capitate. Dorsal 
abdominal prominent pre-caudal setae present on all tergites, long capitate (max length 0.13- 
0.19), prominent caudal plate setae present, eight distinctly capitate; sectasetae absent (replaced 
by four pairs of small simple setae); marginal abdominal setae (other than sectasetae) four pairs, 
distinctly capitate (4th typically narrow) (max length 0.2-0.23); pleurite setae paired capitate and 
simple. Legs with capitate setae present (max length 0.12-0.13); capitate foreleg setae present 
on femur and tibia, on the tibia 2(1 proximal, 1 distal); capitate middle leg setae present on 
femur and tibia, on the tibia 3 (2 proximal, 1 distal); capitate hind leg setae present on femur 
and tibia, on the tibia 3-5.
Host plant: Adenocarpus decorticans.
Distribution: Continental: Spain and Morocco.
Notes: Occurs in the mountain ranges of southern Andalusia and northern Morocco. A. 
montivaga is sympatric in the Andalusian mountains with Livilla baetica sp. nov.
Biology: Nymphs were observed on the base of young leaves, in leaf buds and on fruits. 
Etymology: Named for the geographic distribution of this species in montane regions, the 
epithet is derived from the Latin for wandering over mountains.
Comment: The host plant distribution illustrates the Tertiary links between southern Iberia and 
NW Africa (Valdes 1991). Populations of A. montivaga from these two regions are 
morphological distinct. However, although the Moroccan form is considerably smaller and 
differs in the shape of the male aedeagus and female proctiger, it otherwise shares sufficient
similarity to the Spanish form for them to be treated as a single species. The 5 instar 
chaetotaxy exhibits some similarity with an Arytaina-type while and the short genal cones and 
well developed pterostigma of the adult suggest affinities with Arytinnis gen. nov. However, A.
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 7 0 -
montivaga lacks the full suite of characters of either of these genera and thus the placement of 
this taxon is uncertain.
Type material: Holotype d (slide mounted), SPAIN: Andalusia, N slopes of Sierra de Baza, rd 
Caniles to Alba, 37 15TST 245'W, c. 1600 m, 22.iii.1998 (BMNH). Paratypes 2 ? , 17 nymphs, 
as for holotype (BMNH). 2 d , 1 ? , 10 nymphs, as for holotype (NHMB).
Other material examined: MOROCCO: 5 d , 5 $, Central Rif Mountains, S of Ketama, 3455'N 
440'W, c. 1300 m, 21.vi.1998 (DP 249). 2 d , 1 $, 22 nymphs, Western Rif Mountains btw 
Ketama and Chefchaouen, E of Bab Berret, 3456rN 450'W, c. 1400 m, 22.vi.1998 (DP 253).
3 $, 50 nymphs, as for previous (DP 254). 4 nymphs, Taza, Jbel Tazzeka, 3350rN 418W, c. 
1550 m, 31.iii.1999 (DP 318). SPAIN: 12d,  12$,  10 nymphs, Andalusia, N slopes of Sierra 
Nevada, rd Calaharra to Puerto de la Ragua, 3705rN 302'W, c. 1850 m, 21.iii.1998 (DP 128). 
21 d,  10 $, 30 nymphs, as for holotype (DP 129).
Genus Arytinnis gen. nov.
Arytainilla Loginova, 1972: 17, in part; Hodkinson & Hollis, 1987:41, in part 
Type species: Arytainilla pileolata Loginova, 1976: 26
Adult Description: Generally bright green to grey green (some species become brown with 
age), lacking distinct body and wing membrane patterns; terminal antennal segments brown; 
forewing cells either clear or faintly yellow throughout, with or without light brown apical 
patches, forewing veins either uniformly pigmented light to dark brown, or with distinct light 
and dark bands. Forewing widest in the apical third with a broadly rounded apex; costal break 
and pterostigma present, pterostigma long, one quarter or greater the length of the wing; vein 
Rs typically curved in the middle but not, or only weakly curved at the apex towards the costal 
margin; cells cui and m2 relatively high; costal margin of the hindwing slightly concave. 
Antennae with ten segments. Head deflexed downwards with genal cones directed downwards 
relative to the plane of the vertex; genal cones short, commencing ventrally relative to the 
vertex, with a distinct depression between the vertex and the genal cones; terminal setae as long 
as or typically longer than the vertex. Distal proboscis segment short to very long. Number of 
basal tibial spurs variable, typically five (3+1+1) though individuals may have as few as three; 
one metatarsal spur. Paramere longer than the proctiger, in lateral view either simple, tapering
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY -71  -
to the apex or with an apically thin neck above a medial blade or ridge, apex narrower than the 
base. Profile of female proctiger variable, apex bluntly rounded; subgenital plate shallowly 
curved or with a medial bulge, apex acute; ovipositor valvulae ventralis slender, apex acutely 
rounded with or without small dorsal projections at the tip; height of valvulae dorsalis typically 
as great or greater than valvulae ventralis, dorsally convex, wedge-shaped and tapering to the 
apex.
Nymphal Description: Variable in colour, generally with darker brown sclerites, wing pads, 
legs and terminal antennal segments; prominent setae pigmented light to dark brown. Forewing 
pads and abdomen broadly rounded apically. Antennal segments seven, eight or nine. Tergites 
extensively reduced on the thorax, typically not extending to the lateral margin on the abdomen. 
Arolium pad long, broadly expanded apically, usually with a distinct medial groove and long 
petiole. Circumanal ring broadly crescent-shaped with well rounded anterior lobes, outer ring 
not contiguous with the apical abdominal margin and with a single row of pores. Antennae and 
head without distinctly capitate setae. Eyes with a single ocular seta positioned towards the 
inner margin. Wing pads with prominent setae present, either capitate or simple. Abdomen with 
three to four pairs of marginal sectasetae. Legs with or without capitate setae.
Etymology: Named in part for the subfamily Arytaininae, Aryt-, together with the Gaelic for 
island, innis in reference to the probable origin and extensive diversification of this group in 
Macaronesia. To be treated as a feminine noun.
Comment: The genus is defined by the combination of characters: short genal cones with long 
terminal setae; apically broad and well rounded forewing with an unpattemed membrane and a 
long, well developed pterostigma; ovipositor slender with small dorsal valvulae. The 5th instar 
nymphs have long antennae and three or more pairs of sectasetae. This is a homogeneous group 
of 21 species which appears to have radiated recently, mostly in the Macaronesian region and to 
a much lesser extent on the continent. Interspecific differentiation is based mainly on 
peculiarities of the male genitalia. Due to this overall similarity within the group there are only 
a few clear morphological synapomorphies such as banded forewing veins, elongate genitalia, 
and number of nymphal antennal segments. It may be easier to base an immediate identification 
using geographic region and host plant (although these aspects have not been used directly in
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 7 2 -
the keys) but care must be taken in the Canary Islands where a number of species occur
sympatrically on the same host or on hosts that grow in close association.
Key to adults of Arytinnis
2 Fore wing veins with longer dark bands and fewer short, light bands; male paramere (in 
lateral view) with an apically thin neck above a broad, medially positioned blade produced 
on the external side and directed anteriorly, sclerotized apex with slight anterior and 
posterior projections; tip of aedeagus hook not upturned; male subgenital plate dorsal 
profile slightly raised anteriorly, usually without a distinct step (on Adenocarpus', Tenerife, 
La P a lm a) proboscidea (Loginova)
 Forewing veins with light and dark bands of more or less equal frequency; male paramere 
(in lateral view) tapering towards the apex, without a medial blade, sclerotized apex with a 
pronounced anterior projection; tip of aedeagus hook slightly upturned; male subgenital 
plate dorsal profile markedly raised anteriorly with a distinct step (on Adenocarpus 
3 Males and females with strikingly large genitalia, female proctiger longer than 1.2 x head 
 Male and female genitalia smaller, female proctiger shorter than 1.2 x head width, male 
4 Male paramere broad and female genitalia robust; male paramere with a medially 
positioned blade produced on the external side and directed anteriorly, sclerotized apex (in 
lateral view) dorsally flattened with a slight medial depression and broadly expanded with 
small anterior and posterior projections; in dorsal view, contiguous posteriorly with inner 
margins concave; tip of aedeagus hook acute, not, or only slightly upturned; surface 
forewing spinules dense (60-100 per 0.1mm2) (on Teline stenopetala\ Tenerife) (Fig. 10) 
 Male paramere and female genitalia slender and elongate; male paramere in the basal 
portion more or less parallel sided without a medial blade but with a prominent shoulder on 
the anterior margin towards the apex, above which the apex curves inwards, sclerotized 
apex (in lateral view) small, with small anterior projection, and displaced to the interior and 
posterior of the top of the paramere; in dorsal view, contiguous anteriorly with inner
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 7 3 -
margins straight edged; tip of aedeagus hook blunt and markedly upturned; surface 
5 Larger species: (total length <j 2.96-3.72, 9 3-4.04) antennae longer than 1.5 mm;
forewing longer than 2.4 mm; head wider than 0.75 mm; distal proboscis segment >0.15
mm; male proctiger longer than 0.4 mm; distal aedeagus segment longer than 0.34 mm; 
female proctiger longer than 1 mm; female subgenital plate longer than 0.6 mm; male 
paramere (in lateral view) either with a sloping anterior shoulder produced about two thirds 
up from the base and with the apex (in dorsal view) strongly S-curved; or with a horizontal 
anterior shoulder close to the apex, about three quarters up from the base and with the apex 
 Smaller species: (total length <$ 2.6-2.84, 9 2.76-3.16) antennae shorter than 1.5 mm;
forewing shorter than 2.4 mm; head narrower than 0.75 mm; distal proboscis segment < 
0.15 mm; male proctiger shorter than 0.4 mm; distal aedeagus segment shorter than 0.34 
mm; female proctiger shorter than 1 mm; female subgenital plate shorter than 0.6 mm; 
male paramere (in lateral view) with a horizontal anterior shoulder close to the apex, about 
three quarters up from the base and with the apex (in dorsal view) distinctly curved (on 
6 Male paramere (in lateral view) with a posterior bulge at the base and with a sloping 
anterior shoulder produced about two thirds up from the base, the apex curving posteriorly 
and (in dorsal view) strongly S-curved and expanded towards the sclerotized tip (on 
Chamaecytisus\ Gran Canaria, Tenerife, La Gomera) (Figs 15E-F) .. dividens (Loginova)
 Male paramere (in lateral view) without a posterior bulge at the base and with a sharper, 
horizontal anterior shoulder closer to the apex, about three quarters up from the base, the 
apex not or weakly curving posteriorly and (in dorsal view) not or weakly curved and 
tappering towards the sclerotized tip (on Chamaecytisus and Teline stenopetala, La Palma, 
7 Male paramere (in lateral view) with an apically thin neck above a medially positioned 
blade (sometimes reduced to a shallow ridge) produced on the external side and directed 
anteriorly; sclerotized apex dorsally either slightly rounded or with a distinct bulge, and 
 Male paramere (in lateral view) without a medial blade or ridge, either simple with sides 
tapering towards the apex or more parallel sided with a slight terminal blade present
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 7 4 -
laterally exterior to the apex, and then with the sclerotized apex displaced either to the 
interior or posterior of the top of the paramere; sclerotized apex either dorsally rounded 
with or without small anteriorly and interiorly directed hook, or flattened with small
(Continental and Madeira; cognata, hakani, incuba)
(Continental and Canary Islands; berber, canariensis, ochrita, pileolata,)
9 Male paramere (in lateral view) with distinct medial blade, sclerotized apex dorsally with a 
slight medial depression and small anterior and posterior projections; male proctiger 
shorter (< 0.27 mm) than 0.6 x paramere length; female proctiger longer than 1.65 x length 
of subgential plate; female subgenital plate ventral profile usually with a medial bulge (on 
 Male paramere (in lateral view) with shallow medial ridge, sclerotized apex dorsally 
flattened with a small anterior projection; male proctiger longer (> 0.27 mm) than 0.6 x 
paramere length; female proctiger length < 1.65 x length of subgential plate; female 
10 Male paramere shorter (< 0.45 mm) than 0.55 x head width, in lateral view the apical neck, 
above termination of the medial blade, longer and more slender; male proctiger length <
0.3 mm; female proctiger shorter than 0.85 mm (on Teline monspessulana\ Mediterranean) 
 Male paramere longer (> 0.45 mm) than 0.55 x head width, in lateral view the apical neck, 
above termination of the medial blade, shorter and thicker; male proctiger longer than 0.3
 incuba (Loginova)
11 Male paramere < 1.25 x subgenital plate height, sclerotized apex (in lateral view) with 
slight anterior and posterior projections, and (in dorsal view) contiguous posteriorly; male 
proctiger longer than 0.75 x paramere length; head width > 0.72 mm; distal aedeagus 
 Male paramere > 1.25 x subgenital plate height, sclerotized apex (in lateral view) with 
small anterior projection, and (in dorsal view) contiguous anteriorly or contiguous more or 
less along entire inner margin; male proctiger length < 0.75 x paramere length; head width 
< 0.72 mm; distal aedeagus segment length < 0.26 mm, hook small (< 0.08 mm long) ..13
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 7 5 -
12 Genal cones very short (< 0.09 mm), less than 0.5 x length of the vertex with the terminal 
setae darkly pigmented; distal proboscis segment long (> 0.2 mm); male paramere (in 
lateral view) with distinct medial blade supporting several long stout setae, sclerotized apex 
dorsally with a well rounded bulge; male proctiger longer (> 0.3 mm) than 0.85 x paramere 
length; tip of aedeagus hook blunt; hind leg tibia long, more than 0.9 x head width,
 Genal cones longer (> 0.09 mm), equal to or greater than 0.5 x length of the vertex with the 
terminal setae pale; distal proboscis segment shorter (< 0.2 mm); male paramere (in lateral 
view) with shallow medial ridge supporting several short, stout setae, sclerotized apex 
dorsally flattened; male proctiger length (< 0.3 mm) less than 0.85 x paramere length; tip of 
aedeagus hook acute; hind leg tibia relatively short, less than 0.9 x head width, metatarsus
13 Female proctiger length less than head width; surface forewing spinules sparse (less than 
40 per 0.1mm2); male paramere shorter (< 0.35 mm) than 0.55 x head width, or 1.4 x 
subgenital plate height, sclerotized apex (in dorsal view) contiguous anteriorly; tip of 
aedeagus hook blunt; male proctiger shorter (< 0.24 mm) than 0.35 x head width (on 
 Female proctiger length greater than head width; surface forewing spinules relatively dense 
(40-60 per 0.1mm2); male paramere longer (> 0.35 mm) than 0.55 x head width, or 1.4 x
subgenital plate height, sclerotized apex (in dorsal view) contiguous more or less along
entire inner margin; tip of aedeagus hook acute; male proctiger longer (>0.24 mm) than 
14 Male paramere (in lateral view) more or less parallel sided with a slight terminal tlade 
present laterally exterior to the apex, and with the sclerotized apex displaced either to the 
 Male paramere (in lateral view) simple, either straight or more curvaceous, with sides 
15 Surface forewing spinules sparse (less than 40 per 0.1mm2); male paramere short md 
broad, length (< 0.35 mm) equal to, or less than the height of the subgenital plate; male 
proctiger inflated towards the base; male subgenital plate dorsal profile raised anteriorly 
with a distinct step; female proctiger dorsal profile without a post-anal depression but
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 7 6 -
concave with an upturned apex, shorter than 1.4 x length of subgenital plate; subgenital
 Surface forewing spinules relatively dense (40-100 per 0.1mm2); male paramere long and 
slender, length (> 0.35 mm) greater than the height of the subgenital plate; male proctiger 
not, or only slightly inflated towards the base; male subgenital plate dorsal profile more or 
less straight and horizontal, or slightly raised anteriorly; female proctiger dorsal profile 
either with a post-anal depression or more or less straight from anus to apex, length > 1.4 x 
length of subgenital plate; subgenital plate ventral profile shallowly curved or with a slight 
16 Genal cone terminal setae darkly pigmented; male paramere longer than 1.4 x height of 
subgenital plate, in lateral view apex not bent forwards, and with 3-4 stout setae at the top 
of the terminal blade, the sclerotized apex more or less triangular; sclerotized portion (in 
dorsal view) contiguous anteriorly with inner margins rounded; aedeagus hook small (< 
0.08 mm), about 0.25 x length of distal segment, tip of hook acute and turning upwards; 
female proctiger dorsal profile with a post-anal depression, shorter than 1.5 x length of 
subgenital plate; female subgenital plate without pointed projections on the dorsal margins 
 Genal cone terminal setae pale; male paramere shorter than 1.4 x height of subgenital plate, 
in lateral view curving forwards towards the apex, the terminal blade and sclerotized apex 
with anterior projections; sclerotized portion (in dorsal view) contiguous posteriorly with 
inner margins straight edged; aedeagus hook longer (> 0.1 mm), about 0.33 x length of 
distal segment, tip of hook relatively blunt and not upturned; female proctiger dorsal profile 
more or less straight from anus to apex, longer than 1.5 x length of subgenital plate; female 
subgenital plate with pointed projections on the dorsal margins (on Teline microphylla', 
17 Male paramere (in lateral view) S-curved with the posterior margin strongly curved 
forward medially and with an isolated, medial field of stout spines on the interior surface, 
sclerotized apex more or less flattened with slight anterior projection; aedeagus distal 
segment longer than 0.85 x paramere length (on Teline stenopetala; La Gomera) (Fig. 13) 
 Male paramere (in lateral view) with posterior margin more or less straight, if stout spines 
present on the interior surface, positioned and extending more towards the base of the
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 7 7 -
paramere, sclerotized apex rounded with small anteriorly and interiorly directed hook, or 
18 Surface forewing spinules sparse (less than 40 per 0.1mm2); antennae long (1.7-2.1 mm); 
male paramere interior surface with stout spines on the posterior and sometimes anterior 
sides of a medial ridge, sclerotized apex (in dorsal view) with inner margin concave; 
aedeagus distal segment apex with a well developed, curved hook; male subgenital plate 
dorsal profile slightly raised anteriorly (on Teline stenopetala; La Palma, El Hierro) (Figs 
 Surface fore wing spinules relatively dense (40-60 per 0.1mm2); antennae shorter (1.1-1.71 
mm); male paramere interior surface either lacking stout spines or with stout spines present 
anteriorly at the base, sclerotized apex (in dorsal view) with inner margin straight edged or 
rounded with an acute point; aedeagus distal segment apex with a somewhat flattened,
19 Male paramere longer than 1.3 x height of subgenital plate, sclerotized apex (in dorsal 
view) contiguous more or less along entire inner margin; aedeagus hook larger (> 0.08 
mm) with an acute tip; male proctiger > 0.4 x head width; female proctiger length greater 
than the head width, with the circumanal ring shorter than 0.25 x proctiger length; female 
proctiger dorsal profile concave with a slightly upturned apex; female subgenital plate 
ventral profile with a medial bulge; ovipositor valvulae dorsalis longer than 0.15 mm (on 
 Male paramere shorter than 1.3 x height of subgenital plate, sclerotized apex (in dorsal 
view) contiguous anteriorly; aedeagus hook small (< 0.08 mm) with a blunt tip; male 
proctiger shorter than 0.4 x head width; female proctiger length less than the head width, 
with the circumanal ring longer than 0.25 x proctiger length; female proctiger dorsal profile 
more or less straight from anus to apex; female subgenital plate ventral profile shallowly 
20 Antennae longer than 1.5 mm, equal to, or greater than 2 x head width; genal cones larger; 
distal proboscis segment (<0.15 mm) shorter than 0.2 x head width; male paramere interior 
surface with stout spines present anteriorly at the base, and several long slender spines on 
the anterior margin, sclerotized apex (in dorsal view) with inner margins straight edged;
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 7 8 -
hind leg tibia longer than 0.7 x head width (on Teline splendens', La Palma) (Figs 8 & 30F) 
 Antennae shorter than 1.3 mm, about 1.5 x head width; genal cones smaller; distal
proboscis segment (>0.15 mm) longer than 0.2 x head width; male paramere interior
surface lacking stout spines, with the anterior margin supporting several short, slender 
spines, sclerotized apex (in dorsal view) with inner margins rounded to an acute point; hind 
leg tibia shorter than 0.7 x head width (on Teline rosmarinifolia; Gran Canaria) (Figs 7 & 
Key to 5th instar nymphs of Arytinnis. As the nymphs in this genus are structurally similar, the
type and placement of setae becomes an important aid in species identification (see Fig. 2 for
terminology).
2 Forewing and hindwing pads with simple setae only; dorsal caudal plate with six prominent 
setae; marginal abdominal setae (other than sectasetae) simple or narrowly capitate (on 
 Forewing and hindwing pads with simple and capitate setae; dorsal caudal plate with four 
prominent setae; marginal abdominal setae (other than sectasetae) distinctly capitate (on 
3 Antennae shorter than 1 mm, less than 1.5 x head width; primary and secondary post ocular 
setae distinctly capitate; dorsal thoracic setae short simple and long capitate; proximal 
forewing and hindwing pad setae distinctly capitate; hindwing pad with two prominent
 gomerae sp. nov.
 Antennae longer thanl mm, greater than 1.5 x head width; primary and secondary post
ocular setae simple or narrowly capitate; dorsal thoracic setae long simple; proximal 
forewing and hindwing pad setae simple or narrowly capitate; hindwing pad with one 
prominent capitate seta (apical) (on Teline stenopetala', La Palma, El Hierro) (Fig. 28B) .. 
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 7 9 -
5 Legs with one or more distinct capitate setae present (if only one on tibiae -  positioned
 Legs with simple setae only (one small rod or reduced capitate may be present proximally
6 Wing pads each with one prominent apical seta, proximal setae indistinct; antennae shorter 
than 0.8 mm, less than 1.3 x head width, or 1.68 x forewing pad length; secondary post
ocular seta indistinct; thorax dorsally with very short simple setae; small capitate setae 
present in typical position of first sectasetal pair; middle and hind tibiae each with one 
 Wing pads each with two prominent setae -  apical and proximal; antennae longer than 0.8 
mm, > 1.3 x head width, and greater than 1.68 x forewing pad length; secondary post
ocular seta prominent; thorax dorsally with with short and long simple setae; middle and 
hind tibiae each with two or more captiate setae (on Chamaecytisus; Gran Canaria,
7 Prominent forewing pad setae two (apical and proximal) (on Teline microphylla\ Gran 
8 Antennae typically longer, greater than 1.95 x forewing pad length; secondary post-ocular 
and prominent dorsal thoracic setae longer (max length greater than 0.1 mm), capitate 
(minute simple only); ocular seta long and conspicuous (on Teline maderensis\ Madeira) 
 Antennae typically shorter, less than 1.95 x forewing pad length; secondary post-ocular and 
prominent dorsal thoracic setae shorter (max length 0.1 mm or less), not always capitate, 
thorax with short or longer simple as well as capitate setae; ocular seta usually shorter, less 
9 Thorax dorsally with short simple setae anteriorly and longer capitate posteriorly; ocular 
seta always small; secondary post-ocular setae always simple (on Genista tenera\ Madeira) 
 Thorax dorsally with long simple and long capitate setae; size of ocular seta and type of
 hakani (Loginova)
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 8 0 -
11 Prominent marginal abdominal setae (other than sectasetae) one pair in 1st position (on
 Prominent marginal abdominal setae (other than sectasetae) three pairs (absent from 4th
12 Antennae shorter than 0.9 mm; proximal wing pad setae indistinct; dorsal pre-caudal setae 
on posterior tergites; dorsal caudal plate with numerous prominent setae; marginal 
abdominal setae (other than sectasetae) simple (on Teline; Gran Canaria, Tenerife) (Fig. 
26B)  diluta (Loginova)
 Antennae longer than 0.9 mm; proximal wing pad setae prominent; dorsal pre-caudal setae 
on anterior tergites; dorsal caudal plate prominent setae absent or reduced; marginal 
abdominal setae (other than sectasetae) mostly capitate (on Genista florida ; Morocco) (Fig. 
13 Antennae shorter than 0.9 mm; primary and secondary post-ocular setae distinctly capitate; 
proximal and outer margin forewing pad setae distinctly capitate; dorsal thoracic setae 
short simple and stout capitate; dorsal pre-caudal setae long capitate (on Genista segonnei, 
 Antennae longer than 0.9 mm; primary and secondary post-ocular setae simple or narrowly 
capitate; proximal and outer margin fore wing pad setae simple; dorsal thoracic setae short
 Prominent marginal abdominal setae (other than sectasetae) three pairs (absent from 4th 
15 Forewing and hindwing pads each with more than five prominent setae on the surface and 
margin; dorsal pre-caudal setae on all tergites; dorsal caudal plate with numerous
 Fore wing and hindwing pads each with one or two prominent marginal setae; dorsal post
wing setae on anterior tergites, or indistinct; dorsal caudal plate prominent setae absent or 
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY -81  -
16 Fore wing and hindwing pads each with one prominent capitate seta apically, proximal 
setae short simple or indistinct; dorsal pre-caudal setae short simple or indistinct; dorsal 
caudal plate prominent setae absent (on Chamaecytisus and Teline stenopetala; La Palma, 
El Hierro) (Fig. 27B)  modica (Loginova)
 Fore wing and hindwing pads each with two prominent setae (apical and proximal), 
proximal setae prominent, simple or capitate; dorsal pre-caudal setae long simple or long 
capitate; dorsal caudal plate prominent setae present (on Chamaecytisus; Gran Canaria, 
17 Forewing pad with two prominent setae (apical and proximal) (max length >0.1 mm) (on 
Chamaecytisus; Gran Canaria, Tenerife, La Gomera) (Fig. 27C)  dividens (Loginova)
 Forewing pad with one prominent seta apically (proximal seta short simple or indistinct)
18 Apical forewing pad seta simple or narrowly capitate; marginal abdominal pleurite setae 
paired simple (on Teline stenopetala; La Gomera) (Fig. 27A )  hupalupa sp. nov.
 Apical forewing pad seta distinctly capitate; marginal abdominal pleurite setae paired 
capitate and simple (on Chamaecytisus and Teline stenopetala; La Palma, El Hierro) (Fig. 
19 Antennae shorter than 0.8 mm, less than 1.3 x head width, and < 1.5 x forewing pad length; 
hindwing pad with one prominent seta apically paired with a small rod or simple seta, 
proximal seta indistinct; hind tibia with one capitate seta distally (on Teline rosmarinifolia, 
Gran Canaria) (Fig. 2 9 B )  romeria sp. nov.
 Antennae longer than 0.8 mm, > 1.3 x head width, and greater than 1.5 x forewing pad 
length; hindwing pad with two or more prominent setae, apically with two paired capitate 
20 Antennae shorter than 1.7 x forewing pad length; ocular seta small, inconspicuous (0.04- 
0.05 mm), secondary post-ocular seta simple; dorsal thoracic setae short simple (0.03-0.05 
mm); dorsal pre-caudal setae short simple; fore wing and hindwing pads with simple and 
capitate setae, proximal setae simple; prominent hindwing pad capitate setae two (apical); 
hind tibia with more than two capitate setae (on Teline splendens', La Palma) (Fig. 29A) .. 
 Antennae longer than 1.7 x forewing pad length; ocular seta long, conspicuous (0.08-0.1 
mm); secondary post-ocular seta distinctly capitate; dorsal thoracic setae long (0.08-0.1
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 8 2 -
mm), only capitate, or with simple setae; dorsal pre-caudal setae long capitate; forewing 
and hindwing pads with capitate setae (minute rod or simple), proximal setae distinctly 
capitate; prominent hindwing pad capitate setae more than two (apical and proximal); hind
Arytinnis pileolata (Loginova) comb. nov.
(Fig. 28C)
Arytainilla pileolata Loginova, 1976: 26
Adult Colour: Pale grey-green or yellow-green; fore wing cells with faint brown patches 
apically, veins uniform light or dark brown.
Adult Description: Loginova (1976).
Nymph
Colour: l st-3rd instars cream and black or orange-red, 4^-5* instars green with black tergites. 
Structure: Antennal segments seven.
5th instar measurements and ratios: (specimens 4) BL: 1.53-1.8; BW: 0.98-1.03; WL: 0.49- 
0.55; CPL: 0.46-0.5; CPW: 0.63-0.72; RW: 0.19-0.2; RL: 0.11-0.12; HW: 0.64-0.68; AL: 0.91- 
0.96; AL3: 0.22-0.25. WBL: 0.58-0.67; ALHW: 1.4-1.48; ALWL: 1.73-1.96; WLHW: 0.72- 
0.86; WCPL: 1.37-1.53; CPRW: 3.15-3.79.
5th instar chaetotaxy: Head setae simple (max length at anterior margin 0.13-0.16); ocular seta 
simple or occasionally narrowly capitate, dark, conspicuous (max length 0.08-0.1); primary and 
secondary post-ocular setae distinctly capitate (max length 0.08-0.1). Dorsal thoracic setae 
long, capitate only or with simple (max length 0.08-0.11). Prominent wing pad setae max 
length 0.11-0.13; forewing and hindwing pads with capitate setae only (minute simple or 
sometimes small rod setae on the wing pad surfaces), prominent forewing pad setae 6-9, 
distinctly capitate, marginal (4-5 larger, 1-3 smaller and 1 proximal); prominent hindwing pad 
setae 3-4, distinctly capitate, surface and marginal (1-2 apical, 1 surface, 1 proximal). Dorsal 
abdominal prominent pre-caudal setae present on anterior tergites, long capitate (max length 
0.12), prominent caudal plate setae absent or if present, two, distinctly capitate; sectasetae four 
pairs (1st pair sometimes reduced); marginal abdominal setae (other than sectasetae) three pairs, 
distinctly capitate (max length 0.13-0.16); pleurite setae paired capitate and simple. Legs with
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 8 3 -
capitate setae present (max length 0.08-0.09); capitate foreleg setae absent; capitate middle leg 
setae absent or if present, on tibia only, one (distal) with or without small rod proximally; 
capitate hind leg setae present on tibia only, 2-3 (1 proximal, 1-2 distal) with 4-5 small rod 
setae.
Host plant: Teline canariensis, T. osyroides ssp. sericea, T. stenopetala ssp. spachiana. 
Distribution: Canary Islands: Tenerife.
Notes: This is the most polyphagous species in Arytinnis gen. nov., occurring on three species 
of host plant in the genus Teline. It is found throughout the range of the host plant, Teline 
canariensis, where other sympatric species are restricted to the relict laurisilva habitat of this 
host. It is sympatric with A. menceyata on Teline stenopetala ssp. spachiana in pine forest 
habitat, and it is the only species on Teline osyroides ssp. sericea in the southern xerophytic 
habitat.
Biology: Small nymphs ( l st-2nd instars) were observed at the base of developing fruit under the 
persistent clayx, and in leaf buds.
Comment: This species is selected as the type for the genus as it possesses the more typical 
generic features: small female genitalia, male paramere with an anterior medial ridge and 
forewing veins uniformly pigmented.
Material examined: CANARY ISLANDS. TENERIFE: 1 d , 6 $, 7 nymphs, rd Buenavista to 
Santiago del Teide, N of turning to Los Carrizales, 2819rN 1650'30"W, 900 m, ex Teline 
canariensis, 28.vi.1997 (DP 21). 3 d , 2 ? , just blw Aguamansa, 28o21'30"N 1630'W, 950 m, ex 
Teline stenopetala, 29.vi.1997 (DP 23.1). 4 d , 4 $ , 2 nymphs, Anaga, rd El Bailadero to 
Taganana, 2832'30"N 1612'W, 550 m, ex Teline canariensis, 30.vi.1997 (DP 30). 14d, 12$,
2 nymphs, Teno, 7 km S of Buenavista on rd to Santiago del Teide, 2820rN 1651'W, c. 800 m, 
ex Teline canariensis, 4.iv.l998 (DP 152). 14 d , 16 $, rd El Socorro to La Laguna, abv El 
Portezuelo, nr El Pulpito, 2829'30"N 16021'15"W, c. 600 m, ex Teline canariensis, 25.iv.1998 
(DP 178). 4 d , 5 $ , Anaga, E of Pico del Ingles, 2832'15',N  1616'30"W, c. 960 m, ex Teline 
canariensis, 25.iv.1998 (DP 179). 4 d , 4 $ , 2 nymphs, Gmmar, Caldera de Pedro Gil, 
2820'30"N 1628'W, 1775 m, ex Teline stenopetala, 26.iv.1998 (DP 182). 10d , 10$, Anaga, E 
of El Bailadero, 2833'15"N 1610'30"W, c. 800 m, ex Teline canariensis, l.v.1998 (DP 183). 
39d , 35 $, 14 nymphs, Barranco de Herques, 2814'45"N 1626'30"W, c. 500-600 m, ex Teline
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 8 4 -
osyroides, 2.V.1998 (DP 184). 19d, 11 ? , 1 nymph, NW of Arona, Barranco del Rey, 
2806'30"N 1641'30"W, c. 700 m, ex Teline osyroides, lO.v.1998 (DP 186). 2 d , 8$ , 2 
nymphs, nr La Vega, 2820'30"N 1644'W, c. 800 m, ex Teline stenopetala and hybrids x T. 
canariensis, 31.V.1998 (DP 229).
Arytinnis nigralineata (Loginova) comb. nov.
(Figs 26C, 1G, 1L & 30A)
Arytainilla nigralineata Loginova, 1976: 19
Adult Colour: Bright green, lacking the darker colouration in mature specimens characteristic 
of A. proboscidea; head and genal cones with darkly pigmented setae. Forewing cells with faint 
brown patches, veins with numerous short, light and dark bands.
Adult Description: Loginova (1976).
Nymph
Colour: i st-2nd instars pale orange or cream, 3rd-5th instars pale green to bright green or orange 
and cream, with or without black tergites.
Structure: Antennal segments nine
5th instar measurements and ratios: (specimens 7) BL: 1.55-1.85; BW: 0.98-1.13; WL: 0.51- 
0.55; CPL: 0.46-0.51; CPW: 0.62-0.7; RW: 0.17-0.19; RL: 0.1-0.12; HW: 0.69-0.74; AL: 0.99- 
1.18; AL3: 0.25-0.29. WBL: 0.6-0.63; ALHW: 1.45-1.66; ALWL: 1.91-2.23; WLHW: 0.7- 
0.76; WCPL: 1.35-1.4; CPRW: 3.44-3.82.
5th instar chaetotaxy: Head setae simple (max length at anterior margin 0.13-0.18); ocular seta 
simple, dark, conspicuous (max length 0.04-0.09); primary post-ocular seta simple or narrowly 
capitate (max length 0.12-0.13); secondary post-ocular seta simple or narrowly capitate (max 
length 0.14-0.15). Dorsal thoracic setae long, simple and narrowly capitate (max length 0.12- 
0.14). Prominent wing pad setae max length 0.12-0.17; forewing and hindwing pads with 
simple and capitate setae; each pad with two prominent setae, simple or narrowly capitate, 
marginal (1 apical, 1 proximal); hindwing pad apical seta paired with small simple seta; small 
simple setae scattered on the wing pad surfaces. Dorsal abdominal prominent pre-caudal setae 
present on anterior tergites, long simple and narrowly capitate (max length 0.14), prominent 
caudal plate setae present, usually four simple or narrowly capitate; sectasetae three pairs;
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 8 5 -
marginal abdominal setae (other than sectasetae) three pairs, distinctly capitate (max length 
0.14-0.18); pleurite setae paired simple or slightly capitate. Legs with simple setae only (max 
length 0.05-0.07).
Host plant: Adenocarpus foliolosus.
Distribution: Canary Islands: Gran Canaria, Tenerife, and La Gomera.
Notes: Occurs on the two central islands and one western island, where it is restricted to lower 
altitudes and more humid habitats than the other Adenocarpus-feeding species, A. proboscidea. 
It can also be found sympatrically with A. proboscidea in the extensive host hybrid zone 
between Adenocarpus foliolosus and Adenocarpus viscosus on Tenerife, and occasionally on 
Adenocarpus viscosus where this host is found at lower altitudes on the humid, northern pine 
forest slopes.
Biology: Eggs were found in inflorescences on the inner surface of bracts. Nymphs were 
frequently observed on inflorescences.
Material examined: (ex Adenocarpus foliolosus unless otherwise stated) CANARY ISLANDS. 
GRAN CANARIA: 26d , 20$ , 50 nymphs, 1-2 km S of Cruz de Tejeda, 2759'30"N 1536'W, 
1480 m, 5.vii.l997 (DP 36). 1 ? , as for previous except, ex Teline microphylla (DP 35). lOd,
7 $, 1 nymph, rd from Moya to Fontanales, 285'30"N 1535'W, 800 m, 6.vii.l997 (DP 42). 9d \ 
10$, 1 nymph, just blw Pinos de Gaidar, 282'30"N 1537'30"W, 1400 m, 6.vii.l997 (DP 43). 
18d\ 25 $, 2 nymphs, c. 3.5 km NW of Cruz de Tejeda on rd to Pinos de Gaidar, 28ol'30"N 
1535'30"W, 1600 m, 7.vii.l997 (DP 46). 1 $, c. 5 km S of Moya on rd to San Bartolome de 
Fontanales, 285'N 1535'30"W, c. 800 m, ex Teline stenopetala, 15.iv.1998 (DP 158). 19d, 
14$, rd Moya to San Bartolome de Fontanales, 285'45"N 1535T5"W, c. 700 m, 19.iv.1998 
(DP 170). I d ,  rd Moya to St Bartolome de Fontanales, 285'30"N 1535'W, c. 600 m, ex Teline 
canariensis, 19.iv.1998 (DP 171). 37d , 34$ , 1 nymph, just N of Cruz de Tejeda, 2830'N 
1535'30"W, c. 1500 m, 20.iv.1998 (DP 173). 4 d , 6 $ , as for previous except, ex Teline 
microphylla, 20.iv.1998 (DP 172). 1 $, 1-2 km S of Cruz de Tejeda, 2800'N 1536'W, 1420 m, 
ex Teline microphylla, 20.iv.1998 (DP 175). TENERIFE: 5 d , 6 $ , 1 nymph, rd from La Laguna 
to Parque Nacional del Teide, c. 5 km SW of Las Raices, 2826rN 1622'30"W, 1190 m, 
22.vi.1997 (DP 4). 2 d , 1 $, c.14 km south of Aguamansa, rd Aguamansa to El Teide, 28 19TST 
1633'30"W, 1200 m, ex Adenocarpus viscosus, 29.vi.1997 (DP 24). 5 d , 9 $, 2 nymphs, 5 km
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 8 6 -
NE of Las Canteras on rd to Anaga, 2831'N 1618'W, 700 m, 30.vi.1997 (DP 29). 7 d , 12$, rd 
La Laguna to El Teide, Las Lagunetas, 2825'N 1625'W, 1400 m, 9.vii.l997 (DP 50). 4 d , 6 $ , 
3 nymphs, rd from La Laguna to El Teide, just abv Mirador de La Orotava, 2824rN 
1625'30"W, 1590 m, 9.vii. 1997 (DP 51). 4 d \ rd La Laguna to El Teide, c.20 m before turning 
to Arafo, 2823'30"N 1626'30"W, 1650 m, ex Adenocarpus hybrids, viscosus x foliolosus, 
9.vii.l997 (DP 52). 5 d , rd El Teide to Arafo 2823'N 1625'W, 1250 m, ex Chamaecytisus 
proliferus, 9.vii.l997 (DP 53). 31 d , 16$, 8 nymphs, 3-5 km above Las Raices, rd from La 
Laguna to Parque Nacional del Teide, 2825'N 1623'30"W, 1350 m, ll.iv.1998 (DP 156). 2 d , 
2 $, Anaga, E of Pico del Ingles, 2832'15"N 1616'30"W, c. 960 m, ex Teline canariensis, 
25.iv.1998 (DP 179). LA GOMERA: 112d , 72$ , 30 nymphs, rd from Arure to Las Hayas, 
287'30"N 1718'30"W, 900 m, 13.vii.1997 (DP 67). 2 d , 3 $, as for previous except, ex 
Chamaecytisus proliferus (DP 68). 1 $, as for previous except, ex Spartocytisus filipes (DP 69). 
1 d , 2 $, as for previous except, ex Retama monosperma (DP 70). 30 d , 30 $, 23 nymphs, N 
coast road, nr Tamagarda and Las Rosas, 2811'30"N 1713'30"W, c. 600 m, ex Adenocarpus 
hybrids, viscosus x foliolosus, 26.V.1998 (DP 223). 1 d , La Laguna Grande, Garajonay Park, 
2806'30"N 1716'W, c. 1300 m, ex Chamaecytisus proliferus, 26.v. 1998 (DP 224).
Arytinnis proboscidea (Loginova) comb. nov.
(Fig. 26D)
Arytainilla proboscidea Loginova, 1976: 18
Adult Colour: Generally bright green to mid-green though more mature males and females, but 
particularly females, develope brown to black colouration on the legs, abdomen and thorax. The 
darkest specimens were collected from the subalpine zone on La Palma. Head and genal cones 
with darkly pigmented setae. Forewing cells with faint brown patches, veins with long dark and 
short light bands.
Adult Description: Loginova (1976).
Nymph
Colour: l st-3rd instars cream and orange, 4th-5th instars bright green and orange, with or without 
black tergites.
Structure: Antennal segments nine.
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 8 7 -
5th instar measurements and ratios: (specimens 8) BL: 1.55-1.88; BW: 0.98-1.15; WL: 0.56- 
0.62; CPL: 0.5-0.54; CPW: 0.66-0.73; RW: 0.17-0.19; RL: 0.11-0.11; HW: 0.68-0.75; AL: 
1.01-1.1; AL3: 0.23-0.26. WBL: 0.58-0.64; ALHW: 1.35-1.57; ALWL: 1.65-1.93; WLHW: 
0.75-0.86; WCPL: 1.31-1.4; CPRW: 3.58-4.12.
5th instar chaetotaxy: Head setae simple (max length at anterior margin 0.15-0.19); ocular seta 
simple, inconspicuous (max length 0.04-0.06); primary post-ocular seta simple (max length 
0.12); secondary post-ocular seta simple (max length 0.14). Dorsal thoracic setae long simple 
(max length 0.1-0.15). Prominent wing pad setae max length 0.13-0.17; forewing and hindwing 
pads with simple setae, each pad with two prominent setae (occasionally slightly capitate), 
marginal (1 apical, 1 proximal); hindwing pad apical seta paired with small simple seta; small 
simple setae scattered on the wing pad surfaces. Dorsal abdominal prominent pre-caudal setae 
present on anterior tergites, long simple (max length 0.15), prominent caudal plate plate setae 
present, six simple or narrowly capitate; sectasetae three pairs; marginal abdominal setae (other 
than sectasetae) three pairs, simple or narrowly capitate (max length 0.16-0.23); pleurite setae 
paired simple. Legs with simple setae only (max length 0.05).
Host plant: Adenocarpus viscosus, A. foliolosus.
Distribution: Canary Islands: Tenerife and La Palma.
Notes: Occurs on the two high islands, Tenerife and La Palma. On Tenerife it is restricted to the 
host plant Adenocarpus viscosus and also occurs on hybrids between Adenocarpus viscosus and 
Adenocarpus foliolosus. However, on La Palma it is the only species found on both 
Adenocarpus hosts, as the closely related A. nigralineata is absent from this island. It is 
extremely abundant in the high sub-alpine zone on La Palma where adults can often be 
collected from sympatric plants, both leguminous and non-leguminous. This abundance on La 
Palma is correlated with a population explosion in the host plant after the preferential grazing of 
goats on other native plants reduced several species typical of this zone to near extinction 
(Palomares Martinez, 1997).
Biology: Eggs were observed in developing inflorescences in small clusters on the inner surface 
of bracts and calices and on the corolla, as well as on the inner surface of petioles in developing 
leaf buds. From 35 to more than 300 (on La Palma) eggs were found in a single inflorescence, 
the majority of these were laid on the calyx (more than 60 eggs were found on a single calyx 
and more than 40 eggs on a single corolla). Nymphs ( l 81 1*1 instars) were found in the same
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 8 8 -
locations. Some nymphs migrate to the base of the flower or the pedicel, while others 
congregate on unopened inflorescences or at the base of the stylar tube inside mature flowers. 
Comment: This study did not survey the eastern Canary Islands (Fuerteventura and Lanzarote), 
where there are no recorded host plants in the Genisteae, yet one male was recorded from 
Fuerteventura by Loginova (1976). Neither did this study corroborate Loginovas distributions 
for La Gomera (one <? recorded) or Gran Canaria (one 9 recorded). Loginova (1976) grouped 
this and the previous species (A. nigralineata) together with A. dividens and A. modica based on 
the extremely large, elongate female genitalia. However, in other respects the adult and 
nymphal forms in these two groups are distinct. A. proboscidea and A. nigralineata are the only 
Adenocarpus-feeding species in the Canary Islands and they share several unique features such 
as banded forewing veins, long distal proboscis segment and 5th instars nymphs with nine 
antennal segments.
Material examined: (ex Adenocarpus viscosus unless otherwise stated) CANARY ISLANDS. 
TENERIFE: 50 d \  50 9 , 5 nymphs, rd to Parque Nacional del Teide, Miradores de la Cumbre, 
2823'30"N 1626'W, 1800 m, 22.vi.1997 (DP 5). 3 6 c? , 14$, 17 nymphs, c.14 km S of 
Aguamansa, rd Aguamansa to El Teide, 2819rN 1633'30"W, 1200 m, 29.vi.1997 (DP 24).
56 c?, 50 9 , 18 nymphs, rd Parque Nacional del Teide to Santiago del Teide, 28 15'30"N 
1646'W, 1130 m, 29.vi.1997 (DP 27). 1 c?, rd from La Laguna to El Teide, just abv Mirador de 
La Orotava, 2824rN 1625'30"W, 1590 m, ex Adenocarpus foliolosus, 9.vii.l997 (DP 51). 5 c?, 
rd La Laguna to El Teide, c.20 m before turning to Arafo, 2823'30"N 1626'30"W, 1650 m, ex 
Adenocarpus hybrids, viscosus x foliolosus, 9.vii.l997 (DP 52). 14<?, 1 6 9 ,  12 nymphs, abv 
Roques Imoque and Brezo, nr Trevejos, rd from Arona to Vilaflor, 2829T5"N 16039'15"W, c. 
1300 m, lO.v.1998 (DP 187). 2 c? , 2 9 ,  abv Vilaflor, 2810'30"N 1639'W, c. 1900 m, ex 
Chamaecytisus proliferus, lO.v.1998 (DP 188). LA PALMA: 4 c ? , 6 9 , 1 nymph, SE rd Santa 
Cruz to La Caldera 2843'N 1746'W, 950 m, ex Adenocarpus foliolosus, 15.vii.1997 (DP 72). 
36c?, 24 9 ,47  nymphs, SE rd Santa Cruz to La Caldera, 2 8 ^ 3 ^  17o47'30"W, 1500 m,
15.vii. 1997 (DP 74). 11 c?, 22 9 , 2 nymphs, as for previous except, ex Adenocarpus foliolosus 
(DP 75). 17 c?, 7 9 , 108 nymphs, La Palma, Fuente de Olen, SE rd Santa Cruz to La Caldera, 
2843'30"N 1748'W, 1730 m, 15.vii.1997 (DP 76). 5c? , 9 9 , La Palma, SE rd Santa Cruz to La 
Caldera, 2845'N 1749'30"W, 1950 m, ex Spartocytisus supranubius, 16.vii.1997 (DP 80.1). 
3c?, La Caldera, 2150 m, ex Spartocytisus supranubius, 16.vii.1997 (DP 80.2). 5c? , 16 9 , La
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 8 9 -
Caldera, 2845'N 1750'30"W, 2250 m, ex Genista benehoavensis, 16.vii.1997 (DP 81). 2c? ,
1 ? , La Caldera, 2846'N 1750'30"W, 2280 m, ex Spartocytisus supranubius, 17.vii.1997 (DP 
85). 8 c?,3 ? , La Palma, La Caldera, 2845'30MN 17051'W, 2270 m, ex Genista benehoavensis, 
17.vii.1997 (DP 86). 4 c? , 5 $, 5 nymphs, NE, rd Barlovento to Garaffa, nr Gallegos, 2848'N 
1752'W, c. 600 m, ex Adenocarpus viscosus and hybrids with A. foliolosus, 19.V.1998 (DP 
199). 1 c?, NW rd from Llano Negro to La Caldera, 2848rN 1755'30"W, c. 1050 m, ex 
Chamaecytisus proliferus, 19.v. 1998 (DP 201). 10c?, 18 ? , Roque de los Muchachos, 
2845'30"N 1753'W, c. 2300 m, ex Genista benehoavensis, 19.V.1998 (DP 202). 21 d , 15 9, 15 
nymphs, La Palma, SE rd Santa Cruz to La Caldera, 2843'N 1747'15"W, c. 1100 m, ex 
Adenocarpus foliolosus, 20. v. 1998 (DP 204). 3 c?, 1 $, SE rd Santa Cruz to La Caldera, 
2843'30"N 1748'30"W, c. 1700 m, ex Chamaecytisus proliferus, 20. v. 1998 (DP 205). 5 c?, 4 ? , 
as for previous except, ex Spartocytisus supranubius (DP 206). 40c?, 40 ? , La Caldera rim, NW 
of Pico de la Cruz, 2845'30"N 1751W, c. 2200 m, 20.V.1998 (DP 209). 20c?, 15 ?, as for 
previous except, ex Genista benehoavensis (DP 207). I d ,  10 $, as for previous except, ex 
Spartocytisus supranubius (DP 208).
Arytinnis equitans (Loginova) comb. nov.
(Figs 28D & 30D)
Arytainilla equitans Loginova, 1976: 25
Adult Colour: Pale grey-green, mature specimens becoming darker; forewing cells with faint 
brown patches apically, veins uniform mid-brown.
Adult Description: Loginova (1976).
Nymph
Colour: l st_2nd instars orange-red with black tergites, 3^-5* instars cream or green with black 
tergites.
Structure: Antennal segments seven.
5th instar measurements and ratios: (specimens 5) BL: 1.45-1.83; BW: 0.93-1.05; WL: 0.49- 
0.54; CPL: 0.42-0.47; CPW: 0.61-0.68; RW: 0.18-0.2; RL: 0.11-0.11; HW: 0.66-0.72; AL: 
0.97-1.05; AL3: 0.22-0.26. WBL: 0.57-0.64; ALHW: 1.38-1.59; ALWL: 1.91-2.02; WLHW: 
0.71-0.79; WCPL: 1.38-1.51; CPRW: 3.39-3.61.
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 9 0 -
5th instar chaetotaxy: Head setae simple (max length at anterior margin 0.11-0.17); ocular seta 
simple, dark, conspicuous (max length 0.08-0.11); primary and secondary post-ocular setae 
simple or narrowly, to distinctly capitate (max length 0.09-0.12). Dorsal thoracic setae long, 
simple only or with capitate (max length 0.1-0.12). Prominent wing pad setae max length 0.12- 
0.15; forewing and hindwing pads with simple and capitate setae, prominent setae two on each 
pad, marginal (1 apical, 1 proximal) apical seta distinctly capitate, proximal seta distinctly 
capitate or simple; forewing pad with up to five smaller marginal simple or rod setae; hindwing 
pad apical seta paired with small simple seta; small simple or rod setae scattered on the wing 
pad surfaces. Dorsal abdominal prominent pre-caudal setae present on anterior tergites, long 
capitate (max length 0.1-0.12), prominent caudal plate setae absent or if present, typically two 
distinctly capitate; sectasetae three pairs (small simple or lanceolate seta in 1st position); 
marginal abdominal setae (other than sectasetae) three pairs, distinctly capitate (max length 
0.12-0.16); pleurite setae paired capitate and simple. Legs with simple setae only or with 
capitate setae present (max length 0.03-0.07); capitate fore and middle leg setae absent 
(occasionally small rod setae proximally); capitate hind leg setae absent or if present, on tibia 
only, one (proximal) capitate or small rod.
Host plant: Teline microphylla, T. canariensis.
Distribution: Canary Islands: Gran Canaria.
Notes: Widespread throughout the distribution of the host plant, Teline microphylla. Two 
sympatric species, A. diluta and A. prognata, appear to be restricted to humid or more drier 
habitats respectively. During this study these two species were never found on the same host 
populations, however, Loginova (1975) records two locations (though no host details are given) 
where A. diluta, A. prognata and A. equitans were collected. A few adults and nymphs of A. 
equitans were also collected from relict individuals of the host plant, Teline canariensis, in the 
reduced laurisilva habitat on Gran Canaria. Host acquisition in this instance, may have been 
facilitated by hybridization which has been recorded between Teline microphylla and Teline 
canariensis on Gran Canaria (M. del Arco Aguilar pers. comm.).
Biology: Eggs were found on the outer surface of corolla segments. Small nymphs ( l st-2nd 
instars) were observed on corollas, new leaves and developing fruit, usually under the persistent 
calyx and anther tube.
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY -91  -
Material examined: CANARY ISLANDS. GRAN CANARIA: 45 c ? ,  39 9 , 18 nymphs, 1-2 km 
S of Cruz de Tejeda, 2759'30"N 1536'W, 1480 m, ex Teline microphylla, 5.vii.l997 (DP 35).
1 9 , abv Fataga, 2754'30"N 1534'W, 800 m, ex Teline microphylla, 6.vii.l997 (DP 40). 3 c ? ,
4 9 ,2  nymphs, rd Moya to Fontanales, 285'30"N 1535'W, c. 600 m, ex Teline canariensis, 
6.vii.l997 (DP 41). 1 9, just blw Pinos de Gaidar, 282'30"N 1537'30"W, 1400 m, ex Teline 
microphylla, 6.vii.l997 (DP 44). 1 c?, 19, just abv Pinos de Gaidar, 282'N 1537'W, 1500 m, 
ex Teline microphylla, 6.vii.l997 (DP 45). 1 9 ,1  nymph, rd Ayacata to Tejeda, 2757'30"N 
1538'S, 1370 m, ex Teline microphylla, 7.vii.l997 (DP 48). 6 c ? ,  129, c. 5 km S of Moya on rd 
to San Bartolome de Fontanales, 2 8 ^ ^  1535'30"W, c. 800 m, ex Teline stenopetala, 
15.iv.1998 (DP 158). 3 9 ,1  nymph, abv Fataga, 2754rN 1534'W, c. 800 m, ex Teline 
microphylla, 16.iv.1998 (DP 160). 1 9, S of Risco Blanco, 2756'N 1533'30"W, c. 900 m, ex 
Teline rosmarinifolia, 16.iv.1998 (DP 162). 39c?, 55 9, 16 nymphs, rd to Risco Blanco, btw 
Agualatente and La Culata, 2756'N 1534'W, 1100 m, ex Teline microphylla, 16.iv.1998 (DP 
163). 2 9, base of Risco Blanco, 2756'N 1533'30"W, 1150 m, ex Teline rosmarinifolia, 
18.iv.1998 (DP 165). 1 9, rd Moya to St Bartolome de Fontanales, 285'30"N 1535'W, c. 600 
m, ex Teline canariensis, 19.iv.1998 (DP 171). 13c?, 22 9, 1 km N of Cruz de Tejeda, 2830'N 
1535'30"W, c. 1500 m, ex Teline microphylla, 20.iv.1998 (DP 172). 47c?, 329,  2 nymphs, 1-2 
km S of Cruz de Tejeda, 2800rN 1536'W, 1420 m, ex Teline microphylla, 20.iv.1998 (DP 
175).
Arytinnis prognata (Loginova) comb. nov.
(Fig. 26A)
Arytainilla prognata Loginova, 1976: 28
Adult Colour: Mid-green to yellow green; fore wing clear, veins uniform light brown.
Adult Description: Loginova (1976).
Nymph
Colour: i st_2nd instars orange-red with black tergites, 3rd-5th instars bright green, grey-green or 
cream, with or without black tergites.
Structure: Antennal segments seven.
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 9 2 -
5th instar measurements and ratios: (specimens 5) BL: 1.35-2.03; BW: 0.85-1.08; WL: 0.5- 
0.54; CPL: 0.42-0.49; CPW: 0.57-0.67; RW: 0.16-0.18; RL: 0.1-0.11; HW: 0.57-0.67; AL: 
0.82-0.9; AL3: 0.19-0.22. WBL: 0.53-0.63; ALHW: 1.22-1.5; ALWL: 1.58-1.7; WLHW: 0.75- 
0.93; WCPL: 1.3-1.38; CPRW: 3.17-3.82.
5th instar chaetotaxy: Head setae simple (max length at anterior margin 0.11-0.14); ocular seta 
simple, dark, conspicuous (max length 0.05-0.07); primary post-ocular seta narrowly or 
distinctly capitate (max length 0.08-0.09); secondary post-ocular seta simple (max length 0.03- 
0.06). Dorsal thoracic setae short with few long, simple (max length 0.07). Prominent wing pad 
setae max length 0.09-0.12; forewing and hindwing pads with simple and capitate setae; each 
pad with one prominent apical seta, distinctly capitate; hindwing pad apical seta paired with 
small simple seta; proximal setae indistinct from small simple setae scattered on the wing pad 
surfaces. Dorsal abdominal prominent pre-caudal setae on anterior tergites, long simple (max 
length 0.09), prominent caudal plate setae absent; sectasetae four pairs; marginal abdominal 
setae (other than sectasetae) one pair (1st position), distinctly capitate (max length 0.1-0.14); 
pleurite setae paired simple, occasionally slightly capitate. Legs with simple setae only (max 
length 0.05).
Host plant: Teline microphylla.
Distribution: Canary Islands: Gran Canaria.
Notes: In this study, A. prognata was found to be restricted to southern populations of the host 
plant where the habitat is xerophytic. In all cases it was found to be sympatric with Aequitans 
and in April, more abundant than this species on the most southerly host population sampled. 
However, it was absent from collections made from this same host population later in July, 
when only A. equitans was found. This suggests that these species may exhibit asynchronous 
development with A. prognata developing earlier than A. equitans.
Biology: Small nymphs were observed on the corolla and larger nymphs on the pedicel of 
developing flowers.
Material examined: CANARY ISLANDS. GRAN CANARIA: 14d, 13 ?, 19 nymphs, abv 
Fataga, 2754'N 1534'W, c. 800 m, ex Teline microphylla, 16.iv.1998 (DP 160). 2 d , 8 
nymphs, rd to Risco Blanco, btw Agualente and La Culata, 2756N 1534'W, 1100 m, ex
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 9 3 -
Teline microphylla, 16.iv.1998 (DP 163). I d ,  base of Risco Blanco, 2756'N 1533'30"W, 1150 
m, ex Teline rosmarinifolia, 18.iv.1998 (DP 165).
Arytinnis diluta (Loginova) comb. nov.
(Figs 26B & 30C)
Arytainilla diluta Loginova, 1976: 24
Adult Colour: Yellow-green to yellow-brown, mature specimens become darker brown; genal 
cones with darkly pigmented setae. Forewing cells with faint brown patches apically, veins 
uniform mid- or dark brown.
Adult Description: Loginova (1976).
Nymph
Colour: 5th instars bright green to yellow or cream, with black tergites.
Structure: Antennal segments seven.
5th instar measurements and ratios: (specimens 2) BL: 1.5-1.68; BW: 1.03-1.08; WL: 0.5-0.52; 
CPL: 0.42-0.42; CPW: 0.61-0.67; RW: 0.14-0.15; HW: 0.64-0.66; AL: 0.84-0.86; AL3: 0.2-
0.21. WBL: 0.64-0.69; ALHW: 1.27-1.34; ALWL: 1.62-1.72; WLHW: 0.78-0.79; WCPL: 
1.45-1.6; CPRW: 4.36-4.47.
5th instar chaetotaxy: Head setae simple (max length at anterior margin 0.15-0.16); ocular seta 
simple, dark, conspicuous (max length 0.05-0.08); primary and secondary post-ocular setae 
simple (max length 0.06-0.07). Dorsal thoracic setae short simple (max length 0.02-0.04). 
Prominent wing pad setae max length 0.12; forewing and hindwing pads with simple setae 
only, fore wing pad with one prominent apical seta and up to eight smaller marginal setae; 
hindwing pad with one prominent apical seta (paired with one smaller); proximal setae 
indistinct from small simple setae on the wing pad surfaces. Dorsal abdominal prominent pre- 
caudal setae present on posterior tergites, long simple (max length 0.08-0.1), prominent caudal 
plate setae present, 6-8, simple; sectasetae four pairs; marginal abdominal setae (other than 
sectasetae) four pairs, simple (max length 0.15-0.19); pleurite setae paired simple. Legs with 
simple setae only (max length 0.05).
Host plant: Teline microphylla, T. canariensis.
Distribution: Canary Islands: Gran Canaria and Tenerife.
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 9 4 -
Notes: On Gran Canaria A. diluta was found to be restricted to northern populations of the host 
plant (Teline microphylla) where the habitat is more humid. In all cases it was found to be 
sympatric with A. equitans and in April, more abundant than this species on the most northerly 
host population sampled. However, it was absent from collections made from the same host 
population later in July when only A. equitans was found. This suggests that these two species 
may exhibit asynchronous development with A. diluta (as with A. prognata) developing earlier 
than A. equitans. On Tenerife A. diluta is symaptric with A. pileolata, but similarly found to be 
restricted to more humid habitats of the host plant (Teline canariensis) on the Anaga and Teno 
peninsulas. It also appears to develope earlier than A. pileolata, being absent or rare from 
collections made in June but common from the same locations in April-May.
Biology: Nymphs were observed on leaf buds.
Material examined: CANARY ISLANDS. GRAN CANARIA: 61 d , 50 9, 1 km N of Cruz de 
Tejeda, 2830'N 1535'30MW, c. 1500 m, ex Teline microphylla, 20.iv.1998 (DP 172). 9 d , 28 ?, 
1 nymph, 1-2 km S of Cruz de Tejeda, 2800'N 1536'W, 1420 m, ex Teline microphylla, 
20.iv.1998 (DP 175). TENERIFE: I d ,  1 ? , 3 nymphs, rd Buenavista to Santiago del Teide, N 
of turning to Los Carrizales, 28 19*N 1650'30"W, 900 m, ex Teline canariensis, 28.vi.1997 
(DP 21). 13 d , 17 9, 1 nymph, Teno, 7 km S of Buenavista on rd to Santiago del Teide, 2820rN 
16051'W, c. 800 m, ex Teline canariensis, 4.iv.l998 (DP 152). 1 d , 4 9 , Anaga, E of Pico del 
Ingles, 2832T5"N 1616'30"W, c. 960 m, ex Teline canariensis, 25.iv.1998 (DP 179). 15d,
15 9, Anaga, E of El Bailadero, 2833T5"N 1610'30,'W, c. 800 m, ex Teline canariensis,
l.v.1998 (DP 183).
Arytinnis romeria sp. nov. (5)
(Figs 7, 29B & IN)
Adult
Colour: Yellow-green; forewing clear, veins uniform light brown.
Structure: Surface forewing spinules present in all cells but reduced in cell c+sc; distribution of 
spinules non-uniform, medium density: 40-60 per 0.1mm2; apical spines in wing cells cui, mi 
and m 2 , and absent, or more typically few present in cell r2 . Antennae short; genal cones very 
short, terminal setae not darkly pigmented. Distal proboscis segment mid-length. Paramere
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 9 5 -
short, in lateral view slender and simple, with sides tapering towards the apex, sclerotized apex 
dorsally rounded with small anteriorly and interiorly directed hook, in dorsal view contiguous 
anteriorly and rounded with an acute point; proctiger not inflated posteriorly towards the base; 
aedeagus distal segment with a flattened, shallow hook, tip of aedeagus hook blunt; male 
subgenital plate dorsal profile more or less straight and horizontal. Female proctiger dorsal 
profile more or less straight from anus to apex or with slight post anal depression; subgenital 
plate ventral profile shallowly curved.
Adult measurements and ratios: (4d,  5 9) total length: d 2.64-2.84, 9 2.96-3.16; forewing: d 
length 2.2-2.25 width 0.89-0.93, 9 length 2.25-2.45 width 0.93-0.99; pterostigma length d 
0.64-0.77, 9 0.7-0.85; hindwing length d 1.78-1.8, 9 1.83-2; head width: d 0.75-0.77, 9 0.77- 
0.81; antennal length: 1.1-1.27; genal cone length: 0.08-0.11; distal proboscis segment length: 
0.16-0.18. WLPT: 2.84-3.36; ALHW: 1.47-1.62; GCVL: 0.4-0.58; WLHW: 2.86-3.18; VLW: 
0.39-0.48; WLW: 2.37-2.53; CUR: 1.59-1.84; MR: 0.43-0.53; RMCU: 5-7.05; TLFL: 1.06- 
1.16; TLHW: 0.61-0.68; SCHW: 0.79-0.87; ATIB: 0.25-0.28; MTEB: 0.27-0.31; PBHW: 0.21- 
0.22; ATMT: 0.87-0.93. Adult genitalia d : MP: 0.22-0.23; PL: 0.3-0.31; AEL: 0.23-0.24;
AEH: 0.06-0.07. MPHW: 0.29-0.31; PLHW: 0.4-0.41; MPPL: 0.71-0.77; AEPL: 0.74-0.8; 
MSLH: 1.21-1.31; AHS: 0.27-0.28; PLSH: 1.11-1.15. 9: FP: 0.67-0.72; FSP: 0.42-0.49; RL: 
0.18-0.21; OV: 0.13-0.14; EL: 0.25-0.29. FPHW: 0.87-0.94; FPSP: 1.47-1.6; FPCR: 3.43-3.74; 
OLSP: 0.27-0.31; FEOL: 2.01.
Nymph
Colour: l st-3rd instars orange-red with black tergites, 4th-5th instars mid-green.
Structure: Antennal segments seven.
5th instar measurements and ratios: (specimens 4) BL: 1.35-1.63; BW: 0.93-1; WL: 0.52-0.53; 
CPL: 0.38-0.46; CPW: 0.63-0.67; RW: 0.16-0.19; RL: 0.11-0.11; HW: 0.61-0.64; AL: 0.72- 
0.78; AL3: 0.17-0.2. WBL: 0.61-0.7; ALHW: 1.16-1.28; ALWL: 1.38-1.5; WLHW: 0.83-0.85; 
WCPL: 1.46-1.66; CPRW: 3.5-4.06.
5th instar chaetotaxy: Head setae simple and narrowly capitate (max length at anterior margin 
0.1-0.11); ocular seta simple, inconspicuous (max length 0.04-0.05); primary post-ocular seta 
distinctly capitate (max length 0.07); secondary post-ocular seta distinctly or narrowly capitate 
(max length 0.05-0.06). Dorsal thoracic setae short simple (max length 0.04-0.05). Prominent 
wing pad setae max length 0.1-0.11; forewing and hindwing pads with capitate setae only
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 9 6 -
(minute simple setae scattered on the wing pad surfaces); forewing pad prominent setae 7-10, 
distinctly capitate, marginal (4-5 larger, 3-5 smaller), proximal seta short simple or narrowly 
capitate; hindwing pad with one prominent apical seta, distinctly capitate, paired with one small 
rod seta, proximal seta indistinct from simple surface setae. Dorsal abdominal prominent pre- 
caudal setae present on anterior tergites, short simple and capitate (max length 0.05), prominent 
caudal plate setae absent; sectasetae four pairs; marginal abdominal setae (other than 
sectasetae) three pairs (4th may be reduced, simple or absent), distinctly capitate (max length 
0.12-0.13); pleurite setae paired capitate and simple. Legs with capitate setae present (max 
length 0.1-0.11); capitate foreleg setae absent; capitate middle and hind leg setae present, on 
tibia only, one (distal).
Host plant: Teline rosmarinifolia ssp. rosmarinifolia.
Distribution: Canary Islands: Gran Canaria.
Notes: The host plant has a southern distribution on Gran Canaria and survives in small, 
isolated populations but was recently found to be more widespread than previously thought 
(Marrero, Gonzalez-Artiles & Gonzalez-Martm, 1995). Two subspecies of the host have been 
recognised but only one was sampled. A. romeria sp. nov. was found on only one of the two 
host populations sampled which suggests that size and fragmentation of host populations may 
effect this species distribution.
Biology: Eggs were found scattered on the surface of fruits, at the base of leaflets and on the 
underside of leaves. Nymphs were observed on the corolla of developing flowers and on 
developing fruit under the persistent calyx and anther tube.
Etymology: Named both for the harvest festivals ( romeria) celebrated at the time this species 
was discovered, and for the likeness of the foliage of the host plant {Teline rosmarinifolia) to 
rosemary or romero in Spanish.
Type material: Holotype d (slide mounted), CANARY ISLANDS. GRAN CANARIA: base of 
Risco Blanco, 2756'N 1533'30"W, 1150 m, 18.iv.1998 (BMNH). Paratypes 2 d , 3 9, 6 
nymphs, as for holotype (BMNH). Id ,  19 , as for holotype (DZUL). 2 d , 2 9, as for holotype 
(NHMB).
Other material examined: 12 d , 17 9, as for holotype (DP 165).
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 9 7 -
Arytinnis fortunata sp. nov. (6)
(Figs 8, 29A & 30F)
Adult
Colour: Pale green to mid-green; forewing clear, veins uniform light brown.
Structure: Surface forewing spinules present throughout all cells, but reduced cell c+sc; 
distribution of spinules non-uniform, medium density: 40-60 per 0.1mm2; apical spines in wing 
cells cui, mi and m2 , and few present in cell r2 . Antennae mid-length; genal cones short, 
terminal setae not darkly pigmented. Distal proboscis segment mid-length. Paramere short, in 
lateral view slender and simple, with sides tapering towards the apex, sclerotized apex dorsally 
rounded with very small anteriorly directed hook, in dorsal view contiguous anteriorly, inner 
margin straight edged; proctiger not inflated towards the base; aedeagus distal segment with a 
flattened, shallow hook, tip of aedeagus hook blunt; male subgenital plate dorsal profile more 
or less straight and horizontal. Female proctiger dorsal profile more or less straight from anus to 
apex; subgenital plate ventral profile shallowly curved.
Adult measurements and ratios: (4 c? , 5 9) total length: <? 2 .9 2 - 3 .1 2 ,  9 3 - 3 .4 4 ;  forewing: c? 
length 2 .3 3 -2 .5  width 0 .9 3 - 1 .0 3 ,  9 length 2 .3 9 - 2 .7 6  width 0 .9 7 - 1 .1 ;  pterostigma length <? 0 .8 2 -  
0 .8 9 ,  9 0 .8 - 0 .9 8 ;  hindwing length c? 1 .9 3 -2 ,  9 1 .9 5 -2 .2 5 ;  head width: c? 0 .7 7 - 0 .7 9 ;  9 0 .7 6 -  
0 .8 3 ;  antennal length: 1 .5 2 -1 .7 1 ;  genal cone length: 0 .1 - 0 .1 3 ;  distal proboscis segment length: 
0 .1 4 - 0 .1 5 .  WLPT: 2 .7 5 - 2 .9 9 ;  ALHW: 2 - 2 .1 4 ;  GCVL: 0 .4 5 - 0 .6 5 ;  WLHW: 2 .9 9 - 3 .3 7 ;  VLW: 
0 .4 -0 .4 9 ;  WLW: 2 .3 8 -2 .5 3 ;  CUR: 1 .7 9 -1 .9 3 ;  MR: 0 .4 7 - 0 .5 4 ;  RMCU: 4 .8 3 - 6 .2 1 ;  TLFL: 1 .1 3 -  
1 .2 1 ; TLHW: 0 .7 2 - 0 .7 7 ;  SCHW: 0 .7 9 - 0 .8 5 ;  ATIB: 0 .2 5 - 0 .2 9 ;  MTIB: 0 .2 7 - 0 .2 9 ;  PBHW: 0 .1 8 -  
0 .1 9 ;  ATMT: 0 .9 4 - 1 .0 6 .  Adult genitalia c?: MP: 0 .2 6 - 0 .2 7 ;  PL: 0 .3 6 - 0 .3 7 ;  AEL: 0 .2 4 -0 .2 5 ;  
AEH: 0 .0 7 - 0 .0 8 .  MPHW: 0 .3 3 - 0 .3 5 ;  PLHW: 0 .4 6 - 0 .4 8 ;  MPPL: 0 .7 2 - 0 .7 5 ;  AEPL: 0 .6 5 - 0 .6 9 ;  
MSLH: 1 .1 9 -1 .3 ;  AHS: 0 .3 - 0 .3 1 ;  PLSH: 1 .1 3 -1 .2 .  9: FP: 0 .6 1 - 0 .7 2 ;  FSP: 0 .4 - 0 .4 4 ;  RL: 0 .1 9 -  
0 .2 3 ;  OV: 0 .1 3 - 0 .1 4 ;  EL: 0 .2 4 - 0 .2 8 .  FPHW: 0 .8 - 0 .8 7 ;  FPSP: 1 .5 3 -1 .6 4 ;  FPCR: 3 .0 9 -3 .3 5 ;  
OLSP: 0 .3 - 0 .3 3 ;  FEOL: 1 .9 7 .
Nymph
Colour: i st_2nd instars orange and cream, 5th instars bright green.
Structure: Antenna] segments seven.
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 9 8 -
5th instar measurements and ratios: Specimens 4; BL: 1.5-1.98; BW: 1-1.18; WL: 0.56-0.6; 
CPL: 0.41-0.56; CPW: 0.64-0.73; RW: 0.18-0.19; RL: 0.11-0.11; HW: 0.65-0.71; AL: 0.9-0.94; 
AL3: 0.2-0.23. WBL: 0.6-0.69; ALHW: 1.3-1.42; ALWL: 1.55-1.64; WLHW: 0.83-0.9;
WCPL: 1.3-1.56; CPRW: 3.56-3.84.
5th instar chaetotaxy: Head setae simple (max length at anterior margin 0.12-0.13); ocular seta 
simple, inconspicuous (max length 0.04-0.05); primary post-ocular seta distinctly or 
occasionally narrowly capitate (max length 0.07-0.08); secondary post-ocular seta simple (max 
length 0.06). Dorsal thoracic setae short simple (max length 0.03-0.05). Prominent wing pad 
setae max length 0.1-0.12; forewing and hindwing pads with simple and capitate setae; 
forewing pad with 9-11 prominent setae, marginal, 3-5 larger distinctly capitate and up to 6 
smaller narrowly capitate or simple; hindwing pad with two prominent apical setae, distinctly 
capitate; proximal setae short simple; small simple or rod setae scattered on the wing pad 
surfaces. Dorsal abdominal prominent pre-caudal setae present on anterior tergites, short simple 
(max length 0.06), prominent caudal plate setae absent; sectasetae four pairs; marginal 
abdominal setae (other than sectasetae) three pairs, distinctly capitate (max length 0.13-0.15); 
pleurite setae paired capitate and simple. Legs with capitate setae present (max length 0.12- 
0.13); capitate foreleg setae absent; capitate middle leg setae present on tibia only, one (distal); 
capitate hind leg setae present on femur and tibia or tibia only (femur seta either capitate or 
simple), on the tibia 3(1 larger distal, 2 smaller proximal and occasionally up to 2 small rod 
setae).
Host plant: Teline splendens.
Distribution: Canary Islands: La Palma.
Notes: The host plant distribution is restricted, found only locally in laurisilva habitat, however, 
A. fortunata sp. nov. was relatively abundant in all locations sampled. This is one of two 
occurrences where a single psyllid species is associated with a single host species, and both 
psyllid and host plant are endemic to a single island. The other is A. romeria sp. nov. on the 
host plant T. rosmarinifolia on Gran Canaria.
Biology: Eggs were found sparsely scattered on both sides of young leaves but mostly on the 
glaucous underside, and also scattered on fruit, towards the apex. Small nymphs ( l st-2nd instars) 
were observed on leaf buds and fruit usually under the persistent calyx. Large nymphs (3^-5^ 
instars) were found in flowers, inside the anther tube on the developing ovary.
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 9 9 -
Etymology: Named for the ancient reference to the Canary Islands - Fortunatae Insulae - as the 
Fortunate Islands and also because this species occurs on one of the most attractive species of 
Teline, T. splendens.
Type material: Holotype d (slide mounted), CANARY ISLANDS. LA PALMA: SE rd Santa 
Cruz to La Caldera, 2842'45"N 1746'W, c. 600 m, 20.V.1998 (BMNH). Paratypes 2 d , 3 9, 10 
nymphs, as for holotype (BMNH). 2 d , 1 9 ,5  nymphs, as for holotype (DZUL). 3 d , 2 ? , 5 
nymphs, as for holotype (NHMB).
Other material examined: CANARY ISLANDS. LA PALMA: 22d,  14 $, 25 nymphs, SE rd 
Santa Cruz to La Caldera 2842'30"N 1746'W, 790 m, 16.vii.1997 (DP 78). 52d, 54? ,  31 
nymphs, as for holotype (DP 203).
Arytinnis canariensis sp. nov. (7)
(Figs 9 & 1M)
Adult
Colour: Mid-green to yellow-green, head and genal cones with darkly pigmented setae; 
forewing clear, veins uniform mid-brown.
Structure: Surface forewing spinules present but reduced in all cells, or if absent, only from cell 
c+sc; distribution of spinules uniform, sparse: less than 40 per 0.1mm2; apical spines in wing 
cells cui, mi and m 2 , and in cell r2 but not to the margin. Antennae mid-length; genal cones very 
short, terminal setae darkly pigmented. Distal proboscis segment long. Paramere short, in 
lateral view with an apically thin neck above a medially positioned blade produced on the 
external side and directed anteriorly, sclerotized apex dorsally rounded with slight anterior and 
posterior projections, in dorsal view contiguous posteriorly with the inner margin straight 
edged; proctiger not inflated towards the base; aedeagus distal segment with a flattened, 
shallow hook, tip of aedeagus hook blunt; male subgenital plate dorsal profile more or less 
straight and horizontal, or slightly raised anteriorly. Female proctiger dorsal profile more or less 
straight from anus to apex; subgenital plate ventral profile shallowly curved; egg with stout 
lateral pedicel at the base.
Adult measurements and ratios: (3d,  3 9) total length: d 2.64-2.92, 9 2.88-3.4; forewing: d 
length 2.18-2.3 width 0.91-0.98, 9 length 2.35-2.68 width 1.03-1.13; pterostigma length d
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 100-
0.65-0.74, 9 0.73-0.94; hindwing length d 1.8-1.85, ? 1.9-2.18; head width: d 0.72-0.77, 9 
0.77-0.82; antennal length: 1.5-1.65; genal cone length: 0.06-0.08; distal proboscis segment 
length: 0.2-0.25. WLPT: 2.85-3.35; ALHW: 2-2.17; GCVL: 0.3-0.42; WLHW: 2.92-3.31; 
VLW: 0.41-0.48; WLW: 2.28-2.4; CUR: 1.75-2.08; MR: 0.47-0.58; RMCU: 4.31-5.33; TLFL: 
1.31-1.39; TLHW: 0.94-1.01; SCHW: 0.81-0.92; ATIB: 0.18-0.21; MTTB: 0.22-0.26; PBHW: 
0.28-0.32; ATMT: 0.'78-0.89. Adult genitalia d : MP: 0.33-0.35; PL: 0.38-0.39; AEL: 0.27- 
0.28; AEH: 0.09-0.10. MPHW: 0.43-0.47; PLHW: 0.5-0.53; MPPL: 0.87-0.9; AEPL: 0.69- 
0.74; MSLH: 1.15-1.26; AHS: 0.34-0.35; PLSH: 1.18-1.23. 9: FP: 0.73-0.81; FSP: 0.48-0.55; 
RL: 0.19-0.23; OV: 0.15; EL: 0.25-0.29. FPHW: 0.95-0.99; FPSP: 1.47-1.52; FPCR: 3.3-3.84; 
OLSP: 0.27-0.31; FEOL: 1.8.
Nymph Unknown
Host plant: Teline canariensis.
Distribution: Canary Islands: Tenerife.
Notes: Known from only one location despite extensive sampling of the relatively widespread 
host plant. This species was discovered in the laurisilva habitat of the Anaga peninsula, 
occurring sympatrically with A. pileolata, A. menceyata sp. nov. and A. diluta, and was the 
most common species in this particular location.
Etymology: Named for the Canary Islands and for the host plant, Teline canariensis.
Type material: Holotype d (slide mounted), CANARY ISLANDS. TENERIFE: Anaga, E of 
Pico del Ingles, 2832T5"N 1616'30"W, c. 960 m, 25.iv.1998 (BMNH). Paratypes I d ,  19, as 
for holotype (BMNH). I d ,  1 9, as for holotype (DZUL). I d ,  1 9, as for holotype (NHMB). 
Other material examined: 11 d , 9 9, as for holotype (DP 179).
Arytinnis menceyata sp. nov. (8)
(Figs 10 & 29C)
Adult
Colour: Mid-green to yellow-green; forewing clear, veins uniform light brown.
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 101 -
Structure: Surface forewing spinules present in all cells but reduced in cell c+sc, distribution of 
spinules non-uniform, dense: 60-100 per 0.1mm2; apical spines in wing cells cui, mi and m2 , 
but absent from cell r2 . Antennae short; genal cones very short, terminal setae not darkly 
pigmented. Distal proboscis segment mid-length. Paramere long, in lateral view with an 
apically thin neck above a medially positioned blade produced on the external side and directed 
anteriorly, sclerotized apex dorsally flattened, with slight anterior and posterior projections, in 
dorsal view contiguous posteriorly with inner margin concave; proctiger not inflated towards 
the base; aedeagus distal segment with a well developed, curved hook, tip of aedeagus hook 
acute, not, or only slightly turning upwards; male subgenital plate dorsal profile raised 
anteriorly with a distinct step. Female proctiger dorsal profile more or less straight from anus to 
apex; subgenital plate ventral profile shallowly curved.
Adult measurements and ratios: (3d , 3 9 ) total length: d 2.6-2.84, 9 2.8-3; forewing: d length
2.13-2.2 width 0.88-0.93, 9 length 2.35-2.4 width 0.98-1; pterostigma length d 0.69-0.72, 9 
0.8-0.86; hindwing length d 1.8-1.85, 9 2-2.05; head width: d 0.71-0.72, 9 0.73-0.75; 
antennal length: 1.23-1.35; genal cone length: 0.08-0.1; distal proboscis segment length: 0.16- 
0.17. WLPT: 2.73-3.14; ALHW: 1.66-1.88; GCVL: 0.38-0.56; WLHW: 2.99-3.24; VLW: 0.41- 
0.5; WLW: 2.37-2.42; CUR: 1.57-1.81; MR: 0.42-0.49; RMCU: 5.92-7.05; TLFL: 1.18-1.26; 
TLHW: 0.77-0.82; SCHW: 0.8-0.91; ATIB: 0.24-0.26; MTIB: 0.24-0.25; PBHW: 0.21-0.23; 
ATMT: 1-1.07. Adult genitalia d : MP: 0.33-0.37; PL: 0.58-0.59; AEL: 0.36; AEH: 0.08-0.09. 
MPHW: 0.46-0.51; PLHW: 0.82; MPPL: 0.57-0.63; AEPL: 0.61-0.62; MSLH: 1.33-1.4; AHS: 
0.24; PLSH: 1.4-1.49. 9: FP: 0.97-1; FSP: 0.6-0.63; RL: 0.15-0.19; OV: 0.24; EL: 0.24-0.27. 
FPHW: 1.33-1.34; FPSP: 1.54-1.65; FPCR: 5.26-6.6; OLSP: 0.38-0.4; FEOL: 1.06.
Nymph
Colour: i st_2nd instars cream and orange with black tergites, 5th instars pale grey-green. 
Structure: Antennal segments seven.
5th instar measurements and ratios: (specimens 3) BL: 1.48-1.8; BW: 1.05-1.1; WL: 0.52-0.56; 
CPL: 0.5-0.53; CPW: 0.7-0.72; RW: 0.16-0.17; HW: 0.62-0.63; AL: 0.75-0.77; AL3: 0.17- 
0.19. WBL: 0.6-0.61; ALHW: 1.19-1.24; ALWL: 1.38-1.44; WLHW: 0.83-0.87; WCPL: 1.34- 
1.41; CPRW: 4.12-4.5.
5th instar chaetotaxy: Head setae simple (max length at anterior margin 0.14-0.16); ocular seta 
simple, typically dark and conspicuous (max length 0.07-0.08); primary post-ocular seta
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 102-
distinctly capitate (max length 0.1-0.11); secondary post-ocular seta simple or narrowly capitate 
(max length 0.09). Dorsal thoracic setae short simple and long capitate (max length 0.09-0.1). 
Prominent wing pad setae max length 0.11-0.12; forewing and hindwing pads with simple and 
capitate setae; forewing pad prominent setae 17-23, distinctly capitate, surface and marginal (10 
marginal, 6-12 surface, 1 proximal); hindwing pad prominent setae 6-11, distinctly capitate, 
surface and marginal (2 apical, 3-8 surface, 1 proximal); proximal setae distinctly or narrowly 
capitate; numerous small simple setae scattered on the wing pad surfaces. Dorsal abdominal 
prominent pre-caudal setae present on all tergites, short simple and long narrowly capitate (max 
length 0.1), prominent caudal plate setae present,  25, distinctly capitate; sectasetae four pairs; 
marginal abdominal setae (other than sectasetae) four pairs, distinctly capitate (max length 
0.15-0.17); pleurite setae paired capitate and simple. Legs with capitate setae present (max 
length 0.09-0.11); capitate foreleg setae present on tibia only, one (proximal, occasionally 
simple); capitate middle leg setae present on tibia only, two (1 proximal, 1 distal); capitate hind 
leg setae present on tibia only (femur seta typically simple or very slightly capitate), 3-4 (2 
proximal, 2 distal).
Host plant: Teline stenopetala ssp. spachiana, T. canariensis.
Distribution: Canary Islands: Tenerife.
Notes: Occurs sympatrically with A. pileolata. It is much more abundant than A. pileolata on 
the host plant, Teline stenopetala ssp. spachiana, in pine forest habitat; while only a few adults 
were found on the host plant, Teline canariensis, in laurisilva habitat.
Biology: Small nymphs ( l st-2nd instars) were observed in leaf buds and were found inside 
folded young leaves.
Etymology: Named for the discovery of this species in the Menceyato de Gufmar, one of 
several seats of power for the Guanche people of Tenerife.
Type material: Holotype d (slide mounted), CANARY ISLANDS. TENERIFE: Giifmar, 
Caldera de Pedro Gil, 2820'30"N 1628'W, 1775 m, ex Teline stenopetala, 26.iv.1998 
(BMNH). Paratypes 2 d , 2 9, as for holotype (BMNH). 2 d ,  19 , as for holotype (DZUL). 2 d ,
2 9, as for holotype (NHMB).
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 103-
Other material examined: CANARY ISLANDS. TENERIFE: 1 d , 3 9, Anaga, E of Pico del 
Ingles, 2832T5"N 1616'30"W, c. 960 m, ex Teline canariensis, 25.iv.1998 (DP 179). 24d,
24 9 ,3  nymphs, as for holotype (DP 182).
Arytinnis ochrita sp. nov. (9)
(Figs 11 & 27D)
Adult
Colour: Pale yellow to ochre; forewing clear, veins uniform light brown.
Structure: Surface forewing spinules present throughout all cells, or reduced in one or more 
cells; distribution of spinules non-uniform, medium density: 40-60 per 0.1mm2; apical spines in 
wing cells cui, mi and m 2 , but absent, or occasionally few present in cell r2 . Antennae short; 
genal cones short, terminal setae not darkly pigmented. Distal proboscis segment short. 
Paramere short, in lateral view slender, with an apically thin neck above a reduced medially 
positioned ridge on the external side, and directed anteriorly, sclerotized apex dorsally rounded, 
with a slight anterior projection, in dorsal view contiguous more or less along entire inner 
margin, which is straight edged; proctiger not inflated towards the base; aedeagus distal 
segment with a shallow hook, tip of aedeagus hook acute, not turning upwards; male subgenital 
plate dorsal profile more or less straight and horizontal, or slightly raised anteriorly. Female 
proctiger dorsal profile more or less straight from anus to apex; subgenital plate ventral profile 
shallowly curved.
Adult measurements and ratios: {4 d , 4 9 )  total length: d 2.2-2.52, $ 2.4-2.68; forewing: d 
length 1.7-1.98 width 0.68-0.79, 9 length 1.88-2.08 width 0.79-0.84; pterostigma length d 0.6- 
0.71, 9 0.64-0.72; hindwing length d 1.45-1.63, 9 1.53-1.73; head width: d 0.63-0.66, $ 
0.64-0.67; antennal length: 1.08-1.27; genal cone length: 0.08-0.11; distal proboscis segment 
length: 0.11-0.13. WLPT: 2.72-2.97; ALHW: 1.71-1.92; GCVL: 0.42-0.61; WLHW: 2.94-3.1; 
VLW: 0.44-0.53; WLW: 2.38-2.54; CUR: 1.65-2.09; MR: 0.44-0.53; RMCU: 4.91-5.72; TLFL:
1.17-1.24; TLHW: 0.68-0.76; SCHW: 0.78-0.87; ATIB: 0.27-0.3; MTIB: 0.24-0.28; PBHW: 
0.17-0.2; ATMT: 1-1.17. Adult genitalia d : MP: 0.25-0.28; PL: 0.36-0.38; AEL: 0.24-0.26; 
AEH: 0.07-0.08. MPHW: 0.4-0.43; PLHW: 0.57-0.58; MPPL: 0.69-0.74; AEPL: 0.66-0.7; 
MSLH: 1.35-1.5; AHS: 0.29-0.31; PLSH: 1.46-1.57. $: FP: 0.67-0.72; FSP: 0.45-0.5; RL:
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 104-
0.17-0.18; OV: 0.15-0.17; EL: 0.27-0.3. FPHW: 1.01-1.07; FPSP: 1.42-1.49; FPCR: 3.94-4.12; 
OLSP: 0.31-0.34; FEOL: 1.81.
Nymph
Colour: 3rd instars orange-yellow, 4th-5th instars yellow-green with black tergites.
Structure: Antennal segments seven.
5th instar measurements and ratios: (specimens 1) BL: 1.6-1.6; BW: 0.9-0.9; WL: 0.45-0.45; 
CPL: 0.39-0.39; CPW: 0.56-0.56; RW: 0.18-0.18; RL: 0.11-0.11; HW: 0.58-0.58; AL: 0.75- 
0.75; AL3: 0.19-0.19. WBL: 0.56; ALHW: 1.29; ALWL: 1.67; WLHW: 0.78; WCPL: 1.44; 
CPRW: 3.11.
5th instar chaetotaxy: Head setae simple and occasionally narrowly capitate (max length at 
anterior margin 0.09); ocular seta inconspicuous; primary post-ocular seta distinctly capitate 
(max length 0.07); secondary post-ocular seta, indistinct, small simple. Dorsal thoracic setae 
short simple (max length 0.02-0.03). Prominent wing pad setae max length 0.09; forewing pad 
with one prominent, distinctly capitate, apical seta; hindwing pad with simple and capitate 
setae, one prominent, distinctly capitate, apical seta, paired with small simple seta; proximal 
setae indistinct, minute simple setae scattered on wing pad surfaces. Dorsal abdominal 
prominent pre-caudal setae absent (small simple only), prominent caudal plate setae absent; 
sectasetae three pairs (small capitate seta in 1st position); marginal abdominal setae (other than 
sectasetae) three pairs, distinctly capitate (max length 0.09); pleurite setae paired capitate and 
simple or small rod. Legs with capitate setae present (max length 0.08); capitate foreleg setae 
absent; capitate middle leg setae absent, or more probably, one distal; capitate hind leg setae 
present on tibia only, one (distal).
Host plant: Teline osyroides ssp. osyroides.
Distribution: Canary Islands: Tenerife.
Notes: Known from only one location where the host plant, Teline osyroides ssp, osyroides, 
survives in a population of circa 1000-2000 individuals around the Masca valley region of 
northwestern Tenerife. This is the smallest and possibly rarest species in Arytinnis gen. nov. 
Etymology: Named for the small size and ochre colouration using the familiar diminutive form 
in Spanish.
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 105-
Type material: Holotype d (slide mounted), CANARY ISLANDS. TENERIFE: blw Masca, 
Barranco de Masca, 2818'N 1650'30"W, c. 600 m, 4.iv.l998 (BMNH). Paratypes 1 d\ 2 9 , 1 
nymph, as for holotype (BMNH). I d ,  1 $, as for holotype (DZUL). 1 d , 2 9, as for holotype 
(NHMB).
Other material examined: CANARY ISLANDS. TENERIFE: 2 9, blw Masca, Barranco de 
Masca, 2818'N 1650'30"W, 600 m, 2.vii.l997 (DP 33). 6 d , 3 9, as for holotype (DP 153).
Arytinnis occidentalis sp. nov. (10)
(Figs 12, 28B & 30E)
Adult
Colour: Bright green or yellow-green; forewing clear, veins uniform mid-brown.
Structure: Surface forewing spinules present in all cells, but reduced in one or more cells, or if 
absent only from cell c+sc, where there are typically few present; distribution of spinules 
uniform, density sparse: less than 40 per 0.1mm2; apical spines in wing cells cui, mi and m2 , 
but absent, or occasionally few present in cell r2 . Antennae long; genal cones short, terminal 
setae not darkly pigmented. Distal proboscis segment mid-length. Paramere short, in lateral 
view slender and simple, with sides tapering towards the apex, a medial ridge is present on the 
inner surface, sclerotized apex dorsally rounded with small, anteriorly directed hook, in dorsal 
view contiguous anteriorly with inner margin concave; proctiger slightly inflated posteriorly 
towards the base; aedeagus distal segment with a well developed, curved hook, tip of aedeagus 
hook blunt; male subgenital plate dorsal profile slightly raised anteriorly. Female proctiger 
dorsal profile without a post anal depression, but slightly concave with an upturned apex; 
subgenital plate ventral profile shallowly curved; egg with stout lateral pedicel at the base.
Adult measurements and ratios: (6d , 6 9 ) total length: d' 2.92-3.48, 9 3.08-3.88; forewing: d 
length 2.4-2.72 width 0.96-1.1, 9 length 2.55-3 width 1.03-1.23; pterostigma length d 0.75- 
0.87, 9 0.78-0.96; hindwing length d 1.94-2.2, 9 2.08-2.45; head width: d 0.76-0.82, 9 0.8- 
0.89; antennal length: 1.7-2.1; genal cone length: 0.1-0.13; distal proboscis segment length: 
0.14-0.19. WLPT: 2.83-3.33; ALHW: 2.12-2.51; GCVL: 0.46-0.57; WLHW: 3.1-3.37; VLW: 
0.45-0.5; WLW: 2.38-2.58; CUR: 1.63-2.04; MR: 0.42-0.55; RMCU: 4.67-7.29; TLFL: 1.16- 
1.22; TLHW: 0.78-0.88; SCHW: 0.78-0.9; ATIB: 0.23-0.3; MTIB: 0.25-0.3; PBHW: 0.18-0.22; 
ATMT: 0.89-1.06. Adult genitalia d: MP: 0.24-0.27; PL: 0.35-0.4; AEL: 0.28-0.31; AEH:
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 106-
0.08-0.10. MPHW: 0.31-0.36; PLHW: 0.46-0.49; MPPL: 0.68-0.77; AEPL: 0.75-0.84; MSLH:
1.17-1.29; AHS: 0.3-0.32; PLSH: 1.06-1.18. ?: FP: 0.69-0.79; FSP: 0.47-0.56; RL: 0.21-0.24; 
OV: 0.15-0.17; EL: 0.23-0.28. FPHW: 0.86-0.91; FPSP: 1.41-1.53; FPCR: 3.13-3.41; OLSP: 
0.3-0.34; FEOL: 1.56.
Nymph
Colour: l st-3rd instars cream and orange-red, 4th-5th instars pale grey-green, blue-green or 
yellow-green, with or without black tergites.
Structure: Antennal segments eight.
5th instar measurements and ratios: (specimens 5) BL: 1.55-1.93; BW: 0.98-1.15; WL: 0.56- 
0.64; CPL: 0.47-0.51; CPW: 0.67-0.74; RW: 0.19-0.21; RL: 0.11-0.13; HW: 0.64-0.73; AL: 
1.1-1.15; AL3: 0.27-0.29. WBL: 0.6-0.65; ALHW: 1.58-1.75; ALWL: 1.8-1.96; WLHW: 0.84- 
0.92; WCPL: 1.41-1.49; CPRW: 3.33-3.68.
5th instar chaetotaxy: Head setae simple (max length at anterior margin 0.13-0.17); ocular seta 
simple, typically dark and conspicuous (max length 0.08-0.09); primary and secondary post
ocular setae simple or narrowly capitate (max length 0.08-0.1). Dorsal thoracic setae long 
simple (max length 0.08-0.1). Prominent wing pad setae max length 0.11-0.14; forewing and 
hindwing pads with simple and capitate setae; forewing pad prominent setae two, marginal (1 
apical, 1 proximal), apical seta distinctly capitate, proximal seta simple or narrowly capitate; 
hindwing pad with one prominent apical seta, distinctly capitate, paired with small simple seta, 
proximal seta short simple; small simple setae scattered on the wing pad surfaces. Dorsal 
abdominal prominent pre-caudal setae present on anterior tergites, long simple (max length 
0.12), prominent caudal plate setae typically absent or if present, two simple or narrowly 
capitate; sectasetae four pairs; marginal abdominal setae (other than sectasetae) three pairs, 
distinctly capitate (max length 0.14-0.17); pleurite setae paired capitate and simple. Legs with 
simple setae only (max length 0.04).
Host plant: Teline stenopetala ssp. sericea, ssp. stenopetala and ssp. microphylla.
Distribution: Canary Islands: La Palma and El Hierro.
Notes: Occurs on the two most westerly islands, sympatrically with A. modica on the host plant, 
Teline stenopetala. In May, it is less common than A. modica on the two host subspecies 
restricted to the humid laurisilva habitat, ssp. stenopetala and ssp. microphylla, but during the 
same period it is abundant on ssp. sericea in dry pine forest habitat, from which A. modica was
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 107-
absent. In July, A. occidentalis was found to be more common than A. modica on both ssp. 
stenopetala and ssp. microphylla, suggesting (as with sympatric species on the host plant Teline 
microphylla) asynchronous development and habitat preference.
Biology: Eggs were found singly scattered on the clayx, in small clusters under floral bracts or 
at the base of developing fruit under the persistent calyx. Small nymphs ( l st-3rd instars) were 
observed on the corolla and base of the developing fruit, however, nymphs were more typically 
found on leaf buds and petioles. Larger nymphs (3^-5* instars) and occasionally eggs were also 
found on the underside of mature leaves.
Etymology: Named for the geographic distribution of this species in the most westerly islands, 
La Palma and El Hierro.
Type material: Holotype d (slide mounted), CANARY ISLANDS. LA PALMA: rd to La 
Cumbrecita, 3-4 km from El Paso rd, 284115"N 1751'30"W, 1250 m, 16.V.1998 (BMNH). 
Paratypes 1 d , 3 9, 6 nymphs, as for holotype (BMNH). 2 d , 1 9 ,5  nymphs, as for holotype 
(DZUL). 1 d , 2 9, 5 nymphs, as for holotype (NHMB). EL HIERRO: 2 d , 2 9, 5 nymphs, El 
Golfo, rd to Frontera, 2744rN 1801'30"W, 1100 m, 22.V.1998 (BMNH). 19 , as for previous 
(DZUL). 2 d ,  1 9, as for previous (NHMB).
Other material examined: CANARY ISLANDS. LA PALMA: 6 d \ 4 9, 2 nymphs, SE rd Santa 
Cruz to La Caldera, 2843rN 1746'W, 930 m, 15.vii.1997 (DP 73). 41 d , 38 9, 6 nymphs, as for 
holotype (DP 190). 2 d , 3 9, Los Tilos, Barranco del Agua, 2847'30"N 1747'45"W, c. 500 m, 
17.V.1998 (DP 192). 2 d , 3 9, rd Barlovento to Garafia, c. 3 km E of Roque Faro, 2848'15"N 
1752'30"W, c. 900 m, 19.V.1998 (DP 200). EL HIERRO: 8<?, 5 9, El Golfo, rd to Frontera, 
2743'30"N 18T30"W , 1070 m, ll.vii.1997 (DP 61). 3d', 19 , btw Mirador de la Pena and 
Mirador Jinama, 2747'30"N 1758'W, 960 m, 12.vii.1997 (DP 63.1). 2 d ,  2 9 , as for previous 
except, 900 m (DP 63.2). 59d , 50 9, El Golfo, rd to Frontera, 2744TS11801'30"W, 1100 m, 
22.V.1998 (DP 212). 19c?, 7 9 , nr Arbol Santo, 2747'30"N 1756'30"W, c. 1000 m, 23.V.1998 
(DP 214).
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 108 -
Arytinnis gomerae sp. nov. (11)
(Figs 13 & 28A)
Adult
Colour: Bright green to mid-green; forewing clear, veins uniform light brown.
Structure: Surface forewing spinules present in all cells, but reduced in one or more cells; 
distribution of spinules uniform, sparse: less than 40 per 0.1mm ; apical spines in wing cells 
cui, mi and m2 , but absent, or occasionally few present in cell r2 . Antennae short; genal cones 
short, terminal setae not darkly pigmented. Distal proboscis segment short. Paramere short, in 
lateral view S-shaped with sides tapering towards the apex, sclerotized apex dorsally flattened, 
with slight anterior projection, in dorsal view contiguous anteriorly with inner margin concave; 
proctiger slightly inflated posteriorly towards the base; aedeagus distal segment with a 
flattened, shallow hook, tip of aedeagus hook blunt; male subgenital plate dorsal profile slightly 
raised anteriorly. Female proctiger dorsal profile without a post anal depression, but slightly 
concave with an upturned apex; subgenital plate ventral profile shallowly curved.
Adult measurements and ratios: (4c?, 4 ? )  total length: d 2.32-2.76, 9 2.64-2.92; forewing: d 
length 1.91-2.03 width 0.82-0.85, 9 length 2.18-2.29 width 0.92-0.96; pterostigma length d 
0.6-0.75, 9 0.67-0.8; hindwing length d 1.59-1.65, 9 1.8-1.86; head width: d 0.69-0.73, 9 
0.72-0.75; antennal length: 1.38-1.5; genal cone length: 0.09-0.12; distal proboscis segment 
length: 0.13-0.14. WLPT: 2.82-3.25; ALHW: 1.84-2.05; GCVL: 0.43-0.57; WLHW: 2.77-3.18; 
VLW: 0.43-0.51; WLW: 2.25-2.45; CUR: 1.58-1.77; MR: 0.43-0.52; RMCU: 5.13-6.75; TLFL:
1.13-1.22; TLHW: 0.71-0.76; SCHW: 0.77-0.89; ATIB: 0.25-0.29; MTEB: 0.25-0.28; PBHW: 
0.17-0.2; ATMT: 1-1.07. Adult genitalia d : MP: 0.25-0.28; PL: 0.3; AEL: 0.26-0.27; AEH: 
0.07-0.08. MPHW: 0.36-0.38; PLHW: 0.41-0.43; MPPL: 0.83-0.87; AEPL: 0.87-0.9; MSLH:
1.17-1.3; AHS: 0.28-0.29; PLSH: 1-1.11. 9: FP: 0.62-0.67; FSP: 0.4-0.44; RL: 0.18-0.22; OV: 
0.14-0.15; EL: 0.23-0.27. FPHW: 0.86-0.89; FPSP: 1.48-1.55; FPCR: 2.95-3.1; OLSP: 0.3- 
0.35; FEOL: 1.75.
Nymph
Colour: l st_2nd instars cream with red abdomens.
Structure: Antennal segments eight.
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 109-
5th instar measurements and ratios: (specimens 4) BL: 1.4-1.75; BW: 0.88-1.03; WL: 0.48- 
0.51; CPL: 0.4-0.43; CPW: 0.6-0.64; RW: 0.17-0.19; RL: 0.1-0.11; HW: 0.59-0.64; AL: 0.82- 
0.88; AL3: 0.19-0.21. WBL: 0.53-0.66; ALHW: 1.28-1.49; ALWL: 1.63-1.8; WLHW: 0.75- 
0.83; WCPL:
1.43-1.55; CPRW: 3.26-3.76.
5th instar chaetotaxy: Head setae simple and occasionally narrowly capitate (max length at 
anterior margin 0.11-0.13); ocular seta simple, dark, conspicuous (max length 0.06-0.08); 
primary and secondary post-ocular setae distinctly capitate (max length 0.07-0.09). Dorsal 
thoracic setae short simple and long capitate (max length 0.05-0.09). Prominent wing pad setae 
max length 0.1-0.12; forewing and hindwing pads with simple and capitate setae; forewing pad 
prominent setae 2-6, distinctly capitate, marginal (1 apical, 1 proximal, 0-4 smaller marginal); 
hindwing pad prominent setae two, distinctly capitate, marginal (1 apical, 1 proximal), apical 
seta paired with small simple seta; proximal setae distinctly capitate; small simple setae 
scattered on the wing pad surfaces. Dorsal abdominal prominent pre-caudal setae present on 
anterior tergites, long simple and capitate (max length 0.07), prominent caudal plate setae 
usually absent or if present, 1-4 distinctly capitate; sectasetae three or four pairs (1st may be 
reduced or simple-lanceolate); marginal abdominal setae (other than sectasetae) three pairs, 
distinctly capitate (max length 0.12-0.14); pleurite setae paired capitate and simple. Legs with 
simple setae only, small rod seta sometimes present proximally on hind tibia (max length 0.02- 
0.03).
Host plant: Teline stenopetala ssp. microphylla and ssp. pauciovulata.
Distribution: Canary Islands: La Gomera.
Notes: Occurs sympatrically with A. hupalupa sp. nov. However, it is rare in collections made 
at higher altitudes in the laurisilva forest where A. hupalupa is abundant, and it is the only 
species found on the host in lower altitude habitats of dry sabinar or juniper scrub.
Biology: Eggs were found scattered on the surfaces of fruit and occasionally on leaf buds. 1st- 
2nd instar nymphs were found on fruit and 2nd-5th instars on leaf buds. Many nymphs were 
found on vegetative plants where they were attended by ants which were observed removing 
the excreted frass from the nymphs abdomens.
Etymology: Named for the endemic status of this species on the island of La Gomera.
Comment: A. gomerae and A. occidentalis may represent an example of allopatric speciation as 
they occur on the same host plant but on different islands. Adult morphology and the unique
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 110-
feature of eight antennal segments in the 5th instar nymph supports a close relationship between 
these taxa.
Type material: Holotype <S (slide mounted), CANARY ISLANDS. LA GOMERA: blw Roque 
Cano, 28 1 l'N  1715,30"W, 300-400 m, 26.v. 1998 (BMNH). Paratypes 2 d , 2 9 , 5 nymphs, as 
for holotype (BMNH). 1 d , 2 9, 5 nymphs, as for holotype (DZUL). 2 d , 2 9, 5 nymphs, as for 
holotype (NHMB).
Other material examined: CANARY ISLANDS. LA GOMERA: 3 d , 2 9, nr El Cedro, 
287'30"N 1714'W, 950 m, 14.vii.1997 (DP 71). 1 9, rd Hermigua to Monte del Cedro, 
2807'16"N 1712'30"W, 700-1000 m, 25.V.1998 (DP 219). 21 d , 169, 26 nymphs, as for 
holotype (DP 221). 36d , 329 , Ermita de las Nieves, 2806'30"N 171 l'W , c. 1000 m,
30.vii.2000 (DP 344). 25d , 41 9, 10 nymphs, Roque Agando, 2806rN 1712'W, c. 1000 m,
31.vii.2000 (DP 345).
Arytinnis hupalupa sp. nov. (12)
(Figs 14, 15C-D & 27A)
Adult
Colour: Grey-green or mid-green to yellow-green; forewing clear, veins uniform mid-brown. 
Structure: Surface forewing spinules present in all cells, but reduced in one or more cells; 
distribution of spinules uniform, sparse: less than 40 per 0.1mm2; apical spines in wing cells 
cui, mi and m2 , but absent, or occasionally few present in cell r2 . Antennae short; genal cones 
very short, terminal setae not darkly pigmented. Distal proboscis segment short. Paramere long, 
in lateral view slender, more or less parallel sided, with an apically thin neck above a ridge 
produced on the external side and directed anteriorly, sclerotized apex small, not hooked, but 
with a small anterior projection and displaced to the posterior of the top of the paramere, in 
dorsal view contiguous anteriorly, inner margin straight edged; proctiger not, or only sightly 
inflated posteriorly towards the base; aedeagus distal segment with a well developed, curved 
hook, tip of aedeagus hook blunt and turning upwards; male subgenital plate dorsal profile 
raised anteriorly. Female proctiger dorsal profile more or less straight from anus to apex, or 
with slight post anal depression; subgenital plate ventral profile shallowly curved.
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - I l l  -
Adult measurements and ratios: (3d,  3 9) total length: d 2.6-2.84, $ 2.76-3.16; forewing: d 
length 2.1-2.21 width 0.86-0.87, 9 length 2.35-2.38 width 0.91-0.97; pterostigma length d 
0.75-0.8, 9 0.73-0.8; hindwing length d 1.73-1.8, 9 1.93-1.95; head width: d 0.66-0.72, 9 
0.72-0.74; antennal length: 1.31-1.47; genal cone length: 0.05-0.1; distal proboscis segment 
length: 0.12-0.14. WLPT: 2.75-3.26; ALHW: 1.77-2.16; GCVL: 0.31-0.5; WLHW: 2.92-3.33; 
VLW: 0.41-0.48; WLW: 2.41-2.59; CUR: 1.61-1.93; MR: 0.45-0.49; RMCU: 5.32-6.5; TLFL:
1.13-1.2; TLHW: 0.71-0.81; SCHW: 0.82-0.89; ATIB: 0.25-0.3; MTIB: 0.25-0.29; PBHW: 
0.18-0.19; ATMT: 0.94-1.14. Adult genitalia d: MP: 0.32-0.35; PL: 0.56; AEL: 0.32-0.33; 
AEH: 0.08-0.09. MPHW: 0.44-0.53; PLHW: 0.78-0.85; MPPL: 0.57-0.63; AEPL: 0.57-0.59; 
MSLH: 1.31-1.47; AHS: 0.27-0.28; PLSH: 1.6-1.75. 9: FP: 0.89-0.93; FSP: 0.56; RL: 0.17- 
0.2; OV: 0.2-0.21; EL: 0.18-0.26. FPHW: 1.24-1.26; FPSP: 1.59-1.66; FPCR: 4.65-5.24; 
OLSP: 0.36; FEOL: 1.08.
Nymph
Colour: i st-2nd instars cream and orange, some with black tergites, 3rd-5th instars pale yellow or 
green with black tergites.
Structure: Antennal segments seven.
5th instar measurements and ratios: (specimens 5) BL: 1.45-1.9; BW: 0.93-1.13; WL: 0.54- 
0.61; CPL: 0.46-0.5; CPW: 0.62-0.66; RW: 0.16-0.17; RL: 0.1-0.1; HW: 0.59-0.62; AL: 0.75- 
0.82; AL3: 0.16-0.18. WBL: 0.59-0.64; ALHW: 1.15-1.33; ALWL: 1.3-1.41; WLHW: 0.86-1; 
WCPL: 1.3-1.43; CPRW: 3.65-4.
5th instar chaetotaxy: Head setae simple (max length at anterior margin 0.1-0.14); ocular seta 
simple, inconspicuous (max length 0.02-0.04); primary post-ocular seta narrowly or distinctly 
capitate (max length 0.07); secondary post-ocular seta simple (max length 0.03-0.05). Dorsal 
thoracic setae short simple (max length 0.02-0.04). Prominent wing pad setae max length 0.07- 
0.08; forewing pad with simple and capitate or simple setae only, with one prominent apical 
seta simple or narrowly capitate; hindwing pad with simple and capitate setae, with one 
prominent apical seta distinctly or narrowly capitate, paired with small simple seta; proximal 
setae indistinct from small simple setae scattered on the wing pad surfaces. Dorsal abdominal 
prominent pre-caudal setae absent or if present on anterior tergites, short simple (max length 
0.03-0.04), prominent caudal plate setae absent (numerous small simple); sectasetae four pairs; 
marginal abdominal setae (other than sectasetae) three pairs, distinctly capitate (4th small
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 112 -
simple, or occasionally small capitate) (max length 0.09-0.11); pleurite setae typically paired 
simple, or longer simple with short, slightly capitate setae. Legs with capitate setae present 
(max length 0.04-0.08); capitate foreleg setae absent; capitate middle leg setae absent or if 
present on the tibia only, one (distal, or occasionally one small capitate seta present 
proximally); capitate hind leg setae present (but often narrow) on femur and tibia, or tibia only 
(small seta on femur capitate or simple), on the tibia 1-2(1 larger distally, and typically 1 
smaller proximally).
Host plant: Teline stenopetala ssp. microphylla and ssp. pauciovulata.
Distribution: Canary Islands: La Gomera.
Notes: It is occasionally sympatric with A. gomerae but is much more abundant in the humid 
laurisilva habitat than this species.
Biology: Small nymphs ( l st-2nd instars) were observed on leaf buds and developing fruit. 
Comment: The shape of the male paramere is intermediate between A. dividens and A. modica 
(see Fig. 15). Otherwise A. hupalupa is very similar but considerably smaller than these 
species.
Etymology: The name is that of the pre-hispanic king of La Gomera.
Type material: Holotype d (slide mounted), CANARY ISLANDS. LA GOMERA: rd 
Hermigua to Monte del Cedro, 2807T6"N 1712'30"W, 700-1000 m, 25.V.1998 (BMNH). 
Paratypes 3 d , 3 $, 8 nymphs, as for holotype (BMNH). 2 d , 3 9 ,4  nymphs, as for holotype 
(DZUL). 3 d , 2 9, 5 nymphs, as for holotype (NHMB).
Other material examined: CANARY ISLANDS. LA GOMERA: 2 d , 4 9, nr El Cedro, 
287'30"N 1714'W, 950 m, 14.vii.1997 (DP 71). 72c?, 67 9, 30 nymphs, as for holotype (DP 
219). 1 9, Ermita de las Nieves, 2806'30"N 171 l'W , c. 1000 m, 30.vii.2000 (DP 344). 1 9, 
Roque Agando, 2806'N 1712'W, c. 1000 m, 31.vii.2000 (DP 345).
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 113-
Arytinnis modica (Loginova) comb. nov.
(Figs 15A-B & 27B)
Arytainilla modica Loginova, 1976: 23
Adult Colour: Mid-green to yellow-green or grey-green; forewing clear, veins uniform light or 
mid-brown.
Adult Description: Loginova (1976).
Nymph
Colour: l st_2nd instars orange or cream, some with black tergites, 4th-5^  instars pale green or 
yellow.
Structure: Antennal segments seven.
5th instar measurements and ratios: (specimens 4) BL: 1.6-1.75; BW: 1-1.03; WL: 0.57-0.65; 
CPL: 0.47-0.55; CPW: 0.61-0.7; RW: 0.17-0.18; RL: 0.1-0.1; HW: 0.61-0.69; AL: 0.88-1.08; 
AL3: 0.2-0.26. WBL: 0.57-0.63; ALHW: 1.44-1.59; ALWL: 1.52-1.72; WLHW: 0.84-0.97; 
WCPL:
1.27-1.47; CPRW: 3.59-4.12.
5th instar chaetotaxy: Head setae simple (max length at anterior margin 0.12-0.17); ocular seta 
simple, inconspicuous (max length 0.03-0.05); primary post-ocular seta simple or narrowly 
capitate (max length 0.09); secondary post-ocular seta simple (max length 0.07). Dorsal 
thoracic setae short simple (max length 0.03-0.06). Prominent wing pad setae max length 0.07- 
0.09; forewing and hindwing pads with simple and capitate setae, each pad with one prominent 
apical seta, distinctly or narrowly capitate; hindwing pad apical seta paired with smaller simple 
seta; proximal setae if present simple, sometimes indistinct from small simple surface setae. 
Dorsal abdominal prominent pre-caudal setae absent, or present on anterior tergites, short 
simple (max length 0.04-0.05), prominent caudal plate setae absent (numerous small simple); 
sectasetae four pairs; marginal abdominal setae (other than sectasetae) three or four pairs (4th 
sometimes reduced or simple), distinctly capitate (max length 0.1-0.14); pleurite setae paired 
capitate and simple. Legs with capitate setae present (max length 0.06-0.1); capitate foreleg 
setae absent; capitate middle leg setae present on tibia only, two (1 proximal, 1 larger distal); 
capitate hind leg setae present on femur and tibia, on the tibia 2-3 (1-2 proximal, 1 larger 
distal).
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 114-
Host plant: Teline stenopetala ssp. stenopetala and ssp. microphylla, Chamaecytisus proliferus. 
Distribution: Canary Islands: La Palma and El Hierro.
Notes: This is the only species with bi-generic host preference in Arytinnis gen. nov. It occurs 
on the two most westerly islands where it replaces the closely related A. dividens on the host 
plant Chamaecytisus proliferus. It occurs sympatrically with A. occidentalis on Teline 
stenopetala ssp. stenopetala and ssp. microphylla, and sympatrically with Arytaina devia on 
Chamaecytisus proliferus.
Biology: Clusters of eggs and small nymphs ( l st-2nd instars) were found under floral bracts and 
petiolar bracts. Small nymphs were also observed on leaf buds and on fruit.
Comment: The colonization of host plants in two unrelated genera (i.e. from different host 
groups within the Genisteae) appears to originate from a recent host switch in the progenitor of 
A. modica (possibly A. hupalupa on La Gomera) from Chamaecytisus to Teline, and the 
subsequent retention of preference to both hosts with the colonization of El Hierro or La Palma. 
This evolutionary scenario and the genetic variation in these host races is currently being 
investigated in a molecular anaylsis.
Material examined: CANARY ISLANDS. LA PALMA: 3d \ 2 $, 1 nymph, SE rd Santa Cruz 
to La Caldera, 2843rN 1746'W, 930 m, ex Teline stenopetala, 15.vii.1997 (DP 73). 1 ? , SE rd 
Santa Cruz to La Caldera, abv Fuente de Olen, 2844rN 1749'W, 1850 m, ex Chamaecytisus 
proliferus, 16.vii.1997 (DP 79). 1 d , 2 ? , 1 nymph, E of tunnel under Cumbre Nueva, 2839'N 
1749'W, 1020 m, ex Teline stenopetala, 17.vii.1997 (DP 82). 5 d , 1 ? , rd to La Cumbrecita, c.
3-5 km N of El Paso rd, 2839'30"N 1750'45"W, c. 900 m, ex Chamaecytisus proliferus, 
16.V.1998 (DP 189). 13d, 16?, 4 nymphs, Los Tilos, Bairanco del Agua, 2847'30"N 
1747'45"W, c. 500 m, ex Teline stenopetala, 17.V.1998 (DP 192). 30d , 3 0 ? , 12 nymphs, rd 
Barlovento to Garafia, c. 3 km E of Roque Faro, 2848'15"N 1752'30"W, c. 900 m, ex Teline 
stenopetala, 19.v. 1998 (DP 200). 49 d , 26 ? , 9 nymphs, NW rd from Llano Negro to La 
Caldera, 2848'N 1755'30"W, c. 1050 m, ex Chamaecytisus proliferus, 19.V.1998 (DP 201).
1 ? , 6 nymphs, SE rd Santa Cruz to La Caldera, 2843'30"N 1748'30"W, c. 1700 m, ex 
Chamaecytisus proliferus, 20.v. 1998 (DP 205). EL HIERRO: 1 d , rd Ermita de los Reyes to El 
Pinar, 2743'30"N 181'30"W, 960 m, ex Chamaecytisus proliferus, 10.vii.1997 (DP 59). 3 ?,
El Golfo, rd to Frontera, 2743'30"N 18ol'30"W, 1070 m, ex Teline stenopetala, ll.vii.1997 
(DP 61). 1 ? , btw Mirador de la Pena and Mirador Jinama, 2747'30"N 1758'W, 960 m, ex
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 115 -
Teline stenopetala, 12.vii.1997 (DP 63.1). 4 d , 1 ? , as for previous except, 900 m (DP 63.2). 6 
nymphs, as for previous except, 2748'N 1758'W, 860 m, ex Chamaecytisus proliferus (DP 
64). 89 d , 56 ? , 3 km W of San Andres, 2745'30"N 1758'30"W, 1250 m, ex Chamaecytisus 
proliferus, 22.v. 1998 (DP 210). 6 d , 9 9, 1 nymph, El Golfo rim, nr Mirador del Golfo, 
2745'30"N 1759'W, c. 1300 m, ex Chamaecytisus proliferus, 22.V.1998 (DP 211). 33d , 28 9, 
11 nymphs, El Golfo, rd to Frontera, 2744'N 18o01'30"W, 1100 m, ex Teline stenopetala,
22.v. 1998 (DP 212). 9 d , 9 ? ,  nr Arbol Santo, 2747'30"N 1756'30"W, c. 1000 m, ex Teline 
stenopetala, 23.V.1998 (DP 214). 3 d , 1 $, El Golfo, blw Mirador de Jinama, 2745'15"N 
1759'W, 1100 m, ex Chamaecytisus proliferus, 23.V.1998 (DP 215). 22d , 27 $, rd N of 
Mirador de Jinama, 2748T5"N 1758'30"W, c. 900 m, ex Chamaecytisus proliferus, 23.v.1998 
(DP 216).
Arytinnis dividens (Loginova) comb. nov.
(Figs 15E-F & 27C)
Arytainilla dividens Loginova, 1976: 21
Adult Colour: Grey-green or mid-green to yellow-green, sometimes with parameres noticeable 
blue, mature specimens may be darker; forewing clear, veins uniform mid-brown.
Adult Description: Loginova (1976).
Nymph
Colour: l st-3rd instars cream or orange, with black tergites, 4th-5th instars pale green or blue- 
grey, with or without black tergites.
Structure: Antennal segments seven.
5th instar measurements and ratios: (specimens 9) BL: 1.73-2.25; BW: 1.08-1.33; WL: 0.53- 
0.65; CPL: 0.49-0.59; CPW: 0.7-0.85; RW: 0.17-0.2; RL: 0.1-0.11; HW: 0.7-0.94; AL: 1-1.24; 
AL3: 0.23-0.31. WBL: 0.57-0.62; ALHW: 1.29-1.66; ALWL: 1.69-2.07; WLHW: 0.74-0.91; 
WCPL: 1.32-1.52; CPRW: 3.5-5.
5th instar chaetotaxy: Head setae simple (max length at anterior margin 0.15-0.17); ocular seta 
simple, more or less inconspicuous (max length 0.04-0.07); primary and secondary post-ocular 
setae simple, narrowly or distinctly capitate (max length 0.09-0.12). Dorsal thoracic setae short 
and long simple, occasionally narrowly capitate (max length 0.06-0.08). Prominent wing pad
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 116-
setae max length 0.1-0.12; forewing and hindwing pads with simple and capitate setae; 
forewing pad prominent setae two, marginal (1 apical, 1 proximal, with numerous shorter 
simple setae on the outer margin) apical seta narrowly or distinctly capitate; hindwing pad 
prominent setae two, marginal (1 apical, 1 proximal) apical seta distinctly capitate, paired with 
small simple seta; proximal setae simple, narrowly or distinctly capitate; small simple setae 
scattered on the wing pad surfaces. Dorsal abdominal prominent pre-caudal setae present on 
anterior tergites, occasionally few on posterior tergites, long simple and capitate (max length 
0.11), prominent caudal plate setae present, two or four, distinctly capitate; sectasetae three or 
four pairs (1st pair may be reduced or simple); marginal abdominal setae (other than sectasetae) 
three or four pairs (4th frequently reduced or simple), distinctly capitate (max length 0.13-0.16); 
pleurite setae paired capitate and simple. Legs with capitate setae present (max length 0.09- 
0.12); capitate foreleg setae absent (occasionally one proximally on the tibia); capitate middle 
leg setae present on femur and tibia, or tibia only, on the tibia 2-4 (2 larger and 2 small); 
capitate hind leg setae present on femur and tibia or tibia only, on the tibia 5-7.
Host plant: Chamaecytisus proliferus, on all three recognized subspecies (Acebes Ginoves, 
Arco Aguilar & Wildpret de la Torre, 1991).
Distribution: Canary Islands: Gran Canaria, Tenerife, and La Gomera.
Notes: Occurs sympatrically, on the two central islands and western island of La Gomera, with 
Arytaina devia. However, it is generally more common earlier in the year, and in more humid 
habitats, than the latter species. The host plant is a widespread and variable species, three 
subspecies and four varieties are recognized (Acebes Ginoves et al., 1991), but there is no 
apparent preference or specificity to intraspecific host taxa.
Biology: Eggs were observed in small clusters of three to five on the inner surface, typically 
along the midrib, of folded new leaves, and often towards the tips of the more mature leaves in 
developing leaf buds. In the latter instance, 1st instar nymphs on hatching migrate down into the 
bud to feed on the younger leaves (Fig. 3 IB). Eggs were also found singly, scattered on the 
surface of fruit. Small nymphs ( l st-2nd instars) were observed on leaf buds, and (l^-S* instars) 
were observed at the base of fruit, beneath the persistent calyx.
Comment: One <5 was recorded from La Palma by Loginova (1976) but this distribution has not 
been corroborated during this study.
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 117 -
Material examined: (ex Chamaecytisus proliferus unless otherwise stated) CANARY 
ISLANDS. GRAN CANARIA: 1 9, NE of Tejeda, rd to Cruz de Tejeda, 280'N 1536'30"W, 
1300 m, 5.vii.l997 (DP 38). 16 c?, 13 9, c. 2-3 km S of Moya on rd to San Bartolome de 
Fontanales, 285,45"N 1535T5"W, 680 m, 15.iv.1998 (DP 157). 2 d , 5 9, c. 5 km S of Moya 
on rd to San Bartolome de Fontanales, 285'N 1535'30"W, c. 800 m, ex Teline stenopetala, 
15.iv.1998 (DP 158). 14d, 15 9, 42 nymphs, rd San Bartolome de Tirajana to Fataga, 
2754'30"N 1534'30"W, 920 m, 16.iv.1998 (DP 161). 7 d , 10 9, base of Risco Blanco, 2756'N 
1533'30"W, 1150 m, ex Teline rosmarinifolia, 18.iv.1998 (DP 165). lOd, 7 9 ,17  nymphs, 
Barranco de Mogan, abv town of Mogan, 2754'30"N 1542'30MW, c. 500 m, 18.iv.1998 (DP 
167). 61 d , 6 9 , 28 nymphs, valley NE of Tejeda, btw Cruz de Tejeda and Tejeda, 2759'30"N 
1535'W, 1300 m, 19.iv.1998 (DP 168). 29d,  129, 2 nymphs, rd btw Moya and St Bartolome 
de Fontanales, 285'45"N 1535T5"W, c. 700 m, 19.iv.1998 (DP 169). 4 d , 2 9 , Gran Canaria, 1 
km N of Cruz de Tejeda, 2830'N 1535'30"W, c. 1500 m, ex Teline microphylla, 20.iv.1998 
(DP 172). 27 d , 22 9, 3 nymphs, just N of Cruz de Tejeda, rd Cruz de Tejeda to Valleseco, 
2830'N 1535'30"W, c. 1500 m, 20.iv.1998 (DP 174). 47d ,  31 9, 21 nymphs, rd Cruz de 
Tejeda to San Mateo 2800'N 1534'30"W, c. 1220 m, 20.iv.1998 (DP 176). TENERIFE: 5d ,
2 9 ,3  nymphs, rd to Parque Nacional del Teide, Miradores de la Cumbre, 2823'30"N 1626'W, 
1800 m, 22.vi.1997 (DP 6). 3 d , 2 9 , 3 nymphs, rd Buenavista to Santiago del Teide, N of 
turning to Los Carrizales, 2819'N 1650'30"W, 900 m, 28.vi.1997 (DP 19). 41 d , 37 9, 81 
nymphs, as for previous (DP 20). 1 d , 2 nymphs, just N of Aguamansa, 28o21'30"N 1630'W, 
950 m, 29.vi.1997 (DP 23.2). 8d , 119, mirador NW of Santiago del Teide, Barranco Seco, 
2818'30"N 1649'30"W, 1000 m, 2.vii.l997 (DP 32). 3 d , 119 ,29  nymphs, rd El Teide to 
Arafo 2823rN 1625'W, 1250 m, 9.vii.l997 (DP 53). 1 d , Teno, 7 km S of Buenavista on rd to 
Santiago del Teide, 2820TSf 16051'W, c. 800 m, ex Teline canariensis, 4.iv.l998 (DP 152). 4 d , 
5 9 ,6  nymphs, blw Mirador de la Cumbre Norte, 2822'30"N 1627'30"W, c. 1850 m, 
10.iv.1998 (DP 155). 6 d , 13 9, Barranco del Rey, NW of Arona, 2806'30"N 1641'30"W, c. 
700 m, 10.V.1998 (DP 185). 5 d , 5 9, as for previous except, ex Teline osyroides (DP 186). 
lOd, 99 ,  5 nymphs, N of Vilaflor, 2810'30"N 1639'W, c. 1900 m, lO.v.1998 (DP 188). LA 
GOMERA: 65d, 53 9 ,43  nymphs, rd Arure to Las Hayas, 287'30"N 1718'30"W, 900 m, 
13.vii.1997 (DP 68). 3 d , 2 9, as for previous except, ex Spartocytisus filipes (DP 69). 4 d , 4 9, 
as for previous except, ex Retama monosperma (DP 70). 36d,  23 9, 24 nymphs, La Laguna
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 118 -
Grande, Garajonay Park, 2806'30"N 1716'W, c. 1300 m, 26.V.1998 (DP 224). 22c?, 30$, blw 
Roque de Agando, 2806'N 1712'30"W, 900-1000 m, 27.V.1998 (DP 227). 8d \ 6 $, as for 
previous except, ex Teline stenopetala (DP 228).
Arytinnis umbonata (Loginova) comb. nov.
(Fig. 25A)
Arytainilla umbonata Loginova, 1976: 30
Adult Colour: Grey-green to yellow-green with pale yellow or orange thorax; forewing cells 
with small brown patches apically, veins uniform mid- or dark brown.
Adult Description: Loginova (1976).
Nymph
Colour: l st-3rd instars cream and orange, 4th-5th instars green or yellow with pink abdomens, 
with or without black tergites.
Structure: Antennal segments seven.
5th instar measurements and ratios: (specimens 6) BL: 1.45-1.75; BW: 0.95-1.1; WL: 0.56-0.6; 
CPL: 0.48-0.51; CPW: 0.65-0.7; RW: 0.16-0.19; RL: 0.11-0.12; HW: 0.61-0.68; AL: 0.95-1.07; 
AL3: 0.23-0.26. WBL: 0.62-0.66; ALHW: 1.42-1.72; ALWL: 1.58-1.88; WLHW: 0.84-0.94; 
WCPL: 1.3-1.46; CPRW: 3.53-4.06.
5th instar chaetotaxy: Head setae simple (max length at anterior margin 0.12-0.14); ocular seta 
simple, inconspicuous, occasionally longer and darker (max length 0.04-0.05); primary post
ocular seta distinctly capitate (max length 0.08-0.1); secondary post-ocular seta narrowly or 
distinctly capitate (max length 0.05-0.09). Dorsal thoracic setae short simple and long capitate 
(max length 0.05-0.09). Prominent wing pad setae max length 0.1-0.14; forewing and hindwing 
pads with simple and capitate setae; forewing pad prominent setae 8-10, distinctly capitate, 
marginal (7-9 outer margin, 1 proximal); hindwing pad prominent setae distinctly capitate, 1-2 
marginal (1 apical, 1 proximal), apical seta paired with small simple seta; proximal setae 
simple, narrowly or distinctly capitate; small simple setae scattered on the wing pad surfaces. 
Dorsal abdominal prominent pre-caudal setae present on anterior tergites, long simple and 
capitate (max length 0.07-0.11), prominent caudal plate setae absent; sectasetae three pairs 
(occasionally reduced 4th pair present); marginal abdominal setae (other than sectasetae) three
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 119-
pairs, distinctly capitate (max length 0.13-0.16); pleurite setae paired capitate and simple. Legs 
with simple setae only (max length 0.04-0.05).
Host plant: Genista tenera.
Distribution: Madeira.
Notes: Occurs throughout the host plant range from dry lowland to laurisilva habitat.
Biology: Eggs were found scattered on petioles and on the rim of floral bracts. Nymphs ( l st-5th 
instars) observed on the clayx and corolla, and inside the flower on the stylar column.
t f i
Comment: Although the form of the adult genitalia is distinct, the 5 instar nymph is extremely 
similar to A. incuba, the only other Madeiran species, and to A. hakani from the Mediterranean.
Material examined: MADEIRA: 20 d , 20 9, 13 nymphs, Ribeiro Frio, Levada do Furado, W of 
Balcoes, 900 m, 30.vi.1998 (DP 268). 12 d , 15 9 ,7  nymphs, just N of Ribeira Brava, rd to Serra 
de Agua, c. 100 m, l.vii. 1998 (DP 270). 15d, 17?, 3 nymphs, Pico do Gato, c. 1500 m,
2.vii.l998 (DP 272). 26d,  23 9, 17 nymphs, Encumeada, path to Pico Ruivo, c. 1050 m,
3.vii.l998 (DP 273.1).
Arytinnis incuba (Loginova) comb. nov.
(Fig. 25C)
Arytainilla incuba Loginova, 1976: 28
Adult Colour: mid-green to yellow-green, paler orange on the thorax, with some mature 
specimens darker; forewing clear, veins uniform mid- or dark brown.
Adult Description: Loginova (1976).
Nymph
Colour: l st-3rd instars cream and orange, 4th-5th instars yellow-green or blue-green, with or 
without black tergites.
Structure: Antennal segments seven.
5th instar measurements and ratios: (specimens 5) BL: 1.6-1.95; BW: 1.03-1.15; WL: 0.6-0.61; 
CPL: 0.51-0.53; CPW: 0.68-0.8; RW: 0.19-0.21; RL: 0.11-0.13; HW: 0.68-0.73; AL: 1.18-1.22;
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 120-
AL3: 0.26-0.29. WBL: 0.57-0.64; ALHW: 1.64-1.75; ALWL: 1.97-2; WLHW: 0.83-0.88; 
WCPL: 1.31-1.51; CPRW: 3.24-3.89.
5th instar chaetotaxy: Head setae simple and narrowly capitate (mostly simple anteriorly and 
capitate posteriorly) (max length at anterior margin 0.14-0.17); ocular seta simple, dark, 
conspicuous (max length 0.07-0.09); primary and secondary post-ocular setae distinctly capitate 
(max length 0.11-0.14). Dorsal thoracic setae long capitate with short or minute simple (max 
length 0.13-0.14). Prominent wing pad setae max length 0.12-0.14; forewing and hindwing 
pads with simple and capitate setae; forewing pad prominent setae 8-10, distinctly capitate, 
marginal (7-9 outer margin, 1 proximal); hindwing pad prominent setae two, distinctly capitate, 
marginal (1 apical, 1 proximal), apical seta paired with small simple seta; proximal setae 
distinctly capitate (or rarely simple); small simple or occasionally small capitate or rod setae on 
the wing pad surfaces. Dorsal abdominal prominent pre-caudal setae present on anterior 
tergites, long capitate (max length 0.11-0.15), prominent caudal plate setae typically absent or if 
present, two, distinctly capitate; sectasetae three pairs; marginal abdominal setae (other than 
sectasetae) three pairs, distinctly capitate (max length 0.14-0.17); pleurite setae paired capitate 
and simple. Legs with simple setae only (max length 0.04-0.07).
Host plant: Teline maderensis.
Distribution: Madeira.
Notes: Occurs throughout the host plant range and on both subspecies recognized (Arco Aguilar 
1983).
Biology: Eggs were found singly along the sericeous edges and midribs of mature leaves, or on 
petioles and stems. Clusters of eggs were also found under petiolar bracts and leaf bud bracts. 
Small nymphs ( l st-2nd instars) were also observed in these locations, and on the fruit. Many 
nymphs were collected from vegetative plants.
Comment: This species is extremely similar to the Mediterranean species A. hakani, and a 
record from Sicily (Conci et al. 1993) may be a misidentification of the latter species.
Material examined: MADEIRA: 25 d , 20 9, 20 nymphs, Ribeiro Frio, Levada do Furado, W of 
Balcoes, 900 m, 30.vi. 1998 (DP 267). 31 d , 15 9 ,6  nymphs, Porto do Moniz, Levada da 
Central da Ribeira da Janela, 400 m, l.vii.1998 (DP 271). 17d , 119, 16 nymphs, W of
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 121 -
Encumeada, rd to Porto do Moniz, 1100 m, 3.vii.l998 (DP 274). 16 d , 9 $, 6 nymphs, 
Encumeada, Levada do Norte, 1000 m, 3.vii.l998 (DP 276).
Arytinnis hakani (Loginova) comb. nov.
Arytainilla hakani Loginova, 1972: 21
Adult Colour: Bright green to mid-green or yellow-green; forewing clear, veins uniform light 
brown.
Adult and Nymphal Descriptions: Loginova (adult, 1972), Rapisarda (5th instar nymph, 1987).
Nympha\ Colour: 4th-5th instars bright green or paler blue-green.
Host plant: Teline monspessulana.
Distribution: Continental: Mediterranean.
Notes: This species has the most widespread distribution of the three continental members of 
Arytinnis gen. nov. It is recorded from the western Mediterranean as far east as Algeria 
(Burckhardt, 1989a) and southern Italy (Conci et al., 1993); the host plant distribution, 
however, extends further east to Syria (Gibbs & Dingwall, 1972).
Comment: Both adult and 5 instar nymph are extremely similar to the Madeiran species, A. 
incuba, and these two species may represent disjunct host races which have undergone recent 
diversification.
Material examined: MOROCCO: 28 d , 16 9, 3 nymphs, Western Rif Mountains, rd Bab-Taza 
to Chefchaouen, W of Bab-Taza, 3510TST 520'W, c. 1000 m, 29.iii.1998 (DP 146). 24d, 23 9, 
Western Rif Mountains, btw Ketama and Chefchaouen, E of Bab Berret, 3456'N 450'W, c. 
1400 m, 22.vi. 1998 (DP 256). 1 d , 7 9, as for previous except, ex Adenocarpus decorticans (DP 
254). 4 d , 4 9, as for previous except, ex Cytisus villosus (DP 255). SPAIN: 1 2 d , 159 ,8  
nymphs, Andalusia, Parque Natural de los Alcomocales, W of Los Barrios to Alcala de los 
Gazules rd, 3615'N 537'W, c. 300 m, 25.xii.1997 (DP 118). 38d,  23 9, 21 nymphs,
Andalusia, c. 10 km S of Ubrique, rd to Puerto de Galis, 3635'N 530'W, c. 600-700 m, 
24.iii.1998 (DP 143). 2 d , as for previous except, c. 15 km S of Ubrique, 3633rN 530'W, ex 
Teline linifolia (DP 144).
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 1 2 2 -
Arytinnis cognata (Loginova) comb. nov.
(Fig. 25B)
Arytainilla cognata Loginova, 1972: 22
Adult Colour: Grey-green to yellow-green, mature specimens darker with abdominal 
intersegments yellow-green; forewing clear, veins uniform mid-brown.
Adult Descriptions: Loginova (1972, 1977).
Nymph
Colour: 5 th instars bright green to blue-green or yellow-orange, with black tergites.
Structure: Antennal segments seven.
5th instar measurements and ratios: (specimens 7) BL: 1.45-1.98; BW: 0.95-1.2; WL: 0.54- 
0.64; CPL: 0.45-0.51; CPW: 0.62-0.74; RW: 0.17-0.19; RL: 0.1-0.11; HW: 0.62-0.74; AL: 
0.91-0.99; AL3: 0.21-0.24. WBL: 0.59-0.66; ALHW: 1.28-1.6; ALWL: 1.44-1.83; WLHW:
0.83-0.92; WCPL: 1.35-1.55; CPRW: 3.44-4.06.
5th instar chaetotaxy: Head setae simple (max length at anterior margin 0.11-0.13); ocular seta 
simple, inconspicuous (max length 0.04-0.06); primary post-ocular seta simple or narrowly 
capitate (max length 0.06-0.08); secondary post-ocular seta simple (max length 0.06-0.09). 
Dorsal thoracic setae short simple (max length 0.05-0.09). Prominent wing pad setae max 
length 0.08-0.11; forewing and hindwing pads with simple and capitate setae; forewing pad 
prominent setae 4-7, simple or distinctly capitate, marginal (1 apical seta capitate or simple, 
remainder simple); hindwing pad prominent setae two, simple or distinctly capitate, marginal (1 
apical, 1 proximal), apical seta paired with small simple seta; proximal setae simple (sometimes 
reduced); small simple setae scattered on the wing pad surfaces. Dorsal abdominal prominent 
pre-caudal setae present on anterior tergites, long simple (max length 0.07-0.11), prominent 
caudal plate setae absent or if present, 4-7 simple (sometimes with one centrally and posteriorly 
placed); sectasetae four pairs; marginal abdominal setae (other than sectasetae) three or four 
pairs (4th frequently reduced), simple, narrowly or distinctly capitate (max length 0.1-0.14); 
pleurite setae paired simple (distal sometimes slightly capitate). Legs with simple setae only 
(max length 0.06).
Host plant: Genista florida  var. maroccana.
Distribution: Continental: Morocco.
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 123 -
Notes: Occurs in the High Atlas mountains on a variety of Genista florida  endemic to this 
region. The variety of Genista florida  occurring in Portugal was found to host a Livilla species.
Material examined: MOROCCO: 44d,  409,  10 nymphs, High Atlas, just north of Tizi n  Test 
pass, 3050'N 830'W, c. 2080 m, 19.vi.1998 (DP 238). 3d,  5 9, 3 nymphs, High Atlas, rd to 
Oukai'meden, Vallee de l Ourika, 3110'N 745'W, c. 2000 m, l.v.1999 (DP 324). 22d,  299 , 
9n, High Atlas, c. 2 km blw Oukai'meden, Vallee de l Ourika, 31o08rN 740W, c. 2600 m,
1.v.1999 (DP 325.1). 6d,  3 9, High Atlas, just S of Tizi n* Test, 30 SON 828W, c. 2000 m,
2.v. 1999 (DP 329).
Arytinnis berber sp. nov. (13)
(Figs 16 & 25D)
Adult
Colour: Bright green or grey-green; forewing clear, veins uniform light brown.
Structure: Surface forewing spinules present in all cells, but reduced in one or more cells; 
distribution of spinules uniform, sparse: less than 40 per 0.1mm ; apical spines in wing cells 
cui, mi and m2 , but absent, or occasionally few present in cell r2 . Antennae short; genal cones 
very short, terminal setae not darkly pigmented. Distal proboscis segment mid-length. Paramere 
short, in lateral view with an apically thin neck above a medially positioned blade produced on 
the external side and directed anteriorly, sclerotized apex dorsally rounded with slight anterior 
projection, in dorsal view contiguous anteriorly with inner margin straight edged; proctiger 
slightly inflated posteriorly towards the base; aedeagus distal segment with a flattened, shallow 
hook, tip of aedeagus hook blunt; male subgenital plate dorsal profile more or less straight and 
horizontal, or slightly raised anteriorly. Female proctiger dorsal profile more or less straight 
from anus to apex; subgenital plate ventral profile shallowly curved.
Adult measurements and ratios: (3d,  2 9 ) total length: d 2.52-2.6, 9 2.84; forewing: d length 
1.95-2.16 width 0.85-0.92, 9 length 2.24-2.3 width 0.94-0.97; pterostigma length d 0.53- 
0.62, 9 0.61-0.62; hindwing length d 1.63-1.78, 9 1.8-1.88; head width: d 0.66-0.7, 9 0.69- 
0.72; antennal length: 1.22-1.31; genal cone length: 0.06-0.1; distal proboscis segment length: 
0.14-0.16. WLPT: 3.48-3.77; ALHW: 1.77-1.98; GCVL: 0.33-0.53; WLHW: 2.95-3.25; VLW: 
0.45-0.5; WLW: 2.29-2.38; CUR: 1.47-1.76; MR: 0.48-0.6; RMCU: 5.12-6.48; TLFL: 1.14-
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 124-
1.18; TLHW: 0.71-0.81; SCHW: 0.83-0.88; ATEB: 0.24-0.3; MTIB: 0.27-0.31; PBHW: 0.2- 
0.23; ATMT: 0.88-1.07. Adult genitalia c?:MP: 0.22-0.23; PL: 0.33-0.34; AEL: 0.23-0.24; 
AEH: 0.07-0.08. MPHW: 0.33; PLHW: 0.49-0.5; MPPL: 0.67-0.68; AEPL: 0.68-0.73; MSLH: 
1.19-1.36; AHS: 0.31-0.33; PLSH: 1.27-1.36. 9: FP: 0.67-0.69; FSP: 0.43-0.44; RL: 0.17-0.19; 
OV: 0.15-0.16; EL: 0.27-0.3. FPHW: 0.96-0.97; FPSP: 1.52-1.6; FPCR: 3.63-3.94; OLSP: 
0.34-0.37; FEOL: 1.84.
Nymph
Colour: 5th instars orange-yellow.
Structure: Antennal segments seven.
5th instar measurements and ratios: (specimens 4) BL: 1.25-1.48; BW: 0.83-0.95; WL: 0.47- 
0.5; CPL: 0.4-0.41; CPW: 0.57-0.62; RW: 0.16-0.17; RL: 0.1-0.11; HW: 0.54-0.57; AL: 0.77- 
0.8; AL3: 0.17-0.19. WBL: 0.64-0.71; ALHW: 1.38-1.48; ALWL: 1.6-1.68; WLHW: 0.86- 
0.89; WCPL: 1.39-1.53; CPRW: 3.41-3.88.
5th instar chaetotaxy: Head setae simple (max length at anterior margin 0.11-0.13) ocular seta 
simple or narrowly capitate, dark, conspicuous (max length 0.05-0.07); primary and secondary 
post-ocular setae distinctly capitate (max length 0.05-0.1). Dorsal thoracic setae short simple 
and long, stout capitate (max length 0.07-0.1). Prominent wing pad setae max length 0.09-0.1; 
forewing and hindwing pads with simple and capitate setae; forewing pad prominent setae 3-7, 
distinctly capitate, marginal, proximal seta distinctly capitate or rarely indistinct; hindwing pad 
prominent setae 2-3, simple or distinctly capitate, marginal (1-2 apical, 1 proximal), proximal 
seta simple or distinctly capitate, apical seta paired with small capitate or small simple seta; 
small simple setae scattered on the wing pad surfaces. Dorsal abdominal prominent pre-caudal 
setae present on anterior tergites, long capitate (max length 0.07-0.1), prominent caudal plate 
setae absent; sectasetae four pairs; marginal abdominal setae (other than sectasetae) three pairs, 
distinctly capitate (max length 0.11-0.12); pleurite setae paired simple or paired capitate and 
simple. Legs with simple setae only (max length 0.04).
Host plant: Genista segonnei.
Distribution: Continental: Morocco.
Notes: Occurs in the Anti-Atlas mountains. The host plant is locally common in isolated 
populations, but this species was not common in either of the locations sampled.
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 125 -
Etymology: Named for the Berber culture of the Anti-Atlas region.
Type material: Holotype d (slide mounted), MOROCCO: Anti-Atlas, SE slopes of Jbel Lekst, 
blw Tagudicht Aitsmaon, 2 9 ^ 2 ^  905'W, c. 1500 m, 3.V.1999 (BMNH). Paratypes 2 d , 1 9 ,4  
nymphs, as for holotype (BMNH). I d ,  1 9 , 4  nymphs, as for holotype (NHMB).
Other material examined: MOROCCO: 2 d , Anti-Atlas, just W of Col du Kerdous, 2930rN 
915'W, 1050 m, 23.iii.1999 (DP 302). 5 d \ 19, as for holoptype (DP 332).
Genus Arytaina Foerster 
Arytaina Foerster, 1848: 69; Loginova, 1977: 66; Hodkinson and Hollis, 1987: 10. Type 
species: Psylla spartii Hartig, 1841 (= Psylla genistae Latreille, 1804), designated by Oshanin, 
1912: 128
Amblyrhina Low, 1879: 599; Loginova, 1977: 66. Type species: Psylla torifrons Flor, by 
monotypy; synonymized by Hodkinson and Hollis, 1987
Psyllopa Crawford, 1911: 628. Type species: Psyllopa magna Crawford, by original 
designation; synonymized by Crawford, 1914: 122
Comment: Two of the Canary Island species originally described in Arytaina (A. devia and A. 
nubivaga) by Loginova (1976) were transferred to Arytainilla by Hodkinson and Hollis (1987) 
based on forewing shape and the peculiar forms of the male paramere. However, these species 
are now returned to Arytaina based on the following characters: absence of a costal break or 
pterostigma, shape of the male proctiger and the female genitalia, and reduced number of
sectasetae in 5 instar nymphs. The two larger species, A. nubivaga and A. vittata sp. nov. are 
most similar to A. genistae in general body and wing colouration, in the shape of the hindwing 
costal margin and the aedeagus hook, and in the relative segment lengths of the hind leg. In the 
same respects A. devia is more similar to A. adenocarpi. Any similarity in the paramere shape 
between A. devia and A. nubivaga may therefore be due to convergence.
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 126-
Key to adults of the three Canary Island species of Arytaina.
1 Forewing short and broad, length less than 2.5 x width, widest in the apical third with a 
broadly rounded apex, veins and apical cells (cui, mi and m2) with small dark patches at 
the margin of the wing; hindwing costal margin slightly concave, not darkly pigmented; 
antennae shorter than 1.9 mm; head width less than 0.9 mm; genal cones short (< 0.14 
mm); distal proboscis segment longer, greater than 0.15 x head width; male paramere apex 
with a single anteriorly and interiorly directed hook; aedeagus distal segment with a more 
flattened, shallow hook; female proctiger equal to, or shorter than 0.9 mm; ovipositor 
valvulae dorsalis shorter than 0.2 mm; hind leg tibia longer than the femur, tibia length > 
0.75 x head width, apical and metatarsi relatively short, each about 0.25-0.35 x tibia length 
(on Chamaecytisus; Gran Canaria, Tenerife, La Gomera, La Palma)  devia Loginova
 Forewing long and narrow, length greater than 2.5 x width, margins more or less parallel, 
apex more acutely rounded, veins and apical cells without small dark patches at the wing 
margin, but with extensive brown patches in the apical half of the wing; hindwing costal 
margin markedly concave and darkly pigmented; antennae long (> 1.9 mm); head width 
greater than 1 mm; genal cones long (> 0.14 mm); distal proboscis segment short, less than 
0.15 x head width; male paramere apex with an interiorly directed double claw; aedeagus 
distal segment with a well developed, curved hook; female proctiger longer than 0.9 mm; 
ovipositor valvulae dorsalis longer than 0.2 mm; hind leg tibia shorter than the femur, tibia 
length about 0.5 x head width, apical and metatarsi long, each about 0.5 x tibia length (Figs 
2 Abdomen without dark, longitudinal dorsal stripe; male paramere shorter (< 0.33 mm) and 
broader, length less than 0.9 x subgenital plate height, and less than 0.32 x head width, 
interior medial ridge weakly developed and supporting relatively long setae (visible clearly
 Abdomen with dark, longitudinal dorsal stripe (more distinct in females); male paramere 
longer (> 0.33 mm) and narrower, length greater than 0.9 x subgenital plate height, and 
greater than 0.32 x head width, interior medial ridge extended inwards, such that inner 
margins of the ridge are virtually straight and nearly contiguous when parameres close, 
supporting short setae (visible clearly only in posterior view) (on Spartocytisus, La 
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 127-
Key to 5th instars nymphs of the three Canary Island species of Arytaina.
1 Antennae shorter than 1.1 mm; forewing pad shorter than 0.63 mm; primary and secondary 
post-ocular setae distinctly capitate; dorsal thoracic setae short simple and long capitate; 
forewing and hindwing pads with capitate setae only, each with five or more prominent 
capitate setae present on both wing pad surface and margins, proximal setae distinctly 
capitate; marginal abdominal pleurite setae paired capitate and simple; marginal abdominal 
capitate setae extremely long (max length 0.27-0.35); foreleg tibia with capitate setae 
 devia Loginova
 Antennae longer than 1.1 mm; forewing pad longer than 0.63 mm; primary and secondary 
post-ocular setae simple or narrowly capitate; dorsal thoracic setae short simple; forewing 
and hindwing pads with simple and capitate setae, typically each with one or two 
prominent capitate (occasionally simple) setae present on the wing pad margin, proximal 
setae small simple or indistinct; marginal abdominal pleurite setae paired simple; marginal 
abdominal capitate setae shorter (max length 0.14-0.22); foreleg tibia without capitate setae 
2 Abdominal sectasetae two pairs (in 3rd and 4th positions); fore wing pad length (> 0.7 mm) 
greater than 0.87 x head width; circumanal ring width less than 0.25 x caudal plate width; 
ocular, thoracic and prominent leg setae longer; dorsal caudal plate with six prominent 
setae; middle and hind tibiae each with more than two capitate setae (on Spartocytisus 
 Abdominal sectasetae one pair (in 3rd position, apical pair small simple or rod setae); 
forewing pad length (< 0.7 mm) less than 0.87 x head width; circumanal ring width more 
than 0.25 x caudal plate width; ocular, thoracic and prominent leg setae shorter; dorsal 
caudal plate with two prominent setae; middle and hind tibiae each with one capitate seta 
distally (on Spartocytisus; La Gomera, La Palma, El Hierro) (Fig. 24C) ... vittata sp. nov.
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 128 -
Arytaina devia Loginova comb. rev.
(Fig. 24B)
Arytaina devia Loginova, 1976: 14
Arytainilla devia (Loginova) Hodkinson & Hollis, 1987: 11
Adult Colour: Generally brown or dark grey, though females exhibit more colour variation than 
males and are frequently lighter coloured (recently emerged adults may be green). The 
abdominal intersegment colour is yellow-green, and the thorax is paler chestnut with dark 
bands. Forewing membrane without distinct pattern but apical cells have faint brown patches 
and small darker patches at the margin of cells cui, mi and m 2 , forewing veins mid-brown with 
dark spots at the apices where the veins intersect the wing margin.
Adult Description: Loginova (1976).
Nymph
Colour: 5th pale grey-green or blue green with black tergites; terminal antennal segment darker 
brown.
Structure: Forewing pads and abdomen broadly rounded apically. Antennal segments seven. 
Tergites extensively reduced on the thorax, typically not extending to the lateral margin on the 
abdomen. Arolium pad long, broadly expanded apically, usually with a distinct medial groove 
and long petiole. Circumanal ring broadly crescent-shaped with well rounded anterior lobes, 
outer ring not contiguous with the apical abdominal margin and with a single row of pores.
5th instar measurements and ratios: (specimens 7) BL: 1.6-1.9; BW: 1.08-1.23; WL: 0.57-0.6; 
CPL: 0.48-0.54; CPW: 0.7-0.76; RW: 0.16-0.17; RL: 0.1-0.11; HW: 0.66-0.77; AL: 0.93-1.02; 
AL3: 0.22-0.27. WBL: 0.59-0.68; ALHW: 1.32-1.44; ALWL: 1.58-1.76; WLHW: 0.8-0.91; 
WCPL: 1.37-1.58; CPRW: 4-4.59.
5th instar chaetotaxy: Head setae simple and narrowly capitate (max length at anterior margin 
0.16-0.2); antennal setae simple; ocular seta simple, dark, conspicuous (max length 0.08-0.11); 
primary post-ocular seta distinctly capitate (max length 0.1-0.11); secondary post-ocular seta 
distinctly capitate (max length 0.13-0.18). Dorsal thoracic setae short simple and long capitate 
(max length 0.13-0.17). Prominent wing pad setae max length 0.14-0.17; forewing and 
hindwing pads with capitate and simple setae; forewing pad prominent setae 9-14, distinctly 
capitate, surface and marginal (typically 2-4 surface setae with the remainder marginal); 
hindwing pad prominent setae 5-6, distinctly capitate, surface and marginal; proximal setae
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 129-
distinctly capitate; small simple setae scattered on the wing pad surfaces. Dorsal abdominal 
prominent pre-caudal setae present on anterior tergites, long capitate (max length 0.14-0.17), 
prominent caudal plate setae present, four (Gran Canaria) - six (Tenerife, La Gomera and La 
Palma), distinctly capitate; sectasetae absent (Tenerife, La Gomera and La Palma) or if  present, 
one pair (Gran Canaria); marginal abdominal setae (other than sectasetae) four pairs, distinctly 
capitate (max length 0.27-0.35); pleurite setae paired capitate and simple. Legs with capitate 
setae present (max length 0.14-0.18); capitate foreleg setae present on femur and tibia, on the 
tibia two (1 proximal, 1 distal); capitate middle leg setae present on femur and tibia, on the tibia
4-5; capitate hind leg setae present on femur and tibia, on the tibia 5-6.
Host plant: Chamaecytisus proliferus, on all three recognized subspecies (Acebes Ginoves et 
al., 1991).
Distribution: Canary Islands: Gran Canaria, Tenerife, La Gomera and La Palma.
Notes: Occurs on the two central and two of the western Canary Islands (apparently absent 
from El Hierro). It is sympatric with A. dividens on Gran Canaria, Tenerife and La Gomera and 
with A. modica on La Palma. No specificity or preference for intraspecific host taxa was 
detected.
Biology: Only a few large nymphs (5th instars) were found during April-May, when all of the 
smaller nymphs ( l st-3rd instars) examined were those of the sympatric species A. dividens or A. 
modica. However, it was the only species collected from one location in late July when 
numerous 1^-5^ instars were found on leaf buds, and eggs were found singly on the outer 
surface of young leaves. This suggests asynchronous development, as with other sympatric 
species, with A. devia developing later than either A. dividens or A. modica.
Comment: Loginova ( 1 9 7 6 )  designated specimens from Gran Canaria and La Palma as ssp. 
insularis, citing the more slender and elongate paramere. I have retained this rank and since no 
type was published, I have designated the specimen - La Palma, El Paso, 2 6 .V .1 9 4 7 , 1 d - as a 
lectotype. 5th instar nymphs from Gran Canaria can be separated from those of the other three 
islands by the presence of sectasetae, suggesting a basal position for the Gran Canarian 
population in the colonization of the Canary Islands. Evidence that the reduction in number of 
sectasetae in this genus is derived is taken from a comparison with the ontogeny of this 
character in nymphs of the type species, A. genistae. The 5th instars of A. genistae have one or 
two pairs of sectasetae that may be either reduced or simple, however, 3rd instars have four
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY -130 -
pairs of well developed sectasetae and 4th instars have three pairs. Similarly, A. ademocarpi 4th 
instars have four pairs of sectasetae but 5th instars have only two pairs.
This study did not survey the eastern Canary Islands (Fuerteventura and Lanzarote), where 
there are no recorded host plants in the Genisteae, but one female was recorded from 
Fuerteventura by Loginova (1976).
Material examined: (ex Chamaecytisus proliferus unless otherwise stated) CANAR Y 
ISLANDS. GRAN CANARIA: 1 d , NE of Tejeda, rd to Cruz de Tejeda, 280'N 1536'30"W, 
1300 m, 5.vii.l997 (DP 38). 2 2 d , 23 9 ,3  nymphs, rd San Bartolome de Tirajana to Fataga, 
2754'30"N 1534'30"W, 920 m, 16.iv.1998 (DP 161). 2 d , 3 9 , base of Risco Blanco, 2756'N 
1533'30"W, 1150 m, ex Teline rosmarinifolia, 18.iv.1998 (DP 165). 17d, 199, 9 nymphs, 
Barranco de Mogan, abv town of Mogan, 2754'30"N 1542'30"W, c. 500 m, 18.iv.1998 (DP 
167). 5 d , 2 9, 1 nymph, valley NE of Tejeda, btw Cruz de Tejeda and Tejeda, 2759'30"N 
1535'W, 1300 m, 19.iv.1998 (DP 168). 4 d , 3 9, rd btw Moya and St Bartolome de Fontanales, 
285'45"N 1535T5"W, c. 700 m, 19.iv.1998 (DP 169). 1 d , 1 9, just N of Cruz de Tejeda, rd 
Cruz de Tejeda to Valleseco, 2830'N 1535'30"W, c. 1500 m, 20.iv.1998 (DP 174). 1 9, Gran 
Canaria, rd Cruz de Tejeda to San Mateo 2800rN 15o34'30"W, c. 1220 m, 20.iv.1998 (DP 176). 
TENERIFE: 4 d , 5 9, rd to Parque Nacional del Teide, Miradores de la Cumbre, 2823'30"N 
1626'W, 1800 m, 22.vi.1997 (DP 6). 1 9, just N of Aguamansa, 28o2r30"N  1630'W, 950 m, 
29.vi. 1997 (DP 23.2). 1 9, mirador N of Santiago del Teide, Barranco Seco, 2818'30"N 
1649'30"W, 1000 m, ex Retama monosperma, 2.vii.l997 (DP 31). 13 d , 129, mirador NW of 
Santiago del Teide, Barranco Seco, 2818'30,'N 1649'30"W, 1000 m, 2.vii.l997 (DP 32). 14d, 
16 9, 1 nymph, rd El Teide to Arafo 2823'N 1625W, 1250 m, 9.vii.l997 (DP 53). I d , 5 
nymphs, blw Mirador de la Cumbre Norte, 2822'30"N 1627'30"W, c. 1850 m, 10.iv.1998 (DP 
155). 3 d , 2 9 , Barranco del Rey, NW of Arona, 2806'30"N 1641'30"W, c. 700 m, lO.v.1998 
(DP 185). 19 , as for previous except, ex Teline osyroides (DP 186). 5 d , 6 9, 1 nymph, abv 
Vilaflor, 2810'30MN 1639'W, c. 1900 m, lO.v.1998 (DP 188). I d ,  2 9 , 20 nymphs, rd 
Granadilla de Abona to Vilaflor, 2808,N 1637W, < 1000 m, 28.vii.2000 (DP 342). LA 
GOMERA: 26d , 30 9, 5 nymphs, rd Arure to Las Hayas, 287'30"N 1718'30"W, 900 m, 
13.vii.1997 (DP 68). 1 d , as for previous except, ex Spartocytisus filipes (DP 69). 4 d , 4 9, as 
for previous except, ex Retama monosperma (DP 70). LA PALMA: 2 d , 13 nymphs, SE rd
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 131 -
Santa Cruz to La Caldera, abv Fuente de Olen, 2844rN 1749'W, 1850 m, 16.vii.1997 (DP 79). 
22c?, 26 9, rd to La Cumbrecita, c. 3-5 km N of El Paso rd, 2839'30"N 1750'45"W, c. 900 m, 
16.V.1998 (DP 189). 10c?, 8 9, NW rd from Llano Negro to La Caldera, 2848,N 1755'30"W, 
c. 1050 m, 19.V.1998 (DP 201).
Arytaina nubivaga Loginova comb. rev.
(Fig. 24D)
Arytaina nubivaga Loginova, 1976: 12
Arytainilla nubivaga (Loginova) Hodkinson & Hollis, 1987: 11
Adult Colour: Males generally dark brown, grey or chestnut, females with abdominal 
intersegment colour yellow-grey or green, thorax orange-red with grey bands. Genal cones, legs 
and proximal antennal segments yellow-grey, terminal antennal segments darker brown. 
Forewing cells with brown patches, veins uniform mid-brown; hindwing costal and claval 
margins darkly pigmented.
Adult Description: Loginova (1976).
Nymph
Colour: 4th-5th instars cream with black tergites. Sclerites, wing pads, legs and terminal 
antennal segments darker brown.
Structure: Forewing pads and abdomen broadly rounded apically. Antennal segments seven. 
Tergite structure extensively reduced on the thorax, typically not extending to the lateral margin 
on the abdomen. Arolium pad long, broadly expanded apically, usually with a distinct medial 
groove and long petiole. Circumanal ring broadly crescent-shaped with well rounded anterior 
lobes, outer ring not contiguous with the apical abdominal margin and with a single row of 
pores.
5th instar measurements and ratios: (specimens 5) BL: 1.73-1.88; BW: 1.18-1.28; WL:0.71- 
0.74; CPL: 0.6-0.63; CPW: 0.84-0.87; RW: 0.18-0.19; RL: 0.12-0.13; HW: 0.77-0.81; AL:
1.18-1.23; AL3: 0.29-0.3. WBL: 0.66-0.7; ALHW: 1.49-1.53; ALWL: 1.59-1.68; WLHW: 
0.89-0.94; WCPL: 1.35-1.42; CPRW: 4.47-4.83.
5th instar chaetotaxy: Head setae simple (max length at anterior margin 0.11-0.14); antennal 
setae simple; ocular seta simple, conspicuous (max length 0.06-0.07); primary post-ocular seta
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 132-
simple or narrowly capitate (max length 0.1-0.11); secondary post-ocular seta simple (max 
length 0.05-0.09). Dorsal thoracic setae short simple (max length 0.06-0.08). Prominent wing 
pad setae max length 0.14-0.15; forewing and hindwing pads with simple and capitate setae; 
fore wing pad prominent setae 2-5, simple or narrowly capitate, surface and marginal; hindwing 
pad prominent setae surface and marginal with two apical, distinctly or narrowly capitate; 
proximal setae absent (indistinct from simple surface setae in 5th instars, more prominent in 3rd 
and 4th instars); numerous small simple setae scattered on the wing pad surfaces. Dorsal 
abdominal prominent pre-caudal setae present on anterior tergites, short simple with long 
simple and capitate (frequently narrow, max length 0.12), prominent caudal plate setae present, 
six, narrowly or distinctly capitate; sectasetae two pairs; marginal abdominal setae (other than
t f i
sectasetae) four pairs, narrowly or distinctly capitate (4 pair sometimes simple) (max length 
0.17); pleurite setae paired simple. Legs with capitate setae present (max length 0.14-0.15); 
capitate foreleg setae present on femur only; capitate middle and hind leg setae present on 
femur and tibia, on the tibia three (1 large distal, 2 smaller proximal).
Host plant: Spartocytisus supranubius.
Distribution: Canary Islands: Tenerife.
Notes: Known only from Tenerife where the host plant is abundant in the sub-alpine zone. A. 
nubivaga is relatively common on Tenerife but is apparently absent from La Palma, the other 
high altitude island where the host occurs.
Biology: Eggs were found under the small floral bracts at the base of the clayx.
Comment: The host plant on La Palma is threatened by over grazing (less than 500 individuals 
recorded in 1988 (Palomares Martinez, 1997)). The dramatic reduction of S. supranubius, once 
considered to be widespread on La Palma, raises the possibility that A. nubivaga may have once 
been present but subsequently become extinct on this island with the demise of the host plant.
Material examined: CANARY ISLANDS. TENERIFE: 2c?, 6 nymphs, 12 km NE of Parque 
Nacional del Teide, 2820'30"N 1629'W, 2080 m, 23.vi.1997 (DP 7). I d ,  2 9 , 30 nymphs, 
2818'30"N 1633'W, 2-3 km NE of Parque Nacional del Teide, 2070 m, 23.vi.1997 (DP 10). 
17d, 18 9, c. 2 km N of Observatory, Las Canadas, 29 -1 9 ^  1629'30"W, c. 2200 m, 5.iv.l998 
(DP 154).
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 133 -
Arytaina vittata sp. nov. (14) 
(Figs 17, 24C, 1H & 1J)
Adult
Colour: Males generally darker than females, head and thorax brown or paler chesnut, thorax 
with grey bands, genal cones pale grey or blue-grey, legs grey to yellow-grey, abdomen bright 
green to yellow-green with distinctive dark brown to black dorsal stripe, male abdomens 
sometimes darker grey or chestnut. Apical forewing cells with brown patches, but these are less 
extensive than in A. nubivaga, forewing veins uniform mid- or dark brown; hindwing costal and 
claval margins darkly pigmented.
Structure: Forewing with margins more or less parallel, apex somewhat acute; costal break and 
pterostigma absent; the middle, but not the apex, of vein Rs is curved towards the costal wing 
margin; surface forewing spinules absent from cells c+sc and ri, but usually present, though 
often reduced, in other cells, distribution uniform, sparse: less than 40 per 0.1mm2; apical 
spines in wing cells cui, mi, m2 , and few in cell r2 ; hindwing costal margin markedly concave. 
Antennae long, with ten segments; head not, or only weakly deflexed downwards with genal 
cones in approximately the same plane as the vertex; genal cones long, commencing ventrally 
relative to the vertex, with a distinct depression between the vertex and the genal cones, 
terminal setae typically shorter than the vertex, occasionally longer. Distal proboscis segment 
short. Tibia shorter than the femur, tarsi long; metatarsal spur one. Paramere short, in lateral 
view with a blade on the exterior-anterior margin, and with an internal medial ridge that, in 
posterior view is almost contiguous when the parameres are closed, sclerotized apex with a 
double claw, displaced to the interior and posterior of the top of the paramere, in dorsal view 
contiguous anteriorly, with the inner margin concave; paramere shorter than the proctiger; 
proctiger not inflated towards the base but with a pronounced posterior extension apically; 
aedeagus distal segment with a well developed, curved hook, tip of aedeagus hook acute; male 
subgenital plate dorsal profile more or less straight and horizontal. Female proctiger dorsal 
profile with a slight post anal depression, but subsequently more or less straight, apex bluntly 
rounded; subgenital plate ventral profile shallowly curved, apex acute; ovipositor valvulae 
ventralis slender, apex acute; height of valvulae dorsalis as great, or greater than valvulae 
ventralis, dorsally convex, wedge-shaped and tapering to the apex; eggs with a stout lateral 
pedicel.
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY -  1 3 4 -
Adult measurements and ratios: (5c?, 5 ? )  total length: d 3.32-3.88, $ 3.68-4.33; foTewing: d 
length 2.7-2.88 width 0.98-1.05, 9 length 3-3.2 width 1.03-1.13; hindwing length <5 2.2- 
2.38, 9 2.4-2.65; head width: d 1.01-1.03, 9 1.08-1.13; antennal length: 2.15-2.41; genal cone 
length: 0.15-0.2; distal proboscis segment length: 0.13-0.14. ALHW: 2.07-2.31; GCVL: 0.57- 
0.71; WLHW: 2.67-2.87; VLW: 0.45-0.5; WLW: 2.68-2.91; CUR: 1.65-2.03; MR: 0.41-0.52; 
RMCU: 4.71-6.66; TLFL: 0.84-0.91; TLHW: 0.44-0.5; SCHW: 0.7-0.77; ATIB: 0.42-0.48; 
MTIB: 0.43-0.5; PBHW: 0.12-0.14; ATMT: 0.88-1.04. Adult genitalia d: MP: 0.46-0.49; PL: 
0.34-0.36; AEL: 0.33-0.37; AEH: 0.08-0.09. MPHW: 0.46-0.48; PLHW: 0.33-0.35; MPPL: 
1.31-1.44; AEPL: 0.97-1.03; MSLH: 1.25-1.4; AHS: 0.23-0.26; PLSH: 0.94-1.03. 9 : FP: 0.91- 
1.04; FSP: 0.6-0.7; RL: 0.25-0.29; OV: 0.2-0.22; EL: 0.25-0.33. FPHW: 0.84-0.92; FPSP: 1.48- 
1.52; FPCR: 3.56-4; OLSP: 0.31-0.33; FEOL: 1.41.
Nymph
Colour: i st_2nd instars cream and orange or black, 3rd-5th instars cream and orange, pale yellow 
or blue-green, with black tergites. Sclerites, wing pads, legs and terminal antennal segments 
darker brown.
Structure: Forewing pads and abdomen broadly rounded apically. Antennal segments seven. 
Tergite structure extensively reduced on the thorax, typically not extending to the lateral margin 
on the abdomen. Arolium pad long, broadly expanded apically, usually with a distinct medial 
groove and long petiole. Circumanal ring broadly crescent-shaped with well rounded anterior 
lobes, outer ring not contiguous with the apical abdominal margin and with a single row of 
pores.
5th instar measurements and ratios: (specimens 5) BL: 1.83-2.3; BW: 1.15-1.35; WL: 0.65- 
0.77; CPL: 0.57-0.65; CPW: 0.76-0.87; RW: 0.22-0.24; RL: 0.13-0.16; HW: 0.79-0.9; AL:
1.18-1.28; AL3: 0.28-0.3. WBL: 0.59-0.63; ALHW: 1.42-1.49; ALWL: 1.66-1.85; WLHW: 
0.78-0.86; WCPL: 1.26-1.35; CPRW: 3.45-3.7.
5th instar chaetotaxy: Head setae simple (max length at anterior margin 0.1-0.15); antennal 
setae simple; ocular seta simple, inconspicuous (max length 0.03-0.06); primary post-ocular 
seta simple or narrowly capitate (max length 0.07); secondary post-ocular seta absent or if 
present simple (max length 0.05). Dorsal thoracic setae short simple (max length 0.03-0.05). 
Prominent wing pad setae max length 0.1; forewing and hindwing pads with simple and 
capitate setae; fore wing pad with one prominent apical seta, distinctly or narrowly capitate
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 135 -
(occasionally reduced to small simple); hindwing pad with two prominent apical setae, 
distinctly capitate; proximal setae absent; small simple setae scattered on the wing pad surfaces. 
Dorsal abdominal prominent pre-caudal setae present on anterior tergites, short simple (or very 
slightly capitate, max length 0.05-0.09), two prominent caudal plate setae present, narrowly 
capitate; sectasetae one pair in the 3rd position (apical pair in the 4th position are small simple or 
rod setae); marginal abdominal setae (other than sectasetae) four pairs, distinctly capitate (4th 
pair sometimes simple) (max length 0.14.-0.22); pleurite setae paired simple. Legs with capitate 
setae present (max length 0.07-0.08); capitate foreleg setae absent; capitate middle leg setae 
present on femur and tibia, on the tibia one (distal); capitate hind leg setae present on femur and 
tibia, on the tibia one (distal).
Host plant: Spartocytisus filipes, S. supranubius.
Distribution: Canary Islands: La Gomera, La Palma, and El Hierro.
Notes: Occurs on the three most westerly islands. It is found throughout the host plant range, 
from dry lowland to sabinar and laurisilva habitat. On La Palma, it is sympatric with Arytainilla 
serpentina in the laurisilva habitat, where it is less common than the latter species.
Biology: Eggs, on Spartocytisus filipes, are laid in rows around the inside rim of the calyx, and 
in small clusters on the inner surfaces of corolla segments (Fig. 31 A). Of 46 flowers examined, 
35 were found to have between five, to more than 30 eggs per flower, the majority laid on the 
inner surface of the calyx which is persistent during development of the young fruit. In mid- 
May, small nymphs ( l st-2nd instars) were observed in flowers on the corolla and clayx. 
Etymology: Named for the dorsal, longitudinal stripe or vittae, particularly distinct in females, 
which makes this species easily recognisable in the field and distinguishes it from the closely 
related species, A. nubivaga.
Comment: A. vittata is very similar to A. nubivaga, and appears to represent a recent speciation 
event involving a host switch from the upland to the lowland Spartocytisus species. At present 
these two species do not occur on the same island. On La Palma Spartocytisus supranubius (the 
upland host) is rare and when sampled a few adults and nymphs of A. vittata were found. The 
lowland host, Spartocytisus filipes, is present but extremely rare on Tenerife, where no 
individuals were located for sampling. It is not apparent therefore, whether a host switch may 
have occurred on one island, or been coupled with colonization of a new island. A. vittata can 
be distinguished from A. nubivaga by the more slender paramere with an extended internal
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 136-
ridge which is shallow in A. nubivaga, also by the adult colour (i.e. dorsal vittae) and the 5th 
instar nymph which has a single pair of sectasetae in A. vittata.
Type material: Holotype d (slide mounted), CANARY ISLANDS. LA PALMA: Barranco de 
las Angustias, 2840'30"N 1755'W, c. 300 m, 18.V.1998 (BMNH). Paratypes I d ,  as for 
holotype (BMNH). I d ,  1 9, as for holotype (DZUL). 1 9, as for holotype (NHMB). 1 9, SE rd 
Santa Cruz to La Caldera, 2845TSf 1749'30"W, 1950 m, ex Spartocytisus supranubius, 
16.vii.1997 (BMNH). LA GOMERA: 2 d , 2 9 , S of Hermigua, 2808'30,,N 1712'W> 500-600 
m, 25.V.1998 (BMNH). 3 d , 1 9, as for previous (NHMB). EL HIERRO: 5 nymphs, N coast 
btw Frontera and Sabinosa, 2745rN 1804'W, 300 m, 22.V.1998 (BMNH).
Material examined: (ex Spartocytisus filipes unless otherwise stated) CANARY ISLANDS. LA 
GOMERA: 8 d , 109, Barranco del Agua, abv El Retamal, Valle Gran Rey, 2 8 ^ ^
1718'30"W, 550 m, 13.vii.1997 (DP 66). 17d, 16 9, 7 nymphs, rd Arure to Las Hayas, 
287'30"N 1718'30"W, 900 m, 13.vii.1997 (DP 69 ).21d , 14 9, S of Hermigua, 2808'30"N 
1712'W, 500-600 m, 25.V.1998 (DP 220). 2 d , 8 9, blw Roque Cano, 2 8    1715'30"W, 
300-400 m, 26.v. 1998 (DP 222). LA PALMA: 19, SE rd Santa Cruz to La Caldera, 2845'N 
1749'30"W, 1950 m, ex Spartocytisus supranubius, 16.vii.1997 (DP 80.1). 6 d , 23 9, Barranco 
de las Angustias, abv Los Llanos 2841'N 1753'30"W, 420 m, 17.vii.1997 (DP 83). 3 nymphs, 
La Caldera, 2846rN 175'30"W, 2280 m, ex Spartocytisus supranubius, 17.vii.1997 (DP 85).
1 9, nr Los Galguitos, Barranco de la Fuente, 2846'N 1746'W, 350 m, 17.V.1998 (DP 191).
4 d , 53 9, 1 nymph, as for holotype (DP 193). 17d , 15 9, Barranco de Jurado, S of Tijarafe, 
2842'15"N 1756'45"W, c. 600 m, 18.V.1998 (DP 197). I d ,  15 9, NE, from El Grand to 
Barlovento and Roque Faro, 200-500 m, 19.V.1998 (DP 198). EL HIERRO: 12d, 119, c. 5 km 
W of Frontera on road to Sabinosa, 2745'N 1803'30"W, 230 m, 10.vii.1997 (DP 58). 27 d ,
13 9, 13 nymphs, N coast btw Frontera and Sabinosa, 2745rN 1804'W, 300 m, 22.V.1998 (DP 
213).
Genus Livilla Curtis
Livilla Curtis, 1836: 625; Loginova, 1977: 67; Hodkinson and Hollis, 1987: 19. Type species: 
Livilla ulicis Curtis, by monotypy
Floria, Low, 1879: 594; Loginova, 1977: 66. Type species: Psylla pyrenaea Mink, designated 
by Oshanin, 1912: 128; synonymized by Hodkinson and Hollis, 1987: 19
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 137 -
Alloeoneura Low, 1879: 594; Loginova, 1977: 67. Type species: Arytaina radiata Foerster, by 
monotypy; synonymized by Hodkinson and Hollis, 1987: 19
Floria (Floriella) Ramirez Gomez, 1956: 87. Type species: Psylla pyrenaea Mink [objective 
synonym of Floria]
Livilla monospermae Hodkinson 
(Figs 24A, IE  & IK)
Livilla monospermae Hodkinson, 1990: 29
Adult Colour: Green to yellow-green, thorax usually with dark bands, head and legs sometimes 
brown, femora, genal cones and terminal antennal segments darker brown; forewing membrane 
with distinct, dark brown transverse apical pattern, veins uniform light brown.
Adult Description: Hodkinson (1990).
Nymph
Colour: i st-2nd instars cream with black tergites, 3^-4* instars orange-brown with black
tergites, 5 instars pale blue-green or yellow with black tergites. Sclerites, wing pads, legs and 
terminal antennal segments darker brown.
Structure: Forewing pads and abdomen broadly rounded apically. Antennal segments seven. 
Tergites extensively reduced on the thorax, typically not extending to the lateral margin on the 
abdomen. Arolium pad long, broadly expanded apically, usually with a distinct medial groove 
and long petiole. Circumanal ring shape broadly crescent-shaped with well rounded anterior 
lobes, outer ring not contiguous with the apical abdominal margin and with a single row of 
pores.
5th instar measurements and ratios: (specimens 4) BL: 1.95-2.23; BW: 1.15-1.23; WL: 0.63- 
0.69; CPL: 0.56-0.59; CPW: 0.84-0.91; RW: 0.22-0.24; RL: 0.12-0.14; HW: 0.75-0.84; AL: 
1.03-1.1; AL3: 0.25-0.28. WBL: 0.58-0.67; ALHW: 1.29-1.47; ALWL: 1.59-1.75; WLHW: 
0.79-0.85; WCPL: 1.48-1.63; CPRW: 3.58-3.96.
5th instar chaetotaxy: Head setae simple and distinctly capitate (max length at anterior margin 
0.09-0.1); antennal setae simple and capitate (small capitate on 1st, and distally on 3rd and 5th 
segments); ocular seta small, capitate (max length 0.01-0.05); primary post-ocular seta 
distinctly capitate (max length 0.08); secondary post-ocular seta distinctly capitate (max length 
0.04-0.07). Dorsal thoracic setae short capitate (max length 0.03-0.04). Prominent wing pad
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 138-
setae max length 0.12-0.14; forewing and hindwing pads with capitate setae only; forewing pad 
prominent setae 8-12, distinctly capitate, surface and marginal (7-10 marginal, 1 proximal, 
remainder surface); hindwing pad prominent setae 4-7, distinctly capitate, surface and marginal 
(2 apical, 1 proximal, 1-4 surface); proximal setae distinctly capitate; numerous small capitate 
setae scattered on the wing pad surfaces. Dorsal abdominal prominent pre-caudal setae present 
on anterior tergites, short capitate (max length 0.02), prominent caudal plate setae absent 
(numerous small capitate); sectasetae four pairs; marginal abdominal setae (other than 
sectasetae) four pairs, distinctly capitate (max length 0.23); pleurite setae paired capitate and 
simple or capitate only (anterior pleurites with 2-3 capitate setae). Legs with capitate setae 
present (max length 0.1-0.14); on all legs capitate setae present on femora, tibiae and tarsi, on 
the tibia 3-4 larger, with numerous smaller capitate setae.
Host plant: Retama monosperma.
Distribution: Canary Islands: Tenerife, La Gomera, La Palma, and El Hierro.
Comment: This is the only representative of Livilla in the Canary Islands. It is present on four 
of the five central and western Canary Islands, and the apparent absence from Gran Canaria 
may be due to the restricted host plant distribution on this island. It is closely related to the 
widespread continental, Retama-feeding species, Livilla retamae.
Material examined: CANARY ISLANDS. TENERIFE: 3 d , 13 $, 3 nymphs, c. 2 km S of 
Tamaimo, rd to Santiago del Teide, 2815N 1648'30"W, 600 m, 29.vi.1997 (DP 28). 6 d , 13 $, 
5 nymphs, mirador N of Santiago del Teide, Barranco Seco, 2818'30"N 1649'30"W, 1000 m, 
2.vii.l997 (DP 31). 3 d , 3 $ , blw Masca village, Barranco de Masca, 2818rN 1650'30"W, 550 
m, 2.vii.l997 (DP 34). 2 d , 1 $, La Laguna University, 18.vii.1997 (DP 87). LA GOMERA:
15 d , 5 $, 3 nymphs, Barranco del Agua, abv El Retamal, Valle Gran Rey, 287'N 1718'30"W, 
550 m, 13.vii.1997 (DP 65). 66d , 47 $, 1 nymph, rd Arure to Las Hayas, 287'30"N 
1718'30"W, 900 m, 13.vii.1997 (DP 70). LA PALMA: 4 d , 1 $, btw Las Nieves andMirca, 
2842'N 1746'30"W, 260 m, 16.vii.1997 (DP 77). 15d, 9 9 , 1 0  nymphs, Barranco de las 
Angustias, 2840'N 1755'30"W, c. 300 m, 17.vii.1997 (DP 84). 11 d , 9 9, 6 nymphs, Barranco 
de las Angustias, 2840'15N 1755'45"W, 350 m, 18.V.1998 (DP 196). EL HIERRO: 22d,  12$,
16 nymphs, c. 50 m blw Mirador de la Pena, E rim of El Golfo, 2748'30"N 1759'W, 560 m, 
12.vii.1997 (DP 62).
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 139-
Livilla ima (Loginova) comb. nov.
(Fig. 23C)
Arytainilla ima Loginova, 1972: 19
Adult Colour: Bright or paler green, legs yellow, head and thorax sometimes brown or orange, 
mature specimens may be darker brown. Forewing membrane more or less opaque, yellow- 
brown, veins uniform light brown.
Adult Description: Loginova (1972).
Nymph
Colour: i st-2nd instars orange, 4th-5th instars pale green or orange, with or without black tergites. 
Terminal antennal segment and sometimes sclerites and wing pads darker brown.
Structure: Forewing pads and abdomen broadly rounded apically. Antennal segments seven. 
Tergites extensively reduced on the thorax, typically not extending to the lateral margin on the 
abdomen. Arolium pad short, broadly expanded apically, usually with a distinct medial groove 
and short petiole. Circumanal ring broadly crescent-shaped with well rounded anterior lobes, 
outer ring not contiguous with the apical abdominal margin and with a single row of pores.
5th instar measurements and ratios: (specimens 5) BL: 1.73-1.93; BW: 1.15-1.3; WL: 0.7-0.76; 
CPL: 0.57-0.59; CPW: 0.91-0.93; RW: 0.19-0.23; RL: 0.1-0.11; HW: 0.67-0.71; AL: 0.8-0.88; 
AL3: 0.22-0.23. WBL: 0.66-0.72; ALHW: 1.19-1.29; ALWL: 1.14-1.22; WLHW: 1.04-1.09; 
WCPL: 1.54-1.61; CPRW: 4.04-4.79.
5th instar chaetotaxy: Head setae simple (max length at anterior margin 0.1-0.15); antennal 
setae simple; ocular seta simple, inconspicuous (max length 0.02-0.04); primary post-ocular 
seta typically narrowly or distinctly capitate, sometimes simple (max length 0.05-0.08); 
secondary post-ocular seta absent or if present, short simple (max length 0.02-0.03). Dorsal 
thoracic setae short simple (max length 0.02-0.03). Prominent wing pad setae max length 0.05- 
0.12; forewing and hindwing pads with simple and capitate setae; each wing pad with one 
prominent apical seta, narrowly or distinctly capitate, hindwing apical seta paired with small 
simple seta; proximal setae absent; small simple setae scattered on the wing pad surfaces.
Dorsal abdominal prominent pre-caudal setae absent (indistinct small simple), prominent caudal 
plate setae absent; sectasetae four pairs; marginal abdominal setae (other than sectasetae) three 
or four pairs, simple (occasionally slightly capitate, max length 0.18-0.2); pleurite setae paired 
simple. Legs with or without capitate setae (max length 0.06-0.08); capitate foreleg setae
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 140-
absent; capitate middle and hind leg setae absent or, if present on tibia only, one (distally, often 
narrow or simple).
Host plant: Adenocarpus anagyrifolius.
Distribution: Continental: Morocco.
Notes: Endemic to the High Atlas where this species and its host plant are locally common. 
Biology: Clusters of eggs were found inside folded young leaves and under floral bracts or 
singly on the tips of petiolar bracts, and at the base and tips of young leaflets. Nymphs ( l st-4th 
instars) were observed on leaf buds or in folded young leaves.
Comment: This species is removed from Arytainilla (Loginova, 1972) and placed in Livilla 
with the two following species (L. caprifuga sp. nov. and L. baetica sp. nov.) based on the 
reduced or absent pterostigma, slender genal cones, shape of the female genitalia and 
ovipositor, and similarities in paramere form such as thick setae at the base of the posterior 
margin. Together with L. caprifuga sp. nov. and L. baetica sp. nov., these species form an 
exclusively Adenocarpus-feeding group, which may also include L. complexa sp. nov.
Material examined: MOROCCO: 2 9, High Atlas, S of Tizi n  Test pass, 3045rN 825'W, c. 
2000 m, 19.vi.1998 (DP 236). 1 2 c? , 13 9, as for previous except, c. 2030 m (DP 237). 2 2 c? ,
19 9, High Atlas, N of Tizi n  Test pass, 3052'N 822'W, c. 2030 m, 19.vi.1998 (DP 239). 5 c?, 
13 9, 22 nymphs, High Atlas, just N of Taddert on Tizi n  Tichka rd, 3120TS1 725'W, 1650 m,
27.iii.1999 (DP 305). 2 c? , 1 1 9 , 2  nymphs, High Atlas, S of Taddert on Tizi n  Tichka rd, 
3118'N 725'W, 1650 m, 27.iii.1999 (DP 306). 8<?, 4 9 , 13 nymphs, High Atlas, c. 13 km S of 
Ijoukak, Tizi n  Test rd, 3050^  828'W, c. 1800 m, 2.V.1999 (DP 328).
Livilla caprifuga sp. nov. (15)
(Fig. 19)
Adult
Colour: Grey-green to grey-yellow, female abdomens more blue-grey; terminal antennal 
segments slightly darker brown. Forewing membrane somewhat opaque white, veins unform 
yellow or light brown.
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 141 -
Structure: Forewing widest in the middle third with more acutely rounded apex; costal break 
absent (occasionally feint break discernible); pterostigma absent; vein Rs slightly curved in the 
middle and weakly curved at the apex, towards the costal margin; surface forewing spinules 
present throughout all cells, distribution non-uniform, very dense: more than 100 per 0.1mm ; 
apical spines in wing cells cui, mi and m2 , but absent from cell r2 ; hindwing costal margin 
straight. Antennae short, with ten segments; head deflexed downwards with genal cones 
directed downwards relative to the plane of the vertex; genal cones long, commencing dorsally 
from more or less the same level as the vertex, terminal setae shorter than the vertex. Distal 
proboscis segment mid-length. One metatarsal spur. Paramere mid-length, in lateral view 
slender, simple, with sides tapering towards the apex, sclerotized apex dorsally rounded with a 
pronounced anteriorly directed hook, in dorsal view contiguous anteriorly, the inner margin 
rounded with an acute point; paramere longer than the proctiger; proctiger slightly inflated 
posteriorly towards the base; aedeagus distal segment with a flattened, shallow hook, tip of 
aedeagus hook blunt; male subgenital plate dorsal profile raised anteriorly. Female proctiger 
dorsal profile more or less straight from anus to apex, or with slight post-anal depression, apex 
bluntly rounded; subgenital plate ventral profile shallowly curved, apex acute; ovipositor 
valvulae ventralis slender, apex acute; height of valvulae dorsalis as great, or greater than 
valvulae ventralis, dorsally convex, wedge-shaped and tapering to the apex.
Adult measurements and ratios: (4d,  4 ? )  total length: d 2.84-3.2, 9 3.16-3.4; forewing: d 
length 2.35-2.38 width 0.96-1.03, $ length 2.54-2.82 width 1.13-1.24; pterostigma length d 
0.08-0.12, ? 0.05-0.15; hindwing length d 1.93-2, $ 2.1-2.4; head width: d 0.79-0.82, 9 0.81 
0.93; antennal length: 1.13-1.29; genal cone length: 0.17-0.21; distal proboscis segment length: 
0.14-0.17. ALHW: 1.31-1.58; GCVL: 0.68-0.87; WLHW: 2.9-3.22; VLW: 0.45-0.51; WLW: 
2.24-2.48; CUR: 1.63-1.93; MR: 0.34-0.51; RMCU: 5.6-9.88; TLFL: 1.11-1.19; TLHW: 0.69- 
0.74; SCHW: 0.89-0.97; ATIB: 0.26-0.32; MTTB: 0.3-0.33; PBHW: 0.17-0.2; ATMT: 0.86-1. 
Adult genitalia d : MP: 0.3-0.34; PL: 0.42-0.45; AEL: 0.34-0.36; AEH: 0.1-0.12. MPHW: 0.37 
0.43; PLHW: 0.53-0.57; MPPL: 0.68-0.76; AEPL: 0.8-0.84; MSLH: 1.17-1.28; AHS: 0.31- 
0.32; PLSH: 1.25-1.31. 9: FP: 0.95-0.98; FSP: 0.56-0.61; RL: 0.24-0.28; OV: 0.21-0.23; EL: 
0.31-0.38. FPHW: 1.05-1.17; FPSP: 1.61-1.72; FPCR: 3.5-3.96; OLSP: 0.36-0.4; FEOL: 1.55.
Nymph Unknown
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 142-
Host plant: Adenocarpus bacquei.
Distribution: Continental: Morocco.
Notes: The host plant occurs in isolated populations in the eastern High Atlas and Middle Atlas 
mountains of Morocco. L. caprifuga sp. nov. was not common in any of the locations sampled 
and many of the host plants showed signs of over grazing.
Biology: Eggs were found singly on the exterior of leaf buds.
Etymology: Named for the threat posed by large groups of grazing goats on the Middle Atlas 
plains, a likely cause of the host plants rarity, now restricted to few isolated populations. The 
epithet is derived from the Latin capra for goat, and fugo to cause to flee.
Type material: Holotype d (slide mounted), MOROCCO: Middle Atlas, c. 18 km E of Midelt, 
on rd to Rich, just S of Zebzate, 3233'N 438'W, c. 1500 m, 29.iii.1999 (BMNH). Paratypes 
2 d , 3 ? , as for holotype (BMNH). 4 d , 2 9, as for holotype (NHMB). I d ,  19 , High Atlas, Ait- 
Toukhsine, Gorges du Dades, c. 35 km N of Boulmalne-du-Dades, 3125'N 605'W,c. 1500 d ,
28.111.1999 (BMNH).
Other material examined: MOROCCO: 20d , 15 9, as for holotype (DP 309). 4 d , 5 9, Middle 
Atlas, Ait Ou-fella, south of Col du Zad, rd Midelt to Azrou, 3246'N 505'W, c. 1650 m,
29.111.1999 (DP 310).
Livilla baetica sp. nov. (16)
(Fig. 20)
Adult
Colour: Brown or dark grey, abdominal intersegment colour yellow, femora and terminal 
antennal segments darker brown, thorax with darker bands. Forewing membrane with brown 
pigmentation, veins uniform light or mid-brown.
Structure: Forewing widest in the apical third with a broadly rounded apex; costal break and 
pterostigma present, pterostigma less than one quarter the wing length; vein Rs slightly curved 
in the middle and not, or only weakly curved at the apex towards the costal margin; surface 
forewing spinules present throughout all cells, distribution non-uniform, very dense: more than 
100 per 0.1mm2; apical spines in wing cells cui, mi and m2 but absent from cell r2 ; hindwing 
costal margin straight. Antennae short, with ten segments; head deflexed downwards with genal
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 143-
cones directed downwards relative to the plane of the vertex; genal cones long, commencing 
dorsally from more or less the same level as the vertex, terminal setae as long or longer than the 
vertex. Distal proboscis segment mid-length. One metatarsal spur. Paramere mid-length, in 
lateral view with anterior margin curving forward, sides tapering towards the constricted apex, 
sclerotized apex dorsally flattened with slight anterior projection, in dorsal view contiguous 
more or less along the entire straight edged, inner margin; paramere shorter than the proctiger; 
proctiger slightly inflated posteriorly towards the base; aedeagus distal segment with a 
flattened, shallow hook, tip of aedeagus hook blunt; male subgenital plate dorsal profile raised 
anteriorly with a distinct step. Female proctiger dorsal profile more or less straight from anus to 
apex, apex bluntly rounded; subgenital plate ventral profile angled medially, apex acute; 
ovipositor valvulae ventralis slender, apex acute; height of valvulae dorsalis as great, or greater 
than valvulae ventralis, dorsally convex, wedge-shaped and tapering to the apex.
Adult measurements and ratios: (3d,  3 $) total length: d 3.04-3.2, 9 3.36-3.68; fore wing: d 
length 2.35-2.58 width 1.02-1.08, 9 length 2.66-2.84 width 1.1-1.18; pterostigma length d 
0.35-0.5, $ 0.35-0.45; hindwing length d 1.85-2.05, $ 2.18-2.36; head width: d 0.81-0.84, $ 
0.83-0.88; antennal length: 1.34-1.48; genal cone length: 0.17-0.19; distal proboscis segment 
length: 0.14-0.15. WLPT: 5.16-7.77; ALHW: 1.52-1.76; GCVL: 0.72-0.76; WLHW: 2.9-3.23; 
VLW: 0.44-0.48; WLW: 2.3-2.47; CUR: 1.97-2.09; MR: 0.51-0.58; RMCU: 4.82-6.22; TLFL: 
1.16-1.26; TLHW: 0.73-0.8; SCHW: 0.9-0.96; ATIB: 0.25-0.3; MTIB: 0.28-0.32; PBHW: 
0.16-0.19; ATMT: 0.89-1. Adult genitalia d : MP: 0.46-0.51; PL: 0.41-0.43; AEL: 0.4-0.42; 
AEH: 0.14-0.15. MPHW: 0.57-0.61; PLHW: 0.51-0.54; MPPL: 1.09-1.19; AEPL: 0.95-0.98; 
MSLH: 1.1-1.25; AHS: 0.35-0.36; PLSH: 0.92-1.03. ?: FP: 1.05-1.23; FSP: 0.74-0.79; RL: 
0.22-0.29; OV: 0.24-0.25; EL: 0.29-0.35. FPHW: 1.27-1.4; FPSP: 1.42-1.56; FPCR: 4.24-4.77; 
OLSP: 0.32; FEOL: 1.3.
Nymph Unknown
Host plant: Adenocarpus decorticans.
Distribution: Continental: Spain.
Notes: Occurs sympatrically with A. montivaga sp. nov. on the host in the southern Andalusian 
mountains. It was far less common than the latter species in March, and probably develops 
later. L. baetica sp. nov. was absent from host populations sampled in Morocco.
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 144-
Etymology: Named for the distribution in southern Spain.
Type material: Holotype <5 (slide mounted), SPAIN: Andalusia, N slopes of Sierra de Baza, rd 
Caniles to Alba, 3715rN 245'W, c. 1600 m, 22.iii.1998 (BMNH). Paratypes 1 d\ 2 9, as for 
holotype (BMNH). 1 d , 2 9, as for holotype (NHMB).
Other material examined: SPAIN: I d ,  19 , Andalusia, N slopes of Sierra Nevada, rd Calaharra 
to Puerto de la Ragua, 3705'N 302'W, c. 1850 m, 21 .iii. 1998 (DP 128). 2 d , 7 9, as for 
holotype (DP 129).
Livilla complexa sp. nov. (17)
(Fig. 21)
Adult
Colour: Yellow-orange, femora and terminal antennal segments darker brown, with dark brown 
bands on the thorax. Fore wing membrane coriaceous, yellow-brown becoming darker brown 
towards the apex and margins, veins uniform yellow or light brown.
Structure: Forewing widest in the middle third, with well rounded apex; costal break absent; 
reduced pterostigma present, less than one quarter the length of the wing; vein Rs more or less 
straight, not or only weakly curved towards the costal margin at the apex; surface forewing 
spinules present in all cells but confined to small patches at the margins of cells c+sc and CU2 , 
distribution non-uniform, increasingly dense towards the wing margin: more than 100 per 
0.1mm2; apical spines in wing cells cui, mi and m 2 , but absent, or occasionally few present in 
cell r2 , hindwing costal margin straight. Antennae short, with ten segments; head deflexed 
downwards with genal cones directed downwards relative to the plane of the vertex; genal 
cones long, terminal setae shorter than the vertex. Distal proboscis segment short. One 
metatarsal spur. Paramere short, in lateral view simple with sides tapering, sclerotized apex 
dorsally rounded with anteriorly directed hook, in dorsal view contiguous anteriorly; paramere 
shorter than the proctiger; proctiger not, or only slightly inflated posteriorly towards the base; 
aedeagus distal segment with a flattened, shallow hook, tip of aedeagus hook blunt; male 
subgenital plate dorsal profile more or less straight and horizontal. Female proctiger dorsal 
profile with a post anal depression, but subsequently straight, apex bluntly rounded; subgenital 
plate ventral profile shallowly curved, apex acute; ovipositor valvulae ventralis slender, apex
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 145-
acute; height of valvulae dorsalis as great, or greater than valvulae ventralis, dorsally convex, 
wedge-shaped and tapering to the apex.
Adult measurements and ratios: (2d', 19) total length: d 2.36-2.44, 9 2.76-2.88; forewing: d 
length 1.83-1.93 width 0.9-0.94, $ length 2.13 width 1.02; pterostigma length d 0.2-0.3, $ 
0.15; hindwing length d 1.53, $ 1.76; head width: d 0.71-0.72, 9 0.74; antennal length: 1.13- 
1.22; genal cone length: 0.15-0.16; distal proboscis segment length: 0.13-0.15. WLPT: 6.43- 
14.2; ALHW: 1.57-1.72; GCVL: 0.65-0.73; WLHW: 2.54-2.88; VLW: 0.49-0.53; WLW: 2.03- 
2.09; CUR: 2.16-2.18; MR: 0.49-0.57; RMCU: 6.13-8.08; TLFL: 1.17-1.18; TLHW: 0.78-0.83; 
SCHW: 0.94-1; ATIB: 0.25-0.27; MTIB: 0.28-0.3; PBHW: 0.18-0.2; ATMT: 0.88.
Adult genitalia d: MP: 0.31-0.33; PL: 0.29; AEL: 0.27-0.28; AEH: 0.09-0.10. MPHW: 0.43- 
0.46; PLHW: 0.4-0.41; MPPL: 1.07-1.14; AEPL: 0.93-0.97; MSLH: 1.14-1.22; AHS: 0.34- 
0.35; PLSH: 1.04-1.07. 9: FP: 0.69; FSP: 0.49; RL: 0.23; OV: 0.15; EL: 0.28-0.3. FPHW:
0.93; FPSP: 1.41; FPCR: 3; OLSP: 0.31; FEOL: 1.93.
Nymph Unknown
Host plant: Adenocarpus complicatus.
Distribution: Continental: Spain and Portugal.
Notes: The host plant is widespread but this species is known from only two locations in 
northern Andalusia and in central Portugal. Occurring sympatrically with Arytaina adenocarpi, 
it was not common in either of these locations. The host plant affiliation is not certain due to the 
small number of adults and absence of nymphs. However, the occurence of L. complexa sp. 
nov. on the same host from two distant locations, combined with the affinities of this species 
with the other Adenocarpus-fecding members of Livilla described here, provides evidence for 
the Adenocarpus affiliation.
Etymology: Named for the dual taxonomic complexity of both the host plant and the psyllid 
genus, Livilla.
Comment: Morphologically this species is closest to the ulicis-group, as defined by Hodkinson 
and Hollis (1987). It is similar to Livilla vicina and to the type species of Livilla, L. ulicis, in the 
short oval and coriaceous forewing, and in the shape of the head and genal cones.
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 146-
Type material: Holotype 6 (slide mounted), PORTUGAL: Serra da Estrela, nr Teixeira 
4015'N 745'W, c. 1000 m, 27.vi.1998 (BMNH). Paratypes I d ,  1 9, as for holotype (BMNH). 
Other material examined: SPAIN: 1 9, Andalusia, c. 7 km E of Aracena, 3752'N 630'W, c. 
400 m, 24.vi. 1998 (DP 258). PORTUGAL: 3 9, as for holotype (DP 262.3).
Genus Pseudacanthopsylla Sarny 
Pseudacanthopsylla Sarny, 1972: 455 
Type species Pseudacanthopsylla retamae Sarny, 1972: 455
Pseudacanthopsylla improvisa (Loginova) comb. nov.
(Figs 23D & 30B)
Psylla improvisa Loginova, 1972: 30
Adult Colour: Yellow-grey; forewing membrane clear or faintly yellow, veins uniformly pale. 
Adult Description: Loginova (1972).
Nymph
Colour: Grey-green or more red; terminal antennal segment darker.
Structure: Forewing pads and abdomen acute apically. Antennal segments seven. Tergites 
extensively reduced on the thorax, typically not extending to the lateral margin on the abdomen. 
Arolium pad short, narrowly triangular, without medial groove and with a short petiole. 
Circumanal ring shape narrowly crescent-shaped with acutely rounded anterior lobes, outer ring 
not contiguous with the apical abdominal margin and with a single row of pores.
5th instar measurements and ratios: (specimens 3) BL: 1.43-1.78; BW: 1.03-1.11; WL: 0.59- 
0.62; CPL: 0.45-0.46; CPW: 0.63-0.65; RW: 0.11-0.12; RL: 0.07; HW: 0.61-0.7; AL: 0.48- 
0.52; AL3: 0.11-0.12. WBL: 0.62-0.72; ALHW: 0.74-0.79; ALWL: 0.79-0.88; WLHW: 0.88-1; 
WCPL: 1.39-1.44; CPRW: 5.42-5.82.
5th instar chaetotaxy: Head with numerous sectasetae (few simple setae ventrally) (max length 
at anterior margin 0.03-0.04); antennae with two or more sectasetae on each segment; eyes with 
several small sectasetae dorsally (max length 0.02-0.03); primary post-ocular seta indistinct (of 
the numerous sectasetae, one in the equivalent position appears slightly larger); secondary post
ocular seta absent (indistinct from surrounding setae). Dorsal thorax with sectasetae (max
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 147-
length 0.03-0.04). Prominent wing pad setae max length 0.04; forewing and hindwing pads with 
numerous sectasetae, surface and marginal, proximal setae indistinct from surface setae. Dorsal 
abdominal pre-caudal tergites and caudal plate with numerous sectasetae, including one larger 
positioned centrally and posteriorly; marginal abdominal sectasetae numerous; marginal 
abdominal setae (other than sectasetae) absent; pleurite setae paired simple. All legs with 
sectasetae present ventrally, on femora, tibiae and tarsi (max length 0.04).
Host plant: Retama raetam.
Distribution: Continental: Morocco.
Notes: This species occurs on populations of the host plant along the southern Atlantic coast of 
Morocco. It is found sympatrically with Arytainilla sulci and Livilla retamae, but it is less 
common than either of these species which also occur on inland host populations. The egg is 
particularly slender with a stout lateral pedicel at the base. Sculpturing is evident on the dorsal 
surface between the vitelline membrane and the egg shell in the chorion layer, implying a 
respiratory or insulatory function for this feature (Fig. 30B).
Comment: This species is transferred to Pseudacanthopsylla from Psylla (Loginova, 1972) 
based on the similarity in the form of both adult and nymph to Pseudacanthopsylla retamae.
The nymphal form is uniquely peculiar within the Arytaininae. P. retamae is the only other 
congeneric species and occurs on populations of the same host plant in the eastern 
Mediterranean (Sarny, 1972; Al-Khawaldeh, Katbeth-Bader & Burckhardt, 1997).
Material examined: MOROCCO: 4 d , 1 9, Southern Atlantic coast, E side of Agadir, 3025rN 
930'W, s.l., 19.vi.1998 (DP 234). 16d,  10 9, as for previous except, 23.iii.1999 (DP 301). 
l i d ,  129,  7 nymphs, as for previous except, 29.iv.1999 (DP 321). 14 d , 9 9 , Atlantic Coast, c. 
15 km S of El Jadid, 3255,N 835'W, c. 100 m, 21.iii.1999 (DP 297).
2.3.4 SUBFAMILY ACIZZIINAE
Genus Acizzia Heslop-Hanison 
Neopsylla Heslop-Harrison, 1949: 161 
Acizzia Heslop-Harrison, 1961a: 417
Type species Psylla acaciae Masked, 1894, by original designation
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 148 -
Acizzia uncatoides (Ferris & Klyver)
(Figs ID & 29D)
Psylla uncatoides Ferris & Klyver, 1932: 53
Acizzia uncatoides (Ferris & Klyver) Loginova, 1977: 577
Adult Colour: Orange-brown, sometimes with paler light green or yellow abdomens. Forewing 
membrane pale yellow with a pattern of orange or light brown clouds and spots in the apical 
portion and towards the margins, veins yellow or light brown.
Adult Description: Hodkinson & Hollis (1987).
Nymph
Colour: 1st-2nd instars cream and orange, 3rd-5th instars orange-brown with black tergites. 
Sclerites, wing pads, legs and terminal antennal segments darker brown.
Structure: Forewing pads and abdomen broadly rounded apically. Antennal segments nine. 
Tergites reduced on the thorax (though not as extensively as in other genera), typically not 
extending to the lateral margin on the abdomen. Arolium pad short, expanded apically with or 
without slight medial groove, and with a long petiole; circumanal ring broadly crescent-shaped 
with well rounded anterior lobes, outer ring not contiguous with the apical abdominal margin 
and with a single row of pores.
5th instar measurements and ratios: (specimens 4) BL: 1.13-1.28; BW: 0.86-0.94; WL: 0.48- 
0.49; CPL: 0.3-0.31; CPW: 0.55-0.6; RW: 0.1-0.11; RL: 0.06; HW: 0.52-0.58; AL: 0.52-0.54; 
AL3: 0.1-0.11. WBL: 0.73-0.77; ALHW: 0.9-1.02; ALWL: 1.06-1.13; WLHW: 0.83-0.94; 
WCPL: 1.83-2; CPRW: 5.18-6.
5th instar chaetotaxy: Head setae simple and distinctly capitate (capitate setae on the anterior 
margin, and short simple and longer capitate setae dorsally) (max length at anterior margin 
0.07-0.08); antennal setae simple and capitate (capitate distally on 3rd and 5th segments); ocular 
seta capitate, dark, conspicuous (max length 0.05-0.06); primary post-ocular seta distinctly 
capitate (max length 0.06); secondary post-ocular seta indistinct (small simple). Dorsal thoracic 
setae short simple and long capitate (max length 0.07). Prominent wing pad setae max length 
0.08-0.09; forewing and hindwing pads with capitate setae only; forewing pad prominent setae 
13-16, distinctly capitate, surface and marginal (10-12 marginal, 3-4 surface); hindwing pad 
prominent setae 8, distinctly capitate, surface and marginal (2 apical, 2 marginal,  4 surface); 
proximal setae distinctly capitate; small rod or simple setae scattered on the wing pad surfaces.
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 1 4 9 -
Dorsal abdominal prominent pre-caudal setae present on all tergites, long capitate (max length 
0.08), prominent caudal plate setae present,  21 (1 positioned centrally and posteriorly ), 
distinctly capitate; sectasetae absent; marginal abdominal setae (other than sectasetae) four or 
more pairs, distinctly capitate (max length 0.09-0.1); pleurite setae paired simple or capitate (on 
anterior pleurites). Legs with capitate setae present (max length 0.06-0.07); capitate foreleg 
setae present on tibia only, 3-4; capitate middle and hind leg setae present on femur and tibia, 
on the tibia 4-7.
Host plant: Acacia spp.
Distribution: Canary Islands and Continental (introduced from Australia).
Notes: Recorded from Tenerife and La Palma, this introduced species is abundant on cultivated 
Acacia spp. and is likely to be present on all islands where the host has been introduced. 
Biology: Nymphs were observed in inflorescences and on peduncles.
Material examined: CANARY ISLANDS. TENERIFE: 3 d , 3 ? , La Laguna University, 
18.vii.1997 (DP 87). LA PALMA: 50d , 50 9, 20 nymphs, Barranco de las Angustias, 
2840'15"N 1755'30"W, c. 300 m, 18.V.1998 (DP 194).
2.4 General notes on biology
All eggs examined with the exception of those of Pseudacanthopsylla, were smooth surfaced 
(Fig. 30A) and generally pale cream or yellow with an orange base and, in later development, 
black antennal spots and red eye spots were visible. The basal pedicel is frequently small but is 
more well developed in some species (Fig. 3IB). Little variation in egg type was found. 
However, in the species comprising Arytainilla sensu stricto which are characterized by a 
massive ovipositor, the eggs are generally smaller and more slender. The dorsal part of the eggs 
of Pseudacanthopsylla improvisa are covered with a hexagonal sculpturing and the eggs are 
markedly elongate (Fig. 30B).
Parasitized 5th instar nymphs of three species A. proboscidea, A. occidentalis sp. nov. and 
Livilla monospermae were collected in the field and kept until parasitoids emerged after one to 
two weeks. All parasitoids were identified as Encyrtidae from the genera Prionomitus,
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 150-
Pachyneuron and Trechnites (J. Noyes pers. comm.). Mites were also common parasites and 
were found on a number of Macaronesian and continental species.
Mating between psyllids was frequently observed in the pooter and further observations were 
made in the laboratory. In all cases males were much more active than females. In field 
collections where more than one species was collected into the same vial (typically species that 
share the same host plant), mating was common but interspecific mating activity was never 
observed and only rarely was a male seen to approach a female of a different species.
2.5 Discussion
Among the Gensiteae-feeding species members of Arytainilla and Arytaina feed predominantly 
on host plants in the Cytisus group, while members of Livilla and Arytinnis gen. nov. feed 
predominantly on hosts in the Genista group. However, all genera include species feeding on 
Cytisus, Genista and Adenocarpus groups (Table 1). This implies that there are some 
constraints on host preference but that within these four genera switching between host groups 
does occur. It is sometimes difficult to assess from historical records whether single species 
feed on more than one host group, since identification of hosts, when present, is often doubtful 
or ambiguous. During this study only one species, Arytinnis modica, was found to feed 
sympatrically on unrelated hosts, i.e. hosts from both Cytisus and Genista groups.
The diversity of Arytinnis gen. nov. in the Canary Islands is extraordinarily high for such a 
small area when compared to the continent. Much of this diversity appears to be linked to host 
plant diversity in the genus Teline. Speciation in other legume-feeding genera represented in the 
Canary Islands may therefore be constrained by the level of diversification undergone in the 
host genus. For instance, the host genus Retama is represented by a single widespread species 
which is host to a single psyllid species. The two host genera Adenocarpus and Spartocytisus 
are each represented by two ecologically specialized species, with each pair hosting two closely 
related psyllid species; and on Madeira there is one member of Genista and one member of 
Teline, each host to a single psyllid species. In these instances the one-to-one pattern suggests a 
possible history of parallel diversification in host and psyllid. However, the pattern is 
increasingly complex in the Teline-fceding group, where host sharing and switching may have 
been facilitated by host hybridization. Asynchronicity of development in species sharing the
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 151 -
same host plant and close tracking of host plant phenology may partly explain the complex 
patterns of host associations. There is some evidence that abundance of psyllid species may be 
affected by fragmentation of habitat and host plant populations as well as by the cultivation of 
native legumes for fodder crops. In particular, the cultivation of tagasaste (Chamaecytisus 
proliferus ssp. proliferus var palmensis) could account for the high densities of psyllids 
associated with this host, on both cultivated and natural populations of tagasaste as well as on 
other intraspecific taxa.
More than a quarter of the new species described were collected from continental hosts in the 
genus Adenocarpus, but only a little over half the species in this genus were sampled. With 
several species endemic to montane regions in north Africa, in addition to being the only genus 
in the Genisteae with a distribution extending into tropical Africa (A. mannii is found in 
montane regions from Nigeria to Malawi and Angola), further extensive sampling of this host 
genus may reveal additional species that would contribute to the understanding of the 
phylogenetics of the Arytaininae, in particular the genus Livilla sensu lato.
2.6 References
Acebes Ginoves JR, Arco Aguilar M  del, Wildpret de la Torre W. 1991. Revision
taxonomica de Chamaecytisus proliferus (L. Fil.) Link en Canarias. Vieraea 20: 191- 
Al-Khawaldeh M, Katbeth-Bader A, Burckhardt D. 1997. Psylloidea (Hemiptera) of Jordan.
Zoology in the Middle East 15: 71-82.
Arco Aguilar M del. 1983. Catalogo actualizado de los taxones del genero Teline Medicus en 
la region Macaronesica adiciones y nuevas combinaciones. Viraea 12: 193-232.
Arco Aguilar M del. 1993. New combinations in the genus Teline Medicus. Typification of 
Cytisus pallidus Poiret. Itinera Geobotanica 7: 519-523.
Bisby FA. 1981. Genisteae (Adans.) Benth. (1865). In: Polhill RM, Raven PH, eds. Advances 
in Legume Sytematics. London: Kew, Royal Botanic Gardens, 409-425.
Burckhardt D. 1983. Beitrage zur Systematik und Faunistik der schweizerischen Psyllodea 
(Stemorrhyncha). Entomologica Basiliensia 8: 43-83.
Burckhardt D. 1989a. Les Psylles (Insecta, Homoptera, Psylloidea) de L  Algerie. Archives 
des Sciences 42: 367-424.
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 152 -
Burckhardt D. 1989b. Zur Kenntnis einiger westpalaarktischer Ginsterblattflohe (Homoptera, 
Psylloidea). Bulletin de la Societe Entomologique Suisse 62: 315-322.
Burckhardt D, Onu^ar A. 1993. A review of Turkish jumping plant-lice (Homoptera, 
Psylloidea). Revue Suisse de Zoologie 100: 547-574.
Conci C, Rapisarda C, Tamanini L. 1993. Annotated catalogue of the Italian Psylloidea. First 
part (Insecta, Homoptera). Atti D ellAccademia Roveretana Degli Agiati. 242 (1992), 
series V7/2B: 33-136.
Conci C, Rapisarda C, Tamanini L. 1996. Annotated catalogue of the Italian Psylloidea. 
Second part (Insecta, Homoptera). Atti DelVAccademia Roveretana Degli Agiati. 245 
(1995), series VI I5B: 5-207.
Conci C, Tamanini L. 1986. Arytainilla spartiicola from Puglia, new for Italy (Homoptera, 
Psylloidea). Atti DelVAccademia Roveretana Degli Agiati. 235 (1985), series V I25B: 
123-136.
Crawford DL. 1911. American Psyllidae V. Pomona College Journal o f  Entomology 3: 628- 
Crawford DL. 1914. A monograph of the jumping plant lice or Psyllidae of the New World. 
Bulletin o f the US National Museum 85: 1-182.
Curtis J. 1836. British Entomology. London.
Ferris GF, Klyver FD. 1932. Report upon a collection of Chermidae (Homoptera) from New 
Zealand. Transactions o f the New Zealand Institute 63: 34-61.
Foerster A. 1848. Ubersicht der Gattungen und Arten in der Familie der Psylloden.
Verhandlungen des naturhistorischen Vereins der preussischen Rheinlande 5: 65-98.
Gibbs PE. 1974. Taxonomic notes on some Canary Island and North African species of Cytisus 
and Genista. Lagascalia 4: 33-41.
Gibbs PE, Dingwall 1 .1972 (1971). A revision of the genus Teline. Boletim da Sociedad 
Broteriana 45(series 2): 269-316.
Guerin-Meneville FE. 1843. Iconographie du regne animal de G. Cuvier. Insectes. Paris: 
Bailliere.
Halperin J, Hodkinson ID, Burckhardt D. 1988. Six local psyllids (Homoptera: Psylloidea) 
new to the Israeli fauna. Phytoparasitica 16: 283-284.
Hartig T. 1841. Versuch einter Eintheilung der Pflanzenlause (Phytophthires Burm.) nach der 
Flugelbildung. Zeitschrift fu r  Entomologie (Germar) 3: 359-376.
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY -153 -
Heslop-Harrison G. 1949. A new Indo-Malayan genus and species of the family Psyllidae 
(Hemiptera: Homoptera). Entomologists Monthly Magazine 85: 161-164.
Heslop-Harrison G. 1951. The Arytainini of the subfamily Psyllinae, Hemiptera-Homoptera, 
family Psyllidae. I. Annals and Magazine o f Natural History (12) 4: 417-462.
Heslop-Harrison G. 1961a. The Arytainini of the subfamily Psyllinae, Hemiptera-Homoptera, 
family Psyllidae. II. Annals and Magazine o f Natural History (13) 3: 417-439.
Heslop-Harrison G. 1961b. Hemiptera (Homoptera): Psyllidae. South African Animal Life 8: 
487-532.
Hodkinson ID. 1990. New species of psyllid from the Canary Islands and Madeira 
(Homoptera: Psylloidea). Eos 66: 29-35.
Hodkinson ID, Hollis D. 1987. The legume feeding psyllids (Homoptera) of the west
Palaearctic Region. Bulletin o f the British Museum (Natural History) (Entomology) 56: 
1- 86 .
Hodkinson ID, W hite IM . 1979. Homoptera: Psylloidea. Handbook fo r  the Identification o f  
British Insects 2(5a): 1-98.
Kass E, W ink M. 1997. Phylogenetic relationships in the papilionoideae (family leguminosae) 
based on nucleotide sequences of cpDNA (rbcL) and ncDNA (ITS 1 and 2). Molecular 
Phylogenetics and Evolution 8: 65-88.
Latreille PA. 1804. Histoire naturelle, generale et particuliere des Crustaces et des Insectes. 
Paris: F. Dufart.
Loginova MM. 1972. On the fauna of Psylloidea from Morocco (Homoptera).
Commentationes Biologicae 47: 1-37.
Loginova MM. 1976. Psyllids (Psylloidea, Homoptera) of the Canary Islands and Madeira. 
Commentationes Biologicae 81: 1-37.
Loginova MM. 1977. A classification of the subfamily Arytaininae Crawf. (Homoptera, 
Psyllidae). I. A review of the genera of the tribe Arytainini. Entomological Review, 
Washington 55: 61-68. [English translation of original paper in Russian, 1976].
Loginova MM. 1978. A classification of the subfamily Arytaininae Crawf. (Homoptera,
Psyllidae). 2. A review of the genera of the tribe Cyamohpilini. Entomolgical Review, 
Washington 56: 64-71. [English translation of original paper in Russian. 1977].
Low F. 1879. Zur Systematic der Psylloden. Verhandlungen der zoologisch-botanischen 
Gesellschaft in Wien 28: 585-610.
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 154 -
Low F. 1883. Revision der palaarktischen Psylloden in Hinsicht auf Systematik und
Synonymie. Verhandlungen der zoologisch-botanischen Gesellschaft in Wien 32: 227- 
M arrero  A, Gonzalez-Artiles F, Gonzalez-M artm M. 1995. Notas corologico-taxonomicas 
de la flora Macaronesica (No. 35-81). Botanica Macaronesica 22: 49-63.
M askell WM. 1894. On a new species of Psylla. Entomologists Monthly Magazine 30: 171- 
O shanin B. 1912. Katalog der Palaarktischen Hemipteren (Heteroptera, Homoptera- 
Auchenorhyncha und Psylloidea). Berlin.
Ossiannilsson F. 1992. The Psylloidea (Homoptera) of Fennoscandia and Denmark. Fauna 
Entomologica Scandinavica 29: 1-347.
Palom ares M artinez A. 1997. Memoria anual. Unpublished report. Parque Nacional de La 
Caldera de Taburiente.
Polhill RM. 1976. Genisteae (Adans.) Benth. and related tribes (Leguminosae). Botanical 
Systematics. An Occasional Series o f Monographs 1: 143-368.
Puton A. 1873. Notes pour servir a letude des Hemipteres. Annales de la Societe 
Entomologique de France 3: 11-26.
Puton A. 1876. Notes pour servir a letude des Hemipteres. Description des especes nouvelles 
ou peu connues. Annales de la Societe Entomologique de France 6: 275-290.
Ram irez Gomez C. 1956. Los psflidos de Espana. Boletin de la Real Sociedad Espahola de 
Historia Natural (sec. Biologica) 54: 63-106.
R apisarda C. 1987 (1984). Nymphal description and biological notes on some species of 
psyllid new for the Italian fauna (Homoptera, Psylloidea). Phytophaga 2: 57-70.
R apisarda C. 1989 (1986). A new Scicilian species of Arytainilla Loginova (Homoptera, 
Psylloidea), from Genista aetnensis (Biv.) DC., with notes on its biology. Frustula 
Entomologica 9: 23-39.
R apisarda C. 1990 (1985-89). Psyllids living on Genistinae in the Mediterranean region. IV. 
Morphological and biological notes on Arytainilla cytisi (Homoptera, Psylloidea). 
Phytophaga 3: 115-130.
R apisarda C. 1991 (1990). Faunistic and ecological notes on the psyllids of Sardinia. Estratto 
dalle Memorie della Societa Entomologica Italiana 69: 7-52.
Sarny 0 . 1972. Psyllids of Egypt. Bulletin de la Societe Entomologique d Egypte 56: 437-480.
CHAPTER TWO: PSYLLID TAXONOMY - 1 5 5 -
Sulc K. 1907. Beitrage zur Kenntnis der Psylloden. Bulletin international de UAcademie des 
Sciences de Boheme 12: 1-9.
Sulc K. 1911 (1910). Beitrage zur Kenntnis der Psylloden.il. Bulletin international de 
UAcademie des Sciences de Boheme 19: 1-33.
Talavera S, Gibbs PE. 1999. Teline. In: Talavera S, Aedo C, Castroviejo S, Romero Zarco C, 
Saez L, Salgueiro FJ, Velayos M, eds. Flora Iberica. Madrid: Real Jardrn Botanico, 
CSIC, 141-147.
Valdes B. 1991. Andalucia and the Rif floristic links and common flora. Botanica Chronika 10: 
117-124.
Vondracek K. 1954. Psylla sulci sp. n. (Hemiptera-Homoptera, Psyllidae). Acta Entomologica 
Musei Nationalis Pragae 29: 81-84.
W atm ough RH. 1968. Notes on the biology of Artytaina [sic] spartiophila Foerster and A. 
genistae Latreille (Homoptera: Psyllidae) on broom (Sarothamnus scoparius (L.) 
Wimmer) in Britain. Journal o f the Entomological Society o f Southern Africa 31: 115- 
W hite IM , Hodkinson ID. 1982. Psylloidea (Nymphal Stages) Hemiptera, Homoptera. 
Handbook fo r  the Identification o f British Insects 2(5b): 1-50.
W hite IM, Hodkinson ID. 1985. Nymphal taxonomy and systematics of the Psylloidea
(Homoptera). Bulletin o f the British Museum (Natural History) (Entomology) 50: 153- 
Zeidan-Geze N, B urckhardt D. 1998. The jumping plant-lice of Lebanon (Hemiptera: 
Psylloidea). Revue Suisse de Zoologie 105: 797-812.
- 156 -
TABLE 1. Genera and taxa included in this treatment showing native distribution, host plant 
genus and host group affiliation within the Genisteae; CY -  Cytisus group, GE -  Genista 
group, OU -  outlier.
species native distribution host plant genus and group
ARYTAINILLA 
Arytainilla sensu stricto
A. algeriensis N Africa Cytisus CY
A. barbagalloi Italy Genista GE
A. cytisi Europe, N Africa, 
Middle East
Calicotome CY
A. delarbrei W Europe, N Africa Cytisus CY
A. spartiicola W Europe Cytisus CY
A. spartiophila W Europe, N Africa Cytisus CY
A. serpentina Canary Islands Spartocytisus CY
Arytainilla residual species
A. gredi Spain Genista GE
A. montivaga Spain, Morocco Adenocarpus OU
A. sulci N Africa, Middle East Retama GE
ARYTINNIS
A. berber Morocco Genista GE
A. canariensis Canary Islands Teline GE
A. cognata Morocco Genista GE
A. diluta Canary Islands Teline GE
A. dividens Canary Islands Chamaecytisus CY
A. equitans Canary Islands Teline GE
A. fortunata Canary Islands Teline GE
A. gomerae Canary Islands Teline GE
A. hakani Mediterranean Teline GE
A. hupalupa Canary Islands Teline GE
A. incuba Madeira Teline GE
A. menceyata Canary Islands Teline GE
A. modica Canary Islands Teline, Chamaecytisus GE + CY
A. nigralineata Canary Islands Adenocarpus OU
A. occidentalis Canary Islands Teline GE
A. ochrita 
A. pileolata 
A. proboscidea 
A. prognata 
A. romeria 
A. umbonata 
ARYTAINA 
A. devia 
A. nubivaga 
A. vittata 
LIVILLA 
L. baetica 
L. caprifuga 
L. complexa 
L. ima
L. monospermae
Canary Islands 
Canary Islands 
Canary Islands 
Canary Islands 
Canary Islands 
Madeira
Canary Islands 
Canary Islands 
Canary Islands
Spain 
Morocco 
Spain, Portugal 
Morocco 
Canary Islands
Teline
Teline
Adenocarpus
Teline
Teline
Genista
Chamaecytisus
Spartocytisus
Spartocytisus
Adenocarpus
Adenocarpus
Adenocarpus
Adenocarpus
Retama
Retama
PSEUDACANTHOPSYLLA
P. improvisa Morocco
ACIZZIA
A. uncatoides Australia Acacia
- 157 -
-  1 5 8  -
Ovipositor valvulae dorsalis
length
Hindwing costal margin
/  /  V / T
Hind legs
metatarsal spur
FIGURE 1. Examples of variation in adult ovipositors, hindwings and hind legs. A -  
Arytainilla spartiophila, B -  A. sulci, C -  A. gredi, D -  Acizzia uncatoides, E -  Livilla 
monospermae, F -A rytainilla  serpentina sp. nov., G -  Arytinnis nigralineata, H -  
Arytaina vittata sp. nov., I -  Arytainilla serpentina sp. nov., J -  Arytaina vittata sp. nov., 
K -  Livilla monospermae, L -  Arytinnis nigralineata, M -  A. canariensis sp. nov., N -  A. 
romeria sp. nov. Scale bars: A-D = 0.1 mm, E-N  = 0.5 mm.
-  1 5 9  -
costal break*...
c+sc Rs
surface spinules 
Cu1a  apical spines
FIGURE 2. Adult forewing (above) and 5lh instar nymph (below): guide to measurements, 
terminology and nymphal chaetotaxy. 5th instar nymphs can be distinguished from the 
preceeding four instars by the number of antennal segments and the differentiation of the 
tibia and tarsal segments.
anterior margin head setae
ocular seta
primary post-ocular., 
secondary post-ocular.*
proximal wing 
pad setae
pre-caudal
tergites
caudal
plate
apical wing 
pad setae
tibia setae
proximal
distal
\ :  Imposition 
2nd position
4 pair/position 3
1 6 0  -
X ^ /* / ^ / .  / / '
-  1 6 1  -
- 1 6 2  -
-  1 6 3 -
-  1 6 4 -
-  1 6 5  -
-  1 6 6  -
-  1 6 7  -
-  1 6 8 -
-  1 6 9 -
-  1 7 0 -
A~X S'* m
m ^ WW $r
-  1 7 1  -
-  1 7 2  -
FIGURE 15. d parameres in lateral and dorsal views, A-B Arytinms modica, 
C -D  A. hupalupa sp. nov., E -F A. dividens (scale bars = 50 pm).
-  1 7 3  -
-  1 7 4  -
-  1 7 5  -
FIGURE 18. d parameres in posterior view, A -A ry ta ina  vittata sp. nov., 
B -  A. nubivaga (scale bars = 0.1 mm).
-  1 7 6 -
-  1 7 7  -
rr ' \ V
-  1 7 8  -
$ ' jM
.. 'QS&X'--
r n r n m '
-  1 7 9  -
FIGURE 22. A -  Arytainilla atlantica sp. nov., B -  A. sulci,
C -  A. serpentina sp. nov., D -  A. telonicola sp. nov. Scale bars = 0.5 mm.
FIGURE 23. A -  Arytainilla gredi, B -  A. montivaga sp. nov.,
C -  Livilla ima, D -  Pseudacanthopsylla improvisa. Scale bars = 0.5 mm.
-  1 8 1  -
FIGURE 24. A -  Livilla monospermae, B -  Arytaina devia (Gran Canaria), 
C -  A. vittata sp. nov., D -  A. nubivaga. Scale bars = 0.5 mm.
-  1 8 2 -
FIGURE 25. A -  Arytinnis umbonata, B -  A. cognata,
C -  A. incuba, D -  A. berber sp. nov. Scale bars = 0.5 mm.
-  1 8 3  -
FIGURE 26. A -  Arytinnis prognata, B -  A. diluta\
C -  A. nigralineata, D -  A. probosciclea. Scale bars = 0.5 mm.
-  1 8 4  -
FIGURE 27. A -A rytin n is  hupalupa sp. nov., B -  A. modica,
C  A. dividens, D -  A. ochrita sp. nov. Scale bars = 0.5 mm.
- 185 -
FIGURE 28. A -A rytin n is  gomerae sp. nov., B -  A. occidentalis sp. nov.,
C -  A. pileolata, D -  A. equitans. Scale bars = 0.5 mm.
FIGURE 29. A -  Arytinnis fortuncita sp. nov., B -  A. romeria sp. nov.,
C -  A. menceyata sp. nov., D -  Acizzici uncatoides. Scale bars = 0.5 mm.
-  1 8 7  -
FIGURE 30. A -  eggs of Arytinnis nigralineata laid on the inner surface of the floral bracts 
of Adenocarpus foliolosus (scale bar = 1 mm, inset = 0.1 mm), B -  eggs of 
Pseudacanthopsylla improvisa embedded in the abdomen, showing sculpturing in the 
chorion layer (scale bar = 0.1 mm, inset = 30 pm), C -D  $ genitalia, C -  Arytinnis diluta, D 
-  A. equitans (scale bars = 0.1 mm), E -F  S parameres in dorsal view, E -  Arytinnis 
occidentalis sp. nov., F -  A. fortunata  sp. nov. (scale bars = 30 pm).
-  1 8 8  -
FIGURE 31. Egg placement, A -  eggs of Arytaina vittata sp. nov. are laid around the inner 
rim of the calyx, and in small clusters on the corolla of Spartocytisus filipes, B -  eggs of 
Arytainilla dividens are laid along the midrib, inside folded new leaves of Chamaecytisus 
proliferus, i st_2nd instar nymphs then migrate down to feed on the leaf buds.
- 189 -
-ROO a.
3a.5r
**->
r -Onon
c s (S  c s O n <r>
3X)CS
Ph O Xu U H U H H O O O. H
.3st<9roa
a  a  a
- 190-
(U <D
O u H H
i  :.
fc. r
"a "a 
^  nj
&K*02
c o  c s  c s
ffi P-t u  e_t E-i 
Ictf00
c3 e3 c3 t3 c3 > > - > > >
- 191 -
&e
C/5co
p q  O
-Cisc
<3doa
*2, g
 -  a ^
co* a pu
- 192-
 -   I I
^  #s
- 193-
S .
" uT3
'5 ba>
t - i
- - a
i - H
-i
s--3 ;
- 194 -
<D-4-*
cdi(3
  co  n
U  pp a
cx1o
S*
t - i
s i  -
4-lo
- 195 -
  f a
ed3too<
T3 cd
B*a
toOJJ
cdtod
a  ^<0Op H
^  d  H
o  p; a
CHAPTER THREE: PSYLLID DIVERSITY - 196-
CHAPTER THREE
ORIGINS AND BIOGEOGRAPHY OF MACARONESIAN LEGUME-FEEDING
PSYLLIDS
Abstract
This study presents the first phylogenetic analysis of a phytophagous insect group from 
Macaronesia. Molecular, morphological and ecological data are used to investigate the 
origins of the 23 species in the Macaronesian islands by reassessing the classification of 
the five Palaearctic legume-feeding psyllid genera in the Arytaininae. Molecular 
phylogenies generated from two mitochondrial regions: part of the small ribosomal subunit 
rRNA (12S), and a second region incorporating part of cytochrome oxidase I (COI) and 
cytochrome oxidase II (COII), are analyzed independently and in combination with the 
morphological data generated from adult and nymphal characters. These analyses confirm 
the paraphyly of the Arytaininae in relation to the Psyllinae, as well as the paraphyly of the 
two largest arytainine genera (Arytainilla and Livilla) -  both of which are represented by 
anomalous taxa in the Canary Islands. The phylogenetic results suggest there have been 
five colonizations of the Canary Islands by arytainine psyllids, one or two colonizations of 
Madeira, and probably one or two back colonizations of the continent. Optimization of the 
host plant genera onto the psyllid phylogeny suggests that preadaptation is important in 
determining host plant selection when new regions or islands are colonized. The psyllid 
phylogeny together with ecological and biogeographic data provides evidence, in at least 
one case, for sympatric speciation on the same host plant, while the majority of cases 
involve allopatric speciation via host shifts and inter-island colonization. A surprising 
number of closely related psyllids in the Canary Islands are found on the same host plant 
and there is evidence that the sharing of host resources is facilitated by geographical 
segregation, ecological specialization and divergence in the timing of development. Human 
activity and habitat alteration are implicated in both the reduction and expansion of host 
plant distributions, as well as the promotion of host plant hybridization, all of which may 
affect psyllid host preferences and distributions. Habitat and host population fragmentation 
may reach a critical host plant abundance, below which a host specific psyllid fauna can 
not survive.
CHAPTER THREE: PSYLLID DIVERSITY - 197 -
3.1 Introduction
Ocean islands have discrete boundaries and vary in their size and isolation from other 
islands and from the mainland. These elements have been greatly advantageous in the 
study of evolution (MacArthur & Wilson, 1967). In addition to the unique physical 
characteristics of islands, there is a spectacular diversity of species which is often in sharp 
contrast with the mainland, of which the most famous examples are Darwins Galapagos 
finches (Grant, 1986), and the Hawaiian Drosophila with more than 1000 island species 
(Kaneshiro, Gillespie & Carson, 1995). Recent work using a combination of approaches -  
ecological, morphological and molecular -  has addressed the mechanistic questions raised 
by the evolutionary fecundity of islands (Wagner & Funk, 1995; Givnish & Sytsma, 1997; 
Grant, 1998).
There are common patterns in biotas from different island systems, yet processes 
common to all of these -  dispersal, colonization, isolation and adaptation -  are also present 
in mainland areas. However, a primary difference between oceanic islands and continents 
is that islands provide a terra nullus or virtually unoccupied territory, with low levels of 
immigration and establishment. The natural filters to immigration -  isolation, surrounding 
ocean, small size of islands -  limits the number of colonists. For those that do become 
successfully established, the low level of immigration is likely to reduce the number of 
competitors and/or predators, and allow the successful colonists to undergo an ecological 
release, which may take the form of an adaptive radiation into a variety of niches.
The age and size of islands are important determinants of species diversity smaller 
and younger islands are likely to have accumulated fewer immigrants than larger, older 
islands; but as islands age they are increasingly eroded, resulting in loss of habitat and 
extinction (MacArthur & Wilson, 1967; Carson & Clague, 1995). An important structural 
aspect of island size is altitude which, together with the prevailing climatic zone, 
determines the number and quality of habitat types (high islands accommodate mere 
habitat types than low islands). Thus, a high altitude, large sized island, that is micdle-aged 
would be expected to have the greatest species diversity (e.g. the island of Tenerife in the 
Canaries, Fig 1 & Table 1). The Hawaiian archipelago has been the location for thj most 
comprehensive research to date on the colonization and speciation processes of a 
progressively older island chain (Wagner & Funk, 1995), but recently research has also 
focussed on the flora and fauna of the archipelagos of Macaronesia (Francisco-Orfega, 
Jansen & Santos-Guerra, 1996; Mes & T Hart, 1996; Pinto et a l ,  1997; Brunton & Hurst, 
1998; Emerson, Oromf & Hewitt, 2000b; Juan et al., 2000).
CHAPTER THREE: PSYLLID DIVERSITY - 198-
Macaronesia was originally circumscribed, not as a geographical or political region, 
but as a unique phytogeographical concept (Sunding, 1979). Macaronesia includes five 
Atlantic Ocean archipelagos (north to south: Azores, Madeiras, Salvagens, Canaries, and 
Cape Verdes) which lie off the west coast of North Africa and southern Europe, between 
15 and 40N latitude. The geological ages of individual islands range from 1-30 Myr. The 
centrally positioned Canary Islands (27-29N) have proven particularly rewarding for 
evolutionary studies because they provide the most extreme ranges of altitude, habitat 
types, size, and age of islands (Fig. 1 & Table 1).
Research in both Pacific and Atlantic archipelagos has mainly focussed on plant 
and animal groups independently. Some studies have addressed plant-pollinator systems or 
the endozoochorous dispersal of plants (Percy & Cronk, 1997; Barrett, 1998; Givnish, 
1998), and there has been research into the plant substrate-mediated radiation in Hawaiian 
Drosophila (Kambysellis & Craddock, 1997). But only rarely has research focussed on 
herbivorous insects and their host plants, such as studies by Asquith (1995) and Roderick 
(1997) of Hawaiian Hemiptera.
This is the first Macaronesian study to examine island evolution in a highly host 
specific group of phytophagous insects. Related continental groups are included to 
determine the origin of the island species and to provide a comparison of species diversity 
between island and continental regions. The insects -  psyllids -  are a group of small, sap- 
sucking Hemiptera, and (in this study) the host plants -  brooms -  are shrubby papilionoid 
legumes (Genisteae). Psyllids (Psylloidea, also known as jumping plant lice) feed on a 
wide variety of dicotyledonous and a few monocotyledonous plants, but are generally less 
well known than the other hemipteroid groups of the Stemorrhyncha: aphids (Apidoidea), 
scales (Coccoidea) and whiteflies (Aleyrodoidea), due to the relatively low occurrence of 
psyllid pests. Habitat and host specialization in psyllids makes them an ideal group for 
investigating evolutionary patterns which are associated with habitat or host shifts, and 
geographic isolation. The psyllid group selected for this study (the Genisteae-feeding 
Arytaininae) combines continental species that are locally restricted or widespread across 
Europe and North Africa, with taxa that are isolated on two of the central Macaronesian 
archipelagos (Canary Islands and Madeira) (Fig.l). Among the island taxa, species may be 
endemic to a single island or more widespread on islands of different geological ages.
3.1.1 The arytainine psyllids
The psyllids that feed on papilionoid legumes in the Genisteae are all in the Arytaininae, a 
subfamily of the Psyllidae. The delimitation of the subfamily Arytaininae is unclear,
CHAPTER THREE: PSYLLID DIVERSITY - 199-
particularly in relation to the subfamily Psyllinae (Heslop-Harrison, 1951,1961; Loginova, 
1976b, 1977; Hodkinson & Hollis, 1987). There are thirteen genera, distributed in both the 
Old and New World, that are considered to be in the Arytaininae; nine of these genera feed 
on host plants in the subfamily Papilionoideae (Leguminosae), and a further four, 
somewhat anomalous North American genera, feed on host plants in the families Rosaceae 
(two genera) and Rhamnaceae (two genera). Five of the genera are Palaearctic, all of them 
papilionoid legume-feeders, and four of these genera are confined to the west Palaearctic 
region and feed exclusively on host plants in the Genisteae. The Genisteae-feeding group 
will be the focus of this study. Diversification of the Genisteae in the Mediterranean basin, 
where these shrubs often form a dominant part of the vegetation, is likely to have been 
important in promoting the diversification of the associated psyllid group. There are 
around 96 arytainine species confined to this region and 91 of these feed on genistoid 
legumes. Represented in this study are all five Palaearctic arytainine psyllid genera -  
Arytaina, Arytainilla, Livilla, Pseudacanthopsylla (west Palaearctic, on genistoid legume 
hosts) and Cyamophila (Mediterranean to central Asia, on non-genistoid legumes). The 
monophyly of this Palaearctic group within the Arytaininae, is investigated in this study.
3.1.2 The host plants
The Genisteae (broom, gorse and relatives) is a monophyletic tribe of papilionoid legumes 
which has been the subject of a number of morphological revisions (Gibbs, 1967,1974; 
Gibbs & Dingwall, 1972; Polhill, 1976; Bisby, 1981) and a recent molecular investigation 
(Kass and Wink, 1997). The lupins (Lupinus) are a large (c. 200 species), clearly delimited 
monophyletic group on which there are no recorded psyllid species. The remaining 
members of the Genisteae (c. 260 species in 20 genera) can be separated into three groups, 
a Genista group, a Cytisus group, and a number of generic outliers, and each of these 
groups has members that are psyllid hosts. However, about half of these genistoid genera 
do not have a psyllid fauna, which implies that there are constraints on intergeneric host 
switching.
The objectives of this study were: a) to test the monophyly of the Palaearctic psyllid genera 
in the subfamily Arytaininae, and in particular, the Genisteae-feeding subgroup; b) to 
investigate the taxonomic and biogeographic origin of the Macaronesian species; c) to 
investigate psyllid speciation using biogeographic patterns and host associations in the 
Macaronesian islands.
CHAPTER THREE: PSYLLID DIVERSITY - 2 0 0 -
3.2 Materials and methods
3.2.1 Ingroup selection
The ingroup includes representatives of all Arytaininae genera that feed on legumes in the 
Palaearctic region (Arytaina, Arytainilla, Cyamophila, Livilla and Pseudacanthopsylla).
All known species from the Macaronesian region were comprehensively sampled, and 
continental groups which were identified as possible sister groups to the island species 
were selectively sampled (Table 2, with additional details given in the Taxonomic 
Appendix). Multiple individuals are included where species occur on different 
islands/continental regions and/or different host plants. Pseudacanthopsylla is represented 
by a single species (= Psylla improvisa, see Taxonomic Appendix), and is a 
morphologically atypical arytainine genus that feeds on hosts in the Genisteae. 
Pseudacanthopsylla and Cyamophila (Arytaininae, but not Genisteae-feeding) are 
therefore included to test both the monophyletic origin of Genisteae-feeding and the 
monophyly of the Arytaininae. In addition, two species of Cacopsylla (Psyllinae) were 
included (but see discussion under outgroup selection).
3.2.2 Outgroup selection
Two subfamilies, Psyllinae and Acizziinae, were initially selected as possible outgroups 
for the subfamily Arytaininae, based on morphological affinity (Psyllinae) and host affinity 
(Acizziinae). Members of Acizziinae feed on mimosoid legumes in the tribes Acacieae and 
Ingae, while members of Psyllinae feed on a wide variety of predominantly non- 
leguminous plant families. Trial phylogentic analyses which included more distantly 
related taxa (e.g. Psyllopsis, Livia and Trioza spp., as well as Schizaphis (Aphididae)) 
using 12S rRNA data, indicated that the most suitable outgroup (based on topology and 
bootstrap values) for the Arytaininae was Acizziinae (Acizzia). These preliminary analyses 
affiliated the Psyllinae species with Cyamophila (Arytaininae) suggesting that the Psyllinae 
would be an unsuitable outgroup for the Arytaininae. Two species of Acizziinae were 
selected as the outgroup: one species native to North Africa and the Middle East (Acizzia 
hollisi) and one Australian species (Acizzia uncatoides). The two Psyllinae species 
(Cacopsylla alatemi, C. mali) were included to analyse the monophyly of the Arytaininae, 
but not defined as an outgroup.
CHAPTER THREE: PSYLLID DIVERSITY -201 -
3.2.3 DNA sampling and extraction
Eighty-four individuals representing 62 taxa (61 species and one subspecies) are included 
in this study, and 17 of these species are undescribed, having been recently collected from 
Macaronesian and adjacent continental areas (these species are described and illustrated in 
Chapter 2). Based on the assessment of substitution rates within different cytochrome 
oxidase (CO) regions by Lunt et al. (1996) and Zhang & Hewitt (1997), faster evolving 
CO regions were selected to provide resolution between recently diverged species and 
intraspecific taxa (73 individuals from 50 species were sampled). The small subunit rRNA 
region (12S) was selected as a slower evolving region to resolve intergeneric and 
interspecific groups (68 individuals from 61 species were sampled). Fifty of the 61 species 
included are sampled for both molecular regions, but there are 11 continental species only 
sampled for 12S (10 Livilla spp. and Arytainilla gredi) (Table 2). Samples were collected 
during field work from 1997-2000 in the Canary Islands, Madeira and adjacent continental 
areas (except where indicated in Table 2). Insects were collected into 100% ethanol in the 
field and stored at -20C. One to three insects (abdomens and wings removed and retained 
as vouchers) were either ground in 50pl of 80% SDS lysis buffer and 20% Proteinase K 
(lOmg/ml), or alternatively whole insects were bisected and placed, with Proteinase K, in 
the buffer provided in the QIAGEN DNeasy Tissue Kit (in which case, the whole insect 
was retained as a voucher after incubation). Specimens were incubated for 24 hr at 55C. 
The remainder of the extraction was performed with either the Geneclean II kit (Bio 101) 
in the first protocol, or the QIAGEN DNeasy Tissue Kit in the second. In both cases 
extracts were resuspended in 35pl of sterile water and stored at -20C; lp l of this solution 
was used for each 25pl PCR reaction. Specimens collected by the author were processed 
within three years, however, dry mounted specimens and alcohol preserved material up to 
20 years old (supplied by Daniel Burckhardt and Ian Hodkinson) amplified successfully for 
the shorter 12S region (probably aided by highly conserved primers) but did not, or only 
poorly amplified for the longer CO region.
3.2.4 PCR and sequencing
Amplification of the small ribosomal subunit (12S rRNA) fragment was accomplished 
using primers 12Sai and 12Sbi (equivalent to SR-N-14588 and SR-J-14233 respectively, of 
Simon et al., 1994). A single region incorporating the 3' end of COI, the tRNA leucine and 
the 5' end of COII was amplified for some taxa using primers UEA9 (Lunt et al., 1996) and 
Marilyn (equivalent to C2-N-3389 of Simon et al., 1994). These CO primers amplified 
approximately 68% of the taxa. Additional primers were designed to amplify the remaining
CHAPTER THREE: PSYLLID DIVERSITY - 2 0 2 -
taxa for the CO regions -  DPI: 5 '-GTT AGT AGTGGGTT ATT A AGTTCRTC-3' 
(positioned in COE, and used as an antisense primer to UEA9, amplified approximately 
30% of the taxa); DP2: 5 '-CG AT A ATTTT A ATTGTT AGT AG Y G G -3' (also positioned in 
COII as an antisense primer to UEA9, amplified Pseudacanthopsylla); UEA9-MOD: 55'- 
GGT ATGCCTCGTCGTT ATTCT A A YT AY C -3 ' (positioned in COI, and used as a semse 
primer to Marilyn, amplified approximately 10% of the taxa). Appendix 1 gives the 
primer combinations used for DNA amplification from each species.
Each PCR cycle comprised denaturation at 94C for one minute, followed by 9'2C 
for 30 seconds (41 cycles), annealing at 45C for 40 seconds and an extension of 65C for 
90 seconds, with a final extension of 72C for 10 minutes. Amplified PCR products were 
either run on agarose gels and purified with a QIAGEN QIAquick Gel Extraction Kit or 
were purified with a QIAGEN QIAquick PCR Purification Kit, in both cases resuspension 
was in 30pl of H20  for direct sequencing using an automated Perkin-Elmer ABI 377 
sequencer with ABI Prism Dye Terminator Cycle Ready Reaction Kit. All the sequences 
referred to here will be deposited in GenBank database.
3.2.5 Alignment and sequence analyses
Sequences were aligned manually using the program Se-Al (version l.Oal; Rambaut,
1998). The alignment of the CO regions was unambiguous, with the codon position 
assignment determined by comparison to other insect sequences from GenBank. The 12S 
fragment was generally easy to align, but three regions from 3-1 lbp in length were 
ambiguous (positions 152-154, 254-264 and 300-305 of the aligned matrix) and these were 
excluded from all analyses. Secondary structures of the tRNA and 12S genes were referred 
to for improved alignment. Sequence characteristics are given in Table 3. Appendices 2-3 
give the aligned matrices, and the matrices and trees (Figs 3-5) are available from 
TreeBASE (http://www.herbaria.harvard.edu/treebase/).
3.2.6 Morphological sampling and treatment
Forty-six species were sampled for the morphological analysis. The Macaronesian taxa 
were comprehensively sampled and selected taxa from continental sister groups were 
included. The only groups present in the molecular data but not represented in the 
morphological phylogeny are the non-Genisteae-feeding genera (Cacopsylla and 
Cyamophila). Morphological characters were obtained from alcohol, slide and capillary 
mounted material. Sixty-seven characters were scored for phylogenetic analysis, of which 
43 were derived from adults and 24 were derived from 5th instar nymphs. Seventeen (39%)
http://www.herbaria.harvard.edu/treebase/
CHAPTER THREE: PSYLLID DIVERSITY -203 -
of the adult characters and five (21%) of the nymphal characters are based on continuous 
morphometric data. These were partitioned for discrete character states determined by eye 
from graph plotted data, which incurred minimal polymorphism. The data were compiled 
using the program NDE (Nexus Data Editor; Page, 2000). Appendices 4-5 give the list of 
characters/character states and the data matrix, which are also available from TreeBASE.
3.2.7 Phylogenetic analyses
Phylogenetic analyses were performed with PAUP* (version 4.0b3; Swofford, 1999). The 
following heuristic search parameters were employed for the parsimony analyses: 100 
random stepwise addition replicates with tree bisection-reconnection (TBR) branch 
swapping, other options included saving multiple trees (MULTREES) and collapsing zero- 
length branches (COLLAPSE). For the analysis of the morphological data, all 
morphometric characters were treated as ordered and multiple states as polymorphisms, in 
order to preserve information on the relative similarity between taxa and overlapping states 
as a result of the somewhat arbitrary data partitions. Bootstrap analyses (2000 replicates) 
were performed using simple addition sequence of taxa with TBR branch swapping. 
Congruence between the different types of data (12S, CO and morphology) were tested 
using the partition homogeneity test implemented in PAUP*. Parameters and assumptions 
used in the maximum likelihood (ML) searches were selected using program Modeltest 
(Posada & Crandall, 1998) based on the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC). The model 
selected for the 12S data was HKY85 with invariable sites and gamma distribution. The 
model selected for the CO data was general time-reversible with invariable sites and 
gamma distribution. ML heuristic search parameters included simple addition sequence of 
taxa with TBR branch swapping, MULTREES and COLLAPSE. Assumptions of 
monophyly (e.g. of the genera Livilla and Arytainilla), and particular biogeographic 
assumptions (i.e. continental versus island groups) in the Macaronesian clade, were tested 
using constraint trees and the nonparametric (Templetons Wilcoxon signed-rank) test 
implemented in PAUP*.
3.2.8 Mapping host plant relationships
Host plant relationships were mapped, as an unordered character, onto the combined 
molecular phylogeny of the Genisteae-feeding psyllids using MacClade 3.07 (Maddison & 
Maddison, 1992) with accelerated transformation (ACCTRAN) optimization. One taxon 
(.Livilla pseudoretamae), for which the host plant is unknown, was excluded.
CHAPTER THREE: PSYLLID DIVERSITY - 2 0 4 -
3.3 R esults
3.3.1 Molecular evolution o f the 12S small subunit rRNA
The total aligned length of the 12S matrix is 342bp (of the 322 included sites, 168 were 
variable, of which 134 were parsimony informative), with A+T content 74-80% (further 
sequence details are given in Table 3). The equally weighted maximum parsimony (MP) 
search found 750 trees on five islands (length 807, Cl 0.32 excluding uninformative 
characters, RI 0.614).
The 12S region alone provides poor resolution at the base of the phylogeny, and 
this may be compounded by the short segment of sequence (c. 321bp) and large number of 
samples (68). The 12S and CO data both show saturation of transitions relative to 
transversions (Fig. 2). However, the 12S region is evolving more slowly, relative to the CO 
region, and periods of rapid speciation are likely to be the cause of the poor resolution. 
Extremely short branch lengths at the base of the phylogeny and at the base of several 
clades using maximum likelihood (ML) and neighbour-joining (NJ) analyses (not shown) 
suggest there has been rapid speciation during the evolution of the Arytaininae.
Three major clades have bootstrap support greater than 75% (Arytaina -  AR, the 
Macaronesian clade -  M, and the core Livilla group -  L; see Fig. 3A). The 12S data are 
equivocal on the distinction between the Arytaininae and Psyllinae. The placement of the 
morphologically atypical genus Pseudacanthopsylla is the most variable between the 
different islands of MP trees: consensus trees for two of the five islands place this taxon 
within the Genisteae-feeding Arytaininae (i.e. a single evolution of the Genisteae-feeding 
habit), while consensus trees for the other three islands place Pseudacanthopsylla basal to 
the remaining ingroup taxa, with the Psyllinae nested within the Arytaininae (i.e. multiple 
evolution of the Genisteae-feeding habit). The MP 12S tree in Figure 3A shows the 
topology most similar to that recovered after weighting the 12S data using the mean 
rescaled consistency index in PAUP*. Excluding Pseudacanthopsylla from the analyses in 
order to assess whether the remaining Genisteae-feeding genera were a well supported 
monophyletic group resulted in a strict MP consensus with the Genisteae-feeding 
Arytaininae monophyletic (but with low bootstrap support: 66%) and sister to the 
Psyllinae. The application of distance and likelihood methods does not resolve this 
conflict. NJ analysis using the HKY85 model (see methods) supports the inclusion of 
Pseudacanthopsylla in a monophyletic Genisteae-feeding clade with NJ bootstrap > 80%. 
However, the ML analysis using the same model of nucleotide substitution places 
Pseudacanthopsylla basal to the remaining Arytaininae and Psyllinae.
CHAPTER THREE: PSYLLID DIVERSITY - 2 0 5 -
3.3.2 Molecular evolution o f the COI-tRNA-COlI region
The combined COI-tRNA-COII matrix provides 639 characters when aligned (352 variable 
sites, of which 297 are parsimony informative), with A+T content 67-83% (further 
sequence details are given in Table 3). There are no gaps in COI or COE and sequence 
length differences are due to differences in the length of readable sequence obtained with 
various primer combinations. The tRNA leucine is 65-71bp in length, providing 79 
characters when aligned (positions 263-341 of the aligned COI-tRNA-COE matrix, see 
Appendix 3). A MP search found a single island of six trees (length 2280, Cl 0.248 
excluding uninformative characters, RI 0.613), one of which is shown in Figure 3B.
When compared to the 12S data, the combined CO regions (including the tRNA 
leucine) provide improved resolution and bootstrap support in parts of the phylogeny. 
Interspecific genetic divergence is generally 30-50% higher in the CO than in the 12S 
region: Macaronesian clade -  CO: 2-13%, 12S: 0-9%; Arytainilla sensu stricto -  CO: 6- 
14%, 12S: 3-11%; Arytaina -  CO: 2-15%, 12S: 2-10%. As with the 12S data, the CO 
regions also show saturation, but there is a linear relation between transitions and 
transversions at low levels of divergence (Fig. 2), suggesting that the CO data is more 
appropriate for resolving groups that have recently speciated. However, there is variation 
in the grouping of taxa in the Macaronesian clade using different analyses (MP, NJ and 
ML) possibly as a result of short branch lengths at the base of the clade. As with the 12S 
data, the low accumulation of substitutions in several parts of the CO phylogeny suggests 
periods of rapid speciation. Pseudacanthopsylla is placed in all analyses (MP, NJ, ML) 
within the Genisteae-feeding Arytaininae.
3.3.3 Morphological evolution
MP analysis found a single island of 18 most parsimonious trees (length 554, Cl 0.484 
excluding a single uninformative character, RI 0.612). The number of morphologically 
discrete characters that were applicable to all taxa was, to a certain extent, limited by a 
combination of many closely related taxa with little interspecific variation, and populations 
of widespread taxa isolated on islands or fragmented on the continent exhibiting 
considerable intraspecific morphological variation. In general, nymphal morphology was 
more plastic and incured greater polymorphism than adult characters. Few of the nodes in 
the morphological phylogeny are well supported (Fig. 3C), but excluding polymorphic 
characters, or the subset of morphometric (continuous) characters, resulted in a loss of 
resolution. (Appendix 6 shows the unambiguous character state changes mapped onto the 
morphological phylogeny.) Nevertheless, the morphological phylogeny recovers many of
CHAPTER THREE: PSYLLID DIVERSITY - 2 0 6 -
the groups present in molecular analysis -  the Macaronesian clade (M), Arytaina (AR) 
and Arytainilla sensu stricto (A), as well as similar paraphyletic groupings of Livilla sensu 
lato.
3.3.4 Molecules and morphology combined
The partition homogeneity test (ILD test of Farris et al., 1994) indicated that the molecular 
data sets (12S and CO) were compatible (P = 0.99), but that the molecular and 
morphological data were significantly incongruent (P = 0.01) with one another. A 
combined molecular MP analysis (12S and CO), including all taxa sampled for one or both 
regions, found eight trees (length 3112, Cl 0.265 excluding uninformative characters, RI 
0.609), one of which is shown in Figure 4. Recent criticism of the ILD test suggests that 
the inclusion of small data sets with a relatively high degree of noise (e.g. the 
morphological data in this analysis) may give significant ILD test results even in the 
absence of systematic incongruence (Dolphin et al., 2000). To investigate the presence of 
underlying similarities in the molecular (12S and CO) and morphological phylogenies, 
consensus trees (Strict and Adams) of the independent phylogenies were constructed (Fig.
5 A & B). The lack of resolution in the strict consensus tree shows there is conflict in the 
MP topologies, but the Adams consensus is generally a more appropriate method for 
assessing underlying topological similarities, and it indicates considerable shared structure 
among the trees (Fig. 5B). Combining all three data sets in a total evidence MP analysis 
resulted in eight trees (length 2858, Cl 0.342 excluding uninformative characters, RI 
0.504), with the strict consensus showing clear delimitation and higher bootstrap support 
for several groups (e.g. Livilla, Arytainilla sensu stricto, and the Macaronesian equitans 
group) (Fig. 5C).
3.3.5 The arytainine psyllids in the Canary Islands and Madeira
The Macaronesian members of Arytaininae are from the Canary Islands and Madeira 
(Loginova, 1976a; Hodkinson, 1990). All the species from this region are endemic, and 
belong to three of the Genisteae-feeding genera (Arytaina, Arytainilla and Livilla). There 
are six genera of Genisteae on these islands, five of which host between one and 14 psyllid 
species. On the five central and western Canary Islands there are 21 arytainine species 
(four to 11 species per island). There are no native members of the host plant group on the 
dry, eastern islands of Fuerteventrua and Lanzarote. The island of Madeira (equivalent in 
area to La Palma, which has nine Genisteae species and seven arytainine psyllids) has only
CHAPTER THREE: PSYLLID DIVERSITY - 2 0 7 -
two arytainine psyllids and two native legumes in the Genisteae -  the only Macaronesian 
island with a one-to-one legume to psyllid ratio (Fig. 1 & Table 1).
After recent sampling in the Macaronesian region, it is clear that a substantial 
radiation has resulted in a group which includes the two Madeiran taxa, 16 Canary Island 
species and three continental taxa referred to as the Macaronesian clade due to the 
probable origination of this group in Macaronesia. This clade is by far the most speciose 
psyllid group in the Macaronesian region with no more than three species found in any 
other generic groups. All of the Macaronesian clade species are presently in Arytainilla 
(Loginova, 1972, 1976a) but the evidence presented here distinguishes this clade as both 
morphologically and genetically distinct from the core Arytainilla (defined by the type 
species, A. delarbrei). This latter group, referred to as Arytainilla sensu stricto, is in fact 
only represented by a single species in the Canary Islands. Two additional genera present 
in the Canary Islands are Livilla, also represented by a single species (L. monospertnae), 
and Arytaina (sensu Loginova, 1976a) represented by three species (Ar. devia, Ar. 
nubivaga and Ar. sp.14). Diversity and speciation within each genus in the Canary Islands 
appears mainly to be restricted by diversification in the host genus. The largest number of 
psyllids (13 species in the Macaronesian clade) occur on the most species rich host 
genus, Teline (ten species); and at the other end of the scale a single legume species 
representing the genus Retama is host to the one Canarian species of Livilla.
3.3.6 Intergeneric host switching
The number of host switches that have occurred between plant genera in the 
Macaronesian clade is inferred by mapping the host genera onto the psyllid phylogeny 
(Fig. 6). The optimization of the host genera on the psyllid tree suggests that intergeneric 
host switches are less common than intrageneric host switching. The switches to 
Adenocarpus, Chamaecytisus and Genista, all appear to have been made by psyllids that 
were originally 7e/me-feeding (Fig. 6). There appears to have been a single host switch to 
Adenocarpus (indicated by a white bar, Fig. 6) which resulted in the evolution of two 
Adenocarpus-ftzAmg species (A. nigralineata and A. proboscidea), and there appears to 
have been at least two, possibly three, host switches to Chamaecytisus (indicated by a 
black bar, Fig. 6). The three host switches to Chamaecytisus are required to explain the 
evolution of A dividens (one switch) and to explain the bi-generic host preference of A. 
modica (two switches). The samples of A. modica from Chamaecytisus and Teline hosts on 
two islands (La Palma and El Hierro) are segregated geographically (based on CO data) 
rather than by host affiliation. Therefore, it appears that A. modica made at least one host
CHAPTER THREE: PSYLLID DIVERSITY - 2 0 8 -
switch between Chamaecytisus and Teline on each island. A. modica is the only 
Macaronesian species found on more than one host genus and is a recently derived species 
on young islands (1-2 Myr). Further intraspecific sampling within islands, is required to 
determine whether members feeding on each plant genus have formed host races.
Switching between Genista and Teline in the Madeira/continental subclade was equivocal, 
but when resolved using ACCTRAN optimization, shows a single switch to Genista 
(indicated by a black triangle, Fig. 6), followed by a switch back to Teline (indicated by a 
white triangle, Fig. 6).
3.3.7 Continental versus island divergence
The CO regions have been shown to evolve sufficiently rapidly to provide information on 
the phylogeographic patterns within species of Canarian beetles (Juan et al., 1998; 
Emerson, Oromf & Hewitt, 2000a). Sequences of individuals from different populations in 
continental and Macaronesian taxa provided a comparative measure of intraspecific 
divergence. Three continental species (Ar. adenocarpi, Ar. genistae and A. spartiophila) 
are widespread occurring on several closely related host species. Individuals of these taxa 
were sampled from Morocco, Spain, Portugal and Scotland (Table 2 and Figs 3 & 4). 
Among the island species individuals were sampled from populations that either occurred 
on different islands and/or different host plants. Intraspecific genetic divergence (CO) was 
greatest within four Canary Island species that occurred on different islands but on the 
same host plant (L. monospermae from three islands, 4-5% ; Ar. devia from four islands, 1- 
10%; A. dividens from three islands, 1-4%; and A. sp.10 from two islands, 5%).
Divergence within the widespread continental species which were sampled from different 
hosts was less than 3%, and in each case divergence between Moroccan and European 
samples was double or more than double, the divergence within Europe (e.g. Ar. genistae 
from Portugal and Scotland showed 0.8% sequence divergence, but both samples showed 
2.8% divergence from the Moroccan individual) (Figs 3 & 5). The same pattern in Ar. 
adenocarpi and A. spartiophila suggests that the Moroccan region may have provided 
glacial refugia, with rapid northward migration during inter-glacial periods, as has been 
shown for other invertebrates and mammals (Hewitt, 1996,1999).
3.3.8 Widespread taxa
In the Canary Islands, nine of the 21 species (43%) occur on more than one island (.L, 
monospermae, Ar. devia, Ar. sp.14, A. dividens, A. diluta,A. modica, A. nigralineata, A. 
proboscidea and A. sp.10). All but one of these are specific to a single host plant. About
CHAPTER THREE: PSYLLID DIVERSITY - 2 0 9 -
half of these species show low intraspecific molecular CO divergence (max 0.02-2%), 
suggesting recent inter-island dispersal; but four species (each specific to a single host) 
show considerably greater divergence (max 4-10%) (Figs 3 & 5). Specificity to a single 
host may be contributing to a lack of speciation (morphological stasis) in these taxa, 
particularly where host habitat and ecology are relatively uniform between islands. In other 
examples, where colonization of a new island is unaccompanied by a host switch but has 
resulted in speciation, the intraspecific host variation -  distinct subspecies -  may have 
promoted speciation. However, two of the widespread species occur on one of the most 
variable hosts, Chamaecytisus proliferus (3 subspecies, 4 varieties); and one these species 
(Ar. devia) was found to have almost as much intraspecific divergence (CO: 1-10%) as 
interspecific divergence found within the entire Macaronesian clade (CO: 2-13%).
3.3i.9 Colonization patterns
The 21 species of arytainine psyllid in the Canary Islands are probably derived from five 
independent colonizations of these islands (indicated by *, Fig. 6). Only one of these 
col onizations has resulted in a significant radiation (16 species in the Macaronesian 
clade). Four of the colonizations have resulted in little or no radiation and are represented 
by one or two species in Livilla, Arytainilla s.s. and Arytaina. There has been one 
(ACCTRAN optimization), possibly two colonizations of Madeira (Fig. 6 shows the 
ACCTRAN optimization). The two Madeiran species (A. incuba and A. umbonata) form 
part of a group that includes the three continental species (A. cognata, A. hakani and A. 
sp.13) in the Macaronesian clade, and the derived position of this subclade within the 
Macaronesian clade suggests one, or even two (with ACCTRAN optimization) possible 
back colonizations of the continent (i.e. one colonization of the continent from the Canary 
Islands and one from Madeira, Fig. 6 shows the ACCTRAN optimization). These 
continental recolonizations, however, may also be considered equivocal because the 
additional tree length (10 steps) required to exclude the Madeiran and continental species 
while constraining the Canary Island members of the Macaronesian clade to be 
monophyletic, is not significant (Table 4).
The continental sister groups of the five Canary Island species not in the 
Macaronesian clade (e.g. Arytaina, Arytainilla s.s. and Livilla spp.) are well resolved, and 
the continental sister taxa are all widespread and occur in the Iberian Peninsula and NW 
Africa. A comparison of host associations in the continental and island sister groups is 
used to assess the role of preadaptation to particular host plants in colonizing psyllids. In 
Figure 6, where the legume host genera of the island and continental sister taxa are mapped
CHAPTER THREE: PSYLLID DIVERSITY - 2 1 0 -
onto the psyllid tree, four of the five psyllid colonizations of the Canary Islands (indicated 
by *, Fig. 6) would also have required colonization of a novel host genus. The only 
example of an island psyllid occurring on the same host genus as its continental sister 
taxon, is Livilla monospermae on the host genus Retama (Fig. 6). However, the switches 
between host genera during island/continental colonization events, are all between host 
genera within the same host groups (e.g. the Genista group or the Cytisus group) within the 
Genisteae (Kass & Wink, 1997). Figure 7 presents these generic host groups mapped onto 
the psyllid phylogeny. Following dispersal, therefore, a psyllid may search among 
available hosts for recognizable features, and select the host as closely related to the 
original host as it can find, implying an important role for preadaptation to the selection 
process of particular types of available hosts.
3.4 Discussion
3.4.1 Phylogeny o f the Arytaininae
The molecular analyses (Figs 3 & 4) confirm the reservations expressed by Hodkinson & 
Hollis (1987) concerning the monophyly of the Arytaininae. The current classification 
represents a paraphyletic group with respect to the Psyllinae (represented by Cacopsylla). 
Amongst the papilionoid legume-feeders, the genus Cyamophila whose members feed on 
the tribes Galegeae, Loteae, Phaseoleae, Soporeae and Loteae, are distinct from members 
feeding on the tribe Genisteae. Cyamophila appears to be more closely related to the 
subfamily Psyllinae whose members feed on a wide variety of hosts including species in 
the Rosaceae, Rhamnaceae, Salicaceae, and the Caesalpinioideae (Leguminosae). There is 
some evidence for a monophyletic Genisteae-feeding group (combined molecular analysis: 
MP bootstrap 59%, NJ bootstrap 92%, Fig. 4), but the inclusion of Pseudacanthopsylla in 
this group remains equivocal. Whether Pseudacanthopsylla unequivocally belongs to a 
monophyletic Genisteae-feeding group, may only be tested satisfactorily with additional 
sampling of Afro-tropical genera thought to be related to this genus (Hodkinson & Hollis, 
1987).
The Macaronsian clade (M  in Figs 3-5) is a strongly supported monophyletic 
group, though the origin of this clade from within the Arytaininae remains ambiguous. The 
combined molecular analysis (12S and CO) suggests that it is nested within a paraphyletic 
Livilla sensu lato, and sister to the core Livilla group ( L  in Figs 3-5). The three 
Macaronesian Arytaina species (Ar. devia, Ar. nubivaga and Ar. sp.14) do not appear to be 
a monophyletic group, but further intrageneric sampling is needed to confirm this. The
CHAPTER THREE: PSYLLID DIVERSITY -211
single Macaronesian species of Arytainilla s. s. (A. sp .l) is strongly supported as grouping 
with the type species of this group (A. delarbrei), and the single Macaronesian species of 
Livilla (L. monospermae) is closely related to a continental outlying Livilla species (L. 
retamae) (Fig. 4). Further conclusions on the taxonomic implications of the phylogenetic 
analyses are given in the Taxonomic Appendix. Notably, there is good resolution and 
support for some major groups ( Macaronesain clade -  M, Arytainilla s.s -  A, Arytaina -  
AR and the core Livilla -  L group), but among these groups, the relationships remain 
unsupported.
3.4.2 Origins and colonization in Macaronesian Ayrtaininae
Is there evidence to determine the sequence of colonization or to identify which of the 
Canary Islands was first colonized? The three basal species in the Macaronesian clade (A. 
sp.5, A. diluta and A. prognata) occur on Gran Canaria (the geologically oldest and closest 
island to the African continent of the central islands). It is probable, therefore, that this 
island was the first island colonized, and the location of early diversification of the 
Macaronesian clade.
Within the genus Arytaina, species or populations (Ar. sp.14 and Ar. devia) from 
geologically younger islands have 5th instar nymphs with fewer nymphal sectasetae on the 
abdomen. Optimization of this character on the psyllid phylogeny suggests that loss of 
sectasetae is derived in these taxa, which would reflect colonizations (east to west) from 
older to younger islands. However, a more extensive phylogeographic approach than the 
limited intraspecific sampling here, is required to test this interpretation, and would allow a 
comparison of the stepping stone pattern of colonization found in other island 
invertebrate groups (Roderick & Gillespie, 1998; Juan et al., 1998; Emerson et al., 2000a). 
One common pattern that is evident in three species from different genera (Ar. devia, A. 
dividens and L. monospermae), is the close relationship between individuals sampled from 
the two closest islands, Tenerife and La Gomera (27 km apart). Further phylogeographic 
data for these taxa should be able to differentiate between a pattern of recent colonization 
(with markedly structured populations on each island) versus a pattern of gene flow 
between these geographically close islands, with distant islands more effectively isolated.
3.4.3 Ecological and geographical patterns
Host plant preference, ecology and geographical distribution in sister taxa, determined over 
three years of field surveys, are used to investigate the diversification of psyllids in 
Macaronesia. By combining field data with the psyllid phylogeny, three patterns of sister
CHAPTER THREE: PSYLLID DIVERSITY - 2 1 2 -
taxon relationships were inferred for the island Arytaininae. 1) the majority of sister taxa 
are ecologically and geographically allopatric, occurring both on different host plants and 
different islands or different regions within an island; 2) there are four cases of sister taxa 
occurring on the same host but different islands; 3) and there is only one case where sister 
taxa occur both on the same host and the same island (A. diluta and A. prognata). The 
latter may represent a case of sympatric speciation, however, there is evidence for a micro- 
allopatric adaptive shift, with each species restricted to either northern mesic habitats or 
dry southern habitats of the host. Geographical allopatry is the primary division when sister 
taxa occur on separate islands but on the same host, and furthermore, exhibit a shared 
preference for ecologically specialized subspecies of the host (T. stenopetala): sister taxa 
A. sp.10 and A. sp .ll  are more common on the hosts xerically adapted subspecies on La 
Palma (ssp. sericea) and La Gomera (ssp. pauciovulata); while A. modica and A. sp.12 are 
more common on the hosts mesically adapted subspecies from the same islands (ssp. 
stenopetala and ssp. microphylla). These patterns suggest that, independently, ecological 
or geographical divergence may be sufficient to promote psyllid speciation, but both of 
these mechanisms are apparent in the majority of sister taxon relationships. The prevailing 
pattern that emerges is one of varying amounts of ecological and geographical shifts 
similar to other island invertebrate groups (Roderick & Gillespie, 1998).
A common feature of the Canarian Arytaininae is the presence of multiple (2-6) 
psyllid species on the same host (Table 5). The sharing of host resources may be facilitated 
by geographical segregation, ecological specialization and divergence in the timing of 
development. On Tenerife, T. canariensis is a widespread legume on which four psyllid 
species occur, but only one psyllid is found throughout the host range (A. pileolata) while 
the other species (A. diluta, A. sp.7 and A. sp.8) occur in particular regions or habitats. A 
similar pattern is found on Gran Canaria, where three psyllid species occur on T. 
microphylla, one widespread (A. equitans) and two localized species (A. diluta and A. 
prognata). As a widespread legume occurs in several types of habitat, a widespread psyllid 
species may be considered an ecological generalist, whereas psyllids restricted to local 
habitats types may be ecological specialists. Interestingly, the phylogeny suggests that, on 
Tenerife, the localized species are more derived, but this is reversed on Gran Canaria 
where the widespread species is more derived. In addition, both widespread species 
develop later in the season than the ecologically localized species, and this temporal 
division is also found in two widespread species which both occur throughout the host 
range (Ar. devia develops later than A. dividens on Chamaecytisus proliferus). These
CHAPTER THREE: PSYLLID DIVERSITY - 2 1 3 -
pattems suggest a degree of competitive displacement and/or exclusion is operating to 
partition the use of plant resources by psyllid species.
An example which supports a role for competitive exclusion is found in the two 
Adenocarpus-feeding species (A. nigralineata and A. proboscidea). On Tenerife both the 
psyllids are present and each psyllid is specific to one of two hosts (the hosts are divided 
altitudinally and ecologically). But on La Palma only one psyllid species is present, and 
this psyllid occurs throughout both host ranges. Oviposition in Adenocarpus-feedmg 
species is on the flowers and inflorescence, and exclusivity on Tenerife may be driven by 
adaptation to phenological differences (Adenocarpus foliolosus flowers earlier than A. 
viscosus). The effects of phenology and altitudinal clines are therefore more likely to 
influence patterns of host specialization when the presence of another psyllid requires a 
competetive advantage. A study of willow psyllids found similar variation in resource 
exploitation along an altitudinal gradient (Hill, Hamer & Hodkinson, 1998).
3.4.4 Anthropogenic effects on host populations and host hybridization 
The Genisteae species that were found to host psyllids were all estimated to have an 
abundance equal to, or greater than 2000 individuals. The rarest legume on which a psyllid 
was found is T. osyroides ssp. osyroides with a single population of c. 2000-3000 
individuals in the Barranco de Masca. The Genisteae species which do not host psyllids 
(up to> one third of the legumes (17-33%) per island) are all rare species with less than 2000 
individuals, and in many cases these are rare because of human activity. Thus, there is a 
possibility that there were psyllids on these hosts in the past but these psyllids are now 
extinct. There may be a critical host plant abundance, below which a psyllid species may 
be unable to maintain a viable population. Fragmentation of host populations may also be 
critical: an uncommon legume (T. rosmarinifolia) occurs in several small, fragmented 
populations, and a rare psyllid species (A. sp.5) was found on only one of these 
populations. In contrast, cultivation of some native host plants for animal fodder 
(Chamaecytisus proliferus and Teline stenopetala) and the adaptation of other native hosts 
to disturbed or grazed landscapes (Adenocarpus viscosus) appears to have increased the 
abundance of psyllid species associated with these hosts.
Another effect of human disturbance is the breakdown of ecological barriers 
between plant species, resulting in hybridization (Lems, 1958; Francisco-Ortega et al., 
2000). Several psyllid species occur on multiple hosts (A. diluta, A.equitans, A. pileolata,
A. proboscidea and A. sp.8) and hybrids have also been recorded between these hosts 
(Table 5). On Tenerife, hybrids between three host species (T. canariensis, T. stenopetala
CHAPTER THREE: PSYLLID DIVERSITY - 2 1 4 -
and T. osyroides) occur around the Ladera de Gwrnar (Arco Aguilar, pers. comm.) -  an 
area settled by the aboriginal Guanches; and the most polyphagous psyllid species in the 
Canary Islands (A. pileolata in the Macaronesian clade) is found on these three hosts. As 
hybrids are more likely to occur between closely related species, it is not clear, without 
mapping host and psyllid genotypes across hybrid zones, whether the host shifts occurred 
because of phylogenetic compatibility, or whether hybridization could have promoted the 
shift via a hybrid bridge effect (Floate & Whitham, 1993; Roderick, 1997).
3.5 Taxonomic Appendix
3.5.1 Arytainilla
There are currently 34 species in this genus, but the genus is clearly paraphyletic (Table 4). 
The majority of the species (21) belong to the Macaronesian clade discussed below. The 
remaining species can be divided into a small group which includes the type species 
(Arytainilla sensu stricto: nine species, of which six species are included in this study), and 
four residual and heterogeneous species that are morphologically atypical (A. ima, A. sulci, 
A . gredi and A. sp.4: Arytainilla sensu lato). Arytainilla s.s. is characterized by unusually 
large female genitalia and a massive ovipositor. This group (labelled A  in Figs 3-5) is 
supported as monophyletic in the CO phylogeny (bootstrap MP: 78%, Fig. 3B; NJ: 89%) 
and the combined morphological and molecular analysis (bootstrap MP: 87%, Fig. 5C) but 
appears paraphyletic in respect to the genus Arytaina in the 12S analysis using NJ and ML 
methods, and is unresolved in the MP 12S phylogeny (Fig. 3A). Hence the absence of 
support for Arytainilla s.s. in the MP combined molecular analysis (Fig. 4). There is a 
single species of Arytainilla s.s. in the Canary Islands (A. sp.l), which groups with the type 
species (A. delarbrei, MP bootstrap > 80% in the combined molecular (Fig. 4) and total 
evidence (Fig. 5C) phylogenies). The nymphal morphology of this group is extremely 
variable. A. sulci is unique within the Arytaininae in the tergal plates of the 5th instar 
nymph which are barely reduced. The combined molecular phylogeny (12S and CO, Fig.
4) suggests that A. gredi and A. sp.4 have closer affinities to Livilla than to Arytainilla, and 
that A. sulci is sister to Arytaina. A. ima belongs to a small, well supported group (MP 
bootstrap > 80% in both combined analyses, Figs 4 & 5) of outlying Livilla species that 
feed on the genus Adenocarpus (Fig. 7). Members of Arytainilla s.s. predominantly feed on 
host plants in, or allied to the genus Cytisus (Cytisus group) (Fig. 7).
CHAPTER THREE: PSYLLID DIVERSITY - 2 1 5 -
3.5.2 The Macaronesian clade of Arytainilla
This clade of 21 species is not exclusively Macaronesian, but appears to have evolved and 
diversified in Macaronesia. The clade (labelled M  in Figs 3-5) is unambiguously resolved 
in all molecular analyses and in the morphological analysis. Support for the monophyly of 
the clade is strong in the independent 12S and CO phylogenies (bootstrap MP: 79- 
99%,Fig. 3A & B; NJ: 91-100%); and although the clade lacks bootstrap support in the 
morphological phylogeny (Fig. 3C), the combined morphological and molecular data 
provide 99% MP bootstrap (Fig. 5C). Members of the Macaronesian clade predominantly 
feed on host plants in, or allied to the genus Genista (Genista group) (Fig. 7).
3.5.3 Arytaina
There are 14 species in Arytaina of which five have been included in this study: three 
Macaronesian taxa which are endemic to the Canary Islands (Ar. devia, Ar. nubivaga and 
Ar. sp.14), and two continental species (Ar. adenocarpi and the genus type species, Ar. 
genistae). Although sampling is limited, the strong support for this group (labelled AR in 
Figs 3-5), suggests that Arytaina is the only unambiguously monophyletic genus in the 
Genisteae-feeding Arytaininae (Figs 3-5). The Macaronesian taxa, although originally 
placed in this genus (Loginova, 1976a), were later removed and placed in Arytainilla based 
mainly on the peculiar morphology of the male genitalia (Hodkinson & Hollis, 1987). 
Nevertheless, there is strong support from both the morphological (MP booststrap 74%,
Fig. 3C) and molecular (MP booststrap 89-100%, Fig. 3A & B) phylogenies for reverting 
to the original classification. Members of Arytaina predominantly feed on host plants in, or 
allied to the genus Cytisus (Cytisus group) (Fig. 7).
3.5.4 Livilla
This is the largest Genisteae-feeding genus and, like Arytainilla, it is clearly paraphyletic 
as indicated by the additional tree length required when the genus is constrained to be 
monophyletic (Table 4). There are 39 species, 19 of which are included in this study. The 
monophyly of a core group of Livilla species (labelled L  in Figs 3-5) is well supported 
(combined 12S and CO: MP bootstrap 81%, Fig. 4). Neither the single Macaronesian 
species (L. monospermae), nor the type-group as defined by Hodkinson & Hollis (1987) 
(represented in this study by L. vicina) is included in this core Livilla group. However, 
constraining the core Livilla  species to be monophyletic with the inclusion of three of the 
outlying species (L. nervosa, L. monospermae and L. retamae) but not including L. vicina 
or the Adenocarpus-feeding species (L. sp.15, sp.16 and sp.17) does not require a
CHAPTER THREE: PSYLLID DIVERSITY - 2 1 6 -
significant increase in tree length (Table 4); and this group is recovered in the total 
evidence phylogeny (but with low bootstrap support, MP: 57%, Figs 5C). Members of this 
genus typically feed on hosts plants in, or allied to the genus Genista (Genista group, Fig. 
3.5.5 Pseudacanthopsylla improvisa comb. nov.
Psylla improvisa Loginova, 1972: 30
This genus, previously monotypic (a single species in the Middle East and NE Africa, 
P.retamae), is represented in this study by a second species (Psylla impovisa) from NW 
Africa, which is transferred to Pseudacanthopsylla based on the following generic features: 
unpattemed, parallel-sided forewing with well developed pterostigma, short robust genal 
cones, metatarsal spur absent, and a unique hedgehog nymphal morphology with near 
entire coverage of sectasetae (Fig. 6B). P. improvisa differs from the type species (P. 
retamae, Sarny, 1972: 455) in the narrower, more acutely rounded forewing apex, more 
slender genal cones, and the distinctive shape of the male and female genitalia (illustrated 
by Loginova, 1972). Both the species occur on the same widespread host plant (Retama 
raetam). The conflicting placement of this peculiar genus is discussed in the main body of 
the paper under the separate molecular analyses.
3.6 References
Asquith A. 1995. Evolution of Sarona (Heteroptera, Miridae). Speciation on geographic 
and ecological islands. In: Vagner WL, Funk VA, eds. Hawaiian biogeography: 
evolution on a hot spot archipelago. Washington D.C.: Smithsonian Institution 
Press, 90-120.
Bisby FA. 1981. Genisteae (Adans.) Benth. (1865). In: Polhill RM, Raven PH, eds.
Advances in Legume Sytematics. Kew, Royal Botanic Gardens, 409-425.
B arrett SCH. 1998. The reproductive biology and genetics of island plants. In: Grant PR, 
ed. Evolution on Islands. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 18-34.
B runton CFA, H urst GDD. 1998. Mitochondrial DNA phylogeny of Brimstone
butterflies (genus Gonepteryx) from the Canary Islands and Madeira. Biological 
Journal o f the Linnean Society 63: 69-79.
Carson HL, Clague DA. 1995. Geology and biogeography of the Hawaiian Islands. In: 
Wagner WL, Funk VA, eds. Hawaiian biogeography: evolution on a hot spot 
archipelago. Washington D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press, 14-29.
CHAPTER THREE: PSYLLID DIVERSITY - 2 1 7 -
Dolphin K, Belshaw R, Orme CDL, Quicke DLJ. 2000. Noise and incongruence: 
interpreting results of the incongruence length difference test. Molecular 
Phylogenetics and Evolution 17: 401-406.
Emerson BC, Oromf P, Hewitt GM. 2000a. Colonization and diversification of the
species Brachyderes rugatus (Coleoptera) on the Canary Islands: evidence from 
mitochondrial DNA COE gene sequences. Evolution 54: 911-923.
Emerson BC, Oromf P & Hewitt GM. 2000b. Interpreting colonization of the Calathus 
(Coleoptera: Carabidae) on the Canary Islands and Madeira through the application 
of the parametric bootstrap. Evolution 54: 2081-2090.
Farris JS, KallersjoM, Kluge AG, Bult C. 1994. Testing significance of incongruence. 
Cladistics 10: 315-319.
Floate KD, Whitham TG. 1993. The hybrid bridge hypothesis: host shifting via plant 
hybrid swarms. American Naturalist 141: 651-662.
Francisco-Ortega J, Jansen RK, Santos-Guerra A. 1996. Chloroplast DNA evidence of 
colonization, adaptive radiation, and hybridization in the evolution of the 
Macaronesian flora. Proceedings o f the National Academy o f Science, USA 93: 
4085-4090.
Francisco-Ortega J, Santos-Guerra A, Seung-Chul K, Crawford DJ. 2000. Plant 
genetic diversity in the Canary Islands: a conservation perspective. American 
Journal o f Botany 87: 909-919.
Gibbs PE. 1967. A revision of the genus Adenocarpus. Boletim da Sociedade Broteriana 
41 (series 2): 67-121.
Gibbs PE. 1974. Taxonomic notes on some Canary Island and North African species of 
Cytisus and Genista. Lagascalia 4: 33-41.
Gibbs PE, Dingwall 1 .1972 (1971). A revision of the genus Teline. Boletim da Sociedade 
Broteriana 45 (series 2): 269-316.
Givnish TJ. 1998. Adaptive plant evolution on islands: classical patterns, molecular data, 
new insights. In: Grant PR, ed. Evolution on Islands. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 281-304.
Givnish TJ, Sytsma, KJ. 1997. Molecular Evolution and Adaptive Radiation. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Grant PR. 1986. Ecology and Evolution o f Darwins finches. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press.
Grant, PR. 1998. Evolution on Islands. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
CHAPTER THREE: PSYLLID DIVERSITY - 2 1 8 -
Heslop-Harrison G. 1951. The Arytainini of the subfamily Psyllinae Hemiptera-
Homoptera, family Psyllidae I. Annals and Magazine o f Natural History (12) 4: 
417-462.
Heslop-Harrison G. 1961. The Arytainini of the subfamily Psyllinae Hemiptera-
Homoptera, family Psyllidae II. Annals and Magazine o f Natural History (13) 3: 
417-439.
Hewitt GM. 1996. Some genetic consequences of ice ages, and their role in divergence 
and speciation. Biological Journal o f the Linnean Society 58: 247-276.
Hewitt GM. 1999. Post-glacial re-colonization of European biota. Biological Journal o f  
the Linnean Society 68: 87-112.
Hill JK, Hamer KC, Hodkinson ID. 1998. Variation in resource exploitation along an 
altitudinal gradient: the willow psyllids (Cacopsylla spp.) on Salix lapponum. 
Ecography 21: 289-296.
Hodkinson ID. 1990. New species of psyllid from the Canary Islands and Madeira 
(Homoptera: Psylloidea). Eos 66: 29-35.
Hodkinson ID, Hollis D. 1987. The legume feeding psyllids (Homoptera) of the west
Palaearctic Region. Bulletin o f the British Museum (Natural History) (Entomology). 
56: 1-86.
Juan C, Emerson BC, Oromf P, Hewitt GM. 2000. Colonization and diversification:
towards a phylogeography synthesis for the Canary Islands. Trends in Ecology and 
Evolution 15: 104-109.
Juan C, Ibrahim KM, Oromf P, Hewitt GM. 1998. The phylogeography of the darkling 
beetle, Hegeter ploitus, in the eastern Canary Islands. Proceedings o f the Royal 
Society o f London, Series B Biological Sciences 265: 135-140.
Kambysellis MP, Craddock EM. 1997. Ecological and reproductive shifts in the
diversification of the endemic Hawaiian Drosophila. In: Givnish TJ, Sytsma KJ, 
eds. Molecular Evolution and Adaptive Radiation. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Kaneshiro KY, Gillespie RG, Carson HL. 1995. Chromosomes and male genitalia of
Hawaiian Drosohpila: tools for interpreting phylogeny and geography. In: Wagner 
WL, Funk VA, eds. Hawaiian biogeography: evolution on a hot spot archipelago. 
Washington D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press, 57-71.
Kass E, Wink M. 1997. Phylogenetic relationships in the papilionoideae (family
leguminosae) based on nucleotide sequences of cpDNA (rbcL) and ncDNA (ITS 1 
and 2). Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 8: 65-88.
CHAPTER THREE: PSYLLID DIVERSITY - 2 1 9 -
Lems K. 1958. Botanical notes on the Canary Islands I. Introgression among the species of 
Adenocarpus, and their role in the vegetation of the Islands. Boletin del Instituto 
Nacional Investigaciones Agronomicas, Madrid 39: 351-370.
Loginova MM. 1972. On the fauna of Psylloidea from Morocco (Homoptera). 
Commentationes Biologicae 47: 1-37.
Loginova MM. 1976a. Psyllids (Psylloidea, Homoptera) of the Canary Islands and 
Madeira. Commentationes Biologicae 81: 1-37.
Loginova MM. 1976b. A classification of the subfamily Arytaininae Crawf. (Homoptera, 
Psyllidae). I. A review of the genera of the tribe Arytainini. Entomologicheskoe 
Obozrenie 55: 589-601. [In Russian. English translation, Entomological Review, 
Washington 55 (3): 61-68.]
Loginova MM. 1977. A classification of the subfamily Arytaininae Crawf. (Homoptera:
Psyllidae). II. A review of the genera of the tribe Cyamophilini. Entomologicheskoe 
Obozrenie 56: 577-587. [In Russian. English translation, Entomological Review, 
Washington 56 (3): 64-71.]
Lunt DH, Zhang DX, Szymura JM, Hewitt GM. 1996. The insect cytochrome oxidase I 
gene: Evolutionary patterns and conserved primers for phylogenetic studies. Insect 
Molecular Biology 5: 153-165.
Mac Arthur RH, Wilson EO. 1967. The Theory o f Island Biogeography. Princeton, N.J.: 
Princeton University Press.
Maddison WP, Maddison DR. 1992. MacClade. Analysis of Phylogeny and Character 
Evolution. Version 3. Sunderland, Massachusetts: Sinauer Associates.
Mes THM, T Hart H. 1996. The evolution of growth-forms in the Macaronesian genus 
Aeonium (Crassulaceae) inferred from chloropast DNA RFLPs and morphology. 
Molecular Ecology 5: 351-363.
Page RDM. 2000. NDE. Nexus Delta Editor. Version 0.4.8
(http://taxonomy.zoology.gla.ac.uk/rod/NDE/nde.html). Glasgow: IBLS, University 
of Glasgow.
Percy DM, Cronk QCB. 1997. Conservation in relation to mating system in Nesohedyotis 
arborea (Rubiaceae), a rare endemic tree from St Helena. Biological Conservation 
80: 135-145.
Pinto FM, Brehm M, Hernandez JM, Larruga JM, Gonzalez AM, Cabrera VM. 1997.
Population genetic structure and colonization sequence of Drosophila subobscura 
in the Canaries and Madeira Atlantic islands as inferred by autosomal, sex-linked 
and mtDNA traits. Journal o f Heredity 88: 108-114.
http://taxonomy.zoology.gla.ac.uk/rod/NDE/nde.html
CHAPTER THREE: PSYLLID DIVERSITY - 2 2 0 -
Polhill RM. 1976. Genisteae (Adans.) Benth. and related tribes (Leguminosae). Botanical 
Systematics. An Occasional Series o f Monographs 1: 143-368.
Posada D, Crandall KA. 1998. Modeltest: testing the model of DNA substitution. 
Bioinformatics 14: 817-818.
Rambaut A. 1998. Sequence Alignment Editor. Version l.Oal
(http://evolve.zoo.ox.ac.uk/software/). Oxford: Oxford University.
Roderick GK. 1997. Herbivorous insects and the Hawaiian silversword alliance: 
coevolution or cospeciation? Pacific Science 4: 440-449.
Roderick GK, Gillespie RG. 1998. Speciation and phylogeography of Hawaiian 
terrestrial arthropods. Molecular Ecology 7: 519-531.
Samy 0 . 1972. Psyllids of Egypt. Bulletin de la Societe Entomologique d'Egypte 56: 437- 
Simon C, Frati F, Beckenbach A, Crespi B, Liu H, Flook P. 1994. Evolution, 
weighting, and phylogenetic utility of mitochondrial gene sequences and a 
compilation of conserved polymerase chain reaction primers. Annals o f the 
Entomological Society o f  America 87: 651-701.
Sunding P. 1979. Origins of the Macaronesian flora. In: Bramwell D, ed. Plants and 
Islands. London: Academic Press, 13-40.
Swofford DL. 1999. PAUP*. Phylogenetic Analysis Using Parsimony (*and Other 
Methods). Version 4. Sunderland, Massachusetts: Sinauer Associates.
Wagner WL, Funk VA. 1995. Hawaiian biogeography: evolution on a hot spot 
archipelago. Washington D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Zhang DX, Hewitt GM. 1997. Assessment of the universality and utility of a set of
conserved mitochondrial COI primers in insects. Insect Molecular Biology 6: 143- 
http://evolve.zoo.ox.ac.uk/software/
-221 -
C/3c3
T 3<D
53    C
C/3Ph
c3 <N
i n 00 S
x\ /---\
cn co
r- r- 00 VO OO v_/
CO CM t-Hs .^
co VO O n O '
O" co CM i-H
C/3<D
O<DP-
---- \
CO c s CM
^_' v__'
CO OO r- CM o
O" 1( 1-H CM CM
cxC/3
rf in
T t  00
co  i n  
m oi-H (N
4-Ha<D
vo Ov in  cn
CM Oco
00 h  00
cm CMr- cm r-
O r- r- VO r-H
m i-H 00 CM o VO
O n r- O i n 00
CO T ^ CM fH
m CO r- O n O n o
T f o 00 00 CO
CM CO O" t J- VO
- 2 2 2 -
i-i<D
x io3O>
CO iH
>ri t j- r i CO CO 00 -H ON CO VO 'O'
<N ON VO CO *t 00 OO VO OO VO CN VO
CO CN c s <N VO fH OJ CN CO
f t f t f t f t f t f t f t f t f t GQ f t f t f t
Q Q Q Q Q Q Q Q Q 3 Q Q Q
^  T3O (4-1o 
V) f t
cd 4->> oo
*  . 8
<D4-
3 1o 
(U*
3J4)"3
T 373
&  &  &
S3K
S3*3
S3C
S3G
 2  -S3
S33
Po u 130) O U ft .3 CO>i2
i 1 cd
T 3 X ) . a 00
1 J 1 S
U ac/1 [ C/3 C/3 C/3
b b S
3 3di (Wdo &o
3ftor co
 2-3
s * s
s s s s s S S s s s s S s
o o O o o o o o O o o O o o
u u U u U u u u U u u U u u
00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
CS CN c s CN CN <N CS <N (N CN CN
- 2 2 3 -
OO OO 
VO OO
co VO vo Ov (N CS iH CO VO
VO CO <o CO Ov o r - oCO CS CS CS H cs CS cs
pu K Oh Oh Oh Oh Olh Ph Oh Oh Oh
Q Q Q Q Q Q Q Q Q Q Q
^  J  ^h  O h
&  9
^   u
8 2 I
fS J  f i
-a -a 
ed cd
S S   .a
cd cd
u  u  u
1  1  J
PU Oh g
Vi (/I VI
G  G  G
G G G
cd cd cd
b  b  b  b  b  b
cd cd cd cd cd cd
  d  cd
u  u  u
cd cd
u  u  u
,R -2 R R -2 -2 -2^4 *-4 ^4 ER **4  4 *4 **4
R R R R R R R R R R R R R R
a a a a a a a a a a a a a a
b b b b b b b b b b b b b b
S S S S S S S S S S S S S S
o o o o o o o o o o o o o
u u u u u u u u u u u u u
00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
cs cs cs
cs cs cs cs cs <N cs
- 2 2 4 -
r - r - CO 0 0 NO 0 0 O n n c o O n CS cn O
CS O n r - O n O n CO CS NO 0 r - 0 0 m O n
cn CS CS CS 1H H c s i-H c s i-H
Ph Oh Oh Ph Ph P h P h P h P h Ph P h Ph P h P h
Q Q Q Q Q Q Q Q Q Q Q Q Q Q
a <*5
^  s6oa 3
P a  t  . 1  
>
ed 4-i^H COed 
ed ^ 3  W) cd
.O ,<U ,<D
G *G Ca a <ua d d  a a <u
H H H
x) x>
1 .9 .s I |  I  I  |  |
^ c o c o S o O O U U
5 3 o
a  -a  . a
8.  ad O
0) ' o
co ed -d
edb>
  f H
i . S
<3 J_4* 2
>> <L>0  
^ c N c n T t T t i n ' s o r ^  
0 -( CU On Oh Oh Oh Oh Oh
Xi 2  x
0 0  O n 
O h O h
-3 -3 3 3 3 a 3 3 0*"-*4 *>* a s
a a a a a a a a a a a a a
   3     3 3 3 3 3
  
s s s s s s s S S
s s s s
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0u u u u u u u u u u u u u
CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO 00
c s c s c s c s c s c s
c s c s
c s c s
- 225  -
n 00 o VOOv T tCN
8 CN CN r-HPU PU PU PU Pu
P P P p Q
Tt VO
t-H05
 2  2
  W  o
>,   o
-h  ^  cd
< S  u  u
g g g* b  b  y -g
8> 9 S 9 9 3 .8)
_edO #N
T 3 'O 5
Oh 'ed 5r>
cd j ^ 4
cd a>
.3 s.
.3 G .3 .3 5 -3 -3 G -3 G** G G
> > > u-
> > >
p P p p p
s s s S
CN 12
- 2 2 6 -
- 2 2 7 -
r -~ m
r - i n
f - i ni
v o VO
0 0 r - t J-
i n c s r - i n c n
OVi ONi
i n c s i n c s C S OV OV r -
r*H O n r-H O n c n VO
0 0 0 0 ov
O n c n i n ' __v i nOO CS
c s ' o  2
i n O ni n c s c n r f VO
c s c s -  ^ oc s
00 00
O n CS O v CS (N  (N ' M
i i / )  i O nh- OO ( (S
i n  m  i n  c s  
c s  c s
9 x)On i ri: 
(N ^  ^
vo LJ 
I ^O N
VO T f
0 0  oo
00 o v  
CSI I
r- r- i n  mi i
C S  OO  V O  / S
w  w  w  w  O ^  )
^  cs o  i- ^  ^  
c s  i n  c s
C S t j - m
v o VO
c s1 c s1
r - C S
m i n 1c sO n c s c s
O V O
C S c s C S
c s  ,
J .  o oo  S
h  M 0 \ ^
iP  i n  ooo ^  cs 
O  >n h  On ( i
i n  ^  c n  i
r - c n
c s c s c s
r*H c ni c nc s c s i
i n c n i n c n t--0 0 0 0 o
c s c s c n
c n  cn 4  r-r~~ o
c s  o o  c s
cs *n vj- Tf 
c n  o o  T t  t j -
v o  i n  c n  I 
^  ^  v *
<u a) o  o  
OX) 0J3(-H WH(U <u > >
bb kb 0 0  ed
<D <D
c  4) e
cd 0 0  cd
<D G <Ds s e
00 D <D O 
T ) "O
c  co  a>
<u <u <u a)<l> <u-G rS -3w  -t> <>
ob oo oo C G G
<0 <D O
<U <D
0 0  + a) <d
0 0  cd 0 0q u q
<> *> -4->
00 00 00e a a<U <D D
- 2 2 8 -
TABLE 4. Tests for monophyly in the genera Arytainilla and Livilla, and of biogeographic 
constraints within the Macaronesian clade. Significant length difference (P = < 0.05) for 
constraints is indicated by *.
constraint
no. of 
species
cost of 
monophyly: 
M P tree length 
difference
Templeton 
(Wilcoxon signed- 
rank) test
1. monophyly of Livilla 19 29 P =  0.0095 *
2. Livilla exc. type-group +
Adenocarpus-feeding species 15 4 P  = 0.4328
3. monophyly of Arytainilla 31 34 P =  0.0065*
Macaronesian clade
4. Macaronesian group excluding
continental species 18 33 P = < 0.0001 *
5. Canary Island group excluding
continental and Madeiran species 16 1 0 P=  0.0588
- 2 2 9 -
TABLE 5. Macaronesian arytainine psyllid species showing the island 
distributions and host plant associations for each taxon in the three genera; 
host species between which hybrids have been recorded are indicated. (See 
Fig. 3 for island codes.)
max. no. psyllid sp. 
of hosts
island host plant
Ar. sp.14
1 Ar. nubivaga
2 A. proboscidea
1 A. nigralineata 
  C T G P
Spartocytisus filipes
Spartocytisus supranubius
Adenocarpus viscosus 
hybrids 
Adenocarpus foliolosus
Chamaecytisus proliferus
A. prognata 
A. sp.5 
A. sp . 6  
A. incuba 
A. umbonata
Teline stenopetala
hybrids
Teline osyroides 
hybrids 
Teline canariensis
hybrids
Teline microphylla
Teline rosmarinifolia 
Teline splendens 
Teline maderensis 
Genista tenera
1 L. monospermae   T G P H   Retama monosperma
- 2 3 0 -
A TL A N T IC  
O C E A N
MADEIRA 30 Myr
30 CANARY ISL A N D S
LA PALMA 2 M yr
mative total hosts
Genisteae 6(1) 5
Psyllids
LA GOMERA 10-12 M yr
native total hosts
Genisteae 2 (2) 2
Psyllids 2 (2)
Mediterranean 
Rif Mountains
Middle Atlas
High Atlas N O R TH
W E ST
Anti-Atlas A FR IC A
200 km
native total hosts
Genisteae 9(2) 6
Psyllids 7(1)
native total hosts
Genisteae 11(2) 8
Psyllids 11(4)
native total hosts
Genisteae 7(3) 5
Psyllids 7(3)
native total hosts
Genisteae 5(1) 4
Psyllids 4(0)
TENERIFE 7.5-11.5 M yr
1950 m
EL HIERRO 1.1 M yr
GRAN CANARIA 14.5-16 M yr
0 10 20 km
FIGURE 1. Map of the Macaronesian and adjacent continental areas surveyed for this 
study. Boxes give number of native host plant species (Genisteae) and psyllids for 
Madeira and each of the central and western Canary Islands (with number of endemic 
species in parenthesis).
- 2 3 1  -
FIGURE 2. Substitution rates shown as transitions/transversions for the 12S and CO
regions.
 1 2 S  r R N A  
  C O I  a n d  C O I I
T r a n s v e r s i o n s
Opposite page:
FIGURE 3.
Phylograms of the three data sets in this study. A -  12S, one of the 750 MP trees based on 
12S rRNA sequences (length 807, Cl 0.32 excluding uninformative characters, RI 0.614); 
B -  CO, one of the six MP trees based on COI-tRNA leucine-COII sequences (length 
2280, Cl 0.248 excluding uninformative characters, RI 0.613); C -  morphology, one of the 
18 MP trees based on 67 morphological characters (length 554, Cl 0.484 excluding a single 
uninformative character, RI 0.612). Thick branches indicate nodes with bootstrap values > 
75%, and dotted branches indicate nodes that collapse in the Strict consesus. Labelled 
nodes: A = Arytainilla, AR = Arytaina, L = core Livilla, M = Macaronesian clade. 
Where samples occur on different host plants, these are indicated (abbreviated from Table 
2). Abbreviated codes for sample origin and labelled nodes (Figs 3-5): Scotland -  SC, 
Portugal -  PO, Spain -  SP, Morocco -  MO, Madeira -  MA, Canary Islands -  Cl: Gran 
Canaria -  C, Tenerife -  T, La Gomera -  G, La Palma -  P, El Hierro -  H.
- 2 3 2 -
<gis coTO 0)
Q )  - 3
O )  _ o  
< < CDo
<1) C -OD
o ~  03 Q- 2* Oc< . 03
<  -C <
o  o co
CNi ca
V C D  T O
a> ca
ca ca
C L - X l
= 2 ? =   curt cux:
K  t - 0
a j C U  C U C U
O t-O ^co
iSiS-SS S _  
caca w g S t : ^ o ^
ca?5caca a  o.y o o p 2  ca 
Q - o  -5 5 ^ lo:D ^ LOT3(m;>  >  o2 ooA=i~    O o dF 03t '-c tn   _ -cd d)CD cd-q on^T-ft Q> cuw Jsca Sts-. ^ ^ t S<<<d.0 ^ i i 8 'g-d.S- o;5^|-5ca 
< <-< : L, I <'>-<occcog-o  l/)/ ; j ^ oE?
UJ ^  <  V  L ; W ^ S  P   , < C L < <  c  3  < r
C D C U d .
50clS 
-  SCLCOx
E=8< toS<3_ g*E<   ca_-tooi  9^a < < I o*t 0)0) =3   3  ooL7i S-gSfecgsggg
< 2?-.J5EEEo| | ^
0>=  CLQ-ca 
. CD w ca H 
cn.2'> pS
D - C O ^ ' 5
<<<<<
s is S S s *KQ-og-Q.ca ca
1S5b<< .  a, 
83Sy|j
 C T 3  r a >>
< 1 Sl5-
UJ co co S - cox  ^  ' 't j
Q -W a
o  o  <u ca .5  m q q .
SSSSWSf0 0 2 w
S'S JD Q. 
<  3  co< .  cu cu
<  ca ca o .y - ._  ^  totSO-So-oca ca a .cu  < <<u cu <o ca |'fr3_cg
< D < u  Q .w aj . ,  
 ) a ) w t / 3 <  S - q .
o  Op. i c  c f   ^
t j t ) , -  0  q 0 0  C  (0  ^ C O c d  " 5  E  8  Ooo^-g-gd-Egd:5^o-5<l  c^o 
E E co g - ^  c o ||  E g   o -d .- >
.  .  w '  ^  . ( / ) U .  U) rr\
<<<< l<< d;g <D l ^ i 2
   I  I < -POO w  >  Q . T -  = t _  ir  - i  =;
 Svt-1j  &
<< i_i<
W - i - l f f iL - L T ^ r * ;  .   t  k  .  i 
co OT Q C =  Q <  a .
*<.< I I , ,  <<<
Opposite page:
FIGURE 4.
One of the eight MP trees based on the combined 12S rRNA and COI-tRNA leucine-COII 
sequences (length 3112, Cl 0.265 excluding uninformative characters, RI 0.609). Thick 
branches indicate nodes with bootstrap values >75% , and dotted branches indicate nodes 
that collapse in the Strict consensus. Labelled nodes: A = Arytainilla, AR = Arytaina, L = 
core Livilla, M = Macaronesian clade. MED -  Mediterranean, see Figure 3 for other 
distribution codes. Note: as this analysis includes all individuals sampled for 12S and CO, 
branch lengths will be proportionally shorter for those taxa/individuals only represented in 
one data set (sampling is given in Table 2).
- 2 3 3  -
12S + C 0
G e n i s t e a e -
f e e d i n g
M P :  5 9 %  
N J :  9 2 %
j  A.A. modica ex Teline P 
modica ex Cham. P 
modica ex Teline H 
A. modica ex Cham. H 
A. sp.12 Cl 
A. dividens T 
A. dividens G C l 
A. dividens C
 A. sp.9 Cl 
A. sp.8 Cl 
A. hakani MED 
A. incuba MA 
A. um bonata MA 
A. cognata MO 
A. sp.13 MO
I A. nigralineata C 
  A. nigralineata T C l 
1 A. nigralineata G 
_ j A. proboscidea ex Ad. vis. T 
A. proboscidea ex Ad. fol. P 
A. sp.6 Cl 
A. equitans Cl 
A. sp .1 1 C l,
A. sp .1 0 P  p i  
A. sp.10 H l u l
  A. sp.7 Cl
A. pileolata ex Tel. can. 
A. pileolata ex Tel. osy. Cl
A. sp.5 CL 
diiluta
i - d
A. diiluta ex Tel. mic. C 
A. diiluta ex Tel. can. T 
A. prognata Cl _
_ r  L. blandula
L. pseudoretam ae 
L. m aura 
L. adusta 
L. variegata 
r L. m aculipennis 
L. pyrem aea 
L. norvathi 
*- L. vittipennella 
I  L. radiata 
1 L. speclabilis 
 L. syriaca _
L. nervosa
L. m onosperm ae T 
- i -nP  L. m onosperm ae G 
^  L. m onosperm ae P
1-------- L. reta.mae
L. sp.15
c o r e  LIVILLA
-  L. sip.16 
. ima 
L. sp. 17
  A.
Pseudacanthopsylla
fA .s p .T r
1  L. vici
gredi 
A. sp.4 SP 
vicina
A. spartiophila ex Cyt. st. PO 
A. spartiophila ex Cyt. gr. SP 
A. spartiophila ex Cyt. fo. MO
 A. oelarbrei
A. sp.1 Cl
Livilla t y p e - g r o u p
A. sp.2
A. cytisi 
A. sp.3
ARYTAINILLA 
sensu stricto
Air. devia T 
A.r. devia G 
Ar. devia ssp  insularis P Cl
Ar . devia ssp  insularis C 
j Ar. adenocarpi ex Ad. co. PO 
j1 Ar. adenocarpi ex Ad. te. SP 
 A,r. adenocarpi ex Ad. bo
Ar. nubivaqa C l  
Ar. s r .  14 Cl 
Ar. genistae ex Cyt. sc. SC 
Ar. genistae ex Cyt. st. PO 
Ar. genistae ex Cyt. gr. MO 
A. sulci
Cacopsyiia aiaterni  1 n o n - G e n i s t e a e
MO ARYTAINA
------------  Cyamophila
Acizzia uncatoides
Cacopsyiia mali
Acizzia hollisi J  o u t g r o u p
i f e e d e r s
 10 changes
- 2 3 4 -
*> o
X-ii
4o
T3C<u
a ,<DX)C
C/5<U
4103
T3C03
T3<DC
03 *> 03
3"T33
C4 
a<uc
-4403
C <U 
oo ^ .22
^  ^X O 03
Q* c/5 2
c/5 c/5 r-
<U C c3<D _H ^ 
 0  O gH o Vt-I
003_03
C/5- .S
  ii
  <<D ^
 Ph ^
'* - 4  1 )3 ~0
 oC C
cE "o
 S =
3  <u3 X
3 >J
-44o3O
C/5<u*3
  S. --S 2  o9 CM 0> 00  5 5  d. .E> 2
O) in CO
2  d ai
re o E _JC .E D o
03 03 CO co co CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO <0 CO CO CO CO CO CO
C/3 "O C/3 C/3 C Q. C/3 "O Q. C/3 D
r  to -|  c 
a  a  >  a  a  to in o  (I) u
to to to to to co to
to > <  co
>  -Q V  c
to => cl toT5 c  CO 05
a. to coco TO co
o  E O
c  c  c  c  c  c  c  c  c  c
co cO CO co CO CO co CO co CO
   f t         < < < < < < < < < <
 _____ __ ______ ______ __ ~ZZ     33   CO CO CO CO CO
_c c  c  c  c  c  c  c  c  c  c  c  c  c  c  c  c  c  c  c  c  c
(tjctjctjcococooj c a c o a jc o a s c a c T J c a a ja ja ja j  co co co
J 5 5 5 5 5 5 i 5 f 1? 5 5 Ss1< < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < <
 3 c
tS -g .5
% I  M
tO CD CD C/3 
T. T 03 CTJ
 N |
-  -  =   |c c S  <u co nj i5 
03 =  o   2 -O o gi o
TO TO 
c  -t:2 -So
0303 0303 030303030303
C C C C C C C C C
E13 CLC/3
E CLCO
CO CO jrg J5
t3 O) lO CO
Q_  kl Q_ Q. 03 P
W T3 a  W W ^  T3
03 03 03 03 03 P 5
C C C C C C
ctl 03 03
< < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < <  i
.E cfi
=  CLc 05 TO i5
8. a)CO TO
03 03 03 CO 
> > > >
"q. O 
g :a  ss -  ^  >2 % q . q . O)  a  a  a  nCD U 1(1 l T3 111 (I) Id 3
< c 2  g o oT <U > c 3 Q. T3 CO (1) CO cTO TO TO TO TO TO TOTOt- </5cC' OTOTOJ2 = = .= = = .= = = TO TO TO TO TO = E
.E .E .E .E .E .E .E .E ,E .E .E .E .E .E -i TOTOTOTOTOTO TOTOTOTOTOTO TOTOcj 
.  < < < < < < < < < < < < < < 0.
 TO o i5 
S  -5 '-O 
  C  Q. 
0 3  0 3  0 3  0 3
c o  o  r -  oi  n  ~  
O l    4 0  t D  I C X 5 0  4 -  4 -  4-  t -  W  C OQ  2   d d d d d d d d d S - d l_4 . _  -  (                   . __O T 3 T 3 Q ]  O Q . D ( d ( l } C d C d C d  CO C/5 CO CO O  CO _
TO T O T O T O T O T O  T O T O T O T O T O T O T O T O T O T O _ T O T O T O T O J T O T O T O  c  05 TOT3
03 03 03 03
c c c c c c c c c c  c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c
0 3  0 3  0 3  0 3f  |  < < < <vv
03 03 03 03 03 03 03 03 03 03 03 03 03 03 03 03 03 03 03 03 03 03 03 03 03 03 03
< < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < <
(DTOTO i5
TO to "E
^  ^  ETO I3  C TO 3
'to i3 J3
CL TO CO TO
m i'i
o 2 TO TO
*s sa to to
'O ^  03 
C/3 C/3 O 
03 03
t  > > > > - -
<  _ i _ j i _i <  <
= = = = to a. 
c c c c c 05
TO TO SS i5
<  <  - I
CL CL a CO CO TO
Opposite page:
FIGURE 6 .
Phylogram of one of the eight MP trees from the total evidence analysis -  combined 
molecular and morphological data, reduced to include all the Macaronesian taxa (plus 
intraspecific sampling) and selected continental sister taxa. Unequivocal colonizations of 
the Canary Islands, and equivocal colonizations of Madeira and the continent are mapped 
onto the tree, as are colonizations of host genera (using ACCTRAN optimization for the 
continental and Madeiran species). Distributions for all the Canary Island species are 
illustrated.
- 2 3 5  -
  -  c o l o n i z a t i o n s  o f  t h e  
C a n a r y  I s l a n d s
?  -  e q u i v o c a l  c o l o n i z a t i o n s  o f :  
t h e  c o n t i n e n t  o  
M a d e i r a  O
H O S T  G E N E R A  
Genista  g r o u p :  
Genista  T  
Retam a  I S  
Teline  A
Cytisus  g r o u p :  
Cham aecytisus \ 
Cytisus m 
Spartocytisus  
o u t l i e r :
Adenocarpus  0
* A ,
r modica A  P  
L |  modica I  P
I modica A  H  
 |  modica |  H  
L -  s p . 1 2  A G  
r dividens I  G  
" T  d i v i d e n s  |  T  
  d i v i d e n s  |  C  
s p . 8  A  T   
s p . 9  A  T
nigralineata D G  
nigralineata 0  T  
nigralineata D C
 - proboscidea D  T  I
>- proboscidea D  P  
A r 0  hakani A  M E D o
^ P -  incuba A  M A  ^
  umbonataW  M A  
^   cognata   M O
^  berberW  M O
s p . 1 0  A  P  *
s p . l O A H l T T - L  ^ r
  s p . 1 1 A  G  .
s p . 7  A  T
  equitans A  C  
pileolata A  T  
pileolata A  T  
s p . 6  A  P  h  
diluta A  T  
diluta A  C  
prognata A  C
s p . 5  A  C  h 
r  Ar. devia I  G  
 A r .  devia |  T
  A r .  devia I  P
-  A r .  devia I  C  
A r .  adenocarpi 0  M E D
A r .  s p . 1 4    G  ( P , H )  
A r .  nubivaga   T  
A r .  genistae   M E D  
A .  s p . 1    P  [
A .  delarbrei   M E D  
A .  spartiophila   M E D
L. monospermae I S  T  
L. monospermae I S  G  
>  L. monospermae I S  P  ( H )  
L. retamae I S  M E D  
  Acizzia uncatoides
 1 0  c h a n g e s
Opposite page:
FIGURE 7.
Cladogram of the combined molecular analysis, including those species for which the host 
associations have been established. Host groups are mapped as an unordered character 
using ACCTRAN optimization. Major geographic colonization events in the psyllid group 
(i.e. between: Canary Islands/continent/Madeira; indicated by *) were apparently 
accompanied by selection of a host related to the original host (i.e. in the same major plant 
groups) suggesting an important role for preadaptation to particular hosts in colonizing 
psyllids. White branch tips indicate possible ambiguity in host group assignment for 
Laburnum'. Cytisus group; and Spartium  and Chamaespartium tridentatum: Genista group.
- 2 3 6 -
HOST GROUP
Adenocarpus 
Cytisus group 
Genista group 
Acacia 
equivocal
I-  geographical 
colonization 
events
incuba 
hakani 
um bon ata 
cognata 
sp.13 
nigralineata 
proboscidea 
modica 
modica 
sp.12 
dividens 
sp.11 
equitans 
sp.10 
pileolata
diluta
prognata
sp.5 (
L. maura 
L. blandula 
L. adusta 
L. variegata 
L. maculipennis 
L. pyrenaea 
L. horvathi 
L. vittipennella 
L. spectabilis 
L. radiata
L. syriaca t
L. nervosa 
L. monospermae "jc 
L. retamae 
L. sp.16 
L  sp.15
A. ima 
Pseudacanth opsylla 
L. sp.17 
A. gredi 
L. vicina 
A. sp.4
A. spartiophila 
A. delarbrei 
A  sp.1 i c  
A. sp.3 
A. cytisi 
A. sp.2
Ar. adenocarpi 
Ar. devia ^
Ar. nubivaga 
Ar. sp.14 
Ar. genistae 
A. sulci 
Acizzia hollisi 
Acizzia uncatoides :
MACARONESIAN
clade
core LIVILLA
Livilla outliers
Arytainilla s.I.
Livilla outlier 
Arytainilla s.I. 
Livilla type-group 
Arytainilla s.I.
ARYTAINILLA 
sensu stricto
ARYTAINA
Arytainilla s.I. 
outgroup
- 2 3 7 -
' 1-*
R* K*
R r *
co dCOiH
C' drH CO
d aCO
<3 rHfs dCO
d .3CO 'C
d 3CO 3
i . 1
d V.CO 3
* HH 
dCO 3k.
< 3  r *N4 3
3 3*-Ht
< 1 &3*nT co K/*N p 3 oo
a a3
3 3Jn* a
a* N* a*
 C\ & R
tl 3- s 3
O hCO
Rn**
3*N***>*
3*3*N*>
coN*
.8Gea
| N*
APPENDIX 2 .  Aligned 12S matrix (342bp), ambiguous regions that 
were excluded from the anlyses are indicated by *.
10 20 3 0 4 0 5 0 6 0
A c i z z i a _ h o l l i s i
A c i z z i a _ u n c a t o i d e s
A r y t a i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ P O
A r y t a  i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ S  P
A r y t a i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ M O
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ s s p _ i n s u l a r i s _ C
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ s s p _ i n s u l a r i s _ P
A r y t a i n a _ g e n i s t a e _ S C
A r y t a i n a _ g e n i s t a e _ P O
A r y t a i n a _ n u b i v a g a
A r y t a i n a _ s p . 1 4
A r y t a i n i l l a _ c o g n a t a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ c y t i s i
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d e l a r b r e i
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i l u t a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i v i d e n s _ C
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i v i d e n s _ G
A r y t a i n i l l a _ e q u i t a n s
A r y t a i n i l l a _ g r e d i
A r y t a i n i 1 l a _ h a k a n i
A r y t a i n i l l a _ i m a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ i n c u b a
A r y t a i n i 1 l a _ m o d i c a _ T e l i n e _ P
A r y t a i n i 1 1 a  j n o d i c a _ C h a m . _ P
A r y t a i n i l l a _ n i g r a l i n e a t a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p i l e o l a t a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p r o b o s c i d e a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p r o g n a t a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p a r t i o p h i l a _ P O
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p a r t i o p h i l a _ S P
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s u l c i
A r y t a i n i 1 l a _ u m b o n a t a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 2
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 3
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 4
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 5
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 6
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p .7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 8
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 9
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 0
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 1
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 12
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 13
C a c o p s y l  l a _ a l a t e m i
C a c o p s y l l a _ m a l i
C y a m o p h i l a  _ p r o h a s k a i
L i v i l l a _ a d u s t a
L i v i l l a _ b l a n d u l a
L i v i l l a _ h o r v a t h i
L i v i l l a _ m a c u l i p e n n i s
L i v i l l a _ m a u r a
L i v i 1 1 a _ m o n o s p e r m a e
L i v i l l a _ n e r v o s a
L i v i l l a _ p s e u d o r e t a m a e
L i v i l l a _ p y r e n a e a
L i v i l l a _ r a d i a t a
L i v i l l a _ r e t a m a e
L i v i l l a _ s p e c t a b i l i s
L i v i l l a _ s y r i a c a
L i v i l l a _ v a r i e g a t a
L i v i l l a _ v i c i n a
L i v i l l a _ v i t t i p e n n e l l a
L i v i l l a _ s p . 1 5
L i v i l l a _ s p . 1 6
L i v i l l a _ s p . 1 7
P s e u d a c a n t h o p s y l l a _ i m p r o v i s a
7 0 ]
[ 1 2 S  rR N A  s t a r t
GAGTAGTACAAGTTATTA-TCTTTAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTATTAGAGGAACCTGT [ 6 9
GAGTAGTAATAGTTATGG -  TCTAGGAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTATCAGAGGAACCTGT [ 6 9
GAGTAGTAAGAGTTATGA-TCTTGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTACTAGAGGAACCTGT [ 6 9
GAGTAGTAAGAGTTATGA-TCTTGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTACTAGAGGAACCTGT [ 6 9
GAGTAGTAGTAGTTATGA-TCTTGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTACTAGAGGAACCTGT [ 6 9
GAGTAGTAAAAGTTATGA-TCTTGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTACTAGAGGAACCTGT [ 6 9
GAGTAGTAAAAGTTATGA-TCTTGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTACTAGAGGAACCTGT [ 6 9
GAGTAGTAAGAGTTAAGG-TCTTGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTACTAGAGGAACCTGT [ 6 9
GAGTAGTAAGAGTTAAGG -  TCTTGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTACTAGAGGAACCTGT [ 6 9
GAGTAGTAAGAGTTATGA-TCTTGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTACTAGAGGAACCTGT [ 6 9
GAGTAGTAAGAGTTATGA-TCTTGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTACTAGAGGAACCTGT [ 6 9
GAGTAGTAAAAGATAAGA-TCTCGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTAATCAGAGGAACCTGC [ 6 9
GAGTAGTATAAGTTAAGA-TCTTGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTTTTAGAGGAACCTGT [ 6 9
GAGTAGTATCAGTTAAGA-TCTTGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTGTTAGAGGAACCTGT [ 6 9
GAGTAGTATAAGATAAGA-TCTCGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTATTAGAGGAACCTGC [ 6 9
GAGTAGTATAAGATAAGA-TCTCGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTAATCAGAGGAACCTGC [6  9
GAGTAGTATAAGATAAGA-TCTCGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTAATCAGAGGAACCTGC [6  9
GAGTAGTAAAAGATAAGA-TCTCGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTAATCAGAGGAACCTGC [6  9
GAGTAGTATAAGATATAA-TCTCGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTATTAGAGGAACCTGT [ 6 9
GAGTAGTATAAGATAAGA-TCTCGGAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTAATCAGAGGAACCTGC [ 6 9
GAGTAGTAAAGGTTAAAATTCT-GAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTATTAGAGGAACCTGT [6  9
GAGTAGTATAAGATAAGA-TCTCGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTAATCAGAGGAACCTGC [ 6 9
GAGTAGTACAAGATAAGA-TCTCGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTAATCAGAGGAACCTGC [ 6 9
GAGTAGTACAAGATAAGA-TCTCGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTAATCAGAGGAACCTGC [ 6 9
GAGTAGTATTAGATACGA-TCTTGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTATTAGAGGAACCTGC [ 6 9
GAGTAGTATAAGATAAGA-TCTCGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTAATCAGAGGAACCTGC [ 6 9
GAGTAGTATTAGATAAGA-TCTTGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTATTAGAGGAACCTGC [6  9
GAGTAGTATAAGATAGGA-TCTCGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTATTAGAGGAACCTGC [ 6 9
GAGTAGTAGTAGTTAAGA -  TCTTGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTATTAGAGGAACCTGT [ 6 9
GAGTAGTAGTAGCTAAGA- TCTTGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTATTAGAGGAACCTGT [ 6 9
GAGTAGTAGAAGTTAAGG-TCTCAAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTACTTTATCTTATTAGAGGAACCTGT [ 6 9
GAGTAGTATAAGATAAGA-TCTCGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTAATCAGAGGAACCTGC [ 6  9
GAGTAGTACAAGTTAAGC-TCTTAAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTACTAGAGGAACCTGT [ 6 9
GAGTAGTATCTGTTAAGA-TCATGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTAATTAGAGGAACCTGT [6  9
GAGTAGTATAAGTTAAGA-TCTTGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTTTTAGAGGAACCTGT [ 6  9
GAGTAGTAAAAGTTAAAA-TCTTTAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTCGTTAGAGGAACCTGT [6  9
GAGTAGTATAAGATAAGA-TCTCGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTATTAGAGGAACCTGC [6  9
GAGTAGTAAAAGATATGA-TCTCGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTACTTTATCTTATCAGAGGAACCTGC [6  9
GAGTAGTATAAGATAAGA-TCTCGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTAATCAGAGGAACCTGC [6  9
GAGTAGTATAAGATAAGA-TCTCGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTAATCAGAGGAACCTGC [ 6  9
GAGTAGTATAAGATAAGA-TCTCGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTAATCAGAGGAACCTGC [ 6 9
GAGTAGTATAAGATAAGA-TCTCGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTAATCAGAGGAACCTGC [ 6 9
GAGTAGTATAAGATAAGA-TCTCGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTAATCAGAGGAACCTGC [ 6 9
GAGTAGTACAAGATAAGA-TCTCGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTAATCAGAGGAACCTGC 16 9
GAGTAGTAAAAGATAAGA-TCTCGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTAATCAGAGGAACCTGC [ 6 9
GAGTAGTAAAAGTTAAGA-TCTTGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTATTAGAGGAACCTGT [ 6 9
GAGTAGTAGGAGTTAAGA-TCTTTAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTTTTAGAGGAACCTGT [ 6  9 
GAGTAGTAAGAGTTAAGA-TCTTTAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTATCAGAGGAACCTGT [6  9 
GAGTAGTAGTAGATAAGA-TCTTTAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTGTTAGAGGAACCTGT [6  9 
GAGTAGTAATAGATAAGA-TCTTCAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTGTTAGAGGAACCTGC [ 6 9
GAGTAGTAAGAGTTAAGA-TCTTTAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTACTTTATCTTATTAGAGGAACCTGC [ 6 9
GAGTAGTAGTAGATAAGA-TCTTTAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTATTAGAGGAACCTGC 16 9
GAGTAGTAATAGATAAGA-TCTTTAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTGTTAGAGGAACCTGC [6  9
GAGTAGTAAAAGGTAATA-TCTAGAAACTCAAAAGATTTGGCGGTATTTCATCTTATTAGAGGAACCTGC [6  9
GAGTAGTAAGTGTTAAGG-TCTTTAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTTTTAGW GGW ACCTGT [ 6 9
GAGTAGTAATAGATAAGA-TCTTCAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTGTTAGAGGAACCTGC [6  9 
GAGTAGTAGTAGATAAGA-TCTTTAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTATTAGAGGAACCTGC [6  9 
GAGTAGTAAAAGGTAAGA-TCTTTAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTATTAGAGGAACCTGC [ 6 9 
GAGTAGTAAAAGGTAATA-TCTAGAAACTCAAAAGATTTGGCGGTATTTCATCTTATTAGAGGAACCTGC [6  9 
GAGTAGTATAAGTTATGA-TCTTTAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTACTTTATCTTATCAGAGGAACCTGC [6  9 
GAGTAGTAGGAGTTAAGA-TCTTGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTATTAGAGGAATCTGC [6  9 
GAGTAGTAAGAGGTAAGA-TCTTTAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTGTTAGAGGAACCTGC [ 6 9
GGGTAGTATAAGTTAAAA-TTTTTAAACTCAAAGGATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTAATTAGAGGAACCTGT [6  9 
GAGTAGTAAGAGGTAAGA-TCTTTAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTATTAGAGGAACCTGC [6  9 
GAGTAGTATTAGCTAAAA-TCTTGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTATTAGAGGAACCTGT [6  9
GAGTAGTATAAGTTAATA-TCTTGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTATTAGAGGAACCTGT [ 6 9
GAGTAGTAAAAGTTAAGA-TCTCGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTATTAGAGGAACCTGT [ 6 9
GAGTAGTAATAGTTAAGA-TCTTGAAACTCAAAAAATTTGGCGGTATTTTATCTTATTAGAGGAACCTGT [ 6 9
- 2 3 9 -
APPENDIX 2 cont.
8 0 9 0 100 110 120 1 3 0 1 4 0 ]
A c i z z i a _ h o l l i s i
A c i z z i a _ u n c a t o i d e s
A r y t a i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ P O
A r y t a i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ S P
A r y t a i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ M O
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ s s p _ i n s u l a r i s _ C
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ s s p _ i n s u l a r i s _ P
A r y t a i n a _ g e n i s t a e _ S C
A r y t a i n a _ g e n i s t a e _ P O
A r y t a i n a _ n u b i v a g a
A r y t a i n a _ s p . 14
A r y t a i n i 1 l a _ c o g n a t a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ c y t i s i
A r y  t a i n i l l a _ d e l a r b r e i
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i l u t a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i v i d e n s _ C
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i v i d e n s _ G
A r y t a i n i l l a _ e g u i t a n s
A r y t a i n i l l a _ g r e d i
A r y t a i n i l l a _ h a k a n i
A r y t a i n i l l a _ i m a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ i n c u b a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ m o d i c a _ T e l i n e _ P
A r y t a i n i l l a _ m o d i c a _ C h a m . _ P
A r y t a i n i l l a _ n i g r a l i n e a t a
A iry  t a i n i  l l a _ p i l e o l a t a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p r o b o s c i d e a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p r o g n a t a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p a r t i o p h i l a _ P O
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p a r t i o p h i l a _ S P
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s u l c i
A r y t a  i n i 1 l a _ u m b o n a t a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 2
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 3
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 4
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 5
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 6
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 8
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 9
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 0
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 11
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 12
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 13
C a c o p s y l l a _ a l a t e r n i
C a c  o p s y  1 1  a _ jn a  1 i
C y a m o p h i l a _ p r o h a s k a i
L i v i l a _ a d u s t a
L i v i l a _ b l a n d u l a
L i v i l a _ h o r v a t h i
L i v i l a _ m a c u l i p e n n i s
L i v i l a _ m a u r a
L i v i l a _ i n o n o s p e n n a e
L i v i l a _ n e r v o s a
L i v i l a _ p s e u d o r e t a m a e
L i v i l a _ p y r e n a e a
L i v i l a _ r a d i a t a
L i v i l a _ r e t a m a e
L i v i 1 a _ s p e c  t a b i 1 i  s
L i v i l a _ s y r i a c a
L i v i l a _ v a r i e g a t a
L i v i l a _ v i c i n a
L i v i l a _ v i t t i p e n n e l l a
L i v i l a _ s p . 1 5
L i v i l a _ s p . 1 6
L i v i l a _ s p . 1 7
P s e u d a c a n t h o p s y l l a _ i m p r o v i  s a
TTATTAATTGATAATCCACAACTTAAATTTACTTTTAAAATTAT ATTTGTATACCGCTGTCATGAATC [ 1 3 7
TTA GTA ATTGA TATCCCACAACTTATATTTACTTTTATTATTAT--ATTTGTATACCGCCGTCATGAATC [1 3 7  
TTATTAATTGATACTCCACAACTTAAATATATTTTCATTAGATT- -  ATTTGTATACCGTTGTCATGAATG [1 3 7
TTATTAATTGATACTCCACAACTTAAATATATTTTCATTAGATT--ATTTGTATACCGTTGTCATGAATG [1 3 7  
TTATTAATTGATACTCCACAACTTAAATATATTTTCATTAAATT -  -  ATTTGTATACCGTTGTCATGAATG [ 1 3 7
TTATTAATGGATACTCCACAACTTTAATATACTTTTACTAGTTT -  -  ACTTGTATATCGTTGTCATGAATG [ 1 3 7
TTA TTA ATA GA TACTCCACAACTTTAACTTACTTTCACTAGTTT--  ATTTGTATATCGTTGTCATGAATG [ 1 3 7
TTA TTA ATTG ATATTCCA CAA CTTAAATATACTTTTATTAGTTT--ATTTGTATACCGTTGTCATGAATA [1 3 7  
TTATTAATTGATATTCCACAACTTAAATATACTTTTATTAGTTT-  - ATTTGTATACCGTTGTCATGAATA [1 3 7
TTATTAATTGATATTCCACAACTTAAATGTATTTTCACTAGTTT -  -  ATTTGTATACCGTTGTCATGAATG [ 1 3 7
TTA TTA ATTG ATATTCCACAACTTAAATGTATTTTCACTAGTTT--ATTTGTATACCGTTGTCATGAATG [1 3 7  
TTA TTA ATTG ATATTCCA CAA CTTAAA TTTA CTTTTATTAA TTT--  ATTTGTATACCGTCGTC ATGAATC [ 1 3 7
TTA TTA ATTG ATACTCCA CA ATTTTAA TTTA CTTTTATTAAA TT--ATTTGTA TACCGTTGTCATG AA TC [1 3 7  
TTATTAATTGATATCCCACAACTTAAATTTACTTTTTTAAAGTT -  -  ATTTGTATACCGTTGTCATGAATC [ 1 3 7
TTATTAATTGATATTCC AC AA CTTGA ATTTACTTTTATTAATTT -  -  ATTTGTATACCGTCGTCATGAATC [ 1 3 7
TTA TTA ATTG ATATTCCA CAA CTTAAA TTTA CTTTTATTAA TTT--ATTTGTA TACCGTCGTCATGA ATC [1 3 7  
TTA TTA ATTG ATATTCCA CAA CTTAAA TTTA CTTTTATTAA TTT--ATTTGTA TACCGTCGTCATGA ATC [1 3 7  
TTA TTA ATTG ATATTCCA CAA CTTTAA TTTA CTTTTATTATTTT--ATTTG TATA TCG TCG TCA TGA ATC [1 3 7  
TTATTAATTGATACTCCACA ACTTTAA TTTA CTTTTTTTATA TT--A CTTG TATACCGTTGTCATG AA TC [1 3 7  
TTA TTA ATTG ATATTCCA CAA CTTAAA TTTA CTTTTATTAA TTT--ATTTGTA TACCGTCGTCATGA ATC [1 3 7  
TTATTAATTGATATTCC ACAACTTTAA TTTA CTTTTATTA TG TT - -ACTTGTATATCGTTGTCATGAATC [ 1 3 7
TTA TTA ATTG ATATTCCA CAA CTTAAA TTTA CTTTTATTAA TTT--ATTTGTA TACCGTCGTCATGA ATC [ 137 
TTATTAATTGATATTCCACAACTTAAACTTACTTTTATTAATTT -  -  ATTTGTATACCGTCGTCATGAATC [ 1 3 7
TTATTAATTGATATTCCACAACTTAAACTTACTTTTATTAATTT -  -  ATTTGTATACCGTCGTCATGAATC [ 1 3 7
TTATTAATTGATATTCCACAACTTAAATTTACTTTTATTAATTT -  -  ATTTGTATACCGTCGTCATGAATC [ 1 3 7
TTA TTA ATTG ATATTCCA CAA CTTTAA TTTA CTTTTATTATTTT--ATTTG TATA CCGTTG TCA TGA ATC [1 3 7  
TTATTAATTGATATTCCACAACTTAAATTTACTTTTATTAATTT -  -  ATTTGTATACCGTCGTCATGAATC [ 1 3 7
TTATTAATTGATATTCCA CAA CTTTAA TTTA CTTTTATTAATTT--A TTTG TATACCGTTGTCATG AA TC [1 3 7  
TTATTAATTGATATTCCACAACTTTAATTTACTTTTACTAAATT -  -  ACTTGTATATCGTTGTCATGAATC [ 1 3 7
TTATTAATTGATATTCCACAACTTTAATTTACTTTTACTAAATT -  -  ACTTGTATATCGTTGTCATGAATC [ 1 3 7
TTATTAATTGATAATCCACAACTTTAA TTTA CTTTTATTAA TTT--ATTTGTA TATCGTTGTCATG AA TG [1 3 7  
TTA TTA ATTG ATATTCCA CAA CTTAGACTTACTTTTATTAATTT--ATTTGTATACCGTCGTCATGAATC [1 3 7  
TTATTAATTGATAGTCCACAACTTTAATTTACTTTTATTAAATT -  -ATTTGTATACCGTTGTCATGAATC [ 1 3 7
TTA TTA ATTG ATACTCCA CA ACTTAAATTTACTTTTATTAAATT--ATTTGTATACCGTTGTCATGAGTC [1 3 7  
TTATTAATTGATATTCC AC AA TTTTA ATTTACTTTTA TTA AA TT -  -  ATTTGTATACCGTTGTCATGAATC [ 1 3 7
TTATTAATTGATATTCC AC AACTCTAATTTACCTTTATTAAATT -  -  ATTTGTATACCGTCGTCATGAATC [ 1 3 7
TTGTTAATTG ATATTCCA CAA CTTTAA TTTA CTTTTATTAATTT- -  ATTTGTATATCGTCGTCATGAATC [ 1 3 7
TTA TTAATTGATATTCCACAACTTTAATTTACTTTTATTAATTT -  -  ATTTGTATACCGTCGTCATGAATC [ 1 3 7
TTATTAATTGATATTCCA CAA CTTTAA TTTA CTTTTGTTATTTT-  -ATTTGTATACCGTCGTCATGAATC [ 1 3 7
TTATTAATTGATATTCC ACAACTTAAATTTACTTTTATTAATTT -  -  ATTTGTATACCGTTGTCATGAATC [1 3 7
TTA TTA ATTG ATATTCCA CAA CTTAAACTTACTTTTATTAATTT--ATTTGTATACCGTCGTCATGAATC [1 3 7  
TTATTAATTG ATATTCCA CAA CTTTAA TTTA CTTTTATTATTTT--ATTTG TATA CCGTCGTCATG AATC [1 3 7  
TTATTAATTG ATATTCCA CAA CTTTAA TTTA CTTTTATTATTTT--ATTTG TATA CCGTCGTCATG AATC [1 3 7  
TTA TTA ATTG ATATTCCA CAA CTTAAA CTTACTTTTA TTAA TTT--ATTTGTA TACCG TCG TCA TGA ATC [1 3 7  
TTA TTA ATTG ATATTCCA CAA CTTAAA TTTA CTTTTATTAA TTT- -  ATTTGTATACCGTCGTCATGAATC [ 1 3 7
TTATTAATTGATATTCCACAACTTACATTTACTTCTATTAAATT ATTTGTATACCGCTGTCATGAATC [ 1 3 7
TTATTAATTGATATTCCACAACTTAAATATACTTTTACTAAGCT--ATTTGTATACCGCTGTCATGAATC [ 1 3 7
TTATTAATTGATATTCCACAACTTTAATTTACCTTGACGAGATT--ATTTGTATACCGCTGTCATGAATC [ 1 3 7  
CTATTA ATT GA TATT CCA CG ACTTTAA TTTA CTTTTATTAA ATT--ATTTGTA TACCG TTGTCATAA ATC [ 1 3 7  
TTATTAATTGATATTCCACGACTTAAATTTACTTTTATTAAATT- - ATTTGTATACCGTTGTCATAAATA [ 1 3 7
TTATTAATTGATATTCCACGA CTTTACTTTA CTTTTATTAAG TT--A TTTG TA TACCGTTGTCATA AA TC [ 1 3 7  
TTATTAATCGATACTCCACGACTTAAATTTACTTTTATTAAATT- -  ATTTGTATACCGTTGTCATAAATC [ 1 3 7
TTA TTA ATTG ATATTCCA CGA CTTTAA TTTA CTTTTATTAAA TT- -  ATTTGTATACCGTTGTCATAAATA [ 1 3 7
TTA TTA ATTG ATGTTCCA CAA CTTTAACTTACTTTTATGAGATT--ATTTGTATACCGTTGTCATGAATC [ 1 3 7
TTATTAATTGATAATCCACAACTTTAATTTACTTTTTATTATTTTTACTTGTATACCGTTGTTATGAATT [ 1 3 9  
TTATTAATTGATATTCCACGACTTTAA TTTA CTTTTATTAAA TT--ATTTGTA TACCGTTGTCATA AA TA [ 1 3 7
TTATTAATTGATATTCCACGACTTAAA TTTA CTTTTATTATA TT--ATTTGTA TACCGTTGTCATA AA TC [ 1 3 7
TCATTAATTGATAATCCACAACTTTAATTTACTTTTATTAAATT ACTTGTATACCGTTGTCATGAATC [ 1 3 7
TTATTAATTGATATTCCACAACTTAAATTTACTTTTATGAAATT -  -  ATTTGTATACCGTTGTCATGAATC [ 1 3 7
TTATTAATTGATGTTCCACAACTTTAACTTACTTTTATTAAATT -  -  ATTTGTATACCGTTGTCATGAATC [ 1 3 7
CCATTAATTGATAATCCACAACTTTAATTTACTTTTATTAGATT -  -  ATTTGTATACCGTTGTCATGAATC [ 1 3 7
TTATTAATTGATGTTCC ACGACTTTAATTTACTTTTATTAAGTT -  -  ATTTGTATACCGTTGTCATAAATC [1 3 7
TTAATAATTGATAATCCACAATTTAAACTTATTTCTATTAAATT- -  ATTTGTATACCGTTGTCATGAATC [ 1 3 7
TTATTAATTGATATTCCACGACTTTAACTTACTTTTATTAAATT -  -  ATTTGTATACCGTTGTCATGAATC [ 1 3 7
TTATTAATTGATGTTCCACAACTTTAATTTACTTTTATAAAATT-  -ATTTGTATACCGTTGTCATGAATC [1 3 7
TTGTTAATTGATATTCCACAACTTTAATTTACTTTTATAAAATT -  -  ATTTGTATACCGTTGTCATGAATC [ 1 3 7
TTA TTA ATTG ATATTCCA CAA CTTTAATTTACTTTCATAAGATT--ATTTGTATACCGTTGTCATGAATC [ 1 3 7
TTATTAATTGATATTCC ACAACTTTAATTTACTTTTATTAAATT -  -  ATTTGTATACCGTTGTCATGAATC [ 1 3 7
APPENDIX 2 cont.
A c  i  z  z  i  a _ h o l  1 i  S i  TA TTAA GA AA TTTTA TTTTCTA TCA TTTAT-A-TAAAATTTATGTTAGGTCAAGGTGCAGTA-TTTAAAA [ 2 0 4
A c  i  z  z  i a _ u n c a t o i d e s  TATTAAAAAATTTAATTTTCCGTTATTCTT-A-TGGAATACATGTTAGGTCAAGGTGCAGTG-TGTAAAA [ 2 0 4
A r y t a i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ P O  TACTAAAAAGTGT -  AT TTTC AAGATTTTTT -  A -  TATAATTTATGTTAGATC AAGGTGCAGTC -  TGTGAGA [ 2 0 3
A r y t a i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ S P  TACTAAAAAGTGT -  AT TTTC AAGATTTTTT -  A -  TATAATTTATGTTAGATC AAGGTGCAGTC -  TGTGAGA [ 2 0 3
A r y  t a i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ M O  TACTA AA AAG TGT-A TTTTCAA GA TTTTTT-A -TATA ATTTATG TTA GA TCA AGG TGCAG TC-TG TGA GA [ 2 0 3
A r y  t a i n a _ d e v i a _ s s p _ i n s u l a r i s _ c  TA CTA AA AAG TG-A ATTTTCA GGA TTTTTT-A-TATAATTTATGTTAGATCAAGGTGCAGTC-TGTGAAA [ 2 0 3
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ s s p _ i n s u l a r i s _ P  TACTAAAAAGTG -  AA TTTTCAAGATTTTTT -  A -  TATAATTTATGTTAGATC AAGGTGCAGTT -  TGTGAAA [2 0 3
A r y t a i n a _ g e n i s t a e _ S C  TACTAAAAAGT -A A A TTTTC AAGATTTTTT -  A -  TGTAAATTATGTTAGATCAAGGTGC AGTT -  TGTAAAA [2 0 3
A r y t a i n a _ g e n i s t a e _ P O  TACTAAAAAGT -AA ATTTTCA AGA TTTTTT -  A -  TGTAAATTATGTTAGATCAAGGTGC AGTT -  TGTAAAA [2 0 3
A r y  t  a  i n a _ n u b i  v a g a  TACTAAAAAGTG -AA TTTTCAA GATTTCCT -  A -  TATAGTTTATGTTAGATCAAGGTGC A G TT -  TGTGAAA [ 2 0 3
A r y t a i n a _ s p .  1 4  TA CTA AA AAG TG-A ATTTTCAAG-ATTTCCTA-TATAGTTTATGTTAGATCAAGGTGCAGTT-TGTGAAA [ 2 0 3
A r y  t a i n i  l l a _ C O g n a t a  TACTAAAAAGTG -  -  ACTTTC AGGGGTTTTT -  A -  TTTAATTTATGTTAGATCAAGGTGC AGTT -TGTAAAA [ 2 0 2
A r y t a i n i l l a _ c y t i s i  TACTGAAAAGT -  -  AA TTTTCGAGATTTTTT -  A -  TATAATTTATGTTAGATCAAGGTGCAGTT -  TGTAAAA [ 2 0 2
A r y  t a i n i  1 l a _ d e l a r b r e i  TACTAGAAAGT - -A A TTTTCAA GATTTTTT-A -TA TA ATTTATG TTAG ATCAA GG TGCAGTT-TATG AA A [ 2 0 2
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i l u t a  TA CTA A A A A G T--A ATTTTCA GG AGTTTTT-A -TG TAA TTTA TGTTAG ATCAA GG TGCAGTT-TTTAA AA [ 2 0 2
A r y  t a i n i  1 l a _ d i v i d e n s _ C  TACTAAAAAGT- -  AATTTTC AAGGGTTTTT -  A -  TAAAATTTATGTTAGATC AAGGTGCAGTT -  TTTAAAA [ 2 0 2
A r y  t a i n i  1 l a _ d i v i d e n s _ G  TACTAAAAAGT- -  AATTTTC AGGAGTTTTT -  A -  TAAAATTTATGTT AG ATC AAGGTGCAGTT -  TTTAAAA [ 2 0 2
A r y  t a i n i  1 l a _ e q u i  t a n s  TACTAAAAAGT- -A A TTTTCAA GAG TTTTT-A -TATA ATTTATG TTA GA TCA AGG TGCAG TT-TATAAA A [ 2 0 2
A r y  t a  i n i  1 l a _ g r e d i  TACTAAAAAGTT- -  A T TTTC AGGAGTTTTT -  A -  TAAAGTTTATGTTAGATCAAGGTGCAGTT -  TTTAAAA [ 2 0 2
A r y  t a  i n  i  1 l a _ h a k a n i  TACTAAAAAGT- -  AATTTTC AGGAGTTTTT -  A -  TG TAATTTATGTTAG ATC AAGGTGCAGTT -  TTTAAAA [ 2 0 2
A r y t a i n i l l a _ i m a  T  ATTAAAAAAT -  -  AATTTTC AGAATTTTTT -  A -  TGGAATATATGTTAG ATC AAGGTGCAGTT -  TTTAAAA [ 2 0 2
A r y  t a i n  i  1 l a _ i n c u b a  TA CTA A A A A G TG --ATTTTCA GG AGTTTTT-A -TG TAA TTTA TGTTAG ATCAA GG TGCAGTT-TTTAA AA [ 2 0 2
A r y  t a i n  i  1 l a _ m o d i c a _ T e l  i n e _ P  TACTAAAAAGT- -  AATTTTC AGGAGTTTTT -  A -  TAAAATTTATGTTAGATC AAGGTGCAGTT -  TTTGAAA [ 2 0 2
A r y  t a i n  i  1 l a _ r n o d i c a _ C h a m . _ P  TACTAAAAAGT- -  AATTTTC AGGAGTTTTT -  A -  TAAAATTTATGTT AGATC AAGGTGCAGTT -  TTTGAAA [ 2 0 2
A r y  t a i n i  1 l a _ n i g r a l  i n e a t a  TACTA GA AAG TT--  A T TTTC AAGAGTTTTT -  A -  TA TAA TTTA TGTT AG ATC AAGGTGC AGTG -  TTTAAAA [ 2 0 2
A r y t a i n i l l a  _ p i l e o l a t a  TACTAAAAAGT -  -  AATTTTC AGGATTTTTT -  A -  TAAAATTTATGTTAGATCAAGGTGCAGTT -  TTTAAAA [ 2 0 2
A r y  t a i n i  l l a _ p r o b o s c i d e a  TACTAGAAAGT -  -  AATTTTC AGGAGTTTTT -  A -  TATAATTTATGTTAGATCAAGGTGCAGTT -  TTTAAAA [ 2 0 2
A r y  t  a  i n  i  1 1  a _ p r o g n a t  a  TATTAAAAAGT AATTTTCAGAAGTTTTT -  A -  TGTAATTTATGTTAGATCAAGGTGC AGTT -  TTTAAAA [ 2 0 2
A r y  t a i n i  1 l a _ s p a r t  i o p h i  l a _ P O  TATTAAAAAGTG -  -  A T TTTC AAGATTTTTT -  A -  TAAAATTTATGTT AG ATC AAGGTGC AGTC -  TGTAAAA [ 2 0 2
A r y  t a i n i  l l a _ s p a r t i o p h i l a _ S P  TATTAAAA AG TG--ATTTTCA AGA TTTTTT-A-TAA AA TTTA TGTTAG ATCAAG GTGCA GTC-TGTA AA A [ 2 0 2
A r y  t  a  i n  i  1 l a _ s u  l e i  TACTAAAAAGT- -AA TTTTC A A A A T TTTTT -  A-TAAAATTTATGTTAGATCAAGATGCAGTC -  TATAAAA [ 2 0 2
A r y  t a i n i  1 l a _ u m b o n a t a  TACTAAAAAGTG -  -  A TTTTC AGGAGTTTTT -  A -  TGTAATTTATGTTAGATCAAGGTGC AGTT -  TTTAAAA [ 2 0 2
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p .  1 TATTAAAAAGT- -  AA TTTTCAAGGTTTTTT -  A -  TATAATTTATGTTAGATCAAGGTGCAGTT -  TATAGAA [ 2 0 2
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p .  2 TA CTCAAA AG T--A ATTTTCA GA ATTTTTT-A-TAGAATTTATGTTAGATCAAGGTGCAGTTATGTAAAA [ 2 0 3
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p .  3 TA CTA A A A A G T--A ATTTTCA AG ATTTTTT-A-TA TAA TTTA TGTTAG ATCAAG GTG CA GTT-TG TGA AA [ 2 0 2
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p .  4 TACTAAAAAGT--A ATTTTCA AG ATTTCTT-A-TA AA ATTTATG TTAG ATCAA GG TGCAG TA-TTTA AA G [ 2 0 2
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p .  5 TACTAARAAGT -  -  AATTTTCAGGAGTTTTT -A -TA T A A T TTA T G TTA G A TC  AAGGTGCAGTT -  TTTAAAA [ 2 0 2
A r y t a i n i l l a _ e p .  6 TA CTA A A A A G T--A ATTTTCA GG AGTTTTT-A -TA TAA TTTA TGTTAG ATCAA GG TGCAGTT-TTTAA AA [ 2 0 2
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p .  7 TACTAAAAAGT -  -  AATTTTC AA GA GTTTTT- A -  TATAATTTATGTTAGATCAAGGTGCAGTT -  TATAAAA [ 2 0 2
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 8 TA CTA AG AAG T--A ATTTTCA GG AGTTTTT-A -TA AA ATTTATG TTA AATCAA GG TGCAG TT-TTTA AA A [ 2 0 2
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 9 TACTAAAAAGT -  -  AATTTTCAGGAGTTTTT -  A -  TAAAATTTATGTTAGATCAAGGTGCAGTT -  TTTAAAA [ 2 0 2
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 0  TA CTA A A A A G T--A A TT TTC AAGAGTTTTT-A-TATAA TTTA TGTTAGA TCA AG GTG CA GTT-TTTAA AA [ 2 0 2
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p .  1 1  TACTAAAAAGT -  -  AA TTTTCAAGATTTTTT -  A -  TATAATTTATGTTAGATCAAGGTGCAGTT -TGTA AA A [ 2 0 2
A r y t a i n i  l l a _ s p .  12  TACTAAAAAGT -  -  AATTTTCAGGAGTTTTT -  A -  TAAAATTTATGTTAGATCAAGGTGCAGTT -  TTTGAAA [ 2 0 2
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 13  TA TTAA G A A G TG --A TTTTCA G G G G T TTTT-A -TTT A A TTTA TG TTA G A TCA A G G TG CA G TT-TTTA A A A  [ 2 0 2
C a c o p s y l  l a _ a l a t e m i  TACTAAAAAGTTT -  ATTTTC AAAATTTTTT -  A -  TGC AAGTTATGTTAGGTCAAGGTGTAGTA -  TATAGAA [ 2 0 3
C a c o p s y l  l a _ m a l  i  TACTTAGAAGTTT-ATTTTCA AG ATTTTTT-A-TG TAA TTTA TGTTAG GTCAAG GTGCA GTA -TGTA GA C [ 2 0 3
C y a m o p h i  l a _ p r o h a s k a i  TACTTAAAAGT- -  AA TTTTCGG GA TTTTTT -  A -  TGAAAGTCATGTTAGGTC AAGGTGC AGTT -  TGTGTTG [ 2 0 2
L i v i l l a _ a d u s t a  TACTAAAAGGTT-AA TTTTTGA GGA TTTTT-A -TATA ATTTATG TTA GA TCA AGG TG CAG TT-TTTA GA A [ 2 0 3
L i  v i  1 1  a _ b l  a n d u  1 a  TACTAAAAAGT -  -  AATTTTTAAGGATTTTT -  A -  TATAATTTATGTTAGATCAAGGTGCAGTT -  TTTAAAA [ 2 0 2
L i v i  1 l a _ h o r v a t h i  TACTAAGAAGT -  -  AATCTTTAAGAATTTTT -  AATAGAATTCATGTTAAATCAAGGTGC AGTT -  TTTAAAA [ 2 0 3
L i v i  1 l a _ m a c u l  i p e n n i s  TACTAAAAAGT- -  AACTTTTAAGC A T T T T T -A - TGAAATTTATGTTAGATCAAGGTGC AGTT -  TTTAAAA [ 2 0 2
L i  v i  1 1  a _ jn a u  r  a  TACTAAAAAGT -  -  AATTTTTAAGGATTTTT -  A -  TATAATTTATGTTAGATCAAGGTGCAGTT -  TTTAAAA [ 2 0 2
L i  v i l  l a _ m o n o s p e r m a e  TACTAAAAAGT- -  AATTTTC GGG AGTTTAT -  A -  TAGAATTAATGTTAGATC AAGGTGC AGTA -  TTTAAAA [ 2 0 2
L i v i  1 l a _ n e r v o s a  TACTAAAAAGTG-AA-TTTCAGGGAGTTTT-ATTATAATTTATGTTAGATCAAGGTGCAGTG-TTAAAAA [ 2 0 5
L i v i  1 l a _ p s e u d o r e t a m a e  TACTAAAAAGT- -  AATTTTTAAGGATTTTT -  A -  TATAATTTATGTTAGATCAAGGTGCAGTT -  TTTAAAA [ 2 0 2
L i v i 1 l a _ p y r e n a e a  TA CTA A G A A G T--A ATTTTTA AGA ATTTTT-A-TA TAA TTTA TGTTAG ATCAAG GTGCA GTC-TTTAA AA [ 2 0 2
L i v i  1 l a _ r a d i a t a  TACTAGAAAGT -  -  AATTTTTAAGGATTCTT -  A -  TTTAATTTATGTTAGATCAAGGTGC A G TT -  TTTAAAA [ 2 0 2
L i v i  1 l a _ r e t a m a e  TACTAAAAAGT--AATTTTCGGGAGTTTTT-A -TA GA ATTCATG TTA GA TCA AGG TG CAG TA-TTTAA AA [ 2 0 2
L i v i  1 l a _ s p e c  t a b i  1 i s  TACTAAAAAGTT A T TT TC  AAGCATTTTT-A-TGTAATTTA TGTTAGA TCA AG GTG CA GTT-TTTGAA A [ 2 0 2
L i v i l l a _ s y r i a c a  TACTAAAAAGTT A TTTTC A AG TA TTTTT-A -TA TAA TTTA TG TTAG ATCAA GG TGCAGTT-TTTAA AA [ 2 0 2
L i v i  1 l a _ v a r i e g a t a  TACTAAAAAGT- -  AATTTTTGAGGATTTTT -  A -  TAGAATTTATGTTAGATC AAGGTGC AGTT -  TTTAAAA [ 2 0 2
L i v i l l a _ v i c i n a  TA CTA A A A A G T--A A TT TTC AAGATTTTTT-A-TAA AA TTTA TGTTAGA TCA AG GTG CA GTT-TTTAG AA [ 2 0 2
L i v i  1 l a _ v i  1 1  i p e n n e l  l a  TACTGAGAAGTG -  -  A TTTTC AAG A A TTTTT -  G -  TATAATTTATGTTAGATCAAGGTGCAGTT -  TTTAAAA [ 2 0 2
L i v i l l a _ s p .  1 5  TA TTAA AA AA TG--ATTTTCA AAA TTTTTT-A-TGA AA TTTA TGTTAG ATCAAG GTGCA GTA -TTTAA AA [ 2 0 2
L i v i  1 l a _ s p . 1 6  TATTAAAAAAT - -AA TTTTC A A A TTTTTTT-A -TG A A A TTT A TG TTA G A TC A A G G TG C A G TT-TTTA A A A  [ 2 0 2
L i v i  1 l a _ s p . 1 7  TATTAAAAAAT- -A A TTTTC A G A G A G TTTT-A-TTTA ATTTATG TTA GA TCA AGG TGCAG TT-TTTG AA A [ 2 0 2
P s e u d a c a n t h o p s y l l a _ i i n p r o v i s a  TATTAAAAAAT- -  AATTTTC A T A TTT TTTT -  A -  TGGAATGCATGTTAGATCAAGGTGCAGTT- TTTAAAA [ 2 0 2
APPENDIX 2 cont.
22 0 2 3 0 2 4 0 2 5 0 2 6 0 2 7 0
A c i z z i a _ h o l l i s i
A c i z z i a _ u n c a t o i d e s
A r y t a i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ P O
A r y t a i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ S P
A r y t a i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ M O
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ s s p _ i n s u l a r i s _ C
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ s s p _ i n s u l a r i s _ P
A r y t a i n a _ g e n i s t a e _ S C
A r y t a i n a _ g e n i s t a e _ P O
A r y t a i n a _ n u b i v a g a
A r y t a i n a _ s p . 1 4
A r y t a i n i l l a _ c o g n a t a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ c y t i s i
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d e l a r b r e i
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i l u t a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i v i d e n s _ C
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i v i d e n s _ G
A r y t a i n i l l a _ e q u i t a n s
A r y t a i n i l l a _ g r e d i
A r y t  a  i n  i 1 1 a _ h a k a n  i
A r y t a i n i l l a _ i m a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ i n c u b a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ m o d i c a _ T e l i n e _ P
A r y t a i n i 1 l a _ m o d i  c a _ C h a m . _ P
A r y  t a i n i l l a _ n i g r a l i n e a t a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p i l e o l a t a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p r o b o s c i d e a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p r o g n a t a
A r y t a i n i 1 l a _ s p a r t i o p h i l a _ P O
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p a r t i o p h i l a _ S P
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s u l c i
A r y t a i n i l l a _ u m b o n a t a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 2
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 3
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 4
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 5
Arytainilla_sp.6
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 8
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 9
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 0
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 11
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 12
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 13
C a c o p s y l  l a _ a l a t e m i
C a c o p s y l l a _ m a l i
C y a m o p h i l a _ p r o h a s k a i
L i v i l l a _ a d u s t a
L i v i l l a _ b l a n d u l a
L i v i l l a _ h o r v a t h i
L i v i l l a _ j n a c u l i p e n n i s
L i v i l l a _ m a u r a
L i v i l l a  j n o n o s p e r m a e
L i v i l l a _ n e r v o s a
L i v i l l a _ p s e u d o r e t a m a e
L i v i l l a _ p y r e n a e a
L i v i l l a _ r a d i a t a
L i v i l l a _ r e t a m a e
L i v i l l a _ s p e c t a b i l i s
L i v i l l a _ s y r i a c a
L i v i l l a _ v a r i e g a t a
L i v i l l a _ v i c i n a
L i v i l l a _ v i t t i p e n n e l l a
L i v i l l a _ s p . 1 5
L i v i l l a _ s p . 16
L i v i l l a _ s p . 1 7
P s e u d a c a n t h o p s y l l a _ i m p r o v i s a
2 8 0 ]
G T T T T A - -  ATGGGTTACTTTA -  TTATAATGAATGGAAATTTAGATTT -  G TTAT -  TTTTTTTGAAAAAGGA [ 2 6 9
GTTATA-AATGGGTTACTTTAGTATC -  ATGAATGAAATAAAATATAA-AAAA- -  CTGTTATGAAATAGGA [ 2 6 9
AAG -  TAAAATGGGTTACAATATTTAATATGAATGGAAATTATTCTTA -  GAAG -  -  AATTTTAGAAAAAGGA [ 2 6 9
AAG - TAAAATGGGTTACAATATTTAATATGAATGGAAATTATTCTTA- GAAG -  -AATTTTAGAAAAAGGA [ 2 6 9
AAG -  TAAAATGGGTTACAATATTTAATATGAATGAAAATTATTCTTA -  AAAG AATTTTAGAAAAAGGA [ 2 6 9
GAA-CAAAATGGGTTACAATAATTAATATGAATGAAAAACATTCTTA-ATAT AGTGTTAGAAAGAGGA [ 2 6 9
GAA- TAAAATGGGTTACAATATTTAGTATGAATGGAAAGCATTTTTA -  ATAT -  -  TATGCTAGAAAAGGGA [ 2 6 9
GTA-TAGAATGGGTTACAATATTTAATATGAATGGAAATTATTCTTA-AAAT--AATATTAGAAAAAGGA [ 2 6 9
GTA-TAGAATGGGTTACAATATTTAATATGAATGGAAATTATTCTTA-AAAT--AATATTAGAAAAAGGA [ 2 6 9
AAA-TAAAATGGGTTACAGTATTTAATATGAATGAAAAATATTTTTA-AAAG- -AATGTTAGAAAAAGGA [ 2 6 9
AAA -  TAAAATGGGTTACAGTATTTAGTATGAATGAAAAATATT -  T T A -A A A G - -AATGTTAGAAAAAGGA [ 2 6 8
GAA-AAAAGTGGGTTACAATATTTAATATGAATGGAAATTATTGTTA- G A TA - -  AATAAGGAAAATAGGA [ 2 6 8
GAA-AATAATGGGTTACATTAATTATTATGAATGAAAATTATTATT- -GAAT--AATAACGGAAAAAGGA [ 2 6 7
GTA -  GAAAATGGGTTAC ATTAGTGAAGATGAATGAAAATTATTGTTA- GAA AATAGTGGAAAAAGGA [ 2 6 7
GAA-AAAAGTGGGTTACAATATTTAATATGAATGGAAATTATTATTA-GAGG- -TATAATAGAAAGAGGA [ 2 6 8
GAA-AAAAGTGGGTTACAATATTAAATATGAATGGAAATTATTGTTA-GATA AATAATAGAAATAGGA [ 2 6 8
GAA -  AAAAGTGGGTTACAATATTTAGTATGAATGAAAATTATTGTTA- GG T AATAATAGAAATAGGA [ 2 6 7
GAA -  AAAAGTGGGTTAC AATATTTATTATGAATGGAAATTATTGTAA -  GATA--AATGATAAAAATAGGA [ 2 6 8
GAA-AAAAATGGGTTACATTATTTATTATGAATGAAAATTATTACTA-AATT- -  AATAATGAAAATAGGA [ 2 6 8
GAA-AAAAGTGGGTTACAATATTTAATATGAATGGAAGTTATTGTTA-GATA--AATAATAAAAATAGGA [ 2 6 8
GAA-AAAAATGGGTTACATTATTTAGTATGAATGGAAATTATTGTTA-ATTT--ATTAATAGAAATAGGA [ 2 6 8
GAA-AAAAGTGGGTTACAATATTTAATATGAATGGAAGTTATTGTTA-GATA- -AATAATAAAAATAGGA [ 2 6 8
GAA -  AAAAGTGGGTTACATTATTTAATATGAATGAAAATTATTGTTA -  GATA -  -AATAATAGAAATAGGA [ 2 6 8
GAA-AAAAGTGGGTTACATTATTTAATATGAATGAAAATTATTGTTA-GATA- -AATAATAGAAATAGGA [ 2 6 8
GAA-AAAAGTGGGTTACATTATTTAATATGAATGAAAATTGTTGTTA-GATA--AACAATAGAAAAAGGA [ 2 6 8
GAA-AAAAGTGGGTTACAATATTTAATATGAATGGAAATTATTGTTA-GATA--AATA-TAGAAATAGGA [ 2 6 7
GAA-AAAAGTGGGTTACAATATTTAGTATGAATGAAAATTGTTGTTA-GATA- -  AATAATAGAAAAAGGA [ 2 6 8
GAA-AAAAGTGGGTTACAATATTTAATATGAATGGAAATTGTTGTTA-GATT--TATAATAGAAAGAGGA [ 2 6 8
GAA-AAAAATGGGTTACATTAGTTACTATGAATGAATATTATTATT- -GGAA--AATATTGGAAAAGGGA [ 2 6 7
GAA -  AAAAATGGGTTACATTAGTTACTATGAATGAATATTATTATT -  -G G A A - -AATATTGGAAAAGGGA [ 2 6 7
GAA -  AA -  AATGGGTTACATTAGTTAATATGAATGAAAAATAAGTCTA- TAAA - -ATTATTGAAAAGAGGA [ 2 6 7
GAA -  AAAAGTGGGTTACAATATTT AATATGAATGGAAGTTATTGTTA -  GATA -  -AATAATAAAAATAGGA [ 2 6 8
GTA-AGAAATGGGTTACATTAGTTAAGATGTATGGAAGTTATTATTA-GAA AATAATAGAAAAAGGA [ 2 6 7
GAA-AAAAATGGGTTACATTAGTAACTATGAATGGAAATTATTGTTA-GAA AATAATAAAAAAAGGA [ 2 6 8
GAA -  AATAATGGGTTAC ATTGATTATTATGAATGAAAATTATTATT -  -G A A T  AATAATAGAAAAAGGA [ 2 6 7
GAA-AAGAATGGGTTACAATATTTAATATGAATGAAAATTACTAGA- -A G A T - -  AGTTATGGAAATAGGA [ 2 6 7
GAA -  A A - AGTGGGTTACTATATTTAGTATGAATGAAAATTATTGTTA -  GAAA- -AATAATAGAAATAGGA [ 2 6 7
GAA -  AAAAGTGGGTTACAATATTTAGGATGTATGGAAGTTATTGTTA -  GA CA - -  AATTATAAAAATAGGA [ 2 6 8
GAA -  AAAAGTGGGTTACAATATTTATTATGAATGGAAGTTGTTGTTA -  G A TA - -AATAATAAAAATAGGA [ 2 6 8
GAA -  AAGGGTGGGTTAC AATATTTAGTATGAATGGAAATTATTGTTA -  GATA--AATAATAAAAATAGAA [ 2 6 8
GAA -  AAAAGTGGGTTACACTGTTTAATATGAATGAAAATTATTGTTA- G A TA - -AATAATAAAAATAGGA [ 2 6 8
GAA-AAAAGTGGGTTACAATATTTATTATGAATGAAAATTATTGTTA-GATA- -AATAATAAAAATAGGA [ 2 6 8
GAA -  AAAAGTGGGTTACAATATTTATTATGAATGGAAATTATTGTTA- G A T A - -AATAATAAAAATAGGA [ 2 6 8
GAA-AAAAGTGGGTTACATTATTTAATATGAATGAAAATTATTGTTA-GATA- -AATAATAGAAATAGGA [ 2 6 8
GAA-AAAAGTGGGTTACAGTATTAATTATGAATGGAAATTATTGTTA-GATA- -AATAATAAAAATAGGA [ 2 6 8
GAC -  TAAAATGGGTTACAGTAATTATTATGAATGAATTACGCTATTA -  GTGT - -AGAGTATGAAAGAGGA [ 2 6 9
GAC -  TAAAATGGGTTACATTATTTATTATGAATGGATTATTTTAATTAATATTTTAAATATGAAATAGGA [ 2 7 2
GTT-CAAAATGGGTTA CTTTATTTATTATG AA TGG ATTATTA TTA TT-GTT AAATTATGAAAATGGA [ 2 6 7
GAA-TAAGGTGGGTTACATTTTTTATAATGAATGAAAATTATTGCTA-AAGG-TAATAATAGAAATGGGA [ 2 7 0  
GAT -TAAAGTGGGTTACATTTTTTATAATGAATGAAAATTATTGTTA -  GAGG -  -  AATAGTGGAAATAGGA [ 2 6 8
GGT-TAAAGTGGGTTACATTTTTTATAATGAATGAAAATTATTGTTG -  AAAT - -AATAGTATAAATAGGA [ 2 6 9
GAT -  TAAAGTGGGTTACATTTTTTATAATGAATGAAGCTTTTTATTA-AAAT -  -  AATAATTGAAATAGGA [ 2 6 8
GAT-TAAAGTGGGTTACATTTTTGATAATGAATGAAAATTATTGTTA-GAGC- -AGTAGTAGAAATAGGA [ 2 6 8
GAA-AAAAGTGGGTTACATTATTTATTATGAATGAAATTTATGTGTA-GAT--AATTAAAGGAAATGGGA [ 2 6 8
G-A-AAAAATGGG TTA CACTATTTATTATAAA TGG AA ATTATCTATA -G TTT--  GGTTATTAAAATAGGA [ 2 7 0
GAT -  TAAAGTGGGTTACATTTTTTATAATGAATGAAAATTATTGTTA -  GAGC -  -  AATAGTAGAAATAGGA [ 2 6 8
GAT -  TAAAGTGGGTTACATTTTTGATAATGAATGAAAATTATTACTA -  AAAT -  -  AATAATAGAAATAGGA [ 2 6 8
GAT -  CAGAGTGGGTTACATTTTTTATAATGGATGGAAATTATTATTA -  AAAT -  -  AGTAATAGAAATGGGA [ 2 6 8
GAA-AAAAGTGGGTTACATTATTTATTATGGATGAAATTTATGTTTA-GAG--AATTAAAGGAAATGGGA [ 2 6 8  
GAT -  TAAAGTGGGTTACATTTTTTATAATGGATGAAAATTATTAGTA- AAGT - -AATAATGGAAACAGGA [ 2 6 8
GAT -  TGAGGTGGATTAC ATTTTTTATAATG AATGAAAATTATTGTTT -  AACT -  -AATAATAGAAATAGGA [ 2 6 8
GAT -  TAAAGTGGGTTAC ATTTTTTAT AATGAATGAAAATTATTATTA -  AAGT - -AATAATGGAAATAGGA [ 2 6 8
GAA-AAAAATGGGTTACATTATTTATGATGAATGAAAGTTATTAAA- -  AAATT -  AATAATGGAAAGAGG A [ 2 6 8
GAT-TAAAGTGGGTTACATTTTTTATGATGAATGAAAATTATTGTTA-AATAT-AATAATAGAAACGGGA [ 2 6 9  
GAG -  AAAAATGGGTT AC ATTATTTATTATGAATG AAAATTGTTATAA -  A T T T  -  -  ATTAATGGAAATAGG A [ 2 6 8
GAA -  AAAGATGGGTTACATTATTT ATTATGAATG AAAATTATTATTA -  A T T T  -  -  ATTAATGGAAATAGG A [ 2 6 8
GAA-AAAAATGGGTTACATTATTTATTATGAATGGAAATTACTAT-A-AAATT-AGTAATAGAAATAGGA [ 2 6 8
GAA-AAAAATGGGTTACTATAGTTACAATGAATGAAAATTATAAAAATGGAAT-TATGATAGAAATAGGA [ 2 7 0
- 2 4 2 -
APPENDIX 2 cont.
[ 2 9 0  3 0 0  3 1 0  3 2 0  3 3 0  3 4 0 ]
* * * * * *  1 2 S  rR N A  e n d ]
A c i z z i a _ h o l l i s i  TTTAATAGTA---------AAATAA TTTTTAAGAAATAAAATGAATAT-AGATTCTAAAATATG [ 3 2 3
A c i  z  z  i a _ u n c a t o i d e s  TTTGATAGTAAACTAATTT-----------------------AGAGAATTAATGAAAAG-AT? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  [ 3 2 0
A r y  t a  i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ P O  TTTAGCAGTA---------AGTGAGA-ATTAATAAAGACTTTCTGTGAATTT-AGATTCTAAAATATG [ 3 2 6
A r y t a i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ S P  TTTAGCAGTA---------AGTGAGA-ATTAATAAAGACTTTCTGTGAATTT-AGATTCTAAAATATG [ 3 2 6
A r y  t a  i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ M O  TTTAGTAGTA---------AGTGAGA-ATTAATAAAGACTTTCTGTGAATTT-AGATW CTAAAATATG [ 3 2 6
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ s s p _ i n s u l a r i s _ C  TTTAGAAGTAACCAGGAA TTATTAAAGATTTTTTATGAATAT-AGATW CTGAAATATG [ 3 2 6
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ s s p _ i n s u l a r i s _ P  TTTAGAAGTAACCAGGGAT TATTAAAGTTTTTCTATGAATTT-AGATTCTAAAATATG [ 3 2 6
A r y t a  i n a _ g e n i  s  t a e _ S C  TTTAGAAGTAACCAAGAG----------TTAATAAAGATTTCTTATGAATTT- AGATTCTAAAATATG [ 3 2 6
A r y t a i n a _ g e n i s t a e _ P O  TTTAGAAGTAACCAAGAG----------TTAATAAAGATTTCTTATGAATTT-AGATTCTAAAATATG [ 3 2 6
A r y t a i n a _ n u b i v a g a  TTTAGAAGTAACCAGGAAA TAGTAAAGATTTTTTATGAATTT-AGATTCTAAAATATG [ 3 2 6
A r y t a i n a _ s p . 1 4  TTTAGAAGTAACCAGGAAAT--------AGTAAAGATTTTTTATGAATTT-AGATW CTAAATT  [ 3 2 2
A r y t a i n i l l a _ c o g n a t a  TTTGAAAGTA-------AAAAAA-------- TTATTAAAGATCTTTTATGAATTT-AGATTCTAAAATATG [ 3 2 3
A r y t a i n i l l a _ c y t i s i  TTTAAAAGTA---------AAGGGAA-GTTATTAAAAATTTTTTATGAATTT-AGATTCTAAAATATG [ 3 2 4
A r y  t a i n i  1 l a _ d e l a r b r e i  TTTAAAAGTA---------AGGAGAA-ATTTGTAAAGATTTTTTATGAATAA-AGATTCTAAAATATG [ 3 2 4
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i l u t a  TTTAAAAGTA------ AAAGAA---------TTA TTAAGGATTTTTTATGAATTY- AGATTCTAAAATAT? [ 3 2 3
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i v i d e n s _ C  TTTGAAAGTA------ AAAAAA---------TTA TTA A A G A TTTTTT A TG A A TTT-A G A TT? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  [ 3 2 3
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i v i d e n s _ G  TTTGAAAGTA---------AACAAAA--TTATTAAA GA TTTTTTATG AA TTT-AG ATTCTA AA ATA TG [ 3 2 3
A r y t a i n i 1 l a _ e q u i t a n s  TTTGAAAGTA------ AAAAAA---------C T A TTA A A G A TTTTTTA TG A A TTT-A G A TT CT?? ? ? ? ? ? ?  [ 3 2 3
A r y t a i n i 1 l a _ g r e d i  TTTAATAGTA---------A A G G G A A --TTAA --AA GTG TTTTGATGA ATTA -A GA TTCTAA AATATG [ 3 2 2
A r y t a i n i l l a _ h a k a n i  TTTGAAAGTA------ AAAAAA---------TTA CTA A A G A TTTTTTATG AA TTT-AG ATA CTA AA -TAT? [ 3 2 2
A r y t a i n i  l l a _ i m a  TTTAATAGTA------ AATATAA-----------TTAAAAGATTTTTTATGAATAA -  AGATTCTG AAATATG [ 3 2 2
A r y t a i n i l l a _ i n c u b a  TTTGAAAGTA--------- A A A A A A A --TTA C TA A A G A TTTTTTA TG A A TTT -A G A TA C TA A A -TA T? [ 3 2 3
A r y t a  i n i 1 l a _ m o d i c a _ T e l i n e _ p  TTTGAAAGTA------ AAAAAA---------TTATTAAAGATTTTTTATGAATTT-AGATTCTAAAATATG [ 3 2 3
A r y t a  i n i 1 l a _ m o d i  c a _ C h a m . _ P  TTTGAAAGTA------ AAAAAA---------TTATTAAAGATTTTTTATGAATTT-AGATTCTAAAATATG [ 3 2 3
A r y  t a i n i  1 l a _ n i g r a l  i n e a t a  TTTAAAAGTA------ AAAGAA---------ATATTAAAGATTTTTTATGAATTA-AGATACTAAAATA? ? [ 3 2 3
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p i l e o l a t a  TTTGAAAGTA------ AAAAAA---------TTATTAAAGATTTTTTATG AA TTT- AGATTCTAAAATATG [3 2 2
A r y  t a i n i  1 l a _ p r o b o s c i d e a  TTTGAAAGTA------ AAAAAA----------- TA TTA A A G ATTTTTTA TGA ATTT-AGA TACTAA A-TA ? ?  [ 3 2 1
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p r o g n a t a  TTTAAAAGTA------ AAAAAA-------- TTATTA AA GATTTTTTATG AA TTT- AGATTCTAAAATATG [3 2 3
A r y t a i n i 1 l a _ s p a r t i o p h i l a _ P O  TTTAAAAGTA---------AAATAAA- ATTAATAAAGATTTTTCATGAATTT- AGATTCTAGAATATG [ 3 2 4
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p a r t i o p h i l a _ S P  TTTAAAAGTA--------- A A ATAAA -A T? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  [ 3 2 5
A r y  t a i n i  l l a _ s u l c i  TTTAAAAGTA---------AAGAAAA-ATTAATAAAGATTTTTTATGAATTT-AGATTCTAAAGTATG [ 3 2 4
A r y t a i n i l l a _ u m b o n a t a  TTTGAAAGTA------ AAAAAA-------- TTATTAAAGATTTTTTATGAATTT-AGATTCTAAAATATG [3 2 3
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . l  TTTAAAAGTA------ AAAGAA-------- TTAGTAAAGATTTTTTATGAATTT-AGATTCTAAAATATG [3 2 2
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 2 TTTAAAAGTA------ AATAAG-------- TAAATAAAGATTTTTTATGAATATTAGATTCTAAAATATG [ 3 2 4
A r y  t a i n i  1 l a _ s p . 3 TTTAAAAGTA------ AAGG AAA -  GTT ATTAAA -  ATTTTTT A TG A A TTT -  AG ATACTGAAAT A ? ?  [3 2 3
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 4 TTTAATAGTA---------AATAAAATTTTATTAGAGATTTTTTATGAATTT- AGATWCTAAAATAT? [ 3 2 5
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 5 TTTAAAAGTA------ AAAAAA-----------AATTAAAGATTTTATATGAATTT-AGATTCTAAAATATG [ 3 2 1
Arytainilla_sp. 6 TTTGAAAGTA---AAAAAA----TTATTAAAGATTTTTTATGAATTT - AGATTCTAAATAAT ? [323
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 7 TTTGAAAGTA------ AAAAAA-------- TTATTAAAGATTTTTTATGAATTT-AGATTCTAAAATATG [ 3 2 3
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 8 TTTGAAAGTA------ AAAAAA-----------TA TTAA AG ATTTTT- A TG A A TTT- AGATTCTAAAGTATG [ 3 2 1
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 9 TTTGAAAGTA------ AAAAAA-------- TTATTAAAGATTTTTTATGAATTT-AGATTCTAAAATATG [ 3 2 3
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 0  TTTGAAAGTA------ AAAAAA-------- TTATTAAAGATTTTTTATGAATTT-AGATTCTAAAATATG [ 3 2 3
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 1  TTTGAAAGTA------ AAAAAA-------- TTATTA AA GATTTTTTATG AA TTT- AGATWCTAAAATATG [ 3 2 3
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 2  TTTGAAAGTA------ AAAAAA---------TTATTAAAGATTTTTTATGAATTT-AGATTCTAAAATATG [ 3 2 3
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 3  TTTGAAAGTA------ AAAAAA---------TTATTAAAGATTTTTTATGAATTT-AGATTCTAAAATATG [ 3 2 3
C a c o p s y l l a _ a l a t e m i  TTTATAAGTA------ AAAAAA-------- TTGTTAAAGAATTTGTATGAATAT-AGATTCTAAAATATG [ 3 2 4
C a c o p s y l  l a _ Jm a l i  TTTATAAGTA------ AAAAAG---------TTATTAGAGATTTTATATGAATAG -  AGATTCTAAAATATG [ 3 2 7
C y a m o p h i  1 a _ p r  o h a  s k a  i  TTTGTAAGTA------ AAAAGA-------- T T  ATTAAAGATTTTATATGAATAA -  AGATTCTAAAATATG [ 3 2 2
L i v i  1 l a _ a d u s  t a  TTTAAGAGTA AGGGAGA TTATTAAAGACTTTATATGAATAA-AGATTCTAAAATATG [ 3 2 6
L i v i 1 l a _ b l a n d u l a  TTTAAAAGTA AAAAAGA- ATTATTAAAGATTCTATATGAATAA-AGATTCTAAAATATG [ 3 2 5
L i v i l l a _ h o r v a t h i  TTTAAAAGTA AAGAAAA--TGATTAAAGATTTTACATGAATAT-AGATTCTAAAGTATG [ 3 2 5
L i v i 1 l a _ m a c u l i p e n n i s  TTTAAGAGTA A A G A A A G --TTA TTA A A G A TTTTA TA ?? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  [ 3 2 5
L i v i l l a _ m a u r a  TTTAAAAGTA AAAAAAA--CTATTAAAGATTTTATATGAATAA-AGATTCTAAAGTATG [ 3 2 4
L i v i 1 l a _ m o n o s p e r m a e  TTTAAAAGTA AAACAGA-ATAATTAAAGATTTTTTATGAATAA-AGATTCTGAAATATG [ 3 2 5
L i v i l l a _ n e r v o s a  WTTAAAAGTG TA AAAAA-A--ATTAAAGATTTTATATGAATAA-AGATW CTAAAATATG [ 3 2 5
L i v i  1 l a _ p s e u d o r e t a m a e  TTTAAAAGTA AAAAAGA-ATTATTAAAGATTCTATATGAATAA-AGATTCTAAAATATG [ 3 2 5
L i v i l l a _ p y r e n a e a  TTTAAAAGTA AAAGGAA-- TTATTAAAGATTC ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  [ 3 2 5
L i v i l l a _ r a d i a t a  TTTAAAAGTA AAGTGAA- CTTATTAAAGATTTTATATGAATTT- AGATTCTAAAGTATG [ 3 2 5
L i v i l l a _ r e t a m a e  TTTAAAAGTA AAATAGA-ATAATTAAAGATTTTGTATGAATTA-AGATTCTGAAATATG [ 3 2 5
L i v i 1 l a _ s p e c  t a b i 1 i  S  TTTGAAAGTA AAGAGAG-- TTATTAAAGATTTTACATGAATAT- AGATTCTAAAGTATG [ 3 2 4
L i v i l l a _ s y r i a c a  TTTAATAGTA AAAGAAT? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  [ 3 2 7
L i v i 1 l a _ v a r i e g a t a  TTTGAGAGTA AGAGGAG--CTATTAAAGATTTTATATGAATAA-AGATTCTAAAGTATG [ 3 2 4
L i v i 1 l a _ v i c i n a  TTTAATAGTA AAAGAAA-GTTAATAGAAATTTTTTATGAATTT-AGATTCTAAAATATG [ 3 2 5
L i  v i  1 1  a _ v i  1 1  i p e n n  e  1 1  a  TTTAAAAGTA------ AAAAGAA TTATTAAAGATTTTATATGAATAT -  AGATTCTAAAGTATG [ 3 2 5
L i v i l l a _ s p .  1 5  TTTGATAGTA------ AATGTAA TTTAAAGATTTTTTATG AATAA -  AGATTCTAAAATATG [ 3 2 2
L i v i l l a _ s p .  1 6  TTTAACAGTA------ AATATAA TTAAAAGATTTTTTATGAATAA-AGATTCTAAAATATG [ 3 2 2
L i v i l l a _ s p .  1 7  TTTAATAGTA AGTAAA------------ CTAAAGATTTTTTATGAATAG -  AGATWCTAAAATATG [ 3 2 0
P s e u d a c a n t h o p s y 1 l a _ i m p r o v i  s a  TTTAACAGTA------ AATAAA TAAATAAAGAATTTTGATGAATAA- AGATTCTAAAATATG [ 3 2 5
-2 4 3 -
APPENDIX 3 .  Aligned COI-tRNA-COII matrix (639bp), ambiguous 
regions in the tRNA leucine are indicated by *.
[ 1 0  2 0  3 0  4 0  5 0  6 0  7 0 ]
[C O I 2 6 2 b p  s t a r t
A c i z z i a _ h o l l i s i TCCTCAACATTTTCTAGGATTAATAGGAATACCTCGACGATACTCTAACTATCCAGATTTATTAATTTCA [ 7 0 ]
A c i z z i a _ u n c a t o i d e s TCCTCAACACTTTTTAGGATTAATAGGGATACCTCGACGATACTCAAACTACCCTGATCTTTTAATCTCT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n a . _ a d e n o c a r p i _ P O TCCTCAACACTTCTTAGGACTTATAGGAATACCACGACGCTACTCTAATTACCCAGATTTACTTATCTTC [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n a . _ a d e n o c a r p i _ S P ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  7CTTCTTAGGACTTATAGGAATACCACGACGCTACTCTAATTACCCAGATTTACTTATCTTC [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n a . _ a d e n o c a r p i _ M O TCCTCAACACTTCTTAGGACTTATAGGAATACCACGACGCTACTCTAATTACCCAGATTTACTTATCTTC [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n a . _ d e v i a _ T ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  TTGGACTTATAGGAATACCTCGACGTTACTCAAACTACCCAGACCTCCTTATTTTT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n a . _ d e v i a _ G ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  TTGGACTTATAGGAATACCTCGACGTTACTCAAACTACCCAGW CCTCCTTATTTTT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n a . _ d e v i a _ s s p _ i n s u l a r i s _ C ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  7CTCTTTGGACTCATAGGAATACCTCGACGTTACTCAAACTACCCTGATCTTCTTGTTTTT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n a . _ d e v i a _ s s p _ i n s u l a r i s _ P ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  7CTCTTTGGTCTTATAGGTATACCTCGTCGTTACTCAAATTACCCAGTCCTCCTTATTTTT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n a . _ g e n i s t a e _ S C ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  7CTTGGTCTTATAGGAATGCCACGGCGTTACTCAAATTACCCAGGTTTACTCATTTTT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n a . _ g e n i s t a e _ P O ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  TCTTGGTCTTATAGGAATGCCACGGCGTTACTCAAATTACCCAGATTTACTCATTTTT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n a . _ g e n i s t a e _ M O ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  7TCCTTGGTCTTATAGGAATACCACGGCGTTACTCAAATTATCCAGATTTACTCATTTTT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n a . _ n u b i v a g a TCCTCAACACTTCCTTGGCCTTATAGGGATGCCACGACGCTACTCAAACTACCCAGATCTTCTTATTTTT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n a . _ s p . 1 4 TCCTCAACACTTCCTTGGCCTTATAGGAATGCCACGACGTTACTCAAACTACCCAGATCTTCTTATTTTT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ c o g n a t a ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  7CTTCTTAGGTCTCATAGGTATGCCACGCCGATATTCTAACTACCCTGACCTCCTAATTTCT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ c y t i s i TCCTCAACATTTTCTTGGACTTATAGGAATACCTCGACGATATTCTAATTACCCAGACCTTCTTATCTCT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ d e l a r b r e i ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  7TCCTTGGCTTAATAGGAATACCGCGACGGTATTCTAACTACCCAGATCTTTTAACCTTT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ d i l u t a _ C ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  7TTTCTTAGGTCTTATAGGAATACCACGCCGATACTCTAATTATCCTGACCTCCTAATTTCT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ d i l u t a _ T ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  7TTTCTTAGGTCTTATAGGAATACCACGCCGATACTCTAATTATCCTGACCTCCTAATTTCT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ d i v i d e n s _ C ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  7CTTCCTAGGCCTTATAGGTATGCCCCGCCGCTACTCTAATTACCCAGACCTTCTGATTTCC [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ d i v i d e n s _ T ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  7CTTCCTAGGTCTTATAGGW ATGCCTCGCCGTTACTCTAATTATCCAGW TCTTCTAATTTCC [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ d i v i d e n s _ G ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  7CTTCCTAGGTCTTATAGGTATGCCTCGCCGTTACTCTAATTACCCAGACCTTCTAATTTCC [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ e q u i t a n s ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  TCTTGGCCTTATAGGAATACCTCGACGATATTCTAATTACCCTGATCTTCTAATTTCT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ h a k a n i ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  7AGGGCTTATAGGTATACCACGTCGATACTCTAACTACCCCGACCTCCTCATCTCT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ i m a ????????????7?T A G G A C T T A T A G G A A T G C C T C G A C G C T A T T C T A A T T A C C C T G A T T T A C T T A T T T C T [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ i n c u b a ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  CTTAGGCCTTATAGGTATACCACGTCGATATTCTAACTACCCCGACCTCCTCATTTCT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ m o d i c a _ T e l i n e _ P TCCTCAACACTTCCTAGGCTTCATAGGCATGCCTCGCCGCTATTCTAATTACCCAGATCTTCTAATTTCC [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a  _ j n o d i c a _ C h a m ._ P ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  7CTTCCTAGGCCTCATAGGCATGCCTCGCCGCTATTCTAATTACCCAGNTCTTCTAATTTCC [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ m o d i c a _ T e l i n e _ H TCCTCAACACTTCCTAGGCTTCATAGGCATGCCTCGCCGCTATTCTAATTACCCAGACCTTCTAATTTCC [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ m o d i c a _ C h a m . _H ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  7CTTCCTAGGCCTCATAGGCATGCCTCGCCGCTATTCTAATTACCCAGACCTTCTAATTTCC [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ n i g r a l i n e a t a _ C TCCTCAACACTTCTTAGGTCTTATAGGTATGCCTCGCCGATATTCTAATTACCCCGACCTTTTAATTTCT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ n i g r a l i n e a t a _ T TCCTCAACACTTCTTAGGTCTTATAGGTATGCCTCGCCGATATTCTAATTACCCCGACCTTTTAATTTCT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ n i g r a l i n e a t a _ G ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  7CTTCTTAGGTCTTATAGGTATGCCTCGCCGATATTCTAATTACCCCGACCTTTTAATTTCT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ p i l e o l a t a _ T . c a n 7 7 7 7 7 7TCTCTCTGTAGGTCTTATAGGTATACCTCGCCGATATTCTAACTACCCTGACCTTTTAATTTCT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ p i l e o l a t a _ T . o s y ?????77?7CT CTG TA G G TC TTA TA G G A A TA C CTC G C CG A TA TTCTA A C TA C CCT G A C CTTTTA A TTTC T [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i 1 a _ p r o b o s c i d e a _ A . v i s _ T 7 7 7 7 7 7TCTCTTCTTAGGTCTTATAGGAATACCGCGCCGATATTCTAATTATCCCGACCTTTTAATTTCT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ p r o b o s c i d e a _ A . f o l _ P ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  7TCTTAGGTCTTATAGGAATACCGCGCCGATATTCTAATTATCCCGACCTTTTAATTTCT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ p r o g n a t a ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  7TCTAGGTCTTATAGGAATACCTCGCCGATACTCTAATTATCCTGACCTTTTAATTTCT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p a r t i o p h i l a _ P O TCCTCAACATTTTCTTGGTCTAATAGGGATACCTCGACGATACTCTAATTATCCTGATCTTTTAACTTTT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p a r t i o p h i l a _ S P TCCTCAACATTTTCTTGGTCTAATAGGAATACCTCGACGATACTCTAATTATCCTGATCTTTTAACTTTT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p a r t i  o p h  i 1 a_M O ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  7TCTTGGTCTAATGGGAATACCTCGACGATACTCTAATTATCCTGATCTTTTAACTTTT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ s u l c i ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? 7TCTTGGCTTAATAGGAATACCTCGACGTTATTCCAATTACCCTGATCTTCTAATTTCC [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ u m b o n a t a ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  7CTTTGTAGGCCTTATAGGTATACCACGTCGATATTCTAACTACCCCGACCTCCTCATTTCT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p . 1 TCCTCAACATTTTCTTGGTCTTATAGGAATACCTCGACGATATTCTAACTATCCAGATCTCCTTACCTTT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p . 2 ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  7CTGATCTTCTAA TTTTT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p . 3 ????????7?7?7C T TG G A C TT A T A G G N A T A C C N C G A C G W T A C TC TA A TT A C C C A G A C C T T C TT A TTT C T [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p . 4 _ S P TCCTCAACATTTTCTAGGATTAATAGGAATACCTCGACGATATTCAAATTACCCAGACTTACTTATTTCT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p . 4_MO TCCTCAACATTTTCTAGGATTAATAGGGATACCTCGACGATATTCAAATTACCCAGACTTACTTATTTCT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p . 5 ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  ?CTTCCTAGGTCTTATAGGGATACCTCGCCGATACTCTAACTACCCTGATTTACTTATTTCT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p . 6 ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  7CTTCCTAGGTCTTATGGGGATACCTCGTCGATATTCTAATTACCCTGACCTTTTAATTTCT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p . 7 ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  7CTTCCTTGGTCTTATAGGGATACCTCGACGATACTCTAATTACCCAGATCTCCTAATTTCT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p . 8 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 CTCGCTCTTGGGCTTATAGGCATACCTCGTCGCTATTCTAATTACCCCGATCTTTTAATTTCT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p . 9 ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  7CTTCCTAGGACTTATAGGAATACCTCGTCGCTATTCTAACTACCCCGACCTTTTAATTTCT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p . 1 0 _ P ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  7CTTCCTTGGTCTTATAGGTATGCCTCGACGTTATTCTAACTACCCTGATCTCCTAGTTTCT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p . 1 0 _ H TCCTCAACACTTCCTTGGTCTTATAGGGATGCCCCGACGATACTCTAACTACCCCGATCTTCTAGTTTCT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p . 1 1 ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  7CTTCCTTGGCCTTATAGGAATACCCCGACGATATTCTAACTACCCCGATCTATTAATTTCT [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p . 12 ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  7CTTCCTAGGCCTCATAGGCATGCCTCGCCGCTATTCTAATTACCCAGACCTTCTAATTTCC [ 7 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p . 13 ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  7CTTCTTAGGTCTCATAGGCATACCACGTCGTTATTCTAACTACCCTGATCTCCTAATTTCT [ 7 0 ]
C a c o p s y l a _ a l a t e m i ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  7CTTCCTTGGACTTATAGGTATACCTCGACGTTACTCAAATTACCCTGATCTATTAATCTCT [ 7 0 ]
C a c o p s y l a _ m a l i TCCTCAACATTTCCTAGGCCTTATAGGGATACCCCGTCGATACTCCAATTACCCTGACTTATTAATTTCT [ 7 0 ]
C y a m o p h i a _ p r o h a s k a i TCCTCAACACTTCCTTGGCTTAATAGGAATACCTCGACGATATACAAATTACCCTGACCTTCTAGTATAT [ 7 0 ]
L i v i l l a _ a d u s t a TCCTCAACATTTTTTAGGCCTTATAGGAATACCTCGACGCTATTCTAACTACCCAGACCTTTTACTTTCA [ 7 0 ]
L i v i l l a _ b l a n d u l a TCCTCAACATTTCTTAGGTCTTATAGGAATACCTCGACGCTATTCCAACTACCCGGATCTTTTAATCTCA [ 7 0 ]
L i v i l l a _ m a u r a TCCTCAACATTTCTTAGGTCTTATAGGAATACCCCGGCGTTATTCCAACTATCCAGATCTTTTAATCTCA [ 7 0 ]
L i v i 1 l a _ m o n o s p e r m a e _ T TCCTCAACATTTCTTAGGTTTAATAGGAATACCTCGACGCTATTCCAATTACCCCGATCTTTTAATTTCC [ 7 0 ]
L i v i l l a _ m o n o s p e r m a e _ G TCCTCAACATTTCTTAGGTCTAATAGGAATACCTCGACGCTATTCCAATTACCCCGATCTTTTAATTTCC [ 7 0 ]
L i v i 1 1 a _ m o n o s p e r m a e _ P TCCTCAACATTTCTTAGGTCTAATAGGAATGCCTCGACGCTACTCCAACTACCCCGATCTTTTAATTTCC [ 7 0 ]
L i v i 1 l a _ r e t a m a e ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  TCTTAGGTCTGATAGGCATGCCTCGACGCTACTCCAACTATCCCGATCTTTTAATTTCT [ 7 0 ]
L i v i l l a _ v a r i e g a t a ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  TCCTAGGCCTCATAGGAATACCTCGACGATATTCTAACTATCCAGATCTTTTAATTTCA [ 7 0 ]
L i v i l l a _ s p . 1 5 TCCTCAACATTTCTTAGGACTTATAGGTATGCCTCGACGATACTCAAACTATCCTGATCTATTAATTTCT [ 7 0 ]
L i v i l l a _ s p . 1 6 TCCTCA ACATTTTTTAGGACTTATAGGTATACCTCGACGTTATTCTAACTACCCTGATCTTCTTATTTCT [ 7 0 ]
L i v i l l a _ s p . 1 7 TCCTCAACACTTCTTAGGACTAATAGGTATACCTCGACGATACTCAAATTATCCTGACTTATTAATTTCT [ 7 0 ]
P s e u d a c a n t h o p s y  1 l a _ i n i p r o v i  s a ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  7GGTCTAACAGGTATNNNNNGCCGACAATTAAATTACCCAGATTTACTAATTTCT [ 7 0 ]
- 2 4 4 -
APPENDIX 3 cont.
[ 8 0  9 0  1 0 0  1 1 0  1 2 0  1 3 0  1 4 0 ]
[ . . . . . . . ]
A c i z z i a _ h o l l i s i TGAAATGTAGTTTCATCAATTGGATCAATAATTTCATCATTTTCAATAATTTTATTTATAATTATTGTTT [ 1 4 0
A c i z z i a _ u n c a t o i d e s TGAAATATTGTATCATCATTAGGGTCAATAATTTCTTCGTTTTCTATGATTTTGTTTATAATTATTATTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n a . _ a d e n o c a r p i _ P O TGAAATATTATTTCTTCAATTGGATCAATGATTTCAATATTTTCAGTTCTAATATTTGTAATTATTGTCT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n a . _ a d e n o c a r p i _ S P TGAAATATTATTTCTTCAATTGGATCAATGATTTCAATATTTTCAGTTCTAATATTTGTAATTATTGTCT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n a . _ a d e n o c a r p i_ M O TGAAATATTATTTCTTCAATTGGATCAATGATTTCAATATTTTCAGTTCTAATATTTGTAATTATTGTCT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ T TGAAATATTATTTCTTCTATTGGATCAATA ATTTCTTTA TTTTCAG TTCTTTTA TTTG TA ATTA TTA TTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n a . _ d e v i a _ G TGAAATATTATTTCTTCTATTGGATCAATA ATTTCTTTA TTTTCAG TTCTTTTA TTTG TA ATTA TTA TTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ s s p _ i n s u l a r i s _ C TG AA ATA TTGT TTCTTCTA TTG GGTCTA TAA TTTCTTTA TTTTCAG TACTTCTATTTGTA ATTATTA TTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ s s p _ i n s u l a r i s _ P TGTAATATTATTTCTTCTATTGG TTCAATAATTTCTTTATTCTCAG TTCTCCTA TTTG TA ATTA TTA TTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n a _ g e n i s t a e _ S C TGAAATATTATTTCTTCTA TTG GATCTA TAA TTTCTTTA TTTTCAG TTCTTTTA TTTA TAA TTA TTGTTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n a _ g e n i s t a e _ P O TGAAATATTATTTCTTCTA TTG GATCTA TAA TTTCTTTA TTTTCAG TTCTTTTA TTTA TAA TTA TTATTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n a _ g e n i s t a e _ M O TGAAATATTATTTCTTCTA TTG GATCTA TAA TTTCTTTA TTTTCAG TTCTTTTA TTTA TAA TTA TTGTTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n a _ n u b i v a g a TG AA ACA TTA TTTCTTCCATTGGATCAATGATTTCTTTATTTTCAGTACTTTTGTTTATAATTATTATTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n a _ s p .1 4 TG AA ACA TTA TTTCTTCCATTGGATCAATGATTTCTTTATTTTCAGTACTTTTGTTTATAATTATTATTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ c o g n a t a TG AAATATCGTCTCATCTCTTGGATCAATAATTTCTCTATTCTCAGTAATTTTATTTATTATTATTATTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ c y t i s i TGAAATATTATATCTTCTGTTGGGTCAATA ATTTCTCTTTTTTCA GTTA TTTTATTTATTATTA TTA TTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ d e l a r b r e i TGAAATGTAGTATCTTCTATTGGATCAGTAATTTCTCTTTTTTCAGTGATTTTGCTTGCTGTTATTATCT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ d i l u t a _ C TG AA ACA TTA TCTCTTCTATTGGATCAATAATTTCTTTATTTTCAGTAATCTTATTTATTATTATTATTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ d i l u t a _ T TG AA ACA TTA TCTCTTCTATTGGATCAATAATTTCTTTATTTTCAGTAATCTTATTTATTATTATTATTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ d i v i d e n s _ C TG AAATATTGTTTCATCTATTGGATCAATGATTTCTTTATTTTCAGTAATCCTATTTATCATTATTATTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i . l a _ d i v i d e n s _ T TG AAACATTATTTCATCTATTGGATCAATAATTTCTTTATTTTCAGTAATTCTATTTATCATTATTATTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ d i v i d e n s _ G TG AAACATTATTTCATCTATTGGATCAATAATTTCTTTATTTTCAGTAATTCTATTTATCATTATTATTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ e g u i t a n s TG AA ATA TTATTTCCTCTA TTG GA TCA ATA ATTTCTTTATTTTCA GTA ATTTTATTTATTATTATTA TTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ h a k a n i TGAAATATTGTATCATCTATTGGGTCAATAATTTCTCTATTTTCAGTAATTCTATTTATTATTATTATTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ i m a TGAAATATTATTTCCTCAATTGGATCAATAATTTCGTTATTTTCAGTAATTATGCTTCTTATTATTATTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ i n c u b a TGAAATATTGTATCATCTATTGGATCAATAATTTCTCTATTTTCAGTAATTCTATTTATTATTATTATTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ m o d i  c a _ T e l i n e _ P TGAAACATTGTGTCATCTATTGGATCAATAATTTCTCTATTCTCAGTAATTCTATTTATCATTATTATTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ m o d i  c a _ C h a m . _ P TGAAACATTGTGTCATCTATTGGATCAATAATTTCTCTATTCTCAGTAATTCTATTTATCATTATTATTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i 1 a _ m o d i  c a _ T e 1 i n e _ H TGAAACATTGTGTCATCTATTGGATCAATAATTTCGCTATTCTCAGTAATTCTATTTATAATTATTATTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i . l a  _ m o d i  c a _ C h a m . _H TGAAACATTGTGTCATCTATTGGATCAATAATTTCGCTATTCTCAGTAATTCTATTTATAATTATTATTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ n i g r a l i n e a t a _ C TG AA ACA TTTTATCTTCTATTGGATCAATAGTTTCTTTATTCTCAGTGATTTTATTTATTATCATTATTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ n i g r a l i n e a t a _ T TG AA ACA TTTTATCTTCTA TTGGATCAATAGTTTCTTTATTCTCAGTGATTTTATTTATTATCATTATTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ n i g r a l i n e a t a _ G TG AA ACA TTTTATCTTCTA TTGGATCAATAGTTTCTTTATTCTCAGTGATTTTATTTATTATCATTATTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ p i l e o l a t a _ T . c a n TG AA ATA TTGTTTCCTCCATTGGGTCAATAATTTCTTTATTTTCAGTGATCCTATTTATTATTATTATTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ p i l e o l a t a _ T . o s y TG AA ATA TTGTTTCCTCCATTGGGTCAATAATTTCTTTATTTTCAGTGATCCTATTTATTATTATTATTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ p r o b o s c i d e a _ A . v i s _ T TG AA ACA TTG TATCTTCTATTGGATCAATAATTTCTTTATTCTCCGTAATTCTATTTATTATTATTATTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ _ p r o b o s c i d e a _ A .  f o l _ P TG AA ACA TTG TATCTTCTATTGGATCAATAATTTCTTTATTCTCCGTAATTCTATTTATTATTATTATTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ p r o g n a t a TGAAACATTATTTCCTCTATTGGATCAATAATTTCCCTATTCTCAGTAATCTTATTTATTATTATTATCT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p a r t i o p h i l a _ P O TGAAATATTGTATCTTCTATTG GA TCTA TA ATTTCTCTTTTTTCAG TAA TTTTATTTCTTA TTA TTA TTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p a r t i o p h i l a _ S P TGAAATATTGTATCTTCTATTG GA TCTA TA ATTTCTCTTTTTTCAG TAA TTTTATTTCTTA TTA TTA TTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p a r t i o p h i l a _ M O TGAAATATTGTATCTTCTATTG GA TCTA TA ATTTCTCTTTTTTCAG TAA TTTTATTTCTTA TTA TTA TTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ s u l c i TGAAACATTATTTCTTCTTTAGGATCAATAATTTCTACATTTTCAGTGATTTTATTTATAATCGTTATTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ u m b o n a t a TGAAATATTGTATCATCTATTGGATCAATAATTTCTCTATTCTCAGTAATTCTATTTATTATTATTATTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p .  1 TG AA ATG TAG TATCTTCTATTGGATCAATAATTTCTCTTTTTTCAGTGATTTTGTTTATCATTATTATTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p . 2 TG GA ATA TTATTTCTTCTA TAG GA TCA ATA ATTTCTCTTTTTTCA GTG ATTTTCTTTATTATTATTA TTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p .  3 TG AA ACA TTA TATCTTCTGTCGG ATCAATAATTTCTCTTTTTTCAGTTATTTTATTTATTACTATTATTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p . 4 _ S P TGAAATATTATTTCTTCCATTGGTTCAA TAA TTTCTTTA TTTTCTG TAA TTATATTTATTATTA TTA TTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p .4 _ M O TG GA ATA TTATTTCTTCCA TTG GTTCAA TAA TTTCCTTATTTTCTG TAA TTA TATTTATTATTATTA TTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p . 5 TG AAATATTGTGTCTTCTATTGGATCAATAATTTCATTATTTTCAGTAATTTTATTTGTTATTATCATTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p . 6 TGAAACATCATCTCCTCTATTGGATCAATAATCTCTCTATTTTCAGTAATTTTGTTTATAATTATTATTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p .  7 TG AA ATA TTATCTCCTCTATTGGATCAATAATTTCCTTATTCTCAGTAATTTTATTTATTATTATTATTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p .  8 TG AA ATA TTGTATCTTCTATTGGATCAATAATTTCTTTATTTTCAGTAATCTTGTTTATTATTATTATTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p .  9 TGAAACATTGTATCTTCTATTGGATCAATAATTTCATTATTTTCAGTAATCTTATTTATCATTATTATTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p . 1 0 _ P TG AA ATA TTGTTTCCTCTA TTG GA TCAATAATTTCTTTATTCTCAGTAATTTTATTTATTATTATTATTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p . 1 0 _ H TG AA ATA TTGTTTCTTCTA TTG GATCAA TA ATTTCTTTA TTCTCA GTA ATTTTATTTATTATTATTA TTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p . 1 1 TG AA ATA TTGTATCCTCTATTGGATCAATGATTTCTTTATTCTCAGTCATTTTATTTATTATTATTATTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p . 12 TGAAACATTGTGTCATCTATTGGATCAATAATTTCTTTATTCTCAGTAATTCTATTTATCATTATTATTT [ 1 4 0
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p . 13 TG AA ACA TCA TTTCATCTCTTGGTTCAATAATTTCTCTATTCTCAGTAATTTTATTTATCATTATTATTT [ 1 4 0
C a c o p s y l a _ a l a t e m i TG AA ATA TTATTTCTTCA ATTGGATCCATAATTTCTTTATTCTCAGTTATTTTATTTATAATTATTATCT [ 1 4 0
C a c o p s y l a _ m a l i TG AA ACA TCA TCTCATCTATTGGCTCAATAATTTCACTATTTTCAGTAATTCTATTTATAATTATTATCT [ 1 4 0
C y a m o p h i a _ p r o h a s k a i TGAAATATTATCTCTTCTCTTGGATCAATAATTTCTTTATTTTCAATAATCCTATTTATAATCATTATCT [ 1 4 0
L i v i l l a _ a d u s t a TG AA ATATTATTTCTTCTATTGGATCAATAATTTCCCTATTTTCAGTAATTTTATTTATACTAATTGTTT [ 1 4 0
L i v i l l a _ b l a n d u l a TGAAATATTGTGTCATCTATTGGGTCAATAATCTCTTTATTTTCAGTAATTTTATTTATTGTAATTATTT [ 1 4 0
L i v i 1 1 a _ m a u r a TGAAATATCATATCATCTATTGGATCAATAATCTCTTTATTTTCAGTAATTTTATTTATTGTAATTATTT [ 1 4 0
L i v i  1 l a _ i t i o n o s p e r m a e _ T TG AA ATA TCA TTTCTTCTA TTG GA TCA ATA ATTTCCCTTTTTTCA GTTATTTTATTTATTATCATTG TA T [ 1 4 0
L i v i 1 l a _ m o n o s p e r m a e _ G TG AA ATA TTGTTTCTTCTA TTGGATCAATAATTTCCCTCTTTTCAGTTATCTTATTTATTATCATTGTAT [ 1 4 0
L i v i l l a _ m o n o s p e r m a e _ P TG AA ATA TCA TTTCTTCTATCGGGTCAATAATTTCCCTCTTTTCAGTTATTTTATTTGTTATCATTGTAT [ 1 4 0
L i v i l l a _ r e t a m a e TGAAACATTATTTCTTCTATTG GA TCTA TAA TTTCTCTCTTTTCA GTTA TTTTATTTATTA TTA TTGTAT [ 1 4 0
L i v i l l a _ v a r i e g a t a TG AA ATA TTATTTCTTCTATTGGATCAATAATTTCTTTATTTTCAGTAGTTCTATTTGTCGTAATTATTT [ 1 4 0
L i v i l l a _ s p . 1 5 TGAAATATTGTTTCCTCAATTGGATCAATAATTTCATTATTTTCAATAATTTTAATTTTCATTATTATTT [ 1 4 0
L i v i l l a _ s p . 1 6 TG AA ATA TTATTTCTTCA ATTG GA TCA ATA ATTTCTTTATTTTCA GTA ATTTTAA TTTTTATTATTA TTT [ 1 4 0
L i v i l l a _ s p . 1 7 TG AA ATA TTATTTCTTCA ATTGGATCAATAATTTCTCTATTTTCAGTTATTTTGTTTATTACCATTATTT [ 1 4 0
P s e u d a c a n t h o p s y l l a _ i m p r o v i s a TG AA ATA TCA TTTC ATCTATTGGA TCTATA ATTTCTCTTTTTTCA ATA ATTTTCTTTATTATTA TTA TGT [ 1 4 0
- 2 4 5 -
APPENDIX 3 cont
1 5 0 1 6 0 1 7 0 1 8 0 1 9 0 200
A c i z z i a _ h o l l i s i
A c i z z i a _ u n c a t o i d e s
A r y t a i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ P O
A r y t a i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ S P
A r y t a i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ M O
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ T
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ G
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ s s p _ i n s u l a r i s _ C
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ s s p _ i n s u l a r i s _ P
A r y t a i n a _ g e n i s t a e _ S C
A r y t a i n a _ g e n i s t a e _ P O
A r y t a i n a _ g e n i s t a e _ M O
A r y t a i n a _ n u b i v a g a
A r y t a i n a _ s p . 1 4
A r y t a i n i l l a _ c o g n a t a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ c y t i s i
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d e l a r b r e i
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i l u t a _ C
A r y t a i n i 1 l a _ d i l u t a _ T
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i v i d e n s _ C
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i v i d e n s _ T
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i v i d e n s _ G
A r y t a i n i l l a _ e q u i t a n s
A r y t a i n i l l a _ h a k a n i
A r y t a i n i l l a _ i m a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ i n c u b a
A r y t a i n i  l l a _ i n o d i c a _ T e l i n e _ P
A r y t a i n i l l a _ m o d i c a _ C h a m . _ P
A r y t a i n i l l a _ m o d i c a _ T e l i n e _ H
A r y t a i n i l l a _ m o d i  c a _ C h a m ._ H
A r y t a i n i 1 l a _ n i g r a l i n e a t a _ C
A r y t a i n i l l a _ n i g r a l i n e a t a _ T
A r y t a i n i 1 l a _ n i g r a l i n e a t a _ G
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p i l e o l a t a _ T . c a n
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p i l e o l a t a _ T . o s y
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p r o b o s c i d e a _ A . v i s _ T
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p r o b o s c i d e a _ A . f o l _ P
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p r o g n a t a
A r y t a i n i 1 l a _ s p a r t i o p h i l a _ P O
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p a r t i o p h i l a _ S P
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p a r t i o p h i l a _ M O
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s u l c i
A r y t a i n i l l a _ u m b o n a t a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 2
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 3
A r y t a i n i 1 l a _ s p . 4 _ S P
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 4 _ M O
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 5
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 6
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 8
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 9
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 0 _ P
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 0 _ H
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 1
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 2
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 3
C a c o p s y l  l a _ a l a t e m i
C a c o p s y l  l a _ j n a l  i
C y a m o p h i 1 a _ p r o h a s k a  i
L i v i l l a _ a d u s t a
L i v i l l a _ b l a n d u l a
L i v i l l a _ m a u r a
L i v i l l a _ j n o n o s p e r m a e _ T
L i v i 1 l a _ m o n o s p e r m a e _ G
L i v i  1 l a _ j n o n o s p e r m a e _ P
L i v i l l a _ r e t a m a e
L i v i l l a _ v a r i e g a t a
L i v i l l a _ s p . 1 5
L i v i l l a _ s p . 1 6
L i v i l l a _ s p . 1 7
P s e u d a c a n t h o p s y l 1 a _ i m p r o v i  s a
2 1 0 ] 
GAGAAGCTTTAACTTCTAAACGTGTAATTATTTATAATTCTAATATTCACATAATTGAATGAATACAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAAGCTTTAACTTCAAAACGAGTAGTCATTTTCAACTCAACTACTCACATGATCGAATGAATACAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCTCTACTTTCTAAGCGTTTAATAATTTTTAATACAACTTTTAATATAGTTGAGTGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCTCTACTTTCTAAGCGTTTAATAATTTTTAATACAACTTTTAATATAGTTGAGTGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCTATACTTTCTAAGCGTTTAATAATTTTTAATACAACTTTTAATATAGTTGAGTGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCTTTATTATCTAAACGTCTCATAATTTTTAATAGAACTTTTACTATAATTGAATGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCTTTATTATCTAAACGTCTCATAATTTTTAATAGAACTTTTACTATAATTGAATGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GGGAATCTTTATTAGCAAAACGTATAATAATTTTTAATACAACTTTTACTATAATTGAATGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCTTTATTATCTAAACGGCTAATAATTTTTAATACAACTTTCACTATAATTGAATGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCCTTAGTATCTAAACGTTTTATACTCTTTAATACAACCTTTACTATAATTGAATGAATCCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCCTTAGTATCTAAACGTTTTATACTCTTTAATACAACCTTTACTATAATTGAATGAATCCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCCTTAGTATCTAAACGTTTTATACTCTTTAATACAACCTTTACTATAATTGAATGAATCCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCTTTATTATCTAAGCGTTTTATAATTTTTAATACAACTTTCACTATAATTGAATGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCTTTATTATCTAAACGTTTTATAATTTTTAATACAACTTTCACTATAATTGAATGAATCCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCCCTTATCTCTAAACGTTTATTAATCTTTAATACAACTTTTTCTATAATTGAATGAATCCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCCTTTTTAACTAAACGATTAATTATTTTTAATACTTCCTTTTTTATAATTGAATGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCACTAGTATCTAAACGATTAATTATTTTTAACACTCCCTTTTTCATAATTGAGTGAATCCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCCTTTGTGTCTAAACGATTCTTAATTTTTAATACAACTTTTTCTATAATTGAATGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0
GAGAATCCTTTGTGTCTAAACGATTCTTAATTTTTAATACAACTTTTTCTATAATTGAATGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCATTTATAACAAAACGTTTATTAATTTTTAACACAACTTTTTCTATAATTGAATGAGTTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCTCTTATAACAAAACGTTTATTAATTTTTAACACAACTTTTTCTATAATTGAATGAGTTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCTCTTATAACAAAACGTTTATTAATTTTTAACACAACTTTTTCTATAATTGAATGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCTTTAATTTCCAAACGTTTCATAATCTTTAATACAACTTTTTCTATAATTGAATGAATCCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCCCTTGTCTCTAAACGGTTGTTAATCTTTAACACAACTTTTTCTATAATTGAATGAATCCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAAGCTTTAATTTCTAAACGTCTAATCATTTTTCATACAAATTTTTCTATAATTGAATGAATACAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCTCTTATTTCTAAACGTTTATTAATCTTTAACACAACTTTTTCTATAATTGAATGAATCCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCTCTTGTAACAAAGCGTTTATTAATTTTTAACACAACTTTTTCTATAATTGAATGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCTCTTGTAACAAAGCGTTTATTAATTTTTAACACAACTTTTTCTATAATTGAATGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCTCTTGTAACAAAGCGTTTATTAATTTTTAACACAACTTTTTCTATAATTGAATGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0
GAGAATCTCTTGTAACAAAGCGTTTATTAATTTTTAACACAACTTTTTCTATAATTGAATGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCATTTATATCTAAACGATTATTAATTTTTAACACAAATTTTTCTATAATTGAATGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCATTTATATCTAAACGATTATTAATTTTTAACACAAATTTTTCTATAATTGAATGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0
GAGAATCATTTATATCTAAACGTTTATTAATTTTTAACACAAATTTTTCTATAATTGAATGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCTTTTATATCCAAACGTTTATTAATCTTCAATACAACTTTTTCTATAATTGAATGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCTTTTATATCCAAACGTTTATTAATCTTCAATACAACTTTTTCTATAATTGAATGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCCCTTGTATCTAAACGATTATTAATTTTCAACACAACTTTTTCTATAATTGAGTGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCCCTTGTATCTAAACGATTATTAATTTTCAACACAACTTTTTCTATAATTGAGTGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0
GAGAATCCCTTGTATCTAAACGATTATTAATTTTTAATACAACTTTTTCTATAATTGAATGAATCCAAAA [ 2 1 0
GAGAATCTTTTGTATGTAAACGATTACTTATTTTTAATACTTCTTTTTTTATAATTGAATGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCTTTTGTATGTAAACGATTACTTATTTTTAATACTTCTTTTTTTATAATTGAATGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCTTTTGTATATAAACGATTACTTATTTTTAATACTTCTTTTTTTATAATTGAATGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GGGAATCGTTATTACTAAAGCGTCTACTAATTTTTAATACAACTTTTACCATACTCGAATGAGTCCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCTCTTATCTCTAAACGTTTATTAATCTTTAACACAACTTTTTCTATAATTGAATGAATCCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCTTTAGTGTCAAAACGATTAATTATTTTTAATACCCCCTTTTTTATAATTGAATGAATCCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCTTTTATATGTAAACGTTTACTTATTTTTAATACACCTTTTTTTATAATTGAATGAATCCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GGGAATCCTTTATAGCCAAACGGCTAATTATTTTTAGTACTTCCTTTTTCATAATTGAATGAATCCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCCTTAATATCTAAACGATTAATTATTTTTAATACAAATTTTTCTATAGTTGAATGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCCTTAATGTCTAAACGATTAATTATTTTTAATACAAATTTTTCTATAGTTGAATGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCTTTTATATCTAAACGATTATTAATTTTTAATACAACTTACTCTATAATTGAATGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0
GAGAATCTCTTATATCTAAACGATTATTAATCTTTAACACAACTTTCTCTATAATTGAATGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCCTTAATTTCTAAACGTTTAATAATCTTTAATACAACTTTCGCTATAATTGAATGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCCTTAATAACAAAACGTTTAATAATTTTTAACACAACTTTTTCTATAATTGAATGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCTCTTGTAACCAAACGTTTTATAATTTTTAACACAACTTTTTCTATAATTGAATGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCCCTGATTTCCAAACGTTTAATAATCTTTAACACAACCTTTTCTATAATTGAATGAATCCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCCCTAGTTTCCAAACGTTTAATAATCTTTAATACAACCTTTTCTATAATTGAATGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCCTTAATTTCAAAACGTTTAATAATCTTTAATACAACTTTCTCTATAATTGAATGAATCCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCTCTTGTAACAAAGCGTTTATTAATTTTTAACACAACTTTTTCTATAATTGAATGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0
GAGAATCCCTTATCTCTAAACGTTTACTAATTTTTAATACAACTTTTTCTATAATTGAATGAATCCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCTTTCACAGCAAAACGTATATTAATTTTTAACACAAACTTTGCAATAATTGAATGAATCCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCCTTTATATGTAAACGTCTATTGATTTTCAATACAACATTCGCTATAATTGAGTGAATCCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCTTTAATTGTTAAACGTATCTTAATATTTAACACTAATTTTTCTATAATTGAATGAGCACAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCATTAATTTCTAAACGATTAATTGTTTTCAATATAAATTTTTCTATAATTGAATGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCATTAACTTCGAAACGATTTGTTATCTTCAGTACAAATTTTTCTATAATTGAGTGATCTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCATTAGCTTCGAAACGATTAGTTATCTTCACTACGAATTTTTCTATAATTGAGTGAGCCCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCTTTACTCTCTAAACGACTCCTAATTTTCAATAGAACCTTTTCAATAATTGAATGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCTTTACTCTCTAAACGGCTCCTAATTTTTAATAGAACCTTTTCAATAATTGAATGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCTTTACTCTCTAAACGGCTCCTAATTTTCAATACAACCTTTTCAATAATTGAATGAATCCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCTTTTGTTTCTAAACGACTCCTAATTTTCAATAGAACATTCTCAATAATCGAATGAATTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCATTAGTTTCTAAACGATCTATTATTTTCAGTACAAATTTTTCTATAGTTGAATGAGTCCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAAGCCTTAGTTTCCAAACGCTTAATTATTTTTAATACAAACTATTCTATAATTGAATGAATACAGAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAAGCTTTAGTTTCTAAGCGTCTAATTATTTTTAATACAAACTTTTTTATAATTGAATGAATACAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAAGCTCTTATCTCTAAACGATTAATTATTTTTAATACAAATTTTTCTATAATTGAATGAGCTCAAAA [ 2 1 0  
GAGAATCATTTATTTCCAAACGATTAATTTTATTTACAACGAATTTTTTTATAATTGAATGAGTCCAAAA [ 2 1 0
- 2 4 6 -
APPENDIX 3 cont.
[ 2 2 0  2 3 0  2 4 0  2 5 0  2 6 0  2 7 0  2 8 0 ]
C O I 3 ' ] [ t RNA l e u c i n e  5'
A c  i  z  z  i  a _ h o 1 1 i  s  i  TTCCCCTCCATTAGAACACAGATACTCTGAAATCCCATCAATTTTAATTAAA----------- TACTATTGTGTCAG [ 2 7 6
A c  i  z  z  i a _ u n c a t o i d e s  TTTCCCACCTATAGAACATAGTTATTCAGAAATTCCTTCTATCTTAATTAAATAAATACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 8 0
A r y t a  i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ P O  CTTCCCCCCTATAGAACATAGTTATTCTGAAATCCCCACAATTTCAATTAAATA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a  i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ S  P  CTTCCCCCCTATAGAACATAGTTATTCTGAAATCCCCACAATTTCAATTAAATA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ M O  CTTCCCCCCTATAGAACATAGTTATTCTGAAATCCCCACAATTTCAATTAAATA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ T  CTTTCCTCCTATAGAACATAGTTACTCTGAAATTCCTACAATTTCAATTAAATA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ G  CTTTCCTCCTATAGAACATAGTTACTCTGAAATTCCTACAATTTCAATTAAATA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ s s p _ i n s u l a r i s _ C  TTTTCCTCCTATAGAACATAGTTATTCTGAAATCCCCACAATTTCAGTTAAATA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ s s p _ i n s u l a r i s _ P  CTTCCCCCCCATAGAACATAGTTACTCTGAAATTCCCACAATTTCAATTAAATA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n a _ g e n i s t a e _ S C  TTTTCCCCCCATAGAACATAGTTACTCTGAAATTCCCACAATTTTAGTTAAATA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n a _ g e n i s t a e _ P O  TTTCCCCCCCATAGAACATAGTTACTCTGAAATTCCCACAATTTTAGTTAAATA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n a _ g e n i s t a e _ M O  TTTTCCCCCCATAGAACATAGTTACTCTGAAATTCCCACAATTTTAGTTAAATA--------- ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n a _ n u b i v a g a  CTTTCCACCCATAGAACATAGTTATTCTGAAATTCCCACAATTTCAATTAAATA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n a _ s p . 1 4  CTTTCCCCCTATAGAACATAGTTATTCTGAAATTCCCACAATTTCAATTAAATA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a  i n i 1 l a _ C O g n a t a  TTTCCCCCCGATTGAACACAGATACTCTGAAATTCCCGCAATTTTAATTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t  a  i n i 1 1 a _ c y t  i  s  i  TTTTCCTCCTATAGAACATAGTTATTCTGAGATTCCTGCAATTTTAATTAAATA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t  a  i n  i 1 1 a _ d e 1 a r b r e  i  TTTCCCTCCCATAGAACATAGTTATTCTGAAATTCCTGCTATCTTAGTTAAATA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i l u t a _ C  TTTTCCTCCTATCGAACACAGATACTCTGAAATTCCTACAATTTTAATTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n i 1 l a _ d i l u t a _ T  TTTTCCTCCTATCGAACACAGATACTCTGAAATTCCTACAATTTTAATTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i v i d e n s _ C  CTTCCCCCCAATTGAACATAGATACTCTGAAATTCCTGCAATTTTAATTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n i 1 l a _ d i v i d e n s _ T  CTTTCCCCCAATTGAACATAGATACTCTGAAATTCCTGCAATTTTAATTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i v i d e n s _ G  CTTTCCCCCAATTGAACATAGATACTCTGAAATTCCTGCAATTTTAATTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ e q u i t a n s  TTTTCCTCCAATTGAACATAGATACTCTGAAATTCCTGCAATTTTAGTTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n i 1 l a _ h a k a n i  TTTTCCTCCGATTGAACATAGATACTCTGAAATTCCCGCAATTTTAATTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n  i 1 1 a _ i m a  TTTTCCTCCTACAGAACACAGTTACTCTGAAATTCCTACAATTTTAGTTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ i n c u b a  TTTTCCTCCGATTGAACATAGATACTCTGAAATTCCCGCAATTTTAATTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ m o d i c a _ T e l i n e _ P  CTTCCCCCCAATTGAACATAGATACTCTGAAATTCCTGCAATTTTAATTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n i 1 l a _ m o d i c a _ C h a m . _ P  CTTCCCCCCAATTGAACATAGATACTCTGAAATTCCTGCAATTTTAATTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ m o d i c a _ T e l i n e _ H  CTTCCCCCCAATTGAACATAGATACTCTGAAATTCCTGCAATTTTAATTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t  a  i n i 1 1 a _ m o d i c a _ C h a m . _ H  CTTCCCCCCAATTGAACATAGATACTCTGAAATTCCTGCAATTTTAATTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ n i g r a l i n e a t a _ C  TTTTCCTCCGATTGAACACAGATACTCTGAAATTCCTGCAATTTTAGTTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n i 1 l a _ n i g r a l i n e a t a _ T  TTTTCCTCCGATTGAACACAGATACTCTGAAATTCCTGCAATTTTAGTTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ n i g r a l i n e a t a _ G  TTTTCCTCCGATTGAACACAGATACTCTGAAATTCCTGCAATTTTAGTTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p i l e o l a t a _ T . c a n  TTTCCCCCCAATTGAACATAGATACTCTGAAATTCCAGCAATTTTAATTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p i l e o l a t a _ T . o s y  TTTCCCCCCAATTGAACATAGATACTCTGAAATTCCAGCAATTTTAATTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p r o b o s  c i  d e a _ A . v i  S _ T  TTTTCCTCCAATTGAACATAGTTACTCTGAAATTCCTGCAATTTTAGTTAAGTA------- ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n i 1 l a _ p r o b o s c i d e a _ A . f o l _ P  TTTTCCTCCAATTGAACATAGTTACTCTGAAATTCCTGCAATTTTAGTTAAGTA------- ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
Arytain i1la_prognata TTTTCCTCCAATTGAACATAGATACTCTGAAATTCCTGCAATTTTAATTAAGTA----ACTAATGTGTCAG [277
A r y t a i n  i 1 l a _ s p a r t  i o p h i l a _ P O  TTTTCCACCTGTTGAACACAGTTACTCTGAAATTCCCGCAATTTTAGTTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n i 1 l a _ s p a r t  i o p h i l a _ S P  TTTTCCACCTGTTGAACACAGTTACTCTGAAATTCCCGCAATTTTAGTTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n i 1 l a _ s p a r t  i o p h i l a _ M O  TTTTCCACCTGTTGAACACAGTTACTCTGAAATTCCCGCAATTTTAGTTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n  i 1 1 a _ s u l C  i  TTTCCCCCCATTAGAACATAGTTACTCAGAAATTCCCATAATTTTAATTAAATA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ u m b o n a t a  TTTTCCTCCGATTGAACATAGATACTCTGAAATTCCCGCAATTTTAATTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 TTTCCCTCCTGCTGAACATAGCTACTCTGAAATTCCTGCAATTTTAGTTAAATA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a  i n  i 1 1 a _ s p .2  CTTTCCCCCAATAGAACATAGTTACTCTGAAATCCCTACGATTTTAGTTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 3 TTTTCCTCCCATAGAACATAGTTACTCTGAGATTCCTGCAATTTTAATTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 4 _ S P  TTACCCTCCTATTGAACATAGTTACTCTGAAATTCCTACAATTTTAATTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n i 1 l a _ s p . 4 _ M O  TTATCCTCCTATTGAACATAGTTACTCTGAAATTCCTACAATTTTAATTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 5 TTTTCCTCCAATTGAACATAGATACTCTGAGATTCCTGCAATTTTAGTTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 6 TTTTCCTCCTATTGAACATAGATACTCTGAAATTCCTGCAATTTTAATTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 7 TTTTCCCCCAGTTGAACATAGATACTCTGAAATTCCTGCAATTTTAATTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 8 TTTTCCTCCCACTGAACATAGCTACTCTGAAATTCCTGCAATTTTAATTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 9 TTTTCCCCCAATTGAACATAGATACTCTGAAATTCCTACAATTTTAATTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 0 _ P  TTTCCCTCCGATTGAACATAGATACTCTGAAATTCCTGCAATTTTAATTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 0 _ H  TTTCCCTCCAATTGAACATAGATACTCTGAAATTCCTGCAATTTTAATTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 1  CTTTCCTCCAATTGAACATAGATACTCTGAAATTCCCGCAATTTTAATTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 2  CTTCCCCCCAATTGAACATAGATACTCTGAAATTCCTGCAATTTTAATTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 3  TTTCCCCCCAATTGAACACAGATACTCTGAAATCCCTGCAATTTTAGTTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
C a c o p s y l 1 a _ a l a  t  e r a i  TTTTCCTCCTATCGAACATAGTTATTCTGAAATCCCCTCAATTTTAAGTAAATA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
C a c o p s y l 1 a _ m a l i  CTTTCCTCCCACAGAACATAGTTATTCTGAGATCCCTTCAATCTTGAGTAAGTA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
C y a m o p h i 1 a _ p r o h a s k a i  TTCTCCTCCCTCTGAACATAGTTATTCTGAAATCCCTTCAATTTTAACTAAATA---------ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
L i v i 1 1 a _ a d u s  t a  TTTTCCTCCTGTTGAACATAGATACTCTGAAATTCCGACCATTTTAGTTAAATA GCTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
L i v i l l a _ b l a n d u l a  TTTTCCCCCTATTGAACATAGTTACTCTGAAATTCCTACAATTTTAATTAAGTA ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
L i  v i 1 1 a _ m a u r a  TTTTCCTCCTATTGAACATAGTTACTCTGAAATTCCTACAATTTTAATTAAGTA ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
L i v i 1 1 a _ m o n o s p e r m a e _ T  TTCCCCTCCTATTGAGCATAGTTACTCTGAGATTCCTGCAGTTTTAATTAAGTA ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
L i v i 1 l a _ m o n o s p e r m a e _ G  TTCCCCTCCTATTGAGCATAGTTACTCTGAGATCCCTGCAGTTTTAATTAAGTA ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
L i v i 1 l a _ m o n o s p e r m a e _ P  TTCTCCTCCTATTGAACATAGTTACTCTGAAATCCCTGCAGTTTTAATTAAGTA ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
L i v i 1 l a _ r e t a m a e  TTCTCCCCCCATTGAACATAGTTACTCTGAGATCCCTGCAGTTTTAATTAAGTA ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
L i v i 1 l a _ v a r i  e g a t a  TTTTCCTCCTATTGAACACAGTTACTCTGAGATTCCTGCAATCTTAATTAAGTA ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
L i v i 1 1 a _ s p . 1 5  TTTTCCTCCTATAGAACATAGTTACTCTGAAATTCCCGCAATTTTAGATAAGTA ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
L i v i l l a _ s p . 1 6  TTTCCCACCAATTGAACATAGCTACTCTGAAATTCCCACAATTTTAGTTAAATA ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
L i v i l l a _ s p . 1 7  TTTTCCCCCTATTGAACATAGTTACTCTGAAATTCCTGCAATTTTAGTTAAATA ACTATTGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
P s e u d a c a n t h o p s y l l a _ i m p r o v i s a  TTTTCCTCCCATAGAACATAGATACTCAGAAATTCCAACAATTCTAATCAGGTA ACTAATGTGTCAG [ 2 7 7
- 2 4 7 -
APPENDIX 3 cont.
2 9 0 3 0 0 3 1 0 3 2 0 3 3 0 3 4 0
A c i z z i a _ h o l l i s i
A c i z z i a _ u n c a t o i d e s
A r y t  a  i n a _ a d e n o c a  r p  i_ P O
A r y t a i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ S P
A r y t a i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ M O
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ T
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ G
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ s s p _ i n s u l a r i s _ C
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ s s p _ i n s u l a r i s _ P
A r y t a i n a _ g e n i s t a e _ S C
A r y t a i n a _ g e n i s t a e _ P O
A r y t a i n a _ g e n i s t a e _ M O
A r y t a i n a _ n u b i v a g a
A r y t a i n a _ s p . 1 4
A r y t a i n i l l a _ c o g n a t a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ c y t i s i
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d e l a r b r e i
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i l u t a _ C
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i l u t a _ T
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i v i d e n s _ C
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i v i d e n s _ T
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i v i d e n s _ G
A r y t a i n i l l a _ e q u i t a n s
A r y t  a  i n  i 1 1 a _ h a k a n  i
A r y t a i n i 1 1 a _ i m a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ i n c u b a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ m o d i c a _ T e l i n e _ P
A r y t a i n i l l a _ m o d i c a _ C h a m . _ P
A r y t a i n i 1 l a _ m o d i c a _ T e l i n e _ H
A r y t a i n i 1 l a _ m o d i c a _ C h a m . _ H
A r y t a i n i l l a _ n i g r a l i n e a t a _ C
A r y t a i n i l l a _ n i g r a l i n e a t a _ T
A r y t a i n i l l a _ n i g r a l i n e a t a _ G
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p i l e o l a t a _ T . c a n
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p i l e o l a t a _ T . o s y
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p r o b o s c i d e a _ A . v i s _ T
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p r o b o s c i d e a _ A . f o l _ P
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p r o g n a t a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p a r t i o p h i l a _ P O
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p a r t i o p h i l a _ S P
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p a r t i o p h i l a  _MO
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s u l c i
A r y t a i n i l l a _ u m b o n a t a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 2
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 3
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 4 _ S P
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 4 _ M 0
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 5
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 6
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 8
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 9
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 0 _ P
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 0 _ H
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 1
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 12
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 3
C a c o p s y l l a _ a l a t e r n i
C a c o p s y l l a _ m a l i
C y a m o p h i l a _ p r o h a s k a i
L i v i l l a _ a d u s t a
L i v i l l a _ b l a n d u l a
L i v i l l a _ m a u r a
L i v i 1 l a _ m o n o s p e r m a e _ T
L i v i 1 l a _ m o n o s p e r m a e _ G
L i v i l l a _ m o n o s p e r m a e _ P
L i v i l l a _ r e t a m a e
L i v i l l a _ v a r i e g a t a
L i v i l l a _ s p . 1 5
L i v i l l a _ s p . 1 6
L i v i l l a _ s p . 1 7
P s  e u d a c a n t h o p s y 1 1 a _ i m p r o v i  s a
3 5 0 ]
* * * * *  * * * * * * * * * * * * * *  tR N A  3 ' ] [ C O I I  5 '
AG T A A T G T A T T A A A T T T A A G A T T T G A A A A T G A A --T --A A T -A A -- GTTCCTTTAGTAATTGACTGA [ 3 3 6
A TC- TA A A T G T A TTA A A T TT A A G A T TT A A A TA T G A A --T --TA C -TT --A T T C C T TTA G TA A TTG A C TG A  [ 3 4 2
A C T- C - AATGTATTAAATTTAAGATTTAAGTATGAA----------A T T T -T A ------TTCCTTTAGTAATTGACTGA [ 3 3 7
ACT -  C -  AATGTATTAAATTTAAGATTTAAGTATGAA----------A T T T -T A ------TTCCTTTAGTAATTGACTGA [ 3 3 7
A C T- C - AATGTATTAAATTTAAGATTTAAGTATGAA----------A T T T -T A ------TTCCTTTAGTAATTGATTGA [ 3 3 7
A T T - T - AATGTATTAAATTTAAGATTTAGCTATGAG- -T -T C C T -T T --A T T C C T T T A G T A A T T G A C T G A  [ 3 3 9
A T T - T - A A TG T A T T A A A TTT A A G A TT TA G C TA TG A G --T -TC C T-T T- -ATTCCTTTAGTAATTGACTGA [ 3 3 9
A T T - T-A A TG T A TT A A A T T T A A G A T T T A A A T A T G A A --T --T T T -T T --A T T C C T T T A G T A A T T G A C T G A  [ 3 3 8
A T T-T -A A TG TA TTA A A TT TA A G A TTTA A CTA TG A A C CC CTTTT-A  TTCCTTTAGTAATTGACTGA [ 3 4 0
ATC -  T  -  AATGTATTAAATTTAAGATTTAAATATGAA------------ A A T -T A ----- TTCCTTTAGTAATAGATTGA [ 3 3 6
ATC -  T  -  AATGTATTAAATTTAAGATTTAAATATGAA------------ A A T -T A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGATTGA [ 3 3 6
ATC-T-AATGTATTAA ATTTAA GA TTTA AG TATG AA------------ A A T -T A ----- TTCCTTTAGTAATAGACTGA [ 3 3 6
A T C -T -A A T G T A T T A A A T T T A A G A T T T G A G T A T G A A --A C -T T T -A  TTCCTTTAGTAATTGACTGA [ 3 3 7
A T C - T - AATGTATTAAATTTAAGATTTGAGTATGAA- - A C - T T T -A  TTCCTTTAGTAATTGACTGA [ 3 3 7
A G T -C  -AATGTATTAAATTTAAGATTTAGCTATGAA----------A T T T -T A ------TTCCTTTAGTAATAGATTGA [ 3 3 7
A A T -C -A A T G T A T T A A A T T T A A G A T T T A A C T A T G A A --A -T T T T -A T -- ATTCCTTTAGTAATAGATTGA [ 3 3 9
AAC- C - AATGTATTAAATTTAAGATTTAACCATGAA- -A -TTT T-A TT A C T TC C T TTA G T A A T A G A TT G A  [ 3 4 1
A G T -C  -AATGTATTAAATTTAAGATTTACCTATGAA---------- A T T T -T A ----- TTCCTTTAGTAATAGACTGA [ 3 3 7
A G T -C  -AATGTATTAAATTTAAGATTTACCTATGAA---------- A T T T -T A ----- TTCCTTTAGTAATAGACTGA [ 3 3 7
AGT-C-AATGTACTAAACTTAAGATTTAGCTATGAA G T T T T -A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGACTGA [ 3 3 7
AGT -  C -  AATGT ACTAAACTTAAGATTTAGATATGAA G T T T T -A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGACTGA [ 3 3 7
A G T -C  -AATGTACTAAACTTAAGATTTAGCTATGAA G T T T T -A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGACTGA [ 3 3 7
A G T -C  -AATGTACTAAATTTAAGATTTAGATATGAA A T T T -T A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGATTGA [ 3 3 7
AGT -  C -  AATGTACTAAATTTAAGATTTAGCTATGAA A T T T -T A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGATTGA [ 3 3 7
A C C- T-AATGTATTAAATTTAAGATTTAATTATGAA----------A T T T -T A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGACTGA [ 3 3 7
A G T- C-AATGTACTAAATTTAAGATTTAGCTATGAA---------- A T T T -T A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGATTGA [ 3 3 7
AGT -  C -  AATGTACTAAATTTAAGATTTAGCTATGAA A T T T -T A --------- TTCCTTTAGTAATAGACTGA [ 3 3 7
AGT -  C -  AATGTACTAAATTTAAGATTTAGCTATGAA A T T T -T A --------- TTCCTTTAGTAATAGACTGA [ 3 3 7
A G T -C  -AATGTACTAAATTTAAGATTTAGCTATGAA---------- A T T T -T A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGACTGA [ 3 3 7
AG T-C-AATGTACTAAATTTAAGATTTAGCTATGAA---------- A T T T -T A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGACTGA [ 3 3 7
AG T- C - AATGTACTAAATTTAAGATTTAGATATGAA---------- A T T T -T A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGATTGA [ 3 3 7
AG T- C - AATGTACTAAATTTAAGATTTAGATATGAA----------A T T T -T A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGATTGA [ 3 3 7
A G T -C  -AATGTACTAAATTTAAGATTTAGATATGAA---------- A T T T -T A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGATTGA [ 3 3 7
AG T- C - AATGTACTAAATTTAAGATTTAGGTATGAA---------- A T T T -T A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGATTGA [ 3 3 7
AG T- C - AATGTACTAAATTTAAGATTTAGGTATGAA---------- A T T T -T A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGATTGA [ 3 3 7
AG T- C-AATGTACTAAATTTAAGATTTAGATATGAA---------- A A T T -T A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGATTGA [ 3 3 7
AG T- C-AATGTACTAAATTTAAGATTTAGATATGAA---------- A A T T -T A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGATTGA [ 3 3 7
A G T -C - A A TG TA TT A A A TTTA A G A TT TA TC TA T G A A --G TTTTT -A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGACTGA [ 3 3 8
A A T -C  -AATGTATTAAATTTAAGATTTAACTATGAA- -  A  T T --------------TTTCCTTTAGTAATAGATTGA [ 3 3 5
A A T -C  -AATGTATTAAATTTAAGATTTAACTATGAA- -  A  T T --------------TTTCCTTTAGTAATAGATTGA [ 3 3 5
AAT-C-AA TGTA TTA AA TTTA AGA TTTA ACTATGAA - - A  T T  TTTCCTTTAGTAATAGATTGA [ 3 3 5
ACC -  C -  AATGTATTAAATTTAAGATTTAAGTATGAA A A C C -T A --------- TTCCTTTAGTAATAGATTGA [ 3 3 7
AGT -  C -  AATGTACTAAATTTAAGATTTAGCTATGAA A T T T -T A --------- TTCCTTTAGTAATAGATTGA [ 3 3 7
A A T-C-A A TG TA TTA A A TTTA A G A TTTA A TTA TG A A -- A -T T T T -T T --A T T C C T T T A G T A A T A G A C T G A  [ 3 3 9
AAATC -  AATGTATTAAATTTAAGATTTAACTATGAA A T T T -T A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGATTGA [ 3 3 8
A A T-C-A A TG TA T TA A A T TTA A G A TTT A A C T A T G A A --A -TT TT -A T --A TTC C TTT A G T A A T A G A C T G A  [ 3 3 9
AAC- T - AATGTATTAAATTTAAGATTTAACTATGAA- -A -T T T T -T T --A T T C C T T T A G T A A T A G A T T G A  [ 3 3 9
A A C -T -A A T G T A TT A A A TT TA A G A T TTA A C TA T G A A --A -TT TT -TT--A T TC C T TTA G TA A TA G A T TG A  [ 3 3 9
AGT-C-AATGTACTAAATTTAAGATTTAGATATGAA---------- A T T T -T A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGACTGA [ 3 3 7
A G T -C  -AATGTATTAAATTTAAGATTTAGTTATGAA---------- A T T T -T A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGATTGA [ 3 3 7
A G T- C-AATGTATTAAATTTAAGATTTAGTTATGAA---------- A T T T -T A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGATTGA [ 3 3 7
AG T-C-AATGTACTAAATTTAAGATTTAACTATGAA---------- A T T T -T A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGACTGA [ 3 3 7
AG T-C-AATGTATTAAATTTAAGATTTAAGTATGAA---------- A T T T -T A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGACTGA [ 3 3 7
A G T -C  -AATGTACTAAATTTAAGATTTAGCTATGAA A T T T T T T - -  ATTCCTTTAGTAATAGACTGA [ 3 3 9
A G T-C -A A TG TA C TA A A TT TA A G A TT T A G C TA TG A A --A -T TT T-T T--A TTC C TTT A G T A A T A G A C T G A  [ 3 3 9
AGT -  C -  AATGTACTAAATTTAAGATTTAGCTATGAA---------- A T T T -T A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGATTGA [ 3 3 7
A G T- C-AATGTACTAAATTTAAGATTTAGCTATGAA---------- A T T T -T A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGACTGA [ 3 3 7
AGT-C-AATGTACTAAATTTAAGATTTAGCCATGAA---------- A T T T -T A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGATTGA [ 3 3 7
AAA AATGTATTAAATTTAAGATTTAAGTATGAA---------- A T T T -T A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGATTGA [ 3 3 6
AAA- CAAATGTATTAAATTTAAGATTTAAGTATGAA- -G -T C T T -T T --A T T C C T T T A G T A A T A G A C T G A  [ 3 4 0
AAA-C-AATGTATTAAATTTAAGATTTAAATATGAA---------- A T A T -T A  CTCCTTTAGTAATAGATTGA [ 3 3 7
A G T-C-A A TG TA TTA A A TT TA A G A TT TA G T TA T G A A --A -A A T T-TT --A TTC C TTT A G T A A T A G A C T G A  [ 3 3 9
AAC - C  -  AATGTATTAAATTTAAGATTTAACTATGAA---------- A T T T -T A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGACTGA [ 3 3 7
AAC -  C -  AATGTATTAAATTTAAGATTTAACTATGAA -  -A T T T T T -A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGACTGA [ 3 3 8
AAG-T-AA TGTA TTA AA TTTA AG ATTTAATTATG AA - -A T T T T T -A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGATTGA [ 3 3 8
AAG -  T  -  AATGTATTAAATTTAAGATTTAATTATGAA -  -A T T T T T -A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGATTGA [ 3 3 8
AA G-T-AA TGTATTAAATTTAAGATTTAATTATGAA A T T T T T -A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGATTGA [ 3 3 8
A G A -T - AATGTATTAAATTTAAGATTTAACCATGAA---------- A T T A -T A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGATTGA [ 3 3 7
AG T- T-AATGTATTAAATTTAAGATTTAAGTATGAA A A A G T T -T T  ATTCCTTTAGTAATAGACTGA [ 3 4 0
AAG- CAAATGTATTAAATTTAAGATTTAATTATGAA---------- A C C T -T A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGACTGA [ 3 3 8
AGC- T - AATGTATTAAATTTAAAATTTAAATATGAA---------- A T T T -T A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGACTGA [ 3 3 7
AC C - T - AATGTATTAAATTTAAGATTTAAATATGAA---------- A T T T -T A  TTCCTTTAGTAATAGACTGA [ 3 3 7
ATT-C-A ATGTA TTAA ATTTAA GA TTTA ATTA TG AA A A CA -C TA --TTCC TTTA G TA A TA G A CTG A  [ 3 3 8
- 2 4 8 -
APPENDIX 3 cont.
3 6 0 3 7 0 3 8 0 3 9 0 4 0 0 4 1 0 4 2 0 ]
A c i z z i a _ h o l l i s i
A c i z z i a _ u n c a t o i d e s
A r y t a i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ P O
A r y t a i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ S P
A r y t a i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ M O
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ T
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ G
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ s s p _ i n s u l a r i s _ C
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ s s p _ i n s u l a r i s _ P
A r y t a i n a _ g e n i s t a e _ S C
A r y t a i n a _ g e n i s t a e _ P O
A r y t a i n a _ g e n i s t a e _ M O
A r y  t  a  i  n a _ n u b  i  v a g a
A r y t a i n a _ s p . 1 4
A r y t a i n i l l a _ c o g n a t a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ c y t i s i
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d e l a r b r e i
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i l u t a _ C
A r y t a i n i 1 l a _ d i l u t a _ T
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i v i d e n s _ C
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i v i d e n s _ T
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i v i d e n s _ G
A r y t a i n i l l a _ e q u i t a n s
A r y t a i n i l l a _ h a k a n i
A r y t a i n i l l a _ i m a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ i n c u b a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ m o d i c a _ T e l i n e _ P
A r y t a i n i l l a  _ m o d ic a _ C h a m . _ P
A r y t a i n i 1 l a _ m o d i c a _ T e l i n e _ H
A r y t a i n i 1 l a _ m o d i c a _ C h a m . _H
A r y t a i n i 1 l a _ n i g r a l i n e a t a _ C
A r y t a i n i 1 l a _ n i g r a l i n e a t a _ T
A r y  t a i n i l l a _ n i g r a l i n e a t a _ G
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p i l e o l a t a _ T . c a n
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p i l e o l a t a _ T . o s y
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p r o b o s c i d e a _ A . v i s _ T
A r y t a i n i l l a  _ p r o b o s c i d e a _ A . f o l _ P
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p r o g n a t a
A r y  t a i n i l l a _ s p a r t i o p h i l a _ P O
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p a r t i o p h i l a _ S P
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p a r t i o p h i l a _ M O
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s u l c i
A r y t a i n i l l a _ u m b o n a t a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 2
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 3
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 4 _ S P
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 4 _ M O
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 5
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 6
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 8
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 9
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 0 _ P
A r y  t a i n i  1 l a _ s p .  1 0 _ H
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 1
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 2
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p .1 3
C a c o p s y l  l a _ a l a t e m i
C a c o p s y l l a _ m a l i
C y a m o p h i 1 a _ p r  o h a  s k a  i
L i v i l l a _ a d u s t a
L i v i l l a _ b l a n d u l a
L i v i l l a _ m a u r a
L i v i 1 l a _ m o n o s p e r m a e _ T
L i v i 1 l a _ m o n o s p e r m a e _ G
L i v i 1 l a _ m o n o s p e r m a e _ P
L i v i l l a _ r e t a m a e
L i v i l l a _ v a r i e g a t a
L i v i l l a _ s p . 1 5
L i v i l l a _ s p . 1 6
L i v i l l a _ s p . 1 7
P s e u d a c a n t h o p s y l l a _ i m p r o v i s a
ATAAAAGTATCTCTTTATGATAATGCCTCCCCTATTATAGAACAACTAATTTTATTTCATGATTATAGAA [ 4 0 6  
CTAAAATTTTCTCTATATGATAATGCTTCACCGATTATAGAACAACTTATTTTATTTCATGATTATAGAA [ 4 1 2  
ATAAAAATTTCATTGTATGACAATGCATCACCAATTATAGAACAATTAACCCTATTCCATGATTACAGAA [ 4 0 7  
ATAAAAATTTCATTGTATGACAATGCATCACCAATTATAGAACAATTAACCCTATTCCATGATTACAGAA [ 4 0 7  
ATAAAAATTTCATTGTATGACAATGCATCACCAATTATAGAACAATTAACCCTATTCCATGATTACAGAA [ 4 0 7  
ATAAAAATTTCATTATATGATAATGCATCTCCAATTATAGAACAATTAATCATATTTCATGACTATAGTA [ 4 0 9  
ATAAAAATTTCATTATATGATAATGCATCTCCAATTATAGAACAATTAATCATATTTCATGACTATAGTA [ 4 0 9  
ATAAAAATTTCATTATACGATAATGCATCTCCAATTATAGAACAACTAATTTTATTTCATGATTATAGAA [ 4 0 8  
ATAAAAATTTCATTATATGATAATGCATCCCCAATTATAGAACAGTTAATTCTGTTCCATGATTATAGAA [ 4 1 0  
CTAAAAATTTCATTATATGATAATGCCTCTCCAATTATAGAACAATTAATTTTATTTCATGACTACAGAA [ 4 0 6  
CTAAAAATTTCATTATATGATAATGCCTCTCCAATTATAGAACAATTAATTTTATTTCATGACTACAGAA [ 4 0 6  
CTAAAAATTTCTTTATATGATAATGCCTCTCCAATTATAGAACAATTAATTTTATTCCATGACTACAGAA [ 4 0 6  
ATAAAAATTTCATTATATGATAATGCTTCCCCAATTATAGAGCAATTAACTCTATTTCATGATTATAGCA [ 4 0 7  
ATAAAAATTTCATTGTATGATAATGCTTCCCCAATTATAGAACAATTAACTCTATTCCATGATTATAGTA [ 4 0 7  
ATAAAAATTTCACTTTTTGACAATGCTTCCCCCATTATAGAACAATTAACTTTATTCCATGATTACAGTA [ 4 0 7  
ATAAAAATTTCATTTCTTGATAATGCTTCTCCAATTATAGAACAATTAATTTTATTTCATGATTACAGTA [ 4 0 9  
ATAAAAATTTCACTTTTTGATAATGCTTCACCAATTATAGAACAATTAATTTTATTTCATGATTACAGTA [ 4 1 1  
ATAAAAATTTCGCTTTTTGACAATGCTTCCCCC ATTATAGAAC AA TTAACTTTATTTC ATGATTATAGTA [ 4 0 7
ATAAAAATTTCGCTTTTTGACAATGCTTCCCCCATTATAGAACAATTAACTTTATTTCATGATTATAGTA [ 4 0 7  
ATAAAAATTTCACTTTTTGACAATGCTTCCCCCATTATAGAACAATTAACATTATTTCATGATTATAGTA [ 4 0 7  
ATAAAAATTTCACTTTTTGACAATGCTTCCCCCATTATAGAACAATTAACATTATTCCACGATTACAGCA [ 4 0 7  
ATAAAAATTTCACTTTTTGACAATGCTTCCCCCATTATAGAACAATTAACATTATTCCACGATTACAGCA [ 4 0 7  
ATAAAAATTTCACTTTTTGACAATGCTTCCCCCATTATAGAACAATTAACATTATTTCATGATTACAGTA [ 4 0 7  
ATAAAAATTTCACTTTTTGACAATGCCTCCCCCATTATAGAACAATTAACCCTATTTCATGATTACAGTA [ 4 0 7  
ATAAAAATTTCTCTTTTTGATAATGCTTCTCCAATTATAGAACAATTAATTTTATTTCATGATTATAGTA [ 4 0 7  
ATAAAAATTTCACTTTTTGACAATGCCTCCCCCATTATAGAACAATTAACCCTATTTCATGATTACAGTA [ 4 0 7  
ATAAAAATTTCACTTTTTGACAATGCTTCCCCCATTATAGAACAATTAACATTATTTCATGATTACAGCA [ 4 0 7  
ATAAAAATTTCACTTTTTGACAATGCTTCCCCCATTATAGAACAATTAACATTATTTCATGATTACAGCA [ 4 0 7  
ATAAAAATTTC ACTTTTTGACAATGCTTCCCCCATTATAGAAC AATTAAC ATTATTTCATGATTAC AGCA [ 4 0 7
ATAAAAATTTCACTTTTTGACAATGCTTCCCCCATTATAGAACAATTAACATTATTTCATGATTACAGCA [ 4 0 7  
ATAAAAATTTCACTTTTTGACAATGCTTCTCCCATTATAGAACAACTAACCTTATTTCACGATTACAGTA [ 4 0 7  
ATAAAAATTTCACTTTTTGACAATGCTTCTCCCATTATAGAACAACTAACCTTATTTCACGATTACAGTA [ 4 0 7  
ATAAAAATTTCACTTTTTGACAATGCTTCTCCC ATTATAGAACAACTAACCTTATTTCACGATTACAGTA [ 4 0 7
ATAAAAATTTCACTTTTTGACAATGCTTCCCCCATTATAGAACAATTAACCTTATTCCATGATTATAGTA [ 4 0 7  
ATAAAAATTTCACTTTTTGACAATGCTTCCCCC ATTATAGAACAATTAACCTTATTCCATGATTATAGTA [ 4 0 7
ATAAAAATTTCACTTTTTGATAATGCTTCCCCCATTATAGAACAATTAACCTTATTCCATGATTACAGTA [ 4 0 7  
ATAAAAATTTCACTTTTTGATAATGCTTCCCCCATTATAGAACAATTAACCTTATTCCATGATTACAGTA [ 4 0 7  
ATAAAAATTTCACTTTTTGACAATGCTTCCCCCATTATAGAACAATTAACTTTATTTCATGATTATAGTA [ 4 0 8  
ATAAAAATTTCATTTTTTGACCATGCTTCCCCTACTATAGAACAACTAATTTTATTTCACGACTATAGCA [ 4 0 5  
ATAAAAATTTCATTTTTTGACCATGCTTCCCCTACTATAGAACAACTAATTTTATTTCACGACTATAGCA [ 4 0 5  
ATAAAAATTTCATTTTTTGACCATGCTTCCCCTACTATAGAACAACTAATTTTATTTCACGACTATAGCA [ 4 0 5  
CTAAAACTTTCACTTTACGATAATGCTTCCCCGATTATAGAACAACTCATTTTATTTCATGATTATAGTA [ 4 0 7  
ATAAAAATTTCACTTTTTGACAATGCCTCCCCCATTATAGAACAATTAACTCTATTTCATGATTACAGTA [ 4 0 7  
ATAAAAATTTCATTATTTGATAATGCCTCTTCAATCATAGAACAACTAACTTTATTTCATGATTACAGTA [ 4 0 9  
ATAAAAATTTCACTTTTTGATACTGCTTCTCCAATTATAGAACAATTAACTTTGTTTCATGACTATAGTA [ 4 0 8  
ATAAAAATTTCATTTTTTGATAATGCTTCACCAATTATGGAACAATTAATTTTATTTCATGATTACAGTA [ 4 0 9  
ATAAAAATTTCACTTTCTGACAATGCATCACCTATTATAGAACAATTAATTTTATTTCATGATTACAGAA [ 4 0 9  
ATAAAAATTTCACTTTCTGACAATGCATCACCTATTATAGAACAATTAATTTTATTTCATGATTACAGAA [ 4 0 9  
ATAAAAATTTCGCTTTTTGACAATGCTTCTCCTATTATAGAACAATTAACCTTATTTCATGACTATAGAA [ 4 0 7  
ATAAAAATTTCACTTTTTGACAATGCTTCCCCCATTATAGAACAATTAACCTTATTTCATGACTACAGTA [ 4 0 7  
ATAAAAATTTCACTTTTTGACAATGCTTCCCCCATTATAGAACAATTAACCTTATTTCATGATTATAGTA [ 4 0 7  
ATAAAAATTTCACTTTTTGACAATGCCTCACCTATTATAGAACAATTAACATTATTTCATAATTATAGTA [ 4 0 7  
ATAAAAATTTCACTTTTTGACAATGCTTCCCCCATTATAGAACAATTAACATTATTTCACGATTACAGTA [ 4 0 7  
ATAAAAATTTCACTTTTTGACAATGCTTCCCCCATTATAGAACAATTAACCTTATTTCATGATTATAGTA [ 4 0 9  
ATAAAAATTTCACTTTTTGACAATGCTTCCCCCATTATAGAACAATTAACCTTATTTCATGATTATAGTA [ 4 0 9  
ATAAAAATTTCACTTTTTGACAATGCTTCCCCCATTATAGAACAATTAACCTTATTTCATGATTACAGTA [ 4 0 7  
ATAAAAATTTCACTTTTTGACAATGCTTCCCCCATTATAGAACAATTAACATTATTTCATGATTACAGTA [ 4 0 7  
ATAAAAATTTCACTTTTTGACAACGCTTCCCCCATTATAGAACAATTAACTTTATTTCATGATTACAGTA [ 4 0 7  
ATAAAAATTTCTCTTTACGACAATGCATCCCCAATTATAGAACAACTAATTCTATTTCATGATTACAGCA [ 4 0 6  
TTAAAAATTTCGCTTTATGATAATGCCTCTCCAATTATAGAACAATTAATTCTATTTCATGATTATAGAA [ 4 1 0  
ATAAAAATTTC TCTTTACGACAGTGCCTCTCCAATTATAGAACAATTAATTTTATTTCATGATTACAGCA [ 4 0 7
ATAAAAATTTCTCTCTTTGATAATGCTTCCCCAATTATAGAACAACTAACTTTATTTCATAATTATACTA [ 4 0 9  
ATAAAAATTTCTCTATTTGATAATGCCTCCCCAATTATAGAACAATTAACTTTATTTCACGATTATACTA [ 4 0 7  
ATAAAAATTTCTTTATTTGATAATGCCTCTCCAATTATAGAACAATTAACTTTATTTCATGATTATACTA [ 4 0 8  
ATAAAAATTTCACTCTCTGACAATGCTTCACCAATTATAGAACAATTAATTCTGTTTCACGACTACAGTA [ 4 0 8  
ATAAAGATTTCACTCTCTGACAATGCTTCCCCAATTATAGAACAATTAATTCTGTTTCACGACTACAGTA [ 4 0 8  
ATAAAAATTTCACTCTCTGACAACGCTTCTCCAATTATAGAACAATTAATTCTGTTTCATGACTACAGTA [ 4 0 8  
ATAAAAATTTCACTCTCTGACAATGCTTCCCCAATTATAGAACAATTAATTCTGTTTCATGATTATAGTA [ 4 0 7  
ATAAAAATTTCACTTTCTGATAACGCTTCTCCTATTATAGAACAATTAATTTTATTTCATGATTACACTA [ 4 1 0  
ATAAAAATCTCTTTTTTTGATAATGCTTCTCCGATTATAGAACAATTAATTTTATTTCACGATTATGGAA [ 4 0 8  
ATAAAAATTTC TCTTTATGATAATGCTTCTCCAATTATAGAACAGCTAATTTTATTTCATGATTATACCA [ 4 0 7
AAAAAAATTTCACTTTTTGATAATGCTTCACCTATTATAGAACAATTAATTTTATTTCATGACTACAGTA [ 4 0 7  
CTAAAAATTTCTCTTTTTGATAATGCTTCTCCCATTATAGAACAGCTAATTTTATTTCATAATTACAGTA [ 4 0 8
- 2 4 9 -
APPENDIX 3 cont.
[ 4 3 0  4 4 0  4 5 0  4 6 0  4 7 0  4 8 0  4 9 0 ]
A c i z z i a _ h o l l i s i TATTAATTATTACAACAATTTTATCAGTAGTTTCTTTTTTTATATTTAAAATAATATTTAATAAATTTCT [ 4 7 6
A c i z z i a _ u n c a t o i d e s TACTGATTATTTCTACAACTCTCTCAGTAGTGTCATTTTTTATATTTAAAATAATAATTAATAAATTTTT [ 4 8 2
A r y t a i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ P O TATTAATTATCTCAAGCATTCTCTCTATTGTTTCATTCTTTATAATAAAAATAATTATAAGAACCTTTAC [ 4 7 7
A r y t a i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ S P TATTAATTATCTCAAGCATTCTCTCTATTGTTTCATTCTTTATAATAAAAATAATTATAAGAACCTTTAC [ 4 7 7
A r y t a i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ M O TATTAATTATCTCAAGCATTCTCTCTATTGTTTCGTTCTTTATAGTAAAAATAATTATAAGAACCTTTAC [ 4 7 7
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ T TATTAATTATTTCAAGCATTCTTTCTATTGTATCTTTTTTTATAATAAAAATAATTATAAGAAAATTCAC [ 4 7 9
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ G TATTAATTATTTCAAGCATTCTTTCTATTGTATCTTTTTTTATAATAAAAATAATTATAAGAAAATTCAC [ 4 7 9
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ s s p _ i n s u l a r i s _ C TATTAATTATTACAAGTATTCTCTCTATTGTATCTTTTTTTATAATAAAAATAATTACAAGAAAATTCAC [ 4 7 8
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ s s p _ i n s u l a r i s _ P TATTAATTATTTCAAGCATTCTTTCTATTGTCTCTTTTTTTATAATAAAAATAATCACAAGAAAATTCAC [ 4 8 0
A r y t a i n a _ g e n i s t a e _ S C TATTAATTATTTCAAGTATTCTCTCTATTGTCTCCTTTTTCATATTAAAAATAATTACAATAAAATTTAC [ 4 7 6
A r y t a i n a _ g e n i s t a e _ P O TATTAATTATTTCAAGTATTCTCTCTATTGTCTCCTTTTTCATATTAAAAATAATTACAATAAAATTTAC [ 4 7 6
A r y t a i n a _ g e n i s t a e _ M O TATTAATTATTTCAAGTATTCTCTCCATTGTATCCTTTTTCATATTAAAAATAATTACAATAAAATTTAC [ 4 7 6
A r y t a i n a _ n u b i v a g a TACTTATTATTTCAAGTATTCTTTCTATTGTATCTTTTTTTATAGTAAAAATAATTATAAATAAATTTAC [ 4 7 7
A r y t a i n a _ s p . 1 4 TACTTATTATTTCAAGTATTCTTTCTATTGTATCTTTTTTTATAGTAAAAATAATTATAAATAAATTTAC [ 4 7 7
A r y t a i n i l a _ c o g n a t a TACTAATTATTTCTAGTATTTTATCTATTGTATCTTTTATTATAATTAAAATAGCTTTAAACAAATACAC [ 4 7 7
A r y t a i n i l a _ c y t i s i TATTGATTATTTCTAGTATTTTATCCATTGTATCTTTCTTCATAATTAAAATAATTTTAAATAAATTTAC [ 4 7 9
A r y t a i n i l a _ d e l a r b r e i TAATAATTATTTTCAGTATTTTATCTATTGTATCTTTTTTTATAATCAAAATAATTTTAAATAAATTTAC [ 4 8 1
A r y t a i n i l a _ d i l u t a _ C TACTCATTATTTCTAGTATTTTATCTATTGTATCTTTCATTATAGTTAAAATAATTTTAAACAACTATAC [ 4 7 7
A r y t a i n i l a _ d i l u t a _ T TACTCATTATTTCTAGTATTTTATCTATTGTATCTTTCATTATAGTTAAAATAATTTTAAACAATTATAC [ 4 7 7
A r y t a i n i l a _ d i v i d e n s _ C TACTAATTATTTCTAGTATTTTATCTATTGTATCTTTCATTATAATTAAAATAATCTTAAACAACTTTAC [ 4 7 7
A r y t a i n i , l a _ d i v i d e n s _ T TACTAATTATTTCTAGTATTTTATCTATTGTATCTTTCATCATAATTAAAATAATCTTAAACAACTTTAC [ 4 7 7
A r y t a i n i l a _ d i v i d e n s _ G TACTAATTATTTCTAGTATTTTATCTATTGTATCTTTCATCATAATTAAAATAATCTTAAACAACTTTAC [ 4 7 7
A r y t a i n i l a _ e q u i t a n s TACTAATTATTTCTAGAATTTTATCCATTGTATCTTTCATTATAATTAAAATAGCTTTAAACAGCTACAT [ 4 7 7
A r y t a i n i l a _ h a k a n i TATTAATTATTTCTAGTATTTTATCCATTGTATCTTTCATTATAATTAAAATAACTTTAAACAACTACAC [ 4 7 7
A r y t a i n i l a _ i m a TATTAATTATTTCAAGAATTTTATCTATTGTATCTTTTACTATAATAAAAATAATTTTAAACAAATTTAC [ 4 7 7
A r y t a i n i l a _ i n c u b a TATTAATTATTTCTAGTATTTTATCCATTGTATCTTTCATTATAATTAAAATAGCTTTAAACAACTACAC [ 4 7 7
A r y t a i n i l a _ m o d i c a _ T e l i n e _ P TACTAATTATTTCTAGTATTTTATCTATTGTCTCTTTCATCATAATTAAAATAATTTCAAACAAATTTAC [ 4 7 7
A r y t a i n i l a _ m o d i c a _ C h a m . _ P TACTAATTATTTCTAGTATTTTATCTATTGTCTCTTTCATCATAATTAAAATAATTTCAAACAAATTTAC [ 4 7 7
A r y t a i n i l a _ m o d i c a _ T e l i n e _ H TACTAATTATTTCTAGTATTTTATCTATTGTATCTTTCATCATAATTAAAATAATTTCAAACAATTTTAC [ 4 7 7
A r y t a i n i l a _ m o d i c a _ C h a m . _H TACTAATTATTTCTAGTATTTTATCTATTGTATCTTTCATCATAATTAAAATAATTTCAAACAATTTTAC [ 4 7 7
A r y t a i n i l a _ n i g r a l i n e a t a _ C TACTAATTATTTCTAGTATTTTATCTATTGTATCTTTCATTATAATTAAAATAATTTTAAACAACTACAT [ 4 7 7
A r y t a i n i l a _ n i g r a l i n e a t a _ T TACTAATTATTTCTAGTATTTTATCTATTGTATCTTTCATTATAATTAAAATAATTTTAAACAACTACAT [ 4 7 7
A r y t a i n i l a _ n i g r a l i n e a t a _ G TACTAATTATTTCTAGTATTTTATCTATTGTATCTTTCATTATAATTAAAATAATTTTAAACAACTACAT [ 4 7 7
A r y t a i n i l a _ p i l e o l a t a _ T . c a n TATTAATTATTTCTAGTATTTTATCTATTGTATCTTTCATTATAATTAAAATAACCCTAAATAACTACAT [ 4 7 7
A r y t a i n i l a _ p i l e o l a t a _ T . o s y TATTAATTATTTCTAGTATTTTATCTATTGTATCTTTCATTATAATTAAAATAACCCTAAATAACTACAT [ 4 7 7
A r y t a i n i l a _ p r o b o s c i d e a _ A . v i s _ T TATTAATCATTTCCAGTATTTTATCTATTGTATCTTTTATTATAATTAAGATAATTATAAACAACTACAC [ 4 7 7
A r y t a i n i l a  _ p r o b o s c i d e a _ A .  f o l _ P TATTAATCATTTCCAGTATTTTATCTATTGTGTCTTTTATTATAATTAAGATAATTATAAACAACTACAC [ 4 7 7
Arytaini la_prognata TACTCATTATTTCTAGAATCTTATCTATTGTATCTTTCATTATAATTAAAATAATTTTAAACAGTTACAC [ 4 7 8
A r y t a i n i 1 a _ s p a  r  t  i  o p h i 1 a _ P O TATTAATTATTTTTAGCATTTTATCTATTGTATCTTTTTTTATAATCAAAATAATTTTAAATAAATTTAC [ 4 7 5
A r y t a i n i 1 a _ s p a r t  i  o p h  i 1 a _ S  P TATTAATTATTTTTAGCATTTTATCTATTGTATCTTTTTTTATAATCAAAATAATTTTAAATAAACTTAC [ 4 7 5
A r y t a i n i 1 a _ s p a  r  t  i  o p h  i  1 a_M O TATTAATTATTTTTAGCATTTTATCTATTGTATCTTTTTTTATAATCAAAATAATTTTAAATAAATTTAC [ 4 7 5
A r y t a i n i l a _ s u l c i TACTTATTATTTTTACCATTCTCTCTATTGTAACTTTTTTTATAATAAAAATAATAACAAACAAATTTAC [ 4 7 7
A r y t a i n i l a _ u m b o n a t a TATTGATTATTTCTAGTATTTTATCCATTGTATCTTTCATTATAATTAAAATAGCTTTAAACAATTACAC [ 4 7 7
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p .1 TACTAATCATTTCTAGAATTATATCTATTGTATCTTTCTTTATAATTAAAATAATTTTTAATAAATTTAC [ 4 7 9
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p .  2 TATTAATTATTTCTAATATTTTATCTATTGTATCTTTTTTTATAATCAAAATAATTTTGAACAAATTCAT [ 4 7 8
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p . 3 TACTTATTATTTCTAGTATTTTATCTATTGTATCTTTTTTTATAATCAAAATAATTTTAAATAAATTTAC [ 4 7 9
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p . 4 _ S P TATTAATTATCTCCAGAATTTTATCCATTGTATCTTTTTTTATAATTAAAATAATCCAAAACAAATTTAT [ 4 7 9
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p . 4 _ M O TACTAATTATCTCCAGAATTTTATCTATTGTATCTTTTTTTATAATTAAAATAATCCAAAACAAATTTAT [ 4 7 9
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p .  5 TACTCATTATTACTAGAATTTTATCTATTGTATCTTTCATTATAACTAAAATAGCTTTAAACAATTTCAC [ 4 7 7
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p .  6 TATTAATTATTTCTAGTATTTTATCTATTGTATCTTTTATTATAATTAAAATAATTTTAAACAACTACAC [ 4 7 7
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p .  7 TACTAATTATTTCTAGTATTTTATCCATTGTATCTTTCATTATAATTAAAATAGCTTTAAACAACTACAC [ 4 7 7
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p .  8 TATTAATTATTTCTAGTATTTTATCTATTGTATCTTTCATCATAATTAAAATAATCTTAAACAACTTCAC [ 4 7 7
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p .  9 TACTAATTATCTCTAGTATTCTATCTATTGTATCTTTTATTATAATTAAAATAATTTTAAACAACTTCAC [ 4 7 7
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p . 1 0 _ P TACTAATTATTTCTAGTATTTTATCCATTGTATCTTTCATTATAATTAAAATAGCCTTAAACAACTACAC [ 4 7 9
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p . 1 0 _ H TATTAATTATTTCTAGTATTTTATCCATTGTATCTTTCATTATAATTAAAATAGCTTTAAACAACTACAC [ 4 7 9
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p . 1 1 TACTAATTATTTCAAGTATTTTATCCATCGTATCTTTCATTATAATTAAAATAGCTTTAAACAATTACAT [ 4 7 7
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p . 12 TACTAATTATTTCTAGTATTTTATCTATTGTATCTTTCATCATAATTAAAATAATTTCAAACAAATTTAC [ 4 7 7
A r y t a i n i l a _ s p . 13 TACTAATTATTTCGAGTATTTTATCTATTGTATCTTTTATTATAATTAAAATAACTTTAAACAAATACAC [ 4 7 7
C a c o p s y l a _ a l a t e m i TACTTATTATTGTTACTATTTTATCAATTGTTTCTTTCTTTATAATTAAAATAATAATAAACAAATTTGT [ 4 7 6
C a c o p s y l a _ m a l i TACTAATTATTGTCAGTATCTTATCAATTGTCTCTTTTTTTATAATTAAAATAATAATAAATAAATTTAT [ 4 8 0
C y a m o p h i a  _ p r o h a s k a i TATTAATTATTATAAGAATTCTTTCCATTGTATCCTTTTTTATAATTAAAATAATAAGAAATAAGTTTCT [ 4 7 7
L i v i l l a _ a d u s t a TGTTAATTATTTGTACAATTTTATCTGTCGTTTCTTTCATCATAATAAAAATAATTCATAATAATTTTCT [ 4 7 9
L i v i l l a _ b l a n d u l a TACTAATTATTTGCAGAATTCTTTCTGTTGTATCTTTTATTATAGTAAAAATAATTTTTAACAACTTCCT [ 4 7 7
L i v i 1 l a _ m a u r a TACTAATTATTTGCAGAATCCTTTCTGTTGTCTCTTTCATTATAGTAAAAATAATTTTTAACAACTTCCT [ 4 7 8
L i v i 1 1 a _ m o n o s p e r m a e _ T TATTAATTATTACAAGAATTCTTTCTATTGTTTCTTTTTTCATAATTAAAATAATGTTTAACACCTTTAT [ 4 7 8
L i v i 1 l a _ m o n o s p e r m a e _ G TATTAATCATTACCAGAATTCTTTCTATTGTTTCTTTTTTCATAGTTAAAATAATGTTTAGCACTTTTAT [ 4 7 8
L i v i 1 l a _ m o n o s p e r m a e _ P TATTAATTATTACCAGAATTCTTTCTATTGTTTCTTTTTTCATAATTAAAATAATGTTTAGTACCTTTAT [ 4 7 8
L i v i l l a _ r e t a m a e TACTAATTATTTCAAGAATTCTTTCTATCGTCTCTTTTTTCATAATTAAAATAATCTTAAACACCTTTAT [ 4 7 7
L i v i l l a _ v a r i e g a t a TATTAATTATTTGCACAATTTTATCCGTAGTTTTCTTCATTATAATAAAAATAATTTATAATAATCTTAT [ 4 8 0
L i v i l l a _ s p .  1 5 TATTAATTATTTCAAGAATTTTATCTATTGTATCTTTTACTATACTAAAAATAATTTTAAACAAATTTAC [ 4 7 8
L i v i l l a _ s p .  1 6 TAGTAGTTATTTCAAGAATTTTATCTATTGTATCTTTTACTATATTAAAAATAATCTTAAACAAATTTAC [ 4 7 7
L i v i l l a _ s p .  1 7 TA CTTA TTA TTTCTAGAATTTTATCTATTGTATCTTTCATTATAATTAAAATAATTTTAAATAAATTTAC [ 4 7 7
P s e u d a c a n t h o p s y l l a _ i m p r o v i s a TATTAATCATTGTTAGAGTAATATCTATCATTTCATTTTTTATAATTAAAATAATGATAAATAAATTTAT [ 4 7 8
- 2 5 0 -
APPENDIX 3 cont.
[ 5 0 0  5 1 0  5 2 0  5 3 0  5 4 0  5 5 0  5 6 0 ]
[ . . . . . . . ]
A c i z z i a _ h o l l i s i CTCAAGAAGAATTCTCGAAAATCAAGTAATTGAAGTAATTTGAACTATAATCCCAACTCTAATTTTAAGA [ 5 4 6
A c i z z i a _ u n c a t o i d e s ATCAAGAAGAATCTTGGAAAACCAATTAATTGAAGTAATTTGAACCCTCATTCCTACTATTATCTTAAGA [ 5 5 2
A r y t a i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ P O TAGAAGTAAACTTCTTGAAAACCAATTAATTGAACTTGTATGAACATTAATTCCCACAATTATTTTAAGA [ 5 4 7
A r y t a i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ S P TAGAAGTAAACTTCTTGAAAACCAATTAATTGAACTTGTATGAACATTAATTCCCACAATTATTTTAAGA [ 5 4 7
A r y t a i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ M O CAGAAGTAAACTTCTTGAAAACCAATTAATTGAACTTGTATGAACCTTAATTCCCACAGTTATTTTAAGA [ 5 4 7
A r y  t a i n a _ d e v i a _ T TAGAATAAAAATTCTAGAAAACCAATTAATTGAACTTGTATGAACTTTAATTCCTACAATTATTTTAAGA [ 5 4 9
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ G TAGAATAAAAATTCTAGAAAACCAATTAATTGAACTTGTATGAACTTTAATTCCTACAATTATTTTAAGA [ 5 4 9
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ s s p _ i n s u l a r i s _ C TAGAATGAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAATTACTTGAACTTGTATGAACTTTAATTCCTACAGTTATTTTAAGA [ 5 4 8
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ s s p _ i n s u l a r i s _ P TAGAATAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAGTTAATTGAACTTGTATGAACTTTAATTCCTACAATTATTTTAAGT [ 5 5 0
A r y t a i n a _ g e n i s t a e _ S C AAGAAGAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAATTAATTGAAGTTGTATGAACCCTAATTCCCACATTTATCTTAAGA [ 5 4 6
A r y t a i n a _ g e n i s t a e _ P O AAGAAGAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAATTAATTGAAATTGTATGAACCCTAATTCCCACATTTATCTTAAGA [ 5 4 6
A r y t a i n a _ g e n i s t a e _ M 0 AAGAAGAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAATTAATTGAAATTGTGTGAACCTTAATTCCCACATTTATCTTAAGA [ 5 4 6
A r y t a i n a _ n u b i v a g a CAGAAGAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAACTTATTGAACTTGTATGAACACTAATTCCTACAATTATTTTAAGA [ 5 4 7
A r y t a i n a _ s p . 1 4 CAGAAGAAAAATTCTCGAAAATCAACTTATTGAACTTGTATGAACACTAATTCCAACAATTATTTTAAGA [ 5 4 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ c o g n a t a TAGCACAAAAATCCTTGAAAATCAAATAGTTGAACTTGTGTGAACTTTAATTCCCACAATTATTCTAAGA [ 5 4 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ c y t i s i TAGAAGAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAATTGAACTTACATGAACACTTATTCCAACAGTTATTCTTAGT [ 5 4 9
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d e l a r b r e i TAGAAATAACATTCTTGAGAATCAAATAATTGAACTCATATGAACACTTATTCCAACCATTATTCTTAGT [ 5 5 1
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i l u t a _ C TAGCACAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAGTTGAACTTGTGTGAACCTTAATTCCCACAATTATTCTTAGA [ 5 4 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i l u t a _ T TAGCACAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAGTTGAACTTGTGTGAACTTTAATTCCCACAATTATTCTTAGA [ 5 4 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i v i d e n s _ C TAGTACAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAGTTGAACTTGTGTGAACCCTAATCCCCACAATTGTTCTGAGA [ 5 4 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i v i d e n s _ T TAGTACAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAGTTGAACTTGTATGAACCCTAATCCCCACAATTGTTCTGAGA [ 5 4 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i v i d e n s _ G TAGTACAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAGTTGAACTTGTATGAACCCTAANCCCCACAATTGTTCTGAGA [ 5 4 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ e g u i t a n s TAGAACAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAGTTGAACTAGTATGAACATTGATCCCAACAATCATTCTTAGA [ 5 4 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ h a k a n i TAGAACAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAGTTGAACTTGTATGAACTTTAATTCCCACAATTATTCTTAGA [ 5 4 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ i m a CAGAACAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAATTGAACTTGCATGAACCCTTATTCCTACTATTATTCTCAGA [ 5 4 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ i n c u b a TAGAACAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAGTTGAACTTGTATGAACTTTAATTCCCACAATTATTCTTAGA [ 5 4 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ m o d i c a _ T e l i n e _ P TAGTACAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAGTAGAACTTGTATGAACCTTAATCCCCACGATTGTTCTGAGA [ 5 4 7
A r y t a i n i 1 l a _ m o d i c a _ C h a m . _ P TAGTACAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAGTAGAACTTGTATGAACCTTAATCCCCACGATTGTTCTGAGA [ 5 4 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ m o d i c a _ T e l i n e _ H TAGTACAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAGTAGAACTTGTATGAACCTTAATCCCCACGATTGTTCTGAGA [ 5 4 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ m o d i c a _ C h a m . _ H TAGTACAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAGTAGAACTTGTATGAACCTTAATCCCCACAATTGTTCTGAGA [ 5 4 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ n i g r a l i n e a t a _ C TAGAACAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAATTGAACTTGTGTGAACTTTAATCCCAACAATTATTCTTAGA [ 5 4 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ n i g r a l i n e a t a _ T TAGAACAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAATTGAACTTGTGTGAACTTTAATCCCAACAATTATTCTTAGA [ 5 4 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ n i g r a l i n e a t a _ G TAGAACAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAATTGAACTTGTGTGAACTTTAATCCCAACAATTATTCTTAGA [ 5 4 7
A r y  t a i n i l l a _ p i l e o l a t a _ T . c a n TAGTACAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAGTTGAACTAGTTTGAACTCTAATCCCCACAATCATTCTTAGA [ 5 4 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p i l e o l a t a _ T . o s y TAGTACAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAGTTGAACTAGTTTGAACTCTAATCCCCACAATCATTCTTAGA [ 5 4 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p r o b o s c i d e a _ A . v i s _ T TAGCACAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAATTGAACTTGTGTGAACTTTAATCCCCACAATTATTCTTAGA [ 5 4 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p r o b o s c i d e a _ A . f o l _ P TAGCACAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAATTGAACTTGTATGAACTTTAATCCCCACAATTATTCTTAGA [ 5 4 7
Arytainilla_prognata TAGTACAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAGTTGAACTTGTATGAACCTTAATTCCCACAATTATTCTAAGA [ 5 4 8
A r y  t a i n i l l a _ s p a r t i o p h i l a _ P O TAGAACAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAACAATTGAACTTGTATGAACCTTTATCCCAACTATTATTCTTAGT [ 5 4 5
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p a r t i o p h i l a _ S P TAGAACAAAAATCCTTGAAAATCAAACAATTGAACTTGTATGAACCTTTATCCCAACTATTATTCTTAGT [ 5 4 5
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p a r t i o p h i l a _ M O TAGAACAAAAATCCTTGAAAATCAAACAATTGAACTTGTATGAACCTTTATCCCAACTATTATTCTTAGT [ 5 4 5
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s u l c i TAGAAGAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATTATTGAACTTATTTGAACCTTTATTCCTACTATTATTCTTTCA [ 5 4 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ u m b o n a t a TAGAACAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAGTTGAACTTGTATGAACTTTAATTCCCACAATTATTCTTAGA [ 5 4 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 TAGAAACAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAATTGAAATCGTATGAACCTTAATTCCAACTATTGTTCTTAGT [ 5 4 9
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p .2 TAGAAGAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAACAATTGAACTTTTATGAACATTAATTCCAACCGTTATTCTTAGT [ 5 4 8
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 3 AAGAAGAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAGTAATTGAACTTACATGAACGCTTATTCCAACAGTTATACTTAGT [ 5 4 9
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 4 _ S P TAGAAAAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAATTGAATTAGTATGAACCTTAATTCCTACTATTATTCTTAGA [ 5 4 9
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 4 _ M O TAGAAAAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAATTGAATTAGTGTGAACCTTAATTCCTACTATTATTCTTAGA [ 5 4 9
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 5 TAGTACAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAGTTGAACTCGTTTGAACTTTAATCCCTACTATTATCCTTAGA [ 5 4 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p .6 TACCACAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAGTTGAACTTGTATGAACTTTAATCCCAACAGTTATCTTGAGA [ 5 4 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p .7 TAGTACAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAGTTGAACTAGTATGAACTTTAATTCCCACAATCATTCTTAGA [ 5 4 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 8 TAGCACAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAATTGAACTTGTATGAACTTTAATCCCCACAATCATTTTGAGA [ 5 4 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 9 TAGCACAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAGTTGAACTTGTATGAACCTTAATCCCCACAGTTACTCTAAGA [ 5 4 7
A r y t a i n i 1 l a _ s p . 1 0 _ P TAGAACAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAGTTGAATTAGTGTGAACCTTAATCCCTACAATCATTCTTAGA [ 5 4 9
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 0 _ H TAGAACAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAGTTGAACTAGTGTGAACCCTCATCCCCACAGTCATTCTTAGA [ 5 4 9
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 1 TAGAACAAAAATCCTTGAAAATCAAATAGTTGAACTAGTATGAACCCTAATCCCTACAATCATTCTTAGA [ 5 4 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 12 TAGTACAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAGTAGAACTTGTATGAACCTTAATCCCCACGATTGTTCTGAGA [ 5 4 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 13 TAGCACAAAAATCCTTGAAAACCAAATAGTTGAACTTGTATGAACTTTAGTTCCCACAATTATTCTTAGA [ 5 4 7
C a c o p s y l  l a _ a l a t e m i TTCAAGAAAAATCCTTGAAAACCAAATAATTGAACTAGTATGGACTTTAATTCCTACTATTATTTTAAGA [ 5 4 6
C a c o p s y l l a _ m a l i TTCAAGAAAAATCCTTGAAAATCAAATAATTGAACTAGTATGAACTTTGATCCCTACAATCATCCTTAGA [ 5 5 0
C y a m o p h i l a _ p r o h a s k a i TTCAAGAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAATTGAATTAATTTGAACATTAATCCCCACAATTATTCTTAGA [ 5 4 7
L i v i l l a _ a d u s t a TAGAACTAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAGTTGAATTAGTATGAACTATAATTCCCACAATTATTCTAACA [ 5 4 9
L i v i l l a _ b l a n d u l a TAGAACTAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAATTAGTTGAACTCATTTGAACTCTCATTCCTACAATTATTCTTACA [ 5 4 7
L i v i l l a _ m a u r a TAGAACTAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAATTAGTTGAACTCATCTGAACTCTCATTCCTACAATTATTCTTACA [ 5 4 8
L i v i l l a _ m o n o s p e r m a e _ T TAGAACAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAGTTGAACTCGTATGAACCCTTATTCCTACAATTATTCTTAGC [ 5 4 8
L i v i 1 l a _ m o n o s p e r m a e _ G TAGAACAAAAATTATTGAAAATCAAATAGTTGAACTTGTATGAACCCTAATTCCTACAATCATTCTTAGC [ 5 4 8
L i v i l l a _ m o n o s p e r m a e _ P TAGAACAAAAATTATTGAAAATCAAATAATTGAACTCGTATGAACCCTCATTCCTACAATCATTCTTAGC [ 5 4 8
L i v i l l a _ r e t a m a e TAGAACAAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAATTGAACTTGTATGAACACTAATTCCTACAGTTATTCTTAGA [ 5 4 7
L i v i l l a _ v a r i e g a t a TAGAACTAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAGTAGAACTTGTATGGACTCTAATTCCTACAATTATTCTCACA [ 5 5 0
L i v i l l a _ s p . 1 5 TAGAACTAAAATTCTTGAAAATCAAATAATTGAACTTATATGAACTCTCATTCCTACAATTATTCTTAGA [ 5 4 8
L i v i l l a _ s p . 1 6 TAGAACAAAAATTATTGAAAATCAAATAATTGAATTGATATGAACTCTTATTCCTACAATTATTCTTAGA [ 5 4 7
L i v i l l a _ s p . 1 7 TAGAAAAAAAATTCTAGAAAACCAAATAATTGAACTTATTTGAACTTTAATCCCTACAATTATTCTTAGA [ 5 4 7
P s e u d a c a n  t h o p s y 1 l a _ i m p r o v i  s a TAGAACAAAAATTTTAGAAAATCAAATAATTGAAATTATTTGAACTCTAGTTCCCACACTTATTCTAAGA [ 5 4 8
-251 -
APPENDIX 3 cont.
5 7 0 5 8 0 5 9 0 6 0 0 610 6 2 0 6 3 0 ]
A c i z z i a _ h o l l i s i
A c i z z i a _ u n c a t o i d e s
A r y t a i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ P O
A r y t a i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ S P
A r y t a i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ M O
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ T
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ G
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ s s p _ i n s u l a r i s _ C
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ s s p _ i n s u l a r i s _ P
A r y t a i n a _ g e n i s t a e _ S C
A r y t a i n a _ g e n i s t a e _ P O
A r y t a i n a _ g e n i s t a e _ M O
A r y t a i n a _ n u b i v a g a
A r y t a i n a _ s p . 1 4
A r y t a i n i l l a _ c o g n a t a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ c y t i s i
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d e l a r b r e i
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i l u t a _ C
A r y t a i n i 1 l a _ d i l u t a _ T
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i v i d e n s _ C
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i v i d e n s _ T
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i v i d e n s _ G
A r y t a i n i l l a _ e q u i t a n s
A r y t a i n i l l a _ h a k a n i
A r y t a i n i 1 l a _ i m a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ i n c u b a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ m o d i c a _ T e l i n e _ P
A r y t a i n i l l a _ m o d i c a _ C h a m . _ P
A r y t a i n i l l a _ m o d i c a _ T e l i n e _ H
A r y t a i n i l l a _ m o d i c a _ C h a m . _ H
A r y t a i n i l l a _ n i g r a l i n e a t a _ C
A r y t a i n i l l a _ n i g r a l i n e a t a _ T
A r y t a i n i l l a _ n i g r a l i n e a t a _ G
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p i l e o l a t a _ T . c a n
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p i l e o l a t a _ T . o s y
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p r o b o s c i d e a _ A . v i s _ T
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p r o b o s c i d e a _ A . f o l _ P
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p r o g n a t a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p a r t i o p h i l a _ P O
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p a r t i o p h i l a _ S P
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p a r t i o p h i l a _ M O
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s u l c i
A r y t a i n i l l a _ u m b o n a t a
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1
A r y t a  i n  i l l a _ s p .2
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 3
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 4 _ S P
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 4 _ M O
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 5
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 6
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 7
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 8
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 9
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 0 _ P
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 0 _ H
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 11
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 12
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 13
C a c o p s y l  l a _ a l a t e m i
C a c o p s y l l a j n a l i
C y a m o p h i l a _ p r o h a s k a i
L i v i l l a _ a d u s t a
L i v i l l a _ b l a n d u l a
L i v i l l a _ m a u r a
L i v i 1 l a _ m o n o s p e r m a e _ T
L i v i 1 l a _ m o n o s p e r m a e _ G
L i v i 1 l a _ m o n o s p e r m a e _ P
L i v i l l a _ r e t a m a e
L i v i l l a _ v a r i e g a t a
L i v i l l a _ s p . 1 5
L i v i l l a _ s p . 1 6
L i v i l l a _ s p . 1 7
P s e u d a c a n t h o p s y l l a _ i m p r o v i s a
ATTATTGCCCTTCCGTCTCTTCATTTGCTATACTTAATAGATGAACTACTAAATCCTTTATTAACAATTA [6 1 6  
ATTATTGCACTGCCTTCCCTGCACTTACTCTATTTGATAGATGAGCTGCTCAATCCCATTTTAACTGTAA [6 2 2  
TTTATTGCTCTCCCATCCCTTCATCTTCTTTATTTAATAGATGAATTAAACAATCCCCTATTAACAATCA [6 1 7  
TTTATTGCTCTCCCATCCCTTCATCTTCTTTATTTAATAGATGAATTAAACAATCCCCTATTAACAATCA [ 6 1 7  
TTTATTGCTCTCCCATCCCTTCATCTTCTTTATTTAATAGATGAGTTAAACAATCCCCTATTAACAATCA [6 1 7  
TTTATTG CTCTCCCCTCTCTTCATCTTCTTTATTTAATAGATGAATTAAATAATCCGTTATTAACAAGTA [6 1 9  
TTTATTGCWCWCCCCACACTWCAACTACTTTATTTAATAGATGAATTAAATAAACCGTTATTAACAATTA [6 1 9  
TTTATTGCACTTCCTTCCCTTCAACTTCTTTACTTAATAGATGAACTAAATAAW CCGCTACTAACAATTA [ 6 1 8  
TTTATTGCCCTCCCTTCTCTTCACCTCCTTTACTTGATAGATGAATTAAATAATCCACTATTAACAATTA [ 6 2 0  
TTTATTGCACTGCCTTCWCTTCAACTWCTGTACCTAATAGATGAACTAAATAACCCATTATTAACAATTA [6 1 6  
TTTATTGCACTGCCTTCTCTTCATCTTCTGTACCTAATAGATGAACTAAATAACCCATTATTAACAATTA [ 6 1 6  
TTTATTGCACTACCTTCTCTTCATCTTCTATACTTAATAGATGAACTAAATAACCCATTACTAACAATTA [ 6 1 6  
TTTATTGCACTTCCCTCCCTTCATCTTCTTTATTTAATAGACGAACTTAATAAC? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  [6 1 7
TTTATTGCACTTCCCTCCCTTCATCTTCTTTATTTAATAGACGAACTTAATAACCCACTAC? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  [ 6 1 7
TT T A TTG CTT TA C CCT CA C TTCA CC TTCTCTTT CTTA TA ?? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  [ 6 1 7
TTTATTGCACTCCCTTCACTTCATTTACTCTATCTTATAGATGAATTAAATAACCCCCTTTTAACAATTA [ 6 1 9  
TTTATCGCTTTA C CTTCTCT TCA TA TTCTTT A TC TTA TA ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  [ 6 2 1
TTC ATTGCTCTA CCA TCA CTTCACCTTTTATA CCTTATA? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  [ 6 1 7
TTC ATTGCTCTA CCA TCA CTTCACCTTTTATA CCTTATA? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  [ 6 1 7
TTTATTG CCCTA CCGTCACTTCACCTTCTATATTTAATA? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  [ 6 1 7
TTTATTGCCCTACCA TCA CTCCTTCTTCTATA TTTA ATA ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  [ 6 1 7
TTTATTG CCCTA CCA TCA CTTCNTTTTTTA TA TTTA ATA ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  [ 6 1 7
TTTATTGCCCTACCCTCGCTTCATCTTCTCTATTTAATAGACGAGCTTACTAACCCACTATTAACAATTA [ 6 1 7  
TTTATTGCTTTACCATCACTCCACCTTCTCTACCTTATAGATGAACTTAGTAATCCATTACTCACAATTA [ 6 1 7  
TTTATTGCACTTCCCTCACTTCATATTCTTTACCTTATAGACGAATTAAATAATCCTCTTTTAACTATTA [ 6 1 7  
TTTATTGCTTTGCCCTCACTCCACCTTCTTTACCTTATAGATGAACTTAGTAATCCATTACTCACAATTA [ 6 1 7  
TTTATCGCCCTACCTTCACTTCATCTTCTATATTTAATAGACGAACTTAATAAC ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  [ 6 1 7
TTT A TC G CC CTC CCTTCA CTTC TCTTTTTA TATTTAA TA? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  [ 6 1 7
TTTATTGCCCTACCTTCACTTCATCTTCTATATTTAATAGACGAACTTAATAACCCACTACT? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  [ 6 1 7
TTT A TTG CC CTA CCTTCA CTTCTTCTTCTA TATTTAA TA? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  [ 6 1 7
TTTATTGCATTACCGTCACTTCATCTTTTATATCTTATAGATGAAATTAATAATCCATTATTAACAATTA [6 1 7  
TTTATTGCATTACCGTCACTTCATCTTTTATATCTTATAGATGAAATTAATAATCCATTATTAACAATTA [6 1 7  
TTTATTGCATTACCGTCACTTCATCTTTTATATCTTATAGATGAAATTAATAATCCATTATTAACAATTA [6 1 7
TTT A TTG CTTTG C CTTC A C TCCTTTTC TTTTT CA TA A T ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  [ 6 1 7
TTT A TTG CTTTG C CTTC A C TCCTTTTC TTTTT CA TA A T ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  [ 6 1 7
TTTATTGCTTTACCATCACTCCATCTTTTATACCTTATAGATGAACTTACTAACCCACTATTAACAATTA [6 1 7  
TTTATTGCTTTACCATCACTCCATCTTTTATACCTAATAGATGAACTTACTAACCCACTATNNACAATTA [6 1 7  
TTTATTGCTTTACCTTCACTTCACCTTCTCTATCTTATAGACGAACTTACTAATCCATTGTTGACAATTA [6 1 8  
TTCATTGCATTACCTTCTCTTCATCTTCTTTATCTTATAGACGAACTTAATAACCC? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  [ 6 1 5
TTT ATTG CG TTGCCTTCTCTTCA TCTTCTTTATCTTATAG ACG AA CTTA ATA ACCCA ?? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  [ 6 1 5
TTTATTGCATTACCTTCTCTTCW TCTTCTTTATATAATAGATGAATTAAATAATCCACT?? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  [ 6 1 5
TTTATTGCCCTTCCTTCCCTTCATATTCTTTATCTTATAGACGAAATAAATTACCCTCTTTTAACAATTA [6 1 7  
TTTATTGCATTACCTTCACTTCATCTTCTCTACCTTATAGATGAACTTAGTAATCCATTACTCACAATTA [6 1 7  
TTGATTGCTCTGCCTTCCTTACATCTTCTCTATCTTATAGATGAACTAAACAATCCTCTTTTAACAATTA [6 1 9  
TTTATCGCACTTCCTTCACTTCATCTTCTTTATCTTATAGACGAATTAAATAATCCTCTTTTAACAATTA [ 6 1 8  
TTTATTGCACACCCGTCACTTCATTTACTCTATCTTATAGATGAACTAAATAATCCACTTTTAACAATTA [6 1 9  
TTTATTGCTCTTCCTTCCCTACATCTTTTATACTTAATAGATGAATTAAATAACCCTTTATTAACAATTA [6 1 9  
TTTATTGCTCTTCCTTCCCTTCATCTTTTATACTTAATAGATGAATTAAACAACCCTCTATTAACAATTA [6 1 9  
TTT A TTG CC CTA CCTA CC CTC CTG TCTTTTTTTCTTA TA ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  [6 1 7
TTT A TTG CTTTG C CTTC CCTTCA CCT TCTTTA C CTTA TA ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  [6 1 7
TTTATTGCTTTACCTTCACTTCATCTTCTTTATCTAATAGACGAGCTTAGTAATCCATTATTAACAATTA [6 1 7  
TT T A TT G CTTTA C CCTCA C TTCT TCTTCTG TA TC TA A TA ??? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  [6 1 7
TTTATCGCCTTA CCCTCA CTA CTTCTTTTCTA CTTA ATA ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  [6 1 7
TTC A TT G CC CTCCCTTCA CTTCATTTTCTATA TCTA ATA G?? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  [6 1 9
TTTATTGCCCTCCCCTCACTTCATCTCCTATACTTAATAGACGAACTTAATAACCCACT?? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  [6 1 9
TTTATTGCCTTACCTTCACTTCATCTTCTTTACCTTATAGATGAACTTAGTAACCCATTATTAACAATTA [6 1 7  
TT T A TT G CC CTA CCT TCA CTTC TTCT TCTA TA TTTA A TA ??? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  [6 1 7
TTCATTGCTTTACCCTCACTTCACCTTCTTTATCTCATAGATGAACTTAGTAATCCACTACTCACAATTA [6 1 7  
TTCATTGCACTCCCCTCTCTTCATTTACTTTACTTAATAGATGAATTAAATAACCCGCTTTTAACTATTA [6 1 6  
TTCATTGCACTCCCGTCCTTACATTTACTGTACTTAATAGATGAATTAAATAACCCTCTW STAACAATTA [ 6 2 0  
TTTATTGCCCTTCCCTCACTTCACCTGCTTTATATTATAGATGAACTAAATAACCCTCTTTTAACTGTAA [6 1 7  
TTTATCGCCCTCCCCTCACTCCACCTTCTTTATATCATAGACGAACTTAATAACC ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  [6 1 9
TTTATTGCTCTCCCATCACTTCATCTTCTCTATATTATAGATGAACTTAGACAACCTCTTCTAACAATTA [6 1 7  
TTTATTGCCCTCCCATCACTTCATCTTCTCTACATTATAGATGAATTAGACAATCCTCTTTTAACAATTA [ 6 1 8  
TTTATTGCTCTCCCCTCTCTACATCTCCTATACTTAATAGATGAACTTAGAAACCCTTTATTAACAATTA [ 6 1 8  
TTTATTGCTCTTCCCTCTCTGCATCTTCTTTACTTAATAGATGAACTTAGAAATCCTTTATTAACAATTA [ 6 1 8  
TTTATTG CTCTTCCCTCTCTGCATCTCCTATATTTAATAGATGAACTTAATAAC ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  [ 6 1 8
TTTATTGCTCTGCCTAGACTCCAW CTCCTGTACTTAATAGATGAACTTAGTAACCCTCTACTAACCATTA [6 1 7  
TTTATTGCTCTTCCCTCCCTTCACCTTTTATACATTATAGATGAATTAAGTATTCCTCTATTAACAATTA [ 6 2 0  
TTCATTGCTCTTCCTTCTCTTCATCTTTTATACCTAATAGAAGAATTACATAACCCTCTTTTAACAATTA [ 6 1 8  
TTTATTGCTCTTCCCTCACTTCACCTTCTTTATCTAATAGACGAATTAAATAATCCTCTTTTAACAATTA (6 1 7  
TTTATTGCTCTTCCCTCTCTTCACCTCCTTTATTTAATAGATGAATTAAATAACCCATTATTAACAATTA [6 1 7  
TTTATTGCGCTCCCCTCTCTTCACATTTTATACCTAATAGATGAATTAAGA?? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?  [6 1 8
- 2 5 2 -
APPENDIX 3 cont.
c o n 2 9 8 b p  e n d ]
A c i z z i a _ h o l l i s i AAATTTTAG [ 6 2 5 ]
A c i z z i a _ u n c a t o i d e s AAATTATAG [ 6 3 1 ]
A r y t a i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ P O AAATTATCG [ 6 2 6 ]
A r y t a i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ S P AAATTATCG [ 6 2 6 ]
A r y t a i n a _ a d e n o c a r p i _ M O AAATTATCG [ 6 2 6 ]
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ T AAATTATTG [ 6 2 8 ]
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ G AAATTATTG [ 6 2 8 ]
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ s s p _ i n s u l a r i s _ C AAATTATTG [ 6 2 7 ]
A r y t a i n a _ d e v i a _ s s p _ i n s u l a r i s _ P AAATTATTG [ 6 2 9 ]
A r y t a i n a _ g e n i s t a e _ S C AAATTATTG [ 6 2 5 ]
A r y t a i n a _ g e n i s t a e _ P O AAATTATTG [ 6 2 5 ]
A r y t a i n a _ g e n i s t a e _ M O AAATTATTG [ 6 2 5 ]
A r y t a i n a _ n u b i v a g a ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? [ 6 2 6 ]
A r y t a i n a _ s p . 14 ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? [ 6 2 6 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ c o g n a t a ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? [ 6 2 6 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ c y t i s i AAATTATTG [ 6 2 8 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d e l a r b r e i ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? [ 6 3 0 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i l u t a _ C ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? [ 6 2 6 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i l u t a _ T ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? [ 6 2 6 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i v i d e n s _ C ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? [ 6 2 6 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i v i d e n s _ T ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? [ 6 2 6 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ d i v i d e n s _ G ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? [ 6 2 6 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ e q u i t a n s AAGTAATTG [ 6 2 6 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ h a k a n i AAGTAATCG [ 6 2 6 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ i m a AAATTATTG [ 6 2 6 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ i n c u b a AAGTAATCG [ 6 2 6 ]
A r y t a i n i 1 l a  j n o d i c a _ T e l i n e _ P ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? [ 6 2 6 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ m o d i c a _ C h a m . _ P ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? [ 6 2 6 ]
A r y  t  a  i  n  i  1 1  a _ jn o d i  c  a _ T e  1 i  n  e _ H ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? [ 6 2 6 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ m o d i c a _ C h a m . _ H ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? [ 6 2 6 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ n i g r a l i n e a t a _ C AAGTAATTG [ 6 2 6 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ n i g r a l i n e a t a _ T AAGTAATTG [ 6 2 6 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ n i g r a l i n e a t a _ G AAGTAATTG [ 6 2 6 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p i l e o l a t a _ T . c a n ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? [ 6 2 6 ]
A r y t a i n i 1 l a _ p i l e o l a t a _ T . o s y ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? [ 6 2 6 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p r o b o s c i d e a _ A . v i s _ T AAGTAATTG [ 6 2 6 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p r o b o s c i d e a _ A . f o l _ P A A G T ? ? ? ? ? [ 6 2 6 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ p r o g n a t a AAGTAATTG [ 6 2 7 ]
A r y t a  i n  i 1 l a _ s p a r t  i  o p h i l a _ P O ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? [ 6 2 4 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p a r t i o p h i l a _ S P ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? [ 6 2 4 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p a r t i o p h i l a _ M O ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? [ 6 2 4 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s u l c i AAATTATTG [ 6 2 6 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ u m b o n a t a AAGTAATCG [ 6 2 6 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 AAATCATTG [ 6 2 8 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 2 AAATCATTG [ 6 2 7 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 3 AAATTATTG [ 6 2 8 ]
A r y t a i n i 1 l a _ s p . 4 _ S P AAATTATTG [ 6 2 8 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 4 _ M 0 AAATTATTG [ 6 2 8 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 5 ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? [ 6 2 6 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 6 ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? [ 6 2 6 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 7 AAGTAATCG [ 6 2 6 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 8 ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? [ 6 2 6 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 9 ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? [ 6 2 6 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 0 _ P ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? [ 6 2 8 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 0 _ H ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? [ 6 2 8 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 1 AAGTAATTG [ 6 2 6 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 2 [ 6 2 6 ]
A r y t a i n i l l a _ s p . 1 3 AAGTAATCG [ 6 2 6 ]
C a c o p s y l l a _ a l a t e r n i AAATTATTG [ 6 2 5 ]
C a c o p s y l l a _ m a l i WAWTTTTCS [ 6 2 9 ]
C y a m o p h i l a _ p r o h a s k a i AAATTATTG [ 6 2 6 ]
L i v i l l a _ a d u s t a ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? [ 6 2 8 ]
L i v i l l a _ b l a n d u l a AGATTATTG [ 6 2 6 ]
L i v i l l a _ m a u r a AAATTATTG [ 6 2 7 ]
L i v i l l a _ m o n o s p e r m a e _ T AAATTATCG [ 6 2 7 ]
L i v i 1 l a _ m o n o s p e r m a e _ G AAATTATCG [ 6 2 7 ]
L i v i l l a _ m o n o s p e r m a e _ P ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? [ 6 2 7 ]
L i v i l l a _ r e t a m a e AAATTATCG [ 6 2 6 ]
L i v i l l a _ v a r i e g a t a AAATTATTG [ 6 2 9 ]
L i v i l l a _ s p . 1 5 AAATTAT? ? [ 6 2 7 ]
L i v i l l a _ s p . 1 6 AAATCATTG [ 6 2 6 ]
L i v i l l a _ s p . 1 7 AAATTATTG [ 6 2 6 ]
P s e u d a c a n t h o p s y l l a _ i m p r o v i s a ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? [ 6 2 7 ]
APPENDIX 4. List o f 67 morphological characters and chararcter states.
Adult
1. Forewing shape: (0) widest in the apical third with a broadly rounded apex; (1) widest in 
the middle third with more acutely rounded apex; (2) margins more or less parallel, apex 
broadly rounded or more acute.
2. Forewing costal break: (0) absent; (1) present.
3. Forewing pterostigma: (0) absent; (1) present.
4. Forewing vein pigmentation: (0) uniformly coloured; (1) with distinct light and dark
banding; (2) with dark patches at the terminal apices.
5. Termination o f vein Rs at the forewing apex: (0) strongly curved towards the wing margin;
(1) not, or only weakly curved towards the wing margin.
6. Surf ace forewing spinules density: (0) sparse: less than 40 per 0.1 mm ; (1) medium 
density: 40-60 per 0.1 mm2; (2) dense: 60-100 per 0.1 mm2; (3) very dense: more than 100 
per 0.1 mm2.
7. Shape ofhindwing costal margin: (0) straight; (1) slightly concave; (2) markedly concave.
8. Genal cones position: (0) commencing dorsally from more or less the same level as the 
vertex; (1) commencing ventrally relative to the vertex, with a distinct depression between 
the vertex and the genal cones.
9. Genal cones terminal setae length: (0) as long as, or typically longer than the vertex; (1)
typically shorter than the vertex, occasionally as long.
10. Genal cones terminal setae colour. (0) darkly pigmented; (1) not darkly pigmented.
11. Metatarsal spur. (0) absent; (1) one; (2) two.
12. Male paramere shape'. (0) with an apically thin neck above a medially positioned blade or
ridge produced on the external side and directed anteriorly; (1) apically thin neck typically 
absent or very short, without a medial blade but with a terminal ridge or blade present 
laterally exterior to the apex; (2) broad and parallel sided, lacking medial or apical blade; 
(3) slender, often simple with sides parrallel or tapering towards the apex, lacking medial 
or apical blade.
13. Male paramere sclerotized apex in lateral view'. (0) rounded with small or more 
pronounced, anteriorly or interiorly directed hook; (1) flattened or more or less so, with 
slight or more pronounced anterior projection; (2) either flattened or with a well rounded 
bulge, and with slight anterior and posterior projections; (3) small, not hooked but 
sometimes with small anterior projection, and displaced either to the interior or posterior of
- 2 5 4 -
the top of the paramere.
14. Male paramere sclerotized apex in dorsal view : (0) contiguous anteriorly; (1) contiguous 
more or less along entire inner margin; (2) contiguous posteriorly.
15. Male paramere sclerotized apex inner surface in dorsal view : (0) straight edged; (1) 
concave; (2) rounded with an acute point.
16. Male proctiger apex: (0) with pronounced posterior extension apically; (1) without 
pronounced posterior extension apically.
17. Male aedeagus distal segment apex: (0) with a well developed, curved hook; (1) with a 
somewhat flattened, shallow hook; (2) not developed into a hook.
18. Tip o f male aedeagus hook: (0) turning upwards; (1) not turning upwards.
19. Male subgenital plate dorsal profile: (0) more or less straight and horizontal; (1) raised 
anteriorly, either with or without a distinct step.
20. Male subgenital plate dorsal posterior margin: (0) with a pair of long (more than half the 
length of the paramere) stout setae; (1) without a pair of long stout setae.
21. Female proctiger dorsal profile: (0) more or less straight from anus to apex; (1) with a post 
anal depression, and subsequently more or less straight, or slightly concave or convex; (2) 
without a post anal depression, and concave with an upturned apex.
22. Female proctiger apex: (0) squarely truncated; (1) bluntly rounded; (2) acute.
23. Female subgenital plate ventral profile: (0) shallowly curved, without medial bulge but 
sometimes angled medially; (1) slight, or more pronounced medial bulge; (2) deeply 
curved, without medial bulge.
24. Female ovipositor: (0) valvulae ventralis slender, height of valvulae dorsalis typically as 
great or greater than valvulae ventralis; (1) valvulae ventralis robust, height of valvulae 
dorsalis less than valvulae ventralis.
25. Female ovipositor valvulae dorsalis shape: (0) dorsally convex, wedge-shaped and 
tapering to the apex; (1) dorsally concave, and distinctly inflated anteriorly; (2) more or 
less straight, with or without dorsal tooth-like processes; (3) triangular, tapering both to the 
apex and anteriorly.
26. Female ovipositor valvulae ventralis apex: (0) rounded, often acutely so, lacking any 
serration; (1) rounded with minute serrations that extend along the ventral margin; (2) 
stepped with square tip; (3) rounded with two small ventral processes near the tip.
27. Forewing pterostigma length: (0) short, less than one 20th the wing length (ratio wing 
lengthipterostigma length equal to or more than 20); (1) medium, less than one quarter of
the wing length (ratio wing length:pterostigma length 4.5-20); (2) long, about one quarter 
of the wing length (ratio wing lengthipterostigma length equal to or less than 4.5).
28. Genal cone length: (0) short to very short, 0.15 mm or less (up to half the length of the 
vertex); (1) long, 0.15 - 0.3 mm (roughly the same length as the vertex); (2) very long, 
more than 0.3 mm (about 1.5 times the length of the vertex).
29. Antennal length: (0) very short, less than 1 mm; (1) short, 1 to 1.5 mm; (2) medium, 1 .5 -2  
mm; (3) long, more than 2 mm.
30. Distal proboscis segment length: (0) up to 0.14 mm; (1) 0.14 to 0.2 mm; (2) 0.2 to 0.3 mm; 
(3) 0.3 mm or more.
31. Ratio forewing length to width: (0) less than 2.2; (1) 2.2-2.6; (2) greater than 2.6.
32. Ratio hind leg tibia length to fem ur length: (0) up to 1; (1) 1 to 1.26; (2) 1.26 or more.
33. Ratio hind leg apical tarsus to tibia length: (0) up to 0.22; (1) 0.22 to 0.33; (2) 0.33 or 
more.
34. Male proctiger length: (0) 0.3 mm or less; (1) 0.3-0.4 mm; (2) 0.4-0.5 mm; (3) 0.5 mm or
greater.
35. Male paramere length: (0) very short, less than 0.25 mm; (1) short, 0.25 to 0.4 mm; (2) 
mid-length, greater than 0.4 but less than 0.55 mm; (3) long, greater than 0.55 mm.
36. Male aedeagus length: (0) up to 0.26 mm; (1) 0.26 to 0.37 mm; (2) 0.37 to 0.47 mm; (3) 
0.47 mm or more.
37. Male aedeagus hook: (0) small, 0.08 mm or less; (1) medium, 0.08-0.13 mm; (2) large, 
greater than 0.13 mm.
38. Ratio male subgenital plate length to height: (0) up to 1.3; (1) 1.3 to 1.55; (2) 1.55 or more.
39. Ratio male paramere length to subgenital plate height: (0) 1 or less; (1) 1 to 1.4; (2) 1.4 or 
greater.
40. Female proctiger length: (0) less than 0.5 mm; (1) 0.5 to 0.85 mm; (2) 0.85 to 1 mm; (3) 1 
mm or greater.
41. Female subgenital plate length: (0) less than 0.35 mm; (1) 0.35 to 0.7 mm; (2) greater than
0.7 mm.
42. Female ventral ovipositor valve length: (0) up to 0.2 mm; (1) 0.2 to 0.35 mm; (2) 0.35 mm 
or more.
43. Ratio female proctiger length to circumanal ring length: (0) 4 or less; (1) greater than 4.
5th instar nymph
44. Forewing pad and abdomen apically: (0) acute; (1) broadly rounded.
- 2 5 6 -
45. Antennal segments: (0) seven; (1) eight; (2) nine.
46. Circumanal ring shape: (0) broadly crescent-shaped with well rounded anterior lobes; (1)
narrowly crescent-shaped with well rounded anterior lobes, but with lateral margins either 
straight or slightly concave; (2) narrowly crescent-shaped with acutely rounded anterior 
lobes.
47. Body length: (0) up to 2 mm; (1) 2 mm or more.
48. Antennal length: (0) up to 0.63 mm; (1) 0.63 to 0.88 mm; (2) 0.88 to 1.18 mm; (3) 1.18
mm or more.
49. Ratio forewing pad length to head width: (0) 1 or less; (1) greater than 1.
50. Ratio caudal plate width to length: (0) less than 1.2; (1) greater than 1.2.
51. Ratio caudal plate width to circumanal ring width: (0) up to 4; (1) 4 to 5; (2) 5 or more.
52. Head setae: (0) simple, occasionally narrowly capitate; (1) simple and distinctly capitate;
(2) simple and club-shaped; (3) simple and sectasetae.
53. Antennal setae: (0) simple; (1) simple and capitate; (2) simple and club-shaped; (3) 
sectasetae.
54. Ocular seta: (0) absent; (1) simple, or narrowly capitate or rod; (2) distinctly capitate; (3)
sectasetae.
55. Secondary post-ocular seta: (0) absent or indistinct; (1) prominent, simple, sometimes 
narrowly capitate; (2) prominent, distinctly capitate, occasionally narrow.
56. Dorsal thoracic setae: (0) simple only; (1) capitate present; (2) club setae; (3) sectasetae.
57. Dorsal prominent pre-caudal setae placement: (0) absent or indistinct; (1) prominent, on 
anterior tergites; (2) prominent, on posterior tergites; (3) prominent, on all tergites.
58. Forewing pad setae: (0) simple only; (1) capitate only; (2) simple and capitate; (3) club- 
shaped; (4) sectasetae.
59. Forewing pad prominent setae: (0) marginal; (1) surface and marginal.
60. Forewing pad prominent setae: (0) one; (1) two; (2) more than two.
61. Abdominal sectasetae: (0) absent; (1) present.
62. Abdominal sectasetae: (0) one pair; (1) two pairs; (2) three pairs; (3) four pairs; (4) more 
than four pairs.
63. Marginal abdominal setae (other than sectasetae): (0) absent; (1) one pair; (2) two pairs;
(3) three or four pairs; (4) more than four pairs.
64. Leg setal type: (0) simple setae only; (1) capitate setae present; (2) club-shaped setae 
present; (3) sectasetae present.
- 2 5 7 -
65. Foreleg tibia number o f distinct setal type: (0) one; (1) two; (2) more than two.
66. Middle leg tibia number o f  distinct setal type: (0) one; (1) two; (2) more than two.
67. Hind leg tibia number o f distinct setal type: (0) one; (1) two; (2) more than two.
Opposite page:
APPENDIX 5.
Matrix o f 67 morphological characters and character states.
Inapplicable or missing characters are indicated by and '?  respectively.
CM CM CM CM CM o CM P- CM o 5 o .
CM  -  CM CM  CM CM CM O CM P- CM o
I/O  c- 5 CM c CM c- c* p- CM
CM CM CM CM CM o CM p- 1/
s * o  o   CM CM CM CM CM o O P- -   o C-5 CM c*-CM c**C P" CM
CM - - CM   CM p-    CM CM CM -  P- o c-  CM c- 0/1
/2 o~ *p- CM
- - - - - o CM P- o - 5 - o - o - o - o o - - o o - CM - - C- - - o o - o c~ - c*- - p**C p- CO
CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO P- CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO - CO M1CO CM CO CO CO CO CO P- CO CO CO CO CO CO C CO CO c- CO o- p- o
- o 5 - o CO CO P- CO 2/
3 CM CO CM CO CM CO CM CO CM CO CO O CM CM CO CO CO CO P- CO CM CO 2/
3 CO CO o CO CO c- CO p p** p-
o - 0/1 5 - - - - P- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - o - - P> - - - - - - C*- - - 0 - C*p p- -
CM CM CM CM 5 o CM o P- o - - CM CM o CM o - CM - o  CM CM CM O CM CM CM P CM o - 1/
2 o CM 0" CM CM c- CM c- p p- CM
- - - - o O o P- o o o o o o O o o O o o o - O - o - o O p- - o o o o o C*o - 0 i c> p**p* -
CM - CM CM CM CM CO P* o CM CM CM CM CM CM CM CM - o CM - - CM O o CO CM - CM p*CM - CM CM  CM C CM - c* - C p" p-
CO - CO - - - CO P- CM - - CO - O - - - - - - o CO - o CO CO CO - - p- CO o - - s - C - - C' - c- c- p- CO
5 - O o o o CM P- o - - o - o - o - - o o o - - o - CM - o O p- - o o - o - c~ - - c - C p- p- CO
O CM CM CM - - - o p- - CM CM - CM  CM - - CM - - o CM CM o CM O CM CM - P- - o - CM - CM c- - CM c-
CM C p~ p- o
CM - - - - - - - p- - - - - - - - - - - - - - o - - - - - - - P- - O" - - - - O*- CM C - C* C'- p- CO
- O - o o o CM p- o o o o O o O o o O o o o - O o - CM - o o P- o o o o o O C" o c~ - C--P" p~ CO
O o O o o o CM p- o o o o o o o o o o o o - o o o o CM - o o P- o o o o o o c- o - c- - p~ p p- CO
CM I/O 0/1 - - o  1/2 p- - 0/1
/2 o - o - 5 o o s o o CM 0/1 -
CM CM
- s o P- - o o o s o c- o O c- 5 p- p* CM
- - - - - - - p- - - - - - 1- - - - - - - - - - o - O - - - p- - - - - - - c- - - C - c- Pp- -
o o o o o o o i - p - o o o 
P  P  ftJ   o. r-
 o  o  o  o  o  o   o o
g o g o g o g p - o g o o o o o o o o o g o i - o
g g o O O P O O  O O O P *  O P O P - P - P    
Oi-i-i-CMP-i-r-CM^T-i-O-i-CMP ^jPC-P-O
o o g o o p - o o o o o o p - o g p - g p - p p - o
O O O O O O O C M P O O O O O O O O O O O O O i- O O C M C M O O O P O O O O O O P O O P O P P - P - C M
C M O O O O O O O P O O O O O O O O C M O C M O O O O O O O O O O P O O t- i- O O P - O O P O P  P P ' O
^T-^-Ol-T-^T-p.T-l-T-T-T-^P
O  i- r- r- - i-
-  W CM 
g o o g o o g o g o o i - i - o o i - g o g o i - o o o o o
O O i - i - i - t  0 0 0  - * - O t - C M i - t - i -  -  - i - O i - O O P O i - O O i - i - O i - O t - O O O i - i - t -  - C M *  0  
^ T. v.T- T. ^ M W T - N ^ ^ ^ N ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ T. ^ w > n i - i - > 0 0  - i - 0  -  - i - 0 r * 0 ( M ^ W T - W
( M O W W T - c y i O i - O ( \ | T - N N O T - g i - C M g 0 ^  -  - O O i - i - O O O f O f i - C M { N J W  - W T - O
 N C M C M r i - r r f
2  CM CM CO CO CM 
O O O i- i- i - O
O O O O O O O i -
C N J O i - O O O i - i - i -
O O O O O 1- 1- 1-
O i-C N Ji-1 -i-O O C * -
w o o o o o w o o  
w o o o n n w o o
n w i - W r t - o n n
    S b 
i- i - CM CM CM i
w o o w o o o
 O  O  O  O  O  T-
 O O O O O 1- 
I 1- O 1- CM CM O 
 *- r- *
- o o s  s - - - o - -
1 o - o - o - o - - o - o
1 1- CM- - - - - CMCM- CM-
I y CO- - - COCMCOCO- CO
1 CMCM- 1- 1- 1- 1- CM1- - - -
1 s  s o - o 0/
1 o - o 5 o s
I Oi- 1- o T- CM1- i- 1- 1- 1-
 - CM- - s CM- - s -
t CMCO- - CMCMCMCOCM- CM-
CMo - o CM- CMCMo - 0/1
s 5 * o o
s - CM- - - - CM 1/2 CM 1/2
1- T- 1- 1- 1- i i- i- - 1- i- 1-
 CM o - O- - - co
i CM - CM CM CM CM  1/
2 CM -
Oo Oo O - OOo o o o
CM CM CM o CM - CM CM CM CM CM CM
OOOo OOO 0 3 0 CO O
1 o OOo o o o OOo o O
o o Oo o o
00 Oo o O '
o o - - o o Oo O- o
- - - CM - - - - - - -
1 o o CM o o o o o o o CM
- - - - - - - - - - - -
o - o o - o - - - o - o
o o - o o *
*- ^ .
o o o CM o o o o o o o o 
o o CM o CM o CM o - CM -
CO CO CO o - o - CO - CM CM
o - CO o - o o - Oo CO 1
- - - - - - - - - - -
o - - - - - - - o - o -
o o o o o - o o o o o o
- - - o - o - - - -
- - - o - o - - - - -
CM o - - o - o o o o o
- - - - - - - - - - -
o o o o o o o o - o - o 
- - - - - - - - - - -
T-  _ .
p~ - p- c- p- o 
T-OOOOi-goOi-OOOO-r-OOi-OO 
W O O O O t- O O O i- O i- O i- t- i- i- i- O O
l - l - l - T - l - l - ^ - l - l - ^ - T - ^ T - OJ C S J C VJ l - C J l - l -
 1- CM 1- 1- 1 - 1 - t-
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
1 1 1   Vi J2  3
 CM * *-
o o o - - - CM - o
1 1- - - - - CM CM - -
1 T- o o o o o o o o
2 - - - CM CM CM CM CM
 o CM CM o o o o o O
1 CM CM CM o o o o o O
1 T- - - o o o o o O
o o o o o o o o O
- - - - - - - -
1 o o o 5 o o o o o
- - - - - - - -
o o o o o o o - o
*- *
 T- T 1- T-
1 CM o o o CM o o - o
> o o o - o - CM CM -
> o o o - o o CM CM -
CO CO CO CO CO CO o Oo
- - - - - - - - -
- - - - - o - -
o - o o o o o o
o - - - - - - - -
o o o o - - - - -
' CM - -  - - o CM
- - - - - - - - -
o o o o o o o o O 1
- - - - - - - - -
- - - - - - - -
o o o o o o O 1
1- O  1- O  O  1-
C^i -OJCMCNJi - i - Oi -
O O O O O i - 1 - g O
' N N n w n r r r i -
l i - i - C M i- 1 - 1 - 1 - 1 - 1 -
 OCMi- i- O C M O O t- 1 -
1-1-1-Ol-Ol-l-T-T-
 O O O O O O i - 1 - O O
i - 1 - i - i - i - O i - i -
O O O O O O O O O O t - O O  
O i - O i - O O O O O O i - O O
n o o o c o w n w w c o w w w
> O t- i- t- i- t- i- O i- i-  
T - O O O O O O O O O  
1 - O O O O O O O O t-
( o n e o o o w w c o n i -
1-1-1-1-l-l-l-l-T-l-l-l-l-T-T-l-l-l-l-l-l-T-l-l-OOOOOl-T-l-l-
I O O O O O O O O O O  
1 - 1 - 1 - 1 - O i- O t- i- i-
 i - 1 - i - i - O i - O i - O i -
 OCNJ CMCMr - o g i - Oi - CM
i t  i
i m j fL Q. Q. or 35 3
O 1- CM CO 
i - < N j c o T r m c o i N . o o o ) i - i - i - i -  <o   <b q> 
d d d d d d d d d d d d d c o '5  cr u  cu 
( o < o M ( O 0 i n  ) n < o  i v ) ( A i n ^ ,b O Q ;
g I i 11
S 5  S ^  (Q iS (Q IQ (Q (Q _IQ W ^  ffl IQ jO Q Q IQ (Q (Q Q Q)
sl.l2SS2.sSSSSSS222SSS??SSSSSci3Sc
l l l l l t l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l t l l l t l l l l l
d d d . 313 5  2   m Q. d  
 f t    c  S   ID
- 2 5 9 -
APPENDIX 6.
12131834  
4 1 4 1 9 2 6  35 4041 42 43 
10 23 34 
30 32 60 62
13 23
14 37
613 55 56 64
rH-KHH
7 815 27 30 34
6 9 28 56
[tHBbH
37 55 66 67
f H W
57 62
33 51 58
7 15 34 36 48 55
17 22
9 26 35 40 41 42 43 n |  n n
  n i n i n n n|u~i~ir~Lr 
I I U " U I in n ll/n  pr
nigralineata 
proboscidea
sp.7 56 58
61 2 1 3
58 64 67lH +
H H +  ata
4HH- cognata
1 9 3 5 62 hakani
3 4 40 incuba 
1317375556  Sp.10 
30 sp.11
13 23 39 62 umbonata
36 U U U U
^  sp13  30 sp.12
1719 37 40 4 2 ^  6 1314 15 18 57 59 60
666rim H K 41H - *p -81318 34 51
HHHHH
riH l si~Ml
HHH?9_3ff9g01 modica 
divide ns3843 60 6 10 21 57 58 64
- H 4 f  HHHhUHh diluta
H K t t  rognata
15 3655 5 8 4 - W - I H -  30 36 55 57 58 62 S P 9  
23 38 42 57 4H H H H - 14 29 36 48 67 * p .6  
A .gred i 
36 Livilla blandula 
32 42 Livilla adusta 9 55 59 60
6 15 26 46 57,
8 28 36 40
rtHHH-24 25 37 39 42 58
rfhHHMH
49 55 56 57 60
rf+H H H
34 36 40
35 40 42
A. sp.2
35 36 40 41
A. cytisi
1 so a . sp,3
6 12 17 29
35 36
r a t w  
i i d0 29 i  j1 11 20 29 
29 31
44 52 58 64
W O - H H +  5 51 52 58 Am spa rtiop h i la
17 31 33 A. sp.1
21 22 23 29 30 A. delarbrei
u u u u  u
A. ima
9 13 14 19 30 Livilla sp.16 
28 54 Livilla monospermae 
Livilla retamae
4 H  3 32 35 38
3 19 30 HHH-fh L iv il la  nervosa 
31 HHHY Livilla sp.15
4  Livilla sp.17 5 3 5 7 5 8
r ( H H |-  Arytaina devia 30 51 59 66 67
2 3.4nV5 294n 1 4 13n2? l \ 5n n?n Arytaina sp
4 4 ^ 4 f ^ 4  7 28 31 32 33
1 15 i 7r H i H H -  6  Arytaina nubwaga
H- Arytaina genistae
9 28 30 65
U H H \
Arytaina adenocarpi13 14 15 52 61
4M -M 4- a .sp.4
24 25 26 34 35 36 42 46 47 63 A. SUld
4H H H H H H H 111111 1 6 11 22 32 37 44 46 53 56 58 63 64 Pseudacanthopsylla 
Acizzia uncatoides
Appendix 6. Phylogram of morphological data (strict consensus of 18 trees) showing 
unambiguous character state changes: black symbols = unique changes, white symbols = parallel 
changes; bars indicate apomorphic states, and arrows the direction of character change.
CHAPTER FOUR: LEGUME DIVERSITY - 2 6 0 -
CHAPTER FOUR
DIFFERENT FATES OF ISLAND BROOM S: CONTRASTING EVOLUTION IN 
ADENOCARPUS , GENISTA  AND TELIN E  (GENISTEAE, LEGUMINOSAE) IN 
THE CANARY ISLANDS AND M ADEIRA
[This paper has been submitted to the Botanical Journal o f the Linnean Society] 
Abstract
Analysis of sequence data from the internal transcribed spacers (ITS) and 5.8S region of 
nuclear ribosomal DNA show that Canarian and Madeiran brooms (Genisteae) of the 
genera Teline, Adenocarpus and Genista are related to Mediterranean species and not to 
species from adjacent parts of Morocco. Each separate colonization of the islands has 
resulted in contrasting patterns of adaptation and radiation. The genus Teline is diphyletic 
with both groups (the T. monspessulana group and the T . linifolia group) separately 
nested within Genista. Genista benehoavensis (La Palma) and G. tenera (Madeira) form, 
with G. tinctoria of Europe, a single clade characterized by vestigially arillate seeds. The 
Canarian species of Adenocarpus have almost identical sequence to the Mediterranean A. 
complicatus, and are likely to be the result of island speciation after a very recent 
colonization event. This Canarian/Mediterranean A. complicatus group is sister to the 
afrotropical montane A. mannii which is probably derived from an earlier colonization 
from the Mediterranean, possibly via the Red Sea hills. The independent colonization and 
subsequent radiation of the two Teline groups in the Canary Islands make an interesting 
comparison: the phylogenies both show geographical structuring, each with a central and 
western island division of taxa. Within the T. monspessulana group there is evidence that 
both continental and Madeiran taxa could be derived from the Canary Islands. The finding 
of two groups within Teline also has implications for patterns of hybridization in those 
parts of the world where Teline species are invasive; in California members of the T. 
monspessulana group hybridize readily, but no hybrids have been recorded with T. linifolia 
which has been introduced in the same areas.
CHAPTER FOUR: LEGUME DIVERSITY -261 -
4.1 Introduction
4.1.1 The tribe Genisteae and its representatives in the Canaries and Madeira
The Genisteae (brooms, gorse and relatives) form a large (> 450 spp.) and ecologically 
important group, distributed widely in both Old and New World regions (Polhill, 1976). 
They are notable for having a particularly confused generic taxonomy. There are several 
well established genera, such as Cytisus and Genista but little agreement as to which 
segregates of these genera are valid (Polhill, 1976; Bisby, 1981). Recent molecular studies 
have shown the Genisteae to be monophyletic (excluding Melolobium  and Argyrolobium 
uniflorum, Kass & Wink, 1995, 1997), but further sampling is needed to resolve the 
generic classification.
The Genisteae are well represented in the Canary Islands and Madeira with 22 
native species in six genera. In Madeira there are three endemic species (Teline 
maderensis, T. paivae and Genista tenera) and one possibly native, non-endemic species 
{Adenocarpus complicatus). The situation is more complicated in the central and western 
Canary Islands (see map, Fig. 1) where some groups appear to have undergone adaptive 
radiations. There are no native representatives on the dry, eastern islands (Fuerteventura 
and Lanzarote). The genus Teline is represented by 10 endemic species and Adenocarpus 
by three endemic species (one of which, A. ombriosus, may be close to extinction). The 
two common Adenocarpus species (local name: codeso) are ecologically important, in 
places forming the dominant vegetation. Teline canariensis (local name: retamon) is a 
prominent component of the fayal-brezal {Myricafaya and Erica arborea) vegetation on 
Tenerife, and T. stenopetala ssp. stenopetala (local name: gacia) is cultivated in the 
islands for fodder (Perez de Paz et al., 1986). Genista, however, is represented by a single 
endemic species, reported as extremely rare in the 1970s (Santos-Guerra, 1975) but 
recently part of a successful conservation program in the sub-alpine zone of La Palma 
(Palomares Martinez, 1997). The remaining genera consist of Spartocytisus (an endemic 
genus with two species), Chamaecytisus (one variable endemic species) and Retama (a 
single, non-endemic species). The Adenocarpus, Genista and Teline species have been the 
subject of much generic revision (see Table 1) and have been revised by Gibbs (1967, 
1974), Gibbs & Dingwall (1972) and Arco Aguilar (1982, 1983, 1993). These treatments, 
with minor modifications, have been followed here.
CHAPTER FOUR: LEGUME DIVERSITY - 2 6 2 -
4.1.2 Molecular approaches to plant biogeography in the Macaronesia flora  
Molecular techniques have been used to interpret the historical biogeography of island taxa 
by sampling putative continental progenitors in different source areas (Bohle, Hilger & 
Martin, 1996; Kim et al., 1996; Francisco-Ortega et al., 1997a; Vargas et al., 1999; Panero 
et al., 1999; Helfgott et al., 2000). Biogeographic links for the Macaronesian flora are 
diverse. There is evidence for Eurosiberian (Saxifraga; Vargas et al., 1999), Mediterranean 
(Argyranthemum, Bencomia; Francisco-Ortega et al., 1997a; Helfgott et al., 2000), 
Southern African (Phyllis; Sunding, 1979), North African (Dracaena; Sunding, 1979) and 
New World (Pericallis; Panero et al., 1999) origins, as well as Asian and Australasian 
disjunctions (Apollonias, Picconia', Sunding, 1979). The ITS-5.8S region often fails to 
provide adequate sequence divergence for phylogenetic resolution of rapid speciation on 
islands (Bohle et al., 1996, Kim et al., 1996, Helfgott et al., 2000), and in particular the 
highly conserved 5.8S region is often uninformative in such studies. However, in this 
analysis the three informative sites in the 5.8S region include a putative synapomorphy for 
a group otherwise not recovered with ITS alone (these nodes are indicated in Fig. 2).
The objectives of this study were: (1) to examine phylogenetic relationships of the 
Macaronesian species; (2) to determine whether the Canarian Genisteae share a common 
biogeographic origin (i.e. European, Mediterranean or African); (3) to investigate the 
biogeography of Teline within the Canary Islands. The Canarian Genisteae are host to 21 
species of plant feeding endemic psyllids (Hemiptera). These are the subject of ongoing 
parallel studies by one of us (D.P.) and it is hoped that the answers to the above questions 
may shed light on patterns of speciation in the associated insects.
4.2 Materials and methods
4.2.1 Taxon sampling 
Ingroup selection
Included in the analyses are 18 of the 22 endemic and native species of Genisteae in the 
Canary Islands and Madeira, which are considered to have ambiguous or unresolved 
ancestry. Excluded are the only native non-endemic species, Retama monosperma (L.) 
Boiss., a widespread and common species of less biogeographic interest; and three 
endemic species in Spartocytisus and Chamaecytisus which have been shown by Kass & 
Wink (1997) to have originated from within the Cytisus-group. To shed further light on the 
origins of these species would require extensive sampling among the cytisoid legumes 
which was beyond the scope of this study. Fourteen species of Teline were sampled,
CHAPTER FOUR: LEGUME DIVERSITY -263 -
representing the entirety of the genus as usually circumscibed (section Teline) -  with the 
exception of the restricted endemic T. osmariensis (Coss.) P. E. Gibbs & Dingwall, from 
Morocco. This species, known only from two collections, is described as showing close 
affinity to T. monspessulana (Gibbs & Dingwall, 1972; Maire, 1987). Two Spanish species 
recently transferred (Talavera & Gibbs, 1999) from Cytisus to a separate section of Teline 
(section Chronanthus: T. patens (DC.) Talavera & P.E. Gibbs and T. tribracteolata (Webb) 
Talavera & P.E. Gibbs) are not considered to be closely related to the Macaronesian 
species and have not been included here. The majority of intraspecific taxa in the Canary 
Islands including all five subspecies of Teline stenopetala (the most variable species) were 
also analysed, the only exceptions being the very rare T. rosmarinifolia ssp. eurifolia del 
Arco and a recently described subspecies, T. pallida ssp. silensis del Arco (Arco Aguilar, 
2000). Eleven of the 15 Adenocarpus species, representing each of the three to five species 
groups delimited by Lems (1958), Gibbs (1967) and Maire (1987), were used to determine 
the affiliation of the Canarian taxa. The distinctive basal cytisoid plant, Argyrocytisus 
battandieri, which Talavera & Salgueiro (1999) have suggested should be placed in 
Adenocarpus is also included. Finally, a selection of Genista spp. from Africa and Europe 
were chosen to investigate the biogeographic origins and monophyly of the island species 
of Genista and Teline, and to ascertain the specific affiliation of Genista benehoavensis 
from the Canary Islands. Details of all the taxa sampled are given in Table 2.
Outgroup selection
In order to provide rooting of the tree I used a member of a related leguminous tribe 
(Thermopsideae) as the outgroup (Anagyris foetida). As Anagyris is highly divergent from 
the ingroup, an unrooted analysis without Anagyris was used as a check that this outgroup 
did not affect the topology.
4.2.2 Molecular procedures 
DNA sampling and extraction
A  total of 50 individuals, representing 36 species, were sampled, mostly from field- 
collected leaf material (vouchers in GL). However, herbarium material was used for 
Adenocarpus mannii (E), A. ombriosus (TFC) and Teline stenopetala spp microphylla 
(from La Gomera) (E). In addition, leaf material was obtained from a cultivated, wild- 
origin specimen of G. tinctoria (RBGE). DNA was extracted from silica-dried leaf material 
using a QIAGEN DNeasy Plant Mini Kit. Extracts were eluted in 50pl of Buffer AE
CHAPTER FOUR: LEGUME DIVERSITY - 2 6 4 -
(included in the kit) and stored at -20C. For PCR amplification lp l of this solution was 
used for each reaction.
PCR and sequencing
Amplification of the ITS 1-5.8S rDNA-ITS2 region was accomplished using forward 
primer ITS 5p: 5 '-GG A AGGAG A AGTCGT A AC A A G -3' (Moller & Cronk, 1997), and 
reverse primer ITS 4: 5'-TCCTCCGCTTATTGATATGC-3' (White et a l ,  1990). 
However, the amplification of A. mannii from herbarium sheets dated 1968 (Tanzania) and 
1981 (Malawi), and A. ombriosus (specimen dated 1985) required the use of internal 
primers to sequence ITS1 and ITS2 independently. In this instance ITS1 was amplified 
using primers ITS 5p and ITS 2p: 5'-GCTACGTTCTTCATCGATGC-3' (Moller &
Cronk, 1997), and ITS2 was amplified with a forward primer I designed using sequences 
already obtained (ITS 2-LEG: 5-GCAGAATCCCGTGAACCAT-3') and primer ITS 4. 
The primer ITS 2-LEG is likely to give better amplification of the ITS2 region than 
conventional primers for most papilionoid legumes. Each PCR cycle comprised 
denaturation at 94C for four minutes, followed by 30 cycles of 94C for 30 seconds, 
annealing at 58C for one minute and an extension of 72C for one minute, with a final 
extension of 72C for 10 minutes. Amplified PCR products were purified with a QIAGEN 
QlAquick PCR Purification Kit, and resuspended in 30pl of H 2O for direct sequencing 
using an automated A B I377. All the sequences referred to here have been deposited in 
GenBank database under the accession numbers AF330637 -  AF330686.
4.2.3 Sequence analysis 
Alignment
Sequence boundaries for ITS1-5.8S-ITS2 regions were determined with reference to data 
for Viciafaba (Yokota et al., 1989) and previous sequences for the Genisteae (Kass & 
Wink, 1997). Alignment of sequences was straightforward and was done manually using 
the program Se-Al (version l.Oal; Rambaut, 1998). A single ambiguous region of 3 bp in 
ITS1 (position 219-221 of the aligned matrix) was excluded in a test analysis, but with no 
change of topology, so the final analysis was run on the complete matrix. The remaining 
insertion/deletion events (indels) were unambiguous and small (1-3 bp), with the exception 
of one notable 17 bp deletion in the ITS1 region of Genista cinerea and G. ramosissima 
(position 103-119 of the aligned matrix). The length range of ITS 1 was 219-241 bp, and 
ITS2 217-221 bp, while 5.8S was uniformly 163 bp without gaps. Features of the aligned 
matrix are given in Table 3. The aligned matrix is given in Appendix 1 and is also
CHAPTER FOUR: LEGUME DIVERSITY - 2 6 5 -
available from GenBank; both the aligned matrix and trees (Figs 2 & 3) are available from 
TreeBASE (http://www.herbaria.harvard.edu/treebase/).
Phylogenetic analyses
Phylogenetic analyses were performed with PAUP* (version 4.0b3; Swofford, 1999). The 
following heuristic search parameters were employed: 1000 random stepwise addition 
replicates with TBR branch swapping, other options included MULTREES and 
COLLAPSE. Bootstrap analyses were performed using 2000 simple addition replicates 
with TBR branch swapping, and decay indices (Bremer, 1988) were calculated using 
AutoDecay (version 4.0; Eriksson, 1998) and PAUP*. The analyses were run either with 
gaps coded as missing, or treated as present/absent in a separate binary matrix using 
contiguous and simple indel coding (Simmons & Ochoterena, 2000). A maximum 
likelihood (ML) analysis was performed for a comparison to the MP results. Parameters 
and assumptions used in the ML search were selected using program Modeltest (Posada & 
Crandall, 1998). The model selected was Tamura-Nei with gamma distribution. An 
alternative model, general time-reversible with invariable sites and gamma distribution, 
selected on the basis of the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC), produced the same tree 
with slightly improved (lower) log-likelihood score. ML heuristic search parameters 
included simple addition sequence of taxa with TBR branch swapping, MULTREES and 
COLLAPSE.
To examine the possible diphyletic origin of Teline, three analyses were run with 
the monophyly of Teline constrained for: a) a monophyletic Macaronesian clade; b) a 
monophyletic genus; c) a paraphyletic clade with the inclusion of Genista segonnei. The 
monophyly of an apparently paraphyletic Teline stenopetala (with and without ssp. 
spachiana) was also examined. The Kishino-Hasegawa and nonparametric (Templetons 
Wilcoxon signed-rank) tests, as implemented in PAUP*, were used to assess these 
assumptions by testing significant length differences between constrained and 
unconstrained trees (Table 4).
4.3 Results
4.3.1 Molecular results
Molecular evolution in island and continental Genisteae
A total of 637 sites with an average of 617bp per species (excluding gaps) were used in the 
analyses; 453 sites were constant, 68 variable sites were parsimony-uninformative and 116
http://www.herbaria.harvard.edu/treebase/
CHAPTER FOUR: LEGUME DIVERSITY - 2 6 6 -
were parsimony-informative, further details of sequence characteristics are provided in 
Table 3. Sequences obtained using internal primers lacked between 38-107bp of an 
invariable region of 5.8S. Sequence divergence for the ingroup was greater in ITS1 than in 
ITS2. The 5.8S region was generally conserved, however, there were seven variable sites 
(one at the 5 end and six toward the 3 end), four of these were uninformative (three varied 
only between the ingroup and the outgroup, Anagyris foetida) but three provided 
informative synamomophies in Adenocarpus and Teline. In particular, position 384 of the 
aligned matrix in the 5.8S region provided the single nucleotide change supporting the 
grouping of T. maderensis with T. stenopetala (subspecies from La Palma and El Hierro).
A relatively high proportion of species pairs/groups had identical sequences, these were:
(1) A. foliolosus, A. ombriosus and A. viscosus; (2) Genista cinerea and G. ramosissima;
(3) Teline nervosa and T. pallida ssp. pallida, (4) Teline canariensis and T. osyroides; and 
(5) T. salsoloides and T. stenopetala spp. spachiana. Uncorrected pairwise distances within 
the Teline linifolia group were 0-2.1%  including both continental and island taxa, but only 
0-0.8% between island taxa alone. Within the Teline monspessulana group, distances were 
0-2.1%, with greater distances between taxa within the Canary Islands (e.g. 1.6% 
divergence between subspecies of T. stenopetala) than between the Canary Island and 
continental or Madeiran taxa (with more divergence, 1.8%, between Madeiran and Canary 
Island species than between continental and island species).
Results o f phylogenetic analyses
A maximum parsimony analysis produced a single tree (length 318, Cl 0.643 excluding 
uninformative characters, RI 0.882). Coding gaps as a separate binary matrix provided a 
single synapomorphy grouping Teline salsoloides with T. stenopetala ssp. spachiana, 
within an otherwise totally invariable T. canariensis clade. Another single indel grouped 
the three Adenocarpus complicatus samples in an otherwise invariable complicatus/Canary 
Island group. Two trees were recovered in a maximum parsimony search without Anagyris. 
One of these differed from the tree presented, but only by a single change (the reverse 
placement of the Genista florida-G. tinctoria and G. segonnei-Teline linifolia groups) and 
mid-point rooting gave the same root as that provided by Anagyris.
The ITS region provides sufficient resolution of the majority of continental 
species/group relationships but divergence is insufficient to resolve with confidence the 
island species groups (Figs 2 & 3). Nevertheless, the phylogeny provides 15 nodes 
(excluding intraspecific nodes) with bootstrap support >75%  and 6 nodes with decay
CHAPTER FOUR: LEGUME DIVERSITY - 2 6 7 -
indices > 5, from which a number of conclusions can be drawn on the relationships 
between island and continental taxa, and relationships between island groups.
4.3.2 Taxonomic results 
Genista
The molecular results confirm the transfer of Cytisus benehoavensis to Genista by Arco 
Aguilar (1982), and moreover places it together with the Madeiran species, G. tenera, in 
section Genista with the type species, G. tinctoria (bootstrap 96%). It is interesting that the 
members of this clade (G. benehoavensis, G. tinctoria, G. tenera) all have a small, or 
vestigial aril (Gibbs, 1974, Arco Aguilar, 1982). The data also support the transfer to 
Genista of Adenocarpus segonnei (Gibbs, 1974), and strongly suggests (bootstrap 93%) 
affinity with the Teline linifolia group.
Adenocarpus
The data support the finding of Kass & Wink (1997) of the very close relationship between 
A. foliolosus and A. viscosus of the Canary Islands with the European A. complicatus 
(bootstrap 93%). Our data further show that a third Canarian species, A. ombriosus, has 
identical sequence to A. foliolosus and A. viscosus. Within Adenocarpus as a whole there 
appear to be three subgeneric groups (although the anagyrifolius group is not strongly 
supported, bootstrap 55%). There is support (bootstrap 78%) for a bracteate clade 
(possessing distinct floral bracts that are persistent) including A. nainii, A. boudyi and A. 
telonensis. A. nainii has previously been treated as a subspecies of the weakly bracteate A. 
complicatus (with narrow, simple floral bracts, present when the inflorescence is in bud but 
rapidly caducous on maturation and extension of the inflorescence). However, A. nainii is 
clearly distinct from European A. complicatus, and I therefore revert to former taxonomic 
treatments in recognizing this taxon at specific rank (Maire, 1922). Adenocarpus mannii 
which occurs in montane regions of tropical Africa is of particular biogeographic interest, 
and is shown to be a sister group of the Mediterranean/Canarian A. complicatus-viscosus- 
foliolosus group (bootstrap 82%). Adenocarpus as delimited here is clearly a 
monophyletic genus (bootstrap 87%). The proximity of Argyrocytisus battandieri in the 
tree topology suggests a more cytisoid than genistoid affinity for Adenocarpus (Badr, 
Martin & Jensen, 1994). A reclassification of Argyrocytisus battandieri in Adenocarpus 
has recently been proposed due to the occasional presence of glandular papillae on the fruit 
surface (Talavera & Salgueiro, 1999). The limited sampling here does not allow us to
CHAPTER FOUR: LEGUME DIVERSITY - 2 6 8 -
contradict this classification, and the phylogenies presented by Kass & Wink (1997) do not 
provide an unambiguous placement of A. battandieri.
Teline
Our data show that the genus Teline is diphyletic, contrary to cpDNA (rbcL) results 
presented by Kass & Wink (1995). Forcing Teline to be monophyletic results in an extra 
tree length of 10 steps, which is significant at P -  0.05 (Table 4). Teline has been 
considered of genistoid affinity (Polhill, 1976; Bisby, 1981; Norverto, Gonzalez-Andres & 
Ortiz, 1994; Gonzalez-Andres & Ortiz, 1995) and I confirm that Teline is nested within 
Genista, as shown by Kass & Wink (1997). There therefore seems little reason, other than 
traditional taxonomic practice, to maintain the genus separate from Genista. Each of the 
two clades of Teline ( linifolia clade and monspessulana clade) are monophyletic, with 
independent origins within the genus Genista, and represent two colonizations of the 
Canary Islands. The continental species, T. linifolia, distributed in the western 
Mediterranean including northwest Africa, is the sister taxon to the island linifolia group; 
and the more widespread continental species, T, monspessulana, which has a circum- 
Mediterranean distribution and also occurs in the Azores, is possibly sister to the island 
monspessulana group (but see further discussion below on the biogeography of Teline).
The Madeiran Teline species are in the monspessulana clade. T. maderensis has more 
recently been circumscribed to include T. paivae (Arco Aguilar, 1983; Cannon & Turland, 
1994), but as these two species appear to be distinct in the molecular analysis, I have 
reverted to recognizing two separate Teline species on Madeira.
Within the island linifolia group, Teline pallida (from Tenerife) is more closely 
related to T. nervosa and T. rosmarinifolia (from Gran Canaria, bootstrap 78%) than to the 
conspecific T. pallida ssp. gomerae (P. E. Gibbs & Dingwall) del Arco (from La Gomera). 
It accordingly seems appropriate to revive the name Teline gomerae (Kunkel, 1975). 
Within the island monspessulana group, one of the five subspecies of Teline stenopetala -  
ssp. spachiana -  is identical in sequence to T. salsoloides and differs from T. canariensis 
and T. osyroides by a single indel. This taxon, originally described as Genista (Teline) 
spachiana by Webb (1845), was later synonomized with T. canariensis by Gibbs (1972), 
who cited the intergradation of the two taxa. Furthermore, when Arco Aguilar (1983) 
placed this taxon in T. stenopetala, he reported it as hybridizing with T. canariensis. The 
four Tenerifean taxa (T. canariensis, T. osyroides, T. salsoloides, T. stenopetala spp. 
spachiana) form the homogeneous canariensis group (bootstrap 99%), which are distinct 
from the remaining four subspecies of T. stenopetala. Because of the difficulty of
CHAPTER FOUR: LEGUME DIVERSITY - 2 6 9 -
separating some T. stenopetala ssp. spachiana from T. canariensis, this plant is probably 
best treated as T. canariensis (spachiana-type). Interestingly, ssp. microphylla from La 
Gomera and from El Hierro may not have the same origin (Fig. 3), which would support 
their independent treatment as advocated by Pitard & Proust (see Gibbs & Dingwall,
1972). Even excluding ssp. spachiana, T. stenopetala is paraphyletic in this analysis. 
However, constraining T. stenopetala to be monophyletic (excluding ssp. spachiana) 
requires an additional tree length of only two steps which is not significant (Table 4). One 
should therefore interpret these results cautiously as the possibility that gene flow in the 
monspessulana clade is confounding phylogenetic signal is increased by the human 
introduction and movement of species (Francisco-Ortega et al., 1997b; Clarke, Johnson & 
Murray, 1998).
4.4 Discussion
4.4.1 The Mediterranean element in the Canarian and Madeiran flora  
The Canarian and Madeiran Genisteae have Mediterranean affinities in common with a 
large proportion of the Macaronesian flora (Bramwell, 1976; Sunding, 1979; Francisco- 
Ortega et al., 1997a; Helfgott et al., 2000). The most northern part of Morocco shares 
many floristic links with southern Europe (Valdes, 1991). However, this eu-mediterranean 
element is currently almost completely absent from the northwestern part of Africa (SW 
Morocco) closest to the Canary Islands.
As the Canary Islands are oceanic in origin (Carracedo et al. 1998), long distance 
dispersal is required. The Canarian Genisteae -  with seven colonization events accounting 
for 18 species in six genera -  have been relatively successful at distance dispersal. Quezal 
(1978) and Hooghiemstra et al. (1992) provide evidence for a southward extension of 
Pleistocene Mediterranean woodland along the northwest edge of Africa, which would 
have considerably lessened the present day disjunction (Fig. 4, arrow B). Even so, seeds 
would still have needed to travel more than 200 km to reach suitable habitat on Gran 
Canaria. Wind, bird and sea dispersal may all have been promoted by prevailing 
northeasterly trade winds and sea currents that were accentuated during the Pleistocene 
(Rognon & Coude-Gaussen, 1996) (Fig. 4, arrow A). The Genisteae have an explosive 
dehiscence -  seeds are ejected from the pod, which remains attached to the parent plant, 
and have no obvious adaptations to dispersal by air or water. Mature seeds of all genera of 
Canarian brooms typically sink immediately in sea water (pers. obs.). Endozoochorous bird 
dispersal is a more likely means by which brooms of Mediterranean origin may have
CHAPTER FOUR: LEGUME DIVERSITY - 2 7 0 -
reached the Canary Islands. The endemic avifauna of the Canary Islands is predominantly 
Palaearctic, with central European and Mediterranean affiliations (Bacallado, 1976), and 
European migrants occur as vagrants.
4.4.2 Evolution and biogeography o f  Adenocarpus
The three Adenocarpus groups recovered in the molecular phylogeny are also 
circumscribed geographically. First, there is a predominantly montane group with A. 
anagyrifolius (High Atlas), A. bacquei (High and Middle Atlas) and A. decorticans 
(montane regions of southern Spain and north Morocco). I also predict that this group 
includes A. artemisiifolius (High Atlas) and A. hispanicus (montane regions of central 
Iberia and north Morocco). It has been suggested by Gibbs (1967) that the latter four 
species form a group of vicariant species. Secondly, there is the bracteate group which is 
mainly confined to northwest Africa (Morocco and Algeria). The exception is A. telonensis 
which has a range extending from northern Morocco to southern Iberia and France. The 
bracteate group is predicted to include three species additional to those sampled here: A. 
cincinnatus, A. umbellatus and A. faurei, which share similar morphological traits (Gibbs, 
1967).
The Canarian species belong to the third group which is otherwise comprised of a 
single polymorphic species, A. complicatus (ssp. complicatus sensu Gibbs, 1967), and A. 
mannii which occurs only in tropical and subtropical Africa. A. complicatus is widespread 
across southern Europe to Turkey and Syria, localized in Algeria, and also present on 
Madeira. This species has a controversial taxonomic history with a number of separate 
species recognized by different authors (Castroviejo, 1999) as well as numerous 
intraspecific varieties (Rivas-Martmez & Belmonte, 1989). The lack of molecular 
divergence between the Canarian and European taxa, implies a rapid and widespread 
expansion of this group, which contrasts with the relatively localized distributions and 
greater divergence in the other two Adenocarpus groups. The Canarian species are 
therefore considered part of a recent expansion of A. complicatus in southern Europe.
It is interesting that A. mannii also exhibits considerable morphological variation 
throughout its range but no sequence divergence was found between samples from Malawi 
and Tanzania. Two migration routes (Fig. 5, arrows A & B) have been suggested to explain 
the presence of European and Mediterranean elements in the montane tropical African 
flora (Quezel & Martinez, 1958-59; Wickens, 1976; Quezel, 1978). The absence of A. 
mannii or A. complicatus in the Moroccan Atlas suggests that the Morocco-Sahara track 
(shown by Quezel & Martinez (1958-59) to have had a Pleistocene extension of
CHAPTER FOUR: LEGUME DIVERSITY -271 -
Mediterranean woodland, Fig. 5, arrow A) is not the route by which A. mannii reached 
central Africa. Instead, the close relationship with A. complicatus and the prescence of the 
latter species around the eastern Mediterranean makes the Red Sea hills migration route 
(Fig. 5, arrow B) put forward by Wickens (1976) a reasonable alternative hypothesis. 
Subsequent migration of A. mannii to west Africa may have followed the southern 
migration route (Fig. 5, arrow C) proposed by White (1993).
4.4.3 Bio geography o fTeline
The origin of the linifolia clade in the Canary Islands is unambiguous -  there is a distinct 
monophyletic island group derived from a continental progenitor. In contrast, the ITS 
phylogeny for the monspessulana clade places both the continental and Madeiran species 
nested within the Canary Island taxa. However, the possible derivation of the continental 
and Madeiran species from the Canary Islands is only weakly supported (bootstrap 58%) 
and the additional tree length required to constrain a monophyletic Macaronesian group, 
excluding the continental T. monspessulana, is not significant (Table 4).
A striking geographical division is evident in the phylogeny between the central 
and western island groups. This is particularly evident in the T. linifolia clade, which has a 
subclade of three species endemic to the central islands (Gran Canaria and Tenerife) while 
the remaining two species are restricted to the western islands (La Gomera and La Palma). 
In the T. monspessulana clade the situation is more complex, but the T. canariensis group 
and T. microphylla occur only on the central islands, while all the subspecies of T. 
stenopetala are native only on the western islands. One possible explanation for this east- 
west vicariance, that is consistent with the phylogeny presented here, is that (in both cases) 
an original colonization of the relatively old island of La Gomera (10-12 Myr) was 
followed by two independent further colonizations from La Gomera of 1) the central 
islands and 2) the younger western islands (La Palma and El Hierro, 1-2 Myr). This 
scenario would accord with the basal position of La Gomera species in both Teline clades.
4.4.4 Island evolution and different patterns o f radiation
Each of the main groups of Canarian Genisteae shows a different pattern of species 
diversification. These may be summarized as follows:
(1) the Teline monspessulana clade: geographical segregation within this clade 
indicates that inter-island dispersal has been less frequent than diversification within 
islands. Diversification within islands is, in turn, linked to island size and habitat diversity. 
Thus, the most morphological diversity in Teline can be found on Tenerife (the most
CHAPTER FOUR: LEGUME DIVERSITY - 2 7 2 -
ecologically diverse island) between the five members of the T. canariensis group, and this 
is coupled with the least genetic divergence. The T. canariensis group may therefore 
represent a recent radiation on Tenerife after the main central volcanic and island building 
period, 1-2 Myr ago (Ancochea et al., 1990). In contrast, T. stenopetala (excluding ssp. 
spachiana), which has four to five subspecies on three islands, exhibits greater genetic 
divergence but less morphological diversity.
(2) the Teline linifolia clade: radiation of this clade in the Canary Islands is less 
extensive than the monspessulana clade. Inter-island dispersal has apparently been more 
frequent than diversification within islands, with all species endemic to a single island 
(typically localized or rare in distribution).
(3) Adenocarpus: the two widespread taxa are distributed in similar altitudinal and 
ecological niches on different islands. A. viscosus occurs only on the high islands (Tenerife 
and La Palma) in the subalpine zone and generally more xeric habitats; while A. foliolosus 
occupies a lower altitude, more mesic niche, on four of the five islands with this habitat. 
However, there are extensive hybrid zones that have developed in locations where habitats 
intergrade, and often in recently disturbed hybrid habitats (Lems, 1958).
(4) Genista: the monotypic island endemism of Genista contrasts with the Teline 
and Adenocarpus radiations. Neither Genista species in Madeira nor the Canary Islands 
has undergone any diversification or radiation, and G. benehoavensis and G. tenera may 
represent relict species.
These taxa thus display a contrast between single island lineages (Teline) and 
inter-island colonization or horizontal lineages (Adenocarpus) suggested for other groups 
(Sanchez-Yelamo et al., 1995; Francisco-Ortega et al., 1996; Kim et al., 1996).
4.4.5 Convergent morphologies in the Genisteae
Morphological convergence between unrelated members of the island Genisteae has led to 
some taxonomic confusion, such as the mistaken synonymization of Genista tenera with 
Teline osyroides (noted in Gibbs, 1974). It is also probable that morphological 
convergence within the monspessulana clade resulted in the misclassification of T. 
stenopetala ssp. spachiana. It is a member of the T. canariensis group but shares a number 
of characteristics (longer racemose inflorescences, larger leaves and flowers) with the T. 
stenopetala group. At a higher level, the diphyletic origin of Teline suggests that a number 
of the characters used to delimit the genus are convergent (e.g. strophiolate seeds and 
trifoliolate leaves). In the predominantly unifoliolate Genista sensu stricto reversals to 
trifoliolate leaves may have occurred several times (e.g. the trifoliolate G. clavata in this
CHAPTER FOUR: LEGUME DIVERSITY -273 -
analysis). Development of the seed aril appears to have independent origins in Cytisus and 
Genista, and may also have independent origins in Teline. However, Genista segonnei, 
which is both trifoliolate and possesses strophiolate (rim-aril) seeds, is morphologically 
similar to Teline (Maire, 1987), and constraining Teline to be monophyletic with the 
inclusion of Genista segonnei does not require a significant increase in tree length (Table 
4.4.6 Hybridization and species boundaries
The facility with which island species hybridize when ecological barriers are removed has 
been addressed for a number of different plant groups (Francisco-Ortega et al., 2000). The 
introduction of several Teline species to North America provides a useful comparison to 
ecological behaviour in the native range. It is notable that the one species reported as a 
noxious weed in California (McClintock, 1993), T. monspessulana, is the only widespread 
species within the genus' native distribution. Particularly revealing is the information on 
interspecific hybridization in California (McClintock, 1993). Five species of Teline have 
been introduced into cultivation in California and have become naturalized, four of these 
are members of the monspessulana clade and hybrids between T. canariensis, T. 
monspessulana and T. stenopetala are recorded as common. Hybrids are also known 
from Tenerife (and possibly Gran Canaria; Suarez Rodgrfguez, 1991) between T. 
canariensis and T. stenopetala, where the latter species is not native but cultivated. In 
contrast, T. linifolia, also naturalized in California, has not been reported forming hybrids 
with any of the monspessulana clade; and hybrids do not occur between the two Teline 
clades where these are sympatric in their native distributions. Also unrecorded are hybrids 
within the linifolia clade. However, contact between native species, which is frequent in 
the monspessulana clade, does not occur in the linifolia  clade and no breeding 
experiments have been conducted to provide further data. These patterns of hybridization 
reflect the phylogenetic division in Teline. Further work is required to determine if 
hybridization in the monspessulana clade in the Canary Islands is contributing to genetic 
erosion via introgression and assimilation as has been suggested for other groups 
(Francisco-Ortega et al., 2000).
4.5 References
Ancochea E, Fuster JM, Ibarrola E, Cendrero A, Coello J, Hernan F, Cantagrel JM, 
Jamond C. 1990. Volcanic evolution of the island of Tenerife (Canary Islands) in
CHAPTER FOUR: LEGUME DIVERSITY - 2 7 4 -
the light of new K-Ar data. Journal o f Volcanic and Geothermal Research 44: 231- 
Arco Aguilar M del. 1982. Sobre la presencia de Genista L. en la Isla de la Palma (I. 
Canarias): Genista benehoavensis (Bolle ex Svent.) M. del Arco, comb. nov. 
(Fabaceae-Genisteae). Vieraea 11 (1981): 267-282.
Arco Aguilar M del. 1983. Catalogo actualizado de los taxones del genero Teline Medicus 
en la region Macaronesica adiciones y nuevas combinaciones. Vieraea 12 (1982): 
193-232.
Arco Aguilar M del. 1993. New combinations in the genus Teline Medicus. Typification 
of Cytisuspallidus Poiret. Itinera Geobotanica 7: 519-523.
Arco Aguilar M del. 2000. Notes on the taxonomy and nomenclature of Teline pallida 
(Poir.) G. Kunkel. Taxon 49: 17-25.
Arco Aguilar M del, Acebes Ginoves JR. 1982. Teline salsoloides M. del Arco & J.R. 
Acebes. sp. nov. (Fabaceae-Genisteae), una nueva especie para la isla de Tenerife 
(I. Canarias). Vieraea 11 (1981): 251-266.
Arco Aguilar M del, Acebes Ginoves JR, Wildpret de la Torre W. 1978. Teline
osyroides (Svent.) Gibbs et Dingw. ssp. sericea (O. Kuntze) comb, et stat. nov., una 
nueva subespecie de la isla de Tenerife. Vieraea 1 (1977): 207-230.
Badr A, Martin W, Jensen U. 1994. Chloroplast DNA restriction site polymorphism in 
Genisteae (Leguminosae) suggests a common origin for European and American 
lupines. Plant Systematics and Evolution 193: 95-106.
Bacallado JJ. 1976. Notas sobre la distribution y evolution de la avifauna Canaria. In: 
Kunkel G, ed. Biogeography and Ecology in the Canary Islands. The Flague: Dr.
W. Junk Publishers, 413-431.
Bisby FA. 1981. Genisteae (Adans.) Benth. (1865). In: Polhill RM, Raven PH, eds. 
Advances in Legume Sytematics. Kew, Royal Botanic Gardens, 409-425.
Bohle U-R, Hilger HH, Martin W F. 1996. Island colonization and evolution of insular
woody habit in Echium L. (Boraginaceae). Proceedings o f  the National Academy o f 
Science, USA 93: 11740-11745.
Bramwell D. 1976. The endemic flora of the Canary Islands. In: Kunkel G, ed.
Biogeography and Ecology in the Canary Islands. The Hague: Dr. W. Junk 
Publishers, 207-240.
Bremer K. 1988. The limits of amino-acid sequence data in angiosperm phylogenetic 
reconstruction. Evolution 42: 795-803.
CHAPTER FOUR: LEGUME DIVERSITY -275 -
Cannon MJ, Turland NJ. 1994. Teline Medik. In: Press JR, Short MJ, eds. Flora o f 
Madeira. London: HMSO, 156-157.
Carracedo JC, Day S, Guillou H, Rodriguez Badiola E, Canas JA, Perez Torrado FJ. 
1998. Hotspot volcanism close to a passive continental margin: the Canary Islands. 
Geological Magazine 135: 591-604.
Castroviejo S. 1999. Adenocarpus. In: Talavera S, Aedo C, Castroviejo S, Romero Zarco 
C, Saez L, Salgueiro FJ, Velayos M, eds. Flora Iberica. Madrid: Real Jardrn 
Botanico, CSIC, 189-205.
Clarke B, Jonhson MS, Murray J. 1998. How 'molecular leakage' can mislead us about 
island speciation. In: Grant PR, ed. Evolution on Islands. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 181-195.
Eriksson T. 1998. AutoDecay. Version 4.0. (program distributed by the author). 
Stockholm: Department of Botany, University of Stockholm.
Francisco-Ortega J, Jansen RK, Santos-Guerra A. 1996. Chloroplast DNA evidence of 
colonization, adaptive radiation, and hybridization in the evolution of the 
Macaronesian flora. Proceedings o f the National Academy o f Science, USA. 93: 
4085-4090.
Francisco-Ortega J, Santos-Guerra A, Hines A, Jansen RK. 1997a. Molecular evidence 
for a Mediterranean origin of the Macaronesian endemic genus Argyranthemum 
(Asteraceae). American Journal o f Botany 84: 1595-1613.
Francisco-Ortega J, Crawford DJ, Santos-Guerra A, Jansen RK. 1997b. Origin and 
evolution of Argyranthemum (Asteraceae: Anthemideae) in Macaronesia. In: 
Givnish TJ, Sytsma KJ, eds. Molecular Evolution and Adaptive Radiation. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 407-431.
Francisco-Ortega J, Santos-Guerra A, Seung-Chul K, Crawford DJ. 2000. Plant 
genetic diversity in the Canary Islands: a conservation perspective. American 
Journal o f Botany 87: 909-919.
Gibbs PE. 1967. A revision of the genus Adenocarpus. Boletim da Sociedade Broteriana 
41 (series 2): 67-121.
Gibbs PE. 1974. Taxonomic notes on some Canary Island and North African species of 
Cytisus and Genista. Lagascalia 4: 33-41.
Gibbs PE, Dingwall 1 .1972 (1971). A revision of the genus Teline. Boletim da Sociedade 
Broteriana 45 (series 2): 269-316.
CHAPTER FOUR: LEGUME DIVERSITY - 2 7 6 -
Gonzalez-Andres F, Ortiz J-M. 1995. Isoenzymatic characterization of potentially useful 
forage shrubs belonging to the genus Cytisus and allies (Genistea[e]:
Leguminosea). Biochemical Systematics and Ecology 23: 813-824.
Helfgott DM, Francisco-Ortega J, Santos-Guerra A, Jansen RK, Simpson BB. 2000.
Biogeography and breeding system evolution of the woody Bencomia alliance 
(Rosaceae) in Macaronesia based on ITS sequence data. Systematic Botany 25: 82- 
Hooghiemstra H, Stalling H, Agwu COC, Dupont LM. 1992. Vegetational and climatic 
changes at the northern fringe of the Sahara 250,000-5000 years BP: evidence from 
four marine pollen records located between Portugal and the Canary Islands.
Review o f Palaeobotany and Palynology 74: 1-53.
Kass E, Wink M. 1995. Molecular phylogeny of the Papilionoideae (family
Leguminosae): rbcL gene sequences versus chemical taxonomy. Botanica Acta 
108: 149-162.
Kass E, Wink M. 1997. Phylogenetic relationships in the Papilionoideae (family
Leguminosae) based on nucleotide sequences of cpDNA (rbcL) and ncDNA (ITS 1 
and 2). Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 8: 65-88.
Kim S-C, Crawford DJ, Francisco-Ortega J, Santos-Guerra A. 1996. A common origin 
for woody Sonchus and five related genera in the Macaronesian Islands: molecular 
evidence for extensive radiation. Proceedings o f  the National Academy o f Science, 
USA 93: 7743-7748.
Kunkel G. 1975. Novedades y taxones criticos en la flora de La Gomera. Cuademos de 
Botanica Canaria 25: 17-49.
Lems K. 1958. Botanical notes on the Canary Islands I. Introgression among the species of 
Adenocarpus, and their role in the vegetation of the Islands. Boletm del Instituto 
Nacional de Investigaciones Agronomicas, Madrid 39: 351-370.
Maire R. 1922. Contributions a l'etude de la flore de l'Afrique du Nord. Bulletin de la 
Societe de VHistoire Naturelle de VAfrique du Nord 13: 209-220.
Maire R. 1987. Leguminosae. Flore de VAfrique du Nord. Volume 16. Paris: Lechevalier.
Marrero A, Suarez C. 1988. Aportaciones corologicas de varias especies arbustivos de 
interes en Gran Canaria (Islas Canarias). Botanica Macaronesica 16: 3-14.
McClintock E. 1993. Genista broom. In: Hickman JC, ed. The Jepson Manual: Higher 
Plants o f California. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press,
CHAPTER FOUR: LEGUME DIVERSITY - 2 7 7 -
Moller M, Cronk QCB. 1997. Origin and relationships of Saintpaulia (Gesneriaceae) 
based on ribosomal DNA internal transcribed spacer (ITS) sequences. American 
Journal o f Botany 84: 956-965.
Norverto C A, Gonzalez-Andres F, Ortiz JM. 1994. Leaf and stem anatomy of species 
of Cytisophyllum, Cytisus, Chamaecytisus, Genista, and Genista sect. Teline 
(Fabaceae: Genisteae) as an aid for taxonomy. Israel Journal o f  Plant Science 42: 
213-225.
Palomares Martinez A. 1997. Memoria anual. Unpublished report. Parque Nacional de 
La Caldera de Taburiente.
Panero JL, Francisco-Ortega J, Jansen RK, Santos-Guerra A. 1999. Molecular 
evidence for multiple origins of woodiness and a New World biogeographic 
connection of the Macaronesian Island endemic Pericallis. Proceedings o f  the 
National Academy o f Science, USA 96: 13886-13891.
Perez de Paz PL, Arco Aguilar M del, Acebes Ginoves JR, Wildpret de la Torre W. 
1986. Leguminosas Forrajeras de Canarias. Santa Cruz de Tenerife: Cabildo 
Insular de Tenerife. Museo Insular de Ciencias Naturales.
Polhill RM. 1976. Genisteae (Adans.) Benth. and related tribes (Leguminosae). Botanical 
Systematics. An Occasional Series o f Monographs 1: 143-368.
Posada D, Crandall KA. 1998. Modeltest: testing the model of DNA substitution. 
Bioinformatics 14: 817-818.
Quezel P. 1978. Analysis of the flora of the Mediterranean and Saharan Africa. Annals o f 
the Missouri Botanical Garden 65: 479-534.
Quezel P, Martinez C. 1958-59. Le dernier interpluvial au Sahara central. Libyca 6-7: 
211-229.
Rambaut A. 1998. Sequence Alignment Editor. Version l.Oal. (program distributed by 
the author). Oxford: Oxford University.
Rivas-Martinez S, Belmonte D. 1989. Sinopsis de Adenocarpus DC. (Leguminosae). 
Opuscula Botanica Pharmaciae Complutensis 5: 69-78.
Rognon P, Coude-Gaussen G. 1996. Paleoclimates off Northwest Africa (28-35N) 
about 18,000 yr B.P. based on continental eolian deposits. Quaternary Research 
46: 118-126.
Sanchez-Yelamo MD, Espejo-Ibanez MC, Francisco-Ortega J, Santos-Guerra A.
1995. Electrophoretical evidence of variation in populations of the fodder legume 
Chamaecytisus proliferus from the Canary Islands. Biochemical Systematics and 
Ecology 23: 53-63.
CHAPTER FOUR: LEGUME DIVERSITY -278 -
Santos-Guerra A. 1975. Notas corologicas. I. Vieraea 5: 89-98.
Simmons MP & Ochoterena H. 2000. Gaps as characters in sequence-based phylogenetic 
analyses. Systematic Biology 49: 369-381.
Suarez Rodgrfguez C. 1991. Estudio de los relictos actuales del monte verde en Gran 
Canaria. Las Palmas de Gran Canaria: Cabildo Insular de Gran Canaria.
Sunding P. 1979. Origins of the Macaronesian flora. In: Bramwell D, ed. Plants and 
Islands. London: Academic Press, 13-40.
Swofford DL. 1999. PAUP*. Phylogenetic Analysis Using Parsimony (*and Other 
Methods). Version 4. Sunderland, Massachusetts: Sinauer Associates.
Talavera S, Gibbs PE. 1999. Teline. In: Talavera S, Aedo C, Castroviejo S, Romero
Zarco C, Saez L, Salgueiro FJ, Velayos M, eds. Flora Iberica. Madrid: Real Jardm 
Botanico, CSIC, 141-147.
Talavera S, Salgueiro FJ. 1999. Sobre el tratamiento de la familia Leguminosae en Flora 
Iberica. Lagascalia 21: 155-222.
Valdes B. 1991. Andalucia and the Rif. Floristic links and common flora. Botanica 
Chronika 10: 117-124.
Vargas P, Morton CM, Jury SL. 1999. Biogeographic patterns in Mediterranean and 
Macaronesian species of Saxifraga (Saxifragaceae) inferred from phylogenetic 
analyses of ITS sequences. American Journal o f Botany 86: 724-734.
Webb PB. 1845. Genista (Teline) spachiana. Mr. Spachs Genista. Curtis Botanical 
Magazine 71: tab. 4195.
White F. 1993. Refuge theory, ice-age aridity and the history of tropical biotas: an essay in 
plant geography. Fragmenta Floristica Geobotanica Supplementum 2: 385-409.
White TJ, Bruns T, Lee S, Taylor J. 1990. Amplification and direct sequencing of fungal 
ribosomal RNA genes for phylogenetics. In: Innis MA, Gelfand DH, Sninsky JJ, 
White TJ, eds. PCR protocols: a giude to methods and applications. London: 
Academic Press, 315-322.
Wickens GE. 1976. The flora ofJebel Marra (Sudan Republic) and its geographical
affinities (Kew Bulletin Additional Series 5). London: HMSO and Royal Botanic 
Gardens, Kew.
Yokota Y, Kawata T, Iida Y, Kato A, Tanifuji S. 1989. Nucleotide sequence of the 5.8S 
rRNA gene and internal transcribed spacer regions in carrot and broad bean 
ribosomal DNA. Journal o f  Molecular Evolution 29: 294-301.
- 2 7 9 -
 ^G,
*->Ou<u
-41<D
&aaaa
4>c
i D ( N y ( N ( N a \ ^ ( N i n ( N Mr - T t - r - T t - r - r ^ r ^ r ^ r ^ T i - o o
O n O O O N O O O N O n O n O n O n O O O n
O nr- oo o
<N f4 CN CO 00 WO 00 O n
1 1 0 ON 0 0 w o NO CN ON NO f-H 1
1 1 00 0 0 O n r - 0 0 OO OO OO 00 1
iH iH i-H f H i-H r*H
' s - ' /
ON T t iH Ts 0 0 ON T4 Tl T-H
OO I 00 NO O n 00 r - 00 0 0 0 0
r - 1 1 r - ON 00 00 00 O n 00 0 0 0 0
r-H r  1H f H t-H F -( TH T/
IO h  (N H Tf Tt 
OO ON OO I I I  I I I I I I I I I
C0 a^ Co
Jo -d ii ^ 2
03 02
a a o a o a a a
'a "a
t3aa
fe a ^
co a a a a
Co Co
a ^&0 72. ^ a ^
2  2  *a a
S ^a S a
G toa a
a a a a a, a, 
a a a a a a a a  a a a a a a a a
Q j a a a a a a a a a Te
- 2 8 0 -
?  P >n 
CN CN
it f-K
B*RRo
 Pcn oo 
cn cn
cn n cn o
IN O m cn
f- X cn o
P hGO
<Up*o
z  Po  in 
c < JbO
3 Sna3o
CN O  in
CN XI 
in cn
r-~ cn 
c o  a x
a  
  pX o  
m  i n
R-SJ3
-281 -
CO w  CN ^ t in 00 CN
cn r- cn VO
 cn cn O
in ov3- in
r -  r~  
CN -i
Z P      
in cn
vo in 
O to0
e3(X
z  P m
K K  ( S I
z  Pin i in
oo i" 
CN r-*
d  /-n
  Px  in
cn in  
2  SO i
  in 
in cn
x  in  
 i  fc
a  . 2  
co co
3"cij
- 2 8 2 -
  03
O  PQ
i n  c n
OS OS
<N SO 
gs uO O p  O
in Tt
i t  o
so c n  
c n  o
<N VO 
c n  ii
o o  v o  
s H-' <u 
ON i t
m c--
i-H c s
P h PQ
  P   P
t"  i n i n  i n
c n  CS p  p
v o  i n c s  ?->
c n  o c n  ^
2*-4
SCi
5 U <u
K  PQ
-283 -
  pin x
o o  v o  
a)3or
cs r- 
f t ,
hH (S 
o o  v o
CS I
3CT1O
e d  0  
f t .
  P*t S in cn
r- in 
X-*-
 4 )X
-H*03
SH*
PQ st
- 2 8 4 -
-285 -
C N O v
C N 0 0
0 0 C Ni C Ni
63 ^H
C N C N
VO CN
c n  c n  c n  o v   ?v O  o  Tt-
m  , l
O) i-H c ?
i-H  t r-H
C N r -
H  i nC N O vC N  C N 1 1 s^ S^ V O
i-H t-H c n v o 0 0
v oOO i n Hl-H T j-
c n  c n  
v o  v o
r H  T f  V O
c n  c n  c n  v o  
v o  v o  v o  i 
t- h  t"H c n
i o o  o v
c n r - 7 v O
o v ov o , c r i i nc n
0 0 V Oc n
c n w n
0 0 m c n
u n  c n
c non
. o  o
c n  m  oo i n  
0 , t-5 cn cn cn
t j - r -  ^  v o  _  _
< N   e N   O  OV n V m Tt mov cn o\ cn cn cniH CN rH C'J
CN CN
O v  T f
^  "7
V O  O
d  ^  ^
^  m  OO r H  H
(y-j 1t 1-H I I
i n c n
OO CN  .
v o  c n
<D <D
ob 00 etf feb3 ~oo oo <D <D00 00 <D <D TO T3 
0 )  <d
0 0  <D <D flj
ID (U
ID <D <D <Dg u  u  
oo + +
(D (D
(D <D 6
N  NCD <D
C  <1  G  3  oo S  oo
(D  G  <Da a a
J3  J3  .C JG
*- -*-> -4> -*->00 00 00 00 
G  G  G  G
ID  <D ID <D 13 0 0
- 2 8 6 -
a00<D
*0OOX
C N ON
* r -
CN C N o C N c n
C N i-H o ON
C N c n o rH r H
d d o o o
II II V
II II
P h &H II
T3OOXI
c no\
O nNO
C N00
r- c n
O N r-> o
r -* t-H or H c n o
o o o
II II V
&H P h II
s*4-1
C N C N
<D    O <DP4 Ph
CO r- C N in
<3* r*
stoto
 rH00<D
p00pco
- 2 8 7  -
CD^COh-h
< co 00
L O  N
-  2 8 8  -
^ d 2
FIGURE 2. Cladogram of the single most parsimonious tree (length 318, Cl 0.643 
excluding uninformative characters, RI 0.882) which has an identical topology to the 
maximum likelihood tree. Numbers above branches are % bootstrap support (* 
indicates less than 50%) and decay values are given below. The branches supported 
by variable sites in the 5.8S region are indicated by arrows. Sample origin: Cl -  
Canary Islands, FR -  France, MAD -  Madeira, ML -  Malawi, MO -  Morocco, PO -  
Portugal, SP -  Spain, TZ -  Tanzania.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------  Anagyris SP
Argyrocytisus MO 
A. decorticans SP 
A. decorticans MO 
A. anagyrifolius MO 
A. bacquei MO 
A. nainii MO 
A. nainii MO 
A. boudyi MO 
A. telonensis SP 
A. telonensis MO 
A. mannii TZ 
A. mannii ML 
A. complicatus SP 
A. complicatus PO 
A. complicatus MAD 
A. ombriosus Cl 
A. foliolosus Cl 
A. viscosus Cl 
G. florida MO 
florida PO 
tinctoria FR 
benehoavensis Cl 
G. ten era MAD 
G. segonnei MO _
T. linifolia SP 
T. splendens Cl 
T. gomerae Cl 
T. rosmarinifolia Cl 
T. nervosa Cl 
T. pallida ssp pallida Cl 
G. umbellata SP 
G. clavata MO 
G. cinerea SP 
G. ramosissima SP 
T. stenopetala ssp pauciovulata Cl 
T. stenopetala ssp microphylla Cl 
T. microphylla Cl 
T. paivae MAD 
T. monspessulana SP 
T. monspessulana MO 
T. maderensis MAD 
T. stenopetala ssp microphylla Cl 
T. stenopetala ssp stenopetala Cl 
T. stenopetala ssp sericea Cl 
T. canariensis Cl 
T. osyroides ssp osyroides Cl 
T. osyroides ssp sericea Cl 
T. salsoloides Cl
T. stenopetala ssp spachiana Cl _
d6 74
GENISTA
d1 96
d5 78
^  d15
GENISTA
TELINE 
onspessulana 
- 2 8 9 -
FIGURE 3. Phylogram of the single most parsimonious tree with number of 
substitutions given above branches. Distributions for all Canary Island species are 
illustrated.
Argyrocytisus MOROCCO
Anagyris SPAIN
A. decorticans SPAIN 
A. decorticans MOROCCO 
-2 A. anagyrifolius MOROCCO 
 -   A. bacquei MOROCCO 
2 j 2 A. nainii MOROCCO Middle Atlas 
i A. nainii MOROCCO Rif Mountains 
 Z  A. boudyi MOROCCO
_ 9  q -  A. telonensis SPAIN
A. telonensis MOROCCO 
A. mannii TANZANIA 
A. mannii MALAWI 
A. complicatus MADEIRA 
A. complicatus PORTUGAL 
A. complicatus SPAIN   W rj |
G. florida MOROCCO 
~   G. florida PORTUGAL
-1 5---------------  G. tinctoria FRANCE
G. benehoavensis |-,-------------      , >- *  tr 'T r \
t i -  G. tenera MADEIRA ^  o V  ^
G. segonnei MOROCCO O
s f o
y ' o
linifolia SPAIN
splendens \
r -  rosmarinifolia 
nervosa
pallida ssp pallida |
G. umbellata SPAIN 
  G. clavata MOROCCO
GRAN C A N A R IA  14.5-16 Myr 
TEN ER IFE  7.5-11.5  Myr
LA G O M ER A  10-12 M yr 
LA PALM A 2 M yr 
EL H IERRO 1.1 Myr
 I G. cinerea SPAIN
' G. ramosissima SPAIN
-  steno ssp micro I O
  paivae MADEIRA
monspessulana SPAIN 
monspessulana MOROCCO 
  maderensis MADEIRA
5 changes
2 r  steno ssp steno 
- T ^  steno ssp seric 
l l  steno ssp micro
osyro ssp osyro 
osyro ssp seric 
salsoloides 
steno ssp spach
<?v o
- 2 9 0 -
I I
CL "c
* e5 
c d00o
' 44
CD4>
CD 03O 
.fc s
_ > 4
03 X  rt 3.
" c o
44cd
OD the
- 2 9 1  -
FIGURE 5. Map of Africa (adapted from Wickens, 1976) indicating approximate 
distribution of Adenocarpus mannii, with the location of the Canary Island species and the 
southern extent of the distribution of Adenocarpus complicatus, also shown. A -  incursion 
of Mediterranean vegetation into the central Sahara via the Ahaggar and Tibesti 
Mountains, from Quezel & Martinez (1958-59); B -  eastern incursion of Mediterranean 
woodland vegetation via the Red Sea hills, from Wickens (1976); C -  postulated southern 
migration route of White (1993).
A .  f o l i o l o s u s , 
o o m b r i o s u s ,  
A .  v i s c o s u s  
' J U H >  A .  c o m p l i c a t u s  
O  A .  m a n n i i
> 2000 metres
1000 -  2000 metres
< 1000 metres
- 2 9 2 -
r t : *<,<,<, ( i :<r t :<i<j :<,<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<
O O U U O U U U U U U U U O O U U O U U U U O U O O O O U U O U O O O U U O U U U U U U U E - ' U E - i O E - '
O O O C I U O O C I O U O O U O O O C I C K J O O C I O O C H D O O O O O Q O O O O O O C I O O O t D U O O O O O U
l O O C I t l l O C O O O U O C I O O O U O D U O D O O C J O O O C H J O O O O O O O O O C I O O C l i J O O O C l O O
u u o p u u o u u u o u u o o u u u p u o u u u u u u u u o p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p g u
O f f l U O O O O O O O O C l O O O O O t D U O C K J t J O O O O O O t l l O C I O C H J O O O C I C I O O O O D O t J U O U
O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O U O O O O C J U O C I O t D C I D O O C I O O C I O O t J O O O O O O O U
E - i C J U O p C t U U U U U C J C J U U U O O O C J U U U U U U U O U O p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p U
o u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u o u u u o u u o u u u u o u u u u o u u u o u u u o u u u u u u u u
h u a u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u a u o u u u u u u o o o u u a u u u u u u u o u u u u u o
u u u u u u o u u u o u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u o u u u u u u u c j u o y u u u u u u u a a o u
O U U U U O U C J < J O C J U U < U U O O O U U U U U U U U < J U U O U U U U C J < J U O < J U U < J U U U U U O U
u u u o u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u o u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u
O  I I I I I I I  I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 1 
E < t < t < t H h U U O t H 8 i < J U U t < t < U t < t ( y ^ t ' t < t H E < [ < E H t ( t H t < U f < t H U U U U t i U O t < U t ' U h U U U U y U  
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  
C 5 C 3 0 0 ( J C 3 C 5 0 0 C 5 C 5 0 C 3 C 5 0 < 5 < 5 t 5 C 5 C 5 C 5 C 5 C J < 3 0 < 5 C 5 C 5 0 C 5 C 5 0 C 5 0 C 5 C 3 < 5 C 5 C 5 0 C 5 < 3 C 5 C 3 < 5 C 5 C 5 0 < 5 < 5  
U U U U U U U U U O U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U E - ' U U p U p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
u o u o u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u o u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u
u u u o u u u u u u u u u o o o u u u u u f < u u y u u u t H C j p y p y u y u y u y y y y y y g y y c j c j< < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < <
u u u u u u u o u u u o u u u y y u y u u u u o o u u u u u u u u u u u o u u u u u u u u u u u y y
U U 0 U U 0 0 0 U 0 U U 0 0 U C 3 U U C 3 U U 0 0 U U 0 0 < 0 U U U 0 U 0 0 U 0 0 0 U U U U U U U 0 U U
U U 0 0 0 0 U U U 0 U 0 0 U U 0 0 U U E H 0 < E - ' E - i U E - i E - ' U U E - i 0 U t - i E - i 5 - ' E - ' 0 E - i E - ' U E - i U E - ' 0 E - i E - ' E - ' E - i E - i E - '
E - i U U U U U U U U p U U U U O O U U U U U U U U U p U U E H E - i p p ^ ^ H E H p E H H p e H p H p p E - < p ^ p E - ;
O C 5 C 3 C 5 C 3 C 5 C 5 C 5 0 0 C 5 C 5 < 5 C 5 C 5 C 5 < J C 5 C 3 C 3 < 5 C 5 C 5 C 5 C 5 C 5 0 C 5 C 5 < 5 C 5 C 5 C 5 C 5 C I C 5 C 3 C 5 C 5 C 5 C 3 < 3 C 5 C 5 C 5 C 5 C I < 5 P P
O O C 5 C J C 5 C 3 C 5 C 5 C 5 C 3 C 5 C 5 C 5 C J C 5 C 5 C 5 C 5 C 5 C 5 < 5 < 3 C 5 C 5 C 5 C 5 C 5 C 5 C J C 5 0 < 5 < 5 C 3 C 5 C 5 C 5 C 5 C 3 C 3 C 5 C 5 C 5 0 C 3 C 5 < 5 C 5 C 5 C 3
C 5 0 C 5 0 < 5 C 5 C 5 C 3 C 5 0 C 5 0 0 0 0 C 5 0 C 5 C 5 C 5 C 5 0 C 5 C 3 < 3 C l ) 5 < 5 < 5 C 5 C 3 C 9 C 5 0 C 5 C 5 C 5 C 5 C 5 0 C 5 0 C 5 C 5 C 5 0 t J C 5 0 C 5< < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < U < < < < < < U < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < <
O O U C J O C J O C J C J O O C I C J O O C J O O O C J C J C J C J O O ^ O C J O O O O O O O O E j O C J h O h C J C J C I H O C J C J C J
< < < 3 C 5 < C 5 U C 3 C 5 C 5 0 0 0 C 5 C 5 U C 5 U U < < < < < < < < U < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < <
u u u u u u o u u u u u u u u y u u y y u u u y u y y u y u u u u y u u u u y u u u u u u u u u u u
u < u u u o o o u u u u u u u u u u u u u u o u u u u u u u u u o u u u o u u u u u o u u u o u u u
 8 g g 8 g 8 8 8 g 8 8 8 8 g g 8 g 8 8 8 p 8 8 g 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8
0 U U U 0 U 0 0 U 0 0 0 U 0 0 U 0 0 U U 0 0 Q 0 0 U 0 0 U U U 0 U 0 U U U 0 0 0 U 0 C 3 0 U U 0 0 U 0
O U U O U U U O U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U O U U U O U U U U C 3 U U U C 5 U C 5 U U O U O U U U O U
U U 0 U U U U U U u U U U U U U U U U 0 0 U U C 5 U 0 U U U U U C 5 U C 5 0 0 U C 3 C 3 U C 3 0 C 3 U U U U C 3 C 3 U
u u u o o u u o u u u o u u u u o u o o u u o u u u o u u u u u u u u o u u u u u u u o u u u u y y
< < < < < < < < < < < < I < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < <
g g g g g g g g g g g g g l l l g g l i g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g
u u u u u o u o o u u u u o u y u y u y y u y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y
i < r t ; i < i < i < i ; < < < r t ; r t ; r t : r t ; < : < ; < < r t : < i < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < <u u
u u u o u uu u
8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 g g 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 S 8 8 B 8 8 S 8 8 S 8 S 8 S
o u u o u u u u u u u o u u u u u u u u u u u o u o u u u u u u u o o u o u u o u u u u u u u u u ul E ^ U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U H U l  lt-11 I I I I I U I I I I I I I I I I I I I I i I I I I 1 1
u o u u u u u u u u u u o u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u < u u u o u u u u u u u o u u u u o u u u u
u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u o u u u u u u
u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u o u u u u u u u u u u y y y y y y y y y y y y c j y u u y y y y< < < < . <  : < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < <U U U U 0 U U U U U U U U U U U < < 0 U U U < U U U 0 U U U U C 3 < U 0 U U U U 0 U U U U U 0 U U U U
U 0 U 0 U 0 U U U 0 U U U U 0 0 U U U < 0 U 0 U U U < < U U U U U U U U 0 U U U U U U U 0 U U U U U< < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < <u y u u y u y u u u y u y u u u u y y u u E - ' C j y u u y y o u y y y y y y u o y u y y y y c J u y y y y
o o o o u u o u o o u o u o o o o o u o u o u u o o o u o o u o o u u u o o u u u o u u o u o u o o
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
^ g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g p g g g g g g g
l j U O U < U U O U U U U U U U U U U O U U O U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U
 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8
 3 5 5 3 5 5 5 3 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 2 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 3 5 3 5 5 5 5 3 5 5 5 3 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5
S u o u u o o u o u o u o u o u u u o u u u u u o o o o u u u o u o u u u o u o u u o u u u u o o o u
0|   i KJ 
rd <0 AJ
H  H  (fl
<0 f a
_    , .  <3 ai
a  a  o  <u -h  a  
 o r a  o  o  -h  u  a  o
q  -h <u ^ m c j -h o c
Pi o  3  9i o  O U j g  U U 3  h  Ip 11
h w  c n o i s w a  Pi o  m -h ,o  -h  -h  co <u a  xju 3  I I I I I W .s   ^  >  fc -h d d  a  W 01 ra
0) *H W 01 0) 01 0) | |  Pi O  W 111 r l  I I c I J  J
h  ic 3 3 3 c c o i  p t i w w  w s . o w r H  a  a  a  a  a  a
T J O  J J J J J J ( d < d P > i J N < H 0 1 - H - H  01 I I  l | l d  Id <0 01 01 0] 01 0]
cjm-i i i )  n u o B i S t i s  ; 3 i    - ' i  <d <d f t f t a - H  to oi oi oi in co
Id -H -H  U C J C > - r l - H O | l l | 0 1 C f i 3 0 1  g  3 C  01 01 J  r-1 I I I I J  J
4J M <U -H -rl -rl -rl X) 4J rH -H -H -H -H O <U Q) 01 (3 O  O  B 01 ( d l d l d  11 IP Qi O 0 1  Id Id ti  <d AS Id
> , 3  > | H H H  H H O - H - H - H - r t - l  < c  O II Pi S  -H l d ( d - H  01 r l  H  r l  l | 0 1  M-l a) H  r l  r l  r l  r l  r l
m i d b & ,o e i Q i Q i O O - H g g f l c s j o o c j >  | j w - H  - H - y i o  i j - h h  3  3    
co' id. j3. A u. o.  o.  A 6. h  I I  c. c. 5 a  a  >. a  fc id A A w g fc x3 A -h ns o <u & as as w -h -h a  as fc A ti a a a  a  a a,
T 3 A n S U 3 ^ B B < J C ) r H   - r i - H A ' - i i - i w i d n J n S < d ( d w < i )  1  id (3 -h oi >1 01 <a oj as I e  -h cj
I f l n s o o o o Q i a i o g i d i d i d B P i P i - H O i u . u ' O ' O - H c m O r H a s i U r H C A o i o i A S ' O ' O A S  - r i o a i o i a i a i a i a i a i
c o i d A A u o u ,5 ,o > w B B c e  O J j j j > A n i d - H - H w g ^ 4 J r H - H i d o < u d i < u < u o ) - H - H ,o < u ^ r H T 3 a O i a a ' '   
3  I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I l < U < U > S x U O O < U U 0 ) V l M ' W H O a f t O O O - H i d g O C 3 O O O O  
o < o w M c o w w u i < n w M u i < o w w c o w u w ( 3 i 3 i d 0 0 6 C n i 3 c l A i d a ) - H a ) l - i < o i o > P i h i - i > g m a ) C ( 3 c ; c  i - , i -  
H ' H 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 1 l T i r i r i H i J l H l - H 6 C 6 C ,d O f i C l i | i i S H - H B r i H ( m i l ) ( l D l l )
01 >1 A s? C? ti Ci w ti w w v? ti h h sx m k  w I I I I I I I I I 1 u dj h  E E E s  c  o  o a  a  h 01 n  01 11 01 01 01 
- H U i d i d < d i d < d t d i d t d A ) < d < d t d i d i d < d i d i d t d i d < d i d i d t d i d < d i d < d  I I I I I I I I I I I I  I I I I I I I I I
^ 0 O < J O U C l C J < J U < J O C J C J C J U C l < J U 4 J 4 J x J 4 J x J U U a J a J 4 J ( l ) l l ) < l ) < l ) ( l ) < U < U < U < l ) ( l ) < U a s < U < U < U f l ) < U < U ( l ) < U < l )
S s i O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O o i o i w o i o i w o i o i o i o i f 3 p 3 ( 3 ( 3 l 3 C ( 3 ( 3 C C 3 a f l C C C f i C C C C C i
b  >1 G 13 (3 C C3 13 CS (3 (3 fl (3 C C C (3 C (3 -H -H -rl -rl -rl -rl -rl -rl -rl -rl -rl -rl -rl -rl -rl -rl -rl -rl -H -rl -rl -rl -rl -H -rl -rl -H -H -rl -rl -H
# O l l l ) D I I ) D l l ) l l ) l l ) < l ) l l )  D l l O ) l J l l ( l l l ) C f l P f i 3 f i f l f i C f l H H H H H H H H H H r l H r l H H H H H H H H
c n ,c 3 ' c 3 ' c 3 ,d ' 0 ,3 ,d ' d ,c 3 ' 6 ' 0 ' 0 ' 0 ' 0 ,a ,6 ,6 < u < u a ) < u < u i u a ) < u i i ) < u i i ) < u i i i < u i i ) a ) ( u a ) < u < u < u < u < u < u i u < u < u < u ( u < i ) < u
< i < r t ; < ; < < < i < i < < < i c i ; i < i < i < i < i < < r t ; u O O O U U U U U U E - i H E - i E - i E - i E - i E - i E ^ E - > E H E H ^ E ^ E - i E - i E - i E - i E - ' E - i E - i E - i
o c n ( N c ^ < T \ a \ c n c ^ c n c ^ a ^ < ^ o > ( T . c h < j > c r  c n c ^ o o c N H r - f - < N o o o o c r  C T > o o o o r - < ^ o o r - r * o o a D o o o o o o o o < ^ c D o o o o c 3 0 o o ( ^ o o
C r ^ O O C T V O O O O O O C O O O O O O O O O O O C O O O C O C X J O O C O O O C O r - m o O O O r - O O O O O O O O O O C O O O C J O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O
p l r H r l r l H r l r l r l r l r l r l H r l r l H r l r l r l r l r l H H r l H H r l r l r l r l H H H r l r l H r l r l r l r l r l r l r l r l H r l H H H H H
Eh eh 
c j u  
CJ CJ 
0  CJ 
Eh Eh
Eh Eh 
CJ Eh 
Eh Eh
a CJ 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
o a 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
a CJ 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
CJ o 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
CJ 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
a 0 Eh 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Eh
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
a 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Eh Eh 0 Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh E*
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
< < < < < < < < < < <
0 0 O 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh
Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh < < Eh
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh
Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh
U  CJ CJ CJ CJ
a  cj cj o  cj
Eh CJ Eh Eh CJ
_ Eh Eh CJ CJ EhCS 0 0 < < CD
< < < < < <
8 8 8 8 8
Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh
u  Eh c j a  
Eh Eh Eh 0  
<  CD CD CD 
CJ CJ CJ Eh 
CJ CJ Eh a  
CJ CJ CJ CJ 
CJ CJ CJ CJ 
CJ CJ CJ CJ 
CD CD CD CD 
CJ CJ CJ CJ 
CD CD <  CD 
Eh Eh Eh Eh
9 9 9 9rtC <  C  <  
Eh Eh Eh Eh 
Eh Eh Eh Eh 
Eh Eh Eh Eh 
CD CD CD CD 
CJ CJ CJ CJ 
Eh Eh Eh Eh
CJ Eh 
Eh Eh 
CD CD 
Eh CJ 
CJ CJ 
CJ CJ 
CJ CJ 
CD CD 
CJ CJ 
CD CD 
Eh Eh 
CD CD 
  $ 
Eh Eh 
CD CD 
CJ CJ 
Eh Eh
<  CJ CJ 
Eh Eh Eh 
CD CD CD 
CJ CJ CJ 
CJ CJ CJ 
CJ CJ CJ 
0 CJ CJ
g o o  
0 0 0 
a  c j c j 
CD CD CD 
Eh Eh Eh 
CD CD CD
      Eh Eh Eh 
Eh Eh Eh 
Eh Eh Eh 
CD CD CD 
0 0 0 
Eh Eh Eh
CD CD 
CJ CJ 
CJ CJ 
CJ CJ 
CJ CJ 
CJ CJ 
CD Eh 
CJ CJ 
CD CD 
Eh Eh
Eh Eh 
Eh Eh 
Eh CD 
CD CD 
CJ CJ 
Eh Eh
CD CD 
CJ CJ
a  cj
CD CD 
CD CD 
Eh Eh
E< Eh
CD CD 
a  cj
Eh Eh
CJ CJ 
Eh Eh 
CD CD 
CJ CJ 
CJ CJ 
CJ CJ 
CJ CJ 
CJ CJ 
Eh Eh 
(J  CJ 
CD CD 
Eh Eh
CD CD 
CJ CJ 
Eh Eh
CD CD 
CJ CJ 
CJ CJ 
CJ CJ 
CJ CJ
CJ CJ 
CD CD 
Eh Eh
Eh Eh 
Eh Eh 
CD CD
<  CJ CJ 
Eh Eh Eh 
CD CD CD 
CJ CJ CJ 
CJ CJ CJ 
O  CJ CJ 
CJ CJ CJ 
CJ CJ CJ 
CD Eh Eh 
CJ CJ CJ 
CD CD CD 
Eh Eh Eh 
CD CD CD
< < < 
Eh Eh Eh 
Eh Eh Eh 
Eh CD CD 
CD CD CD 
CJ U  CJ 
Eh Eh Eh
Eh Eh 
CD CD 
CJ CJ 
CJ CJ 
CJ CJ 
CJ CJ 
CJ CJ 
CD Eh 
O  CJ 
CD CD 
Eh Eh
E< Eh 
CD CD
<  CJ <  
Eh Eh Eh 
CD CD CD 
CJ CJ CJ 
CJ CJ CJ 
CJ CJ CJ 
CJ CJ CJ
8 8 8  
U  CJ CJ 
CD CD CD 
Eh Eh Eh
Eh CD Eh 
CD CD CD
CJ CJ CJ CJ 
Eh Eh Eh Eh 
CD CD CD CD
u u u a  
a  u  cj cj 
a  o  o  cj
CJ CJ CJ CJ 
c j u  u  CJ 
Eh Eh Eh Eh 
u c j u y
CD CD CD CD 
Eh Eh Eh Eh 
CD CD CD CD 
<  <  <  <  
Eh Eh E> Eh 
Eh U  Eh CJ 
Eh E> E* Eh 
CD CD CD CD
CD CD 
a  c j 
CJ CJ 
CJ CJ 
CJ CJ 
CJ CJ 
eh Eh 
CJ CJ 
CD CD 
Eh Eh
Eh Eh
CD CD
y c j o o c j c j c j c j p u p
Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh
CDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCD 
E E E E E H E E E E E E E E H E E t H t H E E E E l H E E  
~  '  E h E h E h E h E h E h E h E h E h E h E h E h E h E h I h  -  -  -  -  -  -
CD CD CD CD CD CD 
_ _ _ Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh "
Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh
CDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCD
Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh
Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh
CDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCD
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 CD0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 3 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 3 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5
C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 y 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 00 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
O C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
H c j c j c j o c j c j c j c j u u u o c j c j c j y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y
5 3 5 5 5 5 5 5 3 3 3 5 3 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 3 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 3 5 5 3 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5
CDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCD
C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J
c j c j c j c j c j c j c j c j c j c j c j p c j c j c j y c j c j c j c j c j c j c j c j c j c j c j c j c j c j c j c j c j c j c j c j c j c j c j c j c j y y c j c j c j c j c j c j c j
CDCD0 CDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCDCD
P C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J P U C J C J C J C J Q C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J
c d c d c d c d c d c d c d c d c d c d c d c d c d c d c d c d c d c d c d c d c d c d c d c d c d Q c d c d c d c d c d c d c d c d c d c d c d c d c d c d c d c d c d c d c d c d c d c d c d c d
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J
C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J O C J C J C J C J C J C J C J
o o u c j c j o o u c j o c j o c j c j o c j c j c j c j o o a o c j o a c j o c j u c j o c j o c j c j a c j o c j c j c j u u c j c j c j c j c j c j
C J C J O C J C J O C J U U O O C J U U U U O C J C J C J C J  I U C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J U C J C J O C J C J C J C J C J U C J C J O C J C J U C J C J O
u u o c j u u c j c j c j c j c j u u u u u u u u c j u c j C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J O C J CJ U  O  CJ CJ CJ CJc j c j y c j c j c j c j c j
^ ^ ^ ^ P eJ ^ E E E ^ B H E h E E E E h Eh E E h E E h Eh E H E h E E E h E E E E E E E E E E h Eh Eh E E ;
eh O  CJ CJ
cj  cj  cj  a
CJ CJ CJ - 
CD CD
O u G u 0 o U U C J O U U i j c i c i 2 1 S o S E H ^ i j U C i E H ^ ^ E H E H E H E H  i  H E H ^ E H i i E H ^ E E E E E E  
u o c j u c j u c j u c j o u c j c j u c j u u c j c j u c j c j u c j c j c j c j c j c j c j c j c j c j u c j u u o u c j c j c j c j p p p
O O O O O O O O 0 O O O O U O O
o y o y y o y o u c D o y y p y y
8 8 8 
8 8 8 8
CJ CJ CJ CJ CJ CJ CJ 
CD CD CD CD 0 0 0
a  cj  cj  cj p p c j p c j p p p p p a p u c j p p p c j c j p
E E h Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh C J C J E h Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh
p  U  0  
Eh Eh Eh
0 0 0 0
EH CJ O  O  
0 0 0 0
0 0 0
0 0 0 0
0 0 0
0 0 0 0
0 0 0
                                               
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  
E h E h E h E h E h E h E h E h E h E h E h E h E h . . . . -  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  
C J C J C J C J C J C J U C J C J C J C J C J C J U C J E h  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  
U C J U U U C J U C J C J C J U C J C J C J C J P  
C J C J C J C J O U U C J O O C J O C J C J C J E h
o o o o o o u o o o o o u o c j o  
u c j c j c j c j c j c j c j c j c j c j c j y c j y c j  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 <  
C J C J O C J C J C J O C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J
o 0 u u u o o u u 0 u o o o o a  u o o o u o o o u u o o o o o o  
u o o o u u u o o u a a y y o E H  
0 C J U C J 0 0 U 0 0 0 0 C J 0 0 U 0   .
u u u u o u o o u y u y P E g g  l a o u  i 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
               
CD CD
u u u u u u u u u u u U O U U U U U U U O U U U U  
U C J C J C J U O U C J O C J C J O C J U U O O C J U O O U U O Uu o u p y o u p p o p c j p o u o u u u y u y y y y  
O E n f i u O U U O O O O O a a U U U U U U U C J C ^ O U
o p y y u u u c j y y
C/3 CU
(d to to
u  u  u
o a  afd <u
U U pH
m n  m T} 73  4-1u  u  u
to to to w q10 10 
id fd
id fd to to idTO TO TOrd rd rd fd fd to rd fd
0 u  u U u  u u  u  u u  o
o  o  o  o  to
a  a  c  
a) a) a) 
'O ' O 
C  <  <
<u a> <u <u da) a) a) Q) Q) 0) Q) a> a> a)
T)  *0  T)  d  IDT3 73  ' U 73 73 73 TJ 73 73 73
< < < <  <  <  <  CD
to to
to *H -H 10 
2  10 tO (0 *H
to a  d  ^  to
o  a) a) to a
H c  C o  0)
M o  o  o  >JQ H  r l  to (d
g  <u a) -h  o
O U  >  d
O ffi
fd fd
fd fd
P* Q* oO -H
t> CJ
fd rd CL)
a) Oi aj
to to to
Pi Oi Q Oi P i
fd fd
n) m  rd fd fd fd
73 to Id Cdfd - H r H 2  d
>, to to 
d  rC to to 
a) Oi a) a)
Oi  O i
rd fd fd cd
i J  i J  4J  XJ
a> a) <d a)
Oi Oi Oi Oi
fd fd fd to Q)
73 fdm 0) a) 0) a>
pH 73 <Dfd -h
<u u  &> a da) m d  d  c  da) a) a) a)
V  4J
to to to to
rd 0) to a) m m
0) to to rd fd fd Oi 4JU  4-1 4-1
u  o>
rd <d id fd fd fd fd <D 0) <D (U (U 
d d  d  d  d
a) a) <u a) <1) <D <D <D (L) <U <D (L)0) 0)
t o t o t o t o t o i o t o i o
d d d d d d d d
( D( D( U0 ) ( U( U( U< U
CDOCDCDCDCDCDCD
t J r l H H r H H r l H r l r l H H r l r l H H r l r l H r t r l r l
d ) ( D( U( D( l l f l j ( l ) D( l ) ( U( I ) ( D( D( D( Uf l j m( D( D( D( D( D
o o o r H o o c o o o o o c o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o m c n o ^ ' ^ ' c n i n i n T f o o m i n ^ f v o i n ^ j ' ^ i n i n i n i n i n i n v o i n L n i n i n i n v D i n  
c r  o o c h o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o c o o o o o o o o o o o o o c o c o v o c r > o o o o ^ o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o a 3 o o o o o o o o c x 3 o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o  
( N ( N C N ( N ( N ( N ( N ( N ( N O } ( N ( N ( N C ^ C N O J ( N C N f N f N ( N C N C N ( N f N C N ( N ( N ( N ( N C N C M C N ( N ( N ( N O J O J O J C N ( N C N O J ( N ( N ( N f N r S I C N ( N
o u u o o o o a t D U O P ' P ' O C )
< < < < < < < < < < <  '   '  < <
a o OOOOO OUOUC Dt ' - t ' - U O
C N O U O O O U O U O U U l ' - t ' - O U t '  
< < < < < < < < < < <  t ' - t ' - < <
W < < < < < < < < < < <  t ' - t ' - r t  r i 
E - < 0 0 0 0 C 5 0 0 C 5 0 0 C 9 f ' - ^ - 0 0
H < < < < < < < < < < <  0 . p .  < <  < < < < < << <<<<  t'-ri-<<
M O O O O U O O U O O O t ' - t ' - U U
S < < < < < < < < < < <
 HU0 UC5 U0 C3 0 U0 Uf ' - t ' >0C>n u o o u u u u p p p u  p p
Oh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh
J U O U U U U U U U U U O U O U
i u o o o o o o o o u o o o o o
Eh Eh Eh E  Eh Eh o u o o o u o o o
EH Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh EH -  -
Eh Ehh O
u u u u u o u u u u u u u u o t '
O U O U O O O O O t J O O U O O l '
U O C J U U U U O O U U C J O U O f '
Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh
O U U O U t'
- - Eh Eh 'Eh Eh
rij rij rtj <J 
E- E-< - e- 
rtj rij rfj rij< <
Eh Eh Eh Eh Ehu u u p u  
Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh
eS e5 eS e5 eS< < < <
o u t '  
Eh Eh 
OOt '  
U U U O U O U O U U U U U O U O O U U U O O O U O U O U O U U Q U q
< < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < <Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh
O O U O U O O O U O O O O O O O O O O O O O O U O O O O O O O O C I O
o u u u u u u u u u u u u y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y
%%%%%%$%%%%%$$%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o y y o y
< < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < ^ ^ < < < < < < ^ < >  ? * 5 <
Eh E* < <
q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q p q u o
u o a o u u u o o u u a a u c j u a u u u o u u a u u u u u u u y u o
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 o O o o o o 
o o p o p p p o p o o
E E E H E H E E E E f i E f i E H E E E H E H E ' E H E E E p E f H E H E H E E H E E  
Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eho o p o o o o u u a a o o o p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p u p w v
Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh P h---------------- u u y o u y u u u o o u u u o u u y u o u u u o y y y y
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p  
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
o o o o o o
p p p p p p
p p p p p p
- - - - - -  o  CJ Oo p o u o p u u u o o u o u p  
Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh _ _ .o o o y o u u u o u o o p p p o p p p p
Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh< < 
Eh Eh < <
< < < 
Eh Eh Eh < < <
< <  <  
Eh Eh Eh 
< < <
      & 
(  (
< < < < < < < < < < <  
"  " Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh '< < < < < <
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p y y o p
P P P P P P P P P P P P P O P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P O O O P P
o u o o u o u u o o u o u y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y
u o y y u u o o u u u y y o o u u u y u o o
p Q p p p p p q p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
p p p p p p pu u o  .
Eh Eh Eh
S P  PP  P  .  _ _ _
cj o  a  u  a
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
p p p P p p P p p p p 8 p p p p 8 8 8 8 p 8 8 8 8 p p p
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
o o o o o u u u u u u o o u u o o o o u u u u u u u u o u
u ^ B S B g S B g g g g g g g g g g g g s g g g s s g g g
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
u o o o u o o u o u
g g g g g g g g g g
< P P P P E h Eh Eh P P
y u u p u u u o p p
< P E h Eh P P P P E h Eh
U O U U E h O O O O U< < < < < < < < < <
y o y u o u o u u o< < < < < < < < < <
p p p p p p p p p p
Eh O  O       -
p  p  p
Eh Eh tH
Eh Eh  h Eh Eh
P P P P P P P P P
u u o o o o u u u u u
^ eS eSeS eS ^ eS eS ^ eSeS
E-i OOOOE h OOEh OO
u y u u u a y u a y u  
u o o o o o o o u o o
o o o o o o o o o o o
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
y y y y p y o o u u u y y u u u p p o E H O
P O p P E H P P P P P p P P P P P f c H E H p p P
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
< < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < <
Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh
P P P P P P P < P P < P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
u o o y o y o y o y y y y o o o u o o y o o o y y y u o y
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
o u o o o o o u u o o u u u o o o o o o o o o o u o u o o
u u u u o u u u o u o o y y y y y y y y u u o y y y y y y< < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < <
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
- -    - -  - -  - -  r h  r n  r n  r h  m  rt i  r n  r*\ r h  r h  r r h  fi r n  r n  r *1 r*i r n  r n  r n  m  f )  f d
o  o  y  y
P  P  P  P  
P  P  P  P  
p  p  p  P
< < y O Eh
p p p p p
_ _ p p p p p
p p p p p p p
o o u o o o u
P P P P P P P P P
u o u u u u o u u
U U U O O U U U U O E h
o y y o o u o o u y u
p p p p p p p p p p p
Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh
p p p p p p p p p p p
p p p p p p p p p p p
o u u o o u u u o o u
< < < < < < < < < < <
p p p p p p p p p p p< < < < < < < < < < <
p p p p p p p p p p p
p p p p p p p p p p p
u o u u u u u u u u u
o o u o u o u u o u u
I I I I I I I I I I
o o o o o o o o o o o
u e h o o o u o u u c j o
g g g g g g ? g g g g
O I I I I I i O I I I
O 0 O 0 O 0 O 0 O O  
w w O O O O O O O O O O w w w w
E ^ y o u u o y o o o u y a y u o
g g g g f g g ? g f g g g g g g
U E * U E * < U U U < <
O O O O O O U O O C 3 
o o o o o o o o o o  
o o o o o o o o o o  
o o g o u u g u c j "
0 O 0 0 0 O 0 O O  
Eh Eh Eh E ^ c E h Eh Eh Eh fc 
o o o o o o o o o o
U U U U U U U U ^ H
a y u u u u u u u u  
H C u u u u u u u y  
O O O O O O O O O O  
Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh H E h 
O O O O O O O O U C 5 
O O O O O O O O O O  
u u u o u u u u o u
d < < < < << < < < <
o o o o o o o o o o               ^
p p p p p p p p p p  
p p p p p p p p p p  
u u u u u o u u u u  
y o u u u o u o u o
<  I I I I I I I I I I I I i i I t  r i  I ) I i  i i i  I i i I i i i  i  i  i i i  i  i  i  i i  i i i  i i i  i
u u u u u o u o u u o o o o u u o u o o u u o o u u o o u u u u u u u u y y o o y o o o o u y y y p
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p q q p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
U U U U O U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U O U U O
4 < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < < <
O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O C D O O
o u o u o o o o u o o u o u o o o o o o o u o o o o o o o
o u o u o u u u u u o o o u o o o o o o o u o o o o o u o
a u u u u u u u u u u u a u u u u u u u u u u o u u u u u
u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u
03 CU n. o
m w wu w
a> a) w
a  rn
u it) m 
a) a) -hid m
TJ 4-1
3 D D
O. Pi
<d it) cd
u u u
2 2 Pi Pi u
rd id 
Pi P i
Id CD
a) a) 
73 73 
a) <d
73 73
a a a 
a) a) a; 
'O 'O 'O 
c < flj
a) a) 
73  73 
w w w w 
2 2 P P -
&&&&  
c d c d c d c d c d i d c d i d c d c d c d c d c d i d
UUUUUU-UJJ4JOJ4J4J4J4J
o o o o o o o o w w w w w w w w  
a p c p 
a) a) a) a>
73  73  73  73  < < < <
O O O O W
C P C C -H
tu a. a> a> a
'P 'O *0 d)< < < < o
id cd 
id id cdO O
id cd cd w a)
P  , P w w 73 id
H 73  <U(U 0)
0) w w cd cd
id cd
(U (D CD <U (U (D
P P P P P P
0) 0) <D Q) Q)
I I cd 
id cd j-*
n a  o 
o o -H
0 0 3 
-H -H aS
353Pi Pi Pi 
id td <u
a. -h a  
u x : o  
 h o c
M td tu
I I I 
a  a  a
W W W
II) to 10
to td id id td fd id
QJ H  r l  r l  r l  r l  r l73w c d c d c d i d c d i d
 H d  D  D  - U U  i l
00 ) 0) ( D O J ( D ( D ( D  
i-<73 p i P i P i P i P t P i  
O P O O O O O O  
W O P P P P P P  
H H D M D D I D  
ID Qt i J  i J  D  i J  D  i J  
W W W W W W W W
I 1 I I I I I I
d) ( Da) CL) <UCL) <DCU 
P P P P P P P P
P P  P P P P P<U <D (I) <D P o o
o o o o o o o
P P rH 
qj a) a) 
0  O E-*
- 2 9 5 -
o o o r H o o o o o o o o c o o o o o c o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o i r  < r > o ^ ' ^ < T > L n m ^ o o i r ) i n ^ * v D L n ^ ^ i  i o m L n L n L n L n ^ o i r ) i n L r ) i n L n v o L n
^ooa>oooooooooooooooooooooocoooooooooco^a>oooo^oooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooo(^^(r)(^rororO(^i^i^ ( ^ r O ( ^ f O r ^ i ^ r O ( ^ f ^ f O ( ^ ( ^ ( ^ r O f O r o r O f r)(rirorrtrr)frifr)r,irr)rr)fri()rr)rr)rr)rriforr)fr)fr)(,or'irr)
Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eho o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O
O O P O O U O O O O O O P O O
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o oo o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 ( 5 0 0 0 0o o o o o o o o o o q o o o q
O O O O O O O O O O O O O O Oo o o o o o o o o o o o o o oo o o o o o o o o o o o o o oo o o o o o o o o o o o o o o< < < < <  ; < < < < < < < < < :o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
Eh o o o e h o o o o o o o o o oo o o o o o o o o o o o o o oo o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
o u o u u o o u o o o o o o uo o o o o o o o o o o o o o oo o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o oo o u u o o o o o o o o u o uu u u o o o u o o o o o u o oo o o o o o o q o o u o o o uo o o o o o o o o o o o o o ou u o u u o u o o u u o u u uo o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
Eh Eh EhEhEh EhEh EhEhEh EhEhEhEh Eho o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
O O O O O O O O O O O O O O Oo o o o o o o o o o o o o o oo u u u u u u u o o o u o o u
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
U E h Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Ehy o p o y o o o o o o o p p p
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
^ H g g g g
1 o a o o u u u u u o o o o o c j  
l O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O
in o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o  S o u u u o o u o o u o u o u u
h O O O O O O O O O O O O O O Op o p p p p p p o o p p p o p
S o o o o o o o o o o o o o u o
a a a a a a a a a a a
g g g g g g g g g g g  
.  _ _ _ _ E-* * E-1 E-* H  E-*
o o o o o o o o o o o     o q o o o
"  8 8 8
 o o o o o o o o o o o < v
0, 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 *
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o qo o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o p o o o o o
Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eho p o p p o p p p p p o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
o o o o on E-* Eh^ o b b b b b o b b b b o o o o o o b o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o  o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o  o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
o o o o o o o o o o o q o q o q q q o o q q q q o q q q y q q q q q q
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o q o o o q oo o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o oo o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o oo o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o q q q< < <c o o o
-  H  Eh Eh Eh
$ % o o
Eh Eh
% % e5 e5 < < o o
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o oo o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o q o o o
Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh ,  _o o o o o o o o
< < < p o o  
Eh Eh Eh
Eh Eh 
3 gEh Eh 
Eh Eh 
< < < 
Eh EH Eh
   < <Hi  < < <
< < < 
Eh Eh Eh 
eh Eh Eh 
<  < <
88 < <
< < < < < <  o o o o o o
Eh O  Eh O  Eh Oo o o o o o o o o
Eh Eh 
Eh Eh 
EH Eh Eh 
Eh Eh Eh 
< < <o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o oo o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o oo o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
( 5  ( 5  ( 5  ( 5  ( 5o o u u
Eh Eh Eh Eh
( ) 0 ( j ( ) ( j 0 ( 5 ( 5 ( j ( 5 ( j ( 5 0 0 ( j 0 0 0 0 0 c n ) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 ( 5 t 3
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%q o o o o o o o o o o o q o o o o q o o o o q q o o o o o o o o o o
P O O O O O O O O O O O P O O O O P O O O O O O O O O O O O O C P O Oo o q o o o o o o o q o q o q q o q q y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y
%%%%%%%%%%%%$%%%%%%%%%%%%$%%%%%%%$
C5 O 0 O 0 0 0 0            -- 
H E h Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ H g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g
3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3
0 ( J O O O O O O ( 3 ( J ( J (  I ( J O O O ( J O O C I ( J C K ) 0 ( J ( 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
^ H g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o oo o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g
O O O U O U O U O O O O O O O O U O O O O m j t J O O t J U O O O U O Oo o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o oo o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g
3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3
l l l i l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l i l l
g g g g g g g g g g ^ g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g
g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g gBOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCPOUOOOOCJOO o o o o o o o o o o o o o p o o o o o o o o o y o o o o p p o p o
Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh
( J O O O O O O O C J U O U O C J O O U O O U O O O O U O U O U O O O O O
m m m m m m m m m m m s
H to U G 
TO - H
 H  rIV o a
TO - h
C/3 04
TO to to v
Cn I I
}j  N  <  Hs  y s  oi-HU | | | |
JJ rH *H *H *H *H
M O *H *H *H *H
O -H G G G G
U H  g  g  -H -H 
a) O rd <3 rd TOd h B G fl C .  .I I I I I I I I I I <U
to M  CO to W  W   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(0 to
t o  - H  - H
3  to to
to c  co <u <uH G cMOO
to10 -H
3  to 
to G O <Du > 
to TO
o  4J. AJ. >  43to TO 43 ^3 i i : . . .  .
t o t o i o t o t o c o t o t o
OTOTOTOTOTOTOTOO U O U O U O U
M O O O O O O O
> > G G G G G G G
b a ) ( D < D ( D i D ( D ( DMrOT),dT) ,d ,a ,d< < < < < < < <
TOTOTOTOTOTOTOTOu u u u o u u o
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 O
G G G G G G G C G
< D < D < D < D O ) ( D < D < D ( Df0 ' 0 f0 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,0 ,0< < < < < < < < <
w C 3 <u ft43 Vh I 
(0 (0 O JJ 
O 01e -h ai c o ai < o
n J  * 0  n J  n j  o i
ai  .d >d *0 -rH
M (0 -rH -H 01(I > Vi h Oa <u o o
* H  r H  I I IIo o M H MHI I I I . TO TO TO TO TO
4J  4J  A J  J J  J J
to to to to to
G  G G G G
<d a) a) a) a)u o o o o
cu o t o  <D
TO TO TO
m aiTO TO TO (0TO TO
TO TO -H TO g CT) U
0 > h  E  g
TO CJ TO
> >1  
TO to to TO 
id id <d ni
I I Id id id xj idrH rH Id rHrH rH rH Id Id>1 >1 ? C XIA fi > id id <uPi Qi O <0 -H a0 o -n y A o
P P U -rH O C
U U p  M Id 1)
H H Id (U Pi XI
E E Pi 01 01 01111 I I I 
Pi Pi Pi Pi Pi Pi
01 01 01 01 01 01
01 01 01 01 01 01
o o ]  id id id id id id
H H < U  r H i - H r - H r H r H r H
- r i O d i i d i d i d i d i d t d  
C - r l  p X J X J X J X J X J X J
 r H o a i o a i a i a i a i c i  
Q)  P r H T ?  P l P i P l P l P l P l
I d i d O C O O O O O O
> E o i a i p c c p p pHoirHrHooaiaiaiai
O  id P i  x j  X J  XI  X I  X I  X I0101010101010101
a d c c<u <li a> a>u o o o
- 2 9 6 -
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p P P P
P P P P P P P P P  
o o p u o u o u u  
p p p  p p p   
p p p P P P
cj u p 
p p p
u o u
p p p
p p p P P P
p p p 
P P CD
p p pOOP
CJ CJ CJ
CJ CJ U U P
p p p 
p p p
p p p
p p p
< < < < <
h  Eh E<
u  u  CJ CJ o
p p p p
Eh fH   Eh
p p p p p
p p p p p
p p p p p
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p  
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p  
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P p P P P P P P P  CD P P P P P P P P P  
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p  
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p  
p p p p p p < < p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 3 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8
P P P P P P P P P P P P P E - > P P P E - > P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P ^ P H t > P P P P P P P P P P C J P P P P P P P P P P
' - C J P P P P P P P P C J P C J P C J P C J P P P P P P P P P P P P p P P P P p P P C J C J P C J P P
P P P P P C J P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P C J C J C J P
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P C D P P
P P P P p P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P p ' P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P p P p P P
 8 ^    "<c < c <  <  <;Eh Eh E-> Eh H  Eh
  P P P p p
<  <  < 
Eh O  Eh
P  -  -
u u u u u u u u
P P P C D P P C 9 P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P C D P P P C S P P P P P P P P  - - - - - -  --------
P P P P P P P P P 3 S P E H E H E H E H y f i 5 S F y C J P P P P P P P P P P P P
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
P p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
_____________________________ P P U P P P P C J
p p p p p p p p p p
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p  
p p p p p p p p p p < p p p < p
H n n u U n u n
J P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P C J P P C J P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P  
i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p  i i p p p p p p p p p p p p p p  
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p  
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p y  
| H ^ H F H E < | H H l H H E H | H E H H E < F r ' r < F | H F | H | H E H | H ^  H ^ H | H ^ | H F ^ ^
p P P P p P 8 p P P PEh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh
P P P P P P 8 P P P PP P P 8 P P P P P PP P P P P p P P P P
D P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P  
a u o u o u u a a u u a o o o u c j c j o a ' * ' 
O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O C D
8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 E E E E E
O U U U U U O O O O U U Q Q Q g
u u u u  u
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o  
 8p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p pp p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
. . < < < <
p p p p p p
 p p p p
: n  8
p p p p
Eh Eh Eh H
p p p p
__________________ p p p p
p p p p p p p p p p p
'3 s
CO Ou
CL) <D
j s e e e e & e e e e e e e e e e e e
 H O < t i a S ( 0 f l 3 < 0 a ) ( t i r t ( t i a J ( t i < 0 r t i a J a J f t i r d
rl Oi
(cj aj *h
(J U 4-1 4-1
Pi  f t  f t  Oi U i f t
W M W W W W
W W W W W W
H ,c CO n m
o  <u a  <u a) w
4-J W O ft ft O
fl 'O u
H rt -H
3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3
g  g  g c  G c  G G G c  < h rr rr 'rl t  ' iJ rri t I t  rri rr ^  ^  ^  'Tl ^
P P P P P P P P P P E h Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh
O O O O O O C O C O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O C O O O O O O O V O O O O O O O V O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O r ^ C ^ O O O O O O a D O O O O O O O O O O O O O O C O a D C O
i n i / i i n i n i n i n i n i n i n i n L / i i n i n i n i ^ i n i / i i n i n i n i n i n i n i n i n u i i n i n i n i n i n i n i n i / i i n i n i n i ^ i n i n i n L n i n i n i n i n i n i n i n i n
Eh Eh Eh Eh 
CJ CJ CJ CJ 
Eh Eh Eh Eh
U U U U  < < < < 
CJ CJ CJ CJ 
CJ Eh U  U  
O  C5 C C5 Eh Eh Eh Eh 
Eh Eh Eh Eh 
Eh Eh Eh Eh
<  O  CJ CJ
*5 <2 <5 <2C5 <  <  < u u u u  u o u  y 
cj  <  <  <
Eh CJ CJ Uu u u uu u o u
Eh O  CJ O  
U U U U< < < < u u u u  
Eh Eh Eh Eh
U  CJ O  U  
C5 CJ CJ CJ 
Eh Eh Eh Eh 
CJ CJ CJ CJ 
CJ CJ CJ CJ 
Eh Eh Eh Eh
<  <  CJ <  
CJ CJ CJ CJ 
U U U  I a  o  u a
<  <  <  <  
CJ CJ CJ CJ 
<  <  <  <  
CJ CJ CJ CJ
CH CH CH CH
rtj ^  rtj
Eh Eh Eh 
CJ CJ CJ 
Eh Eh Eh 
U O U  
Eh Eh Eh
U U U
< CJ CJ 
CJ CJ CJ 
CJ CJ CJ 
CJ CJ CJ 
Eh Eh Eh 
Eh Eh Eh 
Eh Eh Eh 
CJ CJ CJ 
CJ CJ CJ< < < UUU  UUU< ec < 
U U U  
CJ u  u  UUU  UUU  UUU< < < UUU  
Eh Eh Eh 
CJ CJ CJ 
Eh Eh Eh 
CJ CJ CJ 
U U U  
CJ CJ CJ 
Eh Eh Eh 
CJ CJ CJ 
U U U  
Eh Eh Eh 
<  < < 
CJ CJ CJ 
U U U
   
CJ CJ CJ 
U U U  
Eh Eh Eh 
U U U  
CJ u u
Eh Eh E  
CJ CJ CJ 
Eh Eh Eh U UU  
Eh Eh EH U UU  
CJ < < 
CJ CJ CJ U UU  
CJ CJ CJ 
Eh Eh Eh 
Eh Eh Eh 
Eh Eh Eh UUU
9 9 9< rt < UUU
9 9 9< < < U UU  U UU  U UU  UUU U UU  < < < U UU  
Eh Eh Eh 
CJ CJ CJ 
Eh Eh Eh 
CJ CJ CJ U UU  
CJ U  CJ 
Eh Eh Eh 
CJ CJ CJ U UU  
Eh Eh Eh 
< < < 
CJ CJ CJ UUU  UUU  rtj
CJ CJ CJ 
< < < 
CJ CJ CJ U UU  
Eh Eh Eh U UU  
CJ CJ CJ
EhEh Eh EhEh Eh Eh EhEh Eh Eh
C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J
Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh
u u u u u u u u u u u
O C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C Ju u u u u u u u u u u
C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C JEhEhEhEh EhEhEhEh Eh EhEh
g g g g g g g g g g g
u u u u u u u u u u u
C J C J O C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J< < < < < < < < < < <
U U U U U U U U U E h Ehu u u u u u u u u u u* $ < < < < <  : < < < <u u u u u u u u u u u
U U U U U U U U U U E h
U U U U U U U U U U E hu u u u u u u u u u uu u u u u u u u u u u< < < c r t : c < i < r t : i < uu u u u u u u u u u uEh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh EhEh Eh EhEh
C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C JEhEhEhEhEhEh Eh EhEhEhEh
C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J
U U U U U U U U U U E h
C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C JEhEhEh EhEh HEh Eh Eh EhEh
O C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C J C Ju u u u u u u u u u uEhEh Eh Eh Eh Eh EhEh EhEh Eh< < < < < < < < < < <
O O O O O O O O O O Ou u u u u u u u u u uu u u u u u u u u u u< < < < < < < < < < <
o o o o o o o o o o o
o o o o o o o o o o o
g g g g g g g g g g g
Eh Eho o
Eh Eh
^  < o o 
Eh Uo o
Eh eh 
Eh Eh 
Eh Eh
9 9<C < 
  9 u < u u u u  u
Eh eho o
Eh Eho o
Eh Uo o 
E- 9 o <
< < o o
S <O O
Eh Eh U E h Eh Eh Eh U U E h Eh Eh Eh
O O r t l O O O O O O O O O O
Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh H E h
U E h Eh U E h U E h U E h Eh Eh Eh Eh Eho o o o o o o o o o o o o o
Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh
u u _ _ _ _o o o o o o
   '  Eh EH
.  Eh Eh
Eh Eh Eh
Eh Eh 
  Eh 
U U U U U U U O U U U U U
o o o o o o o o o o o o o  
  " U U U E h U U U U U U U
E  p  Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh 
Eh c * Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh
U U U U U U U U U U U U Uo o o o o < o o o o o o o< < < < < < < < < < < < <
U E U E h Eh U U U U U U U Uu u u u u u u u u u u u u
U U U U U U U U U U U U U
U E h U U U U U U U U U U U
U E h U U U U E h U U E h Eh Eh Ehu u u u u u u u u u u u u  
u u u u u u u u u u u
_ _ Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh 
O O O O O O O O O O O O O  
Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eho o o o o o o o o o o o o
U E h U U U E h Eh U U E h Eh H E ho o o o o o o o o o o o o
Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eho o o o o o o o o o o o ou u u u y y u u u u y y u
9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9o o o o o o o o o o o o oo o o o o o o o o o o o ou u u u u u u u u u u u u
o o o o o o o o o o o o oKilrtlrtlrtliCiCitCCCiCrtlCrt:
o o o o o o o o o o o o o
g g g g g g g g g g g g g
u u u u
Eh Eh
u u u u u u y u u y u y u y
o o o o o o o o o o o o o ou o o y u u u u u u u u u uo o o o o o o o o o o o o o
Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh E h Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh
H E E E h P E h E P E h E H O E U
Eh Eh E E h Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Ehu u u u u u u u u u u u u uo o o o o o o o o o o o o o<C<<<<<<<<<<<<<
u u u u u u u u u u u u u uu u u u u y y y y y y y y yC C C C C C C C C C C C C Cu u u u u u u u u u u u u uu y y u y u u u y u u u u u
U E h Eh U E h U E h U E h Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh
U U U U U U U U U U U U U U
U U U U U U U U U U U U U U
u u u u u u y u u u y u y u
Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh
O O O O O O O O O O O O O O
Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh
O O O O O O O O O O O O O OUEh EhUEh UEhUEh Eh EhEhEhEh
O O O O O O O O O O O O O OEhEhEhEhEhEhEhEhEhEhEhEhEhEh
O O O O O O O O O O O O O Ou u y u u u y u u u u u u u
Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh
O O O O O O O O O O O O O Ou u u u u u u u u u u u u u
9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9< < < < < < < < < < < < < <o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
o y u u c j u g O u O u o o u u Q o u o O o c j u Q o O u o o o c j o u u o o u c j o u
I I I I I I I I II I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I II I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g y y y y y y y u y y y y y y y y y < y y y ; < y y ^ y y y y y y y a y y y y y y y ^ ^ c j o g
g g g g g g 
u u u u  o o o o o o o o
Eh Eh Eh Eh O O O
g g g g
o o o o  o o o o o oo o
o o o o
g g g g
< < < < < . , . . 
g g g g g g g g g
O O U O O U O O Oo o u o u u u o oy E n o y y y u o y
O O O O O O O O O
o e - * o o c j u u o o  o o o o o o o o o  
0 0 0  0  0 0 0 ( 5  0  o o o o o o o o ortj rfj c  rtj flj c  rij rtj rijo o o o o o o o o
g g g g g g g g g
Bo o o o o o o oC J O O O O O O O
Eh U U U U U U U Uu o o o o o o o ou u u u u u u u uu u y u y y y y uEhEh Eh EhEh EhEh EhEho o o o o o o o o< < < < < < < < <
g g g g g g g g g
Eh U U E h U U U U U
< <<<*t t Ct C<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<
g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
U U U U U U U U U U y U U U U U E n U U U U U U U U U U U U  
U U U U U U U U U U f ' U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U
o Q u o u a o u u o < < o < < < < < < o < < < < < < < < <  u u u y y u u u y u y u u u u u u u u y u u u u y u u u u ^ .  _ _ _ _ _ o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O Oo o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
< < < < u u u u  CJ o o o Q o o O
o o o o o o o o oo o o o o o o o o
Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh
O  O  Eh O  O  O
Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh
< < o o o o
Eh Eh
O  O  Q  
<  <  <  
CJ O  CJo o o
Eh Eh Eh
O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O  o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
c j c j c j b c j c j o c j c j c j b o b o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o  o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o b o o o o o o o o o o o o o  u u u u y u u u u u u u u u y u u u u y u u u y u u y y y y y y y y y y y u y y yO O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O r t  O i < b <  
U U U U U U O U U U E h O U U U O U E h U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U
g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g
_   _ _ _ . _ u u u o u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u u o u u u u u o u u o u o u o u u u u u u
<  I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
O  SB
(0 (0
Oi a  oO *Hu u
0 0 3
fd ra CD
u m a)
(U P l i Ja* o Pi M *HCO Q)Oi OCO CO CO CO
Oi Oi Oi 
CO CO CO 
CO CO CO
Oi Pi Pim CO
Pi Pi Pi CO I 
CO CO Pi
cd 0 0 
co cd cd
td co o  o
cd cd co cd cd co0) -H -H
5 a10 o 3 
(0 (0
' O co cd cd cdh a 4J
o  <u cu <u <u
iH *0 Qi Oi Pi0
co <u o  a  c
a) a) <u
(0 Pi i J
CO CO CO CO CO
cd cd cdco cn co a; a Icd cd cdu u co cd co
cd d  d m m QJ0) <nU U'O'D Q> Pi <U a) Pi Pi Pia) a) U 4-C Oi  O i O -H 
> U U 
U >1 >1 v co co cd 0
P O P  
a) CD <D
CO CO CO CO
CJ B C D  
id O  *hu o> rH g s s. e
Q} -H
Qi A U& & & & a m-i m-iI
cd cd cdcd cd cdcd cd cd cd co co cd cd u u u u (0 cdu  . u  i J
CO COc G G V d) Q) < 0 0
a) a) <d G G G G d)<U<D<D<D<D<D<D<D(UG G G G G G G G G G0) (U Q) (U 0) (U (UG G G C G G GU U U U CO CO CO
<u <d a) a> a) a) <d <d G G c 
a) a) a) o o o
a) a) o o
a) a> o o
m q) a) a>
TJ T; ' u ru Tj Tj Tj *0 *0 T? 73
< < < < < < C <
cd cd cd cd u u u u  o o o o G G G G 
<D 0) <D 0) 73 TJ 'P TJ < < < <
' t f o c s o o o \ o o o o o o o ^ o > a \ o > ^ o ^ o > a > c ^ ^ o * ^ O i H r ' - i n o v o v o i n a > i n v o L n r -  > ^ ^ ' * o i r > i n v D ^ 0 ^ v o v o v 0 v . o i n ^ o v o v  >
CN CN CN rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH O  CN H  rH O  rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH H  rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH 
l O V 0 V 0 l O V O t  l O l O V 0 l 0 V  V O V 0 V 0 l 0 l 0 V 0 V 0 l O V O V 0 V  l O l O l O V 0 V 0 ^ V O V f i V 0 V  V O V 0 l 0 l O ^ O l 0 l 0 l 0 V X > V O l O V 0 ^ 0 V , O \  t O l 0 l O
' d C P C P t P C P C P O C P O t P C P t P C P C P O t P C P C P C P C p C P C P C P C P C P C P C P C P C P C P C P t p C P C P C p C p C P C P C p C p C p C p C p C P C P C P C P C p C P C P C p
G O t P O U U O O U U 0 O  P O O O 0 U 0 0 0 U O O C p C p C P O O O C p 0 O O 0 C P C p C > t P C p C P C P C p C p C p C p C P C p C p U U
( l ) O C 5 O C ) ^ E H f i E H O O f i f ' H f ' ^ h ^ t H ^ O O C D O 0 O 0 c 5 O C  ) C 5 O O O O C ) 0 O O O C 5 O 0 0 0 O O 0 O O Ou < : u u o a o a u u a u o a o u u a o c j o u a o u o o u u o ( J u u u o a u c j o o c j o o u u o o u u u
W t P t P U C P C P C P C P C P C P C P C P C P C P C P C P C P E - i E H C P C P C P O C P C P O C P C P O O C P C P C P C P t P C P C P C P C P C P C P C P C P C P C P t P C P C P C P C P C P
O U o O U C 5 O O U O O O C I 0 C ) O O O O < < _______  _  _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _u u u o u u o u u u u < < u u u o u o u u y u o u u u u y u u y u o u u o u y c j u u u u o u u o u ot H U u o g o o o u o u o o o u u o a u a o H O U u o o c j E H U u E H O u o u u g y q q a u o Q u u u q oo u o o o o o c 5 o q o o o o o o Q o o o c < : o o < < o o x c < < < < : i 4 : < < < C i 4 : r t : i < < * < < r t ; < < < < : i <O o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O  
h i i i < i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i
u u o u u u u u u u u u u u o u u u u u o u u y y y y y y u y y y y y o y u y y y y o y y u y y u yh ^ U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U h B ^ ^ p p f p H H ^ f h p r ' p H h ^ p r h p H ^ t ' ^ f r ^ p
l I I I I 1 I l l I l I l > I I l I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I l I I l I l I I I I I I l l
o o 0 o o <
o o o o o
o o o o o o o o o o
a o y Eh o o
o o o
o o o o O o
o o o
o o o o O o o o o o
eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh Eh
< < < < < < < < < ( < < <
o U O u U U U o o u u o
o u y y U y U o o o o y
q U o u q u u o o u o o
< < < < < < < < < < < <
o O o o O o o o o o o o
O O O O O O O O O O O
o o o o o o o o o o o
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o 1 0 0 0 O 0 0 O O 0 0 0  
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o c o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o  o O o o o o o o o o o
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - - - _ O O O O U U O U U U O
u u u u u o u u u u u u u u o u u u o u o u u u u u u y u u u u u u u u u u u o o u o u u u u u u u  
u o o u u o y o u u o o o u o u u o o u o o o q o o u q u a o o u o o q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q
               '   *      * *  0  U  CP CP CP CP
o , I I <0
id  id j j  id
rH rH 10 rH
rH rH rH 10 10
>1 >1 p  C U
X0 X0 > 10 (0 0)
Qi  P< 0  <U *H Qi
O  O  -H 0  X i o
El M U  -H U  0
,  m  u  Ni ^  u  u  u  iu U U  0  El 0  II
*-> -rl W C/1 ftl g  C/1 g  C E lO  EH -rl 73  -rj -H 0  #  f t  * j
C M 3  I I I I I W 2 ,     >1 tH -H e , 5 , a  W, W, W,
0>-H <U -H Dl ID It  I t  II | |  C E i O W O J r H  I I H  I I IH r H  0  0  0  0  0  I t  Dh W W  W S O W r H  f t  f t  f t  Ql  Q,  0 |
,  . T)  O  X > 4 J 4 J ( 0 ( 0 0 ) i J l S J r f ; M n - H - r t W  | |  | | ( 0 ( O  w w w w w w
U  00 MH  0 l t O U  S E ( S ( l  0 1 t l t l O - H  ( 0 ( 0  f t  f t  f t  - H W W W W W W
rl -rl -rl -H O dl d) W 00
H -rl -rl -H -H 0  0  O  01
0  0  0  0  El O O U >  _ . . , _
S S - r l - H i r H r H W I 0 ( 0 ( 0 ( 0 ( 0 W ( U  00 -rl  W >i  W W ( DO)  I 00 - H 00
U  -rl  | 0 3 ( 5 O O O O < U O ) O ( 0 ( g ( 0 ( 0 B a ) Q ) - r H O ( l l J J ,O T ) - H ( 0 ( 0 i  d ) < U r H 0 3 X  W W ( 0 ,d ,O ( 0  - H O ( U < D < U < U < D < U < UPS U M ( j f t f t U U U ' f l f l lH E g 0 0 O i J E J > ^ 0 0 - H - H l t 0 E U   H 0 O ( l ) & l l l l l l I t - H - H f l l l ) 0 H 0 f t f l P l a f l f l
| _ |  ( U 0E | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | O I ( U > E h E h O O ( U i  E H E H M H E H O a O , O O O - H n ) r d O 0 0 O O O O O O
w1 * & & & & & & & & & & & & & & & & & V i  r r i  i
W - r H C j c d i d c d r G n j c d c d c d c d c d c c j c d c d f d c d t d c d c d r d c d c d i d i d i d c d c d c d  I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I V H O o u u u u u u o o u o o o u u u u x J i J 4 J j j u 4 J i J i J 4 J A j a ) ( U ( U ( U ( D < u ( U ( i ) a ) < D a ) < U ( u a  < u a ) a ) a ) < U ( U _  
Q i  ^ ^ o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o c q c q c q c q c q c q c q c q c q c q g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g g
  b  >1 G  G G G d  d  G G G G G G G G G G G *h h *h *h h *h *h *h - h  *h *h * h *h *h *h *h - h  *h *h - h  *h h *h *ri - h  h *h - h  *h - h  - h
Q j  l d b O ) D f l ) ( l ) O l U D f l ) ( D ( D O J f l ) l U H O ) l l 5 J d C f 3 C f l G d d G d H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H
L 3  G b T } rV ' G ra rV V rO rO V rO rV rO rV rO V V V < V < l ) Q ) < V < V < l ) < V < l ) < U < U < l > Q ) < V < l ) < V < l ) < V ( U V < U < D < l ) < l ) < U < U < U < V < V < V < l ) < l >
^  ^  ^  ^ r t J ^ r i i r i J C ^ C r i J r t J r t J ^ C C C r t J C C r t j C P C P C P O C P C P C P C P C P C p e H E H E - i E H ^ E H E H E H E H E - ' E H ^ E ^ E H E H E - ' E H E H E H ^ E H
Cu o 2 cu O
w CQ w
G G G d d (Q
XJ XJ 4-J cd rd G
m cd (0 u u CQ
u u O H H 0
H  H  H rl XJ 4J rH
>1 rH rH rH U U 0
' d & a 9 0 0 H
G g g g V (J rH0 0 o 0 0) (V0a 0 o u TP T3 MH
Q) <U -H
CH o CQ <u rH
w g O ra rH
1 1 1 1 cd cd
cd (0 Q. a H
G 00 CQ Dl 1 rH
CQ (0 cd (0 CQ Dl a o CQ
 H CQ rH rH rH 1 1 CQ MH CD
CQ cd  H rH G G CQ Dl CQ  H *d
d rH CQ >, CQ CQ 0) a) 1 G  H
<D <U rH G X CQ CQ cd T5 a <d H 0
 H cd 0 0) a <D a) CQ  H rl ' d 0) u rH 1
U u MH Vm 0 a a 0 o o H cd o
cd <u  H Q> M CQ CQ > Eh Eh rH > g (Q
d 6 d u d d u > i > i rH  H CQ rH i
cd 0  H 59  H o Q Q) w Dl cd id O <d
0)  rH 
1 1  i e l e i g i *1
a  a U
0) 0) 0) (U cu a> CD 0) a> a; 0) 0) (U 0)
G G G fl G C d G (0 00 G G G G
CHAPTER FIVE: CO-DIVERSIFICATION - 2 9 9 -
CHAPTER FIVE
LINEAGE CO-DIVERSIFICATION: ARYTAININE PSYLLIDS AND THEIR 
LEGUME HOSTS 
A bstract
To evaluate the extent of phylogenetic congruence between a group of phytophagous insects 
and their host plants, psyllid (Hemiptera) and legume (Leguminosae) phylogenies are 
compared. Inferred cospeciation events are tested by applying an absolute time scale to both 
the plant and insect phylogenies. The time scales are estimated using a nonparametric rate 
smoothing method, calibrated on the maximum geological age of the youngest Canary Islands 
(La Palma and El Hierro; 1-2 Myr). A comparison of the plant and psyllid phylogenies 
suggests that, whilst rare cospeciation events may play a significant role in promoting 
diversification, systemic host switching complicates historical reconstructions of psyllid- 
legume interactions. Psyllids appear to be opportunistic specialists with host switching 
occurring when the plant lineage fluctuates in geographical abundance, population structure or 
through dispersal. Although host switching may be frequent, psyllid preadaptation to 
particular hosts is evident in many cases, and selection of a new host may be constrained by 
plant chemistry and architecture. Thus, successful establishment by a psyllid colonist is likely 
to be more common when available hosts are phylogenetically and ecologically related to the 
original host. A history of parallel cladogenesis between psyllid and legume lineages is 
rejected in favour of a fluctuating lineage model of co-diversification which presents a more 
realistic interpretation of the present day pattern of host associations.
5.1 In troduction
It has frequently been noted that herbivorous insects may show strong patterns of taxonomic 
association with their hosts plants (Mitter, Farrell & Futuyma, 1991; Thompson, 1994). 
However, when cladograms of host and herbivore groups are compared the associations are 
frequently complicated and show relatively little cospeciation (parallel cladogenesis). The 
program TreeMap (Page, 1994a) which analyses host-parasite interactions, is designed to
CHAPTER FIVE: CO-DIVERSIFICATION - 3 0 0 -
maximize cospeciation events when reconciling host and parasite trees. While this is 
appropriate for situations in which cospeciation is the dominant process, it may not be suitable 
for messy data sets which have comparatively little cospeciation relative to other types of 
interaction between host and parasite lineages. Cospeciation is only one of the processes 
generating patterns of revolutionary associations, and localized coevolution (both temporal 
and spatial) may take place between lineages despite historical incongruence (Thompson, 
1994). Host switching onto related plants is another process that can possibly maintain 
taxonomic associations without parallel cladogenesis. I examine here the evidence that 
systemic host switching in a highly non-random fashion could be a mechanism which explains 
the observed patterns of strong taxonomic association in plant-herbivore interactions. A more 
realistic interpretation of the evolution of plant-herbivore associations may be addressed by a 
fluctuating lineage model described below.
5.1.1 The psyllid-legume system
Psyllids (Hemiptera, Stemorrhyncha) are sap-feeding insects which complete their life cycle 
on a single host. They are host specific and widespread on dicotyledonous angiosperms (a few 
species feed on monocotyledons, and over wintering adults can be found on gymnosperms). 
One subfamily of psyllids (Arytaininae) contains three closely related genera which are found 
exclusively on brooms (tribe Genisteae, Leguminosae). The Leguminosae (pea family) 
comprise one of the largest and most economically important families of flowering plants. 
Within the legumes, the Genisteae (brooms, gorse and relatives) are a group of, usually 
shrubby plants, particularly well represented in the Mediterranean.
The three genera of broom-feeding arytainine psyllid (Arytaina, Arytainilla and 
Livilla) are considered to be a monophyletic group (c. 90 known species) (Chapter 3) which 
appear to have diversified in parallel with the diversification of the genistoid legumes (c. 260 
species). These three genera are only found on genistoid host plants and are most often 
restricted to a single host species. The Genisteae and their associated psyllids are well 
represented in the Canary Island archipelago. A detailed survey of the ecology and 
biogeography of the island species allows the evolution of host-parasite associations to be 
studied against a background of island radiation. These radiations can then be dated using the 
geological (K-Ar based) dates of the islands (Ancochea et cd., 1994; Guillou et aL, 1996), as 
has been done in a study of diversity in Canary Island beetles (e.g. Emerson, Oromf & Hewitt, 
2000).
CHAPTER FIVE: CO-DIVERSIFICATION -301 -
5.2 M ethods
5.2.1 Tree construction
Phylogenetic trees were produced using PAUP* (Swofford, 1999) from nuclear (ITS 1-5.8S- 
ITS2) data for legumes and mitochondrial (12S rRNA, and cytochrome oxidase: COI-tRNA- 
COII) and morphological data for the psyllids, using the same methods as previously 
described (Chapters 3 & 4). For the legumes, 11 taxa were added from published GenBank 
sequences (accession numbers given in Table 1) to those previously obtained (Chapter 4). The 
equally weighted MP searches recovered three equally parsimonious psyllid trees and ten 
equally parsimonious legume trees. For each group (psyllid and legume) a single tree 
(identical to one of the equally weighted MP trees) was recovered on successive reweighting 
(using mean rescaled consistency indices), and these tree topologies were used in subsequent 
analyses. Although maximum likelihood (ML, molecular data only) for these data and the MP 
trees were not identical they were broadly congruent.
5.2.2 Rate smoothing
The reweighted parsimony topologies were used with the ML branch lengths estimated using a 
ML model, the parameters of which were determined by a nested hierarchical method using 
Modeltest (Posada & Crandall, 1998). The best model for both data sets, based on Akaike 
Information Criterion (AIC), was general time reversible with invariable sites and gamma 
distribution. The ITS branch lengths were used for the legumes and CO branch lengths were 
selected for the psyllids (see below). As the molecular clock was rejected for all data sets 
(based on the % likelihood ratio test with and without the molecular clock enforced, i.e. 
evolutionary rates are variable across both legume and psyllid lineages), the branch lengths 
were rate-smoothed using the nonparametric (NPRS) method of Sanderson (1997) as 
implemented in TreeEdit (Rambaut & Charleston, 2000). The CO branch lengths were used in 
preference to the 12S branch lengths for the psyllid tree because the increased amount of data 
in the longer CO region improves the accuracy of the NPRS method (Sanderson, 1997). The 
rate smoothed trees were age-calibrated using geological dates for the islands of El Hierro and 
La Palma. These islands were used because they have a single estimated maximum age. The 
particular node selected for each tree was based on the presence of the most divergent
CHAPTER FIVE: CO-DIVERSIFICATION - 3 0 2 -
taxon/clade endemic to La Palma or El Hierro. The selected node was assigned with the 
maximum age of the island (El Hierro, 1.1 Myr for the legumes; and La Palma, 2 Myr for the 
psyllids). Estimates of the error for the NPRS dates was established using 100 randomly 
weighted bootstrap replicates. For each bootstrap replicate the branch lengths were estimated 
for the given psyllid and legume trees, and the distribution of the resulting ages for each node 
and its standard deviation were calculated using the program r8s (Sanderson, 1997).
5.2.3 Tanglegram
In order to estimate the amount of cospeciation, the program TreeMap (Page, 1994a) was used 
to compare psyllid and legume phylogenies using reconciled trees (Page, 1994a, 1994b) (Fig. 
1). A heuristic search (default settings) and the proportional-to-distinguishable randomization 
test (1000 randomizations) were implemented.
5.2.4 Associated nodes
Inspection of the trees indicated that individual nodes on the psyllid tree could be associated 
with nodes on the legume tree. In order to determine correspondence between psyllid and 
legume nodes, psyllid nodes were optimized onto the legume tree using the program 
MacClade (Maddison & Maddison, 1992) with an accelerated transformation (ACCTRAN). 
Each psyllid clade was mapped onto the legume tree and the legume node corresponding to 
this psyllid clade was then recorded (Fig. 2 and Table 2). However, where there is 
incongruence between psyllid and legume trees, it becomes more difficult to determine the 
corresponding nodes. I used a default optimization method which associated the psyllid node, 
with the basal legume node for the present day host or host clade. Where the psyllid node 
could be optimized to more than one legume node, the oldest legume node was selected. In 
some cases this led to a nonlinear sequence of legume node ages associated with a linear 
sequence of psyllid ages (Figs 2 & 4). The hypothetical chronology of psyllid and legume 
trees was determined by rate smoothing the molecular ML estimated branch lengths on the MP 
topology (Fig. 2). This allowed corresponding legume and psyllid nodes to be dated. The dates 
of the associated nodes are compared in Figure 3.
5.2.5 Field observations
Host specificity was determined by a wide geographical survey in which all relevant legume 
species in the Canary Islands and adjacent areas were examined for the presence of nymphs
CHAPTER FIVE: CO-DIVERSIFICATION - 303 -
and adults (nymphs are apterous, and hence are good indicators of the correct host plant). In 
all, c. 315 legume populations were examined. Of these, c. 295 had associated psyllid 
populations. Egg placement and nymphal feeding sites were noted. In most cases samples 
were made across the geographical range of the host plant, and for many species sampling 
covered different times of the year in three consecutive years, in order to obtain information 
on seasonal fluctuations in psyllid populations (see Chapter 2).
5.3 Results
5.3.1 Tangle gram
The tanglegram (Fig. 1) shows a complex pattern of host associations. Little parallel 
cladogenesis is apparent. However, the randomization test in TreeMap indicates that the 15 
cospeciation events (suggested by TreeMap, and indicated by black circles on the nodes in 
Fig. 1) were significantly greater (P = 0.005) than the number expected by chance, and five 
additional cospeciation events (marked in red in Fig. 1) were recovered when secondary host 
associations were discounted. Secondary host associations may obscure cospeciation events if 
psyllids are present on a host only in the absence of the primary psyllid parasite. These results 
suggest that cospeciation is an important element of psyllid-legume interactions. It should, 
however, be noted that TreeMap maximizes cospeciation events by tracing the insect-host 
association back to the most recent ancestral node, and I detail below reasons why this method 
results in some of the 15 cospeciation events being spurious.
5.3.2 Cospeciation and host switching
There may be many possible reconstructions of the historical associations between host and 
parasite when there is incongruence between the phylogenies. Examining the pattern of host 
associations in terminal sister taxa may provide the best available evidence of historical 
evolutionary processes. At the tips of the tree there is good evidence for some cospeciation, 
where sister species of psyllid occur on sister host species (e.g. A, B on Fig. 1). However, 
many of the cospeciation events suggested by the TreeMap model appear to be spurious (e.g. 
C, D on Fig. 1). These are nodes in the psyllid phylogeny which represent relatively recent 
speciation events between psyllids that occur on phylogenetically divergent hosts (see Fig. 2). 
The reconciliation method implemented in TreeMap traces the host-parasite association back
CHAPTER FIVE: CO-DIVERSIFICATION - 3 0 4 -
to the most recent common host ancestor, which, as the divergence of the hosts increases, will 
be mapped to increasingly deeper nodes in the host phylogeny (i.e. young psyllid nodes will 
map to much older legume nodes). It is more likely that recent host switching to relatively 
distant host species accounts for the incongruence between psyllid and legume phylogenies. 
The dynamics that precipitate host switching are interesting because the majority of host 
legumes are associated with a single psyllid species, if host switching is common one might 
expect multiple psyllids on a single host. Field data on the conditions under which host sharing 
by psyllids can occur is therefore important (see below).
5.3.3 Optimization and dating o f nodes
Figure 3 indicates that the majority of the psyllid nodes are markedly younger than their 
associated legume nodes in this reconstruction (i.e. the majority of comparative points in Fig.
3 fall below the diagonal and are therefore not contemporaneous cospeciation events). The 
relatively younger psyllid nodes suggest that the general psyllid-host association pattern is not 
the result of cospeciation but that psyllid colonization is sequential to the origin of the legume 
hosts.
Where the phylogenies are incongruent the optimization of the psyllid nodes onto the 
legume tree may result in a nonlinear age sequence for the corresponding legume nodes. This 
occurs in the event of a host switch from a recently derived host to an evolutionarily older 
host, in which case the default optimization associates the psyllid node with the basal legume 
node of the present day host. A more realistic placement of the psyllid node on the legume 
lineage would be at some point in time further up the branch of the present day host, that 
would postdate the divergence of the host group on which the ancestral psyllid occurred (this 
is illustrated in Fig. 4 -  B, C and D). Shifting the time of host colonization up the host branch 
is therefore required to linearize the age sequence of associated host nodes after host 
switching.
Another example of discordant age sequences between legume and psyllid nodes is 
evident where the divergence of the psyllid taxa appears to predate the divergence of their 
present day hosts. A markedly earlier divergence of psyllids relative to their legume hosts is 
only found in the Macaronesian clade (Table 2, and Figs 2 & 3). The Canarian psyllids 
provide an isolated endemic group which has an estimated minimum colonization age of 4.8 
Myr. The estimated minimum colonization age for the primary host group (Teline) in the 
Canaries is only 3.8 Myr. This age discrepancy (1 Myr) for the initial diversification of the
CHAPTER FIVE: CO-DIVERSIFICATION -305 -
island legume and psyllid lineages may not be significant as the standard deviation for the 
NPRS dates for all nodes in both psyllid and legume trees is 0.2-0.9 Myr. However, four 
additional examples in the Macaronesian clade exhibit a greater discrepancy between an 
earlier psyllid evolution and later host evolution. Two of these examples involve psyllid 
species which are near the base of the Macaronesian clade (A. sp.5 and A. sp.6, 2.2-4.6 Myr) 
but they occur on more recently evolved host species (0.7-2.4 Myr, Fig. 2, nodes 27 & 28; and 
Fig. 4C). The other two examples involve sister psyllid taxa which occur on sister host taxa 
(Fig. 2, nodes 35 & 36; and Fig. 4A), but the divergence between the psyllids is > 2 Myr, and 
the host taxa have identical sequences for the ITS region, giving 0 Myr for the time of host 
divergence.
As the occurrence of psyllid divergence prior to their host plants is only evident in the 
Macaronesian clade, there may be elements responsible for this pattern that are peculiar to 
the evolution of the island legume-psyllid associations. On the one hand the psyllids may have 
evolved and diverged prior to colonizing present day hosts, and then switched to the current 
hosts without speciating. The plausibility of this scenario depends on how closely related the 
ancestral hosts were to the present day hosts. If the current and ancestral hosts were distantly 
related (e.g. Teline and Adenocarpus), the absence of speciation during the switch to the 
current host is unlikely, based on the absence of such dual host associations in present day 
species. Moreover, the independent colonization by sister psyllid taxa of sister hosts would 
appear to be an unlikely coincidence. A second explanation involves the erosion of genetic 
divergence between the island host group due to hybridization and introgression, or via 
introduction of genetic material from more recent colonizations or human introduction. The 
presence of genetic exchange by these processes may be sufficient to obscure the original age 
of host divergence.
5.4 Discussion
5.4.1 Determinants o f host specificity in psyllids
Evidence from field data, and from the psyllid and legume phylogenies, suggest that plant 
characteristics (most likely chemistry and surface properties) are important in restricting the 
host choice of psyllids. The Adenocarpus species are extremely abundant in the Canary 
Islands but have only been colonized by psyllids once. Their chemistry (presence of certain
CHAPTER FIVE: CO-DIVERSIFICATION - 3 0 6 -
pyrrolizidine and biperidine alkaloids) and glandular surface make them unlike other Canarian 
legumes. Chamaecytisus, on the other hand, has a plant architecture that is superficially 
similar to Teline, and has been colonized four times (see Chapter 3). Three of the 
colonizations of Chamaecytisus were apparently from Teline, and were within the same small 
clade of psyllids which may have been preadapted to make this host switch. The 
extraordinarily high diversity to area ratio of psyllids in the Canary Islands may partly be 
explained by the creation of vacant niches each time a legume colonizes a new island. The 
pattern of psyllid distribution on Adenocarpus hosts provides evidence that the presence of a 
psyllid on a legume prevents colonization by other psyllids (presumably by competetive 
exclusion). The current distribution pattern is as follows: on Tenerife A. nigralineata is 
restricted to, and abundant on, A. foliolosus, whilst A. proboscidea is restricted to, and 
abundant on, A. viscosus. Under these conditions A. proboscidea is never found on A. 
foliolosus except in the extensive host hybrid zones. On La Palma, however, only one psyllid 
is present, A. proboscidea, and although it is more abundant on its primary host here, it can 
also be found on A. foliolosus (which, on La Palma, lacks its associated psyllid from Tenerife).
5.4.2 Determining factors o f psyllid occurrence on hosts
Field survey data indicate that rare legumes (even from clades otherwise associated with 
psyllids) tend to lack psyllids. For instance, Genista benehoavensis is a rare species, presently 
with > 1000 individuals, but in the 1970s there were less than 50 individuals recorded (Santos- 
Guerra, 1975). G. benehoavensis lacks a psyllid but its sister taxon on Madeira, G. tenera, is a 
common species and has an associated psyllid which is part of a clade of 7e/me-feeding 
psyllids, which suggests that the phylogenetic switch from Teline to Genista is not prohibitive, 
but insufficient host abundance may have prevented G. benehoavensis from being colonized.
In another example Teline gomerae, T. nervosa and T. pallida (< 2000 individuals each) lack 
psyllids, although this legume clade includes the host species T. rosmarinifolia and T. 
splendens, with > 3000 individuals each. No legume rarer than 2000 individuals has an 
associated psyllid, implying that psyllid extinction may occur if a host population drops below 
a certain level. However, population fragmentation may also be important, e.g. T. 
rosmarinifolia, which occurs in several small populations of c. 500-1000 individuals, and at 
the time of sampling the associated psyllid was a rare presence in only one of the two 
populations sampled. Conversely, extremely abundant hosts appear to be very favourable to 
psyllid association. On Tenerife, T. canariensis (with > 10,000 individuals) occurs in several
CHAPTER FIVE: CO-DIVERSIFICATION -307 -
habitats and climatic zones and has four associated psyllids -  A. pileolata is abundant 
throughout the range of T. canariensis, but the other species tend to be geographically and 
ecologically restricted. Other common and widespread hosts in the Canary Islands with more 
than one psyllid are Teline stenopetala (with four psyllids) and Chamaecytisus proliferus (with 
three psyllids), and continental examples of the same pattern include Adenocarpus 
complicatus and Cytisus scoparius (each with two psyllids).
5.4.3 Fluctuating lineage model
Analysis of the phylogenetic trees as well as field data, indicate that host switching occurs 
throughout the diversification of the two groups (i.e. it is systemic). It is also non-random, 
with host switches to related hosts more typical. The situation in Adenocarpus indicates that 
host switching is unlikely if there is a psyllid already in residence on the host. However, a 
vacant niche may be exploited initially by a poorly adapted psyllid which gradually becomes 
selected to suit the host chemistry, phenology and surface characteristics. Evidence of how 
vacant niches may arise is taken from field data showing the absence of psyllids on rare hosts. 
If a legume species goes through a bottleneck (resulting in extinction of the psyllid fauna) or a 
population is established by long distance dispersal without its psyllid (as would be the case in 
island colonization), it may then recruit a host-switching psyllid when a population expands 
sufficiently to support a psyllid fauna. Thus, although a lineage may originate with an 
autochthonous (native) psyllid inherited from its ancestor, it may end up with an allochthonous 
(foreign) psyllid -  though typically from a related legume lineage -  thus breaking the parallel 
cladogenesis pattern.
The evidence presented here suggests that psyllids colonized the Genisteae early in the 
history of the group, so there is the potential for every broom to have a psyllid, inherited 
without host switching, from this ancestral association. However, the Genisteae lineage is 
clearly a fluctuating environment for psyllids and, where host numbers in a lineage drop below 
a certain level, its psyllid may be lost. If the lineage becomes common again it is an available 
niche for a psyllid, and can be colonized by a psyllid effecting a host switch. I call this the 
fluctuating lineage model of co-diversification. However, colonization of a new host is more 
likely to succeed if the switch occurs from a related host (preadaptation in the psyllid 
colonist). This model is shown diagrammatically in Figure 5, and may be a more realistic 
approach to the complex patterns of plant-herbivore associations. Further studies are needed to
CHAPTER FIVE: CO-DIVERSIFICATION - 308 -
determine whether there is evidence for this model from other plant-herbivore associations 
(such as phytophagous lepidoptera; Menken, 1996).
5.4.4 Concluding remarks
Can historical associations be reconstructed given present distributions? If the 
hypothetical psyllid and host phylogenies derived from the reconstruction in Figure 5 are 
analyzed with TreeMap, the resulting TreeMap reconstructions under represents the number of 
host switches (maximum two host switches in TreeMap, but seven in Figure 5) and over 
represents the number of cospeciation, duplication (parasite speciation without host 
speciation) and sorting events (parasite extinction). However, a history of opportunistic host 
switching and stochastic extinction (such as that illustrated in Figure 5) may never be 
recoverable, and phylogenetic interpretations may remain susceptible to misinterpretation of 
the historical associations.
5.5 References
Ai'nouche A-K, Bayer RJ. 1999. Phylogenetic relationships in Lupinus (Fabaceae:
Papilionoideae) based on internal transcribed spacer sequences (ITS) of nuclear 
ribosomal DNA. American Journal o f Botany 86: 590-607.
Ancochea E, Hernan F, Cendrero A, Cantagrel JM, Fuster JM, Ibarrola E, Coello J.
1994. Constructive and destructive episodes in the building of a young oceanic island, 
La Palma, Canary Island, and genesis of the Caldera de Taburiente. Journal o f 
volcanology and geothermal research 60: 243-262.
Emerson BC, Oromf P, Hewitt GM. 2000. Colonization and diversification of the species
Brachyderes rugatus (Coleoptera) on the Canary Islands: evidence from mitochondrial 
DNA COII gene sequences. Evolution 54: 911-923.
Guillou H, Carracedo JC, Perez Torado F, Rodriguez Badiola E. 1996. K-Ar ages and 
magnetic startigraphy of a hotspot-induced, fast growing oceanic island: El Hierro, 
Canary Islands. Journal o f volcanology and geothermal research 73: 141-155.
Kass E, Wink M. 1997. Phylogenetic relationships in the Papilionoideae (family
Leguminosae) based on nucleotide sequences of cpDNA (rbcL) and ncDNA (ITS 1 
and 2). Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 8: 65-88.
CHAPTER FIVE: CO-DIVERSIFICATION - 3 0 9 -
Kunkel G. 1976. Biogeography and Ecology in the Canary Islands, eds. The Hague: Dr. W. 
Junk Pub.,.
Maddison WP, Maddison DR. 1992. MacClade. Analysis of Phylogeny and Character 
Evolution. Version 3. Sunderland, Massachusetts: Sinauer Associates.
Menken SBJ. 1996. Pattern and process in the evolution of insect-plant associations:
Yponomeuta as an example. Entomologia Experimentalis etApplicata 80: 297-305.
M itter C, Farrell B, Futuyma DJ. 1991. Phylogenetic studies of insect-plant interactions: 
insights into the genesis of diversity. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 6: 290-293.
Page RDM. 1994a. Parallel phylogenies: reconstructing the history of host-parasite 
assemblages. Cladistics 10: 155-173.
Page RDM. 1994b. Maps between trees and cladistic analysis of historical associations 
among genes, organisms, and areas. Systematic Biology 43: 58-77.
Posada D, Crandall KA. 1998. Modeltest: testing the model of DNA substitution. 
Bioinformatics 14: 817-818.
Rambaut A, Charleston M. 2000. TreeEdit. Version 1.0-a4.61 (program distributed by the 
authors). Oxford: University of Oxford.
Sanderson MJ. 1997. A nonparametric approach to estimating divergence times in the 
absence of rate constancy. Molecular Biology and Evolution 14: 1218-1231.
Santos-Guerra A. 1975. Notas corologicas. I. Vieraea 5: 89-98.
Swofford DL. 1999. PAUP*. Phylogenetic Analysis Using Parsimony (*and Other Methods). 
Version 4. Sunderland, Massachusetts: Sinauer Associates.
Thompson JN. 1994. The Coevolutionary Process. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- 3 1 0 -
TABLE 1. Genbank accession numbers for 11 additional sequences used in this study.
species Genbank accession number reference
Calicotome villosa Z72252 + Z72253 (ITS1 + ITS2) Kass & Wink, 1997
Chamaecytisus proliferus Z72234 + Z72235 (ITS1 + ITS2) Kass & Wink, 1997
Chamaespartium tridentatum Z72280 + Z72281 (ITS1 + ITS2) Kass & Wink, 1997
Cytisus albidus AF007472 (ITS 1-5.8S-ITS2) Ai'nouche & Bayer,
(= Chamaecytisus mollis)
Cytisus arboreus Z72240 + Z72241 (ITS1 + ITS2) Kass & Wink, 1997
Cytisus scoparius Z72246 + Z72247 (ITS1 + ITS2) Kass & Wink, 1997
Laburnum anagyroides Z72226 + Z72227 (ITS1 + ITS2) Kass & Wink, 1997
Retama monosperma Z72302 + Z72303 (ITS1 + ITS2) Kass & Wink, 1997
Retama raetam Z72304 +Z72305 (ITS1 + ITS2) Kass & Wink, 1997
Retama sphaerocarpa Z72306 + Z72307 (ITS1 + ITS2) Kass & Wink, 1997
Spartocytisus supranubius Z72250 + Z72251 (ITS1 + ITS2) Kass & Wink, 1997
Opposite page:
FIGURE 1.
Tanglegram showing a complex pattern of host associations 
between psyllids and their legume hosts.
- 3 1 1 -
co CO
-  t o ^ r
CX3 TO
CD CD CO
-  W  CD  CO w  ~
. f f i l f e g ;  <2 w
2  CO W  2 '
O  J D  
0 0  CD
3  M U)
d    
0 )  CO CO
2 0 0  ^  
CL .  .  Q.
|  c  E
8  I f
CD CD 0 5
CD CD
  ^  S5.1 -S o ^
< ' CD <D CZ b  o  2   c
 i _ C ^ 0 C D C / c D t
CD 0 5  0 )    -  C  >  P  Q _C  >  O  Q _
CD co 0 -
2  q w y ]
h l - W  c
2  E oc
05 03 _C  CO CD
CD CD T 3
CD CD
CD CD
2 0 3 <
-  3 1 2
LEGUMES 
0 Myr
2 6 ,2 9 -3 1 ,3 3 ,3 7 ,3 8 ,4 1 ,4 5
3.8 Myr
3 9 ,4 0
0.7 Myr
2.4 Myr
1 5 ,16 ,21
Genisteae 
11.1 Myr
0 Myr
6 ,3 2
9 -1 2
-  1 3 ,2 4
-----^
2 , 2 0
1 4 ,1 8
T .s te n S S P s te n  
T .s te n S S P s e r  
T .s te n S S P m ic  H 
T .m a d e r e n s is  
T .m o n sp e s s u la n a  
T .ca n a r ien s is  group  
T .p a iv a e  
T.m icrophylla  
T .s te n S S P p a u c  
T .s te n S S P m ic  G 
G .cin erea  
r - T.rosm arinifolia  
T.pallida  
L T . n e rv o sa  
T .s p le n d en s  
T .g o m er a e  
T.linifolia  
G .se g o n n e i  
G .b e n e h o a v e n s is  
G .ten era  
G .tinctoria  
G.florida  
C y .sco p a r iu s  
C y.arb oreu s  
C ham .proliferus  
C y.a lb id u s  
C a lico to m e villosa  
S p art.su p ran u b iu s  
Laburnum  a n a g y ro id e s  
R et.m o n o sp e rm a e  
R et.re ta m a e  
R et.sh a ero ca rp a  
C h a m aesp .tr id en ta tu m  
A .boudyi 
A .te lo n en s is  
A.nainii 
A .m annii
A .com p lica tu s  group
A .anagyrifo lius
A .b acq u e i
A .d eco rtica n s
A nagyris
 1 Myr
A .h akani . 4 5  
A .incuba  I 4 4  
A .u m b on ata    4 2
A .co g n a ta   ,
A s p . , 3  IF
A .eq u itan s  
A .sp .7  
A .s p .1 1 
A .sp .1 0  
A .p ileo la ta  
A .m o d ica  P 
A .m od ica  
A .sp .1 2
A .d iv id e n s ------
A .s p . 8  |
A .s p .9  H U  
A .n igralineata  
A .p ro b o sc id ea  
A .s p . 6  
A .sp .5  
A.diluta  
A .p rogn ata  
L.blandula  
L.m aura  
L .variegata
L .a d u s t a  1 2 0
PSYLLIDS
Nodes constrained for 
age calibration:
X  1.1 Myr LEGUMES 
X  2 Myr PSYLLIDS
2.3 Myr 
4.1 Myr 
28^ 2 . 2  Myr 
/  . 4.6 Myr
Macaronesian clade 
4.8 Myr
L .retam ae  
L.im a  
L .sp .1 6  
L .sp .1 5  
L .sp .1 7  
A .sp .4  
A .sp .1  
A .delarbrei 
A .spartiophila  
A .cytisi 
A .sp .3  
A .sp .2  
A r.devia  P 
A r.devia  C 
A r.ad en ocarp i 
A r.sp .1 4  
A r.nu bivaga  
A r .g e n is ta e  
A .su lci 
P sylla  
C yam op h ila
Genisteae 
-feeding 
9.7 Myr
 1 Myr
FIGURE 2. NPRS (nonparametric rate-smoothed) trees for the legume hosts and psyllids. 
Numbered nodes correspond to those in Table 2, and represent the psyllid nodes and the 
comparative host taxon/group node. The majority of the node ages on the psyllid tree are 
younger than the age of the corresponding node on the legume tree (i.e. sequential, see Figure 
3), including node 1 which represents the initial diversification of the Genisteae and the 
Gensiteae-feeding psyllids. Several nodes (numbered) in the M acaronesian clade of psyllids 
appear to predate the corresponding node in the legume tree and these are discussed in the text.
- 3 1 3 -
TABLE 2. Node number and corresponding ages of nodes in legume and psyllid 
phylogenies.
age (Myr) of age (Myr) of 
node no. legume node psyllid node
1 11.1 9.7
2 8.6 8.2
3 6 .5  5.5
4 6 .5  4.3
5 6 .6  4
6 4 .7  2 .6
7 -  0 .5
8 11 8.7
9 6.5 7.2
10 6.5 6.4
11 6 .5  6
12 6 .5  4.6
13 5.8 2.3
14 8.5 8.2
15 10.1 7.5
16 10.1 7.2
17 6 .6  5.5
18 8.5 3.4
19 6.3 2.9
20 8.6 6.8
21 10.1 3.4
22 8 3
23 3.1 1.8
25 3 8  4,8 I Macaronesian clade
26 3.1 3 .8  V
27 0.7 4 .6
28 2 .4  4.1
29 3.1 3.9
30 3.1 3.7
31 3.1 2 .7
32 4 .7  1.6
33 3.1 0.5
34 1.1 0.2
35 0 2.3
36 0 2.2
37 3.1 3.6
38 3.1 3.3
39 2 .6  2
40  2 .6  2
41 3.1 1.7
42 8.2 2.3
43  6 1.3
44  2 .9  1.3
45  3.1 0.8
-  3 1 4 -
N o d e  a g e  ( M y r )  f o r  p s y l l i d  a n d  l e g u m e  p h y l o g e n i e s
GRAN CANARIA 14.5-16
</> 7
LA PALMA 2 2 
EL HIERRO 1.11
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
l e g u m e
LA GOMERA 10-12
TENERIFE 7.5-11.5
 continent 
 Mac clade
A g e  ( M y r )  o f  c o s p e c i a t i o n  n o d e s  f o r  p s y l l i d  a n d  
l e g u m e  p h y l o g e n i e s
continent 
Mac clade
0 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
legum e
FIGURE 3. Comparative ages of psyllid and legume nodes are shown relative to island age. 
The majority of the node ages on the psyllid tree are younger than the age of the 
corresponding node on the legume tree (upper plot). Nodes which represent cospeciation 
events when optimized in TreeMap are shown (lower plot). These would be expected to fall 
on, or near to the diagonal if they represented contemporaneous speciation events.
LEGUMES PSYLLIDS
-  3 1 5  -
LEGUMES PSYLLIDS
4.8 Myr
3.8 Myr3.8 Myr
4.8 Myr
3.8 Myr3.8 Myr
4.8 Myr 4.8 Myr
FIGURE 4. Illustration o f  methods used for associating psyllid  
nodes with host nodes. Numbers at nodes indicate age (M yr). See  
text for discussion o f  optim ization methods and interpretation o f  
nonlinear and noncontem poraneous node ages.
HOSTS
I  T. monspessula  g r o u p  
I  T. linifolia g r o u p  
I I Genista 
I  Adenocarpus 
I  Chamaecytisus
-  3 1 6 -
LEGUMES
PSYLLIDS
host numbers 
2  5  6  4
PSYLLIDS
interpreted as a 
cospeciation event
interpreted as a 
duplication event
LEGUMES
A -  cospeciation events
B -  reduction in host abundance results in extinction 
of the psyllid lineage
C -  increased host abundance after dispersal or 
bottlenecks results in a vacant niche for 
psyllids
D -  sustained host abundance may result in multiple 
colonizations by psyllids and host sharing
E -  rare host plants may never be colonized
FIGURE 5. Hypothetical reconstruction of a fluctuating host lineage, and in response, 
opportunistic host switching by psyllids. There are some cospeciation events, but there is a 
greater degree of host switching, typically between closely related hosts. This history of 
host switching could not be reconstructed from the resultant psyllid phylogeny shown, and 
several misinterpretations of the historic associations may arise: such as the divergence of 
psyllids on hosts 4, 5 & 6, these could be interpreted as cospeciation events as they are 
sister taxa on sister hosts, but the reconstruction shows that the events are neither 
contemporaneous, nor is there sustained phylogenetic tracking (i.e. associaton by descent); 
another case for possible misinterpretation presents the cospeciation event at the base of 
the phylogeny as a duplication event which assumes sympatric speciation of psyllids on 
the same host (8) without host switching.
CONCLUSIONS -317-
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
This work highlights the need for concerted efforts towards documenting and describing, 
as yet unknown biodiversity - particularly those small sized organisms which are so easily 
overlooked. Several of the 17 new species of psyllid collected and described during this 
project are rare and their habitats are increasingly threatened. In other instances, psyllids 
previously recorded from sites - such as Arytainilla delarbrei in the Moroccan Middle 
Atlas - were no longer found in these locations. In the case of A. delarbrei, there has been 
severe overgrazing of the host plants in Morocco. Informed conservation using data on 
species numbers and distributions is critical to the preservation of biodiversity, which in 
this case implies knowledge of insects, host plants and host habitats.
Molecular techniques provide a valuable contribution, together with morphological 
and biological data, to the overall picture of speciation processes and genetic divergence.
In particular, there is sometimes a surprising discrepancy between morphological and 
genetic divergence which emphasises the importance of a combined approach to 
biodiversity assessments. I would argue therefore, that a comprehensive approach, such as 
that taken in this study, is the best way forward for evolutionary studies.
Further work towards a broader phylogeny of the psyllids, including Southern 
African, American and Asian members of the Arytaininae, as well as a larger sampling of 
the sister subfamily Psyllinae, would help to clarify delimitations between the subfamilies, 
and to clarify the placement of outlying species/groups. In addition, using selected nuclear 
genes would provide a comparison to the mitochondrial genes used in this study. As for the 
host plant phylogeny, further sampling of legume species in, or allied to, the genus 
Genista, in particular, the two continental members of Teline section Chronanthus, would 
contribute to an understanding of the genesis of the two Teline groups.
Techniques for dating speciation events using molecular phylogenies are 
developing rapidly and these will be crucial to future analysis of coevolutionary histories 
of associated organisms. A broader sampling strategy for both legume and psyllid groups, 
combined with additional DNA data from mitochondrial and/or nuclear genes may result in 
more robust phylogenies which would facilitate a more accurate comparison of cladogenic 
patterns.
GLASGOW
UNIVERSITY
LIBRARY
