Untitled
Kent Academic Repository
Full text document (pdf)
Copyright & reuse
Content in the Kent Academic Repository is made available for research purposes. Unless otherwise stated all
content is protected by copyright and in the absence of an open licence (eg Creative Commons), permissions 
for further reuse of content should be sought from the publisher, author or other copyright holder. 
Versions of research
The version in the Kent Academic Repository may differ from the final published version. 
Users are advised to check http://kar.kent.ac.uk for the status of the paper. Users should always cite the 
published version of record.
Enquiries
For any further enquiries regarding the licence status of this document, please contact: 
researchsupport@kent.ac.uk
If you believe this document infringes copyright then please contact the KAR admin team with the take-down 
information provided at http://kar.kent.ac.uk/contact.html
Citation for published version
Sibande, Lonester Chanthenda  (2016) Essays On The Impact Of Farm Input Subsidies On Farm
Households In Malawi.   Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) thesis, University of Kent,.
Link to record in KAR
https://kar.kent.ac.uk/55712/
Document Version
UNSPECIFIED
ESSAYS ON THE IMPACT OF FARM INPUT SUBSIDIES 
ON FARM HOUSEHOLDS IN MALAWI 
 Lonester Chanthenda Sibande 
Thesis submitted in fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of 
Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) in Economics 
School of Economics 
 University of Kent 
 Canterbury 
United Kingdom. 
May 2016
To Favour and Sipho 
 with love. 
ABSTRACT 
Farm input subsidies are assumed to improve agricultural production and productivity for small 
resource poor farmers in developing countries by promoting the use of improved farm inputs, 
mainly inorganic fertilizers and hybrid seeds. This is expected to contribute to increased income 
from produce sales, improved food security at household and national levels, and consequently, 
contributing to poverty alleviation.  Limited existing empirical evidence on the impact of farm 
input subsidies on food marketing, household welfare and migration suggests marginal effects. 
This thesis contributes to the existing literature by analysing the impact of farm input subsidies on 
farm households maize market participation, welfare and migration by using the most recent 
nationally representative integrated household panel survey data for Malawi of 2010 and 2013. 
This thesis uses the quantity of subsidised fertilizer the household redeemed to measure the 
impact of farm input subsidies. Different indicators and empirical models from the ones used in 
the existing literature on food marketing, household welfare and migration effects of farm input 
subsidies are used to explore more empirical evidence. 
The main findings are that farm input subsidies increase farm households market 
participation and food security; and reduces household members migration. The results on market 
participation indicate that subsidised fertilizer increases both farmers maize market participation 
as sellers and quantities they sell. On migration, subsidised fertilizer reduces rural to urban and 
rural to rural migration of household members. While on household welfare, the results suggest 
that subsidised fertilizer increases available per capita calories per day, households months of 
food secure, and probability of being food secure from own production of cereals and legumes, 
but has statistically insignificant effects on household annual consumption expenditure.  
    INDEX 
    TOPIC                       PAGE 
Chapter 2   THE IMPACT OF FARM INPUT SUBSIDIES ON MAIZE 
2.8.1 Determinants of quantity of redeemed and receipt of coupons for subsidised 
2.8.2 Impact of subsidised fertilizer on farmers participation in maize market as 
2.8.5 Impact of repeated benefit to subsidised fertilizer on participation in maize 
Chapter 3  THE IMPACT OF FARM INPUT SUBSIDIES ON HOUSEHOLD 
3.3 The impact of farm input subsidies in the post-structural adjustment period: A review 
3.5.1 Fixed Effect (FE) Model for estimating continuous household welfare 
3.5.2 Correlated Random Effect (CRE) Probit Model for estimating binary 
3.5.3 Correlated Random Effect (CRE) Quantile Regression Model for estimating 
Chapter 4  THE IMPACT OF FARM INPUT SUBSIDIES ON INTERNAL 
4.7.1 The impact of subsidised fertilizer on rural to urban migration of household 
4.7.2 The impact of subsidised fertilizer on rural to rural migration of household 
4.7.3 The impact of subsidised fertilizer on seasonal migration of household 
4.7.4 The impact of repeated benefit to subsidised fertilizer on internal migration 
LIST OF FIGURES 
          PAGES 
Figure 2.1  Proportion of farmers who sold selected cereals and legumes in Malawi 
Figure 4.1 Cumulative annual seasonal, rural to rural and rural to urban migrants 
Figure 4.2  Percentage of population distribution by rural and urban locations in 
Figure 4.3 Proportion of households by type of migration of household members 
LIST OF TABLES 
          PAGES 
Table 2.1 Implementation period of large scale farm input subsidy programmes in 
Table 2.2 Community characteristics with and without resident MP or visited the 
Table 2.5 Regression results of factors determining farmers maize market 
Table 2.8 Effects of repeated benefits to subsidised fertilizer:Regression results of 
Table 2.A.1 Effects of MP residence and visits to community: Regression results 
Table 3.1 Average available calories and months of food secure by quantiles of per 
Table 3.2 Average available calories and months of food secure by poverty status 
Table 3.5 Regression results of factors influencing the probability of household 
Table 3.6 Effects of repeated benefit: Regression results  on factors determining 
Table 3.7 Regression results of factors determining food, non-food and total 
Table 3.8 Effects of repeated benefit: Regression results on factors determining 
Table 3.9 CRE quantile regression model results of factors determining available 
Table 3.10 CRE quantile regression model results of factors determining total 
Table 4.A1 Identification test of MP residence and visit as an IV: Regression 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I would like to thank my supervisors Dr Alastair Bailey and Professor Sophia Davidova for 
accepting my research proposal and to work with them on this PhD research project. It is their 
unwavering valuable support and guidance throughout my studies which has contributed to the 
successful completion of my research project and the writing of this thesis. 
I am also grateful to the University of Kent and the School of Economics for financial support by 
awarding me the prestigious University of Kent and School of Economics Doctoral Scholarships, 
which has enabled me to achieve my academic aspiration.  I greatly appreciate additional financial 
support I received from the School of Economics on various occasions. 
I am thankful to Professor Alan Carruth for his support when he was the Head of the School of 
Economics. My special gratitude should also go to Professor Alan Carruth, Dr John Peirson and 
Dr William Collier for allowing me to work with them as a Graduate Teaching Assistant for the 
Statistics for Economics and Business, Mathematics for Economics and Business, and Data 
Analysis for Economists modules, respectively. The experience I have gained through teaching 
these modules is so precious in my life and career. 
A lot of people have contributed enormously to the successful completion of my studies to mention 
them all in this thesis, and I am grateful for their support. My sincerely gratitude should go to my 
wife Nyakazungu and sons Favour and Sipho for their spiritual and moral support, encouragement 
and understanding of my long absence from home during the whole period of my studies. Special 
thanks to all my relatives for their continuous support and encouragement. God bless you all.   
I thank GOD for His abundant grace and all successes in my life (Philippians 4:13). 
DECLARATION 
An earlier version of Chapter 2 of this thesis was presented at the research seminar of the School 
of Economics at the University of Kent on 11th December 2013. It was also presented at the 
Scottish Economics Society conference on 23rd April 2014 in Perth, Scotland, and at the 
International Association of Agricultural Economists (IAAE) conference on 11th August, 2015 in 
Milan, Italy. http://purl.umn.edu/211918 
An earlier version of Chapter 3 was presented at the Royal Economic Society Postgraduate 
Job Market Meeting on 10th January, 2015. It was also presented at the International Association 
of Agricultural Economists (IAAE) conference on 10th August, 2015 in Milan, Italy. 
http://purl.umn.edu/212830 
An earlier version of Chapter 4 was presented at the Agricultural Economics Society 
conference on 13th April 2015 at Warwick University. It was also presented at the Scottish 
Economic Society conference on 15th April 2015 in Perth, Scotland. 
http://purl.umn.edu/211918
http://purl.umn.edu/212830
SUMMARY 
Farm input subsidies are assumed to improve agricultural production and productivity for small 
resource poor farmers in developing countries by promoting the use of improved farm inputs, 
mainly inorganic fertilizers and hybrid seeds. This is expected to contribute to increased income 
from produce sales, improved food security at household and national levels, and consequently, 
contributing to poverty alleviation.  Limited existing empirical evidence on the impact of farm 
input subsidies on food marketing, household welfare and migration suggests marginal effects. 
This thesis examines the impact of farm input subsidies on farm households maize market 
participation, welfare and migration by using the most recent nationally representative integrated 
household panel survey data for Malawi of 2010 and 2013. 
The Malawi government introduced a large farm input subsidy programme (FISP) in the 
2005/2006 agricultural season, mainly targeting maize production, and as a result, the subsidised 
inputs were initially fertiliser and seeds for maize production. The standard programme full 
package per targeted farm household under the FISP for 2012/2013 agricultural season was 
designed to support the purchase of 100 kg of subsidised fertilizer (50 kg bag NPK and 50 kg bag 
Urea); one pack of improved maize seed (5 kg hybrid or 8 kg open pollinated variety (OPV)); and 
one legume pack.  However, the data used in this thesis and earlier studies have shown that FISP 
beneficiaries received heterogeneous coupon packages (such as coupons for only maize seed, for 
one 50 Kg bag of fertilizer or for three 50 Kg bags of fertilizer). Therefore, the quantity of 
subsidised fertilizer the household redeemed, instead of the programme participation, is used in 
this thesis in empirical estimations to measure the impact of farm input subsidies. 
Different indicators and empirical models from the ones used in the existing literature on food 
marketing, household welfare and migration effects of farm input subsidies are used to explore 
more empirical evidence. This thesis uses fixed effect (FE) and correlated random effect (CRE) 
estimators in estimating linear and nonlinear panel data models, respectively; and maximum 
likelihood estimators (MLE) in estimating cross section data models. 
Chapter 1 of this thesis presents a literature review on subsidies with a focus on the 
agricultural sector and in developing countries. The chapter presents the policy reforms 
implemented in the past three decades and their impact. Differences in the implementation of farm 
input subsidies between the past and current policies are discussed. The chapter also discusses the 
theory of change, targeting criteria and implementation reforms of the farm input subsidy 
programme in Malawi.  
Chapter 2 discusses the impact of subsidised fertilizer on farm households maize market 
participation with regards to participation as sellers, quantity sold and ratio of quantity sold to 
quantity harvested, employing non-linear panel data models. The main findings suggests that 
subsidised fertilizer increases farm households participation in maize market as sellers; and 
increases quantities sold of maize. In addition, subsidised fertilizer appears to increase 
commercialisation of maize, but the magnitude of the effects is small. However, repeated benefit 
to subsidised fertilizer is found to have no effects on maize marketing. 
In Chapter 3, the effects of subsidised fertilizer on farm households available per capital 
calories per day, months of food secure, food security status, food, non-food and total annual per 
capita consumption expenditure are examined by employing both linear and non-linear panel data 
models. The study finds that fertilizer subsidy has a positive impact on food security and its effect 
is heterogeneous across the households distribution. The results also indicate higher impact 
among the most food secure. The study finds that subsidised fertilizer increases farm households 
available per capital calories per day, months of food secure and the probability of being food 
secure. The study also finds no evidence of effect on food, non-food and total annual per capita 
consumption expenditure. Furthermore, the frequency of benefit to subsidised fertilizer is found 
to increase the magnitude of effect on available calories per capita per day and food annual per 
capita consumption expenditure. However, the magnitude of the effects of subsidised fertilizer on 
food security are not large enough to eradicate food insecurity among poor households in isolation, 
underscoring the importance of integrated livelihood approach in development interventions. 
The effects of subsidised fertilizer on farm household members rural to urban, rural to rural 
and seasonal migration are discussed in Chapter 4. Overall, the study finds that fertilizer subsidy 
decreases the probabilities of farm household members migration. The results suggest that 
subsidised fertilizer decreases the probability of farm household members migration from rural 
to urban and rural to rural areas. But the study finds no evidence of effects on seasonal migration. 
The study also finds that repeated benefit to subsidised fertilizer does not affect the magnitude of 
effects on migration of household members.  
Finally, Chapter 5 presents a summary of main findings, conclusion, and policy implications. 
Suggestions of future research in line with the empirical analyses in this thesis are also discussed.
Chapter 1 
INTRODUCTION 
The past fifteen years of the 21st Century has witnessed the resurgence of subsidy policies in 
developing countries, especially in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA).  These subsidies are mainly aimed 
at reducing the cost of acquiring predetermined quantity of farm inputs and targeted at sub-groups 
of farmers. The recent renewed interest in subsidies is attributed to persistent acute food shortage 
experienced in most developing countries and the food price increase the world experienced from 
2003, which was followed by the food price crisis in 2008 (FAO, 2011). The IMF (2008) reports 
that twenty two countries increased food subsidies for both targeted and universal in 2008. Thus, 
the motivation for governments to turn into subsidies is to attain food and income security 
(Dorward, et al., 2008).  
Studies on the rural economy have shown that the rural population in developing countries 
employ diversified livelihood strategies to achieve food and income security and these include 
farming, off-farm and non-farm income (Ellis, 2000). Similarly, the World Bank, (2007)   
categorises sources of rural income into three sub-sectors, namely; smallholder farming, labour 
and migration. Farm input subsidies are expected to improve the purchasing power of the 
beneficiaries, and thus making the subsidised input cheaper and adoption of the improved 
technologies associated with the subsidised inputs attractive.  
Access to coupons of the subsidised inputs are expected to have effects on the rural livelihood 
strategies employed by rural households, especially on farming, rural wage labour and migration. 
These effects can occur through direct benefit which may arises from either selling the received 
coupons for subsidised farm inputs or buying the inputs and using them in crops production 
(SOAS, 2008).  
The use of improved farm inputs purchased with subsidised coupons in crops production is 
expected to lead to three positive effects: one, increased yields that could result in improved 
household food availability and hence household food security; two, increased market 
participation, quantities and proportions sold  of produced crops by smallholder farmers and 
therefore, leading to increased farm income from crop sales; and three, reduced market 
participation as buyers of food crops, resulting in savings of household income (Chirwa and 
Dorward, 2013; SOAS, 2008). The income from crop sales and the savings by not purchasing extra 
food crops could be invested in farming or in non-agricultural enterprises, and or used to increase 
the consumption of non-farm produced food and of non-food commodities. The savings which are 
invested in farming could lead to a further increase in purchases of farm inputs in subsequent 
agricultural seasons and boost the future agricultural production and productivity. At the 
macroeconomic level, increased crop production and productivity is expected to result in reduced 
food crop prices whose farm inputs are subsidised and consequently, improving food security of 
the urban population and rural net food buyers (Chirwa and Dorward, 2013; SOAS, 2008). 
The purchase of durable assets and consumption of food and non-food commodities could 
lead to overall improved household welfare and to increased investment in human, social and 
physical capital - essential for future sustainable production and smooth exit from subsidy 
programs. Furthermore, the improved food and income security and overall household welfare as 
a result of accessing coupons of subsidised farm inputs could reduce reliance on rural wage labour 
and migration livelihood strategies for the rural household beneficiaries of farm input subsidies. 
This could lead to low rural wage labour supply and hence, increased wages and labour efficiency 
in the rural economy; and reduced rural to urban, rural to rural and seasonal migration of farm 
household members and thus, contributing to reduced urbanisation, urban food insecurity and 
poverty. 
The justification of implementing farm input subsidy programmes in developing countries is 
based on the observation that most smallholder farmers1 are faced with a number of significant 
challenges in their livelihood endeavours. The most obvious challenges include low assets 
endowment, lack of access to markets for inputs and outputs, poor infrastructure and institutions, 
and adverse climatic conditions. 
To address the challenges of smallholder farmers access to competitive produce and inputs 
markets in developing countries, several reforms have taken place in the agricultural sector in in 
the past three decades. The recent resurgence of subsidy policies is itself a reversal of a number of 
recent policy reforms in particular those reforms introduced within the Structural Adjustment 
Programmes (SAPs) implemented by developing countries in 1980s (Harrigan, 2003; Jayne and 
Jones, 1997). In general, the SAPs aimed at achieving export-oriented growth and improving 
efficiencies through the minimisation of government interventions and to ensure that price 
incentives direct market activity in marketing, while stabilisation programmes aimed at reducing 
public sector expenditures (Harrigan, 2003). In the agricultural sector, the SAPs aimed at 
improving productivity, production, agricultural exports, farmers income and food security 
(SAPRIN, 2002). To achieve these objectives, reforms included liberalisation of exchange rates 
1 The term smallholder farmer is not uniformly defined in development literature and consequently several definitions 
have emerged. The variations in the definition are mainly attributed to differences in countries and regions of study. 
In this study we use the World Bank definition, in which smallholder farmers refer to farmers with up to two hectares 
of cropland (World Bank, 2003, p.6). 
and marketing services, privatisation of state marketing agencies, reduction of tariffs and non-tariff 
barriers and removal of price controls and state subsidies (Husain, 1993; Onumah et al., 2007; 
World Bank, 2007). 
Prior to the SAP reforms of the 1980s, many governments of developing countries 
attempted to control agricultural marketing systems with the objective of achieving food security, 
the generation of foreign exchange and tax revenue from food and cash crops which were 
considered significant to the economy (Akiyama et al., 2001). For instance, Jayne and Jones (1997) 
report that for Southern and Eastern African countries such as Malawi, Kenya, Tanzania and 
Zimbabwe, increased smallholder farmers grain production was the main policy aim soon after 
attaining their independence. Various policy reforms were implemented during independences in 
many developing countries. 
Assessment studies on the impact of government interventions in agricultural marketing 
systems show that the intended objectives were achieved. Jayne and Jones (1997) report that 
government provision of marketing services to smallholder farmers in developing countries had 
led to significant increase in farmer incomes and the production of grain crops. However, despite 
of these successes, it was evident by the beginning of the 1980s that these interventions had 
negative impact on the economy by becoming a fiscal burden because of government subsidies 
which were used in the system, declining of real producer prices due to levies producers were 
paying in the marketing process and contributing to insignificant increase in per capita output in 
food and cash crops (Akiyama et al., 2001; Jayne and Jones, 1997). 
The debate on the impact of policy reforms following the implementation of SAPs in the 
agricultural market sector is largely inconclusive. While some authors report positive impacts, 
others report negative impacts, or both. However, Jayne and Jones (1997) argue that impact 
analysis of the market reforms is difficult because of challenges in separating reform effects on the 
economy from other factors such as climatic effects, incomplete and discontinuation of reforms, 
and unreliable and incomplete data with which to conduct impact analysis. However, the World 
Bank (2000) reports that during the implementation period of these reforms, many developing 
countries were adversely affected by external shocks such as high  world interest rates; and in some 
countries there were inappropriate institutions; inaccurate ordering of reforms; and opportunistic 
management of reforms by the elite groups.  
An assessment by SAPRIN, (2002) finds that SAPs in the agricultural sector have had both 
positive and negative impact. According to SAPRIN, (2002), impacts of reforms include: (i) 
increased production in some countries, while in others it has resulted in decline in production and 
this is mainly attributed to differences in the structure of the economies of the assessed countries. 
(ii) increased inequality due to unequal access to export trade among farmers and is attributed to 
differences in institutional and infrastructural development, and (iii) increased food insecurity due 
to high inputs costs as a result of input subsidy removals and increased consumer prices as a 
consequence of higher producer prices. Husain (1993) also reports that SAPs have had both 
positive and negative impacts in Africa. Positive impacts have been achieved on markets in Africa 
by raising producer prices and consequently, helped the rural poor whose livelihoods are 
agricultural dependent. On the other hand, high producer prices and removal of consumer subsidies 
have negatively impacted the urban poor who rely on market purchases for their foods (Husain, 
1993).  Among the positives effects which some authors report include increased agricultural 
growth and food security; while negative effects include increased market failures due to non-
corresponding attention to poor infrastructure and institutional development during the 
implementation of the reforms (Jayne et al., 2002). For the Eastern and Southern Africa, Jayne and 
Jones (1997) report that market reforms have positively contributed to lowering trading costs of 
food products in areas with food shortages; and improved food availability to urban populations; 
while on the other hand have contributed to the degeneration of the region into food shortage, 
stagnation of food productivity and production; and unimproved fiscal burden. Furthermore, in 
most developing countries, the economic setting has changed with evident of less government 
involvement in economic activities and removal of barriers of domestic markets linkages with 
international markets (World Bank, 2000).  
Overall, the impact assessment results show that SAP reforms in isolation have been 
insufficient in facilitating increased income and growth for the majority of the population in most 
developing countries. In the agricultural sector, the findings suggest that liberalisation of 
agricultural markets alone has not resulted into more competitive agricultural produce and input 
markets. Barrett (2008) argues that achieving increased produce prices and reduced input prices 
can only promote increased production from smallholder farmers when those farmers are engaged 
in those markets, otherwise the prevalent prices they face reflect scarcity internal to their farms 
and households alone. Therefore, a set of policies which focus on getting prices right for 
smallholder farmers is unlikely to lead to improved output or welfare if household and public assets 
are not available in adequate quantities and access to services is not enhanced to produce surpluses 
for the market and improve market access. Important factors to be considered are infrastructure 
and institutional development; smallholder farmers access to information, assets endowment, 
organisation; geographical access and the structure of markets (Kydd and Dorward, 2001; IFAD 
2003). Therefore, a simple rolling back of the state espoused by the SAP may have hindered 
development especially where it relies heavily on production activity conducted by very small 
scale farmers. 
Fafchamps and Gabre-Madhin, (2001) report that liberalisation of the agricultural market 
has led to domination of the market by petty traders, who are characterised by significant 
constraints financially and not capable of inter-seasonal and inter-regional arbitrage. In developing 
countries, financial constraint is attributed to lack of access to credit for most traders in agricultural 
markets, while inter-seasonal and inter-regional arbitrage failure is attributed to poor infrastructure 
development (such as roads and  storage facilities) and institutional development (such as 
information, communication, credit, security and extension services). Consequently, this has led 
into uneven and slow pace of the expansion of private-sector traders coverage of some 
geographical areas following the withdrawal of government marketing agencies (IFAD, 2003).  
To some extent, the failure of the reforms to achieve the expected objectives in most 
developing countries is the reason for the reversal of the SAP reforms, such as the current 
resurgence of subsidies. Among the countries which have recently implemented input studies 
include Malawi where farm input subsidies were re-introduced in 2005 (Denning et al., 2009); 
Zambia in 2001 (Hamukwala et al., 2012); and India in 1993 (Acharya, 2009). The main aim of 
these subsidies is to achieve food security at household and national levels.  
The recent re-introduction of subsidies has seen countries devising new ways of 
implementation, called market-smart subsidies. The design of the market smart subsidies draw 
enormously from the new institutional economics (NIE) theory. Under the NIE theory, markets 
are viewed as important institutions in the economic development process, and a limited period of 
government intervention is deemed necessary to establish basic conditions required to achieve 
increased productivity and efficient marketing, with the objective of inducing increased input 
demand, surplus output and profitability (Dorward et al., 2005).  The World Bank, (2007, p.151) 
defines  market-smart subsidies as subsidies whose implementation facilitates development of 
private sector-led input markets, targets the poor, sustains existing commercial markets,  is of 
limited period and uses instruments such as vouchers, marching grants and partial loan 
guarantees.  
Despite the existence of a wide range of literature on the demerits of subsidies on the 
economy, many governments in developing countries are turning back to agricultural input 
subsidies. According to Schwartz and Clements (1999), economic arguments for use of 
governments subsidies are to remove market failures in the economy, achieving production, input 
and output marketing economies of scale and for social protection. However, donors are against 
the introduction of subsidies and they argues that it is costly, creates distortions in the market, 
leads to diversion of resources from other critical sectors of the economy, lack exit strategies and 
targeting is poor (Schwartz and Clements, 1999; World Bank 2007).  
Empirical studies on the effects of the recent input subsidies suggest that there is increased 
production at both beneficiaries household and national levels and increased in productivity due 
to increased use of improved seeds and fertilisers. For instance, in Malawi the initial phase of farm 
input subsidy programme (FISP) was introduced in 2005/2006 agricultural season, targeting 
mainly maize production, and as a result, the subsidised inputs were initially fertiliser and seeds 
for maize production. Impact analysis of this programme shows that the objectives to increase 
production and productivity have been achieved in Malawi (Dorward, et al., 2008; Denning et al., 
2009; Dorward and Chirwa, 2011).   
There is a wide range of literature on the impact of farm input subsidies and the existing 
literature has focused on production and productivity; subjective food security and poverty, 
economy wide and income.  However, there is little literature on the impact of targeted farm input 
subsidies on smallholder farmers output market participation, migration, consumption 
expenditure and food security. The objective of this thesis is to fill this knowledge gap by 
examining the effects of farm input subsidies on farm households maize market participation, 
food security, consumption expenditure and internal migration of household members. Since the 
use of subsidised fertilizer is expected to lead to increased food crops production and productivity, 
an analysis on its effects on household market participation, food availability and consumption 
expenditure will contribute to understanding the role of the subsidy policy in alleviating poverty 
and addressing food insecurity.  
The potential effects on household food security and income on the decision of household 
members to migrate out of the farm household, especially from rural to urban as a result of receipt 
and use of farm input subsidy coupons is of interest because it has an effect on urbanisation in 
developing countries. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to have analysed these 
effects in more detail and using different indicators and econometric models to explore more 
evidence of effects of farm input subsidies.  
The research in this thesis focuses on Malawi, which is one of the first developing countries 
to have reintroduced a large scale farm input subsidy programme in the 21st Century. The Malawi 
government reintroduced the large farm input subsidy programme (FISP) in the 2005/2006 
agricultural season and has been implementing it every agricultural season to date. The main 
objective of FISP is to improve access to improved farm inputs to resource poor small farmers and 
consequently, achieving food self-sufficiency at beneficiary households and national level and 
improving farm incomes from crop sales (Dorward and Chirwa, 2013). The implementation of the 
2015/16 farm input subsidy programme makes Malawi reach a span of ten years in implementing 
this large scale farm input subsidy programme.  However, the research in this thesis uses the two- 
wave panel data with information on farm input subsidies covering the 2009/2010 and 2012/2013 
agricultural seasons.   
Although the stated main objective of the FISP focuses on addressing the problems of 
persistent food and income insecurity among the resource poor smallholder farmers and at national 
level, achieving political objectives by the ruling party elites underlines the influence in the 
implementation of agricultural policies such as the farm input subsidy policy (Poulton, 2012). The 
objective to gain political patronage, especially during the period of general elections are some of 
the political objectives associated with the implementation of the subsidies. As a result, the 
implementation processes of such policies may be prone to political influence and against technical 
guidelines of achieving efficiency and effectiveness. It might be due to political considerations in 
the implementation of the FISP that the exit strategy is not well defined and political parties 
manifestos on agricultural policies focus on strategies of continuing the FISP. Poulton, (2012) 
explains in more detail the processes of developing agricultural policies in the context of the 
presence of political and technical influence. 
The FISP targeting and implementation processes have undergone several reforms since its 
inception in the 2005/2006 agricultural season. Dorward and Chirwa (2013) outline changes in the 
targeting criteria of FISP from the 2005/2006 to the 2009/2010 agricultural seasons and report that 
overall the targeting is done at the area and beneficiary levels. Area targeting, which refers to 
districts or Extension Planning Area (EPAs) has all along been done by the Ministry of Agriculture 
and Food Security (MoAFS) Headquarters, while beneficiary targeting processes at the village 
level have been unclear is some seasons and has been done by different groups in different seasons. 
The district targeting and coupons allocation criteria changed from focusing on the tobacco and 
maize crops area in the 2005/06 and 2006/2007 agricultural seasons to a focus on the number of 
farm households in the district or EPA in later years of FISP implementation period (Dorward and 
Chirwa, 2013). In terms of beneficiary targeting, the 2005/2006 FISP had no clear criteria, while 
in the later agricultural seasons have been well defined, but with variations in the actual 
implementation. The official targeting criteria has been changing over the years from: fulltime 
smallholder farmers unable to afford the purchase of one or two unsubsidised fertilizer in the 
2006/2007 agricultural season to resource poor local resident with land, guardians looking after 
physically challenged, vulnerable (elderly, child or female headed, people living with HIV) in the 
2009/2010 agricultural season (Dorward and Chirwa, 2013). 
The processes of allocating coupons have also undergone several reforms. While coupons 
allocation to districts has always been done by the MoAFS Headquarters, several changes have 
occurred on coupons allocation to villages. In the 2005/2006 FISP, village coupons allocations 
were done by traditional authorities (TAs); in the 2006/2007 and 2007/2008 was done by the 
District Development Committees (DDCs), Area Development Committees (ADCs) and TAs; 
while in the 2008/2009 and 2009/2010 was done my MoAFS staff, DDCs, ADCs and TAs 
(Dorward and Chirwa, 2013). 
 The strategies and processes of identifying of, allocating and distributing coupons to 
beneficiaries have also undergone several changes over the FISP implementation period. TAs and 
village development committees (VDCs) had the responsibility of identifying, allocating and 
distributing coupons to beneficiaries at village level in the 2005/2006 , while in the 2006/2007 and 
2007/2008 agricultural seasons, MoAFS staff were also involved. The use of farm household 
registers and open meetings in identification of, coupons allocations and distribution to 
beneficiaries and facilitated by MoAFS staff was introduced in the 2008/2009 agricultural season, 
while the use of voter registration numbers and IDs were introduced in the 2009/2010 agricultural 
season (Dorward and Chirwa, 2013). However, despite of these changes in the strategies and 
processes of identification of, coupons allocations and distribution to beneficiaries, Dorward and 
Chirwa (2013) report that reallocation and redistribution of coupons at village level has been 
common in all the years of FISP implementation , and thus, defeating the whole purpose of the 
reforms. 
The types of farm inputs which are included in the FISP have also been changing over time. 
Lunduka et al., (2013) report that the subsidised inputs in the 2005/2006 was only fertilizer for 
maize production; in 2006/2007 were fertilizer and maize seed for maize production; in 2007/2008 
were fertilizer, maize and legumes seed for maize and legumes production; in 2008/2009 were 
fertilizer and maize seed for maize, tobacco and cotton production; while in 2009/2010 and 
2010/2011 were fertilizer, maize and legumes seed for maize, legumes and cotton production. 
Storage pesticides were also included in the 2009/2010 agricultural season. 
These changes in the types of farm inputs which are included in the FISP means that the 
standard programme full package per targeted farm household under the FISP has also undergone 
several modifications since its inception. For the 2009/2010 and 2012/2013 agricultural seasons 
FISP, the full standard program package was designed to support the purchase of 100 kg of 
subsidised fertilizer (50 kg bag NPK and 50 kg bag Urea); one pack of improved maize seed (5 kg 
hybrid or 8 kg open pollinated variety (OPV)); and one legume pack (Dorward, et al., 2013).  
However, the data used in this thesis and earlier studies (Chibwana et al., 2010; Holden and 
Lunduka, 2010; Ricker-Gilbert and Jayne, 2011) show that FISP beneficiaries received 
heterogeneous coupon packages (such as coupons for only maize seed, for one 50 Kg bag of 
fertilizer or for three 50 Kg bags of fertilizer). Therefore, the quantity of subsidised fertilizer the 
household redeemed, instead of programme participation, is used in this thesis in empirical 
estimations to measure the impact of farm input subsidies. 
The application of the correlated random effects (CRE) estimators in the empirical analyses 
of non-linear panel data models for binary and count outcome indicators is one of the important 
contribution of this thesis in analysing the effects of farm input subsidies. Furthermore, analysing 
different types of migration and using various indicators of food security, poverty and market 
participation in examining the effects of farm input subsidies provide a more comprehensive policy 
effects. 
This thesis is divided into five chapters. Chapter 2 presents empirical analyses of the 
impact of subsidised fertilizer on maize marketing. Although several studies have analysed the 
effects of farm input subsidies, none has analysed the direct effects on smallholder farmers market 
participation, such as on maize marketing despite being the target crop in most subsidy 
programmes in sub-Saharan Africa. This thesis analyses maize marketing in terms of the decision 
to sell, quantity sold and ratio of quantity sold to total quantity harvested (commercialisation 
index). The effects of repeated benefit to subsidised fertilizer on maize marketing is also examined 
in this thesis. 
The purpose of Chapter 3 is to analyse the effects of farm input subsidies on households 
food security and annual consumption expenditure. The cumulative impact of subsidised fertilizer 
due to repeated benefits is also analysed in this chapter. This thesis uses the following food security 
indicators: (i) per capita calories per day, and (ii) annual food security status (i.e. food secure or 
insecure). And for annual consumption expenditure we use: (i) annual food per capita consumption 
expenditure, (ii) annual non-food per capita consumption expenditure and (iii) annual total per 
capita consumption expenditure.  
Chapter 4 analyses the relationship between farm input subsidies and the decision of farm 
household members to migrate out of the farm. This thesis focuses on internal migration and 
indicators used are rural to urban, rural to rural and seasonal migration. Furthermore, this thesis 
also analyses the heterogeneity effects of subsidised fertilizer on migration based on repeated 
benefits to the subsidy programme, which aims to capture the effects of continuous flow of 
benefits. 
Lastly, Chapter 5 concludes by presenting main thesis findings from the empirical 
analyses, policy implications of the results and suggesting future research areas to explore more 
on the effects of farm input subsidies. 
Chapter 2 
THE IMPACT OF FARM INPUT SUBSIDIES ON MAIZE MARKETING  
2.1 Introduction 
Small farmers participation in markets is one of the most important factors necessary for economic 
growth and poverty reduction in developing countries (Heltberg and Tarp, 2002; Muriithi et al., 
2015; Pingali, 2007; World Bank, 2007). Markets offer households opportunities to engage in 
productive activities through investments in diversified livelihood strategies and sell both labour 
and products (IFAD, 2003; Njuki et al., 2008; World Bank, 2000). Access to input and output 
markets is also important for farm households adoption of modern technologies (e.g. fertilizers 
and hybrid seed varieties), which are important for increased productivity and incomes (Dorward 
and Kydd, 2005; Zeller et al., 1997). However, in developing countries poor access to, and low 
participation in markets are pervasive, especially as far as small farmers are concerned, which limit 
livelihoods opportunities and perpetuate their poverty (Barrett, 2008; Heltberg and Tarp, 2002; 
Jayne et al., 2010; Poulton et al., 2006). This is one of the major concerns for governments which 
depend on agriculture as a pro-poor growth strategy (de Janvry et al., 1991).  
Small farmers poor access to, and low participation in markets, is mainly attributed to barriers 
to entry (Barrett, 2008; Jayne et al., 2010). These barriers include high inputs requirements in form 
of land, chemicals, fertilizer and processing; high products quality demand, and high transaction 
costs of marketing (Barrett, 2008; Heltberg and Tarp, 2002; Mather et al., 2013; Poulton et al., 
2006). The global agricultural conditions are rather instable due to multiple factors, including 
changes in farm policies in high-income countries and a significant decline in donor and state 
support to the agricultural sector (Jayne et al., 2010). As a result, the majority of small farmers in 
developing countries focus on production of food crops for subsistence. 
To increase the use of fertilizers and hybrid seeds by small farmers, and consequently, 
improve crop production and productivity, a range of farm input subsidy programs had been used 
as policy tools by many developing countries prior to the implementation of structural adjustment 
and stabilisation programs (IMF, 2008). Although most of these input subsidy programs were 
phased out in the 1980s and early 1990s in most countries in sub-Saharan Africa (Husain, 1993; 
World Bank, 2007), since 1998 several countries have reintroduced them, including Malawi 
(Dorward et al., 2008; IMF, 2008). Since the input subsidies target specific crops, coupons used 
to redeem subsidised inputs are for specific crops and this may affect farmers decisions on 
cropping patterns and, therefore, may have direct effects on marketing of food crops. Such 
potential marketing effects have not been fully analysed in previous studies.  
The main objective of this Chapter is to estimate the effects of subsidised fertilizer on 
marketing of maize in Malawi. The specific objectives are to estimate the impact of subsidised 
fertilizer on (i) farmers participation in maize market as sellers; (ii) quantity of maize sold; and 
(iii) commercialisation index of maize, i.e. the ratio of maize quantity sold to total quantity of 
maize harvested. Determining the extent of farmers maize market participation, quantity sold and 
the degree of commercialisation is important to give insights into the potential increase in maize 
market supply as a result of the fertilizer subsidy program. Such information is essential for 
understanding the effects on maize prices since most small farmers are net maize buyers. It will 
also provide an indication of the ability of the program beneficiaries to self-finance commercial 
purchase of fertilizer in the future with income from maize sales and hence the sustainability of 
the subsidy program. The estimations are based on the nationally representative two-wave 
Integrated Household Panel Survey (IHPS) data of 2010 and 2013 for Malawi. 
There are several recent studies analysing different aspects of the effects of farm input 
subsidies (Chibwana et al., 2012; Chibwana et al., 2010; Chirwa et al., 2013; Dorward and Chirwa, 
2011; Holden and Lunduka, 2010; Ricker-Gilbert et al., 2013; Ricker-Gilbert et al., 2011; Ricker-
Gilbert and Jayne, 2011; Xu et al., 2009)  and agricultural marketing in general. To our best 
knowledge, this is the first study to empirically quantify the effects of subsidised fertilizer on 
marketing of maize in Malawi. The only studies which are close to some of the aspects analysed 
in this chapter are  Ricker-Gilbert et al., (2013), who investigate the effects of fertilizer subsidy on 
maize prices in Malawi and Zambia; and Takeshima and Liverpool-Tasie (2015), who analyse the 
effects of fertilizer subsidies on grain prices in Nigeria..  In contrast to previous studies which 
focused on marketing of food crops, this chapter adds estimation of factors influencing 
commercialisation of maize, which helps to identifying key determinants necessary for the 
transition of farmers from subsistence to commercial maize farming; and estimation of the effects 
of repeated benefit to subsidised fertilizer on maize marketing in order to assess the cumulative 
effects of subsidies. 
This Chapter is structured as follows. The next section presents an overview of smallholder 
farmers market participation in developing countries. A review of farm input subsidies in 
developing countries is presented in section 2.3. Section 2.4 discusses the performance of the 
agricultural sector and marketing in Malawi. Sections 2.5 and 2.6 present the conceptual 
framework and the empirical models, respectively. Data sources, descriptive statistics and 
endogeneity tests are discussed in section 2.7. Results and discussions are presented in section 2.8, 
and section 2.9 conclude and discusses policy implications. 
2.2 Smallholder farmers market participation in developing countries 
In this section, we explore historical overview of smallholder farmers participation in markets and 
empirical evidence on the role of smallholder farmers market participation in economic growth, 
poverty reduction and food security. The role of transaction costs and farmer organisations on 
smallholder farmers market participation is also discussed.  
2.2.1 Market Participation and Poverty Reduction 
Markets are of paramount importance in poverty alleviation because of their link with 
livelihood strategies in the rural economy. Most of the rural population in developing countries 
have diversified livelihood strategies, making them rely on a number of sources of food and 
income, which includes farming, off-farm and non-farm income (Ellis, 2000). The World Bank, 
(2007)   categorises sources of rural income into three sub-sectors, namely, smallholder farming, 
labour and migration. 
Furthermore, the World Bank (2007) categories the  rural population based on income 
sources into five livelihood strategies; (i) market-oriented smallholders, defined as those 
smallholders whose larger share of income comes from sales of their agricultural produce on 
markets; (ii) subsistence-oriented smallholders, defined as those smallholders which use larger 
part of their produce for household consumption; (iii) labour-oriented household, defined as those 
households whose major sources of income is from wage labour markets in the farming sector or 
income from the nonfarm labour markets; (iv) migration-oriented households, defined as those 
households whose larger proportion of income is from remittances from migrants or the entire 
household migrate; and (v) diversified households, defined as those households, which have 
multiple important sources of income from engaging in agriculture, off-farm labour markets and 
remittances or wages from migration.  The type of livelihood strategy the household adopts 
determines the type of market it is engaged in and the degree of its engagement. Subsistence-
oriented smallholders have very little engagement with agricultural markets, as evidenced by small 
proportions of their contributions to marketed agricultural products compared with market-
oriented smallholders2 (World Bank, 2007). 
Ellis, (2000) argues that since the rural population operate in an environment which is 
characterised with risks, diversifying livelihoods helps to secure income and food; and reduces 
vulnerability to risks.  However, in order for the rural population to have diverse sources of 
livelihoods and improve their living standard, market access is fundamental and (IFAD, 2003) 
reports that households which do not have access to market fail to diversify their livelihoods and 
improve their living standards. 
Despite of multiple livelihood strategies in the rural economy, most households are poor 
because of pervasive market failures under which livelihood activities operate, and consequently 
leading to inefficient outcomes due to high transaction costs (World Bank, 2007). Therefore, in 
order to achieve economic growth in agro-based economies and to improve rural incomes, 
enhancing market access for rural households is a precondition and this requires producing 
surpluses for the market and existence of competitive markets (IFAD, 2003). Access to market is 
critical in contributing and sustaining achievements in poverty reduction through agricultural 
growth and non-farm livelihood strategies (Njuki et al., 2008). This is achieved through enhanced 
earnings and agricultural productivity by selling produce, engaging in non-farm income, use of 
2 The World Bank (2007, p.78) reports that subsistence oriented smallholder farmers contribute only nine per cent in 
Malawi and two per cent in Nepal and Vietnam to marketed agricultural produce. 
improved technologies in production; and access to food at competitive prices (Dorward and Kydd, 
2005). 
Improved access to markets is one of the fundamental factors in the promotion of economic 
opportunities for poor people. The importance of access to markets for smallholder farmers is 
evident through increased incomes, productivity and diversified livelihoods. Literature on rural 
development point out that majority of the population in developing countries  are still poor due 
to limited access to market, which remains one of the significant factors which prevents 
smallholder farmers from realising benefits of their farming.  In developing countries, poverty 
alleviation and economic growth can be achieved more quickly if favourable terms of trade for the 
rural sector are put in place, because the rural sector comprises majority of the poor whose 
livelihoods are agricultural-based (Husain, 1993). 
2.2.2 Historical Overview of Smallholder Farmers markets Participation 
Barrett (2008) shows that more than half of farming households do not sell their staple food grains 
in Eastern and Southern African. This phenomenon is attributed to the wide spread market failures 
in developing countries due to barriers to access markets for some households because of high 
transaction costs of market participation; and differences in the integration of markets to national 
and international markets due to differences in geographical and spatial costs of trade and level of 
competition of market players (Barrett, 2008).  
However, de Janvry et al., (1991) argue that market failure should be considered at a 
household level, rather than at commodity level3. Market failure is defined by de Janvry et al., 
(1991, p.1401) as: 
 referring to when the cost of transaction through market exchange creates disutility 
greater than the utility gain that it produces, with the result that the market is not used for 
the transaction. 
Several research studies have been conducted on smallholder farmers participation in 
markets in developing countries. Non-price factors namely risks, technology and transport 
infrastructure significantly determine market participation and volume of sales for smallholder 
farmers in Mozambique (Heltberg and Tarp, 2002). Jayne et al. (2010) find low maize market 
participation for smallholder farmers in Zambia, Malawi, Mozambique, Kenya and Ethiopia. The 
authors show that a larger proportion (an average of 50 % in the sampled countries) of rural farmers 
participates in staple grain markets are buyers only; less than 20 % participate are sellers only; and 
about 30 % of the rural farmers are autarky, with the exception of Ethiopia and Kenya where it is 
only 2% and 8 %, respectively.  
Market participation for smallholder farmers is also dependent on types of crops grown. 
Smallholder farmers who produce traditional export crops such as tobacco, cotton, tea and coffee 
participate more in markets because these crops are solely produced for sale. This is because these 
commodities require factory processing before they can be consumed; little quantities are 
consumed at household level and the high integration of domestic with the world markets offers 
3  de Janvry et al. (1991, p. 14001) argue that distinction should be made between lack of market and general market 
failure, in which the former is considered as an extreme of the later. They argue that for most goods, markets are 
available; however, they fail to some households and consequently rendering such goods as non-tradable to them. 
relatively better prices compared with most food crops. However, it is relatively only a small 
proportion of smallholder farmers in developing countries who are engaged in production of 
traditional export crops. For instance, Heltberg and Tarp (2002) find that only 7.1 percent of 
Mozambican farmers sold cash crops compared to 14.3 percent who sold basic food crops.  
According to Poulton et al., (2006), the poor performance of the African domestic markets 
for agricultural products is attributed to involvement of  small traders with limited capital; volatile 
prices due to seasonality and fluctuations of productions; high transaction costs due to 
geographical and spatial barriers; and little production services4 for food crops. With all these 
enormous challenges smallholder farmers are facing in accessing and participating in agricultural 
markets, the future contribution of the smallholder sector in rural poverty reduction, economic 
growth and food security seems rather abating.  
2.2.3 Transaction Costs and Market Participation of Smallholder Farmers 
Key et al., (2000) categorise transaction costs5 into two: (i) proportional transaction costs (variant 
transaction costs dependent on the level of transaction such as unobservable transport and 
marketing costs e.g. cost of self-transportation and time spent selling commodities in the market); 
and (ii) fixed transaction costs (invariant transaction costs such as unobservable costs of search, 
negotiation, bargaining, selection and enforcement). Key et al., (2000) and de Janvry et al. (1991) 
have shown that due to proportional transaction costs, a price band is formed6 in the marketing 
4 Production services refer to services which are important at the production stage and include services such as input 
supply, extension and credit.  
5 Transaction costs refers to costs of planning, adapting, search, monitoring task completion. Williamson, (1981, 
p.553)   
6 de Janvry et al. (1991, p. 1403) report that the wider the price bands is formed, the more internalisation of external 
shocks effects, which displace the shadow prices of food and labour. 
chain, in which, final buyers pay higher prices, while producers receive lower prices, and 
consequently, rendering market participation unprofitable to some households either as buyers or 
producers. This also explains the lower net returns for net-buyer households, compared with 
commercial farmers who solely produce for the market. 
The presence of fixed transaction costs in market participation means that marketing 
economies of scale can be gained with larger traded commodities. This also means that increased 
benefits from improved infrastructure and institutional development, which results in reduction of 
transaction costs can be achieved by corresponding increased supply by smallholder farmers. In 
most cases, individual traders are relatively involved with larger quantities of traded commodities 
compared with individual smallholder sellers or buyers. Consequently, it is conjectured that 
reduction in transaction costs associated with marketing would be more beneficial to traders 
compared with individual smallholder sellers in the absence of corresponding significant increased 
supply by smallholder farmers7. 
Transaction costs affect both traders and producers in the process of their engagement with 
markets either as sellers or buyers. High transaction costs in marketing of agricultural produce are 
attributed to poor infrastructure and institutional development in developing countries. Poor 
transport and telecommunication infrastructure; information asymmetry on prices, traders, and 
new technologies are common phenomenon in developing countries (Poulton et al., 2006). High 
transport, communication and search costs are among the costs which are associated with 
marketing in remote areas in developing countries and are considered the main cause for the poor 
7 Individual  smallholder farmers can still gain economies of scale without corresponding increased supply or 
production to reduce transaction cost by joining farmer organisations and sale their produce as a group, which in 
essence increases the volume of traded commodities. 
market access for smallholder farmers and consequently, the pervasiveness of subsistence farming 
(Davidova et. al., 2009). Fafchamps and Gabre-Madhin (2001) find that agricultural traders in 
Malawi and Benin incur highest transaction costs in search and transport because of the small 
quantities of transacted goods and the reliance in physical visits to markets, respectively, which is 
attributed to lack of access to telephone services. It is therefore, envisaged that low transaction 
costs would reduce the costs associated with marketing and consequently increase profitability and 
market participation (Raballand et al., 2011). Dorward et al., (2004) point out to the potential of 
low transaction costs associated with communication due to increased access to cell phones in 
rural areas. 
 A study on the impact of mobile phone on market participation by Muto and Yamano 
(2009), using panel data of Uganda smallholder farmers find a large increased percentage of 
banana sellers (from 43% in 2003 to 68% in 2005) in areas covered by mobile network and which 
are more than 20 miles from district centres. But they find no increase in the percentage of maize 
sellers in remote areas and that possession of mobile phone at household level does not 
significantly impact on participation in banana sales and marketing of maize. This suggests that 
mobile phones influence smallholder farmers marketing participation for certain types of crops.  
 The World Bank (2004) reports that Malawis domestic transport rates are much higher 
compared with other neighbouring countries. Comparing domestic transport rates for Malawi, 
South Africa and Zimbabwe, the World Bank (2004) finds that in Malawi the rate per tonne and 
per kilometre is between US$0.065 to US$0.075, while in South Africa and Zimbabwe are 
US$0.002 on track roads and US$0.035 on rural roads. The high domestic transport rates in Malawi 
is attributed to firstly, poor conditions of rural roads,  which are rated below the SADC region 
average; secondly, lack of competition due to a few transport operators; and finally, high transport 
taxes. 
Developing infrastructure and institutions is one of the most recommended options in 
development literature in order to reduce transaction costs and consequently, improving access 
and participation of smallholder farmers in markets in developing countries (Dorward et al., 2004; 
IFAD, 2003; Raballand et al., 2011; World Bank, 2007). Improved infrastructure (such as roads, 
markets and storage facilities) and improved institutions (such as information, communication, 
credit, security and extension services) are hypothesised to greatly reduce transaction costs. With 
improved rural road networks and quality of roads, more transport operators are expected to use 
rural routes, which increases competition among operators and hence leading to competitive 
transport fares. Improved roads networks in Malawi have also contributed to establishment of 
community mobile markets8 in rural and urban trading centres, which have helped to reduce 
distances travelled to markets for both rural buyers and sellers. 
Improved communication through both private and public radio stations facilitate access 
to timely, frequent and accurate information on agricultural production practices and marketing 
through radio agriculture programmes9. Therefore, households ownership of radios is expected to 
reduce transaction costs associates with market information searching and addresses information 
8 Community mobile markets are markets which are organised periodically in different trading centres, both in rural 
and urban areas and are organised either on a weekly or a fortnight basis in a particular area.  
9 The Ministry of Agriculture in Malawi annually announces minimum producer prices for several crops through 
private and public radio stations, to help smallholder farmers to have access to accurate and correct price 
information. Large commercial traders also announce their buying prices and buying centres for various crops; and 
selling prices and selling points of farm inputs on private and public radio stations. 
asymmetry. Furthermore, installation of mobile phone networks covering both urban and rural 
areas has led to increased ownership of cell phones in most developing countries. With the 
introduction of cell phone, new innovative means of addressing the challenge of information 
asymmetry on agricultural marketing have been developed in Africa by Esoko10, which works with 
governments, international organisations, NGOs and private businesses to provide current and 
accurate marketing information on prices, bids and offers, weather forecasts and agricultural 
advices to smallholder farmers and traders via text messages through short message service (SMS) 
on their cell phones.  
2.2.4 Farmer Organisations and Market Participation for Smallholder Farmers 
Due to low levels of production and productivity, smallholder farmers individually sale small 
quantities in output markets and this increases assembling costs of commodities for buyers from 
numerous smallholder farmers. This is one of the factors which impede smallholder farmers 
access to markets in developing countries. It is argued in agricultural marketing literature that such 
smallholder farmers can overcome these challenges by forming farmer organisations, which help 
to reduce transaction costs for both farmers and buyers. This can be achieved through bulking of 
commodities and improved access to communication, extension, credit, transport, and contract 
10 Esoko is a technology platform and consulting service that helps organisations profile people and manage the 
information flows between them and is currently working in sixteen countries in Africa and these are: Malawi, 
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroun, Cote dIvoire, Ghana, Kenya, Madagascar, Mozambique, Nigeria, Rwanda, 
Swaziland, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe. Through this technology, smallholder farmers sign up to 
Esoko to receive a package of weekly marketing or advisory information from an organisation which has partnered 
with Esoko. More details of Esoko are on: www.esoko.com. 
http://www.esoko.com/
services through reduced costs of service delivery for service providers and service users11 
(Poulton et al., 2006; World Bank, 2007). 
Most governments in developing countries have put in place policies which promote the 
formation of farmer organisations with the objective of improving smallholder farmers access to 
markets (GoM, 1997, 2009). In most developing countries, formation of farmer organisations dates 
back to periods before independence and decades have passed since developing countries started 
promoting establishment of farmer organisations. However, empirical evidence on effectiveness 
of farmer organisations in facilitating smallholder farmers access to competitive market has been 
mixed (Chirwa et al., 2005; Poulton et al., 2006).  
A study by Okello (2005)  finds that farmer organisations have helped smallholder farmers 
to access markets through their collective supply of produce, which has helped to reduce marketing 
transaction costs and benefiting from economies of scale for both sellers and buyers. However, 
other evidence shows that several farmer organisations have failed and closed-up in developing 
countries, and the few still functioning have few members compared with the total number of 
smallholder farmers, are ineffective and their performance is poor (Salifu et al., 2010Shiferaw et 
al., 2009). Closing-down and poor performance of most farmer organisations is attributed to poor 
management and poor organisation structure (Salifu et al., 2010).  
Despite the implementation of policies which promote formation of famer organisations in 
most developing countries, majority of smallholder farmers are not members of producer 
organisations. This is evident in one of the major findings in the evaluation of the National 
11 By providing services to farmers in a group, service providers incur lower costs of service delivery compared with 
individual service provision. 
Smallholder Farmers Association of Malawi (NASFAM) during the period 2003 -2006. The study 
finds that the members number one priority was the prospect of selling their produce at the 
national and international markets and thereby having access to better prices for their produce. 
However, membership analysis for NASFAM reveals that it does not targeted the poorest 
subsistence farmers, but only those with a potential surplus to bring to the market (NASFAM, 
2006).  
2.3 Farm Input Subsidies in Developing Countries 
Against the orthodox evidence that subsidies distort markets in the economy, a new wave of 
agricultural input subsidies is emerging in most developing countries. Introduction of input 
subsidies is aimed at addressing challenges of low output and productivity of poor smallholder 
farmers who are financially constrained to purchase improved inputs for production and 
consequently, contributing to achieving self-food sufficiency at household and national levels and 
alleviating poverty. Table 2.1 presents a list of countries and the time frame they have been 
implementing the recently large scale farm input subsidy programmes in the Eastern and Western 
Africa in the period of the post-structural adjustment programmes. Zambia and Malawi were the 
first and second to reintroduce the large scale farm input subsidies in Eastern Africa, respectively, 
while Nigeria was the first in Western Africa. 
Table 2.1: Implementation period of large scale farm input subsidy programmes in Eastern 
and Western Africa in the period of the post-structural adjustment programmes. 
Region Country  Large scale farm input subsidy 
programme implementation period 
Eastern Africa 1. Zambia 2002 - on 
 2. Malawi 2005 - on 
 3. Tanzania 2008 - on 
 4. Rwanda 2007 - 2009 
 5. Kenya 2007 - on 
Western Africa 1. Burkina Faso 2008 - on 
 2. Senegal 2008 - on 
 3. Mali 2008 - on 
 4. Nigeria 1999 - on 
 5. Ghana 2008 - 0n 
Source: DANIDA, (2011); Druilhe and Barreiro-Hurle, (2012); Ricker-Gilbert et al., (2013).  
There are several studies on the impact of the recently implemented farm input subsidy 
programmes in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). However, the literature shows that there are more 
studies focusing on Malawi and Zambia. Probably because these two countries were among the 
first to reintroduce the large scale farm input subsidies in this region in the early 2000s. The recent 
studies have focused on both direct and general equilibrium impact of farm input subsidies.  
Crop output effects of farm input subsidies is one of the areas which has been extensively 
studied. Studies by Chibwana, et al., (2010); Dorward et al., (2013);  Holden and Lunduka, (2010); 
Ricker-Gilbert and Jayne, (2011) all find statistically significant positive effects of farm input 
subsidies on maize production and productivity in Malawi.  Ricker-Gilbert and Jayne, (2011)  find 
that an additional kilogram (kg) of subsidised fertilizer increases maize production by 1.82 kg in 
the current year and 3.16 kg in the third year of using subsidised fertilizer. Analysing maize yield 
response to farm input subsidies, Chibwana, et al., (2010) find that using subsidised fertilizer only 
increases maize yield by 249 kg per hectare, while using both subsidised hybrid maize and fertilizer 
increases maize yield by 447 kg per hectare. Dorward et al., (2013) evaluates the 2012/2013 FISP 
and based on simulation results report that a full FISP package increases maize production by at 
least 500 kg, while only 50 kg bag of subsidised fertilizer  or with hybrid maize seed increases 
maize production between 200 kg and 400 kg. Similar results are reported in a study by Mason et 
al., (2013) who analyse the effects of subsidised fertilizer on maize production in Zambia and find 
that an additional kilogram of subsidised fertilizer increases maize production by 1.88 kg. The 
most recent study is by Wiredu et al., (2015) who analyse the impact of fertilizer subsidy on land 
and labour productivity in Ghana and find that receipt of subsidised fertilizer increases rice 
production by 29 kg per hectare. 
 The effects of farm input subsidies on input market has also been analysed by several 
researchers.  Ricker-Gilbert et al., (2011)  and Mason and Ricker-Gilbert (2013) find that an 
additional kg of subsidised fertilizer and hybrid maize seed  in Malawi crowd-out commercial 
purchases of fertilizer and hybrid maize seed by 0.22 kg and 0.58 kg, respectively. A similar effect 
of crowding-out of commercial fertilizer is reported in a study by Chirwa et al., (2013), who find 
a decrease in purchase of commercial fertilizer of between 0.15 % and 0.21% for a 1 % increase 
in subsidised fertilizer. However, Xu et al, (2009) find both crowding out and crowing in effects 
on commercial fertilizer purchases in Zambia, and Liverpool-Tasie (2014) find that subsidised 
fertilizer increases both participation in and quantities of commercial fertilizer bought from the 
private fertilizer markets in Kano State, Nigeria.  
Farm diversification effect of farm input subsidies are examined in the existing literature 
in the context of their impact on land allocation to various crops at household level. Holden and 
Lunduka, (2010); and Chibwana, et al., (2012) are some of the recent studies for Malawi. However, 
these two studies find contradicting results, which is mainly attributed to differences in the 
analytical methodologies employed (Lunduka et al., (2013).  Chibwana et al., (2012) find 
increased land allocated to maize, while Holden and Lunduka (2010) find reduced land allocated 
for maize production. However, Dorward et al., (2013) and NSO (2014b) show decreasing trend 
on land located to maize and increasing proportion of farmers growing other crops, mainly 
legumes. The most recent study is by Yi et al., (2015) who analyse the effects of grain subsidies 
on grain cultivated area in China and they find positive effects, but only on the liquidity-
constrained households.   
Several studies have also analysed the household welfare effects of farm input subsidies in 
Malawi.  Dorward and Chirwa, (2011); Dorward et al., (2013); and Chirwa et al., (2013) all find 
improvement in adequacy of food availability at household level. A study by Ricker-Gilbert and 
Jayne, (2011) find that on average, an additional kg of subsidised fertilizer increases farm net crop 
income by US$1.16, however, they find no evidence of effects on asset worth.  Ricker-Gilbert and 
Jayne (2012) also analyse the effects of subsidised fertilizer on crop income employing quantile 
regression model and find increased crop income to richer households at the top percentiles and 
no statistically significant effect on poor households at the bottom percentiles.  Chirwa, et al., 
(2013) analyse the effects of farm input subsidies on poverty, primary school enrolment and 
sickness of under-five year old children and they find overall increase in primary school enrolment 
and reduced probability of having sick under-five year old children, but the study finds no 
statistically significant effects on subjective self-assessed poverty at household level. However, 
Dorward et al., (2013) find no significant differences on school attendance, sickness of a household 
member or of under-five year children based on number of times of receipt of subsidies. 
Studies on equilibrium effects have focused on food prices and macroeconomic indicators. 
Ricker-Gilbert et al., (2013) find small effects on maize prices in Malawi and Zambia. Similar 
results are found by Takeshima and Liverpool-Tasie (2015) who analyse the effects of fertilizer 
subsidies on grain prices in Nigeria. Chirwa et al., (2013) study the effect of farm input subsidies 
on GDP and agricultural sector growth, poverty and inflation trends in Malawi and they find that 
during the implementation period of the farm input subsidy programme, Malawi experienced 
increased GDP and agricultural sector growth; and a decline in poverty and inflation, which are 
attributed to the FISP. However, their study does not analyse the causal relationship between the 
macroeconomic indicators under consideration and the farm input subsidy programme. 
2.4 Agricultural sector performance and marketing in Malawi  
In the post-structural adjustment reform period the performance of the agriculture sector in Malawi 
has been poor and this has been attributed to the low productivity and profitability of the sector, 
emanating from the multiple risks associated with production and marketing processes (World 
Bank, 2004). Inadequate access to agricultural markets due to high transaction costs is a major 
challenge to most small farmers in Malawi. The World Bank (2010) reports that the marketing 
system for the agricultural sector in Malawi is inefficient and this is evidenced by higher traders 
margin compared to the profits realised by producers. The unfavourable developments of 
agricultural terms of trade have been another challenge facing the agriculture sector, which has 
contributed to low profitability. These adverse development have been due to the high costs of 
transport for both imports to and exports from the country (World Bank, 2004), and the 
inefficiency of the marketing systems in rural areas (Dorward et al., 2004). 
Low agricultural output and the high transaction costs faced by smallholder farmers have 
resulted in the fact that only a small proportion of small farmers in Malawi participate as sellers of 
cereals and legumes. Using the 1997/98 data from the first integrated household survey (IHS1), 
Chirwa (2006) reports that while in general 39 per cent of households which produced crops 
participated in markets as sellers, only 9 per cent of households which produced maize participated 
in the market as sellers. Employing data from the second integrated household survey (IHS2), 
Chirwa (2009) finds out some improvement reporting that in 2004/05 this percentage increased to 
15. Figure 2.1 presents trends in market participation of farmers as sellers of selected cereals and 
legumes in Malawi including maize, based on surveys conducted between 1997/1998 (IHS1) and 
2013 integrated household panel survey (IHPS). The results show that apart from maize, the 
proportion of farmers who sold beans, groundnuts, and rice significantly decreased following the 
2003/2004 agricultural season compared to proportion of sellers following the 1996/1997 
agricultural season. A comparison between the period before (statistics based on the 2004/2005 
data) and after the implementation of the large scale farm input subsidy programme (FISP) 
suggests there has been no significant increase in the proportion of farmers who sold maize and 
rice. However, the results show an increase in proportion of sellers of groundnuts, beans and 
pigeon peas. 
Figure 2.1: Proportion of farmers who sold selected cereals and legumes in Malawi 
(1997/1998 -2013) 
Notes: IHS: Integrated Household Survey; IHPS: Integrated Household Panel Survey. 
Source: Author based on IHS1 (1997/1998), IHS2 (2004/2005) data and NSO (2014b).  
The low level of market participation by small farmers as sellers and the small quantities sold 
coupled with the low rates of commercialisation in cereals is a significant contributing factor 
towards the persistence of poverty among small farmers whose livelihoods are dependent on 
production of staple food crops. This raises doubts on the effectiveness of various agricultural 
policies aimed at facilitating commercialisation of major cereals and legumes in Malawi.  
However, overall and at national level, the performance of the agricultural sector in Malawi 
has improved since the reintroduction of the large farm input subsidy programme (FISP) in the 
2005/2006 agricultural season. In terms of agricultural production at national level, cereals 
production and productivity has improved since the implementation of FISP (Figure 2.2). 
IHS1 (1997/1998) IHS2 (2004/2005) IHPS (2010) IHPS (2013)
Survey Name and Year
Proportion of farmers who sold selected cereals and legumes in Malawi 
(1997/1998 -2013)
Beans Maize Groundnuts Rice Pigeon Peas Other crops
Figure 2.2: Cereals Production and Yield in Malawi (1990-2011) 
Source: Authors calculations based on FAOSTATS Data (2014). 
Similarly, Malawis international trade balance of cereals shows significant improvement 
since the implementation of the FISP. The period 2006 to 2011 shows significant increase and 
decrease of exportation and importation of cereals, respectively, and consequently, significantly 
improving the cereals balance of trade (Figure 2.3). Although the statistics in Figures 2.2 and 2.3 
do not indicate causality relationship between FISP and cereals production, productivity, exports 
and imports, they suggest improvement in cereals marketing at national level in Malawi since the 
implementation of the FISP. 
500000
1000000
1500000
2000000
2500000
3000000
3500000
4000000
4500000
Cereals Production and Yield in Malawi (1990-2011)
Cereals Production (Metric Tonnes) Cereals Yield (Kg per Hect)
Figure 2.3: Cereals Export, Import and Trade Balance in Malawi (1990-2011) 
Source: Authors calculations based on FAOSTATS Data (2014). 
2.5 Conceptual framework 
This study follows the analytical framework developed in Goetz (1992) in modelling the effects 
of subsidised fertilizer on farmers maize market participation as sellers and on the quantities sold. 
On the supply side, the use of subsidised fertilizer is expected to increase maize production and 
productivity, and therefore, it is expected to increase maize market participation by farmers 
benefiting from the subsidy program. However, the farmer decides on the quantities devoted to 
household consumption not only based on the crop production levels, but also on output prices, 
-600000
-400000
-200000
200000
400000
600000
Cereals Export, Import and Trade Balance in Malawi (1990-2011)
Cereals Balance of Trade Cereals Export (Tonnes) Cereals Import (Tonnes)
consumption characteristics, e.g. the number of household members, exogenous income sources 
and farm profits.  
Production of cereals by most farmers in Malawi is rain-fed and consequently, has an annual 
production cycle. As a result, farmers also make decisions on production, consumption and sales 
levels taking into account the annual production cycle. In addition, due to poor storage facilities, 
the post-harvest losses of cereals and legumes are high. For simplification, in this study it is 
assumed that there are no inter-temporal decisions on consumption at household level.  
It is also assumed that farmers decision on whether to sell or not to sell (consume) part of the 
maize output is based on utility derived by the chosen regime. The farmers decision is based on 
the expected benefits of either of the regimes (i.e. selling or consuming maize output), taking into 
account transaction costs. It is also assumed that only one marketing reg 
Ds73ime is chosen by the famer at a time, thus making the decision binary.  
Based on the expected increase in maize production and productivity as a result of the use of 
subsidised fertilizer, four hypotheses are formulated in relation to farm households maize market 
participation; (1): There is positive relationship between the use of subsidised fertilizer and the 
decision to sell maize; (2): There is positive relationship between the use of subsidised fertilizer 
and quantities of maize the farm household sell; (3): There is positive relationship between the use 
of subsidised fertilizer and maize commercialisation (i.e. ratio of quantity sold to quantity 
harvested); (4) The more the frequency of benefit to subsidised fertilizer, the higher the magnitude 
of the positive effects on the decision to sell, quantities sold and commercialisation of maize. 
The random utility theory proposed by Greene (2003) is employed in this study in modelling 
the choice of the marketing regime. Assuming that the ith farmer is faced with two marketing 
regimes, indexed m, the farmer maximises utility by choosing marketing regime m, which can be 
presented as:  
imimim XMaxU  
         (2.1) 
where 
imU  is the utility derived from choosing marketing regime m and m=1 if the farmer 
participates in the market, otherwise m=0; 
imX  is a vector of attributes of farmers characteristics; 
  is a vector of parameter coefficients; and 
im  is an idiosyncratic error term. 
Suppose the farmers utility of two choices is represented by mU and cU , where mU  is utility 
of market participation as a seller and cU
 is utility of consumption (i.e. no market participation as 
a seller). If the farmer chooses one of the two regimes, this implies that the observed decision 
provides greater utility compared with the unobserved utilities. Therefore, the observed chosen 
marketing decision equals 1 if mU > cU , and 0 if mU < cU . 
2.6 Empirical models 
Three empirical models are employed with regard to: (i) farmers participation in maize market as 
sellers; (ii) quantities of maize sold; and (iii) commercialisation index (i.e. ratio of total quantity 
sold to total quantity harvested).   
Since only a small proportion of farmers sell maize in Malawi, this makes the data on quantity 
sold of maize contain a large number of zero observations. The production of maize mainly for 
subsistence by most small farmers provides economic justification for the decision not to sell maize 
and this decision is strategic to the farmers livelihoods. Therefore, this study does not consider 
non-participation of famers in maize marketing as a pure selectivity issue as is the case with 
missing data sample selection models, but rather as a corner solution. The quantity sold of maize 
in this study has characteristics of truncated data, with large number of zeros and small number of 
continuous data units. For such dependent variables, the ideal models employed in estimations are 
the Tobit model for corner solution and the Double Hurdle model. In the case of incidental 
truncation of the data (missing data for non-participants), which causes the problem of sample 
selection bias, most empirical studies using cross-section data employ the Heckman model 
(Heckman, 1979) or the two stage sample selection model.  The sample selection model is based 
on the assumption that the unobserved quantities sold by non-participants in the market as sellers 
is attributed to barriers to entry due to constraints conditional on household characteristics, such 
as assets endowments and transaction costs.  
The farm input subsidy program (FISP) in Malawi provides coupons which entitle the 
recipient to purchase specified quantities of subsidised fertilizer and selected other inputs at 
subsidised prices. The allocation of these coupons is based on a set of targeting criteria set out by 
the government of Malawi.  Since the coupons are not randomly distributed, the unobserved 
household heterogeneity factors influencing receipt of the coupons may also influence maize 
market participation and the quantity sold, consequently making subsidised fertilizer endogenous.  
Therefore, empirical estimations have to address the potential endogeneity of subsidised 
fertilizer. In this study the dependent variables are non-linear. For market participation is binary; 
the commercialisation index variable is proportional bounded between zero and one; and for 
quantity sold of maize is discrete and includes zero quantity for non-maize sellers. The quantity of 
subsidised fertilizer redeemed by the beneficiaries is also discrete and includes zero quantity for 
non-beneficiaries. We therefore, estimate market participation, quantity of maize sold, and 
commercialisation index using correlated random effects (CRE) models following Papke and 
Wooldridge (2008) and Wooldridge (2010, 2013).  
2.6.1 Model of farmers participation in maize market as sellers (i.e. selling maize). 
Farmers market participation as sellers of maize is modelled using the pooled CRE Probit 
model, taking into account the potential endogeneity of subsidised fertilizer by using the Control 
Function (CF) approach as an instrumental variable (IV) method (Papke and Wooldridge, 2008; 
Wooldridge, 2010, 2013). Therefore, the participation equation to be estimated can be written as 
follows: 
1625143121111 itiiitititititit Zcsubfertmktrhhcy    (2.2) 
where 1ity  is the binary dependent variable and equals one if the farmer participated in the market 
as a seller of maize, or zero otherwise; 1ithhc  is a vector of household characteristics and includes 
gender, age and education of household head, total land, rural location, real value of durable assets, 
household size and crop diversification; 1itr is a vector of regional dummies representing north, 
south and central regions location of households; 1itmkt  is a vector of marketing factors and 
includes ICT information on maize marketing and distance to daily market; 1itsubfert  is a vector 
of subsidised fertilizer redeemed by the household; 2itv is a vector of the generalised residuals 
from the reduced form pooled CRE Tobit model of subsidised fertilizer, subfert; ic  is the time-
invariant unobserved heterogeneity of the household; iZ   is the time averages of the time-variant 
explanatory variables; it is an idiosyncratic error term; and  are the parameters  to be estimated. 
2.6.2 Model of quantity of maize sold. 
Maize quantity sold by farmers is estimated using the pooled Double Hurdle CRE Model. We 
take into account the potential endogeneity of subsidised fertilizer by applying the Control 
Function (CF) approach of instrumental variables (IV) methods. Recent application of the pooled 
Double Hurdle CRE Model is by Mather et al., (2013) in estimating maize marketing by 
smallholder farmers in southern and eastern Africa.   
We also estimate two other competing models to check the robustness of the empirical 
estimates: the pooled CRE Tobit Model for corner solution and the pooled CRE OLS Model, which 
takes into account both, sample selection bias and the potential endogeneity of subsidised fertilizer. 
The control function approach is used as an IV method to address the potential endogeneity of 
subsidised fertilizer (Semykina and Wooldridge 2010; Wooldridge, 2013).  All other explanatory 
variables for the quantity equation are the same as in Eq. (2.2) with the exception of the ICT and 
crop diversification covariates, which are not included and are used as exclusions for selectivity 
into market participation in the pooled Double Hurdle CRE Model and pooled CRE OLS Model. 
In addition, the quantity equation in the pooled CRE OLS Model includes the inverse Mills ratio 
as an additional covariate. The quantity equation for estimation of the pooled Double Hurdle CRE 
Model is as follows: 
1625141321111 itiiitititititit Zcsubfertdisrhhcy      (2.3) 
where 
1ity  is the discrete dependent variable representing quantity of maize sold by farmer i in 
natural logarithm; 2itv  is a vector of the residuals from the reduced form pooled CRE Tobit model 
of subsidised fertilizer subfert; and all other explanatory variables are the same as in Eq.(2.2) with 
the exception of the ICT and crop diversification covariates. 
The selection of this model against the pooled CRE Tobit Model for corner solution and the 
pooled CRE OLS model is based on the test results on selecting non-nested models (Vuong, 1989). 
The Vuong test results have shown that the pooled Double Hurdle CRE Model fits better the data 
with p-value of 0.000 on the Likelihood Ratio statistic. 
2.6.3 Model of maize commercialisation index 
Estimation of the commercialisation index uses the pooled CRE Fractional Probit Model and 
estimators are obtained by using the generalised linear model (GLM) approach. The potential 
endogeneity of subsidised fertilizer is taken into account by using the control function approach as 
an IV method (Papke and Wooldridge, 2008; Wooldridge, 2010, 2013). The estimation equation 
is as follows: 
1625141321111 itiiitititititit Zcsubfertdisrhhcy       (2.4) 
where 
1ity  is the fractional dependent variable and is a ratio of total quantity sold to total quantity 
harvested of maize - a continuous variable bounded between zero and one; and all other 
explanatory variables are the same as in Eq.(2.2) with the exception of the ICT and crop 
diversification covariates. 
2.6.4 Estimation approach  
In this chapter, the key covariate of interest is the subsidised fertilizer and therefore, estimation of 
its average partial effect (APE), represented by 
4 in Eq. (2.2-2.4) is the focus of this study. The 
use of panel data allows us to control for the unobserved time-invariant household heterogeneity. 
For the continuous dependent variables and without sample selection bias consideration, the most 
common estimation strategy would be to use the fixed effects (FE) estimator. However, as 
explained above, estimations include binary dependent variable in Eq. (2.2); discrete dependent 
variable in Eq. (2.3); and fractional dependent variable in Eq. (2.4). This makes the use of FE 
estimators inconsistent and unable to control for the time-invariant factors (Wooldridge, 2010, 
2013). Furthermore, we suspect the covariate subsidised fertilizer, which is discrete to be 
endogenous in all the three equations and this requires estimation with IV method using the control 
function approach. For the estimators in this study to be consistent and the APEs to be identified, 
we apply the correlated random effects (CRE) approach (Wooldridge, 2010) following Mundlak 
(1978) and Chamberlain (1984).   
We control for the correlation between the time-invariant unobserved household heterogeneity 
ic  and all the explanatory variables, represented by itX  in all the three equations (Eq. 2.2-2.4).  
Estimation assumes strict exogeneity of
itX . However, where we suspect endogeneity of itX , an IV 
method is applied.  The estimation of the CRE estimators allows the correlation between the time-
invariant unobserved household heterogeneity ic  and the explanatory variables, itX . In addition 
to the assumption of strict exogeneity, the application of the CRE estimator method also assumes 
that the correlation between ic  and itX is of the form: iii aXc   and ii Xc ~ Normal 
),,( 2aiX   where  is the constant, iX  are the time averages of the time-variant explanatory 
variables, and ia  is the error term (Wooldridge, 2010).  Therefore, estimation of the CRE 
estimators requires the inclusion of iX as an additional set of independent variables in order to 
control for the time-invariant unobserved household heterogeneity ic . Post estimation inference 
of the APEs is performed using a panel bootstrapping of the standard errors. 
The potential endogeneity of subsidised fertilizer in estimation of equations 2.2-2.4 has to be 
addressed. As mentioned before, under the FISP, beneficiaries of coupons for purchasing of 
subsidised farm inputs are not randomly selected. Furthermore, despite the program being 
designed to provide a standard package to all beneficiaries, the data suggests that households 
received heterogeneous packages. Consequently, the unobserved factors which influence the 
receipt of coupons for subsidised fertilizer may be correlated with the unobserved factors which 
influence maize marketing, and thus making subsidised fertilizer endogenous. Furthermore, since 
not all households in the sample received coupons for subsidised fertilizer, the covariate subsidised 
fertilizer has a corner solution characteristics, with zero quantity for non-beneficiaries. Since 
subsidised fertilizer is recorded as a discrete variable, we test and if necessary control for its 
endogeneity by using the control function approach (CF) of the IV methods, and employ the pooled 
CRE Tobit model for corner solution in the estimation of the reduced form equation (Wooldridge, 
2010).  
Application of the CF approach follows a two-step procedure. In the first step, a reduced form 
pooled CRE Tobit model of corner solution of the subsidised fertilizer is estimated and the 
generalised residuals, it is generated. We use as an IV a variable indicating whether a Member of 
Parliament (MP) is a resident in or visited the particular community in the past three months. A 
community is defined by NSO (2014 a) as: 
 the village or urban location surrounding the enumeration area selected for the inclusion in 
the sample and which most residents recognise as being their community. 
The Integrated Household Panel Survey (IHPS) was conducted in 204 enumeration areas 
(EAs) of the total 768 EAs in the Integrated Household Survey of 2010/2011 (IHS3). The 
economic intuition of using this IV is that subsidy programs are prone to be used by MPs to gain 
political support, and therefore communities which have resident MPs or their MPs frequently visit 
them  have a greater likelihood to receive more coupons than their counterparts.  
The FISP in Malawi has undergone several implementation modifications based on lessons 
learnt from evaluations of previous years implementation. Beneficiaries targeting and subsidy 
coupons distribution strategies are some of the areas which have undergone several modifications 
in order to improve efficiency and targeting the right group of farmers based on the set criteria 
(Lunduka et al., (2013).  Although allocation of subsidy coupons to districts is done at national 
level by the MoAFS Headquarters mainly based on the number of farm households among other 
criteria, allocations to villages is done at the district level and this is where MPs can influence 
allocation of more coupons to villages in their constituencies against the set criteria such as total 
number of farm families (Lunduka et al., (2013). Since MPs which reside in or frequently visit 
their communities are likely to attend more district level meetings, they may influence for more 
allocations of subsidy coupons to their constituencies than their counterparts. However, there is no 
reason to believe that the presence or frequent visit of an MP may affect farmers decision on 
maize marketing and empirical results in Table 2.A.1 in Appendix 2.A show that it is insignificant 
in all the three equations (2.2-2.4). 
Since the instrument used is at a higher community level, we assume it is exogenous to the 
individual households12.  Furthermore, t-test results in Table 2.2 on weighted mean differences on 
community characteristics between communities with and without MPs resident or visit in the past 
three months preceding the surveys show that are statistically insignificant. This suggests that there 
are no systematic differences between these two communities and the variable MP resident or visit 
to the community is exogenous. However, the chosen instrument might be weak and consequently, 
distorting the models estimation results. But to the best knowledge of the author, there is no 
method of testing weak instrumental variables under the CF approach. Both model results with 
and without the use of the IV method are presented with the aim of checking the robustness of the 
results of the selected models. 
12Ricker-Gilbert and Jayne (2011) use Member of Parliament resident in the community in Malawi; Mason and 
Ricker-Gilbert (2013) use ruling party victory of households district presidential election results of 2004 in Malawi 
and ruling party victory of the households constituency for last presidential election in Zambia as instruments. Both 
studies show that subsides are politicized in Malawi and Zambia. 
Table 2.2: Community characteristics with and without resident MP or visited the past 
three months preceding the surveys in Malawi in 2010 and 2013 
Community characteristic Obs Without 
resident MP 
or visit I) 
With resident 
MP or visit 
differences 
(I-II) 
Household sold maize dummy  6172 0.13 0.15 -0.01 
  (0.018) (0.018) (0.02) 
Household sold maize (kg) 6172 28.27 29.30 -1.03 
  (7.71) (6.13) (8.16) 
Commercialisation index 6172 0.03 0.04 -0.01 
  (0.004) (0.01) (0.01) 
Real value of durable  assets 6172 94024.8 36590.35 57434.46 
  (40212.18) (5162.21) (39045.92) 
Household head sex (female) 6172 0.23 0.25 -0.02 
  (0.015) (0.02) (0.02) 
Household head age (years) 6172 43.30 43.94 -0.63 
  (0.33) (0.64) (0.69) 
Household size 6172 4.86 5.01 -0.14 
  (0.05) (0.10) (0.10) 
Household head  No education 6172 0.21 0.23 -0.02 
  (0.03) (0.03) (0.04) 
Household head primary educ. 6172 0.60 0.56 0.04 
  (0.02) (0.02) (0.03) 
Household head secondary edu 6172 0.16 0.18 -0.02 
  (0.02) (0.02) (0.03) 
Household head  tertiary educ. 6172 0.02 0.03 -0.003 
  (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) 
Rural location  6172 0.89 0.94 -0.05 
  (0.06) (0.03) (0.06) 
Northern region location 6172 0.08 0.09 -0.02 
  (0.04) (0.05) (0.03) 
Central region location 6172 0.45 0.49 -0.04 
  (0.11) (0.12) (0.09) 
Southern region location 6172 0.47 0.41 0.06 
  (0.11 (0.11) (0.09) 
Total land owned (hectares) 6172 0.71 0.70 0.01 
  (0.05) (0.05) (0.05) 
Distance to daily market (Km) 6172 6.79 7.69 -0.90 
  (0.96) (1.96) (1.80) 
Using ICT in marketing 6172 0.10 0.10 0.0002 
  (0.01) (0.02) (0.02) 
Crop diversification  6172 1.97 1.98 -0.003 
  (0.08) (0.07) (0.09) 
Notes: Weighted means and linearised standard errors are in parentheses. 
Source: Author based on Integrated Household Panel Survey (IHPS) data (2010 and 2013). 
The second step is the estimation of the structural equations (2.2-2.4) and includes the 
generated generalised residuals, it , as an additional covariate. The statistical significance of the 
generalised residuals, it  (i.e. 5 ) in the equations indicates that the subsidised fertilizer is not 
exogenous and therefore, requires to control for the endogeneity.  
The use of the pooled Double Hurdle CRE Model in estimation of Eq. (2.3) allows us to use 
different covariates for the selection and quantity equations. This is important because the same 
covariates can be used in estimating the competing pooled OLS CRE model to check the 
robustness of the estimates13.  The participation equation (2.2) is estimated by pooled CRE Probit 
model, using the receipt of maize marketing information through ICTs and crop diversification as 
exclusion variables.  
The choice of these two exclusion covariates is based on the economic intuition that the 
acquisition and analysis of marketing information presents a fixed transaction cost to farmers, 
which only affects market participation decision and not the quantity sold (Key et al., 2000). This 
is because once farmers get marketing information such as location of buyers or prices, they can 
decide any quantities to sell without incurring further costs on the same information. The crop 
diversification (i.e. the number of crops grown) is also expected to only affect the market 
participation because the decision to produce crops for the market or only for consumption is made 
prior to production. Normally when the production is for self-consumption different types of crops 
are grown in order to satisfy the diversified nutritional needs of the household. The farmer decides 
on the quantities to sell later after the harvest. To test the validity of the chosen variables as good 
13 For details on the procedures of estimating a sample selection linear panel data model see Semykina and 
Wooldridge (2010). 
exclusions in our estimations, we test their statistical significance in both participation and quantity 
equations and empirical results show that they have statistically insignificant effects on maize 
quantity sold. Inference of the average partial effects (APEs) follows panel bootstrapping of the 
standard errors. 
2.7 Data source and descriptive statistics 
This study uses the nationally representative two-wave Integrated Household Panel Survey (IHPS) 
data for Malawi from the World Bank Living Standards Measurement Study-Integrated Surveys 
on Agriculture (LSMS-ISA) Project. The first wave of the data was collected between March and 
November 2010; and the second wave between April and December 2013 by the National Statistics 
Office of Malawi. The IHPS data is a balanced panel sample of 4000 households with an overall 
attrition rate at household level of 3.78 per cent.  However, this Chapter uses a balanced panel 
sample of 3086 households after excluding non-agricultural and households with incomplete 
information for main variables used in the empirical analyses. 
Table 2.3 presents descriptive statistics of variables used in the empirical analyses and a 
comparison between fertilizer subsidy beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries. The data presented here 
are the households averages for each variable calculated across the two-time periods included in 
the survey.  We focus our discussion in this section on descriptive statistics for fertilizer subsidies 
and maize marketing variables.  
The IHPS collected detailed information on the Government of Malawis FISP covering the 
2009/2010 and 2012/2013 agricultural seasons. Furthermore, the survey collected household 
historical information on maize seed and fertilizer coupon benefits from 2008/2009 to 2012/2013 
agricultural seasons. This information has helped this study to identify and categorize households 
from those who have never benefited to those who have benefited in any of the five agricultural 
seasons.  
Overall, 53 per cent of farmers nationwide were targeted with coupons to purchase subsidised 
fertilizer. On the average, subsidised fertilizer redeemed was 38 kg, while the average redeemed 
by beneficiaries only was 80 kg. This suggests that the government met the objective to reach at 
least 50 per cent of the farmers. The full standard program package was designed to support the 
purchase of 100 kg of subsidised fertilizer (50 kg bag NPK and 50 kg bag Urea); one pack of 
improved maize seed (5 kg hybrid or 8 kg open pollinated variety (OPV)); and one legume pack 
(Dorward, et al., 2013). Data also show that FISP beneficiaries received different coupon 
packages. These statistics are consistent with earlier studies (Chibwana et al., 2010; Holden and 
Lunduka, 2010; Ricker-Gilbert and Jayne, 2011).  
In terms of maize marketing, overall, 13 per cent of the farmers sold maize. Furthermore, 17 
per cent of fertilizer subsidy beneficiaries sold maize compared to 9 per cent non-beneficiaries and 
the difference is statistically significant at 1 % significance level. On quantity sold and for the 
whole sample, on average only 28 kg of maize is sold and fertilizer subsidy beneficiaries sell 19 
kg more compared to non-beneficiaries and the difference is statistically significant. However, in 
terms of the average ratio of total output sold to total output produced (commercialisation index- 
CI), only three per cent of the maize produced is sold. 
Table 2.3: Descriptive Statistics (Average of two-time periods  2010/2011 and 2013) 
Variable  All  
(Full Sample) 
Beneficiaries 
Beneficiaries 
Only (III) 
Difference 
(II-III) (IV) 
Mean Std. 
Mean Std. 
Mean Std. 
Household head 
(female) 
0.23 0.42 0.25 0.43 0.20 0.4 0.05***   
Household head age 
(years) 
43.56 16.05 46.09 16.3 40.74 15.28 5.35*** 
Head no formal 
education 
0.19 0.39 0.21 0.41 0.16 0.37 0.05*** 
Head primary 
education 
0.56 0.50 0.61 0.49 0.50 0.50 0.12*** 
Head second. 
education  
0.21 0.41 0.17 0.37 0.26 0.44 -0.1*** 
Head tertiary 
education  
0.04 0.20 0.01 0.10 0.08 0.26 -0.07*** 
Household size 5.02 2.33 5.34 2.3 4.66 2.31 0.69*** 
Rural  
location 
0.83 0.38 0.92 0.27 0.72 0.45 0.2*** 
Northern region 0.20 0.40 0.20 0.42 0.17 0.38 0.05*** 
Central region 0.39 0.49 0.36 0.48 0.43 0.5 -0.07*** 
Southern region 0.40 0.49 0.42 0.49 0.4 0.49 0.02 
Total land (hectares)  0.70 0.68 0.82 0.70 0.57 0.65 0.25*** 
Real durable asset 
K1000 
427 24391 33.27 191.2 865.4 35458 -832.13 
Distance to daily 
mktKm  
8.14 17.82 10.71 22.05 5.27 10.68 5.44*** 
MP resident or visit 0.27 0.44 0.30 0.46 0.23 0.42 0.07*** 
Maize sold (kg)  27.94 148.5 36.92 172.7 17.93 114.9 18.99*** 
Sold maize dummy 0.13 0.34 0.17 0.38 0.09 0.28 0.08*** 
Commercialisation 
Index  
0.03 0.11 0.04 0.12 0.02 0.10 0.01*** 
Subsidised fertilizer 
37.98 44.38 79.92 28.14 - - - 
Number of obs. 6172  3252  2920   
Note: *** represents statistically significant at 1 % level; K=Malawi Kwacha; Km=Kilometres; 
MP=Member of Parliament; Mkt=Market 
Considering only maize sellers (not included in Table 2.2), the average quantity of maize sold is 
214 Kg, and there is a slight difference between beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries, 217 Kg and 
210 Kg, respectively.  The average CI for maize sellers only is 23 per cent and again there is a 
slight difference between the two groups with beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries selling 23 and 
24 per cent of their maize produce, respectively. 
2.8 Empirical results and discussion 
This section discusses the empirical results. It focuses on the results of the subsidised fertilizer 
covariate, which is of central interest to this study. The discussion is divided into five sub-sections. 
Factors determining receipt of coupons and the quantity redeemed of subsidised fertilizer are 
discussed in section 2.8.1; market participation of farmers as sellers of maize in section 2.8.2; 
quantity of maize sold in section 2.8.3; commercialisation index of maize in section 2.8.4; and the 
effects of repeated benefit to subsidised fertilizer on market participation, quantity sold and 
commercialisation of maize in section 2.8.5. 
2.8.1 Determinants of quantity redeemed of and receipt of coupons for subsidised fertilizer  
We start by discussing the empirical results regarding the factors that determine the quantity of 
subsidised fertilizer redeemed of the pooled CRE Tobit model (model I) and receipt of coupons to 
purchase subsidised fertilizer of the pooled CRE Probit model (model II) presented in Table 2.4. 
The results show that having a resident Member of Parliament (MP) or having an MP visit the 
community in the past three months preceding the survey increases quantities of subsidised 
fertilizer redeemed (model I)  and increases the probability of receiving coupons of subsidised 
fertilizer (model II). These results do appear to confirm that the subsidy programme in Malawi is 
subject to a degree of politicisation even though there are clear guidelines for coupons distribution. 
Mason and Ricker-Gilbert (2013) also find that households in districts where the ruling party won 
the 2004 presidential election in Malawi redeemed more subsidised maize seed and fertilizer.    
Female headed households do not benefit more from the subsidy program compared to male 
headed households. This is in contradiction to the design of the program which aims at reaching 
more poor households by among other criteria targeting more female headed households because 
they are considered to be the most financially constrained to purchase fertilizer at commercial 
prices. This finding is consistent with previous studies (Chibwana et al., 2010; Chirwa et al., 2013; 
Dorward and Chirwa, 2011; Fisher and Kandiwa, 2014; Holden and Lunduka, 2010; Ricker-
Gilbert et al., 2013).  
Those households headed by older farmers redeem more quantity of subsidised fertilizer and 
are found to have increased probability of being targeted for the subsidy program, and therefore, 
is consistent with the program design of targeting the elderly headed households. Households 
which are located in rural areas redeem 22 Kg more subsidised fertilizer and have an increased 
probability of being targeted by 31 percentage points compared with those in urban areas. These 
results suggest that households located in rural areas are more likely to be targeted and receive 
more coupons to redeem subsidised fertilizer than those in urban areas. 
The education level of the household head is found to have no statistically significant effects 
on access to coupons for subsidised fertilizer. Results on regional location of households show that 
households located in the central region redeem less quantities of subsidised fertilizer and have 
lower probability of being targeted for the program compared to households located in the southern 
region.  
Table 2.4: Factors determining quantity redeemed and receipt of coupons to purchase 
subsidised fertilizer.  
Explanatory Variables Dependent Variable: 
Quantity of subsidised 
fertilizer (Kg) 
Dependent Variable: 
Received subsidised 
fertilizer coupon=1 
Pooled CRE Tobit 
Model (I) 
Pooled CRE Probit 
Model (II) 
APE P-Value APE P-Value 
MP resident or visit 2.21** 0.020 0.03** 0.017 
Household head (Female) -1.79 0.408 -0.02 0.590 
Household head age (years) 0.38*** 0.000 0.01*** 0.000 
Household size 0.04 0.829 -0.002 0.440 
Rural location 21.7*** 0.000 0.31*** 0.000 
Household head primary education -0.64 0.749 -0.004 0.892 
Household head secondary education -5.51* 0.067 -0.07 0.125 
Household head tertiary education -6.33 0.310 -0.07 0.343 
Northern -0.19 0.890 -0.03* 0.067 
Central -9.09*** 0.000 -0.09*** 0.000 
Total land (hectares) 5.64*** 0.000 0.07*** 0.000 
Log real durable asset value (MK) 0.77*** 0.000 0.01*** 0.005 
Log distance to daily market  (Km) 0.23 0.677 -0.001 0.903 
Year 2013  -10.3*** 0.000 -0.16*** 0.000 
No. of Observations 6172  6172  
F-Statistic/Wald 2 : Joint sig. of all 
explanatory variables    
46.81*** 0.000 702.74*** 0.0000 
F-Statistic/ 2 : Joint significance of 
time averages explanatory variables  
4.28*** 0.000 83.74*** 0.0000 
Sigma 74.60    
Log pseudo likelihood -18961.794  -3841.823  
Correctly classified      66.82 %  
Note: ***, **, * represents statistically significant at 1 %, 5 % and 10 % levels, respectively; 
CRE represents Correlated Random Effects; Estimations include time averages of time-
varying explanatory variables; APE represents average partial effect. 
But households with more land and real durable assets value redeem more quantities of 
subsidised fertilizer and have increased probability of being targeted for the subsidy program. This 
may suggest that richer households are benefiting more than poor households, contrary to the 
program design.  
2.8.2. Impact of subsidised fertilizer on farmers participation in maize market as sellers 
Table 2.5 presents four regression results on the determinants of farmers participation in maize 
market as sellers. Models (I), (II) and (III) are presented to check the robustness of the estimates 
by applying different estimators. Since the results in model (IV) show that the generalised residuals 
are statistically significant, thus indicating and controlling for the endogeneity of subsidised 
fertilizer, our discussion in this section will be based on this models results.  In models (I) and (II) 
we do not control for the unobserved time-invariant household heterogeneity and the results show 
higher positive effects of subsidised fertilizer on maize market participation and is almost double 
the effects shown in model (III) using the pooled CRE Probit model. The results show that if we 
ignore the endogeneity of the subsidised fertilizer, the effects are overestimated. Furthermore, the 
results in model (IV) on the subsidised fertilizer covariate show slightly higher effects than just 
controlling for the unobserved time-invariant household heterogeneity in model (III). But the 
effects are still lower than in models (I) and (II), suggesting the importance of controlling for the 
unobserved time-invariant household heterogeneity in our estimations. 
   The results show that subsidised fertilizer is associated with increased probability of selling 
maize; and for model (IV), an additional kilogram of subsidised fertilizer increases the probability 
of selling maize by 0.05 percentage point. In other words, the program standard package of 100 
kg of subsidised fertilizer increases the probability of maize market participation of farmers as 
sellers by five percentage points.  These results support the notion that improving small farmers 
access to modern farm input technologies could lead to increased productivity and hence improve 
their market participation as sellers of agricultural produce. This is important to farmers who have 
limited sources of income and their engagement in marketing of maize could provide them 
incentives to diversify their income sources and commercialise agricultural activities through 
usage of the income from maize sales. Income from maize sales could also help the farmers to self-
purchase improved farm inputs at commercial prices, which is vital for the sustainability of the 
subsidy program. 
Receiving maize market information through electronic media increases the probability of 
farmers maize market participation as sellers by four percentage points. This suggests the 
importance of information and communication technologies (ICTs) in reducing fixed market 
transaction costs such as market information searching costs. Growing different types of crops as 
indicated by the crop diversification covariate also increases the likelihood of selling maize. This 
may be due to availability of food from other food crops and therefore, enabling households to sell 
part of their maize produce.  
Households with more land and high real durable asset value have higher probabilities of 
selling maize. An additional hectare of land increases the probability of maize market participation 
by five percentage points. These results support the notion that household productive resource 
endowments are a prerequisite for small farmers market participation in developing countries.   
Table 2.5: Regression results of factors determining farmers maize market participation 
as sellers (Dependent variable: Binary-Sold Maize) 
Explanatory Variables Pooled 
Probit 
Model (I) 
Probit RE 
Model 
Pooled 
Probit (III) 
Pooled CRE 
Probit & CF 
Residuals(IV) 
 APE/SE APE/SE APE/SE APE/SE 
Generalised residuals    0.026*** 
    (0.009) 
Subsidised fertilizer (Kg) 0.0007*** 0.0006*** 0.0003*** 0.0005*** 
 (0.0001) (0.0001) (0.0001) (0.0001) 
Electronic media market information 0.023 0.02* 0.036** 0.035** 
 (0.015) (0.012) (0.014) (0.014) 
Crop diversification 0.018*** 0.016*** 0.011*** 0.011*** 
 (0.006) (0.004) (0.004) (0.004) 
Household head (Female) 0.004 0.004 0.024 0.024 
 (0.012) (0.01) (0.021) (0.021) 
Household head age (years) -0.001*** -0.001*** -0.002** -0.002** 
 (0.0003) (0.0002) (0.001) (0.001) 
Household size -0.009*** -0.008*** -0.017*** -0.017*** 
 (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) 
Rural location 0.086*** 0.078*** 0.055* 0.053* 
 (0.02) (0.015) (0.03) (0.031) 
Household head primary education  0.029* 0.026** 0.009 0.01 
 (0.016) (0.012) (0.018) (0.018) 
Household head secondary education  0.05** 0.042*** -0.016 -0.014 
 (0.02) (0.015) (0.028) (0.028) 
Household head tertiary education  -0.015 -0.01 0.034 0.035 
 (0.029) (0.027) (0.059) (0.058) 
Northern  0.054** 0.051*** 0.054*** 0.055*** 
 (0.023) (0.012) (0.014) (0.014) 
Central  0.082*** 0.074*** 0.06*** 0.053*** 
 (0.015) (0.01) (0.011) (0.011) 
Total land (hectares)  0.03*** 0.029*** 0.047 *** 0.046*** 
 (0.009) (0.01) (0.011) (0.011) 
Log real durable asset value (MK) 0.004*** 0.004*** 0.004** 0.004** 
 (0.002) (0.001) (0.002) (0.002) 
Log distance to daily market  (Km) 0.014** 0.012*** 0.006 0.006 
 (0.006) (0.003) (0.005) (0.005) 
Constant  0.13*** 0.09***   
 (0.008) (0.007)   
Number of observations 6172 6172 6172 6172 
Correctly classified 86.86%  86.78% 86.78% 
Wald 2 Joint sig. all variables    227.19*** 262.99*** 2380.71*** 2369.06*** 
2 Joint sig. time averages variables   67.62*** 57.13*** 
Note: ***, **, * represents statistically significant at 1 %, 5 % and 10 % levels, respectively; 
CRE(Correlated Random Effects) estimations of models (III) and (IV) include time averages of 
time-varying explanatory variables; APE=average partial effect; SE=standard errors; MK=Malawi 
Kwacha; Km=Kilometres; CF=Control Function; Controls include Year 2013 dummy. 
2.8.3. Impact of subsidised fertilizer on quantity sold of maize 
Regression results on factors influencing the quantity of maize sold by farmers for models (I), (II), 
(III) and (IV) are presented in Table 2.6. Results for models (I), (II) and (III) are presented for 
robustness assessment of the estimates. Model (IV) results show that the generalised residuals are 
statistically significant and this indicates that subsidised fertilizer is endogenous.  Therefore, the 
inclusion of the generalised residuals controls the endogeneity effects of subsidised fertilizer. The 
discussion in this section will focus on the results of this model. In all the four models we control 
for the unobserved time-invariant household heterogeneity. Model (I) is the pooled CRE Tobit 
with the generalised residuals from the reduced form pooled CRE Tobit model for subsidised 
fertilizer to test and control for its potential endogeneity. Model (II) is the pooled CRE OLS model 
which include the inverse mills ratio (IMR) from the pooled CRE Probit model on market 
participation and the generalised residuals from the reduced form pooled CRE Tobit model for 
subsidised fertilizer. Since these two additional variables are both statistically significant in this 
model, this suggests that the allocation of coupons for subsidised fertilizer is endogenous and there 
is sample selection bias. The inclusions of the generalised residuals and the IMR as additional 
covariates in estimations addresses these problems. Models (III) and (IV) are  pooled Double 
Hurdle CRE and the difference between the two is that in model (IV) we include  the generalised 
residuals from the reduced form pooled CRE Tobit model for subsidised fertilizer to test and 
control for its potential endogeneity.  
 Overall, the results show positive effects of subsidised fertilizer on quantity of maize sold. If 
endogeneity is not controlled for, the results on the subsidised fertilizer covariate for the model 
(III) are relatively of higher magnitude compared with results for model (IV). However, these 
results are of slightly lower magnitude in comparison to those of the pooled Tobit CRE Model and 
the pooled OLS CRE Model with generalised residuals.  
Results for model (IV) suggest that on average, an additional kilogram of subsidised fertilizer 
increases quantity of maize sold by 0.15 per cent. Considering the standard FISP fertilizer package 
of 100 kg, this means that on average an additional 100 kg of the program subsidised fertilizer 
increases quantity sold of maize by 15 per cent. These results suggest that maize market supply 
can significantly increase with the usage of improved farm inputs by small farmers to the benefit 
of maize net buyers and non-farmers. However, the low magnitude of effect of subsidised fertilizer 
on maize market supply might be the explanation of the minimal effects it has had on retail maize 
prices in Malawi and Zambia (Ricker-Gilbert et al., 2013) and on grain prices in Nigeria 
(Takeshima and Liverpool-Tasie, 2015). Furthermore, an income from such a small quantity of 
maize sold seems unlikely to enable subsidy beneficiary households to self-finance future 
purchases of  fertilizer and improved seeds at commercial prices and consequently, cast doubt on 
the sustainability of the program in the absence of other sources of households income and the 
claim that this policy is market smart. These results also highlight the challenge of improving 
smallholder farmers income through sales of staple food crops. Therefore, this calls for promotion 
of diversified sources of income for smallholder farmers in order to improve both household food 
and income security.  
The results suggest that large household size has negative effects on quantity of maize sold. 
This is expected because households with bigger household size have to commit more quantity of 
maize to consumption. Regional covariates have the expected effects. Households located in the 
northern and central region sell more quantity of maize than those located in the southern region. 
This effect is due to regional differences in climatic conditions, which affects maize production. 
Northern and central regions are considered important maize producing regions compared to the 
southern region. 
Household resource endowment plays a significant role in maize market supply, especially 
landholding size, and the results show that an additional hectare of land increases quantity of maize 
sold by 24 per cent. Households with more durable assets also sell more quantity of maize, which 
suggest the effects on production levels. Rural location of households is associated with more 
quantity of maize sold. This is expected since most rural households have limited non-farm sources 
of income and therefore, their households income depend more on crops sales compared with those 
in urban areas. Since more land is relatively allocated for maize production for most small farmers, 
relatively more quantity of maize is sold to meet household income demand.  
However, we find no evidence of effects of the level of education or gender of the household 
head and distance to daily market on quantities of maize sold. This may suggest that the maize 
market is already well integrated, such that access to information on marketing is not dependent 
on education level of the household head and maize market is accessible to both male and female 
headed households. This may be due to the presence of small private traders in maize markets, 
who buy maize directly from small farmers, and consequently reducing transportation costs for the 
farmer due to long distance to central markets. 
Table 2.6: Regression results of factors determining farmers maize quantity sold 
(Dependent variable: Quantity of Maize sold in Log Kg) 
Explanatory Variables Pooled 
Tobit CRE 
Model 
With CF 
Residuals 
Pooled OLS 
CRE Model 
With IMR 
and CF 
Residuals 
Pooled 
Double 
Hurdle CRE 
Model 
(III) 
Pooled 
Double 
Hurdle CRE 
with CF 
Residuals 
 APE/SE APE/SE APE/SE APE/SE 
Generalised residuals 0.173*** 0.219***  0.132*** 
 (0.056) (0.075)  (0.044) 
Inverse Mills Ratio (IMR)  1.677***   
  (0.118)   
Subsidised fertilizer (Kg) 0.0029*** 0.0023** 0.0017** 0.0015** 
 (0.0008) (0.0011) (0.0007) (0.0007) 
Household head (female) 0.152 0.408** 0.149 0.148 
 (0.124) (0.189) (0.121) (0.121) 
Household head age (years) -0.009** -0.005 -0.007* -0.006* 
 (0.004) (0.006) (0.004) (0.004) 
Household size -0.098*** -0.05** -0.039*** -0.037*** 
 (0.013) (0.017) (0.009) (0.010) 
Rural location 0.35* 0.045 0.225 0.232* 
 (0.183) (0.284) (0.152) (0.141) 
Household head primary educ. 0.061 0.024 0.031 0.031 
 (0.111) (0.2) (0.108) (0.108) 
Household head secondary ed. -0.087 0.025 -0.081 -0.082 
 (0.168) (0.265) (0.143) (0.151) 
Household head tertiary educ. 0.214 0.305 0.137 0.138 
 (0.357) (0.556) (0.327) (0.338) 
Northern  0.314*** 0.487*** 0.275*** 0.281*** 
 (0.083) (0.094) (0.072) (0.069) 
Central  0.351*** 0.816*** 0.454*** 0.423*** 
 (0.065) (0.091) (0.054) (0.053) 
Total land (hectares)  0.323*** 0.495*** 0.241*** 0.244*** 
 (0.065) (0.108) (0.054) (0.058) 
Log real durable asset MK 0.027** 0.042* 0.022* 0.022* 
 (0.012) (0.022) (0.011) (0.012) 
Log distance to daily Km 0.027 0.118*** 0.002 0.002 
 (0.033) (0.042) (0.002) (0.002) 
Number of observations 6172 804 6172 6,172 
Log pseudo likelihood -4132.75 -3361.576 -3232.842 -3231.367 
Wald 2/F-Stat.: Joint sig. (all)   44.25*** 870.13*** 193.13*** 210.90*** 
Sigma 6.41  0.898 0.898 
F-Stat: Joint sig. time averages 6.14***  46.73*** 46.10*** 
Pseudo R-square /R-square  0.96 0.0902 0.0906 
Note: ***, **, * represents statistically significant at 1 %, 5 % and 10 % levels, respectively; 
CRE(Correlated Random Effects) estimations  include time averages of time-varying 
explanatory variables; APE=average partial effect; SE= standard errors; MK=Malawi 
Kwacha; Km=Kilometres; CF=Control Function; Controls include Year2013 dummy. 
2.8.4. Impact of subsidised fertilizer on commercialisation index of maize (i.e. ratio of quantity 
sold to quantity harvested). 
We present regression results of models (I), (II), (III) and (IV) on factors determining 
commercialisation of maize in Table 2.7. Results for models (I), (II) and (III) are presented to 
check the robustness of the estimates and refer to the preceding two sections for a discussion on 
the generalised residuals. Therefore, this sections discussion will focus on the results of model 
(IV). 
Subsidised fertilizer has positive effects on commercialisation of maize and an additional 
kilogram of subsidised fertilizer increases the commercialisation index of maize by 0.01 per cent. 
Considering the program standard package, an additional 100 kg of subsidised fertilizer increases 
the commercialisation index of maize by one per cent. This suggests subsidised fertilizer has 
marginal effects on maize commercialisation and maize remains a crop which is produced mainly 
for subsistence at household level even when farmers purchase subsidised production inputs. The 
small magnitude of effect shows that the level of maize production at household level is likely in 
many cases to be lower than that required to meet household food demand before which a 
marketable surplus is produced. Since FISP is targeting small farmers, the question is whether this 
is an appropriate strategic group of farmers to be targeted if the objective is to increase maize 
market supply and consequently, reduce maize prices to the benefit of maize net buyers and non-
farmers. 
Table 2.7: Regression results of factors determining farmers maize commercialisation 
(Dependent variable: Commercialisation Index of Maize) 
Explanatory Variables Pooled OLS 
Model 
Linear RE 
Model  
Pooled CRE 
Fractional 
Probit Model 
(III) 
Pooled CRE 
Fractional 
Probit  Model 
with CF (IV) 
 APE/SE APE/SE APE/SE APE/SE 
Generalised residuals    0.005* 
    (0.003) 
Subsidised fertilizer Kg 0.00014*** 0.00013*** 0.00004 0.00011** 
 (0.00003) (0.00003) (0.00005) (0.00004) 
Household head (Female) -0.001 -0.0003 0.004 0.004 
 (0.003) (0.003) (0.007) (0.007) 
Household head age (years) -0.0004*** -0.0004*** -0.001** -0.001** 
 (0.0001) (0.0001) (0.0003) (0.0003) 
Household size -0.002*** -0.002*** -0.005*** -0.005*** 
 (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) 
Rural location 0.015*** 0.015*** 0.001 -0.0002 
 (0.004) (0.004) (0.009) (0.009) 
Household head primary educ. 0.002 0.002 0.004 0.004 
 (0.004) (0.004) (0.008) (0.008) 
Household head secondary ed. 0.015*** 0.014** 0.002 0.003 
 (0.006) (0.006) (0.01) (0.01) 
Household head tertiary educ. 0.0002 0.0000 0.002 0.003 
 (0.008) (0.008) (0.018) (0.018) 
Northern region 0.013*** 0.013*** 0.016** 0.016** 
 (0.004) (0.004) (0.007) (0.008) 
Central  region 0.016*** 0.016*** 0.008* 0.006 
 (0.003) (0.003) (0.005) (0.005) 
Total land (hectares)  0.017*** 0.017*** 0.015*** 0.014*** 
 (0.004) (0.004) (0.005) (0.005) 
Log real durable assets value 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.001 0.001 
 (0.0004) (0.0004) (0.001) (0.001) 
Log distance to daily market 0.003** 0.003*** -0.001 -0.001 
 (0.001) (0.001) (0.002) (0.002) 
Year 2013 dummy -0.007*** -0.007*** -0.016*** -0.015*** 
 (0.003) (0.003) (0.003) (0.003) 
cons  0.004 0.005   
 (0.007) (0.007)   
Number of observations 6172 6172 6172 6172 
F-Stat./Wald 2  : Joint sig.   9.58*** 131.62*** 3610.27*** 3610.32*** 
2 : Joint sig. time averages   104.00*** 92.12*** 
Log pseudo likelihood   -744.49 -741.75 
R-square 0.04    
Note: ***, **, * represents statistically significant at 1 %, 5 % and 10 % levels, respectively; CRE 
(Correlated Random Effects) Estimations  of models (III) and (IV) include time averages of time-
varying explanatory variables; APE represents average partial effect; SE represents standard errors; 
MK=Malawi Kwacha; Km=Kilometres; CF=Control Function. 
Age of the household head and household size covariates have negative effects on maize 
commercialisation, although the magnitudes of the effects are also very small. Landholding size 
has the expected positive effects where an additional hectare of land is estimated to increase the 
maize commercialisation index by one percent. Such a small magnitude of effect also corroborates 
the earlier conjecture that maize is mainly produced by farm households for consumption in 
Malawi. 
2.8.5. Impact of repeated benefit to subsidised fertilizer on market participation as seller, quantity 
sold and commercialisation index of maize. 
Overall, the results in sections 2.8.2 - 2.8.4 show that use of subsidised fertilizer increases small 
farmers participation in maize markets as seller, quantities they sell and commercialisation of 
maize. However, regression results in Table 2.8 on the effects of repeated benefit to subsidised 
fertilizer on the decision to sell maize, quantity sold and commercialisation of maize show that 
overall has no statistically significant effects. This may suggest that repeated benefit to subsidised 
fertilizer has marginal effects on maize production. These results also underscores the premise that 
for staple food crops, which are produced mainly for subsistence, marginal increase in production 
may not lead to subsequent increase in small farmers market participation as sellers, quantities 
sold and commercialisation of the produced crops.  
Table 2.8: Regression results of factors determining farmers maize market participation 
as sellers, quantity of maize sold (Kg) and Commercialisation Index of maize 
Explanatory Variables Pooled 
Probit (I) 
Pooled CRE 
Double Hurdle 
Model (II) 
Pooled CRE 
Fractional Probit 
Model (III) 
 APE/SE APE/SE APE/SE 
One-time benefit to subsidy 0.02 0.12 0.01 
 (0.02) (0.15) (0.01) 
Two-times benefit to subsidy 0.05 0.24 0.01 
 (0.03) (0.18) (0.01) 
Three-times benefit to subsidy -0.004 -.01 0.001 
 (0.03) (0.18) (0.01) 
Four-times benefit to subsidy 0.03 0.20 -0.003 
 (0.04) (0.23) (0.02) 
Five-times benefit to subsidy 0.08** 0.49* 0.02 
 (0.04) (0.28) (0.02) 
Household head (Female) 0.02 0.15 0.004 
 (0.02) (0.12) (0.01) 
Household head age (years) -0.001** -0.01 -0.001* 
 (0.001) (0.004) (0.0003 
Household size -0.01*** -0.04*** -0.002*** 
 (0.002) (0.01) (0.001) 
Rural location 0.07* 0.24** 0.004 
 (0.04) (0.12) (0.01) 
Northern  0.05*** 0.28*** 0.1* 
 (0.01) (0.08) (0.1) 
Central  0.08*** 0.42*** 0.2*** 
 (0.01) (0.06) (0.004) 
Total land (hectares)  0.05 *** 0.24*** 0.01*** 
 (0.01) (0.07) (0.005) 
Log real durable asset value (MK) 0.004** 0.02* 0.001 
 (0.002) (0.01) (0.001) 
Log distance to daily market  (Km) 0.01 0.002 0.0002 
 (0.01) (0.002 (0.002) 
Year 2013 dummy -0.02 -0.10* -0.01** 
 (0.01) (0.06) (0.004) 
Electronic media market information 0.02*   
 (0.01)   
Crop diversification 0.02***   
 (0.004)   
Number of observations 6172 6172 6172 
Correctly classified 86.88%   
Wald 2 Joint sig. all variables    2710.70*** 562.52***  
2 Joint sig. time averages variables 32.78 *** 246.27***  
Log pseudolikelihood -2174.50 -3243.41 -685.08 
Note: ***, **, * represents statistically significant at 1 %, 5 % and 10 % levels, respectively; controls 
include education covariates. 
2.9 Conclusion and policy implications 
Farm input subsidy programs have enjoyed a resurgence in sub-Saharan Africa as a policy tool for 
addressing the problems of food insecurity and poverty by improving agricultural production and 
productivity. Much of this renewed interest has been promoted under the guise of Market Smart 
policies designed to kick start market engagement by small farmers in rural areas with a view to 
increasing the volume of trade and promoting private sector market activity in order to both 
generate static and dynamic efficiency gains.  
This study has estimated the effects of farm input subsidies on the marketing of maize in 
Malawi using the nationally representative two-wave Integrated Household Panel Survey (IHPS) 
data of 2010 and 2013 for Malawi, which also collected information on the farm input subsidy 
program of 2009/2010 and 2012/2013 agricultural seasons. However, due to small number of 
households in the panel sample who grew and sold other cereal and legume crops apart from maize, 
this study has been unable to analyse the effects of the subsidised fertilizer program on the overall 
household food crops marketing. But since maize is the main target crop in the FISP, the empirical 
analyses on the effects on maize marketing are equally more important. Moreover, the less than 
uniform manner in which the Government of Malawi has been distributing input subsidy coupons 
to households has allowed us to investigate the effect of the program within a pseudo experimental 
setting. 
After controlling for the endogeneity of subsidised fertilizer, the empirical results suggest that 
subsidised fertilizer increases the probability of selling, quantity sold and the commercialisation 
index of maize. Based on these empirical results, this Chapter suggests several policy implications 
and avenues for improvements of the farm input subsidy program. First, these results highlight the 
challenge of increasing household income from staple food crop sales when the households 
priority for producing such crops is subsistence. Consequently, this cast doubt on the sustainability 
and success of the programs objective to achieving household food security and increasing 
household income from food crop sales concurrently. This is due to the fact that for most small 
farmers food crops are mainly produced for household consumption. Therefore, apart from food 
crops, the program improvement should include targeting the same households with subsidised 
coupons for market oriented crops such as cotton, legumes and other high value food crops.  
Production of market oriented crops in addition to staple maize could be strategic to farmers with 
relatively adequate land and they can use income from sales of these crops to finance future farm 
input purchases at commercial prices and sustainably exit from the subsidy program. 
Second, the positive effects on maize market participation, quantity sold and 
commercialisation index suggest that increasing crop productivity should be the main strategy to 
increase maize market supply. Therefore, complementary interventions to subsidised fertilizer are 
critical. Such interventions include use of conservation agricultural technologies and 
recommended crop husbandly practices. 
Third, designing programs to suit climatic conditions of specific regions may be more 
beneficial than the standard program for all regions. Despite maize being the staple food for the 
majority of the population, some districts are not suitable for its production, such as Lower Shire 
Valley and mountainous districts in the southern region. Therefore, programs focusing on other 
interventions and types of crops might have more positive effects on households income. 
Fourth, the small magnitude of effects of landholding size on commercialisation of maize 
suggests that maize is not considered a viable commercial crop by farm households. This may have 
implication on household resource allocation, where more resources may be located to cash than 
food crops in order to make profit and increase household income at the expense of food crops 
production. The political intervention in the marketing of maize in Malawi, in which the 
government ban exportation of maize during acute food shortage months or when estimates show 
national food deficit, might have contributed to the commercial unviability of maize.  
Overall, the results in this chapter suggest that the input subsidy program, as implemented in 
Malawi, has contributed toward an increased level of maize market engagement for some farm 
households within the sample. In this sense, the policy has the potential to provide the wider 
external benefits espoused by the proponents of Market Smart policies. It remains to be seen 
whether this policy can deliver reduced transactions costs and risks and allow the private sector to 
take over the delivery of inputs at a price small farmers can benefit from in the future. Further 
research is also suggested on the effects of subsidised fertilizer on maize market participation and 
quantity sold and bought by maize net sellers and buyers, respectively; and effects on other cereal 
and legume crops. 
Appendix 2.A 
Table 2.A.1: Regression results of factors determining farmers maize market participation 
as sellers, quantity sold and commercialisation of maize 
Explanatory Variables Sold Maize Quantity Sold 
(Log-Kilogram) 
Commercialisation 
Index 
Pooled CRE 
Probit 
Model (I) 
Pooled CRE 
Double Hurdle 
Model (II) 
Pooled CRE 
Fractional Probit 
Model (III) 
 APE/SE APE/SE APE/SE 
MP residence or visit in the community 0.01 0.04 0.01 
 (0.01) (0.08) (0.01) 
Household head (Female) 0.02 0.12 0.004 
 (0.02) (0.11) (0.01) 
Household head age (years) -0.001** -0.01* -0.001** 
 (0.001) (0.003) (0.0002) 
Household size -0.01*** -0.04*** -0.01*** 
 (0.002) (0.001) (0.001) 
Rural location 0.07* 0.24* 0.001 
 (0.03) (0.14) (0.01) 
Household head primary education  0.01 0.02 0.004 
 (0.02) (0.11) (0.01) 
Household head secondary education  -0.02 -0.09 0.002 
 (0.03) (0.14) (0.01) 
Household head tertiary education  0.03 0.14 0.003 
 (0.06) (0.32) (0.02) 
Northern  0.05*** 0.29*** 0.02** 
 (0.01) (0.07) (0.01) 
Central  0.08*** 0.41*** 0.01 
 (0.01) (0.05) (0.01) 
Total land (hectares)  0.05*** 0.23*** 0.01*** 
 (0.01) (0.05) (0.01) 
Log real durable asset value (MK) 0.004** 0.02** 0.001* 
 (0.002) (0.01) (0.001) 
Log distance to daily market  (Km) 0.01 0.002 -0.001 
 (0.01) (0.002) (0.002) 
Electronic media market information 0.03*   
 (0.01)   
Crop diversification 0.02***   
 (0.004)   
Number of observations 6172 6172 6172 
Correctly classified 86.89%   
Wald 2 Joint sig. all variables    2687.12*** 195.46*** 2369.06*** 
2 Joint sig. time averages variables 19.83** 42.56*** 94.52*** 
Log pseudolikelihood/Log likelihood -2200.62 -3271.88 -750.69 
Note: ***, **, * represents statistically significant at 1 %, 5 % and 10 % levels, respectively; 
CRE(Correlated Random Effects) estimations of all models  include time averages of time-varying 
explanatory variables; APE=average partial effect; SE=bootstrap standard errors (500 replications); 
MK=Malawi Kwacha; Km=Kilometres; ; Controls include Year 2013 dummy. 
Chapter 3 
THE IMPACT OF FARM INPUT SUBSIDIES ON HOUSEHOLD 
WELFARE  
3.1 Introduction  
Most smallholder farmers in developing countries are subsistence oriented, cultivating food 
crops mainly for household consumption and growing a small proportion of cash crops to meet 
non-food household needs. Furthermore, 75 per cent of rural people in developing countries 
are poor and food insecure, and therefore, improvement of agricultural production is the main 
strategy to reduce rural poverty and food insecurity (World Bank, 2007). Among several factors 
that impede such a livelihood strategy is the low use of improved farm inputs in crop 
production, especially fertilizer and hybrid seeds (Morris et al., 2007). Druilhe and Barreiro-
Hurle (2012) argue that with low household incomes and limited income sources most 
smallholder farmers, especially in Africa, are unable to self-finance the purchase of adequate 
improved farm inputs to produce enough food and cash crops to meet household food and 
income security requirements. In order to promote the use of fertilizer and hybrid seeds, 
subsidies are one of the most pervasive policy instruments used by most governments in 
developing countries (World Bank, 2007). 
Prior to the implementation of structural adjustment and stabilization programs in the 
1980s and early1990s, which were promoted by the World Bank and the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF), most governments in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) implemented farm 
input subsidies, which were phased out to conform to the agreements with the World Bank and 
IMF (Druilhe and Barreiro-Hurle, 2012; Morris et al., 2007). However, in recent years, many 
countries in SSA have reintroduced these subsidies, including Malawi (DANIDA, 2011; 
Druilhe and Barreiro-Hurle, 2012; Ricker- Gilbert et al., 2013).  
Recent studies on the reintroduced farm input subsidies in SSA have focused on their 
direct and general equilibrium impact. Direct impact studies include effects on: (i) maize output 
(Chibwana, et al., 2010; Dorward et al., 2013; Holden and Lunduka, 2010; Ricker-Gilbert and 
Jayne, 2011;); (ii) input markets  (Chibwana et al., 2010; Ricker-Gilbert, et al., 2011; Xu, et 
al.,  2009); (iii) land allocation (Chibwana, et al., 2012; Holden and Lunduka, 2010) and (iv) 
household welfare, including food security (Dorward and Chirwa, 2011); income from crops 
production, livestock and  asset worth (Ricker-Gilbert and Jayne, 2011; 2012); school 
attendance, health, household shocks and  stress  (Chirwa, et al., 2013). Studies investigating 
general equilibrium effects have focused on maize prices, GDP and agricultural sector growth 
(Chirwa et al., 2013; Ricker-Gilbert et al., 2013; Takeshima and Liverpool-Tasie., 2015). 
 The Malawi Government reintroduced a large scale farm input subsidy program since the 
2005/06 agricultural season and use it as a policy tool to improve maize production, 
productivity, food security and household income from crop sales. However, despite the 
implementation of the program, food insecurity and poverty are still wide-spread among 
smallholder farmers. This raises doubts about the effectiveness and sustainability of the 
program. Recent studies show that poverty rate has only decreased by two percent from 52.4 
percent in 2004/05 to 50.7 percent in 2010/2011 (GoM, 2012b). A comparison of household 
food security during the same period shows slight improvement. According to the GoM (2005; 
2012b), 57 percent of households subjectively assessed themselves to be food insecure in 
2004/2005, while in 2010/2011, 42 percent felt food insecure. 
As mentioned previously, a number of studies have been carried out on the impact of farm 
input subsidies, however, there are still gaps in the literature on their effects on household 
welfare. Since farm input subsidies increase the purchasing power of beneficiaries, they may 
have direct household welfare effects, which may affect households annual consumption 
expenditure and food security. These effects have not been fully analysed in the previous 
studies. Chirwa et al., (2013); Dorward and Chirwa (2011); Ricker-Gilbert and Jayne (2011, 
2012) are four recent studies which analyse the effects of fertilizer subsidizes on household 
welfare. However, the current study estimates the effect of input subsidies on a different set of 
household welfare indicators. 
The main objective of this study is to estimate the effects of fertilizer subsidy on household 
food security and consumption expenditure in Malawi, based on the nationally representative 
two-wave Integrated Household Panel Survey (IHPS) data of 2010 and 2013. Specifically, the 
study aims to: (i) assess the impact of subsidised fertilizer on kilocalories available per capita 
per day and number of household food secure months; (ii) assess the impact of subsidised 
fertilizer on household food security status; (iii) assess the impact of subsidised fertilizer on 
annual per capita consumption expenditure;  (iv) assess the heterogeneous impact of subsidised 
fertilizer on household food security and consumption expenditure; and (v) assess the impact 
of repeated benefit to fertilizer subsidies on household food security and consumption 
expenditure.  
Differently from previous studies, which use subjective self-assessment food security 
indicators (Chirwa et al., 2013; Dorward and Chirwa, 2011; and Dorward et al., 2013), this 
study empirically quantifies the effects of subsidised fertilizer on household food security by 
calculating household calorific requirements and the kilocalories available from own cereals 
and legumes production. This helps to more accurately determine annual household food 
security status and the number of household food secure months for smallholder farmers who 
are mainly subsistence farmers. Furthermore, this study uses total annual per capita 
consumption expenditure as a proxy for household income, which is the indicator that is used 
in calculating poverty in the World Bank Living Standards Measurement Study-Integrated 
Surveys on Agriculture (LSMS-ISA) Project. Consequently, examining the effects of farm 
input subsidies using this indicator provides direct estimates on poverty alleviation 
implications, which is important for developing countries since one of the objectives of 
implementing farm input subsidies is to reduce poverty. 
The next section of the study presents an overview of agricultural policy reform in Malawi. 
A review of empirical studies on the impact of farm input subsidies in the post-structural 
adjustment period is discussed in section three. The conceptual and empirical strategy is 
included in section four. Section five presents the empirical model. Data source, descriptive 
statistics and endogeneity tests are discussed in section six. The discussion of empirical results 
is incorporated in section seven and section eight concludes.  
3.2 An overview of agricultural reforms in Malawi 
Malawis population is predominantly rural, with 85 per cent living in rural areas. Agricultural 
activities are the main livelihood strategy. The reliance on agriculture by 80 per cent of the 
labour force makes it a strategic sector in addressing food insecurity and poverty at household 
and national levels. The agricultural sector is also considered as the main engine of economic 
growth through its contribution to about 30 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) and 75 
per cent of foreign exchange income (GoM, 2012).  
Farm structure in Malawi is divided into two sub-sectors - the estate and the smallholder. 
The estate sub-sector is mainly involved in the production of high value crops for the market, 
while the smallholder sub-sector is mainly involved in subsistence farming (Chirwa et al., 
2008; GoM, 2011). Due to the economic importance of agriculture, the government uses 
agricultural policies as the main tool to achieve economic growth and alleviate poverty (GoM, 
2011). 
Several policy reforms have taken place in the agricultural sector since independence. 
Chirwa et al., (2008) categorize agricultural policies into three periods: pre-reform, reform and 
post-reform. During the pre-reform period (between 1964 and 1979), the focus on the 
smallholder sector was to increase agricultural production and productivity, mainly for maize, 
in order to meet food security requirements at household and national levels, and generate cash 
income. The government used a range of policy instruments including input subsidies, and 
assessment of the performance of agriculture during this period provides evidence of improved 
crop production and productivity, mainly for maize, and better food security (Chirwa et al., 
2008). 
 The reform period, between 1980s and early 1990s, followed the implementation of 
structural adjustment and stabilization programs, promoted by the World Bank and IMF. 
Agricultural policy reforms during this period involved liberalization of prices and marketing 
of agricultural commodities; and phasing out fertilizer subsidies. Agricultural performance 
assessment during this period suggests poor crop yields and severe food shortages among 
smallholder farmers (Chirwa et al., 2008). These negative developments have been mainly 
attributed to the low use of fertilizer due to the higher prices after the removal of fertilizer 
subsidies and the low access to agricultural credit by smallholder farmers (World Bank, 2003). 
The post-reform period, which is the period from 1995 to to-date, has also experienced 
several agricultural policy reforms. They include the introduction of an input subsidy program 
from 1998/99-1999/2000 agricultural seasons called Starter Pack Scheme (SPS), which was 
later scaled-down and changed into Targeted Input Program (TIP) (2000/01-2004/05 
agricultural seasons) (Harrigan, 2003; Levy, 2005). Beneficiaries to these programs were 
smallholder farmers and each received 15 kg of fertilizer and 2 kg of maize seed to cultivate a 
0.1 hectare (ha) of crop area (Levy, 2005).  
The impact evaluations (Levy, 2005; Levy and Barahona, 2002) suggest that these 
programs contributed to increased production of maize and promoted food security. However, 
implementation shortfalls and the perceived fiscal burden had led to criticism by donors 
(Harrigan, 2008; Levy, 2005). This was followed by the scaling down of the TIP in 2004/2005 
agricultural season. This season was characterized by poor rainfall and resulted into low 
agricultural yields and severe food shortage (Levy, 2005). In order to address these challenges, 
in the 2005/06 agricultural season the government reintroduced a large scale Malawi Farm 
Input Subsidy Program (MFISP), which was later renamed Farm Input Subsidy Program 
(FISP), with the aim of improving smallholder farmers crop production, productivity, food 
security and income from crop sales (Dorward and Chirwa, 2011).  
The FISP beneficiaries are selected based on the following indicators: farm households 
which are classified as poor and cannot manage to self-finance purchases of improved farm 
inputs such as fertilizer and hybrid seeds at commercial prices; households headed by the 
elderly or females; households with agricultural land and are permanently resident in the village 
(Lunduka et al., 2013). For the 2012/2013 agricultural season FISP, the selected household 
was expected to receive a standard package of four coupons to be used to redeem two 50 kg 
bags of fertilizer (for NPK and Urea); one pack of improved maize seed (5 kg  if hybrid or 8 
kg if open pollinated variety); and one legume pack (Dorward, et al., 2013). 
3.3 The impact of farm input subsidies in the post-structural adjustment period: a review 
of previous studies 
As mentioned previously, there are several studies investigating the impact of the reintroduced 
farm input subsidies in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). Concerning crop output effects, studies have 
found statistically significant and positive effects on maize production and productivity in 
Malawi.  Ricker-Gilbert and Jayne (2011) find that an additional kg of subsidised fertilizer 
increases maize production by 1.82 kg in the first year and 3.16 kg in the third year of using 
subsidised fertilizer. Similar results are found in a study by Mason et al. (2013) who analyse 
the effects of subsidised fertilizer on maize production in Zambia and find that an additional 
kg of subsidised fertilizer increases maize production by 1.88 kg. 
 Analysing maize yield response, Chibwana et al. (2010) find that using subsidised 
fertilizer only increases maize yield by 249 kg per hectare, while using both subsidised hybrid 
maize seeds and fertilizer increases maize yield by 447 kg per hectare. Dorward et al. (2013) 
evaluate the 2012/2013 FISP. Based on simulation results they report that a full FISP package 
increases maize production by at least 500 kg, while only a 50 kg bag of subsidised fertilizer 
or together with hybrid maize seed increases maize production between 200 kg and 400 kg. 
Clearly, all these studies indicate improved food availability due to the use farm input 
subsidies. 
Studies on the household welfare effects of farm input subsidies in Malawi, using 
subjective self-assessment indicators,  all find improvement in adequacy of food availability at 
household level (e.g. Chirwa et al., 2013; Dorward and Chirwa, 2011; Dorward et al., 2013). 
Concerning income and poverty, a study by Ricker-Gilbert and Jayne (2011) reveals that on 
average an additional kg of subsidised fertilizer increases farm net crop income by US$1.16, 
but there is no evidence of effects on asset worth.  Ricker-Gilbert and Jayne (2012) also 
investigate the effect on crop income by employing a quantile regression model. They find that 
subsidised fertilizer results in increased crop income in richer households (those at the top 
percentiles) and lack of statistically significant effect on poor households.  Chirwa et al. (2013) 
analyse the effects of farm input subsidies on poverty, primary school enrolment and sickness 
of under-five year old children and they report an overall increase in primary school enrolment 
and reduced probability of having sick under-five year old children, but this study finds no 
statistically significant effects on the subjective self-assessed poverty at household level. 
Dorward et al. (2013) find no significant differences in school attendance, sickness of a 
household member or of and under-five year old children based on the number of times of 
receipt of subsidies. 
The effects of farm input subsidies on input market has also been analysed by several 
researchers.  Ricker-Gilbert et al. (2011)  and Mason and Ricker-Gilbert (2013) find that an 
additional kg of subsidised fertilizer and hybrid maize seed  in Malawi crowd-out commercial 
purchases by 0.22 kg and 0.58 kg, respectively. A similar effect of crowding-out of commercial 
fertilizer is reported in a study by Chirwa et al. (2013), who find a decrease in purchase of 
commercial fertilizer of between 0.15 per cent and 0.21 per cent for a 1 per cent increase in 
subsidised fertilizer. However, Xu et al, (2009) find both crowding-out and crowing-in effects 
on commercial fertilizer purchases in Zambia.  
Other recent studies are on equilibrium effects focusing on food prices and 
macroeconomic indicators. Ricker-Gilbert et al. (2013) find small effects on maize prices in 
Malawi and Zambia. Similar results are found by Takeshima and Liverpool-Tasie (2015) in 
Nigeria. These results suggests that the benefit of farm input subsidies to net food grain buyers 
through reduced prices is marginal.  
This short literature review indicates relatively consistent positive direct effects on 
beneficiaries although their implications for commercial transactions are questionable.  Farm 
input subsidies help improve the purchasing power of beneficiaries. However, the level of 
incremental benefit may differ among beneficiaries depending on their economic 
characteristics. The poor who could not afford to purchase improved inputs at all without 
subsidies is expected to benefit more from the program than a non-poor beneficiary.  
For the poor, the direct benefit arises from either selling the received coupons for 
subsidised purchases or buying the inputs and using them in production (SOAS, 2008). The 
use of improved farm inputs is expected to lead to three positive effects: increased yields that 
could result in improved food security; increased market participation of poor farmers as sellers 
and, therefore, increased farm income from crop sales; and reduced market participation as 
buyers of food crops resulting in savings of household cash income. The cash income from 
sales and the income savings from purchased food could be invested in farming or in non-
agricultural enterprises, and or used to increase the consumption of non-food commodities. If 
the savings are invested in farming, this could lead to a further increase in purchases of farm 
inputs in subsequent agricultural seasons and boost of future agricultural production. Purchase 
of durable assets and consumption of food and non-food commodities could lead to reduced 
poverty levels and possibly to increased investment in human, social and physical capital - 
essential for future sustainable production and smooth exit from subsidy programs. 
Similarly, the direct impact of farm input subsidies on non-poor beneficiaries could be 
through direct savings on purchases of farm inputs and or through the purchase of additional 
farm inputs due to the increased purchasing power. However, FISP can also lead to a 
displacement of commercial fertilizer purchases by non-poor beneficiaries which may 
undermine the development of the private input traders.  
Based on the above review, four hypotheses are formulated and will be tasted in this study:  
Hypothesis 1: There is a positive relationship between FISP and household food security. 
Hypothesis 2: There is a positive relationship between FISP and household consumption 
expenditure. 
Hypothesis 3: The poorer and less food secure a household is, the higher the incremental 
effect of FISP is. 
Hypothesis 4: Repeated benefit to FISP increases the magnitude of the effect on food 
security and household consumption expenditure. 
3.4 Households food security and consumption expenditure indicators 
In order to test these hypotheses, the study focuses on two household welfare indicators: food 
security and consumption expenditure.  
For food security, the main indicator used are the kilocalories available per capita per day. 
We have constructed it by adding up the kilocalories available from cereals and legumes grown 
by the household and dividing them by the household adult equivalent. The food security 
proxies of household food security status (secure or insecure) and the number of household 
food secure months are determined by comparing the household calorific requirements and the 
kilocalories available from own crop production (cereals and legumes). For this comparison, 
the recommended daily requirements per adult equivalent of 2,100 kilocalories per day and the 
Tanzanian Food Composition Tables of calorific content of food commodities are used 
(Lukmanji et al., 2008). 
The focus is on household produced cereals and legumes because most farmers in 
developing countries produce food crops for subsistence. Furthermore, cereals contribute to 
about 54 percent of kilocalories in developing countries, while in Asia and Africa they account 
for about 70 percent of energy intake (Kearney, 2010). The inclusion of legumes makes the 
combined kilocalories contribution from own production much larger. The use of produced 
cereals and legumes in calculating proxies of household food security indicators for small 
farmers chosen in this study provides more realistic measures of available food, covering the 
whole year, compared to the use of subjective and self-assessment indicators such as in Chirwa 
et al. (2013) and Dorward and Chirwa (2011), in which food consumed may actually be below 
the recommended daily intake during lean food supply periods of the year. The lack of 
information on quantities of food accessed through purchases and other sources that 
supplements households own production means that we underestimate the household annual 
food supply. The only available information in the data used in this study is on the food 
quantities consumed at household level from all sources, but the information covers a recall 
period of only seven days. This information is considered inadequate in this study to estimate 
household annual food security.  
Furthermore, we have not included roots and tubers such as cassava and potatoes in the 
calculations of household available calories from own household production despite being 
main sources in some districts in Malawi. This is because of the perceived high measurement 
errors in estimating quantities harvested since most of the time roots and tubers are harvested 
when they are required for consumption or for sell. As such, these crops remain unharvested if 
not required, which may greatly contribute to measurement errors in calculation of total 
harvests and therefore, available kilocalories. 
Concerning consumption expenditure, the aggregate household consumption expenditure 
is determined by summing up household consumption expenditure on food, non-food, durable 
goods and housing covering a period of one year (GoM, 2012b; NSO, 2014b). The food 
consumption expenditure component is comprised of all food items which were consumed in 
the household based on a recall period of seven days (i.e. the last seven days preceding the 
survey) and from all sources. The calculated consumption expenditure is then converted into 
an annual value. In order to take into account only food that was consumed at household level 
in the calculation of food consumption expenditure, only food items which were actually 
consumed were included in the calculations instead of the total food purchases and household 
own total produced food (GoM, 2012b; NSO, 2014b). 
 The survey collected consumption information on a total of 124 food items, which were 
grouped into eleven food categories of: (i) cereals, grains and cereals products; (ii) roots, tubers 
and plantains; (iii) nuts and pulses; (iv) vegetables; (v) meat, fish and animal products; (vi) 
fruits; (vii) cooked food from vendors; (viii) milk and milk products; (ix) sugar, fats and oil; 
(x) beverages; and (xi) spices and miscellaneous. 
The non-food consumption expenditure component is calculated based on a list of several 
non-food items consumed in the household and using various recall periods depending on the 
average frequency of purchases, which is then converted into an annual value. For example, 
transport consumption, mobile phone and clothing expenses are calculated based on a recall 
period of seven days, one month and three months, respectively (GoM, 2012b). 
Household consumption expenditure on durable goods is calculated based on the services 
the household receive from the use of the durable goods. The survey collected information on 
ownership of thirty-two durable goods. However, only twenty-two of them were included in 
the calculation of the durable good consumption expenditure based on various reference 
periods. The calculated consumption expenditure is then converted into an annual expenditure. 
NSO (2014b) provide details on the calculation of this consumption expenditure component. 
The housing consumption expenditure component is calculated based on either the actual 
rent the household received for letting out the house or the estimated rent they would have 
received if the house was let out. The final value used is the predicated rent from the estimated 
hedonic rental regression, which is used to replace outliers of reported rent values and missing 
values for unreported rent values (GoM, 2012b, NSO, 2014b). 
3.5 Empirical models 
The effect of farm input subsidies on household food security and consumption expenditure is 
estimated using the quantity of subsidised fertilizer a farmer redeemed in order to capture only 
the subsidised fertilizer used and, thus, the direct impact of the program. Fertilizer subsidies 
are chosen since they form the largest share of the total FISP (Lunduka et al., 2013) and 99 per 
cent of FISP beneficiaries received and redeemed a fertilizer coupon in the 2009/2010 and 
2012/2013 agricultural seasons. Furthermore, we do not use a binary variable indicating 
whether a household is a subsidy recipient or not because beneficiaries received heterogeneous 
subsidy coupon packages and, therefore, have different degree of benefit from the program.  
3.5.1 Model for estimating the continuous outcome variables  
The continuous household food security and consumption expenditure outcome variables are 
modelled in relation to food security as: (i) kilocalories available per capita per day and (ii) 
food annual per capita consumption expenditure; (iii) non-food annual per capita consumption 
expenditure and (iv) total annual per capita consumption expenditure. In this study we estimate 
the conditional mean effects of subsidised fertilizer on the continuous food security and 
consumption expenditure indicators by employing fixed effect (FE) models, and the 
heterogeneous effects by employing CRE quantile regression models. The estimation is of the 
following form: 
1141321111
log itiitititititwelfare subfertdistrainhhc     (3.1) 
where 
itwelfare
denotes household food security indicator (kilocalories available per capita 
per day) and consumption expenditure indicators (food, non-food and total annual per capita 
consumption expenditure) for farmer i in natural logarithm. The models control variables are 
as follows: 1ithhc  is a vector of household and farm characteristics and include sex, age and 
education of the household head, total land owned,  location in rural areas; crop diversification; 
1itrain  is a vector of annual average district rainfall; 1itdist  is a vector representing distance to 
daily market in natural logarithm; 1itsubfert  is a vector of quantity of subsidised fertilizer 
redeemed; 
i  is the time-invariant unobserved heterogeneity of the household; it is an 
idiosyncratic error term; and  are the parameters  to be estimated. 
3.5.2 Model for estimating the binary household food security indicator 
The binary outcome of household food security in relation to annual food security status is 
modelled by applying the pooled correlated random effect (CRE) Probit model, following 
Papke and Wooldridge, (2008); Wooldridge (2010). Therefore, the estimation equation is as 
follows: 
15143121111 itiiititititit wsubfertdistrainhhcy    (3.2) 
where 
1ity  is the binary dependent variable and equal to one if the household has adequate 
kilocalories from cereals and legumes from one harvest season to the next (i.e. 12 months or 
more) or zero otherwise. The models control variables are the same as described in Eq. (3.1); 
i  is the time-invariant unobserved heterogeneity of the household; iw   is a vector of the time 
averages of the time-variant explanatory variables; 
1it is an idiosyncratic error term; and 
are the parameters to be estimated. 
3.5.3 Model for estimating heterogeneous effects of subsidised fertilizer on continuous 
household food security and consumption expenditure indicators 
Hypothesis 3 implies heterogeneous welfare effects of FISP on different segments of the farm 
households distribution. In order to test it, this study employs a correlated random effects 
(CRE) quantile regression approach. The heterogeneous effects of subsidised fertilizer on 
continuous household food security and consumption expenditure outcomes are modelled in 
relation to (i) kilocalories available per capita per day; (ii) food annual per capita consumption 
expenditure; non-food annual per capita consumption expenditure and (iii) the total annual per 
capita consumption expenditure. CRE quantile regression approach is employed in a number 
of studies, e.g. Ricker-Gilbert and Jayne (2012) 
The estimation is of the following form: 
11)(11)(1
log itiisubititwelfare wFertZH       (3.3) 
where denotes household welfare indicator; represents quantity of 
subsidised fertilizer in kilograms; is a vector of exogenous variables which are the same as 
described in Eq. (3.1); 
i  is the time-invariant unobserved heterogeneity of the household; iw   
is a vector of the time averages of the time-variant explanatory variables; 
1 , 1  and 1  are 
vectors of parameters of interest to be estimated in the structural Eq. (3.3) and . The 
estimations are carried out at 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th and 90th percentiles. 
3.5.4 Empirical estimation strategy 
The use of panel data in this study enables us to control for the unobserved time-constant 
household heterogeneity.  For the continuous food security and consumption expenditure 
indicators, estimations use the fixed effects (FE) estimator to examine the conditional mean 
effects (Eq. 3.1) and CRE quantile regression to analyse the heterogeneous effects of subsidised 
fertilizer (Eq. 3.3). Since the study includes a binary dependent food security indicator, (the 
annual food security status in Eq. (3.2), and a quantile regression in (Eq. 3.3), the use of FE 
estimators and standard quantile regression, respectively, are inconsistent (Wooldridge, 2010). 
welfareH subFert
10 
For the estimators of Eq. (3.2) and the quantile regression in Eq. (3.3) to be consistent and the 
APEs to be identified, we use the correlated random effects (CRE) approach (Wooldridge, 
2010) following Mundlak (1978) and Chamberlain (1984). This approach allows to control for 
the correlation between the time-invariant unobserved household heterogeneity 
i  and the 
explanatory variables in Eq. (3.2) and Eq. (3.3), here represented by 
itW .  Wooldridge, (2010) 
provides more details on the application of CRE estimators.   
3.6. Data sources and descriptive statistics 
Data used is the same as described in section 2.7 of chapter 2 of this thesis. However, for the 
current analyses, households which did not have agriculture as a livelihood strategy and did 
not grow cereals or legumes, and households with missing key information are excluded. As a 
result this study uses a balanced panel sample of 2,474 households.  
Table 3.1 present averages of available kilocalories per capita per day and the number 
of months of food security from own production of cereals and legumes. These averages are 
based on quantiles of per capita annual consumption expenditure. The results show a positive 
correlation between available kilocalories per capita per day and months of food security, on 
the one hand, and the quantile of per capita annual consumption expenditure. Households with 
higher per capita annual consumption expenditure in the 4th and 5th quantiles meet both the 
standard requirement of kilocalories per capita per day and annual food security of at least 12 
months of adequate available kilocalories. This suggests that the top richest 40 percent of the 
households are food secure, while the bottom 60 per cent are food insecure. Furthermore, the 
results show that households belonging to the 1st quantile have available kilocalories per capita 
per day which only meet about half of the standard requirement and are food secure only half 
of the year. 
Table 3.1: Average available kilocalories and number of months of food security by 
quantiles of per capita annual consumption expenditure (the mean represents the two-
survey waves) 
Food security 
Indicator 
Quantiles of per capita annual consumption expenditure 
Quantile 
Quantile 
Quantile 
Quantile 
Quantile 
Kilocalories per 
capita per day 
1116 1602 1946 2424 3183  
Months of food 
secure 
6.46 9.36 10.99 14.06 17.72 
Source: Calculated by author based on IHPS (2010 and 2013) data 
A similar situation is observed in Table 3.2 where data are presented by poverty status 
of the household as non-poor, poor and extremely poor. A household whose individuals have 
a total annual per capita consumption expenditure below the total poverty line (MK85,852 in 
2013) is defined as poor, while those with total annual per capita consumption expenditure of 
below the food poverty line (MK53,262 in 2013) are defined as extremely poor (NSO, 2014). 
The results show that poor and extremely poor households are food insecure.  While poor 
households are food secure for about eight months, the extremely poor meet calorific 
requirements from own production of cereals and legumes for only six months. These results 
suggests a positive association between poverty status and food security of the household.  
Table 3.2: Average available kilocalories and number of months of food security by 
poverty status of the household (the mean represents the two-survey waves) 
Food security 
Indicator 
Poverty status of the household 
Non-poor Poor Extremely Poor 
Kilocalories per 
capita per day 
2455 1318 1013 
Months of food 
secure 
13.92 7.67 5.84 
Source: Calculated by author based on IHPS (2010 and 2013) data 
Descriptive statistics of the variables used in this study are presented in Table 3.3. 
Concerning the input subsidies, the data show that overall, 54 per cent of the farmers received 
a coupon for fertilizer subsidy during the two agricultural seasons under the study. Since the 
government target in FISP is to reach at least 50 per cent of smallholders, these results suggest 
that this target was met. However, the beneficiaries received heterogeneous coupon packages 
instead of the full standard package of four coupons to redeem two 50 kg bags of subsidised 
fertilizer (NPK and Urea); one pack of maize seed (5 kg if the farmer chose hybrid or 8 kg for 
open pollinated variety); and one legume pack (Dorward, et al., 2013). Only 24 per cent of the 
beneficiaries received the full standard package. Some of the remaining beneficiaries received 
coupons for different quantities of fertilizer and maize seeds, and some received either fertilizer 
or maize coupons only. In terms of quantities of redeemed fertilizer, the sample average is 43 
kg, while considering beneficiaries only the average is 80 kg per beneficiary. 
Food security indicators show that most of the households run out of adequate food 
supply from own production before the next harvesting season. The results indicate that only 
32 per cent are food secure throughout the year. Fertilizer subsidy beneficiaries have higher 
probability of being food secure with a mean difference of five percentage points; have 302 
available kilocalories per capita per day and two months of food secure more than non-
beneficiaries. However, the average of 2,053 kilocalories per capita per day suggests that many 
households in Malawi do not meet the standard of 2,100 kilocalories from own production of 
cereals and legumes. This highlights the importance of alternative sources of food for 
household consumption, i.e. through market purchases. The statistics on household 
consumption expenditure shows that fertilizer subsidy beneficiaries have lower total annual per 
capita consumption expenditure compared to non-beneficiaries, which indicates that FISP is 
targeting relatively poor farm households.  
The average age of the household head is 44 years and the subsidy beneficiaries are 
relatively older than non-beneficiaries, indicating that the FISP is targeting more elderly headed 
households. Although 23 per cent in the sample are female headed households, there is no much 
difference on proportion of female headed households between subsidy beneficiaries and non-
beneficiaries.  Education level of most household heads is low and the results show that most 
of them have primary education (about 60 per cent) and about 20 per cent have no formal 
education.   
The results show that land, which is one of the most important productive assets in 
agricultural production, is a constraint for most of the households in this study. The average 
landholding size is 0.8 hectare and subsidy beneficiaries own relatively large landholdings and 
grow more crops (higher crop diversification) than non-beneficiaries. Overall, about 90 per 
cent of the households are located in rural areas, and it is 94 per cent of the subsidy beneficiaries 
and 85 per cent of non-beneficiaries who reside in rural areas. Daily markets are located far 
from where the farmers reside and the average distance is 9 km. However, subsidy beneficiaries 
reside further away than non-beneficiaries.  
Table 3.3. Descriptive statistics (the mean represents the two-survey waves average) 
Variable  All  
(Full Sample) 
Subsidy 
Beneficiaries 
Only (II) 
Subsidy Non-
Beneficiaries  
Only (III) 
Difference 
(II)-(III) 
Obs Mean Obs Mean Obs Mean Mean /SE 
Head  (female) 4948 0.23 2693 0.24 2255 0.22 0.02*   
       (0.01) 
Head age (years) 4948 44.27 2693 46.28 2255 41.86 4.43*** 
       ( 0.46) 
Head no education 4948 0.2 2693 0.21 2255 0.2 0.013 
       (0.01) 
Head primary educ  4948 0.59 2693 0.61 2255 0.56 0.06*** 
       (0.01) 
Head secondary edu 4948 0.1 2693 0.17 2255 0.20 -0.04*** 
       (0.01) 
Head tertiary educ  4948 0.03 2693 0.01 2255 0.05 -0.04*** 
       (0.01) 
Land total (hectares)  4948 0.79 2693 0.85 2255 0.71 0.14*** 
       (0.02) 
Rural location 4948 0.9 2693 0.94 2255 0.85 0.1*** 
       (0.01) 
Crop  diversification 4948 2.13 2693 2.26 2255 1.98 0.28*** 
       (0.03) 
Distance daily mkt 4948 9.05 2693 10.74 2255 7.03 3.71*** 
       (0.54) 
Irrigation scheme 4948 0.16 2693 0.18 2255 0.13 0.05*** 
       (0.01) 
No. of households  4948 984 2693 967 2255 1005 -38.03 
       (44.44) 
Agricultural Officer 4948 0.37 2693 0.37 2255 0.37   -0.001 
       (0.01) 
Microfinance  institu 4948 0.11 2693 0.1 2255 0.13 -0.03*** 
       (0.01) 
Rainfall amount 4948 967.96 2693 988.01 2255 944.01 44.01*** 
       (8.01) 
Percapita annual exp 4948 142213 2,693 130262 2255 156486 -26223*** 
       (3840) 
Percapita/day calorie 4948 2053.9 2693 2191.6 2255 1889.4 302.24*** 
       (49.36) 
Months food secure 4948 11.72 2693 12.6 2255 10.66 1.94*** 
       (0.37) 
Annual food secure   4948 0.32 2693 0.34 2255 0.29 0.05*** 
       (0.01) 
Subsidised fertilizer  4948 43.43 2693 79.8    
Note: *, **, *** represents statistically significance at 10 %, 5 % and 1 % levels; SE represents 
standard errors. 
Source: Author based on IHPS 2010 and 2013 data 
Irrigation scheme availability in the community is reported by 16 per cent of the 
households and more FISP beneficiaries are located in communities where irrigation schemes 
are available. Lack of access to microfinance institutions shows is a challenge facing most 
farmers in this study as the results show that only 11 per cent have a microfinance institution 
in their communities. In addition, more non-beneficiaries of subsidies than beneficiaries are 
located in communities where microfinance institutions are available. Since the subsidies are 
targeting the poor and vulnerable groups, this highlight the challenge they have in accessing 
microfinance loans. The average number of households in each of the communities is 984 and 
37 per cent of the households report to have a resident agricultural extension officer. However, 
a comparison between subsidy beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries shows no statistically 
significant differences on these two factors. 
3.6.1 Endogeneity Tests of subsidised fertilizer 
Since fertilizer coupons are distributed to households non-randomly (i.e. to only targeted 
households), the unobserved time-invariant household heterogeneity which influences receipt 
of subsidy coupons may also influence household income potentials and production levels of 
cereals and legumes for  household food consumption. This will make subsidised fertilizer 
endogenous in the estimations. We use the control function approach of the instrumental 
variables method to test for the endogeneity of subsidised fertilizer. We employ the residence 
or visit of the Member of Parliament (MP) in the community as an instrument following Ricker-
Gilbert and Jayne (2011).  
Section 2.6.4 of Chapter 2 provides details on the application of the CF approach and a 
discussion on the choice of MP residence or visit to the community as an IV.  The results 
suggest that the quantity of subsidised fertilizer is endogenous in all our estimations, with the 
exception of the 75th and 90th percentiles of the total annual per capita consumption 
expenditure. The estimation of the heterogeneous effects of subsidised fertilizer on continuous 
food security and consumption expenditure indicators is carried out semi-parametrically by 
employing the control function approach to the structural quantile regression model Eq. (3.3) 
following Lee (2004).  As mentioned in Chapter 2, the chosen instrument might be weak and 
therefore, having significant effect on the results. But to the best knowledge of the author there 
is no method of testing weak instrumental variables under the CF approach. Presentation of the 
model results without the use of the IV method alongside model results with the use of the IV 
method helps in checking the robustness of the results of the selected models. 
3.7 Results and discussion 
This section discusses the empirical results and the focus is on the effects of the subsidised 
fertilizer on household food security and consumption expenditure. The results of the random 
effect (RE) model (I) and fixed effect (FE) model (II) in Table 3.4 are presented to check the 
robustness of the results of the instrumental variable fixed effect (IV-FE) model (III). This is 
because the robust Hausman model selection test based on the Sargan-Hansen statistic rejects 
the RE model and the statistically significant generalised residuals indicates that subsidised 
fertilizer is endogenous. Regression results concerning factors determining available per capita 
calories per day are presented in Table 3.4 and the discussion is based on the results of the IV-
FE model (III). 
The results show that subsidised fertilizer has positive effects on available per capita 
calories and on average, an additional kilogram of subsidised fertilizer increases available per 
capita calories per day by 0.18 per cent. Since the FISP standard package includes 100 kg of 
subsidised fertilizer, it means that the program effect is 18 per cent. Estimation in levels shows 
that available per capita calories per day increases by 372 kilocalories for an additional FISP 
standard package of 100 kg of subsidised fertilizer. Linear transformation of these results into 
household food secure months suggests that in levels, on average the FISP standard package 
of 100 kg of subsidised fertilizer increases number of months of household food secure by 2.5.  
The positive effect of subsidised fertilizer on available per capita calories per day and number 
of months of household food secure are consistent with previous studies such as Holden and 
Lunduka (2012) who find that farm input subsidy program beneficiaries were less likely to be 
net buyers of maize and more likely to be net sellers and that the beneficiary households had 
43 per cent higher maize production. A study by Dorward and Chirwa (2011) also find that the 
subsidy program has significantly contributed to improved national food self-sufficiency.  
Age of the household head has statistically significant and positive effects on available per 
capita calories per day, suggesting elderly headed households have more available food. An 
increase in age by one year increases available per capita calories per day by one per cent. More 
crop production experience and accumulation of productive assets over the years may be the 
explanation of the positive effects of old age. Higher education of the household head is 
associated with increased available per capita calories per day. Households whose heads have 
secondary and tertiary education levels have 17 and 41 per cent increased available per capita 
calories per day, respectively, compared with those without formal education.  This effect is 
expected because higher education is associated with adoption of modern technologies, which 
results into higher production and productivity. 
As expected, large landholding size is associated with more available per capita calories 
per day due to high production levels from larger areas under cultivation. An additional hectare 
of land increases available per capita calories per day by 31 per cent. Similarly, crop 
diversification has statistically significant and positive effects on available per capita calories 
per day with an additional crop grown having a 21 per cent effect. The impact of crop 
diversification might be due to the effect of legumes which are grown in addition to maize and 
have higher calorific content.  
Availability of agricultural production information and advice to farmers has positive 
effects on available per capita calories per day. The results show that households in 
communities which have a resident agricultural extension officer have 15 per cent more 
available per capita calories per day compared with those in communities which have no such 
officers. This highlights the importance of access to agricultural production information and 
services in increasing productivity. 
 Much as rainfall is important in crops production, however, too much or too little rainfall 
has adverse effects. The results show that receiving double the average district rainfall 
decreases available per capita calories per day by 18 per cent. Therefore, households in areas 
which receive high annual average rainfall are less likely to have cereals and legumes as their 
main source of calories from own production.   
However, the study finds no evidence of effects on available per capita calories per day of 
sex and primary education level of the household head; rural location; distance to daily market; 
availability of an irrigation scheme, micro-credit institution and number of households in the 
community.  
Table 3.4: Regression results on factors influencing available per capita calories. 
Dependent variable: Log per capita kilocalories.  
Explanatory Variables RE (I) FE(II) IV-FE (III) 
Coef./SE Coef./SE Coef./SE 
Generalised residuals    -0.24*** 
   (0.04) 
Subsidised fertilizer quantity in Kg 0.0014*** 0.0012*** 0.0018*** 
 (0.0003) (0.0004) (0.0004) 
Household head (female) 0.03 -0.05 -0.08 
 (0.04) (0.06) (0.06) 
Household head age (years) 0.004*** 0.01*** 0.01*** 
 (0.001) (0.002) (0.002) 
Household head primary education 0.09** 0.05 0.02 
 (0.04) (0.05) (0.05) 
Household head secondary education 0.28*** 0.2*** 0.17** 
 (0.05) (0.08) (0.08) 
Household head tertiary education 0.48*** 0.43*** 0.41*** 
 (0.1) (0.17) (0.17) 
Total landholding size (hectares) 0.35*** 0.29*** 0.31*** 
 (0.03) (0.04) (0.04) 
Rural location of the household 0.01 -0.07 -0.003 
 (0.06) (0.13) (0.13) 
Crop diversification 0.22*** 0.22*** 0.21*** 
 (0.01) (0.02) (0.02) 
Log distance to daily market (Km) -0.02 -0.004 0.004 
 (0.01) (0.02) (0.01) 
Irrigation scheme in the community 0.07** 0.06 0.06 
 (0.03) (0.05) (0.05) 
Log number of households in the community 0.01 0.02 0.02 
 (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) 
Agricultural Extension Officer in the community 0.14*** 0.16*** 0.15*** 
 (0.03) (0.04) (0.03) 
Micro-finance institution in the community 0.01 0.03 0.03 
 (0.04) (0.05) (0.05) 
Log annual average district rainfall   -0.19*** -0.18* -.12 
 (0.06) (0.10) (0.10) 
Constant 13.09*** 13.02*** 6.53*** 
 (0.4) (0.75) (0.74) 
Number of observations 4948 4948 4948 
Wald chi2(15)/ F-Statistic 688.59 20.42 22.65 
Prob > chi2/ F 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 
R-squared 0.1687 0.1572 0.1812 
Rho 0.4081 0.5485 0.5472 
Robust Hausman test: Sargan-Hansen statistic 25.743**   
Note: *, **, *** represents statistically significant level at 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively; robust 
cluster standard errors (SE) are in parentheses. 
Regression results on factors determining household annual food security status are 
presented in Table 3.5. The discussion in this section is based on the average partial effects 
(APEs) results of the pooled CRE Probit model (III), which controls for the household time-
invariant unobserved heterogeneity and endogeneity of subsidised fertilizer. This model is 
chosen because the joint statistical significance of the added time averages of the time-variant 
explanatory variables cannot be rejected, indicating the need of controlling for the household 
time-invariant unobserved heterogeneity in the estimation. Furthermore, the generalised 
residuals are statistically significant indicating that subsidised fertilizer is endogenous in the 
estimations and hence requires controlling the effects of endogeneity.  
The results show that subsidised fertilizer has statistically significant and positive effects 
on household annual food security status. An additional kilogram of subsidised fertilizer 
increases the probability of a household being annual food secure by 0.07 percentage point. 
This represents seven percentage points increase for the 100 Kg fertilizer of the standard 
subsidised fertilizer program package.  The positive effect of the subsidised fertilizer on food 
security status is consistent with a study by Chirwa et al., (2013), who find that the receipt of 
subsidised fertilizer coupons continuously for six times increases the probability of the 
household reporting adequate food consumption by 22 percentage points compared with non-
beneficiaries and that an additional 100 kg of subsidised fertilizer increases the probability of 
household food consumption adequacy by seven percentage points.  
Old age of household head has statistically significant and positive effects on household 
annual food security, but the magnitude is very small. Land holding size has the expected 
positive effect and an additional hectare of land increases the probability of annual household 
food secure by 15 percentage points. This is because more landholding size is associated with 
more total output and therefore, providing more food for household consumption. The results 
also suggest that growing more crops is associated with increased food security.  
Table 3.5: Regression results on factors influencing the probability of household annual 
adequate calories availability. Dependent variable: Annual food secure=1 
Explanatory Variables Pooled 
Probit (I) 
Pooled CRE 
Probit (II) 
Pooled CRE & CF 
Residuals Probit (III) 
ME/SE APE./SE APE./SE 
Generalised residuals    -0.12*** 
   (0.02) 
Subsidised fertilizer quantity in Kg 0.0003* 0.0004** 0.0007*** 
 (0.0002) (0.0002) (0.0002) 
Household head (female) 0.04** -0.01 -0.02 
 (0.02) (0.03) (0.03) 
Household head age (years) 0.001 0.002*** 0.004*** 
 (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) 
Household head primary education 0.03 -0.01 -0.02 
 (0.02) (0.03) (0.03) 
Household head secondary education 0.12*** 0.04 0.02 
 (0.03) (0.04) (0.04) 
Household head tertiary education 0.18*** 0.12 0.12 
 (0.05) (0.08) (0.07) 
Total landholding size (hectares) 0.19*** 0.14*** 0.15*** 
 (0.01) (0.02) (0.02) 
Rural location of the household 0.01 -0.08 -0.04 
 (0.02) (0.06) (0.05) 
Crop diversification 0.06*** 0.06*** 0.06*** 
 (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) 
Log distance to daily market (Km) -0.01 0.01 0.01 
 (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) 
Irrigation scheme in the community 0.03 0.01 0.002 
 (0.02) (0.02) (0.02) 
Log number of households in com. 0.0002 0.003 0.004 
 (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) 
Agricultural Extension Officer in co. 0.04*** 0.06*** 0.06*** 
 (0.01) (0.02) (0.02) 
Micro-finance institution in the com. 0.04** 0.02 0.02 
 (0.02) (0.02) (0.03) 
Log annual average district rainfall   -0.03 0.02 0.04 
 (0.03) (0.05) (0.05) 
Number of observations 4948 4948 4948 
Wald chi2(15) 514.48 542.15 593.17 
Prob > chi2 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 
Pseudo R-squared 0.1225 0.1288 0.1457 
Log-pseudolikelihood -2714.925 -2695.376 -2643.265 
Chi2: Joint stat sig of time averages  42.49*** 45.21*** 
Correctly classified  72.15 % 72.64 % 73.73 % 
Note: *, **, *** represents statistically significant level at 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively; SE = 
cluster standard errors; SE= bootstrap standard errors (1000 reps); estimation of model (II) include 
time averages of time-variant regressors and year dummy. 
Results in Table 3.6 show the effects of repeated benefit to subsidised fertilizer on 
household food security. The results suggest positive heterogeneous effects of repeated benefit 
to subsidised fertilizer on available per capita per day calories. Accessing subsidised fertilizer 
once increases available calories per capita per day by 11 per cent and the magnitude of the 
effects increases by about five times to 54 per cent for a continuous five times benefit. 
However, it is only after accessing subsidised fertilizer continuously for five times that has 
positive effects on household annual food security status, which increases by 11 percentage 
points.  
Overall, the results in Tables 3.4, 3.5 and 3.6 indicate that the farm input subsidies could 
be useful in contributing to improved food security among farming households in Malawi. 
However, the magnitude of the effects suggests that they alone are not a magic bullet solution 
to food insecurity, but only one tool that has to be built-in in a more comprehensive agricultural 
policy package facilitating agricultural and rural development.   
Table 3.6: Regression results on factors influencing available per capita calories and 
household annual food security status 
Explanatory Variables FE Model Log 
per capita/day 
calories (I) 
CRE Probit 
Model (Annual 
food  secure) (II) 
Coef./SE APE/SE 
One-time benefit to fertilizer subsidy 0.11* -0.05* 
 (0.06) (0.03) 
Two-times benefit to fertilizer subsidy 0.22*** 0.02 
 (0.07) (0.04) 
Three-times benefit to fertilizer subsidy 0.25*** -.06 
 (0.08) (0.04) 
Four-times benefit to fertilizer subsidy 0.45*** 0.02 
 (0.09) (0.06) 
Five-times benefit to fertilizer subsidy 0.54*** 0.11** 
 (0.08) (0.05) 
Household head (female) -0.07 -0.03 
 (0.06) (0.03) 
Household head age (years) 0.01*** 0.002** 
 (0.002) (0.001) 
Total landholding size (hectares) 0.31*** 0.14*** 
 (0.04) (0.02) 
Rural location of the household -0.08 -0.07 
 (0.13) (0.05) 
Crop diversification 0.20*** 0.06*** 
 (0.02) (0.01) 
Log distance to daily market (Km) 0.02 0.01 
 (0.02) (0.01) 
Irrigation scheme in the community 0.09** 0.01 
 (0.05) (0.02) 
Log number of households in the community 0.02* 0.003 
 (0.01) (0.01) 
Agricultural Extension Officer in the community 0.12*** 0.06*** 
 (0.04) (0.02) 
Micro-finance institution in the community 0.04 0.02 
 (0.05) (0.03) 
Log annual average district rainfall   -0.08 0.03 
 (0.10) (0.05) 
Constant 6.35*** 0.32*** 
 (0.75) (0.01) 
Number of observations 4948 4948 
Wald chi2(15)/ F-Statistic 21.59*** 593.51*** 
R-squared/Pseudo R2 0.1647 0.1350 
Rho 0.5572  
Correctly classified  72.98% 
Log pseudolikelihood  -2676.34 
Note: *, **, *** represents statistically significant level at 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively; robust 
cluster standard errors (SE) are in parentheses; controls include education covariates. 
In relation to the food, non-food and total annual per capita consumption expenditure, the 
results are presented in Table 3.7. All the three models results do not show a statistically 
significant effect of subsidised fertilizer. One possible explanation is that since the FISP main 
target crop is maize, which most farm households grow for subsistence, has little contribution 
to sales and consequently to households income and to the overall food, non-food and total 
household consumption expenditure. Although the annual per capita food consumption 
expenditure component represents 60 per cent of the annual total per capita consumption 
expenditure, the share of the maize consumption expenditure in food and total consumption 
expenditure might be minimal due to its lower unit value. However, due to data limitations, we 
are unable to estimate this. Since the main target crop in FISP is maize, the share of maize 
consumption expenditure in food and total consumption expenditure could have provided an 
idea of the expected effects of FISP on household consumption expenditure. The policy 
implication is that when the main subsistence crop is targeted, the subsidised fertilizer may 
hardly have significant effects on poverty alleviation calculated based on consumption 
expenditure. To a certain extent, these results explain the persistence of high poverty levels of 
above 40 per cent of the population in Malawi despite the implementation of the FISP. 
However, it should be taken into account that the data used in the calculations of household 
consumption expenditure in this study did not include consumption information for the months 
of January and February, which are considered as severe lean food availability months in 
Malawi (NSO, 2014). Therefore, the results in this study might underestimate the overall 
contribution of the FISP to food, non-food and total household consumption expenditure. 
Higher education level of household head, more total land owned, crop diversification and 
having more households in the community are associated with increased food, non-food and 
total annual per capita consumption expenditure due to their positive effects on household 
income. Of these factors, education level of the household heads has the most significant effect. 
Table 3.7: Regression results on determinants of food, non-food and total annual per 
capita consumption expenditure. Dependent variable: Log food, non-food and total 
annual per capita consumption expenditure. 
Explanatory Variables Food 
Consumption 
Expenditure 
Non-Food 
Consumption 
Expenditure 
Total 
Consumption 
Expenditure 
IV-FE (I) FE (II) IV-FE (III) 
Coef./SE Coef./SE Coef./SE 
Generalised residuals -0.05**  -0.04* 
 (0.02)  (0.02) 
Subsidised fertilizer quantity in Kg -0.0001 -0.0002 -0.0002 
 (0.0003) (0.0003) (0.0002) 
Household head (female) -0.04 -0.06 -0.05 
 (0.05) (0.05) (0.04) 
Household head age (years) -0.01*** -0.01*** -0.01*** 
 (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) 
Household head primary education 0.01 0.07* 0.03 
 (0.04) (0.04) (0.03) 
Household head secondary education 0.18*** 0.34*** 0.26*** 
 (0.06) (0.06) (0.05) 
Household head tertiary education 0.39*** 0.70*** 0.53*** 
 (0.09) (0.14) (0.11) 
Total landholding size (hectares) 0.04* 0.11*** 0.07*** 
 (0.03) (0.03) (0.02) 
Rural location of the household 0.01 -0.37*** -0.18* 
 (0.09) (0.11) (0.09) 
Crop diversification 0.04*** 0.02 0.03*** 
 (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) 
Log distance to daily market (Km) -0.03** -0.02* -0.02** 
 (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) 
Irrigation scheme in the community -0.02 0.02 0.01 
 (0.03) (0.03) (0.03) 
Log number of households in the community 0.03** 0.01 0.03*** 
 (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) 
Agricultural Extension Officer in the community 0.04 -0.01 0.01 
 (0.03) (0.03) (0.02) 
Micro-finance institution in the community 0.01 -0.01 0.001 
 (0.04) (0.04) (0.03) 
Constant 10.89*** 7.99** 11.75*** 
 (0.24) (0.56) (0.48) 
Number of observations 4948 4948 4948 
Wald chi2(15)/ F-Statistic 6.09*** 8.88*** 8.03*** 
R-squared 0.04 0.16 0.12 
Rho 0.48 0.58 0.55 
Note: *, **, *** represents statistically significant level at 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively; robust 
cluster standard errors (SE) are in parentheses; controls include rainfall covariate. 
Regression results on the effects of repeated benefits to subsidised fertilizer on annual 
food, non-food and total per capital consumption expenditure are presented in Table 3.8. The 
results show positive statistically significant and increased magnitude of effects of repeated 
benefit to subsidised fertilizer on annual food and total per capita consumption expenditure. 
Using subsidised fertilizer once has statistically insignificant effect on all the three types of 
consumption expenditure and this is consisted with results in Table 3.7, which show the effects 
of one-off benefit. For food consumption expenditure, two-times benefits has statistically 
significant positive effects and increases annual per capita food consumption expenditure by 
11 per cent and the magnitude of the effects increases to 28 per cent for a five-times continuous 
benefit. However, the results show that repeated benefit to subsidised fertilizer has statistically 
insignificant effects on annual non-food per capita consumption expenditure. Furthermore, 
only after using subsidised fertilizer for four and five times has statistically significant positive 
effects and increases annual total per capita consumption expenditure by 12 and 19 per cent, 
respectively. 
Overall, the regression results on the effects of repeated benefit to subsidised fertilizer 
suggests positive statistically significant and increased magnitude of effects on food security, 
food and total consumption expenditure. This supports the theory of change espoused by the 
government of Malawi in the implementation of the FISP. Promoting access to, adoption and 
use of improved farm inputs such as inorganic fertilizer and hybrid seeds are some of the 
expected effects of the FISP as a smart subsidy programme. Accumulation of residual 
fertilizer in the soil due to continuous use of inorganic fertilizer from the FISP is also attributed 
to the positive effects of repeated benefit to subsidised fertilizer on crop production (Chirwa et 
al., 2013; Ricker-Gilbert and Jayne, 2011). 
Table 3.8: Regression results on determinants of food, non-food and total annual per 
capita consumption expenditure. Dependent variable: Log food, non-food and total 
annual per capita consumption expenditure. 
Explanatory Variables Food 
Consumption 
Expenditure 
Non-Food 
Consumption 
Expenditure 
Total 
Consumption 
Expenditure 
FE (I) FE (II) FE (III) 
Coef./SE Coef./SE Coef./SE 
One-time benefit to fertilizer subsidy 0.06 0.01 0.03 
 (0.04) (0.05) (0.04) 
Two-times benefit to fertilizer subsidy 0.11** 0.04 0.07 
 (0.05) (0.06) (0.05) 
Three-times benefit to fertilizer subsidy 0.11** -0.08 0.02 
 (0.05) (0.06) (0.05) 
Four-times benefit to fertilizer subsidy 0.19*** 0.05 0.12** 
 (0.07) (0.08) (0.06) 
Five-times benefit to fertilizer subsidy 0.28*** 0.08 0.19*** 
 (0.06) (0.07) (0.06) 
Household head (female) -0.04 -0.06 -0.05 
 (0.05) (0.05) (0.04) 
Household head age (years) -0.01*** -0.01*** 0-.01*** 
 (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) 
Total landholding size (hectares) 0.04 0.10*** 0.07*** 
 (0.03) (0.03) (0.02) 
Rural location of the household -0.02 -0.37*** -0.20** 
 (0.09) (0.11) (0.09) 
Crop diversification 0.03** 0.02 0.03** 
 (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) 
Log distance to daily market (Km) -0.02 -0.02* -0.02* 
 (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) 
Irrigation scheme in the community -0.002 0.02 0.02 
 (0.04) (0.03) (0.03) 
Log number of households in the community 0.03*** 0.01 0.03*** 
 (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) 
Agricultural Extension Officer in the community 0.02 -0.01 -0.001 
 (0.03) (0.03) (0.02) 
Micro-finance institution in the community 0.02 -0.01 0.003 
 (0.04) (0.04) (0.03) 
Constant 10.72*** 7.94** 11.65*** 
 (0.53) (0.56) (0.48) 
Number of observations 4948 4948 4948 
Wald chi2(15)/ F-Statistic 7.17 7.27 7.86 
Prob > chi2/ F 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 
R-squared 0.04 0.16 0.12 
Rho 0.49 0.58 0.56 
Note: *, **, *** represents statistically significant level at 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively; robust 
cluster standard errors (SE) are in parentheses; controls include education and rainfall covariates. 
As previously mentioned, the analysis of the heterogeneous effects of subsidised fertilizer 
employs CRE quantile regression models and estimations are carried out at 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th 
and 90th percentiles of the continuous dependent variables ( i.e. kilocalories available per capita 
per day, and annual per capita consumption expenditure). Table 3.9 presents the CRE quantile 
regression model results on factors affecting the kilocalories available per capita per day; and 
Table 3.10  the effect on consumption expenditure.  
The results in Table 3.9 show that an additional standard package of subsidised fertilizer 
increases the kilocalories available per capita per day by 25 per cent at the 10th and 50th 
percentiles, compared to 22 per cent at the 90th percentile. Therefore the percentage incremental 
effect is slightly larger at the lower percentiles. However, in terms of the impact in levels, the 
results indicate that an additional 100 kg of subsidised fertilizer increases the per capita 
kilocalories by 113 kilocalories at the 10th percentile, 378 kilocalories at the median (50th 
percentile) and 977 kilocalories at the 90th percentile.  
Age of the household head has similar positive effects across the percentiles, but the 
magnitude of the effect is very small. However, total land owned has heterogeneous positive 
effect and the results show smaller effect at the lower percentile compared with the upper 
percentiles. An additional hectare of total land increases available per capita calories per day 
by 28 per cent at the 10th percentile and 44 per cent at the 90th percentile. This suggest that the 
upper percentile (food secure) households are more efficient in land usage compared with the 
lower percentile (food insecure) households. This could be due to economies of scale as more 
food secure households are associated with more total land ownership.  
Table 3.9: CRE Quantile Regression Model results on factors influencing available per 
capita calories. Dependent variable: Log per capita kilocalories.  
Explanatory Variables 10th 
Percentile 
Percentile 
Percentile 
Percentile 
Percentile 
Coef./SE Coef./SE Coef./SE Coef./SE Coef./SE 
Generalised residuals  -0.43*** -0.46*** -0.39*** -0.33*** -0.24*** 
 (0.06) (0.05) (0.04) (0.04) (0.07) 
Subsidised fertilizer in Kg 0.0025** 0.0032*** 0.0025*** 0.0028*** 0.0022*** 
 (0.0011) (0.0007) (0.0007) (0.0005) (0.0008) 
Household head (female) -0.15 -0.01 -0.12** -0.14 -0.04 
 (0.16) (0.12) (0.06) (0.09) (0.13) 
Household head age (years) 0.010*** 0.013*** 0.014*** 0.011*** 0.010** 
 (0.004) (0.003) (0.003) (0.003) (0.005) 
Household head primary educ 0.04 0.08 0.02 -0.04 -0.03 
 (0.15) (0.08) (0.07) (0.09) (0.11) 
Household head secondary ed 0.24 0.24* 0.15 0.05 0.12 
 (0.18) (0.14) (0.11) (0.15) (0.20) 
Household head tertiary educ 0.26 0.69** 0.38 0.22 0.51* 
 (0.29) (0.32) (0.26) (0.30) (0.30) 
Total landholding size (hec) 0.28*** 0.31*** 0.39*** 0.45*** 0.44*** 
 (0.08) (0.08) (0.06) (0.07) (0.08) 
Rural location of the house 0.40 0.18 0.06 -0.15 -0.25 
 (0.26) (0.23) (0.21) (0.20) (0.22) 
Crop diversification 0.24*** 0.27*** 0.17*** 0.13*** 0.12*** 
 (0.04) (0.03) (0.03) (0.03) (0.04) 
Log distance daily market  0.01 0.06** 0.03 0.03 0.04 
 (0.04) (0.03) (0.02) (0.02) (0.04) 
Irrigation scheme in the com 0.27** 0.13** 0.03 0.002 -0.05 
 (0.13) (0.07) (0.06) (0.07) (0.10) 
Log number of households  0.03 0.05* 0.01 0.03 0.02 
 (0.04) (0.03) (0.03) (0.03) (0.03) 
Agricultural Extension Office 0.05 0.13* 0.15** 0.06 0.19** 
 (0.09) (0.07) (0.06) (0.06) (0.08) 
Micro-finance institution  0.08 -0.08 0.07 0.13** 0.05 
 (0.11) (0.10) (0.09) (0.06) (0.10) 
Log average district rainfall   -0.24 0.07 0.01 0.18 -0.14 
 (0.30) (0.24) (0.14) (0.18) (0.30) 
Year dummy 2013=1 0.13*** 0.13*** 0.13*** 0.15*** 0.16*** 
 (0.04) (0.05) (0.03) (0.04) (0.04) 
Constant 5.86*** 6.56*** 7.01*** 7.06*** 7.69*** 
 (0.65) (0.63) (0.46) (0.53) (0.70) 
Number of observations 4,948 4,948 4,948 4,948 4,948 
Pseudo R-squared 0.1158 0.1155 0.1235 0.1336 0.1257 
Note: *, **, *** represents statistically significant level at 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively; bootstrap 
standard errors (SE) are in parentheses (1000 reps); estimation includes time averages of time-variant 
regressors. 
However, crop diversification is found to have larger positive effects at the lower 
percentiles compared to the top percentiles. Growing an additional crop increases available per 
capita calories per day by 24 per cent at the 10th percentile and 12 per cent at the 90th percentile. 
These results reflect the different types of crops grown in addition to maize. For households at 
the lower percentiles, legumes for food consumption are likely to be the additional crops to be 
grown, while it is likely to be non-food cash crops for the upper percentile households.  
Availability of irrigation scheme in the community is found to have positive effects only 
on the food insecure households at the lower 10th and 25th percentiles. Since food crops 
dominate the type of crops grown in irrigation schemes, most of the targeted households are 
the food insecure with the objective of supplementing their rain fed food crops production. 
Interestingly, availability of agricultural extension officer and microfinance institution in the 
community is found to have positive effects on available per capital calories per day only 
among the more food secure households. This suggests that the food insecure households are 
not benefiting much from such services and highlight the importance of participation and 
inclusiveness of the poor and food insecure households in public and private services aimed at 
improving rural livelihoods. 
Concerning consumption expenditure, similar to results in Table 3.7, the CRE quantile 
regression model results in Table 3.10 show no evidence of statistically significant effects 
across the farm households distribution on annual total per capita consumption expenditure. 
Furthermore, this study also finds no evidence of statistically significant effects across the farm 
households distribution on annual food and non-food per capita consumption expenditure. 
This also explains the marginal reduction in poverty during the period of FISP implementation 
in Malawi.  
Table 3.10: CRE Quantile Regression Model results on determinants of total annual per 
capita consumption expenditure. Dependent variable: Log total annual per capita 
consumption expenditure 
Explanatory Variables 10th 
Percentile 
Percentile 
Percentile 
Percentile 
Percentile 
Coef./SE Coef./SE Coef./SE Coef./SE Coef./SE 
Generalised residuals  -0.09*** -0.05* -0.05**   
 (0.03) (0.03) (0.03)   
Subsidised fertilizer in Kg 0.0003 0.0003 0.0002 0.0001 0.0005 
 (0.0004) (0.0003) (0.0004) (0.0004) (0.0005) 
Household head (female) 0.04 -0.11* -0.03 -0.06 -0.06 
 (0.09) (0.06) (0.05) (0.07) (0.10) 
Household head age (years) -0.01** -0.01** -0.01** -0.01*** -0.01** 
 (0.003) (0.003) (0.002) (0.002) (0.003) 
Household head primary educ 0.10* 0.07 0.02 0.07 -0.08 
 (0.06) (0.05) (0.05) (0.06) (0.08) 
Household head secondary ed 0.08 0.23*** 0.24*** 0.28*** 0.26** 
 (0.09) (0.09) (0.07) (0.10) (0.11) 
Household head tertiary educ 0.54*** 0.63*** 0.52*** 0.52** 0.52** 
 (0.15) (0.17) (0.15) (0.26) (0.24) 
Total landholding size (hec) 0.11*** 0.08* 0.07* 0.06* 0.03 
 (0.04) (0.05) (0.04) (0.04) (0.05) 
Rural location of the house -0.21 -0.12 -0.10 -0.24 -0.39 
 (0.13) (0.15) (0.14) (0.16) (0.24) 
Crop diversification 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.06** 
 (0.02) (0.02) (0.02) (0.02) (0.02) 
Log distance to daily market  0.01 0.01 0.01 -0.02 -0.04* 
 (0.02) (0.02) (0.02) (0.02) (0.02) 
Irrigation scheme in the com -0.01 0.04 -0.002 -0.06 -0.06 
 (0.06) (0.04) (0.04) (0.06) (0.07) 
Log number of households  0.05*** 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.04* 
 (0.02) (0.02) (0.02) (0.01) (0.02) 
Agricultural Extension Office -0.07* 0.01 0.01 0.02 -0.04 
 (0.04) (0.05) (0.03) (0.05) (0.07) 
Micro-finance institution  -0.05 -0.004 -0.03 0.06 -0.03 
 (0.06) (0.05) (0.04) (0.07) (0.07) 
Log average district rainfall   0.20 0.16 -0.04 -0.09 -0.003 
 (0.13) (0.12) (0.10) (0.14) (0.18) 
Year dummy 2013 0.09** 0.05** 0.07*** 0.04 0.07** 
 (0.03) (0.03) (0.02) (0.03) (0.03) 
Constant 10.35*** 10.80*** 10.80*** 11.50*** 11.45*** 
 (0.34) (0.35) (0.30) (0.43) (0.42) 
Number of observations 4948 4948 4948 4948 4948 
Pseudo R-squared 0.1006 0.1019 0.1150 0.1202 0.1512 
Note: *, **, *** represents statistically significant level at 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively; bootstrap 
standard errors (SE) are in parentheses (1000 reps);  estimation includes time averages of time-variant 
regressors. 
Results in Table 3.10 also show that old age is associated with lower total annual per 
capita consumption expenditure and the magnitude of the effects are the same across the 
percentiles, but they are very small. Education level of the household head is found to have 
positive effects and the magnitude of the effects are similar across the percentiles. These results 
highlight the negative and positive effects of old age and higher education on household 
income, respectively. However, total land has statistically significant positive effects only on 
the lower percentiles, suggesting that crop production is the main source of income for 
households in the lower percentiles of total consumption expenditure. 
3.8 Conclusion  
Agriculture is the main livelihood strategy for most rural households in Malawi, and in sub-
Saharan Africa in general, and consequently, agricultural policies are vital for achieving 
economic growth, food security and poverty alleviation. Farm input subsidy programs are one 
of the pervasive policy tools used to address the problems of food insecurity and poverty 
through improvement of agricultural production and productivity. This study has estimated the 
effects of a fertilizer subsidy program on kilocalories available per capita per day; household 
annual food security status; food, non-food and the total annual per capita consumption 
expenditure in Malawi.  
The study finds that fertilizer subsidy has a positive impact on food security and its effect 
is heterogeneous across the farm households distribution. Even though the percentage 
incremental effect is higher for the poorest and most food insecure household, measured in 
levels the effect is higher among the most food secure households. Furthermore,  the magnitude 
of the effects of subsidised fertilizer on food security are not large enough to eradicate food 
insecurity among poor households in isolation, and this underscores the importance of 
integrated livelihood approach in development interventions. The study also finds no evidence 
of effects of one-off benefit to subsidised fertilizer on annual food, non-food and total per capita 
consumption expenditure. However, repeated benefit to subsidised fertilizer is found to have 
positive statistically significant and increased magnitude of effects on available per capita per 
day calories, annual food and total per capita consumption expenditure. This supports the 
theory of change of farm input subsidies as espoused by its proponents.  
From the policy point of view, these results provide several important insights. First, farm 
input subsidy programs could be beneficial for some improvement of food security, based 
predominantly on subsistence agriculture where food security is achieved through consumption 
of own production. Such programs are less useful when the main policy objective is to decrease 
consumption expenditure poverty due to the marginal contribution of fertilizer subsidies to 
income from crop sales and the lack of contribution to development of non-farm income 
sources. 
Second, a fertilizer subsidy program has a higher positive impact on the most food secure, 
raising the question of whether targeting households in the lowest food crops production 
percentiles offers value for money in order to achieve the objective to improve food security. 
However, since households in lower food crops production percentiles are the most food 
insecure, provision of subsidised fertilizer to these groups of farmers can be justified on the 
basis to achieve social protection objectives. 
Third, the results highlight the need for promoting complementary policy interventions in 
addition to fertilizer subsidies in order to achieve sustainable household food and income 
security. Implementing policies which promote family planning to slow down population 
growth  and farm household sizes would be important in order to improve available kilocalories 
and total consumption expenditure per capita, consequently, reducing poverty and food 
insecurity.  Also an increase in land holdings can substantially improve household food security 
and reduce poverty. Fourth, policies which support crop diversification and access to 
agricultural extension services would also significantly contribute to improved household food 
security.  
Overall, the input subsidies could be useful for food insecure and poor households in some 
locations in Malawi, but they alone are not a solution to food insecurity and poverty. They are 
only one tool that has to be built-in in a more comprehensive agricultural policy package 
facilitating agricultural and rural development.   
Chapter 4 
THE IMPACT OF FARM INPUT SUBSIDIES ON INTERNAL 
MIGRATION OF FARM HOUSEHOLD MEMBERS 
4.1 Introduction 
Increasing urban food insecurity and poverty due to rapid urbanisation are some of the 
challenges facing most governments in developing countries (UN-Habitat, 2007; 2012; Rhoda, 
1983; Todaro, 1969). Migration of household members from locations of low to high economic 
opportunities, especially from rural to urban areas, has been for decades used as a livelihood 
strategy in both developed and developing countries.  
Africa and Asia are the continents experiencing the highest rates of urbanisation in the 21st 
century, with sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) having the worlds highest annual urban growth rate 
of 4.58 per cent, compared to 0.75 per cent for developed countries (UN-Habitat, 2007;2012).   
This is a major challenge because it has led to high urban food insecurity and poverty. SSA has 
the highest level of urban poverty in the world equal to about 50 per cent in some countries and 
71.8 per cent of the population live in slums (UN-Habitat, 2007).   
Several studies on the effects of migration of household members on household wellbeing 
have shown a positive impact on several indicators such as improved food and income security, 
poverty reduction, improved nutrition and general health of household members, and 
investment in productive enterprises and education of children (Harris and Todaro, 1970). 
However, negative effects have also been reported in areas where the available economic 
opportunities do not match the rate of immigration, resulting into an increased rate of 
urbanisation, urban food and income insecurity, urban poverty, environmental degradation, 
pollution, spread of diseases, and severe malnutrition (UN-Habitat, 2007; Garcia et al., 2014). 
 Malawi is one of the countries currently experiencing rapid urbanisation, and having high 
rates of urban food insecurity and poverty. Malawis annual slum growth rate is estimated to 
be at 3.9 per cent, and in 2007, 68 per cent of the countrys population was living in slums 
(UN-Habitat, 2014). Similar to other developing countries, Malawi is expected to continue 
experiencing rapid urbanisation in the next decades because the seasonal, rural to rural and 
rural to urban migration of household members helps in smoothing food and income security 
for the rural population whose main livelihood strategy is agriculture. It is therefore, assumed 
that improving agricultural production and productivity, and thus improving household food 
security and income in rural areas, will reduce rural out-migration and consequently reduce 
urban food insecurity and poverty. 
Recently some governments in SSA, including Malawi, have reintroduced farm input 
subsidy programmes with the main aim of addressing food and income insecurity at both 
household and national levels. Differently from the previous farm input subsidies, most of the 
current programmes are targeted and are labelled market smart (World Bank, 2007). These 
programmes are expected to improve the economic returns of agricultural production due to 
reduced input costs of subsidised farm inputs, especially fertilizers and hybrid seeds and 
consequently, improve crop production and productivity. This might act as incentive to stay in 
agricultural activities and as a result, slowing down the migration of household members. 
While slowing down migration might help to reduce the negative effects of urbanisation, it 
might also result into loss of economic opportunities which could have contributed to reducing 
rural poverty and food insecurity of the migrants households. On the other hand, improved 
income from crops sales and savings on farm input purchases due to the use of farm input 
subsidies may be used to finance migration costs and hence facilitate migration of household 
members. As a result, farm input subsidies do not have a priori impact on migration.  
The main objective of this study is to estimate the effects of subsidised fertilizer on rural 
to urban, rural to rural and seasonal migration of farm household members. To the authors 
best knowledge, this is the first study to analyse the effects of subsidised fertilizer on seasonal, 
rural to rural and rural to urban migration in SSA, and in particular, Malawi. This study is also 
the first to analyse the effects of repeated subsidy benefits on farm household members 
migration and this helps to assess the effects of sustainable flow of intervention benefits on 
migration decisions and contribute to the analysis of the theory of change associated with farm 
input subsidies as espoused by its proponents. Meng (2012) is the only study which analyses 
similar aspects (i.e. the effects of grain subsidies on rural to urban migration) in China. There 
are substantial differences on the subsidy programmes in Malawi and China. In Meng (2012), 
subsidies are in form of cash, which beneficiaries receive after harvesting and the amount 
depends on the quantity of grain harvested, while in this study the subsidies are in the form of 
farm inputs to be used in production. It is interesting to see whether the differences in the type 
and timing of delivering the subsidies between Malawi and China have implications on the 
decision to migrate from rural to urban areas.  
The structure of this section is as follows. The next section discusses types of migration 
and effects on household welfare and agricultural development. Population distribution and 
migration trend in Malawi are discussed in section 4.3. Sections 4.4 and 4.5 present the 
conceptual framework and the estimation of empirical models, respectively. Section 4.6 
discusses data sources, presents the descriptive statistics and endogeneity tests results. 
Estimation results and discussions are presented in section 4.7. Section 4.8 concludes.  
4.2 Types of migration and effects on household welfare and agricultural development  
This section discusses some common types of migration, the role of migration in the process 
of agricultural development and its impact on household welfare, especially on poverty and 
income.  
4.2.1 Types of Migration: Push and Pull factors 
Migration literature categorises motivation for migration under the push and pull factors (ILO, 
2010). The push factors include low employment opportunities, drought, civil conflicts and 
poverty in the location of origin, while the pull factors include favourable agricultural climatic 
conditions, higher employment opportunities and better working conditions in the destination 
location, family reunion and political stability (ILO, 2010).   
The main migration push factors in SSA are drought (World Bank, 2009, 2010)  and 
the lack of adequate public services, especially in rural areas, while the main pull factor is the 
economic growth in urban areas, which increases employment opportunities, and thus, 
household income (World Bank, 2009). Internal and international migration are the two main 
broad types of migration. Internal migration is the most common form of labour flows 
worldwide and recent statistics indicate that there are about 740 million internal migrants, 
which is four times the number of international migrants (World Bank, 2014). In most of the 
developing countries, internal migration is dominated by temporary rural to urban movement 
of people, and thus, the seasonal migration is the most common type (World Bank, 2014). The 
World Bank (2009) also highlights the importance of rural to rural migration from areas of low 
to high economic activities. 
According to the World Bank, (2003), rural out-migration will continue in developing 
countries as they progress in the development process despite of any interventions in the rural 
economy. Due to rapid urbanisation as a result of rural to urban migration, most policy makers 
in developing countries  implement policies and contemplate ways of slowing down and even 
reversing this trend based on the premise that it  contributes to high urban poverty, food and 
nutrition insecurity (World Bank, 2009). However, trying to reduce and reverse rural to urban 
migration might not be effective and the World Bank (2009) suggests the really effective way 
is to focus at eliminating push factors such as effects of climate change, especially drought, the 
lack of adequate public services and low income opportunities in rural areas. This will improve 
the quality of migrants and contribute to economic growth. 
4.2.2 Migration Effects on Household welfare 
Currently, about 746 million people live below the poverty line (i.e. on less than $2 per day), 
and furthermore, a quarter of the population in developing countries is extremely poor (i.e. live 
on less than $1.25 per day), and also a quarter of the children are malnourished (World Bank, 
2010). This is the reason why most developing countries policies focus on improving 
economic growth and alleviating poverty (World Bank, 2010). 
The literature on migration indicates that in the process of economic development, rural 
out-migration is inevitable. One of the main reasons for migration of household members is to 
maximise their net present value of income and for household members left behind through 
receipt of remittances. There is a wide range of literature on the positive effects of remittances 
on poverty and food security in developing countries. However, the amount of remittances also 
depends on income levels of migrants. Due to differences in economic growth and employment 
opportunities of migrants destinations, amounts of remittances may also vary among the 
migrants.   
Figure 4.1 presents cumulative distribution of remittances by types of migration in Malawi 
based on the third nationally representative integrated household survey 2010/2011 (IHS3) 
data. There is no significant difference in the amounts of remittances among seasonal, rural to 
rural and rural to urban migrants below the 40th percentile of the migrants. Significant 
differences on remittances are observed above the 40th percentile and the figure shows that 
rural to urban migrants remit the highest amounts while rural to rural migrants remit the lowest 
amounts annually. However, a comparison of annual per capita consumption expenditure and 
annual remittances in Figure 4.1 shows that only the top 90th percentiles of seasonal and rural 
to urban migrants remit amounts equivalent to the poverty line amount required to reduce 
poverty of one adult equivalent person per annum in 2011. This could be one of the 
explanations for the continued observed increase in the rural to urban migration trends in 
Malawi. 
Figure 4.1: Cumulative annual seasonal, rural to rural and rural to urban migrants 
remittances in Malawi. 
Source: Author based on IHS3 (2010/2011) data. 
0 20000 40000 60000 80000 100000
Total Value of Remittances (Malawi Kwacha)
Seasonal Migrant Rural to rural Migrant
Rural- to urban Migrant Poverty Line (MK37001.68)
Cumulatives:
Annual Sesonal, Rural to rural and Rural to urban Migrants' Remittances
The World Bank (2007, 2013) argues that migration is one of the important pathways 
to poverty alleviation in developing countries and that the positive effects of migration include 
increased income of migrants and their respective households through their wages and 
remittances and emphasises that the positive benefits of migration is only achieved if migrants 
find jobs in their migration destinations.  According to the World Bank (2009), the positive 
effects of migration also include reduced unemployment in rural areas, where employment 
opportunities are mainly in agriculture; increased income for migrants household members in 
communities of origin; and economic improvement in communities of origin through use of 
improved skills and capital of returning migrants.  The World Bank (2014) underlines the 
importance of migration for households risk diversification, and increasing the resilience 
against household shocks.  
The evidence from empirical studies on the effects of migration on household welfare 
is rather mixed. Gibson et al., (2013) review recent studies in the Pacific and Southeast Asia, 
and conclude that seasonal and temporary migration boosts per capita income by over 30 per 
cent and increases per capita expenditure, savings and purchase of durable assets. A study by 
Vathara et al. (2013) on the effects of emigration on households livelihoods, using data from 
Cambodia, finds that poverty decreases by three percentage points if a household receives 
remittances from one migrant household member; and reduces consumption inequality based 
on Gini coefficient by 1.4 percentage points. Their study also finds that remittances increase 
dependency syndrome by inducing a reduction in the weekly hours worked by remaining 
household members and household income from salary work by 18 per cent. However, the 
authors find mixed results on the overall effect on household income and on crop production.  
The ILO (2010) reports that labour migration can support development through 
remittances and return migration and this is evident in the amount of remittances migrants send 
to their countries of origin. The World Bank (2009) reports that in 2007 the value of remittances 
received by most developing countries exceeded the total value of foreign direct investment 
and equity. Theoretically, such remittances can significantly contribute to the economic 
development through financing of education, infrastructure development and enterprise 
investment. However, it is found that larger proportion of the remittances is used for 
subsistence rather than investment, which reduces the potential developmental effects of 
remittance on receiving countries (ILO, 2010). 
A study by Taylor et al., (2003) on the impact of migration on the income in migrants 
communities of origin in China finds that the migrant raises household income through 
remittances. But migration of a household member results in significant reduction in crop 
income in the absence of remittances. However, the authors also find that remittances increases 
crop income, and they argue that remittance may be reducing the negative effects on crop 
income due to the loss of labour as a result of migration of an active household member. 
Deshingkar and Start (2003) analyse the effects of seasonal migration on livelihoods in India 
and find that income from seasonal migration is used as a copping strategy, improves standard 
of living, increases savings accumulation, and is invested in agriculture and childrens 
education. 
Despite the expected positive effects of internal migration on economic growth and 
poverty alleviation, un-coordinated urbanisation in developing countries has resulted into high 
rate of urban poverty, pollution, spread of diseases and severe malnutrition (World Bank, 
2010).  This is supported by the World Bank (2007), which argue that migration to cities is not 
the major contributor to rural and world poverty reduction, and reports that 81 per cent 
reduction in rural poverty is attributed to better conditions in rural areas rather than to rural 
out-migration.  
4.2.3 Migration Effects on Agricultural Development 
Adaku (2013) studies the effects of rural to urban migration on agricultural production in the 
northern region of Ghana and reports that temporary migration reduces farm production and 
this is mainly attributed to the loss of labour; whilst permanent migration is found to have no 
effects of farm production.  A study by Rozelle et al., (1999) analyses the effects of migration 
and remittances on agricultural productivity in China and reports that migration of a household 
member reduces maize yield due to the loss of labour required to perform farm operations. 
However, their study also finds that migration increases remittances, which, in turn, is also 
found to increase maize yield. But the study on the effects of seasonal migration on agriculture 
in Vietnam by De Brauw (2007) finds no effects on aggregate production; weak evidence of 
move from rice production to other crops and a decrease in input use. The author also reports 
that the effect on agriculture is mainly as a results of a move from labour intensive into land 
intensive crops, rather than productivity changes. Another study by Brainoh (2004) on seasonal 
migration and land use change in the Volta Basin in Ghana finds an increase in the conversion 
of woodland to agricultural land and general transition to less vegetation cover.   
4.3 Population distribution and migration trend in Malawi 
Malawis population is mainly rural based with over 80 percent of the people living in rural 
areas. But overtime the population distribution has been changing with the urban population 
showing a steady increase. Figure 4.2, based on census data (GoM, 2008) shows that the urban 
population increased by three percentage points from 10.7 per cent during the 1987 census to 
14.4 per cent during the 1998 census. However, later on the trend slowed down, as the urban 
population increased by only one percentage point from 14.4 during the 1998 census to 15.3 
percent during the 2008 census. Overall, the trend suggests increasing urbanisation in Malawi, 
but still the vast majority of the population lives in rural areas. 
Figure 4.2: Percentage of population distribution in rural and urban locations in 1987, 
1998 and 2008 Census in Malawi 
Source: Author based on Census data (GoM, 2008) 
The dynamics in the population distribution in Malawi suggest that people are migrating. 
This study focuses on internal migration- rural to urban, rural to rural and seasonal for 
employment purposes. In this study, seasonal migrants refer to those who moved out of their 
main residential areas for a period of between one and twelve months for employment purposes 
and returned; while rural to rural and rural to urban migrants refer to those who migrated for 
employment purposes for a period of between one and three years and had not returned by the 
time of the surveys. The maximum three year period is chosen to correspond with the survey 
periods for the data used and the available information on households benefit to farm input 
subsidies in Malawi. Section 4.6 provides more details on the data and selection of migration 
periods used in the empirical analyses. 
85.6 84.7
14.4 15.3
1987 1998 2008P
Year of Census
Percentage Population Distribution in rural and urban locations in 
1987, 1998 and 2008 Census in Malawi
Rural Urban
Figure 4.3 illustrates migration trends of household members for employment purposes 
between 2005 (before the implementation of the large farm input subsidy programme, FISP), 
2010, and 2013 (during the implementation of FISP) based on the second integrated household 
survey (IHS2) and integrated household panel surveys (IHPS) data, respectively.  
Figure 4.3: Proportion of households by type of migration of household members for 
employment purposes in 2005, 2010 and 2013 in Malawi. 
Source: Author based on IHS2 and IHPS data. 
The seasonal migration of household members decreased by 22 percentage points, from 
27 per cent in 2005 to 5 per cent in 2010 and then increased by 5 percentage points to 10 per 
cent in 2013. Rural to rural migration also decreased by 8 percentage points from 13 per cent 
in 2005 to 5 per cent in 2010 and then increased to 6 per cent in 2013. During the same period 
rural to urban migration increased by two percentage points from four per cent to six per cent; 
2005 2010 2013P
Year of Survey
Proportion of households by type of migration of household members 
for employment purposes in 2005, 2010 and 2013 in Malawi
 Seasonal migrant household member (%) Rural- Rural migrant household member (%)
Rural- Urban migrant household member (%)
and then decreased by again two percentage points to four percent in 2013. However, the report 
by the UN-Habitat shows that Malawis urban population is growing at a much faster rate. The 
average decade rate of Malawis urban population growth for the period 2000  to 2010 was 
3.45 per cent and is projected to increase to 4.9 percent for the period 2020 to 2030 (UN-
Habitat, 2014).  
4.4 Theoretical framework 
This section presents the model of decision to migrate out of the farm. The model is based on 
the new economics of labour migration (NELM) theory (Stark and Bloom, 1985), in which 
migration decision is assumed to be a collective household decision, rather than an individuals 
decision as is the case in the expected income model (Todaro, 1969).  In the expected income 
model, it is  assumed that the individuals decision to migrate or not is based on the net 
difference of discounted expected income between the present location and the migrant 
destination (Todaro, 1969).While in the NELM theory, the household as a whole is assumed to 
share the costs of migration and benefits of migration of a household member through 
remittances, and thus, reducing the risks involved in migration and facilitating migration as a 
household livelihood strategy (Stark and Bloom, 1985).   
In this study, the focus is on migration motivated by both push and pulls factors. The model 
of migration accounts also for other factors which play significant role in migration decisions 
by households. Risks associated with agricultural production, such as drought and floods, 
access to public facilities such as hospitals and schools, and probabilities of employment have 
all been found to have significant effects on the decision to migrate (Meng, 2012; United 
Nations, 2011). Since most households in the dataset in this study are based in rural areas and 
agricultural production is the main livelihood strategy, migration decisions are based on 
expected utility differentials between having a household member staying on the farm (from a 
combination of consumption of own production, income from sales of agricultural produce, 
rural off-farm wages and non-farm income, access to public services) and having a household 
member migrating (mainly from a combination of non-farm wages, reduced risks (Stark and 
Levhari, 1982) , access to improved public and private facilities, increased household income 
through remittances).  
Based on the expected positive impact of farm input subsidies on household food security 
and income from crop sales, two hypotheses are formulated in relation to the internal migration 
of farm households members: 
 (1): There is a negative relationship between FISP and households members rural to 
urban, rural to rural and seasonal migration; 
 (2): The benefits from more cycle of farm input subsidy disbursement, the higher the 
magnitude of the negative effects on households members rural to urban, rural to 
rural and seasonal migration. 
MU and SU  represent overall expected utility to members of household i after 
migration M of a household member and if the household member stays on the farm S, 
respectively. A rational household will choose either of the two by aiming at maximising the 
expected utility and the observed choice signify greater utility.  Following Greene (2003), the 
households optimisation problem is to make a decision that maximises the expected utility: 
}),,()],,,([{ CLSXULSXUEMax MMMSSS       (4.1) 
where X represent a vector of household characteristics, 
SS and MS represent vectors of 
quantities of subsidised fertilizer redeemed with coupons if  a household member stays on the 
farm household and migrates, respectively, 
SL and ML represent vectors of present farm 
household and migration destination locations characteristics, respectively, and C represents 
the costs of migration. The expected utility if the household member stays on the farm is 
determined by a function ),,( SSS LSXU while the expected utility if a household member 
migrates is determined by a function CLSXU MMM ),,( . However, the probability of 
households getting coupons for subsidised fertilizer after a household member has migrated 
might be low because of the community expectation that such households might be receiving 
remittances and therefore, do not meet some of the subsidy targeting criteria such as being poor 
and unable to self-finance the purchase of farm inputs at commercial prices.  
The households decision to have a household member migrate or not is 
1M  if SM UU   
0M  if SM UU          (4.2) 
4.5 Estimation of empirical model 
Empirical analyses are carried out to investigate the impact of subsidised fertilizer on migration 
of farm household members at two levels: (i) the effects of one-off benefit on rural to urban, 
rural to rural, and seasonal migration; (ii) the effects of repeated benefits on rural to urban, 
rural to rural, and seasonal migration.  
Estimation of the model of migration decision for household i is carried out by applying 
the Probit Model. The estimation equation is as follows: 
113211101 iiiii fertilizerregionhM       (4.3) 
where 
1iM  is the binary dependent variable and equal to one if a household member migrated 
(rural to urban; rural to rural; seasonal) or zero otherwise; 1ih  is a vector of household 
characteristics, including sex, and age of household head, total land owned, household size and 
distance to the district centre; 1iregion  is a vector of regional location of the household in 
southern, central or northern region; 1ifertilizer  is a vector of quantity of subsidised fertilizer 
redeemed by the household using  subsidy coupons during the 2009/10 agricultural season (in 
the analyses of the effects of repeated benefit of subsidised fertilizer,  frequency dummies are 
used and are represented by one, two, three, and four times benefits); 
1i is an idiosyncratic 
error term; and  are the parameters  to be estimated. The use of household characteristics 
rather than the individual migrants characteristics in modelling the decision of a farm 
household members migration conforms to the new economics of labour migration (NELM) 
theory of household collective decision making (Stark and Bloom, 1985). 
4.6 Data source, descriptive statistics and endogeneity test 
The empirical analyses of the migration models use the same data source as described in section 
2.7 of Chapter 2 of this thesis. However, for this study, households which did not engage in 
agricultural activities during the two survey periods are excluded in order to ensure that only 
households with similar production function are used as control and treatments in the empirical 
analyses. 
 Furthermore, causality assessment of the impact of subsidised fertilizer on migration 
decisions entails that we cannot use the two wave panel data because we do not have 
information on access to subsidised fertilizer the period before the 2008/2009 agricultural 
season. Since the rural to urban and rural to rural migration of household members in this study 
is categorised as long term migration of one year or more, causality assessment of the impact 
of subsidies can only be carried out by using information on past benefit to subsidised fertilizer 
for at least more than a year based on the preceding surveys and on the observed migration 
decisions based on information in the recent survey. Therefore, in this study we use quantity 
of subsidised fertilizer the household redeemed in the 2009/2010 agricultural season to assess 
its impact on rural to urban and rural to rural migration of farm household members for a period 
of between one to three years; and on seasonal migration for a period of between one and  
twelve months. 
The migration decisions which took place between one to three years are used in this 
study because the information on migration decisions after receipt of the fertilizer subsidy 
coupons during the 2009/2010 agricultural seasons was collected in the second wave of the 
panel data surveys in 2013. However, for the analysis of the effects of the repeated benefits to 
subsidised fertilizer on migration decision, we use the maximum of four times benefit because 
the household historical subsidy coupons access only dates back to the 2008/2009 agricultural 
season.  As a result, this study uses a cross section sample of 3,155 households. 
4.6.1 Descriptive statistics 
Table 4.1 presents the descriptive statistics of variables used in the empirical analyses. 
Concerning the targeted farm input subsidy programme (FISP), the overall sample average of 
the redeemed subsidised fertilizer is 42 kg for the 2009/10 agricultural seasons. Considering 
the beneficiaries only, the average redeemed fertilizer is 79 kg per household, which is less 
than the standard FISP programme package of 100 kg of subsidised fertilizer.  With respect to 
the frequency of benefit to the subsidisation programme, the results show that for most 
households there is no continuity of benefit.  Although about 50 per cent of the households 
received coupons and redeemed them with subsidised fertilizer, only 25 per cent of the sampled 
households received coupons four times continuously from 2008/09 to 2011/12 agricultural 
seasons. Consequently, the fertilizer subsidy programme may have differing effects on 
different households depending of the number of repeated benefits. It is expected that the effect 
will be larger for households which have benefited from the programme more repeatedly and 
continuously than for those which were targeted once in a while. 
Concerning the migration of household members, the descriptive statistics  show that the 
most popular type of migration for work related purposes is the seasonal migration involving 
ten per cent of the sample, while rural to rural and rural to urban migration is at five  and two 
per cent, respectively. This is expected due to differences in migration costs involved in 
different types of migration. Since in seasonal migration the migrant relocates temporarily to a 
new location between periods of one to twelve months, it might involve lower migration costs 
than long-term migration such as rural to urban and rural to rural, and therefore, making it a 
more attractive type of migration. Furthermore, the average differences between fertilizer 
subsidy beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries show higher incidences of farm household 
members migration among non-beneficiary households compared with beneficiaries, 
suggesting the potential negative effects of access to farm input subsidies on farm household 
members migration. 
Statistics show that 76 per cent of the households are headed by males and that the average 
age of the household head is 43 years. However, the mean differences between fertilizer 
subsidy beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries show there is no statistically significant differences 
on sex of the household head, while beneficiary households are headed by older household 
heads than non-beneficiaries. Several migration studies have shown that males and younger 
household members have higher probabilities of migrating than females and older household 
members (Lewin et al., 2012). The educational level of household heads shows that 69 per cent 
have no formal education qualifications, while 10 per cent, 9 per cent, 8 per cent and 4 per cent 
have Primary School Leaving Certificate, Junior Certificate of Education, Malawi School 
Certificate of Education and Diploma or Degree, respectively. The statistics also show that 
fertilizer subsidy beneficiary households have less educated household heads compared with 
non-beneficiary households. In migration literature, education level of the potential migrant is 
found to be one of the key factors determining the probability of migrating. (Lewin et al., 
2012).  
Data on household size show that on average a household has five members. This highlight 
the challenge farm households have of meeting food and income security for household 
members.  Inadequate agricultural land area seems to be one of the constraints faced by most 
farmers as the descriptive statistics show that the average landholding size is only 0.6 hectares, 
with fertilizer subsidy beneficiary households owning relatively larger landholdings than non-
beneficiary households. Coupled with a large household size, such landholdings may not be 
able to produce enough food to feed the household and provide surplus to sell to meet 
household income requirements. It is such types of challenges that force households to smooth 
their food consumption and income through migration of household members.  
The average distance to the district centre is 31 km and such a distance acts as a barrier to 
commuting for household members from remote areas because of high transport and 
transaction costs. The statistics also show that fertilizer subsidy beneficiary households are 
located further away from the district centres compared with non-beneficiary households, 
which also act as a barrier to access farm input and output markets. Overall, 27 per cent of the 
sampled households indicates that MPs reside in or visited their communities in the past three 
months preceding the survey, and 32 per cent of fertilizer subsidy beneficiaries reported to have 
a resident MP or were visited by the MP compared with only 22 percent of the non-beneficiary 
households. This suggests the potential political influence of MPs on coupon distributions of 
subsidised farm inputs in Malawi. 
Table 4.1: Descriptive Statistics  
Variable  All  
(Full Sample) 
Beneficiaries 
Beneficiaries 
Only (III) 
Difference 
(II-III) (IV) 
Mean Std. 
Mean Std. 
Mean Std. 
Mean/SE 
Household head 
(male) 
0.76 0.42 0.76 0.42 0.77 0.42 -0.02   
(0.02) 
Household head age 
(years) 
42.53 15.96 43.92 16.48 40.9 15.17 3.02*** 
(0.57) 
Head no formal 
educ qualification 
0.69 0.46 0.74 0.44 0.63 0.48 0.11*** 
(0.02) 
Head primary educ 
qualification 
0.1 0.30 0.1 0.3 0.09 0.29 0.01 
(0.01) 
Head junior second 
educ qualification 
0.09 0.29 0.09 0.29 0.1 0.3 -0.01 
(0.01) 
Head Malawi 
secondary educ qual 
0.08 0.27 0.06 0.23 0.11 0.31 -0.05*** 
(0.01) 
Head tertiary educ 
qualification 
0.04 0.19 0.01 0.11 0.07 0.25 -0.05*** 
(0.01) 
Household size 4.99 2.29 5.03 2.28 4.96 2.31 0.06 
(0.08) 
Northern region 0.20 0.40 0.22 0.42 0.18 0.38 0.04*** 
(0.01) 
Central region 0.39 0.49 0.37 0.48 0.41 0.49 -0.04** 
(0.02) 
Southern region 0.41 0.49 0.41 0.49 0.41 0.49 -0.004 
(0.02) 
Total land (hectares)  0.64 0.7 0.69 0.7 0.58 0.69 0.11*** 
(0.02) 
Distance to district 
31.23 36.34 33.93 33.64 28.09 39.04 5.84*** 
(1.29) 
MP resident or visit 0.27 0.45 0.32 0.47 0.22 0.41 0.10*** 
(0.02) 
Rural-urban migrant  0.02 0.15 0.01 0.12 0.03 0.18 -0.02*** 
(0.01) 
Rural-rural migrant 0.05 0.21 0.04 0.18 0.06 0.23 -0.02*** 
(0.01) 
Seasonal migrant  
0.1 0.3 0.08 0.27 0.11 0.32 -0.03*** 
(0.01) 
Subsidised fertilizer 
42.41 44.16 78.71 28.14    
One-time benefit 
0.08 0.27 0.11 0.31    
Two-times benefit 
0.09 0.29 0.12 0.33    
Three-times benefit 0.05 
0.22 0.07 0.25    
Four-times benefit 0.25 
0.44 0.36 0.48    
Number of obs. 3155  1700  1455   
Note: ***, ** represents statistically significant at 1 % and 5 % level; Beneficiaries only=2010 
FISP; Km=Kilometres; MP=Member of Parliament; SE=standard errors in parentheses. 
4.6.2 Endogeneity test of subsidised fertilizer 
Distribution of subsidised fertilizer coupons under the farm input subsidy programme is not 
random and only those targeted receive the coupons. Therefore, the unobserved time-invariant 
household heterogeneity may be correlated with the household members decision to migrate 
and hence making the subsidised fertilizer in the estimations endogenous. The endogeneity of 
subsidised fertilizer is tested in all estimations using a Member of Parliament (MP) residence 
or visit in the past three months preceding the surveys in the community as an instrument for 
subsidised fertilizer. Section 2.6.4 of Chapter 2 in this thesis provides details on the application 
of the control function (CF) approach of the IV methods and a discussion on the rationally of 
using a Member of Parliament (MP) as an IV and the test results of its exogeneity at a 
community level. 
 Endogeneity test results on migration decisions are incorporated in the tables of results 
in Tables 4.2-4.5 and the results show that subsidised fertilizer is endogenous only on rural to 
urban migration of household members. Table 4.A1 in Appendix 4A presents identification 
test results of MP residence or visit in the community as an IV and show that it has statistically 
insignificant effects on rural to urban, rural to rural and seasonal migration decision of farm 
household members. Similar to discussions in Chapters 2 and 3, the chosen instrument might 
be weak, however, according to the best knowledge of the author, currently there is no method 
of testing weak instrumental variables under the CF approach. 
4.7 Results and discussion 
This section presents and discusses the regression results on factors determining rural to urban, 
rural to rural and seasonal migration of household members. The focus of the discussion is on 
the effects of subsidised fertilizer. Results on factors determining rural to urban migration are 
discussed in section 4.7.1; rural to rural migration in section 4.7.2; and seasonal migration in 
section 4.7.3. Results on the effects of subsidised fertilizer based on repeated benefits are 
discussed in section 4.7.4. 
4.7.1 The impact of subsidised fertilizer on rural to urban migration. 
Table 4.2 presents the regression results of factors which influence the migration of household 
members from rural to urban area. Model I is a Probit model and is presented to check the 
robustness of the results because it does not take into account the potential endogeneity of 
subsidised fertilizer. Model II is the Probit model with CF residuals to test the IV and control 
for the potential endogeneity of subsidised fertilizer. Since the generalised residuals are 
statistically significant in Model II, indicating the endogeneity of subsidised fertilizer, the 
discussion in this section is based on the results of this model.  
  The results show that the subsidised fertiliser has negative effects on rural to urban 
migration. An additional 100 kg of subsidised fertiliser decreases the probability of household 
members to migrate to urban area by six percentage points. This supports the hypothesis that 
there is a negative relationship between FISP and the migration of household members.  
Education has the expected effects and higher educational attainment of the household 
head increases the likelihood of rural to urban migration of household members.  Households 
with household heads having tertiary education have three percentage points higher probability 
of having household members migrating from rural to urban area than those with household 
heads who have no any qualification. In this study, 75 per cent of the rural to urban migrants 
are household heads, and therefore, these results underline the importance of education on 
migration since those with higher qualifications are more likely to be employed in the migration 
destination area than those with no qualification. 
Table 4.2: Regression results on factors determining Rural to Urban Migration of farm 
household members 
Independent Variables         Dependent variable: 
Rural-Urban Migration. 
Dependent variable: 
Rural-Urban Migration. 
 Probit Model (I)  Probit Model  with CF 
Residuals (II) 
 ME/SE ME/ SE 
Generalised residuals  0.02** 
  (0.01) 
Subsidised fertilizer (100Kg) -0.02** -0.06*** 
 (0.01) (0.02) 
Primary School Certificate 0.01 0.01 
 (0.01) (0.01) 
Junior Secondary Certificate 0.01 0.01 
 (0.01) (0.01) 
Malawi Secondary Certificate 0.02** 0.01 
 (0.01) (0.01) 
Diploma/Degree Certificate 0.04*** 0.03*** 
 (0.01) (0.01) 
Central region location 0.001 0.001 
 (0.01) (0.01) 
Northern region location -0.01 -0.01 
 (0.01) (0.01) 
Household head (male) 0.02*** 0.02*** 
 (0.01) (0.01) 
Household head age (years) -0.001** -0.001** 
 (0.0002) (0.0002) 
Household size  0.002* 0.002* 
 (0.001) (0.001) 
Landholding size (hectares) -0.05*** -0.05*** 
 (0.01) (0.01) 
Distance to district centre  -0.0001 -0.00004 
 (0.0001) (0.0001) 
Constant 0.02*** 0.02*** 
 (0.003) (0.003) 
Number of observations: 3155 3155 
Wald chi2 130.85 120.87 
Prob > chi2  [p-value] [0.0000] [0.0000] 
Log pseudolikelihood -283.32 -280.87 
Correctly classified 97.69% 97.69% 
Pseudo R2 0.18 0.19 
Notes: *, **, and *** represents statistically significant at 10%, 5% and 1% significance 
level, respectively; ME=Average Marginal Effects (AME); SE=robust standard errors are in 
parentheses (); SE =bootstrap standard errors (1000 reps); CF=Control Function. 
The results show that households with large size have higher probabilities of having a rural 
to urban migrant, but the magnitude of the effect is small. This is expected as such households 
usually face food deficit and low incomes, consequently, migration of household members 
could be one of the strategies of smoothening household food availability and income. 
The results on the size of the landholding covariate show statistically significant and 
negative effects. An increase in landholding size by one hectare decreases rural to urban 
migration by five percentage points. Household with male head have higher probability of 
having a rural to urban migrant than female headed households. This is consistent with several 
studies which show that males have higher probability of migrating than females and this is 
expected in this study since the majority of the rural to urban migrants are males and from male 
headed households. 
4.7.2 The impact of subsidised fertilizer on rural to rural migration. 
Regression results on factors affecting rural to rural migration of household members are 
presented in Table 4.3. Model I is the Probit model and the discussion is based on the results 
of this model.  Model II is presented for robustness assessment because the generalised 
residuals in this model are statistically insignificant, suggesting that subsidised fertilizer is 
exogenous in the rural to rural migration decision of farm household members. 
The results show that subsidised fertilizer has statistically significant and negative effects 
on rural to rural migration. An additional 100 kg of subsidised fertilizer reduces the 
probabilities of migration by two percentage points at 10 % level of significance. Relative to 
the effects on rural to urban migration, the magnitude of the effect on rural to rural migration 
is much smaller.  
Table 4.3: Regression results on factors determining Rural to Rural Migration of farm 
household members 
Independent Variables         Dependent variable: 
Rural-Rural Migration. 
Dependent variable: 
Rural-Rural Migration. 
Probit Model (I) Probit Model  with CF 
Residuals (II) 
 ME/SE ME/ SE 
Generalised residuals  -0.01 
  (0.01) 
Subsidised fertilizer (100Kg) -0.02* -0.002 
 (0.01) (0.02) 
Primary School Certificate 0.002 0.002 
 (0.01) (0.01) 
Junior Secondary Certificate 0.04*** 0.04*** 
 (0.01) (0.01) 
Malawi Secondary Certificate 0.04*** 0.04*** 
 (0.01) (0.01) 
Diploma/Degree Certificate 0.06*** 0.06*** 
 (0.02) (0.02) 
Central region location -0.002 -0.001 
 (0.01) (0.01) 
Northern region location 0.004 0.003 
 (0.01) (0.01) 
Household head (male) 0.02** 0.02* 
 (0.01) (0.01) 
Household head age (years) -0.001** -0.001** 
 (0.0003) (0.0003) 
Household size  0.004** 0.004** 
 (0.002) (0.002) 
Landholding size (hectares) -0.01 -0.01 
 (0.01) (0.01) 
Distance to district centre  0.0002** 0.0002** 
 (0.0001) (0.0001) 
Constant 0.05*** 0.05*** 
 (0.004) (0.004) 
Number of observations: 3155 3155 
Wald chi2 75.55 77.43 
Prob > chi2  [p-value] [0.0000] [0.0000] 
Log pseudolikelihood -541.93 -541.75 
Correctly classified 95.50% 95.50% 
Pseudo R2 0.06 0.07 
Notes: *, **, and *** represents statistically significant at 10%, 5% and 1% significance 
level, respectively; ME=Average Marginal Effects (AME); SE=robust standard errors are in 
parentheses (); SE =bootstrap standard errors (1000 reps);  CF=Control Function. 
Due to the similarities in economic characteristics of most rural areas, i.e. their dependence 
on agricultural interventions, farm input subsidies may not have much effects since migrants 
may still benefit from the subsidy programme in the new location. Furthermore, there might be 
little differences on discounted future utility between two rural locations because of similar 
sources of income and accessibility to public services in rural areas. 
Education is also found to increase the probability of having a rural to rural migrant in the 
household. Households with household heads having secondary and diploma or degree 
qualification have higher probability of having rural to rural migration of household members 
by four and six percentage points, respectively compared with those with household heads who 
have no any qualification. Old age of household head and increased distance to district centres 
are associated with reduced probability of household members migration from one rural area 
to another. However, the magnitude of the effects are very small. As expected and similar to 
results in Table 4.2, male headed households and those with large household size have 
increased probability of have rural to rural migrating household members.  
4.7.3 The impact of subsidised fertilizer on seasonal migration. 
Regression results on factors influencing seasonal migration of household members are 
presented in Table 4.4. As in the previous section, the discussion is based on the results of 
Model I, the Probit model.  
The results show that subsidised fertilizer has negative effects on seasonal migration, but 
it is statistically insignificant. One plausible explanation for this finding is that in seasonal 
migration, household members can migrate after receiving subsidised fertilizer coupons and 
thus subsidies have no effect on the decision of the household member to migrate. Household 
members may also migrate after harvesting period, and therefore, the household may still 
benefit from the farm input subsidy despite having a seasonal migrant member. Thus, seasonal 
migration is not necessarily related to the exclusion of the household from benefiting from 
public interventions.   
Higher education of household heads has the expected positive effects on the probability 
of having a seasonal migrant. Having a household head with a junior secondary school 
qualification increases the probability of seasonal migration of household members by five 
percentage points, and it increases by six percentage points for those having tertiary 
qualification, compared to those with no qualification. Old age is found to negatively affect 
seasonal migration, although with minimal effects. 
Having larger landholding size has the expected negative effects on seasonal migration 
since large landholdings are associated with higher income from crop sales and household food 
security. Therefore, such households have higher discounted expected utility from agricultural 
activities than seasonal migration, especially through differences in expected income. 
Increased agricultural labour demand for households with larger landholding size also explains 
the negative effects large landholding size has on migration of household members. The results 
show that an additional hectare of land decreases the probability of seasonal migration by four 
percentage points.  
Regional characteristics is found to have significant effects on seasonal migration of 
household members. Household located in the central and northern regions have lower 
probabilities of having seasonal migration of household members by six and eleven percentage 
points, respectively compared with households located in the southern region. This could be 
attributed to differences among the regions on economic development and demand and supply 
of seasonal labour. The central and northern regions have more tobacco estates and 
consequently, have higher demand of seasonal farm labour, while the southern region is 
associated with lower landholdings per capita and has high seasonal labour supply. 
Table 4.4: Regression results on factors determining Seasonal Migration of farm 
household members 
Independent Variables         Dependent variable: 
Seasonal Migration. 
Dependent variable: 
Seasonal Migration. 
 Probit Model 
 Probit Model with 
CF Residuals (II) 
 ME/SE ME/ SE 
Generalised residuals   -0.01 
  (0.01) 
Subsidy fertilizer (100Kg) -0.02 -0.02 
 (0.01) (0.01) 
Primary School Certificate 0.02 0.02 
 (0.02) (0.02) 
Junior Secondary Certificate 0.05*** 0.05*** 
 (0.02) (0.02) 
Malawi Secondary Certificate 0.03* 0.03* 
 (0.02) (0.02) 
Diploma/Degree Certificate 0.06*** 0.07*** 
 (0.02) (0.03) 
Central region location -0.06*** -0.06*** 
 (0.01) (0.01) 
Northern region location -0.11*** -0.11*** 
 (0.02) (0.02) 
Household head (male) 0.01 0.01 
 (0.01) (0.01) 
Household head age (years) -0.002*** -0.002*** 
 (0.0004) (0.0004) 
Household size  0.001 0.001 
 (0.003) (0.003) 
Landholding size (hectares) -0.04*** -0.04*** 
 (0.01) (0.01) 
Distance to district centre  0.0001 0.00004 
 (0.0002) (0.0002) 
Constant 0.10*** 0.10*** 
 (0.01) (0.01) 
Number of observations: 3155 3155 
Wald chi2 141.93 144.04 
Prob > chi2  [p-value] [0.0000] [0.0000] 
Log pseudolikelihood -933.80 -933.39 
Correctly classified 90.30% 90.30% 
Pseudo R2 0.07 0.07 
Notes: *, **, and *** represents statistically significant at 10%, 5% and 1% significance 
level, respectively; ME=Average Marginal Effects (AME); SE=robust standard errors are 
in parentheses ();SE =bootstrap standard errors (1000 reps); CF=Control Function. 
4.7.4 The impact of repeated benefits to subsidised fertilizer on rural to urban, rural to 
rural and seasonal migration. 
Table 4.5 presents the regression results of Probit Models (I), (II) and (III) on the effects of 
subsidised fertilizer based on repeated benefits on household members rural to urban, rural to 
rural, and seasonal migration, respectively. 
Model (I) in Table 4.5 presents regression results of factors affecting rural to urban 
migration decisions.  The results show that only four times benefit to fertilizer subsidies has 
statistically significant and negative effects on rural to urban migration by three percentage 
points compared to non-beneficiaries. Repeated subsidisation ensures a consistent flow of 
support to the household engaging in agricultural activities and reduces the dependency on 
other forms of livelihood strategies, such as migration.  
The regression results of the determinants of rural to rural migration are presented in model 
(II) in Table 4.5. The results indicate that only after benefiting twice from the subsidised 
fertilizer has statistically significant and negative effects on rural to rural migration of 
household members by four percentage points.  
All other covariates have signs and magnitudes which are similar to those reported in 
section 4.7.2. However, the distance to the district centre has unexpected positive effect of rural 
to rural migration. This may suggest that long distance to the district centres, which are some 
of the major urban areas, may discourage rural to urban migration and households faced with 
this challenge may prefer migrating to other rural areas.  
Regression results of factors influencing seasonal migration are presented in model (III) 
in Table 4.5.  The results on the repeated benefits to subsidised fertilizer show no statistically 
significant effects on household members decision on seasonal migration.  
Table 4.5: Regression results on factors influencing household members migration. 
Independent Variables         
Probit Model-Dependent Variables: 
Rural-Urban  Rural-Rural Seasonal 
Model (I) Model (II) Model (III) 
ME/SE ME/SE M/SE 
One time fertilizer benefit -0.01 -0.001 0.002 
 (0.01) (0.01) (0.02) 
Two times fertilizer benefit -0.01 -0.04** -0.0001 
 (0.01) (0.02) (0.02) 
Three times fertilizer benefit -0.1 -0.02 -0.03 
 (0.01) (0.02) (0.03) 
Four times fertilizer benefit -0.03*** -0.02* 0.001 
 (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) 
HH Head (male) 0.02*** 0.02* 0.01 
 (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) 
HH Head age (years) -0.001** -0.001** -0.002*** 
 (0.0002) (0.0002) (0.0004) 
 Household size 0.002* -0.003* 0.002 
 (0.001) (0.002) (0.002) 
Land total (hectares) -0.05*** -0.003 -0.04*** 
 (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) 
Distance  to district -0.0001 0.0002** 0.00003 
 (0.0001) (0.0001) (0.0002) 
Central  region -0.0004 -0.002 -0.06*** 
 (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) 
Northern region -0.01 0.004 -0.11*** 
 (0.01) (0.01) (0.02) 
Primary Sc Cert. 0.01 0.003 0.02 
 (0.01) (0.01) (0.02) 
Junior Sec. Cert.  0.01 0.04*** 0.05*** 
 (0.01) (0.01) (0.02) 
Malawi Sec. Cert 0.02** 0.04*** 0.03* 
 (0.01) (0.01) (0.02) 
Diploma/Degree  0.04*** 0.06*** 0.07*** 
 (0.01) (0.02) (0.02) 
Control 0.02*** 0.05*** 0.10*** 
 (0.003) (0.004) (0.01) 
No. of observations 3155 3155 3155 
Wald chi2 113.93 80.91 142.42 
Prob > chi2  [p-value] [0.0000] [0.0000] [0.0000] 
Log pseudolikelihood -281.43 -539.02 -933.72 
Correctly classified 97.69% 95.50% 90.30% 
Pseudo R2 0.19 0.07 0.07 
Notes: *, **, and *** represents statistically significant at 10%, 5% and 1% significance 
level, respectively; ME=Average Marginal Effects; SE =robust standard errors. 
This is consistent with the result in section 4.7.3, indicating that subsidised fertilizer has 
no effect on seasonal migration of farm household members. Since seasonal migration is 
temporary, this may mean that households of seasonal migrants can still be targeted and benefit 
from fertilizer subsidies before migrating or after returning from their migration destinations. 
Based on the theory of migration, this may also mean that seasonal migration provides a 
significant alternative source of livelihood to some rural households despite their dependence 
on agriculture and receipt of subsidies. 
4.8 Conclusion 
This study has analysed the impact of subsidised fertilizer on rural to urban, rural to rural and 
seasonal migration of farm household members in Malawi. The study has also investigated the 
effects of repeated subsidisation on migration of household members.  
The results reveal that fertilizer subsidy decreases the probabilities of farm household 
members migration from rural to urban and rural to rural areas and that repeated benefits does 
not increase the magnitude of the negative effects on migration. However, the study finds no 
evidence of effects on seasonal migration 
The negative effects on rural to urban migration suggest that the fertilizer subsidy policy 
might be one of the tools of controlling rural to urban migration in developing countries and 
thereby,  contributing to the reduction in urban unemployment, food insecurity and poverty.  
Concerning policies, these results suggests that policies aimed at reducing urbanisation 
should ensure implementation of interventions which provide increased benefits to rural 
households. As the number of educated and skilled labour in rural areas is increasing over time 
due to improved access to education, rural to urban migration of household members is 
inevitable. Therefore, policies that facilitate access to agricultural land could effectively 
contribute to reduced rate of rural to urban migration in the long-term through increased access 
to food and income from crop production and sales, respectively. 
Appendix 4A. Identification test results of MP community residence and visit as IV 
Table 4.A1: Regression results on factors influencing household members 
migration. 
Independent Variables        
Dependent Variables: 
Rural-Urban  Rural-Rural Seasonal Migration 
Probit Model (I) Probit Model (II)  Probit Model (III) 
ME/SE ME/SE ME/SE 
MP residence or visit 0.004 0.01 -0.02* 
 (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) 
HH Head (male) 0.02*** 0.02* 0.01 
 (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) 
HH Head age (years) -0.001** 0.001** -0.002*** 
 (0.0002) (0.0003) (0.0004) 
 Household size 0.002* -0.004* 0.001 
 (0.001) (0.002) (0.003) 
Land total (hectares) -0.05*** -0.01 -0.04*** 
 (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) 
Distance  to district -0.0001 0.0002** 0.0001 
 (0.0001) (0.0001) (0.0002) 
Central  region 0.001 -0.001 -0.06*** 
 (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) 
Northern region -0.01 0.002 -0.11*** 
 (0.01) (0.01) (0.02) 
Primary Sc Cert. 0.01 0.001 0.02 
 (0.01) (0.01) (0.02) 
Junior Sec. Cert.  0.01 0.04*** 0.05*** 
 (0.01) (0.01) (0.02) 
Malawi Sec. Cert 0.02** 0.04*** 0.03* 
 (0.01) (0.01) (0.02) 
Diploma/Degree  0.04*** 0.06*** 0.07*** 
 (0.01) (0.01) (0.02) 
Control  0.02*** 0.05*** 0.10*** 
 (0.003) (0.004) (0.01) 
No. of observations 3155 3155 3155 
Wald chi2 122.90 74.77 141.83 
Prob > chi2  [p-value] [0.0000] [0.0000] [0.0000] 
Log pseudolikelihood -285.86 -542.37 -933.08 
Correctly classified 97.69% 95.50% 90.30% 
Notes: *, **, and *** represents statistically significant at 10%, 5% and 1% significance 
level, respectively; ME=Average Marginal Effects; SE =robust standard errors. 
Chapter 5 
CONCLUSION 
5.1 Summary of the Results 
The research reported in this thesis, has examined the effects of a farm input subsidy policy on 
farm households market participation, welfare and migration using cross section, linear and 
non-linear panel data models. To our best knowledge, the research in this thesis is the first to 
have estimated the effects of farm input subsidies on farm households output market 
participation, and to have used different indicators of welfare and migration to those used in 
existing literature to analyse the effect of this policy in sub-Saharan African (SSA), and in 
particular, Malawi. Every effort has been taken to account for potential endogeneity of 
explanatory variables and the conversion of non-standard measurement units into standard 
units. A range of alternative models have also been estimated to check the robustness of the 
selected empirical models estimates and the results presented in this thesis do suggest that they 
are robust to the estimation strategies. 
In Chapter 2, the research examined the impact of subsidised fertilizer on farm 
households maize market participation. Here the dependant variables of interest were 
participation in market as sellers, the quantity sold and proportion of harvested maize sold, 
employing non-linear panel data models. The rationally for the analysis of this relationship is 
that theoretically, farm input subsidies are expected to increase production and productivity 
and therefore, increase surplus produce available for sell. Furthermore, a farmers participation 
in agricultural produce markets as a seller can become an important source of household 
income. In addition to the provision of household consumption, this income may be used to 
finance future purchase of farm inputs and investment in non-farm enterprises and hence may 
contribute considerably toward poverty alleviation.  
The main findings of the study presented in Chapter 2 are that subsidised fertilizer does 
appear to increase farm households participation in maize market as sellers and increases 
quantities sold of maize. In addition subsidised fertilizer is estimated to increase the 
commercialisation of maize, but the magnitude of this effect is small. This small effect on the 
commercialisation of maize suggests that the level of maize production at household level 
remains at or below the level needed to meet household food requirements and thus, some part 
of any additional produce resulting from subsidised fertiliser and other input use may itself be 
required for household consumption, leaving little as a marketable surplus. Consistent with the 
theory of change of input subsidies, overall, subsidised fertilizer is estimated to increase farm 
household maize market participation. However, the results highlight the challenge of 
significantly increasing household income from staple food crop sales when the households 
priority for producing such crops remains predominantly for household subsistence 
consumption. Furthermore, the frequency of accessing subsidised fertilizer is found to have no 
effects on maize marketing. 
In Chapter 3, the research examined the effects of subsidised fertilizer on farm households 
food security and consumption expenditure. The dependent variables of interest here were 
available daily per capital calories, the households food security status, food, non-food and 
total annual per capita consumption expenditure. By increasing crop productivity generated by 
farm input subsidies, the potential for increased households purchasing power may result in 
increased consumption expenditure. As a result the availability of food in farm households is 
expected to improve and consequently, contribute to reduction in both poverty and food 
insecurity.  
This study finds that the fertilizer subsidy has a positive impact on food security, but that 
its effect is heterogeneous across the households distribution. In particular, the results suggest 
a higher positive impact among the most food secure households. The study finds that 
subsidised fertilizer increases farm households available per capita per day calories, months 
of food secure and the probability of being food secure. The study also finds no evidence of an 
effect on food, non-food and total annual per capita consumption expenditure. However, 
repeated benefit to subsidised fertilizer is found to increase the magnitude of positive effects 
on available calories per capita per day and annual food per capita consumption expenditure. 
Furthermore, the estimated magnitude of the effects of subsidized fertilizer on food security is 
not large enough to eradicate food insecurity among poor households in isolation. This 
underscores the importance of the adoption of more integrated livelihood policy approaches in 
development interventions. These results also highlight the challenge of achieving significant 
poverty alleviation and food security among small farmers who are faced with myriad 
constraints such as drought, limited income sources, and lack of adequate access to output and 
input markets. Consequently, farm input subsidies are not a magic bullet solution to poverty, 
food and income insecurity. 
The research in Chapter 4 examined the effects of subsidised fertilizer on farm household 
members internal migration. The dependent variables of interest were rural to urban, rural to 
rural and seasonal migration, and estimations employed cross section data models. The 
rationale for this research is based  on the premise that farm input subsidy programmes are 
expected to improve the economic returns of agricultural production due to reduced input costs 
of subsidised farm inputs, especially fertilizers and hybrid seeds and consequently, improve 
crop production and productivity. This might act as incentive to farm household members to 
stay on the farm and engage in agricultural activities, consequently, slowing down the out-farm 
migration.  
Overall, the study finds that fertilizer subsidy decreases the probability of farm household 
members migration. The results suggest that the members of a household which receives a 
programme standard package of subsidised fertilizer have a decreased probability of migrating 
from rural to urban and from rural to rural areas. However, the study finds no evidence of any 
effect on the probability of a household members seasonal migration. The study also finds that 
repeated benefits to subsidised fertilizer does not increase the magnitude of the negative effects 
on migration. The negative effects of subsidised fertilizer on rural to urban migration of the 
rural farm households members suggest that the fertilizer subsidy policy might be one of the 
effective tools of controlling rural to urban migration in developing countries and thereby 
contributing to the reduction in urban unemployment, food insecurity and poverty. 
5.2 Policy Implications 
Overall, the empirical findings of this thesis have important policy implications. The magnitude 
of effects of subsidised fertilizer on maize marketing has policy implication on the 
sustainability of the farm input subsidy programme itself. This is because any increased level 
of household income from crop sales for subsidy beneficiaries affects their ability to self-
finance the purchase of future farm inputs for the next production cycle. This thesis suggest the 
following policy implications: First, the results highlight the challenge of significantly 
increasing household income from staple food crop sales when the households priority for 
producing such crops is subsistence. Consequently, this cast doubt on the sustainability and 
success of the programs objective to simultaneously achieving household food security and 
increasing household income from food crop sales. This is due to the fact that for most small 
farmers food crops are mainly produced for household consumption. Therefore, apart from 
food crops, the program improvement should include targeting the same households with 
subsidised coupons for cash crops production (such as cotton and other high value food crops). 
Cash crop production could be strategic to farmers with relatively adequate land and they can 
use income from cash crop sales to finance future farm input purchases and sustainably exit 
from the subsidy program. 
Second, designing programs to suit climatic conditions of specific regions may be more 
beneficial than the standard program for all regions. Despite maize being the staple food for 
the majority of the population, some districts are not suitable for its production, especially in 
the southern region. Therefore, programs focusing on other interventions and types of crops 
might have more positive effects on households incomes in this region. 
Third, the small magnitude of effects of landholding size on commercialisation of maize 
suggests that maize is not considered a viable commercial crop by farm households. This may 
have implication on household resource allocation, where more resources may be located to 
cash than food crops in order to make profit and increase household income at the expense of 
food crops production. The government intervention in the marketing of maize in Malawi, 
where maize exportation is banned during the months of acute food shortage or when yield 
estimates show national food deficit might have contributed to the commercial unviability of 
maize. 
Fourth, the results reported in Chapter 3 suggest that the farm input subsidy programme 
generates minimal effects on household food security and annual consumption expenditure 
among the poor and food insecure households. This highlight the challenge of achieving 
significant poverty alleviation and food security among small farmers who are faced with many 
constraints. This calls for a more integrated livelihood strategy with interventions promoting 
household food productivity and incomes. 
Fifth, although maize is the main food staple and as such is an important determinant 
of food security in Malawi, focusing and allocating more farm input subsidy programme 
resources on one crop and neglecting other crops and agricultural interventions may render 
such programmes less useful. This is because consumption of maize only cannot provide all 
the required adequate important nutrients. Again, coupled with limited land allocated to maize 
and low commercialisation, income from maize sales may not meet household consumption 
expenditure requirements to achieve food security and poverty alleviation objectives. 
Sixth, since continuous access to subsidised fertilizer has positive effects on household 
food availability and food consumption expenditure, targeting processes should aim at 
providing repeated access to improved farm inputs to the targeted smallholder farmers in order 
to stimulate adoption and increase crops productivity. This would contribute to achieving the 
macroeconomic objectives to reduce food crop prices and hence, improved national food 
security; stimulate the development and efficiency of the inputs markets and thus, leading to 
increased accessibility to improved input and reduced prices. 
Seventh, results in Chapter 4 suggests that policies aimed at reducing urbanisation 
should ensure implementation of interventions which provide increased benefits to rural 
households in terms of increased crop production and productivity as evident in the negative 
effects of subsidised fertilizer and landholding ownership on migration of farm household 
members.   
Eighth, as the number of educated and skilled labour in rural areas is increasing over 
time due to increasing access to education, rural to urban migration of household members is 
inevitable. Therefore, policies that facilitate access to agricultural land could effectively 
contribute to reduced rate of rural to urban migration in the long-term.   
5.3 Future Research 
Based on the empirical analyses in this thesis, future research is suggested to focus on five 
research agenda. Cross-country and regional analyses to compare the effects of farm input 
subsidies will be important to provide more lessons since more countries especially in sub-
Saharan Africa are now implementing farm input subsidies, but using different designs. 
Analysing the market demand effects such as on buyers, net buyers and quantities 
bought of food commodities targeted in the farm input subsidies is also important in 
examining household and economy wide level effects. Understanding such effects is also 
important in estimating subsidies contribution to food security and poverty alleviation. The 
macro level analysis especially on the effects of subsidies on imports and exports of targeted 
crops will help in assessing the economy wide effects of the subsidy programmes and the 
fiscal implication of the subsidies on foreign exchange reserves since importation of both 
farm inputs and food and non-food leads to reduced foreign exchange reserves. 
Analysis of the effects of FISP on the development of the rural input market supply 
system and the rural economy will help in understanding the economy-wide effects and 
contribution to improved farm input use in rural Malawi. Lastly, a comparative analyses of 
the effects of farm input subsidies with other social protection interventions such as public 
works, food and cash transfer programmes will contribute to generation of important 
information for comparison on the efficiency, sustainability and cost effectiveness of the 
FISP to alternative social protection interventions. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Acharya, S.S., (2009). Food Security and Indian agriculture: Polices, Production Performance 
and Marketing Environment. Agricultural Economics Research Review, 22, pp.1-19. 
Adaku, A.A., (2013).The effects of rural-urban migration on agricultural production in the 
northern region of Ghana. Journal of Agricultural Science and Applications, 2, 
pp.193-201. 
Akiyama, T., Baffes, J., Larson, D., and Varangis, P., (2001). Commodity market reforms: 
lessons of two decades, World Bank Regional and Sectoral Studies, The World Bank, 
Washington, D.C. 
Allen, D.W., (1999). Transaction Costs. Department of Economics, Simon Fraser University. 
http://www.sfu.ca/~allen/allentransactioncost.pdf, Accessed on 23rd September, 2012. 
Barrett, C.B., (2008). Smallholder market participation: Concepts and evidence from Eastern 
and Southern Africa, Food Policy, 34, pp.299-317. 
Brainoh, A.K., (2004) Seasonal Migration and Land use change in Ghana, Land Degrad. 
Develop, 15, pp.37-47. 
Chamberlain, G., (1984). Panel data. In:Griliches, Z., Intriligator, M.D., (Eds.). Handbook of 
econometrics, 2, pp.1247-1318. Amsterdam: North-Holland. 
Chibwana, C., Fisher, M. and Shively, G. (2012) Cropland Allocation Effects of Agricultural 
Input Subsidies in Malawi, World Development, 40, pp. 124-133. 
Chibwana, C., Fisher, M., Jumbe, C., Masters, W., and Shively, G., (2010). Measuring the 
impacts of Malawis farm Input Subsidy Program. Accessed on 25th January, 2014 
and is available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1860867. 
http://www.sfu.ca/~allen/allentransactioncost.pdf
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1860867
Chirwa, E. and Dorward, A., (2013). Agricultural Input Subsidies: The Recent Malawi 
Experience. Oxford University Press. 
Chirwa, E., A. Dorward, R. Kachule, I. Kumwenda, J. Kydd, N., Poole, C. Poulton and M. 
Stockbridge, (2005). Walking Tightropes: Supporting Farmer Collective Action to 
Improve Markets for the Poor, Lessons and Policy Options, Overseas Development 
Institute, Natural Resources Perspectives No. 99. 
Chirwa, E.W., (2006). Commercialisation of Food Crops in Rural Malawi: Insights from the 
Household Survey. Department of Economics, Chancellor College, University of 
Malawi, Working Paper No.2006/04. 
Chirwa, E.W., (2009). Determinants of Marketing Channels among smallholder Maize 
Farmers in Malawi. Department of Economics, Chancellor College, University of 
Malawi, Working Paper No.2009/03. 
Chirwa, E.W., Kumwenda, I., Jumbe, C., Chilonda, P. and Minde, I. (2008). Agricultural 
growth and poverty reduction in Malawi: Past performance and recent trends. 
ReSAKSS Working Paper No.8. International Crops Research Institute for Semi-Arid 
Tropics (ICRISAT), International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) and 
International Water Management Institute (IWMI).  
Chirwa, E.W., Matita, M.M., Mvula, P.M., and Dorward, A. (2013). Repeated Access and 
Impacts of the Farm Input Subsidy programme in Malawi. Any Prospects of 
Graduation? Future Agricultures, Working Paper 065. 
Danish International Development Agency (DANIDA), (2011). Agricultural input subsidies 
in sub-Saharan Africa, International Development Cooperation, Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs of Denmark, Evaluation Study 2011/2. 
Davidova, S., Fredriksson, L and Bailey, A., (2009). Subsistence and semi-subsistence farming 
in selected EU new member states. Agricultural Economics, 40, pp.733-744. 
De Brauw, A., (2007) Seasonal Migration and Agriculture in Vietnam, ESA Working Paper 
No. 07/04, Agriculture Development Economics Division, The Food and Agriculture 
Organisation of the United Nations, (FAO). 
De Janvry, A., Fafchamps, M., Sadoulet, E., (1991). Peasant Household Behaviour with 
Missing Markets: Some Paradoxes Explained.  Economic Journal, Royal Economic 
Society, 101(409), pp.1400-417. 
Denning, G., Kabambe, P., Sandrez, P., Malik, A., Flor, R., et al., (2009). Input subsidies to 
improve smallholder maize productivity in Malawi: Towards an African Green 
Revolution. PloS Biol, Vol.7, No.1. 
Deshingkar, P., Start, D., (2003) Seasonal Migration for Livelihoods in India: Copping, 
Accumulation and Exclusion. Working Paper 220, Overseas Development Institute, 
Dorward, A. and Chirwa, E., (2013). Targeting in the Farm Input Subsidy Programme in 
Malawi: Issues and Options. Working Paper 66. Future Agricultures. 
Dorward, A., and Chirwa, E. (2011). The Malawi Agricultural Input Subsidy Programme: 
2005-6 to 2008-9, International Journal of Agricultural Sustainability, 9, pp.232-247. 
Dorward, A., and Kydd, J., (2005). Making Agricultural Market systems Work for the Poor: 
Promoting Effective, Efficient and Accessible Coordination Exchange. Imperial 
College, London, No. 1. 
Dorward, A., Chirwa, E., Boughton, D., Crawford, E., Jayne, T., Slater, R., Kelly, V., and 
Tsoka, M., (2008). Towards Smart Subsidies in agriculture? Lessons from recent 
experience in Malawi. Overseas Development Institute, Natural Resource 
Perspective, No.116. 
Dorward, A., Chirwa, E., Kelly, V., Jayne, T.S., Slater, R., Boughton, D., (2008). Evaluation 
of the 2006/07 agricultural input subsidy programme, Malawi, Final Report, 
Lilongwe, Malawi. 
Dorward, A., Chirwa, E., Matita, M., Mhango, W., Mvula, P., Taylor, E., and Thorne, K., 
(2013). Evaluation of the 2012/2013 Farm Input Subsidy Programme, Malawi, Final 
Report, Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security, Malawi. 
Dorward, A., Kydd, J., Morrison, J., and Poulton, C., (2005). Institutions, Markets and 
Economic Coordination: Linking Development Policy to Theory and Praxis, 
Development and Change, 36, pp. 1-25. 
Dorward, A.R., Kydd, J.G., Morrison, J.A., and Urey, I., (2004). A policy agenda for pro-poor 
agricultural growth, World Development, 32, pp. 73  89. 
Druilhe, Z. and Barreiro-Hurle, J., (2012). Fertilizer subsidies in sub-Saharan Africa. ESA 
Working paper No. 12-04, Rome, FAO. 
Ellis, F. (2000). The Determinants of Rural Livelihood Diversification in Developing 
Countries. Journal of Agricultural Economics, 51, pp. 289302.  
Fafchamps, M. and Gabre-Madhin, E., (2001). Agricultural markets in Benin and Malawi: 
the operation and performance of traders, Policy Research Working Paper Series 
2734, The World Bank. 
Fisher, M., Kandiwa, V., 2014. Can agricultural input subsidies reduce the gender gap in 
modern maize adoption? Evidence from Malawi, Food Policy, 45, 101-111. 
Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO, 2012). West African Food Composition Table. Food 
and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations, Rome, Italy. 
Food and Agriculture Organisation, (FAO, 2011). The state of Food Insecurity in the World: 
How does international price volatility affect domestic economies and food security? 
Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations, Rome, Italy. 
Garcia, A.J., Pindolia, D.K., Lopiano, K.K., and Tatem, A., (2014). Modelling internal 
migration flows in sub-Saharan Africa using census micro-data, Migration studies, 
Oxford University Press, pp.1-22 
Gibson, J., McKenzie, D., Rohorua, H., (2013). Development Impact of Seasonal and 
Temporary Migration: A Review of Evidence from the Pacific and Southeast Asia, 
Discussion Paper Series CDP No. 08/13, Centre for Research and Analysis of 
Migration. 
Goetz, S.J., (1992). A selectivity Model of Household Food Marketing behaviour in Sub-
Saharan Africa.  American Journal of Agricultural Economics. 74, pp. 444-452. 
Government of Malawi, (1997). Cooperative Development Policy, Ministry of Commerce and 
Industry, Republic of Malawi 
Government of Malawi, (2005). Integrated Household Survey 2004-2005: Household Socio-
Economic Characteristics, Volume 1, National Statistics Office, Zomba. Available 
on: http://www.nsomalawi.mw/publications/integrated-household-survey/200405-
integrated-household-survey.html. Accessed on 5th June 2012 
http://www.nsomalawi.mw/publications/integrated-household-survey/200405-integrated-household-survey.html
http://www.nsomalawi.mw/publications/integrated-household-survey/200405-integrated-household-survey.html
Government of Malawi, (2008). 2008 Population and Housing Census Main Report. National 
Statistics Office. Available on:  http://www.nsomalawi.mw/2008-population-and-
housing-census.html. Accessed on 26th September 2014. 
Government of Malawi, (2009). The Agricultural Sector Wide Approach (ASWAp. Malawis 
Prioritised and harmonised Agricultural Development Agenda, Ministry of 
Agriculture and Food Security, Republic of Malawi. 
Government of Malawi, (2011). Malawi Agricultural Sector Wide Approach. A prioritised and 
harmonised Agricultural Development Agenda: 2011-2015. Ministry of Agriculture 
and Food Security. 
Government of Malawi, (2012a). Malawi Growth and Development Strategy II: 2011-2016. 
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. IMF Country Report No.12/222. 
Government of Malawi, (2012b). Integrated Household Survey 2010-2011: Household Socio-
Economic Characteristics Report. National Statistics Office, Zomba. Available on: 
http://www.nsomalawi.mw/images/stories/data_on_line/economics/ihs/IHS3/IHS3_
Report.pdf. Accessed on 5th June 2012. 
Greene, W.H. (2003). Econometric Analysis, Fifth Edition, New York University, Pearson 
Education International, USA. 
Hamukwala, P., Tembo, G., Erbough, J.M and Larson, W.D., (2012). Improved seed variety 
value chain in Zambia; A missed opportunity to improve smallholder productivity. 
African Journal of Agricultural Research, 7, pp.4803-4818.  
Harrigan, J., (2003). U-Turns and Full Circles: Two Decades of Agricultural Reform in 
Malawi 1981-2000, World Development, 31, pp. 847-863. 
http://www.nsomalawi.mw/2008-population-and-housing-census.html
http://www.nsomalawi.mw/2008-population-and-housing-census.html
http://www.nsomalawi.mw/images/stories/data_on_line/economics/ihs/IHS3/IHS3_Report.pdf
http://www.nsomalawi.mw/images/stories/data_on_line/economics/ihs/IHS3/IHS3_Report.pdf
Harrigan, J., (2008). Food insecurity, poverty and the Malawian Starter Pack: Fresh start or 
false start? Food Policy. 33, pp. 237-249. 
Harris, J.R. and Todaro, M.P., (1970). Migration, unemployment and Development: A Two 
Sector Analysis. The American Economic Review, 60, pp. 126-142. 
Heckman, J.J., (1979). Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error. Econometrica, 7, 
pp.153-161. 
Heltberg, R. and Tarp, F., (2002). Agricultural supply response and poverty in Mozambique, 
Food Policy, Elsevier, 27, pp. 103-124. 
Holden, S. and Lunduka, R. (2010). Too poor to be efficient? Impacts of targeted fertilizer 
subsidy program in Malawi on farm plot level input use, crop choice and land 
productivity, Department of Economics and Resource Management, Norwegian 
University of Life Sciences. May 2010. 
Holden, S. T. and Lunduka, R.W. (2012). Who Benefits from Malawis Targeted Farm Input 
Subsidy Program? Forum for Development Studies. 
Husain, I. (1993). Poverty and structural adjustment: the African case. Human resources 
development and operations policy working papers; No. HRO 9. Washington, DC: 
World Bank. 
International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), (2003). Promoting Market Access 
for the Rural Poor in Order to Achieve the Millennium Development Goals. 
Roundtable Discussion Paper for the Twenty-Fifth Anniversary Session of IFADs 
Governing Council.   
International Labour Organisation (ILO), (2010). Making migration a development factor: The 
case of North and West Africa, International Labour Organisation, International 
Institute for Labour Studies, Geneva, ILO. 
International Monetary Fund (IMF), (2008). Fuel and Food Price Subsidies: Issues and Reform 
options. International Monetary Fund (IMF), Washington, DC. 
Jayne, T.S and Jones, S (1997). Food Marketing and Pricing Policy in Eastern and Southern 
Africa: A Survey, World Development, 25, pp. 1505-1527. 
Jayne, T.S., Govereh, J., Mwanaumo, A., Nyoro, J.K., and Chapoto, A. (2002). False Promise 
or False Premise? The Experience of Food and Input Market reform in Eastern and 
Southern Africa. World Development, 30, pp.1967-1985. 
Jayne, T.S., Mather, D., and Mghenyi, E., (2010). Principal Challenges Confronting 
Smallholder Agriculture in Sub-Saharan Africa. World Development, 38, pp.1384-
1398. 
Kearney, J., (2010). Review: Food consumption trends and drivers, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B, 365, 
2793-2807. Available on: http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/. Accessed on March 
17, 2015. 
Key, N., Sadoulet, E., and De Janvry, A., (2000). Transactions Costs and Agricultural 
Household Supply Response, American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 
Agricultural and Applied Economics Association, 82, pp. 245-259. 
Kydd, J., and Dorward, A., (2001). The Washington Consensus on Poor Country Agriculture: 
Analysis, Prescription and Institutional Gaps, Development Policy Review, 19, pp. 
467-478. 
http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/
Lee, S. (2004). Endogeneity in Quantile Regression Models: A Control Function Approach. 
The Institute for Fiscal Studies and Department of Economics, Unversity College of 
London, Centre for Microdata Methods and Practice, Working Paper CWP08/04. 
Levy, S., 2005. Starter Packs: A strategy to Fight Hunger in Developing Countries? Lessons 
from Malawi Experiences, 1998-2003.  Wallingford: CABI, ed. 
Levy, S., Barahona, C., (2002). 2001-02 TIP, Main Report of the Evaluation Programme. 
Calibre Consultants, Reading (UK) and Statistical Services Centre, University of 
Reading (UK). 
Lewin, P.A., Fisher, M., and Weber, B., (2012). Do rainfall conditions push or pull rural 
migrants: evidence from Malawi, Agricultural Economics, 43, pp.191-204.  
Liverpool-Tasie, L.S.O., (2014). Fertilizer subsidies and private market participation:  the case 
of Kano State, Nigeria, Agricultural Economics, 45, pp.663-678. 
Lukmanji, Z., Hertzmark, E., Mlingi, N., Assey, V., Ndossi, G., Fawzi, W., (2008). Tanzania 
food composition Tables. MUHAS- TFNC, HSPH, Dar es Salaam Tanzania. 
Lunduka, R., Ricker-Gilbert, J. and Fisher, M. (2013). What are the farm level impact of 
Malawis farm input subsidy program? A critical Review. Agricultural Economics. 
(Accepted for Publication), August 1, 2013. 
Mason, N.M., and Richer-Gilbert, J., (2013). Disrupting Demand for Commercial Seed: Input 
subsidies in Malawi and Zambia. World Development, 45, pp.75-91. 
Mason, N.M., Jayne, T.S., and Mofya-Mukuba, R., (2013). Zambias input subsidy programs. 
Agricultural Economics, 44, pp.613-628. 
Mather, D., Boughton, D., Jayne, T.S., 2013. Explaining smallholder maize marketing in 
southern and eastern Africa: The roles of market access, technology and household 
resource endowment. Food Policy. 43, 248-266. 
Meng, L., (2012). Can grain subsidies impede rural-urban migration in hinterland China? 
Evidence from field surveys, China Economic Review, 23, pp.729-741. 
Morris, M., Kelly, V.A., Kopicki, R., and Byerlee, D., (2007). Fertilizer use in African 
Agriculture: Lessons Learned and Good Practice Guidelines, Washington, DC: 
World Bank. 
Mundlak, Y., (1978). On the pooling of time series and cross section data, Econometrica, 46, 
pp. 69-85. 
Muriithi, B.W., and Matz, J.A., 2015. Welfare effects of vegetable commercialisation: 
Evidence from smallholder producers in Kenya. Food Policy. 50, pp. 80-91. 
Muto, M., and Yamano, T., (2009). The Impact of Mobile Phone Coverage Expansion on 
Market Participation: Panel Data Evidence from Uganda. World Development, 37, pp. 
1887-1896. 
National Smallholder Farmers Association of Malawi (NASFAM), (2006). Evaluation of 
Norwegian Support to NASFAMS Strategic Development Programme 2003  2006: 
Appraisal of Programme Document for Support to NASFAMS Strategic Development 
Programme 2007 -2011, Noragric Report No.38 
National Statistics Office, (2014a). Integrated Household Panel Survey 2010-2013: Basic 
Information Document, Zomba, Malawi. National Statistics Office. 
National Statistics Office, (2014b). Integrated Household Panel Survey 2010-2013: Household 
Socio-Economic Characteristics Report, Zomba, Malawi. National Statistics Office. 
Njuki, J., Kaaria, S., Sanginga, P., Kaganzi, E., and Magombo, T., (2008). Empowering 
Communities through Market led Development: Community Agro Enterprise 
Experiences from Uganda and Malawi. 
Okello, J.J., (2005). Compliance with International Food Safety Standards: The Case of Green 
Bean Production in Kenyan Family Farms, PhD Dissertation, Michigan State 
University. 
Onumah, G.E, Davis, J.R., Kleih, U., and Proctor, F.J., (2007). Empowering Smallholder 
Farmers in Markets  Changing Agricultural Marketing Systems and Innovative 
Responses by Producer Organisations, IFAP-IFAD-CTA-ECART and AGRI CORG, 
ESFIM Working Paper 2. 
Papke, L.E., and Wooldridge, J.M., (2008). Panel data methods for fractional response 
variables with an application to test pass rates, Journal of Econometrics, 145, pp.121-
Pingali, P., (2007). Agricultural growth and economic development: a view through the 
globalization lens.  Journal of Agricultural Economics. 37, pp. 1-12. 
Poulton, C., Kydd, J., and Doward, A., (2006). Overcoming Market Constraints on Pro-Poor 
Agricultural Growth in Sub-Saharan Africa, Development Policy Review, 24, pp. 243-
Poulton, C., (2012). Democratisation and the political economy of agricultural policy in Africa. 
Working Paper 43. Future Agricultures. 
Raballand, G., Thornton, R., Yang, D., Goldberg, J., Keleher, N., and Muller, A., (2011). Are 
rural road investments alone sufficient to generate transport flows? Lessons from a 
randomized experiment in rural Malawi and policy implications, Policy Research 
Working Paper Series 5535, The World Bank. 
Rhoda, R., (1983). Rural Development and Urban Migration: Can we keep them down on the 
Farm? International Migration Review, 17, pp. 34-64. 
Ricker- Gilbert, J., Mason, N., Jayne, T., Darko, F., and Tembo, S., (2013). What are the effects 
of input subsidy programs on equilibrium maize prices? Evidence from Malawi and 
Zambia. Selected Paper prepared for presentation at the Agriculture and Applied 
Economics Association 2013 AAEC & CAEs Joint Annual Meeting, Washington 
Ricker-Gilbert, J. and Jayne, T.S., (2012). Do fertilizer subsidies boosts staple crop 
production and reduce poverty across the distribution of smallholders in Africa? 
Quintile Regression Results from Malawi. Accessed on 25th January 2014 and 
available at: http://iaae.confex.com/iaae/iaae28/webprogram/Paper16263.html.  
Ricker-Gilbert, J., Jayne, T.S., and Chirwa, E., (2011). Subsidies and Crowding out: A double 
hurdle Model of fertilizer demand in Malawi, American Journal of Agricultural 
Economics, 93, pp. 26-42. 
Ricker-Gilbert. J. and Jayne, T.S., (2011). What are the enduring effects of fertilizer subsidies 
on recipient households? Staff Paper 2011-09. Department of Agricultural Food and 
Resource Economics, Michigan State University. East Lousing, MI. USA. 
Rozelle, S., Taylor, J.E., and De Brauw, A., (1999). Migration, Remittance and Agricultural 
Productivity in China, Papers and Proceedings of the One Hundred Eleventh Annual 
Meeting of the American Economic Association, The American Economic Review, 
89,  pp. 287-291. 
Salifu, A., Francesconi, G.N., and Kolavalli, S., (2010). A Review of Collective Action in Rural 
Ghana, International Food Policy Research Institute, Discussion Paper 00998. 
http://iaae.confex.com/iaae/iaae28/webprogram/Paper16263.html
School of Oriental and African Studies, Wadonda Consult, Overseas Development Institute 
and Michigan State University, (2008). Evaluation of the 2006/7 Agricultural Input 
Supply Programme, Malawi: Final Report. London School of Oriental and African 
Studies; March 2008. 
Schwartz, G. and Clements, B., (1999). Government Subsidies. Journal of Economic Surveys, 
13, pp. 119148.  
Semykina, A., and Wooldridge, J.M., (2010). Estimating panel data models in the presence of 
endogeneity and selection. Journal of Econometrics, 157, pp. 375-380. 
Shiferaw, B.A., Obare, G., Muricho, G., Silim, S., (2009). Leveraging institutions for collective 
action to improve markets for smallholder producers in less-favoured areas, African 
Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics, 3, pp.1-18. 
Stark, O., and Bloom, D.E., (1985). The New Economics of Labour Migration, Paper 
Proceedings of the Ninety-Seventh Annual Meeting of the American Economic 
Association, The American Economic Review, 75, pp. 173-178.  
Stark, O., and Levhari, D., (1982). On Migration and Risks in LDCs, Economic Development 
and Cultural Change, 31, pp. 191-196. The University of Chicago Press. 
Structural Adjustment Participatory Review International Network (SAPRIN), (2002). The 
Policy Roots of Economic Crisis and Poverty: A Multi-Country Participatory 
Assessment of Structural Adjustment, First Edition. 
Swindale, A., and Bilinsky, P., (2006a). Household dietary diversity measurement of household 
food access: Indicator guide, version 2. Washington D.C: Food and Nutrition 
Technical Assistance Project. 
Swindale, A., and Bilinsky, P., (2006b). Development of a universally applicable household 
food insecurity measurement tool: process, current status and outstanding issues. 
Journal of Nutrition, 136, pp. 14495-14525 
Takeshima, H., and Liverpool-Tasie, L.S.O., (2015) Fertilizer subsidies, political influence 
and local food prices in sub-Saharan Africa: Evidence from Nigeria, Food Policy, 
54, pp.11-24. 
Taylor, J.E., Rozelle, S., and De Brauw, A., (2003). Migration and income in source 
communities. A New Economics of Migration Perspective from China, Economic 
Development and Cultural Change, 52, pp. 75-101. 
Todaro, M.P. (1969). A model of migration and urban unemployment in less-developed 
countries. The American Review, 59, pp. 138-148. 
UN-Habitat, (2007). State of the World Cities 2006/2007. United Nations Human Settlements 
Programme, Kenya. 
UN-Habitat, (2012) State of the Worlds Cities 2012/13: Prosperity of Cities. World Urban 
Forum Edition. United Nations Human Settlements Programme, Kenya 
UN-Habitat, (2014). The state of African Cities 2014: Re-imagining sustainable urban 
transition. United Nations Human Settlements Programme, Kenya. 
United Nations, (2011). Population distribution, Urbanisation, Internal migration and 
Development: An International Perspective. Department of Economic and Social 
Affairs, Population Division 
Vathara, R., Vutha, H., Dalis, P., Sreymon, S., (2013). Effects of Emigration on households 
Livelihoods: The case of Cambodia, Final Report, Partnership for Economic Policy. 
Vuong, Q.H., (1989). Likelihood Ratio Tests for Model Selection and Non-Nested 
Hypotheses. Econometrica, 57, pp. 307-333.  
Williamson, O.E., (1981).The Economics of Organisation: The Transaction Cost Approach.  
American Journal of Sociology, 87, pp. 548-577. 
Wiredu, A.N., Zeller, M., and Diagne, A., (2015) Impact of fertilizer subsidy on land and 
labour productivity of rice producing households in North Ghana. Centre for the 
Study of African Economies (CSAE) Conference Contributed Paper, 22nd -24th 
March, 2015, St. Catherines College, Oxford. 
Wooldridge, J.M., (2010). Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, MIT Press 
Books, The MIT Press, 2nd Edition, Vol.1. 
Wooldridge, J.M., (2013). Introduction and Linear Models: Correlated Random Effects 
Panel Data Models, IZA Summer School in Labour Economics, Michigan State 
University.  
Wooldridge, J.M., (2013). Non-Linear Models: Correlated Random Effects Panel Data 
Models, IZA Summer School in Labour Economics, Michigan State University.  
World Bank, (2000). Attacking Poverty: Making Markets Work Better for Poor People, The 
World Bank, Washington DC, USA. 
World Bank, (2003). Reaching the rural poor: A renewed strategy for rural development. The 
World Bank, Washington DC, USA. 
World Bank, (2004). Malawi Country Economic Memorandum: Policies for Accelerating 
Growth, Poverty Reduction and Economic Management 1, Africa Region, World 
Bank, Report No. 25293-MAI. 
World Bank, (2007). Agriculture for Development, World Development Report 2008, World 
Bank, Washington DC, USA. 
World Bank, (2007a). Malawi Poverty and Vulnerability Assessment: Investing in Our Future. 
Full Report. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
World Bank, (2007b). Agriculture for Development, World Development Report 2008, The 
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, Washington, DC: World 
Bank. 
World Bank, (2009). World Development Report 2009: Reshaping the Economic Geography, 
International Bank of Reconstruction and Development, World Bank, Washington 
World Bank, (2010). Malawi Country Economic Memorandum: Seizing Opportunities for 
Growth Through Regional Integration and Trade: Summary of main Findings and 
Recommendations, Poverty Reduction and Economic Management 1, Africa Region, 
Vol. I, World Bank, Report No. 47969-MW. 
World Bank, (2010). World Development Report 2010: Development and Climate Change, 
International Bank of Reconstruction and Development, World Bank, Washington 
World Bank, (2013).World Development Report 2013: Jobs, International Bank of 
Reconstruction and Development, World Bank, Washington DC. 
World Bank, (2014) World Development Report 2014: Risk and Opportunity, Managing Risk 
for Development, International Bank of Reconstruction and Development, The World 
Bank, Washington DC. 
World Bank. (2007). New approaches to input subsidies. World Development Report 2008: 
Agriculture for Development policy brief. Washington D.C. - The World Bank. 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2007/01/8667742/new-approaches-
input-subsidies 
Xu, Z., Burke, W.F., Jayne, T.S., and Govereh, J., (2009). Do input subsidy programs crowd 
in or crowd out commercial market development? Modelling fertilizer demand in 
a two-channel marketing system. Agricultural Economics. 40, pp. 79-94. 
Yi, F., Sun, D., and Zhou, Y., (2015). Grain subsidies, liquidity constraints and food security- 
Impact of the grain subsidy programme on the grain-sown areas in China, Food 
Policy, 50, pp. 114-124. 
Zeller, M., Diagne, A., and Mataya, C., (1997). Market access by Smallholder farmers in 
Malawi: Implications for Technological Adoption, Agricultural Productivity and 
Crop Income. Food Consumption and Nutrition Division, International Food Policy 
Research Institute (IFPRI), Washington DC, USA, FCND Discussion Paper No.5. 
