Microsoft Word - Feklyunina_thesis.doc
National Images in International Relations: 
Putins Russia and the West  
Valentina Feklyunina 
Submitted in fulfilment of the requirements for the Degree of  
Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) in Politics 
Department of Politics 
Faculty of Law, Business and Social Sciences 
University of Glasgow 
December 2009 
Abstract 
This study seeks to analyse the impact of the perceived, projected and self-images of a state 
on its foreign and domestic policies. It approaches this problem by exploring the evolution 
of international images of the Russian Federation in the West in the years of Vladimir 
Putins presidency (2000-2008) and by examining attempts by the Russian authorities to 
improve them with the help of foreign propaganda. Russian political elites have always 
been very sensitive to perceptions of Russia in Western Europe and later in the United 
States of America. Following the collapse of the Soviet Union, Russias images in Western 
countries underwent significant transformation. Although relatively positive in the early 
1990s, they became more negative towards the end of Boris Yeltsins presidency before 
reaching their negative peak during Putins second presidential term. The energetic 
efforts of the Russian authorities in the years of Putins presidency to promote a more 
favourable image of the country provide extremely rich material for analysis, which has 
largely not yet been utilised in the academic literature. 
To facilitate the analysis of Russias perceived images and the effectiveness of foreign 
propaganda, the thesis includes two case studies that examine the issues at question in 
greater detail in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Federal 
Republic of Germany. Based on extensive primary research (elite interviewing and 
discourse analysis), the study seeks to make a three-fold contribution to the academic 
literature. Firstly, it is the first systematic examination of Russian foreign propaganda in the 
post-Soviet period. By analysing Russias attempts to improve its image in the international 
arena, the thesis contributes to the literature in the field of International Political 
Communication that has already examined public diplomacy campaigns conducted by 
other, mainly Western, countries. Secondly, it aims to provide a deeper insight into the role 
of subjective, non-material factors in Russian foreign policy. Finally, it seeks to make a 
contribution to the social constructivist IR literature by presenting a theoretical analysis of 
the role of national images in international relations. 
Table of Contents 
List of Tables  6
List of Figures 7
Acknowledgement 8
Authors Declaration 9
List of Abbreviations    10
Chapter 1. The Revival of Russian Foreign Propaganda: An Introduction            12
1.1 Perceived, Projected and Self-Images in Academic Literature              13 
1.1.1 Perceived Images: Psycho-Attitudinal Perspectives              13 
1.1.2 Self-Images: Social Constructivist Interpretation s              19 
1.1.3 Projected Images: Approaches in International Political Communication         22 
1.1.4 Studies of National Images: the Russian Case               24 
1.2 Theoretical Framework                   27 
1.2.1 Image of the State as a Unit of Analysis                28 
1.2.2 Defining Foreign Propaganda                 29 
1.2.3 (Un)Successful Foreign Propaganda                31 
1.3 Methodology of the Study                  32 
1.3.1 Research Methods: Advantages and Limitations               33 
1.3.2 Choice of Case Studies                  35 
1.3.3 Overview of the Thesis                  36 
Chapter 2. Russias Negative Image: Views of the Problem              38
2.1 Russias Image in the West: From Gorbymania to Putinophobia             39 
2.1.1 Russias Perceived Image among Western Elites and in the Mass Media         39 
2.1.2 Russias Position in Country Rankings                44 
2.1.3 Russias Perceived Image in Public Opinion of Western Countries            46 
2.2 Russias Negative Image in Official Discourse                48 
2.3 Academic and Expert Literature on IR and Foreign Policy Preferences                      50 
2.3.1 Theoretical Approaches in Russian IR Studies               51 
2.3.2 Geopolitics in Russian IR                  52 
2.4 Image studies in Russia             54 
2.4.1 Main Approaches to National Images             55 
2.4.2 Reasons for Russias Negative Image in the West             57 
2.4.3 Views on Foreign Propaganda             59 
Chapter 3. Mechanism of Russian Foreign Propaganda, 2000  2008             62
3.1 Soviet Foreign Propaganda                  62 
3.1.1 Strategy of Soviet Foreign Propaganda                62 
3.1.2 Structure of the Foreign Propaganda Machine               63 
3.2 Strategy of Russian Propaganda in Putins Russia               67 
3.3 Main Actors                    71 
3.3.1 Presidential Administration                 71 
3.3.2 Ministry of Foreign Affairs                      74 
3.3.3 Ministry of Culture and Mass Communications               77 
3.3.4 Other Federal Ministries and Agencies                85 
3.3.5 Western PR Companies                  86 
3.3.6 Grey or Black Propaganda?                 89 
Chapter 4. Projected Image: The Message to Western Audiences             93
4.1 In Search of Russia: Russias Self-Image in the Dominant Discourse             93 
4.1.1 Vagueness of the Dominant Self-Image                95 
4.1.2 Russia as a Great Power                  96 
4.1.3 Russia in the Post-Soviet Area                 97 
4.1.4 Russia as an Energy Superpower                 99 
4.2 Key Elements of the Projected Image               101 
4.2.1 Russia as a Great Power                101 
4.2.2 Russia as an Energy Superpower               104 
4.2.3 Russia as not an Empire                           105 
4.2.4 Historical Characteristics                107 
4.3 Shifting the Focus: Russias Self-, Projected and Perceived Images           109 
Chapter 5. Russias Images and Foreign Propaganda in the UK                      113
5.1 British Images of Russia and the Russians: 16th  20th Centuries           114 
5.2 Images of Putins Russia in the UK, 2000  2008             118 
5.3 Russian Propaganda in the UK                  125 
5.4 Assessing the Results                 133 
Chapter 6. Russias Images and Foreign Propaganda in Germany            137
6.1 German Images of Russia and the Russians: Historical Perspective           138 
6.2 Images of Putins Russia in Germany, 2000-2008             142 
6.3 Russian Propaganda in Germany               150 
6.4 Assessing the Results                 153 
Chapter 7. The Effectiveness of Russian Foreign Propaganda            158
7.1 Discussing the Results: Russias Image as an Investment Destination           160 
7.2 Discussing the Results: Components of Russias Image            163 
7.3 Explaining the (In) Effectiveness of Foreign Propaganda            169 
Chapter 8. Russias International Image at Home             178
8.1 Explaining the Failure of Russian Foreign Propaganda            178 
8.1.1 Western Criticism in the Dominant Discourse             179 
8.1.2 Western Criticism in the Public Discussion             184 
8.2 Russias Negative Image in the West in Domestic Propaganda           186 
8.2.1 Testing Patriotism of the Audience: InoSMI Project            187 
8.2.2 The Use of Western Publications in the Russian Mass Media           189 
8.3 Re-Emergence of Enemy Images               191 
8.3.1 Preventing an Orange Revolution Scenario             194 
8.3.2 Promoting State Patriotism               199 
8.3.3 Mobilising Public Support for the Foreign Policy Strategy           200 
Chapter 9. Conclusion: National Images in International Relations 203
9.1 The Russian Case                 204 
9.2 Theoretical Implications                211 
9.3 Limitations of the Study and Future Research              214 
Appendix 1. A Note on Interviews 217
Bibliography 219
List of Tables 
Table 2.1. Russias ratings by Freedom House, 1991-2008              45 
Table 2.2. Feelings towards Russia, 2002-2008                47 
Table 4.1. Core elements of Russias perceived, projected and self-images          111 
Table 7.1. Macroeconomic indicators for the Russian Federation, 2000-2008         159 
Table 7.2. Russias rank in six dimensions of national competence, 2008          164 
Table 7.3. The Anholt-GfK Roper Nation Brands Index 2008            165 
Table 7.4. Dependence on import of Russian gas in EU member states, 2007         170 
Table 8.1. Russian public opinion on hostility of foreign countries towards  
Russia, 1994-2008                 195 
Table 8.2. Assessment of President Putins achievements in Russian public  
opinion, 2000-2007                201 
List of Figures 
Figure 2.1. Corruption Perceptions Index for the Russian Federation, 1996-2008            46 
Figure 3.1. Soviet organisation structure for foreign propaganda and active  
measures                    65 
Figure 3.2. Structure of Russian foreign propaganda under Putin, 2007            72 
Figure 5.1. Feelings towards Russia in public opinion in the UK, 2002-2008         133 
Figure 5.2. Feelings towards countries, peoples and institutions in the UK, 2008          134 
Figure 6.1. Feelings towards Russia in public opinion in Germany, 2002-2008          154 
Figure 6.2. Feelings towards countries, peoples and institutions in Germany, 2008         155     
Figure 7.1. Assessment by existing and potential investors of Russian economic  
policies and laws that encourage foreign investment, 2007          160 
Figure 7.2. Assessment by existing and potential investors of Russias return on  
investment, as compared with emerging markets in general, 2007          161 
Figure 7.3. Assessment by existing and potential investors of investment risks in  
Russia, as compared with emerging markets in general, 2007          162 
Figure 7.4. Assessment by existing and potential investors of the impact of media  
coverage, 2007                162 
Figure 7.5. Percentage of respondents who were concerned about the  
weakening of democracy in Russia, 2008             166 
Figure 7.6. Percentage of respondents who were concerned about  
Russias behaviour towards its neighbours, 2008            167 
Figure 7.7. Percentage of respondents who were concerned about Russias 
 role as an energy provider, 2008              168 
Figure 7.8. Picture of President Putin kissing a boy on his stomach, June 2006          174 
Figure 7.9. Picture of President Putin fishing in the Yenisei River in Siberia, 2007         175 
Figure 8.1. Article about Boris Berezovsky in The Times, 2007 190
Figure 8.2. Viktor Deni, Nezyblemaya krepost (Unshakeable Fortress), 1919          192 
Figure 8.3. Russian public opinion on Western criticism of democracy in  
Russia as interference in Russias internal affairs, 2008           196 
Figure 9.1. Russias images in its relations with Significant Other           212 
Figure 9.2. Transformation of Russias dominant self-image           213 
Acknowledgement 
I would like to thank my supervisor, Prof. Stephen White, for his invaluable help and 
wholehearted support. He has always been an outstanding example for me  not only 
academically, but also in his optimistic attitude to life. I am very grateful to all those 
people who participated in interviews that I conducted in Moscow, London, Berlin, Paris 
and Brussels in 2006-2007. Without them this project would have been impossible to 
complete. My thanks are also due to the Department of Politics at the University of 
Glasgow for supporting my research. I should mention the Dorothy Hodgkin Postgraduate 
Award that gave me an opportunity to come to Glasgow and undertake this study. 
Moreover, I am very grateful to the University Association for Contemporary European 
Studies and the European Commission for providing generous support that allowed me to 
conduct extensive fieldwork in Germany, France and Belgium, and to the British 
International Studies Association for financial support at the writing-up stage. Also, 
working on the thesis would not have been so enjoyable without the constant 
encouragement of my friends. My warmest thanks are due to James Bilsland, Anke 
Schmidt-Felzmann, Sam Robertshaw, Tanya Biletskaya, Martin Steven, Davina Hill, Liz 
Austin and many others who have made these four years in Glasgow so interesting and 
eventful. Finally, I would like to thank my family in Russia, especially my mother who has 
always believed in me. 
Authors Declaration 
I declare that, except where explicit reference is made to the contribution of others, this 
dissertation is the result of my own work and has not been submitted for any other degree 
at the University of Glasgow or any other institution. 
List of Abbreviations 
AAPSO  Afro-Asian Peoples Solidarity Organisation 
CDU  Christian Democratic Union  
CIS  Commonwealth of Independent States 
CPC  Christian Peace Conference 
CPRF  Communist Party of the Russian Federation 
CPSU  Communist Party of the Soviet Union 
CSU  Christian Social Union 
EU  European Union 
FCO - Foreign and Commonwealth Office 
FDP  Free Democratic Party 
FIAC  Foreign Investment Advisory Council of the Russian Federation 
FPA  Foreign Policy Analysis 
FRG  Federal Republic of Germany 
GDR  German Democratic Republic 
IADL  International Association of Democratic Lawyers 
IIP  International Institute for Peace 
IOJ  International Organisation of Journalists 
IR  International Relations 
IUS  International Union of Students 
LDPR  Liberal Democratic Party of Russia 
NATO  North Atlantic Treaty Organisation 
NGO  Non-Governmental Organisation 
OSCE  Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe 
PD  Public Diplomacy  
PR  Public Relations 
RF  Russian Federation 
SPD  Social Democratic Party of Germany 
UK  United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland 
UN  United Nations 
USA  United States of America 
USSR  Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
WFDY  World Federation of Democratic Youth 
WFTU  World Federation of Trade Unions 
WIDF  Womens International Democratic Federation 
WPC  World Peace Council 
Chapter 1 
The Revival of Russian Foreign Propaganda: An Introduction 
This study seeks to address a problem that has been markedly under-researched in the 
academic literature  the impact of the perceived, projected and self-images of a state on its 
foreign and domestic policies. It approaches this problem by analysing the evolution of 
international images of the Russian Federation (RF) in the West in the years of Vladimir 
Putins presidency (2000-2008) and by examining attempts by the Russian authorities to 
correct them with the help of foreign propaganda. Putins Russia represents a unique 
object for a study of this kind for a number of reasons. Firstly, it has a long history of 
engaging in foreign propaganda: during the Cold War, the Soviet Union conducted large-
scale propaganda campaigns in Western countries, as well as in the Third World on a 
regular basis. Secondly, Russias images in Western countries underwent significant 
transformation in less than two decades that followed the collapse of the Soviet Union. 
Although relatively positive in the early 1990s, they became more negative towards the 
end of Boris Yeltsins presidency before reaching their negative peak during Putins 
second presidential term. The energetic efforts of the Russian authorities in the years of 
Putins presidency to promote a more favourable image of the country provide extremely 
rich material for analysis, which has largely not yet been utilised in the academic literature. 
Thirdly, following the disintegration of the Soviet Union, Russia faced a profound identity 
crisis which had a pronounced impact on its foreign policy and, inevitably, on its foreign 
propaganda. Russias search for a new identity in the context of mounting tensions in its 
relations with Western countries resulted in considerable incoherence among Russias 
projected images, thus making the task of foreign propaganda more difficult. All these 
factors make the Russian case particularly interesting for this analysis. 
The research question that the present study seeks to answer is in what ways do perceived, 
projected and self-images of a state affect its foreign and domestic policies? By answering 
this question, the thesis aims to fill a gap in the research that has been undertaken by 
scholars following the social constructivist tradition in International Relations (IR) studies. 
Although many works have been devoted to the role of national images in general, as well 
as to the role of various psychological factors, there has not been sufficient attention to the 
link of images at the level of perceptions, images consciously manipulated by elites, and 
the effect of both on home and foreign policies. Addressing this issue requires reliance on 
the existing literature that the present work builds on, and aims to contribute to. To 
facilitate further analysis, this introductory chapter begins with an overview of relevant 
academic literature. This is followed by a discussion of the theoretical framework of the 
present study that introduces key concepts and outlines the most significant assumptions. 
The methodology of the present study, including the advantages and limitations of the 
research methods that were utilised, is discussed in the third section. The chapter concludes 
with a brief overview of the remaining chapters of the thesis. 
1.1 Perceived, Projected and Self-Images in Academic Literature 
While analysing the impact of the perceived, projected and self-images of Russia on its 
foreign and domestic policies, this research seeks to contribute to the further development 
of image theory as a distinct direction within a broader social constructivism paradigm in 
IR literature. By doing so, it ultimately aims to bridge a gap between several subfields in IR 
studies that look at images and the interplay between international and domestic factors in 
general, from different perspectives: i) constructivist research in IR studies; ii) Foreign 
Policy Analysis (FPA) with its attention to the interconnection between foreign and 
domestic influences; and iii) International Political Communication. Although the literature 
on national images is abundant, most scholars have tended to focus either on self-images of 
the state (its national identity) or on perceived images  images of the state held by other 
international actors. Moreover, in recent years there has been a significant increase of 
interest in studying Public Diplomacy (PD) and projected national images, with an 
emphasis on PD campaigns conducted by Western countries. Thus, national images have 
been analysed from three different angles, but the link between these three types of images 
and their impact on the states foreign and domestic policies has largely remained under-
researched. Before we proceed to present the theoretical framework of the present study, let 
us examine these three approaches and their key assumptions. 
1.1.1 Perceived Images: Psycho-Attitudinal Perspectives 
The interest in the role of images in international relations can be traced back to the 1950-
1960s when the general interest in psycho-attitudinal approaches led to increasing attention 
to psychological factors in politics. Earlier works on national images were characterised by 
their emphasis on the significant role of perceptions in foreign policy decision-making 
while they did not largely question the rationalist nature of states behaviour in the 
international arena. According to rationalist IR theories, such as (neo)realism and 
(neo)liberalism, which have traditionally dominated the IR field, states are always self-
interested and rational in their decision-making process. They are guided in their actions in 
the international arena by their interests that are considered as pre-given, which implies that 
they exist as if separately from states and are known to those in power. The objectivity of 
these interests makes it possible for researchers, as Hans Morgenthau has argued in his 
Politics among Nations (1956), to anticipate the behaviour of the state as they can put 
themselves in the position of a statesman and see exactly the same as what he/she sees. 
Although national interests are different for every state, they still can be reduced to several 
basic needs  to survive and to have power. Kenneth Waltz in his authoritative Theory of 
International Politics (1979) has compared states to corporations struggling first to survive 
and then to maximise their profits in a self-help environment. While realists and neorealists 
have been preoccupied with studying predominantly material structures, they have still 
acknowledged the existence of nonmaterial factors and their impact on foreign policies. 
Morgenthau, for instance, has suggested that in their pursuit of national interests states 
resort to the politics of prestige, which he describes as the policy of demonstrating the 
power a nation has or thinks it has, or wants other nations to believe it has (1956, p.71). 
Moreover, according to Morgenthau, 
the power of a nation () depends not only upon the skill of its diplomacy and the 
strength of its armed forces but also upon the attractiveness for other nations of its 
political philosophy, political institutions, and political policies (1956, p. 136) 
However, both realists and neorealists view national images only as instruments for 
achieving the goals that are defined by objective material interests of the state. Thus, in the 
(neo)realist tradition images, alongside other non-material factors, largely remain outside 
the focus of research. 
This understanding of the driving force of states behaviour has been challenged by some 
neo-liberalists who have suggested that national interests cannot be considered as the only 
factor shaping their foreign policies. As Judith Goldstein and Robert Keohane have argued, 
the actions of states in the international arena can be explained not only by interests, but 
also by the ideas held by individuals. Although they have not questioned the rational 
character of the states behaviour, Goldstein & Keohane have emphasised that ideas matter 
for policy, even when human beings behave rationally to achieve their ends (1993, p.5). 
However, the role of ideas in their interpretation is limited to some particular situations: 
ideas influence policy when the principled or causal beliefs they embody provide road 
maps that increase actors clarity about goals or ends-means relationships, when they 
affect outcomes of strategic situations in which there is no unique equilibrium, and 
when they become embedded in political institutions (Goldstein & Keohane 1993, p.3) 
Thus, while recognising the importance of non-material factors, such as ideas or national 
images, rationalist theorists have looked at interests as exogenously given, and they have 
had very limited interest in how these interests emerge or transform.  
Although earlier studies of national images largely agreed with this vision of states 
behaviour as rational, they nevertheless placed perceptions at the centre of their attention. 
The works of Kenneth E. Boulding (1956; 1959), Robert Jervis (1970; 1976), Ole R. Holsti 
(1962), W. Scott (1965), K.W. Deutsch & R.L. Merritt (1965) have explained major 
characteristics of images and analysed psychological mechanisms of image formation and 
transformation. National image has been defined as total cognitive, affective, and 
evaluative structure of the behaviour unit, or its internal view of itself and its universe 
(Boulding 1959, pp. 120-121). It has been argued that decisions in the sphere of foreign 
policy are often based on images of other international actors held by political elites. 
National images are historical in their nature, i.e. they contain not only the picture of the 
given state at the present moment, but also the pictures of its past and of its future. 
Moreover, national images are formed and transformed mainly through two psychological 
mechanisms. First of all, images tend to resist any changes, and as a consequence, any 
information that contradicts the existing image will typically be ignored. Therefore, only by 
being repeated many times can this information lead to changes in the image (Deutsch and 
Merritt 1965). However, Boulding (1959) has argued that in certain situations national 
images can undergo significant changes in response to some reorganising events, as 
happened, for instance, with the image of the USSR held by US elites as a reaction to the 
successful launch of Sputnik in 1957. The second psychological mechanism, known as the 
Asch phenomenon, makes it extremely difficult for an individual to hold an image 
contradictory to the one held by the majority. As Urie Bronfenbrenner has put it, when all 
around me saw the world in one way, I too found myself wanting to believe and belong 
(1961, p.50). 
Moreover, as Boulding has argued, images held by both political elites and masses are 
nave, self-centred, and unsophisticated in their nature (1959, p. 131). Their major 
dimensions are those of hostility and friendliness, and of strength and weakness. Since 
images act as simplifiers of objective reality, states are always perceived as either friends 
or enemies, either strong or weak. Images held by political elites are to a significant extent 
close to those held by masses, since firstly, images are essentially mass images (they are 
transferred in course of socialisation), and second, political elites even in undemocratic 
countries in order to stay in power need to represent the public at large, and, thus, cannot 
go too far from the generally held images. On the other hand, elites can manipulate mass 
images for their own purposes.  
It is noteworthy that most works of that time were of a purely theoretical character. 
Moreover, having accepted the rationalist interpretation of international relations, they did 
not attempt to demonstrate empirically the link between existing international images and 
interactions between states in the international arena. Holsti (1962), for instance, while 
examining the image of the USSR held by US Secretary of State John Foster Dulles, has 
argued that foreign policy decision-makers perceive the environment through a set of 
lenses, but the impact of this perception on the states behaviour stays beyond the focus of 
attention. Another distinctive feature of the research in the framework of image theory was 
its preoccupation with studying enemy images, most often limited to the images of the 
USSR and the USA. Obviously, this direction of research was of practical interest as it 
aimed at explaining the motivation of behaviour of the two superpowers during the Cold 
War. One of its most significant accomplishments was the discovery of so called mirror 
images - in Bronfenbrenners words, the Russians distorted picture of us was curiously 
similar to our view of them (1961, p. 46). However, the emphasis on enemy images 
resulted in the negligence of other possible images when all perceptions were 
predominantly looked at from the angle of a conflict situation.  
Yet, the most serious weakness of early image theory lies in the fact that it looked at 
national images in isolation from other elements of the international system, particularly 
material structures, and did not suggest how the images of ones own state and of foreign 
states could fit into such a system. One of the most successful attempts to develop a foreign 
policy model taking into consideration international images alongside other factors, both 
material and non-material, was made by Michael Brecher (1972). Using the foreign policy 
system of Israel as a case study, Brecher has argued that the link between image and 
decisions is indeed the master key to a valuable framework of foreign policy analysis 
(1972, pp. 4-5). 
In the 1990s the image theory was further developed in the works of Richard Herrmann and 
Michael Fischerkeller (1995), James F. Voss, Tonya Y.E. Schooler and Joseph Ciarrochi 
(Hermann et al 1997). Using the images of Iran, Iraq, the USSR and the USA from 1977 to 
1992 as case studies in their research, they have developed a theory of strategy and 
international interaction (Herrmann & Fischerkeller 1995, p. 422) which has suggested 
that ideas held by foreign policy decision-makers about other states are structured in the 
form of schemata, with perceptions of the past, present and future actions of the state in 
question and the evaluation of those actions being interconnected. One can distinguish ideal 
images that states may have of each other, on the basis of which decision-makers act. These 
ideal images are those of an enemy, a degenerate, a colony, an imperialist or an ally. When 
the image types that two states hold in relation to one another are established, the logic of 
game theory can be applied to predict the possible results of their interaction. This 
approach to national images has caused significant changes in the focus of research and the 
choice of research methods used by scholars following the tradition of image theory, 
making it more formal and quantitative than it used to be. Michele G. Alexander, Shana 
Levin and P.J. Henry (2005), for instance, in their examination of the image of the USA in 
Lebanon, have employed the method of opinion surveying, concentrating only on those 
issues that have been pre-defined as crucial (goal incompatibility, power, and cultural 
status), and leaving beyond their focus of interest any other aspects of perceptions. 
Moreover, the dimension of goal incompatibility, for example, has been measured by the 
attitude of respondents towards one single issue - the US-led war on terrorism, thus, 
suggesting, that any other actions of the US do not affect the US image in Lebanon. 
One can argue that while being a valuable tool for analysing a broad picture of a possible 
foreign policy strategy, the theory of strategy and international interaction has been unable 
to provide a deep insight into the details of international images. There are several points 
that the theory appears to overlook. First of all, the ideal image types established by the 
researchers are extremely broad and all-embracing. The image of an ally, for instance, 
according to Herrmann and Fischerkeller, is formed when subjects belief in the prospects 
for mutual gain outweighs the importance of perceived capability or cultural judgments 
(1995, p.426). If we follow the logic of the theory, we would have to acknowledge that the 
image of the USA, for example, is close to the ideal type of an ally in many countries, 
whose attitude towards the USA and, as a result, whose actions in the international arena 
are very different from each other (though for all of them, in accordance with the theory, 
the strategic script with possible policy tracks will be the same). The theory makes it 
difficult to trace differences between, let us say, perceptions regarding the USA held by 
decision-makers in the UK, France or Romania. In this respect it could be argued that five 
images are not sufficient to describe the variety of existing images. It could be suggested, 
for instance, that the image of a rival could be as useful as the image of an ally or the image 
of an enemy. 
Moreover, even when a broad ideal type is adequate for a particular existing image, it 
cannot explain changes in actual policies of the state. This point can be illustrated by the 
example of the image of the Soviet Union held by political elites in the USA. As Herrmann 
and Fischerkeller have demonstrated in their research, the USSR was perceived as an 
enemy in 1977, 1980 and 1985, and as a moderate enemy  in 1990. These results suggest 
that in the period from 1977 till 1985 the image of the USSR remained the same, and, 
consequently, the foreign policies of the USA towards the USSR would be rather similar 
during these years, which, as we know, was not the case. Secondly, the historical 
dimension of international images is not taken into account, though it is an extremely 
important factor underpinning perceptions. Thirdly, the theory sets very strict rules in 
relation to the actions that are possible for each ideal image. If a state, for instance, 
perceives another state as an enemy, it, according to Herrmann and Fischerkeller, will not 
cooperate with the target in any substantial way since it perceives that the target would take 
advantage of cooperative initiatives (1995, p. 431). One could argue that this would fail to 
explain the alliance of the Western countries and the USSR during World War II, as the 
image of the USSR was very negative both before and soon after the war. 
Most importantly, studies of national images in the rationalist tradition have been unable to 
explain how national images emerge and why they change over time. Having accepted the 
rationalist vision of objective national interests as a driving force of states behaviour in the 
international arena, they have not examined the link between images of another state and 
self-images, and the impact of both on interpretation of national interests  which has 
become a primary focus of research in the social constructivist tradition. 
1.1.2 Self-Images: Social Constructivist Interpretations 
Social constructivism as a theoretical paradigm has challenged some of the key 
assumptions of rationalist IR theories, particularly their vision of national interests as pre-
given. Unlike (neo)realism and (neo)liberalism, for social constructivists understanding 
how actors develop their interests is crucial (Reus-Smit 2005, p. 197). Although social 
constructivism in IR is an extremely broad church rather than a well established theory, all 
constructivists are united in interpreting the world as socially constructed, i.e. as 
intersubjectively and collectively meaningful structures and processes (Adler 2002, p. 
100). Most constructivists also agree that one of the decisive factors in international 
politics is national identities, defined as relatively stable, role-specific understandings and 
expectations about self (Wendt 1992, p. 397), that serve as a prism through which states 
see themselves and the world around them. Alexander Wendt in his influential Social 
Theory of International Politics has argued that 
the daily life of international politics is an on-going process of states taking identities in 
relation to Others, casting them into corresponding counter-identities, and playing out 
the result (1999, p. 21)  
The constructivist approach does not deny the role of national interests in international 
relations, but unlike rationalist theories that understand these interests as exogenous to the 
state and pre-given, constructivism claims that they are created as a meaningful object, out 
of shared meanings through which the world, particularly the international system and the 
place of the state in it, is understood (Weldes 1999, p. 4). Moreover, according to Wendt, 
actors do not have a portfolio of interests that they carry around independent of social 
context; instead, they define their interests in the process of defining situations (1992, p. 
398). This explains why in certain circumstances the actions of states may appear 
contradictory to their seemingly objective interests: being shaped by the identity of the 
state, interests are defined according to what the state views as important. Even in similar 
situations states can behave differently from one another since their identities cause 
different understandings of the situation, and, consequently, different interpretations of 
their national interests. As Wendt has argued, US military power means one thing to 
Canada, another to a communist Cuba (1999, p.25).  
Furthermore, constructivism does not deny those basic objective needs that, according to 
rationalist theories, form national interests for any state such as physical survival, 
autonomy, and economic prosperity (see George & Keohane 1980). However, 
interpretation of these objective needs is considered self-biased and subjective. Most 
importantly, apart from the three basic needs, Wendt (1999) has distinguished the need for 
collective self-esteem that, as he has argued, is particularly significant in shaping interests 
of the state. Whether the collective self-image is positive or negative to a large extent 
depends on how the Other (significant Other) perceives the state. A negative self-
perception is often the result of perceived disrespect from other states, which can be 
illustrated by the example of the self-image of Germany after World War 1 or Russia after 
the collapse of the Soviet Union. When the self-image is negative for a long period of time, 
the state can redefine its interests in such a way that their pursuit may lead to its self-
asserted behaviour in the international arena aimed at compensating the negative image. 
This assumption is particularly relevant for the present study. 
Being a complex phenomenon, identities consist of various layers which are organised in 
a hierarchical order, i.e. some of them are more salient than others. Therefore, in the case 
of an identity conflict it can be possible to predict the actions of a state as we can expect 
that it will be easier for the state to sacrifice its less significant identities for the sake of the 
more significant ones (Wendt 1999). However, states do not always follow this logic: 
when their less salient identities are threatened to a large extent, they can become more 
important for them, and thus, will be defended with greater effort. One should mention that 
in the constructivist camp there is no agreement on the origins of national identities. 
Whereas for Wendt national identity is the result of mainly international factors, in other 
words, a product of the interaction of states, this view has been challenged by both 
opponents of social constructivism and by its supporters. Ted Hopf (2002), for instance, 
has emphasised the significance of internal factors (i.e. the domestic situation), which, as 
he has argued, are even more important than external ones, while Ilya Prizel (1998) has 
shown that national identity is to a large extent the outcome of how the state interprets its 
history.  
Another controversial issue is the question of the Other, i.e. they against whom we are 
defined. Although it is generally agreed that in national identities the concept of the Other 
is a fundamental one, there is no single answer to who this Other is. Most often it is 
understood as a different nation, relations with which have played an important role in the 
countrys history. However, as Hopf (2002) has pointed out, the Other can be not only 
another state, but it can take various forms such as the state itself in the past. This point can 
be illustrated by the example of contemporary Russia, where an important constituent of 
the national identity is the attitude towards the USSR. 
The range of the forms that the Other can take, according to Wendt, is not wide: the Other 
can be seen either as an enemy, a rival, or a friend. When the Other is conceived as an 
enemy, any actions that it takes, even if they are not directly related to the state, are viewed 
as aimed against it. As a result, in its foreign policies the state follows the logic of 
destroying the enemy first or being destroyed, i.e. it takes a revisionist position itself. The 
decisions are made without much thought about the distant future and are mainly oriented 
at achieving short-term goals. Seeing the Other as a rival rather than an enemy means that 
threats coming from it appear to be not so disastrous, though they are still substantial. This 
vision affects the foreign policies of the state in such a way that even in the case of a 
conflict the status quo approach to the Others sovereignty will be taken. Unlike in relations 
with an enemy, in its relations with a rival the state thinks more about the future, and losses 
and gains in its politics are viewed as relative. The third type of image, the image of a 
friend, comes into being when the opposition between the state and the Other becomes not 
so significant: the Other is perceived as not very different from the state, and there seems to 
be much in common between the two entities. While in its policies towards both an enemy 
and a rival the state relies mainly on its military power, in its relations with a friend it is the 
economic one that becomes most important. As a consequence, even if a conflict arises 
between the states, there will be no war or use of violence. Moreover, in a situation when 
security of the Other is threatened by a third state, both states will act as a team in their 
efforts to solve the problem (Wendt 1999). As we can see from this typology suggested by 
Wendt, perceptions of the Other have a significant impact on foreign policies, though the 
types appear to be extremely broad and simplistic. It can be argued that under some 
circumstances they can overlap, and the difference between an enemy and a rival, for 
instance, might be not so clear. At the same time there can be various shades of attitudes 
even within one type, which would also have an effect on the policies adopted.  
It should be mentioned that the constructivist approach has often been criticised by its 
opponents for the analytical difficulty of using identities as an explanatory variable in 
research. Maja Zehfuss (2002), for instance, has pointed out the impossibility of finding 
what the identity is by examining the behaviour of states, and, what is more, establishing 
the difference between a mere change in behaviour and change in identity. It could be 
argued, however, that though identities are indeed elusive, it is still possible to trace them 
by using a variety of methods, not purely by examining the behaviour of states. Being 
deeply rooted in the collective consciousness, identities are present in statements made by 
decision-makers, in official documents, and in various texts, and therefore may be open to 
discourse analysis. On the whole, studies following the social constructivist tradition have 
provided an invaluable insight into the role of self-images in the states relations with other 
international actors. However, while focussing on the evolution of national self-images in 
their connection with images of significant Others, the constructivist project has largely 
neglected another type of national image  images of the state that are projected in the 
international arena. Attempts by national governments to promote desirable images abroad 
have been the focus of research in another subfield of IR studies  International Political 
Communication. 
1.1.3 Projected Images: Approaches in International Political Communication 
In recent years, a growing number of studies have analysed various aspects of what Joseph 
Nye has called soft power in a states relations with other international actors. According 
to Nye, soft power is the ability to get what you want through attraction rather than 
coercion or payments, and it is based on the attractiveness of the countrys culture, 
political ideas, and policies (2004, p. x). Efforts by national governments to enhance soft 
power by promoting a more favourable image of a state abroad have been only briefly 
examined in Foreign Policy Analysis. Christopher Hill (2003, p. 44), for instance, has 
mentioned projecting identity abroad among the key functions of foreign policy, 
alongside such functions as protecting citizens abroad or advancing prosperity. However, 
this area of foreign policy has somehow remained on the fringes of foreign policy research 
while having become one of the most rapidly developing areas of studies in International 
Political Communication. 
This focus on promoting a desirable image in the international arena is not a new 
phenomenon in the academic literature. Attempts to manipulate public perceptions in other 
countries were extensively examined in foreign propaganda studies, particularly in relation 
to the Soviet Union (e.g. Barghoorn 1964; Gordon 1988) in the 20th century. Following the 
end of the Cold War, in both the Soviet Union and the USA foreign propaganda lost its 
prominent position on the foreign policy agenda, which inevitably affected the level of 
interest in propaganda in the academic community. However, a surge of interest in the 
subject occurred following the tragic events of 9/11 when many scholars, especially in the 
USA, turned to the problem of anti-Americanism (e.g. see Katzenstein & Keohane 2006). 
Having recognised the rise of negative perceptions of the USA on a global scale, 
particularly in the Muslim world, as a threat to the countrys national security, the US 
authorities intensified their efforts to improve the international image of the USA with the 
help of public diplomacy. At the same time, these developments led to the revival of 
academic interest in foreign propaganda and public diplomacy.  
While discussing attempts by Western countries to improve their international images in 
the post-Cold War context, most scholars have tended to avoid the term propaganda 
because of its negative associations with Soviet or Nazi propaganda campaigns. Instead 
they have predominantly used the term public diplomacy which was coined by the dean 
of the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts University Edmund Gullion in 1965 
(see Cull 2009, p. 19). This has resulted in a certain terminological confusion, as some 
researchers have argued in favour of differentiating between public diplomacy and 
propaganda (see e.g. Zaharna 2004, p. 223) while others have used both terms 
interchangeably. Moreover, several more terms have been occasionally used in relation to 
promoting national images, such as perception management, strategic communication or 
place branding (see Anholt 2004). Differentiating among all of these terms is especially 
problematic due to the fact that many propaganda/public diplomacy practitioners have 
often downplayed any distinctions between them. An illustrative example are the words of 
the US diplomat Richard Holbrooke in The Washington Post in 2001: call it public 
diplomacy, or public affairs, or psychological warfare, or  if you really want to be blunt  
propaganda (October 28, 2001). 
Irrespective of the preferred terminology, most academic research in the past decade has 
tended to focus on the US context with an emphasis on assessing the effectiveness of US 
public diplomacy campaigns in the context of the post-9/11 world. Studies of public 
diplomacy efforts undertaken by other states have been noticeably less abundant although 
there has been a growing interest in examining the experience of other countries in this 
field, including but not limited to the UK (Fisher 2009), Germany (Zoellner 2009), Japan 
(Ogawa 2009) and China (Rawnsley 2009). Apart from the overwhelming dominance of 
US-related studies, much of the public diplomacy research has been oriented primarily 
towards the analysis of various means, techniques and channels of persuasion (e.g. see 
Zaharna 2009) or exploration of the most common practical problems, such as the issue of 
credibility (see Gass & Seiter 2009) or easier access to information as a result of rapid 
technological development in the sphere of mass communications (see Snow 2009, p. 7).  
While most studies have been of an applied character, there have also been some attempts 
to approach the phenomenon of public diplomacy at the level of theory. Kelly, for instance, 
has argued that the activities that are usually associated with public diplomacy can be 
divided into three broad categories  information, influence and engagement  which differ 
significantly in their time span and objectives. Firstly, these are short-term measures that 
are taken in response to a crisis when the distribution and management of information aims 
to minimise the damage to the countrys image caused by some event. Secondly, these can 
be longer-term campaigns that seek to effect attitudinal change amongst a target 
population. Finally, long-term activities are meant to encourage closer relations between 
people of two countries and build their trust in each other (Kelly 2009, p. 73). Only the 
latter type of campaigns can potentially succeed in overcoming the most deeply-rooted 
negative stereotypes, which is particularly relevant for the present study.  
Although public diplomacy studies have made a significant contribution to our 
understanding of the effectiveness of various persuasion techniques in the foreign policy 
context, they have mostly explored the form rather than the content of information 
campaigns. Moreover, being focused on the communication aspect, they have had very 
limited interest in establishing the link between images projected through public diplomacy 
channels, self-images, images of the state as perceived by other international actors, and 
foreign or domestic policies adopted by the governing authorities. As one can see, while 
the three types of national images mentioned above have been analysed from three 
different perspectives, no systematic explanation has been proposed as to how they relate 
to each other, how they evolve or how they affect foreign and domestic policies. 
1.1.4 Studies of National Images: The Russian Case 
In the area of Soviet and post-Soviet studies, academic research has broadly followed the 
same trend, as most studies of Russias (and the Soviet Unions) perceived, projected and 
self-images have examined these phenomena from different angles and have not sought to 
conceptualise their interconnection or their combined impact on Russias foreign or 
domestic policies. Predictably, interest in studying Russias perceived images has varied 
considerably among Western countries. It has been particularly strong in the German 
academic literature, with one of the most developed areas of research within this field 
being an analysis of the emergence of the so-called Russland-Komplex in Germany and the 
transformation of images of Russia and the Russians from an historical perspective (see 
Bhlke 2002; Koenen 2005; Liszkowski 1988; Volkmann 1994). A particularly significant 
contribution to the field has been made by a number of studies that were conducted within 
the framework of a project on the history of German-Russian perceptions that was led by 
Lev Kopelev (see Keller 1987; Herrmann et al 1989; Kopelew et al 1998; Keller et al 
1998; Keller & Korn 2000). Another well-established area of research has been 
sociolinguistic analysis of images of Russia and the USSR in the German mass media (see 
Crudopf 2000; Degtjarova 2007; Gavrilova 2005; Loew & Pfeifer 2001; Seifert 2003; 
Daniliouk 2006).  
Studies of perceptions of Russia and the Soviet Union in other Western countries in the 
Western academic literature have been less abundant (but see, for instance, Bell 1990; 
Gleason 1972; Williams 1989; Wilson 1970 on images of Russia and the USSR in the 
UK). On the contrary, during the Cold War many scholars tended to focus on studying 
images of the West, particularly the USA, in the Soviet Union (see Barghoorn 1950; 
Schwartz 1978; Mills 1990),1 as it was viewed as an effective way of predicting the general 
tendencies of the USSRs behaviour in the international arena. As Schwartz, for instance, 
explained his choice of research focus, among the problems confronting American policy 
makers, few are more vexing than that of assessing the images others, especially 
adversaries, have of the United States (1978, p. 1). Yet, analysis of Russias images 
abroad has become one of the most rapidly developing areas in Russian academic literature 
(see e.g. Pozdeeva 2000; Rukavishnikov 2005; Zashikhin 1994), which is discussed at 
length in Chapter Two of the present study. On the whole, however, both Russian and 
Western literatures on Russias perceived images have tended to focus on examining the 
existing perceptions and explaining their emergence and transformation. Yet, they have not 
aimed to analyse the link between Russias perceived images and projected images, or their 
link to Russias self-images. 
As was mentioned earlier in the chapter, Russia faced a profound identity crisis in response 
to the disintegration of the Soviet Union, which led to considerable attention in the 
academic literature to the problems of Russian identity and nation building (see e.g. Tolz 
1998; Duncan 2005), and particularly to the impact of this crisis on Russian foreign 
policy.2 Following the constructivist turn in IR studies, a number of works have analysed 
the transformation of Russian national identity with an emphasis on the centuries-long 
public debate between Slavophiles and Westernisers concerning Russias place in the 
world, and its relation with its significant Other  Western Europe (Neumann 1996; Prizel 
1998; Hopf 2002). In this regard, several typologies have been suggested to differentiate 
among competing national identity discourses (competing self-images). Iver Neumann 
1 Images of the USA in the media discourse in post-Soviet Russia have been analysed by Becker (2002). 
2 The impact of the identity crisis on Russian foreign policy and the role of perceptions more broadly have 
been discussed, for instance, by Black (2004), Fawn (2004), Light (1996), Piontkovsky (2006), Pravda 
(1996), Richter (1996). 
(1996), for instance, has analysed two major discourses  Romantic Nationalists who tend 
to praise Russias uniqueness and consider any attempts to follow the Western way of 
development as contradicting the historical and cultural peculiarities of Russian society, 
and Europe-oriented Liberals who view the West as a model that Russia should copy in 
order to become a civilised country. Hopf (2002), on the other hand, has differentiated 
between four major identity discourses  New Western Russian, New Soviet Russian, 
Liberal Essentialist and Liberal Relativist.  
Most other scholars have tended to speak of three major identity discourses although they 
have suggested different names for them: Liberal Atlantists, Eurasians and Centrists (Prizel 
1998); Westernist, Statist and Civilisationist (Tsygankov 2006b); or Liberal Westernisers, 
Pragmatic Nationalists and Fundamentalist Nationalists (Allison et al 2006; also White 
2007). It has been argued that these competing discourses articulate different foreign 
policy preferences, and, depending on their prominence in the public debate and 
particularly on the relative weight of their constituencies among the political class, they 
are capable of having a significant impact on Russian foreign policy. Having made an 
invaluable contribution to the discussion of the role of Russias national identity in foreign 
policy, these studies, however, have largely neglected the third type of Russias images, 
namely projected images. 
Images of Russia and the Soviet Union that were projected in the West received significant 
attention in the Western academic literature during the Cold War when Soviet foreign 
propaganda  its mechanisms and content  was analysed in a large number of studies (e.g. 
Barghoorn 1964; Gordon 1988). Smart (1992), for instance, argued that the Soviet political 
elite was very sensitive to the countrys international image. Having analysed a selection of 
public statements by Nikita Khrushchev, Leonid Brezhnev and Mikhail Gorbachev, he 
demonstrated that the level of sensitivity to the image had a marked effect on the general 
character of foreign policy: a higher level of sensitivity resulted in erratic behaviour in the 
international arena, as was the case with Khrushchev and Gorbachev, while a lower level 
led to a more stable behaviour, as was the case with Brezhnev. Predictably, when Russia 
ceased to be viewed as a major security threat for Western countries following the Soviet 
Unions collapse, analysis of propaganda lost its prominence on the research agenda of 
Western scholars. Most studies of Russian foreign policy in the post-Soviet context have 
tended to show very limited interest in Russias soft power ambitions, although they have 
acknowledged that the enduring goals pursued by Russia through its foreign policy have 
placed primary emphasis on () enhancing national prestige in addition to their emphasis 
on ensuing national security and promoting the economic well-being of the country 
(Donaldson & Nogee 2005, p. 4). While Moscows increasing obsession with the 
countrys image and its energetic attempts to improve it were examined in several studies, 
the focus of attention was predominantly on Russias relations with members of the 
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) (e.g. Popescu 2006; Tsygankov 2006a). 
It should be mentioned that Russia has not been the only post-Soviet country that has been 
pre-occupied with efforts to change its international image, as many other post-Soviet 
states in Central and Eastern Europe have also launched public diplomacy campaigns in an 
attempt to promote more favourable images in the West (e.g. see Serajnik-Sraka 2001). As 
Gyrgy Szondi (2009, pp. 294-295) has demonstrated in his study, despite substantial 
differences in their approaches to public diplomacy, most of them have tended to position 
themselves as reliable and eligible candidate[s] of the new system and as regional leaders 
who were worthy of financial support while trying to distance themselves from the 
Communist political system. While the Western academic literature has largely ignored 
Russias attempts to improve the countrys image in the international arena, Russian 
scholars have been increasingly interested in the subject, mostly focusing on the analysis of 
various persuasion techniques that could be used to achieve the goal  as discussed in a 
greater detail in Chapter Two. However, neither Russian nor Western scholars have sought 
to conceptualise the role of Russias projected images at the policy level.  
1.2 Theoretical Framework 
This study seeks to bridge this gap between different approaches to national images by 
analysing the efforts of the Russian authorities to project a more favourable image of the 
country in the West in 2000-2008, i.e. in the years of Vladimir Putins presidency. 
Conceptually, it follows the social constructivist tradition in its vision of national interests 
of the state as not objective or fixed but shaped by the dominant national identity and 
capable of change in response to transformation of the latter. However, it aims to go 
beyond an examination of national identity by focussing on the image of the state as a unit 
of analysis. 
1.2.1 Image of the State as a Unit of Analysis 
Although closely inter-connected with the concepts of identity, perceptions and 
stereotypes, the image has its distinctive characteristics as a unit of analysis. First of all, as 
discussed earlier in the chapter, images have a set of salient characteristics, and are usually 
nave and unsophisticated in their nature (Boulding 1959, p. 131). Moreover, one can 
speak of several types of images, namely self-images (visions of ones own country), 
perceived images (images of the country held by other international actors) and projected 
images (those images that the country is promoting either for domestic or for foreign 
audiences)  this analytical distinction is particularly helpful for a study of this kind. The 
concept of the self-image is close to that of national identity, and the two are used in this 
study interchangeably. National self-images are not fixed: they are in constant change in 
response to changes in the internal or external environment. Moreover, one cannot speak 
about a single self-image of the state but rather about competing self-images which are 
articulated and supported by different groups in the society. One can agree with Tsygankov 
identity is a product of discursive competition among different groups and coalitions, 
drawing on different actions of the Other and interpreting contemporary international 
and local influences in a way that suits the groups interest (2006b, p. 17) 
As a result of this competition, one self-image comes to dominate the discourse although 
sometimes it can include certain elements of competing self-images. It is the dominant 
self-image then that shapes the interpretation of national interests by those in power. 
Moreover, self-images or national identities are embedded in a larger set of beliefs and 
policy preference, not only in relation to foreign policy but also to various paths of 
economic and political development (see Shulman 2005, p. 68). Thus, changes in the 
dominant image can lead to the redefinition of national interests in the sphere of foreign 
policy, as well as to considerable variation in the political, social and economic agenda at 
home.  
Similarly to the self-images of the state, its perceived images can vary greatly  across 
different countries, as well as within any foreign country. On the one hand, variations 
across countries are caused by various factors, ranging from geographic proximity to the 
history of interactions between the two states. Moreover, perceived images of the same 
state can differ substantially not only in their content, but also in their visibility, i.e. their 
relative weight in the picture of the world in a foreign country. The same state can be 
perceived as merely one among many other states in one country and as a significant Other 
in another country. In the latter case, one can expect that the perceived image of the state 
would be considerably more stable as it would play an important role in shaping the self-
image of the foreign country in question. On the other hand, perceived images of the same 
state can vary considerably within a foreign country  in perceptions of different elite 
groups, in the mass media and public opinion. Furthermore, although for the purpose of 
this study we define the image of the state as a unit of analysis, perceived images are not 
monolithic. They contain a number of components, such as an image of the authorities and 
the political leader, an economic image, an image of the country as an investment or tourist 
destination, etc. There can be a significant difference in perceptions of these elements: 
some of them can be viewed more negatively while others  more positively. Thus, while 
analysing Russias perceived images in the West, we should take all these factors into 
consideration. 
Projected images can also vary across countries. On the one hand, they are shaped by the 
dominant self-image: the latter shapes the vision of national interests of the state, which 
then affects the way the state wants to be perceived in a particular foreign country. On the 
other hand, they are linked to the perceived image of the foreign country in question in the 
state itself. To illustrate this point, Russias projected image in the USA, for instance, is 
shaped by both Russias dominant self-image and the image of the USA in Russia. 
Although projected images tend to be positive, particularly more positive than perceived 
images, sometimes states may be interested in promoting more negative images that would 
perform a function of a deterrent (see Kunczik 1997). On the whole, however, all the three 
types of images  perceived, projected and self-images  tend to contain similar 
components, but their relative weight within these images differs. The task of foreign 
propaganda is mainly to shift the focus of attention from negative to more favourable 
characteristics.  
1.2.2 Defining Foreign Propaganda 
As discussed earlier in this chapter, in the academic literature there is no consensus on 
clear-cut distinctions between such terms as propaganda, public diplomacy, marketing 
or public relations (PR). While some scholars have restricted the notion of propaganda to 
the Soviet or Nazi propaganda of the 20th century, other researchers have broadened the 
definition. According to Nicholas OShaughnessy, for instance, propaganda is not 
synonymous with mere overt polemicism, but informs many cultural products, including 
such apparently politically neutral areas as entertainment and documentaries (2004, pp. 1-
2). This study comes from the latter perspective and uses the terms propaganda, public 
diplomacy and state PR interchangeably, without any negative subtext associated with 
the term propaganda. A crucial question is then what exactly constitutes foreign 
propaganda. According to Richard Nelson, for instance, propaganda is  
a systematic form of purposeful persuasion that attempts to influence the emotions, 
attitudes, opinions, and actions of specified target audiences for ideological, political or 
commercial purposes through the controlled transmission of one-sided messages 
(which may or may not be factual) via mass and direct media channels (1996, p. 232) 
While this definition appears to capture the essence of propaganda in general, one can 
argue that in case of contemporary foreign propaganda it should be broadened to include 
transmission of messages through a variety of channels since among the targets of 
foreign propaganda can be elite groups in a foreign country, and the transmission of 
information is not always controlled in the traditional sense as some activities can be 
conducted by non-governmental actors. Thus, the notion of foreign propaganda, as used in 
the present study, largely covers all activities that are pursued by the authorities of the state 
or any other actors with an aim of projecting an image of the state that they view as 
favourable for them. 
While discussing the projection of positive images of the state that are meant to enhance its 
soft power, one of the key questions is how effective foreign propaganda can be. As Joseph 
Nye (2004, pp. 31-32) has argued, efforts to gain or increase soft power can be particularly 
successful when they meet three conditions: i) when the culture and ideas that are 
promoted match prevailing global norms; ii) when a state in question has greater access 
to multiple communication channels that can influence how issues are framed in global 
news media; and iii) when the message is confirmed by the states behaviour both at home 
and in the international arena. An attempt to enhance the soft power of the state can be 
considered successful when its policies are perceived as legitimate by other international 
actors (Nye 2004, p. x). 
1.2.3 (Un) Successful Foreign Propaganda 
One can expect that successful or unsuccessful foreign propaganda would have a 
significant impact on the transformation of the states self-images since construction of 
self is influenced by what other actors think about you (Zevelev 2002, p. 450). In Russias 
case, Western Europe has for centuries been one of the Significant Others for Russian 
identity (see Neumann 1996), and Russian political elites have always looked at Europe 
and later at the United States (or the West in general) to see how they perceive Russia. 
Moreover, elites have become particularly sensitive to perceptions of Russia in Western 
countries in the context of the unresolved identity crisis that followed the collapse of the 
Soviet Union. As Flemming Splidsboel-Hansen has pointed out in his study of Russias 
relations with the European Union (EU), a states new identity depends on acceptance by 
other states, and in the attempt to be recognised as a normal country Russian political 
elites have looked to the West for approval of Russias new identity (2002, p. 407). 
Similarly, Tsygankov (2006b) has argued that recognition of Russian liberal identity by the 
West has tended to strengthen it in the competition against other identity discourses, while 
lack of this recognition has, on the contrary, contributed to strengthening Russias anti-
Western nationalist identity discourse. 
This explanation, however, does not take into account the fact that projected images of the 
state, as discussed earlier in this chapter, can differ to some extent from its dominant self-
image even if they are shaped by the latter. In this case, one can expect that projected 
images, if successfully promoted, would themselves have an impact on the dominant 
image. While trying to construct a desirable international image, the state needs to 
reinforce it by certain signals or actions, and therefore is more or less limited in its foreign 
policy choices to those that would comply with the message. In this process the state can 
gradually accept some of the projected image characteristics as a part of its dominant self-
image, since we are what we want to be (Zevelev 2002, p. 461). On the contrary, one can 
expect that if foreign propaganda fails to promote more favourable characteristics of the 
states image, the state may lose the incentive to comply with the message and may revert 
to old practices. Moreover, the inability to persuade the Other of the states good intentions 
may strengthen enemy images of the Other, which may lead to its dominant self-image 
discourse relying more heavily on a self-image that is based on hostility towards the Other. 
This change, in its turn, may lead to a redefinition of the states national interests in the 
international arena. Furthermore, one can expect that failure to promote a more favourable 
image would affect not only the states foreign policy, but also its domestic policy. On the 
one hand, the state might again revert to old practices at home as it might see no incentive 
in complying with the positive image. On the other hand, a shift in the dominant self-image 
may affect a broader set of social, political and economic preferences that are associated 
with a particular self-image in the dominant discourse.  
It should be mentioned that the link between foreign and domestic has always been 
particularly problematic in the academic literature. While most IR studies had traditionally 
focused on analysing the international causes of the states behaviour, the interconnection 
of international and domestic was first conceptualised in FPA research as it was 
increasingly interested in examining the domestic sources of foreign policy (see Rosenau 
1967). It has been suggested that foreign policy can be affected by such domestic factors 
as, for instance, bureaucratic practices in various institutions (bureaucratic politics model  
see Allison 1969) or public opinion (Risse-Kappen 1991). At the same time, it has been 
argued that the international system is not only a consequence of domestic politics and 
structures but a cause of them (Gourevitch 1978, p. 911). While most scholars have 
agreed that domestic and international is indeed interconnected, or in Christopher Hills 
words, foreign policy has its domestic sources and domestic policy has its foreign sources 
(2003, p. 39), the nature of this interconnection has remained more or less unclear. 
According to Gourevitch, 
We have developed strong research traditions that hold either system or country 
constant. We do not have very good theories to handle what happens when both are at 
play, when each influences the other, when the domestic politics of one country 
interacts with the domestic politics of another, an interaction which itself helps define a 
system that reverberates back on the parts (2002, p. 321)  
Although this study does not aim to arrive at a theory that would explain this 
interconnection entirely, it nevertheless seeks to provide a deeper insight at the link 
between foreign and domestic by analysing the impact of national images on foreign and 
domestic policies. 
1.3 Methodology of the Study 
Having examined the dominant approaches to studying national images in academic 
literature and the theoretical framework of this thesis, let us now turn to a discussion of the 
research methods that have been employed and the choice of case studies that have been 
used to explore Russias perceived and projected images in greater detail. 
1.3.1 Research Methods: Advantages and Limitations 
Following the social constructivist tradition in IR studies, the thesis mostly relies on 
qualitative research methods, such as elite interviewing and discourse analysis. This choice 
can be largely explained by the fact that qualitative methods in general are grounded in the 
interpretivist philosophical position, i.e. they aim at uncovering how the social world is 
understood or constructed (Mason 2001). Moreover, they pay special attention to language 
(Spencer et al 2004), which is particularly advantageous for a study of perceptions and 
national images. Apart from qualitative data, the study has also made extensive use of 
publicly available opinion surveys which were conducted in Russia and a number of 
Western countries by the Moscow-based Levada Centre, and the German Marshall Fund of 
the United States and the Compagnia di San Paolo (Italy).  
In-depth interviews have been used to gain a perspective on Russias perceived images in 
two case study countries  the UK and Germany. Based on purposeful sampling, 
representatives of three groups of elites have been interviewed in each country  journalists 
with expertise in Russian affairs, representatives of political elites (members of the UK 
Parliament and the Bundestag, as well as high-ranking officials with expertise in Russia) 
and various experts, including academics. A large number of the interviewees have been 
directly targeted by Russian foreign propaganda (e.g. invited to various events organised 
by Russian propaganda agencies such as the Valdai Discussion Club), which has made 
their views especially valuable for this study. Moreover, the analysis of Russias projected 
images has benefited from a series of interviews that were conducted with a number of 
high-ranking propagandists (mostly in Moscow, but also in several capitals of EU member 
states) who had first-hand experience of working in Russian foreign propaganda. The latter 
interviews have been particularly helpful in establishing changes in Russias foreign 
propaganda strategy in the years of Putins presidency and the development of the foreign 
propaganda machine. In total, twenty nine anonymous in-depth interviews have been 
conducted.  
The results obtained with the help of in-depth interviewing have been supplemented with 
the findings of discourse analysis. As a method that illuminates the dominant ideas and 
identifies those who legitimate these ideas (Burnham et al 2004, p. 247), discourse 
analysis has provided rich data on Russias perceived, projected and self-images. The 
analysis of Russias dominant self-image has been largely based on a number of Russian 
official documents, including but not limited to the Foreign Policy Concept of the Russian 
Federation (Kontseptsiya vneshnei 2000) and the National Security Concept (Kontseptsiya 
natsionalnoi 2000), and on President Putins statements, interviews and articles published 
under his name. In addition to that, the analysis has drawn on statements and publications 
by Russian oppositional politicians, such as Gennady Zyuganov or Grigory Yavlinsky, 
who have articulated competing discourses. Russias perceived images in the West, 
particularly in the UK and Germany, have been examined by looking at discourses on 
Russia in the mass media, public statements of members of political and business elites, 
official documents, and transcripts of parliamentary debates in the respective countries. At 
the same time, the analysis of Russias projected images in the dominant discourse has 
been undertaken by focussing on statements by President Putin and high-ranking officials 
that were targeted at foreign audiences, and on those texts that were published in foreign 
propaganda outlets, such as Russia Profile.
The use of a large number of primary sources has enabled the study to explore Russias 
images and their transformation over time in depth. Yet, one should mention a number of 
limitations that are usually associated with the research methods employed in this thesis. 
Firstly, there is the question of reliability, which in quantitative methodology is usually 
understood as the replicability of research findings. However, while qualitative findings in 
general are largely impossible to replicate, one can still argue that the findings are reliable 
when detailed information has been provided on the research process (Burnham et al 
2004). Secondly, there is the issue of validity, i.e. correctness or precision of the results. 
This problem, at least to some extent, may be solved by employing the strategy of 
triangulation, i.e. resorting to several methods and sources of research (Lewis & Richie 
2004). This study seeks to address this problem by supplementing the findings obtained 
with the help of elite interviews with the results of discourse analysis. Moreover, it relies 
on a large number of secondary sources, including a vast number of Russian studies that 
touch upon the problem of Russias images and perceptions. Thirdly, there is inevitable 
bias in the selection of interviewees and texts for discourse analysis as it has been 
purposeful rather than representative. It can be argued, however, that this study is 
concerned not with perceptions of particular individuals, but with shared meanings that are 
characteristic of groups in a society, which makes purposeful sampling particularly 
appropriate. Another problem that should be mentioned is connected with measuring the 
effectiveness of foreign propaganda since changes in national images can occur in response 
to a variety of factors and it is often impossible to establish what exactly triggered the 
change. The study attempts to overcome this problem by reflecting on most noticeable 
factors, and by relying on the results obtained with the help of elite interviews and publicly 
available opinion surveys.  
1.3.2 Choice of Case Studies 
To facilitate the analysis of Russias perceived images and the effectiveness of foreign 
propaganda, the thesis includes two case studies that examine the issues at question in 
greater detail in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (UK) and the 
Federal Republic of Germany (FRG). This choice of case studies can be explained by 
several factors. Firstly, Western Europe has traditionally been Russias significant Other, 
and both Britain and Germany have been particularly important in this regard. Thus, one 
can expect that Russias perceived images in these two states would have a pronounced 
impact on the evolution of Russias dominant self-image. Secondly, both states, alongside 
the USA and other G8 members, have been among the primary targets of Russian foreign 
propaganda in the years of Putins presidency. Thirdly, transformation of Russias images 
in the UK and Germany is especially interesting due to the fact that these states are 
important actors in the European Union. As discussed in Chapter Three, one of the central 
elements of Russian foreign propaganda in 2000-2008 was promoting an image of Russia 
as a reliable energy supplier, which was particularly relevant for the EU as the largest 
importer of Russian energy. While both the UK and Germany sought to develop their 
relations with Russia in the energy sphere, the patterns of their relations differed to a 
significant extent. One can expect that this difference would have a noticeable effect on 
Russias images as an energy supplier and the overall effectiveness of Russian propaganda 
in the two states. 
Apart from the structure of economic relations with Russia, there are a number of other 
factors that might contribute to differences in the perceptions of Russia in the two EU 
member states. Among the most significant are the history of Russian-German and 
Russian-British relations, the presence of a large number of immigrants of Russian origin 
in both Germany and the UK (although they represent different social groups), and 
geographical proximity to Russia. It should be noted that although Russia-EU relations 
have been analysed from various perspectives in a rapidly growing literature on this 
subject (see Antonenko & Pinnick 2005; Johnson & Robinson 2005; Smith 2006a; Hopf 
2008), Russias ambitions to enhance its soft power in the area have been largely 
neglected, which makes the choice of the UK and Germany as case studies especially 
valuable for our purposes.  
1.3.3 Overview of the Thesis 
The study covers the period from 2000 to 2008. The following chapter (Chapter Two) sets 
a context for the remaining thesis by examining the emergence of the problem of Russias 
negative image on the foreign policy agenda of the Russian authorities. Having highlighted 
the most significant moments in the evolution of Russias images in the West in the post-
Soviet period, it examines the way in which this problem has been conceptualised in the 
dominant discourse. This is followed by an overview of the key approaches to Russias 
international image in the Russian academic and expert literature.  
Chapters Three and Four focus on the propaganda campaign that was launched by the 
Russian authorities in an attempt to promote a more favourable image of Russia in Western 
countries. Chapter Three analyses the form of this campaign by exploring the structure of 
the foreign propaganda machine as it developed in the years of Vladimir Putins 
presidency. Having discussed the mechanism of foreign propaganda that had been 
employed by the Soviet Union during the Cold War, it proceeds to examine the changes in 
Russian foreign propaganda  conceptual, as well as structural  that took place in 2000-
2008. It should be mentioned that for the purpose of this study, the analysis is limited to 
foreign propaganda at the state level only while attempts to promote favourable images of 
Russian regions by various regional actors are not examined. Chapter Four explores the 
content of propaganda by analysing Russias projected images and their link to Russias 
dominant self-image, as well as its perceived images. It seeks particularly to identify the 
difference between the core elements of these three types of images in such areas as the 
image of Russian democracy, Russias image as an energy supplier, Russias image as an 
actor in the post-Soviet space and the vision of Russias international status. 
The analysis of Russian foreign propaganda at the general level is followed by two case 
studies that examine Russias perceived images and the attempts of the Russian authorities 
to transform them in the UK (Chapter Five) and Germany (Chapter Six). Both case studies 
begin by looking at perceptions of Russia from a historical perspective and establishing a 
set of stereotypes of Russia and the Russians that had developed over centuries. The 
chapters then proceed to analyse the evolution of Russias images in 2000-2008. Based on 
a series of elite interviews, they focus on competing images of Russia among the elites, as 
well as in the mass media and public opinion. Having explored peculiarities of Russian 
foreign propaganda in the UK and Germany, the chapters reflect on the effectiveness of 
Russias campaigns in these two countries.  
The overall results of Russian foreign propaganda in Western countries are discussed in 
Chapter Seven. Based on examining perceptions of Russia by existing and potential 
foreign investors, Russias position in the Anholt-GfK Roper Nation Brands Index and a 
series of public opinion surveys in a number of Western countries that were conducted in 
the final years of Putins presidency, the chapter analyses the increasingly negative 
character of Russias perceived images and discusses possible reasons for the inability of 
Russian foreign propaganda to improve them significantly. The impact of this inability to 
transform the negative image on Russias dominant self-image is examined in Chapter 
Eight. Having looked at the ways in which the continued prevalence of Russias negative 
image in the West despite energetic propaganda efforts was explained in the dominant 
discourse, the chapter analyses the use of Russias negative international image in 
domestic propaganda. The final chapter (Chapter Nine) explores the implications of 
Russias unsuccessful foreign propaganda for Russias actions both at home and in the 
international arena. It also presents the overall findings of the thesis by suggesting a 
theoretical explanation of the link between perceived, projected and self-images of the 
state and their impact on the states foreign and domestic policies. 
Overall, this thesis seeks to make a three-fold contribution to academic literature. Firstly, it 
is the first systematic examination of Russian foreign propaganda in the post-Soviet period. 
By analysing Russias attempts to improve its image in the international arena, the thesis 
contributes to the literature in the field of International Political Communication that has 
already examined public diplomacy campaigns conducted by other, mainly Western, 
countries. Secondly, it aims to provide a deeper insight at the role of subjective, non-
material factors in Russian foreign policy. Finally, it makes a contribution to the social 
constructivist IR literature by presenting a theoretical analysis of the role of national 
images in international relations. 
Chapter 2  
Russias Negative Image: Views of the Problem 
The problem of Russias negative image in the international arena, particularly in Western 
countries, emerged on the foreign policy agenda of the Russian authorities at the beginning 
of Vladimir Putins first presidential term. Although it had been extensively discussed in 
the Russian expert community and the mass media already in the late 1990s, only under 
Putins presidency did it begin to be viewed as a serious threat that required immediate 
action. Before we move on to explore the form and the content of a foreign propaganda 
campaign that was launched as a result of this change (see Chapters Three and Four), we 
should examine the dominant views of the problem in the Russian official discourse. 
Moreover, understanding the role of national images in Russian foreign and domestic 
policies requires a thorough analysis of theoretical and applied image-related issues that 
have been debated in the Russian academic and political community over the past decade. 
The present chapter seeks to undertake this analysis, and is based on a number of open 
official documents and statements, theoretical works and applied research conducted by 
Russian academics, as well as newspaper and journal publications touching upon the 
problem of Russias image.  
This chapter is structured in the following way. The first part provides a brief overview of 
the transformation of Russia's images in the 'West' in the post-Soviet period. Although in 
the present study there is no scope for a detailed discussion of perceived images of Russia,3
the chapter nevertheless attempts to examine the most significant elements of the countrys 
images, with an emphasis on those characteristics which the Russian authorities viewed as 
particularly problematic. The second part explores the way in which the problem of 
Russias negative image was conceptualised in the official discourse. The chapter then 
proceeds to analyse the approaches to the problem in Russian academic and expert 
literature: the third part looks at the main characteristics of Russian IR studies, which is 
followed by an analysis of Russian image literature in the fourth part. The chapter 
concludes by discussing the reasons for this pronounced significance of the image problem 
in the official and academic discourses. 
3 Russias existing images in the West have been examined in a number of Russian studies (see 
Rukavishnikov 2005; Semenenko et al 2006; Solovev 2008). These works are discussed later in this chapter. 
2.1 Russias Image in the West: From Gorbymania to Putinophobia 
While discussing the transformation of Russias image in the West, one should note that it 
would be a serious over-simplification to look at it as a single image of Russia (and of any 
country in general). Russias images differ substantially across countries as a result of 
various factors such as the history of their relations with Russia, the structure of economic 
relations, geographic proximity etc. Moreover, there are also competing images within each 
individual country  in public opinion, in the mass media and in the opinion of political, 
business or expert/academic elites. These differences are analysed in more detail further in 
this study in Chapters Five and Six which examine Russias perceived and projected 
images in two case studies  the UK and Germany. Despite these differences, one can still 
uncover a number of broader trends that are typical of most Western countries.  
2.1.1 Russias Perceived Image among Western Elites and in the Mass Media 
In the Western mass media and among the elites, Russias images were predominantly 
positive in the early 1990s when many in the West shared hopes for the rapid 
democratisation and liberalisation of the country. The image of the USSR President 
Mikhail Gorbachev was particularly positive, which led some commentators to describe 
those attitudes as Gorbymania.4 The first Russian president Boris Yeltsin also enjoyed a 
fairly positive image at the beginning of his presidency. Yeltsins regime was largely 
perceived by Western elites and the mass media as the only viable alternative to Russias 
return to communism. Yeltsins victory in the 1996 presidential elections when he 
competed against the leader of the Communist Party of the Russian Federation (CPRF) 
Gennady Zyuganov was interpreted by many as a victory of democracy over 
authoritarianism. The Washington Post, for instance, praised Russian voters who showed 
the wisdom and fortitude to vote against the greater of the evils (5 July 1996). Moreover, 
Yeltsins foreign policy in the early 1990s was pronouncedly pro-Western. As a 
consequence, although his image did tarnish to some extent, on the whole it remained more 
or less positive even following those Presidents actions which appeared to contradict the 
declared intention to democratise the country (e.g. Yeltsins dispute with the Russian 
Parliament in October 1993).  
4 For a detailed discussion of Mikhail Gorbachevs and Boris Yeltsins images in Western countries, see 
Rukavishnikov (2005). 
However, Yeltsins image (together with the image of Russia) began to change very 
rapidly in a negative direction in the middle of the 1990s. Among the factors that 
contributed to this process were the social and economic situation in the country, the war 
that was launched by the Russian authorities in the break-away republic of Chechnya, 
rampant corruption and crime, etc. At the same time, the Kremlins foreign policy 
underwent significant changes. It became considerably more assertive and independent 
from the West under the newly appointed foreign minister Evgeny Primakov, which also 
had a crucial effect on Russias images. A study that was commissioned in 1997 by the 
Council on Foreign and Defence Policy of the Russian Federation, a think-tank with close 
links to the Kremlin, arrived at extremely upsetting findings. While examining the image of 
the Russian business community in the Western mass media, it revealed that attitudes to 
Russian business were affected by several stereotypes concerning the country in general. 
The most significant of them were: a military threat of a new type (i.e. a threat caused by 
weak state control over nuclear arms), a criminal and corrupt state, and Russias inability 
to conduct reforms without guidance from the West. The research concluded by stating the 
necessity to improve the perceived image in order to help Russian companies become more 
attractive for potential investors (Council on Foreign and Defence Policy of the RF 1997). 
Having reached its negative peak at the end of Yeltsins presidency, Russias images 
began to improve following Vladimir Putins election as president. Predictably, some in the 
West were concerned with Putins background in the security services and the arguably 
non-democratic manner in which Yeltsin had appointed Putin as his successor. As The 
Washington Post commented on the dominant attitudes of American political elites, US 
policymakers were apprehensive () about the no-nonsense former KGB colonel whose 
personal values remain unclear even to Americans who have worked closely with him (1 
January 2000). However, Putins personality appeared to be in stark contrast to that of 
Russias first president, which was beneficial for Putins image. According to The Times,
where Yeltsin was ageing, wobbly and barely coherent, Putin is 47, sober and a judo-belt 
who takes bracing walks in the country (19 January 2000). Moreover, Putins decisions in 
the early years of his presidency indicated a significant shift of Russian foreign policy 
strategy: from Primakovs balancing policy to closer cooperation with the West. The most 
illustrative example was Putins decision to support the US-led war on terror that followed 
the attacks on the World Trade Centre and the Pentagon in September 2001. On the whole, 
in 2001-2002, while Russia was still criticised for corruption and the war in Chechnya, its 
images in the Western mass media and among elites appeared to be changing in a positive 
direction. 
A turning point in the transformation of Russias images in the Putin years was the decision 
of the Russian authorities to join Germany and France in their opposition to the US-led 
intervention in Iraq in 2003. Predictably, it considerably damaged Russias images in the 
eyes of pro-war elites and the mass media in the USA and other members of their coalition, 
particularly the UK. The Christian Science Monitor, for example, wrote about the Cold-
war frost that formed over Iraq (26 March 2003). More interestingly, however, it also had 
a negative impact on Russias images in those countries that opposed the war. As Chapter 
Six will demonstrate, some members of the political and business elites in Germany, for 
instance, considered Berlins alliance with Paris and Moscow against Washington as a 
serious mistake, which inevitably affected their perceptions of France and Russia. Another 
crucial event that significantly damaged Russias images was the arrest of Mikhail 
Khodorkovsky, head of the Yukos oil company, on fraud and tax evasion charges in 2003. 
The Yukos affair was perceived by many in the West as a possible move by the Russian 
authorities towards reversal of privatisation and as punishment of a political opponent. The 
New York Times, for instance, reported that investors and Kremlin watchers said they 
[were] not convinced that the governments prosecution of M. Khodorkovsky () would 
be its last confrontation with Russias business elite (14 November 2003).5
Moreover, strengthening of the vertical of power, the continuing war in Chechnya, human 
rights violations, the murder of the journalist Anna Politkovskaya in October 2006 and 
Alexander Litvinenkos death in London in November 2006 had an increasingly negative 
effect on images of Russia and its leadership. More and more often Putin was accused of 
stepping aside from democratic principles and of creating an authoritarian state. This 
authoritarian element in Russias images among Western elites and in the mass media 
became particularly pronounced in the run-up to the parliamentary elections at the end of 
2007. The Guardian, for instance, wrote about fraud, intimidation and bribery during the 
parliamentary election campaign (30 November 2007).  
Criticism of Russias domestic situation was accompanied by growing concerns about its 
more assertive policies in the post-Soviet area, which were seen as neo-imperial in nature. 
The Financial Times expressed the opinion of many in Western countries writing that the 
West must resist Putins claim on the old Soviet space (22 November 2007). Illustrative 
examples of what was often interpreted in the Western mass media as Russias attempts to 
punish those post-Soviet countries that had articulated their pro-Western rather than pro-
5 For a discussion of the impact of Khodorkovskys arrest and the Yukos affair on Russias international 
image, see Sakwa (2009, pp. 314-321). 
Russian foreign policy strategies were Russias trade wars with Georgia and a series of 
Russias disputes with Ukraine over gas prices. The latter incidents gained particularly 
extensive publicity due to Ukraines status as a major transit country for Russian gas to a 
number of EU member states. It should be mentioned that in 2006, imports from Russia 
accounted for approximately 42% of total EU-27 gas imports. In comparison, imports from 
the other 3 largest suppliers  Norway, Algeria and Nigeria  accounted for 24.2%, 18.2% 
and 4.8% respectively (EUDG 2009, p. 31). Following the disputes with Ukraine, in the 
context of this considerable dependence of the EU on imports of Russian gas, the image of 
Russia as an energy supplier became one of the key elements of Russias images in 
Western countries. 
Moscows dispute with Kiev over gas prices in 2006 had a particularly significant impact 
on Russias images. The reaction of the Western mass media to Russias actions during the 
crisis was predominantly negative. The Times, for instance, wrote about fears of new cold 
war as Russia threaten[ed] to switch off the gas (30 December 2005). Many Western 
politicians hurried to publicly accuse Russia of using its energy resources as a political 
weapon.6 Furthermore, a number of commentators, although acknowledging Kievs 
contribution to the development of the crisis, particularly Ukraines rampant corruption, 
considered Ukraine as mostly a victim of the Kremlins aggression and wrote about 
Russias willingness to use its considerable energy resources for political blackmail 
(Smith 2006b, p. 1). At the same time, a former high-ranking British diplomat who was 
interviewed for this study argued that Russias decision to raise the price was justified but 
the way they did it got them the worst publicity they could think of. One of the reasons 
for the negative reaction of the West, in his opinion, was a centuries-old stereotype that in 
case of a conflict Russia would necessarily very quickly resort to force: since Russia was 
not happy with Ukraines pro-Western orientation, it punished it by turning off gas.7
Interestingly, some scholars in their analysis of the crisis concluded that Gazproms 
motivation was predominantly economic, but warned that in case of future conflicts 
between Russia and any transit country, Russias decision to cut gas supplies would 
inevitably be seen by the Western mass media as politically motivated (Stern 2006, p. 16). 
6 See, e.g. the reaction of U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice: U.S. Department of State (2006) Russia 
Should Act Responsibly in Dispute with Ukraine, Rice Says, 5 January, available at:  
http://www.america.gov/st/washfile-english/2006/January/20060105160612btruevecer0.5403864.html,
accessed 2 May 2009. 
7 Anonymous interview with a former high-ranking British diplomat, London, 14 December 2006. 
Furthermore, Russias pro-active energy policy, combined with the re-emergence of great 
power discourse in Russian society, was interpreted by many in the West as an indication 
of the Kremlins intention to turn Russia into an energy superpower  a concept that 
received substantial attention in both the mass media and the academic literature.8 The 
significantly more assertive rhetoric of the Russian authorities in the sphere of foreign 
policy during Putins second presidential term appeared to confirm these views. Putins 
speech at the Munich Conference on Security Policy in February 2007 (see Putin 2007d), 
where he openly criticised the USA for unilateralism, was perceived by many as 
manifestation of the Kremlins anti-Westernism and great power aspirations. Following 
Putins speech, The New York Times wrote that the relationship between Russia and the 
United States () reached what [was] probably its lowest point since the Soviet Union 
collapsed a decade and a half ago (18 February 2007). The dominant vision of Russian 
foreign policy at that time can be illustrated by the title of an article in Financial Times: A 
Cruder Kremlin: How Russia Is Reasserting Itself as a World Power (1August 2007).  
On the whole, Russias images in the Western mass media and among elites (although as 
Chapters Five and Six will demonstrate there were significant differences between them) 
reached their negative peak in 2006-2007. The dominant image of Vladimir Putin at the 
end of his second presidential term was skilfully captured by the Economist:
There is a prickly KGB officer in the Kremlin. He suppresses dissent at home and () 
abroad. He obstructs America's foreign policy, sells arms to its enemies and cosies up 
to its rivals () He uses his country's vast hydrocarbon reserves to bully the 
neighbours (30 November 2006) 
The pronouncedly negative character of the Russian presidents image led some 
commentators to label these views as Putinophobia  as any action of the Russian 
authorities, both in domestic and foreign policies, appeared to be interpreted in a way that 
was unfavourable for Moscow (see Russia Profile 2008). Moreover, in the context of 
dramatic deterioration of Russias relations with the USA and the EU during the last two 
years of Putins presidency, some commentators, both in Russia and in the West, began to 
speak of a new Cold War. An illustrative example of these views is a book by the 
Economist correspondent Edward Lucas titled The New Cold War (2008). While many 
members of Western elites and the mass media disagreed with this vision, in the dominant 
8 It should be mentioned though that some commentators have argued against this view, as the vision of 
Russia as an energy superpower, in their opinion, exaggerates Russias ability to use oil and gas as 
weapons to augment Russian influence over its neighbourhood and on the world stage (Rutland 2008, p. 
209). 
images the element of hostility between Russia and the West was still significant. As The 
New York Times described the relationship, there was no Cold War, perhaps, but surely a 
lukewarm peace (18 February 2007). 
2.1.2 Russias Position in Country Rankings 
While discussing the transformation of Russias images under Putins presidency, one 
should also examine changes in Russias position in various country ratings, such as 
Freedom in the World, published by Freedom House, or the Corruption Perceptions 
Index, prepared by Transparency International. These ratings are a valuable source for the 
present study for a number of reasons. Firstly, although these organisations seek to arrive at 
balanced and unbiased judgments, they nevertheless acknowledge an element of 
subjectivity inherent in the survey findings (Freedom House 2008). Thus, they may be, at 
least to some extent, affected by perceived images of Russia (or any other country). 
Secondly, once published, these ratings are widely quoted in the Western mass media, 
which means that they themselves have an impact on Russias images. Finally, their 
findings tend to receive substantial attention among the Russian political elite and expert 
community, which indicates that they may affect Russias self-images and images of the 
West. In the Russian mass media there is an on-going debate whether these ratings are 
objective or politically motivated (see e.g. The Moscow Times, 17 January 2008). The latter 
view may have a negative affect on the images of the West, and contribute to strengthening 
the siege mentality in Russian society  this will be discussed in detail in Chapter Eight of 
the thesis. 
Let us now look at the changes in Russias positions in a series of ratings that occurred 
under Putins presidency. Table 2.1 illustrates Russias ratings by the US-based NGO 
Freedom House in the period 1991-2007. The evaluation is conducted by a group of 
regional experts and scholars who use a broad variety of sources of information: from news 
reports and academic analyses to individual contacts and visits to the region (Freedom 
House 2008).  The organisation measures separately political and civil rights on a scale 
from one to seven, with one indicating the highest degree of freedom and seven the lowest. 
The combined average ratings then are used to define the status of a country: countries with 
combined ratings between 1 and 2.5 are designated as free, those with ratings between 3 
and 5  as partly free, and finally countries with ratings that fall between 5.5 and 7  as 
not free (Freedom House 2008).9 As one can see from the table, Russias ratings for civil 
rights changed twice  in 1992 and 1999, i.e. before Putin was elected as President. 
However, political rights ratings increased substantially during his two terms in office: first 
from four to five in 2000, and then from five to six in 2004. Thus, since 2004 Russia has 
been classified as not free.  
Year Political Rights Civil Rights Freedom 
Status 
1991 3 3 Partly Free 
1992 3 4 Partly Free 
1993 3 4 Partly Free 
1994 3 4 Partly Free 
1995 3 4 Partly Free 
1996 3 4 Partly Free 
1997 3 4 Partly Free 
1998 4 4 Partly Free 
1999 4 5 Partly Free 
2000 5 5 Partly Free 
2001 5 5 Partly Free 
2002 5 5 Partly Free 
2003 5 5 Partly Free 
2004 6 5 Not Free 
2005 6 5 Not Free 
2006 6 5 Not Free 
2007 6 5 Not Free 
2008 6 5 Not Free 
Table 2.1. Russias ratings by Freedom House, 1991-2008 (Freedom House n.d; 2007; 2008; 2009) 
This negative trend is also evident in Russias ratings by Transparency International. The 
Berlin-based NGO measures perceived levels of corruption in the public sector in a large 
number of countries, using such methods as expert assessment and opinion surveys (of 
business people and country experts). In their annual Corruption Perceptions Index, 
Russia has consistently remained among the most corrupt countries in the world despite the 
declared intention of the Russian authorities to fight corruption. Figure 2.1 illustrates 
changes in Russias ratings over the last decade. The rating is based on a scale from 0 
(highly corrupt) to 10 (highly clean). As one can see from the diagram, Russias ratings 
stayed very low over the period of Putins presidency. Although there was some indication 
of improvement in the level of perceptions of corruption during the presidents first term 
(with the highest score of 2.8 given in 2004), in his second term the ratings began to 
9 It should be mentioned that until 2003 these categories were different: countries with combined ratings 
between 3.0 and 5.5 were designated as partly free while those with ratings between 5.5 and 7.0 as not 
free (Freedom House 2008). 
decrease again, down to as low as 2.1 in 2008. Moreover, Russias ratings by Transparency 
International appear particularly low if one compares them with those of other countries. In 
2000 Russia was the 82nd in the list of 90 countries. At the end of Putins presidency, it was 
at 143th place in the list of 180 countries in 2007, and then at 147th place among 180 
countries in 2008. 
2.27 2.4 2.4
2.7 2.7 2.8
2.4 2.5 2.3
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
Figure 2.1. Corruption Perceptions Index for the Russian Federation, 1996-2008 (Transparency International 
1996-2008) 
2.1.3 Russias Perceived Image in Public Opinion of Western Countries 
As we can see, among elites  political, business and expert - and in the mass media 
Russias image was predominantly negative. Although, as Chapters Five and Six will 
demonstrate, positive views did exist, they did not challenge the existing consensus to a 
significant extent. In the public opinion of Western countries, however, Russias image was 
less negative and closer to neutral though there was also a clear negative trend in a number 
of countries, particularly during Putins second term in office. This can be illustrated from 
the results of a series of public opinion surveys Transatlantic Trends that were conducted 
in 2002  2008 by the German Marshall Fund and the Compagnia di San Paolo (Italy) in a 
number of European countries (France, Germany, the UK, Italy, the Netherlands, Poland, 
Portugal, Spain, Slovakia, Bulgaria and Romania), the USA and Turkey. The respondents 
were asked to evaluate their feelings towards a number of countries and institutions on a 
scale from 0 to 100 with 100 meaning a very warm, favourable feeling, 0 meaning a very 
cold, unfavourable feeling, and 50 meaning not particularly warm or cold (German 
Marshall Fund of the United States 2008). The results of the survey related to the attitude to 
Russia are presented in Table 2.2.  
USA FR GER UK IT NL Pl PT SP SK TR BG RO 
2008 48 41 49 47 45 47 40 43 45 52 18 66 45 
2007 48 42 48 46 45 42 37 43 44 49 21 65 41 
2006 51 44 50 48 49 46 39 44 47 51 21 67 50 
2005 53 45 50 50 49 45 35 43 47 52 24   
2004 57 49 54 54 54 51 42 44 48 52 21   
2003 54 51 55 52 51 48 41 46      
2002 55 47 44 50 53 46 42       
Table 2.2. Feelings towards Russia, 2002-2008 (German Marshall Fund of the United States 2008) 
As the table demonstrates, in most Western countries the average feelings towards Russia 
were neither particularly warm nor cold although there was a considerable difference 
across the countries. Interestingly, somewhat warmer feelings were expressed by 
respondents from the USA despite Russias negative images in the US mass media. 
Predictably, respondents in Poland held consistently more negative attitudes towards 
Russia, while in Bulgaria these feelings were pronouncedly warmer than in other countries. 
One can notice that in most countries, particularly in the West, average feelings tended to 
become significantly colder during Putins second term in office reaching their lowest point 
around 2007. On the whole, however, one can agree with Andrei Tsygankovs view on the 
problem of Russias image in the public opinion of Western countries:  
people are often poorly informed about the country that no longer matters after the 
end of the Cold War, and Russias problem here is a lack of visibility, rather than lack 
of a favourable image (Russia Profile 2005). 
As this brief overview has demonstrated, the images of Putins Russia in Western 
countries, particularly among Western elites and in the mass media, were predominantly 
negative. One can agree with Bobo Lo that Russia was still often perceived as an alien 
country, strange, unfathomable, even at times barbarous (2003, p. 97). In a context in 
which the Russian authorities urgently needed foreign investment to modernise the Russian 
economy, these negative images represented a significant challenge for the successful 
implementation of Russian economic and foreign policies. The next section examines the 
way in which the problem of Russias negatives images was conceptualised in the official 
discourse by focusing on the evolution of the views of the problem over the years of 
Putins presidency.  
2.2 Russias Negative Image in Official Discourse 
In the Russian mass media and expert community, the problem of Russias negative images 
in the West had been discussed since the late 1990s. At the level of the Kremlin, however, 
it emerged on the agenda only in 2000 when a number of major official documents 
acknowledged the importance of solving this problem. The Foreign Policy Concept of the 
Russian Federation that was approved by Putin in June 2000 listed among the key tasks of 
Russian foreign policy  
() communicating to the broad sectors of the world public objective and accurate 
information about its [Russias] positions on the main international problems, foreign 
policy initiatives and actions by the Russian Federation, as well as on the 
accomplishments of Russian culture, science, and intellectual work (Kontseptsiya 
vneshnei 2000, p. 7) 
The document stressed the need to improve Russias image in foreign countries and to form 
a friendly attitude to it (ibid, p. 7). However, it did not elaborate on any measures that had 
to be taken to achieve this goal.  
The National Security Concept that was adopted earlier that year was more detailed in 
specifying what exactly constituted a threat to Russias national security in the sphere of 
information. According to the concept, a serious danger arises from the desire of a number 
of countries to dominate the global information space and to oust Russia from the foreign 
and domestic information market (Kontseptsiya natsionalnoi 2000, p. 6). This vision of 
threats that Russia faced in the sphere of information was so significant that in September 
of the same year the Russian authorities presented a document that specifically dealt with 
the problems of national security in relation to information threats  the Information 
Security Doctrine of the Russian Federation. Among those threats that the doctrine 
described as particularly serious was the dissemination abroad of disinformation on the 
foreign policy of the Russian Federation (Doktrina informatsionnoi 2000). Thus, the 
document explicitly interpreted negative perceptions of Russia abroad as the result of 
deliberate efforts to tarnish Russias image. To counteract these efforts, the doctrine, 
similarly to the Foreign Policy Concept, envisaged improvement in the information support 
of Russian foreign and domestic policies which would bring to the Russian and 
international public accurate information on the state policy of the Russian Federation, its 
official position on socially significant events in Russian and international life (Doktrina 
informatsionnoi 2000). Among the measures that were supposed to achieve this goal, the 
document referred to strengthening the state mass media, increasing support for Russian 
information agencies and developing the scientific and practical principles of Russias 
information campaign (ibid). 
Official rhetoric on this issue became more assertive following negative changes in 
Russias image in 2003-2004. In July 2004, while addressing Russian ambassadors, Putin 
(2004a, p. 12) emphasised the inadequacy of Russias international image, saying that 
perceptions of Russia () are often far from the reality. Moreover, he mentioned 
frequent planned campaigns to discredit this country, which took the blame for Russias 
negative images away from the Russian authorities. The president urged Russian diplomats 
to put more effort into promoting a positive image of Russia, and emphasised the centrality 
of the economic component in Russias projected image. In Putins words, among the 
priority tasks of Russian diplomacy should be rais[ing] the investment attractiveness of 
Russia. This idea remained crucial in official discourse throughout Putins presidency. In a 
context in which foreign investment was of enormous importance for modernisation of the 
Russian economy, Russias negative image as an investment destination was viewed in the 
official discourse as particularly problematic. Putin articulated this opinion on numerous 
occasions, including his speech at a meeting of the State Council on investment in the 
regional economy in October 2007. According to Putin, () companies in a number of 
countries are scared off from investing in Russia, frightened away by tales of non-market 
methods of doing business and commercial risks (Putin, 2007a).  
As we can see, Russias negative images in Western countries during Vladimir Putins 
presidency were viewed as a serious threat for Russian security, particularly in terms of 
Russias economic development. The need to substantially improve information support of 
Russias domestic and foreign policies was reiterated in numerous documents and official 
statements. In an attempt to develop the principles of this information support, the Russian 
authorities by various means (such as research grants, etc) encouraged the Russian 
academic and expert community to intensify research in this area. The remaining parts of 
the chapter focuses on the most recurrent approaches to Russias image problem in an 
extensive literature that emerged in Russia in response to this state order. 
2.3 Academic and Expert Literature on IR and Foreign Policy 
Preferences 
Before we move on to examine image studies as such, it is important to look at the key 
trends in Russian IR studies. There are at least two factors that should be considered in this 
regard. On the one hand, the way in which Russian IR scholars interpreted reality, and what 
they considered as the driving force of international political processes, casts some light on 
their vision of the role of national images, and, as a consequence, of the preferable strategy 
for the country in relation to its image abroad. On the other hand, examining approaches to 
key concepts within Russian IR, first of all the concept of national interests, should help to 
clarify any discrepancies between understandings of these concepts by Russian and 
Western scholars. It should be noted that Russian studies in the area of International 
Relations have not received sufficient attention in the West. Unlike the Soviet International 
Theory that was considered to be an important direction of research and, thus, was 
examined by a number of Western Sovietologists (e.g., Light 1988; Lynch 1987), Russian 
IR has largely stayed outside the focus of research.  
International Relations became an extremely popular and prestigious discipline in Russian 
academia in the 1990s. While in the Soviet Union it was an elite research area with a very 
limited number of scholars involved in research projects, after the disintegration of the 
USSR the situation changed dramatically. Not only were International Relations introduced 
into curriculum at many universities, but there also appeared a large number of research 
institutes and foundations specialising in IR and foreign policy research (e.g. the Council 
on Foreign and Defence Policy, or the Centre for Political and International Studies) as 
well as various academic journals, such as Pro et Contra or Rossiya i Sovremennyi Mir 
(Russia and the Contemporary World). This popularity did not, however, lead to the 
emergence of any new theories of International Relations. The discipline can be 
characterised as oriented more towards applied research rather than theoretical thinking. 
This fact to a significant extent might be explained by new international and domestic 
challenges that Russia faced following the disintegration of the Soviet Union (Sergunin 
2004). Since one of the most urgent needs was redefining the countrys national interests 
and developing an appropriate foreign policy strategy, the academic community was 
focussed almost exclusively on solving these tasks (Tyulin 2002). At the same time 
theoretical questions were largely neglected.  
Another issue that should be mentioned in relation to Russian IR studies is the question of 
their theoretical distinctness from Western IR. Although there is a general consensus that a 
Russian school of International Relations has not yet emerged (Tsygankov & Tsygankov 
2005; Lebedeva 2004), there is no agreement on whether this school can and even should 
appear. The academic debate around this problem goes in line with a broader public debate 
on Russian identity, with two extreme positions being advocated  Westernisation and 
Isolation of Russian IR theory (Tsygankov & Tsygankov 2005). Westernisation implies 
borrowing Western theories and using them in studying political processes in Russia, while 
the Isolation approach is based on a belief that Western concepts are inadequate for 
Russian reality. Apart from its implications for the future of Russian IR research, this 
debate also has a serious consequence for the present study. It suggests that some of the 
concepts and terms used by contemporary Russian IR scholars might differ substantially 
from their meaning as understood by Western researchers.  
2.3.1 Theoretical Approaches in Russian IR Studies 
There have been numerous attempts to classify theoretical approaches in Russian IR 
studies. According to Sergunin, for instance, there are four main paradigms: realism, 
idealism/liberalism, globalism and post-positivism (2003). Having used these terms, 
Sergunin, however, has admited that these groups do not correspond directly to similar 
approaches in Western IR. Another classification suggested by Tsygankov and Tsygankov 
(2005) has reduced the number of theoretical approaches to three  realism, liberalism and 
post-structuralism. One should mention that in Russian social sciences in general there is a 
strong tendency to rely on the realist perspective. This tendency has its roots in the Soviet 
period when the theoretical base for social research was a mixture of realism and Marxism. 
Soviet scholars were not familiar with works of Western realists and neo-realists as these 
works were not translated into Russian, and were accessible only in specialised libraries 
open to a very limited number of researchers. Officially, Realist theory was considered to 
be a bourgeois approach that could not be used in the Soviet Union. However, as Lebedeva 
(2004) has argued, Soviet research was realist in its nature since it was state-centric, and 
concentrated exclusively on such phenomena as power and national interests. In the 1990s 
a number of works written by Western realists were published (e.g. Politics among Nations 
by Morgenthau), which made it easier for Russian researchers to refer to concepts and ideas 
used in Western realism. However, this familiarity with Western literature was very 
inconsistent, and often led to somewhat distorted interpretations of the theory. 
2.3.2 Geopolitics in Russian IR  
One of the most popular approaches within Russian realism is geopolitics, although not 
all researchers consider it as realist (Solovev 2005). In the Soviet Union the attitude 
towards geopolitics was negative as it was portrayed as an ideological instrument that 
helped capitalist countries to justify their aggressive foreign policy in relation to the USSR 
(Kolosov & Mironenko 2002). Geopolitics was also often associated with German Nazism, 
which made it look even more ominous (Solovev 2005). However, in the 1990s interest in 
the geopolitical approach started to grow fast, and it became one of the most developed 
areas of studies. The new position of the country in the world including both its changed 
international status and territorial reduction (some of the new independent states had been 
part of the Russian Empire and then of the Soviet Union for hundreds of years) made 
geopolitical explanations of political processes particularly appealing to Russian scholars 
(see e.g. Gadzhiev 2007). To a certain extent, the discipline of International Relations as 
such was formed through the process of exploring geopolitical tendencies (Tsygankov & 
Tsygankov 2006). Unlike other theoretical approaches both within the realist paradigm and 
outside it, geopolitics went far beyond the purely academic sphere, and turned into a kind 
of an ideological and rhetorical tool for political elites. It began to be viewed as the key to 
any action taken by Russia or other countries in the international arena. As Solovev puts it, 
geopolitics in Russia claims solutions to some ultimate puzzles in global politics, offering 
both mystical and deterministic explanations for current and future events (2005, p. 131).  
A distinctive feature of Russian geopolitics is its traditional character. The countrys past 
and future actions are explained through the notion of geopolitical interests that are seen as 
constant and independent of any non-material factors, such as, for instance, identity. These 
unchangeable interests are most often derived from the geographical characteristics of the 
state (Solovev 2005). This interpretation of national interests, although typical of realism 
in general, can be stimulated by at least two additional factors. First of all, Russian scholars 
are much more familiar with the works of those Western authors whose research falls 
within the framework of classical geopolitics, which might be illustrated by a large number 
of direct quotations or references to their studies. At the same time they are less familiar 
with critical geopolitics of a kind that emphasises the subjective nature of geopolitical 
interests. Apart from this, the predominance of the traditional approach in Russian 
geopolitical thought might be a result of the so-called Versailles syndrome: although the 
country lost the status of a super-power following the collapse of the Soviet Union, its 
geographical position, size, etc, were perceived by Russian scholars as sufficient reason for 
regaining this status (Lebedeva 2004). The country was viewed as being destined to be a 
great power simply due to these pre-given geographical factors. In a situation in which 
economic and social situations in the state, as well as its position in the international arena, 
were far from ideal, this vision of the countrys bright future compensated dissatisfaction 
with the present state of affairs.10 
Within Russian geopolitics it is possible to distinguish several schools whose interpretation 
of the countrys national interests, its major threats, and, consequently, preferable foreign 
policy strategies differ substantially. According to the classification suggested by 
Tsygankov and Tsygankov (2006), in contemporary Russian geopolitical thinking there are 
two main directions  Westernism (Zapadnichestvo) and Eurasianism (Evraziistvo). While 
Eurasianists view Russia as being very different from the West and closer to Asia, for 
Westernisers Russia is a part of the West, most often understood as Europe. Thus, 
Westernisers consider the Western direction of Russian foreign policy to be the most 
important one, since only integration in Europe can help the country to solve its numerous 
problems.  
Moreover, among Eurasianists there is no consensus on the most appropriate foreign policy 
strategy. Within this tradition there are several distinct groups, each of which offers its own 
vision of national interests and foreign policy priorities based on them. They are Stabilisers, 
Civilisationists, Expansionists and Geoeconomists (Tsygankov & Tsygankov 2006). 
Stabilisers see the main aim of Russian policies in stabilising Eurasia, which can, in their 
opinion, be done through a multi-vector foreign policy in the form of military and political 
balancing. Civilisationists place their emphasis on the uniqueness of Russian civilisation 
and take an anti-Western position in foreign policy discussion. While seeing the national 
interest of Russia in restoring the USSR, they do not, however, support expansionism 
beyond the borders of the former Soviet Union. Expansionists, on the contrary, view Russia 
as an empire whose key aim should be territorial expansion. Unlike the three approaches 
mentioned above, geoeconomists consider economic, rather than merely geographic factors 
as the most important in the contemporary international relations. Therefore, the national 
interest of Russia lies in increasing its economic prosperity (Tsygankov & Tsygankov 
2006). 
10 This understanding of geopolitical factors, although being predominant, is not the only one. Kolosov, for 
instance, has argued that the geopolitical position of a country cannot be stable as it is the result of the perceptions 
of political elites, and competing elites may have different visions of the countrys national interests (Kolosov 
2003). This critical approach to geopolitics is not, however, shared by most Russian scholars. 
This overview of various theoretical traditions suggests that at least three tendencies in 
Russian IR may affect interpretation of international images and their role in foreign policy 
by Russian scholars. In the first instance, one of the main concepts used by researchers is 
national interest. Secondly, the predominant interpretation of this concept is realist in its 
nature. Finally, the position of Russia in the world and its national interest are often 
examined from a geopolitical perspective, although the vision of Russias preferable 
foreign policy strategy varies considerably among supporters of several major approaches 
within geopolitics. Bearing this in mind, let us now turn directly to image-related studies in 
Russian academic and expert literature.  
2.4 Image studies in Russia 
Although the problem of negative national images has been recognised in many countries 
(one of the classic examples being the USA where the rise of anti-Americanism has caused 
serious concern), in Russian academic and expert literature it became particularly 
prominent. Image studies in general became a rapidly growing area of research already in 
the 1990s when a large number of studies, mainly of an applied character, examined the 
role of personal (e.g. Shepel 1997; Tsuladze 1999) or commercial (e.g. Dyachkova 1998; 
Gumennaya 1997) images and various ways to manipulate them. As the problem of 
Russias negative international image emerged on the foreign policy agenda, within several 
years there appeared a large number of works either examining existing images of Russia 
or its regions (e.g. Rukavishnikov 2005; Solovev 2008), or offering recommendations for 
its correction (e.g. Galumov 2003; 2005; Pankrukhin 2002; Rozhkov & Kismereshkin 
2008). As an example of a very wide range of questions that were addressed in Russian 
image-related literature, one can look at the paper Problems and Perspectives of Building 
the Image of Russia in the Context of Russian-Brazil Relations, presented by Alexander 
Bryantsev (2004) at the Third Convention of the Russian Association of International 
Studies, or the report Assessment of the Effect of the Image of Kaliningrad Oblast on the 
Development of Regional Economic and Social Sphere, prepared by the Foundation of 
Social, Economic and Political Research Regionalnaya Strategiya (Foundation of Social, 
Economic and Political Research Regionalnaya Strategiya 2003).  
2.4.1 Main Approaches to National Images 
Although Russian image-related studies differ in their level of analysis and material used, it 
is still possible to trace four major tendencies in this literature. Most of these works are i) 
interdisciplinary; ii) mainly of an applied character, with a special emphasis on 
manipulative techniques; 3) follow the realist paradigm; and, finally, iv) look at images 
from a geopolitical perspective. One of the most distinct features of Russian image-related 
studies is their interdisciplinary character. Among the scholars whose works touch upon 
this subject are not only IR researchers, but also psychologists, sociologists, geographers, 
etc. Moreover, in Russian academia there is a widespread opinion that image studies should 
be officially established as a separate discipline, which means that they should be included 
in the register of academic disciplines approved by the Education Ministry of the Russian 
Federation. On the one hand, the interdisciplinary character makes image studies richer in 
respects that might not be noticed by IR scholars, and broader in coverage of areas that 
either affect or are affected by national images. On the other hand, very often they become 
too broad, trying to explain everything. 
Most of the studies are applied rather than theoretical, focussing on manipulative 
techniques or political technologies that could be used in projecting a favourable image 
(e.g. Solovev 2008), whereas the mechanism of the influence of images on international 
relations receives far less attention. Similarly to the Western literature on public diplomacy, 
one of the key issues discussed in relation to image-making is the question of drawing a 
borderline between political advertising, public relations and propaganda (Drozdova & 
Ovcharenko 2006), or more recently  between propaganda and public diplomacy 
(Kononenko 2006). It should be noted that in Russian image-related studies there is a 
semantic differentiation between two words  imidzh and obraz, the latter being a Russian 
word and the former being its synonym borrowed from the English language. Although this 
differentiation is not obligatory, in practice the word imidzh is usually used when a study 
focuses on a purposefully created image, whereas the word obraz is employed when a piece 
of research concentrates on an already existing image. According to one of the numerous 
definitions, imidzh is a specially created, corrected obraz that reflects a reality 
inadequately while trying to correspond to the expectations of those for whom it is being 
created (Dontsov 2006, pp. 38-9). Moreover, it is often emphasised that any image can be 
positive only if it has been built on purpose, since spontaneous formation would lead to its 
negative character (Sekach & Tarasova 2006, p. 106).  
Another distinctive feature of Russian image-related works is their predominantly realist 
orientation with an element of constructivism. This striking theoretical mixture is the result 
of considering international images (not objective factors) as central to international 
relations, and at the same time considering the countrys national interests as somewhat 
constant and independent of the attitudes and perceptions of political elites. According to 
Erast Galumov, the way how the country is perceived, its image, is the basis for 
developing political and economic relations with the international community (2003, p. 
85). This constructivist idea (it may be regarded as falling within a constructivist 
framework as it privileges subjective over objective factors) is used to demonstrate that a 
favourable international image should help the country to realise its national interests. 
However, the latter are interpreted realistically. Although Galumov refers to them as a 
subjective/objective category, this differentiation between subjective and objective interests 
implies that they are objective when political elites understand them correctly, and 
subjective  when they misunderstand them. Moreover, even Galumovs interpretation of 
the very notion of international interests is based on its understanding by Morgenthau with 
reference to his Politics among Nations (1956). 
It should be noted, however, that although this realist-constructivist combination is 
predominant, it is not the only theoretical approach. Unlike the position of Galumov, the 
views of Zamyatin and Kolosov, for instance, may be described as more constructivist. 
According to Kolosov, the world is not described through systems of images, rather it is 
constituted by it (2003, p. 237). This view, although appearing to be similar to that of 
Galumov, is in fact rather different from it, as it considers the position of the country in the 
international arena, and, consequently, its national interests not as stable and pre-given, but 
changing with changes in the perceptions of political elites (Kolosov 2003). However, as 
was emphasised in the first part of this chapter, it might be difficult, if not impossible, to 
draw parallels between the Western and Russian theoretical paradigms.  
Apart from being interdisciplinary, applied, and mainly realist, research in Russias images 
also tends to be geopolitically oriented. This tendency can be seen in several areas. In the 
first instance, it can be expressed simply in its usage of geopolitical terminology. Galumov, 
for example, speaks about the need to create an image of Russia that would make it easier 
for the country to realise its geopolitical interests. In this context, manipulation of images is 
interpreted as a geopolitics of images since it helps to solve geopolitical problems 
(Galumov 2003; 2005). Secondly, the focus of research may be on geopolitical images 
(obrazy) of Russia that affect the choice of foreign policy strategy by Russian political 
elites. Zamyatin defines a geopolitical image as a structured vision of a geographical area 
that includes the brightest and easily remembered symbols, signs and characteristics () 
that distinguish it from a political perspective (2002). According to Zamyatin, several 
geopolitical images have affected Russian foreign policy throughout its history, the most 
significant of them being Russia as Eurasia, Russia as Europe, Russia as Byzantium (with 
such variants as Russia as Skando-Byzantium, and Russia as Slavoturkika) and Russia as 
Eastern Europe (Zamyatin 2001). These images convey the idea of where Russia belongs 
to, what geopolitical interests it has, and, consequently, what foreign policy strategy it 
should choose. In addition to them, Tsymbursky has suggested one more geopolitical 
image that had played a significant role in Russian history  Russia as an island (Ostrov 
Rossiya). According to this image Russia is an island that has always been separated from 
Western Europe (as well as from many other parts of the world), and, thus, it should 
concentrate on developing its own territory (first of all, the Far East), on the island itself 
(Tsymbursky 1993). 
2.4.2 Reasons for Russias Negative Image in the West 
All of the studies examining the international image of Russia agree that the present image 
is extremely negative, and that it does not contribute to the successful implementation of 
the countrys foreign or economic policies. Most studies also agree that it is inadequate to 
reality as it is much more negative than it should be. The reasons for such a discrepancy 
between the image and the real situation are numerous.  One of them is historical: some 
scholars agree with Neumann (1999) who has suggested that Russia has been a significant 
Other for Europe for hundreds of years, which means that most of the negative 
characteristics in its image cannot disappear easily as they constitute part of European 
identity (Kolosov 2003; Semenenko et al 2006). Those researchers who view Russia as a 
separate civilisation different from Europe suggest that this difference itself is the reason 
for misunderstanding. As Galumov has put it: 
foreign journalists (politicians) are guided not by a social, but by a civilisational order 
that is fixed in their mentality, and there is no point in hoping that they could change 
their opinion about Russia quickly (2005, p. 21) 
Another reason discussed by Russian scholars is the West-centric approach to 
democratisation shared by many in Europe and the USA. Seeing the Western model as an 
example that all other countries should follow, the West looks at Russia as if it were a pupil 
who cannot carry out the task correctly (Kolosov 2003). Lebedeva suggests that the roots of 
misunderstanding may lie in the fact that Russia and Western countries exist as if in 
different systems of international relations, i.e. perceptions of the existing international 
system held by Russian and Western political elites are different. The West lives in a world 
in which principles of international law are becoming more and more important, and the 
attitude towards sovereignty is changing. At the same time, Russian elites consider the 
world to be the same as it was during the Cold War: they cling to the Yalta-Potsdam system 
where the value of sovereignty is indisputable, and non-interference in internal affairs is 
one of the main principles (Lebedeva 2001).  
One of the most popular explanations, however, makes the West itself responsible for the 
negative image of Russia. Galumov, for instance, argues that Western countries see Russia 
as their rival in the global fight for natural resources, and use specially planned information 
campaigns against it. In the struggle for geopolitical and economic influence the West 
deliberately builds an image of Russia that accumulates only negative characteristics while 
ignoring any positive aspects (Galumov 2003; 2005). What is more, these information 
campaigns are seen as one of the main reasons for the collapse of the Soviet Union: 
The international image of Russia as an economically and socially backward country to 
a significant extent was formed as a result of the information war waged by the US 
against the USSR, which actually led to the disintegration of the latter (Galumov 2003, 
p. 86) 
Moreover, as Galumov has argued, although the image of the Soviet Union in the 
international arena was very negative, the image of contemporary Russia is even worse. 
While in case of the USSR this negativism was combined with some sympathy for the 
Russian people who were seen as victims of the regime, and with admiration for Russian 
culture, in case of Russia even the attitude towards people is negative (Galumov 2005). 
Some commentators have gone even further by attributing Russias negative images in the 
West to an information war against Russia (Panarin 2003; 2006). Among other 
explanations that are often discussed by Russian scholars are the negative effect of the 
Russian mass media who by criticising the Russian authorities provide additional material 
for Russias critics abroad, and the negative role of Russian immigrants in Western 
countries (see Semenenko et al 2006). 
Why does Russias negative image in the West constitute a threat to the country? Apart 
from economic reasons (the negative image is an obstacle to foreign investment), one of the 
most serious factors discussed by Russian scholars is the effect of a negative image on the 
self-image of the country in public opinion. As Fadeev, Povalkovich and Karavaeva have 
argued, in a situation in which the dominant self-image used to be more positive (as was 
the case with the Soviet Union), its rapid deterioration may lead to increased political 
activity, dissatisfaction and disagreement with the authorities (2006). Therefore, the 
government should take urgent measures to improve the image. It is suggested that a 
favourable international image would not only help to prevent mass dissatisfaction with the 
actions of elites in the sphere of foreign policy, but it would also provide elites with 
international support in case of internal conflicts. Moreover, it could be used in economic 
competition with other countries, as well as in resistance to any political or military 
pressure from outside (Derkach & Pereligina 2006). Interestingly, the notion of soft 
power, although it has become more prominent in the academic and expert discourse more 
recently (e.g. see Kononenko 2006; Solovev 2008, p. 10), has still largely remained on the 
periphery of academic debate. 
2.4.3 Views of Foreign Propaganda 
In the context of the increasing interest of the academic community in the problem of 
Russias image, a number of scholars turned to re-examining the experience of Soviet 
foreign propaganda (see Fedyakin 2007a; 2007b). It is noteworthy that the efficiency of 
Soviet propaganda was recognised by many Western experts who considered it very 
dangerous and capable of influencing mass attitudes not only in the Third World countries, 
but also in the West itself. According to a paper written in the late 1980s, i.e. only several 
years before the disintegration of the USSR, 
the propaganda of the Soviet Union is a serious threat to the West because it is broad, 
integrated effort staffed by capable personnel who enjoy sustained and generous 
budgetary support (Gordon 1988, p. 8) 
Unlike in the West, in Putins Russia there was no consensus on the efficiency of Soviet 
foreign propaganda. While some Russian researchers had a rather high opinion of its results 
and viewed the destruction of the propaganda machine as a big mistake (Kashlev & 
Galumov 2003), there was also an opposite opinion. Vladimir Pozner, for instance, 
President of the Russian Television Academy, argued that Soviet propaganda was not as 
successful as it appeared to be. Speaking from his experience of working inside the 
propaganda machine from 1970 to 1986, he claimed that there were no results at all, and 
the money went in a bottomless barrel - no efforts could change the image of the USSR in 
the world (Argumenty i Fakty, 22 June 2005). Moreover, some experts argued that the 
problem of Russias negative image could not be solved with the help of propaganda. In 
this view, the countrys image would improve by itself as a result of positive changes, 
while any attempts to improve it without actual democratisation in Russia would be 
fruitless (e.g. Bovin 2001). The contrasting opinion was that propaganda techniques were a 
magical tool that could transform Russias image in any circumstances. Galumov, for 
instance, argued that Russias image could be improved without any significant changes in 
the country since image is not reality, but only the reflection of reality that can be made 
positive (Galumov 2004).  
The latter view gained additional support in Russian academic and expert circles due to the 
extremely prominent role of political technologists in Russian national and local elections 
(see Wilson 2005). In the 1990s, after competitive elections had been introduced, a large 
number of PR companies entered the market. In a situation in which never before had 
image-making been used in political campaigns, they positioned spinning as a magical key 
to political and economic success. In the 1990s, these companies were mainly involved in 
electoral campaigns at parliamentary and then presidential elections. As their most 
significant achievement one could mention the re-election of Yeltsin as President in 1996 
with his support rating in December 1995 (i.e. half a year before the election) being 5.3%, 
and in May 1996  30% (Novoe Vremya,  28, 2001). When the question of the countrys 
negative image was raised at the state level, PR business contributed to placing this 
problem at the centre of the public debate, and, what is more, to the formation of the belief 
that the problem could be solved by purely manipulative measures. Thus, in one of the 
most often-cited articles on this issue, written by the President of Imageland Company 
Veronika Moiseeva, it was argued that a positive image of the country is the most 
important instrument in defending the countrys national interests (Nezavisimaya Gazeta,
11 April 2003). Many representatives of PR business sought to present PR measures as the 
only possible solution of Russias image problem.  
As this chapter has demonstrated, the problem of Russias images in Western countries 
took an extremely high position on both the political and academic agendas during the 
Putin presidency. This was triggered to a large extent by the extremely negative character 
of Russias image among Western elites and in the mass media. Negative perceptions of 
Russia in the West were viewed in the official discourse as a particularly serious problem 
in connection with its impact on the level of foreign investment into the Russian economy. 
An extensive image-related academic literature that developed in response to the perceived 
significance of this problem favoured the employment of political technologies or foreign 
propaganda as a possible solution to the problem. This view was further reinforced by the 
perceived success of Soviet foreign and domestic propaganda. Thus, in a context in which a 
number of other countries (e.g. the USA and the UK) were intensifying their attempt to 
improve their images with the help of public diplomacy, the Russian authorities followed 
suit by launching an energetic campaign that sought to construct a more favourable image 
of the Russian Federation. The key channels of the foreign propaganda mechanism that 
emerged in Russia under Putins presidency are examined in the following chapter. 
Chapter 3 
Mechanism of Russian Foreign Propaganda, 2000-2008 
The previous chapter has demonstrated that the problem of Russias negative images in the 
West emerged on the foreign policy agenda at the beginning of Vladimir Putins first 
presidential term. This chapter examines the mechanism of foreign propaganda as it 
developed in Russia in the years of Vladimir Putins presidency. To provide a context for 
further analysis, it begins with an overview of the role that foreign propaganda played in 
Soviet foreign policy, focussing on its aims, targets and most significant channels. This is 
followed by an examination of how the strategy of foreign propaganda evolved after the 
collapse of the Soviet Union, particularly in 2000-2008. Having highlighted the most 
significant features of the reinvigorated propaganda efforts, the chapter proceeds to look at 
the key actors and their specialisation.  
3.1 Soviet Foreign Propaganda 
For the Soviet leadership, foreign propaganda was an extremely important task. A number 
of researchers have noted the significant role that propaganda and political influence 
techniques played in Soviet foreign policy (e.g. Shultz & Godson 1984). However, it can 
be argued that it represented much more than an instrument of achieving foreign policy 
goals. One can agree with Gerhard Wettig (1987, p. 174) who suggested that for the Soviet 
Union foreign propaganda was not something that accompanie[d] Soviet foreign policy. 
Rather, it [was] an integral part of that foreign policy.  
3.1.1 Strategy of Soviet Foreign Propaganda 
Unlike the traditional objectives of public diplomacy in the post Cold War era  to project a 
favourable image of the country abroad  Soviet foreign propaganda performed several 
functions. On the one hand, it aimed at maintaining and promoting a positive image of the 
Soviet Union as a near-perfect society, a progressive force in the international arena and an 
ideal for the working class all over the world. One the other hand, it sought to discredit the 
governments of Western countries and to promote images of their aggressiveness, 
imperialism and exploitation of the working class. Marxism-Leninism ideology played a 
crucial part in that as the achievements of the Soviet state were employed to demonstrate 
the inevitable victory of Communism over Capitalism. Soviet foreign propaganda was 
conducted on a world-wide scale although a number of target areas were viewed as 
particularly important, such as the United States, Western European members of NATO 
(where one of its main objectives, inter alia, was to drive a wedge between the allies) and 
Third World countries. It was targeted primarily at public opinion: by influencing 
perceptions of the publics, the Soviet leadership ultimately sought to affect the policies of 
their respective governments which would be under pressure from the electorate. Apart 
from the general public, Soviet propagandists paid particular attention to work with 
migrs from the Soviet Union. They were viewed as an important target group as most of 
them were vehemently anti-communist intellectuals, hostile to the Soviet regime and 
politically mobilised. Thus, they represented a threat to the successful implementation of 
Soviet policies as their attitudes could impact on the policies of their respective host 
countries. To neutralise their influence, Soviet propaganda sought to drive a wedge 
between their leaders and ordinary migrs, to cultivate contacts with less anti-Communist 
members of their communities and, most importantly, to discredit Soviet migrs in the 
eyes of their host countries (Parming 1987, p. 310). 
3.1.2 Structure of the Foreign Propaganda Machine 
Before moving on to foreign propaganda in post-Soviet Russia under Vladimir Putins 
presidency, let us briefly examine the structure of the Soviet propaganda apparatus. It 
should be mentioned that foreign propaganda was part of a broader approach that Soviet 
propagandists referred to as active measures (aktivnye meropriyatiya), and which 
included an array of overt and covert techniques for influencing events and behaviour in, 
and the actions of, foreign countries (Shultz & Godson 1984, p. 2). Overt techniques 
implied that the source of information (i.e. the Soviet Union) was acknowledged, and they 
were applied through officially sponsored propaganda organisations, as well as through 
diplomatic channels and cultural diplomacy. On the contrary, when covert techniques were 
employed, the source of information was not acknowledged or the information was 
attributed to a different source. In addition to that, there were a number of propaganda 
channels that were on the borderline between overt and covert measures. Figure 3.1 
demonstrates the organisation structure of Soviet foreign propaganda (and active measures) 
in the 1980s, i.e. less than a decade before the disintegration of the Soviet Union. 
As one can see from the diagram, the strategy of foreign propaganda (and active measures 
in general) was developed by the Politburo of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union 
(CPSU), and two departments of the CPSU Central Committee  the International 
Information Department and International Department  and the Committee for State 
Security (KGB), in particular its Service A, 1st Chief Directorate, were responsible for its 
implementation. The International Information Department was in charge of overt 
propaganda. It supervised the work of two news agencies  the Telegraph Agency of the 
Soviet Union (Tass) which was the official voice of the Soviet government, and Novosti 
which claimed to represent public opinion in the USSR. A significant role in Soviet foreign 
propaganda was given to international radio broadcasting, which was rapidly expanding in 
the 1970-1980s. In addition to Radio Moscow, a number of local radio stations, such as 
Kiev Radio or Radio Erevan, were also part of the propaganda apparatus. By 1980 Soviet 
radio stations were broadcasting in 80 languages, and the air time reached 2,762 weekly 
hours. This represented a considerable advantage over propaganda efforts by Western 
governments at that time. US radio stations - the Voice of America, Radio Free Europe and 
Radio Liberty  were broadcasting in 46 languages, and their total number of weekly hours 
was only 1, 927 (Shultz & Godson 1984, pp. 27-28). 
Moreover, the International Information Department supervised publication and 
distribution of Soviet periodicals in foreign languages. By the early 1970s 91 Soviet 
periodicals, including such prominent outlets as Sovetskii Soyuz (Soviet Union), Novoe 
Vremya (New Time) and Mezhdunarodnaya Zhizn (International Affairs), had foreign 
editions. An illustrative example of this aspect of Soviet foreign propaganda is the weekly 
newspaper Moscow News which was published in English, French, Spanish and Arabic 
with a circulation exceeding 800,000 copies. In addition to that, the Soviet Union published 
a large number of books in foreign languages: in 1982 alone the number of foreign 
languages reached 68 (Kanet 1987, p. 215). Furthermore, information departments of 
Soviet embassies played a key role in disseminating propaganda information about the 
Soviet Union. 
Unlike the International Information Department, the International Department of the 
CPSU Central Committee was in charge of what some researchers refer to as grey 
propaganda: the direct source of information was openly acknowledged, but the 
underlying Moscow connection [was] carefully concealed (Wettig 1987, p. 168). In 
particular, the department oversaw co-operation with foreign Communist parties and 
revolutionary movements, which, although formally independent from the Soviet Union, in 
fact were heavily involved in spreading Soviet propaganda. The department also worked 
with a large number of International Front Organisations, which claimed to be independent 
but in reality were often funded by the USSR. Among the most influential of these were: 
World Peace Council (WPC), World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU), Afro-Asian 
Peoples Solidarity Organisation (AAPSO), World Federation of Democratic Youth 
(WFDY), International Union of Students (IUS), International Institute for Peace (IIP), 
International Organisation of Journalists (IOJ), Christian Peace Conference (CPC), 
Womens International Democratic Federation (WIDF) and International Association of 
Democratic Lawyers (IADL).11 
Figure 3.1. Soviet organisation structure for foreign propaganda and active measures (Shultz & Godson 1984, 
p. 20) 
11 For more information on international organisations linked to Soviet propaganda see Rose (1988). 
CPSU Politburo
CPSU Secretariat
International 
Department of the 
CPSU Central 
Committee 
Service A, 1st Chief 
Directorate of the 
Committee for State 
Security (KGB) 
International Information 
Department of the CPSU 
Central Committee 
 Tass and Novosti 
 International Radio 
Broadcasting (Radio 
Moscow) 
 Prestige Publications 
(e.g., Pravda)
 Periodicals and Books 
(e.g., New Times)
 Embassy Information 
Department 
 Non-ruling Foreign 
Communist Parties 
and Revolutionary 
Movements 
 International Front 
Organisations 
 National Front 
Organisations (e.g., 
US Peace Council) 
 Clandestine Radios 
 Academy of 
Sciences (exchange 
programmes) 
 Covert Propaganda 
 Forgeries 
 Disinformation 
 Agent-of-Influence 
Operations 
 Manipulation of 
Foreign Media 
Assets 
 Paramilitary 
Assistance 
Soviet Bloc States and Other States Governed 
by Pro-Soviet Communist Parties 
 Similar organisational structures within these 
states were coordinated by their Soviet 
counterparts to execute active measures 
By manipulating these organisations, Soviet propagandists to a considerable extent 
succeeded in setting the agenda of international discourse. Among their major 
achievements was the extensive use of peace as a topic when the USSR was positioned as 
a peaceful state that was opposed to the military adventurism of Western governments. By 
transforming the very notion of peace in international discourse, the Soviet leadership, 
according to Herbert Ellison (1987, p. 88), demonstrated great skill in () mobilising 
public opinion in the West to support their policies. 
In addition to that, the Soviet Union used a wide network of Doma Sovetskoi Kultury i 
Nauki (Centres of Soviet Culture and Science) that were based all over the world and 
served the goal of promoting Soviet culture by holding various exhibitions or organising 
meetings with Soviet speakers. Grey propaganda was also disseminated through 
clandestine broadcasting, i.e. broadcasting which did not admit its origin (or attributed it to 
a different source) and transmitted more inflammatory messages than overt radio would 
transmit. According to Hertzberg (1988), in the 1980s this kind of broadcasting took 
approximately 150 hours per week of air time. An illuminating example is the so called 
National Voice of Iran which was in fact operating from Baku (Shultz & Godson 1984, p. 
The KGB in its turn was in charge of covert operations (or so called black propaganda) 
which included, inter alia, spreading disinformation that aimed at discrediting the 
governments of Western countries. Ladislav Bittman (1987, p. 113) has defined 
disinformation as a carefully constructed, false message that is secretly introduced into the 
opponents communication system to deceive either his decision-making elite or public 
opinion. Although these activities were difficult to trace and, consequently, problematic to 
analyse in academic research, some of the operations became publicised. One of the 
examples is the forgery of a letter containing racist statements which was allegedly written 
by the Ku Klux Klan and mailed to the Olympic Committee Headquarters a short time 
before the summer Olympic Games in Los Angeles in 1984  (Bittman 1987, p. 114). 
On the whole, Soviet propaganda was very well co-ordinated  in fact to a much more 
significant extent than similar organisations in Western countries: the pluralism of liberal 
democracies would not allow the degree of coordination that authoritarian regimes can 
achieve. The message conveyed by Soviet propaganda was extremely well defined and was 
strictly followed by every individual actor involved in campaigns. Moreover, Soviet 
propaganda campaigns were very intensive and, as a rule, were spread over longer periods 
of time than any campaigns conducted by Western governments who could not engage in 
such lengthy activities due to, among other reasons, changes of governments as a result of 
regular elections (Shultz & Godson 1984, p. 15). Soviet foreign propaganda was also 
characterised by extensive use of deception and manipulation. The importance that the 
Soviet leadership attached to foreign propaganda can be demonstrated by the amount of 
resources that were allocated to this purpose. Although the exact information was 
classified, the CIA estimated the total cost of Soviet active measures in 1978 as 
approximately $3 billion (Shultz & Godson 1984, p. 31). However, following the 
disintegration of the Soviet Union in 1991, foreign propaganda ceased being a priority for 
the Kremlin. In the context of rapid economic and social de-fragmentation, the extensive 
propaganda apparatus was severely under-financed and many of its key elements were 
dismantled. 
3.2 Strategy of Russian Propaganda in Putins Russia 
Throughout the 1990s, the Kremlin largely neglected foreign propaganda. Although the 
problem of Russias negative image emerged on the media agenda already in the late 
1990s, only in the middle of Vladimir Putins first presidential term did the Russian 
authorities begin to implement practical measures to revive foreign propaganda. The task 
was extremely difficult. Their attempts met a number of formidable challenges that 
stemmed from the Soviet legacy and radical transformations in Russias domestic situation 
and international environment. Firstly, the disintegration of the Soviet bloc and re-
orientation of the policies of Moscows former allies to the United States and the European 
Union implied that the Russian leadership could no longer count on their support in 
disseminating propaganda. Thus, a large number of crucial propaganda channels could no 
longer be used. Moreover, as a consequence of chaotic changes in the management of state 
resources in the 1990s and rampant corruption, by 2002-2003 the gigantic propaganda 
machine was, in the words of a senior Russian propagandist, partly stolen, partly rotten.12 
Secondly, there appeared to be no obvious niche for a number of Russian propaganda 
channels in the West. During the Cold War, as the contacts between people in Western 
countries and in the USSR were extremely limited, any information from the Soviet Union 
generated some interest, which was beneficial for Soviet propaganda. The situation 
changed significantly with the end of the Cold War as these contacts became far more 
12 Anonymous interview with a senior Russian propagandist, Moscow, 29 January  2007. 
extensive. At the same time, in the context of increasing globalisation and information 
flows, a vast amount of information about Russia was readily available. As another senior 
Russian propagandist noted, all that meant that Russian propaganda was forced to compete 
with well-established and reputable sources, such as a number of Western mass media 
outlets, Western news agencies and analytical materials of some broker companies. In the 
interviewees opinion, Russia was significantly weaker in this competition due to a serious 
lack of trained specialists: a large number of personnel had a background in Soviet 
propaganda and they were often unable to adapt to the new requirements of the post Cold 
War public diplomacy. Thus, the quality of information provided by Russian propaganda 
outlets was often not sufficiently high as compared to the Western sources. Moreover, a 
number of senior Russian propagandists stressed that insufficient funding represented a 
serious problem for the successful dissemination of foreign propaganda.13 
Thirdly, and probably most importantly, credibility constituted a major problem for any 
attempt by the Russian authorities to reinvigorate foreign propaganda. It should be 
mentioned that credibility is often recognised as the most formidable problem for any 
government that engages in a propaganda campaign (see e.g. Gass & Seiter 2009). 
However, in Russias case it was even more significant due to a number of factors, such as 
memories of Soviet propaganda, centuries-old stereotypes about Russia and particularly the 
image of Russia as an authoritarian state (or as a state with pronounced authoritarian 
tendencies). As a consequence, propaganda outlets were looked at with inevitable 
suspicion, and Russian propagandists viewed overcoming this credibility hole as one of 
the priority tasks. 
Finally, positive images of Russia were challenged by competing interpretations of events 
that were promoted by various groups of actors, often as part of their own foreign 
propaganda campaigns. Among the most vocal of them were Russian oppositional 
politicians, such as Garry Kasparov, who cultivated their relations with the Western mass 
media. According to several British and German journalists, the Western mass media were 
often unable to access Russian officials and gain their position on a particular issue 
whereas oppositional politicians were always eager to share their views, which inevitably 
led to a wider coverage of their activities than it probably would have been otherwise.14 
Competing images of Russia (most often with an emphasis on the authoritarian nature of 
13 Anonymous interviews with senior Russian propagandists, Moscow, 29-31 January 2007. 
14 Anonymous interviews with British and German journalists, London, 11-13 December 2006; Berlin, 11 
July 2007. 
Russias political regime) were also projected by a number of ex-oligarchs who had lost 
their power under Putins presidency. An illustrative example of the latter can be the 
activities of Robert Amsterdam, a lawyer of imprisoned Mikhail Khodorkovsky (see his 
Internet project http://www.robertamsterdam.com/). A less subtle approach was adopted by 
Boris Berezovsky, a Russian ex-oligarch living in the UK who openly called for the 
overthrow of Putins regime (see The Guardian, 13 April 2007). A significant challenge to 
Russian propaganda was also posed by propaganda campaigns conducted by the 
government of the unrecognised Chechen Republic of Ichkeria. Among the most active 
Chechen propagandists was Akhmed Zakaev, a foreign minister and since 2007 a prime 
minister of the Chechen separatist government in exile. Living in the UK, Zakaev, to a 
large extent successfully, sought to attract more publicity to the breakaway republic.  
In addition to that, one should mention propaganda campaigns that were repeatedly carried 
out by the governments of a number of post-Soviet countries, including Georgia and 
Ukraine. At times of increased tensions in their relations with Moscow, the latter employed 
various techniques (often using the argument of the long history of Russias imperial 
ambitions) to promote their interpretation of the crises. An illuminating example is Russias 
dispute with Ukraine over gas prices in the winter of 2005-2006 when the government of 
Ukraine had far more success in advocating their position in the conflict in the Western 
mass media.  
Thus, in order to overcome all the challenges discussed above, the Russian authorities had 
to make significant changes to the strategy of Russian propaganda. Firstly, in a context of 
limited funding (compared to the generous spending on propaganda by the USSR or by the 
USA) it was decided to target propaganda campaigns more narrowly. On the one hand, 
unlike Soviet propaganda campaigns which were conducted on a global scale, Russian 
propaganda was to focus on a number of priority regions. Among the most important of 
these were the G8 countries, but also China, India and the Middle East. Later, around 2004-
2005, the CIS countries were also included in this list. On the other hand, the emphasis 
shifted from targeting public opinion to targeting elites  politicians, businessmen, 
journalists and members of expert and academic communities. While being more cost-
efficient, work with elite groups was also viewed as more likely to succeed.15 A series of 
public opinion surveys in the Western countries that were commissioned by the Russian 
authorities in 2003 revealed a large number of deeply rooted negative stereotypes about 
15 Anonymous interview with a senior Russian propagandist, Moscow, 31 January 2007. 
Russia, which suggested that it would be unrealistic to attempt to change mass perceptions. 
According to a senior Russian propagandist (ibid.), in each key country there were on 
average about 50 people who were viewed as the primary target of Russian propaganda, 
with the exception of the United States where their number was significantly larger  up to 
about 150 people. It should be mentioned, though, that some of the propaganda channels 
still continued to target mass perceptions as the following section of the chapter will 
demonstrate. 
Moreover, to be able to counteract competing propaganda efforts, Russian foreign 
propaganda had to become more proactive, far more convincing and transparent. As the 
information on Russia was abundant in respectable Western sources, Russian propaganda 
sought to offer information that would be unavailable to Western journalists, in particular 
the views of insiders, i.e. the most senior officials and politicians. A number of the projects 
that were launched in 2004-2005 (such as the Valdai Discussion Club or Russia Profile)
had the advantage of enjoying easier access to high-ranking decision-makers, which made 
them more interesting for the target groups. At the same time, Russian propagandists 
attempted to involve a larger number of Russian commentators and analysts in the 
discussion of Russian politics. In the words of a senior Russian propagandist, until then 
only a very narrow group of Russian commentators had participated in the discussion and 
their critical position had already been known and predictable.16 Thus, Russian 
propagandists sought to introduce new experts whose views might be more sympathetic 
with the regime. Finally, the task of Russian propaganda was to broaden the scope of news 
from Russia. As it was obvious that it would be impossible to avoid coverage of negative 
developments in the country at all, more emphasis was placed on those areas where 
Russian policies were successful.  
The revival of the foreign propaganda machine required a substantial increase in funding. 
According to the assessment of the Deputy Head of the Information and Press Department 
of the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs Mikhail Troyansky in 2004, in order to achieve 
significant results the government would have to spend at least $1-1.5 billion a year for a 
period of 3-20 years (Novaya gazeta, 21 July 2005). However, it is difficult to estimate the 
amount of funding that the Russian government in fact allocated to foreign propaganda 
under Putins presidency. Mikhail Zadornov, a member of the State Dumas Committee on 
Budget and Taxes, mentioned that in 2004 the federal budget included a separate line about 
16 Anonymous interview with a senior Russian propagandist, Moscow, 31 January 2007. 
funding for propaganda purposes, though the actual amount was made partially secret 
(Vedomosti, 29 November 2004). At the same time, a number of senior propagandists 
expressed their opinion that the funding was far from sufficient and a number of other 
countries, such as China, outspent Russia significantly.17 
3.3 Main Actors 
During Putins presidency, the structure of the propaganda apparatus underwent significant 
changes in at least two ways. On the one hand, a number of new bodies were created (such 
as the Russian World Foundation) while some existing bodies (such as RIA Novosti) 
launched a series of new projects. On the other hand, an attempt was made to improve the 
co-ordination of foreign propaganda activities by transforming the hierarchy of the actors 
involved in projecting Russias image abroad. Figure 3.2 illustrates the structure of the 
apparatus that emerged after all these changes at the end of Vladimir Putins second 
presidential term in 2008 (it should be mentioned that since then the structure of the 
Federal Government of the Russian Federation has been transformed again). The activities 
of the major elements of this hierarchy are worth examining in detail. 
3.3.1 Presidential Administration 
At the top of the propaganda hierarchy, the Presidential administration handled the 
development of the strategy and co-ordinated (directly and indirectly, as will be discussed 
later in the chapter) the work of the other elements. The Presidential administration (or 
Presidential Executive Office) was established by Putins predecessor Boris Yeltsin as a 
body that would support the Presidents activities and would supervise the implementation 
of presidential decisions (Willerton 2005, p. 25). Over the years, it was restructured 
several times. Following the latest re-organisation at the beginning of Putins second 
presidential term, it included 12 directorates, two of which were directly engaged in foreign 
propaganda. These were the Foreign Policy Directorate and the Press and Information 
Office. In 2005, as the need to improve Russias image in the former Soviet republics (i.e. 
not only in Western countries) emerged on the agenda, a separate directorate was created to 
supervise this direction of foreign propaganda  the Directorate for Interregional Relations 
and Cultural Contacts with Foreign Countries. 
17 Anonymous interviews with senior Russian propagandists, Moscow, 29-31 January 2007. 
One should note that the administrations influence on policy-making in general was 
profound, with the Head of the Administration and his deputies enjoying significant 
powers. As John Willerton has explained it, he [head of the administration] is not only a 
top aide but also the key conduit linking the president to all subordinate political actors 
(2005, p. 26). However, in the case of foreign propaganda, the Administrations role 
became even more significant. To a large extent, this can be explained by the dominant 
position of Vladislav Surkov, Deputy Head of the Administration since August 1999 and 
Aide to the President since March 2004. During Putins presidency, Surkov was viewed in 
the Russian mass media as the second most powerful politician after Putin himself 
(Moskovskie Novosti, 24 June 2005) and was often referred to as the Grey Cardinal 
(Vedomosti, 22 December 2006). Being the chief ideologist of Putins regime, Surkov 
developed the concept of sovereign democracy which then became the cornerstone of 
Putins politics (Shevtsova 2007, p. 75).  
Figure 3.2. Structure of Russian foreign propaganda under Putin, 2008 
President of the RF 
Presidential Administration
Russian PR 
Consultants 
(Effective Policy 
Foundation, Polity 
Foundation) 
Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs 
Russian Centre of 
International Scientific 
and Culture 
Cooperation 
Prime Minister 
Federal Agency of 
Tourism 
Ministry for 
Economic 
Development and 
Trade 
Ministry of 
Education and 
Science 
Agency of Press 
and Mass 
Communications 
Ministry of 
Culture and Mass 
Communications 
Russkii Mir 
(Russian World 
Foundation) 
ITAR-TASS 
Press and Information 
Office 
Directorate for 
Interregional Relations 
and Cultural Contacts 
with Foreign Countries 
Foreign Policy 
Directorate 
Radio Voice of 
Russia 
RIA Novosti 
Russia 
Today TV 
Russia 
Profile 
Valdai 
Discussion Club 
Trendline 
Russia 
Rossiiskaya 
gazeta 
Foreign PR 
companies 
Gazprom 
Surkovs first-hand experience in advertising and PR  his earlier career included work for 
Mikhail Khodorkovskys Menatep Bank and later for the ORT TV Channel in the 1990s  
helped him become a master of political technologies. He was often described in the 
Russian media as the Kremlins chief piarshchik  chief PR man (Vremya MN, 15
February 2003), a skilful manipulator or a political puppeteer (NG. Figury i Litsa, 25
January 2001). It can be argued, that Surkovs vision of political technologies as a 
powerful (if not the most powerful) instrument in achieving political goals, contributed to 
making foreign propaganda one of the top priorities in Russian foreign policy. Apart from 
Surkov, there were several other high-ranking officials in the Presidential administration 
whose role should be mentioned. Sergey Yastrzhembsky came to the administration from 
the diplomatic service and worked as Yeltsins Press-Attach before becoming 
Presidential Aide in Putins administration in 2000 and later his Special Representative in 
the European Union in 2004. During Putins first presidential term, Yastrzhembsky acted 
as the main Kremlin mouthpiece in relation to the conflict in Chechnya, and his views on 
the need to improve Russias information policy, meaning first of all foreign propaganda, 
were widely publicised (see. e.g. Rossiiskaya gazeta, 27 June 2001). Another example is 
Modest Kolerov, who headed the Directorate for Interregional Relations in 2005-2007. 
Similar to Surkov, Kolerov had a vast experience in political technologies  he had been 
involved in electoral PR campaigns and prior to accepting the position in the 
Administration had headed the information agency Regnum. An important role in 
developing the strategy and implementing Russias foreign propaganda was also played by 
the Presidents Press-Attach Alexei Gromov and his office. 
Although all of the officials mentioned above recognised the need for the Kremlin to 
conduct a more energetic foreign propaganda, in the Administration there was no 
agreement on its content or mechanism. According to the Deputy Press-Attach of the 
President Dmitry Peskov, for instance, some officials initially were sceptical towards the 
idea of contracting a Western PR company (Vedomosti, 2 May 2006). These internal 
disagreements may be seen as a significant factor that affected the overall effectiveness of 
the campaign: competing for the Presidents attention, different elite groups promoted their 
own visions of the campaign and their own projects, which resulted in Russias foreign 
propaganda being often incoherent. 
In addition to its internal resources, the Presidential Administration also relied on the work 
of independent PR consultants. The most prominent of them was Gleb Pavlovsky, president 
of the Moscow-based Effective Policy Foundation. According to Vedomosti (28 May 
2008), Pavlovsky provided extensive information and analytical services (including media 
monitoring) to the administration and collaborated mostly with Surkov. An indication of 
how important Pavlovskys projects were viewed by the Kremlin is the fact that in April 
2008 he was awarded with the medal Of Merit to the Fatherland (Vedomosti, 28 May 
2008). Another pro-Kremlin foundation with close links with the administration was the 
Polity Foundation, headed by Vyacheslav Nikonov who was later appointed by Putin as the 
head of Russkii Mir (Russian World) Foundation  a joint project of the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Education and Science.  
While the Presidential administration developed the strategy of foreign propaganda, its 
implementation was overseen by a number of other actors. Two of them  the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Culture and Mass Communications  dealt with the 
largest number of projects and thus can be seen as the most important elements in the 
propaganda apparatus. It should be mentioned, however, that there was a significant 
difference in their place in the hierarchy: the former reported directly to the President of 
the Russian Federation whereas the latter was subordinate to the Prime Minister (see Figure 
3.2).  
3.3.2 Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
Officially, one of the Ministrys key functions was to provide information support for 
Russian foreign policy. Under Putins presidency, the Information and Press Department 
which was in charge of conducting foreign propaganda was one of the largest in the 
Ministry. According to the head of the Department Mikhail Kamynin, its personnel 
exceeded 100 people (Kamynin 2008). The Departments main responsibilities included 
work with the Russian and foreign mass media and international news agencies. Similar to 
other countries, day to day propaganda work was carried out by Russian embassies which 
monitored the coverage of Russian politics in the mass media of their respective host 
countries. As Russias international image was deteriorating throughout Putins presidency 
(see Chapter Two), one of the key tasks that embassies were assigned in this regard was to 
publicly counter those criticisms of the Russian authorities that were viewed by the 
Ministry as particularly damaging. In order to ensure that the embassies responses were 
consistent across countries, the Ministry introduced a secure section on its Internet 
webpage that could be accessed only by Russian embassies, consulates and representations 
in international organisations, and which provided detailed instructions on what kind of 
counter-arguments should be promoted (Kamynin 2008). 
While the Ministry itself focussed on the political aspects of Russias image, the Russian 
Centre of International Scientific and Culture Cooperation (Roszarubezhtsentr), as a body 
subordinate to the Ministry, handled the work on its cultural aspects. To a large extent, the 
Centre was a successor to the Union of Soviet Societies for Friendship and Cultural 
Relations with Foreign Countries which had been in operation from 1958 until the collapse 
of the Soviet Union, and which, in its turn, was a successor to the All-Union Society for 
Cultural Relations with Foreign Countries that had been established as early as 1925. In the 
post-Soviet period, the Centre had been renamed several times until it received its most 
recent name, and, most importantly, it was transferred by the Presidents decree  146
from 5 February 2002 from the authority of the Russian Government to the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs. It should be mentioned though that under the presidency of Dmitry 
Medvedev, the Centre changed its status again as it was transformed into the Federal 
Agency for the Affairs of the Commonwealth of Independent States, Expatriates, and 
International Humanitarian Cooperation (Rossotrudnichestvo).18 
The Soviet leadership viewed culture as a powerful instrument in conveying ideological 
messages, and as a result the Soviet Union invested heavily in establishing Friendship 
Societies, organising art exhibitions and bringing carefully selected Soviet artists to 
Western countries (see Hazan 1982). The Centre inherited this wide network of Friendship 
Societies which were transformed into local Centres of International Scientific and Culture 
Cooperation. Their heads often had diplomatic status, and worked in close co-operation 
with the embassies. In the 1990s, similar to many other propaganda channels, the Centre 
was severely under-funded and became to a large extent ineffective. Its funding increased 
substantially as foreign propaganda returned to a high position on the Ministrys agenda 
under Putins presidency. However, it retained some Soviet approaches to cultural relations 
(and to its management, more broadly speaking). In the opinion of a high-ranking Russian 
propagandist in one of the EU member states, this remained a serious obstacle to the 
Centres work.19 It should be mentioned that in the Putin years, in addition to traditional 
cultural events, such as art exhibitions, public talks by visiting celebrities or showing 
18 For more information see the official webpage of Rossotrudnichestvo: http://www.rs-gov.ru/node/565,
accessed 2 October 2009. 
19 Anonymous interview with a senior Russian propagandist, the capital of an EU member state, 12 May 
2007. 
Russian movies, the Centre began to put significantly more emphasis on work with Russian 
expatriates.  
This direction of propaganda became particularly important during Putins second 
presidential term. Russian communities abroad began to be viewed as an increasingly 
important target group. One of the key ways to promote a more positive image of Russia 
among them was to encourage studies of the Russian language and literature. President 
Putin declared the year 2007 as the year of the Russian language, and a large number of 
events in Russia and abroad were held within this framework (Literaturnaya gazeta, 5
September 2007). Moreover, in June 2007 Putin signed a decree (decree  796 of 21 June 
2007) that established a new organisation  Russkii Mir (Russian World) Foundation. The 
new foundation was to popularise the Russian language and to support Russian studies 
programmes abroad (Rossiiskaya gazeta, 23 June 2007). Being a joint project of the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Education and Science, Russkii Mir was to 
provide financial support (mostly in the form of grants, books or equipment) to various 
centres of Russian studies. The Board of Trustees, which was to include prominent Russian 
academics and civil servants, and the head of the Foundation were to be appointed by the 
President. Vyacheslav Nikonov, founder of the Polity foundation, became its first head.  
Nikonov repeatedly denied that the main task of the Foundation was to improve Russias 
international image. In his interview with Itogi he, for instance, stressed that the 
Foundations main objective was to promote studies of the Russian language and by doing 
that Russkii Mir was not involved in the work with the countrys image directly (Itogi, 21
April 2008). However, its mission statement on the Foundations webpage includes the 
formation of favourable public opinion and dissemination of knowledge about the country 
among its major tasks.20 Moreover, according to the mission statement, Russkii Mir 
reconnects the Russian community abroad with their homeland, forging new and stronger 
links through cultural and social programs, exchanges and assistance in relocation.21 These 
stated objectives demonstrate that the Foundation is in fact directly involved in foreign 
propaganda, although its activities are limited to cultural aspects of Russias international 
image. 
20 For more information see the official webpage of the foundation: Tseli i zadachi, Russkiy Mir 
Foundation, available on-line at: http://russkiymir.ru/ru/about/celi/, accessed 16 January 2009. 
21 See the official webpage of the foundation: Mission Statement, Russkiy Mir Foundation, available on-
line at: http://russkiymir.org/en/about/mission_statement/, accessed 16 January 2009. 
3.3.3 Ministry of Culture and Mass Communications 
In the years of Vladimir Putins Presidency, the Ministry of Culture, in particular its 
specialised Agency of Press and Mass Communications, supervised an increasingly wide 
range of projects that aimed at improving Russias international image. Mikhail Lesin, who 
headed the Ministry in 1999-2004, repeatedly acknowledged the problem of Russias 
negative image. He was among the first Russian officials who openly called for the revival 
of foreign propaganda. As early as in February 2001, for instance, he declared that the 
Ministry was planning to invest a considerable amount of money into a project aimed at 
correcting Russias image in the USA (Novaya gazeta, 21 July 2005). Although Lesins 
earlier projects did not get off the ground, he may be seen as one of the key personalities in 
bringing the problem of Russias image into the official discourse. Later, as the need for an 
image policy became more apparent for the Russian authorities, Lesin initiated a number of 
projects that became key elements in Russias foreign propaganda machine. In particular, 
as it was suggested in the Russian mass media, Lesin was behind the idea of Trendline 
Russia project (Kommersant Daily, 18 October 2006). During Vladimir Putins second 
presidential term Lesins ability to influence Russias image policy increased further as he 
was appointed Adviser to the President in 2004. 
As Figure 3.2 demonstrates, the Ministry of Culture supervised a number of foreign 
propaganda channels that Russia had inherited from the Soviet Union, including Russias 
two biggest news agencies  ITAR-Tass and RIA Novosti, and the radio station Voice of 
Russia (successor to the Soviet Radio Moscow). The latter was part of the gigantic state 
media holding RTR (All-Russia State Television and Radio Company, or VGTRK). 
Despite severe under-funding that followed the collapse of the Soviet Union, the Voice of 
Russia remained a powerful actor with the size of its audience exceeding 100 million 
people in 160 countries by the year 2007. Its programmes were broadcast in 32 languages 
(Vremya novostei, 28 April 2007), and it succeeded in climbing to the third position among 
the largest international radio stations  after the BBC and the Voice of America 
(Rossiiskaya gazeta, 29 November 2007). To a large extent, the Voice of Russia was the 
most traditional foreign propaganda vehicle as its main objective was to provide 
information support to Russian foreign policy. As a result, it covered events both in Russia 
and abroad exclusively from the position of the Russian government. Although officially 
the radio station was subordinate to the Ministry of Culture, its conceptual approach to 
broadcasting and even day-to day work was largely defined by confidential instructions 
from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. These guidelines specified which issues were to be 
emphasised in radio programmes and news coverage, and provided detailed 
recommendation on how to counteract the most recurrent criticisms of the Russian 
authorities that had been voiced in foreign mass media.22 
While for the Voice of Russia foreign propaganda was the only function it performed and, 
as a result, it could legitimately focus on more positive aspects of Russian politics and 
economy and downplay any negative developments, the situation was more complicated in 
case of the news agencies. For both ITAR-Tass and RIA Novosti, foreign propaganda was, 
to a certain extent, a secondary function as their primary responsibility was to provide 
information, including on those issues that were extremely sensitive for the Russian 
authorities, to the mass media. ITAR-Tass, successor to the Soviet Tass, was one of the 
largest agencies in the world. According to its official webpage, it had more than 130 
bureaus in Russia and around the world.23 As Russias central state news agency, the role 
of ITAR-Tass in foreign propaganda was rather limited whereas RIA Novosti (Russian 
News & Information Agency RIA Novosti) was one of the key elements in the apparatus. 
At the end of Yeltsins presidency, similarly to the radio station Voice of Russia it was 
subordinate to the RTR media holding. Later, however, it was placed under the supervision 
of the Ministry of Culture.  
The agencys rapidly increasing role in Russian foreign propaganda, to a significant extent, 
dates back to the appointment of its new head Svetlana Mironyuk in January 2003. Prior to 
taking the position of Editor-in-Chief, Mironyuk worked in Media-Most, the media empire 
of Vladimir Gusinsky which, inter alia, included the NTV channel and the newspaper 
Segodnya. Gusinskys NTV and printed outlets were strongly critical of the Kremlins 
policies, and their often negatively coloured reporting on the actions of the Russian 
authorities had a certain impact on Russias international image. In this context, Putins 
decision to appoint Mironyuk to one of the key foreign propaganda positions was 
interpreted by some insiders as an intention to solve the problem by using the instrument 
that had created this problem: if the Media-Most team succeeded in damaging Russias 
image in the West, it would have sufficient expertise to improve it.24 Mironyuks approach 
to foreign propaganda was in sharp contrast to the largely Soviet methods that were still 
employed in many other propaganda channels, including the Voice of Russia. Her team 
was younger and more business-minded, which in a way made it easier for them to see 
22 Anonymous interview with a senior Russian propagandist, Moscow, 30 January 2007. 
23 See the webpage of Itar-Tass for more detail, available on-line at: http://www.tass-
online.ru/?page=pages&pageID=24&langID=2, accessed 19 January 2009 
24 Anonymous interview with a senior Russian propagandist, Moscow, 29 January 2007. 
what kind of information/projects would have a chance of succeeding in Western countries. 
It is symbolic that in an attempt to distance the work of RIA Novosti from Soviet style 
propaganda, its senior members of staff would never use the word propaganda. According 
to a senior propagandist, this term was not used even in internal documents.25 
The agencys functions were numerous: they ranged from information support of foreign 
visits of Russian officials to organising press conferences with Russian news-makers, 
distributing press-releases and periodicals, etc. Moreover, RIA Novosti conducted 
extensive monitoring of Russias international image in the key regions. Working in close 
co-operation with the privately-owned PR Company CROSS, it produced regular internal 
reports on Russias image in foreign TV and radio broadcasting, with a separate report on 
Russias image in the national mass media in the CIS and Baltic countries. Other reports 
included Russia and foreign think tanks, Russia and European Institutions, as well as a 
separate report on the new academic literature about Russia. These reports fulfilled several 
functions. On the one hand, this research served to reveal the most problematic aspects of 
Russias image, which helped RIA Novosti to tailor its propaganda campaigns and to 
respond more effectively to the most recurrent criticisms. One the other hand (and this 
function became particularly important in the final years of Putins presidency), it served to 
identify those decision-makers, journalists and academics in the key countries whose 
opinion on Russia appeared to be most influential in their respective countries or 
internationally. Once these individuals were included in this list of prominent Russia-
watchers, they became a target of various propaganda projects organised by RIA Novosti. 
Two of these projects  Russia Profile and the Valdai Discussion Club  are worth 
examining in more detail. 
The idea behind Russia Profile was to create a new English-language media outlet that 
would target this relatively small group of Russia-watchers and would provide unbiased 
information and analysis of Russian politics and economy. This task was not easy. The 
agencys editorial team realised that in order to succeed, the new project would have to be 
substantially different from similar projects of the Soviet years. In particular, it would have 
to overcome the problem of credibility (since any information emanating from a state-
sponsored source would undoubtedly be met with suspicion). Moreover, it would have to 
find some niche in the media market. Thus, one of the most urgent questions was what kind 
of information the project should provide to make the Russia-watchers interested. In an 
25 Anonymous interview with a senior Russian propagandist, Moscow, 31 January 2007. 
attempt to find a solution to these problems, in 2003 RIA Novosti commissioned a series of 
elite interviews with prominent Russia experts in the USA and Western European 
countries, asking them about their views on what could be done. In 2004 the agency 
launched the new project under the name of Russia Profile. It took the form of a website, a 
regular newsletter to subscribers and a printed magazine with articles focusing mostly on 
Russian politics and economy. Andrei Zolotov (Jr) whose previous experience included 
working as a journalist for the newspaper Moscow Times was appointed its editor-in-chief.  
In search of a niche in the context of abundant information on Russia in Western sources, 
Zolotov tried to attract an audience by making the project useful rather than merely 
interesting. To achieve this goal, the most important element of Russia Profile was not the 
magazine but the Internet page that featured information on the structure of the Russian 
government, provided contact information and biographical details of high-ranking 
officials, information on the largest companies, etc. Moreover, in their commentaries on 
Russian politics and economy in the magazine, journalists were given the task not to deny 
criticisms of Russian democracy but rather to widen the scope of information. Thus, the 
motto was not everything you know about Russia is wrong but we will tell you what is 
right, but rather everything you know about Russia might be right but there is much more 
to Russia and we will tell you about that.  
Taking into account some suggestions by Russia-watchers, RIA Novosti addressed the 
problem of credibility in a number of ways. Firstly, Russia Profile was launched as a joint 
project with the publishing company Independent Media, which, inter alia, published the 
newspaper Moscow Times. It was emphasised that although the agency provided funding 
for Russia Profile, Independent Media was in charge of its editorial policy. Secondly, a 
supervisory board, which included a number of prominent Russia-watchers (such as Bobo 
Lo of Chatham House or Alexander Rahr from the German Council on Foreign Relations), 
was established to ensure the editorial independence of the project and to create an image 
of maximum distancing from the government. Finally, Russia Profile commissioned David 
Johnson from the Washington-based think tank Center for Defense Information (CDI)  a 
very well known figure among Russia-watchers and a founder of the so-called Johnsons 
Russia List  to publish materials on Russia on the Russia Profile web page. Similarly to 
his Russia List, Johnsons task in Russia Profile was to select English-language articles or 
analytical pieces about Russia that, in his opinion, would be of interest for Russia-watchers. 
Commissioning Johnson was an extremely interesting decision, as he would inevitably 
include negative publications that might be damaging to Russias image. On the one hand, 
it was meant to prevent possible accusations of Russia Profile in providing only 
information that was positive and favourable for the Russian authorities. Moreover, RIA 
Novosti hoped that Johnsons brand would be an additional attracting factor for the 
potential audience. On the other hand, it served as a precautionary measure against the 
possibility of direct interference by the Russian authorities: in the event of pressure from 
the Kremlin to keep silent on a particular issue, it would be difficult for Russia Profile to 
do so since the issue would be likely to emerge in Johnsons section anyway. 
To reach the target audience, Russia Profile was promoted at various business and 
academic events in the key regions, including the annual conference of the British 
Association for Slavonic and East European Studies in Cambridge. Moreover, in the first 
years of its existence, the magazine was delivered to subscribers free of charge. A number 
of copies were sent to the institutions that were considered key propaganda targets, such as 
the Directorate-General for External Relations of the European Commission. It should be 
noted, however, that in late 2008 RIA Novosti made a decision to stop printing the 
magazine and continue with the Internet page only. It was justified by lack of available 
funding. It can be suggested that a more likely reason was a shift of priority projects in the 
propaganda campaign. In a situation when officials and representatives of various 
propaganda agencies competed for the Presidents attention and for funding, the decision to 
close a project or its part was likely to be the result of bureaucratic infightings. At the same 
time, it could be a consequence of a personality-driven approach in Russian politics: any 
project survived as long as its creator stayed in charge and was supported by the Kremlin. 
As Zolotov left the project in 2008 to go to Harvard University in Cambridge, MA, as a 
Fellow of the Nieman Foundation for Journalism (although he kept an advisory role in 
Russia Profile and remained an advisor to the chief editor of RIA Novosti), Russia Profile 
ceased being one of the leading tools of Russian propaganda. 
Unlike Russia Profile, the Valdai Discussion Club - another project that targeted Russia-
watchers directly  maintained its position as a key foreign propaganda instrument. It was 
created in 2004 as a joint project of RIA Novosti, the Council for Foreign and Defence 
Policy, the newspaper Moscow Times and the journals Russia in Global Affairs and Russia 
Profile. The club functioned as an annual semi-informal meeting of Russian high-ranking 
officials, politicians and experts with prominent Russia watchers. According to the 
information presented on its webpage,  
the clubs mission is to create an international expert venue, where top federal and 
regional officials could share trusted information on the country and societys 
development with home and foreign leading specialists studying various aspects of the 
Russian life26 
Over the years, among its participants were a number of well-known journalists (mainly 
American and British but not limited to them) including Michael Binyon from The Times 
and Mary Dejevsky from The Independent, and researchers from Western universities and 
think tanks such as Richard Sakwa from the University of Kent at Canterbury or Alena 
Ledeneva from University College London. Each year the event was devoted to one central 
topic which was viewed by RIA Novosti as most urgent in relation to Russias image. In 
2006, for instance, the discussion focussed on Russias role in energy trade, developing the 
theme of energy security which had been central to the G8 summit in St Petersburg in July 
2006. The participants were invited to Khanty-Mansiisk, the centre of one of the most 
important oil production regions in Russia.  
The main objective of the Valdai Discussion Club was to provide unmediated access for 
carefully selected Russia watchers to the most senior officials and politicians. Every year 
the event culminated in a meeting with the Russian President where the participants could 
ask him any question or raise any point. The idea behind Valdai was that the Russian 
authorities would be able to convey their message and their views on various issues to the 
Western expert community without the inevitable biases of the mass media. It can be 
argued that to a large extent the project succeeded in that. As one of the participants noted, 
most experts found these discussions extremely valuable as they allowed them to 
comprehend the logic behind the actions of the Kremlin.27 It should be mentioned that 
several participants from a number of countries expressed their doubts about the 
effectiveness of the club for Russian foreign propaganda.28 In the words of one of them, 
the Russian government cannot buy us; they cannot make us say what they want. 
However, they also acknowledged that the access to the key decision-makers, including the 
President, the Minister of Foreign Affairs or the Minister of Defence, as well as senior staff 
from the Presidential administration, enabled them to see more clearly the Kremlins 
position.29 
26 See the webpage of the International Discussion Club Valdai, available on-line at: 
http://en.valday2008.rian.ru/, accessed 25 March 2009. 
27 Anonymous interview with a British scholar, London, 14 December 2006. 
28 Anonymous interview with a French journalist. Paris, 14 May 2007; anonymous interview with a British 
journalist, London, 13 December 2006. 
29 Anonymous interview with a British journalist, London, 11 December 2006. 
After every meeting, which usually took place in September, RIA Novosti monitored 
publications written by the participants. It can be suggested that their tonality or the issues 
they raise were then taken into account when the decision was made on the list of 
participants for the following year. According to one of the participants, he/she was not 
invited to the club again after having published a series of sharply critical articles on 
Russian politics.30 At the same time, a number of journalists and academics who 
continuously expressed critical opinions of the actions of the Kremlin were invited to the 
club every year, so it is difficult to say what criteria were actually used by RIA Novosti in 
selecting Russia watchers. On the whole, the Valdai Discussion club was probably one of 
the most significant elements of the Russian foreign propaganda machine under Vladimir 
Putins presidency. The perceived success of the project gave an impetus to an idea to 
launch another Valdai Club that would target the expert community of Asian countries but 
at the time of writing these plans have not yet materialised.31 
So far we have examined projects that aimed at a very narrow group of Russia watchers. 
However, RIA Novosti also launched several projects that targeted broader audiences. 
Among the most publicised of them was the English-speaking TV channel Russia Today 
that was established in spring 2005 and went on air in December 2005. The idea of creating 
the channel allegedly was born in the Presidential administration and belonged to the 
Presidents Press-Attach Alexei Gromov and Mikhail Lesin, who was already working as 
Putins Advisor at that time (Izvestiya, 6 June 2005). Russia Today was considered as a 
Russian alternative to the BBC or the CNN that would present to the audience Russian 
views on current affairs and, most importantly, would produce an unbiased portrait of the 
country  as opposed to the foreign mass media. In the words of the channels editor-in 
chief Margarita Simonyan, many foreigners are surprised to see that Russia is different 
from what they see in media reports. We will try to present a more balanced picture (Los 
Angeles Times, 8 June 2005). 
According to the then head of the Agency of Press Mikhail Seslavinsky, the budget of 
Russia Today in 2005 was supposed to be $30 million (Novaya gazeta, 21 July 2005). 
Although the project was conceived as global from the start  its broadcasting covered 
Europe, North America, Mexico, Asia, Africa, Australia and New Zealand  one of the 
main concerns for the TV channel was the size of its audience. According to Mironyuk, 
head of RIA Novosti, at the initial stages of the project the audience was likely to be 
30 Anonymous interview with a French journalist, Paris, 14 May 2007. 
31 Anonymous interview with a senior Russian propagandist, Moscow, 31 January 2007. 
around 5-10 thousand people, mainly researchers and political experts specialising in 
Russian politics. It was also expected that the audience might include business people if 
Russia became more attractive for foreign investors (Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 8 June 2005). 
Two year after Russia Today first went on air, in May 2007, the agency launched an 
Arabic version of the channel, which was another indication of the Kremlins ambition to 
broaden the geographic coverage of Russian foreign propaganda (ITAR-Tass Daily, 28 
September 2007). 
Furthermore, in late 2006 RIA Novosti in cooperation with the newspaper Rossiiskaya 
gazeta, an official media outlet of the Russian government, launched a project which was 
to target an even broader audience. Trendline Russia took the form of a newspaper 
supplement inserted into a number of foreign newspapers on a monthly basis. In the 
Russian mass media it was suggested that the idea to create a printed foreign propaganda 
channel came from Presidential advisor Mikhail Lesin who stayed in charge of the project. 
Moreover, according to Kommersant, Trendline Russia was published with the direct 
participation of the Kremlin (Kommersant, 18 October 2006).  
To reach the maximum audience, RIA Novosti and Rossiiskaya gazeta selected newspapers 
with very high circulation numbers, beginning with The Washington Post in the USA 
(approximately 1 million copies) and The Daily Telegraph in the United Kingdom (about 
500,000 copies). According to the chief editor of Trendline Russia Vladimir Bogdanov, 
the project was hoped to cover as many as 20 countries, including Bulgaria, Poland, 
Germany, India and China in the near future (Rossiiskaya Gazeta, 16 November 2006). The 
supplement was published in the national newspapers as an advertisement, which made it 
rather expensive. The project was funded from the federal budget, and in the initial stages 
the Russian government provided to RIA Novosti approximately $2 million for this 
purpose. Moreover, as Kommersant reported, the federal budget for the year 2007 included 
additional funding for Rossiiskaya gazeta to an amount of almost $100 million 
(Kommersant, 18 October 2006). It can be suggested that the main objective of the project 
was to improve Russias attractiveness as an investment destination as the main emphasis 
of the supplements articles was on Russias economic achievements. At the same time, 
much attention was paid to discussions of historical events, Russian culture and particularly 
Russian sport. 
3.3.4 Other Federal Ministries and Agencies 
Compared to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs or the Ministry of Culture and Mass 
Communications, other federal ministries and agencies played a relatively insignificant role 
in foreign propaganda. Nevertheless, the problem of Russias international image often 
emerged on their agenda. The Federal Agency of Tourism, for instance, repeatedly declared 
its intention to put more effort into improving Russias image as a tourist destination. As 
early as in August 2000, Anatoly Yarochkin from the agencys department of image policy 
and information support spoke of the need to promote Russias image as a country of 
cultural-educational tourism. It was suggested that Russian trade missions abroad should 
be given a task to distribute information booklets about the Russian regions (Novaya 
gazeta, 21 July 2005). However, it appears that the agency did not become an important 
actor in the propaganda campaign. 
Another example is the Ministry for Economic Development and Trade which on many 
occasions raised its concern about Russias investment image. Throughout Putins 
presidency, the Ministry took a series of actions that were aimed at improving the countrys 
image in the eyes of potential investors. In 2006, for instance, it published Investors 
Guidebook to Russia which was positioned as an encyclopaedia of the investment climate 
and a source of reliable information on how to do business in the Russian Federation 
(Ministry for Economic Development and Trade of the Russian Federation 2006, p. 4). The 
book, which was to be distributed by Russian trade missions and embassies, claimed that 
Russia was not a country depicted fairly by many foreign politicians and mass media 
(ibid., p. 4). By emphasising success stories of foreign companies in Russia, such as 
Toyota, BMW, Danone, or Siemens, it sought to counteract well-established stereotypes 
about Russia as a country of rampant corruption and to promote the image of a promising 
market. However, this publication was merely a one-off action, and it is doubtful that it 
could substantially affect investors perceptions.  
Recognising the inefficiency of this approach, the ministry developed a Programme of 
Improvement of Russias Investment Image Abroad which was introduced to the Russian 
Government in autumn 2007 (Ministry for Economic Development and Trade of the 
Russian Federation 2007). The rationale was that Russias investment image was 
considerably more negative than its objective investment climate. Since foreign investors 
usually act on the basis of the countrys investment image rather than its investment 
climate, the programme emphasised the need to bridge the gap between the two. Among 
the measures that the paper suggested were creating a webpage with information for 
potential investors; more active participation of the Russian government in international 
economic, investment and political forums, conferences and seminars where the official 
position could be voiced; more energetic reaction of the Russian authorities to negative 
publications in the Western mass media, etc. Moreover, the programme envisaged more 
extensive involvement of the radio station Voice of Russia which was recommended to 
provide wider coverage of economic issues. Most importantly, the paper called for 
improved co-ordination of all foreign propaganda measures. It suggested establishing a 
separate agency that would be in charge of the overall campaign. However, the Ministry 
did not offer any practical recommendations on how to implement all these measures. It 
also advocated hiring a Western PR company that would work specifically on Russias 
investment image and would target foreign investors, leading international rating agencies, 
international organisations, and international consultancies. 
3.3.5 Western PR Companies 
The idea that Western PR companies could be more effective in dealing with the Western 
mass media than Russian companies or governmental bodies did not win support in the 
Kremlin until the winter of 2006. Earlier attempts to commission foreign companies were 
limited in scope. In 2003 RIA Novosti, for instance, hired Hannaford Enterprises to 
monitor Russias image in the USA and to assist in cultural exchanges between the two 
countries (Vedomosti, 5 June 2007). The situation changed radically following Moscows 
dispute with Ukraine over gas prices in December 2005  January 2006 when Gazproms 
decision to stop gas supply to Russias neighbour received extremely negative coverage in 
the Western mass media. The Russian authorities had not expected that. According to a 
senior Russian propagandist, the prevailing opinion in the Kremlin at that time was that the 
conflict would damage Ukraines image, not Russias, particularly since Ukraine was 
allegedly siphoning gas that was meant for deliveries to EU member states.32 The negative 
reaction of the Western mass media demonstrated the inability of the Russian authorities to 
promote their interpretation of events. As a result, the decision to commission a Western 
PR company to work on Russias image gained significantly more support in the 
Presidential administration. This can be illustrated by the words of Presidents Deputy 
Press Attach Dmitry Peskov: Perhaps if we had already been working then with some 
32 Anonymous interview with a senior Russian propagandist, Moscow, 31 January 2007. 
kind of communications company things would have been different (Financial Times, 30
April 2006). 
In the run up to the G8 summit that was to take place in St Petersburg in July 2006, the 
Kremlin signed a contract with a US-based PR company Ketchum which was part of 
Omnicom Group. The fact that Russia was hosting the summit was of extreme significance 
for the Kremlin. As it will be discussed in Chapter Four, it was perceived by many among 
the Russian political elite as an indication that Russia had regained its great power status. 
In this context, the Kremlin was particularly sensitive towards any negative changes in 
Russias image, which resulted in a considerable intensification of the Russian foreign 
propaganda campaign in spring and summer 2006. In an attempt to minimise the negative 
consequences of the gas conflict with Ukraine, the campaign particularly focussed on 
promoting a positive image of Russia as a reliable energy supplier while energy security 
was suggested by the Kremlin as one of the central issues of the summit. In this regard, 
Ketchums task was to advise the Kremlin on communications before and during the 
summit and to coordinate the work of its two sister companies  Brussels-based GPlus 
Europe, and Gavin Anderson & Company  which were also involved in the Kremlins 
campaign (Financial Times, 30 April 2006).  
While the three companies provided general PR support for Russias G8 team, they also 
rendered more specialised services to the Russian authorities. Gavin Anderson focussed on 
promoting Russias image as a business partner. In the words of the head of the companys 
London office, Gavin Anderson was helping Russian companies to improve their 
reputation in the eyes of the international financial community (Nezavisimaya gazeta, 29
May 2006). At the same time, GPlus handled the work on Russias image in EU institutions 
as the main specialisation of the company was in that area, and a number of its employees 
were former EU officials (Rettman 2009). Moreover, some of its members of staff were 
professional journalists, which was an additional advantage for the Russian authorities. An 
illustrative example is Angus Roxburgh, who had a vast experience of covering Russian 
politics including the conflict in Chechnya for the BBC, and who became one of the 
companys advisers for the Kremlin. According to The Observer, GPlus subcontracted part 
of its work to the UK-based company Portland PR which was founded by Tony Blair's 
former deputy Press Secretary Tim Allan (The Observer, 16 July 2006). 
Although it is very difficult, if not impossible, to measure the results of the services 
provided by these companies during such a short period of time, the Russian authorities 
considered them as positive, and extended the contract after the G8 summit. Moreover, 
following the example of the Presidential administration, Gazprom also signed a contract 
with Ketchum, GPlus Europe and Gavin Anderson in 2007 (Vremya novostei, 20 August 
2007). It should be mentioned that as a state-controlled company, Gazprom had significant 
difficulties in conducting an effective PR campaign (see Orlov 2002). One of the main 
challenges was the need to co-ordinate any actions with the state authorities, which resulted 
in very slow reactions to negative changes in its image. It can be suggested that the 
decision to commission the same group of Western companies was meant to solve this 
problem as they would be able to conduct a coordinated image campaign. At the same time, 
another PR company, Hill & Knowlton was commissioned to provide information support 
to the Nord Stream, one of the key Gazprom projects that would bring Russian gas to 
Germany and then to a number of other EU member states (Vremya novostei, 20 August 
2007). 
It is noteworthy that the Russian authorities have provided very little information on the 
terms of these contracts, which provoked a wave of speculation in the mass media. It was 
not very clear how the companies were selected and even where the funding came from. 
According to Dmitry Peskov, the contract was paid by a commercial bank that acted as a 
sponsor of Russias Presidency in the G8, though he refused to name the bank. He also 
said that there were some other sponsors (Nezavisimaya gazeta, 29 May 2006). Vedomosti 
reported that, according to the companys information to the USA Congress, Ketchum 
received about $4 million for its work on Russias image in 2007 alone. Moreover, it 
received $1.2 million for its work for Gazprom in July-November 2007 (Vedomosti, 13
November 2008). 
Among the key contributions of the Western PR experts was an attempt to change the style 
of Russias communications with the West. In the words of Angus Roxburgh from GPlus 
Europe,  
the main thing were trying to persuade the Russians to do is to open up and provide 
more interviews than they were before, from the President down, in order to get their 
own message across (The Times, 6 July 2006) 
To some extent, they succeeded in doing that. In the period before the G8 summit in St 
Petersburg and in the following years, Russian officials, particularly the President, gave a 
large numbers of interviews, participated in press-conferences and published numerous 
articles in the Western mass media. 
3.3.6 Grey or Black Propaganda? 
As discussed at the beginning of this chapter, an important part of Soviet foreign 
propaganda and active measures in general was played by covert measures, or in other 
words by so-called grey and black propaganda. However, following the disintegration of 
the Soviet bloc, the Russian authorities could no longer resort to most channels of grey 
propaganda, such as International Front organisations. Did the Kremlin attempt to establish 
any new organisations that would contribute to the work on Russias international image 
without being part of the state propaganda apparatus? It can be suggested that the Institute 
for Democracy and Cooperation which was founded at the end of Vladimir Putins second 
presidential term was the closest to performing the function of grey propaganda although 
its activities differed substantially from the grey propaganda actors of the Soviet time.  
To a large extent, the main objective of the Institute for Democracy and Cooperation was 
similar to the one of the USSR-backed International Front organisations  to shape 
international discourse in a direction that would be favourable for the Kremlin. The idea 
that Russia needed to participate far more extensively in setting the discourse was voiced 
by the Russian president during the EU-Russia summit in Portugal in October 2007. In 
Putins words, the goal of the Institute is  
to facilitate dialogue () on issues such as organising the electoral process, monitoring 
elections, the situation of national minorities and migrants in the territory of the EU and 
Russia as well, freedom of expression and other questions (Putin 2007c) 
Moreover, Putin pointed out to the EUs financial assistance to similar institutions in 
Russia, and insisted that it is high time () that the Russian Federation can do the same 
thing in the European Union (Putin 2007c). Following this public approval of the concept 
by the President, the Institute was established at the beginning of 2008, with two regional 
offices in Paris and New York. It was headed by a well-known lawyer and a member of the 
Public Chamber Anatoly Kucherena, while the regional departments were headed by the 
historian Natalia Narochnitskaya, and a member of the Public Chamber professor Andranik 
Migranyan respectively. As a non-governmental organisation, the Institute did not receive 
any funding from the federal budget. However, it could apply for various grants provided 
by the Russian government, including grants from the Public Chamber. According to 
Narochnitskaya, there were hopes that part of the funding would come from donations by 
the Russian business community (Novaya gazeta, 7 February 2008).  
The rationale for establishing the institute, as Migranyan explained to the Russian mass 
media, was the need for Russia to take a more active part in discussions on the definition of 
democracy and possible ways of measuring a level of democratisation. He referred to the 
idea, which was shared by many among the Russian political elite at that time, that the 
interpretation of democracy was monopolised by certain states (Rossiiskaya gazeta, 29
January 2008). Kucherena, in his turn, expressed his doubts, also shared by many in Russia, 
about the methods that were used by various organisations, such as Freedom House, in 
their assessment of individual countries. In his opinion, the fact that the Freedom House 
described the elections in Iran, Afghanistan or Georgia as free but those in Russia or 
Belarus as not free, was the result of the biased and ideologically prejudiced approach of 
the organisation towards Russia (Profil, 4 February 2008). At the same time, the 
leadership of the Institute declared their intention to examine the state of democracy and 
human rights issues in Western countries. Kucherena, for instance, mentioned plans to 
monitor the presidential elections in the USA, and raised the question of the role of 
electors who make decisions against the peoples will (Novye izvestiya, 29 January 2008). 
Although the Institute formally was not part of the foreign propaganda apparatus (it was 
not a state body but a non-governmental organisation), it can be suggested that it had the 
potential to become an important element of the Russian foreign propaganda machine. It 
should be mentioned that officially the Institute did not view work on Russias international 
image as one of its priority tasks. Moreover, the leaders of the project repeatedly denied 
speculation that the main function of the Institute would be that of counter-propaganda  to 
demonstrate that the situation in Western countries was as bad or worse that in Russia 
(Profil, 4 February 2008). However, according to Kucherena, the Institute was supposed to 
become a source of objective information about Russian history and politics (Argumenty i 
fakty, 6 February 2008). On the whole, this was an interesting attempt to approach the 
problem of image from the position of changing the discourse on democracy, and it has yet 
to be seen how successful it can be. 
As mentioned earlier, the Institute for Democracy and Cooperation can broadly be viewed 
as an instrument of grey propaganda since it was presented to the outside world as 
independent of the Russian authorities and as a voice of Russian citizens rather than its 
government although its concept had been clearly approved by the President and its 
activities followed the official line of Russian foreign propaganda. It is more difficult to say 
whether the Russian government still employed the methods of black propaganda that had 
been widely utilised by the Soviet Union. Although there is no direct evidence that it did, 
there are some indirect indications that the Kremlin did resort to black propaganda 
techniques in order to create negative images of its opponents on at least several occasions. 
A number of Russian newspapers (as well as British and US media outlets), for instance, 
reported the propaganda-related activities of the Kremlin-supported youth group Marching 
Together (Idushchie vmeste) in the UK and the USA. Versiya suggested that the youth 
group was assigned the task of discrediting a number of Russian migrs, particularly 
representatives of the self-declared Chechen government, in their host countries. Promoting 
their negative images was meant to facilitate extradition requests by the Russian 
government (Versiya, 26 April 2005). 
According to The Sunday Times, Marching Together were behind a series of protests in the 
UK in 2004-2005 that demanded the extradition of Akhmed Zakaev, a Chechen exile who 
had been granted asylum in Britain. The demonstrators targeted, inter alia, the British 
actress Vanessa Redgrave, who had publicly expressed her support for Zakaev. The 
groups leader Vladimir Yakemenko denied any links between Marching Together and the 
protests. However, the newspapers unnamed source claimed that the group was directly 
involved in organising the demonstration. According to the source,  
most of the activists () were paid 15 in cash to take part after they had responded to 
advertisements in a London-based Russian newspaper offering to pay people for giving 
out leaflets (The Sunday Times, 2 January 2005) 
Moreover, the Wall Street Journal reported similar incidents in the US. According to the 
newspapers source, the youth group provided funding to the amount of approximately 
$400,000 for a series of demonstrations that were held in September 2004 and June 2005 in 
New York. Similarly to the protests in the UK, the demonstrators were pressing for the 
extradition of Chechen separatists, including Ilyas Akhmadov (Wall Street Journal, 24
June 2006). 
Taking into account a long history of using black propaganda by the Soviet Union, the 
Kremlins involvement in events of this kind appears to be fairly plausible. It should be 
mentioned, however, that some commentators have argued that the Kremlin was a victim, 
rather than the organiser of the protests. Mikhail Vinogradov from the Russian PR 
company Propaganda suggested that the regimes opponents had been behind the 
demonstrations, and that the reports about the Kremlins involvement could have been used 
to damage Russias international image in the run-up to the G8 summit in St Petersburg 
(Vedomosti, 26 June 2006). 
On the whole, as this chapter has demonstrated, the Russian foreign propaganda apparatus 
underwent a significant transformation in the years of Vladimir Putins presidency. Over 
this period, a number of new channels were created, and there was a substantial increase in 
funding allocated for propaganda purposes. Having examined the form of Russian foreign 
propaganda, let us now turn to its content and analyse the projected image of Russia by 
looking at the most recurrent messages to Western audiences in Russias dominant 
discourse. 
Chapter 4  
Projected Image: The Message to Western Audiences 
This chapter provides an analysis of Russias projected image that was promoted in the 
West in the years of Vladimir Putins presidency. One should note that there can be a 
substantial difference between the images projected for internal and for external use  if not 
in the elements of the image as such, then in their salience. An illustrative example of such 
a discrepancy can be the image of Russia as a great power: in the post-Soviet period, this 
characteristic used to be much more salient in the image that was projected for the domestic 
audience, although in the final years of Putins presidency it became considerably more 
important in Russias external image as well. At the same time, it might be difficult 
sometimes to define which audience  internal, external or both of them - a certain message 
is meant for. While acknowledging these limitations, this study nevertheless seeks to 
uncover the most recurrent themes in those texts  official documents, public statements of 
high-ranking officials and foreign propaganda outlets  that may be seen as targeting 
foreign audiences. The chapter begins by examining Russias dominant self-image, i.e. the 
image of the country held by Russian political and business elites as it developed in the 
dominant discourse. This is followed in the second part of the chapter by a discussion of 
how the dominant self-image, as well as other competing self-images, shaped the vision of 
Russias projected international image. Having analysed the core elements of the projected 
image, the chapter concludes by exploring the links between all the three types of Russias 
images  its self-, projected and perceived images. 
4.1 In Search of Russia: Russias Self-Image in the Dominant Discourse 
In a context of the profound identity crisis that Russian society experienced following the 
disintegration of the Soviet Union, several distinct visions of Russia and its place in the 
world became particularly prominent in Russian public discourse. As already mentioned in 
Chapter One, several classifications have been suggested in the academic literature to 
differentiate between these views. Neumann (1996), for instance, has spoken of Romantic 
Nationalists and Europe-Oriented Liberals  a distinction that goes back to the 19th century 
debate between Westernisers and Slavophiles. Andrei Tsygankov has argued that there are 
three main competing visions - Westernist, Statist and Civilisationist (2006b). Allison, 
Light and White (2006; also White 2007) have also distinguished between three main 
directions, but have labelled them as Liberal Westernisers, Pragmatic Nationalists and 
Fundamentalist Nationalists. The latter two classifications appear to be fairly close, and for 
the purposes of this study we will adopt the one advocated by Allison et al (2006). 
The views of Liberal Westernisers, Pragmatic Nationalists and Fundamentalist Nationalists 
on Russias place in the world and a preferable foreign policy strategy vary to a significant 
extent. Liberal Westernisers perceive Russia as a European country whose natural allies are 
in the West. Thus, in their opinion, Russia should aim at closer cooperation with the EU 
and the USA, and abandon any great power ambitions. Unlike Liberal Westernisers, 
Pragmatic Nationalists tend to view Russia as mostly but not entirely European (White 
2007, p. 163) and as a great power, and they are more cautious in their assessment of the 
West. Although they favour practical cooperation with Western powers, they are unwilling 
to compromise Russias independence in the sphere of foreign policy, and most of them 
share hopes for a multi-polar world in which Russia would become an independent pole. 
Thus, they consider it extremely important to develop closer relations with Asian countries, 
as well as to strengthen Russias position in the post-Soviet space. While sharing the same 
view of Russias great power status as Pragmatic Nationalists, Fundamentalist Nationalists 
perceive Russia as a Eurasian country, and many of them  as a unique civilisation. Seeing 
the West as a threat, they favour a multi-vector foreign policy and believe that Russia 
should develop closer ties with the East (White 2007). 
While these are by no means fixed groups, they nevertheless have distinct constituencies. 
As Stephen White (2007) has argued, among Liberal Westernisers during Putins 
presidency were liberal intellectuals and some political parties (e.g. Yabloko and the Union 
of Right Forces), as well as several high-ranking officials, such as the Minister of 
Economics and Trade German Gref, or the Minister of Finance Alexei Kudrin. Pragmatic 
Nationalists were in the majority in the Russian government and the Presidential 
administration. The party of power United Russia was also their constituency, as well as 
a number of largest Russian companies, particularly natural resource corporations. 
Fundamentalist Nationalists were represented by the so called siloviki (those with military 
and security background) in the government and Presidential administration and by a 
number of political parties, such as the Communist Party of the Russian Federation 
(CPRF), the Liberal Democratic Party (LDPR) and Rodina. In addition to that, the 
Orthodox Church was also part of their constituency. The crucial question for this study is 
which of the three competing self-images discussed above was dominant during Putins 
presidency  as it was reflected in the official discourse.  
4.1.1 Vagueness of the Dominant Self-Image 
In the 1990s the official self-image of Russia was far from homogenous. Russias foreign 
policy was affected by various, sometimes contradictory, visions of Russia. Under Putins 
presidency, the Russian discourse of national images underwent significant changes. These 
changes were connected less with the content of the ideas as such, but more with their 
relative weight and, consequently, their impact on foreign policy. Unlike Yeltsins 
period, the Putin era was characterised by a much stronger position of the President and the 
Presidential administration. Strengthening the vertical of power, which became one of the 
cornerstones of Putins domestic policy, also impacted on foreign policy-making. There 
were numerous attempts to improve coordination of all the actions taken in the 
international arena, which made the official position concerning the countrys major threats 
and strengths far more homogeneous than it used to be in the 1990s (Light 2005). 
In general, Russias self-image as articulated during the period 2000 to 2008, particularly 
during Putins first term in office, may be described as somewhat centrist in comparison 
with other visions, combining some of their elements and at the same time avoiding their 
extremes. Broadly speaking, the official position may be described as Eurasianism, as 
Russia was seen as very different from the West and in some aspects closer to Asia. On the 
one hand, at the level of official rhetoric Russia was often portrayed as belonging to 
Europe, and, consequently, the European direction of foreign policy was declared as one of 
the top priorities. As Putin stated in his Annual Address to the Federal Assembly in 2005, 
above all else Russia was, is and will, of course, be a major European power (2005, p. 3). 
On the other hand, the geographical location of the country was seen as demanding 
development in an Asian direction. According to Putin, Russia has always perceived 
herself as a Eurasian country. We have never forgotten that the main part of Russian land is 
in Asia (2000, p. 1). 
However, this Eurasian definition of the countrys position remained very vague and did 
not answer the questions about its friends or foes. To a large extent, the unresolved identity 
crisis was one of the main problems of Russian foreign policy. This view was shared not 
only by foreign policy experts (e.g. Kortunov 2005), but also by representatives of Russian 
business. Russian businessmen were interested in improving attitudes to Russia in the 
West, and were ready to invest in promoting a more positive image. Yet, the task appeared 
to be extremely difficult due to the unresolved questions of Russias identity. A Vice-
President of the Russian Union of Industrialists and Entrepreneurs, argued, for instance, 
that Russian business could help the authorities to project a favourable image far more 
effectively if it knew what position Russia had in the world. As Igor Yurgens put it, 
Now we have questions: are we enemies for Europe and the USA or are we their 
friends? What should the strategy be? When we answer these main questions  what 
coordinate system and what value system we are in  it will be easier for us, business 
people, to follow this direction33 
Interestingly, both foreign policy experts and business people viewed the Kremlin as 
responsible for articulating characteristics of Russian identity, and considered its inability 
to do so a major failure of the Russian authorities. 
4.1.2 Russia as a Great Power 
While Russias self-image as articulated in the dominant discourse during Putins 
presidency remained fairly vague, one of its most stable components was the vision of 
Russia as a great power. To some extent, it was rooted in the perception of Russian history: 
the roles of the Russian Empire and of the Soviet Union in world history made it difficult 
for Russia to stay on the periphery of world politics. Although always present in the vision 
of Russia, this element underwent considerable transformations in the post-Soviet period. 
In the early 1990s, the idealistic vision of the West that was dominant among Russian 
political elites had the biggest effect on Russian foreign policy. Although declarations of 
the necessity to defend national interests, to pursue an independent foreign policy and to 
establish equal relations with Western countries were present in all major Russian official 
documents and statements of high-ranking officials at that time, these goals were not 
realised. It was soon evident that expectations had been too high, and that Russia was 
losing its great power status. Weakness became one of the central elements of the 
countrys dominant self-image, reaching its peak in the late 1990s. With its seat on the UN 
Security Council and possession of nuclear arms, Russia could still be considered great, 
but the reality of world politics and the worsening social and economic situation 
contributed to the perception that Russia was a developing country, and not even among 
the most developed of the developing ones (Kosolapov 2002, p. 108).  
33 See an interview with I. Yurgens, Yu. Slashcheva and D. Yakobashvili: Ishchem vykhod Radio Ekho 
Moskvy, 17 November 2005, available on-line at: http://echo.msk.ru/programs/exit/39998/, accessed 5 May 
2006. 
This sharp contrast between the perceived strength of the Soviet Union and the Russian 
Empire and the obvious weakness of the Russian Federation led to growing dissatisfaction 
with Russias role in the international arena. This dissatisfaction was shared not only by 
political elites, but also by many ordinary Russians, who welcomed a more active, even 
more aggressive foreign policy aimed at defending Russias national interests and 
positioning Russia as an equal partner of Western countries rather than a junior partner. 
According to an opinion poll conducted by the Public Opinion Foundation (FOM) in June 
2000, when asked what they wanted most for Russia, an overwhelming majority of 
respondents (76-85%) answered that they wanted Russia to become a great and peaceful 
country (Public Opinion Foundation 2000).  Therefore, the goal of restoring the status of a 
great power to some extent was inevitably going to appear on the agenda of the ruling 
elites. Unlike the image of Yeltsins Russia that was often portrayed, especially in the 
early 1990s, as catching up with or running after the West, the image of Putins Russia 
for the domestic audience was built around the idea of strength. The characteristic of a 
country that is getting stronger became particularly salient during the second term of 
Putins presidency. The results of national surveys conducted by FOM in June 2006 
demonstrate that 46% of respondents in Russia believed that the country had become 
stronger while only 16% were convinced of the opposite. Moreover, when asked when 
Russia was at its strongest, 20% of participants chose the Putin era, which was almost as 
high a number as the 28% of respondents who chose Stalins time or the 22% who opted 
for Brezhnevs years. At the same time only 1% thought that Russia had been strongest 
under Yeltsin (Public Opinion Foundation 2006). 
4.1.3 Russia in the Post-Soviet Area 
Another central element of Russias dominant self-image was the idea of Russia having 
special interests in the post-Soviet area. It should be mentioned that the vision of Russia as 
an empire has always been of utmost importance for Russias self-identification. One could 
agree with Trenin (2001, p. 74), that [i]f there was a Russian idea, it was that of a 
universal Eurasian empire. Nostalgia for the imperial past is fairly typical of all former 
empires, but in Russia it became particularly noticeable. One of the reasons for this 
widespread feeling can be that only a relatively short period of time has passed since the 
collapse of the empire. Although the Russian Empire as such disintegrated in 1917, some 
scholars have argued that it was then revived in the form of the Soviet Union, and, thus, 
finally collapsed only in 1991 (e.g. Gaidar 2006). In this context the question of whether 
Russia could or should regain its empire became a popular topic in public and academic 
debate in the post-Soviet period. There were various opinions on this matter, some of them 
quite radical, particularly in Fundamentalist Nationalist discourse. According to the right 
wing geopolitician Alexander Dugin (2000), for instance, empire was the only form of 
natural existence for the Russian people. He argued that for Russia even the role of a 
regional power would be disastrous. Therefore, Russia needed to become an empire again, 
this time even larger than the Soviet Union. Another variant of a somewhat pro-imperial 
position was that of the communist leader Gennady Zyuganov (2001) who called for the 
reunion of Russia, Ukraine and Belarus, while presenting it as a reunion of all Russian 
people.  
Most liberal politicians and researchers, on the contrary, argued that Russia should abandon 
any imperial hopes, as they were not only inappropriate but also unrealistic. As Trenin 
(2001, p. 315) put it, [t]he countrys principal macroeconomic measurements are too 
modest for such an ambitious project. A striking combination of liberal and imperial views 
was presented in the concept of a liberal empire advocated by Anatoly Chubais, the head 
of the company Unified Energy Systems of Russia (RAO UES of Russia) and one of the 
leaders of the party Union of Right Forces (SPS). In his article Missiya Rossii v XXI 
veke published in Nezavisimaya gazeta in October 2003, Chubais suggested that Russias 
mission in the international arena should be to build a liberal empire in the post-Soviet 
area. The core elements of the countrys relations with the near abroad, according to 
Chubais, should be (i) promoting Russian culture and defending the rights of Russian 
speakers, (ii) expansion of Russian business, and (iii) support of democratic rights and 
freedoms. At the same time the concept envisaged that Russia should respect the 
sovereignty of those countries, and its actions should always comply with international law. 
Therefore, Russia would become an empire not through political coercion, but rather with 
the help of economic means through its increasing economic attractiveness (Chubais 2003).  
This project was quite close to the official position of Putins Russia in relation to the near 
abroad. The Presidents Addresses to the Federal Assembly also emphasised the priority of 
this area for Russian foreign policy, and stressed the necessity to support Russian speakers 
and promote Russian culture in the CIS countries. The 2005 Address, for instance, stated 
that Russia should continue its civilising mission on the Eurasian continent, which 
implied ensuring that democratic values, combined with national interests, enrich and 
strengthen our historic community (Putin 2005, p. 4).  At the same time, Russias 
economic presence in the former Soviet republics increased substantially over the years of 
Putins presidency (Tsygankov 2006a). The crucial difference between Chubaiss concept 
and the views articulated by the President and high-ranking decision-makers was not in 
their positions as such, but rather in presenting the final goals of Russias actions in the 
near abroad for both foreign and domestic audiences. While Chubais described his vision 
of Russia as of an empire, though not in the traditional but an economic sense, the Kremlin 
was trying to avoid any associations even with the word empire and put the stress on the 
opportunities for of mutual benefits for Russia and other post-Soviet countries. 
4.1.4 Russia as an Energy Superpower 
Another core component of Russias dominant self-image was connected with the vision of 
economic backwardness as one of the major threats to Russias security. In the official 
discourse, economic modernisation was considered as the most important task for Putins 
Russia, and foreign policy was regarded as a tool for achieving this strategic goal. This led 
to seeing isolationism in the international arena as a very dangerous path to follow. The 
only way to become stronger was to integrate into the world economy, which meant to 
intensify cooperation with the West. According to Putin,  
no country today, no matter how big and how wealthy, can develop successfully in 
isolation from the rest of the world. On the contrary, the biggest success comes to those 
countries that consciously use their energy and intelligence to integrate themselves into 
the world economy (2003, p. 4) 
Connected with the understanding of economic prosperity as the countrys main objective 
was the idea of the key role of energy resources in its economic development. Seeing the 
resource sector as a unique opportunity to modernise Russias economy in a short period of 
time was always central to Putins vision of the countrys future. His attention to the topic 
may be traced back to as early as the late 1990s when he chose it as his research focus 
while doing a PhD in Economics at the St Petersburg Mining Institute. After Putin entered 
the Presidents office in 2000, his thesis and an article summarising its major research 
findings received considerable attention as scholars were trying to examine his personal 
beliefs regarding the countrys political strategy (see Balzer 2005a; 2005b).34 While Putins 
PhD thesis was for several years inaccessible to Western scholars, his article titled Mineral 
34 The authorship of Putins thesis titled The Strategic Planning of Regional Resources under the Formation 
of Market Relations was questioned when in 2006 researchers from the Brookings Institution, USA 
discovered that at least a part of it had been based on a study written by American authors in the 1970s (The 
Sunday Times, 26 March 2006). It could be argued, however, that even if it was not written by Putin but was 
only published under his name, it would still be an interesting material for research. One could suggest that 
Putin, being already a high-ranking official at that time, would not have agreed to be associated with the texts 
if they had been contrary to his personal position. 
Natural Resources in the Strategy for Development of the Russian Economy was openly 
available, and published in English in 2006. The key idea of the article can be formulated 
as the possibility to cope with the countrys economic crisis and to restore its leading role 
in the international arena with the help of efficient management of the resource sector. As 
Putin himself put it, the natural resource complex remains the most important factor in the 
states development in the near term (2006b, p. 54).  
This view was reflected in a number of Russias official documents. The Energy Strategy 
of the Russian Federation for the Period until 2020 (adopted in 2003), for instance, 
stressed that Russias energy resources were an instrument of domestic and foreign 
policies. According to this strategy, the countrys role on the world energy markets 
largely determines its geopolitical influence (Energeticheskaya strategiya 2003). 
Moreover, energy exports, particularly exports of natural gas to EU member states, played 
an extremely important role in the countrys economy. In 2007, for instance, the energy 
sector generated approximately 64% of Russias export revenues (House of Lords 2008, p. 
45). As Dmitry Medvedev acknowledged on leaving Gazproms Board of Directors after 
his election as Russian President in 2008, about 20% of the Russian federal budget was 
formed by Gazprom revenues (Vremya novostei, 28 May 2008, p. 4). Although the Russian 
authorities continuously emphasised the need to diversify the economy, it still remained 
hugely dependent on energy trade (see Hanson 2007).  
In this context, the vision of Russia as an energy superpower (although Putin himself 
avoided using this term) became one of the key element of Russias dominant self-image, 
particularly during Putins second term in office. However, while it was shared by many 
members of the Russian political elite, it was continuously criticised by a number of 
prominent Liberal Westernisers. According to the leader of Yabloko Grigory Yavlinsky, 
for instance, oil and gas are awful things, a real disease, a natural drug: there is oil in one 
vein, there is gas in the other, and there are economic hallucinations in the head 
(Moskovskii komsomolets, 2 December 2005, p. 4). One of the major dangers of the project 
was seen in the risk of repeating the mistake that turned out to be fatal for the economy of 
the Soviet Union - the overreliance on oil exports that led to a very serious economic crisis 
when oil prices plummeted in the 1980s. In addition to that, Russias turning into a 
petrostate was viewed as a major obstacle on the way of the countrys modernisation and 
as a means to preserve the status quo in the political sphere (Shevtsova 2005). 
On the whole, Russias dominant self-image during Putins presidency may be seen as 
mostly Pragmatic Nationalist as it viewed Russia as a great power with special interests in 
the area of the former Soviet Union. Moreover, similarly to the position of Pragmatic 
Nationalists, the official discourse favoured pragmatic cooperation with the West. At the 
same time, it included some elements of competing discourses albeit avoiding their 
extremes. Although Liberal Westernisers became a diminishing minority (White 2007, p. 
149) in the Presidential administration and the Russian government, their views on the 
priority of economic modernisation and cooperation with the West had a pronounced 
impact on the official discourse. On the other hand, Russias dominant self-image was also 
affected by the vision of Russia as a besieged fortress, which was characteristic of 
Fundamentalist Nationalist vision. By combining these, often contradictory, elements, the 
official discourse sought to reconcile various interests among members of the Russian elite, 
particularly between liberals and siloviki. However, it resulted in a noticeable inconsistency 
of the dominant self-image, which represented a formidable challenge for Russian foreign 
propaganda. 
4.2 Key Elements of the Projected Image 
Similarly to Russias dominant self-image, Russias projected image was also fairly 
inconsistent as it included elements of Liberal and Fundamentalist Nationalist discourses. 
Although Russias projected images varied to some extent across target regions depending 
on the goals of Russian foreign policy, it is still possible to trace a number of key elements 
that they had in common. These were the visions of Russia as a great power, as an energy 
superpower, and the emphasis on the non-imperial character of Russias policy in the near 
abroad. In addition to these elements in Russias image there were also a number of 
historical characteristics, mainly connected with the Soviet period of Russian history. 
Although the relative weight of these elements changed depending on the economic and 
political context, they constituted the core of the countrys projected image, and thus are of 
particular interest for this study.  
4.2.1 Russia as a Great Power 
The emphasis on strength in Russias image projected in the West may suggest some 
associations with the image of the USSR created by Soviet propaganda. There was, 
however, one significant difference between the two of them. While for the Soviet Union 
the image was based mainly on the perception of a military and ideological threat, for 
Putins Russia it was not military but rather economic strength that was positioned as 
important. This shift can be explained by the fact that due to numerous economic and social 
problems it would have been extremely difficult for the Russian army to pose a serious 
threat to Western countries. Another reason was the increasing role of economic 
considerations for Russian political elites in general. Although Russia as a nuclear power 
was still an essential characteristic of the countrys image, there was more stress on the 
concept of Russia as an energy superpower, on economic growth (although to a 
significant extent based on high energy prices) and on the readiness to defend the countrys 
economic interests. 
The aim to regain great power status made it particularly important for the ruling elite to 
demonstrate Russias right to this status by active participation in solving international 
conflicts or by membership of prestigious international clubs, such as the G8. The 
Russian presidency of the latter in 2006, for instance, was depicted by Russian high-
ranking officials, as well as researchers and journalists, as evidence that the other members 
of the G8 had acknowledged Russia as a great power. This view can be illustrated by the 
opinion of Sergey Rogov, head of the Institute of the USA and Canada (Russian Academy 
of Sciences): It is symbolic that Russia is enjoying full rights as the President of the G8, 
i.e. this fact demonstrates that our country has returned to the list of great powers (RIA 
Novosti 2006b). It is noteworthy that these words coincided with the intensification of 
criticism of the state of Russian democracy, when even the fact of Russias membership, 
not only its presidency in the G8 was called into question by some Western political elites 
and mass media. However, according to Putin, Russia should be regarded as a natural 
member of the G8 because its involvement was essential for solving the most urgent 
problems of the West, as well as of the rest of the world, in particular the problems of 
energy security and the nonproliferation of weapons of mass destruction (Interview with 
NBC Television Channel 2006). 
Another key element of Russias projected image, which was closely connected with 
positioning Russia as a great country, was Russia as an independent centre of power in a 
multipolar world. The question of whether or not the world became unipolar with the US 
being the only superpower, or whether there were several competing poles, had been at the 
centre of public debate in Russia ever since the disintegration of the Soviet Union. While 
among Russian political elites there was no consensus on this question, in the official 
discourse there was a strong emphasis on the desirability of a multipolar world. According 
to the National Security Concept (2000), for instance, among Russias national interests in 
the international sphere was reinforcing the position of Russia as a great power and one of 
the influential centres of the multipolar world (Kontseptsiya natsionalnoi 2000, p. 4). This 
idea was present in many statements and interviews of the Russian President that were 
aimed at foreign audiences, which demonstrates its significance for Russias projected 
image. In his interview with the French TV Company France 3, for example, Putin 
expressed his opinion that the world will be predictable and stable only if it is multipolar 
(Intervyu Prezidenta 2003c, p. 29).  
Why was this element of Russias image so important? Visions of the world as multipolar 
implied that despite any economic or social problems Russia could still be considered an 
influential world power centre, since poles may vary in their weight in different spheres, 
and no country can be most influential in all spheres. This means that although Putins 
Russia could not yet be considered the strongest actor in world economy, it would 
definitely be an important pole in the sphere of international law since it was a permanent 
member of the UN Security Council, or in the military sphere since it was a nuclear power 
(Torkunov 2002). Therefore, creating the image of Russia as an independent pole in a 
multipolar world could make it easier for the country to reclaim the status of a great power. 
It should be mentioned, however, that the feasibility of Russia becoming an independent 
centre of power was called into question by some researchers. Dmitry Trenin (2001, p. 
316), for instance, argued that Russia would probably not be able to form a separate pole, 
but would rather be attracted to one of the more active poles. 
Moreover, stressing the desirability of a multipolar world was meant to demonstrate that 
Russia was in favour of a more democratic world order: the co-existence of several 
independent centres of power would provide it with a plurality of positions that could not 
be achieved if one country dominated world politics. This emphasis on the countrys 
support of more democratic international relations was particularly beneficial for Russia at 
a time when it was criticised by the West for authoritarian tendencies in its domestic 
policies. One of the core values declared in all major official documents was the supremacy 
of international law and the decisive role of the UN. According to the Foreign Policy 
Concept of the Russian Federation (2000), for instance, one of the major objectives of 
Russian foreign policy should be to influence general world processes with the aim of 
forming a stable, just and democratic world order, built on generally recognised norms of 
international law, including, first of all, the goals and principles in the UN Charter 
(Kontseptsiya vneshnei 2000, p. 3). The perceptions by Russian elites of the UN as the 
most important forum in the system of international relations became extremely significant 
in the 1990s. In the context of Russias rapidly decreasing power in world politics, its 
membership of international organisations began to be seen as providing an opportunity to 
defend the countrys interests that would be difficult to defend otherwise. This idea was 
expressed in the Foreign Policy Concept in 1993 when the weakening position of the 
country left no illusions regarding the possibility of maintaining the status of a great power 
(Kontseptsiya vneshnei 1993). Thus, being a permanent member of the UN Security 
Council and enjoying the right of veto, Russia was especially interested in strengthening 
the UNs role. 
On the whole, positioning Russia as a great power and independent centre in a multipolar 
world has remained among the most significant elements of Russias image projected in the 
West since the early 2000s. During Vladimir Putins second term this rhetoric became 
much more assertive, which was most clearly demonstrated in his speech at the 43rd 
Munich Conference on Security Policy in February 2007 (Putin 2007d). The emphasis on 
the countrys strength became especially pronounced in the context of rapid economic 
growth, when the image of Russia as a great power acquired an additional characteristic 
connected with seeing it as an energy superpower.  
4.2.2 Russia as an Energy Superpower 
Energy security was chosen as one of the main areas for discussion at the G8 summit in St 
Petersburg in July 2006. This topic was regarded by Russian political elites as especially 
important in a situation in which the disagreement over energy prices between Russia and 
Ukraine in the winter of 2005-2006 had a very negative effect on Russias image (as 
demonstrated in Chapter Two of this study). In response to growing concerns over the 
possibility that Russia would use oil and gas as an instrument of putting pressure on other 
states, the Kremlin took a number of steps aimed at improving its image, including 
publishing an article under Putins name in The Wall Street Journal. Its title  Energy 
Egotism Is a Road to Nowhere  speaks for itself. The main message was that Russia was 
a reliable and responsible business partner, and it wanted to create an energy security 
system sensitive to the interests of the whole international community (Putin 2006a). The 
article emphasised the interdependence of the world where not only consumers depended 
on suppliers, but also the latter, in their turn, depended on the former. Thus, it sought to 
convince readers of the impossibility for Russia of using energy as a tool of political 
pressure.  
It is difficult to say how close the image projected with the help of this article was to the 
actual vision held by Russian political elites. On the one hand, the idea of interdependence 
of the forces of supply and demand was central to most public speeches of the President 
and most high-ranking officials on this topic. They attempted to avoid the use of the word 
superpower in relation to Russias energy strategy, as it had negative associations with 
the Soviet Union, and, thus, would imply the imperialist character of Russias energy 
policy. President Putin, for instance, accused the Western mass media that portrayed Russia 
as an energy superpower of deliberate attempts at reviving echoes of the evil Soviet 
Union (Stenograficheskii 2006). On the other hand, some Russian scholars argued that 
for the energy market the 21st century was an era of suppliers rather than consumers. Thus, 
having become an energy superpower Russia would be able to regain its status and role in 
global political processes (Simonov 2006, p. 6). 
Positioning Russia as an energy superpower sent two, to some extent conflicting messages 
to Western countries. On the one hand, there was an emphasis on Russias claim for a more 
important, even decisive role in international relations. Russian foreign propaganda sought 
to convey the idea that Russia was ready to defend its national interests, and had sufficient 
means in the form of natural resources to do so. On the other hand, there was a 
considerable stress on positive, business-like characteristics, such as reliability, 
predictability and stability, which were meant to convince Western consumers that 
Moscow did not consider oil and gas as instruments in geopolitical competition. 
Pragmatism was depicted as the main principle of Russian foreign policy, suggesting that 
in its energy policy Russia was guided by purely economic considerations. This conflict of 
messages contributed to the inconsistency of Russias projected image, which was also the 
case with some other of its core elements, in particular the vision of Russia as not an 
empire. 
4.2.3 Russia as not an Empire 
Considering the label of empire as an extremely negative characteristic, Russian foreign 
propaganda sought to persuade the West that Russia did not cherish any imperial ambitions 
regarding the CIS countries. One of the arguments most often used to demonstrate the lack 
of imperial plans was the fact that Russia had not opposed the disintegration of the Soviet 
Union, but, on the contrary, facilitated it. As President Putin put it in his interview with 
German television channels ARD and ZDF in May 2005, Russia was one of the main 
initiators of the break-up of the Soviet Union (...) And to say or to hint that Russia wishes 
to regain the greatness of a superpower is simply nonsense (Interview with German 
Television Channels 2005). Projecting the image of Russia as not an Empire, the Kremlin 
attempted to draw a rigid dividing line between being an empire and having legitimate 
strategic interests in the neighbouring countries, first of all in terms of security. This 
interpretation of the Kremlins position has been seen as realistic by some commentators. 
According to Tsygankov, for instance, Russia cannot be denied its own political, military 
and economic interests there, and its policy has been an effort to preserve existing 
influence in the region for the purpose of its greater stabilisation, rather than imperial 
control (2006a, p. 1080). 
Another key element of Russias image in relation to the countrys actions in the near 
abroad was the idea that Russian policy was driven by economic considerations as 
opposed to geopolitical ones. One of the clearest examples of this approach was Moscows 
reaction to Western criticism of its decision to turn off gas supplies to Ukraine in the winter 
of 2005-2006. While in the West Russian actions were interpreted mainly as an attempt to 
use energy as a means to punish Ukraine for its pro-Western choice (The Times, 5 January 
2006), Russian officials emphasised purely economic reasons for stopping the energy 
supply. As President Putin explained to the participants of the Valdai Discussion Club in 
September 2006,  
nobody wants to take on the load of subsidising another countrys economy by three to 
five billion USD a year. Nobody wants to but for some reason everybody insists that we 
do so. And we did so for 15 years (Stenograficheskii 2006) 
Moreover, when speaking about Russias role in the Ukrainian gas crisis, Putin touched 
upon the topic of the Ukrainian presidential elections in 2004. While the Western mass 
media fiercely criticised Moscow for interfering in Ukraines elections (as the Kremlin 
openly supported one of the candidates, Viktor Yanukovich), Putin referred to the fact that 
our European and American partners decided to support the orange revolution even 
against the Constitution (Stenograficheskii 2006). These words were meant to convey the 
idea that, from Moscows point of view, the Western mass media often applied double 
standards in their coverage of Russian politics. 
Overall, positioning Russia as a country without imperial ambitions but with legitimate 
interests in neighbouring states was one of the most difficult tasks for Russian foreign 
propaganda. On the one hand, some of Moscows actions in the post-Soviet area, such as 
trade wars with Georgia, did not comply with the projected image. In such cases the use of 
PR techniques could not change the perceptions of Russias policy to any significant 
extent. On the other hand, the centuries-long stereotypes about Russian imperialism held by 
political elites in the near abroad were reinforced every time Russia gave a slightest 
occasion for doing so. For the former Soviet Union republics and the countries that were 
part of the Eastern bloc, any of Russias actions that were not beneficial for them would 
appear to be neo-imperial. 
4.2.4 Historical Characteristics 
In addition to the components discussed above, Russias projected image also contained a 
number of characteristics that were related to Russian history, in particular its Soviet 
period. This can be explained by understanding among the Russian elite that Russias 
existing images in the West were inevitably affected by the image of the Soviet Union. 
Most of these inherited characteristics (e.g. the imperial nature of the countrys foreign 
policy) were extremely negative. As it was very difficult, if not impossible, to rub off 
such links with the Soviet Union, Russian foreign propaganda aimed at presenting the 
connection between the Soviet Union and Russia from a more favourable perspective. 
Among the most significant of such characteristics were a vision of the Soviet Union as 
possessing not only negative, but also positive features; an emphasis on Russias crucial 
role in the World War 2; positioning Russia as a victim of the Soviet regime in the same 
way as other Soviet republics; and finally, stressing Russias contribution to the end of the 
Cold War.  
Seeing the Soviet Union as an evil empire, which was still one of the most widespread 
clichs in the West, implied that most positive achievements of the Soviet period were 
almost completely overshadowed by negative developments. This view was not shared by 
the official position in Putins Russia: although it did not dispute the disastrous 
consequences of the Soviet regime for Russia and other countries of the former Soviet bloc, 
it stressed the necessity of recognising that it had some positive results as well. As Putin 
stated in his article Rossiya na rubezhe tysyacheletii, it would be a mistake not to see, 
and especially to deny unquestionable achievements of that time (1999, p.1). Moreover, in 
the Address to the Federal Assembly in 2005 the Russian President described the 
disintegration of the Soviet Union as the biggest geopolitical catastrophe of the 20th 
century, meaning that it had separated many families and brought about tremendous 
economic and social difficulties to ordinary people (Putin 2005, p. 3).  
Another significant element of Russias projected image was positioning it as the main 
contributor to the Alliances victory in World War 2. The victory over Nazi Germany was 
considered as one of the most important events in Russian history. Moreover, it was 
perceived by many among the Russian elite as legitimising Russias status as a great power. 
The emphasis on the countrys decisive role in the war was also one of the major elements 
in the image of the Soviet Union. However, while in the case of the Soviet Union the 
victory was depicted as being gained by the state under the leadership of the Communist 
party, in Russias projected image it was portrayed as the result of the heroic deeds of 
ordinary people. As an example of such an approach one can look at the article One out of 
Millions: A Veterans Story Tells That of a Generation published by the main editor of 
Russia Profile Andrei Zolotov (2005). This interpretation showed the war as sacred for the 
Russian people, and sought to draw a dividing line between the victory and the events that 
had taken place before or after the war, in particular signing the secret protocols to the 
Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact. 
The crucial role of this element in Russias projected image (as well as in the dominant 
self-image) can explain the Kremlins sensitivity towards the dispute with Latvia, Lithuania 
and Estonia concerning their incorporation into the Soviet Union. The situation became 
particularly tense in 2005 when Moscow was preparing to celebrate the 60th anniversary of 
the victory. While the Russian authorities attempted to use the celebrations to improve the 
countrys image, the leaders of the Baltic States raised the issue of the appropriateness of 
holding celebrations in Moscow. As Latvian President Vaira Vike-Freiberga put it on LNT 
television in Riga in February 2005,  
of course, we wont change the opinions of those old Russians, who will put their vobla 
(dried, salted fish) on a newspaper, drink their vodka and sing their chastushki (a type 
of musical folk limerick) on May 9, remembering how they heroically invaded the 
Baltic countries (quoted in Babich 2005) 
In this context, the prevalent opinion held by Russian political elites was that the former 
Soviet republics were using the argument of the Soviet occupation as a tool to achieve their 
own political goals: first to become independent from the USSR, then to receive support 
from the West, and, finally, to justify discrimination against ethnic Russians living on their 
territory (Demurin 2005). Another example of this pronounced sensitivity of the Russian 
authorities and members of the Russian political elite in general to divergent interpretations 
of Soviet history was their extremely emotional reaction to the controversial decision of the 
Estonian authorities to relocate the so-called Bronze Soldier  a Soviet World War 2 
memorial in Tallinn (The New York Times, 25 January 2007).  
Another key element in Russias projected image was challenging the equals sign that 
was often put between the Soviet Union and Russia. While in the former Soviet republics 
Russia was viewed as the centre of the Soviet empire, and thus responsible for Soviet 
tyranny, in Russias projected image there was an emphasis on differentiating between the 
two. Russia was positioned as a country that had been oppressed and had suffered from 
totalitarianism as much as all the other republics, as a similar victim of the international 
red roller coaster (Pankin 2005). At the same time Russia was positioned as a country 
that had made the end of the Cold War possible: it was not a victory of the West, but the 
choice of the Russian people themselves. According to Putin, Russia made its choice at the 
beginning of the 1990s, and in fact this helped the countries of Eastern Europe to feel free 
and return to their normal state. The Soviet Union did everything to destroy the Berlin 
wall (Interview with German Television Channels 2005). These components in Russias 
projected image became especially salient when there was a need to respond to the 
criticism of Russian democracy voiced by Western countries.  
A significant element in Russias projected image (as well as its dominant self-image) was 
the idea of the countrys special mission in the world. This characteristic may be seen as 
old and new at the same time since a messianic vision had always been central to Russian 
self-image, but it took different forms. For the Russian Empire it was the idea of Moscow 
as the third Rome that implied the mission of keeping original Christian values that had 
been lost elsewhere, for the Soviet Union  the idea of bringing freedom and equality in the 
form of communism to the rest of the world (see Duncan 2000). Putins Russia was 
portrayed as serving the world by being on the front line in the fight against terror (i.e. in 
Chechnya) and acting as a barrier to drugs and criminals on their way to Europe (Putin 
2002). 
4.3 Shifting the Focus: Russias Self-, Projected and Perceived Images 
While Russian foreign propaganda sought to bolster the components of Russias image 
examined above, it also attempted to downplay a number of other components that the 
Russian authorities considered particularly problematic. Broadly speaking, one of its main 
tasks was to shift the focus of attention from one group of image characteristics to another. 
This point can be illustrated by the difference in the relative weight in Russias perceived 
and projected images of the characteristics related to democracy and to the war in 
Chechnya. While for the Western mass media and researchers the state of Russian 
democracy, or, to be more precise, strengthening of authoritarian tendencies, was one of the 
main concerns, in Russias dominant discourse it was one of the least emphasised topics. 
The understanding of how Russian democracy should be presented to the West underwent 
significant changes during the last decade. In the late 1990s the approach to this element of 
Russias image was often reactive, as most statements related to democracy were made in 
response to Western criticism rather than being issued proactively. This situation began to 
change during Putins second presidential term, when the official position became far more 
assertive in relation to this issue, with two main ideas being emphasised.  
Firstly, it was argued that the country was building a system that would be different from 
the Western democratic model, but would still be democratic. According to Putin, it was 
inappropriate for Russia simply to copy the Western system without considering Russias 
own circumstances. On the contrary, Russia should follow its own path of democratisation, 
taking into account [its] historic, geopolitical and other particularities (2005, p. 4). One of 
the major elements of the vision of a democratic model that would correspond to these 
particularities was seeing sovereignty as the highest priority for the country. This can be 
best illustrated by the words of Vladislav Surkov, Deputy Head of the Presidential 
Administration, who, in explaining the goals of Putins politics, called the system that was 
being created sovereign democracy:  
I often hear that democracy is more important than sovereignty. We do not admit that. 
We believe, that we need both of them. An independent country is worth fighting for 
(Surkov 2005).  
Secondly, there was an emphasis on the possible dangers of democratisation in Russia for 
the West itself. Former director of Carnegie Moscow Center, Andrew Kuchins (2006), 
summarised President Putins message to the participants of the Valdai Discussion Club in 
September 2006 as beware of what you wish for. These words imply that although the 
situation in Putins Russia was not as democratic as Western leaders would like it to be, it 
was still beneficial for Western countries in practical terms: the Kremlin was more open for 
cooperation with Western countries than it could have been if it had to take into account 
anti-Western attitudes of the population under a more democratic regime. As Kuchins put 
it, the Russian population is far more anti-American than [Putins] pragmatic approach to 
Washington. It also suggests that democratisation could lead to instability in both political 
and economic terms, which means that the present state of democracy in Russia may be the 
optimum variant for the country and for the world. 
Perceived image Self-image 
(dominant discourse)
Projected image 
(dominant discourse) 
State of  
democracy 
in Russia 
Strengthening of  
authoritarian tendencies 
(not significant) Sovereign democracy 
(democracy that is  
different from the  
Western model) 
Russia as an  
energy 
supplier 
- Energy pressure on  
consumers for political 
reasons (geopolitics  
of energy, pipeline 
diplomacy) 
- Growing strength  
of the country 
- Energy superpower 
(21st century as the  
age of suppliers) 
- Reliable business  
partner (stability,  
pragmatism,  
predictability) 
- Energy superpower  
(ready to defend its  
interests) 
Russia and 
the Post-
Soviet area 
- Russias imperial 
ambitions 
- Russias legitimate 
interests in the near 
abroad 
- Russia as not an  
Empire 
- Russias legitimate  
interests in the near 
 abroad 
International  
status of 
Russia 
- Russia as a former 
superpower 
- Russias growing strength  
and assertiveness 
- Growing strength  
and role in 
international 
relations 
- Great power 
- Independent centre in  
a multipolar world 
Culture Great Russian culture Great Russian 
culture 
Great Russian culture 
Table 4.1. Core elements of Russias perceived, projected and self-images 
Another element that differed substantially in Russias projected and perceived images was 
Russias policy regarding Chechnya. Similarly to the perceptions of Russian democracy, 
the vision of Moscows relations with Chechnya had a much lower relative weight in the 
projected image. What is more, while in the perceived image the emphasis was mainly on 
human rights and military issues, in the projected image the focus was shifted to the 
political aspect of the problem. The core elements of this vision were positioning the 
Chechen crisis as Russias internal problem, emphasising that Chechnya was an integral 
part of the Russian Federation (i.e. one cannot question Russias territorial integrity), 
stressing the legitimate character of Chechnyas status as it had been approved by 
referendum results, and, finally interpreting Russias actions in Chechnya as building a 
very strong barrier against the infiltration of fundamentalism in this part of Europe 
(Intervyu Prezidenta 2003b, p. 19). The latter component of Russias image became 
particularly important in the context of the war against terror that was launched by the US 
following September 11, 2001. The key message that was sent to Western countries 
conveyed the idea that those fighting against Russian forces in Chechnya were the same 
people who () attacked American cities (Intervyu Prezidenta 2003a, p. 14). The 
emphasis on the possible link between Chechen separatists and Al-Qaeda was meant to add 
legitimacy to Russias actions in the breakaway republic.  
On the whole, Russian foreign propaganda sought to place more negative elements on the 
periphery of the projected image, and put more stress on those issues that would be more 
favourable for Russia. Table 4.1 illustrates the most significant differences and similarities 
between the core components of all three images of Russia, i.e. its dominant self-, projected 
and perceived images that were discussed earlier in the chapter. As we can see, these 
images coincided only in their positive assessment of Russian culture. At the same time, 
they differed substantially in all other categories. The emphasis of Russian foreign 
propaganda on the economic component of Russias image, particularly on positioning the 
country as a reliable, pragmatic and predictable partner, sought to demonstrate the priority 
of economic rather than geopolitical considerations for the Russian authorities. This led 
some researchers to suggest that Putins strategy might be described as that of a normal 
great power, which implied that regaining a great power status for Russia was not a goal in 
itself, but a necessary condition for Russias more advanced engagement with the world 
(Tsygankov 2005, p. 134). However, during Putins second presidential term, the economic 
element of Russias projected image was often overshadowed by positioning Russia as a 
great power and an independent international actor, which sent conflicting messages to 
Western audiences and limited the effectiveness of Russian propaganda.  
Chapter 5 
Russias Images and Foreign propaganda in the UK 
Having examined the mechanism of Russian foreign propaganda and having analysed the 
image that the Russian authorities sought to project in Western countries in general, this 
study now proceeds to explore these issues in greater detail in two case studies  the UK 
and Germany. As observed in Chapter Three, the strategy of Russian foreign propaganda 
during Vladimir Putins presidency envisaged intensification of propaganda efforts in all of 
the G8 countries. The UK presents a particularly interesting case in this regard for a 
number of reasons. Firstly, apart from being a member of the G8 and a permanent member 
of the UN Security Council, Britain plays an important role in policy-making at the EU 
level. Moreover, in the early 2000s, in a context of its special relationship with the USA, 
the UK was considered by the Russian leadership as a potential bridge between Russia and 
the US (Bacon 2007, p. 15). Secondly, Britain is the largest foreign investor in the Russian 
economy, particularly in its energy sector. In 2007 its level of investment reached $26,328 
mln, or 21.8% of total investment by foreign countries (Federal State Statistics Service 
n.d.b). However, in terms of trade with Russia the UK is significantly behind a number of 
other EU member states, such as Germany or France. In 2007 Russias exports to the UK 
accounted for only $11,024 mln or 3.7% of Russias total exports to far abroad countries, 
while its imports from the UK were at the level of  $5,642 mln or 3.3% of Russias total 
imports (Federal State Statistics Service n.d. a).  
Another aspect that makes the UK case particularly interesting for the present study is the 
fact that the UK, unlike many other EU member states, is not dependent on imports of 
Russian energy to a considerable extent. At the same time, in recent years Russias state-
controlled gas monopoly Gazprom persisted in efforts to increase its presence in the UK 
energy market. Moreover, a growing number of Russian companies expressed interest in 
being listed on the London Stock Exchange, which according to Russias ambassador to the 
UK Yurii Fedotov became a kind of compulsory quality stamp for them (quoted in 
Financial Times, 5 June 2007). Thus, the Russian authorities viewed the task of projecting 
a more favourable image of Russia in Britain as extremely important for political and 
economic reasons. In addition to that, Britain has for centuries been one of the significant 
Others for Russian identity. Therefore, one can expect that its recognition and acceptance 
of Russias projected image would be extremely important for Russias evolving self-
image.  
This chapter begins by placing Russias image in the UK into a wider historical context and 
traces the most recurrent stereotypes and clichs concerning Russia that became deeply 
rooted in Britains picture of the world in the course of history. This is followed in the 
second part by an analysis of the core elements of Russias images in the UK in 2000-2008. 
The chapter then proceeds to examine peculiarities of Russian foreign propaganda in the 
UK, including the actions of the Russian authorities related to the so called Litvinenko case 
which had a particularly significant impact on Russias images in Britain. The chapter 
concludes by discussing the results of Russian propaganda and implications of Russias 
images in the UK for British-Russian relations. 
5.1 British Images of Russia and the Russians: 16th  20th Centuries 
National images are always affected by stereotypes that emerged in the course of history 
(see e.g. Boulding 1956; 1959). These stereotypes are usually very stable: even when a new 
reality contradicts them, and they seem to have almost disappeared, they tend to become 
stronger again whenever there is a slightest occasion that can confirm them. Over nearly 
five hundred years of British-Russian relations, a number of stereotypes about Russia and 
the Russians became deeply rooted in British culture. Russia was discovered for Britain 
in 1553 by captain Richard Chancellor whose experience in Russia was the first in a series 
of voyage accounts that became the only source of information about Russia for Britons at 
that time. Many stereotypes about Russia and the Russians, including seeing Russians as 
drunkards and as people who could never be trusted, can be traced to that time. Moreover, 
for Britons who came to Russia in the 16th - 18th centuries and who quite often neither 
spoke the Russian language, nor understood the Russian way of life, Muscovys main 
feature was its otherness, its difference from Britain and from Europe in general. According 
to The Present State of Russia, which was published anonymously in London in 1671, the 
Russians were a people who differ from all other nations of the world, in most of their 
actions (quoted in Cross 1971, p. 27). By the beginning of the 19th century barbarity, 
backwardness and particular otherness of Russia had become deeply rooted in the British 
picture of that country.  
Although these characteristics were not positive, on the whole Russias image in Britain at 
that time was more or less neutral rather than negative. Russia was not perceived as a 
threat. Some Russian sovereigns, such as Peter the Great or Catherine the Great, were even 
seen in a more or less positive light and their policies aroused considerable interest in 
Britain (Cross 2000; 2001). What is more, Russia was Britains ally in the war against 
Napoleon in the early 19th century, and its significant contribution to the victory added an 
element of heroism to its image. A profound change in British perceptions of Russia 
occurred in the 19th century when Russian and British imperial ambitions came into 
conflict in Central Asia. Russias growing power in the region was viewed in Britain as 
threatening to British interests in India. It is noteworthy that the vision of Russia as a threat 
had developed long before Russian and British interests clashed in a military conflict, i.e. in 
the Crimean War in 1854-1856. As early as in 1829 The Times wrote that there is no sane 
mind in Europe that can look with satisfaction at the immense and rapid over-growth of 
Russian power (quoted in Gleason 1972, p. 86). The anti-Russian hysteria that gripped 
British society in the first half of the 19th century was, as Gleason (1972) has argued, the 
time when Russophobia emerged as an extremely important element of the British outlook 
on the world.   
At the turn of the 19th-20th centuries Russias images in Britain were predominantly 
negative. Apart from backwardness and otherness, their key characteristics were the 
aggressiveness of Russias imperial foreign policy and a vision of the Russian political 
regime as an Asiatic despotism. These elements became particularly pronounced due to the 
fact that many Jewish migrs from Russia came to live in London, and their negative 
attitudes towards the Russian regime had a noticeable impact on British public opinion 
(Zashikhin 1994). The same was true of Polish migrs whose negative attitude towards the 
Russian Empire also had a profound effect on Britains perceptions (Gleason 1972). In 
addition to that, Russians were seen as corrupt and inefficient. As George Buchanan (1923, 
v. 2, p. 86), who served as a British ambassador to the Russian Empire in 1910-1918, wrote 
in his memoirs, Russia was a vast empire () in which justice was ill-administered, and in 
which nearly every branch of the administration was as incompetent as it was corrupt.  
Although these negative elements constituted the core of the countrys image, there were 
also some positive developments in British perceptions of Russia as a reaction to certain 
events that took place both in the Russian Empire and in the international arena. At the 
beginning of the 20th century many masterpieces of the Russian literature, including works 
by Chekhov and Tolstoy, were translated into English, and thus Britain became familiar 
with Russian culture. Russias image was also affected by the fact that Russia was Britains 
ally in World War 1, which for some time made criticism of Russian internal affairs appear 
as impolite. The year 1917 became another turning point in British perceptions of Russia. 
While the March revolution, which gave hope for Russias democratisation, was welcomed 
in Britain, the Bolshevik revolution and the establishment of the communist state triggered 
a mixed reaction. For the majority of the British political elite these were very negative 
events. As Sir Curtis Keeble (1990, p. 45), who served as a British ambassador to the 
Soviet Union in 1978-1982, wrote in his study of British-Russian relations, the campaign 
of terror which followed the attack on Lenin and the accumulating reports of Bolshevik 
atrocities did much to harden opinion.  It should also be noted that the murder of Emperor 
Nicholas II, who was a cousin of British king George V, could not but affect British 
perceptions in a negative way.  
On the whole, Britains image of communist Russia and later of the Soviet Union was a 
very complicated phenomenon as it differed substantially for the conservative part of 
British society and for some left-wing politicians and their supporters. The ideals that were 
declared by the Soviet government were in many aspects close to those of the Labour Party 
(not to mention the Communist Party of Great Britain), which affected its vision of  the 
USSR (Williams 1989). The 1930s are sometimes called the Pink Decade, as for a 
significant part of British intellectual and political elite it was a time of sympathy for the 
Soviet Union (Keeble 1990, p. 119). However, many of those Britons who were more or 
less positive in their attitudes to the USSR became more critical when the scale of Stalins 
purges became known in the late 1930s, and especially when Soviet forces entered Poland 
in 1939, incorporated the Baltic States and attacked Finland. For the more right-wing part 
of British society these actions of the Soviet Union were only another confirmation of the 
old conviction that there was little to choose between Nazi and Communist dictatorship 
(Keeble 1990, p. 158).  
The image of the Soviet Union in Britain changed significantly during World War 2. 
Understanding of the crucial role that the Soviet army played in the Alliances victory over 
Nazi Germany, and the unprecedented scale of Soviet losses, had an enormous impact on 
British perceptions (Bell 1990). The most widely spread feelings to the USSR at that time 
became sympathy and respect. This wave of positive attitudes reached its peak in 1942-
1943 in response to the Soviet Unions victory at the Battle of Stalingrad (Pozdeeva 2000). 
However, with the end of the war the image very quickly reverted to negativism. As Keeble 
explained this rapid transformation, the bond between Britain and the Soviet Union, in so 
far as it existed, depended upon the common enemy and dissolved with his defeat (Keeble, 
p. 168). However, a number of new characteristics that emerged during the war remained 
central to the image of the post-war USSR. Among those were seeing it as a military power 
and as one of the key actors in world politics. 
During the Cold War, the USSR was largely perceived as the most dangerous enemy and a 
military and ideological threat. This attitude was summarised in the words of British Prime 
Minister Clement Attlee, who, while making a speech for a party political broadcast in 
1948, said that the Soviet Communism pursues a policy of imperialism in a new form  
ideological, economic and strategic  which threatens the welfare and the way of life of the 
other nations of Europe (quoted in Keeble 1990, p. 220). The vision of the USSR as a 
military threat became particularly pronounced in the 1950s when it came to be a nuclear 
power. In addition to that, the Soviet Union was perceived as threatening Britains security 
through espionage. After a number of major espionage scandals, the most notorious of 
them being the case of the so called Cambridge five in the 1960s, the sinister figure of a 
Soviet spy became one of the most widely spread clichs in British mass culture. 
Perestroika, which was started by Mikhail Gorbachev in the late 1980s, was welcomed in 
Britain, and Gorbachev himself became one of the most popular political leaders 
(Braithwaite 2002). When the Soviet Union disintegrated in 1991, and the Russian 
Federation appeared as an independent state under the presidency of Boris Yeltsin, in 
Britain, as in the West in general, there were high expectations of its rapid democratisation. 
However, in the second half of the 1990s negativism began to return to British perceptions 
of Russia. In 2000, when Vladimir Putin took office, Russias image in Britain was already 
rather negative, though it still was much more positive than the image of the Soviet Union 
had been. 
On the whole, over the centuries of British-Russian relations a number of stereotypes of 
Russia and the Russians, such as Russias otherness, untrustworthiness, despotism of its 
authorities and imperialism, became particularly prominent in Britain. Although at times of 
military alliances between the two states, Russias images did improve to a certain extent, 
they quickly reverted to predominance of negative characteristics once the need for such an 
alliance diminished.  
5.2 Images of Putins Russia in the UK, 2000  2008 
Broadly speaking, the transformation of images of Putins Russia in the UK followed the 
same trends as that of images of Russia in the West in general, as examined in Chapter 
Two.  However, there were also a number of peculiarities. In the first instance, at the level 
of the British political elite Russias image, particularly during Vladimir Putins first term 
in office, was significantly less salient than the image of the Soviet Union. According to a 
survey of British experts on Russia commissioned by RIA Novosti in 2003,  
most people in the UK, including decision makers, [did] not know what [was] 
happening in Russia. People certainly [knew] Putin, Berezovsky, vodka and 
kalashnikov, but they [were] not familiar with the present political or economic 
tendencies in Russia (RIA Novosti 2003) 
This relatively low position of Russia on the political agenda stemmed from the fact that in 
the dominant vision of Russia among the British elite it was neither a serious military threat 
nor a promising democratising country.35 Geographically, Russia was not Britains 
neighbour. Moreover, compared to some other EU member states, such as Germany or 
Poland, Britains trade with Russia was modest, and it was not yet dependent on Russian 
energy supplies. In the words of a former British diplomat, mostly we [British] do not 
think about Russia, unlike the Germans.36 Another diplomat explained this apparent lack 
of attention to Russia by what can be called as Russia-fatigue, i.e. a psychological 
reaction to having been exposed to excessive information about Russia in the 1990s.37 The 
interest in Russia came in waves, most often in response to some negative or even 
catastrophic developments. In 2000 2008 these peaks of attention were caused, inter alia,
by the Kursk submarine disaster in 2000, the Nord-Ost theatre siege in Moscow in 2002, 
the Beslan school siege in 2004, the gas dispute with Ukraine in the winter of 2005-2006, 
and particularly Alexander Litvinenkos death in 2006.  
Secondly, at the level of public perceptions, Russias image was even less visible. In 
preparation for Putins official visit in the UK in 2003 RIA Novosti commissioned one of 
Britains best-known research companies  MORI - to conduct a public opinion survey. 
The findings demonstrated that while the attitudes towards Russia were more or less 
neutral, the respondents did not know much about Russia. According to the survey results, 
the most typical spontaneous associations with Russia at that time were cold weather 
35 Anonymous interview with a former high-ranking British diplomat, London, 13 December 2006. 
36 Anonymous interview with a former high-ranking British diplomat, London, 14 December 2006. 
37 Anonymous interview with a former high-ranking British diplomat, London, 14 December 2006. 
(26%), a communist past (22%) and deprivation (17%). Among the most recurrent 
associations with the Russians as people were such descriptions as poor (25%), hard 
working (12 %) and friendly (11%). As for the vision of Putin, the most popular answers of 
the respondents were such qualities as a good leader (14%), good for Russia (9%) and 
KGB trained (8%) (MORI 2003). It should be noted, however, that the survey was 
conducted in June 2003, i.e. before Mikhail Khodorkovskys arrest and the parliamentary 
elections, i.e. the events that had a particularly damaging effect on Russias image. 
Thirdly, Russias images in the British mass media remained predominantly negative 
throughout Putins presidency. A number of British journalists who were interviewed for 
this study insisted on the objective character of this negativism.38 At the same time, 
several prominent commentators pointed to a lack of balance in the coverage of Russia. 
Anatol Lieven, for instance, who covered the first Chechen war in 1994-1996 as a 
correspondent for The Times, expressed a fairly critical opinion of a tendency in the mass 
media to overlook the historical context. According to Lieven, the coverage of the second 
Chechen war was not necessarily () wrong in itself, but it () lacked historical and 
international perspective, and a sense of comparison (2000b, p. 326). Another example 
that should be mentioned in this regard is an article by Jonathan Steele with the title The 
West's New Russophobia Is Hypocritical - And Wrong (The Guardian, 30 June 2006). 
Written shortly before the G8 summit in St Petersburg, when criticism of Russian domestic 
and foreign policies became particularly severe in the West, the article argued against bias 
in depicting Russia. In Steeles words, some criticisms were legitimate, but many [were] 
wildly prejudiced. However, remarks of this kind in the British mass media were rare. 
Fourthly, images of Russia did not vary considerably across the political spectrum. 
According to a member of the House of Lords from the Conservative Party, among the 
British political elite there was more or less a consensus on the vision of Russia, and there 
was neither a pro-Russian, nor an anti-Russian lobby.39 This was in stark contrast to the 
image of the Soviet Union in the UK, as well as to the images of Putins Russia in a 
number of other Western countries, particularly Germany, as will be discussed in Chapter 
Six. Putins first meeting with the British Prime Minister Tony Blair, who came to St 
Petersburg on a private visit in 2000, appeared to give a start to a friendly relationship 
between the two leaders. By 2001 Putin had already had the reputation of a pragmatic and 
38 Anonymous interviews with British journalists, London, 11-13 December 2006. 
39 Anonymous interview with a member of the House of Lords, Conservative Party, London, 12 December 
2006. See Tsygankov (2009) for a discussion of an anti-Russian lobby in the USA. 
efficient politician, a great deal-maker, in the words of Sir Menzies Campbell, an MP 
from the Liberal Democrat Party (House of Commons Hansard: 25 Apr 2001: Column 
406). Putins high standing reached its peak in the autumn of 2001 when he took a decision 
to join the US-led war on terror. During debates in the British Parliament at that time 
Russia was referred to as Britains new-found friend (House of Commons Hansard: 4 Oct 
2001: Column 747). Furthermore, the UK government recognised Moscows interpretation 
of the Chechen War as part of the global war on terror. As Parliamentary Under-Secretary 
of State (Foreign and Commonwealth Office) Ben Bradshaw summarised this position in 
his speech in the House of Commons in October 2001,   
We talk to the Russians at every opportunity about human rights, but we recognise that 
they have a legitimate right to protect their citizens against a terrorist threat which we 
know is linked to Osama bin Laden (House of Commons Hansard: 30 Oct 2001: 
Column 741) 
However, the situation changed when Russia, together with Germany and France, opposed 
the war in Iraq. The Chechen conflict returned to Britains political agenda, and the 
government was under more pressure not only from the opposition but also from the 
Labour MPs to publicly criticise Russias actions in the Chechen republic. This can be 
illustrated by the words of Calum MacDonald, an MP from the Labour Party, who argued 
shortly before Putins visit to the UK in the summer of 2003 that 
President Putin certainly did not let his friendship with the Prime Minister get in the 
way of strongly condemning our role in the conflict in Iraq. It is time for the Prime 
Minister to start some serious arguments with the Russian Government (House of 
Commons Hansard: 18 Jun 2003: Column 73WH) 
Despite this pressure, the British government remained reluctant for some time to change 
its stance on the Chechen war to a significant extent. As Denis MacShane, Minister for 
Europe, formulated this position, there comes a time in inter-state relations when candour 
can be counter-productive (House of Commons Hansard: 18 Jun 2003: Column 85WH).  
The year 2003 was a turning point for the transformation of Russias images in the UK not 
only regarding the increasing focus on the Chechen conflict but also in relation to Russias 
image as a democracy. Putins Russia was increasingly viewed as an authoritarian state as 
opposed to the rapidly democratising Russia of the Yeltsin era. The dominant position of 
the British political elites at that time can be summarised in the words of the Labour MP 
David Drew:  
() it seems that some of the good work that Yeltsin began in opening up Russian 
society is being completely reversed under Putin; indeed, things are being screwed 
down (House of Commons Hansard: 18 Jun 2003: Column 71WH) 
Interestingly, although these perceptions were shared by many among political elites,40 they 
were challenged by a number of British diplomats with a background of working in Russia. 
Sir Roderic Lyne, for instance, who served as British ambassador to the Russian Federation 
in 20002004, repeatedly argued that authoritarian tendencies had become significant in 
Russia long before Putin took office. According to a report to the Trilateral Commission 
which he co-authored with Strobe Talbott and Koji Watanabe, Yeltsin only spoke the 
language of democracy, but he did not rule by it or implant it. Moreover, Yeltsin started 
in one direction, but he changed course in 1993-1994, reverting to a traditional model of 
Kremlin rule (Lyne et al 2006, p. 20). 
A serious blow to Russias images among British political elites was given by the arrest of 
Mikhail Khodorkovsky in October 2003, which was seen by many as an indication that the 
Kremlin had returned to Soviet measures in domestic policy. As a Liberal Democrat MP 
Malcolm Bruce argued in his speech in the House of Commons, if the situation goes 
unchallenged, Russia could slide back into the bad old mechanisms of the Soviet Union and 
not move forward into pluralist democracy (House of Commons Hansard: 10 Mar 2004: 
Column 422WH). At the same time there were growing concerns over freedom of speech 
and the fairness of the Russian parliamentary elections that took place in December 2003. 
Another line of criticism that became pronounced around that time was connected with 
Russias actions in the near abroad: Moscows actions in relation to Ukraine, Belarus, 
Georgia and the Baltic States were often interpreted as an indication of Russias centuries-
old imperial ambitions.41 
The negativism of Russias image in the UK reached its peak in November  December 
2006 in connection with the death of Alexander Litvinenko, who was viewed by many as a 
victim of the Kremlin, and the diplomatic crisis in British-Russian relations that followed 
it. At the end of Vladimir Putins presidency, Russias images among members of British 
political elites were overwhelmingly negative. According to a report published by the 
House of Lords, Russian domestic policy has taken an illiberal direction which is 
unwelcome in the West and its foreign policy is increasingly assertive and pugnacious 
40 Anonymous interview with a member of the House of Lords, Conservative Party, London, 12 December 
2006. 
41 Anonymous interviews with former high-ranking British diplomats, London, 13-14 December 2006. 
(House of Lords 2008, p. 14). Moreover, in the annual report on human rights by the 
Foreign and Commonwealth Office in 2007 Russia was listed among major countries of 
concern (Foreign and Commonwealth Office 2008, pp. 169-171). 
Another distinctive characteristic of Russias images in the UK was related to Russias 
position as the largest supplier of natural gas to the EU. Unlike a number of other EU 
member states, Britain was not dependent on Russian gas. However, the prospect of 
becoming dependent on it in the future  it is expected that by 2015 Gazprom might be 
supplying up to 20% of British gas (House of Commons Hansard: 29 Nov 2006: Column 
97WH) - made many among British political elites wary of possible negative consequences 
of such a dependence. Interestingly, fears that Russia would use energy to put pressure on 
consumer countries in case of a disagreement in foreign policy were widespread in the UK 
long before there was any evidence of Moscows intentions to do so. This can be illustrated 
by the words of Richard Ottaway, MP from the Conservative Party, in relation to Russias 
opposition to the US and the UK in the UN Security Council regarding the war in Iraq in 
2003: 
Tremendous leverage could have been used with the United Kingdom if Russia could 
say that it was free to turn off our energy supply overnight (House of Commons 
Hansard: 16 Sept 2003: Column 753) 
One can argue that to a significant extent these fears stemmed from a centuries-old 
stereotype of Russias imperialism and assertiveness in the international arena. Moscows 
dispute with Ukraine over gas prices in the winter of 2005-2006 was viewed by many as 
confirmation of this threat. By the end of 2006 the vision of Russia as an unreliable energy 
supplier and a potential threat had become well established for a significant part of the 
British political elite and the mass media. Apart from fears that in future Russia would be 
able to put political pressure on the UK by threatening to stop its gas supply, there were 
also fears of price pressure, of a terrorist attack on the pipeline, and of possible competition 
with other EU member states for Russian supplies. The latter point can be illustrated by the 
words of Tim Yeo, an MP from the Conservative Party: 
The gas that Russia sends to Britain may travel through a pipeline that runs across 
Germany. There are no prizes for guessing the country that will have priority if there 
are problems with supply (House of Commons Hansard: 16 Sept 2003: Column 728) 
Most interestingly, while most members of British political elites viewed Russia as a threat 
in terms of energy security, the very nature of this threat was perceived differently by those 
with an expertise in British-Russian relations and a broader political community. The 
former were more concerned with a prospect of insufficient supplies from Russia rather 
than with geopolitical considerations. According to Britains Minister for Europe Jim 
Murphy, one of the major threats was a possibility that within five years with the level of 
current investment Russia [would] not be able to meet her domestic demand and 
international obligations (House of Lords 2008, p. 48). 
Despite this widespread image of Russia as a threat, Russia was also perceived by some 
members of British political and particularly business elites as a promising investment 
destination, first and foremost in energy production. However, this more or less positive 
image that existed during the Yeltsin time and in the first years of Putins presidency 
(although tarnished due to a very high level of corruption) changed significantly in 2003 
following the arrest of Mikhail Khodorkovsky. For British companies, Khodorkovskys 
arrest indicated they could face an additional risk in their operations in Russia. As Malcolm 
Bruce, a Liberal Democrat MP, put it in his speech in the House of Commons in March 
2004, 
Companies that are looking for Russian partners will inevitably be concerned that if 
their Russian partner falls foul of the President or central authorities, a case could be 
fabricated against the western partner and the Russian company in a way that would 
deeply damage the economic and commercial interests of both (House of Commons 
Hansard: 10 Mar 2004: Column 422WH) 
The image of Russia as a business opportunity became even more negative during Putins 
second term after a series of disputes between British companies and the Russian 
authorities. Being accused by the Russian authorities of producing insufficient volume of 
gas and thus breaking the terms of its licence, TNK-BP agreed to sell its stake in Kovykta 
gasfield in Siberia to Gazprom. Following another dispute, Royal Dutch Shell lost a 
controlling stake in the Sakhalin-II project to Gazprom (Independent, 3 September 2007). 
According to a British diplomat, the difficulties that TNK-BP and Shell faced with their 
projects in Russia were seen as an attempt of the Russian government to bully them to 
give up their shares.42 
Although damaging for Russias image in the eyes of British business elites, these incidents 
did not force large British companies that had already been present in Russia to stop their 
investment projects but rather made them reconsider their strategies of operating in the 
42Anonymous interview with a former high-ranking British diplomat, London, 14 December 2006. 
Russian market. As Andrew Gavan of the UKs company KPMG summarised these 
attitudes, the Russian administrations drive to restore control has appeared brutal and 
threatening. Yet business can and should continue, with eyes wide open to both opportunity 
and danger (Gavan 2007, p. 61). Despite perceived risks, Russia remained an attractive 
investment destination for a number of UK companies. This attractiveness, however, was 
of an increasingly limited character as it appealed mostly to those large businesses that had 
already found their niche in the Russian market rather than to potential investors outside 
the energy sphere. 
Finally, Russias images in the UK were considerably affected by the presence of a rapidly 
growing Russian community, particularly in London. By 2005 an estimated 250,000 
Russian speakers (mostly Russians but also from other CIS countries) lived in Britains 
capital (Forbes, 23 May 2005). Their impact on attitudes towards Russia was of a dual 
character. On the one hand, it was relatively positive: most Russians living in the UK were 
well-educated and well-off, and, as Forbes commented, they injected hundreds of millions 
of pounds sterling into the UK economy, buying houses and luxury goods (Forbes, 23
May 2005). One of the most illustrative examples was the purchase of Chelsea Football 
Club by Roman Abramovich, a Russian oligarch with close ties to the Kremlin and the then 
governor of Chukotka. Following the conclusion of the deal in July 2003, The Times wrote 
about Chelsea fans welcom[ing] Russian revolution as they hoped for a sharp increase in 
investment (3 July 2003). However, these positive attitudes were not shared by some 
members of the political elite and the mass media. The Labour MP Tony Banks, for 
instance, argued for a more cautious approach saying that we need to know rather more 
about Roman Abramovich before saying this is a good deal. He explained his position by 
referring to the fact that Russia [was] not settled politically or economically and lots of 
questions [were] asked about the rigours applied in Russian business (The Times, 3 July 
2003).  
On the other hand, Russias images in Britain were adversely affected by the activities of a 
number of Russian citizens who had been granted asylum in the UK, including a Russian 
ex-oligarch Boris Berezovsky and an ambassador of the break-away republic of 
Chechnya, Akhmed Zakaev. While the Russian authorities unsuccessfully sought their 
extradition, Berezovsky, with the help of Zakaev and others, launched their own 
propaganda campaign against Putins regime. In his interview with The Guardian in April 
2007, Berezovsky admitted that he had dedicated much of the last six years to trying to 
destroy the positive image of Putin" that many in the West held, portraying him whenever 
possible as a dangerously anti-democratic figure (13 April 2007). Moreover, he openly 
called for an overthrow of Putins regime and speculated about providing financial support 
to the Russian opposition. In Berezovskys words, we need to use force to change this 
regime () It isn't possible to change this regime through democratic means (The 
Guardian, 13 April 2007). 
The rejection of extradition requests caused serious damage to Russian-British relations 
(see Timmins 2006). One can argue that this was, to a significant extent, the consequence 
of divergent visions of the problem in Russia and the UK. The Kremlins position can be 
best summarised by the words of its chief spokesman Dmitry Peskov: We want to believe 
that official London will never grant asylum to someone who wants to use force to change 
the regime in Russia (The Guardian, 13 April 2007). The Russian authorities considered 
granting asylum a political move that demonstrated the hostility of the British government 
towards Russia. As a British journalist who was interviewed for this study put it, they 
dont understand that its not the Foreign Office. Its a judge, a court - they are 
independent.43 At the same time, the decision to grant asylum to Berezovsky, Zakaev and 
others was a statement that they [the judge] recognised a threat for Berezovsky (ibid.) and 
thus was affected by Russias negative image in the UK. 
5.3 Russian Propaganda in the UK 
Having examined the most distinct characteristics of Russias images in Britain during 
Putins presidency, let us now look at the peculiarities of Russian foreign propaganda in 
this case study. As was discussed in Chapter Three, it was conducted at two levels: some of 
its elements were more general, while others were country-specific. At the more general 
level, British Russia-watchers became one of the core target groups in a number of RIA 
Novosti projects, such as the Valdai Discussion Club. Since its establishment in 2004, 
among the clubs members there were a number of British journalists, including Michael 
Binyon from The Times, Mary Dejevsky from The Independent, Stefan Wagstyl from The 
Financial Times, Jonathan Steele from the The Guardian; several scholars, including Mark 
Bassin and Alena Ledeneva from University College London, Richard Sakwa from the 
University of Kent; and some politicians, such as Lord David Howell, the Deputy Leader 
of the Opposition or the Labour MP Robert Wareing, Secretary of the all-party Russia 
43 Anonymous interview with a British journalist, London, 11 December 2006. 
group. Moreover, the British public was targeted via another project of RIA Novosti  the 
newspaper supplement Trendline Russia that was published in The Daily Telegraph.
As for country-specific projects, Russian foreign propaganda in the UK relied heavily on 
the services of British PR companies, as well as non-profit organisations. Although 
formally they were not part of the propaganda apparatus, these companies received 
financial support of the Russian government or the RIA Novosti. Moreover, their 
independence from the Russian authorities was a significant advantage as their message to 
the British audience sounded more credible. An illustrative example is Eventica, a 
company with offices in London and Moscow that positioned itself as a multi-faceted 
organisation specialising in the Russian market, with extensive expertise in business-to-
business and cultural events, corporate entertainment, publishing, communications and 
much more.44 The work of Eventica on the improvement of Russias image was conducted 
in two directions. On the one hand, it promoted a favourable image of the Russian 
economy, which was meant to encourage British investment. Its most significant project in 
this field was the annual Russian Economic Forum in London. Established in 1997, the 
Forum became one of the largest business events related to Russia. Its mission, according 
to Eventicas webpage, was to discuss and debate the business and investment climate of 
the worlds most exciting emerging market. Eventica was also a co-organiser of a number 
of smaller events, such as the conference Britain and Russia: Partnership and Progress in 
June 2003 that was devoted to Russias commercial ties with Britain, or the conference 
Britain and Russia: The New Wave in December 2003 that was held in Russia and aimed 
at introducing a number of British IT companies to the Russian market. 
The second direction of Eventicas work was connected with promoting the image of 
Russia as an open country. In 2002 it organised its first British Press Mission to Russia, 
which later became an annual event. According to Eventicas webpage, the Press Mission 
was designed for editors and senior correspondents looking for a grasp of the political and 
economic climate of contemporary Russia. In some sense, its goal was close to that of the 
Valdai Discussion Club, as it sought to give British journalists an opportunity to meet 
Russian officials, business people and politicians. During the several years of its existence, 
the Mission brought to Russia a number of leading journalists from The Guardian, The 
Times, The Independent, ITV News and some other media outlets. Another similarity 
between the approaches of the Press Mission and the Valdai Discussion Club was in their 
44 See information on Eventicas webpage: http://www.eventica.co.uk/, accessed 5 March 2007. 
agenda. As the problem of energy security became one of the most urgent issues in British-
Russian relations following Russias conflict with Ukraine over gas prices, both the Valdai 
Club and the Press Mission chose to address this topic. Members of the Valdai Club visited 
a gas field near Khanty-Mansiisk in September 2006 while participants of the British Press 
Mission visited Gazprom's Urengoy gas field in November 2006. 
Eventica also focused on promoting the image of Russia as a country of great culture. One 
of the projects in this category was Russian Rhapsody - a concert that was first held in 
London in 2002 as some sort of entertainment during the Economic Forum but then turned 
into an independent annual event. The emphasis on the cultural component of Russias 
image became especially pronounced since 2005 with the establishment of an annual 
festival of Russian culture in London. The goal of the Russian Winter Festival, as it was 
officially called, was to introduce to Britain the riches of Russian culture and art. It was 
held in Trafalgar Square in January and, according to Eventicas statistics, attracted more 
than fifty thousand visitors. Among its sponsors were RIA Novosti, Gazprom and Aeroflot, 
and it was supported by the Moscow city government and the Federal Agency for Culture 
and Cinematography of the Russian Federation, which indicates the very high profile of the 
event. 
Apart from Eventica, the Russian authorities also supported Academia Rossica, a non-
profit organisation that was established in London in 2000, by British academics, experts in 
Russia, and Russian and British individuals. According to Academias webpage, it aim[ed] 
to promote a deeper understanding of Russian culture internationally. The Russian 
government, as well as the British government, supported a number of events that were 
widely publicised in the British mass media, such as an exhibition of contemporary Russian 
art Moscow Breakthrough in 2005, Days of New Russian Culture in 2004 or the annual 
Russian Nights Festival. Moreover, Academia published a quarterly journal ROSSICA 
(both in English and in Russian) which was distributed worldwide and was promoted as a 
unique international review devoted to the many facets of Russian heritage and culture. It 
also awarded an annual ROSSICA translation Prize for the best literary translation from 
Russian into English.45 
The Russian economy and culture remained two most significant topics for Russian foreign 
propaganda in Britain throughout Putins presidency. At the same time, in the final years of 
45 See information on its webpage: Academic Rosica Brochure, available on-line at: http://academia-
rossica.org/assets/files/PressReleases/AR%20brochure.pdf, accessed 15 July 2009 
Putins presidency, Gazprom became more active in the UK in its efforts to promote a 
favourable image of the company and a positive image of Russia more broadly. In an 
attempt to gain access to end-consumers in EU member states, Gazprom established a 
number of subsidiary businesses, including Gazprom Marketing and Trading in the UK and 
Gazprom Germania in Germany, which became part of Gazprom Group. These companies, 
wholly owned by Gazprom, aimed to facilitate Gazproms operation in foreign markets 
and, among other functions, to promote a positive image of Gazprom. Similarly to other 
Western countries, the key challenge that Gazprom faced in Britain was its image as a 
political instrument of the Kremlin rather than a commercial organisation. As an MP from 
the Conservative Party Sir Malcolm Rifkind put it,  
as 52 per cent of Gazprom is owned by the Russian Government, any decision by 
Gazprom to withhold gas from Ukraine, Moldova or any other country must be deemed 
to have been taken on political, not business, grounds (House of Commons Hansard: 27 
Mar 2006: Column 563) 
This politicisation of Gazproms image represented a significant problem for the company 
as it sought to strengthen its position in the UK, with their declared aim to attain 10% of the 
UK market (Gazprom Marketing and Trading Limited 2007p. 7). It should be mentioned, 
however, that Gazproms campaign to improve its image in Britain, although it did become 
more intensive in recent years, still remained considerably less visible than, for instance, in 
Germany, as will be discussed in Chapter Six. 
So far we have looked at the efforts to project a more favourable image of Russia in the 
UK. Another direction of this work was related to counteracting what was perceived by 
some Russian propagandists and members of the political elite as anti-Russian 
propaganda.46 The Russian Foreign Ministry on several occasions published official 
statements in response to negative articles in the British mass media. Since one of the most 
sensitive issues for the Russian authorities was the war in Chechnya, their reaction to the 
perceived bias in the coverage of this topic was particularly strong. Following the 
publication of Amelia Gentlemans article in The Observer in January 2000, for instance, 
the Minister Counsellor of the Russian Embassy in London wrote in his open letter to the 
editor about his disgust at the publication, and emphasised the one hundred percent 
uncritical presentation of the views of the Chechen side of the conflict (Embassy of the 
Russian Federation in the United Kingdom 2000). Another example is the statement issued 
by the Foreign Ministry in relation to a broadcast of an interview with Shamil Basaev on 
46 Anonymous interview with a senior Russian propagandist, Moscow, 30 January 2007. 
Channel 4 in 2005 (Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation 2005). A 
distinctive feature of Russias attitude towards negative publications was seeing the mass 
media as carrying out some sort of political order. The statement of the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs that was issued in response to an article on Russias relations with Iran in The 
Sunday Telegraph in 2005, for instance, suggested that the article could have been 
politically commissioned, and raised the question of who did the commissioning and 
who paid for it (Embassy of the Russian Federation in the United Kingdom 2005). 
This tendency of the Russian authorities to accuse the British mass media of biased 
reporting, and more generally to view Russias negative image in the UK as a result of anti-
Russian propaganda became particularly pronounced in the context of the so called 
Litvinenko case.47 Alexander Litvinenkos death in London in November 2006 and the 
events that followed it had a strong impact on Russias image in the UK and led to a rapid 
deterioration in British-Russian relations in the final years of Vladimir Putins presidency. 
Although this study does not aim to analyse the resulting crisis in detail, it is important 
nevertheless to examine its effect on the transformation of Russias image and the actions 
of the Russian authorities in this regard. According to a journalist from one of the leading 
British daily newspapers, Litvinenkos murder contributed to seeing Russia as a gangster 
state.48 The main question that was discussed in the British mass media was whether 
President Putin himself was involved in Litvinenkos murder, as suggested by Berezovsky. 
At the same time, the position of the British authorities was cautious. It can be illustrated 
by the words of Denis MacShane who urged the members of the British Parliament not to 
point fingers, and said that the sensationalist rush to judgment by some of the newspaper 
reporting in this case [was] deplorable (House of Commons Hansard: 27 Nov 2006: 
Column 830). The prevailing opinion of those journalists and members of the British 
political elite who specialised in Russia can be summarised by the view of a former British 
diplomat who was interviewed for this study: the fact is that you should choose between 
two options: either he [Putin] did order [to kill Litvinenko], or he cant stop it.49 Thus, one 
of the major effects of the Litvinenko case on Russias image was the vision of Putin as not 
having sufficient control over Russias secret services. 
47 Alexander Litvinenko, a former FSB officer, was granted asylum in the UK in 2001 and received UK 
citizenship in 2006 (The Times, 22 November 2006). Working for Boris Berezovsky in London, he was a 
fierce critic of Putins regime. In November 2006 Litvinenko was poisoned with radioactive polonium-210 
and died several weeks later (The Guardian, 26 January 2007). His illness and death generated an enormous 
wave of media attention. 
48 Anonymous interview with a British journalist, London, 11 December 2006. 
49 Anonymous interview with a former high-ranking British diplomat, London, 14 December 2006. 
Apart from its implications for the image of Russia as a criminal state, Alexander 
Litvinenkos death also had a negative effect on another core element of Russias image  
the image of the war in Chechnya. It brought to the attention of the British mass media 
Litvinenkos views on the allegedly criminal origin of the second Chechen war. According 
to Litvinenko, the apartment bombings in Moscow in autumn 1999 that triggered the start 
of the war were the responsibility not of the Chechen rebels, as the Russian official position 
claimed, but of the Russian special services. This theory was already known in Britain and 
was shared by some British politicians. Julian Lewis, an MP from the Conservative party, 
for instance, suggested in his speech in the House of Commons in June 2003 that if the 
Chechens are entirely responsible for some terrorist activities to which Russia has been 
subjected, at least since 1999, they have been extraordinarily bad tacticians (House of 
Commons Hansard: 18 Jun 2003: Column 74WH). After Litvinenkos death this theory 
was further popularised in the book Blowing up Russia: the Secret Plot to Bring Back KGB 
Terror that was co-written by Litvinenko himself and Yuri Felshtinsky (Litvinenko & 
Felshtinsky 2007). All this contributed to seeing the conflict in Chechnya as an extremely 
dirty war. At the same time these allegations were damaging for Putins personal image. 
Why did Litvinenkos death have such a severe effect on Russias image in the UK? On the 
one hand, there were a number of objective reasons. Firstly, the very method of murder  
using a radioactive substance  was seen as extremely cruel and dangerous for ordinary 
people who happened to be at the same time and place with Litvinenko or his assassins. 
The information that traces of polonium-210 had been found in a large number of places, 
from Moscow to Hamburg to London, triggered panic in the UK. According to a journalist 
who was interviewed for this study, using radiation was perceived as using a weapon of 
mass destruction, which gave the story a different dimension.50 Secondly, Litvinenkos 
death was viewed not as an isolated event, but as an episode in a chain of deaths. The 
attitude towards it was to a significant extent affected by the attitude towards the murder of 
the journalist Anna Politkovskaya, who had been well-known in the UK as a critic of the 
war in Chechnya, a month earlier. Thirdly, Litvinenkos death was seen as damaging not 
only Russias, but also Britains reputation, since Litvinenko had just become a British 
citizen when he was poisoned. As Greg Hands, an MP from the Conservative Party, put it, 
if dissidents and migrs are being assassinated in public or semi-public places in London, 
this country will no longer be considered to be a safe haven (House of Commons Hansard: 
30 Nov 2006: Column 1237).  
50 Anonymous interview with a British journalist, London, 12 December 2006. 
On the other hand, Litvinenkos death was a perfect story for the mass media. It had all the 
necessary elements of a sensation. As it was not a single event but a chain of events (new 
evidence was found, new theories were suggested, etc), the story remained among the top 
news for a considerable period of time. Furthermore, the stereotype of Russian spies that 
had become deeply rooted in British perceptions of Russia during the Cold War, as 
discussed in the first part of this chapter, came to the forefront again, and made the 
involvement of Russian special services in this murder appear more realistic.  
Most importantly for this study, the interest in the story was stimulated further with the 
help of PR measures (see Sixsmith 2007, pp. 63-69). According to Financial Times, a
public relations guru Lord Bell, who was famous for providing PR services to Margaret 
Thatcher, was consulting Litvinenkos relatives and his spokesman Alex Goldfarb on 
media handling on a pro bono basis. In particular, Lord Bell assisted the Berezovsky camp 
in distributing what Financial Times called one of the most haunting images of the year: 
that of Litvinenko, physically emaciated in his final hours, and of a statement - issued 
after his death and said to have been his final testament - in which he pointed the finger 
of blame at the Russian president (Financial Times, 2 December 2006) 
This PR support was extremely effective. On the one hand, it attracted the maximum 
attention of the British mass media to the case. On the other hand, it succeeded in 
presenting Berezovskys interpretation of the events, particularly Putins involvement in 
the murder, as plausible. Moreover, this interpretation fitted perfectly with all those 
stereotypes about Russia that were examined earlier in the chapter  particularly 
perceptions of Russia as an authoritarian state ruled by security services.  
On the whole, one can agree with Henry Plater-Zyberk that emotions and 
oversimplifications ruled the airways and daily papers (2007, p. 9). While Berezovsky and 
his camp successfully used the events to project a negative image of Putins Russia, the 
Russian authorities failed to counteract these accusations effectively. Instead of proactively 
promoting their interpretation of events and assisting the British authorities in the 
investigation, they resorted to blaming Berezovsky and the British mass media for anti-
Russian propaganda. According to Konstantin Kosachev, head of the State Duma 
Committee on Foreign Affairs, Litvinenkos poisoning [was] a well-planned action that 
[was] aimed at damaging Russias image (...) Most likely some ex-oligarchs [were] 
standing behind this tragedy (quoted in BBC 2006b). Similar views were expressed by 
Presidential aide Sergey Yastrzhembsky who emphasised the strange coincidence of 
sensational murders with very important steps by the Kremlin in the international arena. In 
his opinion, this was a well-directed campaign to discredit Russia and its leader (ibid).  
Moreover, as Scotland Yard named Andrei Lugovoi, a former KGB officer, as a prime 
suspect in Litvinenkos poisoning, Russian foreign (and domestic) propaganda focused on 
countering accusations of his involvement in the murder. Lugovoi gave a number of 
interviews and press conferences to the Russian and British mass media that were broadcast 
by Russian state channels, as well as by the English speaking channel Russia Today, 
which suggests that Russian foreign propaganda sought to promote his interpretation of the 
events. Lugovoi repeatedly blamed Berezovsky and British special services for 
Litvinenkos death, and referred to all the evidence against him and statements of the 
Crown Prosecution as lies instigated by the British leadership and secret service (Russia 
Today 2007). Interestingly, Lugovoi appealed to dissatisfaction with Russias image in the 
West among the Russian elites and public opinion in general as he explained the media 
hysteria in the UK by Cold War stereotypes about Russia. Moreover, in his interviews he 
reiterated the central message of Russian foreign propaganda, namely Russias strength. In 
Lugovois words,  
() Russia will never be on the backyards of this World. It was the leading state in the 
World. Thank God now it has risen from its knees again. You may not like it, but 
Russia will be strong again, and you will have to live with it (Russia Today 2007) 
It can be argued that by promoting Lugovois story, Russian propaganda contributed to a 
considerable deterioration of Russias image in the UK. It is particularly striking that in a 
context of a developing diplomatic crisis in British-Russian relations, including inter alia 
expulsions of British and Russian diplomats, Lugovoi was elected for the Liberal 
Democratic Party as a member of the State Duma in the parliamentary elections that took 
place in December 2007, and later became a member of the Duma State Security 
Committee. Predictably, the reaction of the British authorities was extremely negative. 
According to the UK ambassador to Russia Anthony Brenton,  
it is a pity that a man wanted for murder gains political recognition. It does Russia no 
good at all to have Lugovoi there in the parliament, it continues the suspicion (Reuters 
2007)  
Thus, by taking Lugovois side, Russian propaganda appeared to undermine the declared 
task of projecting a more favourable image of Russia abroad. It can be suggested, however, 
that at a time shortly before and after Russian parliamentary elections, and particularly 
before the presidential elections that were scheduled for March 2008, it was domestic 
propaganda rather than foreign propaganda that was considered by the Russian authorities 
as more important. The image of Russia surrounded by enemy forces  in this case the UK 
and Berezovsky  was used as an additional instrument to mobilise the electorate at the 
most crucial moment for the Russian authorities in the run-up to the elections. 
5.4 Assessing the Results 
The handling of the Litvinenko case by Russian propagandists as examined above showed 
the pronounced inconsistency of the Russian authorities approach towards Russias image 
in the UK and the West in general. This inconsistency  when in times of a crisis the image 
of a strong country that would not compromise its principles was prioritised over the image 
of Russia as a partner  had a significant impact on the effectiveness of Russian 
propaganda in Britain. As discussed in Chapter One, measuring the effectiveness of any 
propaganda campaign is problematic. Let us nevertheless attempt to analyse its possible 
results by looking at the most significant changes in perceptions of Russia during Putins 
presidency that can be established, at least to some extent, with the help of public opinion 
surveys and elite interviews. 
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
Figure 5.1. Feelings towards Russia in public opinion in the UK, 2002-2008 (German Marshall Fund of the 
United States 2008) 
Figure 5.1 illustrates changes in feelings towards Russia that occurred in British public 
opinion in 2002-2008. As one can see, the average feelings towards Russia in the year 
2002, when the German Marshall Fund and the Compagnia di San Paolo began their series 
of public opinion surveys, were neutral: they were at a level of 50 on a 0-100 scale with 
100 meaning a favourable feeling and 0 meaning an unfavourable feeling. Moreover, 
despite Moscows disagreement with the UK government over the war in Iraq, there was a 
considerable increase in positive feelings towards Russia in the next two years with the 
peak of favourable feelings at the level of 54 in 2004. However, after 2004 average feelings 
towards Russia became significantly more negative. In 2007, during the diplomatic crisis in 
British-Russian relations that followed Litvinenkos murder, average feelings reached their 
lowest level, and recovered only slightly the following year  from 46 to 47. On the whole, 
however, since 2005 the average feeling towards Russia remained negative, as they stayed 
below 50. 
Figure 5.2. Feelings towards countries, peoples and institutions in public opinion in the UK, 2008 (German 
Marshall Fund of the United States 2008) 
To put Russias image in British public opinion in a wider context, one can compare 
feelings towards Russia to average feelings towards a number of other countries in the UK. 
Figure 5.2 illustrates Russias position in relation to 11 other countries, peoples (e.g. the 
Palestinians) and institutions (the EU) in 2008, i.e. the final year of Putins presidency. 
Predictably, feelings towards Russia were significantly less positive than towards the EU 
member states Spain, Germany or France, as well as towards the EU as a whole. They were 
also less positive than attitudes towards the US or India, with whom the UK traditionally 
had very close ties. Interestingly, the level of positive/negative attitudes towards Russia 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
The Palestinians
Israel
Russia
China
Turkey
India
France
Germany
Spain
was similar to those towards China, at the level of 47. One can conclude that despite the 
attempts of the Russian authorities to improve Russias image in the UK with the help of 
foreign propaganda, at the level of public perceptions their efforts had not yet brought 
substantial results. 
Moreover, Russian propaganda failed to achieve one of its key tasks, namely to project the 
image of Russia as an attractive investment destination among business elites. According to 
a YouGov poll of 147 senior British executives which was conducted in April 2007, nearly 
half of the respondents viewed further investment in the Russian economy as a bad thing. 
At the same time, 62% of them described Russian businessmen as arrogant, 59% - as 
lawless, and 47% - as unreliable (The Guardian, 23 April 2007). It also did not succeed in 
promoting the idea of Russias stability  another crucial component of Russias projected 
image. According to a former British diplomat who worked as a consultant of a large 
British company, Russias stability was viewed by many in Britain as short-term, 
particularly in comparison to the chaos of the Yeltsin era. However, in the long term there 
was a significant risk of turbulence since all power in the country belonged to a very 
limited number of people.51 
Furthermore, despite continuous efforts to promote Russias image as a reliable energy 
supplier, Gazprom continued to experience significant difficulty in its attempts to increase 
its presence in the UK market. This can be illustrated by the extremely negative reaction of 
the British mass media and some members of British political elites to the supposed 
intention of Gazprom to buy Centrica, the largest supplier of gas to domestic customers in 
the UK, in 2006. Lord Jenkin of Roding, for instance, in his speech in the House of Lords 
in February 2007 expressed his hope that the Government [would] be wise enough and 
tough enough to knock that threat very firmly on the head  (House of Lords Hansard: 8 
Feb 2007: Column 781). It should be mentioned that while this view was shared by many 
in the UK, some commentators argued against presenting the possibility of Gazproms 
purchase of Centrica as a threat to Britains energy security. Jonathan Stern of the Oxford 
Institute for Energy Studies, for example, insisted in his evidence to the Select Committee 
on Trade and Industry of the House of Commons that [British] press, and certainly some 
of the political establishment throughout Europe and the United States, [was] anxious to 
play up a threat involved in Russian energy supplies (House of Commons 2006). 
51 Anonymous interview with a former high-ranking British diplomat, London, 14 December 2006. 
Although the Russian authorities failed to substantially improve Russias image in the UK 
in the areas that were discussed above, they were relatively successful in some other 
aspects. Most significantly, they achieved their goal of decreasing the salience of the 
Chechen conflict in the mass media and on the political agenda in Britain. According to a 
journalist from one of the largest British newspapers, the apparent lack of attention to the 
Chechen problem during Putins second presidential term could be explained by such 
factors as the impossibility of visiting Chechnya (no one knows what is happening), 
lower numbers of casualties and particularly a considerably less sympathetic attitudes 
towards Chechen rebels after the school hostage crisis in Beslan in September 2004.52 
Another area of success that should be mentioned was promoting the image of Russia as an 
increasingly prosperous country. In the words of a former British diplomat, Russias image 
was actually more positive than reality as Russias growing inequality remained less 
visible than the luxury of Moscow or St Petersburg. Finally, the image of Russia as a 
country of great culture continued to be positive.53 
On the whole, however, these positive elements stayed on the periphery of Russias image 
in the UK. Despite the attractiveness of Russias culture and, to some extent, its investment 
opportunities, it was the political rather than cultural or economic characteristics of 
Russias image that remained predominant. While Russian foreign propaganda sought to 
promote favourable attitudes towards the country, a number of actions by the Russian 
authorities were sending a conflicting signal to the British audience. In January 2006, for 
instance, four diplomats of the British embassy were accused of spying with the help of 
fake rocks that allegedly contained some sophisticated transmission device. This incident 
was widely publicised by the Russian mass media and resulted in what The Guardian 
called the most embarrassing espionage scandal between Britain and Russia since the end 
of the cold war (24 January 2006). The end of Putins second presidential term also saw a 
scandal around the attempts of the Russian authorities to close the regional offices of the 
British Council in Russia over alleged tax violations and problems with registration 
(Moscow News, 13 December 2007). All of these incidents, and particularly the Litvinenko 
case and the diplomatic crisis that followed it, contributed to what some commentators 
referred to as an apparent decline in Britain-Russia relations (Bacon 2007, p. 14). In this 
context, Russian foreign propaganda could not improve Russias image to any significant 
extent. Moreover, as demonstrated earlier, in some cases it contributed to projecting the 
image of a more assertive, even aggressive Russia.  
52 Anonymous interview with a British journalist, London, 12 December 2006. 
53 Anonymous interview with a former high-ranking British diplomat, London, 14 December 2006. 
Chapter 6 
Russias Images and Foreign Propaganda in Germany 
Similarly to the UK, the Federal Republic of Germany became one of the primary targets 
of Russian foreign propaganda during Putins presidency, first of all for political and 
economic reasons. However, Russias relations with Germany had a number of distinctive 
features that contributed to making Russias propaganda there particularly interesting for 
the purposes of this thesis. In the first instance, the Russian authorities viewed Germany as 
one of the closest allies in political terms. Since the end of the Cold War, German-Russian 
relations were often described as special (see Stent 2007). Moreover, Germany positioned 
itself and was perceived by other EU member states as an advocate of Russias interests in 
Europe. Secondly, Germany traditionally was Russias major trade partner (Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs of the RF 2009c), particularly in the energy sphere. In the period from 2000 
to 2007, Russias exports to Germany rose from $9,232 mln, which accounted for 10.3% of 
Russias total exports to far abroad countries, to $26,290 mln or 8.8% of Russias total 
exports. The increase of Russias imports from Germany was especially noticeable  from 
$3,898 mln, or 17.5% of total imports, in 2000 to $26,572 mln, or 15.6% of Russias total 
imports, in 2007 (Federal State Statistics Service n.d. a). Russias trade with Germany was, 
however, imbalanced: its share in Germanys foreign trade accounted for only 3% in 2008 
(Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the RF 2009d). 
Unlike the UK, Germanys dependence on imports of Russian energy resources, primarily 
natural gas, was substantial throughout Putins presidency. In 2007, for instance, imports of 
Russian gas accounted for 42.46 of Germanys total gas imports (BP 2008). Moreover, 
German energy companies BASF/Wintershall and E.ON Ruhrgas became shareholders 
(with 20% each while the controlling stake remained with Gazprom) in the Nord Stream 
project   a pipeline that would bring Russian natural gas to Germany, and then to other 
destinations in the EU, under the Baltic Sea. These facts led some members of the German 
political elite to speculate about the danger of so called silence for gas, i.e. unwillingness 
of the German authorities to voice any criticism of the Kremlin. In this context, Moscows 
campaign to project an image of a reliable energy supplier became particularly intensive in 
Germany. Moreover, Gazprom Germania  a subsidiary of Gazprom  engaged in a wide 
range of PR activities that were not limited to improving its own image but sought to 
promote a favourable image of Russia more broadly.  
Apart from the intensity of Russian foreign propaganda in Germany, there are a number of 
other factors, mostly related to peculiarities of German national identity, that make 
Germanys case very distinct from Britain. Due to geographic proximity to Russia, German 
speaking lands have for centuries had much closer links with Russia and the Russians, and 
Russias image has played an extremely important role in the evolution of German self-
images. Moreover, the events of the 20th century  the two world wars, the establishment of 
the German Democratic Republic in 1949 and the reunification of the two Germanies in 
1990  had an enormous effect on perceptions of the eastern neighbour. Another factor is a 
large number of Russian speakers living in Germany. According to the Russian Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs, in 1990-2007 as many as 2,916 thousand ethnic Germans moved to 
Germany from the former Soviet Union (692,824 of them from the Russian Federation) 
where they automatically received German citizenship (Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the 
RF 2009a). Predictably, attitudes to these immigrants (who were often viewed as Russian 
even if they came from other post-Soviet states) had a considerable impact on Russias 
image. 
This chapter follows the structure of the previous case study. It begins by exploring 
perceptions of Russia in German lands from a historical perspective with an emphasis on 
the traditionally important position of Russias image in the German picture of the world. 
Having looked at the most widespread stereotypes about Russia up to the end of the 20th 
century, the chapter proceeds to analyse the most distinctive characteristics of Russias 
perceived images in Germany at the time of Vladimir Putins presidency. This is followed 
in the third part of the chapter by an examination of Russias foreign propaganda in 
Germany, its key vehicles and core elements of Russias projected image. The chapter 
concludes by addressing the question of effectiveness of these attempts to improve Russias 
image in the German context. 
6.1 German Images of Russia and the Russians: Historical Perspective 
As in the case of Russias images in Britain, German stereotypical visions of Russia and 
the Russians can be traced back to the time of the first publications by diplomats and 
merchants about Russia in the German language. Among the most influential accounts of 
voyages to Muscovy was that of Adam Olearius who was a member of the Duke of 
Holsteins embassy between 1633 and 1639 (Cross 1971, p. 25). This work, first published 
in German in 1647, was then reprinted several times, as well as being translated into a 
number of European languages (Cross 1971, p. 26). In his book, Olearius described 
Russians as barbarians (see Cross 1971, p. 90) who, among other things, were more 
addicted to drunkenness than any nation in the world (in Cross 1971, p. 96). Moreover, he 
referred to Muscovys political system as a dominating and despotic monarchy (in Cross 
1971, p. 99)  the vision which remained central to Russias image in German lands for 
centuries. 
In contrast to the British, the Germans had a significantly closer contact with Russia since 
at least the time of Peter the Great. In the following centuries, there developed very close 
links between Russian and German dynasties (Zaichenko 2001, p. 92). As a result, 
references to the eastern neighbour were always abundant in German public discourse. 
Moreover, Russia became one of the significant Others for the German identity. The core 
negative elements of its image  its backwardness, barbarity, the tyranny of its political 
regime, and the vision of the Russian people as Asians rather than Europeans  were 
reinforcing positive elements in self-images of the Germans (Zaichenko 2001, p. 93). 
Russia and the Russians were perceived as the opposite of what the Germans aspired to be. 
It should be mentioned that there were times when attitudes towards Russia appeared to 
become more favourable. Similarly to Britain, Russias images in German lands, 
particularly in Prussia, improved substantially following Russias contribution to the 
victory over Napoleons France (Brandt 2003, p. 42). However, the following decades saw 
a dramatic polarisation of attitudes towards Russia across the political spectrum, which was 
triggered to a large extent by internal developments in German lands, especially by the 
German Revolution in 1848 (Zaichenko 2001, p. 96). In the public debate on a preferable 
path of Germanys political development that intensified in the middle of the 19th century, 
images of Russia became a key reference point for both liberal and conservative circles in 
German society. While for conservatives tsarist Russia was a positive symbol of traditional 
monarchy, for liberals it was the embodiment of political oppression. The latter vision was 
further reinforced by the familiarity of German liberals with extremely negative 
publications about Russia in France and Britain (Zaichenko 2001, p. 99). Both 
conservatives and liberals extensively resorted to Russias example in their justification of 
a preferred model for Germany. While doing that, they often over-simplified complex 
Russian reality by limiting it to a set of either predominantly positive or negative 
characteristics respectively. 
Thus, Russophobia and Russophilia became prominent phenomena in German society 
already in the 19th century. On the one hand, a significant number of German intellectuals 
publicly expressed their hatred of Russias political regime, Russian national character  
the Russians were often viewed as slaves in spirit who deserved to live in tyranny  and 
Russias expansionist policy towards neighbouring countries (Zaichenko 2001, p. 99). 
Moreover, Russia was seen as Asian rather than a civilised European country. These 
images were further promoted by anti-Russian propaganda in the unified Germany in the 
late 19th century (Mashkin 2001, p. 122). On the other hand, Russian culture, particularly 
literature and music, found numerous admirers in Germany who speculated about the 
mystery of the Russian soul as a unique Russian feature. These contradictory feelings 
towards Russia were often described by Germans themselves as Hassliebe - love and hatred 
at the same time (Zaichenko 2001, p. 92). 
The first half of the 20th century saw an intensification of German anti-Russian propaganda 
which succeeded in strengthening those stereotypes that had already been deeply rooted in 
the German picture of the world. As Russia fought against Germany during the World War 
1, anti-Russian attitudes were encouraged by the German authorities. Moreover, the 
October Revolution of 1917 which brought Bolsheviks to power in Russia was met in 
Germany with a militant and, on the right, already partially anti-semitic anti-Bolshevism 
(Brandt 2003, p. 45). Later, positioning Bolsheviks as Germanys most dangerous enemies 
was an essential element of a propaganda campaign which was conducted by Adolf Hitlers 
government and which became particularly intensive after Germany had attacked the 
Soviet Union in June 1941. Russian backwardness and the image of the Russian people as 
uncivilised Asians and slaves, which had traditionally been among the most widespread 
perceptions of Russia, were further promoted with the help of various persuasion 
techniques. 
Following Germanys defeat in World War 2 and the subsequent division of the country 
into the Soviet-controlled German Democratic Republic (GDR) and the pro-Western 
Federal Republic of Germany (FRG), the evolution of Russias images in the two states 
differed to a certain extent. In Western Germany, images of the Soviet Union remained 
overwhelmingly negative. With the start of the Cold War, the Federal Republic of the 
early years owed much of its identity to the continuity of hostility to the Soviet Union 
(Brandt 2003, p. 52). Moreover, due to their proximity to the Eastern bloc, Western 
Germans felt particularly vulnerable to a hypothetical attack by the Soviets. Although fears 
of the Soviet Union declined considerably in the course of time, they still remained 
substantial even in the 1970-1980s (ibid., p. 57). In contrast, the GDR was exposed to a 
large-scale Soviet propaganda campaign which sought to construct an entirely positive 
image of the Soviet Union. During the four decades of the states existence, many eastern 
Germans visited the USSR. The Russian language was introduced into the school 
curriculum. As Brandt has argued, all these measures succeeded in substantially decreasing 
the level of Russophobia. However, some core elements of Russias centuries-old image, 
particularly the vision of its backwardness, remained unchanged, and eastern Germans still 
enjoyed a certain Central European feeling of superiority over the unsophisticated East 
European (Brandt 2003, p. 54). 
The fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 and the non-interference of the Soviet leadership in the 
process of Germanys reunification had a markedly positive impact on Russias images. 
Similarly to the UK, the image of Mikhail Gorbachev was especially favourable. As 
Angela Stent has argued, part of his popularity in Germany resulted from the fact that he 
came to represent a favourite German concept: he was berechenbar, predictable (1999, 
p. 156). The Soviet Unions collapse in 1991 introduced a number of new elements in 
Russias images. On the one hand, similarly to the British, most Germans welcomed 
democratic developments in Russia. On the other hand, dramatic events taking place in the 
newly independent Russian Federation gave rise to new fears of the eastern neighbour as 
now Germany fear[ed] not Russias military might, but its weakness (Stent 1999, p. 16).  
In this context, in the 1990s Russia came to occupy a far more prominent position on the 
German political agenda than on that of the UK. The German political elites, recognising a 
special responsibility toward Moscow because of German unification (Stent 1999, p. 157), 
repeatedly emphasised a special character of German-Russian relationship. At the same 
time, fears that Russias weakness in the form of rapidly growing poverty and crime would 
have a spillover effect on other Eastern and Central European countries, including 
Germany, prompted the German authorities to view Russias stabilisation as the highest 
priority. Thus, to support Russia in its transition to a market economy and a liberal 
democracy, Germany provided substantial economic assistance and became one of the 
largest creditors of the Russian Federation. Emphasis on Russias stabilisation as the key 
objective can explain the continuous support by the German leadership of President Boris 
Yeltsin, even at the time when his actions appeared to undermine Russias democratic 
development (e.g. his conflict with the Parliament in 1993). This vision of stability as the 
most important value remained central to Russias images in Germany during Vladimir 
Putins presidency in 2000-2008, as the following part of the chapter will demonstrate. 
6.2 Images of Putins Russia in Germany, 2000-2008 
Transformation of Russias images in Germany in 2000-2008 was in many aspects similar 
to those changes in perceptions of Russia that took place in other Western countries (see 
Chapter Two). However, Germanys geographic proximity to the Russian Federation, 
peculiarities of its post-war and post-unification self-image and close economic ties with 
Russia had a significant impact on perceptions of the eastern neighbour. The most 
distinctive feature of Russias images in Germany during Vladimir Putins presidency was 
their pronounced visibility  at the level of political and business elites, as well as in public 
opinion and the mass media. Compared to the UK (and most other Western countries), 
Russias position on the political agenda in Germany was relatively high. Moreover, 
President Putin and Chancellor Gerhard Schrder developed a strong personal friendship, 
which contributed to the vision of Germanys relations with Russia as special. 
Interestingly, some German politicians and experts in German-Russian relations articulated 
a view that Russias place on the German political agenda was still not as high as it should 
have been, and there was insufficient public discussion of Russia-related issues.54 In the 
Bundestag, for instance, during the period of 2000-2008 discussions of the situation in 
Russia or German-Russian relations were rather rare although Russia was often mentioned 
in relation to other topics.  
At the level of public perceptions, Russias images in Germany, particularly in the eastern 
Lnder, were also more salient than in the UK. One the one hand, this was the consequence 
of the GDR being part of the Warsaw Pact and its close links with the Soviet Union. On the 
other hand, images of Russia were affected by the presence of a rapidly growing Russian 
speaking community in Germany. As mentioned earlier in this chapter, in 1990-2007 
nearly three million ethnic Germans moved to the FRG from the former Soviet Union 
(Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the RF 2009a). They were mostly descendants of 
approximately 30,000 Germans who had been invited by Catherine the Great to establish 
colonies in the south of Russia in the late 18th century (Stent 1999, p. 165). Having lived in 
the Russian Empire and the Soviet Union for more than two centuries, most of these ethnic 
54 Anonymous interview with a German expert in German-Russian relations, Berlin, 5 July 2007; anonymous 
interview with an advisor of a Member of the Bundestag, the Greens, Berlin, 10 July 2007. 
Germans had become russified. They were linguistically and culturally different from the 
rest of Germanys population  many of them spoke either an archaic German of the 18th 
century or none at all. As the German economy struggled with the consequences of 
reunification, these Germans, who were often perceived as Russians disregarding their 
actual country of birth, were viewed with certain hostility (Stent 1999, p. 168). In 
particular, they contributed to strengthening the image of Russia as a criminal country as in 
the eyes of many Germans some of them were involved in organised crime.55 
In the German mass media, Russias images were also considerably more salient than in the 
UK. According to Jutta Falkner, chief-editor of the economic journal Ost-West-Contact,
there [was] hardly any country that [was] covered by the German media as much as 
Russia (2006, p. 33). In the opinion of a German journalist who was interviewed for this 
study, Russia did not rank first on the foreign policy agenda in the media as there was more 
coverage of EU member states and the US but it attracted much more media attention than 
any other country outside the Euro-Atlantic community.56 Similarly to the UK, a vast 
majority of publications devoted to Russia in 2000  2008 were negative and often very 
emotional. It should be mentioned though that during this period there were some moments 
when there was a tendency to more positive coverage. The peak of positive attitudes was in 
2001-2002 following President Putins decision to support the US-led war against terror, 
and especially his speech in the Bundestag in September 2001. The number of positive 
publications also increased in late 2002-2003 when Russia joined Germany and France in 
opposition to the Iraq war, and following the school siege drama in Beslan in September 
2004 when most German newspapers showed their sympathy for Russian children.57 On the 
whole, however, Russias images were predominantly negative, becoming particularly 
unfavourable during Putins second presidential term.  
Similarly to the UK, in the German mass media there was more or less consensus regarding 
Russia on political issues: those publications that might be seen as positive or even pro-
Russian were rare and did not represent continuous support of the Russian politics. Most 
media in their coverage of Russia concentrated on political issues, with the main topics 
being authoritarian tendencies in Russian society, the rise of the FSB and  neo-imperial 
tendencies in Russias relations with the near abroad. During Putins first presidential 
term there was also much attention to the war in Chechnya, but it became less of an issue 
55 Anonymous interview with an advisor of a Member of the Bundestag, the Green, Berlin, 10 July 2007. 
56 Anonymous interview with a German journalist, Berlin, 11 July 2007. 
57 Anonymous interview with a German expert in German-Russian relations, Berlin, 5 July 2007; anonymous 
interview with a German journalist, Berlin, 11 July 2007. 
during his second term. A distinctive feature of Russias image in the German mass media 
was the very heavy relative weight of energy component in it, which became especially 
pronounced after Moscows dispute with Ukraine over gas prices in 2005-2006. Germanys 
dependence on Russias gas supply and fears that Russia might use energy as a political 
weapon in case of a dispute became one of the key topics.  
At the same time, coverage of economic issues by the German mass media was 
substantially different from their approach to political topics, especially in specialised 
media outlets such as newspapers Handelsblatt or Financial Times Deutschland. While 
discussing the Russian economy or German-Russian economic relations, these newspapers 
were more or less neutral, or sometimes even positive. A German journalist who was 
interviewed for this study formulated the main message of the articles devoted to the 
Russian economy as you can make good business in Russia58 During Putins first term in 
office, alongside publications about Russias debts to Germany or possibilities of a new 
financial crisis, there were articles that portrayed Russia as an attractive investment 
destination. Handelsblatt, for instance, wrote in October 2000 that BASF, a German 
chemical company, invested half a billion marks in Russia (11 October 2000). Although 
Mikhail Khodorkovskys arrest in 2003 had a negative impact on Russias image, its effect 
was relatively short-term. As Handelsblatt admitted in November 2003, Khodorkovskys 
fate left German investors in Russia cold (3 November 2003). The situation, however, 
began to change in 2006-2008. Although articles about success stories of German 
companies in Russia continued to be published, on the whole the tone of economic 
coverage became considerably more cautious. Following a series of disputes between the 
British companies British Petroleum and Royal Dutch Shell and the Russian authorities, 
there appeared a feeling of uncertainty about the future of German-Russian economic 
relations. According to a German journalist, there are now questions: What will be next? 
Will it continue to be good, or will it be like with Britain? What does all this mean for 
German companies?59 
As one can see, Russias image remained much more visible in Germany than in Britain 
throughout Vladimir Putins presidency. Another distinctive feature was the presence of a 
relatively strong pro-Russian lobby that had a noticeable influence on German foreign 
policy towards Russia. A leading role in this lobby was played by the Ost-Ausschuss der 
Deutschen Wirtschaft (the so called Eastern Committee of the German Economy) that 
58 Anonymous interview with a German journalist, Berlin, 11 July 2007. 
59 Anonymous interview with a German journalist, Berlin, 11 July 2007. 
represented German economic interests in Eastern and Southern Europe, the Baltic States 
and Central Asia. Among its members were a large number of German companies that 
operated in the Russian market. Being interested in a good political climate of German-
Russian relations, these companies understandably sought to improve Russias image. 
BASF/Wintershall and E.ON Ruhrgas, shareholders of the Nord Stream project, can be an 
illustrative example of this approach. Burckhard Bergmann, Chairman of the Executive 
Board of E.ON Ruhrgas, presented his views in the article Verlsslicher Versorger 
(Reliable Partner) in the issue of IP (Internationale Politik) devoted to the debate on the 
New Ostpolitik in March 2007. Speaking about the security of energy supply, Bergmann 
emphasised the need to have good political relations with all energy suppliers and transit 
countries, meaning first of all Russia. According to Bergmann, Russia had always been a 
reliable energy supplier and there was no danger in increasing the EUs dependency on 
Russian gas. On the contrary, as Bergmann argued, cooperation with Russia would help the 
EU solve the problem of energy security (2007, pp. 65-67). 
Although energy companies did play a significant role in lobbying Russias interests, there 
were also many other industries that were interested in closer cooperation with Russia 
(such as IT, telecommunication, the chemical industry, car companies, etc). According to 
the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, there were approximately 4,600 businesses with 
German share in Russia in 2008 (Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the RF 2009d). Klaus 
Mangold, Executive Advisor to the Chairman of DaimlerChrysler AG and Chairman of the 
Ost-Ausschuss, described Russia as a market of 143 mln consumers and as an extremely 
attractive area for German investments. In his article Unser Markt in Moskau (Our 
Market in Moscow) he pointed out the inadequacy of Russias image in the West and 
argued that most Western countries, first of all the US, did not notice that Russia had 
succeeded in reforming its tax system, banking, etc. Moreover, Mangold argued that only 
through integration and closer cooperation would Russia be able to appreciate Western 
values and thus become a liberal democracy (2007, p. 72). 
Finally, compared to perceptions of Russia in the UK, Russias images in Germany were 
significantly more diverse. At the level of political elites, the difference in the visions of 
Russia could be traced along party lines, with members of the Social Democratic Party 
(SPD) and the Party of Democratic Socialism (later Die Linke  The Left) in general 
holding more positive images of Russia, although these parties were far from being united 
in their attitudes. In addition to that, perceptions of Russia varied considerably depending 
on which part of Germany  Eastern or Western - the particular person was from. On the 
one hand, as a member of the Bundestag from the Left emphasised, those politicians who 
had lived in the GDR tended to know Russia much better; many of them had been to Russia 
and often spoke the Russian language. On the other hand, they were often more sceptical of 
the prospects of Russias democratisation. Furthermore, perceptions of Russia varied 
significantly by generation: politicians of the older generation were often more suspicious 
of Russias intentions and did not believe in the possibility of big changes.60 
With this in mind, let us now examine the most significant changes in Russias images in 
Germany at the level of political elites. One of the most decisive events that affected 
attitudes towards Putin at the beginning of his first term, as well as the image of Russia 
more broadly was his speech in the Bundestag on 25 September 2001 when the Russian 
President expressed his support of the US-led war against terror and spoke about the 
special relations between Russia and Germany (Putin 2001). Most members of the 
Bundestag were enormously impressed by the fact that Putin addressed them in their own 
language since very few leaders speak German.61 Although some German politicians 
were cautious in relation to Putins past, the fact that Putin had served as a KGB officer in 
the GDR in the 1980s did not damage his image to a significant extent. Moreover, his work 
in Germany appeared to be an advantage as it implied that Putin had a good knowledge of 
the country. According to a member of the Bundestag, the main message was: he knows 
our country, he knows our culture, and he understands us.62 One of the core elements of 
Putins image at that time was a German in the Kremlin,  as he was called in his 
biography written by Alexander Rahr (2000).  
At the end of 2002  beginning of 2003 Gerhard Schrders alliance with Vladimir Putin 
and Jacques Chirac against the US-led intervention in Iraq had a pronounced impact on 
Russias image. German political elites were split in their attitudes towards this alliance. 
For a significant part of the political elite, most notably for the Christian Democrats, the 
Paris-Berlin-Moscow axis represented a serious threat of damaging German-US relations, 
which had been one of the most important directions of the German foreign policy since the 
end of the World War 2. Putin was perceived as the wrong partner for Germany in this 
dispute, which contributed to strengthening of a more critical approach towards Russia.63 
At the same time, due to various events in Russia itself positive elements in both Putins 
and Russias images began to give place to more negative characteristics. The focus of 
60 Anonymous interview with a member of the Bundestag, Die Linke, Berlin, 18 July 2007. 
61 Anonymous interview with a member of the Bundestag, FDP, Berlin, 6 July 2007. 
62 Anonymous interview with a member of the Bundestag, FDP, Berlin, 6 July 2007. 
63 Anonymous interview with a German expert in German-Russian relations, Berlin, 5 July 2007. 
attention shifted to the human rights sphere, including issues related to freedom of speech 
and the continuing war in Chechnya. A growing number of siloviki in key positions of the 
Russian state contributed to Putins image as a former KGB officer. In this context 
Chancellor Schrders personal friendship with Putin began to be perceived by many as 
inappropriate.  
The SPD/Green government was criticised by the opposition and the mass media for 
turning a blind eye to any negative developments in Russia for the sake of closer economic 
cooperation between the two countries and Russias support of Germanys position against 
the US regarding the war in Iraq. Schrders words that he agreed that Putin was a 
flawless democrat (lupenreiner Demokrat) were quoted in almost every article or 
programme devoted to German-Russian relations, which could not but damage the 
Chancellors reputation in Germany (see e.g. Die Welt, 21 January 2008). According to a 
member of the Bundestag who was interviewed for this study, Schrder was viewed by 
many German politicians, including members of the SPD and the Green Party, first as 
Vladimir Putins good buddy and only then as the Chancellor. What is more, Schrder 
was seen as ignoring opinions of the Bundestag members and conducting foreign policy in 
relation to Russia without proper consultations with a broader political community.64 
Among the most controversial issues in German-Russian relations that had a significant 
impact on Russias image was the Nord Stream project (formerly the North European Gas 
Pipeline). The fact that Chancellor Schrder had pushed this project to its conclusion just a 
few weeks before the parliamentary elections was perceived many as dubious. Moreover, 
Schrders decision to accept a job offer from Gazprom to head the Shareholders 
Committee of the Nord Stream AG following his defeat in the parliamentary elections was 
viewed as damaging not only Schrders reputations, but the image in Germany in general 
(see Der Spiegel, 12 December 2005). As a member of the Bundestag put it, there was a 
widespread perception among German political elites that Schrder had broken the social 
contract as he had been elected to represent interests of the Germans, not the Russians. 
Schrder was seen by many as acting not according to the countrys interests, but 
according to his personal interests.65 The scandal that followed Schrders appointment 
damaged not only the ex-Chancellors reputation, but also Russias image: Russia was seen 
as a country where such deals were the norm and as such it represented a danger for 
Germany. As Der Spiegel wrote in December 2005, it might be how business is done in 
64 Anonymous interview with a member of the Bundestag, FDP, Berlin, 6 July 2007. 
65 Anonymous interview with a member of the Bundestag, FDP, Berlin, 6 July 2007. 
much of Russia, but even the hint of such shady dealings should make the whole affair 
untouchable for a former German chancellor (12 December 2005). 
The debate on the German Ostpolitik intensified after the victory of the Christian 
Democrats in the parliamentary elections in 2005 and formation of the grand coalition of 
the Christian Democratic Union/Christian Social Union (CDU/CSU) and the SPD. 
Conflicting images of Russia that were held by members of the CDU, the SPD and the 
opposition parties came to the forefront of this debate. The image of Russia held by many 
SPD members was that of a partner of crucial strategic significance, first of all in the 
spheres of energy supply and global security (Steinmeier 2007, p. 53). The motto of the 
new Ostpolitik advocated by the German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier  
convergence through interaction (Annherung durch Verflechtung) - gave a clear 
indication of the foreign policy that was seen as preferable and had a direct association with 
the motto of Willy Brandts Ostpolitik change through convergence (Wandel durch 
Annherung). In the article Interaction and Integration, published in March 2007, 
Steinmeier emphasised the necessity for Germany and the EU as a whole of deepening 
cooperation with Russia and of pursuing new goals, such as a closer energy partnership 
and the creation of a free-trade zone (2007, p. 53). Speaking about energy issues, 
Steinmeier stressed the mutual dependency of Russia and the EU and therefore the 
reliability of Russia as a supplier. This image of Russia as a crucial partner was shared by 
a significant part of the German political and business elite. According to Ulrich Weisser, 
who led the Policy Planning Staff of the German Ministry of Defence from 1992 to 1998, 
for instance,  
those who are now arguing that the relationship between Germany and Russia needs to 
be rethought because of the situation in Chechnya and the two-day drop in gas pressure 
last winter, fail to appreciate the importance of the German-Russian relationship for 
energy security and political stability (2007, p. 57) 
This position was also supported by the politicians from the Left. As a member of the 
Bundestag from Die Linke, put it, Russia should not feel disadvantaged, we should not 
send a signal that it is being rejected by the West.66 
Although Steinmeier did refer to the importance of a dialogue with the Kremlin on Russias 
domestic policy in his public statements and the article Interaction and Integration  
interest in intensifying economic relations is not contradictory to interest in ensuring that 
66 Anonymous interview with a member of the Bundestag, Die Linke, Berlin, 18 July 2007. 
the rule of law and human rights standards are respected in Russia (2007, p. 54)  the 
concept of convergence through interaction was sharply criticised by many for its 
disregard of the human rights dimension. According to an advisor of a Bundestag member 
from the Green party, there was a widespread feeling that the SPD want[ed] to continue 
the Schrder Russland-Politik in a different guise - close trade cooperation without any 
conditionality attached to it.67 Christian Democrats also stressed that German-Russian 
dialogue should place more emphasis on issues related to Russias domestic policy. In this 
respect, Angela Merkels approach to this problem when she raised the question of human 
rights issues at her meetings with the Russian President on several occasions was viewed 
by many members of the CDU and the opposition parties as the right move.68 
On the whole, although perceptions of Russia held by German political elites differed 
substantially depending on the party, personal experience, etc, there were a number of 
characteristics that were common to all these competing images. First of all, Russia was 
viewed as an important partner for Germany and the EU, albeit a difficult one. Secondly, 
Russia was seen as a country that had returned to the world stage and as a growing 
economic power. Thirdly, there was a feeling of uncertainty regarding Russias future 
which became especially pronounced closer to the presidential elections in Russia in 2008. 
As an advisor to a member of the Bundestag from the Green party put it, there emerged 
some sense of helplessness in relation to Russia: we dont know how to deal with it, what 
kind of policies to adopt, there is a sense of insecurity.69 At the same time, Russia was still 
seen by many as a stranger, i.e. as a country difficult to understand. Interestingly, while 
discussing German-Russian relations, those German politicians who were interviewed for 
this study, used the word huge to describe Russia, which implied a potential threat as any 
negative development in such a large country would inevitably affect its neighbours.70 The 
fact that even those members of the German political elite who held more or less positive 
images of Russia shared these negative perceptions, demonstrated the persistence of 
centuries-old stereotypes about Russia. Thus, Russian foreign propaganda in Germany had 
a difficult task in seeking to counterbalance these negative perceptions with more positive 
visions. 
67 Anonymous interview with an advisor of a Member of the Bundestag, the Green, Berlin, 10 July 2007. 
68 Anonymous interview with a member of the Bundestag, FDP, Berlin, 6 July 2007. 
69 Anonymous interview with an advisor of a Member of the Bundestag, the Green, Berlin, 10 July 2007 
70 Anonymous interviews with members of the Bundestag, Berlin, 6 July 2007; 10 July 2007; 18 July 2007. 
6.3 Russian Propaganda in Germany 
Similarly to Russian propaganda in the UK, the Kremlins information campaign in 
Germany was part of a wider effort to construct a more favourable image of the Russian 
Federation in Western countries in general. Probably, the most distinctive feature of the 
German case was an attempt to place the problem of Russias image at the centre of public 
discussion. The question why Russias image in Germany was that bad and what could be 
done to improve it was raised every year at the St Petersburg Dialogue  a forum aimed at 
supporting the dialogue between the civil societies in Russia and Germany that had been 
initiated by Putin and Schrder in 2000. Both sides were encouraged to discuss the problem 
of Russias image in Germany and conduct research in this topic (see e.g. Caspar & 
Galperin 2005).  Moreover, participants of the forum suggested a number of practical 
measures that could be implemented to improve the image. In 2005, for instance, they 
spoke about their intention 
with the support of businessmen, to organise a trip of German journalists to Russia 
(), to use contacts with high-ranking representatives of the national economy and the 
Russian mass media with an aim of objective coverage of history and Russian reality in 
the German school textbooks, and to attract young German and Russian journalists to 
the work on developing concepts of improving the images of both countries71 
The problem of Russias image was often raised during official visits of German politicians 
to Russia, such as a visit of members of the German-Russian Parliamentary group of the 
Bundestag in April 2007. It was also discussed at a number of conferences, for example, in 
2006 at the annual conference of the Deutsch-Russisch Forum  a private independent 
association that aimed at fostering German-Russian cooperation, and thus was explicitly 
interested in improving Russias image. By emphasising the significance of the image 
problem, the Russian authorities initiated a discussion in German society on the factors that 
affected perceptions of Russia, which meant that more people began to question the 
objectivity of this image. At the same time, the Kremlin was sending a signal to the 
German political elite that Russia was very sensitive to its international image and therefore 
would not like to be criticised for its actions  the strategy that seemed to work rather well 
under the chancellorship of Gerhard Schrder. 
71 See the official webpage of St Petersburg Dialog: Ergebnisse der AG Wirtschaft (2005), available 
on-line at: http://petersburger-dialog.de/de/2005/ergebnisse/ergebnisse_der_ag_wirtschaft_3.html, accessed 
29 July 2007. 
Interestingly, Chancellor Schrder took the problem of Russias image in Germany so 
seriously that having left his position in the government he publicly declared his intention 
to help the Russian authorities in this matter. The Russian newspaper Kommersant 
commented on Schrders idea to create a lobbying centre that would promote Russias 
interests in Germany, work on improving Russias image in the German mass media and 
provide information support to German-Russian projects, first of all to Nord Stream (28 
March 2006). Schrders initiative was met with sharp criticism in Germany. In the opinion 
of Guido Westerwelle, Chairman of the Free Democratic Party (FDP) faction in the 
Bundestag, an ex-chancellor should represent German interests in Moscow, not Russian 
interests in Germany. Herr Schrder would call others doing that unpatriotic (Focus On-
line, 28 March 2006). Russian opposition politicians were also sceptical of the project and 
blamed the ex-Chancellor for helping the Kremlin in its propaganda in the West. Following 
a series of extremely critical publications both in Russia and Germany, Schrder stepped 
back and admitted that he had been misunderstood (see Kasparov.ru, 28 March 2006). 
Another distinctive feature of Russian foreign propaganda in Germany was an attempt to 
shift the focus of attention from problems related to Russias democracy and human rights 
to economic issues, particularly to prospects of closer economic cooperation. Although this 
objective was central to Russian foreign propaganda in the West in general, in Germany it 
became especially crucial due to the fact that Germany was Russias main trade partner, as 
well as due to its significant dependence on import of Russian natural gas. In 2007-2008, 
for instance, the Russian authorities supported a number of events that aimed to promote 
Russian regions as attractive investment destinations, such as A Year of Siberia in 
Germany, etc (Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the RF 2009c). The leading role in Russian 
foreign propaganda in this regard was played by Gazproms subsidiary Gazprom Germania 
GmbH which aimed to improve Russias (and Gazproms) image as an energy supplier. 
Among its most widely publicised actions was investment into the German football club 
FC Schalke 04. As Sergey Fursenko, chief executive of OOO Lentransgaz, explained 
Gazproms decision to sponsor the club, 
the club's image, its history, its unique bond with its fans and the international 
ambitions of its team harmonise well with the spirit of Gazprom. We are convinced that 
our sponsorship will be an important step to optimise the brand awareness of 
GAZPROM and to improve the way it is perceived on European markets72 
72 See the webpage of Gazprom Germania: Gazprom Concludes Main Sponsor Contract With Schalke 04, 
available on-line at: http://www.gazprom-germania.de/english/sponsoring/schalke04.php, accessed 10 July 
2007. 
As this focus on optimising brand awareness indicates, Gazproms campaign was targeted 
at German public opinion, rather than merely political or business elites. In addition to 
promoting its image as a reliable supplier, Gazprom Germania also sought to construct a 
more favourable image of Russia in general. In 2006-2007, for instance, it sponsored a 
large number of cultural events in Germany ranging from the Russian Language 
Olympics to guest performances of Russian artists.73 
Promoting the image of Gazprom as a reliable energy supplier was also an important 
element in the campaign that was conducted by the Nord Stream AG. Unlike Gazprom 
Germania, Nord Stream aimed to create a positive image not in the eyes of end consumers, 
but in the perceptions of political and expert elites in Germany and other EU member 
states, especially those countries that expressed their concerns about the project, such as 
Finland and Sweden. It is noteworthy that the official Internet page of the company that 
contained well presented information about the project and clearly performed a PR function 
was translated into the Swedish, Finnish and Danish languages (in addition to Russian, 
German and English), but not Polish, though the Polish government had been the most 
vocal critic of the project. A crucial element of the PR campaign was positioning Nord 
Stream not as a German-Russian project, but as an EU project. This was mostly achieved 
by referring to the fact that the project was declared to be part of the Trans-European 
Network  Energy (TEN-E), which meant that it was  
a key project for sustainability and security of supply in Europe and must be supported 
by EU member states, as it contribut[ed] to the rapid implementation of the most 
important cross-border interconnection capacity74 
Moreover, the company sought to persuade numerous opponents of the project that the 
pipeline would not endanger the unique ecosystem of the Baltic Sea  the argument that 
was particularly often used by Nord Streams critics. It repeatedly emphasised that the 
project would facilitate future studies of the Baltic Sea and thus, would contribute to 
preserving the ecosystem. According to the information on the companys webpage, the 
research that Nord Stream AG commissioned prior to commencing the construction would 
be a unique contribution to subsequent study of the Baltic Sea environment and [would] 
benefit scientists, environmental NGOs and other parties involved in Baltic Sea research.75 
73 For more information see the webpage of Gazprom Germania: Interkulturelle Synergien nutzen, available 
on-line at: http://www.gazprom-germania.de/sponsoring/kunst-und-kultur.html, accessed 28 July 2009. 
74 For more information see the webpage of the project: Status TEN, available on-line at: http://www.nord-
stream.com/en/the-pipeline/project-significance/status-ten.html, accessed 28 July 2009. 
75 See the webpage of the project: Baltic Sea Studies, available on-line at: http://www.nord-
stream.com/en/safety-environment/balticseastudies.html, accessed 28 July 2009. 
In addition to the images of Russia and Gazprom as reliable energy suppliers, Russian 
foreign propaganda sought to promote the cultural component of Russias image. The year 
2003 was declared to be the year of Russian culture in Germany, and approximately 800 
various events were held in 20 German towns and cities, including Russias participation as 
a Guest of Honour in the Frankfurt Book Fair (Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the RF 
2009b). Another example is a series of Festivals of Russian cinema that were held in 
several German regions in 2006 (ibid). The Embassy of the Russian Federation in Berlin 
and the Russian House of Science and Culture played one of the key roles in this direction 
of Russian propaganda. Their efforts were primarily targeted at the Russian speaking 
community in Germany, especially in the field of promoting the study of the Russian 
language. Another direction of Russian foreign propaganda in Germany was connected 
with appealing to the history of German-Russian relations. An illustrative example of this 
approach can be the celebrations of the 60th anniversary of the victory in the World War 2 
that were held in Moscow in May 2005, and where the German Chancellor was invited to 
join the leaders of the victorious allies. As Schrder wrote in his memoirs (2007), the fact 
that the German Chancellor was invited to the victory parade on Red Square was of an 
enormous symbolic significance for Germany. This gesture meant to emphasise the idea of 
reconciliation between Russia and Germany, and at the same time to demonstrate the 
important role of Russia in world history.  
6.4 Assessing the Results 
Despite the intensity of Russian foreign propaganda in Germany in 2000-2008, it did not 
succeed in transforming Russias image to a significant extent. At the level of public 
perceptions, attitudes to Russia remained more or less neutral. Figure 6.1 illustrates the 
dynamics of changes in feelings towards Russia in German public opinion on a scale from 
0 to 100. Interestingly, in 2002, when the German Marshall Fund of the United States and 
Compagnia di San Paolo began their series of public opinion surveys, the average feeling 
towards Russia in Germany was more negative than that in the UK  at a level of 44 
compared to 50 in Britain. Among other factors, this could be probably explained by a 
more pronounced salience of Russias image in Germany, as discussed earlier in the 
chapter, as neutral feelings to a country can often be a result of insufficient knowledge 
about it and its low position on the mass media agenda. Similarly to the UK, average 
feelings to Russia became noticeably more positive in 2003-2004, but then returned to the 
neutral level in the following years. Unlike Britain, where the Litvinenko case and a series 
of diplomatic crises had a pronounced impact on perceptions of Russia, these neutral 
feelings remained at more or less the same level in the last years of Putins presidency. 
55 54
50 50 48 49
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
Figure 6.1. Feelings towards Russia in public opinion in Germany, 2002-2008 (German Marshall Fund of the 
United States 2008) 
These perceptions of Russia as neither a friend nor a foe can be illustrated more clearly if 
one compares Russias image with images of other countries in German public opinion. 
Figure 6.2 shows the indices of feelings to a number of countries, institutions and peoples 
as evaluated by German respondents in 2008. The diagram demonstrates that Russia 
occupied a somewhat middle position in the system of German perceptions of the world, 
with a number of countries or peoples, such as Iran, the Palestinians or Turkey being 
perceived more negatively and the EU member states being perceived much more 
positively than Russia. At the same time, compared to perceptions of Russia in Britain, the 
level of positive/negative feelings towards Russia in Germany was considerably more 
positive than that towards China. One should note, however, that the results of these 
surveys do not differentiate between the feelings of Western and Eastern Germans, 
although these can differ substantially. 
How effective were the attempts to improve Russias image in Germany as an energy 
supplier? On the one hand, one should admit that Russian foreign propaganda did begin to 
bring some results. Gazproms sponsorship of various cultural events was perceived by 
many German politicians and journalists as a positive move. A member of the Bundestag 
who was interviewed for this study mentioned that Gazprom had sponsored a festival in her 
constituency and the reaction of most people towards its sponsorship was positive. She 
referred to the opinion that was expressed by some members of the public that now when 
Schrder is with Gazprom, Gazprom should invest in Germany.76 Moreover, according to 
the results of a study that was conducted by the German research institute Media Tenor, the 
image of Gazprom in the German mass media at the end of 2006 was more positive than at 
the beginning of the year, i.e. right after Russias gas dispute with Ukraine (Media Tenor 
2006). 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
The Palestinians
China
Turkey
Israel
Russia
India
Spain
France
Figure 6.2. Feelings towards countries, peoples and institutions in public opinion in Germany, 2008 (German 
Marshall Fund of the United States 2008) 
On the other hand, Gazproms attempts to improve its image clearly failed to resolve its 
main problem. Despite its efforts to emphasise exclusively economic characteristics in its 
image, Gazprom continued to be largely perceived as a political instrument of the Kremlin. 
In the words of a German journalist who was interviewed for this study, it is not clear 
what Gazprom actually is. Is it a company, or is it Russia as such?77 A number of 
politicians with an expertise in German-Russian relations also stressed that Gerhard 
Schrders election as Chairman of the Nord Stream Shareholders Committee was a 
serious mistake in terms of PR. The ex-Chancellors connection with Gazprom was 
perceived particularly negatively in Eastern European countries where Schrder was seen 
as ignoring their interests in favour of his personal relations with the Russian president. 
76 Anonymous interview with a member of the Bundestag, Die Linke, Berlin, 18 July 2007. 
77 Anonymous interview with a German journalist, Berlin, 11 July 2007. 
While discussing the PR campaign conducted by Nord Stream, interviewees repeatedly 
stressed its insufficiency. In the words of a member of the Bundestag, they [did] not do 
enough to convey their message.78 Furthermore, the predominant view was that it might be 
more or less impossible to significantly improve Gazproms image at all.79 
At the same time, one can argue that Russian foreign propaganda had a certain success in 
shifting the focus of attention from issues related to Russian democracy to the benefits of 
economic cooperation. In the vision of some members of German political elites (and 
especially business elite), Russias economic stabilisation and the prospects of closer 
economic cooperation did continue to outweigh the importance of human rights dimension. 
It should be mentioned though, that while defending the inadequacy of a more critical 
approach towards Putins Russia, a number of German politicians tended to refer not only 
to economic factors, but also to the history of German-Russian relations. One of the most 
important factors in this regard was Germanys responsibility for the World War 2. As 
Schrder wrote in his memoirs,  
We, the Germans, have a special responsibility that comes from our history not only for 
Poland and other European countries, but also for Russia. This awareness should 
determine our relations with Russia beyond all other interests (2007, p. 471) 
According to a member of the Bundestag who was interviewed for this study, some of the 
German politicians shared the view that because of the war Germany [was] not the one to 
give advice. Another factor was Germanys own experience of a difficult transition 
following the re-unification in 1990: if it was difficult for the former GDR, how can it be 
easier for Russia?80 While under Schrders chancellorship the German government was 
more attentive to the Kremlins complaints about Russias negative image, under Angela 
Merkels chancellorship Germany took a much more critical approach towards Russia. The 
benefits of further development of German-Russian economic relations were viewed as 
important, but they did not overshadow the importance of human rights problems and 
issues of democratisation, and Russian PR did not succeed in changing that. Although some 
of the Bundestag members who were interviewed for this study argued that silence for 
gas was still part of German-Russian relations and it would always be, its significance for 
German foreign policy towards Russia decreased substantially.81 
78 Anonymous interview with a member of the Bundestag, FDP, Berlin, 6 July 2007. 
79 Anonymous interview with an advisor of a Member of the Bundestag, the Green, Berlin, 10 July 2007. 
80 Anonymous interview with a member of the Bundestag, FDP, Berlin, 6 July 2007. 
81 Anonymous interview with a member of the Bundestag, Die Linke, Berlin, 18 July 2007. 
It is noteworthy that German public opinion supported a more critical approach despite 
Germanys dependence on Russias gas supplies. In a survey of February 2007, the Forsa 
Institute asked German respondents whether in their opinion the government should refrain 
from criticising the Russian authorities in order not to endanger gas and oil supplies. 
Interestingly, 80% of respondents answered negatively although the results differed 
significantly between the Eastern and Western parts of Germany. While in Western 
Germany only 14% of respondents agreed that the government should pursue the politics of 
silence for gas, in Eastern Germany this number was 22% (Internationale Politik 2007). 
Thus, one can conclude that Russian foreign propaganda did not succeed in improving 
Russias image in Germany to a significant extent. Similarly to the UK, it achieved positive 
results in promoting Russian culture and projecting the image of Russia as an important 
trade partner. However, the negative elements of Russias images remained considerably 
more visible. Having discussed the peculiarities of Russias campaigns in Britain and 
Germany, the study now turns to a broader assessment of the results of Russian foreign 
propaganda in Western countries. 
Chapter 7  
The Effectiveness of Russian Foreign Propaganda 
The analysis of Russias images in the UK and Germany that was undertaken in the 
previous two chapters has revealed that a number of negative characteristics, mostly related 
to Russian politics, remained central to perceptions of Russia. Although these two countries 
were among the primary targets of Russian foreign propaganda in the years of Vladimir 
Putins presidency, the Russian authorities largely failed to promote a more favourable 
image. The persistence of Russias negative images in both Britain and Germany is 
particularly striking in the context of substantial differences in their historical experience of 
dealing with Russia, the pattern of their economic ties, and especially the existence of a 
relatively active pro-Russian lobby in Germany. Clearly, some of the actions by the 
Russian authorities both at home and in the international arena contributed to strengthening 
these negative perceptions, which to a certain extent explains inability of Russian foreign 
propaganda to substantially improve Russias image. However, one should also consider a 
number of other possible factors, such as the importance of Russias negative images as a 
significant Other for dominant self-images in a particular country, as it was demonstrated 
in the German case study, or the inefficiency of the Russian propaganda apparatus. 
While discussing the effectiveness of Russian foreign propaganda, one of the key questions 
is whether Russias existing images changed to a considerable extent in response to 
positive/negative developments in Russia or whether they remained more or less the same. 
Over the years of Putins presidency, the Russian authorities achieved some positive results 
in a number of areas, particularly in the economy. As Table 7.1 illustrates, Russias GDP 
growth was impressive throughout the period. Russias reserves, including gold, increased 
tremendously from $27.97 billion in 2000 to $427.1 billion in 2008. In stark contrast to the 
1990s, Russias external debt was declining (Denisov 2006). Moreover, compared to the 
social and economic upheavals of the previous decade, the Putin era brought noticeable 
stability to the Russian population. Average wages, for instance, grew rapidly year after 
year  from $80.19 in 2000 to $694.3 in 2008. At the same time, unemployment level 
decreased substantially, from 10.4% at the beginning of Putins presidency down to 6.1% 
in 2007 (although it rose again up to 7.8% in 2008). While this remarkable economic 
performance was to a large extent based on revenues from the export of Russian energy, 
the actions of the Russian authorities did contribute to this success. The World Bank, for 
instance, admitted that Russia () implemented important reforms in recent years, mainly 
fiscal (World Bank 2008, p. 13). It is particularly interesting to see then whether these 
economic achievements had a pronounced impact on perceptions of Russia or whether they 
remained on the periphery of Russias images.  
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 
GDP growth, % 8.3 5.1 4.7 7.3 7.2 6.4 7.7 8.1 5.6 
Reserves, 
including  
gold, billion $ 
27.97 36.6 47.8 76.9 124.5 182.2 303.7 477.9 427.1 
Average wage, 
80.19 112.4 138.6 179.4 237.2 301.6 391.9 532.0 694.3 
Unemployment, 
10.4 9.0 8.0 8.6 8.2 7.6 7.2 6.1 7.8 
Table 7.1. Macroeconomic indicators for the Russian Federation, 2000-2008 (World Bank 2001, p. 11; 2008, 
p. 26; World Bank 2009, p. 29) 
This chapter seeks to place the two case studies into a broader context by discussing the 
results of Russian foreign propaganda in Western countries in general. As mentioned 
earlier in the thesis, any assessment of propaganda results is usually problematic for a 
number of reasons. On the one hand, changing deeply rooted stereotypes takes a long time, 
which makes it difficult to measure the effectiveness of a propaganda campaign in a 
short-term perspective. On the other hand, there are a large number of factors that affect 
national images. It is often difficult, if not impossible to establish what exactly caused a 
particular change in the image. Most often it is a combination of factors rather than merely 
the effect of foreign propaganda or actions of the authorities. While acknowledging these 
limitations, the chapter discusses Russias existing images in Western countries at the end 
of Vladimir Putins presidency (2007-2008), and attempts to explain the changes.  
The chapter begins by examining Russias investment image  the element of Russias 
image which the Russian authorities were particularly determined to improve. This is 
followed by a discussion of the relative weight of different components in Russias 
image, with an emphasis on Russias brand as presented in the Anholt-GfK Roper Nation 
Brands Index in 2008 and on the distribution of negative perceptions of certain aspects of 
Russias domestic and foreign policies across a number of countries in 2008. Finally, the 
chapter proceeds to discuss the reasons for the continued predominance of negative 
characteristics in Russias images, by looking at the role of negative stereotypes about 
Russia in the West, as well as at a number of weaknesses in Russian foreign propaganda. 
7.1 Discussing the Results: Russias Image as an Investment Destination 
As was discussed previously in this study, Russian foreign propaganda sought to shift the 
focus of attention from the political to the economic components of Russias image in 
Western countries. Promoting a favourable image of Russia as an investment destination 
remained one of the key objectives of the Russian authorities in the years of Putins 
presidency. The effectiveness of foreign propaganda in this regard can be examined by 
comparing the perceptions of Russias investment climate that were held by existing and 
potential foreign investors into the Russian economy. The Foreign Investment Advisory 
Council of the Russian Federation (FIAC)  a body that was chaired by the Russian Prime 
Minister and included among its members chief executives of major international 
companies operating in the Russian market  commissioned regular research on Russias 
investment image. In 2007 the US-based company Peter D. Hart Research Associates 
conducted a series of surveys among 106 existing foreign investors and 51 potential foreign 
(mainly Western) investors (see Foreign Investment Advisory Council 2007). Their 
findings demonstrated a significant gap in visions of Russia as an investment destination 
between those who had first-hand experience of working in Russia and those who did not.  
Headed in the
right direction
Difficult to say Gotten off track in
past year
Current investors
potential investors
Figure 7.1. Assessment by existing and potential investors of Russian economic policies and laws that 
encourage foreign investment (Foreign Investment Advisory Council 2007) 
The most substantial difference between the views of existing and potential investors was 
in their assessment of the actions of the Russian authorities. As Figure 7.1 illustrates, 
existing investors shared a considerably more positive opinion regarding Russian economic 
policies and laws that encouraged foreign investment. Nearly a half of existing investors 
(47%) believed that Russian policies headed in the right direction whereas only a quarter 
of potential investors (26%) agreed with this assessment. On the contrary, only a quarter of 
existing investors described Russian policies as gotten off track in past year (25%) while 
among potential investors this view was significantly more widespread (33%). Most 
importantly, the share of those who had a difficulty in answering the question was large 
among both groups of respondents although, predictably, it was higher among potential 
investors  41% as opposed to 28% among existing investors.  
Higher than
average
About average Lower than
average
Current investors
potential investors
Figure 7.2. Assessment by existing and potential investors of Russias return on investment, as compared 
with emerging markets in general, 2007 (Foreign Investment Advisory Council 2007) 
Moreover, existing investors tended to be overwhelmingly positive in their assessment of 
Russias return on investment whereas potential investors had considerably lower 
expectations. As Figure 7.2 demonstrates, more than a half of existing investors (52%) 
considered the return on investment as higher than average and nearly a quarter (24%) as 
about average. At the same time, the share of potential investors who viewed it as higher 
than average was almost three times smaller (18%). In the vision that was dominant 
among potential investors, Russias return on investment was about average (39%) while 
almost a third of respondents in this group described it as lower than average  29% 
compared to only 17% among existing investors. Potential investors also tended to be more 
negative in their assessment of investment risks in Russia in comparison to emerging 
markets in general, as Figure 7.3 illustrates. A vast majority of respondents in this group 
(59%) believed that investment risks in Russia were higher than average. On the contrary, 
most existing investors (53%) perceived investment risks as about average. It should be 
mentioned, however, that the share of those existing investors who saw investment risks as 
higher than average was also fairly substantial (39%). 
Higher than
average
About average Lower than
average
Current investors
potential investors
Figure 7.3. Assessment by existing and potential investors of investment risks in Russia, as compared with 
emerging markets in general, 2007 (Foreign Investment Advisory Council 2007) 
More reassured No impact More concerned
Current investors
potential investors
Figure 7.4. Assessment by existing and potential investors of impact of media coverage, 2007 (Foreign 
Investment Advisory Council 2007) 
Finally, both groups of respondents acknowledged the negative impact of media coverage 
on their image of Russia. As Figure 7.4 shows, an overwhelming majority of both existing 
and potential investors admitted that what they heard or read about Russia in the media in 
the past 12 months made them feel more concerned about Russias investment climate 
(57% and 61% respectively). At the same time, more than a quarter of existing investors 
(27%) as opposed to only 16% of potential investors believed that media coverage did not 
have any impact on their perceptions. Interestingly, 23% of potential investors, compared 
to only 16% of existing investors, felt more reassured by media coverage. 
One can conclude that those business executives who did not have first-hand experience of 
operating in the Russian market tended to hold significantly more negative perceptions of 
Russia as an investment destination, which indicates a substantial gap between Russias 
investment climate and its investment image. Despite energetic efforts to promote a more 
favourable image of Russia, Russian foreign propaganda failed to close this gap. As 
Russias stability, reliability and predictability were among the core components of the 
countrys projected image, the fact that the share of potential investors who viewed 
investment risks in Russia as higher than average exceeded the share of existing investors 
by 20% is particularly striking. Most importantly, Russian foreign propaganda largely did 
not succeed in counteracting the negative impact of media coverage although the fact that 
almost a quarter of potential investors felt more reassured by media coverage implies that 
the coverage of the increasing stability and predictability of the Russian economy 
(Forbes, 8 January 2008) and success stories of international companies did have a 
noticeable positive impact on Russias images.  
7.2 Discussing the Results: Components of Russias Image 
Having analysed perceptions of Russia as an investment destination, let us now turn to 
other components of Russias images. To facilitate the discussion, one can examine 
Russias position in the Anholt-GfK Roper Nation Brands Index in 2008, i.e. the final 
year of Putins presidency. Looking at national images from a marketing perspective, 
Simon Anholt has argued that they may be considered as nation brands. In 2005 Anholt 
developed the Nation Brands Index which was expanded into the Anholt-GfK Roper 
Nation Brands Index in 2008 when he entered a partnership with the US based company 
GfK Roper Public Affairs & Media. The index claims to measure the image and 
reputation of 50 nations, and is based on the results of a series of public opinion surveys 
of a total of 20,000 consumers across 20 panel countries (Anholt 2008). The list of these 
panel countries is not limited to the West: apart from a number of Western European and 
North American countries, such as the U.S., Canada, U.K., Germany, France, Italy and 
Sweden, it also includes some countries in Central and Eastern Europe (Russia, Poland and 
Turkey), Asia-Pacific (Japan, China, India, South Korea and Australia), Latin America 
(Argentina, Brazil and Mexico), and the Middle East and Africa (Egypt and South Africa). 
The index takes into account six dimensions of national competence: i) exports; ii) 
governance; iii) culture, iv) people; v) tourism; and vi) immigration/investment. 
Respondents are asked a series of questions in relation to these parameters, and their 
answers are used then to develop a separate index of nations in each of these six categories. 
Thus, a country can score relatively high according to one of the six parameters but receive 
a significantly lower rating according to another. In Russias case, as Table 7.2 
demonstrates, the difference in how respondents assessed the countrys attractiveness 
according to these six categories was dramatic. Predictably, Russias culture was the most 
positive component of the nations brand: Russia was ranked seventh in the list of 50 
nations in this category. By contrast, the political component of Russias brand was 
perceived extremely negatively: in terms of governance (which included perceptions of 
both domestic and foreign policies), Russia was almost at the bottom of the list. 
Interestingly, Russia also scored relatively badly in the people index, which indicates that 
the Russians were perceived as not very friendly or welcoming, as well as not very 
valuable as potential (or existing) employees. At the same time, Russia was placed in the 
middle of the list regarding its attractiveness as a tourism, investment and immigration 
destination. The appeal of Russias exports was assessed more favourably, although still 
relatively low  Russia was ranked 17th in this category. 
Parameter Russias rank 
Exports 17 
Governance 43 
Culture 7 
People index 31 
Tourism 22 
Immigration/Investment 25 
Table 7.2. Russias ranks in six dimensions of national competence (Anholt 2008) 
Russias position in the overall Nation Brands Index in 2008, as Table 7.3 illustrates, was 
relatively low  it was ranked 22 out of 50 nations. It was behind all Western countries 
(with the exception of Iceland), although ahead of some Eastern and Central European 
countries, such as Hungary or Poland. Yet, one can argue that Russias overall ranking was 
somewhat inflated as its high score in the category of culture compensated for significantly 
low scores in the other categories, which brought Russias overall rank closer to the top of 
the list. This inflated position reflects the weakness of the index methodology as it treats all 
the six parameters as playing a quantitatively equal role in defining the overall rank of a 
nation brand. However, the components of a national image discussed above may vary 
greatly in their relative weight. In Russias case, for instance, the political component  or 
governance as defined in the index  is particularly prominent, especially in perceptions of 
Western countries. Therefore, Russias extremely low position on the governance index (it 
was ranked 43 out of 50 countries) indicates that the impact of negative perceptions of 
Russias domestic and foreign policies on Russias overall image was substantial. 
Moreover, as it was mentioned earlier, this index does not differentiate between views of 
individual countries. One would expect that perceptions of Russias governance would be 
more negative in Western countries than in the rest of the panel countries and, on the 
contrary, would be considerably more positive in authoritarian states. 
Overall 
order 
Country Overall 
order 
Country Overall 
order 
Country Overall 
order 
Country 
1 Germany 13 Austria 27 India 40 Peru 
2 France 15 Denmark 28 Hungary 41 Romania 
3 UK 16 Scotland 28 China 42 Lithuania 
4 Canada 17 New 
Zealand 
30 Poland 43 Indonesia 
5 Japan 18 Finland 31 Czech 
Republic 
44 Estonia 
6 Italy 19 Ireland 31 Egypt 44 United 
Emirates 
7 US 20 Belgium 33 South 
Korea 
46 Cuba 
8 Switzerland 21 Brazil 34 Thailand 46 Ecuador 
9 Australia 22 Russia 35 Taiwan 48 Saudi 
Arabia 
10 Sweden 23 Iceland 36 Turkey 49 Nigeria 
11 Spain 24 Singapore 37 South 
Africa 
50 Iran 
12 Netherlands 24 Argentina 38 Chile   
13 Norway 26 Mexico 38 Malaysia   
Table 7.3. The Anholt-GfK Roper Nation Brands Index 2008 (Anholt 2008) 
Most importantly for our analysis, perceptions of Russias governance varied significantly 
across individual Western countries. The distribution of negative/positive perceptions of 
Russian domestic and foreign policies across a number of EU member states, as well as the 
US and Turkey can be illustrated by the results of the Transatlantic Trends survey in 2008 
that were already referred to in this study on several occasions. Figure 7.5 shows the share 
of respondents in 13 panel countries that admitted that they were concerned about the 
weakening of democracy in Russia. Predictably, the assessment of Russias democracy was 
far more negative in the public opinion of well-established democracies, i.e. West 
European countries and the US, and considerably less negative in Turkey (27% of 
respondents) and Eastern and Central European countries which had not had a long history 
of democracy themselves. This is especially evident in Polands case: although the overall 
feeling of Polish respondents towards Russia remained pronouncedly more negative than in 
other EU member states throughout the years of Vladimir Putins presidency (see Table 2.2 
in Chapter Two), perceptions of Russias democracy were not crucial in this regard. 
Interestingly, among Western countries perceptions of Russias democracy were most 
negative in Germany  75% of respondents compared to, for instance, 65% in the UK. 
Among other factors, this can be explained by the traditional salience of Russias image in 
Germany in general and fears that Russias illiberal practices could have a corrupting effect 
on German political elites. The latter aspect manifested itself in continued criticisms of ex-
Chancellor Schrders friendship with Russias president in the German mass media  as 
discussed in Chapter Six. 
0 20 40 60 80
Turkey
Slovakia
Bulgaria
Romania
Spain
Poland
Portugal
France
Italy
Netherlands
Germany
Figure 7.5. Percentage of respondents who were concerned about the weakening of democracy in Russia, 
2008 (German Marshall Fund of the United States 2008) 
0 20 40 60 80
Bulgaria
Turkey
Slovakia
Spain
Romania
France
Italy
Portugal
Netherlands
Germany
Poland
Figure 7.6. Percentage of respondents who were concerned about Russias behaviour towards its neighbours, 
2008 (German Marshall Fund of the United States 2008) 
The distribution of negative perceptions of Russian foreign policy roughly followed the 
same trend, as illustrated in Figure 7.6. The share of respondents who expressed their 
concern about Russias behaviour towards its neighbours was considerably larger in the 
public opinion of Western countries, especially the USA, Britain and Germany (69%, 69% 
and 68% respectively). At the same time, respondents in Turkey and Eastern and Central 
European states were significantly less concerned with Russias actions. This is 
particularly striking since in case of the latter their geographic proximity to Russia and 
their history of being in the Russian and Soviet sphere of influence could have made them 
more wary of Russias expansionism. The only exception among the Eastern and Central 
European countries that participated in the survey was Poland. Unlike perceptions of 
Russian democracy, the image of Russia as a threat in the international arena was 
extremely salient there. Compared to respondents in other countries, an overwhelming 
majority of Polish participants were concerned with Russias actions (71%). 
0 20 40 60 80 100
Turkey
Bulgaria
Spain
France
Portugal
Slovakia
Netherlands
Romania
Italy
Germany
Poland
Figure 7.7. Percentage of respondents who were concerned about Russias role as an energy provider, 2008 
(German Marshall Fund of the United States 2008) 
The vision of Russia as a threat in the sphere of energy security was also very pronounced 
in Poland with the share of respondents who expressed their concern about Russias role as 
an energy provider (81%) significantly exceeding the share of those who were wary of 
Russias behaviour towards its neighbours (71%). Germany and the UK, as Figure 7.7 
demonstrates, were also among the countries with the highest percentage of respondents 
who shared negative views on Russia as an energy supplier. This is particularly striking if 
one takes into consideration different patterns of their relations with Russia in the energy 
sphere as was discussed at length in Chapters Five and Six. One should mention that the 
views of Russia as a threat to energy security differed substantially not only quantitatively 
across the countries, but also qualitatively in public opinion, the mass media and 
perceptions of political elites. While the mass media tended to focus on geopolitical 
questions and possibility that Russia would be dictating its will to consumer countries, 
members of political elites tended to have more fears in relation to Russias 
underdeveloped infrastructure, underinvestment in researching new gas and oil fields and 
other technical problems that might considerably limit Russias potential as an energy 
supplier.82 
On the whole, one can conclude that perceptions of Russia in Western countries, including 
Germany and the UK, remained overwhelmingly negative despite the attempts of the 
Russian authorities to improve its image. Moreover, there was a considerable difference in 
distribution of negative perceptions of Russia across the countries, with public opinion in 
most Western countries being more wary of Russias actions than public opinion in Eastern 
and Central European states with the notable exception of Poland. Most importantly, 
Russias images were often more negative than could be expected, as was demonstrated in 
the discussion of the views held by existing and potential foreign investors in the Russian 
economy.  
7.3 Explaining the (In) Effectiveness of Foreign Propaganda 
Why did Russias images in the West remain predominantly negative despite the efforts of 
Russian foreign propaganda? The most obvious answer would be the inability of any 
propaganda to construct a favourable image of a country in a context of increasingly 
negative developments in its foreign and domestic policies. However, in Russias case it 
was not entirely true. Although Russias economic performance, for instance, was 
impressive throughout Putins presidency, foreign business executives whose companies 
did not operate in the Russian market tended to view Russia in a considerably more 
negative light than those familiar with Russias economy  as demonstrated earlier in the 
chapter. Thus, Russias negative image was not necessarily simply a reflection of the actual 
situation in the country. Russias image as a threat to energy security is a particularly 
interesting example in this regard. One might expect that the level of negative perceptions 
of Russias role as an energy provider would be closely linked to the level of dependence 
of a particular country on Russias energy supplies. As Table 7.4 shows, dependence on 
supplies of Russian natural gas varied greatly across EU member states in 2007. Among 
EU members that were covered in the Transatlantic Trends project (2008), Russias image 
as an energy supplier was most negative in Poland, Germany and Italy (see Figure 7.7). 
This is not surprising as the level of dependence on Russian supplies in those countries was 
considerable: in 2007 they imported about 45.26%, 42.99% and 30.59% of their gas from 
82 Anonymous interview with a member of the Bundestag, FDP, Berlin, 6 July 2007; anonymous interview 
with an advisor of a Member of the Bundestag, the Green, Berlin, 10 July 2007; anonymous interview with a 
member of the House of Lords, Conservative Party, London, 12 December 2007. 
the Russian Federation. However, a number of countries with a significantly higher level of 
dependence appeared to view Russia in a less negative light. In Slovakia, for instance, 60% 
of respondents were concerned about Russias role as an energy provider although the 
country imported about 98% of its gas from Russia. At the same time, only 44% of 
Bulgarian respondents expressed their concern about Russia while imports of Russian gas 
accounted for 100% of total gas consumption in Bulgaria in 2007. On the other hand, the 
UK was not dependent on Russian gas but an overwhelming majority of British 
respondents nevertheless shared a negative view of Russia as an energy supplier (72%).  
EU Member State Gas import from 
Russia (bcm) 
Share of total gas 
import (%) 
Share of total gas 
consumption (%) 
Austria 5.6 74.87 62.92
Bulgaria 3.1 100.00 100.00
Czech republic 6.43 74.51 72.25
Finland 4.3 100.00 104.88
France 7.63 22.60 18.21
Germany 35.55 42.46 42.99
Greece 2.89 100.00 72.25
Hungary 7.85 74.90 66.53
Ireland 0 0.00 0.00
Italy 23.8 32.85 30.59
Latvia 1.6 100.00 n/d
Lithuania 3.4 100.00 89.47
Netherlands 2.3 12.20 6.18
Poland 6.2 66.67 45.26
Portugal 0 0.00 0.00
Romania 2.5 52.08 15.24
Slovakia 5.8 100.00 98.31
Slovenia 0.56 50.91 n/d
Spain 0 0.00 0.00
Sweden 0 0.00 0.00
UK 0 0.00 0.00
Table 7.4. Dependence on import of Russian gas in EU member states, 2007.83 Compiled by author from BP 
(2008). 
83 This table illustrates trade movements via pipelines only, and thus does not take into account the gas volumes 
sold by Gazproms subsidiaries to ultimate consumers in a number of EU member states. According to the table, 
for instance, the UK did not import Russian gas in 2007. However, Gazproms official documents indicate that 
Thus, energy dependency on Russian supplies and potential vulnerability to Russias 
pressure can not be seen as the most crucial factor in explaining negative attitudes towards 
Russias behaviour in the energy sphere. Most likely, fears of Russia as an energy supplier 
were closely linked to Russias negative images in general, particularly to centuries-old 
stereotypes of its expansionism and aggressiveness. In this context, Russian foreign 
propaganda could not improve the countrys image to a large extent. One can suggest that 
deeply rooted negative stereotypes of this kind can take a long time to lose their 
prominence. Moreover, they could be overcome only if the actions of the Russian 
authorities did not contradict the projected positive image, as they often did in the years of 
Putins presidency. 
Another reason for the apparent inability of the Russian authorities to promote a more 
favourable image of the country was the inefficiency of the foreign propaganda machine. 
Although its overall performance definitely improved during the Putin years, especially if 
compared to the decade of Boris Yeltsins presidency, the Russian authorities still did not 
succeed in addressing several fundamental problems. Firstly, despite continuous efforts to 
synchronise actions of the constituent elements of the propaganda machine, there was still 
no single co-ordinating body. A large number of actors that were involved in performing a 
propaganda function did not consult with each other on a regular basis, nor were their 
activities regulated according to the same principles. There are at least two aspects to this 
problem that should be discussed in more detail: i) the formal structure of the propaganda 
apparatus; and ii) informal relationships between the actors. As far as the structure is 
concerned, the problem mostly stemmed from different patterns of subordination. Some of 
the actors, such as the Ministry of Culture and Communication, were subordinate to the 
Prime Minister, while others, such as the Ministry of Foreign Affairs reported directly to 
the President. Moreover, the hierarchy of subordination was somewhat broken. A number 
of the key bodies, such as RIA Novosti or the Russian World Foundation, were formally 
subordinate to the respective federal ministries, but their heads were appointed directly by 
the President. A series of interviews that were conducted for this study indicate that many 
senior propagandists tended to share the belief that ideally most of the bodies should have 
been incorporated into a single media holding.84 However, in practice that would have been 
an extremely complicated process as it would have involved changing the legal status of 
these organisations, transforming their bureaucracies, etc. 
Gazproms subsidiary GM&T began supply to ultimate consumers in industrial and commercial sectors in the UK 
through the BBL gas pipeline (pipeline between the Netherlands and the United Kingdom) (Gazprom 2008). 
84 Anonymous interviews with senior Russian propagandists, Moscow, 29-31 January 2007. 
A more crucial problem, however, originated from the disproportionately important role of 
informal relations between the heads of various propaganda projects and senior officials, 
which resulted in the increasingly non-transparent nature of decision-making. This was 
largely the consequence of the favouritism typical of authoritarian regimes in general when, 
as Lilia Shevtsova has argued, the authority of the state is inevitably privatised by the 
leaders entourage (2007, p. 62). As the need to improve Russias image emerged on the 
agenda, high-ranking officials engaged in intense competition for the Presidents attention 
and for funding by promoting their own propaganda projects. Thus, it is difficult to speak 
of a single foreign propaganda strategy, as it was constantly changing depending on who 
was winning this competition at any given time.  
Secondly, the quality of foreign propaganda was compromised by corruption. With the 
considerable increase of funding allocated to various projects, propaganda unavoidably 
became a source of regular income for some officials. As an illuminating example, one of 
the senior propagandists interviewed for this research pointed out to the PR campaign 
which sought to promote Sochi as a host city for the 2014 Olympic Games. In his opinion, 
there was an evident mismatch between the funding provided to the organisers of this 
campaign and the actual output, i.e. the number and quality of publications, interviews, 
events, etc.85 Some Russian commentators, such as Yulia Latynina, suggested that certain 
propaganda projects could have been used as an excuse to raise money from the business 
community on a regular basis (Novaya gazeta, 25 July 2005). In a context when patriotism 
was presented in domestic propaganda as one of the most important values, big businesses 
would be interested in positioning themselves as patriotic and would eagerly sponsor 
various propaganda projects. By doing so, they would demonstrate their loyalty to the 
Kremlin. At the same time, since this money did not come from the federal budget, it 
would be more difficult to trace what it was actually spent on.  
Thirdly, the idea of openness remained fairly alien to Russian political elites. The access to 
key decision-makers was often problematic not only for the Western mass media, but for 
Russian propagandists as well. To a significant extent, President Putin remained the only 
news-maker: during his presidency he gave a large number of interviews and participated 
in many press conferences. As a senior Russian propagandist pointed out, this situation was 
very risky. In case of any negative development in the country, the mass media would 
inevitably rely on the Presidents statements in their coverage of the event as they would be 
85 Anonymous interview with a senior Russian propagandist, the capital of an EU member state, 12 May 
2007. 
unlikely to gain access to any other high-ranking officials. Instead of a balanced discussion 
that would examine the problem from various perspectives, the mass media would then 
focus predominantly on the Presidents words, and, as a result, he would be viewed as 
directly responsible for the crisis.86 Moreover, as was pointed out in one of the interviews, 
it was often impossible to arrange an interview with a high-ranking official. When officials 
did agree to give an interview, they often did not have sufficient skills in dealing with the 
mass media, and, as a result, their words could sometimes have a negative impact on 
Russias image.87 At the same time, oppositional politicians were always eager to make a 
statement or to give an interview, and, as a result, their presence in the Western mass media 
was significantly more noticeable than it would have been if the Russian authorities had 
been more open. As a German journalist who was interviewed for this study put it, the 
Kremlins intolerance of any signs of the opposition gave them an aura of saints who 
suffered for the sake of Russias democracy, which contributed to the increasing relative 
weight of their views in the Western political and mass media discourse on issues related 
to Russia.88 
Moreover, among Russian propagandists there was no consensus on what role propaganda 
should be playing in foreign policy. Some actors, such as Russia Profile, operated on the 
assumption that the image was not completely separate from reality, and used more subtle 
approaches to persuasion. A senior propagandist compared the work of his/her agency to 
powder  it can improve the appearance, but one still needs to have a nice face to look 
good.89 At the same time, other actors viewed the image as a picture than could be easily 
manipulated. From their perspective, a positive image could be constructed without any 
radical changes in Russia. As a result, they tended to resort to cruder techniques, and their 
work to some extent resembled that of the Soviet propaganda of the past. Another 
fundamental problem was the rigidity of the propaganda machine and its inability to rapidly 
adapt to a changing situation  a common problem for public diplomacy campaigns in 
general, but more pronounced in Russias case due to the increasingly authoritarian nature 
of the regime. Despite the fragmented character of the propaganda machine, the Russian 
authorities attempted to retain a firm control over all the elements of the campaign. 
Whereas in Western countries public diplomacy involved a large number of non-state 
actors, the Russia authorities, on the contrary, sought to limit propaganda activities only to 
state or state-controlled actors. What is more, Russian foreign propaganda continued to be 
86 Anonymous interviews with a senior Russian propagandist, Moscow, 31 January 2007. 
87 Anonymous interviews with a senior Russian propagandist, Moscow, 29 January 2007. 
88 Anonymous interviews with a German journalist, Berlin, 11 July 2007. 
89 Anonymous interviews with a senior Russian propagandist, Moscow, 31 January 2007. 
largely crisis-driven and reactive. In this regard, one can recall the words of Edward R. 
Murrow, legendary director of the United States Information Agency (UCIA), who once 
said: If they want me on the crash landings, Id better damn well be on the take-offs 
(quoted in Kelly 2009, p. 72). As the previous chapters demonstrated, efforts to improve 
Russias image tended to intensify following major PR disasters, such as Russias gas 
dispute with Ukraine in 2005-2006. Thus Russian foreign propaganda tended to focus on 
the short-term goal of minimising the damage that had already been inflicted. However, in 
the last years of Putins presidency there was an increasing emphasis on the longer-term 
goal of promoting favourable attitudes to Russia more broadly, particularly among 
Russian-speaking communities in foreign countries.  
Figure 7.8. Picture of President Putin kissing a boy on his stomach, June 2006 (BBC 2006a) 
While Russian foreign propaganda became more elaborate, sometimes it was excessively 
energetic. On a number of occasions, efforts to promote a more positive image were 
counterproductive as they appeared to have caused a wave of media publications that 
viewed the intentions of the Russian authorities suspiciously. One of the most illustrative 
examples is the extremely unexpected gesture by President Putin when he kissed a five-
year-old boy, who was among a group of tourists in the Kremlin, on his stomach in June 
2006 (see Figure 7.8). One can hypothesise that Putin had been recommended to 
demonstrate the more emotional and humane side of his personality. Putin later explained 
his decision to kiss the boy as spontaneous. In his words, the boy seemed very independent 
and serious (...) I wanted to cuddle him like a kitten and it came out in this gesture. He 
seemed so nice (quoted in BBC 2006a). However, this gesture was viewed by many as 
inappropriate and as merely a clumsy attempt to soften Mr Putin 's image (The Times, 6
July 2006). Another example is the publication of a series of photographs that showed the 
Russian President fishing on the Yenisei River in Siberia in 2007 (see Figure 7.9). The 
image of a topless Putin in military trousers, demonstrating his muscles, provoked a 
somewhat hysterical reaction in the Western mass media. The Times was particularly 
critical of the decision to publish these photos: 
unless Russias best-known martial arts expert is using the rod as some novel kind of 
muscle-toning device  or possibly is sending a signal by some secret rod-grip known 
only to the KGB or maybe the masons  this picture, against all propaganda intent, is an 
appalling PR gaffe and a gift to the West in what it reveals. The advisers who set it up 
() should be shot (The Times, 3 September 2007) 
Probably, the photos were intended primarily for an audience in Russia rather than for 
Western countries, as projecting the image of Putin as a strong leader was central to 
Russian domestic propaganda. However, as discussed earlier in this study, it is extremely 
difficult in the context of modern mass media to separate domestic and foreign 
propaganda. 
Figure 7.9. Picture of President Putin fishing in the Yenisei River in Siberia, 2007 (The Times, 3 September 
2007) 
While Russian foreign propaganda to a large extent failed to promote a more favourable 
image of Russia in general, it nevertheless succeeded in some more narrow aspects, first of 
all in projecting the image of a strong country that had returned to the world stage. The fact 
that Russia was increasingly perceived as a world power while the Russian President was 
viewed as someone who made this comeback possible was reflected in the recognition of 
Putin as Person of the Year by Time magazine in 2007. Time wrote about Russia as a 
nation that had fallen off our mental map, but led by one steely and determined man, [it] 
emerged as a critical linchpin of the 21st century (Time, 31 December 2007  7 January 
2008, p. 36). Interestingly, the magazine repeatedly insisted that this title was neither an 
honour nor an endorsement but rather a clear-eyed recognition of the world as it is and 
of the most powerful individuals and forces shaping that world  for better or for worse 
(ibid., p. 37). Moreover, Putins image as Person of the Year in Time was overwhelmingly 
negative as he was described on the magazine cover as Tsar of the New Russia or as an 
elected emperor in one of the articles of the issue (ibid., p. 41). Yet, this negative vision 
may be considered a major success of Russian foreign propaganda as it implied that Russia 
was seen as a country that other big powers, particularly the US, had now to take more 
seriously. 
Among other achievements was selection of the Russian city of Sochi to host the 2014 
Winter Olympics by the International Olympic Committee, as well as the emerging image 
of Russia as a rich country  although one should mention the negative impact on 
perceptions of Russia in Western countries of the often less than endearing conduct of 
nouveau riche Russians abroad (Brandt 2003, p. 58). At the same time, Russian culture 
remained a positive element of Russias image. Its effect on Russias overall image was, 
however, fairly limited as it was primarily the culture of pre-Soviet Russia that was widely 
known in the West whereas Russian contemporary culture was considerably less visible. 
This is particularly noticeable if one compares the prominence of Russian contemporary 
culture to that of the U.S. where Hollywood and Madison Avenue are usually seen as the 
main assets of the countrys soft power (Snow 2009, p. 5).  
Most importantly, despite all the achievements discussed above, Russias images in 
Western countries remained predominantly negative. This failure by the Russian 
authorities to significantly improve the countrys image while needing to gain recognition 
of the West was one of the central elements in Russian public discourse had profound 
consequences for the evolution of Russias dominant self-image. Moreover, being unable 
to change negative perceptions of Russia in Western countries, the Russian authorities 
began to use Russias negative image as in instrument in their domestic propaganda  as 
will be discussed in the following chapter. 
Chapter 8  
Russias International Image at Home 
Russian society has always been extremely sensitive to the countrys international image. 
Both political elites and ordinary Russians tend to pay a great deal of attention to what 
Western politicians and the mass media say or write about Russia. Western observers have 
often pointed out that this interest is much more pronounced than in Western countries. 
Boris Reitschuster, Moscow correspondent of the German weekly newsmagazine Focus, 
has suggested that this obsession with the countrys image is a traditional Russian feature 
(InoSMI 2007). According to a public opinion survey conducted by the Levada Centre in 
2007, the majority of Russian respondents (54%) considered it important what the West 
[thought] about Russia as opposed to only 40% who did not view it as important (Levada 
Centre 2008c). This chapter seeks to analyse the role of Russias international image in 
domestic policy. It begins by examining the way in which the failure of Russian foreign 
propaganda to promote a more favourable image of Russia in the West was interpreted in 
the dominant discourse during the Putin years, and exploring the main arguments related to 
this issue in the broader public discussion in Russia. The second part of the chapter looks 
at the use of Russias negative image in domestic propaganda. Finally, the chapter 
concludes with a discussion of the impact that these interpretations had on Russian 
domestic policy. 
8.1 Explaining the Failure of Russian Foreign Propaganda 
As the previous chapters of this study demonstrated, Russias image in the West became 
increasingly negative in the Putin years. One of the most urgent questions that dominated 
the public debate in this regard was whether this vision was an adequate reflection of 
reality or not. Only a few Russian politicians and commentators, mainly those who can be 
described as Liberal Westernisers (see Chapter Three), publicly acknowledged that the 
negative image was predominantly the result of negative developments in the country itself. 
Alexander Bovin, a former diplomat and a prominent Russian journalist, argued in an 
article in Nezavisimaya gazeta in May 2001 that the most powerful generator of Russias 
negative image [was] Russian reality (Bovin 2001). His opinion was shared, among others, 
by the oppositional politician Irina Khakamada, who believed that if our situation is bad, 
there is no point in taking offence with the neighbours who do not like us (Khakamada 
2005). This view, however, remained on the fringes of the public debate on Russias image. 
In the dominant discourse, by contrast, Russia was presented as a victim of Russophobia 
that for centuries had been widely spread in Western countries and had further been 
promoted by the Kremlins enemies. Since the dominant discourse was articulated mainly 
by the President, an overview of the evolution of Vladimir Putins views on the issue is 
necessary.  
8.1.1 Western Criticism in the Dominant Discourse 
In the early days of Putins presidency, his interpretation of the reasons for Western 
criticism of Russia was rather cautious. In relation to Chechnya, for instance, he stressed 
that although some criticism voiced by Western countries was (geo)politically motivated, 
most blame for Russias negative image was to be laid on Chechen terrorists who were 
promoting their view of the situation in the breakaway republic. In his interview with the 
state RTR TV channel in January 2000, Putin, who was acting President at that time, stated 
() there are people in the West who will always criticise us and take an anti-Russian 
stand out of geopolitical considerations (...) But a significant part of the international 
community does not understand what is going on there and is influenced by superficial 
information and terrorist propaganda (Interview with the RTR TV Channel 2000) 
Following the events of 9/11, when Moscow allied with the USA in the subsequent war on 
terror, Putins stance on Western criticism became considerably softer. As was 
demonstrated earlier in this study, by portraying the Chechen conflict as part of the global 
anti-terror campaign, the Kremlin to an extent succeeded in silencing its Western critics. In 
a situation in which the prospects of Russias closer cooperation with the US and its allies 
appeared to be promising, Putin refrained from any accusations against Western countries 
of nurturing anti-Russian sentiments. In his annual address to the Federal Assembly in 
April 2002, Putin expressed the view that 
After 11 September () many, many people in the world realised that the Cold War 
was over. They realised that now there are different threats, that a different war is on  
the war with international terrorism (Putin 2002) 
However, in the following few years Putins rhetoric underwent significant changes. 
Already in late 2002 and the beginning of 2003 the Kremlin was exposed to a new wave of 
criticism from the West. Among the reasons, as discussed in Chapter Two, were Moscows 
opposition in the UN Security Council to the US-led war in Iraq, the Yukos affair and 
particularly perceived anti-democratic tendencies in Russian domestic politics. This 
criticism intensified following Putins re-election as President in March 2004. In response 
to the renewed criticism, Putin accused his Western critics of deliberate misinterpretation 
of the processes taking place in Russia. His annual address to the Federal Assembly in May 
2004 emphasised the idea that  
young Russian democracy has had considerable success in establishing itself. And 
those people who do not notice this success, or who do not want to notice it, are not 
quite honest (Putin 2004b) 
Moreover, he spoke of Russias deteriorating image being the result of anti-Russian 
propaganda. In July 2004, while addressing Russian ambassadors and permanent 
representatives, Putin mentioned frequent planned campaigns which aimed to discredit 
this country and which were damaging both for the state and for the national business 
(Putin 2004a). 
Since then, the idea of the existence of some kind of an anti-Russian plot has been a key 
element of the dominant discourse. It became even more evident in 2006 following the 
murder of the Kremlins prominent critic, journalist Anna Politkovskaya, in Moscow. In his 
speech at the St Petersburg Dialogue on 10 October 2006, Putin offered his explanation of 
the murder: 
We have reliable, consistent information that many people who are hiding from Russian 
justice have been harbouring the idea that they will use somebody as a victim to create 
a wave of anti-Russian sentiment in the world (Putin 2006c) 
Although Putin preferred to remain unspecific while talking about these enemies of the 
Kremlin, it was clear that he meant first of all the ex-oligarch Boris Berezovsky who had 
lived in self-imposed exile in the UK since 2000 and Chechen terrorists, including 
Akhmed Zakaev, who also lived in the UK (see Chapter Five). Therefore, in Putins vision, 
these were forces that represented a threat to Russias integrity and political regime. 
In addition to that, as Western criticism of Russias democracy became more pronounced 
during Putins second term, he began to put more emphasis on its political causes. 
Although he refrained from openly anti-Western comments, the idea that the attempts of 
Western countries (meaning first of all the USA) to interfere in Russian affairs represented 
a threat to Russia was at the heart of his vision. At his meeting with the members of the 
Valdai Discussion Club in September 2007, Putin pointed out: 
we do see attempts to use the lexicon of democracy to influence our domestic and 
foreign policy (...) It only undermines trust in the very institutions and principles of 
democracy (Meeting with Members 2007)  
Putin was particularly critical of NATOs intention to deploy interceptor missiles and a 
radar tracking system in Poland and the Czech Republic. On a number of occasions he 
expressed the opinion that Russias negative image was used by Washington as an 
instrument to solve domestic problems and to secure more substantial defence spending. 
During his visit to Jordan in February 2007, for instance, Putin stated: 
I have an impression that some partners are promoting themselves and have started 
using the non-existent Russian threat to get more money from the U.S. Congress for 
military operations in Iraq, Afghanistan, and the expensive missile defence project 
(RIA Novosti 2007b) 
Moreover, Putin stressed that the vision of Russia as a threat was deliberately promoted by 
Western political elites and that anti-Russian sentiment [had] been fuelled intentionally to 
create a moral and political situation conducive to deploying the [missile defence] systems 
(RIA Novosti 2008). 
On the whole, President Putin repeatedly interpreted any criticism of Russian democracy as 
an attempt to limit Russias sovereignty, to pressure the Kremlin into acting against the 
countrys national interests in the international arena or even to change the political regime. 
Putins vision of how criticism was used to damage Russias interests was summarised in 
his address to the Federal Assembly in April 2007: 
our policy of stable and gradual development is not to everyones taste. Some, making 
skilful use of pseudo-democratic rhetoric, would like to return us to the recent past, 
some in order to once again plunder the nations resources with impunity and rob the 
people and the state, and others in order to deprive our country of its economic and 
political independence (Putin 2007b) 
This self-image of Russia as a besieged fortress and the vision of the West as a threat that 
became increasingly prominent in the official discourse during Putins second term in 
office indicated the growing impact of the Fundamentalist Nationalist discourse in Russia 
(see Chapter Three). The Presidents views of the reasons for Russias negative image were 
continuously reiterated in the statements of high-ranking officials which displayed more 
open elements of the re-emerging anti-Western, in particular anti-American consensus 
among the political elite. Russias Minister for Foreign Affairs Sergey Lavrov, for instance, 
while speaking at a press conference in January 2005, suggested that the increasing 
negativism towards Russia was caused by Russias improving position. According to 
Lavrov, not everyone like[d] that Russia [was] strengthening and that Russia was 
becoming more independent politically and financially (Lavrov 2005). In a number of his 
statements, Lavrov drew attention to the simply amazing number of negative and non 
fact-based articles abroad (quoted in Rossiiskaya gazeta, 28 February 2007, p. 1). 
Moreover, he went even further by blaming some members of the European Union 
(meaning primarily Poland and the Baltic States) for conducting a propaganda campaign 
aimed at constructing a negative image of Moscow the goal of which was to formulate a 
negative common policy of the EU towards Russia (Lavrov 2007). 
The sensitivity of the Russian political elites towards the countrys negative image 
increased dramatically in the run-up to the parliamentary elections of 2007. An illustrative 
example is Moscows reaction towards a letter to Lavrov that was written by the OSCE 
Representative on Freedom of the Media Miklos Haraszti, who voiced concerns over the 
situation with press freedom during the electoral campaign to the State Duma. The Russian 
Foreign Ministry responded with a statement that Harasztis letter was a part of 
propaganda attempts to discredit Russian parliamentary elections made by certain forces in 
the West (RIA Novosti 2007a). According to Mikhail Kamynin, head of the Information 
and Press Department of the Foreign Ministry, the West increased its information pressure 
on Russia around the time of the elections in order to force the Russian authorities into 
making decisions which would be contradictory to the interests of the Russian people 
(Kamynin 2008). 
Russian parliamentarians were also heavily involved in the discussion on Russias image. 
Most Fundamentalist Nationalists, such as a member of the Rodina (Motherland) faction 
Nikolai Leonov, agreed with Lavrov that the negative image was the result of anti-Russian 
propaganda (see RIA Novosti 2006c). Moreover, another member of Rodina, Alexander 
Krutov, authored an instruction to the Information Policy Committee of the State Duma to 
request information from state bodies on the anti-Russian campaign in the Western media 
(RIA Novosti 2006a). Interestingly, even those members of Russian political elite who 
could previously be described as Liberal Westernisers tended to articulate a significantly 
more critical position towards the West, which brought their views closer to those of 
Pragmatic Nationalists. Konstantin Kosachev, for instance, a member of Edinaya Rossiya 
and head of the State Dumas Foreign Affairs Committee, argued in his article in 
Mezhdunarodnaya zhizn that among Western countries few need[ed] a strong and stable 
Russia despite all their statements and even despite common sense (Kosachev 2008).  
While analysing the dominant discourse on Russias image, it is essential to examine the 
position of the siloviki, most of whom could also be described as Fundamentalist 
Nationalists. A number of studies have demonstrated that during Putins presidency there 
was a distinct tendency for an increasing role of siloviki in policy-making. According to 
Olga Kryshtanovskaya and Stephen White, by the start of 2005 siloviki accounted for 
almost a quarter of the top leadership with their presence in the national government 
amounting to 34.2% and in both houses of the Russian parliament to 18.3% 
(Kryshtanovskaya & White 2005, p. 1065). These estimates were later challenged by some 
researchers who argued that their number was slightly lower (see, e.g. Renz 2006; Rivera & 
Rivera 2006), but it is still obvious that this elite group had a significant influence on 
Russian politics. Although some scholars have argued against looking at them as a coherent 
group (see Renz 2006), most siloviki were united in considering Russia to be a besieged 
fortress and holding anti-Western, particularly anti-American, views. As Richard Sakwa 
has pointed out, siloviki, especially chekisty (i.e. those who worked in the KGB or later in 
the FSB), can be generally characterised by believing that Russia was beset with hostile 
external forces and their domestic allies to reduce the country to little more than a vassal of 
the West and that their destiny as a group was to save Russia (2008, p. 76). 
This approach can de illustrated by the opinion of Viktor Cherkesov who, similarly to 
Putin, graduated from the Law Department of Leningrad State University, and later worked 
as his First Deputy Director in the FSB, then as Presidents envoy to the North-West 
Federal District before being appointed head of the Federal Anti-Narcotic Service in 2003. 
In the article he published in Komsomolskaya Pravda in 2004, Cherkesov spoke of the 
threat that any criticism of chekisty and the Russian authorities in general represented for 
the country. He argued that the real target [was] not these or those authorities, but the 
country, and that, if not confronted with adequate measures, this anti-Russian campaign 
would lead to the further disintegration of the country. Moreover, he presented chekisty as 
saviours of the Russian state since the history placed the burden of retaining the Russian 
statehood to a large extent on [their] shoulders (Cherkesov 2004). 
8.1.2 Western Criticism in the Public Discussion 
Let us now turn to the wider public discussion of Russias international image in the 
Russian mass media which became particularly intensive during Putins second term in 
office. A large number of political analysts and commentators participated in the debate, 
and although their views were not part of the dominant discourse as such (which, as we 
noted earlier, was largely articulated by the President), most often they reiterated its major 
points and developed them further. Thus, they to a significant extent can be seen as part of 
a broader (near-) dominant narrative which was based on a number of recurrent ideas. 
Firstly, it was emphasised that Russias image was negative predominantly in Western 
countries while the rest of the world viewed Russia in a much more positive light, which 
meant that the West was not objective in its assessment of Russias development. A 
prominent TV commentator Alexei Pushkov  the author and host of a popular analytical 
programme Postscriptum (TVC channel)  stressed that China, India, Brazil, Mexico, the 
absolute majority of the people of the planet [saw] Russia as a positive factor (Pushkov 
2008). Moreover, Vyacheslav Nikonov, a political technologist with close ties to the 
Kremlin, went even further by arguing that on a global scale the image of Russia and Putin 
[was] better than images of most G8 members (Nikonov 2006b). This idea was extremely 
important as it resonated with the self-image of Russia as a country which supported a 
more democratic system of international relations, one based on multi-polarity and the 
prevalence of the UN role. 
Secondly, the negative image of Russia was perceived as the product of a hostile reaction 
by Western political elites to Russias recovery. According to this narrative, Russia was a 
potential economic competitor and a geopolitical rival to the West, which meant that 
Western countries did not need a prosperous and strengthening Russia. In this 
interpretation, Russias image was positive only when Russia was weak, humiliated and 
dependent on the West. In the opinion of Vyacheslav Nikonov,  
in the last century, Russia received applause [from the West] only twice  when it 
committed suicides which were accompanied by social disintegration and economic 
collapse  in February 1917 and in December 1991. It is always pleasant when there is 
one serious competitor less (Nikonov 2006a) 
This view was also shared by Alexander Dugin, a prominent right-wing ideologist and the 
leader of the Eurasia Movement, whose views can be described as Fundamentalist 
Nationalist. According to Dugin, the stronger and more prosperous Russia is, the more the 
West hates it, fears it and throws mud at it. Thus, the negative character of Russias image 
was seen as unavoidable. In this respect Dugin offered an original solution to the countrys 
image problem: I suggest looking at the situation in the following way: if the West begins 
to hate us more and to scold us more, then we are going in the right direction (Tribuna, 29
December 2006, p. 7). 
Thirdly, the increasing criticism of Russian democracy was explained by the centuries-long 
Russophobia rooted in the mentality of Western political elites. As a prominent academic, 
member of the Russian Academy of Sciences Sergo Mikoyan put it in his article in 
Mezhdunarodnaya zhizn (International Affairs),  
It is clear to any attentive Russian reader of Western, especially US and UK press that 
Russophobia is not a myth, not an invention of the Red-Browns, but a real phenomenon 
of political thought in the main political think tanks in the West (Mikoyan 2006, p. 31) 
According to Pushkov, the culture of a negative attitude towards Russia emerged to a 
large extent as a consequence of Russias choice in favour of Orthodox Christianity while 
most other Western and Central European countries were Catholic. As a result Russia 
began to be perceived as something that belong[ed] to Europe territorially () but not 
ideologically, and thus the Russians were always viewed as different (InoSMI 2008). In 
this narrative, Russias image as an enemy was an essential part of Western identity and as 
such it could not be easily changed. Moreover, as Pushkov argued, the West needed an 
external enemy since having a common enemy would unite Western countries and would 
mobilise their electorates (Pushkov 2008). Therefore, Russia would always be seen as an 
enemy. 
Fourthly, Russias negative image was interpreted as a result of some kind of conspiracy. A 
number of prominent Russian commentators blamed Western elites and the mass media for 
conducting propaganda campaigns against Moscow and promoting Russophobia. 
According to Sergei Markov, director of the Political Studies Institute, Russophobia [had] 
almost become an official ideology for many in the West (Markov 2006). In his article that 
was published in Izvestiya Markov accused the government of several post-Soviet 
countries, in particular Latvia, Estonia, Georgia and Poland, of deliberate attempts to 
promote anti-Russian attitudes. At the same time, in the Russian mass media it was often 
argued that in the West it was considered politically correct to criticise Russia and 
politically incorrect to justify any of the Kremlins actions. In this atmosphere, as 
Vyacheslav Nikolaev pointed out in his article in Rossiiskie vesti, the Western mass media 
attack[ed] those [Western] politicians and public figures who [did] not share pessimistic 
views [on Russia] (Nikolaev 2005).  
Finally, a key element of this narrative was a very strict division between them (the 
Western mass media and politicians who did not want a stronger Russia) and us (the 
Russians who were continuously feared, hated and criticised by the West for no objective 
reasons). In this context, any Russian politicians or commentators who openly agreed with 
Western criticisms of Russian democracy or expressed their support for Western values 
(e.g. Liberal Westernisers) were portrayed as traitors or as a fifth column who contributed 
to the promotion of Russophobia. Mikoyan, for instance, condemned those Russian 
readers who view[ed] Russophobia as one of the ways in the struggle for democracy, for 
all-human values and for Russia becoming part of Europe (Mikoyan 2006). In a context in 
which it had become to a large extent politically incorrect to agree with any Western 
criticism, very few commentators openly denied or doubted the idea that the countrys 
negative image was the product of Russophobia or some kind of a plot against Russia. 
Liberal Westernisers who had already been a diminishing group among Russian political 
and expert elites, were further marginalised. At the same time, Fundamentalist Nationalist 
views tended to play an increasingly important role in the dominant discourse.  
8.2 Russias Negative Image in the West in Domestic Propaganda 
The interest of the Russian electorate in the countrys international image was exploited 
and further stimulated by various political actors: oppositional politicians, foreign actors 
and the authorities. It should be noted that this was not a new phenomenon. Publication of 
Western articles translated into Russian had been widely used by the Soviet propaganda 
machine (see Fateev 1999). An illustrative example of using this technique is a weekly 
magazine Za rubezhom (Abroad) which was launched in 1932 with the prominent Soviet 
writer Maxim Gorky as its first editor. In post-Soviet Russia the idea of using Western 
publications for propaganda purposes was first picked up by Media-Most - the media 
empire of oppositional oligarch Vladimir Gusinsky. His Internet project InoPressa, which 
specialised in translating foreign articles about Russia and putting them on-line, was 
launched in 1999. Apparently, the idea belonged to Svetlana Mironyuk, who was then 
working for Gusinsky (InoSMI 2007). 
8.2.1 Testing Patriotism of the Audience: InoSMI Project 
In 2000 the Russian authorities made an attempt to employ the method for their own 
propaganda. The national information service Strana.Ru  a large-scale Internet project 
created by the pro-Kremlin Effective Politics Foundation which was headed by Gleb 
Pavlovsky  intended to launch a project InoStrana which would publish translated articles. 
However, the idea was later abandoned. Yet, Strana.ru launched a project Foreign press 
about Russia (Zarubezhnaya Pressa o Rossii) which was then transformed into InoSMI 
(Smi.ru 2004). In 2002 InoSMI changed its owner: among a number of other Internet 
projects that belonged to Pavlovskys Strana.Ru it was handed over to the Internet 
Directorate of the state media corporation VGTRK (Russian State TV and Radio 
Broadcasting Company) (Rossiiskaya gazeta, 11 July 2002, p. 9.). In 2004 it was handed 
over to RIA Novosti which was also part of that media corporation (InoSMI 2007). In 
2004-2008 the project succeeded in attracting a growing number of readers. According to 
its main editor Yaroslav Ognev, in 2007 about 70-90 thousand people visited the webpage 
daily. The project very quickly achieved unprecedented popularity in Russia, and its 
success was recognised not only by readers, but by the professional community as well. In 
2005 and 2007 Yaroslav Ognev was awarded the title of editor of the year and producer of 
the year.90 
It should be noted that InoSMI is a phenomenon which is not unique to Russia. In several 
countries there exist a number of Internet projects that specialise in translating materials 
from other countries. The webpage WatchingAmerica.com, for instance, is a US project. In 
Poland there are at least two sites: an Internet edition of Forum magazine and a big Internet 
resource Onet.pl (InoSMI 2007). However, only in Russia did the project become so 
successful. It can be argued that among other factors that contributed to its success was the 
modest knowledge of foreign languages among the Russian electorate. According to a 
survey that was conducted by the Levada Centre in 2008, only 15% of respondents 
acknowledged that they could speak more or less fluently at least one foreign language 
(Levada-Centre 2008a). 
How did the project work? The editorial team conducted daily monitoring of about 800 
foreign mass media and selected 30-40 pieces to be translated and published on-line 
90 For more information see Chitatel InoSmi  chelovek inosmifitsirovanny, 27 November 2007, available 
on-line at: http://news.bbc.co.uk/hi/russian/in_depth/2007/rus_elecs/newsid_7115000/7115241.stm, accessed 
20 August 2008.
(Rossiiskie vesti, 27 December 2006, p. 4). According to Ognev, the most important 
criterion for selection was how remarkable the articles were: these [were] materials that 
everyone notice[d] (): they [were] quoted, commented, referred to and actively discussed 
in forums (quoted in Ermolaev 2006). In addition to these pre-selected articles, there 
were translations that had been sent in by readers. Although the main emphasis of the 
project was on contemporary articles (they were translated on the same day), they also 
occasionally published translations of old articles  which were devoted to some big 
events in Russian history. An interesting example is the publication of a number of articles 
about the Crimean War in the 19th century. Ognev pointed out that the interest in these 
translations turned out to be extremely high (InoSMI 2007). As the project developed, a 
range of materials other than newspaper articles was added, including translations of 
remarks by politicians, opinions from various blogs, forums of foreign mass media, video 
materials, etc. An important element of the project was a moderated readers forum, where 
articles were discussed by the audience, which was introduced at the end of 2003. By the 
end of 2006 the number of registered users reached 15 500 people (Ermolaev 2006). 
What were the functions of this project? On the one hand, one can argue that, at least to 
some extent, it contributed to democracy promotion in Russia: while the Russian 
authorities were increasingly limiting freedom of speech, the project provided an open 
access to critical publications about Russia. On the other hand, being part of RIA Novosti, 
InoSMI was indisputably part of the propaganda machine. The use of predominantly 
negative publications about Russia suggests that the projects main function was to 
reinforce enemy images (seeing the West as an enemy) and to strengthen the siege 
mentality in Russian public opinion. As one of the readers noted, 
while reading translations of the foreign mass media, I have the impression that Russia 
() is encircled by implacable enemies and there will be no end to this confrontation 
(InoSMI 2005) 
Yaroslav Ognev, the editor-in-chief, on several occasions denied accusations that the 
project deliberately selected only extremely negative publications while at the same time 
stressing that the project test[ed] patriotism of the audience (Smi.ru 2004). However, the 
question of the projects criteria for selecting articles is still open. Another problematic area 
is the quality of translation  whether translated articles may sound more negative than the 
original publications.  
How significant was the impact of InoSMI on Russian politics? At first sight the number of 
visitors, although considerable for an Internet project, seems to be very small if compared 
to the size of Russian electorate. In the Putin years, the Internet was still a luxury for the 
overwhelming majority of Russias population. In 2004 the number of Internet users in 
Russia amounted to only 14.9 million people, although it was growing very fast (see March 
2006, p. 137). However, one can argue that the impact of the project by far exceeded the 
size of its audience. Firstly, the materials published on the webpage were then further 
disseminated by the Russian mass media. A number of Russian national and local 
newspapers, including Nezavisimaya gazeta, Trud, Novye izvestiya, Sovetskaya Rossiya, 
Rossiiskaya gazeta, Moskovskii komsomolets and Sankt-Peterburgskie vedomosti,
occasionally published complete articles or extracts with reference to InoSMI. There were 
also examples when translated articles from InoSMI were published without reference to 
the webpage.91 Secondly, many Russian journalists used the webpage to get an idea of what 
was written about Russia at the moment and then referred to this world (or most often 
Western) public opinion. Alexei Pushkov, for instance, admitted that his editorial team 
was not able to trace the work of all the mass media. Thus, the initial selection of Western 
articles about Russia (which were later referred to in the programme) was done on InoSMI,
and only then were the selected articles translated by the editorial team (InoSMi 2008). 
8.2.2 The Use of Western Publications in the Russian Mass Media 
As was mentioned earlier, InoSMI was part of RIA Novosti and thus was directly involved 
in promoting views that corresponded to the picture of the West created by the Kremlins 
propaganda machine. However, publications in many other Russian media outlets often 
conveyed the same message. To a large extent, this can be explained by the prevalent 
attitudes in public opinion: as will be discussed in more detail later in the chapter, the 
vision of Russia being surrounded by hostile external forces became widespread under 
Putins presidency. At the same time, one can argue that a large number of media outlets, 
particularly national TV channels, acted as vehicles of the Kremlins propaganda in this 
respect. Although many mass media outlets remained in private ownership, it was 
increasingly difficult for them to challenge the Kremlins interpretation of events. Self-
censorship became an essential element of the Russian media system. According to Sarah 
Oates, much as in Soviet times, tight control [was] not needed at every chain in the 
91 Anonymous interviews with a Russian propagandist, Moscow, 31 January 2007 
command. Rather, there [was] a good understanding of the line throughout the news 
organisation (2006, p. 28). 
In the years of Putins presidency, the Russian mass media paid close attention to Western 
publications about Russia. These repetitive references created an illusion that Russia 
occupied an extremely prominent place on the Western mass media (and political) agenda. 
In some cases Russian journalists deliberately twisted the information to produce an 
impression of the salience of Russia-related issues. One of the most influential news 
programmes Vesti (state channel Rossiya), for instance, mentioned an article about the 
oppositional oligarch Boris Berezovsky in The Times - Berezovsky Is Playing Us, and Its 
Embarrassing, by S. Marsh (The Times, 30 July 2007). The picture of the newspaper that 
was shown in the programme (see Figure 8.1) created the impression that the article had 
been published on the front page  thus making it look as if it was news number one for the 
British audience, while in reality the front page on that day was given to a completely 
different article - Criminal Trial Chaos over Lack of Judges by S. ONeill and F. Gibb 
(Logutkov 2007). 
Figure 8.1. Article about Boris Berezovsky in The Times, 2007 (Logutkov 2007) 
Moreover, the Russian mass media often reproduced Western articles on their pages. In 
addition to more or less neutral reports (e.g. Western reaction to recent government 
appointments in Russia  see Novye izvestiya 2005) or curious facts, the Russian print 
media, similarly to InoSMI project, focused on negative publications about the country, 
thus reinforcing the image of the West as an enemy. However, positive publications were 
also used. Firstly, these were articles that conveyed a message which was contradictory to 
the mainstream opinion in the Western media. Ogonek, for instance, quoted an article from 
The New York Times (with reference to InoSMi but without  the title of the article or its 
publication date) which appeared to argue against the opinion that the freedom of speech in 
Russia was under threat (Ogonek, 4 August 2008, p. 3). Secondly, these were publications 
that acknowledged bias towards Russia in the Western mass media and thus, confirmed the 
Kremlins argument that Western criticism was not justified. RIA Novosti, for instance, 
publicised a commentary from The Guardian which discussed the biased character of many 
Western articles on democracy promotion in post-Soviet space, in particular on the Orange 
Revolution in Ukraine (RIA Novosti 2004). The author of the article, John Laughland, 
argued that   
Pora [youth group] continues to be presented as an innocent band of students having 
fun in spite of the fact that - like its sister organisations in Serbia and Georgia, Otpor 
and Kmara - Pora is an organisation created and financed by Washington92 
Another type of Western articles was those publications which conveyed an idea of positive 
attitudes towards Russia by ordinary Western people as opposed to the political elites. 
Sankt-Peterburgskie vedomosti, for instance, reproduced a letter, which had been published 
in The Daily Mail, from a British citizen who had fought in World War 2 and received a 
medal from the Russian Government. The author complained that he had not received a 
single medal from the British government and explained it by the unwillingness of the 
British authorities to emphasise Britains alliance with the Soviet Union during the war 
(Sankt-Peterburgskie vedomosti, 2 June 2005). On the whole, the Russian mass media 
repeatedly emphasised the negative character of Russias image in the West, which 
contributed to strengthening of a siege mentality in Russian public opinion and promoted 
the vision of the West as an enemy. 
8.3 Re-emergence of Enemy Images 
The re-emergence of the enemy image in such a relatively short period of time can be 
explained by a number of factors. Firstly, perceptions of Russia being surrounded by 
hostile external forces have a long history, so any anti-Western propaganda would fall on 
fertile soil (see Shlapentokh 2009). A deep-rooted distrust of the West has also been 
widespread among some parts of the Russian intelligentsia and political elite since the 19th 
century and was most clearly manifested in the debates between Slavophiles and 
Westernisers (see Neumann 1996). It intensified following the Bolshevik revolution in 
1917. In the next few years, as the newly established Soviet republic was struggling against 
counter-revolutionary forces  the White Army and Allied intervention - the vision of 
92 For more information see RIA Novosti (2004) Gardian: zapadnye SMI osveschayut vybory na Ukraine 
predvzyato, 27 November, available on-line at: http://www.rian.ru/politics/20041127/745365.html, accessed 
25 February 2008. 
Russia as a besieged fortress became central to the countrys self-image. It was further 
promoted in various ways by Soviet propaganda. An illustrative example is the poster 
Nezyblemaya krepost (Unshakeable Fortress) by Viktor Deni which was published in 1919 
and was accompanied by a poem by the revolutionary poet Demyan Bedny (see Figure 
8.2).  
Figure 8.2. Viktor Deni, Nezyblemaya krepost (Unshakeable Fortress), 1919 (White 1990, p. 95) 
Following the end of World War 2, portraying the West as an imminent external threat was 
one of the central elements in Soviet propaganda (see Fateev 1999). In the 1990s, with the 
collapse of the Communist regime, anti-Western sentiments in Russia gave way to some 
kind of an idealistic vision of Western countries for a short period.  However, as Russias 
relations with the West deteriorated under Putins presidency, anti-Western attitudes 
strengthened again, albeit in a different form: unlike political values, the Western way of 
life and prosperity were still considered very attractive. As the Moscow-based film director 
Mumin Shakirov put it in his article in Russia Profile, in Moscow it was easy to meet a 
self-assured intellectual who uses Windows on his PC, wears Levis jeans, drives a Ford 
and lambastes the United States (Shakirov 2008). One can argue that the deep-rooted 
perceptions of Russia being surrounded by hostile forces (originating from the West) were 
relatively easy to manipulate, and the Kremlin used them for domestic propaganda. 
Secondly, the idea that Russias negative image in the West was the product of an 
orchestrated propaganda campaign, rather than a reflection of reality, corresponded to the 
belief, shared by many in Russia, that the mass media cannot be independent in principle. 
This view, to a large extent, was the result of the Soviet and post-Soviet legacy. In the 
Soviet Union the mass media served first and foremost as an instrument of Soviet 
propaganda. Then, in the late 1990s they were largely perceived as tools employed by 
oligarchs in extremely dirty information wars against each other and the authorities. Under 
Putin, the most influential mass media were brought under the direct or indirect control of 
the state again. As a consequence, as Sarah Oates has pointed out in her study of the 
Russian media, most Russians reject[ed] the idea of objectivity or even balance in 
their mass media. Moreover, many Russians shared the view that no media system could 
be free from the influence of political or financial patrons (Oates 2007, p. 1285). Since the 
mass media were perceived as not independent, they were viewed as carrying out political 
instructions, i.e. being used by Western political and business elites as a propaganda 
instrument in their anti-Russian campaign. This can be illustrated by the words of a reader 
of InoSMI project: 
The unanimity and the striking similarity of the German, American, Dutch [articles 
about Russia] seem suspicious, and I think someone has simply given an order to the 
editorial boards not to accept articles of a different type (Ino SMI 2005). 
Moreover, this vision was reinforced by the efforts of Soviet propaganda throughout most 
of the 20th century to promote the image of venality of the Western press (see Fateev 1999). 
Finally, the vision of the West as hostile towards Russia was, to some extent, reinforced by 
the Western mass media themselves, as a large number of publications about Russia were 
extremely negative indeed. The Kremlin simply publicised the most hostile and emotional 
of them with the help of such projects as InoSMI, and used them as propaganda material. 
While the predominant tone of the Western mass media publications about Russia was 
negative, a number of Western journalists and academics spoke of resurging Russophobia 
in the West. Richard Sakwa, for instance, argued that Putins administration was vilified 
by Western analysts and much of the media in yet another outbreak of the deep-seated 
Russophobia that has characterised the West since the early nineteenth century (Sakwa 
2008, pp. 42-43). These views, to an extent supporting the argument of the regimes 
ideologists that Russophobia does exist in the West, were also publicised by the Kremlin. 
While there was fertile soil for the re-emergence of enemy images already, the Kremlin 
further promoted them by employing a number of techniques. Firstly, recurrent references 
to Western publications or statements related to Russia created the impression that Russia 
was higher on the political agenda in Western countries than it actually was. Secondly, 
criticisms of Russia were increasingly portrayed in the Russian mass media as a 
propaganda campaign or an information war against Russia aimed at weakening Russias 
geopolitical position. Thirdly, Western criticisms were repeatedly presented as 
manifestations of the Wests Cold War approach towards Russia, while the Kremlin was 
described as attempting to avoid confrontation and to maintain good relations with Western 
countries. According to Lavrov, for instance,  
When criticism is constructive, we always consider it. When the analysis of our internal 
situation is used as an attempt to return us all to the Cold War, we will not agree with 
that (Lavrov 2005). 
Furthermore, criticism of the Russian authorities was presented as criticism of Russia as a 
whole, so that any anti-Kremlin statements began to be perceived as anti-Russian and a 
manifestation of Western Russophobia. What were the functions of the enemy image, and 
how effective was the Kremlins propaganda in this respect? It can be argued that the main 
functions were related to i) maintaining the status quo in terms of possible democratisation 
and preventing an Orange Revolution scenario; ii) promoting state patriotism, and iii) 
mobilisation of public support for foreign policy strategy. Let us now examine these three 
areas in more detail. 
8.3.1 Preventing an Orange Revolution Scenario 
It can be argued that one of the purposes of promoting the enemy image was to neutralise 
any Western criticism and make it appear illegitimate in the eyes of the Russian electorate. 
It was particularly important in the context of rapidly developing communication 
techniques when the Internet, satellite TV and more opportunities to travel abroad made it 
much easier for the Russian people than ever before to gain access to Western views on 
events in Russia. The idea that Western elites had always been and probably always would 
be Russophobic was used to persuade the electorate that the West could not be objective in 
its criticism of the Kremlin. It should be noted that the vision of Russia as a fortress 
surrounded by hostile (mainly Western) forces, although always present in a Russian 
society, became significantly more widespread at the turn of the centuries and remained 
very pronounced throughout Putins presidency. This can be illustrated by the results of a 
series of public opinion surveys that were conducted by the Moscow-based Levada Centre 
in 1994-2008. Respondents were asked if they agree[d] that other countries have always 
felt hostility towards Russia, and that today no one wishes us good (Levada Centre 
2008b).  
1994 2000 2008
Completely agree 18 28 22 
Mainly agree 24 38 43 
Mainly disagree 26 21 22 
Completely 
disagree 
12 6 5 
Difficult to say 20 7 8 
Table 8.1. Russian public opinion on hostility of foreign countries towards Russia, 1994-2008 (Levada Centre 
2008b) 
As Table 8.1 demonstrates, the majority of participants completely/mainly agreed with the 
statement. However, while at the time of Boris Yeltsins presidency in 1994 this view was 
shared by only 42% of respondents (against 38% of those who disagreed with it), this 
number rose to 66% in 2000 and amounted to 65% of the respondents in 2008. It can be 
argued that the Kremlin to a large extent succeeded in promoting the idea that other 
countries (meaning mostly the West, but also a number of former Soviet republics 
including the Baltic States, Ukraine, Georgia and Poland) had always been hostile to 
Russia. A logical conclusion then would be that since Russophobia had for centuries been 
an essential part of the Western world view, then Western countries would always see 
Russia in a negative light, no matter how successful Russias development actually was. 
Thus, Western criticism did not have an objective basis and should not be trusted. 
According to an opinion poll conducted by the Levada Centre in August 2007, i.e. at a time 
when the Russian authorities were particularly severely criticised in the West for 
authoritarian tendencies, 46% of respondents said that Western accusations of violations of 
democracy in Russia did not have any basis. At the same time, only 29% believed that the 
accusations were well-grounded (Levada Centre 2007b). While discussing the attitudes of 
the Russian electorate towards Western criticisms of the Kremlins domestic policies, one 
should take into account particular features of widespread views of democracy in Russian 
society. For many in Russia democracy was associated with a decade of social 
disintegration, economic decline, chaos and continuous humiliation in the international 
arena under Yeltsins presidency (see Sakwa 2008, p. 43). In this context, stability and the 
relative economic prosperity of the Putin years were often viewed as more important than 
democratic freedoms. This also contributed to the vision of Western criticisms as ill-judged 
or self-serving. 
Figure 8.3. Russian public opinion on Western criticism of democracy in Russia as interference in Russias 
internal affairs, 2008 (Sedov 2008) 
The Kremlin also largely succeeded in promoting the idea that Western criticisms were 
aimed at weakening Russias position in the world, which can be illustrated by the findings 
of another public opinion survey conducted by the Levada Centre in August 2007. 
Respondents were presented with the question whether in their opinion Western 
accusations of the violations of democracy in Russia were caused by their concern for 
Russian citizens or by their intention to discredit Russia and gain some advantages over it. 
Only 8% agreed with the view that the reason for the criticism was actual concern for 
Russian citizens, while the overwhelming majority (68%) viewed the West as deliberately 
attempting to discredit Russia (Levada Centre 2007b). Moreover, many Russians perceived 
Definitely yes
Mainly yes
Mainly no
Definitely no
Don't know
Western criticisms as threatening to Russias sovereignty. A clear majority of respondents 
(51%) in yet another survey conducted by Levada Centre in March 2008 admitted that they 
considered the criticism by Western politicians of the state of democracy and human 
rights in Russia as interference in Russias internal affairs while only 27% disagreed (see 
Figure 8.3).What is interesting, the number of those who agreed with the statement was 
relatively equal among supporters of United Russia (52%), the CPRF (51%) and Just 
Russia (52%), and was lower only for supporters of Yabloko and the Union of Right 
Forces (34%) as well as Moscow residents (42%) (Sedov 2008). Thus, the survey revealed 
a general consensus regarding this issue across the political spectrum. 
In addition to neutralising Western criticism, promoting an enemy image also played a 
significant role in the marginalisation of domestic opposition. As Mendelson and Gerbner 
have pointed out, in the face of a supposed foreign threat, any challenge to the regime can 
easily be portrayed as treasonous (Mendelson & Gerbner 2008, p. 133). Liberal pro-
Western politicians were often portrayed as agents of the West and as anti-patriots who, by 
criticising the Russian authorities, were surrendering Russias national interests. At the 
same time, this vision contributed to discrediting democracy promotion by NGOs 
supported by the West. In his address to the Federal Assembly in May 2004, Putin voiced 
concern that 
not all of the organisations are oriented towards standing up for peoples real interests. 
For some of them, the priority is to receive financing from influential foreign 
foundations (Putin 2004b) 
Thus, making a link between NGOs and the West (which, according to this narrative, is not 
interested in a stronger Russia) the Kremlin presented the activity of Western-funded 
NGOs as a threat to Russias sovereignty.  
This view gained additional prominence in the dominant discourse following the Orange 
Revolution in Ukraine in 2004, which was perceived by many in Russia and presented in 
official propaganda as being staged by Western-funded NGOs. In an attempt to prevent 
any possibility of an Orange Revolution scenario in Russia, the Russian authorities 
limited the activities of such organisations. As Alexei Ostrovsky, a nationalist Duma 
deputy, put it:  
We have seen what happened in Ukraine, Georgia and Moldova and how these local 
branches of foreign NGOs that are funded by the CIA functioned () We want to 
defend our citizens from the chaos which our country can be dragged into by these 
foreign NGOs (quoted in The Times, 24 November 2005) 
During Putins second term, one of the main concerns for Russian political elites was the 
problem of the 2008 presidential election (see Sakwa 2008, p. 130). Since the Russian 
constitution prevented Putin from running for office for a third consecutive time, it was not 
clear how sustainable the regime would be without him as head of state. In order to 
maintain the regime, the most urgent task for the Russian authorities was to bring Putins 
chosen successor to power. In this context, any possibility of Western interference around 
the time of the elections was viewed as extremely threatening. By promoting the image of 
the West as an enemy, the Kremlin made an attempt to minimise any impact of Western 
criticism or Western-supported activities of the Russian opposition or civil society on the 
political situation in the country. 
At the same time, this vision of Western interference as a threat was used by the Kremlins 
ideologists to promote the concept of sovereign democracy (see Chapter Three). It is 
noteworthy that Putin tried to keep some distance from the public discussion of sovereign 
democracy, and the main elements of the doctrine were articulated by Vladislav Surkov, 
Deputy Chief of the Presidential Administration and aide to the President. However, a brief 
summary of the concept, or as Richard Sakwa called it the manifesto of sovereign 
democracy (2008, p. 64), was nevertheless given by Putin in his address to the Federal 
Assembly in April 2005. According to Putin, 
Russia is a country that has chosen democracy through the will of its own people. It 
chose this road of its own accord and it will decide itself how best to ensure that the 
principles of freedom and democracy are realised here, taking into account our historic, 
geopolitical and other particularities and respecting all fundamental democratic norms. 
As a sovereign nation, Russia can and will decide for itself the timeframe and 
conditions for its progress along this road (Putin 2005) 
Thus, portraying the West as an enemy was used to prevent any possibility of Western 
interference, to counter any attempt at democracy promotion, and, on the whole, to 
maintain the regime at a time when it was particularly vulnerable due to the change of 
presidency. Moreover, the enemy image was used to consolidate the electorate, and to a 
certain extent to shift its attention from any domestic problems to the external threat 
represented by the West. 
8.3.2 Promoting State Patriotism 
Furthermore, among the major tasks of Putins presidency was forging some sort of 
national consensus on Russias new place in the world and finding a solution to the 
continuous identity crisis the country had faced following the disintegration of the Soviet 
Union. Seeking to overcome the debilitating pessimism, [and] sense of humiliation of the 
1990s (Sakwa 2008, p. 216), Putin viewed the promotion of patriotism as one of the most 
significant measures. The state Programme for the Patriotic Education of the citizens of 
the Russian Federation for the period 2001-2005 emphasised the role of patriotism as a 
basis for the consolidation of society and strengthening of the state (Patrioticheskoe 
vospitanie 2001). The document envisaged the involvement of the mass media in 
implementing the programme and in the propaganda of patriotism. On can argue that to a 
large extent the Russian authorities succeeded in overcoming pessimistic attitudes and in 
particular in promoting the self-image of Russia as a great power. As Sakwa notes, Putin 
appeared able to restore Russias national dignity (2008, p. 23). 
The kind of patriotism promoted by the Kremlin, although based on genuinely positive 
values, such as pride in the motherland, respect for the countrys history etc, also included 
some element of distrust of the West. To a significant extent, that could be a legacy of the 
Soviet propaganda of patriotism which had traditionally centred on the idea of resistance to 
an external threat. At the same time, the Kremlins ideologists employed the enemy image 
of the West in patriotic propaganda as a means of mobilising public support for the concept 
of sovereign democracy. This approach can be illustrated by the manifesto of the youth 
movement Nashi (Molodezhnoe demokraticheskoe anti-fashistskoe dvizhenie Nashi) which 
was created in 2005 with the support of the Kremlin in an attempt to prevent a possible 
Orange Revolution. The movement viewed its primary task as maintaining the 
sovereignty and integrity of Russia. Their manifesto provided a detailed description of 
Russias enemies: 
In the area of the former Soviet Union the West, under the disguise of democracy and 
freedom slogans, leads a big geopolitical game, the purpose of which is to squeeze 
Russia out of the world politics and to introduce external governance in Russia93 
Mendelson and Gerber in their study of youth attitudes in Russia have demonstrated a 
considerable rise in anti-American sentiment among the Putin generation who, as they 
93 See the webpage of Molodezhnoe antifashistskoe dvizhenie Nashi: Manifesto, available on-line at: 
http://www.nashi.su/ideology, accessed 14 November 2008. 
have argued, favor the restoration of a hypersovereign Russia that remains outside the 
Euro-Atlantic community (2008, p. 131). 
8.3.3 Mobilising Public Support for the Foreign Policy Strategy 
Another area where official propaganda made extensive use of Russias international image 
and the image of the West is related to foreign policy issues. In Russia, foreign policy had 
traditionally been considerably high on the media agenda, and in Putins years the mass 
media continued this tradition by devoting significant attention to various state visits and to 
the coverage of Russias relations with foreign countries in general. Russian public opinion 
viewed Putins foreign policy as very successful, and Russias perceived achievements in 
this sphere contributed to the high approval ratings that Putin enjoyed throughout his 
presidency. In 2000-2007 his approval ratings were consistently between 65  73% of 
respondents (Sakwa 2008, p. 85). Moreover, according to the results of a series of polls that 
were conducted by the Levada Centre in 2000 -2007, Putins accomplishments in foreign 
policy were perceived as far more successful than his achievements in any other sphere. As 
Table 8.2 demonstrates, 58% of respondents expressed the view that Putin had succeeded 
in strengthening Russias international positions in 2000. This number steadily increased 
over the following years, and reached 74% of respondents in 2007. By contrast, in 2007 
only 48% of respondents viewed Putins actions aimed at restoring order in the country as 
successful, and even a smaller proportion of the electorate  43% - believed that Putin had 
achieved successful results in improving the economy and well-being of the people 
(Levada Centre 2007a, p. 73). 
Interestingly, despite increasing criticism of Russian democracy by the West, many in 
Russia believed that public opinion in Western countries, unlike the mass media and 
political elites, viewed Putin in a positive light. As a survey conducted by the Levada 
Centre in March 2007 revealed, 31% of Russian respondents thought the population of 
Western countries perceived Putin as a far-seeing, peace-loving and responsible 
politician. At the same time, 26% of participants said that in their opinion Putin was 
perceived as a determined defender of Russias national interests, while 25% believed 
that Putin was seen as a cautious and pragmatic statesman. Only 10% of respondents 
expressed their view that the Western public considered Putin as an authoritarian leader 
who [had] abolished the elements (beginnings) of democracy in Russia (Levada Centre 
2007a, p. 72). 
Very or quite 
successful 
(Nov)
(Nov)
(Nov)
(Nov)
(July)
(Nov)
(March)
(March)
Restoring order in the 
country 
38 51 46 47 50 48 46 48 
Improving the 
economy and well-
being of the people 
23 39 33 33 37 39 31 43 
Protection of 
democracy and 
political freedoms 
32 45 46 44 39 46 38 38 
Strengthening 
Russias 
international 
positions 
58 72 71 72 64 66 69 74 
Defeat of fighters in 
Chechnya 
30 30 19 24 27 33 40 49 
Political settlement of 
the situation in 
Chechnya 
20 24 16 27 27 30 37 48 
Table 8.2. Assessment of President Putins achievements in Russian public opinion, 2000-2007 (Levada 
Centre 2007a, p. 73) 
As one can see, the overwhelming public approval of foreign policy was a significant factor 
in Putins popularity. Thus, the regime was particularly interested in maintaining a high 
level of popular support in this area. As Russias relations with the West began to 
deteriorate at the end of Putins first term in office and became particularly tense during his 
second, the Russian authorities started to put more emphasis on the vision of the West as a 
threat in order to explain why relations were worsening (e.g. the failure to start negotiations 
on a new Partnership and Cooperation Agreement with the European Union in 2007). 
Although some scholars have pointed out that Putin remained a Westerniser in his approach 
to foreign policy throughout his presidency (see e.g. Sakwa 2008, p. 224), the Kremlin 
increasingly resorted to great power nationalism in its rhetoric. By portraying Western 
accusations of authoritarianism in Russia as unjustified and a manifestation of double 
standards, the Russian authorities promoted an image of the Kremlin as successfully 
struggling against foreign policy pressure that represented a threat to the country. It can be 
suggested that among the factors that affected Moscows choice in favour of a more 
assertive foreign policy at that stage, a significant role was played by the necessity of 
further promoting the image of a successful foreign policy that would meet the great power 
expectations of the electorate. The Kremlin needed to mobilise popular support for its 
foreign policy strategy in order to maximise the domestic support of the regime. In the 
context of the mounting tensions in Russias relations with the West, the Russian 
authorities achieved that objective by promoting the image of the Western criticism as a 
threat to Russias sovereignty. 
As this chapter has demonstrated, the Russian authorities were extremely sensitive to 
negative changes in the countrys international image. However, during Vladimir Putins 
presidency Russias reaction towards Western criticism underwent significant changes. 
With the sharp improvement in the Russian economy, assisted by extremely high energy 
revenues, Russia became noticeably less dependent on the West financially, in sharp 
contrast to the Yeltsin period. While in 1997 Russias foreign debt amounted to $110 
billion, already by October 2006 it had fallen to $50 billon which constituted only 18% of 
the countrys GDP, whereas for the EU on average foreign debt equaled about 60% of GDP 
at that time (Sakwa 2008, p. 245). In this context, the Kremlin became more inclined to 
ignore Western criticism of Russias democracy and resorted to a considerably more 
assertive rhetoric in relation to the West. Russias self-image in the dominant discourse, 
while largely remaining Pragmatic Nationalist, tended to include more elements of the 
Fundamentalist Nationalist vision of Russia and the West. 
Moreover, the Russian authorities used Russias negative international image very 
effectively in their domestic propaganda. By presenting Western criticism as the product of 
the Wests centuries-long Russophobia and the will of Western elites to diminish Russias 
international position for geopolitical reasons, the Kremlin contributed to the promotion of 
anti-Western sentiments in Russian public opinion and the strengthening of Russias self-
image as a besieged fortress. It can be argued that the regime resorted to this measure in 
order to maximise public support for the concept of sovereign democracy and, by doing 
so, prevent any possibility of events similar to the Orange Revolution in Ukraine and, more 
generally, to neutralise any Western attempts at democracy promotion. In addition to that, 
the image of a threat had a considerable impact on identity transformation, and was used by 
the Russian authorities to mobilise popular support for its foreign policy strategy. 
Chapter 9  
Conclusion: National Images in International Relations 
As this study has demonstrated, the problem of Russias negative image in Western 
countries remained very high on the political agenda of the Russian authorities throughout 
Vladimir Putins presidency. The view that Russias perceived images in the West were 
considerably more negative than Russian reality was advocated in numerous statements 
by Russian officials and in the mass media. Moreover, as discussed in Chapter Two, the 
problem of Russias image and possible ways to improve it were extensively debated in the 
Russian academic literature that rapidly developed over the past decade. In response to the 
perceived importance of the problem, the Putin administration made an attempt to promote 
a more favourable image of the country abroad by investing more effort into the 
information support of Russian foreign policy. These measures, as examined in Chapter 
Three, led to the revival of Russian foreign propaganda, which had largely been neglected 
during the previous decade. While a number of existing propaganda vehicles, such as the 
radio station Voice of Russia, received increased funding, a number of new outlets were 
established, such as the English speaking TV channel Russia Today or the Internet 
project Russia Profile.
The main task of Russian foreign propaganda, as analysed in Chapter Four, was to shift the 
focus of attention from the political elements of Russias perceived images, particularly the 
negative image of re-emerging authoritarianism and human rights problems, to more 
favourable cultural and especially economic elements, such as the image of Russia as a 
responsible business partner and  more narrowly  a reliable energy supplier. At the same 
time, Russian foreign propaganda increasingly emphasised Russias strength in the 
international arena as one of the key components of the countrys image. As this study 
demonstrated, the latter aspect of Russian foreign propaganda appeared to be more or less 
successful since Russia came to be perceived by many in the West as a country that had 
returned to the world stage. However, Russias strength was not necessarily viewed in a 
positive light. One can agree with the view that 
in the course of making itself heard in the international arena, Russia has succeeded in 
frightening many, while reassuring and winning over very few, if any, thus raising 
further questions about the long-term sustainability of its posture (Rumer 2007, p. 77) 
Moreover, the Russian authorities largely failed to neutralise the negative elements of 
Russias political image by promoting more positive elements of Russias image as an 
emerging economic power and an attractive investment destination. Predictably, Russias 
perceived images varied across Western countries and within individual countries  across 
the political spectrum in the perceptions of elites, as well as in the mass media and in 
public opinion, as demonstrated in Chapters Five and Six. In some countries, as in 
Germany (see Chapter Six), some sections of the political and business elite advocated 
closer links with Russia. However, despite these differences, Russias images remained 
predominantly negative. Their political components continued to outweigh Russias 
economic attractiveness while the appeal of Russian culture, which had traditionally been 
the most positive component of the countrys perceived images, was not sufficient to 
counteract Russias negative image as an authoritarian state. In addition to that, Russia was 
increasingly perceived as a threat in the sphere of energy security. What is more, its image 
as an investment destination, as argued in Chapter Seven, was not as positive as it could 
have been otherwise as it was severely damaged by Russias political image.  
Thus, the Russian authorities did not succeed in their attempts to enhance Russias soft 
power by projecting a more favourable image. This failure had a pronounced impact on the 
evolution of Russias dominant self image, which in turn affected Russias actions both at 
home and in the international arena. The first part of this concluding chapter seeks to 
conceptualise the implications of Russias unsuccessful foreign propaganda for Russian 
foreign and domestic policies. Having explored the Russian case, the chapter proceeds to 
present a theoretical explanation of the link between national images and a states foreign 
and domestic policies. Finally, the chapter discusses the limitations of the study and 
suggests possible directions for future research. 
9. 1 The Russian Case 
Why did Russian foreign propaganda fail to improve Russias image in Western countries 
to any significant extent? As was argued in Chapter Seven, there are a number of factors 
that can explain its lack of success. Some of them are related to problems that are internal 
to the propaganda machine (e.g. lack of coordination, insufficient funding, corruption, etc). 
To use Kellys typology of public diplomacy campaigns (see Chapter One), Russian 
foreign propaganda remained crisis-driven and mostly sought to disseminate information 
rather than to increase influence or promote engagement. Although there were some 
attempts to focus on influence or engagement (such as the activities of the Russkii Mir 
Foundation), they were not systematic and it is not clear yet how successful they can be. 
Other factors are connected to the existing negative stereotypes of Russia and the Russians 
that had developed over centuries and were further reinforced by anti-Soviet propaganda in 
the 20th century. These stereotypes, although becoming less prominent at times of military 
alliance of Western countries with Russia, tended to strengthen again once a common 
threat had been defeated. One can agree with a Russian commentator that  
when Western countries need Russia as a geopolitical or military ally, it is viewed as 
belonging to the West; when the need for this alliance decreases  Russia is viewed as a 
country whose interests contradict the interests of the civilised world (Semenenko et 
al 2006, p. 118)
This tendency was reflected, among other instances, in the temporary improvement of 
Russias image, particularly in regard to the conflict in Chechnya, following President 
Putins decision to join the US-led war on terror in 2001, as discussed in Chapter Two. 
Among other factors that contributed to the negative character of Russias perceived 
images in the West were propaganda efforts by other actors, such as Russian oppositional 
politicians, ex-oligarchs and members of political elites in a number of post-Soviet states. 
A large number of Russian commentators have explained the countrys negative image as 
the result of a Russophobia that is widespread among Western political elites (see e.g. 
Markov 2006; Mikoyan 2006). This view is also shared by some Western commentators. 
Anatol Lieven, for instance, has argued that  
Western Russophobia has various roots. One shoot is the continuing influence of () 
residual elites: groups and individuals who rose to prominence during the Cold War 
and have lacked the flexibility to adapt to a new reality. To these can be added others 
who have sought to carve out careers by advocating the expansion of U.S. influence 
into the lands of the former Soviet Union, in direct competition with Russia. Then there 
are various ethnic lobbies, whose members hate and distrust Russia for historical 
reasons and whose sole remaining raison d'tre is to urge an anti-Russian geopolitical 
agenda. Finally, there are those individuals who need a great enemy, whether from 
some collective interest or out of personal psychological need (Lieven 2000a, p. 26) 
One can argue that it would be simplistic to attribute Russias negative image solely to 
anti-Russian attitudes in Western countries. However, the existence of these attitudes did 
constitute a formidable challenge for Russian foreign propaganda. In addition to that, 
negative elements in Russias images in the West were reinforced by the inevitable 
emphasis on sensations in the Western mass media. The latter factor was especially 
obvious in the coverage of the Litvinenko affair in the British mass media, as discussed in 
Chapter Five.  
While all of the factors discussed above had a marked impact on the effectiveness of 
Russian foreign propaganda, the most serious damage to Russias perceived images, as this 
study has demonstrated, was caused by the apparent conflict in the signals that Russian 
foreign propaganda and actions of the Russian authorities more broadly sent to Western 
audiences. While Russian propaganda focused on projecting the countrys image as a 
reliable business partner, Russias actions in the international arena, particularly in the 
near abroad, often appeared to contradict this message. An illustrative example was 
Moscows dispute with Kiev over gas prices in the winter of 2005-2006 (and especially a 
similar dispute in the winter of 2008-2009). At first sight this seeming contradiction 
between words and actions may be explained by the disregard by the Russian authorities of 
the consequences of their actions for Russias image. Probably, this would be, at least to a 
certain extent, true in some cases. However, one can argue that this inconsistency of 
signals arose not so much from the disregard by the Russian leadership of the countrys 
image but rather from the conflict of several elements in Russias dominant self-image. As 
discussed in Chapter One, in a situation of an identity conflict states may be more likely to 
sacrifice a less salient element of the self-image in order to maintain a more prominent one. 
At times of a crisis in Russias relations with another country, Russias self-images as a 
partner and as a strong country often came into conflict: being a partner implied being 
ready to compromise, which was perceived by many among Russian elites as being weak. 
As the self-image of Russia as a strong country was increasingly important, the Russian 
authorities tended to emphasise Russias strength rather than Russias openness for 
compromise. 
To use Nyes criteria of a states ability to enhance its soft power (see Chapter One), 
Russian foreign propaganda did not satisfy any of them. Firstly, as discussed above, the 
actions of the Russian authorities often appeared to contradict its message rather than to 
confirm it. Secondly, Russias access to communications channels, although it 
considerably improved during Vladimir Putins presidency, remained fairly limited. The 
English-speaking TV channel Russia Today, for instance, could not compete with the 
CNN or BBC World with their significantly larger audiences and well-established 
reputations. Most importantly, however, many of the ideas promoted by Russian foreign 
propaganda did not match prevailing global norms (Nye, 2004, pp. 31-32). Presenting the 
Russian political system as a sovereign democracy (with a greater stress on sovereignty 
than on democracy) was especially problematic as this concept was clearly different from 
the understanding of democracy in Western countries. Moreover, projecting Russias 
increasing strength as a central characteristic of the countrys image was often counter-
productive as it emphasised the growing power of the Russian authorities, which was 
inevitably seen as dangerous, rather than the strength of the Russian economy, which 
would be more attractive to Western audiences. This apparent mismatch between the ideas 
promoted by Russian propaganda and the norms shared by Western political elites can also 
explain why Russia has never been accepted by Western countries as a great power  a 
status to which the Russian leadership has always aspired. One can agree with Neumann 
that the reason for Russias failure to do so lies not in a lack of material resources but 
rather in the absence of social compatibility between Russia and the West. In Neumanns 
words,  [a]s seen from Europe, a Great Power cannot have state-society relations that are 
too different from those that at any one given time dominate European politics (2008, p. 
147). 
In a context of the pronounced sensitivity of Russian political elites to Western perceptions 
of Russia, the failure of Russian foreign propaganda to substantially improve the countrys 
perceived image had a profound impact on the evolution of Russias dominant self-image. 
As discussed in Chapter Four, Russias self-image in the dominant discourse tended to be 
closer to the position of Pragmatic Nationalists who viewed Russia as a great power while 
advocating a pragmatic approach to cooperation with the West. However, in the final years 
of Putins presidency it moved noticeably closer to the position of Fundamentalist 
Nationalists who stressed the uniqueness of Russia and viewed it as a besieged fortress 
surrounded by hostile forces. As argued in Chapter Eight, the fact that Russia was 
continuously criticised by Western elites and in the mass media was perceived by many as 
an indication of the unwillingness of the West to deal with a stronger and more 
independent Russia as compared with the Yeltsin period. In the dominant discourse, the 
inability to promote a more favourable image was explained by the hostility of a West that 
did not want to accept Russia as an equal partner. In 2006-2008 Putins rhetoric became 
increasingly confrontational. When asked by Time magazine about his opinion of 
American misconceptions about Russia, the Russian President accused US elites of 
deliberate attempts to damage Russias image: 
I dont believe these are misconceptions. I think this is a purposeful attempt by some to 
create an image of Russia based on which one could influence our internal and foreign 
policies. This is the reason why everybody is made to believe () [Russians] are a little 
bit savage still or they just climbed down from the trees, you know, and probably need 
to have () the dirt washed out of their beards and hair (Time, 31 December 2007  7 
January 2008, p. 41) 
This transformation of the dominant self-image affected the dominant vision of Russias 
national interests in the international arena. The perceived strengthening of Russia together 
with growing dissatisfaction with perceived disrespect on the part of the West made it 
appealing for the Russian authorities to act more assertively in relations with other 
countries. These changes were reflected in the Foreign Policy Survey of the Russian 
Federation that was prepared by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and approved by the 
Russian President in March 2007. The survey sought to reconsider Russian foreign policy 
strategy in the new international environment and emphasised the newly acquired foreign 
policy independence of Russia as the chief achievement of the Putin years.94 The 
document was openly critical of a number of states whose relations with Russia had 
become particularly strained in previous years. It blamed Georgia, for instance, for 
waging an incessant anti-Russian media campaign, and referred to the post-Soviet 
countries that had joined the EU in the 2004 enlargement round as turning the Russia-EU 
relationship into a hostage of their own narrow national interests. The UK was 
mentioned as a difficult partner due to the well-known stand of London on the problem 
of so-called new political emigrants and the avowedly messianic disposition of a 
considerable part of the British political elite, inter alia regarding the internal political 
processes in Russia. Predictably, the strongest criticism centred on the USA, which was 
accused of a striving () to arrange [relations with Russia] according to the leader and 
led scheme (Ministry of Foreign Affairs 2007). 
In more general terms, the Survey repeatedly emphasised the hostility of the international 
environment in relation to Russia, which represented a considerable shift in official 
discourse as compared to the years of Putins first term in office. In this context, the task of 
improving Russias image in the West was still viewed as extremely important. According 
to the document, [b]uilding up efforts to counter the stereotyped anti-Russian thinking in 
the United States and a number of European countries acquire[d] particular urgency and 
relevance (Ministry of Foreign Affairs 2007). The Survey did not specify exactly what 
image Russian foreign propaganda had to promote. However, the predominant view on this 
question in the Russian academic and expert literature was increasingly hard-line. Since 
94 Published a year before Putin was to leave his post as the Russian President, the Survey did not have the 
same status as a Foreign Policy Concept. Its main purpose was to reassess Russias position in the world and 
to suggest recommendations for the future Foreign Policy Concept. The new Concept was subsequently 
adopted in the first year of Dmitry Medvedevs presidency (see The Foreign Policy Concept 2008). 
Russian propaganda had not succeeded in improving Russias image by focusing on the 
image of a partner, as some scholars have argued, it should place more emphasis on 
positioning Russia as a strong country that was capable of defending its national interests 
(see Semenenko et al 2006, p. 119).  
Most importantly, the perceived unwillingness of the West to accept a stronger and more 
independent Russia noticeably strengthened those discourses that depicted the West as 
hostile towards Russia, and undermined the position of those groups in Russian society that 
had advocated closer links with Western countries. One can argue that the whole spectrum 
of foreign policy opinion somehow moved in the direction of the Fundamentalist 
Nationalist pole. A number of those experts who could previously been described as 
Liberal Westernisers, for instance, began to question the good intentions of Western 
criticisms of Russias democracy. In the words of Dmitry Trenin of the Moscow Carnegie 
Centre, 
Western talk on democracy and values is essentially hollow and is used to put 
American or European interests at an advantage and Russia at a disadvantage. Western 
powers routinely use double standards in approaching similar situations, depending on 
their particular interests (2007, p. 76) 
Thus, a vicious circle emerged. On the one hand, Russias already existing negative images 
in the West tended to give rise to pessimistic expectations of Russias behaviour in the 
international arena. In the event of a tension in Russias relations with any foreign country, 
Western political elites (as well as the mass media) were more likely to expect that the 
Russian authorities would take disproportionate measures to punish the opponent. An 
illustrative example was a series of Russias disputes with Ukraine over gas prices when, 
as discussed earlier in the study, the actions of the Russian authorities were perceived by 
many in the West as an attempt to punish Ukraine for its pro-Western choice. These 
expectations, in turn, tended to lead to a more critical assessment of Russias actions by 
Western political elites. On the other hand, the mounting criticism of Russias policies was 
increasingly perceived by many in Russia as a consequence of Western Russophobia and 
the determination of Western elites to prevent Russia from successful integration into the 
world economy. These views contributed to the growth of anti-Western attitudes in 
Russian society by undermining the position of more pro-Western groups and by 
strengthening the position of more nationalist forces. The resulting change in Russias 
dominant self-image, in turn, affected the vision of Russias national interest as the 
Russian authorities were more likely to pursue a more assertive foreign policy. Russias 
more assertive stance, in turn, appeared to confirm Russias negative images in Western 
countries, thus making the circle complete. 
The inability of the Russian authorities to promote a more favourable image of the country 
in the West had a pronounced effect not only on Russias foreign policy, but on its 
domestic politics as well. As was discussed in Chapter One, self-images are embedded in 
larger sets of policy preferences, including those related to competing visions of the social 
and economic development of the country. A change in Russias dominant self-image 
reinforced a change of priorities in domestic politics  particularly, in the direction of 
further centralisation and a greater role for the state in order to strengthen Russia in a 
hostile environment. Moreover, Russias negative image in Western countries began to be 
extensively used in Russian domestic propaganda, especially in the run-up to parliamentary 
elections in December 2007 and presidential elections in March 2008. As demonstrated in 
Chapter Eight, the Russian authorities sought to promote a vision of Russia as a besieged 
fortress surrounded by hostile forces in an attempt to minimise the effect of Western 
criticisms. By doing so, they aimed to discredit any efforts by Western actors, including 
NGOs funded by Western sources, to promote democracy in Russia. In addition to that, 
Russian domestic propaganda sought to mobilise support for Putins foreign policy, as 
Russias perceived success in the international arena remained one of the key factors 
behind Putins popularity. 
Predictably, the goals of Russian foreign and domestic propaganda often came into 
conflict. As discussed earlier, while Russian foreign policy could benefit from promoting 
the image of a partner, it was increasingly important for the Russian authorities to project 
an image of a strong country and a great power for their domestic audience. The Russian 
leadership was continuously faced with the need to somehow reconcile these objectives. 
To use Robert Putnams metaphor of a two-level game (1988, p. 434), the Kremlin had to 
respond to domestic and international pressures by playing at both game boards at the 
same time. The crucial question is which audience  foreign or domestic- tended to be a 
priority? This study has demonstrated that domestic propaganda was often considered as 
more important. This is hardly surprising as domestic propaganda remained among the key 
instruments that were used by the Russian authorities to ensure regime survival. One can 
agree with Shevtsova (2007, p. 8) that Russias claim to great-power status remain[ed] an 
important means of rallying society and preserving the centralised state. Thus, Russias 
image as projected for domestic purposes inevitably affected the image that was promoted 
in Western countries, which contributed to the failure of Russian foreign propaganda to 
construct a more favourable image of Russia in the international arena. 
2. Theoretical Implications 
What does the Russian case tell us about the role of perceived, projected and self-images of 
states in international relations? This study has followed the constructivist tradition in IR 
theory by looking at the vision of the national interests of the state by the political elite as 
shaped by the dominant self-image. At the same time, it has argued that understanding of 
the transformation of the dominant self-image can be enhanced if we examine its link to 
the states projected and perceived images. Figure 9.1 illustrates the interconnection 
between these three types of state image. As the analysis of Russias images has shown, 
the state is interested in projecting an image that would facilitate its pursuit of national 
interests in the international arena. The importance of projecting this favourable image 
drastically increases in the context of an identity crisis that usually follows a major change 
in the states domestic situation or international environment, as was the case with post-
Soviet Russia. Moreover, in the perceptions of the political elite, this task becomes 
especially urgent if the states perceived image held by the significant Other does not 
appear to be objective and is more negative than reality (i.e. reality as perceived by the 
ruling elite).  
As Figure 9.1 demonstrates, the states projected image is shaped by the dominant self-
image. The former usually has the same elements as the latter although the relative weight 
of these elements may differ: we want to be perceived in a better way than we actually are. 
By promoting this projected image, the state (in our case Russia) ultimately seeks to 
change its perceived image in another state (state A in the diagram) that plays the role of 
the Significant Other in its dominant self-image. In the diagram, the link between Russias 
projected and perceived images is shown with a dotted line as the state does not always 
succeed in transforming the perceived image. When it does succeed in constructing a 
favourable image and the significant Other recognises it in the way it wants to be 
recognised, the projected image will have a pronounced impact on the states dominant 
self-image, which is also shown with a dotted line. In Russias case, for instance, it sought 
to be accepted by Western countries as a reliable and predictable business partner. One can 
hypothesise that had it been recognised as a reliable partner, this projected image would 
have affected Russias dominant self-image, as the Russian authorities would have had an 
incentive to confirm the image by their actions and gradually would have accepted 
reliability and predictability as the most essential components of Russias self-image. 
However, as the study has argued, Russian foreign propaganda largely failed to convince 
Western audiences of Russias reliability. 
Figure 9.1. Russias images in its relations with Significant Other 
The task of transforming perceptions of the state in another state is always difficult and 
requires consistent long-term effort, as stereotypes that national images are based on are 
historical in nature and relatively stable. Changing an image is particularly problematic if 
the first state is perceived as a Significant Other by another state (state A), as is the case in 
Russias relations with West European countries. The perceived image of the first state 
(Russia) is then closely linked to the self-image of state A, and thus tends to resist any 
radical changes. As this study has argued, Russia has traditionally been perceived in 
Western countries as a backward, expansionist and dangerous state under authoritarian 
leadership. This negative image has played an important role in the transformation of the 
self-images of Western countries. They have defined themselves as in many aspects 
opposite to Russia  they are what Russia is not, and Russia is what they are not. This 
made the task of improving Russias perceived image especially difficult. 
Russias vision of 
its image in state A 
State As image in 
Russia (Significant 
Other) 
Russias 
dominant self-
image 
Russias 
projected image 
State As 
perception of its 
image in Russia 
Russias image in 
state A 
State As self-
image 
State As projected 
image 
As one can see from the diagram, the states image as perceived by the significant Other 
(state A) has a pronounced impact on the transformation of its dominant self-image, as 
well as on the evolution of the image of state A itself. One should stress that the states 
vision of its perceived image in state A may substantially differ from this perceived image 
although it is clearly shaped by it: in the diagram an arrow links Russias image in state A 
to Russias vision of its image in state A. To illustrate this point, at the beginning of 
Vladimir Putins presidency, for instance, Russia was not very high on the political and 
media agenda of most Western countries. However, Russias image in the West, as 
perceived by many in Russia itself, appeared to be much more salient and even more 
negative than it actually was.  
Figure 9.2. Transformation of Russias dominant self-image 
More importantly, the states vision of its image held by the significant Other has a 
profound effect on the competition among the discourses of self-images that are articulated 
by different elite groups in the society. This point is particularly important as it contributes 
to the understanding of the link between foreign and domestic in policy-making. In 
Russias case, as shown in Figure 9.2, the vision of Russias image in the West varied 
among Liberal Westernisers, Pragmatic Nationalists and Fundamentalist Nationalists. The 
perceived disrespect and hostility of the West towards Russia supported the 
Fundamentalist Nationalist discourse while discrediting the position of Liberal 
Westernisers. Thus, Russias dominant self-image, albeit still close to the position of 
Pragmatic Nationalists, began to rely more heavily on elements of the Fundamentalist 
Nationalist discourse. Moreover, each of the states competing self-images is associated 
Russias vision 
of its image in 
state A 
Russias self-image as 
articulated by Liberal 
Westernisers 
Russias self-image as 
articulated by Pragmatic 
Nationalists 
Russias self-image as 
articulated by 
Fundamentalist 
Nationalists 
Russias 
dominant self-
image 
with a set of broader issues, such as different preferences in terms of the social, economic 
and political development of the country. Thus, a change in the prominence of a particular 
self-image as a result of the acceptance or a lack of it by the significant Other may 
contribute to a significant shift in domestic policy. While this study has focused primarily 
on international causes of change in Russias dominant self-image (i.e. changes resulting 
from Russias interaction with other states), one cannot disregard various domestic 
influences. One can suggest that the evolution of the dominant self-image is also affected 
by changes in public support for these broader issues. In this case, the support of a 
particular elite group on the basis of their economic or political preferences in the sphere of 
domestic policy will enable them to promote their vision of the countrys position in the 
world. Thus, the transformation of the dominant self-image is shaped by both international 
and domestic developments. At the same time, it has a strong impact on both foreign and 
domestic policies of the state as it shapes the vision of its national interest at home and in 
the international arena. 
3. Limitations of the Study and Future Research 
This study has attempted to offer the first systematic account of Russian foreign 
propaganda in the post-Soviet period. By analysing the effort by the Russian authorities 
under Vladimir Putins presidency to construct a more favourable image of Russia in the 
West, it has sought to explain the impact of Russias perceived, projected and self-images 
on its foreign and domestic policies. However, it has inevitably been limited in scope. On 
the one hand, it has focused primarily on the transformation of Russias images in 2000-
2008, which is a relatively short period of time. As discussed earlier in the thesis, national 
images are very stable, and changing them may take a long time. Taking into consideration 
the fact that the Russian authorities launched a full-scale propaganda campaign in Western 
countries only around 2003, the period covered in this study might be insufficient for 
measuring its results. Thus, any future analysis of Russian foreign propaganda would 
benefit from looking at the evolution of Russias images from a longer-term perspective. 
Events that have taken place both in Russia and in the international arena after Putin left 
office would provide extremely interesting material for a study of this kind.  
Following Dmitry Medvedevs election as President of the Russian Federation in March 
2008 and the subsequent appointment of Putin as Prime Minister, one of the key questions 
in Russian studies has been the balance of power in the Putin-Medvedev political 
relationship (see e.g. Badovsky 2009; Piontkovsky 2008). Will this tandem succeed in 
sharing power? Will Putin attempt to discredit Medvedev in the eyes of the electorate and 
regain the presidency? Will Medvedev seek to undermine Putins position and become 
more influential? These questions would be central to a discussion of Russias images in 
the post-Putin period.  
Moreover, one can expect that the rapidly changing economic situation will have a 
pronounced impact on Russias dominant self-image. As this study has argued, Russias 
economic prosperity and stability as compared to the Yeltsin era was one of the main 
sources of legitimacy of the Russian authorities at home. However, in the past year the 
Russian economy has been badly hit by the global recession. Its heavy dependence on 
energy export made it particularly vulnerable to the dramatic drop in oil prices from $95.1 
(Urals, a barrel) in 2008 down to $45.5 at the beginning of 2009 (World Bank 2009, p. 2). 
According to a World Bank report, in 2009 Russias GDP was expected to contract about 
7.9 % while the level of unemployment was likely to reach 13% (World Bank 2009, p. 1). 
In the context of Russias uninterrupted economic growth during Putins presidency, these 
developments appear to be almost catastrophic. Although the Russian authorities hurried to 
announce an improvement in the economic climate in September 2009, they still 
emphasised that it was too early to say that the crisis was over (see RIA Novosti 2009).  
Apart from the changing economic environment, Medvedevs Russia has also faced a 
number of foreign policy challenges, the analysis of which would be extremely important 
for a study of this kind. Russias military conflict with Georgia over South Ossetia in 
August 2008, for instance, indicated Moscows increasing assertiveness in the international 
arena. The Russian authorities sought to present the actions of the Georgian leadership as 
aggression and genocide against South Ossetia and Russias actions as an attempt to 
prevent a humanitarian disaster (Interview of Dmitry Medvedev with BBC Television 
2008). However, they largely failed to make their case, as the coverage of Russias actions 
in Georgia by the Western mass media was predominantly negative. Some commentators 
have argued that Russias military victory was accompanied by major failures on both the 
diplomatic and media fronts (Antonenko 2008, p. 26). One can expect that this conflict 
and the information war that accompanied it (in both the Western and Russian mass media) 
will have a profound and long-lasting impact on the transformation of Russias images.  
An analysis of these recent developments would undoubtedly enrich any future study of 
Russias images and their role in the countrys foreign and domestic policies. More 
importantly, however, the study would benefit from a wider geographic scope. This thesis 
has focussed on Russias images in Western countries with Germany and the UK as two 
case studies. While this approach has yielded interesting results, it would be useful to 
include a number of case studies outside Western Europe. An examination of Russias 
images in the USA would be extremely important due to the complex nature of Russian-
US relations in the 20th century, and especially due to the USAs position as the only 
remaining super-power in the post-Cold War world. To enhance the validity of the project, 
another case study could look at the transformation of Russias images in a post-Soviet 
country, such as Poland. An in-depth analysis of Russian-Polish relations would give an 
opportunity to examine the historical component in national images  particularly the 
impact of divergent views of the Soviet Union, including its role in the World War 2, on 
the dominant self-images in the two countries. Finally, future research should address the 
problem of wider normative issues related to projected national images. One can hope that 
the findings of this thesis will contribute to the conceptualisation of the role of national 
images in international relations, and that the issues it has addressed will be developed 
further in future studies. 
Appendix 1  
A Note on Interviews 
Interviews for this thesis were conducted mostly in Russia (Moscow) and two case-study 
countries  the UK (London) and Germany (Berlin). In Moscow, five interviews were 
conducted with Russian propagandists who had first-hand experience of working in 
Russian foreign propaganda aimed at Western countries. In addition to that, two interviews 
were arranged with an independent PR consultant and a Russian scholar who commented 
on the actions of the Russia authorities related to propaganda efforts. Three senior Russian 
propagandists were also interviewed in capitals of EU member states. However, for the 
purposes of anonymity their exact affiliation cannot be disclosed. In the UK and Germany, 
interviews were conducted with members of the political elite (members of the UK 
Parliament and the Bundestag, and senior diplomats), journalists with a background in 
covering Russian politics, and experts in German-Russian and British-Russian relations. 
Moreover, additional interviews were arranged with a French journalist, a former European 
Commission Advisor and a Senior European Commission official, all of whom had a 
background in EU-Russia relations. In total, 29 in-depth interviews were conducted. All 
the interviews were given on condition that anonymity would be ensured. Thus, the list of 
interviews below indicates only broadly-defined affiliation of interviewees, as well as the 
location and the date. 
One should mention a number of challenges that the use of interviews has posed for the 
present study. They are mostly similar to those limitations that are typical of elite 
interviewing in general (e.g. see Dexter 1970; Morris 2009). Firstly, there can be some bias 
in selection of interviewees as it has been based not on representative but on purposeful 
sampling (see Snape & Spencer 2004). This choice can be explained by the emphasis of 
the study on exploring shared images held by different elite groups in soceity rather than 
on investigating their quantitative distribution. Moreover, some bias can also be caused by 
a difficulty of gaining access to a number of potential interviewees whose views would 
have been extremely important for the analysis of Russias images. This problem was 
particularly significant during the fieldwork in Moscow. As has been suggested in the 
academic literature, respondents in more politically unstable environments may be a good 
deal more suspicious about the goals and purposes of the research project (Rivera,  
Kozyreva & Sarovskii 2002, p. 684). Another typical problem in elite interviewing is 
inaccuracy of factual information: sometimes interviewees may have a limited picture of 
events, they may have convinced themselves in a particular vision of the situation in order 
to rationalise their behaviour, or, what is more, they may deliberately tell lies (Manheim & 
Rich 1986). This thesis, however, has been interested in studying shared perceptions and 
interpretations of events rather than in looking for some objective information, which has 
made elite interviewing especially relevant. Finally, one should mention a possible 
interviewers effect. It has been argued, that the interviewers gender, ethnicity or other 
characteristics can affect the way in which an interviewee answers questions (Burnham et 
al 2004). While this study acknowledges all these limitations, it has sought to overcome 
them, at least to some extent, by supplementing results obtained with the help of elite 
interviewings with findings of discourse analysis of a large number of primary sources, as 
well as with reliance on extensive secondary literature. 
List of interviews: 
1) Senior Russian propagandist, Moscow, 29 January  2007  
2) Senior Russian propagandist, Moscow,  30 January 2007  
3) Senior Russian propagandist, Moscow, 31 January 2007  
4) Russian propagandist, Moscow, 29 January  2007  
5) Russian propagandist, Moscow, 31 January 2007  
6) Russian PR consultant, Moscow, 1 February 2007  
7) Russian scholar, Moscow, 30 January 2007  
8) Senior Russian propagandist, the capital of an EU member state, 12 May 2007 
9) Senior Russian propagandist, the capital of an EU member state, 15 May 2007 
10) Senior Russian propagandist, the capital of an EU member state, 27 June 2007 
11) Former high-ranking British diplomat, London, 13 December 2006  
12) Former high-ranking British diplomat, London, 14 December 2006  
13) Former high-ranking British diplomat, London, 14 December 2006  
14) Member of the House of Lords, Conservative Party, London, 12 December 2006 
15) Member of the House of Lords, Labour Party, Edinburgh, 15 December 2006  
16) British journalist, London, 11 December 2006  
17) British journalist, London, 12 December 2006 
18) British journalist, London, 12 December 2006 
19) British journalist, London, 13 December 2006 
20) British scholar, London, 14 December 2006  
21) High-ranking German diplomat, Brussels, 5 June 2007 
22) Member of the Bundestag, Die Linke, Berlin,  18 July 2007  
23) Member of the Bundestag, FDP, Berlin, 6 July 2007  
24) Advisor of a Member of the Bundestag, the Greens, Berlin, 10 July 2007  
25) German journalist, Berlin, 11 July 2007 
26) German expert in German-Russian relations, Berlin, 5 July 2007 
27) Former European Commission Advisor, Brussels, 2 June 2007  
28) Senior official in the European Commission, Brussels, 30 May 2007 
29) French journalist, Paris, 14 May 2007 
Bibliography 
1. Russian Official Documents 
Doktrina informatsionnoi bezopasnosti Rossiiskoi Federatsii, 9 September (2000) 
Rossiiskaya gazeta, 28 September, pp. 4-6. 
Energeticheskaya strategiya Rossii na period do 2020 goda (2003) available on-line at: 
http://www.minprom.gov.ru/docs/strateg/1/, accessed 7 September 2007, accessed 
25 September 2009. 
 Kontseptsiya natsionalnoi bezopasnosti Rossiiskoi Federatsii, 10 January (2000) 
Diplomaticheskii vestnik, 2, pp. 3-13. 
Kontseptsiya vneshnei politiki Rossiiskoi Federatsii, 23 April (1993) Diplomaticheskii 
vestnik, 1-2, pp. 3-23. 
Kontseptsiya vneshnei politiki Rossiiskoi Federatsii, 28 June (2000) Diplomaticheskii 
vestnik, 8, pp. 3-11. 
The Foreign Policy Concept of the Russian Federation, 12 July (2008) International 
Affairs: A Russian Journal of World Politics, Diplomacy and International 
Relations, 54, 5, pp. 8-28. 
Patrioticheskoe vospitanie grazhdan Rossiiskoi Federatsii na 2001-2005 gody, 16 
February (2001) Rossiiskaya gazeta, available on-line at: 
http://www.rg.ru/oficial/doc/postan_rf/122_1.shtm, accessed 9 September 2008. 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the RF (2007) Obzor vneshnei politiki Rossiiskoi 
Federatsii, available on-line at:  
http://www.mid.ru/brp_4.nsf/sps/3647DA97748A106BC32572AB002AC4DD,
accessed 9 September, 2009. 
2. Russian Government and Corporate Publications 
Embassy of the Russian Federation in the United Kingdom (2000) Press release 4, 8 
February, available on-line at: http://www.great-britain.mid.ru/pressrel/pr04.htm,
accessed 6 March 2007. 
Embassy of the Russian Federation in the United Kingdom (2005) Press release 28, 19 
October, available on-line at: http://www.great-britain.mid.ru/, accessed 6 March 
2007. 
Federal State Statistics Service (n.d.a) Foreign Trade of the Russian Federation with Far 
Abroad Countries, available on-line at: 
http://www.gks.ru/bgd/regl/b08_11/IssWWW.exe/Stg/d03/26-05.htm, accessed 10 
July 2009. 
Federal State Statistics Service (n.d. b) Volume of Foreign Investments in the Economy of 
the Russian Federation in 2007 by Main Countries-Investors, available on-line at: 
http://www.gks.ru/bgd/regl/b08_12/IssWWW.exe/stg/d02/24-12.htm , accessed 10 
July 2009. 
Foreign Investment Advisory Council of the Russian Federation (2007) Russias Image 
Among Foreign Investors, Key Findings of Research Conducted by  Peter D. Hart 
Research Associates, Inc, May, available on-line at:  
http://portal.economy.gov.ru/UnidocFileServlet/FileServlet?unidoc_id=118725163
7656&template_id=4, accessed 22 January 2008. 
Gazprom (2008) Annual Report 2007, available on-line at: 
http://www.gazprom.ru/documents/Annual_Eng_2007.pdf, accessed 1 May 2009. 
Gazprom Marketing and Trading Limited (2007) Annual Review 2007, available on-line 
at: http://www.gazprom-
mt.com/financials/documents/Gazprom_Annual_Review_2007.pdf, accessed 15 
July 2009. 
Ministry for Economic Development and Trade of the Russian Federation (2006) 
Investors Guidebook to Russia, available on-line at: 
http://www.economy.gov.ru/wps/wcm/connect/economylib/mert/resources/fee9048
0479df85a8695a6dc84076ae0/investor%25E2%2580%2599s_guidebook_to_russia.
pdf, accessed 5 February 2009. 
Ministry for Economic Development and Trade of the Russian Federation (2007) 
Kontseptsiya Programmy uluchsheniya investitsionnogo imidzha Rossii za 
rubezhom, available on-line at: 
www.economy.gov.ru/wps/wcm/connect/economylib/mert/resources/77588000478
2b4cc9618bfb5a4f36a29/oznakomitsya.pdf, accessed 21 January 2008. 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation (2005) Statement 224-04-02-2005, 
4 February, available on-line at: http://www.mid.ru/ns-
reuro.nsf/348bd0da1d5a7185432569e700419c7a/432569d80022027
ec3256f9e002e956d?OpenDocument, accessed 6 March 2007. 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation (2009a) Federativnaya Respublika 
Germaniya, available on-line at: http://www.mid.ru/ns-
reuro.nsf/348bd0da1d5a7185432569e700419c7a/17e84d2cd88694e843256d10004
6a1e2?OpenDocument, accessed 22 July 2009. 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation (2009b) O rossiisko-germanskikh 
kulturno-gumanitarnykh svyazyakh, available on-line at: http://www.mid.ru/ns-
reuro.nsf/348bd0da1d5a7185432569e700419c7a/daa0ace330f95b0fc325755c002e0
91e?OpenDocument, accessed 22 July 2009. 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation (2009c) O torgovo-
ekonomicheskikh svyazyakh Rossiya-Germaniya, available on-line at: 
http://www.mid.ru/ns-
reuro.nsf/348bd0da1d5a7185432569e700419c7a/97d01032edcc8fd5c325755c002e
3852?OpenDocument, accessed 22 July 2009. 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation (2009d) Rossiisko-germanskie 
otnosheniya, available on-line at: http://www.mid.ru/ns-
reuro.nsf/348bd0da1d5a7185432569e700419c7a/432569d80022027e43256b84002
96af8?OpenDocument, accessed 22 July 2009. 
3. Other Official and Corporate Publications 
BP (2008) BP Statistical Review of World Energy 2008. British Petroleum. 
EUDG (European Union, Directorate-General for Energy and Transport) (2009) EU 
Energy and Transport in Figures. Brussels, European Commission. 
Foreign and Commonwealth Office (2008) Human Rights. Annual Report 2007, 
available on-line at: http://www.fco.gov.uk/resources/en/pdf/human-rights-report-
2007, accessed 15 July 2009. 
House of Commons (2006) Minutes of Evidence, Select Committee on Trade and 
Industry, 16 May, available on-line at: 
http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200506/cmselect/cmtrdind/1123/6051
602.htm, accessed 21 July 2009. 
House of Commons Hansard (2000-2008), available on-line at: 
http://www.parliament.uk/publications/index.cfm, accessed 28 September 2009. 
House of Lords (2008) The European Union and Russia, 14th Report, European Union 
Committee. London, Stationery Office. 
World Bank (2001) Russian Economic Report N1, available on-line at: 
http://ns.worldbank.org.ru/files/rer/RER_1_eng.pdf, accessed 30 July 2009. 
World Bank (2008) Russian Economic Report N16, available on-line at: 
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTRUSSIANFEDERATION/Resources/rer16_
Eng.pdf, accessed 29 July 2009. 
World Bank (2009) Russian Economic Report N19, available on-line at: 
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTRUSSIANFEDERATION/Resources/30549
9-1245838520910/rer19-eng.pdf, accessed 18 September 2009. 
4. President Putins Statements, Articles and Interviews 
BBC (2006a) Putin recalls kissing boy's belly, 6 July, available on-line at: 
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/5155448.stm, accessed 3 August 2009. 
Interview with German Television Channels ARD and ZDF, 5 May 2005, available on-
line at: http://www. July 2006.kremlin.ru/eng/speeches/2005/05/05/ 
2355_type82916_87597.shtml/, accessed 17 July 2006. 
Interview with NBC Television Channel, USA, 12 July 2006, available at: 
http://www.kremlin.ru/eng/speeches/2006/07/12/1443_type82916_108525.shtml/, 
accessed 20 July 2006. 
Interview with the RTR TV Channel, 23 January 2000, available on-line at: 
http://www.kremlin.ru/eng/speeches/2000/01/23/0000_type82912type82916_12261
2.shtml, accessed 11 November 2008. 
 Intervyu Prezidenta Rossiiskoi Federatsii V.V. Putina amerikanskim telekanalam, 20 
September (2003a) Diplomaticheskii vestnik, 10, pp. 11-15. 
Intervyu Prezidenta Rossiiskoi Federatsii V.V. Putina amerikanskoi gazete New-York 
Times, 4 October (2003b) Diplomaticheskii vestnik, 11, pp. 13-22. 
Intervyu Prezidenta Rossiiskoi Federatsii V.V. Putina telekompanii France -3, 9
February (2003c) Diplomaticheskii vestnik, 3, pp. 29-32. 
Meeting with Members of the Valdai International Discussion Club, 14 September 2007, 
available on-line at: 
http://www.kremlin.ru/eng/speeches/2007/09/14/1801_type82917type84779_14410
6.shtml, accessed 20 December 2007. 
Putin, V. (1999) Rossiya na rubezhe tysyacheletii, Nezavisimaya gazeta, 30 December, 
available on-line at: http://www.ng.ru/politics/1999-12-30/4_millenium.html,
accessed 24 September 2009. 
Putin, V. (2000) Rossiya: novye vostochnye perspektivy, Nezavisimaya gazeta, 14
November, p. 1. 
Putin, V. (2001) Vystuplenie v Bundestage FRG, 25 September, available on-line at: 
http://www.kremlin.ru/appears/2001/09/25/0002_type63377_28641.shtml,
accessed 12 July 2007. 
Putin, V. (2002) Rossii nado byt silnoi i konkurentnosposobnoi (Annual Address to the 
Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation, 18 April), Rossiiskaya gazeta, 19
April, pp. 4-7. 
Putin, V. (2003) Poslanie Prezidenta Rossii Vladimira Putina Federalnomu Sobraniyu 
RF (Annual Address to the Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation, 16 May), 
Rossiiskaya gazeta, 17 May, p. 4. 
Putin, V. (2004a) Address at the Plenary Session of the Russian Federation Ambassadors 
and Permanent Representatives Meeting, 12 July, available on-line at: 
http://www.kremlin.ru/eng/speeches/2004/07/12/1323_type82912type82913type84
779_74425.shtml, accessed 23 July 2009. 
Putin, V. (2004b) Poslanie Federalnomu Sobraniyu Rossiiskoi Federatsii (Annual 
Address to the Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation, 26 May), Rossiiskaya 
gazeta, 27 May, pp. 3-4. 
Putin, V (2005) Poslanie Federalnomu Sobraniyu Rossiiskoi Federatsii (Annual Address 
to the Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation, 25 April), Rossiiskaya gazeta,
26 April, pp. 3-4. 
Putin, V. (2006a) 'Energy Egotism Is a Road to Nowhere, The Wall Street Journal, 28
February. 
Putin, V. (2006b) Mineral Natural Resources in the Strategy for Development of the 
Russian Economy, Problems of Post-Communism, 53, 1, January-February, pp. 
48-54. 
Putin, V. (2006c) Speech at the St Petersburg Dialogue Social Forum, 10 October, 
available on-line at: 
http://www.kremlin.ru/eng/text/speeches/2006/10/10/2138_type82914type84779_1
12411.shtml, accessed 11 November 2008. 
Putin, V. (2007a) Excerpts from Transcript of the Meeting of the State Council on 
Investment in the Regional Economy, 11 October, available on-line at: 
http://www.kremlin.ru/eng/speeches/2007/10/11/0954_type82913_148101.shtml,
accessed 1 July 2009. 
Putin, V. (2007b) Poslanie Federalnomu Sobraniyu Rossiiskoi Federatsii Prezidenta 
Rossii Vladimira Putina (Annual Address to the Federal Assembly of the Russian 
Federation, 26 April), Rossiiskaya gazeta, 27 April, pp. 3-5. 
Putin, V. (2007c) Press Statement and Answers to Questions following the 20th Russia-
European Union Summit, 26 October, available on-line at: 
http://www.kremlin.ru/eng/speeches/2007/10/26/1918_type82914type82915_14970
6.shtml, accessed 31 March 2009. 
Putin, V. (2007d) Speech at the 43rd Munich Conference on Security Policy, 10 
February, available on-line at: 
http://www.securityconference.de/konferenzen/rede.php?sprache=en&id=179,
accessed 15 August 2007. 
RIA Novosti (2007b) U.S. Plays 'Anti-Russian Card' to Raise Defence Spending  Putin, 
13 February, available on-line at: http://en.rian.ru/russia/20070213/60681925.html,
accessed 11 November 2008. 
RIA Novosti (2008) Economic Tensions with Poland Linked to Missile Plans  Putin, 14 
February, available on-line at: http://en.rian.ru/russia/20080214/99237121.html,
accessed 11 November 2008. 
RIA Novosti (2009) Ekonomika RF budet razvivatsya v pozitivnom napravlenii  Putin, 
18 September, available on-line at: 
http://www.rian.ru/crisis_news/20090918/185533275.html, accessed 18 September 
2009. 
Stenograficheskii otchet o vstreche s uchastnikami tretego zasedaniya mezhdunarodnogo 
diskusionnogo kluba Valdai, 9 September 2006, available on-line at: 
http://www.kremlin.ru/appears/2006/09/09/1930_type63376type63381_111114.sht
ml/, accessed 20 October 2006. 
5. Other Statements, Opinion Articles and Other Primary Sources 
Babich, D. (2005) Unsettling Old Scores, Russia Profile, 28 April, available on-line at: 
http://www.russiaprofile.org/international/2005/4/28/3467.wbp/, accessed 15 
October 2006. 
BBC (2006b) Smert Litvinenko v tsitatakh, 24 November, available on-line at: 
http://news.bbc.co.uk/hi/russian/russia/newsid_6179000/6179856.stm, accessed 6 
March 2007 
Bergmann, B. (2007) Verlsslicher Versorger. Energiepartnerschaft mit Moskau: Warum 
wir Russland auch weiterhin vertrauen, Internationale Politik (Frankfurt/Main), 62, 
3, pp. 65-69. 
Bovin, A. (2001) Myach v svoi vorota. Polemika s Leonidom Slutskim, Nezavisimaya 
gazeta, 19 May, p. 8. 
Braithwaite, R. (2002) Across the Moscow River: The World Turned Upside Down. New 
Haven and London: Yale University Press. 
Buchanan, G. (1923) My Mission to Russia and Other Diplomatic Memories. London: 
Cassell. 
Cherkesov, V. (2004) Nevedomstvennye razmyshleniya o professii. Moda na KGB?, 
Komsomolskaya pravda, 28 December, p. 6. 
Chubais, A.  (2003) Missiya Rossii v XXI veke, Nezavisimaya gazeta, 1 October, p. 1. 
Demurin, M. (2005) Russia and the Baltic States: Not a Case of Flawed History, Russia 
in Global Affairs, 3, 3, pp. 130-138. 
Denisov, A.I. (2006) Russian Federation Economic Policy in 2006, available on-line at: 
http://www.ln.mid.ru/brp_4.nsf/itogi06/AA98F78C8DA21F7CC3257251003A26D
1, accessed 29 July 2009. 
Ermolaev, D. (2006) Yaroslav Ognev: InoSMI  zerkalo vo vneshnii mir, Rossiiskie vesti,
28 December, available on-line at: http://www.inosmi.ru/translation/231918.html,
accessed 21 August 2008. 
Gavan, A. (2007) Russia for the Russians: The View of a Western Business Advisor, in 
A. Monaghan (ed) The UK and Russia- A Troubled Relationship. Part 1. Defence 
Academy of the United Kingdom, pp. 55-62. 
InoSMI (2005) Boris Reitschuster: Ranshe pri slove Rossiya dumali o Pushkine, On-line 
questions and answers session with Boris Reitschuster (Focus, Germany), 26 
August, available on-line at: http://www.inosmi.ru/press/222333.html, accessed 28 
August 2008. 
InoSMI (2007) Yaroslav Ognev: Dobro pozhalovat v mir InoSMI, 28 November, 
available on-line at: http://www.inosmi.ru/stories/02/07/18/3106/238074.html,
accessed 21 August 2008. 
InoSMI (2008) Alexei Pushkov: Rossiya  eto takoi plokhoi rebenok Evropy, 28 April, 
available on-line at: http://www.inosmi.ru/press/241044.html, accessed 28 August 
2008. 
Interview of Dmitry Medvedev with BBC Television, 26 August 2008, available at: 
http://www.kremlin.ru/eng/text/speeches/2008/08/26/2131_type82915type82916_2
05790.shtml, accessed 17 August 2009. 
Kamynin, M. (2008) Russias Image: The Information Service of the RF Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs Turns 90, International Affairs: A Russian Journal of World 
Politics, Diplomacy and International Relations, 54, 2, pp. 113-118. 
Khakamada, I. (2005) Imidzh Rossii: Pravda i vymysel, 19 October, available on-line at: 
http://www.hakamada.ru/1321/Folder.2004.12.06.3035/895, accessed 11 November 
2008. 
Kortunov, S. (2005) Rossiya: ne serditsya, a sosredotochitsya, Rossiya v globalnoi 
politike, 5, pp. 51-61. 
Kosachev, K. (2008) A Strong Diplomacy for a Strong Country, International Affairs: A 
Russian Journal of World Politics, Diplomacy and International Relations, 54, 2,
pp. 105-112. 
Kosolapov, N.A. (2002) Kontury novogo miroporyadka, 1999, in T.A. Shakleina (ed) 
Vneshnyaya politika i bezopasnost sovremennoi Rossii, 1991-2002. Moscow: 
Rosspen, Vol. 3, pp. 419-432. 
Lavrov, S. (2005) Speech at the Press-Conference on Foreign Policy Results of the Year 
2004 in the Press-Centre of the Russian Foreign Ministry, 19 January, available 
on-line at: 
http://www.mid.ru/brp_4.nsf/2fee282eb6df40e643256999005e6e8c/764267994d17
333bc3256f8e007329a8?OpenDocument, accessed 14 November 2008. 
Lavrov, S. (2007) Nastoyashchee i budushchee evropeiskoi politiki, Izvestiya, 3 July, p. 
Litvinenko, A. & Y. Felshtinsky (2007) Blowing Up Russia: The Secret Plot to Bring Back 
KGB Terror. London: Gibson Square. 
Lucas, E. (2008) The New Cold War: How the Kremlin Menaces Both Russia and the West.
Bloomsbury Publishing PLC. 
Lyne, R., S. Talbott & K. Watanabe (2006) Engaging with Russia: The Next Phase. The 
Trilateral Commission. 
Mangold, K. (2007) Unser Markt in Moskau. Handel durch Annherung: Deutsch-
russische Wirschaftskooperation, Internationale Politik (Frankfurt/Main), 62, 3, 
pp. 70 - 74. 
Markov, S. (2006) Delo Litvinenko i zastarelyi kompleks rusofobii, Izvestiya, 6
December, p. 6. 
Mikoyan, S. (2006) Russophobia, a Protracted Political Ailment, International Affairs: A 
Russian Journal of World Politics, Diplomacy and International Relations, 52, 5, 
pp. 31-40. 
Nikolaev, V. (2005) Natsionalnyi interes. Severnyi Kavkaz: informatsionnye ugrozy, 
Rossiiskie vesti, 13 July 2005, p. 16. 
Nikonov, V. (2006a) Pena u rta. S chego by eto? Trud, 9 December, p. 2 
Nikonov, V. (2006b) Rossiya, mir i G8, Izvestiya, 24 July, p. 6. 
Pankin, A. (2005) A Missed Opportunity: The Peoples Feelings for Victory Day Could 
Have Supported Reform, Russia Profile, 25 April, available on-line at: 
http://www.russiaprofile.org/politics/article.wbp?article-id=6DE03E24-5F85-
4DA6-B546-CD6F4403D4C3, accessed 15 October 2006. 
Pushkov, A. (2008) Obraz vraga v litse Rossii mobilizuet Zapad, InoSmi, 2 April, 
available on-line at: http://www.inosmi.ru/translation/240588.html, accessed 28 
August 2008. 
Rahr, A. (2000) Wladimir Putin - Der `Deutsche` im Kreml. Mnchen: Universitas Verlag. 
Reuters (2007) Britain Regrets Russia's Lugovoi Elected to Duma, 7 December, available 
on-line at: http://www.reuters.com/article/newsMaps/idUSL0749585820071207,
accessed 29 September 2009. 
RIA Novosti (2006a) Duma Orders Probe into "Anti-Russian Campaign" in Western 
Media, 30 June, available on-line at: 
http://en.rian.ru/russia/20060630/50740473.html, accessed 11 November 2008. 
RIA Novosti (2006b) Sammit G8 znamenuet vozvrashchenie Rossii v ryad velikikh 
derzhav  eksperty, 19 July, available on-line at: 
http://www.rian.ru/world/foreign_russia /20060719/51566984.html/, accessed 27 
October 2006. 
RIA Novosti (2006c) What the Russian Papers Say: West Sees Kremlin's Hand in 
Poisoning of Former KGB Officer, 22 November, available on-line at: 
http://en.rian.ru/analysis/20061122/55909504.html, accessed 11 November 2008. 
RIA Novosti (2007a) Russia Calls OSCE Letter on Parliamentary Polls 'Propaganda, 10 
December, available on-line at: http://en.rian.ru/russia/20071210/91740163.html,
accessed 11 November 2008 
Russia Today (2007) Press conference of Dmitry Kovtun and Andrey Lugovoi, 29 
August, available on-line at: http://www.russiatoday.ru/Top_News/2007-08-
29/Press_conference_of_Dmitry_Kovtun_and_Andrey_Lugovoy.html, accessed 21 
July 2009. 
Schrder, G. (2007) Entscheidungen  Mein Leben in der Politik. Hoffmann und Campe. 
Shakirov, M. (2008) The Jealousy in Patriotism, Russia Profile, 18 November, available 
on-line at: http://www.russiaprofile.org/page.php?pageid=International
&articleid=a1227028688, accessed 5 December 2008. 
Shevtsova, L. (2005) Rossiya  god 2006: logika politicheskogo strakha, Nezavisimaya 
gazeta, 13-16 December. 
Smi.ru (2004) Yaroslav Ognev: Mi proveryaem patriotism nashikh chitatelei na 
prochnost i zhiznesposobnost, 27 January, available on-line at: 
http://www.smi.ru/interviews/87/, accessed 20 August 2008.  
Steinmeier, F.-W. (2007), Interaction and Integration. A New Phase of Ostpolitik: 
Globalization Demands Interaction, Not Isolationism, in Internationale Politik 
(Global Issues), Spring, pp. 50-55. 
Surkov, V. (2005) Stenogramma vystupleniya na gensovete Delovoi Rossii, Radio 
Svoboda, 17 May, available on-line at: 
http://www.svoboda.org/programs/tp/2005/tp.071105.asp/, accessed 14 July 2006. 
Weisser, U. (2007) Dont Ignore Russia: Close Strategic Cooperation between the 
European Union and Russia Is Essential to Ensuring Security throughout the 
World, Internationale Politik (Global Issues), Spring, pp. 56  61. 
Zolotov, A. (2005) One out of Millions: A Veterans Story Tells That of a Generation, 
Russia Profile, 5 May, available on-line at: 
http://www.russiaprofile.org/culture/2005/5/5/2135.wbp/, accessed 15 October 
2006. 
Zyuganov, G. (2001) Na rubezhe tysyacheletii: sudba Rossii v sovremennom mire. 
Moscow: Mysl. 
6. Russian Newspapers and Periodicals 
Argumenty i fakty 
Itogi 
Izvestiya 
Kommersant Daily 
Literaturnaya gazeta 
Mezhdunarodnaya zhizn 
Moskovskie novosti 
Moskovskii komsomolets 
NG: Figury i litsa 
Nezavisimaya gazeta 
Novaya gazeta 
Novye izvestiya 
Ogonek 
Profil 
Rossiiskaya gazeta 
Rossiiskie vesti 
Russia in Global Affairs 
Russia Profile 
Sankt-Peterburgskie vedomosti 
Sovetskaya Rossiya 
The Moscow Times 
Tribuna 
Vedomosti 
Versiya 
Vremya MN 
Vremya novostei 
7. Other Newspapers and Periodicals 
Der Focus 
Der Spiegel 
Die Welt 
Financial Times 
Financial Times Deutschland 
Forbes 
Handelsblatt 
Internationale Politik 
Los Angeles Times 
The Christian Science Monitor 
The Daily Mail 
The Daily Telegraph 
The Economist 
The Guardian 
The Independent 
The New York Times 
The Observer 
The Sunday Telegraph 
The Sunday Times 
The Times 
The Wall Street Journal 
The Washington Post 
8. Public Opinion Surveys 
German Marshall Fund of the United States (2008) Transatlantic Trends 2008, available 
on-line at: http://www.transatlantictrends.org/trends/doc/2008_English_Top.pdf,
accessed 10 December 2008. 
Levada Centre (2007a) Obshchestvennoe mnenie  2007. Moscow: Analiticheskii Tsentr 
Yuriya Levady. 
Levada Centre (2007b) Rossiya i Evropa, 3 September, available on-line at: 
http://www.levada.ru/press/2007090303(1).htm, accessed 13 November 2008. 
Levada Centre (2008a) Est takoe mnenie, available on-line at: http://www.levada.ru/,
accessed 19 August 2008. 
Levada Centre (2008b) Rossiya i mir, available on-line at: 
http://www.levada.ru/interrelations.html, accessed 19 August 2008. 
Levada Centre (2008c) Rossiya, Zapad, SNG, 14 January, available on-line at: 
http://www.levada.ru/press/2008011403.html, accessed 21 October 2008. 
MORI (2003) Britains View of Russia, 19 June 2003, available at: http://www.ipsos-
mori.com/polls/2003/novosti-top.shtml, accessed 5 March 2007. 
Public Opinion Foundation (2000) Nadezhdy i trevogi: Rossiya, 14 June, available on-
line at: http://bd.fom.ru/report/cat/societas/image/Great_Power/d000837/, accessed 
25 October 2006. 
Public Opinion Foundation (2006) Obraz Rossii: silnoe ili slaboe gosudarstvo?, 8 June, 
available on-line at: http://bd.fom.ru/report/cat/societas/image/tb062212/, accessed 
25 October 2006. 
RIA Novosti (2003) Rezultaty ekspertnogo oprosa v Velikobritanii, September, 
unpublished document. 
9. Rankings 
Anholt, S. (2008) The Anholt-GfK Roper Nation Brands Index 2008, available on-line at: 
http://www.simonanholt.com/Publications/publications-other-articles.aspx,
accessed 29 July 2009. 
Freedom House (n.d.) Freedom in the World Historical Rankings: Comparative Scores for 
All Countries 1973 to 2006, available on-line at: 
http://www.freedomhouse.org/template.cfm?page=5, accessed 10 April 2009.  
Freedom House (2007) Freedom in the World. Country Reports: Russia, available on-line 
http://www.freedomhouse.org/template.cfm?page=22&year=2007&country=7258,
accessed 10 April 2009. 
Freedom House (2008) Freedom in the World. Country Reports: Russia, available on-line 
http://www.freedomhouse.org/template.cfm?page=363&year=2008&country=7475,
accessed 10 April 2009. 
Freedom in the World (2009) Freedom in the World 2009 Survey Release, available on-
line at: 
http://www.freedomhouse.org/uploads/fiw09/FIW09_Tables&GraphsForWeb.pdf,
accessed 22 June 2009. 
Transparency International (1996) 1996 Corruption Perceptions Index, available on-line 
http://www.transparency.org/policy_research/surveys_indices/cpi/previous_cpi__1,
accessed 8 April 2009.  
Transparency International (1997) 1997 Corruption Perceptions Index, available on-line 
http://www.transparency.org/policy_research/surveys_indices/cpi/previous_cpi__1,
accessed 8 April 2009. 
Transparency International (1998) 1998 Corruption Perceptions Index, available on-line 
http://www.transparency.org/policy_research/surveys_indices/cpi/previous_cpi__1/
1998, accessed 8 April 2009. 
Transparency International (1999) 1999 Corruption Perceptions Index, available on-line 
http://www.transparency.org/policy_research/surveys_indices/cpi/previous_cpi__1/
1999, accessed 8 April 2009. 
Transparency International (2000) 2000 Corruption Perceptions Index, available on-line 
http://www.transparency.org/policy_research/surveys_indices/cpi/previous_cpi__1/
2000, accessed 8 April 2009. 
Transparency International (2001) 2001 Corruption Perceptions Index, available on-line 
at: http://www.transparency.org/policy_research/surveys_indices/cpi/2001,
accessed 8 April 2009. 
Transparency International (2002) 2002 Corruption Perceptions Index, available on-line 
at: http://www.transparency.org/policy_research/surveys_indices/cpi/2002,
accessed 8 April 2009. 
Transparency International (2003) 2003 Corruption Perceptions Index, available on-line 
at: http://www.transparency.org/policy_research/surveys_indices/cpi/2003,
accessed 8 April 2009. 
Transparency International (2004) 2004 Corruption Perceptions Index, available on-line 
at: http://www.transparency.org/policy_research/surveys_indices/cpi/2004,
accessed 8 April 2009. 
Transparency International (2005) 2005 Corruption Perceptions Index, available on-line 
at: http://www.transparency.org/policy_research/surveys_indices/cpi/2005,
accessed 8 April 2009. 
Transparency International (2006) 2006 Corruption Perceptions Index, available on-line 
at: http://www.transparency.org/policy_research/surveys_indices/cpi/2006,
accessed 8 April 2009. 
Transparency International (2007) 2007 Corruption Perceptions Index, available on-line 
at: http://www.transparency.org/policy_research/surveys_indices/cpi/2007,
accessed 8 April 2009. 
Transparency International (2008) 2008 Corruption Perceptions Index, available on-line 
at: http://www.transparency.org/policy_research/surveys_indices/cpi/2008,
accessed 8 April 2009. 
10. Secondary Literature 
Adler, E. (2002) Constructivism and International Relations, in W. Carlsnaes, T. Risse & 
B.A. Simmons (eds) Handbook of International Relations. London: Sage, pp. 95-
Alexander, M.G., Sh. Levin & P.J. Henry (2005) Image Theory, Social Identity, and 
Social Dominance: Structural Characteristics and Individual Motives Underlying 
International Images, Political Psychology, 26, 1, pp. 27-45. 
Allison, G. (1969) Conceptual Models and the Cuban Missile Crisis, American Political 
Science Review, 63, 3, pp. 689-718. 
Allison, R., M. Light & S. White (2006) Putins Russia and the Enlarged Europe. Oxford: 
Blackwell Publishing. 
Anholt, S. (2004) Editors Foreword to the First Issue, Place Branding, 1, 1, pp. 4-11. 
Antonenko, O. (2008) A War with No Winners, Survival, 50, 5, pp. 23-36. 
Antonenko, O. & K. Pinnick (eds) (2005) Russia and the European Union: Prospects for a 
New Relationship. London; New York: Routledge. 
Bacon, E. (2007) The UK-Russia Political Relationship, in A. Monaghan (ed) The UK 
and Russia- A Troubled Relationship. Part 1. Defence Academy of the United 
Kingdom, pp. 13-23. 
Badovsky, D. (2009) Chances for a Reset in Russian Politics, Russia in Global Affairs, 2,
April-June, pp. 14-23. 
Balzer, H. (2005a) The Putin Thesis and Russian Energy Policy, Post-Soviet Affairs, 21,
3, pp. 210-225. 
Balzer, H. (2005b) Vladimir Putin on Russian Energy Policy, The National Interest On-
Line, available on-line at: 
http://www.inthenationalinterest.com/Articles/November2005/November2005Balze
r.html/, accessed 1 July 2006. 
Barghoorn, F. (1950) The Soviet Image of the United States: A Study in Distortion. New 
York: Harcourt, Brace. 
Barghoorn, F. (1964) Soviet Foreign Propaganda. Princeton, New Jersey. 
Bell, P.M.H. (1990) John Bull and the Bear: British Public Opinion, Foreign Policy and 
the Soviet Union, 1941-1945. London: Edward Arnold. 
Bittman, L. (1987) The Language of Soviet Disinformation, in Contemporary Soviet 
Propaganda and Disinformation. A Conference Report, Airlie, Virginia, June 25-
27, 1985. Washington: United States Department of State, pp. 111-127. 
Black, J.L (2004) Vladimir Putin and the New World Order. Lanham; Oxford: Rowman & 
Littlefield. 
Bhlke, E. (2002) Rulandbilder aus dem 18. und 19. Jahrhundert: Entworfen in der 
deutschen und franzsischen politisch-philosophischen Literatur, Osteuropa, 52, 5,
pp. 576-597. 
Boulding, K.E. (1956) The Image: Knowledge in Life and Society. Ann Arbor: University 
of Michigan Press. 
Boulding, K.E. (1959) National Images and International Systems, The Journal of 
Conflict Resolution. 3, 2, pp. 120-131. 
Brandt, P. (2003) German Perceptions of Russia and the Russians in Modern History, 
Debatte, 11, 1, pp. 39-59. 
Brecher, M. (1972) The Foreign Policy System of Israel: Setting, Images, Process. London, 
Toronto, Melbourne: Oxford University Press. 
Bronfenbrenner, U. (1961) The Mirror Image in Soviet-American Relations: A Social 
Psychologists Report, Journal of Social Issues, 17, 3, pp. 45-56. 
Bryantsev, A.E. (2005) Problemy i perspektivy formirovaniya imidzha Rossii v kontekste 
rossiisko-brazilskikh otnoshenii (2002-2003), paper presented at the Third 
Convent of Russian Association of International Studies, available on-line at: 
http://www.rami.ru/publications/2005-11/bryantsev.rtf, accessed 12 April 2006. 
Burchill. S., A. Linklater, R. Devetak, J. Donnelly, M. Paterson, C. Reus-Smit & J. True 
(2005) Theories of International Relations. Houndmills, Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
Burnham, P., K. Gilland, W. Grant & Z. Layton-Henry (2004) Research Methods in 
Politics. Palgrave Macmillan. 
Carlsnaes, W., T. Risse & B.A. Simmons (eds) (2002) Handbook of International 
Relations. London: Sage. 
Caspar, O. & J. Galperin (2005) Das Russlandbild in den deutschen Medien  Ursachen 
und mgliche Folgen, Diskussionspapier der Mediengruppe in der 
Zukunftswerkstatt, Petersburg Dialog, 29 June, available on-line at: 
http://www.petersburger-
dialog.de/de/news/das_russlandbild_in_den_deutschen_medien_ursachen_und_mcg
liche_folgen_274.html, accessed 29 July 2007. 
Council on Foreign and Defence Policy of the Russian Federation (1997) Imidzh Rossii i 
rossiiskogo biznesa v zapadnykh sredstvakh massovoi informatsii, available on-
line at: http://www.svop.ru/live/materials.asp?m_id=7007&r_id=7026, accessed 15 
April 2006. 
Cross, A. (ed) (1971) Russia under Western Eyes, 1517-1825. London: Elek Books. 
Cross, A. (2000) Peter the Great through British Eyes: Perceptions and Representations of 
the Tsar since 1698. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Cross, A. (2001) Catherine the Great and the British: A Pot-Pourri of Essays. Keyworth; 
Nottingham: Astra Press. 
Crudopf, W. (2000) Ruland-Stereotypen in der deutschen Medienberichterstattung,
Arbeitspapiere des Osteuropa-Instituts der Freien Universitt Berlin: Politik und 
Gesellschaft, 29, Berlin: Osteuropa-Institut der Freien Universitt Berlin. 
Cull, N.J. (2009) Public Diplomacy before Gullion, in N. Snow & P.M. Taylor (eds) 
Routledge Handbook of Public Diplomacy. New York, London: Routledge, pp. 19-
Daniliouk, N. (2006) Fremdbilder in der Sprache: Konstruktion? Konnotation? Evolution. 
Das Russlandbild der Jahre 1961, 1989 und 2003 in ausgewhlten deutschen 
Printmedien. Berlin: LIT Verlag. 
Degtjarova, V. (2007) Russlandbilder im Deutschen Fernsehen 2001-2002.  
Studie zur Konstruktion Russlands bei ffentlich-rechtlichen und privatrechtlichen 
Sendern (ARD, NDR und RTL). Hamburg. 
Derkach, A.A. & E.B. Pereligina (eds.) (2006) Politicheskaya imidzheologiya. Moscow: 
Aspect Press. 
Dexter, L.A. (1970) Elite and Specialized Interviewing. Evanston: Northwestern University 
Press. 
Deutsch K.W. & R.L. Merritt (1965) Effects of Events on National and International 
Images, in H.C. Kelman (ed.), International Behaviour: A Social-Psychological 
Analysis. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, pp. 132-187. 
Donaldson, R.H. & J.L. Nogee (2005) The Foreign Policy of Russia: Changing Systems, 
Enduring Interests, 3d edition. Armonk, N.Y.; London: M.E. Sharpe. 
Dontsov, A.I. (2006) Psikhologicheskie zakonomernosti vospriyatiya politicheskogo 
imidzha, in A.A. Derkach & E.B. Pereligina (eds.) Politicheskaya imidzheologiya.
Moscow: Aspect Press, pp. 35-44. 
Drozdova, A.V. & A.N. Ovcharenko (2006) Politicheskii imidzh v politicheskoi reklame 
kak faktor obshchestvennogo soznaniya, in A.A. Derkach & E.B. Pereligina (eds) 
Politicheskaya imidzheologiya. Moscow: Aspect Press, pp. 310-319. 
Duncan, P. (2000) Russian Messianism: Third Rome, Revolution, Communism and After.
London, New-York: Routledge. 
Duncan, P. (2005) Contemporary Russian Identity between East and West, The Historical 
Journal, 48, 1, pp. 277-294. 
Dugin, A. (2000) Osnovy geopolitiki: geopoliticheskoe budushchee Rossii. Myslit 
prostranstvom. Moscow: Arktogeya-Tsentr. 
Dyachkova, E. (1998) Imidzheologiya dlya rukovoditelya. Novosibirsk. 
Ellison, H.J. (1987) Controlling the Agenda: Soviet Propaganda and American Foreign 
Policy, in Contemporary Soviet Propaganda and Disinformation. A Conference 
Report, Airlie, Virginia, June 25-27, 1985. Washington: United States Department 
of State, pp. 81-94. 
Fadeev, V.V., T.G. Povalkovich & L.P. Karavaeva (2006) Motivatsionnye 
zakonomernosti formirovaniya politicheskogo imidzha i ikh svyaz s sotsialnymy 
faktorami imidzheobrazuyushchei deyatelnosti, in A.A. Derkach & E.B. 
Pereligina (eds) Politicheskaya imidzheologiya. Moscow: Aspect Press, pp. 126-
Falkner, J. (2006) Lnderchancen  Lnderrisiken. Welche Rolle spielt das staatliche 
Image?, Recht und Praxis der Deutsch-Russischen Wirtschaftsbeziehungen,
VDRW-Mitteilungen 32 / 2006, pp. 32-38. 
Fateev, A.V. (1999) Obraz vraga v sovetskoi propagande. 1945-1954. Moscow: Institut 
rossiiskoi istorii RAN. 
Fawn, R. (ed) (2004) Ideology and National Identity in Post-Communist Foreign Policies.
London; Portland, Or: Frank Cass. 
Fedyakin, A.V. (2007a) Formirovanie pozitivnogo obraza sovetskogo gosudarstva v 
1920e-1940e gg: ofitsialnye dokumenty i politicheskaya praktika, Vestnik 
Moskovskogo Universiteta. Ser. 12. Politicheskie nauki, 2, pp. 11-24. 
Fedyakin, A.V. (2007b) Politika formirovaniya pozitivnogo obraza SSSR v 1950e-1980e 
gg i ee primenimost v sovremennykh usloviyakh, Vestnik Moskovskogo 
Universiteta. Ser. 12. Politicheskie nauki, 4, pp. 29-44. 
Fisher, A. (2009) Four Seasons in One Day: The Crowded House of Public Diplomacy in 
the UK, in N. Snow & P.M. Taylor (eds) Routledge Handbook of Public 
Diplomacy. New York, London: Routledge, pp. 251-261. 
Foundation of Social, Economic and Political Research Regionalnaya Strategiya (2003) 
Otsenka vliyaniya imidzha Kaliningradskoi Oblasti na razvitie regionalnoi 
ekonomiki i sotsialnoi sfery, available on-line at: 
http://duma.kaliningrad.org/rudnikov/53/53.pdf, accessed 5 May 2006. 
Gadzhiev, K. (2007) Geopoliticheskie gorizonty Rossii. Moscow: Ekonomika. 
Gaidar, E. (2006) Gibel imperii. Moscow: Rosspen. 
Galumov, E.A. (2003) Mezhdunarodnyi imidzh Rossii: strategiya formirovaniya. Moscow: 
Izvestiya. 
Galumov, E. (2004) Vmesto argumentov my predlagaem sobesedniku sdelat obrezanie, 
available on-line at: http://galumov.ru/index2.php?option=com_content&do_pdf 
=1&id=19/, accessed 18 October 2006. 
Galumov, E. (2005) Imidzh protiv imidzha. Moscow: Izvestiya. 
Gass, R.H. & J.S. Seiter (2009) Credibility and Public Diplomacy, in N. Snow & P.M. 
Taylor (eds) Routledge Handbook of Public Diplomacy. New York, London: 
Routledge, pp. 154-165. 
Gavrilova, S. (2005) Die Darstellung der UdSSR und Russlands in der Bild-Zeitung 1985-
1999. Verlag: Lang, Peter Frankfurt. 
George, A. & R. Keohane (1980) The Concept of National Interests: Uses and 
Limitations, in A. George, Presidential Decisionmaking in Foreign Policy.
Boulder: Westview, pp. 217-238. 
Gleason, J.H. (1972) The Genesis of Russophobia in Great Britain. New York: Octagon 
Books. 
Goldstein, J. & R. O. Keohane (1993) Ideas and Foreign Policy: An Analytical 
Framework, in J. Goldstein & R.O. Keohane (eds) Ideas and Foreign Policy: 
Beliefs, Institutions and Political Change. Ithaca and London: Cornell University 
Press, pp. 3-30. 
Gordon, J.S. (1988) Introduction, in J.S. Gordon (ed) Psychological Operations: The 
Soviet Challenge. Boulder; London: Westview Press, pp. 1-19. 
Gordon, J.S. (ed) (1988) Psychological Operations: The Soviet Challenge. Boulder; 
London: Westview Press. 
Gourevitch, P. (1978) The Second Image Reversed: The International Sources of 
Domestic Politics, International Organization, 32, 4, pp. 881-912. 
Gourevitch, P. (2002) Domestic Politics and International Relations, in W. Carlsnaes, T. 
Risse & B.A. Simmons (eds) Handbook of International Relations. London: Sage, 
pp, 309-328. 
Gumennaya, I. (1997) Imidzh firmy. Ekaterinburg. 
Hanson, Ph. (2007) The Russian Economic Puzzle: Going Forwards, Backwards or 
Sideways?, International Affairs, 83, 5, pp. 869-889. 
Hazan, B. (1982) Soviet Impregnational Propaganda. Ann Arbor: Ardis Publishers. 
Herrmann, D., J.Peters, K.H.Korn & V.Pallin (1989) Deutsche und Deutschland aus 
russischer Sicht 11-17 Jahrhundert. Mnchen: W. Fink. 
Herrmann, R.K. & M.P. Fischerkeller (1995) Beyond the Enemy Image and Spiral Model: 
Cognitive-Strategic Research after the Cold War, International Organization, 49,
3, pp. 415-450. 
Herrmann, R.K., J.F. Voss, T.Y.E. Schooler & J. Ciarrochi (1997) Images in International 
Relations: An Experimental Test of Cognitive Schemata, International Studies 
Quarterly, 41, 3, pp. 403-433. 
Hertzberg, D. (1988) Soviet-Sponsored Clandestine Broadcasting, in J.S. Gordon (ed) 
Psychological Operations: The Soviet Challenge. Boulder; London: Westview 
Press, pp. 60-76. 
Hill, Ch. (2003) The Changing Politics of Foreign Policy. Basingstoke; New York: 
Palgrave Macmillan. 
Holsti, O. R. (1962) The Belief System and National Images: A Case Study, The Journal 
of Conflict Resolution, 6, 3, pp. 244-252. 
Hopf, T. (2002) Social Construction of International Politics: Identities and Foreign 
Policies, Moscow, 1955 and 1999. Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press. 
Hopf, T. (ed) (2008) Russias European Choice. Palgrave Macmillan. 
Internationale Politik (2007) IP Frage, Internationale Politik, 3, p. 5.
Jervis, R. (1970) The Logic of Images in International Politics. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton 
University Press. 
Jervis, R. (1976) Perception and Misperception in International Politics. Princeton, N.J.; 
Guildford: Princeton University Press. 
Johnson, D. & P. Robinson (eds) (2005) Perspectives on EU-Russia Relations. London; 
New York: Routledge. 
Kanet, R.E. (1987) Soviet Propaganda and the Process of National Liberation, in 
Contemporary Soviet Propaganda and Disinformation. A Conference Report, 
Airlie, Virginia, June 25-27, 1985. Washington: United States Department of State, 
pp. 215-254. 
Kashlev, Yu. & E. Galumov (2003) Informatsiya i piar v mezhdunarodnykh otnosheniyakh.
Moscow: Izvestiya. 
Katzenstein, P.J. & R.O Keohane (eds) (2006) Anti-Americanisms in World Politics. Ithaca 
and London: Cornell University Press. 
Keeble, C. (1990) Britain and the Soviet Union, 1917  89. London: Macmillan. 
Keller, M. (1987) Russen und Russland aus deutscher Sicht: 18 Jahrhundert. Mnchen: W. 
Fink. 
Keller, M., U.Dettbarn & K.H.Korn (1998) Russen und Russland aus deutscher Sicht : 9-17 
Jahrhundert. Mnchen: W. Fink. 
Keller, M. & K.H.Korn (2000) Russen und Russland aus deutscher Sicht: 19./20 
Jahrhundert: von der Bismarckzeit bis zum Ersten Weltkrieg. Mnchen: W. Fink. 
Kelly, J.R. (2009) Between Take-offs and Crash Landings: Situational Aspects of 
Public Diplomacy, in N. Snow & P.M. Taylor (eds) Routledge Handbook of Public 
Diplomacy. New York, London: Routledge, pp. 72-85. 
Koenen, G. (2005) Der Ruland-Komplex: Die Deutschen und der Osten 1900  1945.
Mnchen: C. H. Beck Verlag.  
Kolosov, V.A. (ed) (2003) Mir glazami rossiyan: mify i vneshnyaya politika. Moscow: 
Institut Fonda Obshchestvennoe Mnenie. 
Kolosov, V.A. & N.S. Mironenko (2002) Geopolitika i politicheskaya geografiya.
Moscow: Aspekt Press. 
Kononenko, V. (2006) Sozdat obraz Rossii?, Rossiya v globalnoi politike, 4, 2, pp. 192-
Kopelew, L., K.Eimermacher & G.Koenen (1998) Russen und Russland aus deutscher 
Sicht: West-stliche Spiegelungen, Bd.5, Deutschland und die Russische Revolution 
1917-1924: 5. Mnchen: W. Fink 
Kryshtanovskaya, O. & S. White (2005) 'Inside the Putin Court: A Research Note, 
Europe-Asia Studies, 57, 7, pp. 1065-1075. 
Kuchins, A. (2006) Russian Spin Job?, available on-line at: 
http://www.carnegieendowment.org 
/publications/index.cfm?fa=view&id=18715&prog=zru/, accessed 27 November 
2006. 
Kunczik, M. (1997) Images of Nations and International Public Relations. Mahwah, New 
Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Publishers. 
Laruelle, M. (ed) (2009) Russian Nationalism and the National Reassertion of Russia.
London, New York: Routledge. 
Lebedeva, M.M. (2001) Formirovanie novoi politicheskoi struktury mira i mesto Rossii v 
nei, in M. Iliin & V. Inozemtsev (eds) Megatrendy mirovogo razvitiya. Moscow: 
Ekonomika, pp.  148-165.  
Lebedeva, M.M. (2004) International Relations Studies in the USSR/Russia: Is There a 
Russian National School of IR Studies?, Global Society, 18, 3, pp. 263-278. 
Lewis, J. & J. Richie (2004) Generalizing from Qualitative Research, in J. Ritchie & J. 
Lewis (eds), Qualitative Research Practice: A Guide for Social Science Students 
and Researchers. London, Thousand Oaks, New Delhi: Sage Publications, pp. 263-
Lieven, A. (2000a) Against Russophobia, World Policy Journal, 17, 4, pp. 25-32. 
Lieven, A. (2000b) Through a Distorted Lens: Chechnya and the Western Media, Current 
History, October, pp. 321  328. 
Light, M. (1988) The Soviet Theory of International Relations, 1917-1982. Brighton: 
Wheatsheaf. 
Light, M. (1996) Foreign Policy Thinking, in Malcolm, N., A. Pravda, R. Allison & M. 
Light, Internal Factors in Russian Foreign Policy. Oxford: Published for the Royal 
Institute of International Affairs by Oxford University Press, pp. 33-100. 
Light, M. (2005) Foreign Policy, in White, S., Z. Gitelman & R. Sakwa (eds) 
Developments in Russian Politics 6. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 221-240. 
Liszkowski, U. (1988) Rulandbild und Rulandstudien vor dem Ersten Weltkrieg: Zur 
Grndung der Deutschen Gesellschaft zum Studium Rulands 1913, Osteuropa 
(Stuttgart), 38, 10, pp. 887-901. 
Lo, B. (2003) Vladimir Putin and the Evolution of Russian Foreign Policy. Oxford: 
Blackwell. 
Loew, R. & A. Pfeifer (2001) Wie wir die Fremden sehen: Russen-, Rumnen- und 
Polenbilder im aktuellen deutschen Pressediskurs. Hamburg. 
Logutkov, A. (2007) Zaglyadyvaya v chuzhoe zerkalo, BBCRussian.com, 27 November, 
available on-line at: 
http://news.bbc.co.uk/hi/russian/in_depth/2007/rus_elecs/newsid_7114000/7114792
.stm, accessed 28 October 2008. 
Lynch, A. (1987) The Soviet Study of International Relations. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Malcolm, N., A. Pravda, R. Allison & M. Light (1996) Internal Factors in Russian Foreign 
Policy. Oxford: Published for the Royal Institute of International Affairs by Oxford 
University Press. 
Manheim, J.B. & R.C. Rich (1986) Empirical Political Analysis: Research Methods in 
Political Science. New York and London: Longman. 
March, L. (2006) Virtual Parties in a Virtual World: The Use of the Internet by Russian 
Political Parties in S. Oates, D. Owen & R.K. Gibson (eds) The Internet and 
Politics: Citizens, Voters and Activists. London, New York: Routledge, pp. 136-
Mashkin, M.N. (2001) Iz istorii antirossiiskoi propagandy v Germanii v kontse 80-kh 
godov XIX veka, in B.M. Tupolev (ed) Rossiya i Germaniya, vol. 2. Moscow: 
Nauka, pp. 122-134. 
Mason, J. (2001) Qualitative Researching. London, Thousand Oaks, New Delhi: Sage 
Publications. 
Media Tenor (2006) Gazprom als neuer Image-Trger?, 12 June, available on-line at: 
http://www.mediatenor.de/newsletters.php?id_news=496, accessed 9 July 2007. 
Mendelson, S.E. & T.P. Gerber (2008) Us and Them: Anti-American Views of the Putin 
Generation, The Washington Quarterly, 31, 2, pp. 131-150. 
Mills, R. M. (1990) As Moscow Sees Us: American Politics and Society in the Soviet 
Mindset. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Monaghan, A. (ed) (2007) The UK and Russia - A Troubled Relationship. Part 1. Defence 
Academy of the United Kingdom 
Morgenthau, H. (1956) Politics Among Nations: The Struggle for Power and Peace. New 
York: Alfred A. Knopf. 
Morris, Z.S. (2009) The Truth about Interviewing Elites. Politics, 29, 3, pp. 209-217. 
Nelson, R.A. (1996) A Chronology and Glossary of Propaganda in the United States.
Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. 
Neumann, I.B. (1996) Russia and the Idea of Europe: A Study in Identity and International 
Relations. London and New York: Routledge. 
Neumann, I. (1999) Uses of the Other: The East in European Identity Formation.
Manchester: Manchester University Press. 
Neumann, I. (2008) Russia as a Great Power, 1815-2007, Journal of International 
Relations and Development, 11, pp. 128-151. 
Nye, J. (2004) Soft Power: The Means to Success in World Politics. New York, N.Y.: 
Public Affairs. 
Oates, S. (2006) Television, Democracy and Elections in Russia. London: Routledge 
Curzon. 
Oates, S. (2007) 'The Neo-Soviet Model of the Media', Europe-Asia Studies, 59, 8, pp.
1279-1297. 
Oates, S., D. Owen & R.K. Gibson (eds) (2006) The Internet and Politics: Citizens, Voters 
and Activists. London, New-York: Routledge. 
Ogawa, T. (2009) Origin and Development of Japans Public Diplomacy, in N. Snow & 
P.M. Taylor (eds) Routledge Handbook of Public Diplomacy. New York, London: 
Routledge, pp. 270-281. 
Orlov, D. (ed) (2002) Problemy gosudarstvennogo PR v Rossii, Conference proceedings, 
Marketing, Reklama i PR, 8 April, available on-line at: 
http://www.marketing.spb.ru/conf/2002-02-lbs/tspt.htm, accessed 22 January 2009. 
OShaughnessy, N. (2004) Politics and Propaganda: Weapons of Mass Seduction.
Manchester: Manchester University Press. 
Panarin, I. (2003) Tekhnologiya informatsionnoi voiny. Moscow: KCP+. 
Panarin, I. (2006) Informatsionnaya voina i geopolitika. Moscow: Pokolenie. 
Pankrukhin, A. (2002) Marketing territotii. Moscow: Izvatelstvo RAGS. 
Parming, T. (1987) The Soviet Union and the migr Communities: A Case Study in 
Active Measures and Disinformation, in Contemporary Soviet Propaganda and 
Disinformation. A Conference Report, Airlie, Virginia, June 25-27, 1985. 
Washington: United States Department of State, pp. 309-328. 
Piontkovsky, A. (2006) East or West?: Russias Identity Crisis in Foreign Policy. London: 
Foreign Policy Centre. 
Piontkovsky, A. (2008) Russia: Moscows Power Divide, Transitions Online, 18 August.  
Plater-Zyberk, H. (2007) Misunderstanding Russia: Alexander Litvinenko, in A. 
Monaghan (ed) The UK and Russia- A Troubled Relationship. Part 1. Defence 
Academy of the United Kingdom, pp. 9-12. 
Popescu, N. (2006) Russias Soft Power Ambitions, CEPS Policy Brief, 115. Brussels: 
Centre for European Policy Studies. 
Pozdeeva, L.V. (2000) London  Moskva: Britanskoe obshchestvennoe mnenie i SSSR, 
1939-1945. Moscow: Institut vseobshchei istorii RAN. 
Pravda, A. (1996) The Public Politics of Foreign Policy, in Malcolm, N., A. Pravda, R. 
Allison & M. Light, Internal Factors in Russian Foreign Policy. Oxford: Published 
for the Royal Institute of International Affairs by Oxford University Press, pp. 169-
Prizel, I. (1998) National Identity and Foreign Policy: Nationalism and Leadership in 
Poland, Russia and Ukraine. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Putnam, R.D. (1988) Diplomacy and Domestic Politics: The Logic of Two-Level Games, 
International Organization, 42, 3, pp. 427-460. 
Rawnsley, G.D. (2009) China Talks Back: Public Diplomacy and Soft Power for the 
Chinese Century, in N. Snow & P.M. Taylor (eds) Routledge Handbook of Public 
Diplomacy. New York, London: Routledge, pp. 282-291. 
Renz, B.A. (2006) Putin's Militocracy? An Alternative Interpretation of Siloviki in 
Contemporary Russian Politics, Europe-Asia Studies, 58, 6, pp. 903-924. 
Rettman, A. (2009) Russia Hones New Image Among EU Elite, EU Observer, 9
February, available on-line at: http://euobserver.com/9/27567, accessed 1 March 
2009. 
Reus-Smit, Ch. (2005) Constructivism, in S. Burchill et al (eds) Theories of International 
Relations. Houndmills, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 188-212.  
Richter, J. (1996) Russian Foreign Policy and the Politics of National Identity, in C.A. 
Wallander (ed) The Sources of Russian Foreign Policy after the Cold War. Boulder, 
Colo.: Westview Press, pp. 69-93. 
Risse-Kappen, T. (1991) Public Opinion, Domestic Structure and Foreign Policy in 
Liberal Democracies, World Politics, 43, 4, pp. 479-512. 
Ritchie, J. & J. Lewis (eds) Qualitative Research Practice: A Guide for Social Science 
Students and Researchers. London, Thousand Oaks, New Delhi: Sage Publications. 
Rivera, S.W., P.M. Kozyreva & E.G. Sarovskii (2002) Interviewing Political Elites: 
Lessons from Russia, Political Science and Politics, 24, pp. 683-8. 
Rivera, S.W. & D.W. Rivera (2006) The Russian Elite Under Putin: Militocratic Or 
Bourgeois?, Post-Soviet Affairs, 22, 2, pp. 125-144. 
Rose, C. (1988) The Soviet Propaganda Network: A Directory of Organizations Serving 
Soviet Foreign Policy. New York: St. Martin's Press. 
Rosenau, J.N. (1967) Domestic Sources of Foreign Policy. New York: Free Press; London: 
Collier-Macmillan. 
Rozhkov, I. & V. Kismereshkin (2008) Imidzh Rossii: resursy, opyt, prioritety. Moscow: 
Ripol Classic. 
Rukavishnikov, V. (2005) Kholodnaya voina, kholodnyi mir. Moscow: Akademicheskii 
Proekt. 
Rumer, E.B. (2007) Russian Foreign Policy beyond Putin. Abingdon; New York, N.Y.: 
Routledge for the International Institute for Strategic Studies. 
Russia Profile (2005) Russia Profiles Weekly Experts Panel: Russias Image in the 
World, 16 December, available on-line at:  
http://www.cdi.org/Russia/johnson/9319-11.cfm, accessed 1 July 2009. 
Russia Profile (2008) Russia Profiles Weekly Experts Panel: An Investment of 
Diminishing Returns?, 14 March, available on-line at:  
http://www.cdi.org/russia/johnson/2008-57-39.cfm, accessed 1 July 2009. 
Rutland, P. (2008) Russia as an Energy Superpower, New Political Economy, 13, 2, pp.
203-210. 
Sakwa, R. (2008) Putin: Russias Choice, 2nd ed. London and New York: Routledge. 
Sakwa, R. (2009) The Quality of Freedom: Khodorkovsky, Putin, and the Yukos Affair.
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Schmidt, S., G. Hellmann & R. Wolf (eds) Handbuch zur Deutschen Auenpolitik.
Wiesbaden: VS Verl. fr Sozialwissenschaften. 
Schwartz, M. (1978) Soviet Perceptions of the United States. Berkeley; London: University 
of California Press. 
Scott, W. (1965) Psychological and Social Correlates of International Images, in H.C. 
Kelman (ed) International Behaviour: A Social-Psychological Analysis. New York: 
Holt, Rinehart and Winston, pp. 70-103. 
Sedov, L.A. (2008) Kritika Rossii Zapadom, Levada Centre, 1 April, available on-line at: 
http://www.levada.ru/press/2008040101.html, accessed 1 April 2008. 
Seifert, K. (2003) Die Konstruktion Rulands in der deutschen Auslandsberichterstattung 
1985-1995. Studien zum Wandel der deutschen Wahrnehmung Rulands. Berlin: 
Wissenschaftlicher Verlag wvb. 
Sekach, M.F. & L.V. Tarasova (2006) Individualnye subekty politicheskogo imidzha i 
ikh osnovnye cherty, in A.A. Derkach & E.B. Pereligina (eds) Politicheskaya 
imidzheologiya. Moscow: Aspect Press, pp. 106-117. 
Semenenko, I.S., V.V. Lapkin & V.I. Pantin (2006) Obraz Rossii na Zapade: dialektika 
predstavlenii v kontekste mirovogo razvitiya, Polis, 6, pp. 110-124. 
Serajnik-Sraka, N. (2001) Slovenias Promotion through Mass Media, in A. Chong & J. 
Valencic (eds) The Image, the State and International Relations. Proceedings from 
the conference on 24 June 1999 at the London School of Economics and Political 
Science, pp. 39-41. 
Sergunin, A. A. (2003) Rossiiskaya vneshnepoliticheskaya mysl: problemy natsionalnoi i 
mezhdunarodnoi bezopasnosti. Nizhnii Novgorod: Nizhegorodskii Gosudarstvennyi 
Lingvisticheskii Universitet imeni N.A. Dobrolyubova. 
Sergunin, A.A. (2004) Discussions of International Relations in Post-Communist Russia, 
Communist and Post-Communist Studies, 37, pp. 19-35. 
Shakleina, T.A. (ed) (2002) Vneshnyaya politika i bezopasnost sovremennoi Rossii, 1991-
2002. Moscow: Rosspen. 
Shepel, V. (1997) Imidzhelogiya: Sekrety lichnogo obayaniya. Moscow. 
Shevtsova, L. (2007) Russia  Lost in Transition: The Yeltsin and Putin Legacies.
Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. 
Shlapentokh, V. (2009) Perceptions of Foreign Threats to the Regime: From Lenin to 
Putin, Communist and Post-Communist Studies, 42, pp. 305-324. 
Shulman, S. (2005) National Identity and Public Support for Political and Economic 
Reform in Ukraine, Slavic Review, 64, 1, pp. 59-87. 
Shultz, R.H & R. Godson (1984) Dezinformatsia: Active Measures in Soviet Strategy.
Washington: Pergamon-Brassey's. 
Simonov, K. (2006) Energeticheskaya sverkhderzhava. Moscow: Algoritm. 
Sixsmith, M. (2007) The Litvinenko File. Pan Books. 
Smart, Ch.W. (1992) The Imagery of Soviet Foreign Policy in West Europe. Ann Arbor, 
MI: UMI. 
Smith, H. (ed) (2006a) The Two Level Game: Russias Relations with Great Britain, 
Finland and the European Union. Helsinki: Aleksanteri Institute. 
Smith, K.C. (2006b) Security Implications of Russian Energy Policies, CEPS Policy Brief 
90. Brussels, Centre for European Policy Studies. 
Snape, D. & L. Spencer (2004) The Foundations of Qualitative Research, in J. Ritchie & 
J. Lewis (eds.) Qualitative Research Practice: A Guide for Social Science Students 
and Researchers. London, Thousand Oaks, New Delhi: Sage Publications, pp. 1-23. 
Snow, N. (2009) Rethinking Public Diplomacy, in N. Snow & P.M. Taylor (eds) 
Routledge Handbook of Public Diplomacy. New York, London: Routledge, pp. 3-
Snow, N. & P.M. Taylor (eds) (2009) Routledge Handbook of Public Diplomacy. New 
York, London: Routledge. 
Solovev, E.G. (2005) Geopolitics in Russia  Science or Vocation?, in A.P. Tsygankov 
& P.A. Tsygankov (eds) New Directions in Russian International Studies. Stuttgart: 
Ibidem-Verlag, pp. 127-142. 
Solovev, E.G. (ed) (2008) Imidzh Rossii v SMI i obshchestvennom mnenii Zapada.
Moscow: IMEMO RAN. 
Spencer, L., J. Ritchie, & W. OConnor (2004) Analysis: Practices, Principles and 
Processes, in J. Ritchie & J. Lewis (eds.), Qualitative Research Practice: A Guide 
for Social Science Students and Researchers. London, Thousand Oaks, New Delhi: 
Sage Publications. Pp. 199-218. 
Splidsboel-Hansen, F. (2002) Russias Relations with the European Union: A 
Constructivist Cut, International Politics, 39, pp. 399-421. 
Stent, A. (1999) Russia and Germany Reborn: Unification, the Soviet Collapse, and the 
New Europe. Princeton: University of Princeton Press. 
Stent, A. (2007) Russland, in S. Schmidt, G. Hellmann & R. Wolf (eds) Handbuch zur 
Deutschen Auenpolitik. Wiesbaden: VS Verl. fr Sozialwissenschaften, pp. 436  
Stern, J. (2006) The Russian-Ukrainian Gas Crisis of January 2006, Oxford Energy 
Comment. Oxford: Oxford Institute for Energy Studies. 
Szondi, G. (2009) Central and Eastern European Public Diplomacy: A Transitional 
Perspective on National Reputation Management, in N. Snow & P.M. Taylor (eds) 
Routledge Handbook of Public Diplomacy. New York, London: Routledge, pp. 
292-313. 
Timmins, G (2006) Bilateral Relations in the Russia-EU Relationship: The British View, 
in H. Smith (ed) The Two Level Game: Russias Relations with Great Britain, 
Finland and the European Union. Helsinki: Aleksanteri Institute, pp. 49  65. 
Tolz, V. (1998) Forging the Nation: National Identity and Nation Building in Post-
Communist Russia, Europe-Asia Studies, 50, 6, pp. 993-1022. 
Torkunov, A.V. (2002) K chitatelyu, in Shakleina, T.A. (ed) (2002) Vneshnyaya politika i 
bezopasnost sovremennoi Rossii, 1991-2002. Moscow: Rosspen, Vol. 1, pp. 5-13. 
Trenin, D. (2001) The End of Eurasia: Russia on the Border between Geopolitics and 
Globalization. Moscow: Carnegie Moscow Center. 
Trenin, D. (2007) Getting Russia Right. Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for 
International Peace. 
Tsuladze, A. (1999) Formirovanie imidzha politika v Rossii. Moscow: Universitet. 
Tsygankov, A.P. (2005) Vladimir Putins Vision of Russia as a Normal Great Power, 
Post-Soviet Affairs, 21, 2, pp. 132-158. 
Tsygankov, A.P. (2006a) If Not by Tanks, then by Banks? The Role of Soft Power in 
Putins Foreign Policy, Europe-Asia Studies, 58, 7, pp. 1079  1099.
Tsygankov, A.P. (2006b) Russias Foreign Policy: Change and Continuity in National 
Identity. Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield. 
Tsygankov, A. P. (2009) From Belgrade to Kiev: Hard-Line Nationalism and Russias 
Foreign Policy, in M. Laruelle (ed) Russian Nationalism and the National 
Reassertion of Russia. London, New York: Routledge, pp. 187-202. 
Tsygankov, A. P. (2009) Russophobia: Anti-Russian Lobby and American Foreign Policy.
New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Tsygankov, A.P. & P.A. Tsygankov (2005) New Directions in Russian International 
Studies: Pluralization, Westernization, and Isolation, in A.P. Tsygankov & P.A. 
Tsygankov (eds) New Directions in Russian International Studies. Stuttgart: 
Ibidem-Verlag, pp. 13-35. 
Tsygankov, A.P. & P.A. Tsygankov (2006) Sotsiologiya Mezhdunarodnykh Otnoshenii.
Moscow: Aspect Press. 
Tsymbursky, V. (1993) Ostrov Rossiya, available online at: 
http://www.archipelag.ru/ru_mir/ostrov-rus/cymbur/island_russia/, accessed 16 
May 2006. 
Tyulin, I.G. (2002) Issledovaniya mezhdunarodnykh otnoshenii v Rossii: vchera, 
segodnya, zavtra, in T.A. Shakleina (ed.) Vneshnyaya Politika i Bezopasnost 
Sovremennoi Rossii, 1991-2002. Moscow: Rosspen, Vol. 3, pp. 395-407. 
Volkmann, H.E. (1994) Das Rulandbild im Dritten Reich. Kln. 
Wallander, C.A. (ed) (1996) The Sources of Russian Foreign Policy after the Cold War.
Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press. 
Waller, M. (2005) Russian Politics Today. Manchester: Manchester University Press. 
Waltz, K. (1979) Theory of International Politics. Boston: Addison-Wesley. 
Weldes, J. (1999) Constructing National Interests: The United States and the Cuban 
Missile Crisis. Minneapolis; London: University of Minnesota Press. 
Wendt, A. (1992) Anarchy Is What States Make of It: The Social Construction of Power 
Politics, International Organization, 46, 2, pp. 391-425. 
Wendt, A. (1999) Social Theory of International Politics. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Wettig, G. (1987) The Peace Movement in Western Europe: Manipulation of Popular 
Perceptions, in Contemporary Soviet Propaganda and Disinformation. A 
Conference Report, Airlie, Virginia, June 25-27, 1985. Washington: United States 
Department of State, pp. 161-188. 
White, S. (1990) The Bolshevik Poster. New Haven and London: Yale University Press. 
White, S. (2007) Elite Opinion and Foreign Policy in Post-Communist Russia, 
Perspectives on European Politics and Society, 8, 2, pp. 147-167. 
White, S., Z. Gitelman & R. Sakwa (eds) (2005) Developments in Russian Politics 6. 
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Willerton, J.P. (2005) Putin and the Hegemonic Presidency, in S. White, Z. Gitelman & 
R. Sakwa (eds) Developments in Russian Politics 6. Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 18-39. 
Williams, A.J. (1989) Labour and Russia: The Attitude of the Labour Party to the USSR, 
1924-34. Manchester and New York: Manchester University Press. 
Wilson, A. (2005) Virtual Politics: Faking Democracy in the Post-Soviet World. New 
Haven, London: Yale University Press. 
Wilson, F. (1970) Muscovy: Russia through Foreign Eyes, 1553-1900. London: George 
Allen & Unwin Ltd. 
Zaharna, R.S. (2004) From Propaganda to Public Diplomacy in the Information Age, in 
Y.R. Kamalipour & N. Snow (eds) War, Media, and Propaganda: A Global 
Perspective. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, pp. 219-225. 
Zaharna, R.S. (2009) Mapping out a Spectrum of Public Diplomacy Initiatives: 
Information and Relational Communications Frameworks, in N. Snow & P.M. 
Taylor (eds) Routledge Handbook of Public Diplomacy. New York, London: 
Routledge, pp. 86-100. 
Zaichenko, O.V. (2001) Obraz Rossii v Germanii v pervoi polovine XIX veka (na 
materiale liberalnoi publitsistiki), in B.M. Tupolev (ed) Rossiya i Germaniya, vol. 
2. Moscow: Nauka, pp. 92-109. 
Zamyatin, D. (2002) Strategii interpretatsii istoriko-geograficheskikh obrazov Rossii, 
Otechestvennye zapiski, 6, available on-line at: 
http://magazines.russ.ru/oz/2002/6/2002_06_64-pr.html, accessed 15 May 2006. 
Zashikhin, A.N. (1994) Glyadya iz Londona: Rossiya v obshchestvennoi mysli Britanii, 
vtoraya polovina XIX  nachalo XX v. Arkhangelsk: Izdatelstvo Pomorskogo 
mezhdunarodnogo pedagogicheskogo universiteta. 
Zehfuss, M. (2002) Constructivism in International Relations: The Politics of Reality.
Cambridge, UK; New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Zevelev, I. (2002) Russian and American National Identity, Foreign Policy, and Bilateral 
Relations, International Politics, 39, 4, December, pp. 447-465. 
Zoellner, O. (2009) German Public Diplomacy: The Dialogue of Cultures, in N. Snow & 
P.M. Taylor (eds) Routledge Handbook of Public Diplomacy. New York, London: 
Routledge, pp. 262-269. 
