Detection of trapped survivors in 
collapsed reinforced concrete buildings 
using structure-borne sound 
transmission 
Thesis submitted in accordance with the requirements of the University 
of Liverpool for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy 
Marios Filippoupolitis 
School of Architecture, University of Liverpool 
August 2020
Abstract 
Every few years an earthquake of high magnitude occurs around the globe resulting in 
collapsed structures with people trapped inside them. The seismic research method has 
the potential to detect physical movement or signals by measuring vibration due to 
structure  borne sound using seismic sensors. The placement and positioning of these 
sensors is critical for the successful detection of the survivors and prediction models 
could be developed and used as a tool to assist in the decision making of the rescue 
teams. This thesis investigates the potential to use Statistical Energy Analysis (SEA) 
to model the vibration transmission between structural members of a collapsed 
reinforced concrete building in order to find trapped survivors.  
Experimental Modal Analysis (EMA) was carried out to validate finite element models 
of reinforced concrete beam junctions with surface-to-surface contact conditions 
which are used to investigate the normal contact stiffness between reinforced concrete 
beams. It is shown that the contact stiffness follows a lognormal distribution and that 
the mean value could be used as approximation of the contact stiffness in beam 
junctions.   
An ensemble of 30 random beam junctions was generated for Monte Carlo simulations 
with Finite Element Method (FEM) that allowed Experimental Statistical Energy 
Analysis (ESEA) to be used to determine Coupling Loss Factors (CLFs) between the 
two beams. These were compared with CLFs calculated using an analytical model 
based on a lump spring connector (LSC). It was shown that close agreement 
(difference within 5 dB) was achieved only for bending waves or torsional waves 
between FEM ESEA and the analytical model up to the frequency where half the 
bending or torsional wavelength equalled the longest side of the contact area. When 
all wave types were combined, reasonable agreement (difference within 10 dB) can be 
achieved at frequencies below 900 Hz.  
FEM, SEA path analysis and general SEA matrix solutions were used to estimate 
vibration transmission in piles of beams using both FEM ESEA CLFs and CLFs from 
an analytical model of a lump spring connector. It was shown that SEA is more 
accurate when the number of transmission paths increases and that reasonable 
agreement is achieved between SEA and FEM up to 700 Hz for the majority of the 
beams in the piles.  
Additionally, an ensemble of 30 randomly damaged beam-to-column junctions was 
generated using a Monte Carlo simulation with FEM. This allows an assessment of 
ESEA with two or three subsystems to be used to determine the CLFs between the 
beam and the column considering either only bending modes or the combination of all 
modes. It is shown that the bending modes are dominating the dynamic response of 
the junctions over the combination of all the modes and that the uncertainty of 
predicting the CLFs using FEM ESEA is sufficiently low that it should be feasible to 
estimate the coupling even when the exact angle between the beam and the column is 
unknown. In addition, the use of two instead of three subsystems for the junction 
significantly decreases the number of negative coupling loss factors in FEM ESEA 
indicating that the two-subsystem model provides a reasonable basis on which to build 
an SEA model. 
                                                           For the one who changed my perspective on life, 
for . 
Acknowledgements 
I would like to gratefully acknowledge the funding provided by the Institute for Risk 
and Uncertainty of the University of Liverpool and the Engineering and Physical 
Sciences Research Council (EPSRC).  
I would like to thank my supervisor, Professor Carl Hopkins, for his support, advice, 
and guidance over the years of this PhD. Carl was always available to me for 
discussing any matter that concerned me.     
I would like also to thank Dr Gary Seiffert for his help in the experimental work of 
this thesis and for his positive vibe and attitude.  
I would like to gratefully acknowledge Prof. Barry M. Gibbs for our discussions 
regarding acoustics and life in general.   
Special thanks to my colleagues in the Acoustics Research Unit, Xiaoxue Shen, 
Nazmiye Gulenay Yilmaz and especially Alessia Frescura for their support during  the 
writing up of this thesis.         
I would like to thank my family and especially my brother Avgoustinos Filippoupolitis 
who had my back during the last one and a half years.  
Last but not least, I would like to gratefully acknowledge Dr. Eleni-Eva Toumbakari. 
Eleni was the supervisor of my undergraduate thesis and was the first person who 
believed in me and my research skills.   
Contents 
2.2.4 Dynamic stiffness measurement for the rubber material according to ISO 
9052 -1 21 
4. Experimental validation of finite element models  representing stacked concrete 
5. Vibration transmission between reinforced concrete beams with surface-to-
5.6 Comparison of coupling loss factors from lump spring theory and FEM 
ESEA 108 
6. Vibration transmission in piles of reinforced concrete beams with surface-to-
7. Vibration transmission in damaged reinforced concrete beam-to-column 
7.3 Comparison of coupling loss factors from FEM ESEA and wave approach 
7.4 Coupling loss factors from FEM ESEA for damaged and rigid T-junctions
List of Symbols  
cB,b Phase velocity for the propagating bending waves on a solid 
beam (m/s) 
cL,b Phase velocity of a beam for quasi-longitudinal waves (m/s) 
f Frequency (Hz) 
fck Characteristic crushing strength of concrete (N/mm
fms Mass  spring resonant frequency (Hz) 
fyk Characteristic yield strength of steel (N/mm
h Depth (m) 
i -1, integer 
j Integer 
k  Spring stiffness (N/m) 
m Mass (kg) 
t Time (s) 
u Displacement (m) 
v Velocity (m/s) 
x Coordinate position (cm) 
y Coordinate position (cm) 
A FEM data 
C Structural damping (Ns/m), contact area (cm2) 
E Youngs modulus (N/m2), energy (J) 
F Force (N) 
K Stiffness (N/m) 
L Length (m) 
LC,max Length of the longest side of the surface-to-surface contact 
area (m) 
M Mass (kg) 
N Mode count, number of nodes, positions, samples, etc. 
S Cross-sectional area of a beam (m2) 
W Power (W) 
X Experimental data 
YA,FEM FEM driving-point mobility for combination of bending, 
torsional and longitudinal modes (m/Ns) 
YB,FEM FEM driving-point mobility for excitation of bending modes 
(m/Ns) 
YB,Inf Driving-point mobility of a thin beam of infinite extent for 
excitation of bending waves in the central part of the beam 
(m/Ns) 
Yc Mobility of a point spring connection (m/Ns)  
Ydp Driving-point mobility (m/Ns) 
YR Spatial-average transfer mobility ratio (dB) 
YT,FEM FEM driving-point mobility for excitation of torsional modes 
(m/Ns) 
 Damping ratio (-) 
ii Internal loss factor for subsystem i (-) 
ij Coupling loss factor from subsystem i to subsystem j (-) 
 Rotation angle (degrees) 
B Bending wavelength (m) 
T Torsional wavelength (m) 
 Poissons ratio (-) 
 Density (kg/m3) 
s  Surface density (kg/m
 Transmission coefficient (-) 
 Translational degrees of freedom for the FEM mode shapes 
 Translational degrees of freedom for the experimental mode 
shapes (m) 
 Angular frequency (radians/s) 
 Mode of vibration (-) 
List of Abbreviations 
B32 Abaqus quadratic linear beam element 
C3D20R Abaqus continuum three-dimensional quadratic element with 
20 nodes and reduced integration 
CLF Coupling Loss Factor 
DOF Degrees of Freedom 
EMA Experimental Modal Analysis 
ESEA Experimental Statistical Energy Analysis 
FEM Finite Element Method 
FFT Fast Fourier Transform 
LSC Lump Spring Connector 
MAC Modal Assurance Criterion 
NFPA National Fire Protection Association (USA) 
PMAC Partial Modal Assurance Criterion 
PMVR Partial Modal Vector Ratio 
SEA Statistical Energy Analysis 
SPRING1 Abaqus spring element between a node and ground, acting in 
a fixed direction 
xviii 
SPRING2 Abaqus spring element between two nodes, acting in a fixed 
direction 
USAR Urban Search and Rescue 
List of Figures 
Figure 1-1 Collapse patterns in reinforced concrete buildings: (a) complete pancake 
Figure 1-3 Simplified collapse patterns using beams and columns: (a) pancake and (b) 
Figure 2-2 Test setups of the beam junctions: (a) Setup J1, (b) Setup J2, (c) Setup J3, 
(d) Setup J4, (e) Setup J5  Plan view and (f) Setup J5  Side view (units: millimetres). 
Figure 2-3 Test equipment and transducers for test setups: (a) I3, (b) J3, (c) J4 and (d) 
Figure 3-1 FEM model of test setup J5. The purple circles indicate the SPRING2 
elements used for modelling the interaction between beams 1 and 2, purple squares 
indicate the SPRING1 elements that approximate the aluminium support and purple 
Figure 3-2 FEM model of test setup J2. The purple squares indicate the SPRING1 
elements that approximate the aluminium support and the purple line indicates the 
Figure 3-3 Geometry and reinforcement details of beams SS1 (top) and SS2 (bottom).
Figure 3-4 Example FEM model showing the surface-to-surface connection between 
Figure 3-5 Excitation positions for the calculation of the driving-point mobilities of 
Figure 3-6 Pile 1a consists of seven beams with surface-to-surface contact conditions.
Figure 3-7 Pile 1b consists of seven beams with surface-to-surface contact conditions.
Figure 3-8 Pile 2 consists of 14 beams with surface-to-surface contact conditions: (a) 
Figure 3-9 FEM models of pile 1a and pile 1b consisted of seven beams arranged in 
Figure 3-10 FEM model of the pile 2 consisted of 14 beams arranged in six layers. 42 
Figure 3-11 Geometry and reinforcement details of: (a) an undamaged and (b) a 
Figure 3-12 Cross-section details of the reinforced concrete members that for the 
Figure 3-13 FEM model of a rigid beam-to-column T-junction. The orange symbols 
Figure 3-14 FEM model of a damaged beam-to-column T-junction. The orange 
Figure 3-15 Schematic diagram of a N-subsystem SEA model showing only direct 
Figure 3-17 Division of the beam-to-column junctions in: (a) two and (b) three ESEA 
subsystems. The red lines indicate the surfaces where the rain-on-the-roof excitation 
Figure 3-18 Subsystem numbering for the beam-to-column T-junction for the 
Figure 4-1 Comparison of FEM against experimental eigenfrequencies for Setups I1, 
Figure 4-2 MAC values for FEM model of Setup I1: (a) in-plane bending modes, (b) 
Figure 4-3 MAC values for FEM model of Setup I2: (a) in-plane bending modes, (b) 
Figure 4-4 MAC values for FEM model of Setup I3: (a) in-plane bending modes, (b) 
Figure 4-5 Comparison of FEM against experimental eigenfrequencies for Setups J1, 
Figure 4-8 FEM mode shapes of Setup J3: (a) Mode 12 at 1782.3 Hz and (b) Mode 18 
at 2418.8 Hz. The legends show the normalized out-of-plane modal displacements. 66 
Figure 4-9 PMVR values for FEM model of Setup J3. The green and red straight lines 
indicate difference levels of 5 and 10 dB respectively while the empty column 
Figure 4-10 Spatial-average transfer mobility ratio between the beams of setup J3: (a) 
Figure 4-11 Lognormal probability distribution fitted to the dataset of the normal 
Figure 4-12 Comparison of FEM model No.1 and 2 against experimental 
Figure 4-13 MAC values for Setup J4: (a) FEM model No.1 and (b) FEM model No.2.
Figure 4-14  PMAC values for Setup J4: (a) FEM model No.1 and (b) FEM model 
Figure 4-15 PMVR for FEM models No.1 and 2 with Setup J4: (a) PMVR12, (b) 
Figure 4-16 Spatial-average transfer mobility ratio for the beams in setup J4: (a) YR21,1, 
Figure 4-17 Comparison of FEM against experimental eigenfrequencies for Setup J5.
Figure 4-21 Spatial-average transfer mobility ratio for the beams in setup J5: (a) YR21,1, 
xxiii 
Figure 5-1 Types of global modes: (a) bending modes, (b) torsional modes and (c) 
combination of bending and torsional modes. The legends show the normalized out-
Figure 5-2 Average mode count for bending, torsional and combination of all modes 
Figure 5-3 Average mode count for bending, torsional and combination of all modes 
Figure 5-4 Beam SS1 (simply supported)  Ratio of the real part of the driving-point 
mobilities (FEM using bending modes only to infinite beam theory) along with the 
Figure 5-5 Beam SS1 (simply supported)  Ratio of the magnitude of the driving-point 
mobilities (FEM using bending modes only to infinite beam theory) along with the 
Figure 5-6 Contour plots of the ratio of the real part of the driving-point mobilities 
(FEM to infinite beam theory in decibels) for simply supported beam SS1 for 
excitation of bending waves only. X and Y axis indicate the grid of the measuring 
Figure 5-7 Contour plots of the ratio of the real part of the driving-point mobilities 
(FEM to infinite beam theory in decibels) for simply supported beam SS2 for 
excitation of bending waves only. X and Y axis indicate the grid of the measuring 
Figure 5-8 Contour plots of the ratio of the real part of the driving-point mobilities 
(FEM to infinite beam theory in decibels) for simply supported beam SS1 for 
excitation of torsional waves only. X and Y axis indicate the grid of the measuring 
Figure 5-9 Contour plots of the ratio of the real part of the driving-point mobilities 
(FEM to infinite beam theory in decibels) for simply supported beam SS2 for 
excitation of torsional waves only. X and Y axis indicate the grid of the measuring 
Figure 5-10 Contour plots of the ratio of the real part of the driving-point mobilities 
(FEM to infinite beam theory in decibels) for simply supported beam SS1 for 
combination of all types of waves. X and Y axis indicate the grid of the measuring 
Figure 5-11 Contour plots of the ratio of the real part of the driving-point mobilities 
(FEM to infinite beam theory in decibels) for simply supported beam SS2 for 
combination of all types of waves. X and Y axis indicate the grid of the measuring 
Figure 5-12 Ratio of the real part of the driving-point mobilities (FEM to infinite beam 
theory) along with the 95% confidence intervals for beam SS1 (top) and beam SS2 
Figure 5-13 Ratio of the magnitude of the driving-point mobilities (FEM to infinite 
beam theory) along with the 95% confidence intervals for beam SS1 (top) and beam 
Figure 5-14 Contour plots of the ratio of the real part of the driving-point mobilities 
(FEM to infinite beam theory in decibels) for the free supported beam SS1 for 
excitation of bending waves only. X and Y axis indicate the grid of the measuring 
Figure 5-15 Contour plots of the ratio of the real part of the driving-point mobilities 
(FEM to infinite beam theory in decibels) for the free supported beam SS2 for 
excitation of bending waves only. X and Y axis indicate the grid of the measuring 
Figure 5-16 Contour plots of the ratio of the real part of the driving-point mobilities 
(FEM to infinite beam theory in decibels) for the free supported beam SS1 for 
excitation of torsional waves only. X and Y axis indicate the grid of the measuring 
Figure 5-17 Contour plots of the ratio of the real part of the driving-point mobilities 
(FEM to infinite beam theory in decibels) for the free supported beam SS2 for 
excitation of torsional waves only. X and Y axis indicate the grid of the measuring 
Figure 5-18 Contour plots of the ratio of the real part of the driving-point mobilities 
(FEM to infinite beam theory in decibels) for the free supported beam SS1 for 
combination of all types of waves. X and Y axis indicate the grid of the measuring 
Figure 5-19 Contour plots of the ratio of the real part of the driving-point mobilities 
(FEM to infinite beam theory in decibels) for the free supported beam SS2 for 
combination of all types of waves. X and Y axis indicate the grid of the measuring 
Figure 5-20 Ratio of the real part of the driving-point mobilities (FEM to infinite beam 
theory) along with the 95% confidence intervals for beam SS1 (top) and beam SS2 
Figure 5-21 Ratio of the magnitude of the driving-point mobilities (FEM to infinite 
beam theory) along with the 95% confidence intervals for beam SS1 (top) and beam 
Figure 5-22 Bending wavelength of beams SS1 and SS2. The red line indicates the 
Figure 5-23 Torsional wavelength of beams SS1 and SS2. The red line indicates the 
Figure 5-24 Comparison of FEM ESEA (bending modes) and the analytical model 
(LSC) coupling loss factors 12 and 21. The error bars denote the 95% confidence 
Figure 5-25 Comparison of FEM ESEA (torsional modes) and the analytical model 
(LSC) coupling loss factors 12 and 21. The error bars denote the 95% confidence 
Figure 5-26 Comparison of FEM ESEA (combination of all modes) and the analytical 
model (LSC) coupling loss factors 12 and 21. The error bars denote the 95% 
Figure 5-27 Comparison of FEM ESEA (bending modes) and the analytical model 
(LSC) coupling loss factors 12 and 21. The error bars denote the 95% confidence 
Figure 5-28 Comparison of FEM ESEA (torsional modes) and the analytical model 
(LSC) coupling loss factors 12 and 21. The error bars denote the 95% confidence 
xxvii 
Figure 5-29 Comparison of FEM ESEA (combination of all modes) and the analytical 
model (LSC) coupling loss factors 12 and 21. The error bars denote the 95% 
Figure 6-1 Coupling loss factors 12 and 21 with 95% confidence intervals from FEM 
ESEA for beams with simply supported and free support conditions at the end of each 
Figure 6-2 Coupling loss factors 12 and 21 resulted from an analytical model based 
on a lump spring connector using driving-point mobilities of an infinite beam and 
Figure 6-3 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E2, from the SEA matrix solution 
Figure 6-4 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E3, from the SEA matrix solution 
Figure 6-5 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E4, from the SEA matrix solution 
Figure 6-6 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E5, from the SEA matrix solution 
Figure 6-7 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E6, from the SEA matrix solution 
Figure 6-8 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E7, from the SEA matrix solution 
Figure 6-9 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E2, from the SEA matrix solution 
xxviii 
Figure 6-10 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E3, from the SEA matrix solution 
Figure 6-11 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E4, from the SEA matrix solution 
Figure 6-12 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E5, from the SEA matrix solution 
Figure 6-13 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E6, from the SEA matrix solution 
Figure 6-14 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E7, from the SEA matrix solution 
Figure 6-15 Difference between the energy ratios from FEM and SEA with CLFs from 
Figure 6-16 Difference between the energy ratios from FEM and SEA with CLFs from 
Figure 6-17 Difference between the energy ratios from FEM and SEA with CLFs from 
Figure 6-18 Difference between the energy ratios from FEM and SEA with CLFs from 
Figure 6-19 Difference between the energy ratios from FEM and SEA with CLFs from 
Figure 6-20 Difference between the energy ratios from FEM and SEA with CLFs from 
Figure 6-21 Difference between the energy ratios from FEM and SEA with CLFs from 
Figure 6-22 Difference between the energy ratios from FEM and SEA with CLFs from 
Figure 6-23 Difference between the energy ratios from FEM and SEA with CLFs from 
Figure 6-24 Difference between the energy ratios, E1/Ei from FEM and SEA with 
CLFs from FEM ESEA (combination of bending, torsional and longitudinal modes).
Figure 6-25 Difference between the energy ratios, E1/Ei from FEM and SEA with 
Figure 6-26 Difference between the energy ratios, E1/Ei from FEM and SEA with 
Figure 6-27 Difference between the energy ratios, E1/Ei from FEM and SEA with 
CLFs from FEM ESEA (combination of bending, torsional and longitudinal modes)  
Figure 6-28 Difference between the energy ratios, E1/Ei from FEM and SEA with 
CLFs from an analytical model (LSC with infinite beam mobilities)  Excitation on 
Figure 6-29 Difference between the energy ratios, E1/Ei from FEM and SEA with 
CLFs from an analytical model (LSC with FEM mobilities)  Excitation  on subsystem 
Figure 6-30 Difference between the energy ratios, E1/Ei from FEM and SEA with 
CLFs from FEM ESEA (combination of bending, torsional and longitudinal modes)  
Figure 6-31 Difference between the energy ratios, E1/Ei from FEM and SEA with 
CLFs from an analytical model (LSC with infinite beam mobilities)  Excitation on 
Figure 6-32 Difference between the energy ratios, E1/Ei from FEM and SEA with 
CLFs from an analytical model (LSC with FEM mobilities)  Excitation  on subsystem 
Figure 7-1 Comparison of the average mode count of the 30 damaged junctions with 
the mode count of the rigid T-junction for out-of-plane bending modes and 
Figure 7-2 Comparison of FEM and the analytical (wave approach) coupling loss 
Figure 7-3 Comparison of FEM and the analytical (wave approach) coupling loss 
Figure 7-4 Comparison of FEM and the analytical (wave approach) coupling loss 
Figure 7-5 Coupling loss factors 12 and 21 resulted from FEM ESEA with two 
subsystems with bending only (B) and the combination of all modes (A). The error 
Figure 7-6 Damaged junctions  Percentage of negative CLFs 12 and 21 resulted from 
FEM ESEA with two subsystems with bending only (B) and the combination of all 
Figure 7-7 Coupling loss factors 12 and 21 resulted from FEM ESEA with three 
subsystems with bending only (B) and the combination of all modes (A). The error 
Figure 7-8 Coupling loss factors 13 and 31 resulted from FEM ESEA with three 
subsystems with bending only (B) and the combination of all modes (A). The error 
Figure 7-9 Coupling loss factors 23 and 32 resulted from FEM ESEA with three 
subsystems with bending only (B) and the combination of all modes (A). The error 
Figure 7-10 Damaged junctions  Percentage of negative CLFs resulted from FEM 
Figure 7-11 Damaged junctions  Percentage of negative CLFs resulted from FEM 
Figure C-1 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E2, from the SEA matrix solution 
Figure C-2 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E3, from the SEA matrix solution 
Figure C-3 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E4, from the SEA matrix solution 
Figure C-4 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E5, from the SEA matrix solution 
xxxii 
Figure C-5 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E6, from the SEA matrix solution 
Figure C-6 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E7, from the SEA matrix solution 
Figure C-7 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E8, from the SEA matrix solution 
and path analysis. Combination of paths No. 1-5 and No. 1-16 result in identical 
Figure C-8 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E9, from the SEA matrix solution 
Figure C-9 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E10, from the SEA matrix solution 
Figure C-10 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E11, from the SEA matrix solution 
Figure C-11 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E12, from the SEA matrix solution 
Figure C-12 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E13, from the SEA matrix solution 
Figure C-13 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E14, from the SEA matrix solution 
xxxiii 
List of Tables 
Table 3-2 Geometry of the beams of pile 1 (counter-clockwise angles are positive).38 
Table 3-5 Geometry of the beams of pile 2 (counter-clockwise angles are positive).40 
Table 4-2 Normal contact stiffness values determined from model updating for the 
Table 6-1 Transmission paths to beams SS2 to SS7 through the pile 1a shown in Figure 
Table 6-2 Transmission paths to beams SS2 to SS7 through pile 1b shown in Figure 
Table C-1 Transmission paths to beam SS2 through pile 2 shown in Figure 3-8 for 
Table C-2 Transmission paths to beam SS3 through pile 2 shown in Figure 3-8 for 
Table C-3 Transmission paths to beam SS4 through pile 2 shown in Figure 3-8 for 
xxxiv 
Table C-4 Transmission paths to beam SS5 through pile 2 shown in Figure 3-8 for 
Table C-5 Transmission paths to beam SS6 through pile 2 shown in Figure 3-8 for 
Table C-6 Transmission paths to beam SS7 through pile 2 shown in Figure 3-8 for 
Table C-7 Transmission paths to beam SS8 through pile 2 shown in Figure 3-8 for 
Table C-8 Transmission paths to beam SS9 through pile 2 shown in Figure 3-8 for 
Table C-9 Transmission paths to beam SS10 through pile 2 shown in Figure 3-8 for 
Table C-10 Transmission paths to beam SS11 through pile 2 shown in Figure 3-8 for 
Table C-11 Transmission paths to beam SS12 through pile 2 shown in Figure 3-8 for 
Table C-12 Transmission paths to beam SS13 through pile 2 shown in Figure 3-8 for 
Table C-13 Transmission paths to beam SS14 through pile 2 shown in Figure 3-8 for 
1. Introduction 
1.1 Background and motivation 
Every few years an earthquake of high magnitude occurs around the globe resulting in 
collapsed structures with people trapped inside them. When victims are trapped inside 
a collapsed building, the challenge is to detect and locate survivors within a period of 
time that will allow them to be rescued. An uninjured healthy adult with a supply of 
fresh air has a high probability of survival if the rescue occurs within 72 hours of the 
entrapment [1]. After 72 hours the survival rate is decreasing and without access to 
water the victims are unlikely to survive for more than 5-6 days ( [1], [2]). However, 
important variables affect the survivability including the structure type and void space 
formation, the cause of the structural collapse, the survival location in the building and 
the speed and sophistication of available urban search and rescue (USAR) capabilities 
In a canine search, up to three dogs use their sense of smell to search the entire site 
individually or in pairs to detect potential victims trapped inside rubble. This USAR 
technique is considered as the most effective and it is time efficient [4]. However, the 
main disadvantages are the limited  availability and operational time of the canines as 
long as their stress-sensitivity [5]. Other USAR techniques include the use of optical 
sensors such as video, infrared and thermal cameras and/or acoustical sensors (e.g. 
microphones, probes) mounted on either a bendable cable or a telescopic rod or 
recently on robots. Although these techniques offer a direct communication between 
the rescuers and the trapped survivor, their efficiency depends on the existence of voids 
inside the rubble ( [4], [6]). 
Airborne sound from survivors tends to be highly attenuated by layers of rubble and 
requires the existence of air paths for propagation to the surface. For this reason, there 
is greater potential to detect physical movement or signals by measuring vibration due 
to structure-borne sound (i.e. seismic research method). In a seismic search, a small 
number of seismic sensors are moved over a regular grid so that the operators can be 
certain they have searched the entire site. The placement and positioning of these 
sensors is critical for the successful detection of the survivors. However, grid spacing 
and sensor placement are often decided simply by checking whether it is possible to 
detect transients generated by the operators in an adjacent grid area on the surface in 
places where the structure is safe to walk [4]. This can be misleading because 
horizontal propagation of vibration across the surface of a collapsed structure is not 
necessarily indicative of propagation into the depths of a collapsed structure. In 
addition, if the search area is not completely silent the seismic sensors will detect 
signals from other sources of vibration and not only from a trapped survivor. This will 
possibly make the operator to fail to detect or locate the survivor [4]. 
To address this problem, it is proposed that prediction models could be developed and 
used as a tool to assist in the decision making of the rescue teams. Deterministic 
models such as Finite Element Method (FEM) [7] are not efficient for modelling 
collapsed buildings which are complex systems with a high degree of uncertainty (e.g. 
the collapse pattern and the size, the distribution and the contact conditions between 
the debris). To predict vibration transmission in collapsed buildings, there is potential 
to develop models based on Statistical Energy Analysis (SEA) as these can account 
for the inherent uncertainty in describing modal features of component parts of a 
structure [8]. In addition, SEA models are much more efficient in terms of the 
computational time needed compared with FEM. Therefore, this thesis investigates 
whether SEA could be used to model vibration transmission between the structural 
members of a collapsed reinforced concrete building.  
1.2 Literature review 
This section reviews the literature related to the main topics in this thesis. 
1.2.1 Collapse patterns in reinforced concrete buildings after earthquakes 
According to NFPA 1670 [9], in buildings there are five main types of collapse 
patterns: (a) lean-to, (b) cantilever, (c) pancake, (d) V-shape and (e) A-frame collapse. 
In heavy floor structures such as the reinforced concrete buildings the most frequent 
earthquake collapse patterns that lead in trapped survivors are: (a) the pancake and (b) 
the lean-to collapse.  
In a complete pancake collapse (see Figure 1-1a) the column-floor joints fail, the 
columns fracture and the floors are collapsing on top of each other. Specifically, a 
complete pancake collapse results in a large pile of debris [10]. When the columns are 
strong enough not to fracture, the floors can project laterally as they fall forming the 
offset pancake collapse pattern as it is shown in Figure 1-1b. The mid-story collapse 
(see Figure 1-1c) is a sub-category of the pancake collapse as the pancaking is 
restricted to one or more intermediate floors of the building [11]. The pancake collapse 
patterns decrease the probability of survival due to the limited number of the formed 
void spaces and the difficulty of the rescue teams to reach the potential survivors [10].    
A lean-to collapse (see Figure 1-1d) occurs when the one end of a floor is supported 
by a fragmented structural member or debris whereas the opposite end stays connected 
to a column [12]. The angle between the anchored floor and the column  is usually 
between 45 and 55 degrees and the connection is made only via the yielded steel 
reinforcement [13]. The lean-to collapse pattern is often combined with the pancake 
collapse [11] and creates voids of triangular shape where potential survivors could be 
found [14].   
Due to a catastrophic earthquake event and regardless the collapse pattern, the 
structural members of a reinforced concrete building (i.e. beams, columns and slabs) 
develop individual fractures which lead to the formation of concrete discontinuities 
along their length. The fragmented parts are connected via the yielded steel 
reinforcement as it is shown Figure 1-2.   
                                 (a)                                                          (b) 
                                 (c)                                                          (d) 
Figure 1-1 Collapse patterns in reinforced concrete buildings: (a) complete pancake 
[15], (b) offset pancake [16], (c) mid-story [17] and (d) lean-to collapse [18].  
Figure 1-2 Discontinuities in reinforced concrete structural members [19]. 
This thesis investigates vibration transmission using FEM and SEA across structural 
elements that approximate: (a) the pancake collapse pattern and (b) the lean-to collapse 
pattern with the simplification that only beams and columns are considered, rather than 
plates representing floors or walls. This facilitates the experimental work as large 
facilities would be needed for full-scale reinforced concrete slabs. By producing 
experimentally validated models of reinforced concrete beams it should be feasible to 
extend the work in the future to plates. In the simplified pancake collapse pattern (see 
Figure 1-3a), reinforced concrete beams are randomly piled on top of each other 
without any bonding material whereas in the simplified lean-to collapse pattern (see 
Figure 1-3b), a reinforced concrete beam is connected to a column only via the yielded 
steel reinforcement. 
Figure 1-3 Simplified collapse patterns using beams and columns: (a) pancake and (b) 
lean-to collapse. 
1.2.2 Finite Element Method  
The Finite Element Method is a computational technique used to obtain approximate 
solutions of boundary value problems in engineering. The method was first applied in 
the late 1940s for analysis of airframe structures. During the 1960s and 1970s it was 
extended to applications in plate bending, shell bending, pressure vessels and general 
three-dimensional problems in elastic structural analysis as well as to fluid flow and 
heat transfer [20]. More recently the method was extended to cover multiphysics [21].  
For heavyweight buildings, the Finite Element Method has mainly been used for 
modelling the linear and non-linear dynamic behaviour of heavyweight buildings 
made of masonry (e.g. [22], [23]) and reinforced concrete (e.g. [24], [25]). The main 
advantage of using FEM is the capability to model complex structures by 
approximating their geometry and boundary conditions using line (spring/beam) 
elements, area (shell/plate) elements and volume (solid) elements [26]. The main 
limitation of FEM is that the accuracy of the method depends on the size and the type 
of the element used. In structural dynamics, there is strong relationship between the 
wave frequency and finite element size [27]. In literature, it is suggested that there 
should be at least six elements per wavelength ( [27], [28], [29]). In high frequency 
problems, typically over 500 Hz [30], this could either significantly increase the 
computational time or even make the problem impossible to be solved by a desktop 
computer. However, recent advances in computer hardware allows the solution of 
detailed finite element models of millions of degrees of freedom [31].            
1.2.2.1 Modelling of reinforced concrete beams and columns 
Various methods are available in the literature for the FEM modelling of reinforced 
concrete beams and columns. The most popular procedure is the use of solid elements 
for the concrete part of the member and the use of truss elements for the reinforcement 
(e.g. [32], [33], [34]). Truss elements have one degree of freedom per node, can sustain 
only axial deformation and cannot propagate bending waves [20]. Thus, they are not 
appropriate for modelling the steel reinforcement in the damaged concrete beams of 
this thesis. The 3D smeared approach approximates the steel bars using solid elements 
with equivalent properties calculated as weighted averages of the properties of 
reinforcement and concrete [34]. However, this method is not applicable to beams with 
concrete discontinuities. Other researchers used a combination of solid and beam 
elements [33]. Beam elements can sustain bending wave motion and this approach is 
adopted for modelling the reinforced concrete members in this thesis.  
1.2.2.2 Modelling of piles of beams 
For concrete beams it is reasonable to assume that they will remain in contact whilst 
undergoing vibratory motion. However, there are other engineering applications where 
vibration is transmitted between lightweight structural elements that are not rigidly 
bonded together which results in them being in two distinct states, in contact and out-
of-contact. For example, Ervin [35] studied impacts between two orthogonal pinned-
pinned beams by modelling a point connection between them using an elastic spring. 
Springs can be used to model complex connections between structural elements (e.g. 
[36], [37], [38]) and their stiffness can be determined analytically or by model updating 
[39] against experimental results. Research has been carried out on the investigation 
of the vibration of coupled beams when aligned parallel to each other when connected 
with uniformly distributed translational springs (e.g. [40], [41], [42], [43], [44]). 
However, the literature rarely considers the dynamics of beam systems where the 
beams are connected along their length rather than at the ends. The exception is Ervin 
[35] that showed contact stiffness affects the eigenfrequencies and mode shapes of a 
system of two beams. The Finite Element Method [20] allows study of the dynamic 
behaviour of unbonded contacts using elastic spring contacts. However, this requires 
an estimate of the normal contact stiffness which is not commonly available in the 
literature. Therefore, this thesis investigates the normal contact stiffness between 
reinforced concrete beams by experimentally validating FEM models. 
1.2.3 Statistical Energy Analysis 
Statistical Energy Analysis was introduced in 1959 and is a framework analysis for 
predicting the transmission of sound and vibration in built-up structures by using a 
statistical approach based on energy flow between weakly coupled parts of the system 
of interest, called subsystems. SEA calculates the response variables in terms of 
averages and variances over frequency and space thus it is not possible to obtain the 
exact response at a precise location and frequency [8]. The main advantage compared 
to deterministic methods such as FEM is the ability to deal with high frequency 
problems where the modal density is high without increasing the number of the degrees 
of freedom in the model ( [30], [45]).   
1.2.3.1 Subsystem definition 
Subsystems are defined by their ability to store modal energy [46]. Craik [47] defines a 
subsystem as a group of modes with the same properties that will have the same modal 
energies for all sources of excitation. A beam can support bending waves (in-plane and 
out-of-plane), longitudinal waves and torsional waves and can be represented in an SEA 
model by using one subsystem for each wave type. However, there are many situations 
where only bending waves could be considered and a single subsystem should be sufficient 
[48].  
The piles in this thesis consist of beams which are not rigidly bonded together; hence 
it is reasonable to assume that each beam represents one subsystem. However, since it 
is unknown what types of modes will be excited, this thesis investigates whether it is 
possible to consider one type of wave motion (bending waves) or whether two or more 
types of wave motion can be considered simultaneously (bending and torsional waves).  
Rigid T-junctions in heavyweight buildings are mainly modelled using SEA with three 
subsystems (e.g. [48], [49]). To the knowledge of the author, limited work has been 
carried out on damaged T-junctions where the connection between the beam and the 
column is made only via the yielded steel reinforcement; hence this thesis investigates 
whether these junctions should be modelled using two or three subsystems and whether 
it is possible to only consider bending waves or whether two or more types of wave 
motion could be considered simultaneously (e.g. bending and torsional waves). 
1.2.3.2 Coupling between structural subsystems 
In SEA, the coupling between two subsystems is defined using the Coupling Loss 
Factor (CLF) which represents the rate of energy transfer out of a subsystem to another 
Point connections between parallel plates (e.g. wall ties, resilient mounts or bridged 
screeds), between plates and beams (e.g. screws, nails or bolts) and between  beams 
are very common [46]. Simple models to quantify the power flow across a single point 
connection make use of the driving-point mobility of the plates or beams and the 
mobility of the point connection ( [50], [8]). A resilient point connection could be 
modelled using a simple linear spring. The analytical model based on a lump spring 
connector (LSC) is assessed in this thesis for modelling the contact condition between 
the beams in a pile.  
1.2.4 Experimental Statistical Energy Analysis  
Experimental Statistical Energy Analysis (ESEA) could be used in complex coupling 
situations and/or between complex subsystems to determine CLFs when they are not 
available or difficult to measure [51]. The standard approach of ESEA relies on the 
power injection method where the coupling loss factors are determined by the 
inversion of the power balance equations [52]. ESEA and FEM could be combined to 
determine the CLFs of the entire system by using the FEM calculated energies of each 
subsystem into the inversed system response matrix for excitation of each subsystem 
individually [8]. The efficiency of the method decreases for large number of 
subsystems [8] and to avoid the result of negative CLFs the subsystems must be weakly 
coupled [46]. ESEA could also work when the subsystems have low modal overlap 
and low mode counts [49].  
In this thesis, FEM ESEA is used to determine the CLFs in beam junctions with 
surface-to-surface contact conditions and in damaged beam-to-column junctions when 
either only one type of wave motion is considered or two or more types of wave motion 
can be considered simultaneously.  
1.3 Aims 
The main aims of this thesis are: 
1. To experimentally validate FEM models of non-bonded concrete beams when in 
contact with each other and identify a suitable contact stiffness value for surface-
to-surface or edge-to-surface contact conditions. 
2. To assess the potential to use SEA to model vibration transmission between two 
reinforced concrete beams when they are stacked on top of each other and 
investigate are (a) whether it is possible to only consider one type of wave motion 
(bending waves) or whether two or more types of wave motion can be considered 
simultaneously (bending and torsional waves) and (b) whether analytical models 
based on lump spring connectors can be used to model the contact condition. 
3. To investigate whether SEA could be used to model vibration transmission in piles 
of more than two reinforced concrete beams when they are stacked on top of each 
other. 
4. To assess the potential to use SEA to model vibration transmission in damaged 
beam-to-column junction and investigate (a) whether the number of the 
subsystems affects the validity and accuracy of FEM ESEA and (b) whether it is 
possible to only consider one type of wave motion (e.g. bending waves) or 
whether two or more types of wave motion could be considered simultaneously 
(e.g. bending and torsional waves). 
1.4 Thesis layout 
The layout of the chapters in this thesis is as follows. 
Chapter 2 describes the experimental work carried out on individual reinforced 
concrete beams and beam junctions. 
Chapter 3 presents the theory and the numerical models used in this thesis.  
Chapter 4  investigates the normal contact stiffness between reinforced concrete beams 
by experimentally validating FEM models of beam junctions where the beams are 
stacked on top of each other without any bonding material and the interaction between 
the beams is modelled by using either linear elastic contacts or linear elastic springs.  
Chapter 5 assess the potential to use SEA to model vibration transmission between two 
reinforced concrete beams when they are stacked on top of each other. Numerical 
experiments with FEM are used to create an ensemble of beam junctions for a Monte 
Carlo simulation to allow use of FEM SEA to determine CLFs between the beams. 
These are compared with the CLFs from an analytical model of a lump spring 
connector. 
Chapter 6 applies SEA to two piles of reinforced concrete beams. SEA path analysis 
is carried out to quantify and assess the strength of the transmission paths between the 
beams and the general SEA matrix solution is used to estimate the energy ratios 
between the beams of the piles using: a) FEM ESEA CLFs and b) the CLFs from an 
analytical model of a lump spring connector. SEA predictions are compared against 
the results of FEM models. 
Chapter 7 assesses the potential to use SEA to model the vibration transmission in 
seismic damaged reinforced concrete beam-to-column junctions. The FEM model of 
a rigid T-junction is validated against the wave theory in terms of CLFs that only 
consider bending wave motion. A concrete discontinuity is then introduced at the 
connection of the beam with the column and the resulting FEM model is used to carry 
out numerical experiments with FEM to create an ensemble of damaged beam-to-
column junctions for a Monte Carlo simulation. This allows use of ESEA to determine 
CLFs between the beam and the column.   
Chapter 8 summarises the main conclusions and provides suggestions for further work. 
2. Experimental work 
2.1 Introduction 
This chapter describes the experimental work which has been carried out on individual 
reinforced concrete beams and beam junction used for validating the predictive 
approaches in chapters 3  6.  
2.2 Experimental work 
2.2.1 Reinforced concrete beams  
The experimental samples consist of three reinforced concrete beams with the same 
dimensions; these were 2.4 m in length with a rectangular cross-section of 200  300 
mm. A Class 25/30 concrete (C25/30) with a characteristic cylinder crushing strength 
(fck) of 25 MPa and cube strength of 30 MPa was selected for casting the beams. 
C25/30 concrete is commonly used in the construction industry [53]. Grade 500 steel 
(S500) with a characteristic yield strength (fyk) of 500 MPa was selected for the 
reinforcement. Grade 500 has replaced Grade 250 and Grade 460 reinforcing steel for 
construction works [53].  
As indicated in Figure 2-1, beam 1 is reinforced with four longitudinal steel bars of 16 
mm diameter (4H16) whereas beams 2 and 3 are reinforced with eight longitudinal 
steel bars of 16 mm diameter (8H16). The transverse reinforcement consists of 8 mm 
diameter stirrups placed at 200 mm centres (H8/200) along beams 1, 2 and 3. Beam 3 
was designed to have a 100 mm wide discontinuity in the centre to simulate an 
(idealised) fracture that could occur in a collapsed building (see section 1.2.1). 
Figure 2-1 Structural details of the experimental samples (units: millimetres). 
2.2.2 Test setups 
The test setups for the beams were arranged so that they could be tested individually 
in isolation and when forming a junction with surface-to-surface or edge-to-surface 
contact conditions. Note that the term edge-to-surface is used because an edge on one 
beam makes a line connection across the surface area of the other beam. 
2.2.2.1 Individual beams 
Setups I1, I2 and I3 refer to isolated beams 1, 2 and 3 respectively when suspended 
from a crane using polyester slings. These beams are assumed to have free support 
conditions which avoids any additional uncertainty in the model updating process 
when modelling boundary conditions. The slings were assumed to have negligible 
effect on the dynamic response. The beams were orientated so that bending wave 
motion occurred across the longer dimension of the cross-section (i.e. 300 mm 
thickness). 
2.2.2.2 Junctions 
For the beam junctions, it was necessary to support the lower beam (beam 1). Hence 
setup I4 was created with beam 1 orientated such that bending wave motion was across 
the shorter dimension of the cross-section (i.e. 200 mm thickness) and the lower 
surface rested upon a square-section solid aluminium bar (2525 mm) at each end. 
This aluminium bar rested on two concrete blocks (each 440215100 mm) stacked 
on top of each other; this was necessary to elevate them 200 mm above the ground for 
the operation of the crane that moved the beams.  
Setups J1 - J5 (see Figure 2-2) were selected to investigate the effect of: (a) the contact 
area, (b) the relative position and the angle between the beams, (c) the contact type 
(surface-to-surface or edge-to-surface) and (d) the number of the beams on the 
dynamic behaviour of the junctions.  
Setups J1, J2 and J3 were formed after placing beam 2 on top of beam 1 in setup I4 to 
create a surface-to-surface contact condition. In setups J1 and J2, the angle between 
the beams is equal to 90 but the beams are in contact at different positions along the 
length (see Figure 2-2a and b). In Setup J3 the two beams are at an angle of 41; this 
angle was determined by the available space in the laboratory (see Figure 2-2c). 
Figure 2-2 Test setups of the beam junctions: (a) Setup J1, (b) Setup J2, (c) Setup J3, 
(d) Setup J4, (e) Setup J5  Plan view and (f) Setup J5  Side view (units: millimetres). 
The red markers indicate the positions of the accelerometers (see Table 2-1). 
In setup J4, beam 3 was placed on top of setup J3 to create a pile of three beams with 
surface-to-surface contact conditions  see Figure 2-2d. Beams 2 and 3 form a cross 
for reasons of stability since there are no supports at their ends.  
Setup J5 is identical to setup J2 except for the inclination angle of 9 between the two 
beams. To create edge-to-surface contact conditions, one end of beam 2 was elevated 
by 600 mm using six stacked aggregate concrete blocks with 30 mm thick rubber 
(60 mm length) to isolate beam B from the concrete blocks (see Figure 2-2e and 2f). 
The stiffness of the rubber material was measured according to ISO 9052-1 [54] (see 
section 2.2.4). 
2.2.3 Experimental modal analysis 
Experimental Modal Analysis (EMA) is used to identify the material properties, 
damping and the modal characteristics of the individual beams and the beam junctions 
using FFT analysis with 1 Hz frequency lines. Brel & Kjr Pulse Reflex software 
was used for signal processing and EMA. As it is shown in Figure 2-3, the beams were 
excited using an impact hammer (Brel & Kjr Type 8200) and the response was 
measured using accelerometers (Brel & Kjr Type 4371). The transducers were 
connected to an FFT analyser (Brel & Kjr Type 3050-A-060) via a Nexus 
Conditioning Amplifier (Brel & Kjr Type 2692).   
To avoid altering the natural frequencies of the test setups when removing and 
remounting the accelerometers at different positions, the roving hammer technique 
was selected over the roving accelerometers technique for modal testing. The 
accelerometers remained at fixed positions (see red markers in Figure 2-2) whilst the 
impact hammer was moved along a mesh of excitation points with spacing between 
0.10 and 0.20m.  
Table 2-1 shows the number of the accelerometers and the number of the excitation 
positions for each setup. Only out-of-plane acceleration was measured, except in 
setups I1, I2 and I3 where the response was measured in all three coordinate directions.  
                                       (a)                                                                    (b) 
                                       (c)                                                                    (d) 
Figure 2-3 Test equipment and transducers for test setups: (a) I3, (b) J3, (c) J4 and (d) 
Table 2-1 Accelerometers and excitation positions per setup (see Figure 2-2).  
setup 
Description Accelerometers Hammer positions 
plane1 
Out-of-
plane2 
plane 
Out-of-
plane 
I1 Beam 1  sling supports 2 1 128 78 
I2 Beam 2  sling supports  2 1 128 78 
I3 Beam 3  sling supports 4 2 160 84 
I4 Beam 1  aluminium supports - 3 - 100 
Junction of two beams (1&2) 
(surface-to-surface) 
- 3 - 171 
Junction of two beams (1&2) 
(surface-to-surface) 
- 3 - 171 
Junction of two beams (1&2) 
(surface-to-surface) 
- 3 - 167 
Pile of three beams (1,2&3) 
(surface-to-surface) 
- 4 - 242 
Junction of two beams  (1&2) 
(edge-to-surface) 
- 3 - 171 
2.2.4 Dynamic stiffness measurement for the rubber material according to 
ISO 9052 -1  
Figure 2-4 shows the measurement setup for the dynamic stiffness of the rubber 
material which was used in setup J5 for isolating beam 2 from the concrete blocks (see 
section 2.2.2.2). This corresponds to a mass  spring system where a sample of rubber 
material with dimensions 200 x 200 mm is placed on a rigid concrete cube and an 8 
kg steel load plate with the same dimensions is installed on the top of the rubber 
material.  
According to ISO 9052 Part 1 [54], between the rubber material and the steel load plate 
should exist a sheet of a waterproof material and a layer of plaster of Paris to remove 
any surface irregularities and ensure excitation over the entire surface of the sample. 
1 In plane transducer = excites/measure the response in a direction parallel to the ground plane 
2 Out-of-plane transducer = excites/measure the response in a direction normal to the ground 
plane 
However, in this measurement the steel load plate was directly attached to the rubber 
material.     
Figure 2-4 Measurement setup for the dynamic stiffness of the rubber material. 
An impact hammer (Brel & Kjr Type 8200) was used to measure the input force 
and  an accelerometer (Brel & Kjr Type 4371) was positioned slightly off centred 
to measure the vertical vibration of the load plate. The excitation force was applied to 
the centre of the load plate so that there is only a vertical component to the vibration. 
The transducers were connected to an FFT analyser (Brel & Kjr Type 3050-A-060) 
via a Nexus Conditioning Amplifier (Brel & Kjr Type 2692). All the signal 
processing was carried out using Brel & Kjr Pulse Reflex using FFT analysis with 
0.3125 Hz frequency lines. 
The resonant frequency, fms, of the mass  spring system is given by [46], 
 =
 (2.2.1) 
where k is the stiffness of the rubber sample and m the mass of the steel load plate. 
For lightly damped systems the resonant frequency can be determined by the peak in 
the magnitude of the driving-point mobility, Ydp [46]. Figure 2-5 shows the magnitude 
of the driving-point mobility in the frequency range from 20 to 500 Hz. The peak 
occurs at 59.06 Hz. By replacing this value in Eq. (2.2.1), the stiffness k of the rubber 
material was calculated equal to 27512887.25 N/m3. 
Figure 2-5 Driving-point mobility for the rubber sample. 
2.3 Conclusions 
Experimental Modal Analysis was carried out using the roving hammer technique to 
determine the dynamic characteristics of individual reinforced concrete beams and 
beam junctions with surface-to-surface and edge-to-surface contact conditions. The 
results of the experimental work will be used for validating the predictive approaches 
in chapters 3  6.  
3. Theory and modelling 
3.1 Introduction 
This chapter describes (a) Finite Element Method and (b) Statistical Energy Analysis 
as predictive methods used in this thesis. 
3.2 Finite Element Method  
The fundamental concept of FEM is to divide the domain of interest (e.g. a structure) 
into a finite number of simple sub-domains (elements) and uses numerical methods 
(interpolation and integration) to construct an approximation of the solution over the 
collection of sub-domains [55]. With this approach, problems with complex geometry, 
complex boundary conditions or other complexities are possible to find an 
approximate solution whereas this was not possible before using analytical methods.  
Today, many commercial finite element analysis software packages are available for 
use on personal computers to obtain solutions to large problems in static and dynamic 
analysis, heat transfer, fluid flow, electromagnetics, seismic response and acoustics. 
For the finite element models of beams in this thesis the finite element software 
Abaqus was used with the programs Abaqus/Standard and Abaqus/CAE (version 
6.14). All FEM models in this thesis used Abaqus software (Version 6.14) [56].   
3.2.1 Analysis methods 
3.2.1.1 Eigenvalue analysis 
Natural frequencies and mode shapes of vibration of a mechanical system were 
determined using eigenvalue analysis based on the elastic (stiffness, K) and inertia 
(mass, M) characteristics of the system [20].  
The results of the eigenvalue analysis (i.e. eigenfrequencies and mode shapes) are used 
in this thesis for the validation and updating of the finite element models.   
For a multi-degree of freedom system (N-DOF), the eigenvalue problem can be written 
as [57], 
 [[]  
2[]]{} = 0   (3.2.1) 
where [] is the stiffness matrix of the system, [] is the mass matrix of the system, 
 is the natural angular frequencies of vibration and {} is the matrix of the natural 
modes of vibration.  
The natural angular frequencies of an N-DOF system can be obtained by solving        
Eq. 3.2.2 [57]. This equation has N roots and each root corresponds to one independent 
natural angular frequency,  of the system.  
 [[]  
2[]] = 0   (3.2.2) 
Inserting the N natural angular frequencies, n of the system in Eq. (3.2.1) gives  
independent vectors of the natural modes of vibration, {}. The natural modes, {} 
and {} corresponding to different natural angular frequencies, n and r must satisfy 
the following orthogonality criterion [57],     
}[]{} = 0                  {
}[]{} = 0 (3.2.3) 
Orthogonality makes the modal solutions independent and the corresponding mode 
shapes normal. It also makes the infinite set of modal solutions a complete set, or a 
basis, so that any arbitrary response can be formed as a linear combination of these 
normal mode solutions [58]. 
In Abaqus/Standard the default eigenvalue extraction method is Lanczos. This was 
used in the frequency range from 1 to 3200 Hz to extract the eigenfrequencies and the 
mode shapes of: (a) the individual beams and beam junctions in chapters 4 and 5, (b) 
the pile of beams in chapters 4 and 6 and (c) the beam-to-column junctions in chapter 
7. The upper frequency limit of 3200 Hz had to be established since Lanczos solver 
was resulting to spurious modes for the beam elements of the reinforcement bars above 
that frequency.    
3.2.1.2 Mode-based steady-state dynamic analysis 
Steady-state dynamic analysis provides the steady-state amplitude and phase of the 
response of a system due to harmonic excitation at a given frequency. Usually such 
analysis is done as a frequency sweep by applying the loading at a series of different 
frequencies and recording the response [56]. 
For a multi degree of freedom system that exhibits harmonic excitation, the equation 
of motion can be written as [59], 
 {} + []{} + []{} = {}exp ()   (3.2.4) 
where {} is the column matrix of nodal displacements,  is the mass matrix, [] is 
the damping matrix, [] is the stiffness matrix, {}exp ()  is the column matrix of 
equivalent harmonic nodal forces and  is the angular frequency of the harmonic 
forces. 
In this thesis, the mode-based steady-state analysis was chosen over other types of 
steady-state dynamic analyses which are available in Abaqus/Standard (e.g. direct-
solution and subspace) because it is computationally cheaper while the user can select 
the number and the type of the modes that participate in the analysis. However, when 
frequency-dependent material damping is involved the mode-based steady-state 
analysis offers less accurate solutions [56]. 
In a mode-based steady-state dynamic analysis the response is based on modal 
superposition techniques where the modes of the system must first be extracted using 
the eigenfrequency extraction procedure.  
The modal mass matrix, [], the modal damping matrix, [] and the modal stiffness 
matrix, [] of the system are given by [59], 
[] = [][][]   
[] = [][][] 
[] = [][][] 
(3.2.5) 
where [] is the matrix of the eigenmodes, [] is the mass matrix, [] is the damping 
matrix and [] is the stiffness matrix of the system.  
If Eq. (3.2.3) is satisfied and using the formulas of Eq. (3.2.5) the solution of Eq. (3.2.4) 
can be expressed in the form [59], 
 {} = [][[]  2[] + []]
[]{}exp ()     (3.2.6) 
where {} is the column matrix of nodal displacements, [] is the matrix of the 
eigenmodes, [] is the diagonal matrix of the angular frequencies of the system equal 
to [], [] is the unit matrix, [] is the modal damping matrix,  is the angular 
frequency of the harmonic forces and {}exp () is the column matrix of equivalent 
harmonic nodal forces.   
For the beam junctions in chapter 4, mode-based steady-state dynamic analysis was 
used to calculate vibration transmission between the beams in test setups J3, J4 and J5. 
Only the experimentally validated modes were included into the mode-based analysis. 
The nodes of the top surface of the beams were excited sequentially by applying a unit 
perpendicular force over a 100 mm square grid which approximately corresponds to 
the hammer positions used in EMA.  
In chapter 5, mode-based steady-state dynamic analysis was used to calculate the 
driving-point mobilities of the individual beams and the dynamic response of the beam 
junctions up to 3200 Hz considering (a) the out-of-plane bending modes, (b) the 
torsional modes and (c) the combination of all modes (bending, torsional and others).  
In chapter 6, mode-based steady-state dynamic solver to calculate the dynamic 
response of the piles up to 3200 Hz when considering the combination of all modes.  
For the beam-to-column junctions in chapter 7, mode-based steady-state dynamic 
analysis was used to calculate the dynamic response of the beam-to-column junctions 
up to 3200 Hz considering (a) out-of-plane bending modes and (b) the combination of 
all modes.  
The direct damping based on the modal damping identified in the experimental work 
was used for the dynamic analyses of chapter 4. For the numerical experiments, the 
damping ratio, , was set to be equal to 0.05 except for the steady-state analyses of 
section 5.4.1 where two values of damping ratios were considered: (a) =0.05 and (b) 
=0.005. A damping ratio of 5% is commonly recommended for the seismic design of 
reinforced concrete structures [60] and represents all sources of damping associated 
with yielding of members including any structural damping due to cracking of concrete 
members and energy dissipation during pre-yield cycles [17]. A damping ratio of 0.5% 
approximates internal losses in fully cracked reinforced concrete members without 
yielded reinforcements [61].  
3.2.2 FEM modelling of the experimental setups  
3.2.2.1 Beams 
The concrete and the steel bars were modelled using solid element C3D20R (20 nodes) 
and beam element B32 (3 nodes) respectively. Both elements were selected to have 
interpolation functions of the same order (quadratic) to avoid a reduction in accuracy 
[20]. In addition, quadratic elements were found to be more accurate than linear 
elements thus they were preferred in this thesis. The element mesh had dimensions of 
25 mm along the length of the beam and 20 mm over the beam cross-section to fulfil 
the requirement of at least six quadratic elements per bending wavelength up to 
3200 Hz [28]. 
3.2.2.2 Aluminium supports 
The linear spring element, SPRING1 was used to approximate the elastic support that 
the square aluminium bars provide to beam 1  see Figure 3-1. The stiffness of the 
springs was estimated to be 4.1E05 N/m after model updating against the experimental 
results for beam 1 on the aluminium supports (setup I4). Numerical trials with different 
spring stiffness values were carried out until the lowest eigenfrequency (bending 
mode) from FEM and measurements were identical to one decimal place (193.8 Hz).  
Figure 3-1 FEM model of test setup J5. The purple circles indicate the SPRING2 
elements used for modelling the interaction between beams 1 and 2, purple squares 
indicate the SPRING1 elements that approximate the aluminium support and purple 
triangles indicate the SPRING1 elements that approximate the rubber support. 
3.2.2.3 Rubber support  
The linear spring element, SPRING1 (indicated by purple triangular markers in Figure 
3-1) was selected from the element library of Abaqus to approximate the elastic 
support that the rubber material provides to beam 2 in setup J5. The stiffness of each 
of the springs was estimated to be 3236.8 N/m.  
3.2.2.4 Surface-to-surface contact 
The unbonded contact between the beams (see Figure 3-2) was modelled using the 
surface-to-surface contact algorithm of Abaqus/Standard and was defined to have 
elastic normal behaviour. When a contact is used in a linear perturbation step (such as 
in the eigenfrequency and steady-state analysis) the contact remains closed during 
the analysis when the starting condition is also closed [56]. Initial checks on the models 
confirmed that using a surface-to-surface contact with elastic normal behaviour during 
a linear perturbation step is equivalent to using an array of linear springs between the 
nodes of the two surfaces of the contact. 
Figure 3-2 FEM model of test setup J2. The purple squares indicate the SPRING1 
elements that approximate the aluminium support and the purple line indicates the 
surface-to-surface contact between beams 1 and 2. 
The normal contact stiffness for each mode pair in setups J1, J2 and J3 was determined 
through model updating to give eigenfrequencies within 2% of the EMA 
eigenfrequencies.  
3.2.2.5 Edge-to-surface contact 
The linear spring element, SPRING2, was used to model the interaction between the 
edge nodes of beam 1 and the nodes along the lower surface of beam 2 in Setup J5  
see Figure 3-1. For every pair of coupled nodes, one horizontal and one vertical spring 
(acting in the X and Y directions respectively) were used to approximate a spring with 
a line of action normal to the lower surface plane of beam 2. The mean value of this 
stiffness was the same as determined from the surface-to-surface contact. 
3.2.3 Validation criteria used to assess FEM and EMA 
3.2.3.1 Mode shape criteria 
The Modal Assurance Criterion (MAC) is used to assess the correlation between mode 
shapes from FEM and EMA using [62] 
(, ) =
|{}
T{}
({}
T{}
)({}
T{}
 (3.2.7) 
where A indicates FEM, X indicates the experiment, {X} and {A} are the column 
vectors of the degrees of freedom for the experimental and FEM mode shapes 
respectively (superscript T indicates the transpose) and {X}* and {A}* are the 
complex conjugate of vectors {X} and {A} respectively. 
MAC values close to 1 indicate well correlated modes while MAC values close to 0 
indicate uncorrelated modes [63]. In the literature (e.g. [64], [65]), MAC values above 
0.9 correspond to good correlation whereas MAC<0.7 indicate weak correlation.  
An important limitation of MAC is that it is sensitive to large values and insensitive to 
small values [66]. Therefore, if one subset of the modal vector is significantly larger 
than the remaining subset of the modal vector, then the MAC value will be mainly 
determined by the former subset and any lack of correlation related to the latter will 
not be identified by MAC. In this thesis, a subset is defined as the vector containing 
the degrees of freedom for each of the beams that form a junction. To overcome this 
problem, the Partial Modal Assurance Criterion (PMAC) [67] can be used to give 
insight into individual subsets of the modal vector by applying Eq. (3.2.7) to each 
subset separately. For two coupled beams it is feasible to consider the degrees-of-
freedom on each beam as one subset. However, MAC and PMAC only describe 
correlation between the mode shapes and do not consider the relative response between 
different parts of the model. This is essential to assessing the connection between the 
beams in this thesis because it is necessary to check that the model correctly describes 
vibration transmission across the springs that are used to model the unbonded contact 
condition. The proposal in this thesis is to introduce an additional criterion, the Partial 
Modal Vector Ratio (PMVR) for which the results in chapter 4 will be used to establish 
PMVR values that indicate close or reasonable agreement between FEM and 
measurements. The PMVR is defined as the ratio in decibels of the squared modal 
vectors from EMA relative to FEM. For two subsets of the complete modal vector i 
and j, PMVR is given by 
            (, ), = |10 log10 ((
|{}|
|{}|
|{}|
|{}|
) )| (3.2.8) 
where{A} and {X} are subsets of the modal vectors for FEM and EMA respectively 
from beams i and j. 
3.2.3.2 Spatial-average transfer mobility ratio 
Using point force excitation, a ratio of spatial-average transfer mobilities can be used 
to assess vibration transmission between two different beams in a junction. Using data 
from EMA or FEM, the spatial-average transfer mobility ratio, YRji,i, for two beams i 
and j, with force excitation on i is given by 
, = 10log10 (
=1  )
=1  )
) (3.2.9) 
where v is the velocity, F is the force, m is the mass, N represents the number of nodes 
in the FEM model or the number of accelerometer positions used in EMA.  
3.2.4 Numerical experiments with FEM 
Based on the experimentally validated FEM models, numerical models were created 
with FEM. This section describes the FEM models used in these numerical 
experiments. 
3.2.4.1 Material properties 
Table 3-1 shows the physical and mechanical properties of the materials used in the 
FEM models of the numerical experiments in chapters 5  7. These represent the 
average of the values determined from the experimentally tested beams given in 
chapter 4 (see section 4.2.1). 
Table 3-1 Material properties. 
Material Density,  (kg/m3) 
Youngs modulus, 
E (N/m2) 
Poissons ratio, 
 (-) 
Concrete 2287 34.7E09 0.2 
Steel 7800 200E09 0.3 
3.2.4.2 Junctions of two beams 
The junctions of chapter 5 consist of two reinforced concrete beams, SS1 and SS2 (see 
Figure 3-3). SS1 is the lower beam of the junction with 6.0 m length, 0.3 m width and 
0.2 m depth. SS2 is the upper beam of the junction with 5.0 m length, 0.2 m width and 
0.3 m depth. Both beams are reinforced with four longitudinal steel bars of 16 mm 
diameter. The transverse reinforcement of both beams consists of 8 mm diameter 
stirrups placed at 200 mm centres along the beams. 
Figure 3-3 Geometry and reinforcement details of beams SS1 (top) and SS2 (bottom). 
The solid element C3D20R (20 nodes) and the beam element B32 (3 nodes) were 
selected from the element library of Abaqus [56] to model the concrete and the steel 
bars respectively (see Figure 3-4). The mesh density fulfils the requirement for at least 
six elements per wavelength in structural and vibroacoustic problems [28]. The beams 
were either simply supported or free at both ends. 
Figure 3-4 Example FEM model showing the surface-to-surface connection between 
beams SS1 and SS2. 
The interaction between the two beams was modelled using an elastic contact in the 
normal direction as described in detail in section 3.2.2.4. In chapter 4, it will be shown 
that the contact stiffness follows a log-normal distribution with a mean value equal to 
7.038E08 N/m and this value will be used for the elastic contact in the numerical 
experiments with FEM in chapter 5.  
For calculating the driving-point mobilities of the individual beams SS1 and SS2, the 
upper surface of beam SS1 and the lower surface of beam SS2 were excited using a 
unit force (perpendicular to the surface) on 124 and 104 nodes respectively, indicated 
by the red markers in Figure 3-5. 
Figure 3-5 Excitation positions for the calculation of the driving-point mobilities of 
beams SS1 (top) and SS2 (bottom). 
3.2.4.3 Piles of beams 
Table 3-2 to Table 3-4 give the details of the geometry for piles 1a and 1b. Each colour 
in Figure 3-6 and Figure 3-7 indicates a different layer of beams. The shaded surfaces 
show the connection areas (using the colours of the two layers) between the beams of 
the pile using surface-to-surface contacts. The only difference between piles 1a and 1b 
is the one additional contact, C10 between beams SS2 and SS5. 
Figure 3-6 Pile 1a consists of seven beams with surface-to-surface contact conditions. 
Figure 3-7 Pile 1b consists of seven beams with surface-to-surface contact conditions. 
Table 3-2 Geometry of the beams of pile 1 (counter-clockwise angles are positive). 
SS3 SS4 SS5 SS6 SS7 Pile 
Length (m) 6.0 6.0 6.0 5.0 5.0 5.0 6.0 6.0 
Width (m) 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.3 
Depth (m) 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.2 
Centroid 
x (m) -1.4 2.4 1.8 0.0 -1.6 -0.5 -1.8 1.4 
y (m) 0.9 0.2 1.4 0.0 0.9 2.4 0.4 1.3 
Angle (degrees) 50 -30 -75 0 -15 20 -59 35 
Table 3-3 Contact areas between the beams of pile 1a. 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
783.2 662.0 1200.0 1200.0 1076.4 699.1 783.2 861.9 611.0 
Table 3-4 Contact areas between the beams of pile 1b. 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
783.2 662.0 1200.0 621.2 1076.4 699.1 783.2 861.9 611.0 602.3 
Table 3-5 and Table 3-6 present the geometry of pile 2. Each colour in Figure 3-8 
indicate a different layer of beams, whereas the shaded surfaces show the connection 
areas between the beams of the pile using surface-to-surface contacts.  
Figure 3-8 Pile 2 consists of 14 beams with surface-to-surface contact conditions: (a) 
layers 1  4 and (b) layers 4  6. 
Table 3-5 Geometry of the beams of pile 2 (counter-clockwise angles are positive). 
 SS1 SS2 SS3 SS4 SS5 SS6 SS7 
Length (m) 5.0 5.0 6.0 6.0 6.0 5.0 5.0 
Width (m) 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.2 
Depth (m) 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.3 
Centroid 
x (m) -3.6 -5.3 -6.4 -3.2 -2.2 -4.8 -2.4 
y (m) -0.2 1.4 0.6 0.3 1.3 -0.2 0.8 
Angle (degrees) 15 0 -55 90 80 15 0 
 SS8 SS9 SS10 SS11 SS12 SS13 SS14 
Length (m) 6.0 6.0 5.0 5.0 5.0 6.0 6.0 
Width (m) 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.3 
Depth (m) 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.2 
Centroid 
x (m) -3.8 0.0 -2.4 -4.0 -2.9 -4.2 -1.0 
y (m) 1.2 0.0 0.2 1.1 2.6 0.6 1.5 
Angle (degrees) 50 -30 0 -15 20 -59 35 
Table 3-6 Contact areas between the beams of pile 2. 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
783.2 662.0 1200.0 662.0 783.2 1200.0 1046.1 699.1 1200.0 783.2 861.9 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
(cm2) 
611.0 621.2 933.4 554.2 640.4 609.2 621.2 600.0 638.5 732.5 662.0 
The experimentally validated FEM models of the beam junctions with surface-to-
surface contact conditions were used as a basis for creating finite element models of 
three piles with: (a) seven reinforced concrete beams (Pile 1a and 1b) and (b) 14 
reinforced concrete beams (Pile 2), arranged in three and six layers respectively (see 
Figure 3-9 and Figure 3-10).  The piles were arranged to give multiple transmission 
paths between the layers of the beams and trying to avoid the overlapping of 
connection areas directly above each other. The ends of the beams were assumed to be 
free or simply supported. More information regarding the FEM modelling and the 
interaction between the beams of the piles is given in section 3.2.4.1. 
Figure 3-9 FEM models of pile 1a and pile 1b consisted of seven beams arranged in 
three layers. 
Figure 3-10 FEM model of the pile 2 consisted of 14 beams arranged in six layers. 
In piles 1 and 2, all the nodes of the lower surface on beam SS1 were excited using 
rain-on-the-roof excitation (i.e. forces with unity magnitude and random phase). In 
both piles the out-of-plane response was extracted on all the nodes of the lower surface 
of the beams of each pile. 
3.2.4.4 Beam-to-column junctions 
The junctions consist of a reinforced concrete beam (5.1 m length, 0.3 m width and 
0.5 m depth) and a reinforced concrete column (8.0 m length, 0.4 m width and 0.3 m 
depth) as it is shown in Figure 3-11. The beam and the column are reinforced with six 
and eight longitudinal steel bars of 16 mm diameter, respectively and the transverse 
reinforcement consists of 8 mm diameter stirrups placed at 200 mm centres along the 
beams (see Figure 3-12). Two types of junctions were considered as shown in Figure 
3-11: (a) undamaged (rigid T-junction) and (b) damaged with a concrete discontinuity 
of 50 mm between the beam and the column. In addition, the beam is rotated by the 
angle,  and connected to the column via the longitudinal steel reinforcement.  
The solid element C3D20R (20 nodes) and the beam element B32 (3 nodes) were 
selected from the element library of Abaqus [56] to model the concrete and the steel 
bars respectively (see Figure 3-13 and Figure 3-14). The mesh density fulfils the 
requirement for at least six elements per wavelength for structural dynamics problems 
[28]. Tie constraints were used for modelling the rigid connection between the beam 
and the column in the undamaged junction. Both beam and column were assumed to 
be simply supported at the ends.  
                                   (a)                                                                         (b) 
Figure 3-11 Geometry and reinforcement details of: (a) an undamaged and (b) a 
damaged beam-to-column junction (units: millimetre).  
                                (a)                                                                               (b) 
Figure 3-12 Cross-section details of the reinforced concrete members that for the 
junctions: (a) beam and (b) column (units: millimetre). 
Figure 3-13 FEM model of a rigid beam-to-column T-junction. The orange symbols 
indicate the positions of the simple supports. 
Figure 3-14 FEM model of a damaged beam-to-column T-junction. The orange 
symbols indicate the positions of the simple supports.  
3.3 Statistical Energy Analysis 
3.3.1 Classical SEA 
SEA considers a structure as a number of coupled structural components (e.g. beams, 
columns, plates etc) which are called subsystems.  Figure 3-15 shows an N-subsystem 
SEA model with only direct coupling between the subsystems. A power input is 
applied to subsystem 1 and the transmitted power from subsystem (N-1) to N is denoted 
by W(N-1)N. The power dissipated through internal losses and coupling losses to other 
subsystems is denoted by Wd(N).  
Figure 3-15 Schematic diagram of a N-subsystem SEA model showing only direct 
coupling.  
In a SEA model the losses of a subsystem are described using three loss factors: (a) 
the internal loss factor (nii) which accounts for the energy of a subsystem that is mainly 
converted to heat, (b) the coupling loss factor (nij) which account for energy transferred 
to another subsystem and (c) the total loss factor which is the sum of the internal loss 
factor and all the coupling loss factors from that subsystem [47].   
3.3.1.1 General matrix 
The general SEA matrix solution for N subsystems is given by [47] 
 1
21 31  1
12  2
13 23  3
1  
=1 ]
in(1)
in(2)
in(3)
in(N)
 (3.3.1) 
where ij is the coupling loss factor from subsystem i to j, ii is the internal loss factor 
for subsystem i, Ei is the energy of subsystem i, Win(i) is the power injected into 
subsystem i, and  is the angular frequency.  
In chapter 6, each beam in piles 1 and 2 represents one subsystem and SEA has been 
carried out to calculate the energy, E of each subsystem. The SEA matrix formulations 
for each pile are given in Appendix B. 
3.3.1.2 Path analysis 
With SEA it is possible to use path analysis to assess the relative importance of one 
transmission path compared to another [47].  
The energy ratio between subsystem 1 and subsystem N for transmission along the 
chain of the direct coupled subsystems 123N of Figure 3-15, is given by 
23 
1223 (1)
 (3.3.2) 
where ij is the coupling loss factor from subsystem i to j, i is the total loss factor for 
subsystem i and Ei is the energy of subsystem i  
Sometimes, it is useful to combine different paths to give E1/EN for a specific 
combination of paths. The energy level differences in decibels (dB) due to 
transmission between subsystem 1 and subsystem N along P different paths can be 
calculated from [46] 
10lg (
Due to 
 paths
= 10lg( (
) (3.3.3) 
Path analysis has been carried out on piles 1 and 2 of chapter 6 to assess the relative 
importance of one transmission path compared to another. The power was injected into 
subsystem 1 (see Figure 3-6 - Figure 3-8) and the energy ratio between subsystem 1 
and the other subsystems was calculated using Eq. 3.3.2. The path with the lowest 
energy ratio is the strongest path whereas the path with the highest energy ratio is the 
weakest path. It is noted that the energy ratio due to a single path (even if dominant) 
is typically significantly higher than the actual energy ratio between two subsystems. 
For the path analyses of chapter 6, it was assumed that paths cannot re-enter the 
subsystems that contain the source and they cannot revisit other subsystems.  
3.3.2 Experimental SEA 
In collapsed buildings, there are complex coupling situations and/or complex 
subsystems for which coupling loss factors are either not available or difficult to 
measure. To overcome this problem, Experimental Statistical Energy Analysis is used 
to determine CLFs by using FEM to provide experimental data. 
3.3.2.1 Monte Carlo simulation for ESEA 
SEA only predicts the mean response of an ensemble of similar systems; therefore, a 
Monte Carlo simulation is combined with FEM ESEA in order to provide average 
responses and consider the inherent uncertainties. The technique is based on random 
number generation to determine each variable based on a chosen statistical distribution 
[46].   
In chapter 5, the experimentally validated FEM model of the beam junction was used 
as a basis for creating a sample of 30 beam junctions using a Monte Carlo simulation 
with FEM. For convenience, the angle between the two beams was fixed at 41 so that 
the length of the longest side of the surface-to-surface contact area, LC,max, was 
constant. The relative position of the two beams was defined by the coordinates of the 
centroid of beam SS2, CSS2(x, y). These were sampled from the uniform distributions 
CSS2(x)~U(-2.68, 2.68) and CSS2(y)~U(-1.43, 1.43) with the rule that the black shaded 
area in Figure 3-16 which indicates the surface-to-surface connection area remains 
constant and equal to 0.091 m2.   
In chapter 7, a sample of 30 damaged beam-to-column junctions was created using a 
Monte Carlo simulation with FEM. Although the angle  between the beam and the 
column in a damaged junction (see Figure 3-11) is often between 45 and 55 [16] in 
this thesis the angle  was sampled from a uniform distribution ~U(-80, 80) to include 
more extreme angles in the ensemble and assess whether there was a significant 
variation with angle. 
Figure 3-16 Relative beam positions in the ensemble of junctions. 
3.3.2.2 General ESEA 
The general ESEA can be determined from the general SEA matrix and is given by 
 1
21 31  1
12  2
13 23  3
1  
=1 ]
11 12 13  1
21 22 23
31 32 33
1 ]
in(1)
0 0  0
in(2)
in(3)
in(N)
(3.3.4) 
where Eij is the energy of subsystem i when the power is input into subsystem j 
The energy associated with each subsystem is given by 
 = 2, (3.3.5) 
where m is the mass of the subsystem and <v2>t,s is the temporal and spatial average 
of the mean-square velocity of all the unconstrained nodes of the subsystem.     
For rain-on-the-roof excitation (i.e. forces with unity magnitude and random phase) at 
P nodes, the power input, Win is given by 
in =
(Im{}{}  Re{}{})
 (3.3.6) 
where F is the force and  is the peak out-of-plane displacement associated with each 
node. 
In chapters 5 and 7, numerical experiments with FEM were used as input data for 
ESEA to calculate CLFs for an SEA model.  
In chapter 5, each beam represents one subsystem and the output from the FEM models 
was used to calculate the subsystem energy and power input that apply to a SEA model 
of each beam junction. These FEM data were then used in ESEA to determine coupling 
loss factors. The beams were excited using rain-on-the-roof excitation  on all the nodes 
of the lower surface of beam SS1 and all nodes on the upper surface of beam SS2. 
These surfaces were selected to avoid applying any forces to the contact nodes. The 
same node sets were used for extracting the out-of-plane displacements.  
In chapter 7, the T-junction formed by two columns and one beam is modelled as either 
two or three subsystems. When two subsystems are considered, each beam and column 
of the junction represents one subsystem (see Figure 3-17a). When three subsystems 
are considered, the beam represents again one subsystem whereas the column is 
divided in two subsystems as indicated in Figure 3-17b. The output from the FEM 
models was used to calculate the subsystem energy and power input that apply to a 
SEA model of each beam-to-column junction. These FEM data were then used in 
ESEA to determine coupling loss factors. The beam and the column of the junctions 
were excited using rain-on-the roof excitation at all the nodes of the surfaces which 
are indicated in Figure 3-17 with red lines.  
                                 (a)                                                                     (b) 
Figure 3-17 Division of the beam-to-column junctions in: (a) two and (b) three ESEA 
subsystems. The red lines indicate the surfaces where the rain-on-the-roof excitation 
is applied and the response is measured.  
3.3.3 Theoretical models for Coupling Loss Factors 
3.3.3.1 Lump spring connector 
An analytical model for the surface-to-surface connection as a lump spring can be used 
to calculate CLFs for an SEA model. This is expected to be valid when the bending 
wavelength is much larger than the length of the longest edge of the surface-to-surface 
connection area. 
For N identical point connections between two beams, the coupling loss factor from 
beam i to beam j can be calculated using (e.g. see [46]) 
 =
{}
| +  + c|
 (3.3.7) 
where mi is the mass of beam i, the driving-point mobility of a thin beam of infinite 
extent (for excitation of bending waves in the central part of the beam) is calculated 
using [50] 
B,Inf = ((1 + )2.67L,b)
 (3.3.8) 
and the mobility of the point spring connection, Yc, representing the surface-to-surface 
connection can be calculated using (e.g. see [46]) 
 (3.3.9) 
where  is the density of the solid beam, S is the cross-sectional area of the beam, f is 
frequency, h is the depth of the beam, cL,b is the phase velocity of the beam for quasi-
longitudinal waves, k is the dynamic stiffness of the point connection acting as a 
spring.  
3.3.3.2 T-junctions  wave approach: bending waves only  
To validate the FEM models of the beam-to-column junctions, the coupling loss 
factors resulted from the FEM ESEA of the rigid junction with the inclusion of bending 
modes only are compared with the CLFs calculated using the wave approach. 
For a beam that is connected at both ends, the coupling loss factor between two beams 
i and j is 
 =
2B,b,
4
 (3.3.10) 
where cB,b,i is the phase velocity for the propagating bending waves on a solid beam i, 
ij is the transmission coefficient between the beams i and j and Li is the length of beam 
In rigid beam-to-column T-junctions (see Figure 3-18) all waves are at normal 
incidence, so only the normal incidence transmission coefficient is needed.  
Figure 3-18 Subsystem numbering for the beam-to-column T-junction for the 
application of the wave approach. 
Using the subsystem numbering system in Figure 3-18 with an incident bending wave 
on subsystem i, the transmission around the corner is given by [47] 
 =
0.5
()
+ 2 + (2
 (3.3.11) 
where Ji=2 and Jj=0.5 when the incident bending wave is on subsystem i and Ji=2 and 
Jj=2 when the incident bending wave is on subsystem j. 
The variables  and  are given by [47] 
 = 


 (3.3.12) 


 (3.3.13) 
where h is the depth, cL is the quasi-longitudinal phase velocity and s is the surface 
density of  subsystems i and j.  
For an incident bending wave on subsystem i, the transmission across a straight section 
of a rigid T-junction (Figure 3-18) is given by [47] 
 =
0.52
()
2 + 2 + (2
 (3.3.14) 
where Jk=0.5 for T-junctions.  
The variables  and  are given by [47] 
 = 


(3.3.15) 


(3.3.16) 
3.4 Conclusions 
This chapter described in detail the FEM models of the experimental setups and the 
numerical experiments, as long as the correlation criteria used for the validation of 
FEM models against EMA results. Furthermore, prediction models based on Statistical 
Energy Analysis were developed for modelling the vibration transmission in beam 
junctions, piles of beams and beam-to-column junctions. Finally, theoretical models 
for the determination of the coupling loss factors in beam junctions and beam-to-
column T-junctions were presented in this chapter.  
4.  Experimental validation of finite element models  
representing stacked concrete beams with unbonded 
surface contacts 
4.1 Introduction 
This chapter investigates the normal contact stiffness between reinforced concrete 
beams by experimentally validating FEM models in the frequency range up to 
3200 Hz. In each junction, the beams are stacked on top of each other without any 
bonding material and the interaction between the beams is modelled by using either 
linear elastic contacts (e.g. surface-to-surface junctions) or linear elastic springs (e.g. 
edge-to-surface junctions). The contact stiffness is determined after model updating 
against the experimental eigenfrequencies. The main aims of this investigation are to 
experimentally validate FEM models of non-bonded concrete beams when in contact 
with each other and identify a suitable contact stiffness value for surface-to-surface or 
edge-to-surface contact conditions. 
4.2 Individual beams 
4.2.1 Material properties 
Table 4-1 shows the material properties for the beams. The density of the concrete for 
each beam was calculated by dividing the measured weight of the beams by the volume 
of concrete after extracting the weight of the steel reinforcement. The Youngs 
modulus of the concrete was estimated after model updating for beams 1 and 2 against 
the experimental results for the individual beams. Numerical trials were carried out 
until the lowest eigenfrequency from FEM and measurements were identical to one 
decimal place (138.2 and 131.1 Hz for beams 1 and 2 respectively). The estimated 
value of the Youngs modulus for beam 1 is relatively higher than beam 2 but it is 
within the range proposed in the literature for C25/30 concrete [68]. A possible reason 
for this discrepancy is that beam 1 was cast on a different day to beams 2 and 3. The 
material properties for the steel and Poissons ratio for the concrete were taken from 
the literature ( [68], [53]). The average damping ratios for Setups J3, J4 and J5 
determined from EMA were 0.53, 0.49 and 0.49% respectively. 
Table 4-1 Material properties of beams 1, 2 and 3. 
Material 
Density,  
(kg/m3) 
Youngs modulus, 
E (N/m2) 
Poissons ratio, 
 (-) 
Concrete 
Beam 1 2329 36875E6 
0.2 Beam 2 2245 32475E6 
Beam 3 2235 32475E6 
Steel 7800 200E9 0.3 
4.2.2 Frequencies 
Figure 4-1 compares FEM and experimental eigenfrequencies for setups I1, I2 and I3. 
Close agreement was achieved with differences less than 5% for the majority of the 
mode pairs in the frequency range up to 3200 Hz.  
Figure 4-1 Comparison of FEM against experimental eigenfrequencies for Setups I1, 
I2 and I3. 
4.2.3 Mode shapes 
Figure 4-2 to Figure 4-4 compare EMA and FEM results for setups I1, I2 and I3 in 
terms of MAC. For setups I1 and I2, close agreement was achieved for bending and 
torsional modes (MAC > 0.95) for all the modes up to 3200 Hz (see Figure 4-2 and 
Figure 4-3).  
For setup I3 (see Figure 4-4), whilst there is close agreement for the majority of the 
bending modes (MAC > 0.8 for 11 out of 18 bending modes) there was weaker 
agreement for the torsional modes (MAC > 0.8 for two out of seven torsional modes).  
This indicates that the discontinuity mainly affects the accuracy of the torsional modes 
and therefore it could be that the torsional stiffness of the reinforcement bars needs to 
be modelled differently.  
Figure 4-2 MAC values for FEM model of Setup I1: (a) in-plane bending modes, (b) 
out-of-plane bending modes and (c) torsional modes. 
Figure 4-3 MAC values for FEM model of Setup I2: (a) in-plane bending modes, (b) 
out-of-plane bending modes and (c) torsional modes. 
Figure 4-4 MAC values for FEM model of Setup I3: (a) in-plane bending modes, (b) 
out-of-plane bending modes and (c) torsional modes. 
4.3 Junctions of two beams (surface-to-surface contact) 
4.3.1 Normal contact stiffness 
Normal contact stiffness values were determined from model updating of the FEM 
model against EMA for the first 24 modes in each of the setups J1, J2 and J3. These 
are shown in Table 4-2 in terms of the mean, minimum and maximum values. During 
the model updating, the eigenfrequencies of some modes were mainly dependent on 
the eigenfrequencies of the individual beams rather than the value of the contact 
stiffness. This resulted to a relatively wide range of values for the modes and along 
with the significantly different mean values for setup J2, the validity of the FEM 
models was assessed using the mean stiffnesses for each individual setup (J1, J2 and 
J3) in the following sections. 
Table 4-2 Normal contact stiffness values determined from model updating for the 
surface-to-surface contacts in setups J1, J2 and J3. 
setup 
Number of 
modes 
Contact 
Normal contact stiffness (N/m) 
Mean Minimum Maximum 
J1 22 0.06 7.6E8 5.1E5 3.9E9 
J2 22 0.06 4.5E8 1.5E6 2.2E9 
J3 23 0.09 7.5E8 5.0E5 4.3E9 
4.3.2 Eigenfrequencies 
Figure 4-5 compares FEM and experimental eigenfrequencies for setups J1, J2 and J3. 
Close agreement was achieved with differences less than 5% for the majority of the 
mode pairs in the frequency range from 700 to 3200 Hz. The three setups have similar 
eigenfrequencies because the global modes of the three setups are partly determined 
by the eigenfrequencies of the individual isolated beams, and these beams are the same 
in each of these setups. 
Figure 4-5 Comparison of FEM against experimental eigenfrequencies for Setups J1, 
J2 and J3. 
4.3.3 Mode shapes  
In this section, setup J3 is chosen to assess the FEM model in terms of MAC, PMAC 
and PMVR because the other two setups give similar findings. 
Correlation between EMA and FEM is shown using the MAC in Figure 4-6. Note that 
only bending and torsional modes were included in the validation procedure of the 
FEM models. Whilst there is close agreement for the first two modes (MAC > 0.8) 
there was poor agreement for modes three, four and five. Close agreement was 
achieved above the first five global modes (i.e. between 1000 and 3200 Hz) with 
MAC > 0.8 for 17 of the mode pairs (only mode pair 17 had MAC<0.8).  
Figure 4-6 MAC values for FEM model of Setup J3. 
For setup J3 that comprises two beams, Figure 4-7 shows the PMAC for beams 1 and 
2 for comparison with the MAC. Note that there is no data for the fifth mode pair as 
this pair was not identifiable. It is seen that for each mode pair there is often a PMAC 
value for one beam that is higher or similar to the MAC, and one PMAC value for the 
other beam that is lower than the MAC. The reason for this is the sensitivity of MAC 
to large values in the modal vector. Note that only seven of the 24 mode pairs had 
PMAC > 0.8 for both beams. The global modes of the coupled beams are related to the 
local modes of each isolated beam where one or both beams have an identifiable modal 
response that is similar to the local mode shape. Hence there are some global modes 
where only one beam has a clear modal response and the other has a low response; in 
this situation, the modal vectors of the former beam primarily determine the MAC and 
the influence of the other beam will be negligible. For example, in Figure 4-8a the 
modal vectors of beam 2 determine the MAC value of mode pair 12, whereas in Figure 
4-8b the MAC value of mode pair 18 is determined by the modal vectors of beam 1 
(see Figure 4-7).  
Figure 4-7 PMAC values for FEM model of Setup J3. 
                                  (a)                                                                 (b) 
Figure 4-8 FEM mode shapes of Setup J3: (a) Mode 12 at 1782.3 Hz and (b) Mode 18 
at 2418.8 Hz. The legends show the normalized out-of-plane modal displacements.  
Figure 4-9 compares FEM and experimental results for setup J3 using PMVR. When 
introducing this new descriptor in section 3.2.3.1 it was noted that a criterion could not 
be assigned a priori. A value of 0 dB would indicate complete correlation between 
EMA and FEM. However, as the contact condition is modelled using a single contact 
stiffness value it is expected that low values, such as between 0 and 2 dB, might only 
occur for a few mode pairs. In this thesis the application considers the response in 
frequency bands; hence the velocity level difference between two beams when one is 
excited a point force will be determined by more than one mode pair. For this reason, 
two criteria are proposed based on the results from all beam junctions, close agreement 
being PMVR  5 dB (33% of mode pairs) and reasonable agreement being 5 dB < 
PMVR  10 dB (25% of mode pairs). Only 38% of mode pairs had PMVR > 10 dB. 
These results indicate that the model for the interaction between the two beams with 
FEM is appropriate.  
Figure 4-9 PMVR values for FEM model of Setup J3. The green and red straight lines 
indicate difference levels of 5 and 10 dB respectively while the empty column 
indicates an unidentified mode pair.  
4.3.4 Spatial-average transfer mobility ratio 
As in the previous section, setup J3 is used to illustrate features of the spatial-average 
transfer mobility ratio. Figure 4-10a and b allow comparison of these ratios from FEM 
and measurements when a point force is applied to beams 1 and 2 respectively. Below 
650 Hz there are only rigid body modes; hence results are shown above 650 Hz using 
17 frequency bands with a 150 Hz bandwidth to simplify the comparison. 
The results for FEM and measurements have similar curves, except in the lowest and 
highest frequency bands, with the average difference being 2.4 dB. This indicates that 
the FEM model is able to provide reasonable estimates of vibration transmission 
between coupled beams by using a single value for the contact stiffness. The next 
section will consider a three beam junction (setup J4) and combine the stiffness values 
determined from J1, J2 and J3 by treating them as a sample of the population in order 
to identify a single contact stiffness that could be used in FEM models of larger 
combinations of coupled beams. 
                                    (a)                                                               (b)  
Figure 4-10 Spatial-average transfer mobility ratio between the beams of setup J3: (a) 
YR21,1 and (b) YR12,2. 
4.4 Junction of three beams (surface-to-surface contact) 
This section aims to identify and assess the use of a single, representative value for the 
contact stiffness that could be used to model collapsed buildings where there is a high 
level of uncertainty in the modal properties of the fragmented structure as well as the 
position of the contact and its surface area. 
4.4.1 Normal contact stiffness derived from model updating 
In Section 4.3, model updating with setups J1, J2 and J3 resulted in 67 individual 
values for the normal contact stiffness. It is now assumed that these values represent a 
sample from a population from which a representative average value could be 
identified that has general application to two coupled beams. The contact stiffness 
values for each mode were divided into classes and a probability distribution was fitted 
to the data using the MATLAB distribution fitter toolbox [69]. The stiffness values are 
sub-divided into nine bins with a width of 4.78E08 N/m for which the fitted probability 
distribution is a lognormal distribution as shown in Figure 4-11 with a mean value of 
7.038E08 N/m. As the first bin contains 66% of the values it is also feasible to consider 
the mean of the values in this bin which was 8.77E07 N/m. Previous work [48] has 
also identified that lognormal distributions describe structural coupling parameters 
between stiff, heavy structures (i.e. concrete) where there are relatively few modes; 
this applies to the situation assessed in this thesis with the concrete beams. 
Figure 4-11 Lognormal probability distribution fitted to the dataset of the normal 
contact stiffness. 
4.4.2 Eigenfrequencies 
An assessment of the FEM model is now made through comparison with EMA when 
the normal contact stiffness is (a) the mean value of the first bin, i.e. 8.77E07 N/m 
which is referred to as FEM model No.1 and (b) the mean value of the lognormal 
distribution, i.e. 7.038E08 N/m which is referred to as FEM model No.2. 
Figure 4-12 Comparison of FEM model No.1 and 2 against experimental 
eigenfrequencies for Setup J4. 
Figure 4-12 allows comparison of FEM models No.1 and 2 against EMA for setup J4. 
Both FEM models show close agreement with differences less than 5% for the majority 
of mode pairs. Considering only the first eight mode pairs the average difference 
(3.7%) is lower for FEM model No.1 than No.2  (6.0%). Whilst the value chosen for 
the normal contact stiffness affects the global eigenfrequencies below 1200 Hz, both 
FEM models have similar eigenfrequencies above 1200 Hz (average differences equal 
to 0.98 and 1.3% for FEM models No.1 and 2 respectively). This indicates that the 
global eigenfrequencies of the junction are mainly determined by the eigenfrequencies 
of the individual beams rather than their interaction.  
4.4.3 Mode shapes 
MAC results for Setup J4 are shown in Figure 4-13a and Figure 4-13b. For the first 
eight correlated mode pairs (i.e. below 1200 Hz), MAC>0.8 for seven mode pairs with 
FEM model No.1 but only three mode pairs with No.2. Above the eighth mode (i.e. 
between 1200 and 3200 Hz), both FEM models showed equally close agreement with 
MAC > 0.8 for 17 of the 32 mode pairs.  
In terms of PMAC, neither of the FEM models had PMAC > 0.8 for all three beams  
see Figure 4-14a and b. This issue with one or two of the individual beams was not 
detected with MAC because (as discussed in section 4.3.3) the MAC value is primarily 
determined by the modal vectors of one beam. 
In terms of PMVR, close agreement ( 5 dB) was achieved for 16% and 29% of the 
mode pairs from FEM models No.1 and 2 respectively. It is seen that for FEM model 
No.1, many PMVR values are >10 dB (see Figure 4-15a, b and c). Hence, whilst FEM 
model No.1 had higher MAC values than No.2, PMVR indicates that FEM model No.2 
gives an improved representation of the interaction between the coupled beams.  
                              (a)                                                                (b)  
Figure 4-13 MAC values for Setup J4: (a) FEM model No.1 and (b) FEM model No.2. 
Figure 4-14  PMAC values for Setup J4: (a) FEM model No.1 and (b) FEM model 
No.2. 
Figure 4-15 PMVR for FEM models No.1 and 2 with Setup J4: (a) PMVR12, (b) 
PMVR13 and (c) PMVR23. 
4.4.4 Spatial-average transfer mobility ratio 
Figure 4-16 allows comparison of FEM models No.1 and No.2 with EMA for the 
beams in setup J4. When the force is applied to beam 1 (Figure 4-16a and b), FEM 
model No.2 shows closest agreement with EMA (differences less than 4 dB) whereas 
FEM model No.1 was offset with differences up to 12 dB on average.  
When the force is applied to beam 2 (Figure 4-16c) or beam 3 (Figure 4-16e), FEM 
model No.2 also shows significantly closer agreement with EMA than No.1. However, 
both FEM models Nos. 1 and 2 show reasonable agreement when the force is applied 
to beam 2 (Figure 4-16d) or beam 3 (Figure 4-16f) and the velocity response is 
measured on beams 2 and 3. This indicates that the choice of normal contact stiffness 
might be less critical where the size of the area connection is reduced, in this case the 
area is reduced due to the discontinuity in beam 3. 
In general, the results show that FEM model No.2 is significantly better than No.1 for 
modelling vibration transmission between the beams in setup J4. Therefore, the mean 
value of the lognormal distribution provides the better approximation of the normal 
contact stiffness to model the dynamic behaviour of beam junctions where the beams 
are connected with surface-to-surface contact conditions. The next section assesses the 
potential of using this normal contact stiffness value in beam junctions with edge-to-
surface contact conditions. 
                                    (a)                                                                (b) 
                                    (c)                                                                (d) 
                                   (e)                                                                 (f) 
Figure 4-16 Spatial-average transfer mobility ratio for the beams in setup J4: (a) YR21,1, 
(b) YR31,1, (c) YR12,2, (d) YR32,2, (e) YR13,3 and (f) YR23,3. 
The FEM model that best represented the physical situation was identified by PMVR 
but not by MAC which led to a misleading validation by indicating that FEM model 
No.1 was more accurate than No.2. MAC is very sensitive to large values, so any 
correlation problem caused by the interaction between the beams is not reflected in its 
value. For this reason, it is proposed here that PMVR is a computationally efficient 
supplement to MAC when validating FEM models where structural components are 
coupled by elastic connections of unknown stiffness.  
4.5 Junction of two beams (edge-to-surface contact) 
Following the findings in the previous section, only one FEM model is used in this 
section which uses the mean value of the lognormal distribution for the normal contact 
stiffness. 
4.5.1 Eigenfrequencies 
Figure 4-17 compares FEM and experimental eigenfrequencies for setup J5. Close 
agreement was achieved with differences less than 3% for mode pairs in the frequency 
range from 700 to 3200 Hz. 
Figure 4-17 Comparison of FEM against experimental eigenfrequencies for Setup J5. 
4.5.2 Mode shapes 
In terms of MAC, close agreement was achieved for 21 out of 23 mode pairs with 
MAC > 0.8 and reasonable agreement was achieved for mode pairs 8 and 23 with 
MAC > 0.7  see Figure 4-18. In terms of PMAC, beams 1 and 2 have PMAC > 0.8 for 
15 out of the 23 mode pairs  see Figure 4-19. These PMAC results are higher than 
occurred with the surface-to-surface contact conditions which indicates that the 
reduced contact area which occurs with an edge-to-surface contact introduces lower 
errors when modelling the coupling using springs. 
In terms of PMVR, close agreement (PMVR  5 dB) was achieved for 22% of the 
mode pairs with reasonable agreement for 52% of the mode pairs (5 dB < 
PMVR  10 dB) and only 26% of mode pairs had PMVR > 10 dB  see Figure 4-20.  
Figure 4-18 MAC values for FEM model of Setup J5. 
Figure 4-19 PMAC values for FEM model of Setup J5. 
Figure 4-20 PMVR values for FEM model with Setup J5. 
4.5.3 Spatial-average transfer mobility ratio 
Figure 4-21a and b allow comparison of FEM and EMA in terms of the spatial-average 
transfer mobility ratio for setup J5. For a point force applied to beam 1 (Figure 4-21a) 
and beam 2 (see Figure 4-21b), FEM and EMA show close agreement within 4 dB on 
average. This confirms that the mean value of the lognormal distribution can be used 
for the contact stiffness in FEM models where the beams are connected with edge-to-
surface contact conditions.  
Figure 4-21 Spatial-average transfer mobility ratio for the beams in setup J5: (a) YR21,1, 
(b) YR12,2. 
4.6 Conclusions 
FEM models have been developed and validated with experimental modal analysis for 
beams connected with surface-to-surface and edge-to-surface contact conditions. 
These models were validated in terms of eigenfrequencies, mode shapes and spatial-
average response. It was shown that the interaction between the beams could be 
approximated using a normal contact stiffness. This stiffness showed some 
dependence on the modal response with values forming a lognormal distribution. It 
was shown that the mean value of this lognormal distribution could be used to 
approximate the contact stiffness in FEM models of beams junctions with surface-to-
surface or edge-to-surface contact conditions. This approximation was more effective 
in junctions with two than three beams and especially with edge-to-surface contact 
conditions. 
For concrete beams that are stacked on top of each other without any rigid bonding 
material it was shown that MAC is not able to assess the validity of the FEM model 
and led to misleading results. Using PMAC for these beams, it was shown that MAC 
was mainly determined by the modal vectors of one beam whereas the contribution of 
the other beam(s) to the MAC value was negligible. To overcome the shortcomings of 
MAC when validating FEM models of structural coupling between elastic systems 
using spring connectors to model the unbonded contact condition, an additional 
criterion, the Partial Modal Vector Ratio was introduced in this thesis. This criterion 
allowed identification of the FEM model that gave the most appropriate representation 
of the interaction between the coupled beams. 
Compared to running FEM models with applied loads to assess vibration transmission 
between the coupled beams, PMVR is a time efficient approach and can be used as a 
supplementary criterion to MAC to identify potential correlation problems caused by 
the interaction of the beams. 
5. Vibration transmission between reinforced concrete 
beams with surface-to-surface contact conditions 
5.1 Introduction 
The aim of this chapter is to assess the potential to use SEA to model vibration 
transmission between two reinforced concrete beams when they are stacked on top of 
each other (i.e. without any bond connecting the two beams) to make a surface-to-
surface connection. This is carried out using numerical experiments with FEM to 
create an ensemble of beam junctions for a Monte Carlo simulation which will allow 
use of ESEA to determine Coupling Loss Factors between the beams.  
The two main aspects to investigate are (a) whether it is possible to only consider one 
type of wave motion (bending waves) or whether two or more types of wave motion 
can be considered simultaneously (bending and torsional waves) and (b) whether 
analytical models based on lump spring connectors can be used to model the contact 
condition. The first aspect concerning the use of ESEA with multiple wave types is 
necessary because in a collapsed structure it is not known whether one or more wave 
type will be excited at the surface-to-surface connection. For coupled plates with wave 
conversion at the junction, Hopkins [48] previously showed that with ESEA it was not 
always possible to identify the existence of multiple wave types when only bending 
waves are excited on one plate. In chapter 4, it was shown that the contact conditions 
between reinforced concrete beams with a dry unbonded contact could be modelled by 
using an array of springs. This provides the impetus to assess analytical models based 
on lump spring connectors to calculate CLFs for SEA models.  
5.2 Mode types  
The global modes identified by the eigenfrequency analysis of the beam junctions were 
grouped into three categories according to the deformed shape of each of the beams 
that form the junctions as: (a) bending modes, (b) torsional modes and (c) combination 
of bending and torsional modes (see Figure 5-1). Even though in-plane bending and 
longitudinal modes were identified by Lanczos eigen solver, these are not relevant to 
this study since they are not excited by the rain-on-the-roof force and they do not 
significantly affect the out-of-plane response of the beam junctions.  
Figure 5-1 Types of global modes: (a) bending modes, (b) torsional modes and (c) 
combination of bending and torsional modes. The legends show the normalized out-
of-plane modal displacements. 
5.3 Mode count 
Figure 5-2 and Figure 5-3 show the average mode count for out-of-plane bending, 
torsional and combinations of all the modes for beam junctions with simply supported 
and free support conditions respectively. Results are shown for 16 frequency bands of 
200 Hz bandwidth. These were preferred than one-third octave bands so there is at 
least one mode in each frequency band. The later has been shown to improve the 
efficiency of SEA [46].  
 For the simply supported junctions, there is at least one bending mode in 13 out of the 
16 frequency bands whereas there is less than one torsional mode in 10 out of the 16 
frequency bands. When all the modes are combined, all the frequency bands have at 
least seven modes.  
For free support conditions, all the frequency bands have at least one bending mode 
except for the 2900 Hz band. In addition, there is less than one torsional mode in 10 
out of the 16 frequency bands. When all the modes are combined, all the frequency 
bands have at least six modes.  
Figure 5-2 Average mode count for bending, torsional and combination of all modes 
of the 30 beam junctions when simply supported.  
Figure 5-3 Average mode count for bending, torsional and combination of all modes 
of the 30 beam junctions with free support conditions. 
5.4 Assessment of the FEM driving-point mobilities 
5.4.1 Assessment of damping 
This section compares the ratio of the spatial average driving-point mobilities from 
FEM (with only bending modes) to infinite beam theory for beam SS1 with simple 
supports at both ends. Two values of internal loss factors were considered: (a) =0.1 
and (b) =0.01. In the absence of measured damping data from collapsed buildings, 
these values were selected as the two extremes damping conditions that are likely to 
occur in practice (see section 3.2.1.2 considering that =2 [46]); =0.1 is assumed to 
represent the situation where a beam is connected to many concrete beams/plates and 
=0.01 represents a situation where there is only one connection to a concrete 
beam/plate. Results are shown for both the real part (Figure 5-4) and the magnitude 
(Figure 5-5) of the driving-point mobility as this is required for the lump spring 
connector model (see Eq. 3.3.7). As expected, the lower damping leads to more peaks 
and troughs than the higher damping where the latter is a much smoother curve. 
The difference of the ratio 10lg(<YB,FEM>s /YB,Inf) for the two values of damping is 
within 1.5 dB for the real part and up to 3 dB for the magnitude between the 100 and 
3100 Hz frequency bands. This indicates that the driving-point mobility of an infinite 
beam is a good estimate for the driving-point mobility of a reinforced concrete beam 
regardless the value of the internal loss factor. In a collapsed building, it is more likely 
to have multiple connections between the fragmented structural members than only 
one, thus the internal loss factor =0.1 is adopted for the next sections of this thesis.  
Figure 5-4 Beam SS1 (simply supported)  Ratio of the real part of the driving-point 
mobilities (FEM using bending modes only to infinite beam theory) along with the 
95% confidence intervals for two different internal loss factors.  
Figure 5-5 Beam SS1 (simply supported)  Ratio of the magnitude of the driving-point 
mobilities (FEM using bending modes only to infinite beam theory) along with the 
95% confidence intervals for two different internal loss factors. 
5.4.2 Simply supported condition  
Figure 5-6 to Figure 5-11 show the ratio of the real part of the driving-point mobilities 
from FEM relative to infinite beam theory over the surface of beams SS1 and SS2 
using one contour plot for each frequency band. Figure 5-12 and Figure 5-13 compare 
the spatial average of the driving-point mobilities of the simply supported beams SS1 
and SS2 from FEM using either bending or torsional or all modes against the driving-
point mobilities of a thin beam of infinite extent for bending wave excitation (Eq. 
3.3.8). Results are shown for 16 frequency bands of 200 Hz bandwidth, in terms of a 
mean value with 95% confidence intervals for both the real part and the magnitude of 
the mobilities that are used in Eq. (3.3.7) to calculate the CLF.  
The lowest frequency bending modes for the isolated simply supported beams SS1 and 
SS2 occur at 9.7 and 21.4 Hz respectively. For excitation of only bending waves on 
beams SS1 and SS2, the ratio of the real part of the driving point mobilities,                 
10lg(YB,FEM /YB,Inf) is less than 5 dB for 94% and 76% of the excitation positions on 
beams SS1 and SS2 respectively (see Figure 5-6 and Figure 5-7). Higher differences 
were observed at positions close to the ends of the beams. In terms of the spatial 
average, the ratio 10lg(<YB,FEM>s /YB,Inf) is between -1 and 3.8 dB between the 100 and 
3100 Hz frequency bands, for both the real part and the magnitude of the driving point 
mobilities. 
The lowest frequency torsional modes for the isolated simply supported beams SS1 
and SS2 occur at 164.4 and 172.8 Hz respectively. For excitation of only torsional 
waves, the ratio of the real part of the driving point mobilities, 10lg(YT,FEM /YB,Inf) is 
less than 5 dB for 46% and 44% of the excitation positions on beams SS1 and SS2 
respectively (see Figure 5-8 and Figure 5-9). This is partially expected since the 
driving point mobility of a beam of infinite extent is valid only for bending wave 
excitation. However, in terms of the spatial average the ratio 10lg(<YT,FEM>s /YB,Inf) is 
between -4 and 3 dB between the 300 and 3100 Hz bands. At 100 Hz the differences 
are up to -7 and -5.6 dB for the real part and magnitude respectively.  
For all modes (i.e. the combination of bending, torsional and longitudinal modes) of 
beams SS1 and SS2, the ratio of the real part of the driving point mobilities, 
10lg(YA,FEM /YB,Inf) is less than 5 dB for 66% and 67% of the excitation positions of 
beam SS1 and SS2 respectively (see Figure 5-10 and Figure 5-11). In terms of the 
spatial average, the ratio 10lg(<YA,FEM>s /YB,Inf) is positive and up to 5.7 dB between 
the 100 and 3100 Hz frequency bands, both for the real part and the magnitude of the 
driving point mobilities. 
The main finding is that the infinite beam equation gives close estimates for bending 
modes for which it is derived but can still give reasonable estimates for torsional modes 
and for the combination of all modes. 
5.4.3 Free support condition 
Figure 5-14 to Figure 5-19 show the ratio of the real part of the driving-point mobilities 
from FEM relative to infinite beam theory across the excitation positions of beams 
SS1 and SS2 using one contour plot for each frequency band. Figure 5-20 and Figure 
5-21 compare the spatial average of the driving-point mobilities of the free-free 
supported beams SS1 and SS2 from FEM using either bending or torsional or all modes 
against the driving-point mobilities of a thin beam of infinite extent for bending wave 
excitation (Eq. 3.3.8). Results are shown for 16 frequency bands of 200 Hz bandwidth, 
in terms of a mean value with 95% confidence intervals for both the real part and the 
magnitude of the mobilities that are used in Eq. (3.3.7) to calculate the CLF.  
The lowest frequency bending modes for the isolated free beams SS1 and SS2 occurs 
at 22.0 and 48.2 Hz respectively. For bending wave excitation of beams SS1 and SS2, 
the ratio of the real part of the driving point mobilities, 10lg(YB,FEM /YB,Inf) is less than 
5 dB for 88% and 72% of the excitation positions of beam SS1 and SS2 respectively 
(see Figure 5-14 and Figure 5-15). As it was observed with the simple supports, the 
differences were higher at positions close to the ends of the beams. In terms of the 
spatial average, the ratio 10lg(<YB,FEM>s /YB,Inf) is between -0.4 and 2 dB between the 
100 and 3100 Hz frequency bands, for both the real part and the magnitude of the 
driving point mobilities. Compared to the simply supported beams, slightly better 
agreement is achieved when the beams are free at both ends. 
The lowest frequency torsional modes for the isolated free beams SS1 and SS2 occurs 
at 174.4 and 209.3 Hz respectively. For torsional wave excitation, the ratio of the real 
part of the driving point mobilities, 10lg(YT,FEM /YB,Inf) is less than 5 dB for the 45% 
and 43% of the excitation positions of beam SS1 and SS2 respectively (see Figure 5-16 
and Figure 5-17). As before, this difference is reasonable since the driving point 
mobility of a beam of infinite extent is valid only for bending wave excitation. 
However, in terms of the spatial average the ratio 10lg(<YT,FEM>s /YB,Inf) is between      
-3.2 and 3.3 dB between the 300 and 3100 Hz bands for both the real part and the 
magnitude of the driving point mobilities. At 100 Hz the differences are up to -5 and  
-12.3 dB for beams SS1 and SS2 respectively.  
For the combination of bending, torsional and longitudinal modes of beams SS1 and 
SS2, the ratio of the real part of the driving point mobilities, 10lg(YA,FEM /YB,Inf) is less 
than 5 dB for the 65% and 67% of the excitation positions of beam SS1 and SS2 
respectively (see Figure 5-18 and Figure 5-19). In terms of the spatial average, the 
ratio 10lg(<YA,FEM>s /YB,Inf) is positive and up to 6 dB between the 100 and 3100 Hz 
frequency bands, both for the real part and the magnitude of the driving point 
mobilities. 
As for the simply supported beams, the infinite beam equation gives close estimates 
for bending wave only modes and reasonable estimates for torsional modes only and 
with all modes. 
5.4.4 Discussion 
For beam SS1 (which is thinner in the direction of bending wave motion) the infinite 
beam mobility is a reasonable estimate for both bending and torsional modes and 
whilst it is also reasonable for bending waves on SS2, it is less reasonable for torsional 
modes. For both beams the infinite beam theory gives the least reasonable estimate for 
the combination of all modes. However, in the absence of any alternative equation, 
both will be used to calculate the CLF in section 5.6. 
Figure 5-6 Contour plots of the ratio of the real part of the driving-point mobilities (FEM to infinite beam theory in decibels) for simply supported 
beam SS1 for excitation of bending waves only. X and Y axis indicate the grid of the measuring positions of YB,FEM. 
Figure 5-7 Contour plots of the ratio of the real part of the driving-point mobilities (FEM to infinite beam theory in decibels) for simply supported 
beam SS2 for excitation of bending waves only. X and Y axis indicate the grid of the measuring positions of YB,FEM. 
Figure 5-8 Contour plots of the ratio of the real part of the driving-point mobilities (FEM to infinite beam theory in decibels) for simply supported 
beam SS1 for excitation of torsional waves only. X and Y axis indicate the grid of the measuring positions of YT,FEM. 
Figure 5-9 Contour plots of the ratio of the real part of the driving-point mobilities (FEM to infinite beam theory in decibels) for simply supported 
beam SS2 for excitation of torsional waves only. X and Y axis indicate the grid of the measuring positions of YT,FEM. 
Figure 5-10 Contour plots of the ratio of the real part of the driving-point mobilities (FEM to infinite beam theory in decibels) for simply supported 
beam SS1 for combination of all types of waves. X and Y axis indicate the grid of the measuring positions of YA,FEM. 
Figure 5-11 Contour plots of the ratio of the real part of the driving-point mobilities (FEM to infinite beam theory in decibels) for simply supported 
beam SS2 for combination of all types of waves. X and Y axis indicate the grid of the measuring positions of YA,FEM. 
Figure 5-12 Ratio of the real part of the driving-point mobilities (FEM to infinite beam 
theory) along with the 95% confidence intervals for beam SS1 (top) and beam SS2 
(bottom) when they are simply supported. 
Figure 5-13 Ratio of the magnitude of the driving-point mobilities (FEM to infinite 
beam theory) along with the 95% confidence intervals for beam SS1 (top) and beam 
SS2 (bottom) when they are simply supported. 
Figure 5-14 Contour plots of the ratio of the real part of the driving-point mobilities (FEM to infinite beam theory in decibels) for the free supported 
beam SS1 for excitation of bending waves only. X and Y axis indicate the grid of the measuring positions of YB,FEM. 
Figure 5-15 Contour plots of the ratio of the real part of the driving-point mobilities (FEM to infinite beam theory in decibels) for the free supported 
beam SS2 for excitation of bending waves only. X and Y axis indicate the grid of the measuring positions of YB,FEM. 
Figure 5-16 Contour plots of the ratio of the real part of the driving-point mobilities (FEM to infinite beam theory in decibels) for the free supported 
beam SS1 for excitation of torsional waves only. X and Y axis indicate the grid of the measuring positions of YT,FEM. 
Figure 5-17 Contour plots of the ratio of the real part of the driving-point mobilities (FEM to infinite beam theory in decibels) for the free supported 
beam SS2 for excitation of torsional waves only. X and Y axis indicate the grid of the measuring positions of YT,FEM. 
Figure 5-18 Contour plots of the ratio of the real part of the driving-point mobilities (FEM to infinite beam theory in decibels) for the free supported 
beam SS1 for combination of all types of waves. X and Y axis indicate the grid of the measuring positions of YA,FEM. 
Figure 5-19 Contour plots of the ratio of the real part of the driving-point mobilities (FEM to infinite beam theory in decibels) for the free supported 
beam SS2 for combination of all types of waves. X and Y axis indicate the grid of the measuring positions of YA,FEM.
Figure 5-20 Ratio of the real part of the driving-point mobilities (FEM to infinite beam 
theory) along with the 95% confidence intervals for beam SS1 (top) and beam SS2 
(bottom) with free-free support conditions.  
Figure 5-21 Ratio of the magnitude of the driving-point mobilities (FEM to infinite 
beam theory) along with the 95% confidence intervals for beam SS1 (top) and beam 
SS2 (bottom) with free-free support conditions. 
5.5 Bending and torsional wavelength 
To assess the potential frequency range of application for the lump spring model, the 
length of the longest side of the surface-to-surface contact area, LC,max, is compared 
with the bending and torsional wavelength. It is assumed that the lump spring model 
will be valid at frequencies where B/2 > LC,max for bending motion and T/2 > LC,max 
for torsional motion [70]. 
Figure 5-22 shows the bending wavelength, B and the half-wavelength, B/2 for beam 
SS1 and SS2. LC,max is equal to B/2 for beams SS1 and SS2 at 1720 Hz and 2580 Hz 
respectively. For torsional waves, LC,max is equal to T/2 for beams SS1 and SS2 at 
2360 Hz (see Figure 5-23). This information will be used in assessing the validity of 
the lump spring model in section 5.6. 
Figure 5-22 Bending wavelength of beams SS1 and SS2. The red line indicates the 
length of the longest side, LC,max=0.45 m of the contact area.  
Figure 5-23 Torsional wavelength of beams SS1 and SS2. The red line indicates the 
length of the longest side, LC,max=0.45 m of the contact area. 
5.6 Comparison of coupling loss factors from lump spring theory 
and FEM ESEA 
Figure 5-24 to Figure 5-29 show the coupling loss factors, 12 and 21 from FEM ESEA 
for the 30 beam junctions along with two prediction models based on the lump spring 
connector model (see section 3.3.3.1). The analytical lump spring model is calculated 
using (a) the driving point mobilities, YB,Inf, of thin beams of infinite extent for 
excitation of bending waves in the central part of the beams and (b) the spatial average 
of the FEM driving point mobilities, YFEM, over the surface of beams SS1 and SS2 with 
simply supported and free support conditions (see section 5.4). The FEM ESEA results 
for simply supported and free supported beams are shown in terms of a mean value 
with 95% confidence intervals.   
5.6.1 Simply supported condition 
For bending waves only in the FEM model (Figure 5-24), there is close agreement 
between the coupling loss factors from FEM ESEA and the analytical model up to the 
1700 Hz frequency band (where B/2 > LC,max), with differences up to 5 dB. Above 
1700 Hz, the differences increased up to 12 dB where the contact area between SS1 
and SS2 can no longer be considered as a point connection. Using FEM mobilities 
instead of the infinite beam mobilities for bending wave motion does not significantly 
improve the agreement. This is expected because the real part and the magnitude are 
between -1 and 3.8 dB of YB,inf in this frequency range. 
For torsional waves only in the FEM model (Figure 5-25), there is close agreement 
between FEM ESEA and the analytical model up to the 2300 Hz frequency band 
(where T/2 > LC,max), with differences up to 5 dB. Note that in two low frequency 
bands (100 Hz and 300 Hz) the spread of the FEM ESEA coupling loss factors was  
5 dB. Above 2300 Hz, the differences were between 5 and 12 dB where the contact 
area between SS1 and SS2 can no longer be considered as a point connection. The 
infinite beam mobilities are intended for bending rather than torsional motion but are 
shown for reference. However, using FEM mobilities instead of the infinite beam 
mobilities for torsional motion did not significantly improve the agreement.  
For the combination of all modes (Figure 5-26), close agreement was achieved 
between the FEM ESEA and the analytical model between 100 and 900 Hz, with 
differences up to 5 dB. Considering only bending modes, the analytical model is not 
expected to be valid above 1700 Hz (where B/2 > LC,max). However, the combination 
of all modes seems to reduce the frequency where close agreement is obtained from 
1700 to 900 Hz. The infinite beam mobilities are an approximation as they intended 
for bending rather than all types of wave motion; hence it is a coincidence that the 
infinite beam mobilities show better agreement than the FEM calculated mobilities 
with the analytical model above 1100 Hz.  
Figure 5-24 Comparison of FEM ESEA (bending modes) and the analytical model 
(LSC) coupling loss factors 12 and 21. The error bars denote the 95% confidence 
intervals. 
Figure 5-25 Comparison of FEM ESEA (torsional modes) and the analytical model 
(LSC) coupling loss factors 12 and 21. The error bars denote the 95% confidence 
intervals. 
Figure 5-26 Comparison of FEM ESEA (combination of all modes) and the analytical 
model (LSC) coupling loss factors 12 and 21. The error bars denote the 95% 
confidence intervals. 
5.6.2 Free supported condition 
For bending waves only in the FEM model (Figure 5-27), there is reasonable 
agreement between the coupling loss factors from FEM ESEA and the analytical 
model between 500 and 1900 Hz, with differences up to 6 dB. Below 500 Hz, the 
curves of the FEM ESEA and theoretical coupling loss factors follow the same trend 
although the differences are up to 9.8 dB. Above 1900 Hz, the differences increased 
up to 10.7 dB where the contact area between SS1 and SS2 can no longer be considered 
as a point connection. Using FEM mobilities instead of the infinite beam mobilities 
for bending wave motion did not significantly improve the agreement. This is expected 
because the real part and the magnitude are within 3 dB of YB,inf in this frequency range 
For torsional waves only in the FEM model (Figure 5-28), there is reasonable 
agreement between FEM ESEA and the analytical model between 500 and 2300 Hz 
(where T/2 > LC,max), with differences up to 6 dB. In the 300 Hz band the differences 
are up to 7 dB, but the agreement can be considered reasonable since the spread of the 
FEM ESEA coupling loss factors was  4 dB. At 100 Hz, the differences are up to 18 
dB and the spread of the FEM ESEA coupling loss factors was  8 dB. Above 2300 
Hz, the differences were between 5 and 10 dB where the contact area between SS1 and 
SS2 cannot be considered as a point connection. The infinite beam mobilities are 
intended for bending rather than torsional motion but are shown for reference. 
However, as with the simply supported beams, using FEM mobilities instead of the 
infinite beam mobilities for torsional motion did not significantly improve the 
agreement except in the 100 Hz frequency band. This is expected because the real part 
and the magnitude are between -1 and 3.1 dB of YB,inf in this frequency range.   
For the combination of bending, torsional and longitudinal modes (Figure 5-29), close 
agreement was achieved between the FEM ESEA and the analytical model between 
100 and 900 Hz, with differences up to 5 dB. Above 900 Hz, the curves of the FEM 
ESEA and theoretical coupling loss factors do not follow the same trend even though 
the differences are up to 7 dB. The analytical model is not expected to be valid above 
1700 Hz (where B/2 > LC,max) but the combination of all modes seems to reduce the 
frequency where reasonable agreement is obtained from 1700 to 900 Hz. The infinite 
beam mobilities are an approximation as they intended for bending rather than all wave 
motion; hence it is a coincidence that the infinite beam mobilities show better 
agreement than the FEM calculated mobilities with the analytical model above 
1100 Hz.  
Figure 5-27 Comparison of FEM ESEA (bending modes) and the analytical model 
(LSC) coupling loss factors 12 and 21. The error bars denote the 95% confidence 
intervals. 
Figure 5-28 Comparison of FEM ESEA (torsional modes) and the analytical model 
(LSC) coupling loss factors 12 and 21. The error bars denote the 95% confidence 
intervals. 
Figure 5-29 Comparison of FEM ESEA (combination of all modes) and the analytical 
model (LSC) coupling loss factors 12 and 21. The error bars denote the 95% 
confidence intervals. 
5.7 Conclusions 
Finite element models were used to calculate the driving-point mobilities of reinforced 
concrete beams for bending modes only, torsional modes only and the combination of 
all modes in the frequency range up to 3200 Hz with free and simply supported 
conditions. These mobilities were in close agreement (differences within 5 dB) with 
the theoretical driving-point mobilities of a thin beam of infinite extent for bending 
wave excitation but not for the combination of all modes. 
An ensemble of 30 random beam junctions with free and simply supported conditions 
was generated for Monte Carlo simulations with FEM that allowed ESEA to be used 
to determine coupling loss factors between the two beams. These were compared with 
coupling loss factors calculated using an analytical model based on a lump spring 
connector. For only bending waves or torsional waves, close agreement was achieved 
between FEM ESEA and the analytical model up to the frequency where half the 
bending or torsional wavelength equalled the longest side of the contact area. Above 
this frequency the interaction between the two beams cannot be considered as a point 
connection. The inclusion of the FEM driving-point mobilities in the prediction model 
(instead of the infinite beam model) did not significantly `improve the agreement. 
When all wave types are combined, close agreement can still be achieved at 
frequencies below 900 Hz.  
6. Vibration transmission in piles of reinforced concrete 
beams with surface-to-surface contact conditions 
6.1 Introduction 
The aim of this chapter is to assess the potential to use Statistical Energy Analysis to 
model the vibration transmission in two piles of seven and one pile of fourteen 
reinforced concrete beams when they are stacked on top of each other (i.e. without any 
bond connecting the beams) to make a surface-to-surface connection. SEA path 
analysis is carried out to quantify and assess the strength of the transmission paths 
between the beams. Next, the general SEA matrix solution is used to estimate the 
energy ratios between the beams of the piles using: a) FEM ESEA CLFs and b) the 
CLFs from an analytical model of a lump spring connector. SEA predictions are 
compared against the results of FEM models.  
Average coupling loss factors are determined from ESEA for the 30 beam junctions 
(for combination of all wave types) and the theoretical coupling loss factors based on 
an analytical model of a lump spring connector (see sections 5.6.1 and 5.6.2). The 
analytical lump spring model is calculated using (a) the driving-point mobilities of thin 
beams of infinite extent for excitation of bending waves in the central part of the 
beams, YB,Inf and (b) the spatial average of the FEM driving-point mobilities (for 
combination of all wave types) over the surface of beams, YA,FEM. Figure 6-1 and 
Figure 6-2 shows the CLFs which are used throughout the SEA analysis in this chapter.  
Figure 6-1 Coupling loss factors 12 and 21 with 95% confidence intervals from FEM 
ESEA for beams with simply supported and free support conditions at the end of each 
beam.  
Figure 6-2 Coupling loss factors 12 and 21 resulted from an analytical model based 
on a lump spring connector using driving-point mobilities of an infinite beam and 
6.2 Path analysis 
This section presents the results of SEA path analysis carried out to quantify and assess 
the strength of the transmission paths between the seven beams of piles 1a and 1b (see 
Figure 3-6 and Figure 3-7). The path analysis results of pile 2 (see Figure 3-8) lead to 
similar findings and are therefore given in Appendix C.   
6.2.1 Pile 1a  
For power input to source beam SS1, Table 6-1 shows the transmission paths from 
source beam SS1 to receiving beams SS2 up to SS7. For each energy ratio, the paths 
are grouped according to the number of the intermediate subsystems.  
Figure 6-3 to Figure 6-8 show the differences between the energy level differences 
resulting from the SEA matrix solution and path analysis. The curves are coloured 
according to the number of intermediate subsystems in each transmission path. The 
path that gives the lowest energy ratio difference is the strongest path (shaded grey in 
Table 6-1). 
Between beams SS1 and SS2 there is no direct connection and path No.1 (132) is 
the strongest path with beam SS3 being the only intermediate subsystem. For this path, 
there was close agreement between the SEA matrix solution and the path analysis with 
differences between -1.5 and 0 dB in the frequency range up to 3100 Hz (see Figure 
6-3). Paths with three and five intermediate subsystems were at least 10 dB higher than 
the matrix solution. Note that all the transmission paths between beams SS1 and SS2 
pass through subsystem 3 (beam SS3).    
Beam SS1 is directly connected to beams SS3, SS4 and SS5 hence the direct 
transmission paths 13, 14 and 15 are the strongest paths with differences 
between -1.5 and 0 dB between the SEA matrix solution and path analysis (see Figure 
6-4 - Figure 6-6). Energy level differences from paths with two and four intermediate 
subsystems were at least 10 dB higher than the matrix solution. This indicates that 
longer paths were less important than the direct paths.  
Table 6-1 Transmission paths to beams SS2 to SS7 through the pile 1a shown in Figure 
3-6 for power input to beam SS1 (grey shading indicates the strongest path). 
Energy 
ratio 
Number of intermediate subsystems 
0 1 2 3 4 5 
E1/E2 - 
132 
14632 
1564732 
14732 
15632 
E1/E3 
1463 
156473 
1473 
1563 
E1/E4 
1564 
156374 
1364 
1374 
E1/E5 
1465 
137465 
 1365 147365 
E1/E6 - 
136 
13746 
- - 146 14736 
156  
E1/E7 - 
137 
13647 
147 15637 
15647 
14637 
Figure 6-3 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E2, from the SEA matrix solution 
and path analysis (pile 1a).  
Figure 6-4 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E3, from the SEA matrix solution 
and path analysis (pile 1a). 
Figure 6-5 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E4, from the SEA matrix solution 
and path analysis (pile 1a). 
Figure 6-6 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E5, from the SEA matrix solution 
and path analysis (pile 1a). 
Between beams SS1 and SS6 there is no direct connection and although path No.3 
(156) is the strongest path, the difference between the SEA matrix solution and 
the path analysis is up to 5 dB. Similar results occur for the other two paths with one 
intermediate subsystem, path No.1 (136) and path No.2 (146) with 
differences up to 6 and 7 dB respectively.  When paths No.1-3 are combined, close 
agreement is achieved between the SEA matrix solution and the path analysis with 
differences between -1.2 and 0 dB in the frequency range up to 3100 Hz (see Figure 
6-7). This indicates that these are the dominant three paths. 
The energy ratios E1/E7 from the SEA matrix solution and path analysis between 
beams SS1 and SS7 differ up to 4 dB for path No.2 (147) and up to 4.8 dB for 
path No.1 (137). When path No.2 is combined with path No.1, there is close 
agreement between the SEA matrix solution and the path analysis with differences 
between -1.4 and 0 dB in the frequency range up to 3100 Hz (see Figure 6-8). Hence 
these two paths can be considered to be the dominant paths. 
Figure 6-7 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E6, from the SEA matrix solution 
and path analysis (pile 1a). 
Figure 6-8 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E7, from the SEA matrix solution 
and path analysis (pile 1a). 
6.2.2 Pile 1b 
The only difference between piles 1a and 1b is one additional contact between beams 
SS2 and SS5. For power input to source beam SS1, Table 6-2 shows the transmission 
paths from source beam SS1 to receiving beams SS2 up to SS7. For each energy ratio, 
the paths are grouped according to the number of the intermediate subsystems.  
Figure 6-9 to Figure 6-14 present the differences between the energy ratios from the 
SEA matrix solution and path analysis.  
Table 6-2 Transmission paths to beams SS2 to SS7 through pile 1b shown in Figure 
3-7 for power input to beam SS1 (grey shading indicates the strongest path). 
Energy 
ratio 
Number of intermediate subsystems 
0 1 2 3 4 5 
E1/E2 - 
132 
13652 
1374652 
152 14632 1473652 
14652 1564732 
14732 
15632 
E1/E3 
1463 
146523 
1473 156473 
1523 
 1563 
E1/E4 
1564 
132564 
1364 152364 
1374 152374 
 156374 
E1/E5 
1325 
137465 
1365 146325 
1465 147325 
 147365 
E1/E6 - 
136 
13256 
1473256 
146 13746 1523746 
156 14736 
 15236 
E1/E7 - 
137 
13647 
1325647 
147 15637 1465237 
15647 1523647 
14637 
15237 
Between beams SS1 and SS2 there is no direct connection and path No.2 (152) is 
the strongest path. As shown in Figure 6-9, close agreement was achieved between the 
SEA matrix solution and the path analysis for path No.2 with differences up to 4 dB 
in the frequency range up to 3100 Hz. Differences up to 5 dB occurred for path No.1 
(132). When paths No.1 and 2 are combined, close agreement is achieved 
between the SEA matrix solution and the path analysis with differences up to 2.0 dB. 
This indicates the importance of these two short paths. 
Figure 6-9 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E2, from the SEA matrix solution 
and path analysis (pile 1b). 
Beam SS1 is directly connected with beams SS3, SS4 and SS5 hence the transmission 
paths 13, 14 and 15 are the strongest paths with differences up to 2 dB between 
the SEA matrix solution and the path analysis (see Figure 6-10 - Figure 6-12).  
Figure 6-10 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E3, from the SEA matrix solution 
and path analysis (pile 1b). 
Figure 6-11 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E4, from the SEA matrix solution 
and path analysis (pile 1b). 
Figure 6-12 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E5, from the SEA matrix solution 
and path analysis (pile 1b). 
Between beams SS1 and SS6 there is no direct connection and paths No. 2 (146) 
and 3 (156) are equally strong paths with differences between the SEA matrix 
solution and the path analysis up to 5.9 dB. Similar results are obtained for the other 
path with one intermediate subsystem, path No.1 (136) with differences up to         
6.8 dB.  When paths No.1-3 are combined, close agreement is achieved between the 
SEA matrix solution and the path analysis with differences up to 1.4 dB in the 
frequency range up to 3100 Hz (see Figure 6-13).  
The energy ratios E1/E7 resulted from the SEA matrix solution and the path analysis 
between beams SS1 and SS7 differ by 4 dB for path No.2 (147) and by 4.9 dB 
for path No.1 (137). Thus, path No.2 is the strongest path and when it is combined 
with path No.1, close agreement is achieved between the SEA matrix solution and the 
path analysis with differences up to 1.5 dB in the frequency range up to 3100 Hz (see 
Figure 6-14).  
Figure 6-13 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E6, from the SEA matrix solution 
and path analysis (pile 1b). 
Figure 6-14 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E7, from the SEA matrix solution 
and path analysis (pile 1b). 
6.2.3 Discussion 
From path analysis of piles 1a and 1b it was found that when direct paths (i.e. a 
transmissions paths with no intermediate subsystems between the first and the last 
subsystem) were present, these were always the strongest and the transmitted energy 
was in close agreement with the energy determined by the SEA matrix formulation. In 
absence of a direct path between two subsystems, the transmission paths with the 
smaller number of intermediate subsystems were the strongest and a few paths could 
often be combined to give a result within 2 dB of the matrix solution.     
6.3 Pile 1a - Comparison between SEA and FEM  
Figure 6-15 to Figure 6-20 show the difference between the energy ratios from FEM 
and SEA for the seven beams (simply supported or free) of pile 1a when the power is 
injected on beam SS1. The colour of each curve is analogous to the colour index of 
Figure 3-6 and indicates the layer of the pile where the energy is transmitted. Positive 
differences indicate that SEA overestimates the energy ratios whereas negative 
differences indicate that SEA underestimates the energy ratios compared with FEM.   
6.3.1 Simply supported beams  
When the FEM ESEA coupling loss factors are used in the SEA model (Figure 6-15), 
reasonable agreement was achieved between SEA and FEM for beams SS3 to SS7 
with differences between -7.6 and 7 dB, in the frequency range from 100 to 3100 Hz. 
The difference of the energy ratios for beam SS2 (E1/E2) is in general between -6.6 
and 1.5 dB (except for the frequency bands of 2300 and 2900 Hz where the differences 
are -10.5 and -11.6 dB). This agreement is reasonable considering the CLFs estimates 
are derived from FEM.   
When the SEA model uses the coupling loss factors from an analytical model based 
on a lump spring connector with the infinite beam mobilities (see Figure 6-16), 
reasonable agreement was achieved between SEA and FEM for all the beams of the 
pile up to the frequency band of 1100 Hz, with differences between -9.3 and 5.3 dB. 
Above 1100 Hz, the difference of the energy ratios for beam SS2 (E1/E2) is up to -18.4 
dB. Between 1100 and 1700 Hz, the difference of the energy ratios for beams SS3 to 
SS7 is negative and up to -7.6 dB whereas above 1700 Hz the differences are up to        
-12.4 dB.  
When the SEA model uses the coupling loss factors from the analytical model with 
the inclusion of the FEM mobilities (see Figure 6-17), reasonable agreement was 
achieved between SEA and FEM for all the beams of the pile up to the frequency band 
of 900 Hz, with differences between -8.5 and 4.5 dB. This is reasonable since 900 Hz 
is the estimated upper frequency for the theoretical model of the lump spring connector 
to be valid (see Figure 5-26 in section 5.6.1). Above 900 Hz, SEA underestimates the 
energy ratio for beam SS2 (E1/E2)  with differences up to -30.84 dB. Between 900 
and1500 Hz, the differences were up to -8.8 and -14.8 dB for the beams of the second 
(SS3-5) and third (SS6-7) layer of the pile respectively. Above 1500 Hz, the energy 
ratios for beams SS3 to SS7 had negative differences over 10 dB. 
To conclude, the lowest differences between FEM and SEA were achieved when the 
FEM ESEA coupling loss factors were used in the SEA model.   
Figure 6-15 Difference between the energy ratios from FEM and SEA with CLFs from 
FEM ESEA (combination of bending, torsional and longitudinal modes). 
Figure 6-16 Difference between the energy ratios from FEM and SEA with CLFs from 
an analytical model (LSC with infinite beam mobilities). 
Figure 6-17 Difference between the energy ratios from FEM and SEA with CLFs from 
an analytical model (LSC with FEM mobilities). 
6.3.2 Free supports  
When the FEM ESEA coupling loss factors are used in the SEA model (Figure 6-18), 
reasonable agreement is achieved between SEA and FEM for beams SS3 to SS7 with 
differences between -8.7 and 6.6 dB in the frequency range from 100 to 1700 Hz. 
Above 1700 Hz, the differences of the energy ratios were between -9.1 and 0.5 dB for 
the beams of the first (SS2) and second (SS3-5) layer of the pile whereas differences 
up to 15.6 dB were occurred for the beams in the third layer of the pile.  
When the SEA model uses the coupling loss factors from an analytical model based 
on a lump spring connector with infinite beam mobilities (see Figure 6-19), reasonable 
agreement was achieved between SEA and FEM for beams SS3 to SS7 with 
differences within -10 and 8 dB between 100 and 1900 Hz. Above 1900 Hz, the 
differences were up to -10.1 dB and 22.3 dB for the beams of the second (SS3-SS5) 
and third (SS6-SS7) layer of the pile respectively. For beam SS2, the difference was 
within 10 dB except for the frequency bands of 700, 900 and 1500 Hz with 
differences up to -14.6 dB.  
When the SEA model uses the coupling loss factors from the analytical model with 
the inclusion of the FEM mobilities (see Figure 6-20), reasonable agreement was 
achieved between SEA and FEM for beams SS3 to SS7 with differences between -4.1 
and 7.3 dB up to the frequency band of 700 Hz. Above 700 Hz, the differences were 
up to -14.5 dB and 11.2 dB for the beams of the second (SS3-SS5) and third (SS6-
SS7) layer of the pile respectively. SEA underestimates the energy ratio for beam SS2, 
with differences up to -18.7 dB between 700 and 2300 Hz. Outside this frequency 
range the difference was within 10 dB. 
As with the simply supported beams, the lowest differences between FEM and SEA 
were achieved when the FEM ESEA coupling loss factors were used in the SEA 
model. Note that closer agreement both in terms of level differences and frequency 
range was achieved for the pile with the simple supports.    
Figure 6-18 Difference between the energy ratios from FEM and SEA with CLFs from 
FEM ESEA (combination of bending, torsional and longitudinal modes). 
Figure 6-19 Difference between the energy ratios from FEM and SEA with CLFs from 
an analytical model (LSC with infinite beam mobilities). 
Figure 6-20 Difference between the energy ratios from FEM and SEA with CLFs from 
an analytical model (LSC with FEM mobilities). 
6.4 Pile 1b  Comparison between SEA and FEM 
Figure 6-21 to Figure 6-26 show the difference between the energy ratios from FEM 
and SEA for the seven either simply supported or free-free beams of pile 1b when the 
power is injected on beam SS1. The colour of each curve is analogous to the colour 
index of Figure 3-7 and indicates the layer of the pile where the energy is transmitted. 
As in the previous section, positive differences indicate that SEA overestimates the 
energy ratios whereas negative differences indicate that SEA underestimates the 
energy ratios compared with FEM.   
6.4.1 Simply supported beams  
When using FEM ESEA coupling loss factors in the SEA model (Figure 6-21), 
reasonable agreement was achieved between SEA and FEM for all the beams of the 
pile with differences between -7.7 and 7 dB, between 100 and 3100 Hz.  
When the SEA model uses the coupling loss factors from an analytical model based 
on a lump spring connector with the infinite beam mobilities (see Figure 6-22), 
reasonable agreement was achieved between SEA and FEM for all the beams of the 
pile up to the frequency band of 1100 Hz, with differences between -7.5 and 6.3 dB. 
Above 1100 Hz, the difference of the energy ratios for beam SS2 (E1/E2) is up to -13.4 
dB. Between 1100 and 1700 Hz, the difference of the energy ratios for beams SS3 to 
SS7 is up to -10 dB whereas above 1700 Hz the differences are up to -12.4 dB.  
When the SEA model uses the coupling loss factors from the analytical model with 
the inclusion of the FEM mobilities (see Figure 6-23), reasonable agreement was 
achieved between SEA and FEM for all the beams up to the frequency band of 900 
Hz, with differences between -8.7 and 5.5 dB. This is reasonable since 900 Hz is the 
estimated upper frequency for the theoretical model of the lump spring connector to 
be valid (see Figure 5-26 in section 5.6.1). Between 900 and1500 Hz, the differences 
were up to -8.8 dB for the beams of the second layer of the pile (SS3-5) whereas for 
SS2 and SS6-7 the differences were and up to -16.4 dB. Above 1500 Hz, SEA 
underestimates the energy ratios for all the beams with differences up to -23.9 dB.  
As with pile 1a, the lowest differences between FEM and SEA were achieved when 
the FEM ESEA coupling loss factors were used in the SEA model.   
Figure 6-21 Difference between the energy ratios from FEM and SEA with CLFs from 
FEM ESEA (combination of bending, torsional and longitudinal modes). 
Figure 6-22 Difference between the energy ratios from FEM and SEA with CLFs from 
an analytical model (LSC with infinite beam mobilities). 
Figure 6-23 Difference between the energy ratios from FEM and SEA with CLFs from 
an analytical model (LSC with FEM mobilities).  
6.4.2 Free support 
When the FEM ESEA coupling loss factors are used in the SEA model (Figure 6-24), 
reasonable agreement was achieved between SEA and FEM for beams SS2 to SS7 
with differences within -9.3 and 8.4 dB, between 100 and 1900 Hz. Above 1900 Hz, 
the differences of the energy ratios were up to -9 dB for the beams of the second layer 
of the pile (SS3-SS5) which are connected directly with beam SS1. For the remaining 
beams of the pile which are not directly connected with beam SS1, the difference 
curves had a similar shape with differences up to 13.2 dB.  
When the SEA model uses the coupling loss factors from an analytical model based 
on a lump spring connector with infinite beam mobilities (see Figure 6-25), reasonable 
agreement was achieved between SEA and FEM for beams SS2 to SS7 with 
differences within  -9.8 and 5.4 dB, between 100 and 1700 Hz. Above 1700 Hz, the 
differences were up to -10.7 dB for the beams of the second layer of the pile (SS3-
SS5). For the beams of the first and third layer of the pile (SS2, SS6 and SS7) where 
there is no direct connection with the source beam SS1, the differences were below 10 
dB between 1700 and 2100 Hz. Above this frequency the differences were up to 20 
dB. Note that above 900 Hz the difference curves for beams SS2, SS6 and SS7 follow 
the same trend. 
When the SEA model uses the coupling loss factors from the analytical model with 
the inclusion of the FEM mobilities (see Figure 6-26), reasonable agreement was 
achieved between SEA and FEM for beams SS2 to SS7 with differences between                   
-10.3 and 4.3 dB up to the frequency band of 1100 Hz. Above 1100 Hz, the differences 
were up to -14.7 dB for the beams of the second layer of the pile (SS3-SS5) whereas 
reasonable agreement with differences between -8.6 and 8.9 dB was achieved for the 
beams of the first and third layer (SS2, SS6 and SS7) of the pile. 
Figure 6-24 Difference between the energy ratios, E1/Ei from FEM and SEA with 
CLFs from FEM ESEA (combination of bending, torsional and longitudinal modes). 
Figure 6-25 Difference between the energy ratios, E1/Ei from FEM and SEA with 
CLFs from an analytical model (LSC with infinite beam mobilities). 
Figure 6-26 Difference between the energy ratios, E1/Ei from FEM and SEA with 
CLFs from an analytical model (LSC with FEM mobilities). 
6.5 Piles 1a and 1b  Discussion  
In piles 1a and 1b with either simply or free-free support conditions, the beams of the 
second layer (SS3-SS5) which were directly connected with beam SS1 achieved the 
closest agreement between SEA and FEM in terms of energy ratio difference, 
regardless of the coupling loss factors used in the SEA matrix calculation.  
In pile 1a it was observed that among the beams with no direct connection with the 
beam where the power is injected (SS1), the largest differences between SEA and FEM 
occurred for beam SS2. In addition, the E1/E2 difference curve had a different shape 
than the rest of the E1/Ei curves. This problem did not occur in pile 1b where the 
difference curves of beams SS2, SS6 and SS7 had similar values and followed the 
same trend.  
The main reason for this improvement was that in pile 1b the number of transmission 
paths between subsystems 1 and 2 was doubled after connecting beam SS2 with beam 
SS5 (see Table 6-1 and Table 6-2) leading to SEA to work more efficiently. This was 
partially expected considering that a SEA model with many short paths is less affected 
by errors than a model that consists of a few long paths [71]. This indicates the 
potential for SEA to predict the energy transmission between the beams in a pile as the 
number of the interconnected members and consequently the complexity of the pile 
increases. 
6.6 Pile 2  Comparison between SEA and FEM 
Figure 6-27 to Figure 6-32 present the difference between the energy ratios, E1/Ei from 
FEM and SEA for the 14 beams of pile 2 when the power is injected on beam SS1. 
Results are shown for simply supported and free-free beams. The colour of each curve 
is analogous to the colour indexes of Figure 3-8 and indicates the layer of the pile 
where the energy is transmitted. Positive differences indicate that SEA overestimates 
the energy ratios whereas negative differences indicate that SEA underestimates the 
energy ratios compared with FEM. 
6.6.1 Simply supported beams 
When the FEM ESEA coupling loss factors are used in the SEA model (Figure 6-27), 
reasonable agreement was achieved between SEA and FEM for beams SS2 to SS14 
(except for beam SS9) with differences within 10 dB, for the majority of the 
frequency bands between 100 and 1500 Hz. Above 1500 Hz, reasonable agreement 
was still achieved for the beams of the first five layers of the pile, although for beam 
SS12 the differences were up to -15.1 dB at 1700 Hz. For beams SS13 and SS14 the 
differences between SEA and FEM were up to 39 dB. The difference of the energy 
ratios for beam SS9 was negative and over 10 dB for most of the frequency bands 
above 100 Hz. Above 700 Hz, the shape of the difference curve is also different than 
the other curves of Figure 6-27. 
When the SEA model uses the coupling loss factors from an analytical model based 
on a lump spring connector with the infinite beam mobilities (see Figure 6-28), 
reasonable agreement was achieved between SEA and FEM for all the beams of the 
pile up to the frequency band of 300 Hz, with differences within 10 dB. Above 300 
Hz and up to the frequency band of 1300 Hz, reasonable agreement was achieved for 
the beams of layers 1-4 of the pile (except for the beam SS9) with differences between 
-8 and 1.6 dB. Above 1300 Hz the differences were up to -13.6 dB. For beams SS9 to 
SS14 differences over 10 dB was received for the majority of the frequency bands 
above 300 Hz. Note that above 900 Hz the difference curve of beam SS9 had different 
trend than the other curves of  Figure 6-28. 
When the SEA model uses the coupling loss factors from the analytical model with 
the inclusion of the FEM mobilities (see Figure 6-29), reasonable agreement was 
achieved between SEA and FEM for all the beams of the pile up to the frequency band 
of 300 Hz, with differences within 10 dB. Above 300 Hz and up to the frequency 
band of 700 Hz, reasonable agreement with differences between -7.6 and 4 dB was 
achieved for the all the beams of the pile except for beam SS9. Above 700 Hz the 
differences were over -10 dB for most of the beams of the pile. Note that the difference 
of the energy ratios for beam SS9 was greater than 10 dB in all the frequency bands 
above 300 Hz.  
Figure 6-27 Difference between the energy ratios, E1/Ei from FEM and SEA with 
CLFs from FEM ESEA (combination of bending, torsional and longitudinal modes)  
Excitation  on subsystem SS1. 
Figure 6-28 Difference between the energy ratios, E1/Ei from FEM and SEA with 
CLFs from an analytical model (LSC with infinite beam mobilities)  Excitation on 
subsystem SS1. 
Figure 6-29 Difference between the energy ratios, E1/Ei from FEM and SEA with 
CLFs from an analytical model (LSC with FEM mobilities)  Excitation  on subsystem 
6.6.2 Free supports 
When the FEM ESEA coupling loss factors are used in the SEA model (Figure 6-30), 
reasonable agreement was achieved between SEA and FEM for beams SS2 to SS14 
with differences within 10 dB, for the vast majority of the frequency bands between 
100 and 700 Hz. Above 700 Hz, reasonable agreement was achieved mainly for the 
beams of the first three layers of the pile (SS2  SS7). For beams SS8 to SS14 the 
difference between SEA and FEM was greater than 10 dB for the majority of the 
frequency bands above 700 Hz.  
When the SEA model uses the coupling loss factors from an analytical model based 
on a lump spring connector with the infinite beam mobilities (see Figure 6-31), 
reasonable agreement was achieved between SEA and FEM for the most beams of the 
pile up to the frequency band of 300 Hz, with differences within 10 dB. Between 300 
and 900 Hz, the difference curves of the 14 beams follow the same trend but reasonable 
agreement was achieved mainly for beams SS2-SS8. Above 900 Hz, differences within 
10 dB were achieved for the majority of the frequency bands of beams SS2  SS7 
whereas for beams SS9 to SS14 the differences were in general over 10 dB.  
When the SEA model uses the coupling loss factors from the analytical model with 
the inclusion of the FEM mobilities (see Figure 6-32), reasonable agreement was 
achieved between SEA and FEM for all the beams of the pile up to the frequency band 
of 300 Hz, with differences between -8 and 8.8 dB. Above 300 Hz and up to the 
frequency band of 900 Hz, reasonable agreement with differences within 10 dB was 
achieved for the most beams of the pile. However, above 900 Hz the majority of the 
beams had differences over 10 dB. 
Figure 6-30 Difference between the energy ratios, E1/Ei from FEM and SEA with 
CLFs from FEM ESEA (combination of bending, torsional and longitudinal modes)  
Excitation  on subsystem SS1. 
Figure 6-31 Difference between the energy ratios, E1/Ei from FEM and SEA with 
CLFs from an analytical model (LSC with infinite beam mobilities)  Excitation on 
subsystem SS1. 
Figure 6-32 Difference between the energy ratios, E1/Ei from FEM and SEA with 
CLFs from an analytical model (LSC with FEM mobilities)  Excitation  on subsystem 
6.7 Pile 2  Discussion 
For pile 2 it was observed that the largest differences between SEA and FEM occurred 
for beam SS9. Specifically, for simply supported conditions the E1/E9 difference curve 
was different  than the rest of the E1/Ei curves both in terms of shape and value, 
regardless of the CLFs used in the SEA matrix calculation. This is explained 
considering that between beams SS1 and SS9 there are only two transmission paths 
that approximate the SEA matrix solution when they are combined (Table C-8 and 
Figure C-8) and SEA is less prone to error when multiple transmission paths exist 
between the source and receiver subsystems. 
From the study of the pile 2 with either simply supported or free support conditions it 
is seen that when the coupling loss factors from an analytical model of a lump spring 
connector are used in the SEA matrix, the energy ratios between the subsystems of the 
pile are predicted with reasonable accuracy in the frequency range from 100 to 700 
Hz. Reasonable accuracy does not occur at higher frequencies. 
6.8 Conclusions 
SEA path analysis has been carried out in two piles with seven and one pile with 14 
beams to assess the strength of the various transmission paths. The comparison of the 
energy ratios with the results of the SEA matrix solution shows that a direct path 
between two subsystems transfers more energy than the other paths. If a direct path 
does not exist, the transmission paths with the smaller number of intermediate 
subsystems will be the strongest and tends to approximate the SEA matrix solution.   
FEM models of the piles with simply supported and free support conditions were used 
to calculate the energy ratios between the beams of the piles. These were compared 
with the energy ratios calculated from a SEA model which used a) FEM ESEA 
coupling loss factors and b) CLFs resulted from an analytical model of a lump spring 
connector. For piles 1a and 1b reasonable agreement (differences within 10 dB) was 
achieved between SEA and FEM up to 900 Hz and 1100 Hz for simply supported and 
free supports respectively regardless the CLFs used in the SEA matrix. It was also 
shown that the SEA works more efficiently as the number of transmission paths 
between the subsystems increases. For pile 2 with either simply supported or free 
support conditions, reasonable agreement was achieved between SEA (for any CLFs) 
and FEM for the majority of the beams with differences up to 10 dB in the frequency 
range from 100 to 700 Hz.  
7. Vibration transmission in damaged reinforced concrete 
beam-to-column junctions  
7.1 Introduction 
The aim of this chapter is to assess the potential to use SEA to model the vibration 
transmission in seismic damaged reinforced concrete beam-to-column junctions where 
the connection between the beam and the column is made only via the steel 
reinforcement according to the lean-to collapse pattern which was introduced in Figure 
1-3b. A FEM model of a rigid T-junction defined in section 3.3.3.2 is validated against 
the wave theory in terms of CLFs that only consider bending wave motion. A concrete 
discontinuity is then introduced at the connection of the beam with the column and the 
resulting FEM model is used to carry out numerical experiments with FEM to create 
an ensemble of damaged beam-to-column junctions for a Monte Carlo simulation. This 
allows use of ESEA to determine CLFs between the beam and the column.   
The two main aspects to be investigated are (a) whether two or three subsystems should 
be used for FEM ESEA (refer back to Figure 3-17) and (b) whether it is possible to 
only consider one type of wave motion (e.g. bending waves) or whether two or more 
types of wave motion could be considered simultaneously (e.g. bending and torsional 
waves). The second aspect concerning the use of ESEA with multiple wave types is 
necessary because in a collapsed structure it is not known whether one or more wave 
type will be excited at the damaged beam-to-column connections. 
7.2 Mode count 
Figure 7-1 shows the mode count from FEM for out-of-plane bending (rotation about 
X-axis  see Figure 3-14) and combinations of all modes for damaged and rigid beam-
to-column junctions. On average, there are at least two bending modes in all the 
frequency bands for the damaged junctions. The rigid T-junctions have at least one 
bending mode in all the frequency bands. When all the modes are combined, all the 
frequency bands have at least eight and seven modes for the damaged and rigid T-
junctions respectively.   
Figure 7-1 Comparison of the average mode count of the 30 damaged junctions with 
the mode count of the rigid T-junction for out-of-plane bending modes and 
combination of all mode types. 
7.3 Comparison of coupling loss factors from FEM ESEA and 
wave approach (bending waves only) for the rigid T-junction  
In this section, the FEM model of the rigid T-junction is validated against the wave 
theory in terms of CLFs, considering only bending wave motion. Figure 7-2 - Figure 
7-4 compare the coupling loss factors resulted from FEM ESEA and the wave 
approach (bending waves only) for the rigid T-junction. As shown in Figure 7-2, the 
CLFs, 12 and 21, from FEM ESEA are negative below 500 and 300 Hz respectively. 
However, reasonable agreement was achieved for 12 and 21 from 300 to 1700 Hz 
(differences  4 dB) and from 1700 to 2500 Hz (differences  10 dB). Above 2500 Hz 
the differences were up to 15 dB.   
The CLFs 13 and 31 resulted from FEM ESEA are negative above 2700 and 2900 Hz 
respectively (see Figure 7-3). Close agreement was achieved for 13 and 31 between 
500 and 1500 Hz with differences within 5 dB. In the higher frequency bands the 
differences were within 10 dB except for the frequency band of 2300 Hz where the 
difference for 13 were up to 21 dB.  
As Figure 7-4 shows, nine out of 16 frequency bands between 100 and 3100 Hz 
achieved close agreement for 23 and 32 with differences within 5 dB. Reasonable 
agreement was achieved for the remaining seven frequency bands with differences 
within 10 dB except for the frequency band of 3100 Hz where the difference for 23 
were up to 11 dB.  
To conclude, differences up to 10 dB and negative CLFs were noticed at low 
frequencies whereas the agreement was in between 5 dB from 500 to 1700 Hz. At 
higher frequencies, errors larger than 10 dB were noticed for most of the frequency 
bands.    
Figure 7-2 Comparison of FEM and the analytical (wave approach) coupling loss 
factors 12 and 21. 
Figure 7-3 Comparison of FEM and the analytical (wave approach) coupling loss 
factors 13 and 31. 
Figure 7-4 Comparison of FEM and the analytical (wave approach) coupling loss 
factors 23 and 32. 
7.4 Coupling loss factors from FEM ESEA for damaged and rigid 
T-junctions 
This section compares the CLFs from FEM ESEA for damaged and rigid beam-to-
column junctions to investigate whether the number of the subsystems affects the 
efficiency of FEM ESEA and whether it is possible to only consider one type of wave 
motion (e.g. bending waves) or whether two or more types of wave motion could be 
considered simultaneously (e.g. bending and torsional waves). 
7.4.1 Two subsystems 
Figure 7-5 compares the coupling loss factors 12 and 21 from FEM ESEA with two 
subsystems, considering either only bending modes or the combination of all modes 
in the frequency range from 1 to 3200 Hz. Results are shown for rigid and damaged 
junctions. The FEM ESEA results for the 30 damaged beam-to-column junctions are 
shown in terms of a mean value with 95% confidence intervals.  
In the damaged junctions, the coupling is weaker than the rigid junction because 
subsystems 1 and 2 are connected only via the steel reinforcement.  
For the damaged junctions, the comparison of the CLFs from FEM ESEA with bending 
modes and the combination of all modes showed close agreement (differences within 
5 dB) from 100 to 2500 Hz. Above 2500 Hz, the differences were up to 10 dB. The 
95% confidence intervals for the damaged junctions show that the uncertainty is 
sufficiently low that it should be feasible to estimate the coupling even when the exact 
angle between the beam and the column is unknown in the damaged junctions of a real 
collapsed building.  
For the rigid junction, there were differences up to 5 dB between the CLFs from FEM 
ESEA with bending modes and the combination of all modes up to 3200 Hz. The 
higher CLFs with bending modes indicate that the bending modes are dominating over 
the combination of all the modes for the dynamic response of a beam-to-column 
junction either if the beam is connected to the column rigidly or only via the steel 
reinforcement.  
For consideration of either only bending modes or the combination of all modes, FEM 
ESEA resulted in positive CLFs for each of the 30 damaged junctions except for one 
junction in the frequency band of 100 Hz as Figure 7-6 indicates.  
Figure 7-5 Coupling loss factors 12 and 21 resulted from FEM ESEA with two 
subsystems with bending only (B) and the combination of all modes (A). The error 
bars denote the 95% confidence intervals. 
Figure 7-6 Damaged junctions  Percentage of negative CLFs 12 and 21 resulted from 
FEM ESEA with two subsystems with bending only (B) and the combination of all 
modes (A). 
7.4.2 Three subsystems 
Figure 7-7 to Figure 7-9 allow comparison of the coupling loss factors from FEM 
ESEA with three subsystems, considering either bending or combination of all modes 
in the frequency range from 1 to 3200 Hz. Results are shown for rigid and damaged 
junctions. The FEM ESEA results for the 30 damaged beam-to-column junctions are 
shown in terms of a mean value with 95% confidence intervals.  
The CLFs 12 and 21 from FEM ESEA with damaged junctions are comparable to the 
CLFS of the rigid one (see Figure 7-7). This was partially expected since subsystems 
1 and 2 are located in the column of the junction where there is no damage. The 
remaining CLFs (13, 31, 23, and 32) are smaller in the damaged than in the rigid T-
junction. This is expected because in the damaged junctions, subsystem 3 is connected 
to subsystems 1 and 2 only via the steel reinforcement and weaker coupling is expected 
(see Figure 7-8 and Figure 7-9). 
For the rigid T-junction, the differences of the CLFs 12, 13 and 31 from  FEM ESEA 
by using bending and combination of all modes were up to 5 dB between 100 and 900 
Hz. Above 900 Hz, the differences were between 5 and 10 dB for the vast majority of 
the frequency bands. For 21, 23 and 32 the differences were typically up to 5 dB over 
the complete frequency range. FEM ESEA resulted in negative CLFs below 500 Hz 
and over 2700 Hz as it is shown in Figure 7-7. 
For the damaged junctions, the differences between the CLFs from the FEM ESEA for 
bending only and the combination of all modes were up to 5 dB between 100 and 2500 
Hz. Above 2500 Hz, the differences were between 5 and 10 dB. The 95% confidence 
intervals show that the uncertainty is sufficiently low that it should be feasible to 
estimate the coupling even when the exact angle between the beam and the column is 
unknown in the damaged junctions of a real collapsed building. 
Regardless of the type of modes (bending or combination of all modes), the 
consideration of three subsystems for the FEM ESEA of the 30 damaged beam-to-
column junctions resulted in a significant number of negative coupling loss factors 
(see Figure 7-10 and Figure 7-11). Specifically, below 1500 Hz the percentage of the 
junctions with negative loss factors was between 17 and 54%. These mainly occurred 
with the CLFs from the column (SS1 and SS2) to the beam (SS3) and vice versa. 
Above 1500 Hz, the percentage of the junctions with negative loss factors was between 
3 and 10%.     
Comparing the above percentages with the 3% of negative CLFs of Figure 7-6 (FEM 
ESEA with two subsystems), it is seen that in damaged junctions the use of two instead 
of three subsystems in FEM ESEA significantly decrease the number of negative 
coupling loss factors.    
Figure 7-7 Coupling loss factors 12 and 21 resulted from FEM ESEA with three 
subsystems with bending only (B) and the combination of all modes (A). The error 
bars denote the 95% confidence intervals. 
Figure 7-8 Coupling loss factors 13 and 31 resulted from FEM ESEA with three 
subsystems with bending only (B) and the combination of all modes (A). The error 
bars denote the 95% confidence intervals. 
Figure 7-9 Coupling loss factors 23 and 32 resulted from FEM ESEA with three 
subsystems with bending only (B) and the combination of all modes (A). The error 
bars denote the 95% confidence intervals. 
Figure 7-10 Damaged junctions  Percentage of negative CLFs resulted from FEM 
ESEA with three subsystems with bending modes only (B). 
Figure 7-11 Damaged junctions  Percentage of negative CLFs resulted from FEM 
ESEA with three subsystems with the combination of all modes (A). 
7.5 Conclusions 
The FEM model of a rigid reinforced concrete T-junction was validated by comparing 
the FEM ESEA coupling loss factors against the theoretical CLFs which were 
calculated using the wave approach for only bending modes. An ensemble of 30 
randomly damaged beam-to-column junctions was generated using Monte Carlo 
simulation with FEM that allowed ESEA with two or three subsystems to be used to 
determine the CLFs between the beam and the column considering either only bending 
or the combination of all modes.  
Regardless of the number of the subsystems and the wave types in FEM ESEA, the 
coupling between the beam and the column was weaker in the damaged than in the 
rigid junction. In both rigid and damaged junctions, the CLFs from FEM ESEA were 
similar with only bending and the combination of all modes, regardless of the number 
of the subsystems. This indicated that the bending modes are dominating the dynamic 
response of a beam-to-column junction over the combination of all the modes, either 
if the beam is connected to the column rigidly or only via the steel reinforcement. 
In damaged junctions, it was shown that the uncertainty of predicting the CLFs using 
FEM ESEA is sufficiently low that it should be feasible to estimate the coupling even 
when the exact angle between the beam and the column is unknown. In addition, the 
use of two instead of three subsystems should be preferred in FEM ESEA since it 
significantly decreases the number of negative coupling loss factors.    
8. Conclusions 
8.1 Introduction 
This thesis has investigated the vibration transmission between reinforced concrete 
beams in situations that represent fragmented concrete buildings after an earthquake 
using Experimental Modal Analysis (EMA), Finite Element Methods (FEM) and 
Statistical Energy Analysis (SEA).   
8.2 Main findings 
The research in this thesis provides evidence of the potential to use SEA to predict 
vibration transmission in fragmented concrete buildings after an earthquake. The main 
extensions to SEA modelling were for concrete elements that are in contact with each 
other and to beam-column junctions where the rigid connection has broken leaving 
only the reinforcement. Whilst the findings apply to reinforced concrete beams, the 
experimentally validated FEM models provide a basis on which to model reinforced 
concrete walls and floors. 
FEM models were developed and validated with experimental modal analysis for 
beams connected with surface-to-surface and edge-to-surface contact conditions. 
These models were validated in terms of eigenfrequencies, mode shapes and spatial-
average response. It was shown that the interaction between the beams could be 
approximated using a normal contact stiffness. This stiffness showed some 
dependence on the modal response with values forming a lognormal distribution. It 
was shown that the mean value of this lognormal distribution could be used to 
approximate the contact stiffness in FEM models of beams junctions with surface-to-
surface or edge-to-surface contact conditions.  
For concrete beams that are stacked on top of each other without any rigid bonding 
material it was shown that MAC is inadequate to assess the validity of the FEM model 
as this led to misleading results. Whilst shortcomings of MAC have been identified in 
other work [66], this problem may have gone unnoticed because most connections tend 
to be rigid rather than spring-coupled. Using PMAC for these beams, it was shown 
that MAC was mainly determined by the modal vectors of one beam whereas the 
contribution of the other beam(s) to the MAC value was negligible. To overcome the 
shortcomings of MAC when validating FEM models of structural coupling between 
elastic systems using spring connectors to model the unbonded contact condition, an 
additional criterion, the Partial Modal Vector Ratio was introduced in this thesis. This 
criterion allowed identification of the FEM model that gave the most appropriate 
representation of the interaction between the coupled beams. 
Compared to running FEM models with applied loads to assess vibration transmission 
between the coupled beams, PMVR is a time-efficient approach that can be used as a 
supplementary criterion to MAC to identify potential correlation problems caused by 
the interaction of structural elements.  
Finite element models were used to calculate the driving-point mobilities of reinforced 
concrete beams for bending modes only, torsional modes only and the combination of 
all modes in the frequency range up to 3200 Hz with free and simply supported 
conditions. These mobilities were in close agreement (difference within 5 dB) with the 
theoretical driving-point mobilities of a thin beam of infinite extent for bending wave 
excitation but not for the combination of all modes. 
Coupling loss factors between two beams were determined using an ensemble of 30 
random beam junctions (free and simply supported boundary conditions) for Monte 
Carlo simulations with FEM and ESEA. These were compared with CLFs calculated 
using an analytical model based on a lump spring connector. For only bending waves 
or torsional waves, close agreement (difference within 5 dB) was achieved between 
FEM ESEA and the analytical model up to the frequency where half the bending or 
torsional wavelength equalled the longest side of the contact area. Above this 
frequency the interaction between the two beams cannot be considered as a lump 
spring connection. The inclusion of the FEM driving-point mobilities in the analytical 
model (instead of the infinite beam equation for the driving-point mobility) did not 
significantly improve the agreement. When all wave types are combined, close 
agreement can still be achieved at frequencies below 900 Hz.  
To extend the validation of vibration transmission between two beams, SEA path 
analysis was carried out on two piles with seven beams and one pile with 14 beams to 
assess the strength of the various transmission paths. The comparison of the energy 
ratios with the results of the SEA matrix solution showed that a direct path between 
two subsystems will transfer more energy than the other paths. If a direct path does not 
exist, the transmission paths with the smaller number of intermediate subsystems will 
be the strongest and will approximate better the SEA matrix solution.   
FEM models of these piles were used to calculate the energy ratios between the beams 
of the piles. These were compared with the energy ratios calculated from an SEA 
model which used a) FEM ESEA coupling loss factors and b) CLFs resulted from an 
analytical model of a lump spring connector. For the piles of seven beams, reasonable 
agreement (difference within 10 dB) was achieved between SEA and FEM up to at 
least 900 Hz and it was shown that SEA can become more accurate when the number 
of transmission paths increases. For the pile of 14 beams, reasonable agreement was 
achieved between SEA and FEM for the majority of the beams in the frequency range 
up to 700 Hz.  
The next step was to broaden the approach using FEM and SEA to other types of 
damaged beam or column elements found in a building after an earthquake. Initially, 
FEM models of a rigid reinforced concrete T-junction were validated by comparing 
FEM ESEA coupling loss factors against theoretical CLFs calculated using the wave 
approach for only bending modes. In this situation it was apparent that the T-junction 
needed to be modelled as three subsystems. However, for the damaged T-junction, an 
ensemble of 30 randomly damaged beam-to-column junctions was generated using a 
Monte Carlo simulation with FEM. This allowed an assessment of ESEA with two or 
three subsystems to be used to determine the CLFs between the beam and the column 
considering either only bending modes or the combination of all modes. Regardless of 
the number of the subsystems and the wave types in FEM ESEA, the coupling between 
the beam and the column was weaker in the damaged than in the rigid junction. In both 
rigid and damaged junctions, the CLFs from FEM ESEA were similar with only 
bending and the combination of all modes, regardless of the number of the subsystems. 
This indicated that the bending modes are dominating the dynamic response of a beam-
to-column junction over the combination of all the modes, either if the beam is 
connected to the column rigidly or only via the steel reinforcement. In damaged 
junctions, it was shown that the uncertainty of predicting the CLFs using FEM ESEA 
is sufficiently low that it should be feasible to estimate the coupling even when the 
exact angle between the beam and the column is unknown. The use of two instead of 
three subsystems for the junction significantly decreases the number of negative 
coupling loss factors in FEM ESEA. This indicates that the two-subsystem model 
provides a reasonable basis on which to build an SEA model. 
8.3 Future work 
Future work could assess the structure borne power input from a person banging on 
concrete with their hand or a piece of rubble. This will identify the relevant frequency 
range that needs to be considered.   
Results in chapter 4 indicate that the mean value of the lognormal distribution could 
be used to approximate the contact stiffness in FEM models of beams junctions with 
edge-to-surface contact conditions. To extend the validity of this approach it would be 
useful: (a) to assess the potential to use SEA to model the vibration transmission in 
these junctions and (b) investigate whether an analytical model based on a lump spring 
connector is valid.  
Results in chapters 6 and 7 shown that SEA could be used to model the vibration 
transmission in piles of reinforced concrete beams and in damaged beam-to-column 
junctions separately. Next stage of the work would be to combine these collapse 
patterns and assess the potential to use SEA to model the vibration transmission.   
A. MAC values for experimental setups J1 and J2 
Figure A-1 and Figure A-2 compare FEM and EMA results for setups J1 and J2 in 
terms of mode shapes. Close agreement was achieved for the vast majority of the mode 
pairs with MAC > 0.8. 
 Setup J1 
Figure A-1 MAC values for FEM model of Setup J1. 
 Setup J2 
Figure A-2 MAC values for FEM model of Setup J2. 
B. SEA matrix solution for piles 1a, 1b and 2 
The general SEA matrix solution for the seven subsystems of pile 1a and 1b and for 
the 14 subsystems of pile 2 for excitation on subsystem 1 is given by Eq. B.1, B.2 and 
B.3. For subsystems that are not directly connected, the coupling loss factor was set 
equal to zero. 
 Pile 1a 
 1
0 31 41 51 0 0
0  2
32 0 0 0 0
13 23  3
0 0 63 73
14 0 0  4
0 64 74
15 0 0 0  5
65 0
0 0 36 46 56  6
0 0 37 47 0 0  7
=1 ]
in(1)
 (B.1) 
 Pile 1b 
 1
0 31 41 51 0 0
0  2
32 0 52 0 0
13 23  3
0 0 63 73
14 0 0  4
0 64 74
15 25 0 0  5
65 0
0 0 36 46 56  6
0 0 37 47 0 0  7
=1 ]
in(1)
 (B.2) 
 Pile 2 
 1
0 31 41 51 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0  2
32 42 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
13 23  3
0 0 63 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
14 24 0  4
0 64 74 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
15 0 0 0  5
65 75 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 36 46 56  6
0 86 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 47 57 0  7
87 97 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 68 78  8
0 108 118 128 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 79 0  9
109 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 810 910  10
0 0 1310 1410
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 811 0 0  11
0 1311 1411
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 812 0 0 0  12
1312 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1013 1113 1213  13
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1014 1114 0 0  14
=1 ]
in(1)
 (B.3) 
C. Path analysis of pile 2 
For power input to source beam SS1, Table C-1 to Table C-13 show the transmission 
paths to receiving beams SS2 to SS14. For each energy ratio, the paths are grouped 
according to the number of the intermediate subsystems.  
Figure C-1 to Figure C-13 present the differences between the energy ratios from the 
SEA matrix solution and path analysis. Results are shown for 16 frequency bands of 
200 Hz bandwidth. The difference curves are coloured according to the number of the 
intermediate subsystems of each transmission path and the path that gives the lowest 
energy ratio difference is considered as the strongest path.  
Table C-1 Transmission paths to beam SS2 through pile 2 shown in Figure 3-8 for 
power input to beam SS1 (grey shading indicates the strongest path). 
Number of 
intermediate 
subsystems 
Number 
of paths 
Paths 
0 - - 
No.1 (132) 
No.2 (142) 
2 - - 
No.3 (13642) 
No.4 (14632) 
No.5 (15632) 
No.6 (15642) 
No.7 (15742) 
4 - - 
 (1365742) 
No.12 
(1568742) 
 (1368742) 
No.13 
(1574632) 
No.10  
(1475632) 
No.14 
(1578632) 
No.11  
(1478632) 
No.15 
(1578642) 
Figure C-1 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E2, from the SEA matrix solution 
and path analysis.  
Table C-2 Transmission paths to beam SS3 through pile 2 shown in Figure 3-8 for 
power input to beam SS1 (grey shading indicates the strongest path). 
Number of 
 intermediate 
subsystems 
Number 
of paths 
Paths 
0 1 No.1 (13) 
1 - - 
No.2 (1423) 
No.3 (1463) 
No.4 (1563) 
3 - - 
(147563) 
(157423) 
(147863) 
 (157463) 
(156423) 
No.10  
(157863) 
5 - - 
Figure C-2 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E3, from the SEA matrix solution 
and path analysis. 
Table C-3 Transmission paths to beam SS4 through pile 2 shown in Figure 3-8 for 
power input to beam SS1 (grey shading indicates the strongest path). 
Number of 
intermediate 
subsystems 
Number 
of paths 
Paths 
0 1 No.1 (14) 
1 - - 
No.2 (1324) 
No.3 (1364) 
No.4 (1564) 
No.5 (1574) 
3 - - 
No.6 (136574) 
No.7 (136874) 
No.8 (156324) 
No.9 (156874) 
No.10 (157864) 
5 - - 
Figure C-3 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E4, from the SEA matrix solution 
and path analysis. 
Table C-4 Transmission paths to beam SS5 through pile 2 shown in Figure 3-8 for 
power input to beam SS1 (grey shading indicates the strongest path). 
Number of 
intermediate 
subsystems 
Number 
of paths 
Paths 
0 1 No.1 (15) 
1 - - 
No.2 (1365) 
No.3 (1465) 
No.4 (1475) 
3 - - 
(132465) 
(142365) 
(132475) 
(146875) 
(136875) 
No.10 
 (147865) 
5 - - 
Figure C-4 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E5, from the SEA matrix solution 
and path analysis. 
Table C-5 Transmission paths to beam SS6 through pile 2 shown in Figure 3-8 for 
power input to beam SS1 (grey shading indicates the strongest path). 
Number of 
intermediate 
subsystems 
Number 
of paths 
Paths 
0 - - 
No.1 (136) 
No.2 (146) 
No.3 (156) 
2 - - 
No.4 (13246) No.7 (14786) 
No.5 (14236) No.8 (15746) 
No.6 (14756) No.9 (15786) 
4 - - 
No.10 (1324756) 
No.11 (1324786) 
No.12 (14791086) 
No.13 (1574236) 
No.14 (15791086) 
Figure C-5 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E6, from the SEA matrix solution 
and path analysis. 
Table C-6 Transmission paths to beam SS7 through pile 2 shown in Figure 3-8 for 
power input to beam SS1 (grey shading indicates the strongest path). 
Number of 
intermediate 
subsystems 
Number 
of paths 
Paths 
0 - - 
No.1 (147) 
No.2 (157) 
2 - - 
No.3 (13247) No.7 (14657) 
No.4 (13647) No.8 (14687) 
No.5 (13657) No.9 (15647) 
No.6 (13687) No.10 (15687) 
4 - - 
No.11 
 (1324657) 
No.15 
(1423687) 
No.12 
(1324687) 
No.16 
(14681097) 
No.13 
(13681097) 
No.17 
(1563247) 
No.14 
(1423657) 
No.18 
(15681097) 
Figure C-6 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E7, from the SEA matrix solution 
and path analysis. 
Table C-7 Transmission paths to beam SS8 through pile 2 shown in Figure 3-8 for 
power input to beam SS1 (grey shading indicates the strongest path). 
Number of 
intermediate 
subsystems 
Number 
of paths 
Paths 
0 - - 
1 - - 
No.1 (1368) 
No.2 (1478) 
No.3 (1468) 
No.4 (1578) 
No.5 (1568) 
3 - - 
(132468) 
No.10 
(142368) 
No.14 
(156478) 
(132478) 
No.11 
(146578) 
No.15 
(157468) 
(136478) 
No.12 
(147568) 
No.16 
(1579108) 
(136578) 
No.13 
(1479108) 
5 - - 
Figure C-7 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E8, from the SEA matrix solution 
and path analysis. Combination of paths No. 1-5 and No. 1-16 result in identical 
curves. 
Table C-8 Transmission paths to beam SS9 through pile 2 shown in Figure 3-8 for 
power input to beam SS1 (grey shading indicates the strongest path). 
Number of 
intermediate 
subsystems 
Number 
of paths 
Paths 
0 - - 
1 - - 
No.1 (1479) 
No.2 (1579) 
3 - - 
(132479) 
(146579) 
No.13 
(156879) 
(136479) 
(146879) 
No.14 
(1568109) 
(136579) 
No.10 
(1468109) 
No.15 
(1578109) 
(136879) 
No.11 
(1478109) 
(1368109) 
No.12 
(156479) 
5 - - 
Figure C-8 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E9, from the SEA matrix solution 
and path analysis. 
Table C-9 Transmission paths to beam SS10 through pile 2 shown in Figure 3-8 for 
power input to beam SS1 (grey shading indicates the strongest path). 
Number of 
intermediate 
subsystems 
Number 
of paths 
Paths 
0 - - 
1 - - 
2 - - 
No.1 (136810) 
No.2 (146810) 
No.3 (147810) 
No.4 (147910) 
4 - - 
(13246810) 
No.16 
(14236810) 
No.27 
(15647810) 
(13247810) 
No.17 
(14657810) 
No.28 
(15647910) 
(13247910) 
No.18 
(14657910) 
No.29 
(15687910) 
(13647810) 
No.19 
(14687910) 
No.30 
(1568111310) 
(13647910) 
No.20 
(1468111310) 
No.31 
(1568111410) 
No.10 
(13657810) 
No.21 
(1468111410) 
No.32 
(1568121310) 
No.11 
(13657910) 
No.22 
(1468121310) 
No.33 
(15746810) 
No.12 
(13687910) 
No.23 
(14756810) 
No.34 
(1578111310) 
No.13 
(1368111310) 
No.24 
(1478111310) 
No.35 
(1578111410) 
No.14 
(1368111410) 
No.25 
(1478111410) 
No.36 
(1578121310) 
No.15 
(1368121310) 
No.26 
(1478121310) 
Figure C-9 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E10, from the SEA matrix solution 
and path analysis. 
Table C-10 Transmission paths to beam SS11 through pile 2 shown in Figure 3-8 for 
power input to beam SS1 (grey shading indicates the strongest path). 
Number of 
intermediate 
subsystems 
Number 
of paths 
Paths 
0 - - 
1 - - 
2 - - 
No.1 (136811) 
No.2 (146811) 
No.3 (147811) 
No.4 (156811) 
No.5 (157811) 
4 - - 
(13246811) 
No.16 
(1468101411) 
No.26 
(1568101311) 
(13247811) 
No.17 
(1468121311) 
No.27 
(1568101411) 
(13647811) 
No.18 
(14756811) 
No.28 
(1568121311) 
(13657811) 
No.19 
(1478101311) 
No.29 
(15746811) 
No.10 
(1368101311) 
No.20 
(1478101411) 
No.30 
(1578101311) 
No.11 
(1368101411) 
No.21 
(1478121311) 
No.31 
(1578101411) 
No.12 
(1368121311) 
No.22 
(147910811) 
No.32 
(1578121311) 
No.13 
(14236811) 
No.23 
(1479101311) 
No.33 
(157910811) 
No.14 
(14657811) 
No.24 
(1479101411) 
No.34 
(1579101311) 
No.15 
(1468101311) 
No.25 
(15647811) 
No.35 
(1579101411) 
Figure C-10 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E11, from the SEA matrix solution 
and path analysis. 
Table C-11 Transmission paths to beam SS12 through pile 2 shown in Figure 3-8 for 
power input to beam SS1 (grey shading indicates the strongest path). 
Number of 
intermediate 
subsystems 
Number 
of paths 
Paths 
0 - - 
1 - - 
2 - - 
No.1 (136812) 
No.2 (146812) 
No.3 (147812) 
No.4 (156812) 
No.5 (157812) 
4 - - 
(13246812) 
No.14 
(1468101312) 
No.22 
(1568101312) 
(13247812) 
No.15 
(1468111312) 
No.23 
(1568111312) 
(13647812) 
No.16 
(14756812) 
No.24 
(15746812) 
(13657812) 
No.17 
(1478101312) 
No.25 
(1578101312) 
No.10 
(1368101312) 
No.18 
(1478111312) 
No.26 
(157910812) 
No.11 
(1368111312) 
No.19 
(147910812) 
No.27 
(1579101312) 
No.12 
(14236812) 
No.20 
(1479101312) 
No.28 
(1578111312) 
No.13 
(14657812) 
No.21 
(15647812)  
Figure C-11 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E12, from the SEA matrix solution 
and path analysis. 
Table C-12 Transmission paths to beam SS13 through pile 2 shown in Figure 3-8 for 
power input to beam SS1 (grey shading indicates the strongest path). 
Number of 
intermediate 
subsystems 
Number 
of paths 
Paths 
0 - - 
1 - - 
2 - - 
3 - - 
(13681013) 
(14781013) 
No.13 
(15681213) 
(13681113) 
(14781113) 
No.14 
(15781013) 
(13681213) 
(14781213) 
No.15 
(15781113) 
(14681013) 
No.10 
(14791013) 
No.16 
(15781213) 
(14681113) 
No.11 
(15681013) 
(15791013) 
(14681213) 
No.12 
(15681113)  
5 - - 
Figure C-12 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E13, from the SEA matrix solution 
and path analysis. 
Table C-13 Transmission paths to beam SS14 through pile 2 shown in Figure 3-8 for 
power input to beam SS1 (grey shading indicates the strongest path). 
Number of 
intermediate 
subsystems 
Number 
of paths 
Paths 
0 - - 
1 - - 
2 - - 
3 - - 
(13681014) 
(14791014 
(13681114) 
(15681014 
(14681014) 
(15681114 
(14681114) 
No.10  
(15781014 
(14781014) 
No.11  
(15781114 
(14781114) 
No.12  
(15791014) 
5 - - 
Figure C-13 Difference between the energy ratio, E1/E14, from the SEA matrix solution 
and path analysis. 
References 
[1]  R. Huo , A. Agapiou, V. Bocos-Bintintant, L. J. Brown, C. Burns, C. S. Creaser, 
N. A. Devenport, B. Gao-Lau, C. Guallar-Hoyas, L. Hildebrand, A. Malkar, H. 
J. Martin, V. H. Moll, P. Patel, A. Ratiu, J. C. Reynolds, S. Sielemann, R. 
Slodzynski, M. Statheropoulos, M. A. Turner, V. Vautz, V. E. Wright and C. L. 
P. Thomas, The trapped human experiment, Journal of Breath Research, vol. 
5, pp. 1-12, 2011.  
[2]  A. G. Macintyre, J. A. Barbera and E. R. Smith, Surviving collapsed structure 
entrapment after earthquakes: A "Time-to-Rescue" analysis, Prehospital and 
Disaster Medicine, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 4-19, 2006.  
[3]  A. G. Macintyre, J. A. Barbera and B. P. Petinaux, Survival interval in 
earthquake entrapments: Research findings reinforced during the 2010 Haiti 
earthquake Response, Disaster Medicine and Public Health Preparedness, vol. 
5, no. 1, pp. 13-22, 2011.  
[4]  C.-J. Bckstrm and N. Christofferson, Urban search and rescue - an evaluation 
of technical search equipment and methods, Lund University, Lund, 2006. 
[5]  A. T. Guntner, N. J. Pineau, P. Mochalski, H. Wiesenhofer, A. Agapiou, C. A. 
Mayhew and S. E. Pratsinis, Sniffing entrapped humans with sensor arrays, 
Analytical Chemistry, vol. 90, pp. 4940-4945, 2018.  
[6]  M. van Zomeren, Search methods in USAR, Delft University of Technology, 
Delft, 2008. 
[7]  R. D. Cook, D. S. Malkus, M. E. Plesha and R. J. Witt, Concepts and 
Applications of Finite Element Analysis, 4th ed., Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc, 2001.  
[8]  R. H. Lyon and R. G. DeJong, Theory and application of Statistical Energy 
Analysis, 2nd ed., Newton: Butterworth-Heinemann, 1995.  
[9]  NFPA 1670:2017 - Standard on Operations and Training for Technical Search 
and Rescue Incidents, National Fire Protection Association.  
[10]  R. M. Downey, Types of Collapse, WNYF Magazine, pp. 10-11, 2001.  
[11]  L. Collins, Technical Rescue Operations, Volume II: Common Emergencies, 1st 
ed., Tulsa: Penn Well Corporation, 2005.  
[12]  J. O'Connell, Collapse operations for first responders, 1st ed., Tulsa: Penn Well 
Corporation, 2012.  
[13]  H. Sezen , A. S. Whittaker, K. J. Elwood and K. M. Mosalam, Performance of 
reinforced concrete buildings during the August 17, 1999 Kocaeli, Turkey 
earthquake, and seismic design and construction practice in Turkey, 
Engineering Structures, vol. 25, pp. 103-114, 2003.  
[14]  National Urban Search and Rescue Response System - Structure Collapse 
Awareness Training, FEMA, 2008.  
[15]  A. Bayraktar, A. C. Altuniik and M. Pehlivan, Performance and damages of 
reinforced concrete buildings during the October 23 and November 9, 2011 Van, 
Turkey, earthquakes, Soil Dynamics and Earthquake Engineering, vol. 53, pp. 
49-72, 2013.  
[16]  C. Schweier and M. Markus, Classification of collapsed buildings for fast 
damage and loss assessment, Bulletin of Earthquake Engineering, vol. 4, pp. 
177-192, 2006.  
[17]  M. N. Fardis, Seismic Design, Assessment and Retrofitting of Concrete 
Buildings, New York: Springer, 2009.  
[18]  J. . D. Marshall, A. F. Lang, S. M. Baldridge and D. R. Popp, Recipe for 
disaster: Construction methods, materials, and building performance in the 
January 2010 Haiti earthquake, Earthquake Spectra, vol. 27, pp. 323-343, 2011.  
[19]  F. Ypez and O. Ypez, Role of construction materials in the collapse of R/C 
buildingsafter Mw 7.8 Pedernales  Ecuador earthquake, April 2016, Case 
Studies in Structural Engineering, vol. 7, pp. 24-31, 2017.  
[20]  D. V. Hutton, Fundamentals of Finite Element Analysis, 1st ed., New York: 
McGraw-Hill , 2004.  
[21]  A. Khennane, Introduction to Finite Element Analysis Using MATLAB and 
Abaqus, 1st ed., Boca Raton: CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group, 2013.  
[22]  S. Atamturktur and J. A. Laman, Finite element model correlation and 
calibration of historic masonry monuments: review, The Structural Design Of 
Tall and Special Buildings, vol. 21, pp. 96-113, 2012.  
[23]  M. Valente and G. Milani, Seismic assessment of historical masonry towers by 
means of simplifiedapproaches and standard FEM, Construction and Building 
Materials, vol. 108, pp. 74-104, 2016.  
[24]  R. Jankowski, Non-linear FEM analysis of earthquake-induced pounding 
between the main building and the stairway tower of the Olive View Hospital, 
Engineering Structures, vol. 31, pp. 1851-1864, 2009.  
[25]  S. Kokot, A. Anthoine, P. Negro and G. Solomos, Static and dynamic analysis 
of a reinforced concrete flat slab frame building for progressive collapse, 
Engineering Structures, vol. 40, pp. 205-217, 2012.  
[26]  G. R. Liu and S. S. Quek, The Finite Element Method: A Practical Course, 
Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann, 2014.  
[27]  T. odygowski and W. Sumelka, Limitations in application of finite element 
methods in acoustic numerical simulation, Journal of Theoretical and Applied 
Mechanics, vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 849-865, 2006.  
[28]  N. Attala and F. Sgard, Finite element and boundary methods on structural 
acoustics and vibrations, Boca Raton: CRC Press, Taylor&Francis Group, 2015.  
[29]  P. Langer, M. Maeder, C. Guist, M. Krause and S. Marburg, More than six 
elements per wavelength: The practical use of structural finite element models 
and their accuracy in comparison with experimental results, Journal of 
Computational Acoustics, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 1-23, 2017.  
[30]  T. Hartmann, G. Tanner, G. Xie, D. Chappell and J. Bajars, Modelling of high-
frequency structure-borne sound transmission on FEM grids using the Discrete 
Flow Mapping technique, Journal of Physics: Conference Series, vol. 744, pp. 
1-10, 2016.  
[31]  Y. Mizushima, Y. Mukai, H. Namba, K. Taga and T. Saruwatari, Super-detailed 
FEM simulations for full-scale steel structure with fatal rupture at joints between 
membersShaking-table test of full-scale steel frame structure to estimate 
influence of cumulative damage by multiple strong motion: Part 1, Japan 
Architectural Review, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 96-108, 2018.  
[32]  N. Pei, S. ivanovi, J. Dennis and J. Hargreaves, Experimental and finite 
element dynamic analysis of incrementally loaded reinforced concrete 
structures, Engineering Structures, vol. 103, pp. 15-27, 2015.  
[33]  A. Earij, G. Alfano, K. Cashell and X. Zhou, Nonlinear threedimensional 
finiteelement modelling of reinforcedconcrete beams: Computational 
challenges and experimental validation, Engineering Failure Analysis, vol. 82, 
pp. 92-115, 2017.  
[34]  J. Obolt and A. Sharma, Numerical simulation of reinforced concrete beams 
with different shearreinforcements under dynamic impact loads, International 
Journal of Impact Engineering, vol. 38, pp. 940-950, 2011.  
[35]  E. K. Ervin, Vibro-impact behaviorof two orthogonal beams, Journal of 
Engineering Mechanics, vol. 135, pp. 529-537, 2009.  
[36]  M. Filippoupolitis, C. Hopkins, R. Vltl, U. Schanda, J. Mahn and L. Kraji, 
Structural dynamics of a dowelled-joist timber floor in the low-frequency range 
modelled using finite element simulation, Engineering Structures, vol. 148, pp. 
602-620, 2017.  
[37]  F. Zhou, K. M. Mosalam and M. Nakashima, Finite-element analysis of a 
composite frame under large lateral cyclic loading, Journal of Structural 
Engineering, vol. 133, pp. 1018-1026, 2007.  
[38]  P. Martinelli, A. Galli, L. Barazzetti, M. Colombo , R. Felicetti, M. Previtali, F. 
Roncoroni, M. Scola and M. Di Prisco, Bearing capacity assessment of a 14th 
century arch bridge in Lecco (Italy), International Journal of Architectural 
Heritage, vol. 12, pp. 237-256, 2018.  
[39]  T. Marwala, Finite-element model updating using computational intelligence 
techniques, 1st ed., London: Springer, 2010.  
[40]  J. M. Seelig and W. H. Hoppman, Normal mode vibrations of systems of 
elastically connected parallel bars, Journal of the Acoustical Society of 
America, vol. 36, pp. 93-99, 1964.  
[41]  S. S. Rao, Natural vibrations of systems of elastically connected Timoshenko 
beams, The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 55, pp. 1232-
1237, 1974.  
[42]  Z. Oniszczuk, Free transverse vibrations of elastically connected simply 
supported double-beam complex system, Journal of Sound and Vibration, vol. 
232, pp. 387-403, 1999.  
[43]  T. Irie, G. Yamada and Y. Kobayashi, The steady state response of an internally 
damped double-beam system interconnected by several springs, Journal of the 
Acoustical Society of America, vol. 71, no. 5, pp. 1155-1162, 1982.  
[44]  J. Li and H. Hua, Dynamic stiffness vibration analysis of an elastically 
connected three-beam system, Applied Acoustics, vol. 69, pp. 591-600, 2008.  
[45]  Y. Gur, D. A. Wagner and K. N. Morman, Energy finite element analysis 
methods for mid-frequency NVH applications, SAE International Journal of 
Passenger Cars, vol. 108, pp. 2979-2987, 1999.  
[46]  C. Hopkins, Sound Insulation, Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann, 2007.  
[47]  R. J. M. Craik, Sound Transmission Through Buildings: Using Statistical Energy 
Analysis, Hampshire: Gower Publishing Limited, 1996.  
[48]  C. Hopkins, Statistical energy analysis of coupled plate systems with low modal 
density and low modal overlap, Journal of Sound and Vibration, vol. 251, no. 
2, pp. 193-214, 2002.  
[49]  C. Hopkins, Experimental statistical energy analysis of coupled plateswith 
wave conversion at the junction, Journal of Sound and Vibration, vol. 322, pp. 
155-166, 2009.  
[50]  L. Cremer, M. Heckl and E. E. Ungar, Structure-Borne Sound, Berlin: Springer-
Verlag, 1973.  
[51]  R. H. Lyon, Statistical energy analysis of dynamical systems theory and 
applications, Cambridge: MIT Press, 1975.  
[52]  D. A. Bies and S. Hamid, In situ determination of loss and coupling loss factors 
by the power injection method, Journal of Sound and Vibration, vol. 70, no. 2, 
pp. 187-204, 1980.  
[53]  B. Mosley, J. Bungey and R. Hulse, Reinforced Concrete Design to Eurocode 2, 
New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2012.  
[54]  ISO 9052-1:1989 Acoustics - Determination of dynamic stiffness - Part 1: 
Materials used under floating floors in dwellings, International Organization for 
Standardization.  
[55]  B. J. Mac Donald, Practical Stress Analysis with Finite Elements, 2nd ed., 
Dublin: Glasnevin Publishing, 2013.  
[56]  Abaqus 6.14 Documentation and User Manual, Providence, Rhode Island, USA: 
Dassault Systmes Simulia Corporation, 2014.  
[57]  A. K. Chopra, Dynamics of Structures, 3rd ed., New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 2006.  
[58]  C. W. de Silva, Vibration and shock handbook, 1st ed., Boca Raton: Taylor & 
Francis, 2005.  
[59]  M. Petyt, Introduction to finite element vibration analysis, 2nd ed., New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 2010.  
[60]  D. Lu, J. Meng, S. Zhang, Y. Shi, K. Dai and Z. Huang, Damping Ratios of 
Reinforced Concrete Structures Under Actual Ground Motion Excitations, in 
Dynamics of Civil Structures, Volume 2: Proceedings of the 37th IMAC, A 
Conference and Exposition on Structural Dynamics , Cham, Springer, 2019, pp. 
259-268. 
[61]  H. Bachmann, W. J. Ammann, F. Deischl, J. Eisenmann, I. Floegl, G. H. Hirsch, 
G. K. Klein, G. J. Lande, O. Mahrenholtz, H. G. Natke, H. Nussbaumer, A. J. 
Pretlove, J. H. Rainer, E.-U. Saemann and L. Steinbeisser, Vibration Problems 
in Structures: Practical Guidelines, Boston: Birkhuser Verlag, 1995.  
[62]  D. J. Ewins, Modal Testing: Theory, Practice and Application, Baldock: 
Research Studies Press Ltd., 2000.  
[63]  D. J. Ewins, Model validation: Correlation for updating, Sadhana, vol. 25, no. 
3, pp. 221-234, 2000.  
[64]  G. Martin, E. Balmes and T. Chancelier, Improved Modal Assurance Criterion 
using a quantification of identification errors per mode/sensor, in 26th 
International Conference on Noise and Vibration engineering (ISMA2014), 
Leuven, 2014.  
[65]  J. F. Mercer, G. S. Aglietti, M. Remedia and A. M. Kiley, Study of Correlation 
Criteria for Spacecraft-Launch Vehicle Coupled Loads Analysis, in 32nd IMAC 
Conference and Exposition on Structural Dynamics, Brescia, 2012.  
[66]  R. J. Allemang, The modal assurance criterion - Twenty years of use and 
abuse, Sound and Vibration, pp. 14-21, 2003.  
[67]  W. Heylen and T. Janter, Extensions of the modal assurance criterion, Journal 
of Vibrations and Acoustics, vol. 112, pp. 468-472, 1990.  
[68]  P. Bamforth, D. Chisholm, J. Gibbs and T. Harrison, Properties of Concrete for 
use in Eurocode 2, The Concrete Centre, Surrey, 2008. 
[69]  MATLAB R2018b, Natick, Massachusetts: The Mathworks Inc., 2018.  
[70]  R. J. Craik and R. S. Smith, Sound transmission through lightweight parallel 
plates. Part II: structure-borne sound, Applied Acoustics, vol. 61, pp. 247-269, 
2000.  
[71]  R. J. Craik, The effect of random errors on a large statistical energy analysis 
model, Journal of Sound and Vibration, vol. 91, no. 1, pp. 57-64, 1983.  
