Physicochemical evolution of an active plate boundary fault; 
the Alpine Fault, New Zealand: insight from the Deep Fault 
Drilling Project 
Thesis submitted in accordance with the requirements of the University 
of Liverpool for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy by 
Michael John Allen 
September 2017 
Abstract 
The Alpine Fault, a transpressional plate boundary between the Australian and Pacific 
plates, bounding the western edge of the Southern Alps on New Zealands South Island, 
accommodates over 70 % of the relative motion between the colliding Australian and 
Pacific Plates with dextral-reverse movement offsetting basement rocks laterally by ~470 
km. This motion manifests itself as quasi-periodical ruptures of large magnitude 
earthquakes (Mw ~8), with the fault currently thought to be nearing the end of its most 
recent interseismic period. Seismicity in the upper crust occurs due to frictional instabilities 
on faults; with earthquake nucleation, propagation, and inhibition governed by the 
properties of the fault zone and the tectonic forces acting upon it. 
The Deep Fault Drilling Project (DFDP) is an ongoing international effort, undertaken in 
order to provide insight into the current geological and seismological state of a plate 
boundary fault at the end of its latest seismic cycle. The first phase of the DFDP comprised 
two vertical pilot holes (DFDP-1A and DFDP-1B) drilled into an active thrust segment of the 
Alpine Fault Zone at Gaunt Creek, Westland in January  February 2011. The boreholes 
reached depths of 100.6 m and 151.4 m, respectively, sampling a range of fault lithologies 
including ultramylonites, cataclasites and gouges from both the hanging wall and footwall 
of the fault; including multiple fault principal slip zones. This was followed by diverse down-
hole observations and the installation of sensors for long-term in situ monitoring. Drilling 
revealed the presence of a ~30 m thick alteration zone overprinting the fault core and 
transition into the damage zone. This alteration zone was defined based on a distinctive, 
light green colour in drill core and in field outcrop, produced by elevated concentrations of 
alteration minerals (e.g., phyllosillicates and carbonates) above regional levels.  
This thesis presents a multidisciplinary approach of experimental physical property 
measurement, microstructural observations and fine-scale spatially resolved geochemical 
analyses performed with the aim to characterise and define the behaviour of a major plate 
boundary fault throughout its seismic cycle, with particular focus on fluids within the fault 
and the impact they have on fault processes. The study includes: the measurement of 
permeability and seismic velocity anisotropy of heavily cataclased and altered fault rock, in 
order to characterise the properties of the fault at the end of an interseismic period; the 
microstructural and geochemical observations of carbonate-mineralised fractures within 
the fault core / alteration zone, in order to better understand sealing processes and fluid-
rock interactions within heavily cataclased rock; and a study of the occurrence of frictional 
melt and ultracataclasis within the fault, with focus on the inter-relations of these 
processes as fault properties and fluid behaviour varies throughout the seismic cycle. These 
analyses were performed on Alpine Fault lithologies collected from the field and the DFDP. 
Our suite of experimental permeability and seismic velocity measurements, conducted with 
pore fluid (H2O) pressure held at 5 MPa over an effective pressure range of 5  105 MPa, 
show a zone of low permeability, from 10-17 to 10-21 m2, and low seismic velocity, P-wave: 
4400 to 5900 m/s; S-wave: 3900 to 4200 m/s, material bounding the PSZ of the central 
Alpine Fault, i.e. the fault core / alteration zone, under conditions approximating depths of 
5  6 km. Measurements performed on protolith lithologies show lower permeabilities and 
higher seismic velocities than the fault-damaged rock owing to their intact, unfractured 
nature. Low permeabilities at low experimental pressures are explained by the presence of 
fine grained alteration products, carbonate precipitation and highly variable cataclastic 
structures within the fault zone. The PSZ, being composed of ultrafine-grained alteration 
products, acts as a barrier to cross-fault fluid flow postseismicity. This is in agreement with 
other petrophysical studies on other mature faults subjected to extensive comminution and 
fluid-rock alteration.  
Using SEM-based electron backscatter diffraction and optical cathodoluminescence 
together with secondary ion mass spectroscopy, we present fine-scale, quantitative 
microstructural and spatially resolved geochemical observations on the alteration zone 
carbonate-sealed fractures. We have shown that the hanging wall alteration zone is 
pervasively mineralised by carbonate precipitation, while the footwall is relatively devoid. 
This mineralisation is generated through a protracted cycle of fracturing and sealing, with 
ambient conditions fluctuating during exhumation and seismicity, as evidenced by variation 
in calcite trace element chemistry and deformation microstructures across vein 
generations. The vast majority of veins appear to be filled by blocky-equant calcite crystals 
with uniform chemistry, indicating that the veins were rapidly sealed by a single fluid pulse. 
Subsequent fluid-rock interaction and deformation has resulted in modification of vein 
microstructures and chemistry. These findings reflect the transient nature of permeability 
on the Alpine Fault, highly permeable co- and immediately post-seismically, and reduced to 
its current state in the late interseismic period. 
The evolution of fault rock microstructure with seismic shear and subsequent interseismic 
fluid-rock interaction has a great effect on the hydraulic and elastic properties of fault 
zones. This evolution is complex and cyclical, potentially promoting rupture via dynamic 
coseismic processes such as thermal pressurization. During interseismic periods fluid flow is 
likely concentrated upon pervasive, unconsolidated gouge-filled fracture networks at the 
contact of the fault core / alteration zone and the relatively unaltered damage zone in the 
hanging wall, allowing the flow of fluid along the fault and to the surface, as observed by 
abundant hydrothermal springs southeast of the fault.  
Using SEM-based microstructural observations and geochemical analyses, including: 
backscatter electron imaging; electron backscatter diffraction; and energy dispersive 
spectroscopy, presented is a study on the occurrence of pseudotachylytes and 
nanoparticulates within the fault zone. The focus is on the setting of these features, as well 
as the extent of mechanical reworking, chemical alteration and/or preservation they have 
undergone throughout the seismic cycle. It is shown that pseudotachylytes occur 
throughout the fault core / alteration zone cataclasites, predominantly as reworked, 
disassociated clasts, with intact pseudotachylyte veins constrained to the fault core / 
damage zone contact in the fractured ultramylonites. Frictional melt appears to occur in the 
presence of fluid, as evidenced by the cataclasis of calcite veins associated with, amygdules 
within and veins overprinting pseudotachylytes. With the lack of intact pseudotachylyte 
veins within and in the immediate vicinity of the principal slip zone it can be inferred that 
frictional melt did not occur during the most recent high magnitude Alpine Fault slip event. 
It is more likely that the pseudotachylytes observed are reworked relicts from older Alpine 
Fault ruptures below the Brittle  Viscous Transition, or rather, smaller magnitude 
earthquakes that have produced pseudotachylytes that have been subsequently 
incorporated into the widening alteration zone with exhumation. The presence of 
preserved nanoparticles within clasts in the principal slip zone could indicate that the 
Alpine Fault produced nanoparticulates during increments of slip at greater depths without 
the production of melt. This could indicate a transition in slip weakening mechanisms with 
exhumation; frictional melting may occur in the more competent rock close to the Brittle  
Viscous Transition, nanoparticulate-aided slip may be important at intermediate depths, 
aided by thermal pressurisation, while cataclasis dominates at shallower crustal levels.  
Acknowledgments 
Many thanks go to my supervisors Elisabetta Mariani and Daniel Faulkner for their support 
and guidance throughout my PhD. It has been an honour to have had the opportunity to 
work alongside both in the Rock Deformation and Electron Microscopy Laboratories at 
Liverpool as well as in the field and during the drilling in Whataroa. I have learned so much 
from them in past few years.  
I would like to thank everyone who has been involved in the research, including Carolyn 
Boulton, Catriona Menzies and Virginia Toy for valuable discussions on the Alpine Fault 
Zone, working together over in New Zealand and for taking me around and about the West 
Coast for geology and tramping. Thanks to Dan Tatham for his help and feedback on the 
experimental work in this thesis. And Im grateful for the opportunity to have had time 
working at the NERC Ion Microprobe Facility with John Craven and Richard Hinton.  
Working in the department in Liverpool has been entertaining and interesting, with 
particular thanks to John Bedford and Gary Coughlan for putting up with my blathering at 
lunchtimes and general doings in the Rock Def Lab. Thanks to my office mates Joe Gardner, 
Joe Aslin and Teo Nagy for company throughout the PhD, particularly in the final stages. 
Finally, special thanks to my petit pois, Henri Leclre for experimental and body language 
expertise.  
The Whataroa River, Central Westland, New Zealand 
Contents 
Physicochemical evolution of an active plate boundary fault; the Alpine Fault, New 
3. Permeability and seismic velocity and their anisotropy across the Alpine Fault, New 
Zealand: an insight from laboratory measurements on core from the Deep Fault Drilling 
4. Cycles of fault zone sealing and restrengthening from the structure and chemistry of 
5. Occurrence and nature of pseudotachylyte and ultracomminution within the Alpine 
5.5.1. Melt behaviour and subsequent alteration and reworking of 
Preface 
i. Thesis structure 
Chapter 1 outlines the background, motivation, and aims of this thesis, Chapter 2 describes 
the techniques and methods utilised throughout the course of this project, Chapters 3, 4 
and 5 contain the original research that was undertaken for this thesis. Chapters 3, 4 and 5 
were written as stand-alone manuscripts and for this reason they will contain some 
repetitions of the key techniques and Alpine Fault related concepts that underpin this 
research. The content of these chapters is as follows:  
Chapter 3  presents permeability and seismic velocity measurements performed in 
multiple orientations on fault rock from core retrieved during the Deep Fault Drilling 
Project. These data are then analysed to assess the degree of anisotropy present in the 
Alpine Fault Zone and the microstructural controls on physical property variation are 
explored.  
Chapter 4  presents microstructural observations and geochemical analyses on the 
carbonate vein infill of the Alpine Fault alteration zone. The influence of fluid-rock 
interactions and sealing mechanisms are explored in light of these data sets.  
Chapter 5  presents microstructural observations and geochemical analyses on fault 
gouges and pseudotachylytes generated on the Alpine Fault. These observations are then 
interpreted in regard to melt and nanoparticle generation and mineral alteration. Two 
process based models are proposed and implications for seismic cycle processes are 
discussed.  
All references are consolidated into one list that can be found at the end of the thesis while 
supplementary materials, abbreviated as SM, follow each respective chapter or in the 
Digital Supplementary Material.  
A summary of the thesis and the main conclusions are provided in Chapter 6.  
ii. Status of manuscripts and co-author contribution 
Chapter 3: M.J. Allen1, D. Tatham1, D.R. Faulkner1, E. Mariani1, and C. Boulton12. 
Permeability and seismic velocity and their anisotropy across the Alpine Fault, New 
Zealand: an insight from laboratory measurements on core from the Deep Fault Drilling 
Project phase 1 (DFDP-1). Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth.  
Submitted: 25th April 2017 
Status: Published.  
Co-author contribution: 
Michael John Allen  Principal investigator, primary author, data collection, analysis and 
interpretation.  
Daniel Tatham  Data collection, manuscript review, discussion. 
Daniel Faulkner  Data interpretation, manuscript review, discussion. 
Elisabetta Mariani  Manuscript review, discussion. 
Carolyn Boulton  Manuscript review, discussion. 
Chapter 4: M.J. Allen1, E. Mariani1, D.R. Faulkner1, C. Boulton12 and C.D. Menzies3. 
Cycles of fault zone sealing and restrengthening from the structure and chemistry of vein 
networks in the Alpine Fault, New Zealand. 
Status: Near completion, to be submitted to the Journal of Structural Geology.  
Co-author contribution: 
Michael John Allen  Principal investigator, primary author, data collection, analysis and 
interpretation. 
Elisabetta Mariani  Data collection, analysis and interpretation, manuscript review, 
discussion. 
Daniel Faulkner  Manuscript review, discussion. 
Carolyn Boulton  Discussion. 
Catriona Menzies  Discussion.  
Chapter 5: M.J. Allen1, E. Mariani1, D.R. Faulkner1 and C. Boulton12. 
Occurrence and nature of pseudotachylyte and other seismic cycle microstructures within 
the Alpine Fault, New Zealand: insight from the Deep Fault Drilling Project. 
Status: In preparation.  
Co-author contribution: 
Michael John Allen  Principal investigator, primary author, data collection, analysis and 
interpretation. 
Elisabetta Mariani  Data analysis and interpretation, manuscript review, discussion. 
Daniel Faulkner  Manuscript review, discussion. 
Carolyn Boulton  Data collection, discussion. 
Co-author affiliations:  
1 Department of Earth Ocean and Ecological Sciences, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK. 
2 School of Geography, Environment, and Earth Sciences, Victoria University of Wellington, 
Wellington, New Zealand. 
3 Ocean and Earth Science, National Oceanography Centre Southampton, University of 
Southampton, UK. 
Publication co-authorship of thesis author  
Through involvement with the drilling operations and data collection of Deep Fault Drilling 
Project Phase 2 (DFDP-2) the thesis author is included as co-author in the following peer-
reviewed publications, with published manuscripts included in the thesis Digital 
Supplementary Material.  
R. Sutherland, J. Townend, V. Toy, P. Upton, J. Coussens, M.J. Allen, et al., (2017) Extreme 
hydrothermal conditions at an active plate-bounding fault. Nature, (546)7656, 137  140. 
V. Toy, R. Sutherland, J. Townend, M.J. Allen, et al., (2017) Bedrock Geology of DFDP-2B, 
Central Alpine Fault, New Zealand. New Zealand Journal of Geology and Geophysics. (60)4, 
497  518. 
J. Townend, R. Sutherland, V. Toy, M. Doan, B. Celerier, C. Massiot, J. Coussens, T. Jeppson, 
L. Janku-Capova, L. Remaud, P. Upton, D. Schmitt, P. Pezard, J. Williams, M.J. Allen, et al., 
(2017) Petrophysical, geochemical, and hydrologic evidence for extensive fracture 
mediated fluid and heat transport in the Alpine Faults hanging-wall damage zone. 
Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems. (18)12, 4709  4732. 
Included in the Digital Supplementary Material of this thesis are a selected number of 
conference posters and presentations the thesis author has delivered throughout the PhD 
studies. These include: posters concerning Chapter 3 of this thesis, presented at the Gordon 
Research Conference  Rock Deformation 2014 and the American Geophysical Union Fall 
Meeting 2015; poster concerning Chapter 4 of this thesis, presented at the American 
Geophysical Union Fall Meeting 2016; and an oral presentation slide show concerning 
Chapter 4 of this thesis presented at the Tectonic Studies Group  Volcanic and Magmatic 
Studies Group  British Geophysical Association Joint Assembly 2017.  
iii. Funding information  
This work was supported by the Natural Environment Research Council (NERC) grants 
NE/J024449/1: Evolution of the physical, geochemical and mechanical properties of the 
Alpine Fault Zone: A journey through an active plate boundary, to D.R. Faulkner and E. 
Mariani; and NE/H012486/1: The evolution of deformation mechanisms, physical 
conditions and physical properties in the seismogenic Alpine Fault zone: a pilot study, to D. 
Prior, E. Mariani and D.R. Faulkner.  
List of figures and tables 
SM  supplementary materials 
Figure 1.1  The Sibson  Scholz conceptual fault zone model.      28 
Figure 1.2  Conceptual model of fault zone structure.      33 
Figure 1.3  Satellite image of New Zealands South Island with the Alpine Fault.    37 
Figure 1.4  Schematic diagram of the fluid flow regime and isotherms in the Southern Alps.    
Figure 1.5  Generalized geology map of the South Island, New Zealand and a digital 
elevation model image of the central South Island.      42 
Figure 1.6  Schematic cross-section of an oblique thrust segment within the central section 
of the Alpine Fault.          43 
Figure 1.7  Photomicrographs and backscatter electron images of protolith lithologies; the 
Alpine Schist and a quartzofeldspathic ultramylonite.      44 
Figure 1.8  Flow chart of the alteration reactions occurring in the Alpine Fault alteration 
zone.            50 
Figure 1.9  Flow diagram of the factors influencing fault zone structure, composition and 
behaviour.           52 
Table 1.1  Mineralogies of the schist and mylonite protoliths for the Alpine Fault 
ultramylonites / cataclasites and gouges.       46 
Table 1.2  Description of lithological units recovered in the Deep Fault Drilling Project-1.  
Figure 2.1  Photographs of the Deep Fault Drilling Project Phase 1 and Phase 2 drill sites.  
Figure 2.2  The Revolution XT Ring Saw, used for sample preparation.    62 
Figure 2.3  Schematic cross-section and diagrams of the triaxial experimental apparatus.  
Figure 2.4  Photograph of the triaxial experimental apparatus.     67 
Figure 2.5  Schematic and photograph of the seismic sample assembly configuration with 
test specimen set-up.           69 
Figure 2.6  Illustration of the theory for the pulse transient decay method of measuring 
permeability.           71 
Figure 2.7  Illustration of a scanning electron microscope primary electron beam and how 
it interacts with the atoms within a sample.       75 
Figure 2.8  Illustration of a calcite rhomb with trigonal crystal system and illustration of 
electron beam scattering pattern generation.       78 
Figure 2.9  Photograph and schematic cross-section of the CAMSCAN X500 CrystalProbe 
field emission gun scanning electron microscope.      80 
Figure 2.10  Electron backscatter diffraction reference frame vs. scanning electron 
microscope reference frame conventions.       86 
Figure 2.11  Schematic plan view of the CAMECA IMS-1270 microprobe used in the trace 
element analyses.          90 
Figure 2.12  Schematic plan view of the CAMECA IMS-4f microprobe used in the stable 
isotope analyses.          91 
Figure 2.13  Schematic cross-section and plan view of the sample holders used in the 
microprobes.           92 
Table 2.1  Location information for the Deep Fault Drilling Project Phase 1 and 2.  
Table 2.2  Complete sampling summary for both phases of the Deep Fault Drilling Project.  
Sheet SM 2.1  Water pore fluid properties.       97 
Table SM 2.1  Water properties with temperature and varying pressure.   97 
Table SM 2.2  Water properties with temperature and varying pressure.   97 
Figure SM 2.1  Graph of viscosity variation with pressure.     97 
Figure SM 2.2  Graph of compressibility variation with pressure.    97 
Table SM 2.3  Calculated values for compressibility from pressure and density.                97 
Figure SM 2.3  Graph of density variation with pressure.     97 
Figure SM 2.4  Graph of volume variation with pressure.     97 
Sheet SM 2.2  Triaxial Apparatus Pressure system reservoirs volumes.     97 
Table SM 2.4  Three Way Valves / Two Pressure Connections information.   97 
Table SM 2.5  High Pressure Elbows information.      97 
Table SM 2.6  High Pressure Tees information.       97 
Table SM 2.7  Triaxial experimental apparatus pore pressure system pipe work volumes.  
Table SM 2.8  Seismic sample assembly pipe work volumes.     97 
Table SM 2.9  Honeywell Pressure Transducer information.    97 
Table SM 2.10  Triaxial apparatus pore fluid reservoir volume breakdown.   97 
Table SM 2.11  Circle to square and porous spacer volume breakdown.    98 
Sheet SM 2.3  Worksheet containing parameters for permeability calculations.   98 
Sheet SM 2.4  Worksheet for calculating permeability.      98 
Figure SM 2.5  Example of a batch file used to convert seismic velocity data.   99 
Table SM 2.12  University of Edinburgh NERC Ion Microprobe facility standards for 
carbonate trace element and 18O stable isotope analyses.                 100 
Figure 3.1  Map of the South Island, New Zealand with location of Alpine Fault, major 
towns and rivers marked, including a schematic borehole section of Deep Fault Drilling 
Project  1.                        105 
Figure 3.2  Photomicrographs of cataclastic microstructures from the Alpine Fault hanging 
wall and footwall.                      107 
Figure 3.3  The Revolution XT Ring Saw, used for sample preparation.                109 
Figure 3.4  Schematic illustrations and photographs of the triaxial experimental apparatus, 
including the Seismic sample assembly and sample configuration.                111 
Figure 3.5  Graphs showing permeability, P-wave velocity and S-wave velocity 
measurements as a function of effective pressure.                  114 
Figure 3.6  Graphs showing permeability and seismic velocity ranges for material from 
DFDP-1A and DFDP-1B with depth and field derived protolith lithologies.               116 
Figure 3.7  Graphs showing permeability and seismic velocity anisotropy with depth.    118 
Figure 3.8  Backscatter electron images of hanging wall and footwall cataclasites.           120 
Figure SM 3.1  Graphs showing the hysteresis effect observed in both the permeability 
and seismic wave velocity measurements.                   130 
Table SM 3.1  Seismic velocity values reported in Figures 3.5 and 3.6.                131 
Table SM 3.2  Permeability values reported in Figures 3.5 and 3.6.                131 
Table SM 3.3  Anisotropy values reported in Figures 3.7.                 131 
Video SM 3.1  nanoCT tomographic reconstruction of an Alpine Fault hanging wall 
cataclasite.                       131 
Video SM 3.2  nanoCT tomographic reconstruction of an Alpine Fault footwall cataclasite.  
Figure 4.1  Schematic borehole section showing the lithologies encountered during DFDP-
1A and 1B and sampling for Chapter 4.                    140 
Figure 4.2  Microstructural observations of a sheared calcite vein in a hanging wall 
ultramylonite (1B-99.3m-A  Unit 2), including; photomicrographs, cathodoluminescence 
images, electron backscatter diffraction analyses and geochemical measurements.  
Figure 4.3  Microstructural observations of cataclased calcite vein in a hanging wall 
ultramylonite (1B-99.3m-B  Unit 2), including; photomicrographs, cathodoluminescence 
images, electron backscatter diffraction analyses and geochemical measurements.  
Figure 4.4  Microstructural observations of an en-chelon calcite vein structure in a 
hanging wall cataclasite (1B-118.64m-A  Unit 3), including; photomicrographs, 
cathodoluminescence images, electron backscatter diffraction analyses and geochemical 
measurements.                      152 
Figure 4.5  Microstructural observations of an oscillatory chemically zoned calcite vein a 
hanging wall cataclasite (1B-118.64m-B  Unit 3), including; photomicrographs, 
cathodoluminescence images, electron backscatter diffraction analyses and geochemical 
measurements.                      155 
Figure 4.6  Microstructural observations of a multigenerational calcite clast in a principal 
slip zone gouge (1A-90.74m-A  Unit 5), including; photomicrographs, 
cathodoluminescence images, electron backscatter diffraction analyses and geochemical 
measurements.                      157 
Figure 4.7  Microstructural observations of a multigenerational calcite clast in a principal 
slip zone gouge (1A-142.2m  Unit 5), including; photomicrographs and 
cathodoluminescence images.                     158 
Figure 4.8  Graph showing carbonate trace element Mg and Fe concentrations in part per 
million with depth.                                    160 
Figure 4.9  Graph showing a principal component analysis plot of all trace element 
measurements, Fe, Mn, Mg, Sr, Ba and Ce, made in this study.                 173 
Figure 4.10  Summary schematic illustration of various vein calcite mineralisation 
mechanisms.                       176 
Table 4.1  Classification and description of calcite twin morphology variation with 
increasing temperature.                     165 
Figure SM 4.1  Microstructural observations of a multigenerational calcite vein in a 
hanging wall cataclasite (1A-89.4m  Unit 3), including; photomicrographs and 
cathodoluminescence images.                    182 
Figure SM 4.2  Microstructural observations of an ankerite vein in a hanging wall 
cataclasite (1A-111m-A  Unit 4), including; photomicrographs, cathodoluminescence 
images, electron backscatter diffraction and geochemical measurements.               183 
Figure SM 4.3  Microstructural observations of a multigenerational calcite vein in a 
hanging wall cataclasite (1A-111m-B  Unit 4), including; photomicrographs, 
cathodoluminescence and electron backscatter diffraction analyses.               184 
Figure SM 4.4  Microstructural observations of an en-chelon calcite vein structure in a 
hanging wall cataclasite (1B-118.64m-C  Unit 3), including; photomicrographs, 
cathodoluminescence images, electron backscatter diffraction analyses and geochemical 
measurements.                      185 
Figure SM 4.5  Microstructural observations of a calcite vein in a hanging wall cataclasite 
(1B-123.15m  Unit 3), including; photomicrographs, cathodoluminescence images, 
electron backscatter diffraction analyses and geochemical measurements.               187 
Figure SM 4.6  Microstructural observations of a multigenerational calcite clast in a 
principal slip zone gouge (1A-90.74m-B  Unit 5), including; photomicrographs, 
cathodoluminescence images and electron backscatter diffraction analyses.               188 
Figure SM 4.7  Microstructural observations of a calcite vein in a footwall cataclasite (1B-
133m  Unit 6), including; photomicrographs, cathodoluminescence images and 
geochemical measurements.                     189 
Figure SM 4.8  A Stereographic projection of calcite showing key planes and directions.  
Figure SM 4.9  Graph showing carbonate trace element Mg and Fe concentrations in part 
per million with depth. Symbol variation denotes separate generations.                191 
Figure SM 4.10  Photomicrographs and backscatter electron images of Alpine Fault 
garnets.                       192 
Table SM 4.1  Table detailing all the vein types observed and identified in this study.  
Workbook SM 4.1  Microsoft Excel workbook containing all carbonate trace element and 
18O measurement data and workings for Principal Component Analysis (PCA).               183 
Figure 5.1  Schematic borehole section showing the lithologies encountered during DFDP-
1A and 1B and sampling for Chapter 5.                    203 
Figure 5.2  Microstructural observations of melt segregation in a hanging wall 
ultramylonite pseudotachylyte (1B-99.3m-A  Unit 2), including; photomicrographs and 
backscatter electron image.                     208 
Figure 5.3  Microstructural observations of melt segregation and ultracataclasite-melt 
transition in a hanging wall ultramylonite pseudotachylyte (1B-99.3m-A  Unit 2), including; 
photomicrographs and backscatter electron image.                  209 
Figure 5.4  Microstructural observations of melt segregation in a hanging wall 
ultramylonite pseudotachylyte (1B-99.3m-A  Unit 2), including; photomicrographs, 
backscatter electron image and energy dispersive spectroscopy maps.                210 
Figure 5.5  Microstructural observations of melt segregation and calcite veining in a 
hanging wall ultramylonite pseudotachylyte (1B-99.3m-B  Unit 2), including; 
photomicrographs backscatter electron image and energy dispersive spectroscopy maps.   
Figure 5.6  Cathodoluminescence of amygdules and other mineralised voids in a hanging 
wall ultramylonite pseudotachylyte (1B-99.3m-B  Unit 2).                214 
Figure 5.7  Cathodoluminescence of calcite veining in a hanging wall ultramylonite 
pseudotachylyte (1B-99.3m-B  Unit 2).                    215 
Figure 5.8  Backscatter electron image and energy dispersive spectroscopy maps of calcite 
veining and pseudotachylyte matrix alteration in a hanging wall ultramylonite 
pseudotachylyte (1B-99.3m-B  Unit 2).                    216 
Figure 5.9  Microstructural observations of pseudotachylyte in a hanging wall 
ultramylonite (1A-68.36m  Unit 2), including; photomicrographs, quantitative evaluation 
of minerals by scanning electron microscopy map, backscatter electron images and energy 
dispersive spectroscopy maps.                    218 
Figure 5.10  Microstructural observations of fragmented pseudotachylyte in a hanging wall 
cataclasite (1B-118.64m  Unit 3), including; photomicrographs, backscatter electron 
images and energy dispersive spectroscopy maps.                  219 
Figure 5.11  Microstructural observations of irregularly shaped pseudotachylyte in a 
hanging wall cataclasite (1B-123.15m  Unit 3), including; photomicrographs, backscatter 
electron images and energy dispersive spectroscopy maps.                 221 
Figure 5.12  Photomicrographs of pseudotachylyte in a footwall cataclasite (1B-132.2m  
Unit 6).                        222 
Figure 5.13  Hand specimen images of the principal slip zones from DFDP-1 A/B with 
lithological key.                      224 
Figure 5.14  Microstructural observations of a feldspathic fragment in a principal slip zone 
gouge (1A-90.74m  Unit 5), including; photomicrographs, backscatter electron images and 
electron backscatter diffraction analyses.                   226 
Figure 5.15  Microstructural observations of a feldspathic fragments in a principal slip zone 
gouge (1B-143.85m  Unit 5), including; photomicrographs, backscatter electron and 
cathodoluminescence images.                                               227 
Figure 5.16  Microstructural observations of a polygonal clast in a principal slip zone gouge 
(1A-90.74m  Unit 5), including; photomicrographs, EBSD analyses and backscatter electron 
images.                       228 
Figure 5.17  Block diagram illustrating the proposed formation mechanism of the 
polygonal feldspathic clasts.                    238 
Figure 5.18  Schematic illustration of the Alpine Fault Zone in the upper crust, showing the 
fault rock lithological sequence, geothermal gradient and pseudotachylyte occurrence.  
Figure SM 5.1  Energy dispersive spectroscopy maps of clasts detailed in Figure 5.14.    244 
Figure SM 5.2  Energy dispersive spectroscopy maps of clasts detailed in Figure 5.16.    245 
Figure SM 5.3  Microstructural observations of pseudotachylyte matrix in a hanging wall 
metabasic mylonite (field sample), including; photomicrographs, backscatter electron 
images and energy dispersive spectroscopy maps.                  246 
Figure SM 5.4  Microstructural observations of secondary minerals associated with 
pseudotachylyte in a hanging wall metabasic mylonite (field sample), including; 
photomicrographs, backscatter electron images and energy dispersive spectroscopy maps.  
Figure SM 5.5  Microstructural observations of a calcite vein cross-cutting host-rock and 
pseudotachylyte margin, including; backscatter electron image and EBSD analyses.          248 
Figure SM 5.6  Microstructural observations of calcite veining and a quartz survivor clast 
within a pseudotachylytes matrix, including; backscatter electron image and EBSD analyses.
Figure SM 5.7  Image analyses of backscatter electron images of pseudotachylyte survivor 
clast grain shapes.                      252 
Figure SM 5.8  Image analyses of backscatter electron images of pseudotachylyte survivor 
clast grain shapes.                      253 
Table SM 5.1  Table detailing all the pseudotachylyte and gouge microstructures observed 
and identified in this study.                     243 
Table SM 5.2  Table detailing preliminary grain shape analyses of pseudotachylyte survivor 
clasts shown in Figures SM 5.5 and 5.6.                    251 
1. Introduction 
1.1. Shear zones in the crust  
Movement within the Earth, from global to microscopic scales, occurs along discrete zones 
of displacement which, depending on their setting in the crust, may be viscous or brittle  
viscous shear zones or brittle faults. The largest of these structures occur at the contacts 
between tectonic plate boundaries. Accommodating significant motion and very large 
displacements, these features extend far into the lithosphere, sometimes into the lower 
crust and mantle, and are the focus for either the burial or exhumation of vast amounts of 
geological material, processes that have great influence on climatic, oceanic and biological 
Earth systems [Snoke et al., 1998; Tikoff et al., 2001; Mooney, W. D., Beroza, G. C., and Kind, 
2009]. At shallow depths in the crust, between 2  15 km in a region known as the 
seismogenic zone, plate boundary faults often rupture periodically with large magnitude 
earthquakes. The rapid release of elastic strain energy from the fault during slip is radiated 
through the crust as earthquake waves causing massive shaking and represent significant 
economic and societal threat.  
1.2. Rheology of the crust 
Shear zones form a broad continuum of geological structures in which strain is localised in 
the Earth, transitioning from broad, distributed, viscous shear zones in the lower crust to 
brittle faults in the upper crust. This transition in rheological response to stress does not 
occur at a specific depth but rather occurs over a transitional zone within which brittle  
viscous processes coexist [Kohlstedt et al., 1995]. The onset of plasticity (or, conversely, 
cataclasis) is dependent on a number of factors such as the geothermal gradient, pressure 
(both overburden and fluid), the bulk strain rate and the stress field orientation [Simpson, 
1985]. Other factors include the mineral composition of the rock, grain size and pre-existing 
textures or fabrics. Fault structure and varied responses to deformation with depth have 
been studied in both ancient and modern shear zones using geological field techniques and 
remote sensing. The resulting conceptual model initially formed by Sibson [1977] and 
further developed by Scholz [1988] is widely known as the Sibson  Scholz fault zone 
model, illustrated in Figure 1.1.   
1.3. Deformation of the crust  
To a first approximation the variation in deformation mechanisms within the crust 
corresponds to variations in ambient conditions, particularly the systematic change of 
temperature, via the Earths geothermal gradient and pressure, via gravity, with crustal 
depth. These changes in ambient conditions alter the material properties of minerals and 
thus how they respond to an applied stress. A materials response to stress can be divided 
into the following behaviours: elastic; inelastic, which can be sub-divided into plastic and 
viscous; and brittle. Elastic behaviour is exhibited in materials that can undergo 
deformation that is instantaneously recoverable once stress is removed. Inelastic materials 
can behave viscously, when a material undergoes non-recoverable deformation in which 
the bulk strain rate is directly proportional to the applied stress; or plastically, in which a 
material will only deform once its yield stress has been exceeded. In inelastic materials 
permanent strain is accommodated without losing the ability to resist the load (or stress). 
Brittle behaviour is when a material undergoes non-recoverable deformation and its ability 
to resist load decreases with permanent strain [Blenkinsopp, 2000; Jaeger et al., 2007].  
Viscous behaviour is characterised by deformation mechanisms such as intracrystalline 
plasticity and solid-state diffusive mass transfer at grain boundaries. These occur at deeper 
crustal levels and are sensitive to strain rate but insensitive to pressure and strongly 
promoted by high temperatures. Brittle behaviour is characterised by deformation through 
cataclasis, involving the fracture and sliding of rock, and is supressed by pressure but 
insensitive to temperature, and so is favoured in the upper crust [Blenkinsopp, 2000; Jaeger 
et al., 2007]. 
Minerals at high temperatures and pressures deform by crystal-plasticity. This is facilitated 
by the movement of dislocations, and/or vacancies in a crystal lattice, through a crystal as it 
responds to an applied stress. This can occur by dislocation glide, in which slip occurs on the 
defect planes, or dislocation climb when defects move out of their respective 
crystallographic plane to overcome obstacles. The combination of dislocation glide and 
climb is known as dislocation creep. If dislocation glide operates without sufficient 
dislocation climb dislocations can tangle, causing work hardening of the crystal. This can 
result in brittle failure even at low strain rates. When climb occurs dislocations are able to 
move out of their slip planes and into subgrain boundaries, this can be similarly achieved by 
the movement of boundaries, which can collect isolated dislocations. Formation of subgrain 
boundaries and grain boundary migration are dynamic recrystallisation processes that aid 
the grain-size reduction of rock and allow deformation to continue resulting in the 
generation of mylonites [Blenkinsopp, 2000]. 
Diffusive mass transfer (DMT) processes, which involves the removal, transportation and 
deposition of material without distortion of the crystal lattice or fracturing, can occur by 
the diffusion of atoms in a solution at the grain boundaries of a crystal or the solid-state 
diffusion of atoms through the crystal lattice, i.e. Nabarro-Herring creep, or along the grain 
boundaries of a crystal, i.e. Coble Creep [Poirier, 1985; Wheeler, 1992; Blenkinsopp, 2000]. 
DMT is grain-size sensitive creep, driven by stress and/or chemical gradients around the 
crystal boundaries, induced by macroscopically homogenous differential load [Poirier, 1985; 
Wheeler, 1992]. It is the general consensus that, in nature, up to amphibolite facies 
conditions, the majority of DMT occurs via solution due to the large time-scales of solid-
state diffusion at these temperatures [Rutter, 1983], while above amphibolite facies 
conditions solid-state diffusion is favoured.  
Conditions within the upper crust are generally of low temperature and low lithostatic 
pressures, and facilitate the failure of rock through brittle fracture and cataclasis during 
frictional sliding at high strain rates. The fracture of material, particularly the generation of 
microfractures, was recognised and described by Griffith, [1921], after whom the Murrel 
Griffith  macroscopic failure criterion was formulated; 
2 = 4
 0 + 40
2                     (1) 
where 0 is the tensile strength of intact rock, 
  is the effective stress normal to the failure 
plane and  is the shear stress perpendicular to that plane [Price and Cosgrove, 1990]. 
Griffith, [1921] and Brace, [1960] formulated a scheme of fracture classification which 
relates the displacement of the wall rock relative to the fracture plane and edge and is 
divided into three end members as follows. Mode I  extensional fractures that form 
perpendicular to the least principal compressive stress 3
; at the fracture tips of these 
extensional fractures the stress field is perturbed, concentrating stress between 
neighbouring, en-chelon fractures and allowing them to link, forming through going 
structures which can accommodate shear. These are classified as Mode II (sliding) and 
Mode III (tear or shear) fractures. Fractures that exhibit both shear and extension modes of 
failure are classified as hybrid fractures [e.g., Ramsey and Chester, 2004]. Experimental 
evidence from Kohlstedt et al., [1995] suggests that, at confining pressures of 600  800 
MPa, Mode I fracturing is supressed and only Mode II and III shear fractures can form. 
However Scambelluri et al., [1998] reports evidence of Mode I fracturing in the eclogites of 
the Italian alps, suggesting formation at 1100  1300 MPa and 450  550C.  
When elastic strain is accumulated in a rock mass encompassing a fracture or fault plane, 
the stored energy can be released suddenly through slip upon the fault contact, causing 
sudden displacement of the rock mass and generating an earthquake. The timing, 
magnitude and severity of the earthquake depend on variety of factors including the 
frictional strength of a fracture surface. This process is described by Amontons Law where 
further deformation on a fracture can be accommodated by sliding on the cohesionless 
fracture plane; 
 = 
                      (2) 
where the shear stress, , is proportional to the normal stress, 
 , via the coefficient of 
friction, . This is the ratio of shear stress to normal stress required to: 1) initiate a sliding 
surface (internal friction); 2) initiate sliding on a pre-existing surface (static friction); and 3) 
maintain sliding on a surface (dynamic friction). The frictional behaviour of a surface and a 
systems overall stiffness governs whether a steady-state or a stick-slip form of sliding is 
observed [Leeman et al., 2015]. Stick-slip behaviour is characterised by a rapid transition 
from a static state to dynamic slip on a fracture plane; it is controlled by a systems 
compliance and can occur at rates of 0.1  2 ms-1, releasing a large amount of energy in the 
form of seismic waves. As well as compliance (or stiffness) the recurrence of stick-slip 
behaviour at all scales is influenced by the composition of material upon the fracture / fault 
plane and weakening processes that occur within the zone surrounding the fracture / fault, 
modifying compliance through time. The initiation and duration of shear on a fracture / 
fault is controlled by the velocity weakening or velocity strengthening behaviour of the rock 
[Dieterich, 1978, 1979; Ruina, 1983; Tse and Rice, 1986; Chester et al., 1993; Marone, 1998]. 
In velocity weakening materials the resistance to sliding decreases with increased velocity 
allowing the generation of earthquakes, while in velocity strengthening materials sliding 
upon fractures and faults is stable, aseismic and steady-state, a behaviour thought to be 
favoured at higher temperatures [Shimamoto, 1989; Chester et al., 1993]. Stick slip 
behaviour is also controlled by the rate of loading, with increased loading rates supressing 
stick slip and their accompanying stress drops [Karner and Marone, 2000]. 
1.4. Structure of brittle fault zones 
The generation of fractures and their coalescence into a localised plane is the precursor 
stage to the development of a fault. As a fault accommodates progressive deformation, via 
seismic slip or aseismic creep, its structure evolves, scaling with fault displacement and 
increasing in length and width. A conceptual model for fault zone structure divides the fault 
zone into two primary features; the fault core, where most strain is localised, and a damage 
zone comprised of distributed fractures and faulting, both of which are hosted within a 
country rock protolith, as shown in Figure 1.2 [Caine et al., 1996; Wibberley and 
Shimamoto, 2002; Faulkner et al., 2010]. The fault core typically contains at least one 
principal slip zone (PSZ) composed of fine-grained and/or amorphous material such as 
ultracomminuted gouges, cataclasites and pseudotachylytes [Caine et al., 1996; Chester and 
Chester, 1998; Sibson, 2003]. As most strain is localised in the fault core and this is also 
where the majority of coseismic displacement takes place, the material within the fault 
core is interpreted to be generated from grain-size reduction by fragmentation, abrasion 
and comminution with some translation and rotation [Chester and Logan, 1986; Chester 
and Chester, 1998; Sibson, 2003; Boulton et al., 2017b]. Fault cores are commonly nested 
within damage zones, regions of rock consisting of fractures and subsidiary faults over a 
wide range of length scales generated as a result of off-fault damage during seismicity. A 
generalised view of off-fault damage is illustrated in Figure 1.2, showing an increase in 
fracture density with proximity to the principal slip zone, where fracture density then 
dramatically decreases due to the fine-grained nature of the fault core, enhancing 
compaction and the closure of fractures. Fault zones, comprising a high strain fault core and 
lower strain damage zone vary in thickness between 10  103 m [Sibson, 1986; Caine et al., 
1996; Faulkner et al., 2010]. 
Figure 1.2  [A] A schematic illustration of a fault zone; a fault core (FC) typically composed 
of gouge, cataclasite and ultracataclasite, where most of the strain is localised and a 
damage zone (DZ) a distributed zone of fractures and subsidiary faulting on a range of 
length scales. [B] Some physical properties, particularly permeability, are related to fault 
structures such as fracture density, which increases exponentially from the host country rock 
protolith to the FC. Within the FC fractures are healed and sealed by compaction of 
ultracomminuted material and fluid-rock interaction. Modified after Faulkner et al., [2010].  
1.5. Fluids in the crust and how fault zones influence their behaviour 
Fluids are ubiquitous throughout the Earths crust and have a significant effect on rock 
strength, influencing deformation behaviour through mechanical and fluid-rock interaction 
processes. Fluids facilitate the transport of mass at a range of scales, via diffusive mass 
transfer [Rutter, 1983] and stress corrosion [Carter et al., 1990] processes, can reduce 
effective stresses [Murrell, 1963] and are able to cause hydrolytic weakening [Kronenberg 
and Tullis, 1984]. These processes aid the localisation of strain in the crust, and the 
generation of brittle and viscous shear zones depending on the crustal depth setting and 
geothermal gradient. Localised deformation on shear zones, coupled with bulk rock flow 
and the activity of pervasive and dynamic fluid-rock interactions, govern the rheology of the 
lithosphere [Carter et al., 1990].  
Sources of crustal fluids are determined by geological setting and are broadly defined as 
follows. Sedimentary fluids are derived from the burial of wet sediments where compaction 
expels the majority of pore fluids, with buried sediments typically retaining ~ 2 wt.% water, 
or <10 wt. % if the sediment is clay-rich [Yardley, 1997]. Metamorphic fluids may develop 
through mineral dewatering and devolatilisation during burial and heating, making 
available volatiles such as CO2, H2O, CH4 and others [Yardley, 1997]. During prograde 
metamorphism hydrous minerals may undergo transformations to denser, dehydrated 
minerals stable at higher temperatures and pressures. Up to greenschist facies 
metamorphism water originating from detrital clays are assimilated into newly formed 
hydrous phases such as chlorite and muscovite for example. With further metamorphism 
up to amphibolite facies, chlorite reacts to form biotite, garnet and amphibole, a reaction 
that produces excess fluids of up to 5 wt. % of the rock (H2O and CO2) [Walther and Orville, 
1982]. Magmatic fluids are generated through aqueous fractionation during melt 
crystallisation and are mobilised through hydrothermal fluid flow from the igneous bodies 
heat. These fluids generally contain higher concentrations of dissolved solids and have 
higher salinity than metamorphic fluids. Meteoric fluids, derived from surface precipitation, 
have been observed to penetrate as far down as the Brittle-Viscous Transition Zone [e.g. 
Jenkin et al., 1994; Upton et al., 1995; Menzies et al., 2014]. Their movement is driven by 
the topographic and thermal structure of the crust, that facilitate descent into the crust by 
flow up temperature gradients, gain heat and then ascend once fluids have become 
sufficiently buoyant [Koons and Craw, 1991].  
As temperatures and confining pressures increase with depth, compaction and 
cementation reduce permeability and limit fluid mobility, potentially allowing fluid 
pressures to reach or exceed lithostatic pressures in certain circumstances. The movement 
of fluid in the crust can be described by two end-member states, pervasive and focussed, 
with commonly observed overlap between these two states [Oliver, 1996]. As described by 
Oliver [1996], focussed fluid flow involves the passage of fluid through high-permeability 
conduits that may include: shear zones, lithological contacts, boudin necks and permeable 
lithologies. Pervasive flow involves the distributed passage of fluids around individual 
mineral grains and may be initiated by the creation of regions of low fluid pressure by 
means of focussed flow for example, resulting in pervasive flow characterising volumes of 
low pressure.  
Darcys law describes the pervasive flow of fluids in a porous permeable material; 
 = 
[ + 
)                     (3) 
where qx is the magnitude of the fluid flux, k is the intrinsic permeability of the medium,  is 
the fluid viscosity,  is the fluid pressure,  is fluid density,  is the gravitational 
acceleration and  is the elevation above a defined point. The energy gradient for fluid flow 
along a pathway  is defined through ( + )/ [Ague, 2003]. A fluid flux can be 
increased by decreasing the fluid viscosity , increasing the intrinsic permeability k or by 
increasing the fluid pressure gradient.  
Permeability of rock varies considerably, with gravel and highly fractured rocks measuring 
at ~ 10-7 m2 to crystalline igneous and metamorphic rocks yielding permeabilities as low as 
~10-22 m2 [Bear, 1972; Ague, 2003]. These latter values can be considered the intact, matrix 
permeabilities of a rock and can be drastically increased as a function of the concentration, 
orientation and connectivity of fractures and faults. 
The dynamic nature of fault zones means that faults, though occupying a relatively small 
volume of the lithosphere, can act as conduits or barriers to fluid flow, influencing the 
distribution of heat and chemical changes depending on their tectonic setting, maturity and 
composition [Chester and Logan, 1986; Caine et al., 1996; Faulkner et al., 2010]. Where 
faults act as favourable conduits to fluid flow they are sites of enhanced dissolution and 
precipitation. The permeability of a fault zone is thought to be dynamic, evolving from 
highly permeable immediately post-earthquake rupture, due to seismically induced fracture 
damage, to becoming effectively sealed by the precipitation of minerals in pore spaces and 
fractures and the compaction of clay-rich, ultrafine-grained fault gouges [Blanpied et al., 
1992; Gratier et al., 2002]. 
1.6. The Alpine Fault, New Zealand 
The Alpine Fault Zone (AFZ), bounding the western edge of the Southern Alps on New 
Zealands South Island from Arthurs Pass to Milford Sound, accommodates over 70 % of 
the relative motion between the colliding Australian and Pacific Plates, see Figure 1.3 
[Norris and Toy, 2014]. The ramping of the Pacific plate over the Australian plate is 
accommodated through a transpressional dextral-reverse movement, offsetting basement 
rocks laterally by ~470 km, with Quaternary horizontal displacement rates estimated at 2  
27 mm yr-1 [Norris and Cooper, 2001; Lamb et al., 2015]. The mean plane of the fault dips at 
40  60 southeast to a depth of 15 km, at which it begins to shallow downwards into a 
lower crustal detachment at 35 km depth [Norris and Cooper, 2007; Stern et al., 2007; 
Sutherland et al., 2012]. Uplift across the fault is rapid, exhuming crustal rocks from depths 
of 20 to 30 km at a rate of ~6  9 mm yr-1 [Little et al., 2002b]. Accompanying this rapid 
uplift is the advection of the regional geothermal gradient. Quartz fluid inclusion 
microthermometry places the gradient at 40 C/km [Toy et al., 2010], while titanium 
thermobarometry of quartz shows a gradient of 45 C/km [Cross et al., 2015] and recent 
shallow borehole measurements report a gradients of 62.6  2.1 and 125  55 C/km 
attributed to rapid uplift on the fault and the topographically-driven movement of fluids 
concentrating heat in valleys [Sutherland et al., 2012, 2017].  
The Alpine Fault originated during the Oligocene  Miocene as a broad zone of dextral 
crustal shearing <100 km wide, [Carter and Norris, 1976; Cooper et al., 1987; Sutherland, 
1999a; Little and Mortimer, 2001] with an additional convergent component relative to the 
Pacific  Australian plate motions [Sutherland, 1995; Walcott, 1998; Cande and Stock, 
2004]. Deformation was progressively localised on the current fault trace forming a linear 
feature along the South Island West Coast. Much of the deformation is localised in a clay-
rich gouge zone, approximately 25 cm thick, known as the Principal Slip Zone (PSZ), this 
zone is nested within a cataclasite zone ranging from 10  50 m thick which transitions into  
Figure 1.3  Satellite image of New Zealands South Island with the Alpine Fault, image from 
Google. Red / yellow point marks the region of study in this thesis.   
a mylonitic rock sequence of approximately 1  1.5 km thickness that has been exhumed 
from <35 km depth in the last 5  8 Ma [Norris and Cooper, 2007; Toy et al., 2008]. This 
viscous to brittle fault rock sequence is sourced from non-mylonitised amphibolite facies 
schist protoliths that are predominantly quartzofeldspathic, with dykes of metabasic 
composition [Holm et al., 1989; Grapes and Watanabe, 1992; Little et al., 2002a]. 
1.6.1. Historic and paleoseismicity 
Palaeoseismic evidence has indicated that the Alpine Fault has had numerous geologically 
recent rupture episodes at 1717  25, 1630  25 and 1460  25 A.D., estimated to have 
moment magnitudes of 7.9  0.3, 7.6  0.3, and 7.9  0.4, respectively [Wells et al., 1999; 
Rhoades and Van Dissen, 2003; Langridge et al., 2012], with these ruptures propagating 
along nearly the entire ~600 km length of the fault. Recent seismicity patterns, geodetic 
strain records, and inferred high pore fluid pressures from regional seismic P- and S-wave 
velocity ratios and gravity surveys deep in the fault zone, suggest that the fault is locked 
above 6  12 km depth and that it is in the late stages of its earthquake cycle [Eberhart
Phillips, 1995; Eberhart-Phillips and Bannister, 2002; Sutherland et al., 2007; De Pascale and 
Langridge, 2012; Lamb and Smith, 2013]. There has been no evidence for aseismic creep on 
the fault, though these observations are limited to the past 50 years. The global significance 
of the Alpine Fault in the study of major fault zones and crustal processes is considerable; 
the opportunity to study a locked continental plate boundary fault thought to be late in the 
earthquake cycle will yield insight into the pre-rupture conditions of a major fault and the 
nature of the interseismic physico-chemical processes that have taken place. It is to be 
noted that rock retrieved from the surface or shallow depths will yield incomplete 
information on the locked sections of the fault at depth, where elastic strain energy is 
stored and earthquake nucleation occurs.  
1.6.2. Fluids in the Southern Alps 
The origin, behaviour and compositions of fluids around the Alpine Fault, and the Southern 
Alps as a whole, have been the focus of many studies, covering warm springs [Barnes et al., 
1978; Allis and Shi, 1995; Menzies et al., 2014, 2016], hydrothermally altered rock and vein 
assemblages [Jenkin et al., 1994; Vry et al., 2001], borehole fluid temperature observations 
[Sutherland et al., 2012, 2017] as well as geophysical imaging  
Figure 1.4  Schematic of the fluid flow regime in the Southern Alps, adapted from Menzies 
et al., [2014] with isotherms adapted from Toy et al., [2010]. Meteoric water permeates 
through the Alpine Fault hanging wall and is focused up along the fault to the surface as hot 
springs. A small component also reaches the Brittle  Viscous Transition and is incorporated 
into vein-infill. Metamorphic and mantle derived fluid also have a small input into the 
overall fluid composition.  
[Stern et al., 2001; Wannamaker et al., 2002]. These studies indicate the presence of an 
extensive, advective hydrothermal system at depth, east of the Alpine Fault beneath the 
Southern Alps [Koons et al., 1998; Cox et al., 2015; Menzies et al., 2016]. This hydrothermal 
system is driven by a variety of factors including: abundant rainfall, elevated isotherms and 
steep topography [Barnes et al., 1978; Koons and Craw, 1991; Sutherland et al., 2017], a 
small component of metamorphic overpressured fluids [Vry et al., 2001; Craw and 
Campbell, 2004; Menzies et al., 2016] and fluctuations in permeability at the Brittle  
Viscous Transition [Upton et al., 1995; Vry et al., 2010; Menzies et al., 2014]. A simplified 
schematic of the fluid behaviour in the Southern Alps is presented in Figure 1.4.  
Thermal springs, a result of the elevated geotherm, are common in the fault hanging wall, 
extending from 1  20 km south east of the Alpine Fault [Allis et al., 1979; Koons, 1987; Allis 
and Shi, 1995; Beavan et al., 2010]. The influence of seismicity on fluid flow on the fault, 
and across the Southern Alps, appears substantial, with work by Cox et al., [2015] showing 
that large distal earthquakes across the South Island of New Zealand, including a Mw 7.8 in 
south-western Fiordland in 2009 and a Mw 7.1 in eastern Canterbury in 2010, caused 
variation in temperature and fluid chemistry in a monitored spring in the western Southern 
Alps, at a distance of 350 km and 180 km respectively.  
The fluids within the Southern Alps are dominantly derived from meteoric waters, with a 
small component of metamorphic fluid [Vry et al., 2001; Craw and Campbell, 2004; Menzies 
et al., 2016]. Magmatic fluids do not feature in the Alpine Fault zone as there have been no 
large scale igneous intrusions into the hanging wall Alpine Schists and there are no known 
magma repositories at depth beneath the fault.  
1.6.3. The Deep Fault Drilling Project 
In order to study the Alpine Fault at depth at in situ conditions away from surface 
weathering and processes, and to provide a continuous transect across the Alpine Fault 
rock sequence, the Deep Fault Drilling Project (DFDP) was initiated. DFDP is an ongoing 
international effort, being undertaken in order to provide insight into the current geological 
and seismological state of the Alpine Fault. DFDP has currently performed two phases of 
drilling operations, sampling the Alpine Fault lithologies including the principal slip zone of 
the fault, performing down-hole observations and installing sensors for long term in situ 
monitoring. Both phases of drilling took place in the central section of the Alpine Fault with 
the first, DFDP-1, taking place at Gaunt Creek, a tributary to the Wanganui River, and the 
second, DFDP-2, taking place in the Whataroa River valley (see Figure 1.5B). An account of 
the drilling operations and findings of DFDP is detailed in Section 2.2 of this thesis.  
1.6.4. The lithologies of the Alpine Fault and the nature of the alteration zone 
The sequence of lithologies present in the Alpine Fault Zone can be divided into five main 
groups; protoliths, mylonites, cataclasites, ultracomminuted gouges and pseudotachylytes. 
This section provides a brief review of these lithologies based on previous work in the 
region. Figure 1.5A shows the broad geological terranes present in the South Island, New 
Zealand and Figure 1.5B showing the main focus of this thesis, the central section of the 
Alpine Fault. A schematic cross-section of the Alpine Fault lithological sequence is also 
illustrated in Figure 1.6 after Norris and Cooper, [2007].  
1.6.4.1. Protoliths  
The basement terranes of New Zealand can be divided into two main groups, the Western 
Province and the Eastern Province, broadly separated by the Alpine Fault trace across the 
South Islands west coast, as shown in Figure 1.5 [Sutherland, 1999b]. Within the central 
section of the Alpine fault, the area that is the focus of this thesis, the fault is bounded to 
the southeast by metamorphosed metasediments and to the northwest by a number of 
formations belonging to the Western Province, including: Palaeozoic granites and gneisses, 
metasediments and Cretaceous granitoids [Muir et al., 1998; Toy, 2007].  
The predominant lithology in the Eastern Province group is the Haast schists, derived from 
a variety of sediments including volcanoclastic greywacke and argillite, transitioning into 
pelitic schists, metacherts and mafic metavolcanics [Mortimer and Roser, 1992]. These rock 
types were metamorphosed and deformed during the Mesozoic, forming the Otago Schist 
and Alpine Schist subgroups within the Haast Schist [Mortimer, 2000], with the Alpine 
Schists as the main protolith lithology of fault lithologies in the central Alpine Fault. The 
Alpine Schists are quartzofeldspathic schists grading from greenschist facies (quartz  albite 
 muscovite  chlorite) to amphibolite facies (biotite  albite  oligoclase  garnet) with 
proximity to the fault, with estimated burial depths of ~40 km in the Mesozoic  
Figure 1.5  [A] Generalized geology map of South Island, New Zealand with the main 
features of the Australian  Pacific plate boundary, including Alpine Fault, Puysegur trench, 
and Hikurangi trough, adapted from Norris and Cooper, [2003]. Arrows show the interplate 
velocity vector of the South Island and its components parallel and perpendicular to the 
Alpine Fault (Nuvel 1A; DeMets et al., [1994]). Shading, light grey >800 m and dark grey 
>1800 m elevation. [B] A digital elevation model (DEM) image of the central South Island 
highlighted in (A) [Barth et al., 2013]. The location of the Alpine Fault is shown with 
locations of the DFDP-1 and DFDP-2 drill sites and sites where field specimens were 
collected are marked. [C] Metamorphic facies map after [Menzies et al., 2014].  
Figure 1.6  Schematic cross-section of an oblique thrust segment within the central section 
of the Alpine Fault, section line highlighted in Figure 1.5B, adapted from Norris and Cooper, 
[2007].  
Figure 1.7  [A and B] Quartzofeldspathic Alpine Schist (QF-AS), the protolith for many of 
the mylonite sequence rock in the Alpine Fault hanging wall. [C and D] Quartzofeldspathic 
ultramylonite (QF-UM) derived from the QF-AS, one of the most common mylonite sequence 
rocks in the Alpine Fault hanging wall.   
[Grapes and Watanabe, 1992]. Intercalated within the Alpine Schist are bands of metabasic 
and metachert lithologies forming limited horizons within the hanging wall sequence. 
Figure 1.7 shows the characteristic textures and microstructures of the Alpine Schist and 
Table 1.1 details the typical mineralogies of the hanging wall protolith schists.  
1.6.4.2. Mylonites  
Mylonites are foliated rocks that have undergone considerable deformation within high 
strain zones at conditions favourable for the viscous deformation of their constituent 
minerals. Viscous deformation may result in grain size reduction (through dynamic 
recrystallisation during dislocation creep, for example) and the generation of strong, planar 
fabrics which, if present, wrap around porphyroclasts of resistant minerals, usually garnets 
and feldspars. The mylonite classification used most widely for the Alpine Fault is based on 
percentage of matrix material compared to porphyroclasts [Sibson, 1977; Schmid and 
Handy, 1991; Scholz, 2002], in which rocks with 10  50 % matrix are classified as 
protomylonites; those with 50  90 % matrix as mylonites and those over 90 % as 
ultramylonites. Pre-mylonitic schist structures are retained in protomylonites and are not 
preserved in mylonites and ultramylonites.  
The hanging wall mylonites derived from the Alpine Schist can be divided into four, broad 
sub zones transitioning from the non-mylonitic schist to protomylonites, mylonites and 
ultramylonites, as established by Norris and Cooper, [2003]. These mylonites have been 
studied extensively since their first description by Reed, [1964] and comprise a 1  1.5 km 
thick zone to the southeast of the fault, in which the ultramylonites compose ~150 m thick 
zone in closest proximity to the fault, with the upper ~500  600 m comprised of 
progressively less deformed mylonites to protomylonites that preserve Mesozoic fabrics 
[Little et al., 2002a, 2016; Norris and Cooper, 2007; Toy et al., 2012, 2013]. 
These mylonites are again similarly intercalated with metabasic, metachert and metapelitic 
lithologies though are dominantly quartzofeldspathic in composition. An example of a 
quartzofeldspathic mylonite is shown in Figure 1.7C and Table 1.1 details the typical 
mineralogies of the various hanging wall mylonite sequence lithologies. 
Alpine Schist     Mylonites   
Lithology Mineralogy   Lithology Mineralogy 
Quartzofeldspathic 
schist  
[Campbell, 2002] 
Qz + Pl + Ms + Grt + Bt + 
Ilm + Ap  Chl  Ep  Gr 
 Rt  Zrn 
Quartzofeldspathic 
mylonite 
[Toy, 2007] 
Qz + Pl + Bt  Ms  Gr  
Chl  Ep  Cal  Spn  Ap 
 sulfides  Gr  Tur  Zrn 
Metabasic schist 
[Campbell, 2002] 
Hbl + Pl + Bt + Grt + Ttn 
+ Czo + Ap + Opq  Qz  
Ms  sulphides  
Metabasic 
mylonite  
[Prior, 1988] 
Hbl + Pl + Qz + Ilm + Ttn  
Grs Grt  Ep  Cal  Ank  
Chl  Bt if transitional to 
pelite 
Metachert schist 
[Cooper, 1970] 
Qz + Grt (often Sps)  
Ab  Ms  Bt  Rt  Ttn 
 Chl  Ap  Mag  Opq  
Metachert 
mylonite  
[Prior, 1988] 
Qz  Ms  Sps Grt  Pl  
Bt  Ilm 
Table 1.1  Mineralogies of the schist and mylonite protoliths for the Alpine Fault 
ultramylonites / cataclasites and gouges analysed in this thesis [Cooper, 1970; Prior, 1988; 
Campbell, 2002; Toy, 2007].  
1.6.4.3. Pseudotachylytes 
Pseudotachylytes, a fine-grained, cohesive, sometimes glassy but often devitrified, fault 
rock that generally occurs as veins, are thought to be derived from frictional heating along 
fault planes producing melt [Magloughlin and Spray, 1992]. Numerous studies have been 
undertaken on Alpine Fault pseudotachylytes, first described by Reed, [1964] with further, 
more recent work by Sibson et al., [1981] and Toy et al., [2011] documenting their 
occurrence across the entire Alpine Fault rock sequence. A more comprehensive 
description on these features and their occurrence in the study area can be found in 
Chapter 5 of this thesis.  
1.6.4.4. Cataclasites and gouges  
Fault rocks derived from brittle processes can be divided into incohesive and cohesive sub-
groups. Incohesive brittle fault rocks can be further subdivided into incohesive breccias, 
incohesive cataclasites and fault gouge with breccias containing >30 % visible fragments of 
>2 mm diameter; cataclasites containing 50  90 % matrix of <0.1 mm diameter and fault 
gouge containing <30 % visible fragments of >2 mm diameter [Woodcock and Mort, 2008]. 
These incohesive brittle fault rocks are commonly associated with shallow crustal levels, 
while material generated at greater depths becomes increasingly cohesive. Cohesive brittle 
fault rocks are subdivided into cohesive breccias, cohesive cataclasites and 
pseudotachylytes. This cohesion is due to the cementation of brittle fault rocks by 
precipitation of secondary minerals such as calcite, quartz, epidote and chlorite, and, if fluid 
infiltration is limited and the precipitating solution is highly alkaline, K-feldspar may form 
[Wintsch, 1975; Wintsch et al., 1995; Passchier and Trouw, 2005].  
Cataclastic rocks within the Alpine Fault Zone occur throughout the mylonites as breaks in 
the fault rock sequence by subsidiary faulting [Reed, 1964; Sibson et al., 1981]. The 
transition from mylonitic to cataclastic rocks was further investigated by White and White, 
[1983] who attributed the generation of these features to the cyclic operation of brittle and 
viscous mechanisms with accompanying pervasive retrogressive alteration. Within the 
central Alpine Fault Zone Cooper and Norris, [1994] described the cataclasites immediately 
above the Alpine Fault at Gaunt Creek as being composed of a sequence of ultracataclasite, 
cataclastic mylonite and pseudotachylyte transitioning into intact mylonite. This sequence 
comprises the lithologies sampled during the Deep Fault Drilling Project Phase 1 (DFDP-1) 
and is the focus of this study; Table 1.2 outlines the main lithologies sampled during DFDP-1 
and the nomenclature that will be used throughout the thesis.  
1.6.4.5. Retrogression and alteration within the Alpine Fault cataclasites 
In the hanging wall of the Alpine Fault, overprinting the fault core and the transition into 
the damage zone, is a distinct ~20 to 30 m thick zone of hydrothermally altered rock, 
containing elevated concentrations of hydrous alteration minerals and cements 
(phyllosillicates and carbonates) [Sutherland et al., 2012; Townend et al., 2013; Toy et al., 
2015b; Boulton et al., 2017a].  
This alteration takes the form of retrograde mineral assemblages as first outlined by Warr 
and Cox, [2001] and further explored by Toy et al., [2015] and Boulton et al., [2017a]. This 
alteration is understood to occur during exhumation from sub-greenschist facies 
conditions, with the first occurrence of retrogressed minerals within the ultramylonites ~ 30 
m above the principal slip zone (PSZ). The extent of alteration increases with proximity to 
the PSZ within hanging wall cataclasites. Warr and Cox, [2001] identified two stages of 
chemical alteration. The first stage occurs at conditions near or at the Brittle  Viscous 
Transition in which non-oxidised metasomatic alteration reactions at <400 C replace 
feldspars with muscovite, sericite or sausserite, while biotite (phlogopite), epidote and 
actinolite react to form chlorite (clinochlore) via hydrous chloritization, see Figure 1.8C. A 
second stage of alteration occurs at temperatures of <120 C. This, depending on redox 
conditions, alters primary minerals such as chlorite, albite / feldspar and muscovite to 
kaolinite, smectite and/or pyrite or smectite, kaolinite, Fe-hydroxide (goethite) and/or 
carbonate (see Figure 1.8A and B) [Warr and Cox, 2001; Boulton et al., 2017a]. Boulton et 
al., [2017a] identified the presence of low temperature clay minerals montmorillonite and 
kaolinite in the PSZ gouges of the fault, and inferred that the gouges are the most altered 
rock within the fault core. This degree of alteration found in the fault core has been 
attributed to cyclical, seismically induced fracture damage and comminution facilitating the 
infiltration of fluids into the fault, promoting fluid-rock interaction, resulting in carbonate 
and phyllosilicate precipitation and the gradual reduction of fault porosity and permeability 
[Boulton et al., 2017a].  
Lithologic 
Name Description Dominant Microstructures 
Grain 
Mineralogy 
Unit 1 
Grey and dark 
green 
ultramylonites 
Planar-foliated 
mylonite to 
ultramylonite 
Segregations of Qz + Pl and 
Ms + Bt  Ep  Chl with 
locally abundant Pl-augen 
trains, mm-spaced 
continuous foliation 
>0.03  
Qz + Pl + Bt + 
Ms  Cal  
Amp  Ep  
Chl  Ilm  
Unit 2 
Brown-green-
black 
ultramylonites 
Planar-foliated 
ultramylonite 
Indistinct mm-spaced 
foliation defined by opaque 
seams and parallel mica 
grains which form a locally 
dilatant disjunctive cleavage; 
Pl-augen common 
<0.05  
Qz + Pl + Bt + 
Ms  Chl  Cal 
 Ep  Amp  
Ilm  Ttn 
Unit 3 
Upper 
unfoliated 
cataclasites 
Unfoliated 
cataclasites derived 
from Units 1 and 2 
Angular clasts of Units 1 and 
2 in a variably calcite-
cemented ultrafine-grained 
matrix (<0.1 mm grains) 
<0.01  
clasts 
Qz + Pl + Bt + 
Ms  Chl  Cal 
 Ep  Amp  
Ilm  Ttn 
Unit 4 
Upper foliated 
cataclasites 
Foliated 
cataclasites derived 
from Units 1-3 
Foliation defined by micro-
shears, anastomosing seams 
of opaques, and/or locally 
aligned phyllosilicates; e-
twinned veins and clasts of 
calcite 
<0.01  
Qz + Pl + Ms + 
Chl  Cal  Bt 
 Ep  Amp  
Ilm  Ttn 
Unit 5 Gouges 
Cemented to 
uncemented 
gouges with 
variable mineralogy 
Predominantly random 
fabric with rare locally 
aligned phyllosilicates; e-
twinned calcite clasts; gouge 
and cataclasite clasts 
common 
<0.001 
 <0.01 
Qz + Pl + Ms + 
Chl + Cal  
Ksp  
Sme(Mnt)  
Kln  Gth  
Mn  Ilm  
Ttn  Zrn  Ap 
Unit 6 
Lower 
cataclasites  
 divided into 4 
subunits 
6a- white to cream-
colored ccl with 
granitoid and 
gneissic clasts; 6b- 
greenish grey 
foliated 
protocataclasite; 
6c- greenish grey to 
black 
ultracataclasite to 
gouge with gneiss, 
Qz-Pl- Fsp, and rare 
mylonite clasts; 6d- 
a mixture of 6a - 6c. 
6a - random fabric, granitoid 
clasts contain myrmekite 
and antiperthite textures, 
gneissic clasts contain ribbon 
Qz; 6b - foliations comprise 
muscovite and chlorite; 6c - 
random fabric; 6d - 
interlayered mixture of 6a -
6c containing numerous 
micro to mesoscale faults 
<<0.03 
 >>0.1 
Qz + Ksp + Pl 
+ Ms  Bt  
Chl  Zrn  Ap 
 Ttn 
Unit 7 Breccias 
Protocataclasite to 
breccia composed 
of black mylonite-
gneiss clasts 
Remnant mylonitic-gneissic 
foliation with Pl-augen or Qz 
segregations; phyllosilicate 
foliations wrap 
porphyroclasts 
Qz + Ksp + Pl 
+ Ms + Bt + 
Chl + Ep + Ap 
+ Ttn + Gr 
Unit 8 Gravels 
Quaternary gravels 
composed primarily 
of Alpine Schist 
clasts 
Locally imbricated 
0.25  
Qz + Pl + Bt + 
Ms  Cal  
Amp  Ep  
Chl  Ilm  
Table 1.2  Description of the lithological units recovered in DFDP-1, modified from Toy et 
al., [2015] and Boulton et al., [2017].   
Figure 1.8  Retrogressive reactions occurring in the Alpine Fault alteration zone, after 
Boulton et al., [2017]. As the Alpine Fault cataclasites and gouges have been exhumed from 
subgreenschist facies conditions they have undergone multiple phases of alteration. Primary 
nonoxidized and oxidized alteration reactions are outlined, after Chamberlain et al., [1999] 
and Warr and Cox, [2001].  
1.7. Thesis aims  
The behaviour and nature of faults is a product of a variety of interrelated factors that can 
be divided into three main aspects: fault structure, fluid flow and mechanics, with a number 
of sub-factors, all feeding into the umbrella term of fault zone composition [Faulkner et 
al., 2010] (Figure 1.9). The research reported in this thesis is focused on fluid-rock 
interactions and fluid flow on faults and on related sub-topics of permeability, alteration 
reactions and mode of failure. Insight on such factors was gained through investigation of 
the physicochemical processes that occur within rock from core of the Alpine Fault Zone, 
with the following aims: 
1  To constrain the interseismic permeability and seismic velocities of the Alpine Fault core 
experimentally, and investigate the extent and causes of physical property anisotropy in 
heavily cataclased and altered fault rock, exploring potential implications on fault zone 
processes.  
2  To investigate the sealing behaviour of fracture damage generated during seismicity 
within the Alpine Fault core by constraining fracture generation mechanisms, fluid-rock 
interactions and mineral precipitation processes through quantitative microstructural and 
fine-scale, spatially resolved, geochemical analyses. 
3  To investigate the occurrences of frictional melt and nanoparticulates within the Alpine 
Fault fault core / alteration zone by examining their setting, extent of cataclastic reworking, 
chemical alteration and/or preservation through the many seismic cycles of the Alpine 
Fault.  
Figure 1.9  Flow diagram showing the inter-relationships among the three main aspects of 
structure, mechanics and fluid flow. Mode of failure refers to whether or not seismic slip 
occurs or not. The focus of this thesis is in fluid flow and its related sub-topics of 
permeability, reaction alteration and mode of failure. Diagram after Faulkner et al., [2010].  
2. Methods 
2.1. Introduction 
This chapter details all techniques and methods utilised during the course of this project. 
These include the drilling operations of the Alpine Fault Deep Drilling Project Phase 1 and 
Phase 2 (DFDP-1 and DFDP-2); sample preparation techniques for fragile drill core material; 
the experimental apparatus and procedures used for the measurement of fault rock 
physical properties; and the analytical equipment and methods used for microstructural 
and geochemical investigations of deformation microstructures.  
All drilling operations aiming to sample the Alpine Fault Zone (AFZ) took place in Westland, 
South Island, New Zealand through the combined efforts of a multinational team of 
scientists, see Figure 2.1. Seismic velocity and permeability measurements were 
undertaken using a triaxial high pressure apparatus and ultrasonic seismic sample assembly 
in the Rock Deformation Laboratory, at the University of Liverpool. All microstructural 
observations were performed in the Electron Microscopy Laboratory (Liverpool Earth 
Sciences) using a Camscan X500 CrystalProbe and Philips XL30 Scanning Electron 
Microscopes (SEM) for Electron Backscatter Diffraction (EBSD) and Energy Dispersive 
Spectroscopy (EDS). Optical Cathodoluminescence (CL) analyses were undertaken at the 
University of Liverpools Central Teaching Laboratory. Secondary Ion Mass Spectroscopy 
(SIMS) was performed at the University of Edinburghs NERC Ion Micro-Probe Facility using 
a Cameca IMS-4f for trace element analyses and a Cameca IMS-1270 for stable isotope 
analyses. X-ray Computed Tomography (CT) was performed at the Delft University of 
Technology, Netherlands by Ludmila Adams and Auke Baarnhorn (University of Auckland, 
New Zealand and Delft University of Technology). Quantitative evaluation of minerals by 
scanning electron microscopy (QEMSCAN) analyses were performed at the Intellection Pty 
Ltd, Milton, Australia by Alan Butcher (Intellection Pty Ltd). All mineral abbreviations used 
in this thesis are after Whitney and Evans, [2010].  
2.2. Drilling operations 
The only way to determine ambient conditions directly, measure physical and chemical 
properties in situ and collect geological material away from surface weathering effects is  
Figure 2.1  [A] Drill site of DFDP-1 at Gaunt Creek, a tributary to the Wanganui River, 
Westland, South Island, New Zealand, photo courtesy of E. Mariani. [B] Drill site of DFDP-2 
in the Whataroa River valley, Westland, South Island, New Zealand, photo courtesy of J. 
Thompson.   
through scientific drilling. Drilling programs have been performed on a number of active 
fault zones globally, usually after the occurrence of a large magnitude earthquake. Some 
major examples are the drilling projects that took place on the Tohoku-Oki fault and Nojima 
fault, Japan after a Mw 9.1 and 6.9 earthquake; the Chelungpu fault, Taiwan after a Mw 7.7 
earthquake; the Wenchuan fault, China after a Mw 7.9 earthquake and on the creeping 
section of the San Andreas Fault, USA [Fulton et al., 2004, 2013; Ma et al., 2006; Kitagawa 
et al., 2007; Xue et al., 2013]. 
In regard to the Alpine Fault, the Deep Fault Drilling Project (DFDP) is an ongoing 
international effort, undertaken in order to provide insight into the current geological and 
seismological state of a plate boundary fault thought to be nearing the end of its latest 
interseismic state [Townend et al., 2013]. The broad science objectives of DFDP include 
determining how and why earthquakes happen and how slip occurs on a large scale 
tectonic boundary, investigated through borehole collection of rock, fluid and gas samples, 
diverse down-hole observations and the installation of sensors for long-term in situ 
monitoring. The long-term strategy of DFDP is to drill to progressively greater depths along 
the exhumation trajectory of the Alpine Fault in order to identify how the ambient 
conditions and processes change on the fault with depth. While the drilling operations 
planned so far have been completed, there are plans to continue this multinational project 
in the future. 
The first phase of the Deep Fault Drilling Project (DFDP-1) comprised two vertical pilot holes 
(DFDP-1A and DFDP-1B) drilled into an active thrust segment of the Alpine Fault Zone (AFZ) 
at Gaunt Creek, Westland in January  February 2011. For locations of drill sites see Figure 
1.5 and Table 2.1. The boreholes reached depths of 100.6 m and 151.4 m, respectively, 
through percussion drilling in the upper borehole sections followed by wireline coring. A 
range of fault lithologies from both the hanging wall and footwall were recovered including 
ultramylonites, cataclasites and gouges. The Principal Slip Zone (PSZ) of the Alpine Fault 
Zone was reached at 90.74 m depth in DFDP-1A and 128.3 m in DFDP-1B, marking the 
boundary between the Australian and Pacific Plates, with a second PSZ recorded in DFDP-
1B at 143.85 m [Toy et al., 2015b]. Both slip zones are composed of clay-rich gouge 
[Sutherland et al., 2012]. For full details on sampling in DFDP-1 see Table 2.2. Once core 
collection, wireline logs and hydraulic observations were completed a downhole 
observatory was installed to monitor seismicity, temperature, fluid pressure and chemistry 
[Sutherland et al., 2012; Carpenter et al., 2014].  
The drilled core diameter was 85 mm (PQ wireline bit size) and supplied for sample 
preparation as 200  300 mm length intact core rounds and half rounds. These core 
sections were oriented with respect to the borehole axis, however due to core rotation 
during retrieval the horizontal orientation could not be preserved [Sutherland et al., 2011; 
Toy et al., 2015]. Subsampling of material recovered in DFDP-1 for this thesis was 
performed by supervisors Elisabetta Mariani, Daniel Faulkner and Daniel Tatham using 
detailed core logs and individual observations. 
Findings from the DFDP-1 drilling operations combined with finite element models, LIDAR 
studies on river terraces [Barth et al., 2012; Langridge et al., 2014] and a 640-channel 
seismic-reflection survey [Lay et al., 2016] informed the decision to perform the second 
phase of drilling in the lower Whataroa valley, see Figures 1.3, 1.5 and Table 2.1 for location 
information. This site was further investigated with a 96  channel (stacked hammer 
source) seismic line, a gravity survey and potentiometric groundwater survey in order to 
confirm the location of the fault, the thickness of the overlying sediment and the elevation 
of the unconfined water table surface. These pre-drilling analyses concluded with the aim 
to intersect the fault at ~1 km depth, with a target total depth of 1.3 km and a contingency 
to reach 1.5 km. Initially destructive drilling was to take place through Holocene river gravel 
(estimated depth 0  8 m), post-glacial pebbly gravel containing cobbles and boulders (est. 
8  80 m), cohesive silt with interbedded sand or gravel layers containing scattered cobbles 
or boulders (est. 80  100 m) and Alpine Schist and mylonite (est. 100  950 m). Coring of 
the brittle fault rock sequence, as detailed in the Section 1.6.4 of this thesis, was estimated 
to occur at 950  1000 m sampling both the hanging wall and footwall damage zone / fault 
core. The footwall protolith lithologies (est. 1000  1300 m) composed of fractured granite, 
gneiss, and metaquartzite were also marked for sampling due to the poor exposure of 
these rocks at the surface northwest of the fault [Sutherland et al., 2015]. 
As the primary objectives of the drilling project lay in the bottom ~500 m of the borehole 
the following goals were set out for the project [Sutherland et al., 2015];  
1. Grout (full annulus) steel casing in place to secure the borehole above 800 m depth. 
2. Collect core with minimum diameter 61 mm (HQ3 bit size), ideally 83 mm (PQ bit 
size), via triple-tube wire-line to below 800 m. 
3. Use wire-line geophysical tools to log the open borehole (as completely as 
possible). 
4. Make hydraulic/stress observations using a downhole packer tool. 
5. Install permanent instruments to create a fault zone observatory. 
DFDP  Borehole locations   
DFDP-1A Latitude, longitude (WGS84) 43.316031S, 170.325925E 
  NZTM coordinates 1383121.61 m east, 5200611.2 m north 
DFDP-1B Latitude, longitude (WGS84) 43.315886S, 170.326657E 
  NZTM coordinates 1383221.7 m east, 5200621.3 m north 
DFDP-2A Latitude, longitude (WGS84) 43.29065S, 170.40661E 
  NZTM coordinates 1389611.5 m east, 5203642.6 m north 
DFDP-2B Latitude, longitude (WGS84) 43.29065S, 170.40646E 
  NZTM coordinates 1389599.2 m east, 5203641.9 m north 
Table 2.1  Location information for the phases of the Deep Fault Drilling Project (DFDP) 
detailed in this thesis.  
2.2.1. Deep Fault Drilling Project-2: onsite operations summary 
Drilling operations for DFDP-2 took place from August 2014 to January 2015 and involved 
an international group of seventy one scientists along with the drilling team and support 
staff. Prior to the start of drilling the thesis author attended a course on drilling operations 
and technology run by the International Ocean Drilling Programme (IODP) and held in Franz 
Josef, South Island, New Zealand. Afterwards work began in the Whataroa valley drilling 
site with the author taking part in the full duration of the drilling operations. Work was 
organised in shifts running 24/7. The authors contribution, including a team-leading role in 
the preparation of thin sections, is described in detail in Section 2.2.2. Throughout the 
drilling operations the following data sets were collected: drill rig data, wireline geophysical 
observations, geological sampling and observations, gas sampling and observations, mud 
sampling and observations and seismological observations.  
Two phases of drilling took place for the first bore hole, DFDP-2A. The first phase consisted 
of drilling and casing through the Quaternary sediments to provide a stable platform for 
deeper operations into the bedrock. A Washington drill rig using dual rotary air or water 
drilling was used during the installation of a 12 welded casing to 29 m followed by 10 
welded casing to 126 m depth, with a total depth of 212.6 m reached. DFDP-2A was 
abandoned as drilling large boulders alternating to fine till in fluvial and glacial deposits 
proved challenging. To optimise chances of success it was decided larger casing was 
required in the upper bore hole to drill more effectively to further depths.  
DFDP-2B was located ~12.5 m to the east of DFDP-2A with the Washington drill rig used to 
install 16 welded casing to 78 m, open hole drilling at 14 was performed to 197 m 
followed by the installation of 12 welded casing to 237 m after which 10 welded casing 
was installed and seated to bedrock at 243 m and continued down to 264.93 m. A 9.5 
open hole was drilled to 275.91 m to ensure the bedrock had been reached. The second 
phase of drilling in the DFDP-2B borehole was conducted with a Hanjin D&B-45D using 
tungsten carbide bits with water / drilling mud lubricant. The aim was to perform 8.5 open 
hole drilling in order to rapidly progress to the region of interest, followed by the 
installation of Anchor Casing and then by wireline coring. However, due to technical 
problems this stage of drilling did not go to plan with 8.5 drilling and casing continued to 
893.2 m (818 m true vertical depth) after which drilling ceased.  
The technical problems encountered during the project included: deviation of the borehole, 
with a spontaneous tilt of <4 by 275 m, increasing to 12 by 121 m, to 21 by 526 m and 
then to 44 by 893.2 m depth. The bottom hole assembly (BHA), which consisted of the drill 
bit and stabilizers, was lost and recovered on two separate occasions postponing 
operations; and finally a failure in the thread-coupling between casings at 436 m and 439.6 
m resulted in the loss of the borehole, due to cement flooding the hole during the grouting 
of casing. A combination of the above problems resulted in the cessation of drilling 
operations. The deviation of the borehole was attributed to the heavily foliated schist-
protomylonite sequence which was proposed to be leading the drilling equipment away 
from vertical, while the loss of the BHA and casing failure were attributed to mechanical 
failure of equipment. A full report on the DFDP-2 operations is available in Sutherland et al., 
[2015]. 
2.2.2. Observations and findings of Deep Fault Drilling Project-2 
Although the drilling project failed to achieve some of its intended goals, sample collection 
and observations were performed throughout the duration of the project. Sampling of the 
boreholes in the form of rock cuttings, cores, drilling mud and gas extracted from the 
drilling mud were performed during drilling. Full details on sampling depths and intervals 
are shown in Table 2.2. During breaks in drilling, wireline observations were performed in 
the borehole fluids and on the borehole walls prior to casing installation. These included: 
fluid temperature and conductivity, flow measurement, natural / spectral gamma rays, 
magnetic susceptibility, electrical induction, full waveform sonic logs, calliper diameter 
measurements (3 arms) and acoustic borehole imaging. For details on tool specifications 
see Sutherland et al., [2015]. 
The author of this thesis spent 52 days on the DFDP-2 drill site, aiding in the construction of 
the science block which comprised of four shipping containers housing a gas lab, a 
geophysical logging facility, a thin section lab and a DMT core scanner / photography lab. 
The author worked principally as part of a team focused on the collection, preparation and 
analysis of rock cuttings during the drilling operations. This role involved the preparation of 
high quality thin sections in a short period of time in order to keep up with the rhythm of 
drilling and the recovery of cuttings. These thin sections were then analysed through optical 
microscopy to inform drilling procedure on the distance to the principal slip zone of the 
fault, predominantly through the analysis of mylonitic quartz grain size and modal 
abundances. For full details on this procedure see Section SM 2.7.1. Other tasks fulfilled by 
the author included crafting thin sections and polished blocks of field specimens during lulls 
in drilling for comparative work with borehole sampling, optical microscope point analyses 
of cutting material to determine mica abundance with proximity to the PSZ, field excursions 
for sample collection as well as taking part in a number of outreach events with local 
residents and school children.  
While core could not be recovered, the main successes of DFDP-2 where in valuable 
wireline measurements, and the analysis of fluids from mud. This resulted in a high profile 
publication in Nature regarding the enhanced geothermal gradient observed at depth 
within the Whataroa Valley attributed to rapid exhumation of the fault and topographic 
focusing of groundwater, published by Sutherland et al., [2017]. Many more publications  
are in preparation regarding the geological and geophysical observations made during both 
DFDP-1 and DFDP-2.  
For more information on both DFDP-1 and DFDP-2 drilling operations see, Sutherland et al., 
[2011] and Sutherland et al., [2015]. 
2.3. Sample preparation for experiments and laboratory analyses 
Due to the friable nature of many of the recovered lithologies, traditional methods of 
sample preparation such as water-lubricated coring, sawing and grinding proved 
catastrophic, causing washout of the finer grain-size fractions and often total 
disaggregation. Therefore, in order to overcome these challenges AFZ core presented us 
with, we developed new preparation techniques that could be used to produce high-quality 
specimens for all experimental measurements, microstructural observations and chemical 
analyses. These new procedures are described below. 
2.3.1. Experimental sample preparation 
The experimental measurement of physical properties and permeability required the 
preparation of 15 x 15 x 15 mm cubic specimens. To obtain suitable specimens AFZ core 
was first wrapped in thin plastic wrap (to protect it from plaster contamination) followed by 
the application of three to four layers of modroc (gypsum plaster bandages). The original 
core orientation was recorded throughout the wrapping process and once plaster bandages 
had fully hardened it was scribed onto the final plaster covering. Cutting the material was 
accomplished through the use of an annular saw (Revolution XT Ring Saw), see Figure 2.2. 
The annular saw blade is 5 mm thick with a total diameter of 254 mm and a blade width of 
1.5 mm; it is fabricated from pressed powder and diamond ensuring uniform sharpness and 
hardness throughout the blade lifespan. The configuration of the annular blade means that 
only the actively cutting portion of the blade is in contact with the sample, reducing grain 
plucking and disaggregation. Some cooling and lubricating fluid (tap water) is required 
during cutting; this was applied by a moist sponge to the blade edge. The saw also operates 
at low revolutions per minute (RPM) and high torque, further improving the quality of the 
Figure 2.2  [A] The Revolution XT Ring Saw, developed by Gemini Saw Company, used in 
shaping the study specimens. Sponges and wooden shims were used for lubrication and 
securing sample during cutting. [B] Examples of clean cut surfaces of cataclasites bound in 
ModRoc bandages.  
A first cut through the bandaged core exposed a surface that was again covered by plastic 
wrap and modroc following the above procedure. A second cut perpendicular to the first 
surface exposed a second face that was then wrapped and the operation was repeated 
until the required 15 x 15 x 15 mm experimental specimen was produced, unwrapped, 
mounted in the sample assembly and loaded in the experimental apparatus. The 
orientation of the vertical borehole axis was transferred on the cubic specimen obtained, 
which also had two faces orthogonal to the core surface and cut according to any relevant 
microstructural fabric if present, i.e., foliations, calcite veins and fractures. A final step, if 
the specimen proved sufficiently robust, involved hand grinding the cube surfaces with dry, 
fine (2000 grit) emery paper to provide a smooth flat surface to maximise acoustic wave 
and fluid transmission from the sample assembly to the sample cube. 
2.3.2. Thin section preparation 
Rock billets for thin sections (of dimensions 20 x 15 x 5 mm) were prepared following the 
wrapping and cutting procedure described above with a final stage of epoxy impregnation, 
using a low viscosity epoxy (Buehler EpoThin) and a vacuum chamber. This was required 
in order to increase specimen strength for transport to an external thin section workshop. 
Thin sections were prepared using standard petrographic thin section techniques, if robust 
enough, using tap water and progressively finer grit size to polish the sample surface to a 
finish of 0.5 m alumina grit. Friable material was prepared using dry polishing techniques 
and was carried out using numerous non-aqueous fluids, a 50:50 mixture of Ethylene Glycol 
and Methylated spirit for the lapping slurry and a solvent based diamond suspension for 
polishing. EBSD analyses require a high-quality surface polish which eliminates any residual 
amorphous layer on the surface of interest; therefore final chemo-mechanical polishing was 
performed on thin sections using SYTON  colloidal silica consisting of particles of grit size 
0.005  0.006 m dispersed in an alkaline solution. Depending on the mineral under 
investigation SYTON polishing time varied; calcite was polished for 20 minutes while quartz 
and feldspars were polished for 2 hours. SYTON polishing was conducted at the Electron 
Microscopy Laboratory (Liverpool Earth Sciences) and thin sections made by Paul Hands of 
Hands on Thin Sections Ltd. 
2.3.3. Sample preparation for trace element and stable isotope analyses 
After optical and SEM analyses key areas for trace element and stable isotope 
measurements were located. For use in the Cameca microprobes thin section dimensions 
had to be altered by coring and sampling the key areas using specialist glass cutting 
techniques, see Figure 2.12 for specimen set up schematics. For the Cameca IMS-4f a 
standard diamond-tipped hand glass cutter and diamond grit grinder were used to shape a 
25 mm diameter disc containing the area of interest to fit into the sample holder for trace 
element analysis. For use in the Cameca IMS-1270 the specimen had to be further altered, 
involving the coring of 2.5 mm diameter cores using a GatanTM (Model 601) ultrasonic 
cutter using boron-carbide slurry. These small diameter cores along with the chemical 
standards (see Section SM 2.7.4 for more details) were then set and pressed into an indium 
mount, housed within an aluminium base, using an EnerpacTM (P142) hand press, up to 200 
bars. For both analyses gold coating was required. Separate sample preparations were 
required for each analysis due to limitations in sample carrying capacity of the microprobe 
equipment. The Cameca IMS-4f is fitted with an eight sample airlock system, allowing more 
samples to be accommodated and measurements to be made without the need to vent the 
apparatus and switch samples. The Cameca IMS-1270 however does not have such a 
system and thus requires all samples and standards to be housed in a single sample holder.  
2.4. Overview of experimental apparatus  
The triaxial experimental apparatus, used to undertake permeability and seismic velocity 
measurements, and illustrated and detailed in Figures 2.3 and 2.4, was first described in 
Faulkner and Armitage, [2013]. This apparatus is capable of triaxial deformation under 
confining pressures up to 250 MPa, which is applied using silicon oil confining medium (at 
20 cSt viscosity). A differential stress can be imposed with a servo-controlled axial loading 
system, this was not utilised in this thesis. This apparatus is capable of measuring 
permeability down to 10-22 m2 and resolving sample volume changes of less than 0.1 mm3 in 
samples with porosities lower than 1 % [Mitchell and Faulkner, 2008]. The upstream pore 
pressure system is servo-controlled and the downstream end of the sample is connected to 
a low-volume reservoir. The transducers (Honeywell Pressure Transducer  TJE) used to 
monitor the controlled values of confining and pore fluid pressures have a resolution of 
7000 Pa. Pressure measurements from the transducers are sent in millivolt form to an 
amplifier to boost the signal to a 10 V range for the CompactRio (NI9024) data logging 
module. The signal is then sent to a 4-channel, 16-Bit analogue input modules (NI 9215). 
Working set points (WSPs) for the pressure systems are input into a LabVIEW program on 
the apparatus computer and sent to the CompactRio wherein a servo-loop compares them 
to the signals being received by the analogue input modules. If the input signal and WSP do 
not match, a signal is sent from the 4-channel, 16-bit analogue voltage output module (NI 
9263) to the servo-control box, the magnitude of which is controlled by user entered PID 
parameters (Proportional gain, Integral gain, and Derivative gain). A servo-amplifier within 
the control box then amplifies the signal to a higher voltage and current which is then used 
to drive the actuators / motors that control the confining and pore pressure systems and 
the axial load, within the apparatus [Bedford, 2017]. The workings of this servo-control 
system are summarised in Figure 2.3D 
The pressure data recorded in the experiments, and used in this thesis for permeability 
calculation, are logged as raw voltage values by using National Instruments CompactRio and 
a LabVIEW program designed by Daniel Faulkner installed on the apparatus computer. This 
is programmed to use equations, obtained from instrumental calibrations, to convert raw 
voltage outputs from the confining and pore pressure gauges, the force gauge and the 
linear variable differential transformer (LVDT measuring displacement  note that the latter 
two devices were not utilised in this study) into mega pascals (MPa) and millimetres (mm). 
Instrumental calibrations take place by measuring a gauge output against that of a pre-
calibrated, high resolution device such as a Heise gauge for pressure or a load cell of known 
calibration for force. These calibrations are repeated annually or when a component of the 
apparatus is altered or replaced.  
2.4.1. Permeability and seismic wave velocity measurements  
Before experimental measurement of permeability and ultrasonic wave velocities the 
specimen must first be mounted in the experimental sample assembly as follows. Once 
prepared into its cubic form, as described in Section 2.3.1, the specimen is jacketed in heat-
shrink polyolefin and PVC tubing along with porous steel spacers (SIKA R-AX) and housed 
within a seismic sample assembly, configured to supply de-ionised water pore fluid to each 
end of the specimen via the upstream and downstream platens, see Figure 2.5A  C. Porous 
steel spacers were used in order to stop any fine-grained material entering into the pore 
fluid pipe work of the apparatus and to distribute the pore fluid across the entire specimen  
Figure 2.3  [A] Faulkner Triaxial Experimental Apparatus (TR2-3) schematic cross-section at 
the Rock Deformation Laboratory, University of Liverpool. [B and C] Schematic diagrams of 
the confining (Pc) and pore pressure (Pp) systems in TR2-3. FRL = filter regulator lubricator; 
ADP = Air Differential Pressure Switches. [D] Schematic diagram of the servo-control system 
showing the conversions of instrument signals. The purple highlight corresponds to the 
sensors highlighted in (B) and (C). WSPs = working set points; NI = National Instruments.   
Figure 2.4  (above) [A] Faulkner Triaxial Experimental Apparatus (TR2) at the Rock 
Deformation Laboratory, University of Liverpool. [B] The servo-control box used to send high 
voltage / current signals to the actuators driving the pressure control systems. [C] The 
pressure control components used to control the Pp and Pc systems. LVDT = Linear variable 
differential transformer; ADP = Air Differential Pressure Switches. [D] Pressure transducers 
and pipework monitoring and containing the Pp and Pc systems. Also shown are the vessel 
heaters which were not used in this thesis. [E] Data logging and signal processing 
equipment for the servo-control system detailed in Figure 2.3D.  
face. For improved coupling between the square cross-section of the specimen and the 
circular fluid-flow platens, a circle to square spacer is required. The assembly is loaded into 
the pressure vessel, the required confining pressure (Pc) is applied slowly, and finally the 
specimen is allowed to saturate and equilibrate with the pore fluid pressure (Pf) at low 
effective pressures (~5 MPa) for a time determined by the estimated permeability of the 
test specimen. This ranged between 12  24 hours.  
Piezoelectric ceramics (PZT-5H, with fundamental frequency set at 1.5 MHz) with different 
polarisation directions are secured in each upstream and downstream platen, with silver-
loaded epoxy adhesive and copper plate backing see Figure 2.5D for schematic illustration. 
These ceramics are used to produce and record ultrasonic P and S waves that travel 
through the specimen. Ultrasonic velocities are measured with the through-transmission 
method, using the travel times and specimen length [Birch, 1960] after correction for the 
travel time through the loading platens. Due to the high frequencies involved in ultrasonic 
measurements the electrical cabling used can alter the final recorded value through 
attenuation of the signal through the cable material. To minimize these effects high 
frequency coaxial cable is used (attenuation at 100 MHz: 3.61 dB, capacitance per metre: 
105 pF). The resistance of this high frequency coaxial cable should equal the output of the 
pulser / receiver set up used in the measurement. In the case of this study a resistance of 
50 Ohms is used to reduce internal reflections at connections between components [Blake, 
2011].  
Ultrasonic velocity data was collected using a Tektronix TDS 3032B oscilloscope, with 300 
MHZ bandwidth and time based accuracy of 20 ppm time based accuracy. The signals were 
summed or stacked 512 times to improve the signal to noise ratio and were collected in  
Figure 2.5  [A] Schematic illustration of the seismic sample assembly showing specimen 
position and platen configuration. [B] Photograph of (A). [C] A cube-shaped specimen set 
between porous steel spacers (both square and circle) and a circle to square adapter to 
allow coupling with the circular assembly platens. [D] Schematic illustration of the seismic 
sample assembly top and bottom platens with configuration of piezoelectric ceramics 
shown for each platen.  
the .isf file format and later converted to .csv file format, see Section SM 2.7.3 for 
conversion script. Data processing and analysis were carried out in a LabVIEW program as 
described above.  
Permeability measurements were achieved using the transient-pulse decay method [Brace 
et al., 1968] in hydrostatic conditions. The method involves the separation of an upstream 
and downstream pore fluid reservoir by the rock specimen. The upstream reservoir is 
subjected to a small (<1 MPa), instantaneous pressure increase, exposing the top of the 
rock specimen to a higher pore fluid pressure than the bottom. This pressure difference 
then decays at a rate proportional to the permeability of the sample. See Figure 2.6 for an 
illustration of this process.  
Equation 4 after Brace et al., [1968] was used to calculate permeability through an 
algorithm reported in the spreadsheet detailed in SM Section 2.7.2;  
 =   / (1/1 + 1/2)  ()/                                  (4)   
where k is permeability,  is the gradient calculated from the ln (Upstream Pore pressure  
Calculated Equilibrium), v1 and v2 are the upstream and downstream pore volumes, 
respectively,  is the pore fluid viscosity,  is the pore fluid compressibility, L is the sample 
length and A is the sample area.  
2.5. Methods for microstructural and chemical analyses  
2.5.1. X-ray computed tomography 
Computed tomography (CT) is a technique that utilises X-ray equipment to obtain images of 
the internal structure of an object at various angles and from these then form detailed 3-
dimensional cross-sectional or tomographic images through computer processing. This 
technique was used to visualise, non-destructively, the connectivity and extent of fractures 
present within the specimens used for experimental physical property measurements. 
These analyses were performed by Ludmila Adams and Auke Baarnhorn (University of 
Auckland, New Zealand and Delft University of Technology.  
Figure 2.6  Illustration of the theory for the Pulse Transient Decay (PTD) method of 
measuring permeability, showing the assumed and real pressure variations across a sample 
during a PTD measurement, adapted from Childs, [1986] and Faulkner, [1997]. [A] Initial 
conditions (P0) where pressure is equal in both upstream and downstream reservoirs and 
test specimen. [B] A sudden increase in pressure (P) in the upstream reservoir at time = 0. 
[C] The assumed variation of pressure across the specimen. [D] The true variation in 
pressure across the specimen. [E] The final equilibration of pressure in both reservoirs and 
specimen.   
The instrumentation used in this study was a Phoenix Nanotom nano-CT scanner at the 
Delft University of Technology, Netherlands. The analysis is performed with a micro-focus 
X-ray source, operating at 180 kV / 15 W, illuminating the specimen; the projected X-rays 
are then collected by a planar X-ray detector upon which they are magnified. As the 
specimen rotates during data acquisition a large number of X-ray images or slices are 
collected; these slices are synthesised into a stack of virtual cross-section images of the 
specimen. As the X-rays pass through a material they are attenuated according to the 
materials atomic number (Z) and density, however the original strength of the X-ray energy 
itself can influence the degree of attenuation [Ketcham and Carlson, 2001]. These 
variations in X-ray attenuation allow the differentiation of various phases and open pore 
spaces in the test specimens. In post-processing the raw intensity data of the detected X-
rays are linearly converted into a CT number, which in this study relates to a 12-bit 
Hounsfield Unit (HU) scale. 2-dimensional images are then constructed using the CT 
numbers as a greyscale with voids in the sample appearing black and the minerals varying 
shades of grey depending on their density. More details on this method can be found in 
Ketcham and Carlson, 2001 and Cnudde and Boone, 2013.  
2.5.2. Optical cold-cathode cathodoluminescence 
Optical cathodoluminescence (CL) is a technique that permits the optical examination and 
imaging of a sample through the attachment of an evacuated CL-stage to an optical 
microscope. This stage makes use of an attached cathode gun which bombards the sample 
with a high-energy electron beam resulting in the luminescence of a mineral, i.e., the 
emission of photons of a characteristic wavelength. This luminescence is the result of the 
transformation of various energy types into visible light, through emissive transition of 
molecules, anions or the transition of a crystal from excited electronic states to lower 
energy or ground states [Marfunin, 1979]. Luminescence in solids is controlled by the 
transition of electrons between conduction and valence bands, this transition is influenced 
by defects in a materials crystal lattice which form luminescence centres by the addition of 
energy levels within the conduction  valence band gap [Pagel et al., 2000; Gtze and 
Kempe, 2009]. Variation in a materials luminescence highlight subtle compositional and 
microstructural variations that are not visible using standard optical microscopy, as well as 
other more sophisticated techniques such as the SEM-based EDS and BSE imaging. This is 
the case for many minerals, in this study particularly calcite and quartz, as the CL activating, 
sensitising or quenching trace elements are within parts per million concentrations.  
This study used a cold-cathode CL apparatus, wherein an electron beam is generated by the 
discharge between a negative high voltage cathode and an anode at ground potential 
within ionized gas. The electron beam is produced within a moderate vacuum of ~10-2 Torr, 
resulting in a relatively low-intensity CL. In cold-cathode CL the specimen does not require a 
conductive coating due to the presence of positive ions with the electron beam which 
neutralises any surface charge build up [Marshall, 1991; Waychunas, 2014].  
Cold-cathode CL can be viewed through a microscope objective lens or digital camera; this 
study used a Nikon Eclipse Ci microscope with a CITL Mk5-2 cold stage and Nikon DS-Fi1c 
camera, working at beam conditions of 10.8 Kv and 390 A in a vacuum of 0.047-33 Torr, 
suitable for analysis of carbonate minerals. CL observations were made on polished thin 
sections prior to performing any SEM analyses. This precaution was taken to avoid 
compromising cold-cathode CL observations and interpretations due to the damage that a 
specimen surface would undergo during interaction with the electron beam in the SEM.  
2.5.3. Scanning Electron Microscopy  
This section will described the scanning electron microscopes (SEM) and the various SEM-
based techniques used throughout this thesis. 
2.5.3.1. CamScan X500 CrystalProbe field emission gun SEM 
The CamScan X500 Crystal Probe field-emission gun (FEG) SEM was purposely designed by 
Obducat CamScan Ltd and Professor Dave Prior for the optimised performance of electron 
backscatter diffraction (EBSD) analyses of all Earth and engineering materials and for in situ 
experimentation (hot static and deformation tests). This specially designed SEM is one of 
only two ever built worldwide [Seward et al., 2004]. 
The X500 CrystalProbe was used in this study for the acquisition of orientation contrast 
images (OCI), all EBSD data and qualitative EDS analyses. This SEM features a thermionic 
field emission warm cathode source, formed by a tungsten single crystal tip coated with 
ZrO2 that generates a highly focussed (coherent) electron beam thus enabling high 
resolution imaging. Conventional SEM configurations for EBSD analyses involve the 
specimen / stage being tilted at a high angle, 160 corresponding to 70 specimen tilt, to 
the incident electron beam. As illustrated in Figure 2.7 the X500 CrystalProbe SEM the 
column and electron-optic axis is inclined at an angle of 70 to the conventional vertical 
position allowing the specimen / stage to remain horizontal whilst allowing the ideal 
specimen-beam geometry for EBSD analysis. This configuration allows greater accuracy in 
specimen positioning and enhanced stage speed by removing the vertical component of 
movement for automated EBSD analysis. The tilted column geometry also allows a division 
of the SEM chamber into two domains: a lower domain for the sample and stage, and an 
upper domain for the detectors, particularly the large forescatter detector array for 
orientation contrast imaging (described below). Two main advantages are that: 1) 
particularly large samples (up to 12 x 12 cm) can be analysed using EBSD without issues of 
sample stability due to the action of gravity, and 2) in situ experiments (not performed in 
this study) are devoid of issues such as the gravitational flow of material out of its location 
on the stage (again due to gravity when the stage is tilted) [Prior et al., 1999; Seward et al., 
2004; Mariani and Ghassemieh, 2010; Dempsey et al., 2011]. 
EBSD analyses were performed using the F+ Nordlys EBSD detector mounted on the X500 
CrystalProbe SEM in combination with the AZtec Oxford Instrument acquisition system. 
EBSD patterns (EBSPs) are collected using a phosphor screen which is mounted in front of a 
CCD camera, with 1344 x 1024 resolution, that digitises the EBSPs imaged on the phosphor 
screen at a speed of 640 Hz (equivalent to 640 patterns per second). EDS analyses are 
performed using an Oxford Instruments X-Max 50 mm2 silicon drift detector (SDD), also 
combined with the AZtec Oxford Instrument acquisition system. SDD detectors are cooled 
using the Peltier method and do not require the traditional liquid nitrogen cooling system, 
thus permitting data acquisition at speeds that are comparable and exceed that of the 
Nordlys F+ detector. EBSD and EDS can therefore be acquired simultaneously at speeds of 
640 Hz covering whole thin sections areas in a matter of 1  2 hours at 10 m step sizes. 
The typical operating parameters for this study were 20 kV accelerating voltage, 20  30 nA 
beam current, and 5.5 nm spot size.  
The X500 CrystalProbe is also equipped with an Everhart-Thornley secondary electron 
detector, a KE industries solid-state backscattered electron (BSE) detector (K.E. 
Developments Ltd), an array of nine solid-state detectors for OC imaging and a four-axis 
stepping motor driven stage with high precision encoders. In terms of imaging capabilities 
the Philips XL30 SEM is better equipped for standard secondary electron imaging (SE), for 
observation of topographic surface features, and backscatter electron imaging (BSE), for 
qualitative assessment of atomic number contrast (Z), which gives information on 
mineralogy. The X500 CrystalProbe SEM is a cutting edge research SEM that, in addition to 
being optimised for the EBSD and EDS techniques described above, can provide information 
on crystallographic orientation using orientation contrast images (OCI) acquired with nine 
forward-mounted (with respect to electron beam and the diffracted electrons) backscatter 
detectors. These are mounted in an arc around the specimen. Signal from any combination 
of forescatter detectors can be processed via three separate analogue channels. As the 
central three detectors are at the smallest scattering angle from the incident beam, they 
receive the greatest component of crystallite orientation signal [Prior et al., 1999]. As the 
perimeter angle from specimen to the detector increases, a greater amount of Z-contrast is 
incorporated into the signal, which weakens the OC signal. Orientation contrast images 
complement EBSD studies due to ability of rapidly identifying even subtle differences in 
crystallographic orientation. OC images can be directly compared and complement 
collected EBSD maps.  
CHANNEL 5 HKL software was used for EBSD data acquisition and data processing and 
analysis; see Section 2.5.3.4 for details on data presentation.  
2.5.3.2. Philips XL30 Tungsten filament SEM 
The Philips XL30 SEM is a conventional, tungsten filament SEM with an adjustable stage for 
tilt between 0  70. The Philips XL30 is fitted with backscatter electron (BSE), secondary 
electron (SE) and cathodoluminescence (CL) detectors; is capable of electron backscatter 
diffraction (EBSD) analyses using an Nordlys EBSD detector and Energy Dispersive X-Ray 
Spectroscopy (EDS) analyses using an Oxford Instruments x-act 10 mm2 silicon drift detector 
(SDD); both EBSD and EDS are used in combination with the AZtec Oxford Instrument 
acquisition system. 
The Philips XL30 SEM was utilised for BSE imaging and EDS analyses, operating at 20 kV 
accelerating voltage, 60  80 A beam current and a 5 nm spot size. 
2.5.3.3. Electron Backscatter Diffraction 
Electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) is a predominantly SEM based technique (but is also 
used in transmission electron microscopy  TEM) that measures the absolute 
crystallographic orientation of minerals with respect to the (known) SEM reference frame. 
EBSD uses the interactions between the electron beam and the surface of a crystalline 
sample favourably oriented at low angle to the beam (incidence angle 70 - see Figure 2.8); 
to form a divergent source of fore-scattered electrons close to the sample surface. Some of 
the scattered electrons diffract on atomic planes, satisfying Braggs equation; 
  =  2                            (5)  
where n is an integer,  is the wavelength of the electrons, d is the spacing of the diffracting 
plane and  the angle of incidence of the electrons on the diffracting plane [Randle, 1992]. 
These electrons are diffracted to form a set of paired large-angle cones that correspond to 
each diffracting plane and are received by a phosphor screen; which fluoresces with an 
image containing characteristic Kikuchi bands (cone traces on a 2-dimensional surface), 
which are then viewed using a sensitive lens distortion correction (LDC) camera. These 
bands are formed where the regions of enhanced electron intensity intersect the phosphor 
screen, see Figure 2.9B [Nishikawa and Kikuchi, 1928]. 
The image of a particular set of Kikuchi bands collected on the phosphor screen is referred 
to as electron backscatter diffraction pattern (EBSP) and is characteristic of the structure 
and orientation of a crystalline material in the small volume (a few m3) of sample that 
returns that image. EBSPs are photographed by a LDC high resolution camera and then 
saved to a PC where specialised software (commercially available  Oxford Instruments HKL 
Software) can index each pattern as long as the mineral phase of interest and its 
crystallography are known. EBSPs can be used to determine the crystal orientation of 
grains, discriminate between crystallographically different phases (polymorphs), 
characterise grain boundaries (misorientation >10) and the relationship between grains 
across such boundaries  
Figure 2.8  [A] Illustration of an SEM primary electron beam and how it interacts with the 
atoms within a sample. Some electrons are ejected from the sample, i.e. backscattered 
electrons, while some collide with atoms causing the generation of secondary electrons. 
Other products of these interactions are X-rays, light and heat. [B] The interaction volume 
generated within the sample surface by the primary electron beam. Illustration shows the 
depths at which the different interactions and thus products are generated.   
characterise sub-structure (sub-grain walls and sub-grain boundaries (misorientation <10) 
and provide information about the local crystalline perfection. EBSPs are collected in a grid 
fashion, whereby the area and spacing (step size) of the grid are chosen by the user. 
Indexed EBSPs are then most commonly visualised as orientation maps and stereographic 
projections (pole figures and/or inverse pole figures). In this thesis EBSD is used to 
determine the crystallographic orientation of calcite, ankerite, quartz and K-feldspar 
(orthoclase), with particular focus on calcite, a schematic of its typical crystal system is 
illustrated in Figure 2.9A.  
As the phase and orientation at each pixel in an EBSD map is known, visualisation of the 
data can be achieved in a number of ways, each chosen as the best means to communicate 
effectively the relevant scientific message. Post-processing and analysis of EBSD data was 
performed using the Oxford Instruments HKL Channel 5 software. Channel5 provides a 
range of software modules including; Tango, which allows the presentation and 
manipulation of data via a suite of orientation maps, permitting a variety of post-processing 
and data analysis techniques to be applied including; a noise-reduction facility, multiple 
grain size analyses and misorientation profiles. Mambo software is a pole figure plotting 
program that allows the analysis of a specimens crystallographic preferred orientation 
(CPO) and presentation as pole figure figures (PF), and inverse pole figures (IPF).The 
different types of orientation maps and pole figures used in this thesis are described below. 
A Band Contrast (BC) map is an image of the EBSP quality factor, determined from the 
Hough transform, which describes the average intensity of the Kikuchi bands with respect 
to the overall intensity within the EBSP. The values are scaled and mapped to a greyscale 
range (byte range 0 to 255) and give a realistic representation of the microstructures 
analysed, with dark BC indicating no or poor EBSP quality (fuzzy EBSP image with poor 
contrast and definition) , while light BC indicates good quality EBSPs (bright, sharp image 
with high Kikuchi band definition).  
All-Euler (AE) maps visualise orientation through use of an Euler angle-based colour scale. 
Euler angles are a set of three angles (1, , and 2) used to describe the crystallographic 
orientation of crystals relative to a reference coordinate system; defined by the primary 
SEM stage axes. The value of each Euler angle, reflecting the magnitude of the 3 rotations 
necessary to determine a rotation path from the SEM reference frame to that of the crystal  
Figure 2.9  [A] Calcite rhomb with trigonal crystal system, [0001] c-axis, <11-20> a-axis 
and {10-14} r-rhomb face shown. [B] The electron beam scattering pattern (EBSP) is 
generated through the interaction of electrons within the specimen when exposed to an 
electron beam. Cones are generated by the electrons from divergent sources that satisfy the 
Bragg equation on a single lattice plane. The generated cones are projected onto the EBSD 
cameras phosphor screen forming Kikuchi bands (C).   
analysed, is individually set to a colour scale (red, green and blue for Euler angles 1, , 
and 2, respectively) which are then combined into a single RGB colour that represents the 
observed crystallographic orientation. AE maps display microstructures quantitatively, 
using colour schemes in which similar colours indicate similar crystallographic orientations, 
thus enabling for example the determination of intracrystalline distortion within grains and 
the fabric (or texture in the Materials Science terminology) strength of the aggregate. 
However, the AE component contains a wraparound effect caused by one or more of the 
Euler angles reaching their respective limit, resulting in the RGB value to vary between 
minimum and maximum, potentially resulting in colour speckling even when little to no 
orientation variation between grains exists.  
This limitation of AE map can be mitigated by complementing data analysis with Inverse 
Pole Figure (IPF) orientation maps. In this case a RGB colouring scheme is fitted to the data 
using an inverse pole figure scheme, whereby the colouring of pixels is relative to the 
chosen projection-parallel crystallographic axis only, independent of the other 2 axis in the 
reference frame. This technique is useful for displaying preferred orientations parallel to a 
particular sample direction. However, the user must bear in mind that in IPF maps, grains 
with identical axes parallel to a specified IPF projection direction will have the same colour 
in the IPF-based scheme, but may be in significantly different orientations. With this in 
mind IPF maps must be viewed in multiple orientations (X, Y and Z for example) to 
determine the full orientation properties of the aggregate.  
Texture component (TC) maps display orientation using a user-determined orientation 
colouring scheme relative to a specific orientation of interest that can be selected as a 
reference point. Each pixel on the map is coloured relative to the misorientation between 
the orientation at that pixel and the reference point. This reference point can be a 
crystallographic definition (plane / direction pair), a fibre-texture definition or a set of Euler 
angles. This visualisation is particularly useful when comparing a parent grain orientation to 
recrystallised daughter grains for example.  
Stereographic projections of pole figures (PFs) allow the visualisation of 3-dimensional 
orientation information in 2-dimensions, showing the projected positions of a chosen set of 
crystallographic planes or directions in which the poles to the plane / normals or the 
directions are projected onto a sphere and visualised in 2-dimensions as intersections onto 
the circle representing the equatorial plane of the sphere. There are two main projection 
techniques that PF employ, the stereographic and equal area projection which can be 
shown as upper or lower hemisphere depending on conventions in a given discipline. In 
Earth Sciences stereographic projections are generally shown as lower hemisphere while 
crystallographers tend to show upper hemisphere projections. Inverse Pole Figures (IPFs) 
plot specific directions of interest, such as the stress direction for example, on a projection 
using crystallographic coordinates for the reference frame. Such coordinates will reflect the 
crystal system of the mineral of interest. For the data presented in this thesis a lower 
hemisphere equal area projection was used for PF plots, further details regarding this can 
be found in Section 2.5.3.4. In an equal area projection a random distribution of crystal 
orientations generates a uniform distribution of points in the whole projection area while in 
a stereographic projection a random distribution of crystal orientations results in a denser 
population of points in the centre of the PF, thinning towards the perimeter. The plotted 
points can be colour coded according to their respective Euler orientation and can be 
contoured according to their densities. In this thesis contouring is set to a half width of 20 
and data clustering of 5. In order to describe the intensity of the fabric shown in PFs a 
statistical method is used known as the multiple of uniform density (MUD), which is 
quantified using the maximum intensity of a contoured PF. MUD values of 1 indicate 
randomly orientated grains (uniform distribution) while a MUD >1 is indicative of a fabric or 
CPO, these values are illustrated alongside the PFs. MUD values, however, are only a 
qualitative approximation of CPO strength and cannot be used in direct comparison of 
different PFs as multiples of uniform density are calculated only relative to the dataset 
being analysed. More reliable quantitative measures of the strength of a CPO may be the J 
index and the m index (see e.g., Skemer et al., 2005). These were not utilised in this thesis 
as no systematic comparison of CPOs across datasets was carried out. The notations used in 
the PFs to represent crystallographic orientations are: [hkil] and (hkil) for individual 
crystallographic axes and poles to planes, respectively, and <hkil> and {hkil} for families of 
axes and poles to planes, respectively. More information can be found in Prior et al., [1999, 
2009] and Bestmann and Prior, [2003], wherein they report the advent and evolution of 
EBSD in the Earth Sciences as well as some specific case studies. 
2.5.3.4. EBSD reference frame vs. SEM reference frame conventions 
In early 2016 it was brought to the attention of members of the EBSD community that 
inconsistences in EBSD orientation data in comparison with other techniques, e.g., U-stage 
data, existed for many research groups and labs. This inconsistency was discovered by 
performing EBSD measurements on an obliquely cut quartz single crystal reference sample 
in a number of Oxford EBSD / SEM systems. In these systems the derived crystal 
orientations are rotated with respect to the EBSD-map and scanning electron image.  
In any EBSD-SEM system the point of view of the SEM (always looking down along the 
electron beam trajectory) is different from the point of view of the EBSD camera. This is 
represented in Figure 2.10B, where Xs, Ys and Zs are the axes of the sample reference frame. 
Therefore, when we look at the image generated by the SEM, in the plane of the image, Xs 
is horizontal and points to the left, while Ys is vertical and points down. However, looking 
from the EBSD camera point of view (represented by a kikuchi pattern in Figure 2.10B), Xs 
and Ys are rotated 180 around Zs with respect to the SEM image. In other words, the 
crystallographic orientation measured when the EBSD software fits a best solution to the 
kikuchi pattern collected, is rotated 180 around Zs with respect to the orientation of the 
studied crystal as seen in the SEM image. Constructing a convention that relates the SEM 
reference frame to the EBSD reference frame from first principles is non-trivial as this must 
account fully for the sample-EBSD camera-SEM column geometric relationships. While 
sample normal, EBSD camera and SEM column always lay within the same vertical plane, 
the angle at which the EBSD camera is set-up may vary in every different EBSD-SEM system. 
Britton et al., [2016] provide a mathematical framework for an EBSD-SEM reference frame 
convention, suggest methods of testing the system using crystals of known orientation and 
make their code (written in Python and MATLAB) freely available to other users. 
Generally, companies that provide commercial EBSD acquisition and processing software 
apply their own corrections to the system. So not only the geometry of each EBSD-SEM 
system might be different, but also each company might implement different software 
conventions. With ever increasing interdisciplinary collaborations between SEM 
laboratories it has clearly become paramount that each laboratory test their system and 
the commercial EBSD software of choice so to make sure that the correct crystallographic 
orientations are reported and that confusion and misinterpretation are avoided. 
Recently Rdiger Kilian and Michel Bestmann (personal communication), of the Geologisch-
Palontologisches Institut, Universitt Basel and the GeoZentrum Nordbayern, University 
Erlangen-Nuremberg, respectively, tested the conventions used by HKL Channel-5 
Flamenco and Oxford instruments AZtec software by indexing a quartz single crystal of 
known orientation. They found that, while the EBSD-map reference frame and scanning 
electron image remain consistent, pole figures (PF) plotted using this software display a 
180 rotation around the normal to the sample surface / centre of the PF (Zs) in relation to 
the SEM image and EBSD maps [Kilian et al., 2016]. 
In the Liverpool Earth Science EBSD-SEM laboratory a kyanite single crystal of known 
orientation was used to test the reference frame convention when the system was first 
installed. However, further testing was carried out by myself and Joseph Gardner, a fellow 
PhD student at the University of Liverpool, using a quartz single crystal reference sample, 
this is reported below. 
Firstly the EBSD reference frame was compared to the SEM reference frame; this was 
checked within the virtual AZtec chamber with the view from the EBSD camera along the 
horizontal plane. In the case of a standard SEM the sample is tilted at 70 around Xm and 
the electron beam is vertical, see Figure 2.10A. As detailed in Section 2.5.3.1, within the 
X500 CrystalProbe SEM system the sample is horizontal, the electron beam at 70 and EBSD 
camera at 110 to the sample surface, see Figure 2.10B. The collection of data occurs from 
the top left hand corner of the scanning electron image, rastering, in user-defined steps, to 
the right then down and left, rastering the next acquisition line to the wright again and so 
on. This beam movement builds a data collection grid from the top left corner of the SEM 
image and is referred to as scanning down by Oxford Instruments.  
In our test an idiomorphic quartz single crystal was used. A clear rhombohedral {r} plane 
was chosen and oriented to rest as the horizontal surface of interest in the SEM sample 
holder (Figure 2.10C). The quartz crystal was positioned so that its c-axis <0001> had a 
plunge of 165 and dip 38 towards southeast. Figure 2.10C shows the point of view of the 
EBSD camera, which, as discussed previously, is rotated 180 from the actual SEM image 
(see SE image of the rhombohedral quartz face in Figure 2.10D). Xs and Ys reported here 
show a reference frame consistent with X0, Y0 of the AZtec virtual chamber in Figure 2.10A. 
In this configuration the c-axis <0001> will plot in the northwest quadrant of lower  
Figure 2.10  caption overleaf.  
Figure 2.10  (above) EBSD reference frame vs. SEM reference frame calibration procedure. 
[A] Virtual AZtec SEM chamber showing the SEM reference frame for a standard SEM with 
tilted sample for EBSD analysis. [B] Schematic diagram showing the configuration of the 
CamScan X500 CrystalProbe SEM chamber and the kikuchi pattern projection onto the EBSD 
detector phosphor screen. FSE = Forescattered electron. [C] Photograph of the quartz single 
crystal in the SEM sample holder. [D] Secondary electron image (SE) of the sample from the 
point of view of the EBSD camera. [E] An All-Euler (AE) EBSD map of the quartz single crystal 
r-rhomb face showing uniform orientation. Black are misindexed data points and blue pixels 
are due to the wraparound effect. [F] CH5 3-dimensional crystal orientation tool of the 
region shown in (E), with c-axis pointing towards the southeast. [G] Pole figure plots of the 
orientation data in (E) showing the c-axis [0001] and r-rhomb face {10-11} orientations 
plotted as lower hemisphere projections. Note the c-axis plots to the northwest indicating a 
180 rotation. 
hemisphere PF plot or the southeast quadrant of an upper hemisphere PF plot. A map of a 
small area on the {r} surface was acquired and it is shown in Figure 2.10E as an All-Euler 
map. Several pixels on this map were then selected and the CH5 3-dimensional crystal 
orientation tool was used to show the orientation of each pixel. All pixels consistently show 
the orientation reported in Figure 2.10F, where the orientation of the c-axis <0001> 
(purple) is consistent with <0001> in the SEM image (Figure 2.10D) i.e., with the sample 
orientation in the SEM as seen from the point of view of the electron beam. This indicates 
that AZtec software applies a 180 rotation to the acquired orientation data to bring such 
data into coincidence with the orientation of the SEM image when visualised as an EBSD 
map. Therefore here the convention utilised is consistent between the EBSD and SEM 
reference frames. 
Following the same convention, in the equal area lower hemisphere PF reported in Figure 
2.10G the c-axis <0001> should plot in the southeast quadrant. However, this is not the 
case and c plots in the northwest quadrant instead, indicating that there is a difference 
corresponding to a 180 rotation around Zs between the c-axis measured with EBSD and the 
orientation of the c-axis in the SEM image.  
As the crystal orientation reported in EBSD maps and that in SEM images are consistent 
with each other, we infer that there is consistency in the convention used during data 
acquisition. However, the same convention is not applied to PFs plotted using AZtec and 
CH5 software. This is of course confusing and a consistent convention should be utilised by 
commercial suppliers of EBSD acquisition and processing software. For any data acquired in 
the Liverpool Earth Science EBSD-SEM laboratory we apply a rotation of 180 to any pole 
figures plotted using Aztec or CH5 (upper hemisphere PFs are in reality lower hemisphere 
ones). This has been done for all PFs reported in this thesis. 
2.5.3.5. Energy dispersive spectroscopy  
Energy Dispersive X-Ray Spectroscopy (EDS) is an SEM technique used to determine the 
chemical composition of a solid material. When bombarded by an electron beam, atoms in 
the specimen eject electrons. The resultant electron vacancies are filled by electrons from a 
higher energy state, with X-rays emitted as energy packages reflecting the energy 
difference between the two electrons' states. This X-ray energy is characteristic of the 
element from which it is emitted.  
The EDS detector measures the relative abundance of the emitted X-rays versus their 
energy, whereby, when an incident X-ray is received by the detector, a charge pulse is 
generated proportional to the energy of the X-ray. The charge pulse is converted to a 
voltage pulse via the charge-sensitive preamplifier; the signal is then passed through a 
multichannel analyser in which pulses are sorted by voltage. After subtraction of the 
background signal, the spectrum of X-ray energy versus counts is then evaluated in order to 
determine the elemental composition of the sampled volume [Agarwal, 1991; Goldstein et 
al., 2003].  
EDS data acquisition can be qualitative or quantitative. Qualitative EDS consists of 
identifying the traces in the generated X-ray spectra, giving the elemental composition of 
the specimen. Quantitative EDS, in which the concentrations of the elements are acquired, 
requires measuring line intensities for each element in a specimen and to compare with a 
calibration standards that contain these elements [Goldstein et al., 2003].  
At the Electron Microscopy Laboratory (Liverpool Earth Sciences) semi-quantitative EDS is 
possible using the Philips XL30 SEM as a full set of geological standards is available for 
calibration. A full element standardization procedure is carried out regularly. Once the most 
recent standardization files are created, these are used as a reference to quantify element 
weight % in minerals within research samples. When performing quantitative EDS analyses, 
a purposely made thin section holder with mounted standards (cobalt, kyanite and 
diopside) is used to carry out regular checks on beam stability, on the cobalt, and on the 
validity of the element weight % values obtained. The resolution of energy dispersive 
detectors limits the accuracy of analyses to within 2 % from the total elemental 
composition expected for a given mineral. In this study only qualitative EDS analyses were 
undertaken, using a Philips XL30 SEM. 
2.5.3.6. Quantitative evaluation of minerals by SEM 
Using similar methods as SEM EDS analyses the quantitative evaluation of minerals by 
scanning electron microscopy (QEMSCAN) is an SEM technique developed by CSIRO to 
identify mineral species rapidly, automatically and non-destructively.  
The technique consists of the automatic acquisition of EDS spectra and BSE images of a 
specimen surface which are then combined with one another to identify the mineral 
species within it, this achieved through comparison to a comprehensive mineral database 
incorporated into the QEMSCAN software [Qian et al., 2015]. The technique requires 
standard polished thin sections or blocks with a surface coating of conductive material to 
avoid surface charging effects. This technique was used briefly in Chapter 5 of this thesis on 
pseudotachylyte and cataclastic material by Alan Butcher of Intellection Pty Ltd, Milton, 
Australia who performed the analysis using a QEMSCAN system. 
2.6. Geochemical study  
2.6.1. Secondary ion mass spectrometry  
Secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) is a technique used to analyse the surface 
compositions of solid material through the use of a focused primary ion beam. This ion 
beam when focused on a surface bombards it with heavy particles, resulting in the 
sputtering of secondary ions. The secondary ions ejected from the sample upon 
bombardment are collected and isolated within a mass analyser within the ion detection 
unit, which consists of a photographic plate, a Faraday cup, an electron multiplier or a 
charge coupled device (CCD) camera and image plate. This records the magnitude of the 
secondary ion signal and measures their mass / charge ratios revealing the elemental, 
isotopic or molecular composition of the point of interest. The primary beam source, 
utilised for sample bombardment, is usually composed of O2+, O-, Cs+, Ar+, Ga+ at energies 
between 1 and 30 keV.  
Secondary ions leave the sample from a volume approximately 1  2 nm below the surface; 
this coupled with the small volume of material sputtered, 100  1000 m3 for high energy 
and high primary beam densities, allows a high spatial resolution of 10  15 m. 
Elements from H to U can be detected, and most elements can be measured down to 
concentrations of 1 ppm or 1 ppb, with isotopic ratios to a precision of 0.5  0.05 %. 
However, the technique has some limitations. The sputtered material consists of both 
mono-atomic ions and molecular species which dominate the mass spectrum, making some 
elemental analysis impossible; these include for example the unresolvable equal mass ions 
such as Lu  Hf in zircon [Benninghoven et al., 1987]. Also, the sputtering process is poorly 
understood, so that secondary ionisation processes cannot be predicted, as a result suitable 
standards and empirical corrections are required for quantitative information. The 
composition of the specimen and also the primary beam type used in the measurement 
have a strong effect on the element detection sensitivity; Therefore standards should have 
a major element composition as close to the unknown as possible. See Section SM 2.7.4 for 
details and compositions of the standards used in this study.  
2.6.2. Instrumentation and operational conditions  
The University of Edinburgh NERC Ion Microprobe Facility comprises two Cameca ion 
microprobes for SIMS analysis, the Cameca IMS-4f, used in this study for trace element 
measurements, and the Cameca IMS-1270, that was used for stable isotope measurements. 
The following section details the capabilities of these microprobes and the analytical 
protocols that are followed in order to obtain reliable SIMS measurements. See Figure 2.11, 
2.12 and 2.13 for detailed schematics of the instruments and sample holders.  
Both the IMS-4f and IMS-1270 microprobes are equipped with a Duoplasmatron and a Cs 
ion source. Duoplasmatron can operate with most gasses, including air, though oxygen is  
commonly used as it enhances the yield of electropositive elements (Al, Si, REE etc.). It can 
be used to extract O- O2- or O2+ depending on the electrical polarity set by the operator, 
whereby in negative polarity mode O- is more abundant, while in positive mode O2+ are the 
most abundant ions. When the specimen is an electrical insulator, setting a negative mode 
(O- ions) prevents charge build-up on the specimen surface. A Cs ion beam is used to 
enhance yields of electronegative elements (C, O and S etc.) and only operates in positive 
mode. This source generates smaller beams than the Duoplasmatron and sputters more 
effectively due to the greater ion mass. Due to the high operating expense the Cs source is 
used routinely only for O, S or C isotopic analysis.  
Once the primary ion beam is generated it is passed through the primary column mass 
filter, the apertures, lenses and deflection plates, it reaches the sample surface and 
generates secondary ions. These ions are removed by an extraction / immersion lens and 
then transferred by a second electrostatic (transfer) lens into the mass spectrometer. For 
further details see Hinton, [1995]. 
The settings used on the IMS-4f microprobe during the carbonate trace element analyses 
for collection of species 23Na, 26Mg, 27Al, 30Si, 44Ca, 54Fe, 55Mn, 88Sr, 138Ba and 140Ce trace 
elements were as follows. A primary ion beam operating with O2- ions with a 20 m spot 
size; within the microprobe a field of view of 825 m, 25 m image field, 150 m field 
aperture and 150 m contrast aperture. Measurements were collected using an offset of 75 
volts with dwell times in seconds of 3 for 23Na, 5 for 26Mg, 2 for 27Al, 2 for 30Si, 2 for 44Ca, 5 
for 54Fe, 5 for 55Mn, 2 for 88Sr, 5 for 138Ba, 5 for 140Ce and wait times in seconds of 1 for 23Na, 
0.2 for 26Mg, 0.2 for 27Al, 0.2 for 30Si, 0.2 for 44Ca, 0.2 for 54Fe, 0.2 for 55Mn, 0.2 for 88Sr, 0.2 
for 138Ba, 0.2 for 140Ce. The settings used on the IMS-1270 microprobe during the carbonate 
18O analyses were as follows. A primary ion beam operating with Cs+ ions at 10 kV with a 
20 m spot size; within the microprobe a field aperture of 3 mm, entrance slit at 60 m, 
exit slit at 411 m, energy slit of 81 m, contrast aperture of 150 m and a transfer lens of 
30 m were used.   
2.7. Supplementary material 
2.7.1. DFDP-2: Thin section preparation protocol  
Two thin sections are to be prepared; pure quartz cuttings (Q) and bulk rock cuttings (R) 
Notes: Wear personal protection equipment (PPE) appropriately; gloves are provided for 
handling epoxy, ear and eye protection for use of saw. Oven temperature should remain at 
60 C, avoid activating the timer function. Ensure water reservoir for saw is maintained, 
refill with water from the hose / creek.  
Creating the block 
1) Acquire cuttings and depths from cutting curators, should be dried and cleaned.  
2) Separate as many pure quartz cuttings from the bulk rock cuttings as possible with 
tweezers / spatula. 
3) Bond block moulds securely to glass plate with sticky back plastic  ensure mould 
bottoms are clean to prevent leaks. 
4) Mix epoxy resin:hardener as 5:1. In order to fill a SINGLE mould 6 ml total of mix is 
required. 
5) Cover the bottoms of each mould with a thin layer of epoxy.  
6) Sprinkle grain cuttings into the mould, ensure cuttings are spread out evenly and 
are touching the glass base. 
7) Fill mould with remaining epoxy and slam (gently) on the table to remove bubbles.  
8) Cure in the oven at 60 C for ~30 mins. 
9) Remove from oven and check hardness, submerge in water to cool. 
10) Use the arbor press set up to remove blocks from moulds. 
Polishing the block 
11) Use the lapper and 240 grit to expose the cuttings at the block base, ensure even 
pressure is applied and block is moved across plate surface. Try to expose as many 
grains as possible (all). 
12) Once cuttings are exposed use 600 grit to give a final polish for ~2 mins, ensure the 
full surface of glass polishing block is used. 
13) Wash and dry blocks.  
Applying block to glass slide  
14) Mix ~3 ml total of epoxy and apply a very thin layer to two fresh slides. Apply a 
small amount of epoxy to the polished block face and apply to the centre of the 
slide.  
15) Place slides and blocks into oven ensuring they do not slide off, allow to cure for 
~20 mins or until hard.  
16) Remove from oven and allow to cool (make sure oven door is completely latched 
shut). 
Removing excess block material 
  When using the saw ensure adequate PPE is used i.e., safety goggles and ear 
protection.  
17) Mount the bottom of the slide into the right angle jig of the saw; support the slide / 
block against the side.  
18) Ensure reservoir of saw is sufficiently filled and turn on taps to lubricate / cool the 
cut. Initiate saw at wall switch  
19) Slowly push block into the path of the saw blade, cut ~1/2 way through block, 
return the jig to its original position and flip sample. Cut the remaining half 
retaining the removed block.  
Polishing slide 
20) Begin polishing the slide with 240 grit, move the slide across the lapper plate while 
polishing and apply pressure depending to varying thickness of slide. More pressure 
on thicker areas. Check slide very frequently with optical microscope to avoid over 
polishing.  
21) Once blue to purple interference colours are visible in quartz switch to 600 grit until 
the majority of quartz cuttings show grey interference colours. Ensure sections do 
not get too thin as material will be lost and damage to the grains will occur. 
Interpretation will be comprised.  
22) Dry and clean sections. 
Finishing touches 
23) Apply a thin strip of UV glue to surface of cuttings, cover with a single cover slip 
ensuring an even spread below slip.  
24) Put under UV lamp for ~30 seconds, turn off after use. 
25) Once cured wash slide with ethanol and paper towels.  
26) If slide has excess cured epoxy on surface shave off with razor blade.  
27) Label thin section and deliver to thin section describer. 
  e.g., DFDP-2B_###_CU_(R) 
           DFDP-2B_###_CU_(Q) 
28) Put any excess material and block material into a labelled plastic bag and return to 
cutting curator. 
2.7.2. Permeability calculation spreadsheet 
The spreadsheet detailed in this section was adapted from an original spreadsheet 
designed by Daniel Faulkner and Peter Armitage and can be found in the Digital 
Supplementary Materials attached to the hard copy of this thesis.  
Sheet SM 2.1  Water pore fluid properties  
Table SM 2.1  Water properties with temperature at 295.15 K (22 C) and varying pressure 
(MPa) from The Engineering ToolBox, [2014]. CV = Specific heat at a constant volume; CP = 
Specific heat at a constant pressure. 
Table SM 2.2  Water properties with temperature at 295.15 K (22 C) and varying pressure 
(MPa) from The Engineering ToolBox, [2014] required for permeability calculations. 
Figure SM 2.1  Graph of viscosity (Pa.S) variation with pressure (MPa). 
Figure SM 2.2  Graph of compressibility (Pa-1) variation with pressure (MPa). 
Table SM 2.3  Calculated values for compressibility from pressure and density values.  
Figure SM 2.3  Graph of density (kg/m3) variation with pressure (MPa). 
Figure SM 2.4  Graph of volume (m3) variation with pressure (MPa). 
Sheet SM 2.2  Pressure system volumes (reservoirs) for Faulkner Triaxial Apparatus 2 (TR2), 
used to calculate permeability values. All pressure fitting dimensions and diagrams taken 
from The High Pressure Equipment Company, [2014]. 
Table SM 2.4  Three Way Valves / Two Pressure Connections information.  
Table SM 2.5  High Pressure Elbows information. 
Table SM 2.6  High Pressure Tees information. 
Table SM 2.7  Triaxial apparatus pore pressure system pipe work volumes.  
Table SM 2.8  Seismic sample assembly pipe work volumes.  
Table SM 2.9  Honeywell Pressure Transducer (TJE) information. 
Table SM 2.10  Reservoir volume breakdown.  
Table SM 2.11  Circle to square and porous spacer volume breakdown. 
Sheet SM 2.3  Front sheet containing parameters for permeability calculations, calibrations 
for converting raw voltage data to pressure values and front graph / table to show 
permeability (m2) variation with effective pressure (MPa).  
Sheet SM 2.4  Example sheet in which raw voltage data logged from the pressure 
transducers is loaded into the spreadsheet and converted to pressure values, equilibrium 
pressures are calculated and used to calculate the ln (Upstream Pore pressure  Calculated 
Equilibrium). The gradient from the ln (Upstream Pore pressure  Calculated Equilibrium) 
values is then used to finally calculate a permeability value. The time series cells are used to 
select the region of interest within the pressure log and the up calib (up calibration) is used 
to remove the calibration that allows the upstream and downstream pore pressure signals 
to be distinguished from one another in the Rig Computer LabVIEW Program.   
2.7.3. Ultrasonic velocity conversion script  isf to csv. 
This program is used to convert the ultrasonic wave data that is saved from the Tektronix 
TDS 3032B oscilloscope in a .isf extension to a .csv extension. The follow command should 
be executed in MS-Dos: cnvrtwfm.exe. Executing this command generates a file called 
placeholdername.csv. In order to covert numerous .isf data files a batch script (.bat) file is 
used, see Figure SM 2.5 below for an example script. The batch file and files for conversion 
are placed in the same folder as the isf to csv script when being executed. 
@echo off 
cnvrtwfm -l -8- p-p-M2-5.isf 
cnvrtwfm -l -8- p-p-M2-15.isf 
cnvrtwfm -l -8- p-p-M2-30.isf 
cnvrtwfm -l -8- p-p-M2-40.isf 
cnvrtwfm -l -8- p-p-M2-55.isf 
cnvrtwfm -l -8- p-p-M2-65.isf 
cnvrtwfm -l -8- p-p-M2-80.isf 
cnvrtwfm -l -8- p-p-M2-90.isf 
cnvrtwfm -l -8- p-p-M2-105.isf 
cnvrtwfm -l -8- s-s-M2-5.isf 
cnvrtwfm -l -8- s-s-M2-15.isf 
cnvrtwfm -l -8- s-s-M2-30.isf 
cnvrtwfm -l -8- s-s-M2-40.isf 
cnvrtwfm -l -8- s-s-M2-55.isf 
cnvrtwfm -l -8- s-s-M2-65.isf 
cnvrtwfm -l -8- s-s-M2-80.isf 
cnvrtwfm -l -8- s-s-M2-90.isf 
cnvrtwfm -l -8- s-s-M2-105.isf 
Figure SM 2.5  Example of a batch file. A text editor (Notepad or WordPad in Windows) 
can be used to create the batch file. The file extension of the file should be saved as .bat. 
2.7.4. Secondary ion mass spectrometry carbonate standards 
Haxby OKA LFC NCC DIS UWC M93 Dol 
23Na 2655 119 12 41 15 15 3195 26 
26Mg 18006 610 821 2657 528 472 1076 109475 
27Al 22 43 13 15 20 12 34 38 
30Si 28 102 18 31 40 17 45 1152 
44Ca 400220 400220 400220 400220 400220 400220 400220 218000 
54Fe 57 426 5966 15118 771 64 97 1137 
55Mn 1 1910 356 1461 433 75 2 79 
88Sr 2820 13363 542 909 484 394 8655 83 
138Ba 24 1801 0 5 0 286 4 8 
140Ce 0 715 0 5 4 1 0 4 
18O - - 19.029 20.366 17.348 23.28 25.93 - 
16O/18O - - 0.0020434 0.0020460 0.0020400 0.0020519 0.0020572 - 
Table SM 2.12  University of Edinburgh NERC Ion Microprobe facility standards for 
carbonate trace element and 18O stable isotope analyses. Trace element values are 
reported in parts per million (ppm) with Ca artificially set at the stated values. Stable 
isotope standards are also reported. Standards were chosen to cover as wide a range of 
carbonate trace element concentrations as possible due to the highly variable nature of the 
Alpine Fault Zone carbonates.  
Haxby: Deep Water coral, Haxby Ridge; used for its high 26Mg content. See Kasemann et al., 
2009 (as PS69/318-1) for more details. OKA: The Oka carbonatite complex, Quebec; used 
for their high 88Sr, 138Be and 140Ce content. Provided by Blundy, J., University of Bristol. LFC, 
NCC and DIS: Provided by Tony Dickson, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom; used for 
their high 54Fe, 55Mn and 88Sr content. See Swart, 1990 for more details. UWC: Inorganic 
calcite; sky blue marble from the Valentine Wollastonite Mine in the Adirondacks, USA, also 
known as University of Wisconsin Calcite; used for its high 88Sr and 138Ba content. See 
Graham et al., 1998 for more details. M93: also known as M93-T-FC1. Porites coral micro-
atoll from the north coast of Papua New Guinea; used for its high 23Na, 26Mg and 88Sr 
content. Provided by Allison, N., St Andrews University, United Kingdom. Dol: Dolomite of 
unknown origin; used for its high 26Mg content.  
3. Permeability and seismic velocity and their anisotropy 
across the Alpine Fault, New Zealand: an insight from 
laboratory measurements on core from the Deep Fault 
Drilling Project 
M.J. Allen, D. Tatham, D.R. Faulkner, E. Mariani, and C. Boulton 
Published in Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth 
Key Points 
 Low permeability and low seismic velocity is associated with the damage zone of 
the Alpine Fault Zone, New Zealand. 
 The development of pervasive gouge-filled and calcite-filled fractures explains the 
low permeability and low seismic velocity. 
 Seismic velocity anisotropy is low (<30 %) due to the lack of preferred orientation of 
the fracture network in the fault damage zone. 
Abstract 
The Alpine Fault, a transpressional plate boundary between the Australian and Pacific 
plates, is known to rupture quasiperiodically with large magnitude earthquakes (Mw ~8). 
The hydraulic and elastic properties of fault zones are thought to vary over the seismic 
cycle, influencing the nature and style of earthquake rupture and associated processes. We 
present a suite of laboratory permeability and P (Vp) and S (Vs) wave velocity measurements 
performed on fault lithologies recovered during the first phase of the Deep Fault Drilling 
Project (DFDP-1), which sampled principal slip zone (PSZ) gouges, cataclasites and fractured 
ultramylonites, with all recovered lithologies overprinted by abundant secondary 
mineralization, recording enhanced fluid-rock interaction. Core material was tested in three 
orthogonal directions, orientated relative to the down-core axis and, when present, 
foliation. Measurements were conducted with pore pressure (H2O) held at 5 MPa over an 
effective pressure (Peff) range of 5  105 MPa. Permeabilities and seismic velocities 
decrease with proximity to the PSZ with permeabilities ranging from 10-17 to 10-21 m2 and Vp 
and Vs ranging from 4400 to 5900 m/s in the ultramylonites / cataclasites and 3900 to 4200 
m/s at the PSZ. In comparison with intact country rock protoliths, the highly variable 
cataclastic structures and secondary phyllosilicates and carbonates have resulted in an 
overall reduction in permeability and seismic wave velocity, as well as a reduction in 
anisotropy within the fault core. These results concur with other similar studies on other 
mature, tectonic faults in their interseismic period. 
3.1. Introduction 
The quantitative characterization of the physical properties of fault zones, such as 
permeability and the transmission of seismic waves, is essential in order to understand the 
influence they have on fluid flow and seismicity in the brittle crust. Upper-crustal fault 
zones can be divided into three primary components: the fault core, the damage zone, and 
the host protolith. These components may be lithologically and structurally distinct and 
vary in proportion according to geological setting [Chester and Logan, 1986; Caine et al., 
1996; Faulkner et al., 2010]. The fault core can consist of singular or multiple anastomosing 
slip surfaces and is where the highest strain and most displacement are accommodated 
[Faulkner et al., 2003]. This core is usually nested within a damage zone, a region of 
kinematically related cracks and small faults, decreasing in density with distance from the 
core and transitioning into the local host protolith [Anders and Wiltschko, 1994; Wilson et 
al., 2003; Mitchell and Faulkner, 2009].  
The Alpine Fault in New Zealand is a major fault that forms the active plate boundary 
between the Pacific and Australian plates. The exhumation of the Alpine Fault hanging wall 
enables direct observations of the internal structure of a large plate-boundary fault, which 
is late in its seismic cycle and could therefore provide important information on the fault 
state at the time prior to an earthquake. The damage zone of the Alpine Fault of New 
Zealand is composed of diverse fault rock lithologies including clay-rich gouges, cataclasite, 
ultramylonites, and fault breccias, all overprinted, to different extents, by a geochemically 
altered zone, which, in this fault, masks evidence of a Brittle  Viscous Transition [Sibson et 
al., 1981; Caine et al., 1996; Sutherland et al., 2012] 
Fault zone architecture has a considerable influence on the hydraulic properties of the rock 
surrounding fault zones, with faults acting as either conduits or barriers for fluid flow or a 
combination of the two [Caine et al., 1996; Evans et al., 1997]. The determining factors are 
dominantly the ratio of fault core (typically low permeability regions) to damage zone (high 
permeability regions), with the fault core acting as a barrier to flow across the fault and the 
damage zone acting as a conduit for fault-parallel flow [Caine et al., 1996]. Furthermore, 
there may be inherent anisotropy within the rocks of both the fault core [Faulkner and 
Rutter, 1998; Farrell et al., 2014] and the damage zone [Faulkner and Armitage, 2013]. This 
model is further complicated by the occurrence of fault-related alteration via fluid-rock 
interactions. This commonly leads to phase transformation, clay mineral generation, and 
cementation and hence variations in physical properties with time [e.g., Wintsch et al., 
1995; Holdsworth, 2004] 
Investigation at a variety of scales requires quantification of the variables that control fault 
zone behaviour, for instance, whether slip is accommodated seismically or aseismically; 
whether a fault is a fluid conduit or barrier, can pore fluid overpressures develop, or will 
mineralization occur. Geophysical investigation techniques, such as seismic and electrical 
resistivity surveys, give broad regional information on fault structure [Rietbrock, 2001; 
Eberhart-Phillips and Bannister, 2002; Hoffmann-Rothe et al., 2004; Lay et al., 2016]. Direct 
observations of fault zones, and collection of samples for laboratory testing and 
microstructural analyses, are limited to faults that have been exhumed to the surface [e.g.,, 
Wibberley and Shimamoto, 2002] or that have been drilled and cored at depth [e.g., Zoback 
et al., 2011]. Otherwise, only indirect measurements of some of the properties of faults at 
depth are possible through inference [e.g., Faulkner et al., 2008; Mitchell and Faulkner, 
2012].  
In this paper, laboratory measurements of permeability and ultrasonic wave velocity are 
made on fault rock samples recovered from the central Alpine Fault Zone. These specimens 
were sampled from core collected from two shallow (<150 m depth) boreholes that were 
drilled as part of the Deep Fault Drilling Project (DFDP-1). These cores provide a unique 
opportunity to sample through a continuous section across the Alpine Fault Zone, 
uninterrupted by thick vegetation and relatively unaffected by surface weathering effects. 
First, a brief introduction to the Alpine Fault Zone and the DFDP project is given. Then the 
techniques used to prepare the delicate samples analysed are described. Finally, results of 
permeability, P and S wave velocity measurements, including their anisotropy, and 
microstructural controls, are described and their influence on fault zone processes during 
and after seismicity is discussed. 
3.2. The Alpine Fault, New Zealand, and DFDP Drilling 
The Alpine Fault Zone (AFZ), bounding the western edge of the Southern Alps on New 
Zealands South Island, accommodates over 70 % of the relative motion between the 
colliding Australian and Pacific Plates [Norris and Toy, 2014]. The ramping of the Pacific 
plate over the Australian plate is accommodated through dextral-reverse movement, 
offsetting basement rocks laterally by ~470 km, with Quaternary horizontal displacement 
rates estimated at 21  27 mm yr-1 [Norris and Cooper, 2001; Lamb et al., 2015]. Uplift 
across the fault is rapid, exhuming crustal rocks from depths of 20  30 km at a rate of ~6  
9 mm yr-1 [Little et al., 2002b]. Accompanying this rapid uplift is the advection of the 
regional geothermal gradient. Quartz fluid inclusion microthermometry places the gradient 
at 40 C/km [Toy et al., 2010], while titanium thermobarometry of quartz shows a gradient 
of 45 C/km [Cross et al., 2015] and recent shallow borehole measurements report 
gradients of 62.6  2.1 and 125  55 C/km [Sutherland et al., 2012, 2017].  
Palaeoseismic evidence indicates that the Alpine Fault has had numerous geologically 
recent rupture episodes at, 1717  25, 1630  25 and 1460  25 A.D., estimated to have 
moment magnitudes of 7.9  0.3, 7.6  0.3, and 7.9  0.4, respectively [Wells et al., 1999; 
Rhoades and Van Dissen, 2003; Langridge et al., 2012]. This, coupled with recent seismicity 
patterns, geodetic strain records, and regional low-velocity zones indicative of high pore 
fluid pressures deep in the fault zone, suggests that the fault is locked above 6  12 km 
depth and is in the late stage of the earthquake cycle [EberhartPhillips, 1995; Sutherland et 
al., 2007; De Pascale and Langridge, 2012; Lamb and Smith, 2013]. The global significance 
of the Alpine Fault in the study of major fault zones and crustal processes is considerable; 
the opportunity to study a locked continental plate boundary fault thought to be late in the 
earthquake cycle will yield insight into the prerupture conditions of a major fault and the 
nature of the interseismic physico-chemical processes that have taken place. 
The Deep Fault Drilling Project (DFDP) was undertaken to better understand the processes 
that lead to major earthquakes by drilling into and observing a major continental fault 
during its build up to a large seismic event. The first phase of the Deep Fault Drilling Project 
(DFDP-1) comprised two pilot holes (DFDP-1A and DFDP-1B) drilled into an active thrust 
segment of the AFZ at Gaunt Creek, Westland in January 2011 (Figure 3.1). The boreholes 
reached depths of 100.6 m and 151.4 m, respectively, sampling a range of fault lithologies  
Figure 3.1  [A] Location of the Alpine Fault Plate Boundary across the continental New 
Zealand, South Island. Topography shading, light grey >800 m and dark grey >1800 m. Red 
box shows region of (B). [B] Central region of the Alpine Fault, location of DFDP-1 shown in 
red circle. [C] Cross-section of DFDP-1 boreholes showing schematic lithological divisions 
and local topography, adapted from Sutherland et al., [2012]. HW = hanging wall; FW = 
footwall.   
including ultramylonites, cataclasites and gouges. All samples used in this study were 
collected from core recovered from DFDP-1A and 1B. The principal slip zone (PSZ) of the 
AFZ was reached at 90.74 m depth in DFDP-1A and 128.44 m in DFDP-1B, marking the 
boundary between the Australian and Pacific Plates, with a second PSZ within footwall 
rocks recorded in DFDP-1B at 144 m. The PSZ in both boreholes is composed of clay-rich 
gouge (Figure 3.1) [Sutherland et al., 2012].  
Drilling revealed the presence of a ~30 m thick alteration zone overprinting both the fault 
core and damage zone. This alteration zone was defined based on a distinctive light green 
colour in core and in outcrop produced by elevated concentrations of alteration minerals 
(e.g., phyllosillicates and carbonates) above regional levels [Sutherland et al., 2012; 
Townend et al., 2013; Toy et al., 2015b; Boulton et al., 2017a]. The degree of alteration 
increases with proximity to the PSZ within the fractured ultramylonites and cataclasites of 
the damage zone, implying that extensive fluid-rock interactions have occurred in the 
hanging wall of the Alpine Fault.  
3.3. Methods  
3.3.1. Sample selection and preparation 
For this study, samples were collected from both the DFDP-1A and 1B drill cores. The drilled 
core diameter was 85 mm (PQ wireline bit size) and supplied for sample preparation as 200 
 300 mm-length intact core rounds and half rounds. These core sections were axially 
oriented to the borehole axis, however, due to core rotation during retrieval the azimuthal 
orientation could not be preserved [Sutherland et al., 2011; Toy et al., 2015]. The 
lithological character of the recovered core has been described in detail by Toy et al. 
[2015]. The core (and consequently the fault zone) was classified into a number of 
lithological units, based on the original protolith and level of damage / alteration. These 
unit classifications are outlined in Figure 3.2. Seven hanging wall cataclasites (Units 3 and 
4), two footwall cataclasites (Units 6a and 6b) and the PSZ gouge were sampled in this 
study, representing a section across the plate boundary (Unit 5). For comparison, lithologies 
classified as potential protoliths for the Alpine Fault cataclasites were collected from the 
field and tested. These include an Alpine Schist, a foliated quartzofeldspathic schist, and a 
quartzofeldspathic ultramylonite all collected from the faults hanging wall exposures in the  
Figure 3.2  Photomicrographs of cataclastic microstructures from the hanging wall [A  D] 
and the footwall [E and F] of the Alpine Fault from both DFDP-1A and 1B drill cores. Blue / 
red / orange direction arrows denote the direction of measurement used in Figure 3.5 and 
3.6. Crosses in (G) represent regions of sampling in the drill core; red circle denotes location 
of pictured cube micrographs (A  F). Classification scheme used in (G) and (H) adapted 
from Toy et al., [2015].  
Southern Alps foothills close to the drill site. For more details on these lithologies, see 
Cooper [1972] and Little et al., [2015], respectively. Most hanging wall cataclasites used in 
this study were sourced from the alteration zone (see Sutherland et al., 2012), a zone of 
heavily altered cataclasites rich in carbonate precipitation and authigenic phyllosilicates 
(illite / muscovite and chlorite). Figure 3.2 depicts selected optical micrographs of the 
tested material and a schematic outlining core sampling intervals. 
Due to the friable nature of many of the test specimens, traditional methods of sample 
preparation such as water-lubricated coring, sawing, and grinding proved catastrophic, 
causing washout of the finer grain-size fractions and often total disaggregation. We 
therefore developed new, reliable preparation techniques to produce systematically intact 
samples suitable for experimental investigation. The aim was to produce cubic samples that 
could be used for measurements of anisotropy of both permeability and ultrasonic wave 
velocity. 
Initially the core was wrapped in thin plastic wrap followed by the application of three to 
four layers of ModRoc (gypsum plaster bandages). The original core orientation was 
recorded throughout the wrapping process, and once fully hardened, it was scribed onto 
the final plaster covering. Cutting the material was accomplished through the use of an 
annular saw (Revolution XT Ring Saw; Figure 3.3). The configuration of the annular blade 
means that only the actively cutting portion of the blade is in contact with the sample. This 
reduces grain plucking and disaggregation. Some cooling and lubricating fluid (water in this 
case) is required during cutting; this was applied by gently pressing a moist sponge to the 
blade edge.  
After each cut, the exposed face was again covered by plastic wrap and ModRoc following 
the above procedure and repeated until a ~15  15  15 mm cube was produced. The final 
cube is orientated to the vertical borehole axis, with two orientations orthogonal to the 
core cut according to any microstructural fabric if present, i.e., foliations, calcite veins and 
fractures. A final step, if the specimen proved sufficiently robust, involved hand grinding 
the cube surfaces with dry, fine emery paper to provide a smooth flat surface to maximise 
acoustic wave and fluid transmission from the sample assembly to the sample cube. Once 
preparation was complete, the specimen, porous steel spacers, and solid steel spacers were 
jacketed in heat-shrink polyolefin in order to secure the sample. This was then jacketed in  
Figure 3.3  [A] The Revolution XT Ring Saw, developed by Gemini Saw Company, used in 
shaping the test specimens. [B] Examples of clean cut surfaces of cataclasites bound in 
ModRoc bandages.   
PVC tubing, which forms a physical barrier between the sample and its pore fluid, and the 
silicon oil confining medium (Figure 3.4).  
Once measurements were concluded, the experimental specimens were prepared for 
microstructural analysis, with their orientations preserved, using standard petrographic thin 
section techniques if the samples were sufficiently robust. Friable material was prepared by 
using water-free polishing techniques by Paul Hands of Hand On Thin Sections Ltd. As the 
DFDP core is not horizontally oriented, the relative orientation of the observed 
microstructures cannot be conclusively related to the fault orientation.  
3.3.2. Experimental procedure  
The triaxial experimental apparatus used to undertake permeability and seismic velocity 
measurements is illustrated schematically in Figure 3.4 [Faulkner and Armitage, 2013]. 
During each experiment, the sample assembly was loaded into the pressure vessel, 
confining pressure (Pc) of 10 MPa was applied using a low viscosity silicon oil confining 
medium, and finally, the specimen was allowed to saturate with deionised water pore fluid 
which was allowed to equilibrate at a pore fluid pressure (Pf) of 5 MPa and an effective 
confining pressure (Pe) of 5 MPa, assuming a simple effective pressure law where the 
poroelastic constant  is equal to unity [Rice and Cleary, 1976]. Confining pressure and pore 
fluid pressure are servo-controlled to a resolution of 0.1 MPa.  
Since each sample was recovered and tested again 3 times in three orthogonal orientations 
(x, y and z, see Figure 3.2I), no measurements were recorded during the first pressure cycle 
each sample experienced. A pressure cycle consisted of increasing the confining pressure 
through the range 10, 20, 35, 45, 60, 70, 85, 95 and 110 MPa, while holding the Pf at 5 MPa. 
These effective pressures (Peff = 5, 15, 30, 40, 55, 65, 80, 90 and 105 MPa) are 
approximately equivalent to pressure conditions spanning the near surface to ~5  6 km 
depth. This method means that, during an experiment, the samples were overconsolidated 
with respect to the near-surface conditions, removing the effects of sample preparation, 
storage, transport, and the effect of unloading during retrieval between tests on the same 
sample, making comparison with borehole measurements difficult. Another consideration 
to be made is the evolution of the fault rocks during the exhumation of the Alpine Fault. As 
mentioned above, the Alpine Fault is a mature fault that has undergone extensive and  
Figure 3.4  [A] Schematic illustration of the triaxial experimental apparatus used in the 
study, including the seismic sample assembly housed within the pressure vessel. [B] The 
seismic sample assembly with piezoelectric ceramics and pore fluid supply pipes set into the 
upstream and downstream platens. [C] A cube-shaped specimen set between porous steel 
spacers (both square and circle) and a circle to square adapter to allow coupling with the 
circular assembly platens.   
cyclical comminution and geochemical alteration. Consequently, the specimens tested are 
likely to be substantially different structurally and compositionally to fault rocks at depths 
of ~5  6 km. Nonetheless the results provide insight and an approximation of the 
permeability and seismic velocity of the Alpine Fault as it is exhumed from depth. 
Piezoelectric ceramic transducers (Piezoelectric lead Zirconate Titanate  PZT-5H, 
fundamental frequency at 1.5 MHz), with P wave and orthogonal S wave polarization 
directions, are housed in each opposing platen and are used to produce and record 
ultrasonic P and S waves through the samples. The ultrasonic velocities are measured using 
the through-transmission method, utilizing the travel times and specimen length [Birch, 
1960] after correction for the travel time through the loading platens. Elastic wave speeds 
were picked and velocities calculated over an effective pressure range of 55-105 MPa for S-
waves (Vs) and 15  105 MPa for P-waves (Vp). Poor coupling between the loading platens 
and the test specimen at low effective pressures (<55 MPa for Vs and <15 MPa for Vp) made 
reliable picking of arrival times difficult, and so these data are not reported. 
Permeability measurements were performed using the pulse transient technique [Brace et 
al., 1968], involving the introduction of small pressure difference of <1 MPa to one end of 
the specimen and observing the pressure decay through the sample with time. One 
effective pressure cycle consisted of measuring the permeability, Vp and Vs at each effective 
pressure as the confining pressure is increased, with the unloading effective pressure path 
covering the same increments during measurement. A typical pressure cycle lasted 
between 3 and 7 days owing to the low permeability of some samples. Once one pressure 
cycle was completed for a given cube orientation, the specimen was removed from its 
jacket and reoriented and the above experimental procedure was repeated.  
In a typical experiment, permeability and seismic velocities do not fully recover after 
deconfinement from the initial up-pressure leg, with upleg and downleg variations typically 
an order of magnitude for permeability and between 2 and 30 % for seismic velocities; see 
Supplementary Material Figure SM 3.1 for an illustration of this hysteresis. Subsequent 
variations after repeated pressure cycles become progressively smaller. Similar procedures 
and observations are reported by Bernabe, [1987], Faulkner and Rutter, [2000], and 
Morrow et al., [2014]. The drying and unloading of samples at room conditions were 
minimized by conducting experiments for each sample orientation in immediate succession 
or by sealing the sample in heat shrink or plastic film where this rapidity was not possible. 
As these samples have undergone compaction and consolidation up to pressures of 105 
MPa, the measurements do not correlate with borehole wireline and slug tests but rather 
reflect greater depths on the Alpine Fault. We refer to Carpenter et al., [2014] for 
experimental results performed at in situ borehole conditions.  
3.4. Results  
3.4.1. Permeability Measurements 
Permeability results are plotted as log permeability against effective pressure and show a 
systematic decrease with increasing Peff, generally decreasing by larger increments over the 
lower Peff range, ~5  40 MPa, presumably as handling / drilling-induced fractures close. This 
initial closure can account for a drop in permeability of up to 2 orders of magnitude (for 
example, the permeability trace for 1A-83.2 in Figure 3.5C); however this effect more 
commonly manifests itself as a drop of 1 order of magnitude. Once above ~ 30 MPa Peff the 
rate of permeability reduction with effective pressure, in most cases, lessens with 
increasing pressure.  
At Peff 5 MPa permeabilities range from 1.49  10-17 m2 in 1A-81.32 (D-down) to 1.35  10-20 
m2 in 1B-127.3 (X-down). At Peff 105 MPa, the overall permeabilities range from 1.35  10-18 
m2 in 1A-81.32 (Y-down) and 1.25  10-21 m2 in 1B-127.3 (X-down). In some instances, 
pressure sensitivity accounts for a greater variation in permeability than individual 
specimen variation, as shown by 1B-120.1 (D-down) and 1A-83.2 (Y-down) in Figure 3.5A 
and C.  
Permeability variation and an indication of the permeability anisotropy throughout the 
boreholes are illustrated in Figure 3.6, showing the range of permeabilities of each 
orientation with variation in Peff. With increasing proximity to the PSZ, permeability 
decreases. This trend is particularly noticeable in Figure 3.6A within the hanging wall 
alteration zone. This same feature is not as easily observed in Figure 3.6D, within the DFDP-
1B core, as sparser sampling density makes it more difficult to highlight the trend,  
Figure 3.5  (above) Permeability [A  C], P-wave velocity [D  F] and S-wave velocity [G  I] 
measurements as a function of effective pressure. Each row denotes the orientation of the 
specimen, illustrated in K. D-down is equivalent to the down core axis while X-down and Y-
down represent two horizontal directions in the borehole; note the X and Y directions do not 
correlate between specimens due to the inability to horizontally orient samples from the 
drill core. Colours represent depths and are noted in the legend, (J). 
particularly close to the PSZ. Within the DFDP-1B alteration zone, there is a decrease in 
permeability with depth, and the lowest permeability value of 1.25  10-21 m2 was measured 
immediately above the PSZ. With increased distance from the PSZ, into the footwall 
cataclasites (e.g., 1B-142), permeability increases by up to 2 orders of magnitude from ~10-
20 to ~10-18 m2, respectively (see Figure 3.6D). Permeability measurements for the protolith 
lithologies could not be performed as their permeability was too low for the resolution of 
the experimental apparatus, at ~10-22 m2. At permeabilities lower than ~10-21 m2, flow rates 
are very small and pores are inferred to be approaching molecular size. The permeability 
anisotropy exhibited by borehole specimens appears to have little correlation to 
orientation; this is conceivably due to the highly variable microstructures present in these 
fractured or comminuted lithologies. Direct correlation of permeability with specific 
microstructural causes is difficult to make, except in the case of 1A-90.67, the clay-rich PSZ 
gouge. This specimen exhibits the lowest permeability anisotropy at 40 %, potentially due 
to its finer grained and more homogenous structure in comparison to other fault core 
lithologies.  
3.4.2. Seismic velocity measurements 
Elastic wave transmission through the specimens shows a similar relation to increasing Peff 
as permeability, with a rapid increase in velocity over initial pressure increments (e.g. 5 to 
40 MPa) stabilizing once open fractures and porosity are reduced at high Peff (~ 40  50 
MPa). Both Vp and Vs show similar trends across the fault; the material exhibiting the 
highest Vp and Vs is on the periphery of the pervasive alteration zone, farthest from the PSZ, 
(1B-108.2 and 1B-120.1) with Vp of ~5700 m/s and Vs of ~4000 m/s (see Figure 3.6B-F).  
Both Vp and Vs decrease with increased proximity to the PSZ with a substantial reduction in 
velocity within the PSZ at 1A-90.67. Across the respective pressure ranges, hanging wall Vp  
Figure 3.6  caption overleaf.   
Figure 3.6  (above) [A-I] Permeability and Seismic velocity ranges for material from DFDP-
1A and DFDP-1B with depth, including field derived protolith lithologies [G and H]. Each 
tested specimen is represented by a bar colour coded to orientation (see I); note the X and Y 
directions do not correlate between specimens due to the inability to horizontally orient 
samples from the drill core. Peff ranges for permeability measurements are 5  105 MPa, Vp 
15  105 MPa and Vs 55  105 MPa. Peff range for measurements from Carpenter et al., 
[2014] at 2.5  65 MPa. Wireline sonic velocity logs in (B) and (E) adapted from Townend et 
al., [2013]. 
values span 4500 to 5900 m/s with Vs values between 2400 to 4000 m/s. Material from the 
footwall exhibits lower velocities than the hanging wall with Vp values ranging from 4400 to 
5600 m/s and Vs values from 2200 to 3500 m/s. PSZ material exhibits the lowest Vp from 
3900 to 4200 m/s and Vs at 1900 to 2000 m/s. Figure 3.6G and H show seismic velocity 
measurements for the protolith lithologies, with the Alpine Schist Vp from 4800 to 6700 
m/s and Vs at 3400 to 4250 m/s while the ultramylonite had Vp of 5600 to 6170 m/s and Vs 
3600 to 4030 m/s.  
Performing measurements parallel to the down core axis and in two further mutually 
orthogonal orientations allowed the seismic velocity anisotropy present in these rocks to be 
investigated and approximated. As only three orientations were measured in this study and 
these directions are not necessarily oriented parallel to the principal axes of the dynamic 
elasticity tensor, the measurements presented provide only a minimum constraint on 
anisotropy. Figure 3.7 illustrates the magnitude of this anisotropy with depth at 105 MPa, 
with the anisotropy calculated using Equation 6 following Mainprice and Humbert, [1994],  
 AVp,s1,s2  =  (
,1,2 max  ,1,2 min
,1,2    
)  100    (6) 
where Vnmax and Vnmin are the maximum and minimum seismic velocities at a given Peff 
increment with the subscript n denoting the wave type, while  is the averaged velocity 
(0.5 (Vnmax + Vnmin)) and AVn is the value of anisotropy in percent.  
The degree of anisotropy present in the test specimens appears far greater for permeability 
than for seismic wave velocity. Presumably, this is largely due to the maintenance of  
Figure 3.7  Permeability [A and C] 
and Seismic velocity [B and D] 
anisotropy with depth at 105 MPa is 
shown. 
interconnected voids and fractures for fluid mobility, which will be greatly affected by 
increasing Peff, while the propagation of elastic waves is not limited by fracture / void 
connectivity in the same way. Similar observations were made by Fortin et al., [2011] when 
hydrostatically loading fractured basalt. We must also state that the anisotropies measured 
in this study, due to the arbitrary horizontal directions of the test specimens, are a 
minimum value of transverse anisotropy.  
In most specimens, most notably in 1A-83.2 and 1B-142.2, Vs1 anisotropy is much greater 
than that found for Vp, potentially due to attenuation as an S-wave pulse will be more 
sensitive to scattering of wave energy via impingement on an inhomogeneity, potentially a 
pore, fracture, foliation or lithological interface [Sato et al., 2012]. This may explain the 33 
and 17 % difference in the anisotropy in 1A-83.2 and 1B-142.2, respectively. 1A-83.2 
contains a penetrative foliation that may allow for easier transmission of P-waves while the 
S-waves are more inhibited by the aforementioned factors, particularly pores and fractures. 
However, 1B-142.2 has no obvious mineral or fracture alignments, implying that the 
heterogeneity in clast size, shape, and orientation may also result in a greater variation of 
Vs with orientation than with Vp. Saturation of the fractures present may also be an 
important influence on seismic wave velocity, particularly in regard to the anisotropy 
observed. In this study we can assume that the fractures are fully saturated, explaining the 
greater anisotropy seen in Vs than in Vp; if anisotropy was greater in Vp, this would imply 
that fractures remained dry throughout the experiments [Guguen and Sarout, 2011].  
3.4.3. Specimen Microstructural Variation 
Figure 3.2 shows the mm to cm-scale microstructures that govern the variation of physical 
properties throughout the Alpine Fault damage zone in both the hanging wall and footwall. 
Gouge-filled fractures are common throughout the alteration zone, generally manifesting 
as low-displacement shears filled with unconsolidated gouge material of the same 
composition as adjacent wall rock with little authigenic clay, appearing as angular to 
subangular shaped clasts ranging from sub m to 100 m diameter (Figure 3.8C). 
Occasionally, elongated clasts show a preferred orientation parallel to the vein walls (Figure 
3.8E). These fractures are typified by their lack of carbonate cementation or phyllosilicate 
alteration and assumingly belong to a relatively recent episode of deformation. Fracture 
density through the Alpine Faults damage / alteration zone was quantified by Williams et  
Figure 3.8  Backscatter Electron images of hanging wall [A  D] and footwall [E  F] 
cataclasites. Mineral abbreviations after Whitney and Evans, [2010]; additionally, Op Fr = 
open fracture, Un Go = unconsolidated gouge, Phyll = phyllosilicate. (A), (B), and (C) exhibit 
carbonate-filled veins; (C), (E), and (F) exhibit unconsolidated gouge-filled fractures; (D) 
contains with clay-filled fractures.  
al., [2016] using CT scans of the DFDP-1 core material, reporting that damage zone 
structures (including open, healed and semi healed fractures) do not increase in density 
with proximity to the PSZ, remaining largely uniform throughout the cored interval of the 
fault. The distribution of these fractures and the presence of authigenic clay minerals within 
them are the key controlling factors governing the permeability and seismic velocity 
variations of these rocks. NanoCT scans of specimens from this study are included in the 
Digital Supplementary Material as Videos SM 3.1 and SM 3.2; these images highlight the 
presence of throughgoing open fractures with little evidence of shear, particularly visible in 
1B-120.1 and fractures that contain gouge material visible in 1B-133.3. Cataclasites in the 
hanging wall are generated from an amphibolite-facies quartzofeldspathic or metabasic 
mylonitic protolith and are typified by a pervasive carbonate infill, as both cement and vein 
precipitation, composing ~5 % of the bulk mineralogy. Veining is evidently multi-
generational, exhibiting cross-cutting relationships, varying orientations (Figure 3.2), and 
evidence of reactivation shown by crack-seal structures. Foliation, when present, is typified 
by alternating phyllosilicates or opaque oxides anastomosing around sub-mm relict 
protolith quartz fragments. 
In contrast, the footwall cataclasites contain far less carbonate veins, and as a result are far 
more incohesive and generally exhibit a lighter grey-white colour owing to their prehnite-
pumpellyite to greenschist-facies granitic protolith [Toy et al., 2015b]. Foliation is similarly 
variable in pervasiveness, from distinct as in 1B-133.3 (Figure 3.2E) with obvious alternating 
quartz / feldspar and phyllosilicate fabric, to completely absent as in 1B-142 (Figure 3.2F). 
Foliation is seen to be highly variable in orientation on the sub-cm scale. In contrast with 
both cataclasites, the PSZ ultracomminuted gouge has a finer grain size (<10 m) and 
consists of two main gouge types that occur in discrete layers ~30  50 mm thick: a brown 
smectitic gouge and a blue chloritic / micaceous gouge, described in detail by Boulton et al., 
[2014], the latter of which was tested in this study.  
Overall, the mineralogy across the fault, in both the hanging wall and footwall, remains 
largely constant. X-ray diffraction results from Boulton et al., [2017] show that calcite, 
precipitated as cements and veins, vary in proportion more than any other mineral phase, 
comprising ~5 % of the modal mineralogy in the hanging wall, decreasing sharply across the 
PSZ to ~1.5 % in the footwall. Phyllosilicates such as chlorite and biotite are present 
throughout the fault zone, while smectite, an authigenic swelling clay, appears only within 
the PSZs.  
3.5. Discussion  
The temporal and spatial variations of permeability and seismic velocity within fault zones 
are thought to be largely influenced by the variation of fracture density with respect to the 
fault zone [Faulkner et al., 2003; Mitchell and Faulkner, 2008, 2012]. This picture is 
complicated when lithological variation occurs with the fault zone [e.g., Wibberley and 
Shimamoto, 2002] and also when mineralization occurs within both the damage zone and 
fault core. Mineralization can occur in two ways: as authigenic mineral growth that 
produces clay mineral formation and as precipitation that may, respectively, heal and seal 
the fault [Madariaga et al., 1998; Tenthorey and Cox, 2006]. In this section, we consider 
how mineralogical and microstructural characteristics influence the fault zone physical 
properties, how the Alpine Fault Zone compares with other mature fault zones, and finally, 
how mineralogy and microstructure influence earthquake processes such as thermal 
pressurization and the propagation of seismic waves.  
3.5.1. Microstructural controls on physical properties 
Other than a few discrete features such as the PSZ and pseudotachylyte veins, the bulk 
mineralogy remains largely consistent across the fault zone [Toy et al., 2015b; Boulton et 
al., 2017a]. Hence, the bulk mineralogy does not appear to be a major factor controlling the 
observed variations in physical properties. Consequently, the fracture density might be 
considered to be the primary influence on the physical properties at the scale of the 
experimental measurements. As fractures make up proportionally far less of the bulk rock 
than the matrix, the small variations of mineralogy associated with fractures, primarily 
carbonate and phyllosilicate fill, are masked by the bulk rock mineralogy in regard to 
seismic velocities. However, small variations in the overall mineralogy, due to fracture infill, 
could significantly modify the fluid transport properties of the fractures and hence those of 
the bulk rock. 
Williams et al., [2016], using combined CT and SEM analyses of the DFDP core, to a fracture 
aperture resolution of >1 mm, discovered that, within the alteration zone, the majority of 
the fault damage is cemented with varying carbonate, clay, and gouge materials (72 % 
being fully sealed and an additional 24 % remaining partially sealed). Outside of the 
alteration zone (<50 m away from the PSZ), fault damage may persist between periods of 
seismicity, as evidenced by the high in situ permeability measured during wireline slug tests 
and the lack of intact core recovery outside of the alteration zone due to disaggregation 
[Sutherland et al., 2012]. Fracture porosity is likely to be the main control of fluid flow in 
these damage zone ultramylonites and cataclasites, as the intact protolith or cemented 
regions have very low permeabilities, below the capabilities of measurement of the 
experimental apparatus detailed above, at <10-22 m2 as measured in the protolith lithologies 
in this study. The length scales of the fractures within a rock mass have great influence on 
permeability and seismic wave velocities; this scale effect is detailed in Brace et al., [1968] 
and Nara et al., [2011] regarding permeability and Budiansky and Oconnell, [1976] 
regarding seismic velocities. Samples prepared for this study were actively chosen away 
from the macroscopic fractures described by Williams et al., [2016] in order to avoid 
sample failure during preparation. With this in mind, the measurements reported here 
represent the intact matrix properties of the fault lithologies, giving the minimum 
permeability and maximum seismic velocity values of the Alpine Fault due to the fine-scale 
sampling bias inherent in this study, where heterogeneity of microstructure is a key 
characteristic of all fault rocks analysed. In the following section, the nature of the fracture 
networks and their fillings present in the experimental samples are explored.  
Open fractures within core material are predominantly opened along pre-existing gouge-
filled or carbonate-filled fractures, as visible in Figure 3.8C and Figure 3.8E. These are 
presumably stress-relief fractures, opened during core retrieval, handling and resting prior 
to testing and microstructural analysis preparation. This is supported through the lack of 
displacement on the fracture or mobilisation of the fracture-fill, indicating that the 
fractures have opened up by dilation in dry conditions. As illustrated in Section 3.1, there 
is a significant initial drop in permeability and increase in seismic velocity after an initial 
pressure interval between 5 and 40 MPa, after which trends in the data remain largely 
constant, marking the closure of open fractures and voids and allowing a more 
representative measurement for the specimen to be taken [Nara et al., 2011]. 
Immediately after a seismic event, it is possible that the permeability within the fault 
damage zone is enhanced by 3  8 orders of magnitude [Miller et al., 2004; Mitchell and 
Faulkner, 2008; Gomila et al., 2016]. This transiently enhanced fluid mobility coupled with 
reduced grain size via cataclasis can result in a period of heightened fluid-rock interaction. 
Warr and Cox, [2001] determined two generations of phyllosillicates on the Alpine Fault, 
hydrous chloritization at ~320 C, followed by the generation of swelling clays at shallower 
depths and temperatures of ~120 C. The dominant clay phases within the Alpine fault 
hanging wall are white mica (illite / muscovite) and chlorite [Boulton et al., 2012, 2017a; 
Schleicher et al., 2015]. Schleicher et al., [2015] found enhanced levels of authigenic illite 
and smectite are present in the PSZ in contrast to higher levels of metamorphic illite / 
muscovite in surrounding cataclasites. White mica and chlorite fill a large proportion of 
fractures in the hanging wall while smectite is found solely in the brown PSZ fault gouges, 
generated from the low temperature alteration of illite / muscovite and chlorite which is 
further altered into kaolinite and goethite [Craw, 1984; Boulton et al., 2012, 2017a; 
Schleicher et al., 2015], with the combination of ultracomminuted grains and swelling clays 
on the PSZ reducing permeability to ~10-20 to 10-21 m2, becoming an hydraulic seal. 
The nature of carbonate precipitation is variable, occurring as veins both parallel and cross-
cutting foliation, bounding gouge-filled fractures, disseminated cement in gouge-filled 
fractures and fragmented clasts within gouge and cataclasite. Hanging wall cataclasites 
contain a pervasive carbonate infill, and as a result are more cohesive than the carbonate-
poor footwall cataclasites, resulting in the increase in permeability with distance from the 
PSZ into the footwall (Figure 3.6D).The presence of calcite networks indicates periods of 
damage-enhanced fluid transport focussed within the hanging wall cataclasites and 
ultramylonites. Mineralization effectively seals the newly formed postseismic fracture 
networks resulting in an increase in strength and stiffness relative to its immediate post-
rupture state and lowering of permeability of the fault zone lithologies [Lund Snee et al., 
2014]. Similar processes are inferred to take place in geothermal fields, with mineral 
precipitation reducing permeability potentially on the time scale of days for mm  scale 
fractures in high temperature settings, especially if considerable fluid pressure fluctuation 
occurs [Griffiths et al., 2016; McNamara et al., 2016]. 
A main control on the anisotropy of physical properties is the presence or lack thereof of a 
tectonic foliation [Okaya et al., 1995; Okaya and Christensen, 2002]. For instance, the 
poorly developed fabric in the PSZ gouge exhibits the least anisotropy, while distinctly 
foliated specimens such as 1A-83.2 exhibit a strong anisotropy, with higher seismic wave 
velocity and permeability parallel to foliation and slower values perpendicular to the 
foliation (Figures 3.6 and 3.7). However, the nature of the cataclastic fabrics within the 
alteration / damage zone is spatially variable, with pods of intensely foliated material (1B-
133.3) located within wide swath of unfoliated material (1B-142) or vice versa (Figures 3.2E-
F and 3.8E-F). With this in mind, the experimental results from this study place a lower limit 
on matrix permeability and an upper limit on matrix seismic wave velocity, respectively, 
through the Alpine Fault. Overall, both permeability and seismic velocity anisotropy show a 
general trend to decreasing toward the principal slip zones, in both DFDP-1A and 1B.  
3.5.2. Correlation with other studies 
Figure 3.6B and E show the DFDP-1 wireline logs as a black trace in comparison to the 
results presented here. As each test specimen was pre-compacted to 105 MPa Peff, it is not 
possible to make a direct comparison to measurements made at pressure conditions within 
the DFDP-1 borehole. Furthermore, the sampling length scale for the P-wave velocity 
wireline tool (a single source, dual receiver logging sonde as documented in Townend et al., 
[2013] used to collect Vp data is 304.8 mm, approximately 20 times the length of the 
experimental specimens used in this study. The selection of samples and subsequent 
sample preparation means that measurements were made on coherent core material that 
was perhaps more intact than the in situ material. Large, relative to specimen size, 
throughgoing fractures may not have been sampled in the experiments, and hence 
measurements provide a minimum value of permeability and a maximum value of seismic 
velocity. However, the trends of the data show a reasonable comparison, indicating that 
the measurements made here may be representative of the permeability and seismic 
velocity at greater depths, equivalent to the effective pressures used in the experiments. 
Slug tests performed in the distal damage zone of DFDP-1 recorded in situ permeability of 
10-14 m2, indicating that permeability may drop by up to 5 orders of magnitude at low 
effective pressures toward the fault core [Sutherland et al., 2012]. 
Carpenter et al. [2014], illustrated in Figure 3.6B and E, presented similar laboratory 
measurements of DFDP-1 fault rock permeability and seismic velocity, but at a lower Peff 
range (2.5  65 MPa) with no pre-consolidation. The permeability data presented in this 
study correlate with Carpenter et al.'s [2014] data, with measurement ranges overlapping 
at similar depths in the core. In terms of seismic velocity, the data presented here are 
higher than those in Carpenter et al. [2014]. This is most likely due to pre-consolidation of 
samples in the method used here, and therefore, the values for seismic velocity are more 
representative of those at greater depth than the data of Carpenter et al. [2014]. Other 
factors that might produce differences are the variation in specimen dimensions, 
frequency, and natural specimen variation.  
The overall variations in seismic velocities with depth in this study and that of Carpenter et 
al. [2014] correlate well with each other (Figure 3.6B and E). The PSZ exhibits lower 
velocities than the surrounding cataclasites, and the higher velocities witnessed in the 
hanging wall cataclasites in contrast to the footwall are indicative of a greater degree of 
carbonate cementation and cohesiveness and potentially asymmetrical damage imparted 
upon the fault zone during seismicity [Townend et al., 2013].  
Physical property measurements of the Alpine Fault Zone are consistent with a number of 
mature, geochemically altered fault zones worldwide. Similarities with studies performed 
on the Nojima Fault Zone [Mizoguchi et al., 2008], Median Tectonic Line (MTL) [Wibberley 
and Shimamoto, 2002], the San Andreas Fault [Morrow et al., 2014], and the Carboneras 
Fault [Faulkner et al., 2003] highlight the microstructural complexity within a fault damage 
zone, with numerous episodes of brittle rupture damage and subsequent fluid-rock 
interactions. Laboratory gas permeability measurements of the MTL fault core show values 
between 10-13 and 10-21 m2 (Peff = 50  180 MPa) that are attributed to enhanced grain size 
reduction with increasing proximity to the PSZ [Wibberley and Shimamoto, 2002]. Material 
reclaimed from depth on the actively creeping segment of the San Andreas Fault shows a 
similar range of permeabilities of 10-18 to 10-23 m2 (Peff = 10  120 MPa), with gouge material 
exhibiting lower permeabilities than bounding cataclasites [Morrow et al., 2014]. The gouge 
zones of the Carboneras Fault show permeability values in the range of 10-17 to 10-22 m2, 
with permeability anisotropy of up to 3 orders of magnitude [Faulkner and Rutter, 2000; 
Faulkner et al., 2003]. 
The permeability variations of up to 6 orders of magnitude in previous studies seem typical 
of major, mature fault zones and are related directly to degree of comminution and 
associated authigenic mineral generation and cementation. Both experimental and in situ 
seismic velocity measurements have revealed that faults, and their associated damage 
zones are regions of low seismic velocities [Mooney and Ginzburg, 1986; Li et al., 2004; 
Jeppson et al., 2010; Jeppson and Tobin, 2015], which concur with velocity measurements 
in this study.  
3.5.3. Implications for fault zone properties during the seismic cycle 
The hydraulic properties of fault rock have implications for transient variations in pore fluid 
behaviour during seismic slip. Coseismic thermal effects may promote slip propagation via 
processes such as thermal pressurization [Rempel and Rice, 2006; Rice, 2006]. The low 
permeability of the core of the Alpine Fault and alteration zone in the hanging wall may 
favour thermal pressurization during earthquake rupture [Segall and Rice, 1995; Wibberley, 
2002; Mizoguchi et al., 2008; Leclre et al., 2015]. Evidence for the development of 
overpressures within the damage / alteration zone includes gouge-filled fractures 
emanating from, and propagating through, the PSZ. These features indicate that dilatancy 
driven pore depressurization may also stabilise slip and arrest rupture [Segall and Rice, 
1995; Samuelson et al., 2009]. 
Geochemical studies of vein mineralization [Menzies et al., 2014] and fluids from hot 
springs from the Alpine Fault hanging wall [Barnes et al., 1978] show that much of the fluid 
circulating at <2 km depth is meteorically derived. Fluid inclusion measurements indicate 
that water infiltration is at least 2 orders of magnitude greater than metamorphic water 
production [Menzies et al., 2016]. In its low permeability pre-rupture state the Alpine fault 
appears to act as a barrier to fluid flow, isolating fluid geochemical regimes on a regional 
scale. Similarities can be drawn with low fluid 3He / 4He ratios in San Andreas Fault fluids at 
seismogenic depths, indicating a dominantly meteorically derived source. As the overall 
permeability structure across the creeping sections of the San Andreas is low, it has been 
suggested that the proportion of mantle derived fluids will increase within more permeable 
faults at distance from the active San Andreas strands within the North American Plate 
[Wiersberg and Erzinger, 2007].  
The strong, penetrative tectonic and metamorphic foliations present in the protolith host-
rock bounding the Alpine Fault, the hanging wall Alpine Schist and mylonite sequence 
lithologies, have a strong regional seismic anisotropy [Christensen and Okaya, 2007]. This 
anisotropy extends to depths of <90 km into the deep-lithosphere and is broadly 
distributed, according to shear wave splitting studies [Karalliyadda and Savage, 2013]. Fault 
Zone Guided Waves (FZGWs) have been observed on the Alpine Fault, in which seismic 
waves are channelled and propagated along the fault zone [Eccles et al., 2015]. These 
FZGWs occur due to material contrast between the fault zone material and the intact 
country rock, causing seismic waves to focus along low-velocity zones. Our observations of 
fault zone velocities in comparison to the intact country rock are consistent with the 
presence of these FZGWs. These types of seismic wave allow the fault to be imaged and 
some of the properties of the fault at depth, such as fault zone width, to be inferred [Li et 
al., 1997; Ben-Zion, 1998]. The use of FZGWs is critically dependent on the velocity contrast 
between the fault and the country rock, and the orientation of any anisotropic fabric in the 
country rock. If the slow direction of any anisotropy is oriented perpendicular to the low 
velocity fault zone, seismic energy may escape the low velocity zone, making the fault 
difficult to recognise through FZGWs [Kelly et al., 2017]. The seismic velocities and 
anisotropies reported in this study support previous regional observations on the behaviour 
of seismic waves on the Alpine Fault, where the fault core material has lower seismic 
velocities than the fastest direction in the country rock hosting it and the heterogeneity of 
microstructures within the fault zone serves to homogenize any anisotropy [Eccles et al., 
2015]. 
3.6. Conclusion 
Our suite of experimental measurements shows a zone of low permeability and low seismic 
velocity material bounding the PSZ of the Central Alpine Fault, under conditions 
approximating depths of 5  6 km. Measurements performed on protolith lithologies show 
lower permeabilities and higher seismic velocities than the fault-damaged rock owing to 
their intact, unfractured nature. Low permeabilities at low experimental pressures are 
explained by the presence of fine grained alteration products and carbonate precipitation 
within the fracture networks of the fault hanging wall. The PSZ, being composed of 
ultrafine-grained alteration products, acts as a barrier to cross-fault fluid flow 
postseismicity. This is in agreement with other petrophysical studies on other mature faults 
subjected to extensive comminution and fluid-rock alteration [Wibberley and Shimamoto, 
2002; Faulkner et al., 2003; Boulton et al., 2012; Townend et al., 2013; Carpenter et al., 
2014; Morrow et al., 2014].  
The evolution of fault rock microstructure with seismic shear and subsequent interseismic 
fluid-rock interaction has a great effect on the hydraulic and elastic properties of fault 
zones. This evolution is complex and cyclical, potentially promoting rupture via dynamic 
coseismic processes such as thermal pressurization and dilatancy hardening. During 
interseismic periods, fluid flow is likely concentrated upon pervasive, unconsolidated 
gouge-filled fracture networks that are progressively mineralized / altered, reducing along-
fault communication of pore fluid. With fluid focusing along these fracture networks, fault 
rock fabrics have little influence on permeability anisotropy. In addition, as the cataclastic 
microstructures are so variable on a mm  cm scale, their overall effect within the fault 
zone would be to homogenize seismic velocities, limiting seismic anisotropy. The main 
microstructural controls on fault rock physical properties are throughgoing fractures, both 
gouge-filled and mineralized, which have a great effect on seismic wave speeds and fluid 
flow at the experimental specimen scale and likely to act as preferential fluid flow paths 
and planes of discontinuity in the Alpine Fault Zone as a whole.  
3.7. Supplementary material 
Figure SM 3.1  The hysteresis effect observed in both the permeability (A) and seismic 
wave velocity (B and C) measurements during and after the initial pressurisation for 
specimen 1B-127.1 in the down-core orientation (d-down). Circle markers denote the up 
pressure portion of the cycle; diamond markers denote the down pressure portion of the 
cycle.  
Table SM 3.1  Experimental seismic velocity values reported in Figures 3.5 and 3.6 in the 
paper. See Digital Supplementary Material 
Table SM 3.2  Experimental permeability values reported in Figures 3.5 and 3.6 in the 
paper. See Digital Supplementary Material 
Table SM 3.3  Anisotropy values reported in Figures 3.7 in the paper. See Digital 
Supplementary Material 
Video SM 3.1  nanoCT tomographic reconstruction of 1B-120 parallel to the Y-down plane. 
See Digital Supplementary Material.  
Video SM 3.2  nanoCT tomographic reconstruction of 1B-133 parallel to the Y-down plane. 
See Digital Supplementary Material. 
4. Cycles of fault zone sealing and restrengthening from the 
structure and chemistry of vein networks in the Alpine 
Fault, New Zealand 
Key points 
 The Alpine Fault hanging wall alteration zone is pervasively mineralised by 
carbonate precipitation, while the footwall is relatively devoid of carbonate 
minerals.  
 Microstructural and chemical observations point to a protracted cycle of fracturing 
and sealing at changing ambient conditions during exhumation.  
 Carbonate mineralisation reflects the transient nature of permeability on the Alpine 
Fault, which is currently in a low permeability interseismic state. 
Abstract 
The Alpine Fault, a transpressional plate boundary between the Australian and Pacific 
plates, is known to rupture quasi-periodically with large magnitude earthquakes (Mw ~8) 
and is thought to be nearing the end of its latest interseismic state. Using temporal and 
fine-scale spatial variations in carbonate-vein deformation microstructures and 
geochemistry, this study investigates the influential role of calcite in sealing and 
restrengthening the Alpine Fault. Phase 1 of the Deep Fault Drilling Project (DFDP-1) 
sampled fault lithologies from both the Alpine Fault hanging wall and footwall at Gaunt 
Creek, Westland. Drilling revealed a fault zone structure composed of a fault core and 
associated damage zone, both of which are overprinted by a zone of alteration focused in 
the hanging wall. This alteration was produced through enhanced fluid-rock interaction on 
a fault which currently has very low permeability. Carbonate is one of the primary 
authigenic minerals of this alteration, with mineralisation concentrated within fractures. 
Through electron backscatter diffraction, cathodoluminescence, and secondary ion mass 
spectrometry, multiple episodes of fracturing and mineralisation have been recognised. 
Our observations show that the Alpine Fault alteration zone contains extensive carbonate 
mineralisation, occurring predominantly as vein infill. Multiple fracture and sealing events 
have occurred on the fault, which provide evidence for cyclical damage generation and 
recovery. The lack of twinning and other signs of deformation in the most recent vein 
generation indicate that there has been little deformation or strain accumulation in the 
alteration zone since the last period of seismicity.  
The trace element incorporation into the calcite during precipitation, including Mn, Mg and Fe, 
were sourced from fluid-rock interactions between hydrothermal fluids and cataclased rock. Mn 
was likely sourced from the retrogressive breakdown of Mn-rich garnet while Mg and Fe from 
low temperature transformations of clay minerals, i.e., biotite to chlorite to smectite and 
chlorite to muscovite, particularly in the principal slip zone. The variation in trace element 
incorporation during precipitation is due to the variation in ambient conditions and alteration 
reactions through fluid-rock interaction occurring in the fault core  alteration zone between 
periods of fracture generation. In most cases, older vein generations contain more Fe and Mg, 
while younger generations and recrystallised regions contain more Mn, likely due to variation in 
temperature and pressure during precipitation as the fault hanging wall was exhumed.  
The majority of veins appear to be filled by blocky-equant calcite crystals with uniform 
chemistry indicating that they were rapidly sealed by a single fluid pulse. Subsequent fluid-rock 
interaction and deformation resulted in modification of vein microstructures and chemistry. 
Many of the veins were likely generated by hydrofracturing, in which a hot fluid was pulsed 
through the fault core / alteration zone during seismicity, rapidly propagating dilatant fractures 
with some shear component. The sudden pressure drop during dilation would result in rapid 
supersaturation of the fluid and therefore in rapid precipitation on the fracture walls, evidenced 
by blocky grain shapes, weak growth competition and floating wall-rock / older calcite 
fragments. 
The transient nature of the permeability within the fault core / alteration zone is inferred to be 
due to seismically-induced fractures and porosity generation, potentially from both large 
magnitude Alpine Fault events and moderate magnitude events elsewhere in the fault zone. 
Immediately postseismicity the mobilisation of fluid results in rapid mineralisation and fluid-
rock interactions, which seal and restrengthen the fault until the next cycle of seismicity occurs. 
Outside the fault core / alteration zone, within the Alpine Fault damage zone, fractures likely 
remain open for longer time scales, allowing the passage of meteorically derived hydrothermal 
fluids above the contact of the damage zone and fault core / alteration zone, manifesting at the 
surface as hots springs.  
4.1. Introduction 
4.1.1. Fluids in fault zones and fluid-rock interactions  
Fault zones, though occupying a relatively small volume of the Earths crust, greatly 
influence crustal physical properties and processes, particularly fluid transport properties 
via grain-size reduction, dilation, fracturing, and fluid-rock interactions [Faulkner et al., 
2010]. Faults can variably act as conduits or barriers to fluids, or a combination of the two, 
depending on their tectonic setting, maturity and composition [Chester and Logan, 1986; 
Caine et al., 1996; Faulkner et al., 2010]. The permeability of a fault zone is therefore 
thought to be dynamic, evolving from highly permeable immediately post-earthquake 
rupture, due to seismically induced fracture damage, to becoming effectively sealed by the 
precipitation of minerals in pore spaces and fractures in conjunction with the compaction 
of ultrafine-grained fault gouges [Blanpied et al., 1992; Gratier et al., 2002] during the 
interseismic period.  
During seismicity, pulses of fluid are mobilised by thermal pressurisation [Rice, 2006; Viesca 
and Garagash, 2015] or fluid-pressure fluctuations [Sibson, 1990], redistributing heat and 
soluble material as frictional sliding, within the shearing volume of the fault, heats up, 
pressurises and mobilises pore fluids. As well as initiating dramatic fault zone weakening, 
this results in enhanced fluid-rock interaction within the fragmented rock mass 
encompassing the fault core, known as the damage zone [Evans and Chester, 1995; Caine et 
al., 1996; Morton et al., 2012], and in the mixing of shallow, regional groundwater 
chemistries [Cox et al., 2015]. In the shallow crust, at and above the Brittle-Viscous 
Transition (BVT), fluid-rock interaction is typically evidenced by the precipitation of 
secondary minerals, primarily calcite and quartz, as cements and veins infill [Sibson et al., 
1975; Gratier et al., 2002; Mittempergher et al., 2011] and phyllosilicate mineral 
precipitation, through the retrograde reaction of fine-grained, comminuted material during 
exhumation [Wu et al., 1975; Saffer and Marone, 2003; Collettini et al., 2009]. 
During brittle failure and fragmentation of rock, a number of modes of failure in the form of 
fracturing can occur. These modes are classified into three end members, relating the 
displacement of the wall rock relative to the fracture plane and edge: Mode I  extensional 
failure; Mode II  failure by sliding; and Mode III  failure by tear, with Mode II and III 
producing shear fractures [Griffith, 1921; Irwin, 1957; Brace, 1960]. Cracks that exhibit both 
shear and extension modes of failure are classified as hybrid fractures [e.g., Ramsey and 
Chester, 2004].  
Various sealing mechanisms act on fractures postseismically, reducing void space and 
decreasing permeability. Mechanical compression can lead to crack closure, facilitated by 
the readjustment of local stresses or a decrease in fluid pressure [Brace, 1972]. Many 
major, non-carbonate hosted faults contain elevated concentrations of carbonate cements 
and vein infill indicating that physical-chemical mechanisms contribute greatly to fault 
sealing [Arai et al., 2003; Mittempergher et al., 2011]. Fluctuations in ambient conditions 
(temperature, pressure, chemistry etc.) alter mineral solubility in fluids, resulting in the 
precipitation of secondary minerals, which can seal and strengthen fault zones over 
geologically short time scales [Gratier et al., 2002]. The composition and mobility of the 
agents of sealing (fluids and their dissolved or precipitated minerals) are largely controlled 
by the local geothermal gradient and fluid flow paths. Calcite dominates hydrothermal vein 
mineralogies in the shallow crust (2  4 km) at temperatures of <150C, as temperatures 
increase to 150  300C quartz becomes increasingly prevalent down to the BVT [Sharp, 
1965; Renard et al., 2000]. 
A number of geochemical investigations on carbonate vein fillings from a variety of 
geological settings have been undertaken, including trace elements [Mller et al., 1991; 
Denniston et al., 1997; Hickmott et al., 1997], stable isotopes [Rye and Bradbury, 1988; 
Hilgers and Sindern, 2005; Katz et al., 2006] and stable oxygen / carbon isotopes together 
with trace elements (such as Fe, Mg, Sr, Mn) studies [Lee et al., 1997; Wogelius et al., 1997; 
Maskenskaya et al., 2014]. These data-sets have constrained temporal changes in fluid 
sources between successive generations of calcite [Denniston et al., 1997; Hilgers and 
Sindern, 2005; Sandstrm and Tullborg, 2009] and documented the evolution and 
characteristics of mineral-forming fluids [Rye and Bradbury, 1988; Hickmott et al., 1997; Lee 
et al., 1997; Wogelius et al., 1997; Barker et al., 2006; Katz et al., 2006; Smith et al., 2014]. 
Trace-element concentrations and stable isotope compositions within carbonate veins of a 
single generation can either be highly variable [Rye and Bradbury, 1988; Mller et al., 1991; 
Denniston et al., 1997; Wogelius et al., 1997] or relatively constant [Lee et al., 1997; Hilgers 
and Sindern, 2005; Barker et al., 2006; Katz et al., 2006; Lund Snee et al., 2014]. Large 
variations across individual veins can be attributed to trace-element fluctuations in the 
super-saturated fluid and, potentially mixing of fluids with variable chemistries [Denniston 
et al., 1997; Wogelius et al., 1997; Barker et al., 2006]. Variations in ambient conditions 
during crystallization may impact the incorporation of trace elements [Denniston et al., 
1997] and fluid flow rates [Mller et al., 1991]. Isotopic analyses across multiple calcite vein 
sets show that a (<3 ) variation in 18O and 13C values may indicate that: 1) the 
precipitating solution was buffered by bedrock [Hilgers and Sindern, 2005; Smith et al., 
2014]; 2) the solution had a stable temperature [Lee et al., 1997; Barker et al., 2006]; or 3) 
rapid mineralisation could have prevented significant isotopic water-rock exchange [Katz et 
al., 2006]. On the other hand, large variations (<6  9 ) may indicate lesser amounts of 
fluid-rock interaction, so less homogenisation of the fluid with the host rock, [Rye and 
Bradbury, 1988] or that the vein infill was precipitated from a mixture of fluids from 
different sources. 
The aim of this study is to characterise the sealing processes recorded on a major plate 
bounding fault zone through a fine-scale microstructural and geochemical investigation of 
the distinct generations of carbonate mineralisation in the pervasive vein network of the 
Alpine Fault. This is achieved here through the utilisation of multiple, complementary 
techniques including Electron Backscatter Diffraction, Optical Cathodoluminescence and 
spatially resolved Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry. We focus on temporal and spatial 
changes in vein morphology, cement microstructures, trace element content and stable 
isotopic composition. We document the evolution of mineralising fluids and the fault rocks 
that host them throughout the seismic cycle and constrain whether advective fluid flow or 
local dissolution-precipitation processes control sealing behaviour within the Alpine Fault. 
This work will begin with establishing the geological setting of the Alpine Fault, followed by 
the methodology and technical aspects of the study, including a brief outline of the Deep 
Fault Drilling Project. The results of the microstructural and geochemical analyses are then 
presented and discussed. Finally, we explore how these findings elucidate fundamental 
fault zone processes that modulate the seismic cycle.  
4.1.2. The Alpine Fault Zone, New Zealand 
The Alpine Fault Zone (AFZ), bounding the western edge of the Southern Alps on New 
Zealands South Island, accommodates over 70 % of the relative motion between the 
colliding Australian and Pacific Plate [Norris and Cooper, 2007; Norris and Toy, 2014]. The 
ramping of the Pacific plate over the Australian plate is manifested through dextral-reverse 
movement, offsetting basement rocks laterally by over 470 km, with Quaternary horizontal 
displacement rates estimated at 21  27 mm yr-1 [Norris and Cooper, 2001; Lamb et al., 
2016]. Uplift on the fault is rapid, exhuming crustal rocks from depths of 20  30 km at a 
rate of ~6  9 mm yr-1 [Little et al., 2002b]. Accompanying this rapid uplift is the advection 
of the regional geothermal gradient with fluid inclusion microthermometry placing the 
gradient at 40 C/km [Toy et al., 2010] or 75 C/km in the upper 2 km [Craw, 1997]. Recent 
shallow borehole measurements within the fault hanging wall report gradients of 62.6  2.1 
and 125  55 C/km [Sutherland et al., 2012, 2017].  
Palaeoseismic evidence has indicated that the Alpine Fault has had numerous geologically 
recent rupture episodes at 1717  25, 1630  25 and 1460  25 A.D., which are each 
estimated to have a moment magnitude of 7.9  0.3, 7.6  0.3, and 7.9  0.4, respectively 
[Wells et al., 1999; Rhoades and Van Dissen, 2003; Langridge et al., 2012; Howarth et al., 
2016], with these ruptures propagating along nearly the entire ~600 km length of the fault. 
Recent seismicity patterns, geodetic strain records, and inferred high pore fluid pressures 
from regional seismic P- and S-wave velocity ratios and gravity surveys deep in the fault 
zone, suggest that the fault is locked above 13  18 km depth and that it is in the late stages 
of its earthquake cycle [EberhartPhillips, 1995; Eberhart-Phillips and Bannister, 2002; Stern 
et al., 2007; Sutherland et al., 2007; Toy, 2007; Beavan et al., 2010; Lamb and Smith, 2013]. 
On the Central Alpine Fault, between the Toaroha River and Martyr River [Barth et al., 
2013], overprinting the fault core and transition into the damage zone, is a distinct <30 m-
thick zone of hydrothermally altered rock, containing elevated concentrations of hydrous 
alteration minerals and cements (e.g., phyllosillicates and carbonates), as observed through 
field and borehole studies [Sutherland et al., 2012; Townend et al., 2013; Toy et al., 2015b]. 
The extent of this alteration increases with proximity to the faults principal slip zone (PSZ) 
within the hanging wall rock, with far less carbonate cementation in the footwall [Boulton 
et al., 2017a]. This indicates a focusing of fluid in the hanging wall damage zone, with little 
cross-fault flow throughout the seismogenic crust [Menzies et al., 2016].  
Enhanced hydrothermal activity and the generation of thermal springs in the fault hanging 
wall, extending from 1 to 20 km south east of the Alpine Fault, gives insight into the 
composition and behaviour of fluids in relation to the fault [Barnes et al., 1978; Barber and 
Wenk, 1979; Koons, 1987; Allis and Shi, 1995; Beavan et al., 2010]. The influence of 
seismicity on fluid flow across the Southern Alps appears substantial, with work by Cox et 
al., [2015] showing that large distal earthquakes across the South Island of New Zealand, 
including a Mw 7.8 in south-western Fiordland, 2009 and a Mw 7.1 in eastern Canterbury, 
2010, caused variation in temperature and fluid chemistry in a monitored spring in the 
western Southern Alps, at a distance of 350 km and 180 km from the respective earthquake 
epicentres.  
There are a limited number of previous studies on hot spring and bulk calcite and quartz 
vein stable isotope signatures upon the Alpine Fault, and these have focused on the distal 
vein assemblages hosted in the quartzofeldspathic Alpine schists and intercalated 
metabasic mylonites that compose the Southern Alps, [Jenkin et al., 1994; Upton et al., 
1995; Menzies et al., 2014]. These studies suggested that fluids are dominantly of meteoric 
origin, indicating that the fault is a crustal-scale conduit for deep-circulating meteoric water 
that has undergone substantial geochemical exchange with the lithologies of the Southern 
Alps, down to the top of the BVT at ~6 km depth, with a small component of mantle-
derived fluid [Menzies et al., 2014, 2016].  
The Deep Fault Drilling Project (DFDP) was undertaken to better understand the processes 
that lead to major earthquakes by drilling into and observing a major continental fault 
during its build-up to a large seismic event. 
4.2. Methods 
4.2.1. The Deep Fault Drilling Project 
The first phase of the Deep Fault Drilling Project (DFDP-1) comprised of two pilot boreholes 
(DFDP-1A and DFDP-1B) drilled into an active thrust segment of the Alpine Fault at Gaunt 
Creek, a tributary to the Waitangitaona River, in January 2011. The boreholes reached 
depths of 100.6 m and 151.4 m, respectively, through percussion drilling in the upper 
borehole sections followed by wireline coring, collecting core for over 50 % of the borehole 
length [Sutherland et al., 2011, 2012]. A range of fault lithologies from both the hanging 
wall and footwall were recovered including ultramylonites, cataclasites and fault gouges. 
The PSZ of the AFZ was reached at 90.74 m depth in DFDP-1A and 128.44 m in DFDP-1B, 
marking the boundary between the Australian and Pacific Plates, with a second PSZ 
recorded in DFDP-1B at 143.85 m [Toy et al., 2015b]. Both slip zones are composed of clay-
rich gouge [Sutherland et al., 2012; Toy et al., 2015b]. A more detailed report on the drilling 
operations can be found in Sutherland et al. [2011]. The drilled core diameter was 85 mm 
(PQ wireline bit size) and supplied for sample preparation as 200  300 mm length intact 
core sections and half sections [Sutherland et al., 2011]. These core sections were oriented 
with respect to the borehole vertical axis, however, due to core rotation during retrieval 
the horizontal orientation could not be preserved [Sutherland et al., 2011; Toy et al., 2015]. 
4.2.2. Petrology of core lithologies 
Eight rock units were distinguished in the DFDP-1 boreholes and are systematically detailed 
in Toy et al., [2015]. These include: grey and dark-green ultramylonites; brown-green-black 
ultramylonites; hanging wall (upper) unfoliated cataclasites; hanging wall (upper)  foliated 
cataclasites; fault gouges; footwall (lower) cataclasites; fault breccias; and Quaternary 
gravels. The DFDP-1 core provided an excellent section through the AFZ, allowing a number 
of associated lithological units to be distinguished and classified, based on the original 
protolith and the level of damage and/or alteration. This classification follows the fault rock 
nomenclature of Woodcock and Mort, [2008], with units numbered sequentially as they 
were encountered in the recovered core, from top to bottom (Figure 4.1B).  
The extent of alteration via clay and carbonate mineralisation, extending ~30 m from the 
PSZ, obscures the boundary between the Alpine Faults damage zone and fault core, as well 
as the exhumed BVT. The hanging wall ultramylonite encountered (Unit 1 and 2) is planar-
foliated with a variable quartzofeldspathic and metabasic composition. Foliations are 
defined by aligned phyllosillicates, graphite and opaque minerals. These ultramylonites are 
of midcrustal origin and have undergone extensive grain-size reduction via plastic 
deformation mechanisms, overprinted by successive generations of brittle cataclasis as 
evidenced by clay and carbonate-filled shears and fractures, with minimal quartz 
mineralisation evident. Ultramylonites transition to variably foliated and unfoliated 
cataclasites (Unit 3 and 4); composed of quartzofeldspathic and metabasic material, 
consisting of angular fragments of ultramylonite variably clast-supported (>10 mm 
diameter) and matrix-supported (<10 mm diameter) in a matrix of comminuted feldspar, 
quartz, chlorite, white mica, calcite and rare epidote. These cataclasites  
Figure 4.1  [A and B] Schematic 
borehole section showing the 
lithologies encountered during DFDP-
1A and 1B. Recovered core shows the 
collected lithologies with classification 
scheme from Toy et al., [2015] while 
the schematic lithologies shows a 
simplified representation of the fault 
rocks encountered. Sampling 
undertaken in this study is highlighted. 
The estimated extent of the alteration 
zone is also illustrated [Sutherland et 
al., 2012; Toy et al., 2015b; Boulton et 
al., 2017a].  
have been successively fractured and cemented as evidenced by cross-cutting relationships 
of mineralised (or mechanically generated gouge-filled) veins, pseudotachylytes, and clasts 
with cataclastic texture. The PSZ is a ~250 mm thick zone of ultracomminuted, cohesive, 
clay-rich gouge (Unit 5). This gouge is ultrafine-grained, variably foliated with indistinct, 
sub-planar layering containing fragmented clasts of smectitic-chloritic gouge and calcite. 
The footwall is comprised of lower cataclasites (Units 6a to 6d), of granitic and gneissic 
origin, that are variably foliated and contain far less carbonate and less hydrothermal 
alteration than Units 1 to 4 of the hanging wall [Toy et al., 2015b; Boulton et al., 2017a]. 
4.2.3. Techniques 
Optical cold-cathode cathodoluminescence (CL) was employed in this study, using a Nikon 
Eclipse Ci microscope with a CITL Mk5-2 cold stage and Nikon DS-Fi1c camera, working at 
conditions of 10.8 kV and 390 A in a vacuum of 0.047-33 Torr. CL signal in calcite is 
strongly modified by trace element content (ppm concentrations); Fe quenches the signal 
while Mn enhances luminescence [Long and Agrell, 1965; Marshall and Mariano, 1988; 
Waychunas, 2014]. CL was used to obtain crucial, spatially resolved information on subtle 
chemical and structural variations within the carbonate vein infill and to inform further 
analyses with electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) and secondary ion mass spectroscopy 
(SIMS).  
SEM analyses were undertaken in the EBSD-SEM Laboratory at the University of Liverpool 
using an X500 Crystal Probe field-emission gun (FEG) SEM, designed by Obducat CamScan 
Ltd (for full technical specifications see Seward et al., 2002). EBSD analyses were collected 
using an F+ Nordlys EBSD detector combined with the AZtec Oxford Instrument acquisition 
software. The typical operating parameters for this study were 20 kV accelerating voltage, 
20  30 nA beam current, and 5.5 nm spot size. The raw EBSD datasets were processed and 
analysed using the Oxford Instruments HKL Channel5 software. Erroneous data points were 
carefully removed using band contrast values to sub-sample grain boundaries effectively, 
thus avoiding the generation of artefacts.  
The EBSD data in this study are presented in All-Euler (AE), which visualises orientation 
through use of an Euler angle-based colour scale. Euler angles are a set of three angles (1, 
, and 2) used to describe the crystallographic orientation of crystals relative to a 
reference coordinate system; defined by the primary SEM stage axes. The value of each 
Euler angle, reflecting the magnitude of the 3 rotations necessary to determine a rotation 
path from the SEM reference frame to that of the crystal analysed, is individually set to a 
colour scale (red, green and blue for Euler angles 1, , and 2, respectively) which are 
then combined into a single RGB colour that represents the observed crystallographic 
orientation. However, the AE component contains a wraparound effect caused by one or 
more of the Euler angles reaching their respective limit, causing the RGB value to vary 
between minimum and maximum, potentially resulting in colour speckling even when little 
to no orientation variation between grains exists. Crystallographic orientations are plotted 
in equal area upper hemisphere stereographic projections, i.e. pole figures (PF), to reveal if 
any crystallographic preferred orientation (CPO) exists. The data in pole figures are 
coloured according to their respective Euler orientation and contoured to a half width of 
20 and data clustering of 5. In order to describe the intensity of the fabric shown in a PF a 
statistical method is used known as the multiple of uniform density (MUD), which is 
quantified using the maximum intensity of a contoured PF. MUD values of 1 indicate 
randomly orientated grains while a MUD >1 is indicative of a fabric or CPO; these values are 
illustrated alongside the PFs. MUD values however are only a qualitative approximation of 
CPO strength because, for example in Oxford Instruments software, they are calculated 
only relative to the pole figures visualised for a given mineral in a given dataset and cannot 
be used for direct comparison between PFs from different datasets. For more information 
on relevant EBSD data presentation please see Prior et al., [1999, 2009] and Bestmann and 
Prior, [2003]. 
SIMS analyses were performed at the University of Edinburgh NERC Ion Microprobe Facility 
(IMF) using a Cameca IMS-4f for trace element measurements and a Cameca IMS -1270, for 
stable isotope measurements. For the purpose of this study, the IMS-4f used a negative 
mode O- duoplasmatron ion source as oxygen implantation into the sample surface 
enhances ionization efficiency for electropositive elements (Al, Si and REE etc.). The IMS-
1270 operated with a positive mode Cs+ ion beam, used to enhance yields of 
electronegative elements (C, O and S etc.) [Hinton, 1995]. The settings used on the IMS-4f 
microprobe during the carbonate trace element analyses for collection of species 23Na, 
26Mg, 27Al, 30Si, 44Ca, 54Fe, 55Mn, 88Sr, 138Ba and 140Ce trace elements were as follows. A 
primary ion beam operating with O2- ions with a 20 m spot size; within the microprobe a 
field of view of 825 m, 25 m image field, 150 m field aperture and 150 m contrast 
aperture. Measurements were collected using an offset of 75 volts with dwell times in 
seconds of 3 for 23Na, 5 for 26Mg, 2 for 27Al, 2 for 30Si, 2 for 44Ca, 5 for 54Fe, 5 for 55Mn, 2 for 
88Sr, 5 for 138Ba, 5 for 140Ce and wait times in seconds of 1 for 23Na, 0.2 for 26Mg, 0.2 for 27Al, 
0.2 for 30Si, 0.2 for 44Ca, 0.2 for 54Fe, 0.2 for 55Mn, 0.2 for 88Sr, 0.2 for 138Ba, 0.2 for 140Ce. The 
settings used on the IMS-1270 microprobe during the carbonate 18O analyses were as 
follows. A primary ion beam operating with Cs+ ions at 10 kV with a 20 m spot size; within 
the microprobe a field aperture of 3 mm, entrance slit at 60 m, exit slit at 411 m, energy 
slit of 81 m, contrast aperture of 150 m, transfer lens of 30 m were used. For all 
analyses, the initial two measurement cycles were discarded to reduce the effects of 
surface contamination, with the remaining cycles averaged for the final measurement. 
Standards used for these analyses are reported in Table SM 2.12. 
4.2.4. Sample preparation  
Thin sections were prepared using standard petrographic thin section techniques to a 30 
m thickness, with final chemical-mechanical polish applied using colloidal silica of grit size 
0.005  6 m in an alkaline solution. This removed the amorphous layer (few nm thick) 
produced on the thin section surface during mechanical polishing and ensured the high 
quality polishing required for electron backscatter (EBSD) analyses. Samples were carbon 
coated to a thickness of ~10 nm and the thin section edges painted with colloidal carbon for 
analysis in the SEM.  
For SIMS trace element analyses the traditional thin section dimensions required 
modification, using a standard diamond-tipped hand glass cutter and diamond grit grinder, 
25 mm diameter discs containing the area of interest were created for trace element 
analysis. Further modification was required for SIMS stable isotope analyses with the coring 
of 2.5 mm diameter cores using a GatanTM (Model 601) ultrasonic cutter using boron-
carbide slurry. These cores, along with suitably chosen chemical standards were then set 
and pressed into an indium mount, housed within an aluminium base, using an EnerpacTM 
(P142) hand press, up to 200 bar axial load. These SIMS analyses required gold coating of 
the sample surface to avoid surface charging effects.  
4.3. Results 
4.3.1. An introduction to fracture and vein classification  
The morphology of fractures and the minerals that precipitate within them give insight into 
the factors governing the brittle failure of rock as well as the processes that occur 
immediately following failure, particularly the behaviour of newly mobilised fluids and their 
interaction with rock. Therefore, before the results from this study are presented, current 
classifications of veins at different scales are introduced below. An effective classification, 
that can be useful to the broader Earth science community, requires the consideration of 
various factors, including: fault rock lithology, dip of planar features (bedding or foliation) 
relative to fault, the stress system and the composition and temperature of fluid present 
both during and after failure, all of which control the nature of the damage surrounding a 
fault [Kim et al., 2004].  
Previous work by Kim et al., [2004] proposed a classification of fault damage zone fractures 
on the exposure-scale based on geometries of faults, the locations of their damage zones, 
and on the structures within the damage zones. Kim et al., [2004] proposed three main 
zones according to geometries and fracture patterns: Tip damage zones, which are 
controlled by the mode of slip immediately at the fault tip and include horsetail and wing 
cracks; Linking damage zones, which occur between two sub parallel, non-coplanar fault 
segments and Wall damage zones, which form through the propagation of mode II and III 
fractures produced by the build-up of slip on a fault and include features such as en-
chelon extension fractures, antithetic and synthetic faults.  
In regard to the fracture filling the classification of tectonic veins according to the nature of 
their filling was reviewed by Bons et al., [2012], and workers within, in which crystal 
morphology and growth direction were studied in relation to the fracture hosting them and 
the precipitating fluid. Deciphering mineral sealing processes from vein infills is complicated 
due to the range of factors that influence mineral precipitation, which include: degree of 
supersaturation, anisotropic growth kinetics, rates of local deformation and rates of fluid 
transport [Hilgers et al., 2004; McNamara et al., 2016]. Broadly, vein mineralisation, 
including calcite, quartz etc., can be divided into four categories, at the cm-mm scale, which 
form a spectrum: syntaxial veins, in which vein-filling minerals grow out from the fracture 
wall rock into the void formed by a crack, from either both or one side, with the nucleation 
of new crystals inhibited due to being energetically less favourable, resulting in growth 
competition. As crystallography is the main control on growth competition, syntaxial veins 
often show [0001] c-axis CPOs perpendicular to vein walls that strengthens towards the 
vein centre due to elimination of unfavourably oriented crystals. Stretching veins occur 
when a fracture opens within previously precipitated vein infill (localised) or wall rock 
(delocalised) rather than upon the original mineral growth surface. This results in no 
systematic trend in location of newly precipitated material, no growth competition occurs 
and the void is sealed via epitaxial growth from previous vein minerals [Bons et al., 2012]. 
Antitaxial veins, are distinct from other vein types due to the appearance of mineral growth 
originating from a median suture line towards the fracture wall in a fibrous form [Oliver and 
Bons, 2001; Bons and Montenari, 2005]. These veins are usually attributed to cyclical crack-
seal mechanisms or diffusional mass transfer (DMT) with both processes potentially 
exerting enough force to open the fracture to allow further mineral growth [Wiltschko and 
Morse, 2001]. Pressure shadows or fringes form when a rigid object in a deforming matrix 
generates a low pressure zone facing the least principal stress. This results in an enrichment 
of soluble minerals with shadows having a diffuse edge and fringes a sharp boundary with 
the host matrix [Passchier and Trouw, 2005].  
Due to the 2-dimensional nature of thin sections used in this study, accurately determining 
the lateral continuity and mode of fractures can be difficult. Many of the reported 
microstructures have been supported by hand specimen observations of the drill core 
samples as well as the use of multiple consecutive thin sections to act as a tomographic 
view to explore how structures vary within 3-dimensional space.  
4.3.2. Microstructural and chemical variation with proximity to the PSZ 
In this study, six calcite-filled veins, representative of the key types recognised in the AFZ 
damage zone up to 30 m from the PSZ, were selected as case studies for analyses using the 
spatially resolved research techniques described above, allowing direct correlation of 
microstructure and trace element chemistry. Analytical results for each key type vein are 
presented below, and results are organised to build a comprehensive quantitative overview 
of the geometry, microstructure and trace element chemistry of each type. Additional 
examples are included in the supplementary material at the end of this chapter. 
4.3.2.1. Cataclased ultramylonite shear vein  
These characteristic shear fractures are located predominantly within the ultramylonites of 
Unit 2 and the cataclasites of Unit 3, where the example in Figure 4.2 retrieved at 29.14 m 
(1B-99.3m-A) above the main PSZ. The vein cross-cuts the main mylonitic foliation and 
lithological contacts of ultramylonite-cataclasite at a high angle and exhibits shear 
movement, evidenced by 450  500 m wide jogs, in the main vein segment and by the 
displacement of previous generation vein structures (1Gen) (Figure 4.2A). The main 
segment splays into smaller branches that form a horsetail geometry as it crosses 
different lithologies, with branching observed at the lithological boundaries between the 
ultramylonite and cataclasite and cataclasite and pseudotachylyte (Figure 4.2 A). 
The 1Gen vein (Figure 4.2 B, D and H) cross-cut by the shear vein is 400 m wide with an 
irregular outline showing areas of thinning near its ends and has no lateral continuity, 
potentially indicating this may be a collapse structure, a phenomenon generated when a 
void is partially filled by mineralisation but closes through compaction of the host matrix 
generating an irregular shape. The shear vein (2Gen  see also Figures 4.2C, E, G and H) 
shows calcite crystals with blocky-equant grain shape and grain size of 5  12 m diameter 
(EBSD map, Figure 4.2B), which appears to be controlled by the vein width as this is on 
average equal to the grain size. There is no evidence of twinning, lattice distortion or 
recrystallisation. Grain boundaries are oriented at a high angle (near 90) to vein walls with 
the relevant pole figure (Figure 4.2G) showing a scatter of c-axis orientations. Note that due 
to the small number of grains that are available to measure in a constrained length of the 
vein, the contoured PF in Figure 4.2G is dominated by some of the biggest grains, while raw 
data (plotted on the right of Figure 4.2G) give an idea of the random distribution of the c-
axes. 
The 1Gen vein is filled by what appears to be one single grain (green AE colouration) and 
has a high density of closely spaced twin lamella, manifested as two sets of e-twins (or 
deformation twins in calcite), the crystallographic orientations of which are highlighted in  
Figure 4.2  caption overleaf.  
Figure 4.2  (above) [A] A hanging wall ultramylonite (1B-99.3m-A  Unit 2) 29.14 m above 
the upper PSZ. This ultramylonite is heavily cataclased with planes of ultracomminuted 
material and pseudotachylyte which are cross-cut by multiple generations of calcite veins 
which occur both parallel to and at high angles to the original mylonitic foliation. [B] An AE 
EBSD map of a sheared calcite vein which has undergone further mineralisation. The earlier 
calcite (1Gen) is heavily twinned and recrystallised, the younger calcite within the shear has 
no evidence of deformation. [C] An AE EBSD map of an isolated region of 2Gen not in 
contact with the 1Gen. [D] PF for the 1Gen calcite shows the parent and e-twin orientations 
of the vein infill. [E] PF for the 2Gen calcite showing a CPO girdle similar to the 1Gen twin 
orientations. [F] PF for the cataclased / recrystallised region on the contact between 1Gen 
and 2Gen, it shows a CPO closely matching the orange / blue twin set of 1Gen. [G] PF of 
2Gen calcite isolated from 1Gen, shows a weak, distributed CPO to calcite nucleated upon 
the previous generation. [H] CL image of the sheared calcite vein showing that 2Gen has a 
bright orange CL signal while 1Gen has highly variable CL with intensity ranging from bright 
orange, corresponding to fractures, twin boundaries and recrystallised regions, to dull red, 
corresponding to the intact 1Gen parent grain. [I] SIMS trace element concentrations for 
sites marked in (H); brighter regions are more Mn-rich while darker regions more Fe-rich.  
Figure 4.2C. The 1Gen vein is cut by fractures and shows evidence of recrystallisation to fine 
grain sizes (diameters of 1  3 m) along twin boundaries and at twin intersections. 
Where the 2Gen shear vein cuts across the earlier 1Gen, 2Gen is un-twinned, and it is 
characterised by elongated grains and irregular grain boundaries with orientations 
inherited from the 1Gen host and twin grains upon which 2Gen calcite has epitaxially 
nucleated. This is shown by the PF girdle in Figure 4.2E, where the new grains in 2Gen 
inherit a spread of orientations in between those of the two dominant twin sets. At the 
contact with 2Gen, 1Gen has formed a population of fine-grained (diameters of ~0.5  5 
m) material, with a CPO dominated by inheritance of the main 1Gen twin set orientation 
(Figure 4.2F). 
From microstructural relationships, it is clear that the cataclased ultramylonite of 1B-
99.3m-A (Figure 4.2A) contains at least two distinct generations of carbonate 
mineralisation. However, CL analysis reveals an additional level of complexity, where four 
different CL signals are recognised that may be linked to chemical variations in calcite 
and/or to lattice defects introduced by deformation (Figure 4.2H). The younger mineralised 
shear fracture (2Gen) has a lighter, bright orange (signal 3) and generally fairly 
homogeneous CL signal, with sporadic brighter yellow (signal 4) areas. The older generation 
(1Gen) consists of uniform regions of dark orange-red (signal 1) CL intersected by network 
of lighter orange (signal 2) CL, which in part mimics the pattern of the 1Gen e-twin sets. 
Wider, irregular areas (~20  50 m) of yet lighter CL, matching in colour the bright orange 
(signal 3) CL of 2Gen, also exist in 1Gen. The CL signal at the contact between 2Gen and 
1Gen is diffuse and gradational over ~5  10 m, changing from bright orange in 2Gen to 
progressively darker and eventually a dark orange-red in 1Gen. SIMS analyses show that the 
darker (orange-red) CL is caused by higher concentrations of Fe, accompanied by increases 
in Mg and Sr content as seen in Figure 4.2G and H (Point 1). The regions of 1Gen in contact 
with 2Gen show an intermediary orange CL signal and contain lower Fe, Mg and Sr and 
higher Mn (Point 2). Bright orange CL regions are caused by a greater proportion of Mn and 
are apparent in the 2Gen vein (Point 4 and 5), and areas of 1Gen that have been deformed 
and appear to have undergone recrystallisation, as evidenced by small grain sizes and 
lobate grain boundaries (Point 3).  
4.3.2.2. Cataclased calcite vein 
A heavily cataclased calcite vein runs parallel to the pseudotachylyte veins and mylonitic 
foliation present in the 1B-99.3m-B ultramylonite and is cross-cut by the microstructures 
detailed in Section 4.3.2.1 (Figure 4.3). This vein has irregular margins indicating some shear 
has occurred, and it contains abundant, rounded wall rock clasts with diameters of 5  50 
m, frozen in place during calcite precipitation. This vein is classified as 1Gen in this field of 
view. In multiple regions, 5  10 m thick veins cross-cut the cataclased material and exhibit 
a brighter CL and enrichment in Mn; these features have been termed 2Gen. CL and SIMS 
analyses show 1Gen has a greater concentration of Fe than 2Gen at the same depth in the 
core (see Section 4.3.2.1). There are four different CL signals identified at this depth 
interval, with dark orange-red and lighter orange CL dominating the 1Gen vein. These two 
signals highlight a breccia-like texture in the vein, where older calcite (dark CL) was 
fragmented and the spaces in the crack network that formed were filled with newly 
precipitated calcite (lighter CL). Bright orange CL is typical of 2Gen while bright yellow CL 
appears only in minor patches (e.g., top of Figure 4.3A). 
Figure 4.3  [A] Located within the same hanging wall ultramylonite (1B-99.3m-B  Unit 2) 
as Figure 4.2. The CL image shows a calcite vein with irregular margins and abundant, 
rounded wall rock clasts suspended in the calcite vein fill. The CL signal is predominantly dull 
red with fine networks of lighter CL corresponding to grain boundaries and later calcite 
generations. [B and C] The AE EBSD maps show an older generation (1Gen) of calcite 
composed of heavily twinned grains with angular grain shapes cross-cut by a younger 
generation (2Gen) that shows no evidence of deformation. [D and E] PFs of (B); show the 
wide spread of orientations and weak CPO present in 1Gen, the 2Gen PF shows a weak 
correlation with the previous generation.  
The calcite composing the 1Gen vein is variably shaped (see EBSD maps in Figure 4.3B and 
4.3C), being characterised by sub-rounded to angular grain boundaries and interlocking 
calcite grains with diameters of 5  50 m and extensive e-twinning. Crystallographic 
orientation of these grains is quite variable, with [0001] c-axis orientations ranging between 
230 and 040 in Figure 4.3E. However, there is a strong CPO with c-axes clustering at high 
angles to the trace of the vein walls. This CPO is controlled by the orientation of e-twin 
boundaries, the traces of which are predominantly sub-parallel to the trace of the vein 
walls (Figures 4.3B, C and E). 2Gen is composed of a continuous plane of fine-grained 
equant calcite grains at diameters of 1  5 m, which appears to deflect around wall rock 
clasts. These grains are largely free of any internal distortion and exhibit a similar 
crystallographic orientation as adjacent 1Gen grains, indicating epitaxial growth from 
seeding on the earlier calcite generation (Figures 4.3B, C and F). Twin boundaries cross-cut 
both dark orange-red and lighter orange CL domains in 1Gen but do not extend into 2Gen. 
This suggests that e-twins formed after brecciation and further precipitation of new calcite 
in 1Gen, but likely before 2Gen veins were produced. 
4.3.2.3. En-chelon void mineralisation  
A foliated cataclasite (1B-118.64m-A) 9.8 m above the PSZ contains multiple mineralised 
voids that appear to be generated through en-chelon fracture development, displacing a 
pseudotachylyte vein by ~1 mm (Figure 4.4). The CL image highlights two distinct 
generations of mineralisation, the older generation (1Gen) exhibits a dull red-orange CL 
while the younger generation (2Gen), determined as such due to it cross-cutting and 
rimming of 1Gen, exhibits an lighter orange CL. 1Gen contains greater concentrations of Fe 
and Mg, while 2Gen contains less Fe and Mg and more Mn and Sr. The brightest orange CL 
signal visible in Figure 4.4C are artefacts from sample preparation as there is no evidence to 
suggest this is caused by chemical or crystallographic variability confirmed. 
Older 1Gen is intensely twinned (EBSD maps Figures 4.4D and 4.4E), with the twins being 
variably tapered and bent and associated with recrystallised calcite both within and at the 
boundaries of the twins and host. In 1Gen at least three e-twin sets are present, for 
example Figure 4.4G and H show the host calcite c-axis dip towards 270 with the two sets 
of e-twin c axes dipping to 000 and 180, respectively. The later calcite cross-cutting the 
earlier generation, 2Gen, has far less twinning and recrystallised material. Both the  
Figure 4.4  (above) [A] A hanging wall cataclasite (1B-118.64m-A  Unit 3) 9.8 m above the 
upper PSZ. This cataclasite is heavily foliated and contains multiple en-chelon shears that cut 
across a pseudotachylyte vein and foliations and have been mineralised with calcite. [B] Site of 
interest in PPL at higher magnification. Two generations of calcite are evident through disparity 
in twinning. [C] CL image of (B); heavily twinned earlier generation (1Gen) has a dull orange CL 
signal with some bright traces along twin boundaries and areas of recrystallisation. Younger 
generation (1Gen) has bright orange CL and cross-cuts 2Gen. [D and E] AE EBSD maps of the 
sites highlighted in (C); shows that 1Gen is heavily twinned with abundant recrystallisation 
focused on twin boundaries while 2Gen has little twinning and no recrystallisation. [F  H] PFs of 
sites highlighted in (D); 1Gen shows the [0001] c-axis orientations for the parent and e-twins, 
2Gen shows a similar CPO to the 1Gen parent and e-twin 1. Lower Region highlighted in orange 
showing elongate grains and separated from 2Gen by host-rock material. [I] SIMS trace element 
concentrations from sites marked in (C); 1Gen has greater Fe and Mg content, corresponding to 
a dull orange CL, while 2Gen has greater Mn and Sr, corresponding to a bright orange CL. 
orientation and twinning of 2Gen calcite is inherited from those of the previous generation, 
with the more recently precipitated material seeding on the parent or twin terminations at 
the 1Gen vein walls and growing epitaxially. 
Beyond the broad identification of 1Gen and 2Gen in the microstructure of Figure 4.4, there 
are more complex aspects to be described but that prove challenging to interpret. These 
are: 1) on the left hand side of Figure 4.4D, the vein that branches off from the main sub-
horizontal vein; and 2) on the left and bottom, the region extending down from the main 
vein, termed Lower Region and highlighted in orange. It can be noted that 1) has a CL signal 
equivalent to what was defined as signal 2 (lighter orange) in Section 4.3.2.1 that is 
strikingly darker that the bright orange of the main vein, despite the fact that from EBSD 
data they both look the same, more recent, generation of calcite. This may be due to local 
diffusion of Fe from 1Gen calcite into some 2Gen veins. The microstructure at 2) is 
separated from 2Gen by a discontinuous boundary of wall rock material ~5 m thick. It is 
characterised by boundary traces orthogonal to the vein wall and subparallel to one set of 
twins in 1Gen calcite and it shows 1Gen (and 2Gen) orientation minus a small rotation of 20 
 30. These features seem to suggest that 2) could be a part of 1Gen that had drifted away 
when 2Gen vein formed. However, it has a bright orange to yellow CL signal, suggesting it is 
relatively devoid of Fe.  
4.3.2.4. Oscillatory zoned calcite in a shear vein 
Associated with the en-chelon microstructure detailed in Section 4.3.2.3 at 9.8 m above 
the PSZ is a laterally discontinuous, ~50 m thick and 1 mm long, micro-shear vein with ~50 
m displacement (see Figure 4.5). This fracture has been infilled with blocky calcite growth 
that exhibits little evidence of growth competition, with variable c-axis orientations, and 
has an average grain size of half the vein thickness. Most grains display one or no sets of e-
twins and these are thin (<2 m) and widely spaced (>20 m). In contrast to other calcite 
vein structures observed, this vein has distinct, oscillatory zoning visible in CL (Figure 4.5A). 
This appears to be a largely chemically controlled feature as SIMS analyses in Figure 4.5D 
(traverse from blue to red dot in Figure 4.5A) show that the zoning correlates well with 
cyclical variations in trace metals. Peaks in Mn, Mg and Sr (and by inference troughs in Fe 
which could not be measured within the transect) correspond to the bright CL zones, with 
dramatic reductions in these ions resulting in areas of darker CL signal. The misorientation 
profile in Figure 4.5E, taken from the green to the red dots within the purple grain in Figure 
4.5C, shows a small overall variation of ~2 in the internal orientation of this grain across 
the zoning. However, there appear to be some subtle variations in orientation (0.1  0.2) 
coinciding with peaks in trace element variations. Such perturbations may be too small to 
influence the sealing mechanism of the vein; further nano-scale investigation would be 
needed to ascertain their validity. 
4.3.2.5. Principal Slip Zone: reworked calcite and calcite pooling 
Carbonate within the Unit 5 ultracomminuted gouges of PSZ-1 (1A-90.74m-A), the 25 cm 
thick main slip zone of the Alpine Fault, occurs as monomineralic angular clasts (diameters 
of 10  1000 m), or as micro-veins (2  5 m thick) within recycled gouge clasts (Figure 4.6) 
and compose ~5 % of the gouge. In Figure 4.6A and C a carbonate clast is highlighted that 
exhibits CL zoning with four distinct regions. SIMS analyses confirm that, as seen previously, 
bright CL signal corresponds to low trace Fe, while dull CL signal is caused by increasing 
levels of Fe (Figure 4.6A and B). 
As visible in the CL and trace element analyses many clasts within the principal slip zone are 
composed of multiple generations of chemically distinct calcite. These variations are also 
marked by distinct changes in rock texture within these clasts. Figure 4.6A and C show  
Figure 4.5  caption overleaf.  
Figure 4.5  (above) [A] Located within the same hanging wall cataclasite (1B-118.64m-B  
Unit 3) as Figure 4.4. The CL image shows a calcite mineralised shear with regular, 
oscillatory zoning with an alternating bright  dull orange CL signal. [B] PPL image of (A). [C] 
The AE EBSD map shows that this zoning is constrained largely within a single calcite grain. 
[D] SIMS trace element concentration transect, location shown in (A); oscillatory zoning in 
CL corresponds to trace element variation. [E] The relative misorientation (in degrees) with 
distance along the transect detailed in (A); overall increase in misorientation along the 
calcite growth direction. 
four generations of calcite separated by 2  10 m thick boundaries of finely comminuted, 
cataclased material. Regions 1 and 2 display yellow and bright orange CL and contain 
angular, interlocking grains of calcite (0  40 m), which are heavily twinned into one or 
two sets of e-twinning lamellae. Regions 3 and 4 exhibit finer grain sizes (1  20 m), lobate 
sometimes serrated grain boundaries and networks of subgrains. No pervasive twinning is 
evident. 
The secondary, lower PSZ at 1B-143.85m shown in Figure 4.7, which forms the lower 
boundary of the granitoid-derived footwall cataclasites, is composed of a continuous ~10 
mm thick layer of cataclasite and ultracomminuted gouge, the cataclasite above this gouge 
layer has been cemented by calcite precipitation. The CL image reveals a fine-scale fracture 
mesh, localised to a layer ~1 mm thick and constrained above PSZ. Multiple shades of CL 
are present with larger regions of carbonate exhibiting darker CL while finer micro-veins 
show lighter CL.  
4.3.2.6. Overall trace element variation 
The most variable trace elements incorporated into calcite as it precipitated within the 
alteration zone are Fe, Mg, Mn and Sr. The variation of Mg and Fe concentrations within a 
single depth interval can be dramatic (Figure 4.8A) and some of the greatest variations can 
be seen in the en-chelon veins of 1B-118.64m-A (Figure 4.4), a foliated cataclasite ~10 m 
above the main PSZ, with Fe spanning 300  6250 ppm and Mg 250  5900 ppm, 
demonstrating the variability of trace elements both between and within generations of 
AFZ calcite veins within a single depth interval. However, the largest variability is measured 
within calcite veins of the PSZ, with Fe and Mg concentrations ranging between at  
Figure 4.6  [A] Ultracomminuted gouge from the upper PSZ (1A-90.74m-A  Unit 5). CL 
image shows veined recycled gouge clasts and monomineralic calcite aggregates that 
variably have uniform CL signals or range from dull to bright orange. [B] SIMS trace element 
concentrations from sites marked in (A); brighter CL regions contain greater Mn content 
than Fe while darker CL regions more Fe than Mn, with Mg increasing with Fe. [C] An AE 
EBSD map of site highlighted in (A); four distinct generations of calcite can be seen 
differentiated by cataclastic material boundaries, degree of deformation and chemistry. [D 
 G] PFs of regions highlighted in (C), show that the CPO across generations is unrelated.  
Figure 4.7  [A] Ultracomminuted gouge and cataclasite from the lower PSZ (1B-142.2m  
Unit 5). Contact between smectite-rich gouge and cataclasite with abundant calcite veining 
above gouge layer (highlighted in yellow). [B] CL image of region marked in (A). Blue CL is 
from K-feldspar clasts and green CL is from apatite. 
1100  9000 ppm and between 1100  6450 ppm respectively, ranging higher in 
concentrations than all other samples (red data points in Figure 4.8A). In contrast, the 
concentrations of Fe and Mg in calcite veins of the AFZ footwall are low (blue data points in 
Figure 4.8A). The data points labelled Field in Figure 4.8B and shown in black are 
measurements taken from a quartz-calcite vein within an AF hanging wall metabasic 
mylonite acquired from field exposures at the Waikukupa River (see Figure 1.5 for sampling 
location) that was analysed for comparison with borehole specimens. The estimated depth 
of this Field quartz-calcite vein is ~6 km, approximately at the BVT of the Alpine Fault, based 
on fluid inclusion microthermometry and quartz microstructure identification by Menzies et 
al., [2014]. 
4.3.2.7. Overall stable oxygen isotope variation 
Just like trace element concentration analyses, stable oxygen isotope (18O) measurements 
were also spatially resolved, and they were taken from carbonate veins (calcite and 
ankerite) through the alteration zone, sampling a number of generations (based on cross-
cutting relationships) at a given depth, where these were available (see Figure 4.8B). 
Overall 18O values range from 6.4  15.8  which is within the range for quartz precipitate 
from fluids of dominantly meteoric origin [Menzies et al., 2014, 2016]. Variations between 
generations of calcite veins at the same depth interval are substantial, particularly in 
samples 1B-99.3m and 1B-111m. Interestingly, a close match in 18O values can be 
observed between 1B-118.64m (foliated cataclasite) and 1A-90.74m (PSZ gouge). Notably, 
these two samples also have the largest range of trace element concentrations, as 
described above. Furthermore, while recognising the large variations in the 18O values 
measured, a weak trend of decreasing 18O values with increasing depth within the 
borehole is apparent in Figure 4.8B. Bulk rock stable isotope analyses performed by 
Menzies et al., [2014]  on separated and crushed quartz-calcite, calcite and chlorite veins 
from field exposures, one such sample is included in these analyses as Field, compare well 
(2.5  15  18Omin values) with our spatially resolved SIMS measurements of 18Ocalcite in 
the DFDP-1 borehole samples. 
Figure 4.8  [A] SIMS Mg and Fe concentrations in part per million (ppm) with depth: a 
strong correlation of combined increase Fe and Mg content is visible; calcite within the PSZ 
has the greatest Fe  Mg content as well as the greatest range. Symbol variation denotes 
separate generations, for full key see Figure SM 4.9. [B] SIMS 18O measurements with 
depth. The quartz  calcite vein Field sample was acquired from Menzies et al., [2014]. 
Triangle symbols denote a separate generation measured at that depth. HW = hanging wall; 
PSZ = principal slip zone; FW = footwall; Field = sample retrieved from field exposure.  
4 4. Discussion  
4.4.1. Classification of the Alpine Fault alteration zone carbonate veins 
During an earthquake, much of the strain and thus deformation in the crust is localised in 
the principal slip zone of a fault. With increasing distance away from the principal slip zone, 
the extent of damage is progressively less [Mitchell and Faulkner, 2009; Faulkner et al., 
2010]. The length-scales of fractures within a fault damage zone can range from grain-scale 
micro-fractures to macro-fractures (exposure to km scale) that may in their own right be 
considered subsidiary fault structures [Faulkner et al., 2010]. Due to the sampling 
limitations inherent in drilling projects, decimetres to micron scale fractures / veins are 
typically the only scales that can be observed in drill-core [Williams et al., 2016].  
In regard to the Alpine Fault fault core / alteration zone, Kim et al.'s [2004] wall damage 
zone classification appears most applicable in regard to the scale of fracture detailed in this 
study (m  cm), while the nature of the precipitate matches most closely a syntaxial vein 
classification. However, a number of features described below may extend the range of 
these classifications due to the evolved, complex nature of the heavily cataclased, altered 
zone of rock bounding the AF. This section aims to interpret the variety of vein 
microstructures and chemistries that have been studied in samples from AFZ core. From 
interpretations a preliminary classification of AFZ calcite veins will be proposed, providing 
some further insight into the processes of crack sealing that may take place within a fault 
zone during the seismic cycle. This may have potential application to other mature, tectonic 
faults zones that are similarly heavily damaged and have undergone extensive geochemical 
alteration.  
Though limited by sampling size and 2-dimensional observations, the majority of the veins 
and voids detailed in this study appear to be of hybrid shear-extensional (mixed mode) 
fracture origin [Ramsey and Chester, 2004]. The veins described show evidence of at least 
some shear, with displacements of <4 mm, and with dilation appearing to be partially shear 
induced but with some extensional component. These mm  cm scale microfractures 
concur with other studies and models on mature fault zones, with distributed deformation 
in the fault core cataclasites as the strain gradient reduces away from the main shearing 
PSZ where slip is localised.  
4.4.2. The microstructure of vein calcite in the Alpine Fault 
The morphology, texture and microstructure of the vein-infill can reveal much about the 
formation processes and conditions both before and after precipitation, however the 
variety of factors that influence crystal growth from a fluid and subsequent deformation 
means deciphering such processes and conditions can be challenging. In this section, the 
microstructural variation of the Alpine Fault carbonate vein-infill across generations and 
with proximity to the PSZ is discussed.  
Crystal morphology and growth direction reveal information on the mechanisms that 
control the precipitation of the vein filling. Calcite, having trigonal crystal symmetry, is 
anisotropic and generally grows faster in the direction of the [0001] c-axis. With growth 
competition between grains, a CPO can develop in the vein-infill [Nollet et al., 2005]. 
However, depending on the setting and conditions during crystal growth, different axes of 
the calcite crystal can preferentially grow. A number of studies report these controls on 
growth of calcite relative to its c-axis. Folk, [1974] reported that incorporation of Mg2+ into 
the calcite would sufficiently distort the crystal lattice and inhibit growth normal to the c-
axis if the precipitating fluid had a high Mg/Ca ratio. Alternatively, variation in surface 
charges on crystal faces could lead to preferential growth of the c-axis, depending on the 
Ca2+ / HCO3- ratio of the precipitating fluid [Lahann, 1978]. Growth of particular faces would 
also be bound to whether the prism or basal faces of the calcite nucleates on the vein wall, 
with fast flowing fluid potentially forcing the prism face to nucleate on the vein wall and 
resulting in the subsequent growth of the c-axis basal face parallel to the vein wall, as 
reported by Tulloch, [1982] in geothermal energy pipework. In this study, all calcite crystal 
planes and axes were analysed. However, the strongest fabrics were observed in the [0001] 
c-axis PF plots, and thus these results are presented.  
The majority of the veins studied in this thesis within the Alpine Fault fault core / alteration 
zone, whether deformed or undeformed, exhibit blocky-equant, and occasionally elongate-
blocky, grains that span the entire width of the vein. These veins are characterised by little 
growth competition as evidenced by their weak shape preferred orientations and also, in 
those that show no twinning, by the weak, often inherited fabrics observed in pole figure 
plots. These blocky grain shapes are attributed to growth within an open cavity or rapidly 
opening veins that synchronously seal by mineral precipitation [Hilgers et al., 2004]. Fibrous 
crystals, which are usually attributed to crack-seal or progressive opening of a fracture with 
incremental vein precipitation, are not observed in the Alpine Fault material studied. 
Similar vein microstructures are observed in studies of the San Andreas Fault Zone reported 
by Mittempergher et al., [2011] and Hadizadeh et al., [2012], who attribute blocky vein-infill 
textures to precipitation from a free fluid in an open void. The lack of preferred orientations 
in calcite vein-infills have also been reported by McNamara et al., [2016], who suggested 
that calcite crystals grow syntaxially outward from multiple orientations on a vein wall, 
eventually sealing the void space with a 3-dimensional interlocking set of elongated 
crystals.  
The majority of the veins show evidence of at least partial reactivation and subsequent 
precipitation of calcite vein-infill indicated by: the reworking of calcite within sheared veins 
as in 1B-99.3m-A and 1B-99.3m-B (Figures 4.2 and 4.3); the incorporation of the cataclastic 
host-matrix as coherent boundaries as in 1B-118.64m-A, 1A-90.74m-A and 1B-111m-B 
(Figures 4.4, 4.6 and SM 4.3), or the encompassing of older generation calcite by newer 
generations as in 1A-89.4m and 1A-90.74m-B (Figures SM 4.1 and 4.6). Reactivation 
predominantly occurs along vein-infill and host-wall contacts as these represent natural 
zones of weakness. However, in some instances fractures, especially those at high angles to 
pre-existing veins, propagate through the cataclasite / gouge host and calcite vein-infill as 
seen in 1B-99.3m-A and B, 1A-90.74-A and B, 1A-89.4m and 1B-118.64m-C (Figure 4.2, 4.3, 
4.6 and SM 4.1, 4.4 and 4.6), resulting in clasts of the older generation calcite floating 
within a more recent calcite cement.  
The constitution of the nucleation surface has a strong influence on crystallographic 
orientation of vein calcite. If precipitation occurs upon pre-existing vein calcite, the CPO is 
inherited, as evident in 1B-99.3m-A and 1B-118.64m-A (Figure 4.2 and 4.4), in which the 
more recent generation has nucleated upon and inherited the previous generations host or 
twin orientations. This is likely a result of epitaxial growth in the presence of a fluid being 
the most energetically favourable form of crystal growth [Putnis and Putnis, 2007; Mithen 
and Sear, 2014]. When a fracture or void is generated in the cataclastic wall rock and there 
is no pre-existing calcite, as for example in 1B-99.3m-A 2Gen-isolated (Figure 4.2C and 4G), 
the calcite nucleating on the fracture wall will grow in orientations likely governed by a 
combination of wall rock properties such as grain size and chemistry, fracture morphology, 
and the stress field. The incorporation of wall rock clasts or boundaries into the vein-infill 
also appears to have a considerable effect on grain shape and orientation; within 1B-
118.64m-A and 1A-90.74m-A (Figure 4.4 and 4.6) wall-rock boundaries may serve as the 
nucleation surface, resulting in c-axis orientations distinct from one another in the same 
generation as well as subsequent generations.  
The predominance of blocky grain shapes, weak growth competition and floating wall-rock 
/ old calcite fragments indicate that precipitation of the vein-infill often occurred rapidly 
and explosively as the fracture propagated, potentially sealing the fracture instantaneously 
(Figure 3 and 4). This is likely evidence of hydrofracturing, in which a fluid is pulsed through 
the fault core / alteration zone during seismicity, propagating Mode I  dilatant fractures 
through reduction of effective pressures, which undergo some shear by movement on the 
fault. The sudden pressure drop during dilation results in the rapid supersaturation of the 
fluid and therefore in rapid precipitation on the fracture walls [Phillips, 1972; Sibson et al., 
1975], which could be in the order of seconds if wall rock clasts are frozen in suspension as 
in Figure 4.3 and 4.4. This rapid sealing mechanism is likely most applicable to fractures that 
have a sub-mm width, wider fractures may only be partially filled by rapid supersaturation / 
precipitation, being subsequently sealed through precipitation of calcite from a constant 
flux of fluid over a longer, though shorter than the overall interseismic period, timescale. 
The common evidence of vein reactivation in the Alpine Fault may indicate the propagation 
of mobile hydrofractures, particularly as vein structures are sub-vertical, at high angles to 
the fault plane (Figure 2, 3, 5 and SM 3, and 4).  These mobile hydrofractures occur when 
the fluid at the upper tip of a fracture is overpressured while at the bottom is 
underpressured. If the fluid pressure at the upper tip can overcome the rock strength and 
lithostatic pressure it will propagate upward while its under-pressurised lower end will 
close. Mobile hydrofractures preferentially ascend along planes of weakness which may 
explain the reactivation of many of the vein microstructures witnessed in the Alpine Fault 
[Pollard, 1976; Bons, 2001; Oliver and Bons, 2001].  
Experimental and theoretical models on vein mineralisation timescales predict a time span 
of ~68  760 years for the formation of small veins, with a volume of 30 mm3, under 
constant room pressure and temperature, with varying fluid volume and degree of calcite 
saturation [Lee and Morse, 1999]. The typical fluid / calcite volume ratio required for the 
formation of these short veins ranges from 105 to 106, indicating that an extremely large 
amount of fluid is required for their production in nature. However, the time span needed 
for vein filling is highly variable depending on factors such as fluid saturation state, flow 
velocity, vein dimension, and precipitation kinetics. In the process of hydrofracturing on the 
Alpine Fault, as described above, conditions are likely to speed up mineral precipitation 
dramatically, with rapid fluid flow and pressure fluctuations causing supersaturation of the 
fluid. The high temperatures observed at the near-surface on the Alpine Fault, as well as 
the transiently high temperatures generated within the PSZ coseismically, also promote 
calcite precipitation due to its reverse solubility, which persists up to pressures of ~1100 
MPa [Caciagli and Manning, 2003].  
Deformation twinning (also termed mechanical twinning, e-twinning or deformation 
lamella) is the key intracrystalline deformation mechanism that takes place within calcite at 
low temperatures, <~400 C, and low confining pressures [Burkhard, 1993; Ferrill et al., 
2004]. Individual e-twins are considered to be zones of perfect simple shear and, where the 
twin domain has a crystallographic orientation different from the host calcite grain and 
defined by a rotation of 75 around < 2021>. This shearing leads to strain incompatibilities 
at twin-host boundaries and twin-twin intersections resulting in strain hardening. These 
incompatibilities may be removed by either grain-scale pressure solution processes at low 
temperatures or dynamic recovery processes at higher temperatures [Burkhard, 1993]. 
Twin-twin intersections form due to multiple twin-sets occurring simultaneously, and are 
known as Rose-channels [Rose, 1868]. These can form voids within calcite due to 
microfracturing but can also be filled by secondary calcite precipitation.  
Temperature 
Morphology 
 I <200  Thin, straight twins, up to three sets per grain. 
 II 150  300 Thick (>1 m), straight with slight lense shape. 
 III >200 Thick, curved and often themselves twinned. 
IV >250  
Patchy with irregular geometries caused by recrystallisation 
and grain-boundary migrations. 
Table 4.1  Classification and description of calcite twin morphology variation with 
increasing temperature after Vernon, [1981]; Burkhard, [1993] and Ferrill et al., [2004]. 
Twin thickness is a function of the temperature at which deformation occurred (Table 4.1). 
This has been determined by both experimental and field observations. Type I and II twins 
(Table 4.1) are known as rational twins, as they reflect rigorously the crystallographic 
relation with their parent grain and always post-date it. Type III and IV twins on the other 
hand are irrational twins, where their relation with the parent grain is often altered by high 
temperature processes, and they may also be twinned themselves. 
Variations in orientation within a crystal lattice, within a single grain or across grain 
boundaries, can be investigated by misorientation analysis of EBSD data. Lattice distortions 
themselves may be generated by a variety of processes including: sub-grain formation, 
incorporation of defects or varying trace elements during growth.  
Within the studied veins, twin thickness, density and morphology vary substantially, 
particularly between vein generations. Older generations, i.e., 1Gen 1B-99.3m-A; 1Gen 1B-
99.3m-B; 1Gen 1B-118.64m-A (Figures 4.2, 4.3, 4.4 and 4.6), have thick twins with irregular 
twin-host boundaries that are decorated at these boundaries with fine, recrystallised 
material, and usually contain multiple e-twin sets which are indicative of strains of more 
than a few percent [Barber and Wenk, 1979]. This indicates that older generation(s) of 
calcite have undergone considerable deformation and recovery processes. In the twin 
classification scheme, these largely fall between Type II and IV indicating formation 
conditions of 250  300 C [Burkhard, 1993; Ferrill et al., 2004]. Within un-twinned calcite 
grains in the older generation, vein misorientations in the range of 5  10 are observed. 
Younger generation veins, i.e., 2Gen 1B-99.3m-A; 2Gen 1B-99.3m-B; 2Gen 1B-118.64m-A, 
and those regions that have undergone recovery and recrystallisation, particularly focused 
on twin-host boundaries and twin-twin intersections, rarely exhibit twinning and show little 
internal misorientation (<1).  
The presence of multiple twin-sets and internal misorientation, which are both indicative of 
deformation, in older generation veins (1Gen) indicate that the vein infill precipitated 
during earthquake events prior to the most recent seismicity. Twin morphology in the 1Gen 
calcite indicates it has been exhumed from depths of 4  6 km according to local 
geothermal gradients stated above. The 1Gen calcite infill may therefore have seen 
multiple increments of slip on the Alpine Fault and has itself accommodated some (small) 
amount of the deformation imparted to the fault damage zone surrounding the fault core. 
The lack of twinning and internal misorientation in younger generation of veins and in 
regions where recrystallisation has occurred within the older generations, indicates that 
these veins and the processes that have obliterated twinning post-date the latest episode 
of deformation within the Alpine Fault Zone, as there is no evidence of seismically induced 
deformation.  
The existence of fine-grained calcite (diameters of ~0.5  5 m) decorating twin boundaries, 
vein  wall-rock, and vein  vein contacts is common across the range of depths of the 
sampled zone. In sample 1B-99.3m-A, fine-grained regions are interpreted as areas of 
recrystallisation within older generations, highlighted by a typical bright-orange CL signal 
indicating a higher Mn content as well as showing little sign of internal lattice distortion. 
This indicates that temperature dependent recovery and dissolution-precipitation 
processes are active, especially in areas of high dislocation density such as at twin-host 
boundaries, twin-twin intersections and boundaries at which fracturing or shear have 
occurred allowing fluid ingress. For example, in the sheared vein in sample 1B-99.3m-A 
(Figure 4.2), the fine-grained material is in close spatial relation with the shear plane 
indicating that some of the fine-grained material is a product of brittle cataclasis during 
shear, with some precipitation and sealing evidenced by the variation in trace element 
content of the cataclased region compared to the parent calcite. These cataclastic 
processes are also evident in the cataclased vein of sample 1B-99.3m-B Figure 4.3, in which 
a calcite vein has been remobilised and sheared causing fragmentation (brecciation 
evidenced by CL) and grain-size reduction, with fluid infiltration and new precipitation 
(evidenced by lighter orange CL) cementing this calcite breccia and the incorporated 
rounded wall rock fragments. This process potentially happened throughout successive 
periods of seismicity on the Alpine Fault, indicated by the change in trace element content 
between the brecciated calcite and younger cementing calcite (see section 4.4.3).  
The chemical and mechanical responses of carbonate material at earthquake deformation 
rates have been the focus of a number of experimental investigations using high velocity 
shear apparatus. Smith et al., [2013] performed experiments on room-dry calcite gouges, 
with grain size <250 m, and up to 26 MPa normal stress and found that at slip velocities 
0.1 m/s a principal slip zone was generated within the calcite gouge that was flanked by a 
<300 m-thick layer containing dynamically recrystallised grains of 1  10 m diameter, 
with well-defined shape and CPOs. This dynamic recrystallisation was accompanied by 
thermal decomposition of calcite to CO2 and CaO and fault weakening behaviour. Smith et 
al., [2013] also report similar recrystallised material observed on a natural principal slip 
zone in the Garam thrust, South Korea , exhumed from <5 km depth. Smith et al., [2013] 
infers that frictional heating along principal slip surfaces (both experimental and natural) 
would produce localised dynamic recrystallisation, a feature that could be diagnostic of 
shallow crustal seismicity. A number of other experimental / field studies have shown 
similar observations. Han et al., [2007] reported thermal decomposition and phase 
transformations during slip of room-dry siderite-calcite quartz gouges in high velocity 
experiments and within the Chelungpu fault zone, China. In addition De Paola et al., [2011] 
also reported thermal decomposition of experimental room-dry calcite gouges and 
suggested that a variety of mechanisms, e.g., flash heating, thermal pressurization and 
nanoparticle lubrication, take place within a principal slip zone composed of carbonates.  
Within the principal slip zone of the Alpine Fault, recrystallised regions in a number of the 
calcite clasts (see Regions 3 and 4 in 1A-90.74m-A; Figure 4.6) may be an indicator of 
transiently high temperatures upon or in the near vicinity of the PSZ. While the Alpine Fault 
PSZ is not entirely composed of, or hosted within, carbonate material, as in the examples 
above, the presence of substantial carbonate clasts horizons within the gouge layers, as 
well as concentrated layers above the PSZs (see 1B-143.85m; Figure 4.7), there is still 
evidence of recrystallisation that may be an indicator of coseismic heating and thus 
potentially weakening processes associated with carbonate decomposition. The products of 
calcite thermal decomposition, CO2 and CaO, would leave no direct record in the PSZ, as 
CaO (lime) readily hydrates to Ca(OH)2, which then forms calcite again in the presence of 
CO2 [Han et al., 2007b].  
4.4.3. Controls on trace element variation 
The Alpine Fault alteration zone has undergone extensive fluid-rock interaction, leading to 
the precipitation of secondary phases and to the alteration and retrogression of the fault 
rock protolith lithologies [Sutherland et al., 2012; Townend et al., 2013; Toy et al., 2015b; 
Boulton et al., 2017a]. An incomplete but informative record of these reactions exists in the 
trace element chemistry of the carbonate vein-infills that provides evidence on: 1) the 
composition of the fluids that precipitated them; 2) the composition of the rocks the fluids 
had interacted with; and 3) the conditions at which fluid-rock interactions occur.  
The compositions of fluids in the crust are controlled by the reactions that occur between 
fluid and rock as well as the local geothermal gradient, due to the temperature control on 
partitioning of elements between fluid and mineral phases. As a result, trace element 
concentrations within carbonate minerals are strongly dependent on the composition and 
temperature of the vein forming fluid. The influence temperature exerts on the partitioning 
of trace elements into calcite mineralisation has been derived both experimentally and 
theoretically [e.g., Oomori et al., 1987; Rimstidt et al., 1998]. In response to a temperature 
increase Mg2+ is more strongly partitioned into calcite, while Sr, Fe and Mn are less strongly 
so [Rimstidt et al., 1998]. Menzies, [2012] showed, in studies of shallow level fluid flow on 
the Alpine Fault, that at higher temperatures fluid-rock interaction generates an increase in 
Mg, Sr and Ca concentrations in the fluid. The ratios of these trace elements would vary 
with incorporation or precipitation of minerals from solution, such as the precipitation of 
chlorite, would decrease Mg fluid concentrations, while calcite precipitation would increase 
Mg/Ca, Mn/Ca, Fe/Ca and Sr/Ca ratios [Menzies, 2012].  
During calcite precipitation in the Alpine Fault alteration zone, temperature has had a 
measurable influence on calcite trace element incorporation. Therefore, from this, and in 
conjunction with microstructural observations, inferences on the location and depth of the 
mineralisation, and on the associated processes can be made. 
CL observations and SIMS measurements in this study have revealed a number of trends in 
carbonate compositions. Older generation veins within the hanging wall fault core / 
alteration zone, such as those that show extensive deformation and are cross-cut by 
younger structures, generally, but not always, have dull-orange CL signals and greater Fe 
and Mg concentrations e.g., 1B-99.3m-A and B, 1B-118.64m-A, 1A-89.4m (Figures 4.2, 4.3, 
4.4 and SM 4.1). This is indicative of precipitation at higher temperatures, which 
corroborates with the twinning microstructures discussed above, with twinning 
temperatures estimated at 250  300 C, as well as the high Mg and Fe content in the Field 
quartz-calcite veins, which are inferred to have been formed at the BVT, with estimated 
temperatures of 250  370 C [Menzies et al., 2014]. These older veins typically contain 
areas of bright CL, marking increased Mn and Sr, that mark regions where recrystallisation 
has occurred, but also marks fractures and twin boundaries e.g., 1B-99.3m-A, 1B-118.64m-
A (Figures 4.2 and 4.4). This may be evidence for fluid-rock interaction between old vein-
infills and new fluids in the fault zone, characterised by a composition different from that 
of the older vein precipitating fluid, resulting in incorporation of Mn and Sr into 
recrystallised material and trace element exchange at points of fluid ingress such as 
fractures and twin boundaries. A similar mechanism may occur that allows the 
incorporation of Fe into newly precipitated calcite, which may explain the microstructure 
observed in 1B-118.64m-A (Figure 4.4) wherein a 2Gen calcite, with little twinning and 
lattice distortion, has an identical CL signal as 1Gen calcite, caused by high Fe content.  
Within a single generation of veins, and particularly apparent in younger generations, that 
show little evidence of deformation and fluid interaction, the CL signal is predominantly 
uniform, e.g., 1B-118.64m-A and C, 1B-111m-B, 1B-123.15m and 1B-133m (Figures 4.3 and 
SM 4.4, SM 4.3, SM 4.5 and SM 4.7). Uniform CL signal in a vein suggests that pore fluid 
chemistry, conditions, and fluid-rock interactions remained largely constant during 
precipitation. This, coupled with the blocky grain morphology seen in most veins, implies 
that vein precipitate was substantially fluid-buffered with a constant, homogenous source 
of Ca and other trace elements during precipitation, which persisted at least until the 
fracture was entirely filled.  
Distinct zoning of CL signal and thus trace element content has only been found in one 
example, in sample 1B-118.64m-B (Figure 4.5), where oscillatory zoning within a vein 
reflects fluctuations in Mn/Ca, Sr/Ca and Mg/Ca (and by inference Fe/Ca) ratios. Along the 
traverse where trace element concentrations were measured (blue to red point in Figure 
4.5A), within the purple grain, a gradual and progressive misorientation of up to 2 is 
observed, suggesting that the zoning reflects the trace of the main growth surface of the 
crystal. As this growth surface migrates, it incorporates trace elements and defects, and 
lattice rotations (distortions) develop due to such defects [Piazolo et al., 2005] (Figure 4.5A 
and 4.5E). Trace element zoning is indicative of changing fluid composition or temperature 
during mineral precipitation. As observed in experimental work by Borg et al. [2014], this 
variation could be caused by rapid fluid-rock interaction during precipitation causing fluid 
chemistry differentiation at the calcite growth interface even in cases when the overall 
system is fluid-buffered. Complete sealing of the fracture hosting this zoned calcite would 
then limit secondary reactions or alteration by fluid in the fault zone, preserving the zoning. 
This may be most likely in short-lived hydrothermal activity, for example during and 
immediately following an earthquake [Borg et al. 2014]. Crystal structure and growth may 
also play a considerable part in preferential incorporation of trace elements. As calcite is 
anisotropic, different faces grow via different mechanisms, e.g., spiralling, polygonised 
growth or hillocks development etc. This controls the surface micro-topography, specifically 
the orientation of growth steps and kink sites, resulting in differential incorporation of trace 
elements [Paquette and Reeder, 1995]. Growth rate has also been called upon to explain 
zoning in calcite [Barker and Cox, 2011], whereby decreasing precipitation rate and 
increasing temperature cause Fe and Mn incorporation and the ratio of Mn / Fe to increase 
[Dromgoole and Walter, 1990]. In regards to the zoning in 1B-118.64m-B (Figure 4.5), it 
likely reflects slower precipitation rates within porosity that has remained open into the 
faults interseismic period. If precipitation rates were slower, it would be more likely for 
fluctuations in temperature or trace element concentration in the fluid, or a combination of 
the two, to be recorded during calcite precipitation. 
Of all AFZ lithologies, the calcite present in the principal slip zone shows the greatest range 
in Mg/Ca and Fe/Ca ratios and highest Mg/Ca and Fe/Ca ratios (Figure 4.8).  An additional 
characteristic of veins in the PSZ is that the CL signal has a trend generally opposing that 
observed in the alteration zone, whereby bright CL is seen in older, deformed generations 
of calcite cement (samples 1A-90.74m-A and B, Figure 4.6 and SM 4.6). This could be due to 
a number of processes and conditions unique to the PSZ gouge, such as intense grain-size 
reduction to <0.001 mm for the matrix and <0.01 mm clasts [Toy et al., 2015b], and 
elevated temperatures due to frictional heating during seismicity, resulting in enhanced 
fluid-rock interaction and efficient mixing of trace elements and alteration [Boulton et al., 
2017a]. A number of reactions occurring in the alteration zone could enrich fluids with Mg 
and Fe, these are outlined by Wintsch and Yeh, [2013] and Boulton et al., [2017] and 
include biotite to chlorite: 2phlogopite + 4H+ + H2O = clinochlore + 2SiO2 + Mg2+ + 2K+; and 
chlorite to muscovite: 3clinochlore + 2K+ + 28H+ = 2muscovite + 3SiO2 + 15Mg2+ + 24H2O. Fe 
may be present in these reactions within clinochlore but the reactions are balanced 
assuming only octahedral magnesium cations. These reactions could progressively enrich 
the fluid in Mg and Fe, resulting in the formation of Mg and Fe-rich calcite as seen in 1A-
90.74m-A and B (Figures 4.6 and SM 4.6).  
Permeabilities within the cataclasites and gouges of the fault core / alteration zone are 
habitually low, as shown in static experimental measurements, at ~10-18 to 10-21 m2 
[Boulton et al., 2012; Carpenter et al., 2014; Allen et al., 2017]. Coseismically, these 
permeabilities are increased through fracture generation in the cataclasites, and inferred to 
be quickly reduced through vein sealing as evidenced by the vein microstructures detailed 
above. However, within the gouge layers permeability is likely only marginally increased 
during seismicity, in contrast to the cataclasites, and reduced on a far shorter time-scales. 
This potentially occurs through coseismic thermal pressurisation within the gouges, 
allowing the reduction of effective stresses and fluidisation of the gouge, increasing the 
permeability [Ujiie et al., 2011]. This permeability is then rapidly reduced through shear-
induced compaction resealing the gouge layer [e.g., Tanikawa et al., 2012]. This rapid 
reduction in gouge permeability could potentially result in the trapping of local fluids and 
resulting in an rock-buffered environment in which the calcite in and around the PSZ gouge 
layer is isolated and enriched in Mg and Fe as local fluids dominate over fluids from further 
afield in the fault zone.  
In order to aid discussion and interpretation of trace element data as a whole, a statistical 
method known as Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was used. PCA may reveal simplified 
patterns in a complex set of variables by reducing the observed variables to a smaller 
number, called factors. The program used to perform PCA is XLSTAT, a data analysis and 
statistical application that runs through Microsoft Excel developed by Addinsoft.  
PCA is a true eigenvector-based multivariate analysis. It involves the use of an orthogonal 
transformation that converts a set of possibly correlated variables into linearly uncorrelated 
variables termed principal components. The amount of principal components is less than or 
equal to the smaller of the number of original variables. The transformation results in the 
first principal component having the largest possible variance, accounting for as much of 
the original datas variability as possible, with each successive component having the 
highest variance possible under the constraint that it is orthogonal to the preceding 
component. This results in vectors which are an uncorrelated basis set [Davis, 2002; Jolliffe, 
2002]. The spread sheet containing the calculations and original trace element datasets is 
included in Workbook SM 4.1 in the Digital Supplementary Materials. 
After feeding the trace element concentrations of interest, comprising the Fe, Mn, Mg, Sr, 
Ba and Ce measurements from all the depths and veins sampled, into the PCA application, 
the plot illustrated in Figure 4.9 was generated. The proportion of the variance for each 
principal component is as follows: 1st principal component (PC), 45.88 %; 2nd PC, 21.83 %; 
3rd PC, 16.16 %; 4th PC, 9.43 %; 5th PC, 6.47 %; 6th PC, 0.22 %. It is clear from the pattern of 
clustering in the plot that chemical variation in the veins correlates with their location in 
the fault. A wide cluster comprising all data from veins in the AFZ hanging wall,  
Figure 4.9  Principal component analysis (PCA) plot of all trace element measurements, Fe, 
Mn, Mg, Sr, Ba and Ce, made in this study. Clustering shows correlation between calcite 
composition and location on the Alpine Fault. HW = hanging wall; PSZ = principal slip zone; 
FW = footwall; Field = sample retrieved from field exposure.   
PSZ and footwall is clearly observed. There are clear groupings of calcite chemistries within 
1B-118.64m-A and the PSZ 1A-90.74m, with the remaining data highlighting the wide range 
of calcite chemistries present through the fault core / alteration zone calcite overlapping 
one another. The ankerite and mixed calcite-ankerite vein in 1B-111m-A (Figure SM 4.2) 
both cluster separately from the calcite veins, due to their greater Mg, Fe and Mn content. 
The quartz-calcite vein Field sample also clusters separately, similarly due to higher Mg and 
Fe content, a result of higher precipitation temperatures that may be associated with a 
quartz-bearing vein, estimated by Menzies et al., [2014] to be between 250  370 C. 
Jenkin et al., [1994] speculate that the substantial Ca and CO2 in the shallow crustal fluids of 
the Alpine Fault hanging wall could be explained through fluid-rock interaction with 
metamorphosed carbonaceous material in the fault hanging wall or dissolution of Ca from 
Ca-bearing minerals in the Alpine Schists (hornblende, plagioclase, garnet and epidote). As 
for the origin of the trace element species discussed above, the alteration, hydration and 
retrogressive reactions that take place within the fault likely provide substantial material 
for dissolution in the hot fluids of the Alpine Fault hanging wall [Sutherland et al., 2012, 
2017]. Mg, Fe and Sr are likely sourced from interaction with the chlorite-rich rocks within 
the shallow Alpine Fault, with the transformation of primary minerals, i.e., biotite, 
muscovite and chlorite, to kaolinite, smectite (montmorillonite), Fe- goethite and lower 
temperature muscovite/illite (white mica) releasing substantial Mg+ and Fe2+ into the free 
fluid [Boulton et al., 2017a]. 
The abundance of Mn in the alteration zone calcite however has a less obvious source. 
Garnets are present throughout the Alpine Fault rock sequence, including the Alpine 
Schists, protomylonites and mylonites, and have been observed to have Mn-rich cores 
(Alm19Gr30Py3Sp48) and Mg-rich rims (Alm61Gr22Py8Sp9) [Cooper, 1974; Prior, 1988]. Cooper, 
[1974] and Grapes and Watanabe, [1994] found that these spessartine garnets had 
equilibrated at 450  480 C, predominantly below the garnet zone of the amphibolite 
facies. Here Mn is expected to be abundant and as few other minerals form that are able to 
accommodate Mn at these conditions, as such it was incorporated into the garnet [Bucher 
and Frey, 2001; Toy, 2007]. Garnet readily retrogresses to chlorite and quartz as 
amphibolite facies schists and mylonites are exhumed to sub-greenschist facies conditions 
on the fault following the reaction (Garnet + Mg-rich Chlorite + H2O = Chlorite + Quartz) (see 
Figure SM 4.10 for microstructural evidence). This potentially explains the lack of evidence 
for garnet in the alteration zone, where no relict grains or pseudomorphs are observed. 
Therefore, retrogressed garnets are potentially the main source of Mn in the Alpine Fault 
fault core / alteration zone, as well as providing some Mg, Fe and Ca.  
Ankerite, a rhombohedral carbonate Ca (Fe, Mg, Mn)(CO3)2, has been reported infrequently 
in the Alpine Fault, occurring as the dominant hydrothermal precipitate in the northern 
section of the fault, between the Whataroa River to the Taramakau River, while calcite 
dominates in the central section from Havelock Creek to the Whataroa River [Campbell, 
2002; Craw and Campbell, 2004]. A monomineralic ankerite vein (2  3 mm thick) and a 
calcite-ankerite vein (~1 mm thick) were located in sample 1B-111m-A (Figure SM 4.3), a 
finding that correlates with X-ray diffraction measurements undertaken by Boulton et al., 
[2017] that show an ankerite peak in 1B-112.12m. The presence of these ankeritic veins has 
been attributed to a precipitating fluid temperature greater than that of the host-rock, at 
~200  300 C [Craw et al., 2009]. This may mean that ankerite precipitated from hot fluid 
circulating at shallow crustal depths (<5 km) and has been exhumed, with calcite then 
becoming the dominant hydrothermal phase at shallower depths in the alteration zone 
[Craw et al., 2009]. The sampled ankerite is likely a relic of deeper vein mineralisation 
processes that preceded the calcite mineralisation documented in this study and that most 
ankerite has been reworked and altered during seismicity and exhumation. Alternatively, 
variation in the geothermal gradient along-strike of the Alpine Fault as observed within 
tributaries, 62.6  2.1 C/km as recorded during DFDP-1 at Gaunt Creek [Sutherland et al., 
2012], and valleys, 125  55 C/km as recorded during DFDP-2 at the Whataroa River Valley 
[Sutherland et al., 2017], may result in variation in carbonate mineralisation at the same 
depth upon the fault. 
4.4.4. Implications for fault zone processes  
The observations and measurements presented in this study show that the fluids circulating 
in the hanging wall of the Alpine Fault carry abundant calcium and carbon dioxide, which 
preferentially precipitate as calcite in the alteration zone. This precipitation seals fractures 
and voids opened during seismicity, decreasing permeability and increasing rock strength 
and competency (e.g., Boulton et al., 2017a). These physical properties govern many 
aspects of the fault through the seismic cycle.
Figure 4.10  
 caption overleaf 
Figure 4.10  Schematic illustrations for the formation of the calcite vein microstructures in 
the Alpine Fault fault core / alteration zone. [A] The Alpine Fault Zone in the upper crust, 
showing the fault rock lithological sequence and geothermal gradient after Toy et al., 
[2010]. The red marker denotes the plate boundary fault between the Pacific and Australian 
Plate; the green marker the onset of cataclasis and alteration in the fault core above the 
BVT , ~30 m thick; and the purple marker denotes the ultramylonite zone, ~150 m thick, 
through which the fault core transitions into the fault damage zone. [B] Magnified view of 
the fault zone showing the path of meteoric fluid to and along the fault, red lines mark 
regions of slip and gouge generation, white lines mark calcite mineralisation. [C] Illustration 
of fluid within the pores of gouge/cataclasites within the Principal Slip Zone and fault core / 
alteration zone, pore fluid pressure increases due to shear heating during seismicity 
reducing the tensile strength of the rock inducing fracture generation.  
[1] The formation of overprinting vein generations; [D] A dilatant shear fracture is 
generated in the fault core rock during seismicity, filled with pressurised fluid. [E] This 
fracture is sealed by calcite mineralisation immediately post-seismicity. [F] Subsequent 
seismicity generates an overprinting fracture over the previous vein generation. [G] The 
overprinting fracture is filled by calcite mineralisation. [2] The rapid mineralisation of a 
fracture entraining host rock clasts; [H] A dilatant shear fracture is generated in the fault 
core rock during seismicity, filled with pressurised fluid with wall rock clasts suspended in 
fluid. [I] Clasts are mobilised and remain suspended in the mobile fluid. [J] Mineralisation 
occurs rapidly freezing the wall rock clasts in suspension. [3] The formation of oscillatory 
zoned calcite veins; [K] A dilatant shear fracture is generated in the fault core rock during 
seismicity filled with pressurised fluid. [L] Fracture remains open into the interseismic 
period, potentially due to formation at shallow depths thus lower overburden pressures, 
allowing progressive mineralisation of calcite into the fracture void space. Varying amounts 
of trace metals is due to fluctuating ambient conditions or fluid source. [4] Incorporation of 
calcite veins into gouge layers; [M] As shear during seismicity is localised onto a surface 
gouge is generated from damaged wall rock. [N] Multiple subsequent slip events in the 
gouge zone progressively widens the slip zone resulting in incorporation of calcite veins 
previously generated in the more intact wall rock.  
The uniformity of vein chemistry within a single generation suggests that most veins were 
precipitated from a single pulse of fluid and that chemical variation within a single 
generation is the result of syn- and post-emplacement fluid-rock interactions and structural 
modification, such as fracturing and recrystallisation. This rapid generation and sealing of 
coseismic damage on the fault is consistent with recovery of rock strength and permeability 
after seismicity and brittle failure as observed in a number of crustal settings, including 
hydrothermal fields and fault zones [Madariaga et al., 1998; Tenthorey et al., 2003; Vidale 
and Li, 2003; Tenthorey and Cox, 2006; Brenguier et al., 2008; Cochran et al., 2009; Kelly et 
al., 2013; Griffiths et al., 2016; Kitagawa and Kano, 2016; McNamara et al., 2016]. 
However, the presence of zoned calcite may indicate slower rates of precipitation do occur 
in the alteration zone, and that sealing mechanisms persist well into the interseismic period 
of the Alpine Fault. See Figure 4.10 for a schematic illustration of the various sealing 
mechanisms taking place in the Alpine Fault Zone.  
The lack of thoroughgoing fractures in the PSZ gouge layers is due to the lack of cohesive 
strength, rapid compaction post slip and low competency at shallow crustal levels, 
generating an impermeable barrier which must be long-lived (e.g. Boulton et al., 2012; 
Sutherland et al., 2012; Carpenter et al., 2014; Menzies et al., 2016; Allen et al., 2017). This 
interpretation is supported by the high concentration of calcite above the PSZ in the 
hanging wall and, in stark contrast, the lack of calcite, even reworked, in the footwall of the 
fault. An exception to the commonly observed calcite-free footwall is the vein network 
immediately above PSZ-2 (e.g., 1B-143.85m in Figure 4.7). Here calcite is pooling between 
two slip zones. We propose two potential mechanisms controlling the emplacement of this 
horizon: 1) The percolation of a small amount of calcium carbonate-rich fluid through PSZ-1 
and into the footwall during seismicity, before re-sealing, potentially as a pulse of hot fluid, 
reaching the secondary slip surface and pooling against the impermeable layer and 
precipitating; 2) the PSZ-2 is the result of a near surface thrust, generating a less mature, 
subsidiary slip surface. This slip surface may act as a conduit for flow at the near surface, 
bypassing the footwall cataclasites above it, resulting in preferential emplacement of 
calcite. 
4.4. Conclusions  
From microstructural and geochemical observations of carbonate mineralisation in the 
Alpine Fault alteration zone and PSZ, the following conclusions may be drawn on the 
behaviour of the fault and its fluids throughout the seismic cycle:  
1. The Alpine Fault alteration zone shows extensive carbonate mineralisation, 
occurring predominantly as vein infill. Multiple fracture and sealing events have 
occurred on the fault, providing evidence for cyclical damage generation and 
recovery. 
2. The lack of twinning and other signs of deformation in the most recent vein 
generation indicate that there has been little deformation or strain accumulation in 
the alteration zone since the last period of seismicity.  
3. The transient nature of the permeability within the fault core / alteration zone is 
inferred to be due to seismically-induced fractures and porosity generation, 
potentially from both large magnitude Alpine Fault events and moderate 
magnitude events elsewhere in the fault zone. Immediately postseismically, the 
mobilisation of fluids results in rapid mineralisation and fluid-rock interactions, 
which seal and restrengthen the fault in preparation for the next cycle of seismicity 
occurs.  
4. The trace elements incorporated into calcite during precipitation were sourced 
from fluid-rock interactions between hydrothermal fluids and cataclased rock. Mn 
was likely sourced from the retrogressive breakdown of Mn-rich garnet while Mg 
and Fe are derived from low temperature transformations of biotite into chlorite to 
smectite and muscovite alteration, particularly in the principal slip zone.  
5. The variation in trace element incorporation into the carbonate veins during 
formation is due to the variations in ambient conditions of temperature and 
pressure within the fault zone and alteration reactions, through fluid-rock 
interaction occurring in the fault core / alteration zone between periods of fracture 
generation. In most cases, older vein generations contain more Fe and Mg, while 
younger generations and recrystallised regions contain more Mn, likely due to 
variation in temperature and pressure during precipitation as the fault hanging wall 
was exhumed. Increased Mg / Fe concentrations at the principal slip zone are 
potentially caused by enhanced fluid-rock interaction within the ultracomminuted 
gouges, where clay-mineral alteration occurs during the exhumation of the fault.  
6. Many of the veins are interpreted to be generated by hydrofracturing, where a hot 
fluid pulsed through the fault core / alteration zone during seismic activity, via 
rapidly propagating dilatant fractures with some shear component. The sudden 
pressure drop during dilation would result in rapid supersaturation of the fluid and 
therefore in rapid precipitation on the fracture walls, evidenced by blocky grain 
shapes, weak shape preferred orientations, uniform chemistry and floating wall-
rock / older calcite fragments. These features are predominantly observed in 
younger generation veins. Older generations may have formed via similar 
processes, but subsequent fluid-rock interaction and deformation has resulted in 
modification or sometimes obliteration of previous vein microstructures and 
chemistry.  
7. The rare presence of oscillatory zoned vein calcite indicates that in some cases 
precipitation occurs over a longer time scale, with fluctuations in temperature, 
pressure or fluid-rock interactions, or any combination of the three, resulting in 
variations in calcite trace element incorporation rates. This could mean that, as well 
as rapid sealing occurring immediately postseismically, a fraction of void space 
remains open long enough to undergo slow sealing by calcite precipitation during 
the interseismic period.  
8. Outside the fault core / alteration zone, within the AF damage zone, fractures likely 
remain open for far longer time scales or potentially indefinitely, allowing the 
passage of meteorically derived hydrothermal fluids above the contact of the 
damage zone and fault core / alteration zone, manifesting at the surface as hot 
springs.  
4.5. Further work 
To further understanding of fault sealing and restrengthening on the Alpine Fault a number of 
threads of further research could be followed. Performing calcite twin piezometry analyses, as 
developed by Rowe and Rutter, [1990] and Yamaji, [2015], could inform on palaeostresses on 
the Alpine Fault throughout periods of the seismic cycle in which calcite had been present. 
Another aspect to constrain better is the rate of precipitation of the calcite veins across 
generations, needed in order to improve understanding of the time frame for the sealing and 
restrengthening of the Alpine Fault. This would require better estimates on the rate of fluid flow 
and the magnitude of pressure drops during seismicity on the Alpine Fault and the effect these 
have on oversaturation and thus precipitation rates. Undertaking a clumped isotope or fluid 
inclusion study on the calcite would also be useful to constrain temperature and pressure, and 
potentially depth, of the formation of the veins. An investigation of suspended host rock 
fragments within the calcite with microCT could supply more evidence for rapid 
depressurisation, if fragments are truly suspended in the vein precipitate.   
4.6. Supplementary material 
Table SM 4.1  Details of all the carbonate veins observed during this study, including: 
depth, lithology, figure number, description and techniques used during analysis. Available 
in the Digital Supplementary Materials included with this thesis. 
Workbook SM 4.1  Microsoft Excel workbook containing all carbonate trace element 
measurement data (Sheet SM 4.1) and workings for Principal Component Analysis (PCA) 
using XLSTAT (Sheet SM 4.2). Available in the Digital Supplementary Materials included 
with this thesis. 
Figure SM 4.1  [A] A hanging wall cataclasite (1A-89.4m  Unit 3) 1.3 m above the upper 
PSZ. An unfoliated cataclasite containing a 5 mm thick, heavily twinned calcite vein. [B] CL 
image of location marked in (A); shows an older, dull-orange calcite generation cross-cut by 
multiple generations of brighter CL calcite.   
Figure SM 4.2  [A] A hanging wall cataclasite (1A-111m-A  Unit 4) 17.4 m above the 
upper PSZ. This specimen is composed of two cataclasites, black and grey. This lithological 
contact between the two terminating the carbonate veins in the upper grey cataclasite. 
These carbonates include calcite and ankerite veins. [B] Ankerite vein in PPL and CL at 
higher magnification, note the lack of luminescence. [C] An AE EBSD map of the ankerite 
vein, recrystallisation, sub grain formation and 2  5 misorientations within the grains is 
common. [D] SIMS trace element concentrations, sites marked in (C); show high Mg and Fe 
content, confirming ankerite composition. [E] PF of whole field of view in (C); note the wide 
spread in [0001] c-axis orientations and weak CPO.   
Figure SM 4.3  [A] Located within the same hanging wall cataclasite (1B-111m-B  Unit 4) 
as Figure SM 4.2. The calcite veins run perpendicular to foliation and terminate at the 
cataclasite lithological contact. [B] CL image of calcite vein showing bright orange CL signal 
and wall rock fragments entrained within vein fill. [C] An AE EBSD map showing two 
generations of calcite present, one of which is a large, blocky grain composing most of the 
vein fill and an elongate-blocky generation separated from one another by wall rock 
fragments. [D and E] PFs of the blocky and elongate-blocky infill show that they have 
disparate orientations.  
Figure SM 4.4  caption overleaf.  
Figure SM 4.4  (above) [A] A hanging wall cataclasite (1B-118.64m-C  Unit 3) 9.8 m above 
the upper PSZ. This cataclasite is heavily foliated and contains multiple en-chelon shears 
that cut cross a pseudotachylyte vein and foliations and have been mineralised with calcite. 
[B] CL image shows two regions distinguishable through CL, a bright orange region 
surrounded and cross-cut by a dull orange region. [C] An AE EBSD map of the region 
highlighted in (B) shows elongate-blocky crystal morphology with some twinning and 
fracturing in the calcite. [D] Site of interest in CL at higher magnification, with transect mark 
over fractures and accompanying CL variation. [E] SIMS trace elements transect, shows a 
decrease in Mn and Sr and increase in Mg, and likely Fe (unmeasured), over the duller CL 
features.  
Figure SM 4.5  [A] A hanging wall cataclasite (1B-123.15m  Unit 3) 5.29 m above the 
upper PSZ, an unfoliated cataclasite with reworked pseudotachylyte material cross-cut by 
calcite vein. [B] PPL image of calcite vein showing blocky grains and twinning. [C] CL image 
showing uniform CL signal throughout the vein, grain boundaries occasionally show brighter 
CL signals. [D] An AE EBSD map showing blocky and elongate-blocky grains with some 
twinning. [E] SIMS trace element concentrations sites marked in (C); show uniform 
composition across vein. [F] PF of field of view in (D); shows a distributed spread of [0001] c-
axis orientations of grains in vein.  
Figure SM 4.6  [A] Ultracomminuted gouge (1A-90.74m-B  Unit 5) within the upper PSZ-1. 
[B] A monomineralic calcite clast in a gouge and calcite clast matrix. CL shows three distinct 
generations of calcite, the dull-orange cut by bright-orange and both cut by a fine dull-red 
CL calcite. [C and D] EBSD AE maps of locations highlighted in (B); they show the varying 
degree of deformation in each generation. 
Figure SM 4.7  [A] A footwall cataclasite (1B-133m  Unit 6) 4.6 m below the upper PSZ, a 
heavily foliated cataclasite, one of the rare examples of calcite within the footwall 
cataclasites. Also note the green CL apatite. [B] CL image of calcite-filled void between 
foliations. [C] SIMS trace element concentrations, sites marked in (B), show a high Mn  low 
Fe content. 
Figure SM 4.8  A Stereographic (upper hemisphere, equal angle) projection of calcite 
showing key planes and directions, adapted from [Bestmann and Prior, 2003]. These include 
slip systems after De Bresser and Spiers, [1997]. Shading illustrates the trigonal symmetry 
point group 3m of calcite.  
Figure SM 4.9  [A] SIMS Mg and Fe concentrations in part per million (ppm) with depth. 
Symbol variation denotes separate generations. [B] Key of the measurement sites in the 
Alpine Fault calcite veins. Bracketed letters refer to vein classification in Table SM 4.1. 
Figure SM 4.10  [A  D] Photomicrographs and backscatter images of a quartzofeldspathic 
mylonites containing Mn-bearing garnet. Garnet shows evidence for retrogressive 
metamorphic alteration to quartz and chlorite. Specimens acquired from Stony Creek (A  B) 
and Waikukupa River (C  D), West Coast, South Island, New Zealand.  
5. Occurrence and nature of pseudotachylyte and 
ultracomminution within the Alpine Fault, New Zealand: 
insight from the Deep Fault Drilling Project 
Key points 
 There is record of substantial pseudotachylyte generation within the Alpine Fault 
core, in support of Toy et al., [2011]. 
 Frictional melt appears to be generated in the presence of fluids or in close vicinity 
to fluid conduits. 
 Pseudotachylyte is cataclased and altered by successive seismicity and fluid input 
and incorporated into cataclasites and gouges. 
Abstract 
The Alpine Fault, a transpressional plate boundary between the Australian and Pacific 
plates, is known to rupture quasi-periodically with large magnitude earthquakes (Mw ~8) 
and is thought to be nearing the end of its latest interseismic state. Pseudotachylytes and 
ultracomminuted gouges, and thus nanoparticles, are both products of localised, brittle 
deformation within the mid to upper crust, with their respective generation dependent on 
the ambient conditions and concurrent processes that exist during fault slip. Using SEM-
based microstructural observations and geochemical analyses, including: backscatter 
electron imaging; electron backscatter diffraction; and energy dispersive spectroscopy, and 
optical cathodoluminescence, we present a study on the occurrence of pseudotachylytes 
and nanoparticulates within the Alpine fault zone. We focus on the setting of these 
features, as well as the extent of mechanical reworking, chemical alteration and/or 
preservation they have undergone throughout the seismic cycle.  
Phase 1 of the Deep Fault Drilling Project (DFDP-1) sampled fault lithologies from both the 
Alpine Fault hanging wall and footwall at Gaunt Creek, Westland. Drilling revealed a fault 
zone structure comprised of a fault core and associated damage zone, both of which are 
overprinted by a zone of alteration focused in the hanging wall. This alteration was 
produced through enhanced fluid-rock interaction on a fault which currently has very low 
permeability. Pseudotachylytes occur throughout the Alpine Fault Zone fault core / 
alteration zone cataclasites, predominantly as reworked, disassociated clasts, with intact 
veins constrained to the fault core / damage zone transition in the fractured ultramylonites. 
These pseudotachylytes have an overall K-feldspathic composition but contain 
compositional segregations comprised of K / Si / Al-rich pseudotachylyte margins and Mg / 
Fe-rich and K / Si / Al-rich banding within the pseudotachylyte core. These K / Si / Al-rich 
bands exhibit a weak blue cathodoluminescence. Within the principal slip zone, 
ultracomminuted gouges contain sub  mm clasts that share similar characteristics with 
these pseudotachylytes. Such similarities include: a dominantly K-feldspathic composition, 
with minor Mg and Fe; the presence of nanoparticulates of quartz, calcite and Ti-oxides; 
and, in some cases, a blue cathodoluminescence. If these clasts are of pseudotachylyte 
origin, it can be inferred that the principal slip zone was capable of generating frictional 
melt at deeper crustal levels and that as it was exhumed, matured and altered, during the 
protracted history of seismicity, pseudotachylyte was entrained into the gouge layer, with 
subsequent devitrification and alteration resulting in microcrystalline clasts with entrained 
survivor nanoparticles. Alternatively the precipitation of K-feldspathic material within the 
principal slip zone from a rock-buffered alkali solution, incorporating nanoparticulates 
during growth, could be a viable mechanism. Further work is required to constrain the 
origin and nature of these materials.  
The lack of intact pseudotachylyte veins within the fault core /alteration zone cataclasites 
and gouges suggests that frictional melt did not occur during the most recent high 
magnitude Alpine Fault slip event. Most pseudotachylytes observed are reworked relicts 
from older Alpine Fault ruptures or smaller magnitude earthquakes that have been 
subsequently incorporated into the widening alteration zone with exhumation. Frictional 
melt appears to occur in the presence of fluid, as evidenced by the cataclasis of calcite veins 
associated with; amygdules within; and veins overprinting the pseudotachylytes. The 
presence of preserved nanoparticles within K-feldspathic clasts in the principal slip zone 
could indicate that the Alpine Fault produced nanoparticulates during increments of slip at 
greater depths without the production of melt. This could indicate a transition in slip 
behaviour with time and exhumation; frictional melting in the more competent, dryer rock 
close to the Brittle  Viscous Transition, transitioning to nanoparticulate-aided slip at 
intermediate depths and finally with propagation of an Alpine Fault rupture occurring 
through steady-state slip on weak phyllosillicates at shallower crustal levels.  
5.1. Occurrence of melt and ultracomminution within fault zones 
During seismicity on a fault, at slip rates of 1  3 ms-1, comminution and friction-induced 
melting can lead to the formation of pseudotachylyte [McKenzie and Brune, 1972; Spray, 
1995; Ray, 1999; Di Toro and Pennacchioni, 2004]. The generation and accumulation of 
melt on a dynamically displacing surface may have implications on the seismic and 
mechanical behaviour of faults, particularly the lubrication of the fault plane by low 
viscosity melts and its subsequent sealing when melt solidifies [Spray, 1993; Hirose and 
Shimamoto, 2003, 2005; Rempel and Rice, 2006; Rice, 2006; Nielsen et al., 2008; Di Toro et 
al., 2011; Mitchell et al., 2016]. Assuming that all frictional work is converted into heat, the 
production of heat, , during earthquake slip can be represented by the following;  
   (  )                                        (7) 
where  is the friction coefficient,  is the normal stress,  is the pore fluid pressure and 
 is the slip velocity, after McKenzie and Brune, [1972] and Di Toro et al., [2009]. As such, 
the occurrence of other weakening mechanisms, particularly those that involve fluid in and 
around the fault, i.e. the formation of frictionally weak phyllosillicate phases or thermal 
pressurization, could limit frictional melting via low friction sliding of the fault on 
phyllosillicate-rich planes or the dissipation of heat by plumes of pressurised fluid 
[Shimamoto and Logan, 1981; Rice, 2006; Ferri et al., 2010]. Thermal pressurization can 
occur when frictional heat generated during the initiation of fault slip increases 
temperatures within local intergranular pore-fluids generating transient increases in fluid 
pressure. This increase in pore-fluid pressure results in a lowering of the effective normal 
stress on the fault plane, with some authors proposing that this may reduce the generation 
of further heat during slip, limiting the generation of pseudotachylyte [Sibson, 1973, 1975; 
Lachenbruch, 1980]. However, if, during slip, the host-rock / fault walls become highly 
damaged, upon dilation fluid can escape efficiently from the heated and pressurised zone 
encompassing the shear zone. This would dissipate pore fluid pressures, maintain fault 
strength and promote melting [Rempel and Rice, 2006]. This damage-enhanced fluid 
mobility may be integral in allowing a wet fault to generate frictional melt. However, this 
enhanced mobility would predominantly occur within a host-rock / fault wall of low 
porosity, in high porosity rock the damage generated would likely produce a zone of low 
permeability that would limit fluid mobility [Mitchell and Faulkner, 2012]. The presence of 
hydrous mineral phases within the host-rock may also prevent melting during fault slip, as 
the latent heat required to dehydrate these phases would limit temperature increase and 
thus melting [Brantut et al., 2012]. 
Pseudotachylytes form from the non-equilibrium melting / preferential melting of low-
melting point, volatile-rich mineral phases, such as micas and amphiboles, resulting in a 
pseudotachylyte matrix of a more mafic (Mg- and Fe-rich) composition relative to the host 
lithology. Within this mafic matrix, depending on host-rock mineralogy, refractory minerals 
such as quartz and feldspars survive, usually having undergone some degree of 
comminution and, once melting initiates, partial melting. The bulk composition (clast and 
matrix) of the pseudotachylyte match that of the host-rock [Sibson, 1975; Bossire, 1991; 
Spray, 1992]. However, if melt travels over sufficient distances, crystal fractionation can 
occur, resulting in pseudotachylytes that compositionally contrast with the host-rock [e.g. 
Warr and van der Pluijm, 2005]. 
Extreme comminution i.e. ultracomminution upon a shearing fault plane can occur without 
the initiation of frictional melt [Wenk, 1978; Lin, 1997]. A product of this shearing are 
nanoparticulates, materials of grain sizes <100 nm, generated through ultracomminution or 
chemical break down of larger clasts that may be ripped off the rock contacts at the slipping 
surface and subsequently undergo cataclastic flow. Such materials have recently been 
called upon to explain fault weakening without thermal effects as nanoparticles have 
contrasting physicochemical properties to their larger parent clasts, such as reduction in 
frictional shear resistance which could result in fault lubrication [Goldsby and Tullis, 2002; 
Di Toro et al., 2011; Han et al., 2011]. Although generally attributed to frictional melting, 
pseudotachylytes have also been speculated to be a product of ultracomminution, i.e. crush 
origin pseudotachylytes [Wenk, 1978; Lin, 1997]. These crush origin materials share many 
similarities with those of melt origin, including fluidisation, flow and injection structures. 
However, melt origin material can be differentiated through a number of features, 
including but not limited to: the presence of amygdules [Maddock et al., 1987], and 
survivor clast-size distribution, composition and roundness [Magloughlin, 1992; Shimamoto 
and Nagahama, 1992; Kirkpatrick and Rowe, 2013]. 
Phase transformation and the generation of nanoparticulates have been invoked as an 
explanation for deep earthquakes, 30  70 km depth, where brittle failure is unlikely to 
occur due to the increase in static frictional strength with increasing normal stress and 
increasing temperatures with depth [Green and Houston, 1995; Kirby, 1995; Green II et al., 
2015]. In experiments performed at high-pressure conditions, approaching the 
intermediate to deep earthquakes setting in the lower crust, high static frictional strength 
can be overcome in the presence of nanoparticulates, allowing shear failure at lower shear 
stresses than are needed for the predicted static friction [Burnley et al., 1991; Tingle et al., 
1993]. Shear failure under deep earthquake conditions has been attributed to phase 
transformation, generating low-viscosity nanometric particles that are able to initiate 
instability and lubricate the sliding surface through grain-boundary sliding [Green II and 
Burnley, 1989; Green II et al., 2015]. Nanoparticles have been produced in experiments 
simulating slip on faults at both seismic slip velocities at low pressures [Di Toro et al., 2004; 
Han et al., 2011; Smith et al., 2013; Green II et al., 2015] and slow slip velocities at high 
pressures [Yund et al., 1990; Pec et al., 2012; Verberne et al., 2014; Toy et al., 2015a]. 
Observations of nanoparticles on natural slip surfaces have also been made on exhumed 
faults that have accommodated several kilometres of slip [De Paola, 2013; Kirkpatrick et al., 
2013; Green II et al., 2015]. 
As well as melt and nanoparticle lubrication a range of weakening mechanisms has been 
established to account for slip on faults in different settings. These include fluid-based 
mechanisms such as thermal pressurization, as outlined above, [Sibson, 1973; Lachenbruch, 
1980; Wibberley, 2002; Rempel and Rice, 2006] and fluid film lubrication [Brodsky and 
Kanamori, 2001; Ferri et al., 2011]; due to thermochemical pressurization via dehydration 
reactions [Brantut et al., 2008, 2011; Chen et al., 2013a; Platt et al., 2015] or thermal 
runaway (thermal shear instability) in which the initiation of a highly localised zone of 
viscous creep generates heat and promotes slip [Andersen et al., 2008; John et al., 2009; 
Prieto et al., 2013; Thielmann et al., 2015]. 
Pseudotachylytes and ultracomminuted gouges, and thus nanoparticles, are both products 
of localised deformation within the mid to upper crust, with their respective generation 
dependent on the ambient conditions and concurrent processes that exist during fault slip. 
Here we aim to investigate and characterise the occurrence of frictional melting and 
ultracomminution, and whether they occur contemporaneously or exclusively from one 
another during seismicity in the Alpine Fault Zone. We present microstructural and 
chemical observations of pseudotachylytes throughout the Alpine Fault Zone fault core / 
alteration zone (FC / AZ) and of clasts within the principal slip zone (PSZ) ultracomminuted 
gouges that share similar characteristics with these pseudotachylytes. This was undertaken 
with a variety of analytical techniques, including: optical microscopy; SEM-based 
backscatter electron imaging, energy dispersive spectroscopy and electron backscatter 
diffraction; and optical cathodoluminescence. We also explore the conditions and 
mechanisms allowing the coexistence of nominally dry condition dependent 
pseudotachylytes with a fluid-rich fault and the variation of slip behaviour with time and 
exhumation.  
5.2. Geological Setting 
5.2.1. The Alpine Fault, New Zealand 
The Alpine Fault Zone (AFZ), bounding the western edge of the Southern Alps on New 
Zealands South Island, accommodates over 70 % of the relative motion between the 
colliding Australian and Pacific Plate [Norris and Toy, 2014]. The ramping of the Pacific plate 
over the Australian plate is manifested through dextral-reverse movement, offsetting 
basement rocks laterally by ~470 km, with Quaternary horizontal displacement rates 
estimated at 21  27 mm yr-1 [Norris and Cooper, 2001; Lamb et al., 2016]. Uplift and 
erosion upon the fault is rapid, exhuming crustal rocks from depths of 20  30 km at a rate 
of ~6  9 mm yr-1 [Little et al., 2002b]. Accompanying this rapid uplift is the advection of the 
regional geothermal gradient with quartz fluid inclusion microthermometry placing the 
gradient at 40 C/km [Toy et al., 2010], while recent shallow borehole measurements within 
the fault hanging wall report gradients of 62.6  2.1 and 125  55 C/km [Sutherland et al., 
2012, 2017].  
Palaeoseismic evidence has indicated that the Alpine Fault has had numerous geologically 
recent rupture episodes at 1717  25, 1630  25 and 1460  25 A.D., estimated to have 
moment magnitudes of 7.9  0.3, 7.6  0.3, and 7.9  0.4, respectively [Wells et al., 1999; 
Rhoades and Van Dissen, 2003; Langridge et al., 2012], with these ruptures propagating 
along nearly the entire ~600 km length of the fault. Recent seismicity patterns, geodetic 
strain records, and inferred high pore fluid pressures from regional seismic P- and S-wave 
velocity ratios and gravity surveys deep in the fault zone, suggest that the fault is locked 
above 6  12 km depth and that it is in the late stages of its earthquake cycle [Eberhart
Phillips, 1995; Eberhart-Phillips and Bannister, 2002; Sutherland et al., 2007; De Pascale and 
Langridge, 2012; Lamb and Smith, 2013]. 
Immediately upon the Central Alpine Fault, overprinting the fault core and transition into 
the damage zone, is a distinct <30 m thick zone of hydrothermally altered rock, containing 
elevated concentrations of hydrous alteration minerals and cements (e.g., phyllosillicates 
and carbonates), observed through field and borehole studies [Sutherland et al., 2012; 
Townend et al., 2013; Toy et al., 2015b]. The extent of this alteration increases with 
proximity to the faults principal slip zone (PSZ) within the hanging wall rock, with far less 
carbonate cementation in the footwall. This indicates a focusing of fluid in the hanging wall 
damage zone, with little cross-fault flow throughout the seismogenic crust [Menzies et al., 
2016].  
5.2.2. Occurrence of pseudotachylyte in the Alpine Fault Zone 
Numerous studies on Alpine Fault pseudotachylyte have been undertaken, focusing on the 
structural settings and age of frictional melt generation within the Alpine Fault Zone 
[Wallace, 1976; Seward and Sibson, 1985; Sibson and Toy, 2006; Warr et al., 2007; Toy et 
al., 2011]; and the petrology and compositions of pseudotachylyte, determining variations 
in melt composition as a function of host-rock mineralogy [Bossire, 1991] and crystal 
fractionation during melt transport [Warr et al., 2003; Warr and van der Pluijm, 2005].  
Toy et al., [2011] classified four major settings for pseudotachylyte within the Alpine Fault 
Zone: i) Foliated quartzofeldspathic hanging wall mylonites, containing mm  cm thick 
pseudotachylytes parallel to mylonitic foliations and with respect to the host-rock, deficient 
in Si and alkali elements and enriched in Al2O3 and TiO2; ii) Lithological boundaries between 
hanging wall / footwall mylonites and metabasic lozenges, containing  1cm thick faults and 
injection veins and, with respect to the host-rock, depleted in Si, Fe and Mg and to greater 
extent K; iii) Footwall granitoid mylonites, containing the largest volume of 
pseudotachylytes occurring as chaotic, <2.5 cm thick injection structures and mm  thick 
pseudotachylytes; iv) Cataclasites, containing chaotic injected masses in the fault core and, 
with respect to the host-rock, depleted in Si and Ca and enriched in K and Na. These 
pseudotachylytes are estimated to have formation depths of 4  7 km, at host rock 
temperatures 170  300 C [Toy et al., 2011]. The settings outlined above are constrained to 
depths of 4  10 km, below the Brittle  Viscous Transition (BVT), through distributions of 
current hanging wall seismicity. The greater volume of melt generation in ii) is attributed to 
rheological heterogeneities between lithologies and in iii) due to high stresses in anhydrous 
conditions.  
Warr et al., [2003] and Warr and van der Pluijm, [2005] studied vein composition and age 
and found that compositional variation within pseudotachylytes, and particularly between 
the margin and main body of the vein, was a result of either: A) crystal fractionation during 
transport away from the melt-generating surface during a single seismic event, generating 
younger melt / glass layers enriched in Na, K and Si while being depleted in Fe, Mg and Mn, 
this mobile melt would become progressively less viscous due to higher melt to clast ratio 
with travel but also become more viscous with time due to compositional change and 
volatile loss; or B) successive pulses of frictional melt are generated during a single, large 
earthquake, generating a clast- and Si-rich vein margin and a melt-dominated main vein 
body.  
There is abundant evidence for a sustained presence of fluid within the Alpine Fault, 
including: hot springs and hydrothermal activity within the fault hanging wall [Cox et al., 
2015; Menzies et al., 2016; Sutherland et al., 2017]; mineral precipitation [Jenkin et al., 
1994; Craw and Campbell, 2004; Menzies et al., 2014] and extensive fluid-rock interaction 
witnessed in the Alpine Fault alteration zone; a zone of rock overprinting the fault core / 
damage zone transition of the Alpine Fault, defined by elevated concentrations of 
alteration minerals (e.g., phyllosillicates and carbonates) above regional levels [Sutherland 
et al., 2012; Townend et al., 2013; Schleicher et al., 2015; Toy et al., 2015b; Boulton et al., 
2017a]. As mentioned previously the presence of pore fluids in the vicinity of a fault has 
been speculated to limit the generation of frictional melt, through the dissipation of heat, 
dehydration reactions and the reduction of normal stresses on actively displacing faults.  
5.3. Methods  
5.3.1. The Deep Fault Drilling Project 
The Deep Fault Drilling Project was undertaken to better understand the processes that 
lead to major earthquakes by drilling into and observing a major continental fault during its 
build-up to a large seismic event. The first phase of the Deep Fault Drilling Project (DFDP-1) 
comprised of two pilot boreholes (DFDP-1A and DFDP-1B) drilled into an active thrust 
segment of the Alpine Fault at Gaunt Creek, Westland, in January 2011. The boreholes 
reached depths of 100.6 m and 151.4 m respectively, through percussion drilling in the 
upper borehole sections followed by wireline coring, collecting core for over 50 % of the 
borehole length. A range of fault lithologies from both the hanging wall and footwall were 
recovered including ultramylonites, cataclasites and fault gouges. The PSZ of the Alpine 
Fault Zone (AFZ) was reached at 90.74 m depth in DFDP-1A and 128.44 m in DFDP-1B, 
marking the boundary between the Australian and Pacific Plates, with a second PSZ 
recorded in DFDP-1B at 143.85 m [Toy et al., 2015b]. Both slip zones are composed of clay-
rich gouge [Sutherland et al., 2012]. A detailed report on the drilling operations can be 
found in Sutherland et al., [2011]. The drilled core diameter was 85 mm (PQ wireline bit 
size) and supplied for sample preparation as 200  300 mm length intact core sections and 
half sections. These core sections were oriented with respect to the borehole vertical axis, 
however due to core rotation during retrieval the horizontal orientation could not be 
preserved [Sutherland et al., 2011; Toy et al., 2015b]. One of the key aspects of the DFDP 
was to sample material from the Alpine Fault Zone FC / AZ, a sequence of rock that is very 
poorly exposed at the surface due to surface weathering and alteration. This sampling has 
allowed the collection of intact samples from this friable fault rock sequence, with 
microstructures reflecting processes that are occurring at depth on the fault away from 
surface effects that have previously not been observed.  
5.3.2. Petrology of core lithologies 
Eight rock units were distinguished in the DFDP-1 boreholes and these are systematically 
detailed in Toy et al., 2015. These include: grey and dark-green ultramylonites; brown-
green-black ultramylonites; upper unfoliated cataclasites; upper foliated cataclasites; fault 
gouges; lower cataclasites; fault breccias; and Quaternary gravels. The DFDP-1 core 
provided an excellent continuous section through the AFZ, allowing a number of associated 
lithological units to be distinguished and classified, based on the original protolith and the 
level of damage and/or alteration. This classification follows the fault rock nomenclature of 
Woodcock and Mort, [2008], with units numbered sequentially as they were encountered 
in the recovered core, from top to bottom, see Figure 5.1.  
The hanging wall ultramylonite encountered (Unit 1 and 2) is planar-foliated, of variably 
quartzofeldspathic and metabasic composition. Foliations are defined by aligned 
phyllosillicates, graphite and opaque minerals. These ultramylonites are of midcrustal origin 
and have undergone extensive grain-size reduction via plastic deformation mechanisms, 
overprinted by successive generations of brittle cataclasis as evidenced by clay and 
carbonate filled shears and fractures. Ultramylonites transition to variably foliated and 
unfoliated cataclasites (Units 3 and 4); composed of quartzofeldspathic and metabasic 
material, consisting of angular fragments of ultramylonite variably clast-supported (>10 mm 
diameter) and matrix-supported (<10 mm diameter) in a matrix of comminuted feldspar, 
quartz, chlorite, white mica, calcite and (occasionally) epidote. These cataclasites have been 
successively fractured and cemented as evidenced by cross-cutting relationships of 
mineralised (or gouge filled) veins, pseudotachylytes and the presence of clasts with 
cataclastic texture. The PSZ is a zone of ultracomminuted, cohesive, clay-rich gouge (Unit 
5). This gouge is ultrafine-grained, variably foliated with indistinct, sub-planar layering 
containing fragmented clasts of gouge and calcite. The footwall is comprised of lower 
cataclasites (Units 6a to d), of granitic and gneissic origin, that are variably foliated and 
contain far less carbonates and less evidence of hydrothermal alteration than Units 1 to 4 
of the hanging wall. 
All samples used in this study were sourced from DFDP-1A and DFDP-1B core, at depths 
ranging from 65 m to 145 m, see Figure 5.1. The choice of samples was based on the 
microstructural identification of cataclasites and ultracataclasites, zones of shear and 
pseudotachylytes in the core during core logging, and from observations of core scans. The 
characteristics of these microstructures are summarised in Table SM 5.1. 
5.3.3. Sample preparation  
Standard 30 m thick thin sections were prepared using standard petrographic thin section 
techniques. A high quality final, chemical-mechanical polish was applied using colloidal silica of 
grit size 0.005  6 m in an alkaline solution. This removed the amorphous layer (few nm thick) 
produced on the thin section surface during mechanical polishing and ensured that the high 
quality polishing required for electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) analyses was achieved. 
Thin section edges were painted with colloidal carbon paint and samples were then carbon 
coated to a thickness of ~10 nm for analysis in the Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM).  
Figure 5.1  [A and B] Schematic 
borehole section showing the 
lithologies encountered during DFDP-1A 
and 1B. Recovered core shows the 
collected lithologies with classification 
scheme from Toy et al., [2015] while 
the schematic lithologies shows a 
simplified representation of the fault 
rocks encountered. Sampling 
undertaken in this study is highlighted. 
The estimated extent of the alteration 
zone is also illustrated [Sutherland et 
al., 2012; Toy et al., 2015b; Boulton et 
al., 2017a].  
5.3.4. Techniques 
SEM analyses were undertaken in the EBSD-SEM Laboratory at the University of Liverpool 
using an X500 Crystal Probe field-emission gun (FEG) SEM for electron backscatter 
diffraction (EBSD) analyses and a Philips XL30 SEM for energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) 
analyses. Cathodoluminescence (CL) observations were made using an optical cold-cathode 
CL apparatus and QEMSCAN analyses were performed by Alan Butcher of Intellection Pty 
Ltd, Milton, Australia who performed the analysis using a QEMSCAN system. The following 
section outlines these techniques and the manner in which they are presented in this study.  
The Philips XL30 SEM was utilised for backscatter electron (BSE) imaging and qualitative 
EDS analyses, operating at 20 kV accelerating voltage, 60  80 A beam current and a 5 nm 
spot size, EDS analyses were performed using an Oxford Instruments x-act 10 mm2 silicon 
drift detector; and INCA software. BSE imaging was used to visualise the compositional 
variation of the material within the samples. This is achieved through the use of a greyscale, 
which is proportional to the average atomic number of a material, with a brighter BSE 
intensity correlating with greater average atomic number and dark BSE intensity with lower 
average atomic number, allowing different mineral phases to be discerned at the micron-
scale. EDS analyses, using characteristic X-ray energy emitted during electron beam 
interaction with the sample surface, was used to characterise the chemical variations 
between the various mineral and pseudotachylyte phases observed optically and in BSE 
imaging. EDS analyses were performed as maps in order to qualitatively visualise chemical 
variations. 
The X500 Crystal Probe field-emission gun (FEG) SEM, designed by Obducat CamScan Ltd 
(for full technical specifications see Seward et al., 2002) was utilised for EBSD analyses. 
EBSD data was collected using an F+ Nordlys EBSD detector combined with the AZtec 
Oxford Instrument acquisition software. The typical operating parameters for this study 
were 20 kV accelerating voltage, 20  30 nA beam current, and 5.5 nm spot size. The raw 
EBSD datasets were processed and analysed using the Oxford Instruments HKL Channel5 
software. Erroneous data points were carefully removed using band contrast values to sub-
sample grain boundaries effectively, thus avoiding the generation of artefacts.  
The EBSD data in this study are presented in All-Euler (AE), which visualises orientation 
through use of an Euler angle-based colour scale. Euler angles are a set of three angles (1, 
, and 2) used to describe the crystallographic orientation of crystals relative to a 
reference coordinate system; defined by the primary SEM stage axes. The value of each 
Euler angle, reflecting the magnitude of the 3 rotations necessary to determine a rotation 
path from the SEM reference frame to that of the crystal analysed, is individually set to a 
colour scale (red, green and blue for Euler angles 1, , and 2, respectively) which are 
then combined into a single RGB colour that represents the observed crystallographic 
orientation. However, the AE component contains a wraparound effect caused by one or 
more of the Euler angles reaching their respective limit, resulting in the RGB value to vary 
between minimum and maximum, potentially resulting in colour speckling even when little 
to no orientation variation between grains exists. Crystallographic orientations are plotted 
in equal area upper hemisphere stereographic projections, also known as pole figures (PF), 
to reveal if any crystallographic preferred orientation (CPO) exists. The data in pole figures 
are coloured according to their respective Euler orientation and contoured to a half width 
of 20 and data clustering of 5. In order to describe the intensity of the fabric shown in PF a 
statistical method is used known as the multiple of uniform density (MUD), which is 
quantified using the maximum intensity of a contoured PF. MUD values of 1 indicate 
randomly orientated grains while a MUD >1 is indicative of a fabric or CPO, these values are 
illustrated alongside the PFs. MUD values however are only a qualitative approximation of 
CPO strength because, for example in Oxford Instrument software, they are calculated only 
relative to the pole figures visualised for a given mineral in a given dataset and cannot be 
used for direct comparison between PFs from different datasets. For more information on 
relevant EBSD data presentation please see Prior et al., 1999, 2009 and Bestmann and Prior, 
2003. 
Optical cold-cathode CL was employed in this study, using a Nikon Eclipse Ci microscope 
with a CITL Mk5-2 cold stage and Nikon DS-Fi1c camera, working at conditions of 10.8 kV 
and 390 A in a vacuum of 0.047-33 Torr. CL in minerals is the result of the transformation 
of various energy types into visible light, through emissive transition of molecules, anions or 
the transition of a crystal from excited electronic states to lower energy or ground states 
[Marfunin, 1979]. In solids this is controlled by the transition of electrons between 
conduction and valence bands, this transition is influenced by defects in a materials crystal 
lattice which form luminescence centres by the addition of energy levels within the 
conduction  valence band gap [Pagel et al., 2000; Gtze and Kempe, 2009]. Variation in a 
materials luminescence highlight subtle compositional and microstructural variations that 
are not visible using standard optical microscopy nor are they using other more 
sophisticated techniques such as the SEM-based EDS and BSE imaging. This is the case for 
many minerals as CL activating, sensitising or quenching trace elements are within parts per 
million concentrations. Specific ions incorporated into a materials structure can act as 
activators, sensitizers or quenchers for CL signal, depending on the mineral or material 
being studied. 
Using similar methods as SEM EDS analyses the quantitative evaluation of minerals by 
scanning electron microscopy (QEMSCAN) is an SEM technique developed by CSIRO to 
identify mineral species rapidly, automatically and non-destructively. The technique 
consists of the automatic acquisition of EDS spectra and BSE images of a specimen surface 
which are then combined with one another to identify the mineral species within it; 
achieved through comparison to a comprehensive mineral database incorporated into the 
QEMSCAN software [Qian et al., 2015]. The QEMSCAN analysis in this study used a 10 m 
step size and collected a total of 8,283,252 x-ray points over ~10 hours.  
5.4. Results 
This section describes the characteristics of the pseudotachylyte and ultracomminuted 
gouge microstructures observed from hand specimen to micron scale. Due to the spatial 
constraints of drill core sampling the lateral continuity of a number of the microstructures 
is difficult to determine. Pseudotachylyte is referred to as PST in figures and all mineral 
abbreviations are after Whitney and Evans, [2010]. 
5.4.1. Pseudotachylyte within the Alpine Fault core 
Pseudotachylytes within the Alpine Fault FC / AZ appear at the hand specimen scale as 
blue-grey to light grey layers of flint-like, glassy material, 1  5 mm thick. Some 
pseudotachylytes show a clear shear surface (Figures 5.2, 5.3 and 5.9), but many occur in 
pockets and are disassociated from their generating surfaces (Figures 5.5, 5.10, 5.11 and 
5.12). Segregation of the pseudotachylyte is observable in hand specimen with margins 
with the host-rock, 1  2 mm thick, appearing blue with an irregular, sharp boundary with 
the pseudotachylyte main body, which appears light blue-grey with colour variations 
highlighting lobes and flow structures within it, see Figure 5.5A. At the drill-core scale 
injection veins in clear association with their parent pseudotachylyte cannot be recognised, 
though may not be identified due to their apparent irregular geometries on the observation 
surfaces and to the limited scale of the drill-core available for analyses. The 
pseudotachylyte hosted in the quartzofeldspathic ultramylonite at 1B-99.3m and 1A-
68.36m, Figures 5.2  5.8 and 5.9, are the only laterally continuous pseudotachylyte 
structures at the scale of the drill-core rounds, 85 mm diameter . Within the hanging wall 
cataclasites, in closer proximity to the PSZ at depths of 1B-118.64m, 1B-123.15m and 1B-
132.32m, Figures 5.10, 5.11 and 5.12, the pseudotachylyte typically occurs as discontinuous 
layers, pockets or fragments floating within a cataclastic matrix or irregularly shaped 
masses (possibly injection veins), disassociated from their generation surface. 
Optically the pseudotachylyte appear predominantly light to dark brown in plane polarised 
light (PPL) and isotropic in crossed-polarised light (XPL), see Figures 5.2  5.12, many display 
layering and flow structures. All pseudotachylytes analysed are associated with cataclasites, 
either being entirely hosted within them or, when within more intact rock, i.e. fractured 
ultramylonite, occur adjacent to planes ultracataclasites. 1B-99.3m-A (Figure 5.2 and 5.3) is 
the best example of a clear ultracataclasite to pseudotachylyte transition; from coarse, sub-
rounded to sub-angular lithic clasts at 50  1000 m diameter to finer monomineralic clasts 
at 20  50 m diameter within a sub-micron clast matrix, over 3  5 mm with proximity to 
the pseudotachylyte vein. The pseudotachylytes contain extensive cross cutting veins that 
are mineralised by calcite, quartz and opaque minerals. Fragmentation and displacement by 
fracturing and shears can be observed in pseudotachylytes at the mm  scale, alongside 
cross-cutting mineralised veins, Figure 5.5. Within the intact veins of pseudotachylyte in 
samples 1B-99.3m and 1A-68.36m (Figure 5.2, 5.3 and 5.9), flow structures and 
compositional segregation of the glass is apparent. Bounding the edges of the intact veins 
of pseudotachylyte are pale margins (in PPL) of variable thickness, 100  1000 m, see 
Figures 5.3, 5.4 and 5.5. The clasts in all observed pseudotachylytes are abundant and 
include: sub-rounded and embayed quartz clasts of 5  100 m diameter; sub-rounded to 
angular plagioclase feldspar clasts of 5  50 m diameter; lithic fragments of 50  200 m 
diameter; and low concentrations of Fe and Ti oxides.   
Figure 5.3  Photomicrographs and BSE images of areas highlighted in Figure 5.2 (1B-
99.3m-A  Unit 2). [A and B] Lobate flow structures in pseudotachylyte matrix with 
compositionally segregated regions. [C and D] Transition of ultracomminuted material to 
pseudotachylyte glass with cross-cutting calcite veins. 
EDS analyses show that throughout the FC / AZ cataclasite all pseudotachylyte has elevated 
K content with respect to the host-rock, however flow banding highlighted by 
compositional segregation does occur; towards the centres of the pseudotachylyte veins 
these segregated regions alternate between Mg / Fe-rich and Si / K / Na-deplete regions 
and vice versa, see Figure 5.5, 5.8 and 5.11. EDS analyses in Figures 5.4 and 5.5 also show 
that the margins have increased concentrations of K and Si and are depleted in Mg and Fe 
in comparison with the majority of the pseudotachylyte matrix. In some instances the pale 
margin material blebs and fingers into the darker main body matrix with sharp contacts, 
Figure 5.4, shows immiscibility between the two pseudotachylyte compositions occurred to 
some extent. Some paler regions of the pseudotachylyte matrix flank calcite-mineralised 
fractures that cut across the margins and main melt bodies, as in Figure 5.4. In Figure 5.9 
QEMSCAN mineral analyses attribute a K-feldspar stoichiometry to pseudotachylyte veins in 
sample 1A-68.36m. It has to be noted that the QEMSCAN system, designed to assign 
specific mineral species to EDS chemical spectra, is not calibrated to recognise specific 
pseudotachylyte compositions, therefore these analyses need to be considered with 
caution. However, the choice of mineral species was prompted by the relative quantities of 
K, Al, Si and O, even in the presence of Fe and Mg. All observed pseudotachylytes are 
deficient in Ca in their matrix, with Ca almost entirely hosted within calcite mineralisation. 
In Figures 5.6 and 5.7, a faint blue CL signal can be observed constrained to regions of the 
pseudotachylyte matrix enriched in K, Na and Si, a green CL is also visible associated with 
plagioclase survivor clasts.  
EBSD analyses were undertaken on pseudotachylyte microstructures including survivor 
clasts and pseudotachylyte matrix. In Figures SM 5.5 and SM 5.6 EBSD analyses have 
indexed material that has strong crystallinity within the pseudotachylyte, i.e. survivor clasts 
and secondary mineralisation, illustrated with the grey colouration  colouration in the 
band contrast (BC)  All-Euler (AE) images. The lack of indexed points within the 
pseudotachylyte matrix indicates an absence of crystalline structure or that crystallinity of 
the matrix is below the resolution (~0.2 m) of the EBSD technique. EBSD analyses of quartz 
survivor clasts, see Figure SM 5.6C, show little distortion of the crystalline lattice and the 
formation of sub-grains.  
Figure 5.5  (above) [A] A hanging wall ultramylonite (1B-99.3m-B  Unit 2) 29.14 m above 
the upper PSZ. This ultramylonite is heavily cataclased with planes of ultracomminuted 
material, pseudotachylyte and calcite veins. [B and C] BSE and EDS images of 
pseudotachylyte-host rock contact with calcite vein and Fe-oxide vein. The pseudotachylyte 
matrix is segregated at the vein margins into K / Si-rich layers and Mg / Fe-rich layers. EDS 
map step size at 1.7 m.  
Figure 5.10 shows a fragmented pseudotachylyte within a foliated cataclasite (1B-118.64m), 
with the offset of the original vein at 2  5 mm. Features such as survivor clast population, a 
pale vein margin and brown main body (in PPL) are similar to the intact pseudotachylyte 
veins at greater distance from the PSZ. However, EDS analyses show that the vein material 
and host-rock are of near identical composition and throughout the vein matrix pitting and 
extensive, fine-scale calcite precipitation is present (see Figure 5.10C).  
Calcite mineralisation is intimately associated with the pseudotachylytes, appearing to 
occur before, during and after melt solidification. In the cataclased ultramylonite at 1B-
99.3m-A (Figure 5.2), running parallel to the tectonic foliation are both a calcite vein and an 
intact pseudotachylyte vein with full transition from highly comminuted host-rock to glass. 
The calcite vein, as reported in Chapter 4  Figure 4.3 of this thesis, has been extensively 
sheared, has irregular margins and contains abundant, rounded wall rock clasts, diameters 
of 5  50 m, suspended in a matrix of sub-angular to angular interlocking calcite grains, 
diameters of 5  50 m, with irregular grain boundaries and extensive e-twinning. The 
pseudotachylyte in 1B-99.3m-B, Figures 5.5  5.8, shows abundant amygdules, mineralised 
vesicles, filled with variable proportions of calcite, quartz and opaque oxides. The 
pseudotachylyte vein itself has also been heavily fractured and mineralised with multiple, 
cross-cutting generations of calcite precipitation, with varying CL signal strength, see Figure 
5.7. Variation in the orange  red CL signal in calcite is strongly modified by trace element 
content in ppm concentrations; Fe quenches the CL signal while Mn enhances it [Long and 
Agrell, 1965; Marshall and Mariano, 1988; Waychunas, 2014]. Figures 5.5B and   
Figure 5.8  BSE and EDS maps of veined pseudotachylyte in a hanging wall ultramylonite 
(1B-99.3m-B  Unit 2). Note the variation in pseudotachylyte composition in immediate 
vicinity to calcite vein. Area highlighted in Figure 5.5. EDS map step size at 1.6 m.  
SM 5.5 show a calcite vein cutting across the contact between the host-rock and 
pseudotachylyte with irregular, lobate margins. EBSD analyses of this vein, reported in 
Figure SM 5.5, shows that the portion of the vein within the pseudotachylyte (Figure SM 
5.5B) contains 50  100 m diameter grains, showing little twinning and crystal lattice 
distortion; the same vein within the host-rock (Figure 5.5C) runs parallel to the host 
tectonic foliation, and similarly contains calcite grains with little twinning and crystal lattice 
distortion though with a finer grain size at 10  50 m. Two separate generations of calcite 
vein are reported in Figure SM 5.6 within the pseudotachylyte of 1B-99.3m-B. Both exhibit 
little twinning and crystal lattice distortion but differ in regards to vein-infill morphology. 
For example in Figure 5.6B the grains are blocky and span the entire vein width while in 
Figure 5.6D the calcite occurs as fine-grained, 10  40 m equant fill, with little preferred 
orientation of the calcite axis, see Figure 5.6G.  
The setting of the pseudotachylytes in the Alpine Fault influences the morphology and 
chemistry of the pseudotachylytes, as outlined in Toy et al., [2011]. For comparison with 
the FC / AZ pseudotachylytes in this study a pseudotachylyte from hanging wall mylonites 
was analysed. This pseudotachylyte (Figure SM 5.3 and SM 5.4), hosted within a metabasic 
mylonite, was acquired from the field in float at Cataclasite Creek / Little Man River, see 
Figure 1.5B for location. Due to the limited size of the hand specimen the extent and 
morphology of the pseudotachylyte is difficult to constrain. The pseudotachylyte is 5  15 
mm thick and appears black and aphanitic in hand specimen. Optically, in PPL, again it 
appears homogenously black with an indistinguishable matrix while appearing isotropic in 
XPL, with lithic clasts and survivor clasts present throughout the matrix, no flow banding is 
apparent. The pseudotachylyte is cross-cut and edged by secondary mineralisation, 
including chlorite and calcite, with pseudotachylyte fragments floating in the vein-infill 
within the pseudotachylyte main body, see Figures SM 5.4A. BSE and EDS analyses show 
homogenous matrix chemistry with high concentrations of Na, Si and Al, with lesser 
amounts of Ca, Fe, Mg and K, see Figure SM 5.3. The clast population in this 
pseudotachylyte comprises a large proportion of the material ,~80 %, comprised of: sub-
rounded, embayed quartz clasts at 5  30 m diameter; sub-rounded plagioclase clasts at 5 
 20 m diameter; sub-rounded host lithic fragments at 20  100 m diameter; and Fe and 
Ti oxides, which compose ~20 % of the pseudotachylyte, at 1  20 m diameter.  
Figure 5.9  [A] A hanging wall ultramylonite (1A-68.36m  Unit 2) 22.38 m above the upper 
PSZ. The QEMSCAN map shows that the pseudotachylyte material is indexed as K-feldspar. 
[B and C] BSE images and EDS maps of the pseudotachylyte matrix in (A), note the 
significant proportion of Mg and Fe with some Ca, indicating QEMSCAN indexing is 
inaccurate when dealing with melt origin material. EDS map step size at 1.6 m.
Figure 5 .10  (above) [A] A hanging wall cataclasite (1B-118.64m  Unit 3) 9.8 m above the 
upper PSZ. This cataclasite is heavily foliated and contains multiple en-chelon shears that 
cut cross a pseudotachylyte vein and foliations. [B] Higher magnification micrograph of 
region highlighted in (A); showing a pseudotachylyte fragment with extensive calcite 
mineralisation. [C] BSE image of pseudotachylyte fragment matrix with calcite vein, note the 
heavily pitted and altered matrix material. [D] BSE images and EDS of maps of the contact 
between the host cataclasite and pseudotachylyte fragment both cross-cut with calcite 
veining. Compositionally the host and pseudotachylyte appear similar; however the 
pseudotachylyte clasts are far finer grain-sizes (10 - 20 m, as opposed to the host 
fragments 50  100 m) and appear rounded and embayed. EDS map step size at 3.5 m.
5.4.2. Principal Slip Zone ultracomminuted gouges of the Alpine Fault  
A continuous sequence of Alpine Faults cataclastic fault rocks was acquired during the 
DFDP-1; from the heavily fractured ultramylonites in the damage zone, transitioning to the 
FC / AZ cataclasites. Hosted within the FC / AZ cataclasites are discrete zones of 
ultracataclasis, where slip has been localised over successive cycles of seismicity generating 
ultracomminuted gouges known as the principal slip zones (PSZ). The Alpine Fault 
cataclastic rocks, have been described by numerous workers at field exposures [Reed, 1964; 
Sibson et al., 1981; White and White, 1983; Cooper and Norris, 1994; Boulton et al., 2012] 
as well as in the DFDP drill-core [Toy et al., 2015b; Williams et al., 2016]. These localised 
occurrences of ultracataclasis also occur along the same planes in which pseudotachylytes 
occur, present within 1B-99.3m-A of the drill-core in Figure 5.2 and 5.3 and described in 
Section 5.1.1.  
The upper PSZ of the Alpine Fault (PSZ-1), encountered at 1A-90.74m and 1B-128.3m, is 
composed of a ~25 cm-thick zone of ultracomminuted gouge that marks the oblique thrust 
contact (055 / 29SE, lineation 23 / 109) between the Alpine Fault hanging wall and footwall 
lithologies [Boulton et al., 2015]. A secondary slip surface (PSZ-2) was also encountered at 
1B-143.85m marking the boundary between the footwall cataclasites and breccias. Each of 
these PSZs can be delineated into separate gouge lithologies, based on mineralogy and 
morphology. These lithological classifications are illustrated in Figure 5.13 after Boulton et 
al., [2015] and are as follows:  
 Smectitic brown gouges, an incohesive gouge composed of a smectite, white mica 
and goethite matrix with quartzofeldspathic and recycled gouge clasts with 
diameters of 20  100 m. 
 Blue gouge, a poorly cohesive gouge composed of a chloritic and white mica matrix 
with quartzofeldspathic and calcite clasts with diameters of 20  1000 m. 
 Calcite fragments, composed of boudinaged lenses and sub-rounded clasts within 
the blue gouge. 
 Cataclasites, a cohesive unit with 10  80 % chloritic matrix with regions of chaotic 
breccia composed of calcite and quartz clasts.  
All of the above gouge types appear in the PSZ-1 of 1A-90.74m, Figure 5.13A. The brown 
gouges inject and bifurcate into the more cohesive units and are reworked into recycled 
gouge clasts. The blue gouges encompass all other PSZ lithologies and are cross-cut by the 
brown gouge structures; contacts between the blue and brown gouges are sharp and 
undulating and the cataclasites contain fault-parallel Y-shears. XRD results show that calcite 
comprises ~10 % of the blue gouge with clast diameters of up to 200 m while the brown 
gouge contains ~4 % calcite at finer grain sizes [Boulton et al., 2015]. Considerable variation 
in calcite CL signal exists within PSZ-1 (see Chapter 4) indicating that the calcite was 
precipitated in fluctuating pressure  temperature conditions with the precipitating fluid 
containing variable trace elements in solution, due to varying fluid-rock interactions during 
exhumation and the seismic cycle. It is likely this calcite was derived from many, separate 
increments of mineral precipitation evidenced by the many cross-cutting veins. 
PSZ-1 was also sampled within 1B-128.3m, Figure 5.13B, and is comprised of all four of the 
gouge materials as described in 1A-90.74m above. However, both the brown and blue 
gouge layers are thicker and with a more homogenous internal structure. The PSZ-2 brown 
gouge shows microstructures and chemistry near identical to that in 1A-90.74m. The 
secondary PSZ-2 of 1B-143.85m, Figure 5.13C, includes an upper Unit 6 footwall cataclasite 
in sharp contact with a smectitic brown gouge layer. Above the contact a layer of calcite-
cemented clasts sits; this feature is discussed in more detail in Section 4.3.2.5 of this thesis.  
Within the brown gouges of both PSZ-1 and PSZ-2 four distinctive types of K-feldspathic 
composition clasts were observed. Type 1 clasts in 1A-90.74m, detailed in Figures 5.14, 
occur as angular clasts with diameters of 50  200 m, appearing homogenously dirty-
brown in PPL and isotropic in XPL. In CL they exhibit a blue CL signal that varies in strength 
between individual clasts. They have a K-feldspathic composition, with minor Mg, Fe, Na 
and Ti, containing inclusions of quartz (<5 m), calcite (<5 m) and Ti-Oxides (~1 m) that 
comprise a combined ~5 % of the clast; see Figure SM 5.1 for EDS analyses. EBSD analyses 
reveal that these clasts are composed of cryptocrystalline, <5 m, feldspar grains (indexed 
as orthoclase) visible in Figures 5.14C and D, that comprise ~40 % of the clast. When plotted 
in a PF the crystallographic orientations of the feldspathic cryptocrystalline material 
exhibits a very weak CPO.  
Clasts Type 2 and Type 3 are present in the secondary PSZ-2 at 1B-143.85m, Figure 5.15. 
Type 2 occur as angular clasts, ~30  50 m diameter, appearing colourless in PPL, with 
first-order grey or white birefringence in XPL and have a bright blue CL. Type 3 occur as sub-
rounded clasts, ~30  50 m, appearing cloudy-brown in PPL, isotropic in XPL and have a 
dull blue CL. Both clasts contain inclusions of quartz (<5 m), calcite (<5 m) and Ti-Oxides 
(~1 m) within a K-feldspathic matrix with minor amounts of Mg and Fe. Type 1 and 3 clasts 
may be the same clast type; further analyses are required to confirm this.  
Clast Type 4, detailed in Figure 5.16, occur as polygonal clasts with diameters of 100  800 
m, containing embayed quartz grains (5  50 m) and Ti oxide (1  5 m) set in a matrix of 
K-feldspathic composition, see Figure SM 5.2 for EDS analyses, with calcite mineralising 
thoroughgoing joints and the clast edges. The matrix in these clasts appears isotropic in XPL 
and exhibits no CL emissions. The matrix material could not be indexed using EBSD. Quartz 
grains >40 m exhibit sub-grain boundaries (<10 misorientation), indicating that crystal-
plastic deformation prior to entrainment in the gouge affected these grains (Figure 5.16C). 
A small fraction of the grains hosted in the clast were indexed as feldspars. 
5.5. Discussion  
In this section we present a number of potential mechanisms for the generation of the 
microstructures detailed above and infer what these features may tell us about seismicity 
on the Alpine Fault and the processes that take place within the fault during the seismic 
cycle. 
5.5.1. Melt behaviour and subsequent alteration and reworking of 
pseudotachylytes 
The features termed pseudotachylytes in this study are demonstrably of frictional melt 
origin, as evidenced by a variety of features determined by previous workers, including: 
mineralised vesicles (amygdules) [Maddock et al., 1987] and evidence of melting and 
assimilation of survivor clasts into the vein matrix [Magloughlin, 1992] as well as the 
survivor clasts being predominantly rounded [Lin, 1999]. The observed association of the 
pseudotachylyte veins with ultracomminuted material (Figure 5.2) could represent further 
indication of a frictional melt origin, as cataclasis is generally accepted as being a precursor 
to the generation of pseudotachylyte during seismic slip [Magloughlin, 1992; Bjornerud and 
Magloughlin, 2004]. Additionally, multiple studies show the genetic relation between 
cataclasites and solidified melt within fault zones [Otsuki, 2003; Rowe et al., 2005; Sibson 
and Toy, 2006; Toy et al., 2011]. A clear transition from a pseudotachylyte vein margin to 
ultracataclasites is not always observed, as in injection features and cataclastically 
reworked pseudotachylyte, this may be due to poor mobility of ultracataclasites along the 
generation surface into injection structures or their mechanical assimilation into the host 
cataclasite during subsequent reworking.  
The only observed occurrence of intact vein of pseudotachylyte occurs at 1A-68.36m 
(Figure 5.9) and 1B-99.3m (Figure 5.2  5.5), within the fractured ultramylonites that mark 
the boundary between the damage zone and fault core / alteration. With increasing 
proximity to the PSZ the lack of intact veins of pseudotachylyte could be due to the 
extensive fragmentation and comminution during periods of seismicity within the fault 
core.  
As pseudotachylyte melt is so transiently mobile and occupy such small volumes, 
gravitational and convectional fractionation is unlikely to occur. The nature of melt 
segregation observed in the pseudotachylyte veins of this study (Figure 5.2  5.4), 
particularly between the vein margins and the main body of the melt, is likely due to 
processes outlined by Warr et al., [2003] and Warr and van der Pluijm, [2005] where two 
related mechanisms are used to explain sequential formation of pseudotachylyte of 
different compositions. The first involves successive and rapid injections of frictionally 
generated material in the form of melt pulses. The first pulse, preserved on the vein 
margins is proximally derived, has a Si-rich composition and high concentration of survivor 
clasts, the second pulse is comprised of a distally derived melt with lesser clast content. 
This behaviour is attributed to a single, large earthquake that has undergone stick-slip 
generating potentially multiple pulses of melt at asperity contacts along the rupture plane 
[Warr et al., 2003]. The second mechanism is rapid crystal fractionation during transport of 
the melt, in which an initial mobile, low viscosity, melt-clast mixture migrates along 
fractures and coats the vein margin, followed by a more viscous melt that has undergone 
more fractionation and volatile loss which fills the vein centre. Though not identical in 
regard to clast population in the segregations described by Warr et al., [2003] and Warr 
and van der Pluijm, [2005], a combination of these mechanisms may be at work in 
pseudotachylyte observed within the Alpine Fault core, with enrichment of K / Si and Mg / 
Fe in segregated melt layers caused by preferential comminution and melting of biotite and 
muscovite, both of which are present in the host-rock but not in the pseudotachylyte. In 
this study, where the immiscibility of two melts in the same pseudotachylyte is observed 
(Figure 5.4), segregation is interpreted as being encouraged by viscosity contrasts [Spray, 
1993]. These variations in composition and inferred viscosity contrasts between the margin 
and main body melt indicate that these margins are not a result of rapid quenching, relative 
to the inner main body melt, but are due to initial contrasting melt compositions. Due to 
limited scale of sampling it is unclear whether this immiscibility occurred via unmixing of 
one melt or the mingling of two separate melts.  
Amorphous materials, i.e. melt glasses, do not produce CL emissions themselves but rather 
strongly absorb them. Any CL signal observed in a glass is due to the presence of chemical 
and structural defects, potentially products of devitrification, which manifest as CL signals 
of variable colouration. If these CL signals are weak, with emission wavelengths of <350 nm, 
they can be obscured by the glassy medium, making observations difficult [MacRae and 
Wilson, 2008]. Blue CL emissions have been observed in the Alpine Fault FC / AZ 
pseudotachylytes, as shown in Figures 5.4 and 5.5. This blue CL has also been observed in 
other compositionally related materials, in moldavites, glass derived from meteoric impacts 
[Fritzke et al., 2017], or in synthetically derived material such as amorphous quartz 
[Stevens-Kalceff, 2013]. Blue CL has been attributed to the presence of various 
crystallographic lattice defects and include: nonbridging oxygen-hole centres (NBOHC), 
where an electron hole in the 2p  orbital of a single, nonbridging oxygen is bound to a 
threefold coordinated silicon (O3 = Si - O); the generation of lattice defects during 
interactions with an electron beam are known as self-trapped excitions, where an electron-
hole pair is formed which can coexist with other defects such as electron centres with an 
interstitial oxygen or NBOHC; and oxygen deficiency centres [Pacchioni et al., 2000; 
Stevens-Kalceff, 2009, 2013; Fritzke et al., 2017]. Green CL emissions are attributed to 
defects related to a strong local disorder, which can indicate local amorphisation, as well as 
Al - O- - Al defects [Fritzke et al., 2017]. As both blue and green CL emissions are observed in 
the studied pseudotachylytes it can be inferred that the original glass has undergone 
alteration and devitrification with differing products according to its original chemistry. In 
the K, Al and Si-rich matrix regions a blue or green CL could be attributed to any number of 
the above causes. Further analysis using transmission electron microscopy (TEM) to 
distinguish the crystallinity of the pseudotachylyte matrix is required.  
All pseudotachylytes observed in this study are pervasively associated with secondary 
mineralisation of calcite, quartz and Fe-oxides. Calcite mineralisation is interpreted to 
predate, occur synchronously and postdate pseudotachylytes. As described in the result 
section, evidence for this is provided by: (pre-) disrupted and cataclased calcite veins; (syn-) 
the presence of amygdules; (post-) multiple generations of calcite mineralisation cutting 
across the solidified melt. In the instances where calcite veins within the pseudotachylytes 
are encompassed by regions of pale material, as in 1B-99.3m-B; Figure 5.4, localised fluid-
rock interaction along fracture planes may be indicated, as these regions are enriched in 
Mg and Fe. This interaction is likely short-lived due to the rapid sealing by blocky-equant 
calcite [Hilgers et al., 2004], see Figure SM 5.6. The presence of amygdules in 
pseudotachylyte is likely further evidence for the presence of fluids during frictional 
melting. Calculations by Dixon and Dixon, [1989] suggest that, in order to generate vesicles, 
melt must first entrain available volatiles (H2O and CO2) from the surrounding rock mass as 
there is insufficient time to nucleate bubbles via degassing before melt quenching. Fluid 
flux through the damaged region, encompassing the pseudotachylyte, would then cause 
mineralisation of the vesicles with its dissolved load. This evidence would appear to counter 
the previous schools of thought that the presence of fluid in the vicinity of a shearing plane 
would buffer temperature and/or cause thermal pressurisation thus lowering normal 
stresses on the fault and inhibiting frictional melting [Sibson, 1973; Lachenbruch, 1980]. 
Recent experiments on the reactivation of slip surfaces at room temperature under high 
normal stresses using axial load or fluid pressure fluctuations, by Hayward and Cox, [2017], 
showed that at normal stresses of >500 MPa melting and frictional welding occurred at 
asperity contacts while the rock was fully saturated. Violay et al., [2014] also generated 
frictional melting in experiments on saturated, cohesive rock at lower effective stresses, 20 
MPa, at displacements of 8 - 12 m. This gives credence to models by Rempel and Rice, 
[2006] claiming that damage-enhanced fluid mobility would allow a saturated rock to 
generate frictional melt, as fluid would migrate away from the slip surface and allow 
frictional heating to take place. This may be a coseismic mechanism commonly taking place 
within the Alpine Fault core.  
The susceptibility of pseudotachylytes to hydration and chemical alteration and cataclastic 
reworking has been invoked to explain the dearth of frictional melt observed in the rock 
record, leading to the underrepresentation of episodes of seismicity [Kirkpatrick and Rowe, 
2013]. This is likely the case in the Alpine Fault core. Candidate melt-origin microstructures 
are common in the alteration zone. However, due to reworking and alteration processes, 
definite recognition of pseudotachylytes is difficult. With this in mind, pseudotachylyte may 
play a larger part in the accommodation of off-fault damage in the fault during seismicity 
than previously thought, with subsidiary fault planes localising displacement within the 
fault damage zone as opposed to exclusively on the PSZ.  
In comparison to the field pseudotachylyte sampled from Cataclasite Creek / Little Man 
River within a metabasic ultramylonite, the FC / AZ pseudotachylytes have a lower clast / 
matrix ratio, have far more secondary minerals disseminated within them, and appear blue-
grey rather than the typical black colouration of pseudotachylytes. The comparatively small 
clast population in the FC / AZ pseudotachylytes is potentially due to the cataclased nature 
of its host / protolith, with finer starting grain sizes being assimilated into melt more easily 
than fragments generated during shear in intact rock. In regard to the greater amount of 
secondary mineralisation and colouration, this is likely due to a greater degree of fracturing 
and fluid ingress into the pseudotachylytes within the FC / AZ compared to within the distal 
fault damage zone mylonite sequence, altering the pseudotachylyte matrix and 
subsequently followed by mineralisation of the fractures. 
5.5.2. The nature and behaviour of the principal slip zone 
The progressive localisation of slip in a fault zone results in the generation of fine-grained 
gouge layers as displacement increases and exhumation to the upper crust occurs. During 
periods of gouge generation material is entrained and reworked in a principal slip zone, 
where deformation is highly localised [Faulkner et al., 2010; Boulton et al., 2012]. Fault 
gouges can potentially serve as indicators of the conditions and mechanisms of coseismic 
slip on the principal slip zone [Han and Hirose, 2012; Janssen et al., 2014]. They are formed 
of material with fine grain-sizes down to nanoparticles, which are known to be 
characterised by physical properties, and therefore mechanical behaviour, different from 
that of the coarser materials throughout the rest of the fault. This is particularly true for 
nanoparticulates which have been found to reduce frictional shear resistance of a slipping 
plane [Goldsby and Tullis, 2002; Reches and Lockner, 2010; Chen et al., 2013b]. Therefore, 
processes in PSZs are likely to be unique to these highly localised zones in fault systems.  
This section outlines the inferred evolution of the Alpine Fault principal slip zone over many 
cycles of seismicity, with particular focus on the entrainment and reworking of 
pseudotachylytes and nanoparticulates generated throughout successive seismic cycles.  
The principal slip zone is a lithologically and mechanically distinct unit within the fault rock 
sequence of the Alpine Fault zone. The presence of reworked gouge clasts, reworked 
multigenerational calcite veins and sheared injection structures indicate a long-lived 
structure that has undergone many increments of high magnitude slip events and has 
potentially accommodated up to 460 km of cumulative displacement in the past 25 Myr 
[Wellman, 1953; Sutherland et al., 2000]. AFZ fault gouges are unique in the fault zone as 
they contain abundant low temperature (<120 C) phyllosillicates kaolinite, smectite and 
montmorillonite, the presence of which suggests that the PSZs exclusively host reactions 
not seen elsewhere on the fault, and have undergone the most extensive alteration [Inoue 
and Utada, 1991; Schleicher et al., 2015; Boulton et al., 2017a]. Experimental measurement 
have shown that the presence of these weak, strongly anisotropic minerals, results in a slip 
surface with intermediate frictional strengths with coefficients of friction of 0.36  0.61 at 
sub-seismic velocities between 0.1  10 m/s at 30 MPa [Boulton et al., 2015]. The gouges 
show velocity strengthening behaviour, have low static and dynamic permeabilities of 10-20 
 10-21 m2 and have been predicted to slip in a stable manner at the near surface [Boulton et 
al., 2015, 2017b; Allen et al., 2017]. The mechanical and physical properties outlined result 
in long fluid diffusion times within the gouge layers. This, coupled with shear-enhanced 
compaction, favours the generation of pore fluid overpressures, which may limit the 
generation of frictional melt and nanoparticles, as normal stresses and dynamic friction on 
the slipping surface is reduced thus limiting frictional sliding and cataclasis, but would still 
facilitate seismic rupture [Lachenbruch, 1980].  
The presence of material with K-feldspathic composition, as observed in the 
pseudotachylytes and gouge clasts detailed above, is anomalous in the Alpine Fault rock 
sequence. K-feldspar is not present in the hanging wall mylonitic protolith lithologies, the 
Alpine schists, nor in its mylonitic sequence. However, quantitative XRD analyses performed 
by Boulton et al., [2017] throughout the Alpine Fault alteration zone found that K-feldspar 
was only present within the hanging wall, 5 m above the PSZ in DFDP-1A and in the footwall 
sampled in DFDP-1B. These occurrences have been attributed to incorporation of footwall 
material derived from granitic protoliths just above the PSZ-1 into the hanging wall, while 
within the PSZ layers it is speculated by Boulton et al., [2017] that elevated K2O is caused by 
a combination of footwall K-feldspar, adularia and/or potassic pseudotachylyte.  
Blue CL in feldspars can be attributed to the alteration of feldspars inducing local disorder 
and amorphisation, and the presence of Al  O-   Al defects [Krbetschek et al., 1997; Gtze 
et al., 2000; Wendler et al., 2012]. However, these Al - O- - Al defect centres can be 
eliminated by fluid-feldspar interaction below ~450 C via ordering of the Si  Al bonds 
[Finch and Klein, 1999]. K-feldspars also exhibit blue CL emissions when Ti4+ is substituted 
into the feldspar lattice (Al  O  Ti) [Lee et al., 2007; Parsons et al., 2008; Kayama et al., 
2010].  
A potential origin for the enrichment of K2O and K-feldspathic clasts are localised, 
deformation induced, alteration reactions within the PSZs. During seismicity, biotite and 
muscovite undergo comminution; due to their affinity for H+ over K+ they release K+ into the 
local system [Eisenman, 1962]. This K+ creates ultrafine-grained particles with high surface 
energy and generates local disequilibrium conditions. In order to return to equilibrium 
chlorite and/or K-feldspar are precipitated. This metasomatic cataclastically catalysed 
dissolution-precipitation reaction mechanism has been outlined both theoretically and 
experimentally by Wintsch, [1975] and Wintsch et al., [1995]. The reaction of muscovite + 6 
quartz + 2K+ = 3 K-feldspar + 2 H+ while classically occurring at ~600 C and 200 MPa, 
conditions far higher than is found in the brittle field of the Alpine Fault, may occur at lower 
temperatures and pressures by chemical disequilibrium, increased surface area by 
cataclasis and the activity of key ions in the solution, allowing K-feldspar precipitation to 
occur at temperatures as low as ~250 C. A similar reaction can occur with biotite in the 
place of muscovite. However, biotite only occurs in significant quantities within the Alpine 
Fault schists and mylonite sequence with most replaced through shallow alteration to 
chlorite in the FC / AZ [Toy et al., 2015b; Boulton et al., 2017a]. The feldspathization 
reaction outlined above would not be able to take place in the schist / mylonite sequence 
due to the inability to maintain dis-equilibrium conditions over sufficient time scales that 
are possible in the PSZ ultracomminuted, low permeability, clay-rich gouges. The fluid-rock 
interactions of materials, particularly pseudotachylyte post-emplacement, may result in the 
leaching/depletion of Fe, Mg, etc. and the subsequent enrichment of K. Observations of 
pseudotachylytes hosted in granitoid rocks by Di Toro and Pennacchioni, [2004] show K-rich 
coronas rimming spherulites, a feature attributed to fluid-rock interaction.  
The above cataclastically catalysed dissolution-precipitation reaction holds some 
similarities to field observations undertaken by Green II et al., [2015]. On the principal slip 
surface of the Punchbowl Fault, California, USA, where ~15 m diameter, porous, K-feldspar 
crystals containing nanoparticulates of quartz, albite, sphene and pyroxene were 
discovered. Green II et al., [2015] speculate that K-feldspathic material grew authigenically, 
engulfing the gouge nanoparticles that were generated in the most recent slip event, 
protecting them from subsequent interseismic fluid-rock interaction.  
An alternative hypothesis for the origin of the Blue-CL clasts implicates the K-enriched 
pseudotachylytes observed throughout the alteration zone. This is as follows: the initiation 
of coseismic slip within the fault zone causes rupture on a heterogeneous plane, on which 
high normal stresses at asperity contacts can generate frictional heating. During slip the 
host-rock is damaged while melt is generated and mobilised along the shearing surface and 
surrounding damage zone, forming injection veins. This melt is rapidly quenched once slip 
ceases, with the enhanced permeability of the host-rock, due to coseismic fracture damage, 
allowing the mobilisation of fluids around the solidified pseudotachylyte. Due to the rapid 
quenching, polygonal joints may be generated and represent preferential zones of 
weakness along which solidified melt fails brittely during successive deformation. These 
newly formed clasts are reworked into the cataclasite and gouge, and represent survivor 
clasts from a pseudotachylyte generated during seismic slip, and are variably altered by 
fluid-rock interactions and devitrification over time. Figure 5.17 is a schematic block 
diagram illustrating this process. Undeformed pseudotachylytes have not been observed 
within and in the immediate vicinity of the PSZ, perhaps indicating that melting is unlikely 
to occur along this slip zone. The energy required to dehydrate hydrous phyllosillicates 
within the PSZ and the preference for clays to undergo thermal pressurisation [Faulkner et 
al., 2011], evidenced within the AF PSZ by gouge fluidisation and injection structures 
[Boulton et al., 2015], would severely limit melt production. As such, pseudotachylyte clasts 
may be entrained in the PSZ gouge at greater depths on the fault where melting is more 
likely on a less mature, less altered, more competent and wider PSZ, with the clasts being 
repeatedly reworked within the developing gouge layer during exhumation of the fault.  
The origin of clast Types 1, 3 and 4 could be explained by the processes outlined above. 
Types 1 and 3 have the most similarities with pseudotachylytes within the FC / AZ, 
including: a matrix of dominantly K-feldspathic composition with minor Mg and Fe content; 
inclusions of quartz, calcite and Ti-Oxides; and weak blue CL emissions. However, the FC / 
AZ pseudotachylyte matrices lack any observable crystallinity, as evidenced by the lack of 
indexed material through EBSD, in marked contrast to the Type 1 clast. Type 4 clasts, 
lacking the blue CL signal of Types 1 and 3, could have the potential for being a candidate 
for the cataclastically catalysed dissolution-precipitation reaction. The presence of quartz 
clasts with subgrains and crystal lattice distortion in the Type 4 clast also indicates that no 
annealing during entrainment in a frictional induced melt took place, which appears to have 
occurred in other quartz survivor clasts within definite pseudotachylytes, Figure SM 5.6.  
Figure 5.17  (above) Schematic block illustration of the stages involved in the generation of 
microstructures detailed in Figures 5.15 and 5.16. [A] The intact rock (ultramylonite, 
cataclasite, gouge etc.) [B] Coseismic shearing initiates causing a rupture on a 
heterogeneous plane upon which asperities contact and generate frictional heating. [C] The 
host rock is damaged during rupture and melt is generated from volatile minerals and 
mobilised incorporating host-rock fragments and more refractory mineral clasts. [D] The 
melt is rapidly quenched once slip ceases, by dissipation of heat into the host-rock. 
Fracturing in the host rock increases permeability and fluids are mobilised around the site of 
the pseudotachylyte, allowing precipitation of secondary minerals and alteration of the 
glass. [E] Due to this rapid quenching of the melt polygonal joints are generated upon which 
the glass preferentially breaks upon during subsequent deformation. [F] These clasts are 
reworked into cataclasite and gouge material and are variably altered by fluid-rock 
interactions and devitrification over time. 
This annealing of quartz in association with pseudotachylyte generation has been observed 
in natural specimens by Bestmann et al., [2012]. Type 2, appears mostly likely to be a K-
feldspar incorporated into PSZ gouges from the footwall granitoids, its optical properties 
matching that of K-feldspar, with its blue CL likely due to any number of the CL activators 
described above.  
5.5.3. Implications for fault processes  
As previously mentioned, the generation of frictional melt and nanoparticulates on a fault 
surface could potentially act as lubricant. However, it has also been proposed that the 
solidification of melt within fault zones could be a mechanism in which faults recover 
strength postseismicity. A number of studies speculate that once melt is transported and 
distributed across a sliding surface and solidifies, the surfaces will be locally welded 
together [Di Toro et al., 2005; Rice, 2006; Mitchell et al., 2016], hindering reactivation of the 
slip surface or encouraging the migration of slip surfaces in subsequent slip events [Chester 
and Chester, 1998]. This restrengthening hypothesis is supported by experimental work 
performed by Mitchell et al., [2016] in which triaxial deformation strength tests were 
performed on intact rock, saw-cut samples, and pseudotachylyte bearing rock. These 
experiments showed that pseudotachylyte welded rock and intact rock had comparable 
cohesive strength. There is also experimental evidence suggesting that the initiation of 
melting at asperity contacts is accompanied by an abrupt increase in frictional strength, 
potentially arresting slip before the transition to macroscopic melting occurs [Tsutsumi and 
Shimamoto, 1997; Hirose and Shimamoto, 2005]. However, this may only be true for cohesive 
rocks at low normal stresses, <10 MPa, at higher normal stresses, >25 MPa, the increase in 
frictional strength with asperity melting may no longer occur as evidenced in experiments by 
Violay et al., [2014a, 2014b]. 
The length-scale over which natural pseudotachylytes form is an important factor when 
considering the above. Rupture surfaces may locally weld together but if the remainder of the 
fault remains free these sites of increased strength will likely be overcome by the rupture and 
associated weakening mechanisms. In regards to the Alpine Fault pseudotachylyte, they occur 
distributed throughout the fault core, indicating that zones of rupture migrate within it, or are 
active simultaneously, each accommodating increments of displacement, perhaps indicating 
that solidified melt locally welds material until broad cataclasis of the rock mass results in the 
reworking of the pseudotachylyte into the cataclastic matrix.  
A transitioning of weakening mechanisms and the manner in which slip was accommodated 
within the principal slip zone with exhumation likely took place: frictional melting in the more 
competent, dryer rock below and about the Brittle  Viscous transition; transitioning to 
cataclastic flow, generating gouges and nanoparticulates, and thermal pressurisation at 
intermediary depths (4  7 km); and finally with propagation of an Alpine Fault rupture 
occurring through steady-state slip on weak phyllosillicates at shallower crustal levels (0  4 
km). Pseudotachylytes both within the PSZ and in the encompassing ultramylonites are 
entrained into the increasingly widening FC / AZ with exhumation, being either destroyed / 
altered into the cataclastic material, becoming unrecognisable or more rarely preserved as 
fragmented survivor clasts as observed in the microstructures detailed above; see Figure 5.18 
for an illustration and explanation of this process.  
Both Warr et al., [2003] and Toy et al., [2011] infer from field and microstructural studies that 
pseudotachylytes in the Alpine Fault are not voluminous enough to account for all the 
increments of slip on the Alpine Fault and that the observed pseudotachylytes preserve 
moderate magnitude events (3 < Mw < 6), which include foreshock and aftershock events of 
larger earthquakes. Toy et al., [2011] concluded that thermal pressurisation and granular 
fluidisation are more important dynamic weakening mechanisms than frictional melt during 
large magnitude Alpine Fault events.   
Figure 5.18  [A] Schematic illustration of the Alpine Fault Zone in the upper crust, showing 
the fault rock lithological sequence and geothermal gradient after Toy et al., [2010]. The red 
marker denotes the plate boundary fault between the Pacific and Australian Plate; the 
green marker the onset of cataclasis and alteration in the fault core above the BVT , ~30 m 
thick; and the purple marker denotes the ultramylonite zone, ~150 m thick, through which 
the fault core transitions into the fault damage zone. [C] Magnified view of the fault zone at 
the BVT, highlighted in (A). The Black marks represent areas of PST generation and 
preservation; the black dots represent reworked PST within the FC / AZ; and the white marks 
represent mineralised fractures, predominantly filled with calcite and quartz. It is inferred 
that PST was generated upon the PSZ below the BVT within the localised, viscous shear 
zone. As gouge generation on the PSZ initiated around the BVT, PST generation on the PSZ 
was restricted by other dynamic weakening processes, such as thermal pressurisation. The 
PST on the PSZ is progressively reworked in the PSZ gouge and appears now as fragmented 
clasts. [B] Magnified view of the fault zone at the cut off depth of PST generation as 
estimated by Toy et al., [2011], highlighted in (A).PST are progressively reworked in the FC / 
AZ cataclasites and overprinted by mineralised fractures and shears. Within the FC / AZ the 
PST is enriched in K in comparison to PST within the mylonite sequence rocks, likely due to 
localised alteration reactions.  
5.6. Conclusions 
1. Frictional melt appears to occur in the presence of fluid on the Alpine Fault, as 
evidenced by the cataclasis of calcite veins associated with pseudotachylyte, as well 
as the postseismic mineralisation of vesicles showing fluid-rock / melt interaction 
during and immediately prior to melt solidification and the overprinting of 
pseudotachylyte and surrounding host-rock by multiple generations of calcite veins.  
2. As there is a lack of intact pseudotachylyte veins within and in the immediate 
vicinity of the PSZ it can be inferred that frictional melt did not occur during the 
most recent high magnitude Alpine Fault slip event. It is more likely that observed 
pseudotachylytes are reworked relicts from older Alpine Fault ruptures below the 
Brittle  Viscous transition, or rather aftershocks and smaller earthquakes off the 
principal slip zone that have produced pseudotachylytes, which have been 
subsequently incorporated into the widening alteration zone with exhumation.  
3. The origin of the K-feldspathic clasts within the principal slip surfaces is currently 
uncertain. If these clasts are of pseudotachylyte origin, it can be inferred that the 
PSZ was capable of generating frictional melt at deeper crustal levels and that as 
the PSZ exhumed, matured and altered during the protracted history of seismicity, 
pseudotachylyte was entrained into the gouge layer. After entrainment subsequent 
devitrification and alteration results in microcrystalline clasts with entrained 
survivor nanoparticles. Alternatively the K-feldspathic material precipitated within 
the PSZ from a rock-buffered alkali solution, incorporating nanoparticulates during 
growth, could be a viable mechanism.  
4. The presence of preserved nanoparticles within K-feldspathic clasts in the principal 
slip zone could indicate that the Alpine Fault produced nanoparticulates during 
increments of slip at greater depths without the production of melt. This could 
indicate a transition in weakening mechanisms with exhumation; frictional melting 
may occur in the more competent rock close to the Brittle  Viscous Transition, 
nanoparticulate-aided slip may be important at intermediate depths aided by 
thermal pressurisation, while cataclasis dominates at shallower crustal levels. 
5.7. Further work 
This study requires further work, particularly focused on the nature of the K-feldspathic PSZ 
clasts. TEM and /or XRD analyses, utilising characteristic Laue diffraction techniques, would 
be necessary in order to determine whether any amorphous material can be found in the K-
feldspathic clasts, potentially clarifying whether they are of frictional melt origin or 
precipitated from isolated fluids in the PSZ. EBSD analyses are to be extended to the various 
PSZ clasts outlined above as well as the pseudotachylyte matrix throughout the FC / AZ. 
This will better our understanding of the ultracataclasis  pseudotachylyte transition and 
whether alteration and devitrification of amorphous pseudotachylyte material correlates 
with the cryptocrystalline PSZ clasts identified through EBSD. Image analyses, using ImageJ 
or similar software, are to performed on the pseudotachylyte and ultracomminuted 
survivor clasts populations; this is intended to give quantitative observations on grain sizes, 
clast : matrix ratio and clast roundness in order to inform on the behaviour of the material 
entraining these clasts, i.e. whether these clasts are a product of melt or comminution. This 
work has undergone some preliminary steps with pseudotachylyte survivor clast grain 
shape analyses; see Section SM 5.8.2 for a summary of this preliminary work. Fully 
quantitative chemistry could also performed, likely microprobe analyses, in order to fully 
understand the chemical make-up of the melts and clasts.  
5.8. Supplementary material  
5.8.1. Additional tables and figures  
Table SM 5.1  Details of all the pseudotachylyte and related structures observed during 
this study, including: depth, lithology, description and techniques used during analysis. 
Available in the Digital Supplementary Materials included with this thesis.  
Figure SM 5.5   
  caption overleaf. 
Figure SM 5.5  (above) [A] BSE image of a pseudotachylyte margin and calcite vein from a 
hanging wall ultramylonite (1B-99.3m-B  Unit 2) 29.14 m above the upper PSZ. This 
ultramylonite is heavily cataclased with planes of ultracomminuted material, 
pseudotachylyte and calcite veins. [B] An AE EBSD map of a calcite vein cutting through the 
host-rock and pseudotachylyte margin, the region is highlighted in (A). The calcite vein-infill 
has blocky-equant grains with very little twinning and no crystal lattice distortion, indicating 
little deformation. [B] An AE EBSD map of a calcite vein cutting through the host-rock and 
pseudotachylyte margin, the region is highlighted in (A). The portion of the calcite vein 
within the host-rock is similarly blocky-equant, has little twinning and no crystal lattice 
distortion, with the only difference being a smaller grain size. [D and E] PFs of areas 
highlighted in (B) and (C), respectively, show a large spread in crystallographic orientations 
in the calcite vein-infill. 
5.8.2. Grain shape analyses 
Preliminary grain shape analyses were undertaken on pseudotachylyte survivor clasts, 
predominantly quartz with minor plagioclase, using backscatter electron (BSE) images and 
ImageJ image analysis software. BSE images visualise the compositional variation of a 
sample through the use of a greyscale, proportional to the atomic number of a sample with 
a brighter BSE intensity correlating with greater average atomic number and dark BSE 
intensity with lower average atomic number. Survivor clasts are dominantly quartz and 
plagioclase feldspars their BSE intensity is dark in comparison to the pseudotachylyte 
matrix, secondary calcite mineralisation and Fe  Ti oxides. The colour thresholding tool in 
ImageJ was then used to separate regions of the image based on intensity variation 
between pixels, in this case greyscale. A pixel intensity threshold range was then chosen, 
allowing the rejection of all pixels that did not correspond with a survivor clast, generating a 
monochrome image highlighting the survivor clasts, see Figures SM 5.7B and SM 5.8B. This 
monochrome image is then analysed using the ImageJ grain shape analysis tool allowing the 
calculation of the grain area and circularity. Circularity is a measure of how circular a grain 
is according to the following; circularity = 4 (area / perimeter2), with a value of 1 indicating 
a perfect circle and a value approaching 0 being an increasingly elongate polygon. The 
results of these analyses are presented in Table SM 5.2., with results suggesting the 
survivor grains are largely circular. Further analyses using the Image software will be 
undertaken to calculate roundness of survivor clasts and how this relates to melt behaviour 
in the Alpine Fault.  
Table SM 5.2  Table showing the results of preliminary grain shape analyses of 
pseudotachylyte survivor clasts shown in Figures SM 5.7 and 5.8. Available in the Digital 
Supplementary Materials included with this thesis.  
Figure SM 5.7  [A] BSE image of a region in the pseudotachylyte from 1B-99.3m-B, chosen 
as a preliminary site for survivor clast grain shape analysis. [B] Region of pseudotachylyte 
highlighted in (A). Colour thresholding in ImageJ allows the differentiation of material of 
different compositions using the BSE greyscale image. Here the quartz survivor clasts, 
darkest grey in BSE, have been highlighted. [C] Image showing the grain shapes determined 
by the ImageJ software, numbering refers to clast number in Table SM 5.2.  
Figure SM 5.8  [A] BSE image of a region in the pseudotachylyte from 1B-99.3m-B, chosen 
as a preliminary site for survivor clast grain shape analysis. [B] Region of pseudotachylyte 
highlighted in (A). Colour thresholding in ImageJ allows the differentiation of material of 
different compositions using the BSE greyscale image. Here the quartz survivor clasts, 
darkest grey in BSE, have been highlighted. [C] Image showing the grain shapes determined 
by the ImageJ software, numbering refers to clast number in Table SM 5.2.  
6. Conclusions  
The following chapter summarises the main conclusions presented in Chapters 3, 4 and 5, 
and their implications on processes occurring within the Alpine Fault Zone throughout its 
seismic cycle.  
The suite of experimental measurements, presented in Chapter 3, shows that a zone of low 
permeability and low seismic velocity material bounds the PSZ of the Central Alpine Fault, 
i.e. fault core / alteration zone (FC / AZ), under conditions approximating depths of 5  6 
km. Measurements performed on protolith lithologies show lower permeabilities and 
higher seismic velocities than the fault-damaged rock, owing to their intact, unfractured 
nature. Low permeabilities at low experimental pressures are explained by the presence of 
fine grained alteration products and carbonate precipitation within the fracture networks 
of the fault hanging wall, that seal porosities in the fault core up to 2  10 %, estimate 
based on modal proportion filled fractures. The PSZ is predominantly composed of 
ultrafine-grained gouges and alteration products, and therefore acts as a barrier to cross-
fault fluid flow postseismicity.  
During interseismic periods fluid flow is likely concentrated outside the FC / AZ, within the 
damage zone. The damage zone fractures are likely to remain open for long time scales or 
potentially indefinitely, allowing the flow of meteorically derived hydrothermal fluids above 
the contact of the damage zone and FC / AZ, manifesting at the surface as hot springs. 
Within the FC / AZ, pervasive, unconsolidated gouge-filled fracture networks are 
progressively mineralized and altered, reducing along-fault communication of pore fluid. 
With fluid focusing along these fracture networks, fault rock fabrics have little influence on 
permeability anisotropy. In addition, as the cataclastic microstructures are so variable on a 
mm  cm scale, their overall effect within the fault zone is to homogenize seismic velocities, 
limiting seismic anisotropy. The main microstructural controls on fault rock physical 
properties are throughgoing fractures, both gouge-filled and mineralized, which have a 
great effect on seismic wave speeds and fluid flow at the experimental specimen scale and 
likely to act as preferential fluid flow paths and planes of discontinuity in the Alpine Fault 
Zone as a whole.  
From microstructural and geochemical observations on carbonate mineralisation in the 
Alpine Fault FC / AZ, as presented in Chapter 4, it is shown that the Alpine Fault FC / AZ is 
pervasively mineralised with carbonate precipitation, occurring predominantly as vein infill. 
Multiple fracture and sealing events have occurred on the fault, evidence for cyclical 
damage generation and recovery. The evidence of extensive fluid-rock interaction and the 
current low permeability state of the FC / AZ indicates that permeability of this rock volume 
is transient. This is inferred to be due to seismically-induced fractures and porosity 
generation, potentially from both large magnitude Alpine Fault earthquake events and 
moderate magnitude events elsewhere in the wider fault zone. Immediately postseismicity 
the mobilisation of fluid results in rapid mineralisation and fluid-rock interactions, which 
seal and restrengthen the fault until the next cycle of seismicity occurs.  
The trace elements incorporated into calcite during precipitation were sourced from fluid-
rock interactions between hydrothermal fluids and cataclased rock. The variation in trace 
element incorporation into the carbonate veins during formation is due to the variation in 
ambient conditions and alteration reactions, through fluid-rock interaction occurring in the 
FC / AZ between periods of fracture generation. In most cases, older vein generations 
contain more Fe and Mg, while younger generations and recrystallised regions contain 
more Mn, likely due to variation in temperature and pressure during precipitation as the 
fault hanging wall was exhumed. Increased Mg / Fe concentrations at the PSZ are 
potentially caused by enhanced fluid-rock interaction within the ultracomminuted gouges, 
where alteration to clay minerals during the exhumation of the fault occurs. Mn was likely 
sourced from the retrogressive breakdown of Mn-rich garnet while Mg and Fe are derived 
from low temperature transformations of biotite into chlorite to smectite and muscovite 
alteration, particularly in the PSZ. 
Many of the FC / AZ veins are interpreted to be generated by hydrofracturing, where a hot 
fluid was pulsed through the FC / AZ during seismicity, via rapidly propagating dilatant 
fractures with some shear component. The sudden pressure drop during dilation would 
result in rapid supersaturation of the fluid and therefore in rapid precipitation, in the order 
of seconds, onto the fracture walls, evidenced by blocky grain shapes, weak shape 
preferred orientations, uniform chemistry of the calcite vein-infill and floating wall-rock / 
older calcite fragments within it. These features are predominantly observed in younger 
generation veins. The lack of twinning, localised microshears in the most recent vein 
generations indicate that there has been little deformation or strain accumulation in the 
alteration zone since the last period of seismicity. Older generations may have been 
similarly formed. However subsequent fluid-rock interaction and deformation has resulted 
in modification or sometimes obliteration of previous vein microstructures and chemistry.  
The rare presence of oscillatory zoned vein calcite indicates that in some cases precipitation 
occurs over a longer time scale, with fluctuations in temperature, pressure or fluid-rock 
interactions, or any combination of the three, resulting in variations in calcite trace element 
incorporation rates. This could mean that, as well as rapid sealing occurring immediately 
after seismicity, there is a fraction of void space remaining open long enough to undergo 
slow sealing by calcite precipitation during the interseismic period. This sealing potentially 
over a period on the order of months to years, as inferred from in situ borehole studies on 
permeability evolution [Xue et al., 2013], and the recovery of seismic wave velocities 
around recently active fault zones [Peng and Ben-Zion, 2006].  
The evolution of fault rock microstructure with seismic shear and subsequent interseismic 
fluid-rock interaction has a great effect on the hydraulic and elastic properties of fault 
zones. This evolution is complex and cyclical, and potentially promotes rupture via dynamic 
coseismic processes such as thermal pressurization. 
The study in Chapter 5 details the occurrence of pseudotachylytes throughout the Alpine 
Fault FC / AZ cataclasites, predominantly as reworked, disassociated clasts, with intact 
pseudotachylyte veins constrained to the fault core / damage zone contact in the fractured 
ultramylonites. It has been previously theorised that the presence of fluid in the vicinity of a 
shearing plane would buffer temperature and/or cause thermal pressurisation, thus 
lowering normal stresses on the fault and inhibiting frictional melting [e.g. Sibson, 1973; 
Lachenbruch, 1980]. However, frictional melting is observed to occur in the presence of 
fluid on the Alpine Fault, evidenced by the cataclasis of calcite veins associated with 
pseudotachylyte, the mineralisation of vesicles showing fluid-rock / melt interaction during 
and immediately prior to melt solidification and the overprinting of pseudotachylyte and 
surrounding host-rock by multiple generations of calcite veins. Examples of natural 
pseudotachylytes potentially produced in fluid-rich environments have been reported by 
multiple workers, including; Rowe et al., 2005; Meneghini et al., 2010; Ujiie et al., 2011. 
As there is a lack of intact pseudotachylyte veins within and in the immediate vicinity of the 
PSZ it can be inferred that frictional melt did not occur during the most recent high 
magnitude Alpine Fault slip event. It is more likely that pseudotachylytes observed are 
reworked relicts from older Alpine Fault ruptures below the Brittle  Viscous Transition or 
rather aftershocks and smaller earthquakes off of the principal slip zone that have 
produced pseudotachylytes that have been subsequently incorporated into the widening 
alteration zone with exhumation.  
The pseudotachylytes observed have an overall K-feldspathic composition but contain 
compositional segregations comprised of K / Si / Al-rich pseudotachylyte margins and Mg / 
Fe-rich and K / Si / Al-rich banding within the pseudotachylyte core. These K / Si / Al-rich 
bands exhibit a weak blue CL. Within the PSZ, ultracomminuted gouges containing sub  
mm clasts that share similar characteristics with these pseudotachylytes exist. Such 
similarities include: a dominantly K-feldspathic composition with minor Mg and Fe content; 
the presence of nanoparticulates of quartz, calcite and Ti-oxides; and, in some cases, a blue 
CL. If these clasts are of pseudotachylyte origin, it can be inferred that the PSZ was capable 
of generating frictional melt at deeper crustal levels and that as the PSZ exhumed, matured 
and altered during the protracted history of seismicity pseudotachylyte was entrained into 
the gouge layer, with subsequent devitrification and alteration resulting in microcrystalline 
clasts with entrained survivor nanoparticles. Alternatively the precipitation K-feldspathic 
material within the PSZ from a rock-buffered alkali solution, incorporating nanoparticulates 
during growth, could be a viable mechanism. Further work is required to constrain the 
origin and nature of these materials.  
The presence of preserved nanoparticles within K-feldspathic clasts in the PSZ could 
indicate that the Alpine Fault produced nanoparticulates during increments of slip at 
greater depths without the production of melt. This could indicate a transition in 
weakening mechanisms with exhumation; frictional melting may occur in the more 
competent rock close to the Brittle  Viscous Transition, nanoparticulate-aided slip may be 
important at intermediate depths and aided by thermal pressurisation, while cataclasis 
dominates at shallower crustal levels. 
7. Future work 
The studies presented in this thesis have allowed us to advance our understanding of the 
mechanics of the Alpine Fault Zone and the nature of the seismic cycle in mature plate 
boundary faults. However, it has also highlighted the scientific challenges that await us in 
future research of these topics. This section outlines potential avenues for future work for 
the thesis author and the Deep Fault Drilling Project (DFDP) as a whole.  
Further constraints on the conditions and time scales of fracture mineralisation 
The study presented in Chapter 4 of this thesis has shown the microstructural and 
geochemical character of carbonate mineralisation associated with seismic and interseismic 
processes on a major plate boundary fault. To truly understand the processes during which 
these features are formed, processes which vary considerably as evidenced by the wide 
range of structures and chemistries described, further constraints must be made on the 
ambient conditions during their formation. These key aspects include, but are not limited 
to: stress states; temperature; and the rate of precipitation. Estimation of the stresses 
imparted upon the calcite veins could be achieved through calcite twin paleo piezometry, 
allowing the comparison of the transient stresses imposed upon the calcite-bearing veins 
during successive periods of seismicity as well as with the modern regional stresses as 
determined from borehole and geophysical techniques. Temperature is another key factor, 
as it controls the fluid solubility of the carbonate as well as the partitioning of the trace 
elements into the precipitating carbonates. Temperatures could be constrained through the 
use the of chemical ratios of Ca and the trace metals within the calcite, specifically Sr/Ca 
and Mg/Ca. Using these ratios and estimated temperatures it is possible to calculate back 
to fluid chemistry, giving us a better understanding of fluid and temperature fluctuations 
during and between periods of seismicity. The rate of precipitation of calcite in conditions 
during and immediately post seismicity is key in improving our understanding of the time 
frame for the sealing and restrengthening of a fault and how this influences earthquake 
recurrence intervals. This would require better estimates on the rate of fluid flow and the 
magnitude of pressure drops during seismicity on the Alpine Fault and the effect these have 
on oversaturation and thus precipitation rates. 
The occurrence and alteration of frictional melt in a mature plate boundary fault core 
The study presented in Chapter 5 of this thesis described and highlighted the 
microstructural and chemical variations of cataclastically and frictionally derived structures 
within the Alpine Fault core. The aim of the study was to characterise the occurrence of 
frictional melt and provide evidence for frictional melt at shallow crustal conditions in the 
presence of fluid in highly pulverised rock. In order to strengthen this study a number of 
further lines of evidences need to be collected and presented, these include: undertaking 
TEM analyses on features where their formation is ambiguous, i.e. ultracataclasis or 
frictional melting, allowing the analysis of amorphous material and devitrification or 
alteration products; further microstructural evidence for coexistence of pseudotachylytes 
and calcite mineralisation is to be collected. Bolstered by these lines of evidence a better 
contribution could be made to the understanding of the formation and destruction of 
pseudotachylytes, their role in seismic faulting and their abundance in nature.  
Future of the Alpine Fault and the Deep Fault Drilling Program  
The material retrieved from shallow depths in the first phase of the Deep Fault Drilling 
Project has yielded a partial view on the shallow behaviour of the fault. In order to better 
understand this behaviour, particularly in the deeper locked sections of the fault where 
strain accumulation and seismic slip occurs, further phases, at greater depths, of the DFDP 
must be undertaken. If drilling operations were to reach their final objectives of reaching 
the Alpine Fault at depths of ~3 km the evolution of the mechanical properties and 
microstructure with exhumation could be better understood, particularly if an oriented 
suite of fault rock core could be retrieved. This coupled with determination of the 
magnitude and orientation of the principal stresses, pore fluid pressure, fluid chemistry and 
geophysical properties via wireline logging, through analyses undertaken during drilling, will 
further advance our understanding of the fault at depth.  
8. References 
Agarwal, B. K. (1991), X-Ray Spectroscopy, Springer Series in Optical Sciences, 2nd ed., 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg. 
Ague, J. J. (2003), Fluid Flow in the Deep Crust, in Treatise on Geochemistry, pp. 195228, 
Elsevier. 
Allen, M. J., D. J. Tatham, D. R. Faulkner, E. Mariani, and C. Boulton (2017), Permeability and 
seismic velocity and their anisotropy across the Alpine Fault, New Zealand: an insight 
from laboratory measurements on core from the Deep Fault Drilling Project phase 1 
(DFDP-1), J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth, doi:10.1002/2017JB014355. 
Allis, R. G., and Y. Shi (1995), New insights to temperature and pressure beneath the central 
Southern Alps, New Zealand, New Zeal. J. Geol. Geophys., 38(August), 585592, 
doi:10.1080/00288306.1995.9514687. 
Allis, R. G., R. . Henley, and A. F. Carman (1979), The thermal regime beneath the Southern 
Alps, in The origin of the Southern Alps. Bulletin of the Royal Society of New Zealand, 
edited by R. I. Walcott and M. M. Cresswell, pp. 7985, Royal Society of New Zealand, 
Wellington, N.Z. 
Anders, M. H., and D. V. Wiltschko (1994), Microfracturing, paleostress and the growth of 
faults, J. Struct. Geol., 16(6), 795815, doi:10.1016/0191-8141(94)90146-5. 
Andersen, T. B., K. Mair, H. Austrheim, Y. Y. Podladchikov, and J. C. Vrijmoed (2008), Stress 
release in exhumed intermediate and deep earthquakes determined from ultramafic 
pseudotachylyte, Geology, 36(12), 995998. 
Arai, T., H. Tsukahara, and T. Morikiyo (2003), Sealing Process with Calcite in the Nojima 
Active Fault Zone Revealed from Isotope Analysis of Calcite, J. Geogr. (Chigaku Zasshi), 
112(6), 915925, doi:10.5026/jgeography.112.6_915. 
Barber, D. J., and H.-R. Wenk (1979), Deformation twinning in calcite, dolomite, and other 
rhombohedral carbonates, Phys. Chem. Miner., 5(2), 141165, 
doi:10.1007/BF00307550. 
Barker, S. L. L., and S. F. Cox (2011), Oscillatory zoning and trace element incorporation in 
hydrothermal minerals: Insights from calcite growth experiments, Geofluids, 11(1), 
4856, doi:10.1111/j.1468-8123.2010.00305.x. 
Barker, S. L. L., S. F. Cox, S. M. Eggins, and M. K. Gagan (2006), Microchemical evidence for 
episodic growth of antitaxial veins during fracture-controlled fluid flow, Earth Planet. 
Sci. Lett., 250(12), 331344, doi:10.1016/j.epsl.2006.07.051. 
Barnes, I., C. J. Downes, and J. R. Hulston (1978), Warm springs, South Island, New Zealand, 
and their potentials to yield laumontite, Am. J. Sci., 278(10), 14121427, 
doi:10.2475/ajs.278.10.1412. 
Barth, N. C., V. G. Toy, R. M. Langridge, and R. J. Norris (2012), Scale dependence of oblique 
plate-boundary partitioning: New insights from LiDAR, central Alpine fault, New 
Zealand, Lithosphere, 4(5), 435448, doi:10.1130/L201.1. 
Barth, N. C., C. Boulton, B. M. Carpenter, G. E. Batt, and V. G. Toy (2013), Slip localization on 
the southern Alpine Fault, New Zealand, Tectonics, 32(3), 620640, 
doi:10.1002/tect.20041. 
Bear, J. (1972), Dynamics of Fluids in Porous Media, Soil Sci., 120(2), 162163, 
doi:10.1097/00010694-197508000-00022. 
Beavan, J., P. Denys, M. Denham, B. Hager, T. Herring, and P. Molnar (2010), Distribution of 
present-day vertical deformation across the Southern Alps, New Zealand, from 10 
years of GPS data, Geophys. Res. Lett., 37(16), n/a-n/a, doi:10.1029/2010GL044165. 
Bedford, J. D. (2017), The kinetics and mechanics of a dehydrating system and the 
deformation of porous rock, University of Liverpool. 
Ben-Zion, Y. (1998), Properties of seismic fault zone waves and their utility for imaging low-
velocity structures, J. Geophys. Res. Earth, 103(B6), 1256712585, 
doi:10.1029/98JB00768. 
Benninghoven, A., F. G. Rudenauer, and H. W. Werner (1987), Secondary ion mass 
spectrometry: basic concepts, instrumental aspects, applications and trends, John 
Wiley and Sons,New York, NY, United States. 
Bernabe, Y. (1987), The effective pressure law for permeability during pore pressure and 
confining pressure cycling of several crystalline rocks, J. Geophys. Res., 92(B1), 649, 
doi:10.1029/JB092iB01p00649. 
Bestmann, M., and D. J. Prior (2003), Intragranular dynamic recrystallization in naturally 
deformed calcite marble: Diffusion accommodated grain boundary sliding as a result 
of subgrain rotation recrystallization, J. Struct. Geol., 25(10), 15971613, 
doi:10.1016/S0191-8141(03)00006-3. 
Bestmann, M., G. Pennacchioni, S. Nielsen, M. Gken, and H. de Wall (2012), Deformation 
and ultrafine dynamic recrystallization of quartz in pseudotachylyte-bearing brittle 
faults: A matter of a few seconds, J. Struct. Geol., 38(May 2012), 2138, 
doi:10.1016/j.jsg.2011.10.001. 
Birch, F. (1960), The velocity of compressional waves in rocks to 10 kilobars: 1., J. Geophys. 
Res., 65(4), 10831102, doi:10.1029/JZ065i004p01083. 
Bjornerud, M., and J. F. Magloughlin (2004), Pressure-related feedback processes in the 
generation of pseudotachylytes, J. Struct. Geol., 26(12), 23172323, 
doi:10.1016/j.jsg.2002.08.001. 
Blake, O. (2011), Seismic Transport Properties of Fractured Rocks, University of Liverpool. 
Blanpied, M. L., D. A. Lockner, and J. D. Byerlee (1992), An earthquake mechanism based on 
rapid sealing of faults, Nature, 358(6387), 574576, doi:10.1038/358574a0. 
Blenkinsopp, T. (2000), Deformation Microstructures and Mechanisms in Minerals and 
Rocks, Kluwer Academic Publishers, New York, Boston, Dordrecht, London, Moscow. 
Bons, P. D. (2001), The formation of large quartz veins by rapid ascent of fluids in mobile 
hydrofractures, Tectonophysics, 336(1), 117, doi:10.1016/S0040-1951(01)00090-7. 
Bons, P. D., and M. Montenari (2005), The formation of antitaxial calcite veins with well-
developed fibres, Oppaminda Creek, South Australia, J. Struct. Geol., 27(2), 231248, 
doi:10.1016/j.jsg.2004.08.009. 
Bons, P. D., M. A. Elburg, and E. Gomez-Rivas (2012), A review of the formation of tectonic 
veins and their microstructures, J. Struct. Geol., 43, 3362, 
doi:10.1016/j.jsg.2012.07.005. 
Borg, S., W. Liu, M. Pearce, J. Cleverley, and C. MacRae (2014), Complex mineral zoning 
patterns caused by ultra-local equilibrium at reaction, Geology, 42(5), 415418, 
doi:10.1130/G35287.1. 
Bossire, G. (1991), Petrology of pseudotachylytes from the Alpine Fault of New Zealand, 
Tectonophysics, 196(12), 173193, doi:10.1016/0040-1951(91)90295-4. 
Boulton, C., B. M. Carpenter, V. Toy, and C. Marone (2012), Physical properties of surface 
outcrop cataclastic fault rocks, Alpine Fault, New Zealand, Geochemistry, Geophys. 
Geosystems, 13(1), 113, doi:10.1029/2011GC003872. 
Boulton, C., C. D. Menzies, M. J. Allen, D. R. Faulkner, and E. Mariani (2015), Observations 
and implications of cyclical slip in DFDP-1 principal slip zone gouges, Alpine Fault, New 
Zealand, EOS Trans. AGU Fall Meet. Suppl. Abstr., T23D66079. 
Boulton, C., C. D. Menzies, V. G. Toy, J. Townend, and R. Sutherland (2017a), Geochemical 
and microstructural evidence for interseismic changes in fault zone permeability and 
strength, Alpine Fault, New Zealand, Geochemistry, Geophys. Geosystems, 18(1), 238
265, doi:10.1002/2016GC006588. 
Boulton, C., L. Yao, D. R. Faulkner, J. Townend, V. G. Toy, R. Sutherland, S. Ma, and T. 
Shimamoto (2017b), High-velocity frictional properties of Alpine Fault rocks: 
Mechanical data, microstructural analysis, and implications for rupture propagation, J. 
Struct. Geol., 97, 7192, doi:10.1016/j.jsg.2017.02.003. 
Boulton, C. J., D. E. Moore, D. A. Lockner, V. G. Toy, J. Townend, and R. Sutherland (2014), 
Frictional properties of exhumed fault gouges in DFDP-1 cores, Alpine Fault, New 
Zealand, Geophys. Res. Lett., 41(2), 356362, doi:10.1002/2013GL058236. 
Brace, W. F. (1960), An extension of the Griffith theory of fracture to rocks, J. Geophys. Res., 
65(10), 34773480, doi:10.1029/JZ065i010p03477. 
Brace, W. F. (1972), Pore Pressure in Geophysics, Flow Fract. Rocks; Geophys. Monogr. Ser. 
Vol. 16, 16, 265273, doi:10.1029/GM016p0265. 
Brace, W. F., J. B. Walsh, and W. T. Frangos (1968), Permeability of granite under high 
pressure, J. Geophys. Res., 73(6), 22252236, doi:10.1029/JB073i006p02225. 
Brantut, N., A. Schubnel, J.-N. Rouzaud, F. Brunet, and T. Shimamoto (2008), High-velocity 
frictional properties of a clay-bearing fault gouge and implications for earthquake 
mechanics, J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth, 113(B10), n/a-n/a, 
doi:10.1029/2007JB005551. 
Brantut, N., R. Han, T. Shimamoto, N. Findling, and A. Schubnel (2011), Fast slip with 
inhibited temperature rise due to mineral dehydration: Evidence from experiments on 
gypsum, Geology, 39(1), 5962, doi:10.1130/G31424.1. 
Brantut, N., A. Schubnel, E. C. David, E. Hripr, Y. Guguen, and A. Dimanov (2012), 
Dehydration-induced damage and deformation in gypsum and implications for 
subduction zone processes, J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth, 117(B3), n/a-n/a, 
doi:10.1029/2011JB008730. 
Brenguier, F., M. Campillo, C. Hadziioannou, N. M. Shapiro, R. M. Nadeau, and E. Larose 
(2008), Postseismic Relaxation Along the San Andreas Fault at Parkfield from 
Continuous Seismological Observations, Science (80-. )., 321(5895), 14781481. 
Britton, T. B., J. Jiang, Y. Guo, A. Vilalta-Clemente, D. Wallis, L. N. Hansen, A. Winkelmann, 
and A. J. Wilkinson (2016), Tutorial: Crystal orientations and EBSD  Or which way is 
up?, Mater. Charact., 117, 113126, doi:10.1016/j.matchar.2016.04.008. 
Brodsky, E. E., and H. Kanamori (2001), Elastohydrodynamic lubrication of faults, J. 
Geophys. Res. Solid Earth, 106(B8), 1635716374, doi:10.1029/2001JB000430. 
Bucher, K., and M. Frey (2001), Petrogenesis of Metamorphic Rocks, 7th ed., Springer, 
Heidelberg. 
Budiansky, B., and R. J. Oconnell (1976), Elastic moduli of a cracked solid, Int. J. Solids 
Struct., 12(2), 8197, doi:10.1016/0020-7683(76)90044-5. 
Burkhard, M. (1993), Calcite twins, their geometry, appearance and significance as stress-
strain markers and indicators of tectonic regime: a review, J. Struct. Geol., 15(35), 
351368, doi:10.1016/0191-8141(93)90132-T. 
Burnley, P. C., H. W. Green, and D. J. Prior (1991), Faulting associated with the olivine to 
spinel transformation in Mg2GeO4 and its implications for deep-focus earthquakes, J. 
Geophys. Res. Solid Earth, 96(B1), 425443, doi:10.1029/90JB01937. 
Caciagli, N. C., and C. E. Manning (2003), The solubility of calcite in water at 616 kbar and 
500800 C, Contrib. to Mineral. Petrol., 146(3), 275285, doi:10.1007/s00410-003-
0501-y. 
Caine, J. S., J. P. Evans, and C. B. Forster (1996), Fault zone architecture and permeability 
structure, Geol. , 24(11), 10251028, doi:10.1130/0091-
7613(1996)024<1025:FZAAPS>2.3.CO;2. 
Campbell, J. R. (2002), Hydrothermal Alteration within the Alpine Fault Zone, University of 
Otago. 
Cande, S. C., and J. M. Stock (2004), PacificAntarcticAustralia motion and the formation 
of the Macquarie Plate, Geophys. J. Int., 157(1), 399414. 
Carpenter, B. M., H. Kitajima, R. Sutherland, J. Townend, V. G. Toy, and D. M. Saffer (2014), 
Hydraulic and acoustic properties of the active Alpine Fault, New Zealand: Laboratory 
measurements on DFDP-1 drill core. 
Carter, N. L., A. K. Kronenberg, J. V Ross, and D. V Wiltschko (1990), Control of fluids on 
deformation of rocks, Geol. Soc. London, Spec. Publ., 54(1), 113. 
Carter, R. M., and R. J. Norris (1976), Cainozoic history of southern New Zealand: An accord 
between geological observations and plate-tectonic predictions, Earth Planet. Sci. 
Lett., 31(1), 8594, doi:10.1016/0012-821X(76)90099-6. 
Chamberlain, C. ., M. . Poage, D. Craw, and R. . Reynolds (1999), Topographic development 
of the Southern Alps recorded by the isotopic composition of authigenic clay minerals, 
South Island, New Zealand, Chem. Geol., 155(34), 279294, doi:10.1016/S0009-
2541(98)00165-X. 
Chen, J., X. Yang, Q. Duan, T. Shimamoto, and C. J. Spiers (2013a), Importance of 
thermochemical pressurization in the dynamic weakening of the Longmenshan Fault 
during the 2008 Wenchuan earthquake: Inferences from experiments and modeling, J. 
Geophys. Res. Solid Earth, 118(8), 41454169, doi:10.1002/jgrb.50260. 
Chen, X., A. S. Madden, B. R. Bickmore, and Z. Reches (2013b), Dynamic weakening by 
nanoscale smoothing during high-velocity fault slip, Geology, 41(7), 739742. 
Chester, F. M., and J. S. Chester (1998), Ultracataclasite structure and friction processes of 
the Punchbowl fault, San Andreas system, California, Tectonophysics, 295(1), 199221, 
doi:10.1016/S0040-1951(98)00121-8. 
Chester, F. M., and J. M. Logan (1986), Implications for mechanical properties of brittle 
faults from observations of the Punchbowl fault zone, California, pure Appl. Geophys., 
124(1), 79106, doi:10.1007/BF00875720. 
Chester, F. M., J. P. Evans, and R. L. Biegel (1993), Internal structure and weakening 
mechanisms of the San Andreas Fault, J. Geophys. Res., 98(B1), 771, 
doi:10.1029/92JB01866. 
Childs, C. (1986), The Measurement of Low Temperatures.pdf, University of London. 
Christensen, N. I., and D. A. Okaya (2007), Compressional and Shear Wave Velocities in 
South Island, New Zealand Rocks and their Application to the Interpretation of 
Seismological Models of the New Zealand Crust, in A Continental Plate Boundary: 
Tectonics at South Island, New Zealand, pp. 123155, American Geophysical Union. 
Cnudde, V., and M. N. Boone (2013), High-resolution X-ray computed tomography in 
geosciences: A review of the current technology and applications, Earth-Science Rev., 
123, 117, doi:10.1016/j.earscirev.2013.04.003. 
Cochran, E. S., Y.-G. Li, P. M. Shearer, S. Barbot, Y. Fialko, and J. E. Vidale (2009), Seismic 
and geodetic evidence for extensive, long-lived fault damage zones, Geology, 37(4), 
315318. 
Collettini, C., C. Viti, S. A. F. Smith, and R. E. Holdsworth (2009), Development of 
interconnected talc networks and weakening of continental low-angle normal faults, 
Geol. , 37(6), 567570, doi:10.1130/G25645A.1. 
Company, H. P. E. (2014), High Pressure Valves, Fittings and Tubing, High Press. Equip.  
Available from: www.HighPressure.com (Accessed 20 April 2004) 
Cooper, A. F. (1970), Metamorphism, structure and postmetamorphic intrusives of the 
Haast River area, south Westland, New Zealand, University of Otago. 
Cooper, A. F. (1972), Progressive metamorphism of metabasic rocks from the haast schist 
group of Southern New Zealand, J. Petrol., 13(3), 457492, 
doi:10.1093/petrology/13.3.457. 
Cooper, A. F. (1974), Multiphase deformation and its relationship to metamorphic 
crystallisation at Haast River, South Westland, New Zealand, New Zeal. J. Geol. 
Geophys., 17(4), 855880, doi:10.1080/00288306.1974.10418230. 
Cooper, A. F., and R. J. Norris (1994), Anatomy, structural evolution, and slip rate of a plate-
boundary thrust: The Alpine fault at Gaunt Creek, Westland, New Zealand, GSA Bull., 
106(5), 627633. 
Cooper, A. F., B. A. Barreiro, D. L. Kimbrough, and J. M. Mattinson (1987), Lamprophyre dike 
intrusion and the age of the Alpine fault, New Zealand, Geol. , 15(10), 941944, 
doi:10.1130/0091-7613(1987)15<941:LDIATA>2.0.CO;2. 
Cox, S. C., C. D. Menzies, R. Sutherland, P. H. Denys, C. Chamberlain, and D. A. H. Teagle 
(2015), Changes in hot spring temperature and hydrogeology of the Alpine Fault 
hanging wall, New Zealand, induced by distal South Island earthquakes, Geofluids, 
15(12), 216239, doi:10.1111/gfl.12093. 
Craw, D. (1984), Ferrous-iron-bearing vermiculite-smectite series formed during alteration 
of chlorite to kaolinite, Otago Schist, New Zealand, Clay Miner., 19(4), 509520. 
Craw, D. (1997), Fluid inclusion evidence for geothermal structure beneath the Southern 
Alps, New Zealand, New Zeal. J. Geol. Geophys., 40(August), 4352, 
doi:10.1080/00288306.1997.9514739. 
Craw, D., and J. R. Campbell (2004), Tectonic and structural setting for active mesothermal 
gold vein systems, Southern Alps, New Zealand, J. Struct. Geol., 26(67), 9951005, 
doi:10.1016/j.jsg.2003.11.012. 
Craw, D., P. Upton, and D. J. Mackenzie (2009), Hydrothermal alteration styles in ancient 
and modern orogenic gold deposits, New Zealand, New Zeal. J. Geol. Geophys., 52(1), 
1126, doi:10.1080/00288300909509874. 
Cross, A. J., S. Kidder, and D. J. Prior (2015), Using microstructures and TitaniQ 
thermobarometry of quartz sheared around garnet porphyroclasts to evaluate 
microstructural evolution and constrain an Alpine Fault Zone geotherm, J. Struct. 
Geol., 75, 1731, doi:10.1016/j.jsg.2015.02.012. 
Davis, J. C. (2002), Statistics and Data Analysis in Geology. 
De Bresser, J. H. P., and C. J. Spiers (1997), Strength characteristics of the r, f, and c slip 
systems in calcite, Tectonophysics, 272(1), 123, doi:10.1016/S0040-1951(96)00273-9. 
DeMets, C., R. G. Gordon, D. F. Argus, and S. Stein (1994), Effect of recent revisions to the 
geomagnetic reversal time scale on estimates of current plate motions, Geophys. Res. 
Lett., 21(20), 21912194, doi:10.1029/94GL02118. 
Dempsey, E. D., D. J. Prior, E. Mariani, V. G. Toy, and D. J. Tatham (2011), Mica-controlled 
anisotropy within mid-to-upper crustal mylonites: an EBSD study of mica fabrics in the 
Alpine Fault Zone, New Zealand, Geol. Soc. London, Spec. Publ., 360(1), 3347, 
doi:10.1144/SP360.3. 
Denniston, R. F., C. K. Shearer, G. D. Layne, and D. T. Vaniman (1997), SIMS analyses of 
minor and trace element distributions in fracture calcite from Yucca Mountain, 
Nevada, USA, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 61(9), 18031818, doi:10.1016/S0016-
7037(97)00049-5. 
De Pascale, G. P., and R. M. Langridge (2012), New on-fault evidence for a great earthquake 
in A.D. 1717, central alpine fault, New Zealand, Geology, 40(9), 791794, 
doi:10.1130/G33363.1. 
De Paola, N. (2013), Nano-powder coating can make fault surfaces smooth and shiny: 
implications for fault mechanics?, Geology, 41(6), 719720. 
De Paola, N., T. Hirose, T. Mitchell, G. Di Toro, C. Viti, and T. Shimamoto (2011), Fault 
lubrication and earthquake propagation in thermally unstable rocks, Geology, 39(1), 
3538, doi:10.1130/G31398.1. 
Dieterich, J. H. (1978), Time-dependent friction and the mechanics of stick-slip, pure Appl. 
Geophys., 116(4), 790806, doi:10.1007/BF00876539. 
Dieterich, J. H. (1979), Modeling of rock friction: 1. Experimental results and constitutive 
equations, J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth, 84(B5), 21612168, 
doi:10.1029/JB084iB05p02161. 
Di Toro, G., and G. Pennacchioni (2004), Superheated friction-induced melts in zoned 
pseudotachylytes within the Adamello tonalites (Italian Southern Alps), J. Struct. Geol., 
26(10), 17831801, doi:10.1016/j.jsg.2004.03.001. 
Di Toro, G., D. L. Goldsby, and T. E. Tullis (2004), Friction falls towards zero in quartz rock as 
slip velocity approaches seismic rates, Nature, 427(6973), 436439. 
Di Toro, G., G. Pennacchioni, and G. Teza (2005), Can pseudotachylytes be used to infer 
earthquake source parameters? An example of limitations in the study of exhumed 
faults, Tectonophysics, 402(14 SPEC. ISS), 320, doi:10.1016/j.tecto.2004.10.014. 
Di Toro, G., G. Pennacchioni, and S. Nielsen (2009), Pseudotachylytes and earthquake 
source mechanics, 1st ed., Elsevier Inc. 
Di Toro, G., R. Han, T. Hirose, N. De Paola, S. Nielsen, K. Mizoguchi, F. Ferri, M. Cocco, and T. 
Shimamoto (2011), Fault lubrication during earthquakes, Nature, 471(7339), 494498, 
doi:10.1038/nature09838. 
Dixon, J. E., and T. H. Dixon (1989), Vesicles, amygdales and similar structures in fault-
generated pseudotachylites - comment, Lithos, 23(3), 225227, doi:10.1016/0024-
4937(89)90007-8. 
Dromgoole, E. L., and L. M. Walter (1990), Iron and manganese incorporation into calcite: 
Effects of growth kinetics, temperature and solution chemistry, Chem. Geol., 81(4), 
311336, doi:10.1016/0009-2541(90)90053-A. 
Eberhart-Phillips, D., and S. Bannister (2002), Three-dimensional crustal structure in the 
Southern Alps region of New Zealand from inversion of local earthquake and active 
source data, J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth, 107(B10), ESE 15-1-ESE 15-20, 
doi:10.1029/2001JB000567. 
EberhartPhillips, D. (1995), Examination of seismicity in the central Alpine Fault region, 
South Island, New Zealand, New Zeal. J. Geol. Geophys., 38(4), 571578, 
doi:10.1080/00288306.1995.9514685. 
Eccles, J. D., A. K. Gulley, P. E. Malin, C. M. Boese, J. Townend, and R. Sutherland (2015), 
Fault Zone Guided Wave generation on the locked, late interseismic Alpine Fault, New 
Zealand, Geophys. Res. Lett., 42(14), 57365743, doi:10.1002/2015GL064208. 
Eisenman, G. (1962), Cation Selective Glass Electrodes and their Mode of Operation, 
Biophys. J., 2(2), 259323, doi:10.1016/S0006-3495(62)86959-8. 
Evans, J. P., and F. M. Chester (1995), Fluid-rock interaction in faults of the San Andreas 
system: Inferences from San Gabriel fault rock geochemistry and microstructures, J. 
Geophys. Res. Solid Earth, 100(B7), 1300713020, doi:10.1029/94JB02625. 
Evans, J. P., C. B. Forster, and J. V Goddard (1997), Permeability of fault-related rocks, and 
implications for hydraulic structure of fault zones, J. Struct. Geol., 19(11), 13931404, 
doi:10.1016/S0191-8141(97)00057-6. 
Farrell, N. J. C., D. Healy, and C. W. Taylor (2014), Anisotropy of permeability in faulted 
porous sandstones, J. Struct. Geol., 63, 5067, doi:10.1016/j.jsg.2014.02.008. 
Faulkner, D. R., and P. J. Armitage (2013), The effect of tectonic environment on 
permeability development around faults and in the brittle crust. 
Faulkner, D. R., and E. H. Rutter (1998), The gas permeability of clay-bearing fault gouge at 
20C, Geol. Soc. London, Spec. Publ. , 147(1), 147156, 
doi:10.1144/GSL.SP.1998.147.01.10. 
Faulkner, D. R., and E. H. Rutter (2000), Comparisons of water and argon permeability in 
natural clay-bearing fault gouge under high pressure at 20C, J. Geophys. Res. Solid 
Earth, 105(B7), 1641516426, doi:10.1029/2000JB900134. 
Faulkner, D. R., A. Lewis, and E. H. Rutter (2003), On the internal structure and mechanics of 
large strike-slip fault zones: field observations of the Carboneras fault in southeastern 
Spain, Tectonophysics, 367(3), 235251, doi:10.1016/S0040-1951(03)00134-3. 
Faulkner, D. R., T. M. Mitchell, E. H. Rutter, and J. Cembrano (2008), On the structure and 
mechanical properties of large strike-slip faults, Geol. Soc. London, Spec. Publ. , 299(1), 
139150, doi:10.1144/SP299.9. 
Faulkner, D. R., C. A. L. Jackson, R. J. Lunn, R. W. Schlische, Z. K. Shipton, C. A. J. Wibberley, 
and M. O. Withjack (2010), A review of recent developments concerning the structure, 
mechanics and fluid flow properties of fault zones, J. Struct. Geol., 32(11), 15571575, 
doi:10.1016/j.jsg.2010.06.009. 
Faulkner, D. R., T. M. Mitchell, J. Behnsen, T. Hirose, and T. Shimamoto (2011), Stuck in the 
mud? Earthquake nucleation and propagation through accretionary forearcs, 
Geophys. Res. Lett., 38(18), n/a-n/a, doi:10.1029/2011GL048552. 
Faulkner D.R. (1997), The role of clay-bearing fault gouges in controlling fluid pressures in 
fault zones: implications for fault mechanics, University of Manchester. 
Ferri, F., G. Di Toro, T. Hirose, and T. Shimamoto (2010), Evidence of thermal pressurization 
in high-velocity friction experiments on smectite-rich gouges, Terra Nov., 22(5), 347
353, doi:10.1111/j.1365-3121.2010.00955.x. 
Ferri, F., G. Di Toro, T. Hirose, R. Han, H. Noda, T. Shimamoto, M. Quaresimin, and N. de 
Rossi (2011), Low- to high-velocity frictional properties of the clay-rich gouges from 
the slipping zone of the 1963 Vaiont slide, northern Italy, J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth, 
116(B9), n/a-n/a, doi:10.1029/2011JB008338. 
Ferrill, D. A., A. P. Morris, M. A. Evans, M. Burkhard, R. H. Groshong, and C. M. Onasch 
(2004), Calcite twin morphology: A low-temperature deformation geothermometer, J. 
Struct. Geol., 26(8), 15211529, doi:10.1016/j.jsg.2003.11.028. 
Finch, A. A., and J. Klein (1999), The causes and petrological significance of 
cathodoluminescence emissions from alkali feldspars, Contrib. to Mineral. Petrol., 
135(2), 234243, doi:10.1007/s004100050509. 
Folk, R. L. (1974), The natural history of crystalline calcium carbonate; effect of magnesium 
content and salinity, J. Sediment. Res., 44(1), 4053. 
Fortin, J., S. Stanchits, S. Vinciguerra, and Y. Guguen (2011), Influence of thermal and 
mechanical cracks on permeability and elastic wave velocities in a basalt from Mt. 
Etna volcano subjected to elevated pressure, Tectonophysics, 503(12), 6074, 
doi:10.1016/j.tecto.2010.09.028. 
Fritzke, B., J. Gtze, and J.-M. Lange (2017), Cathodoluminescence of moldavites, Meteorit. 
Planet. Sci., 52(7), 14281436, doi:10.1111/maps.12852. 
Fulton, P., E. Brodsky, Y. Kano, J. Mori, F. Chester, T. Ishikawa, R. Harris, W. Lin, N. Eguchi, 
and S. Toczko (2013), Low Coseismic Friction on the, Science (80-. )., (December), 
12141217, doi:10.1126/science.1243641. 
Fulton, P. M., D. M. Saffer, R. N. Harris, and B. A. Bekins (2004), Re-evaluation of heat flow 
data near Parkfield, CA: Evidence for a weak San Andreas Fault, Geophys. Res. Lett., 
31(15), n/a-n/a, doi:10.1029/2003GL019378. 
Goldsby, D. L., and T. E. Tullis (2002), Low frictional strength of quartz rocks at subseismic 
slip rates, Geophys. Res. Lett., 29(17), 25-1-254, doi:10.1029/2002GL015240. 
Goldstein, J. I., D. E. Newbury, P. Echlin, D. C. Joy, C. E. Lyman, E. Lifshin, L. Sawyer, and J. R. 
Michael (2003), Scanning Electron Microscopy and X-ray Microanalysis, Springer US, 
Boston, MA. 
Gomila, R., G. Arancibia, T. M. Mitchell, J. M. Cembrano, and D. R. Faulkner (2016), 
Palaeopermeability structure within fault-damage zones: A snap-shot from 
microfracture analyses in a strike-slip system, J. Struct. Geol., 83, 103120, 
doi:10.1016/j.jsg.2015.12.002. 
Gtze, J., and U. Kempe (2009), Physical Principles of Cathodoluminescence (CL) and its 
Applications in Geosciences, in Cathodoluminescence and its Application in the 
Planetary Sciences, edited by A. Gucsik, pp. 122, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, 
Heidelberg. 
Gtze, J., M. R. Krbetschek, D. Habermann, and D. Wolf (2000), High-Resolution 
Cathodoluminescence Studies of Feldspar Minerals, in Cathodoluminescence in 
Geosciences, edited by M. Pagel, V. Barbin, P. Blanc, and D. Ohnenstetter, pp. 245
270, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg. 
Graham, C. M., J. W. Valley, J. M. Eiler, and H. Wada (1998), Timescales and mechanisms of 
fluid infiltration in a marble:  an ion microprobe study, Contrib. to Mineral. Petrol., 
132(4), 371389, doi:10.1007/s004100050430. 
Grapes, R., and T. Watanabe (1992), Metamorphism and uplift of Alpine schist in the Franz 
JosefFox Glacier area of the Southern Alps, New Zealand, J. Metamorph. Geol., 10(2), 
171180, doi:10.1111/j.1525-1314.1992.tb00077.x. 
Grapes, R., and T. Watanabe (1994), Mineral composition variation in Alpine Schist, 
Southern Alps, New Zealand: Implications for recrystallization and exhumation, Isl. 
Arc, 3(3), 163181, doi:10.1111/j.1440-1738.1994.tb00105.x. 
Gratier, J. P., P. Favreau, F. Renard, and E. Pili (2002), Fluid pressure evolution during the 
earthquake cycle controlled by fluid flow and pressure solution crack sealing, Earth, 
Planets Sp., 54(11), 11391146, doi:10.1186/BF03353315. 
Green, H. W., and H. Houston (1995), The Mechanics of Deep Earthquakes, Annu. Rev. Earth 
Planet. Sci., 23(1), 169213, doi:doi:10.1146/annurev.ea.23.050195.001125. 
Green II, H. W., and P. C. Burnley (1989), A new self-organizing mechanism for deep-focus 
earthquakes, Nature, 341(6244), 733737. 
Green II, H. W., F. Shi, K. Bozhilov, G. Xia, and Z. Reches (2015), Phase transformation and 
nanometric flow cause extreme weakening during fault slip, Nat. Geosci., 8(6), 484
489, doi:10.1038/ngeo2436. 
Griffith, A. A. (1921), The Phenomena of Rupture and Flow in Solids, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A 
Math. Phys. Eng. Sci., 221(582593), 163198, doi:10.1098/rsta.1921.0006. 
Griffiths, L., M. J. Heap, F. Wang, D. Daval, H. A. Gilg, P. Baud, J. Schmittbuhl, and A. Genter 
(2016), Geothermal implications for fracture-filling hydrothermal precipitation, 
Geothermics, 64, 235245, doi:10.1016/j.geothermics.2016.06.006. 
Guguen, Y., and J. Sarout (2011), Characteristics of anisotropy and dispersion in cracked 
medium, Tectonophysics, 503(1), 165172, doi:10.1016/j.tecto.2010.09.021. 
Hadizadeh, J., S. Mittempergher, J. P. Gratier, F. Renard, G. Di Toro, J. Richard, and H. A. 
Babaie (2012), A microstructural study of fault rocks from the SAFOD: Implications for 
the deformation mechanisms and strength of the creeping segment of the San 
Andreas Fault, J. Struct. Geol., 42, 246260, doi:10.1016/j.jsg.2012.04.011. 
Han, R., and T. Hirose (2012), Clayclast aggregates in fault gouge: An unequivocal indicator 
of seismic faulting at shallow depths?, J. Struct. Geol., 43, 9299, 
doi:10.1016/j.jsg.2012.07.008. 
Han, R., T. Shimamoto, J. Ando, and J.-H. Ree (2007a), Seismic slip record in carbonate-
bearing fault zones: An insight from high-velocity friction experiments on siderite 
gouge, Geology, 35(12), 11311134. 
Han, R., T. Shimamoto, T. Hirose, J.-H. Ree, and J. Ando (2007b), Ultralow Friction of 
Carbonate Faults Caused by Thermal Decomposition, Science (80-. )., 316(5826), 878
Han, R., T. Hirose, T. Shimamoto, Y. Lee, and J. Ando (2011), Granular nanoparticles 
lubricate faults during seismic slip, Geology, 39(6), 599602. 
Hayward, K. S., and S. F. Cox (2017), Stress-driven versus fluid-driven slip: using experiments 
to explore differences in modes of earthquake rupture, in Deformation Mechanisms, 
Rheology and Tectonics - DRT 2017, p. 63, Inverness, Scotland. 
Hickmott, D. D., B. E. Treves, G. T. Roselle, and L. P. Baumgartner (1997), Micro-PIXE 
analysis of carbonates and silicates: Tracking fluid flow in crustal environments, Nucl. 
Instruments Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B Beam Interact. with Mater. Atoms, 130(1), 
660665, doi:10.1016/S0168-583X(97)00262-0. 
Hilgers, C., and S. Sindern (2005), Textural and isotopic evidence on the fluid source and 
transport mechanism of antitaxial fibrous microstructures from the Alps and the 
Appalachians, Geofluids, 5(4), 239250, doi:10.1111/j.1468-8123.2005.00114.x. 
Hilgers, C., K. Dilg-Gruschinski, and J. L. Urai (2004), Microstructural evolution of syntaxial 
veins formed by advective flow, Geol. , 32(3), 261264, doi:10.1130/G20024.1. 
Hinton, R. W. (1995), Microprobe Techniques in the Earth Sciences, edited by P. J. Potts, J. 
F. W. Bowles, S. J. B. Reed, and M. R. Cave, pp. 235289, Springer US, Boston, MA. 
Hirose, T., and T. Shimamoto (2003), Fractal dimension of molten surfaces as a possible 
parameter to infer the slip-weakening distance of faults from natural 
pseudotachylytes, J. Struct. Geol., 25(10), 15691574, doi:10.1016/S0191-
8141(03)00009-9. 
Hirose, T., and T. Shimamoto (2005), Growth of molten zone as a mechanism of slip 
weakening of simulated faults in gabbro during frictional melting, J. Geophys. Res. 
Solid Earth, 110(B5), n/a-n/a, doi:10.1029/2004JB003207. 
Hoffmann-Rothe, A., O. Ritter, and C. Janssen (2004), Correlation of electrical conductivity 
and structural damage at a major strike-slip fault in northern Chile, J. Geophys. Res. B 
Solid Earth, 109(10), doi:10.1029/2004JB003030. 
Holdsworth, R. E. (2004), Weak Faults-Rotten Cores, Science (80-. )., 303(5655), 181182, 
doi:10.1126/science.1092491. 
Holm, D. K., R. J. Norris, and D. Craw (1989), Brittle and ductile deformation in a zone of 
rapid uplift: Central Southern Alps, New Zealand, Tectonics, 8(2), 153168, 
doi:10.1029/TC008i002p00153. 
Howarth, J. D., S. J. Fitzsimons, R. J. Norris, R. Langridge, and M. J. Vandergoes (2016), A 
2000 yr rupture history for the Alpine fault derived from Lake Ellery, South Island, 
New Zealand, Bull. Geol. Soc. Am., 128(34), 627643, doi:10.1130/B31300.1. 
Imber, J., R. E. Holdsworth, C. A. Butler, and R. A. Strachan (2001), A reappraisal of the 
Sibson-Scholz fault zone model: The nature of the frictional to viscous (brittle-
ductile) transition along a long-lived, crustal-scale fault, Outer Hebrides, Scotland, 
Tectonics, 20(5), 601624, doi:10.1029/2000TC001250. 
Inoue, A., and M. Utada (1991), Smectite-to-chlorite transformation in thermally 
metamorphosed volcanoclastic rocks in the Kamikita area, northern Honshu, Japan, 
Am. Mineral., 76(34), 628640. 
Irwin, G. R. (1957), Analysis of Stresses and Strains Near the End of a Crack Traversing a 
Plate, J. Appl. Mech. 
Jaeger, J. C., N. G. W. Cook, and R. Zimmerman (2007), Fundamentals of rock mechanics, 
fourth edi., Wiley-Blackwell, London. 
Janssen, C., R. Wirth, H. R. Wenk, L. Morales, R. Naumann, M. Kienast, S. R. Song, and G. 
Dresen (2014), Faulting processes in active faults - Evidences from TCDP and SAFOD 
drill core samples, J. Struct. Geol., 65, 100116, doi:10.1016/j.jsg.2014.04.004. 
Jenkin, G. R. T., D. Craw, and A. E. Fallick (1994), Stable isotopic and fluid inclusion evidence 
for meteoric fluid penetration into an active mountain belt; Alpine Schist, New 
Zealand, J. Metamorph. Geol., 12(4), 429444, doi:10.1111/j.1525-
1314.1994.tb00033.x. 
Jeppson, T. N., and H. J. Tobin (2015), San Andreas fault zone velocity structure at SAFOD at 
core, log, and seismic scales, J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth, 120(7), 49834997, 
doi:10.1002/2015JB012043. 
Jeppson, T. N., K. K. Bradbury, and J. P. Evans (2010), Geophysical properties within the San 
Andreas Fault Zone at the San Andreas Fault Observatory at Depth and their 
relationships to rock properties and fault zone structure, J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth, 
115(12), 120, doi:10.1029/2010JB007563. 
John, T., S. Medvedev, L. H. Rpke, T. B. Andersen, Y. Y. Podladchikov, and H. Austrheim 
(2009), Generation of intermediate-depth earthquakes by self-localizing thermal 
runaway, Nat. Geosci., 2, 137. 
Jolliffe, I. T. (2002), Principal Component Analysis, Springer Series in Statistics, 2nd ed., 
Springer-Verlag, New York. 
Karalliyadda, S. C., and M. K. Savage (2013), Seismic anisotropy and lithospheric 
deformation of the plate-boundary zone in South Island, New Zealand: inferences 
from local S-wave splitting, Geophys. J. Int., 193(2), 507530, doi:10.1093/gji/ggt022. 
Karner, S. L., and C. Marone (2000), Effects of Loading Rate and Normal Stress on Stress 
Drop and Stick-Slip Recurrence Interval, in Geocomplexity and the Physics of 
Earthquakes, pp. 187198, American Geophysical Union. 
Kasemann, S. A., D. N. Schmidt, J. Bijma, and G. L. Foster (2009), In situ boron isotope 
analysis in marine carbonates and its application for foraminifera and palaeo-pH, 
Chem. Geol., 260(12), 138147, doi:10.1016/j.chemgeo.2008.12.015. 
Katz, D. A., G. P. Eberli, P. K. Swart, and L. B. Smith (2006), Tectonic-hydrothermal 
brecciation associated with calcite precipitation and permeability destruction in 
Mississippian carbonate reservoirs, Montana and Wyoming, Am. Assoc. Pet. Geol. 
Bull., 90(11), 18031841, doi:10.1306/03200605072. 
Kayama, M., S. Nakano, and H. Nishido (2010), Characteristics of emission centers in alkali 
feldspar: A new approach by using cathodoluminescence spectral deconvolution, Am. 
Mineral., 95(1112), 17831795. 
Kelly, C. M., A. Rietbrock, D. R. Faulkner, and R. M. Nadeau (2013), Temporal changes in 
attenuation associated with the 2004 M6.0 Parkfield earthquake, J. Geophys. Res. 
Solid Earth, 118(2), 630645, doi:10.1002/jgrb.50088. 
Kelly, C. M., D. R. Faulkner, and A. Rietbrock (2017), Seismically invisible fault zones: 
Laboratory insights into imaging faults in anisotropic rocks, Geophys. Res. Lett., n/a-
n/a, doi:10.1002/2017GL073726. 
Ketcham, R. A., and W. D. Carlson (2001), Acquisition, optimization and interpretation of X-
ray computed tomographic imagery: applications to the geosciences, Comput. Geosci., 
27(4), 381400, doi:10.1016/S0098-3004(00)00116-3. 
Kilian, R., M. Bestmann, and R. Heilbronner (2016), Absolute orientations from EBSD 
measurements - as easy as it seems?, , 18, 8221. 
Kim, Y. S., D. C. P. Peacock, and D. J. Sanderson (2004), Fault damage zones, J. Struct. Geol., 
26(3), 503517, doi:10.1016/j.jsg.2003.08.002. 
Kirby, S. (1995), Interslab earthquakes and phase changes in subducting lithosphere, Rev. 
Geophys., 33(S1), 287297, doi:10.1029/95RG00353. 
Kirkpatrick, J. D., and C. D. Rowe (2013), Disappearing ink: How pseudotachylytes are lost 
from the rock record, J. Struct. Geol., 52(1), 183198, doi:10.1016/j.jsg.2013.03.003. 
Kirkpatrick, J. D., C. D. Rowe, J. C. White, and E. E. Brodsky (2013), Silica gel formation 
during fault slip: Evidence from the rock record, Geology, 41(9), 10151018. 
Kitagawa, Y., and Y. Kano (2016), Changes in permeability of the Nojima fault damage zone 
inferred from repeated water injection experiments, Earth, Planets Sp., 68(1), 185. 
Kitagawa, Y., K. Fujimori, and N. Koizumi (2007), Temporal change in permeability of the 
Nojima fault zone by repeated water injection experiments, Tectonophysics, 443(34), 
183192, doi:10.1016/j.tecto.2007.01.012. 
Kohlstedt, D. L., B. Evans, and S. J. Mackwell (1995), Strength of the lithosphere: Constraints 
imposed by laboratory experiments, J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth, 100(B9), 17587
17602, doi:10.1029/95JB01460. 
Koons, P. O. (1987), Some thermal and mechanical consequences of rapid uplift: an 
example from the Southern Alps, New Zealand, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 86(2), 307319, 
doi:10.1016/0012-821X(87)90228-7. 
Koons, P. O., and D. Craw (1991), Evolution of fluid driving forces and composition within 
collisional orogens, Geophys. Res. Lett., 18(5), 935938, doi:10.1029/91GL00910. 
Koons, P. O., D. Craw, S. C. Cox, P. Upton, A. S. Templeton, and C. P. Chamberlain (1998), 
Fluid flow during active oblique convergence: A Southern Alps model from mechanical 
and geochemical observations, Geology, 26(2), 159162. 
Krbetschek, M. R., J. Gtze, A. Dietrich, and T. Trautmann (1997), Spectral information from 
minerals relevant for luminescence dating, Radiat. Meas., 27(5), 695748, 
doi:10.1016/S1350-4487(97)00223-0. 
Kronenberg, A. K., and J. Tullis (1984), Flow strengths of quartz aggregates: Grain size and 
pressure effects due to hydrolytic weakening, J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth, 89(B6), 
42814297, doi:10.1029/JB089iB06p04281. 
Lachenbruch, A. H. (1980), Frictional heating, fluid pressure, and the resistance to fault 
motion, J. Geophys. Res., 85(B11), 6097, doi:10.1029/JB085iB11p06097. 
Lahann, R. W. (1978), A chemical model for calcite crystal growth and morphology control, 
J. Sediment. Res., 48(1), 337347. 
Lamb, S., and E. Smith (2013), The nature of the plate interface and driving force of 
interseismic deformation in the New Zealand plate-boundary zone, revealed by the 
continuous GPS velocity field, J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth, 118(6), 31603189, 
doi:10.1002/jgrb.50221. 
Lamb, S., E. Smith, T. Stern, and E. Warren-Smith (2015), Continent-scale strike-slip on a 
low-angle fault beneath New Zealands Southern Alps: Implications for crustal 
thickening in oblique collision zones, Geochemistry, Geophys. Geosystems, 16(9), 
30763096, doi:10.1002/2015GC005990. 
Lamb, S., N. Mortimer, E. Smith, and G. Turner (2016), Focusing of relative plate motion at a 
continental transform fault: Cenozoic dextral displacement &gt;700 km on New 
Zealands Alpine Fault, reversing &gt;225 km of Late Cretaceous sinistral motion, 
Geochemistry, Geophys. Geosystems, 17(3), 11971213, doi:10.1002/2015GC006225. 
Langridge, R. M., R. Basili, L. Basher, and A. P. Wells (2012), Late Holocene landscape 
change history related to the Alpine Fault determined from drowned forests in Lake 
Poerua, Westland, New Zealand, Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci., 12(6), 20512064, 
doi:10.5194/nhess-12-2051-2012. 
Langridge, R. M., W. F. Ries, T. Farrier, N. C. Barth, N. Khajavi, and G. P. De Pascale (2014), 
Developing sub 5-m LiDAR DEMs for forested sections of the Alpine and Hope faults, 
South Island, New Zealand: Implications for structural interpretations, J. Struct. Geol., 
64, 5366, doi:10.1016/j.jsg.2013.11.007. 
Lay, V., S. Buske, A. Lukcs, A. R. Gorman, S. Bannister, and D. R. Schmitt (2016), Advanced 
seismic imaging techniques characterize the Alpine Fault at Whataroa (New Zealand), 
J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth, 121(12), 87928812, doi:10.1002/2016JB013534. 
Leclre, H., F. Cappa, D. Faulkner, O. Fabbri, P. Armitage, and O. Blake (2015), Development 
and maintenance of fluid overpressures in crustal fault zones by elastic compaction 
and implications for earthquake swarms, J. Geophys. Res.  Solid Earth, 120, 4450
4473, doi:10.1002/2014JB011759. 
Lee, M. R., I. Parsons, P. R. Edwards, and R. W. Martin (2007), Identification of 
cathodoluminescence activators in zoned alkali feldspars by hyperspectral imaging 
and electron-probe microanalysis, Am. Mineral., 92(23), 243253. 
Lee, Y.-J., D. V. Wiltschko, E. L. Grossman, J. W. Morse, and W. M. Lamb (1997), Sequential 
vein growth with fault displacement: An example from the Austin Chalk Formation, 
Texas, J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth, 102(B10), 2261122628, doi:10.1029/97JB01945. 
Lee, Y. J., and J. W. Morse (1999), Calcite precipitation in synthetic veins: Implications for 
the time and fluid volume necessary for vein filling, Chem. Geol., 156(14), 151170, 
doi:10.1016/S0009-2541(98)00183-1. 
Leeman, J., M. M. Scuderi, C. Marone, and D. Saffer (2015), Stiffness evolution of granular 
layers and the origin of repetitive, slow, stick-slip frictional sliding, Granul. Matter, 
17(4), 447457, doi:10.1007/s10035-015-0565-1. 
Li, Y. G., W. L. Ellsworth, C. H. Thurber, P. E. Malin, and K. Aki (1997), Fault-zone guided 
waves from explosions in the San Andreas fault at Parkfield and Cienega Valley, 
California, Bull. Seismol. Soc. Am., 87(1), 210221. 
Li, Y. G., J. E. Vidale, and E. S. Cochran (2004), Low-velocity damaged structure of the San 
Andreas Fault at Parkfield from fault zone trapped waves, Geophys. Res. Lett., 31(12), 
doi:10.1029/2003GL019044. 
Lin, A. (1997), Injection veins of crushing-originated pseudotachylyte and fault gouge 
formed during seismic faulting, in Developments in Geotechnical Engineering, vol. 81, 
pp. 163179. 
Lin, A. (1999), Roundness of clasts in pseudotachylytes and cataclastic rocks as an indicator 
of frictional melting, J. Struct. Geol., 21(5), 473478, doi:10.1016/S0191-
8141(99)00030-9. 
Little, T. A., and N. Mortimer (2001), Rotation of ductile fabrics across the Alpine Fault and 
Cenozoic bending of the New Zealand orocline, J. Geol. Soc. London., 158(5), 745756, 
doi:10.1144/jgs.158.5.745. 
Little, T. A., R. J. Holcombe, and B. R. Ilg (2002a), Ductile fabrics in the zone of active oblique 
convergence near the Alpine Fault, New Zealand: identifying the neotectonic 
overprint, J. Struct. Geol., 24(1), 193217, doi:10.1016/S0191-8141(01)00059-1. 
Little, T. A., R. J. Holcombe, and B. R. Ilg (2002b), Kinematics of oblique collision and 
ramping inferred from microstructures and strain in middle crustal rocks, Central 
Southern Alps, New Zealand, J. Struct. Geol., 24(1), 219239, doi:10.1016/S0191-
8141(01)00060-8. 
Little, T. A., D. J. Prior, V. G. Toy, and Z. R. Lindroos (2015), The link between strength of 
lattice preferred orientation, second phase content and grain boundary migration: A 
case study from the Alpine Fault zone, New Zealand, J. Struct. Geol., 81, 5977, 
doi:10.1016/j.jsg.2015.09.004. 
Little, T. A., D. J. Prior, and V. G. Toy (2016), Are quartz LPOs predictably oriented with 
respect to the shear zone boundary?: A test from the Alpine Fault mylonites, New 
Zealand, Geochemistry, Geophys. Geosystems, 17(3), 981999, 
doi:10.1002/2015GC006145. 
Long, J. V. P., and S. O. Agrell (1965), The cathodoluminescence of minerals in thin section., 
Mineral. Mag., 34, 318326. 
Lund Snee, J.-E., V. G. Toy, and K. Gessner (2014), Significance of brittle deformation in the 
footwall of the Alpine Fault, New Zealand: Smithy Creek Fault zone, J. Struct. Geol., 64, 
7998, doi:10.1016/j.jsg.2013.06.002. 
Ma, K.-F. et al. (2006), Slip zone and energetics of a large earthquake from the Taiwan 
Chelungpu-fault Drilling Project, Nature, 444(7118), 473476. 
MacRae, C. M., and N. C. Wilson (2008), Luminescence database I - Minerals and materials, 
Microsc. Microanal., 14(2), 184204, doi:10.1017/S143192760808029X. 
Madariaga, R., K. Olsen, and R. Archuleta (1998), Modeling dynamic rupture in a 3D 
earthquake fault model, Bull. Seismol. Soc. Am., 88(5), 11821197. 
Maddock, R. H., J. Grocott, and M. Van Nes (1987), Vesicles, amygdales and similar 
structures in fault-generated pseudotachylytes, Lithos, 20(5), 419432, 
doi:10.1016/0024-4937(87)90019-3. 
Magloughlin, J. F. (1992), Microstructural and chemical changes associated with cataclasis 
and frictional melting at shallow crustal levels: the cataclasite-pseudotachylyte 
connection, Tectonophysics, 204(34), 243260, doi:10.1016/0040-1951(92)90310-3. 
Magloughlin, J. F., and J. G. Spray (1992), Frictional melting processes and products in 
geological materials: introduction and discussion, Tectonophysics, 204(34), 197204, 
doi:10.1016/0040-1951(92)90307-R. 
Mainprice, D., and M. Humbert (1994), Methods of calculating petrophysical properties 
from lattice preferred orientation data, Surv. Geophys., 15(5), 575592, 
doi:10.1007/BF00690175. 
Marfunin, A. S. (1979), Luminescence, in Spectroscopy, Luminescence and Radiation Centers 
in Minerals, pp. 141222, Springer-Verlag, Berlin. 
Mariani, E., and E. Ghassemieh (2010), Microstructure evolution of 6061 O Al alloy during 
ultrasonic consolidation: An insight from electron backscatter diffraction, Acta Mater., 
58(7), 24922503, doi:10.1016/j.actamat.2009.12.035. 
Marone, C. (1998), Laboratory-derived friction laws and their application to seismic faulting, 
Annu. Rev. Earth Planet. Sci., 26(1), 643696, doi:10.1146/annurev.earth.26.1.643. 
Marshall, D. J. (Donald J. ., and A. N. Mariano (1988), Cathodoluminescence of geological 
materials, Unwin Hyman. 
Marshall, J. D. (1991), Cathodoluminescence of geological materials, Geol. J., 26(4), 351
351, doi:10.1002/gj.3350260409. 
Maskenskaya, O. M., H. Drake, C. Broman, J. K. Hogmalm, G. Czuppon, and M. E. strm 
(2014), Source and character of syntaxial hydrothermal calcite veins in 
Paleoproterozoic crystalline rocks revealed by fine-scale investigations, Geofluids, 
14(4), 495511, doi:10.1111/gfl.12092. 
McKenzie, D. P., and J. Brune (1972), Melting on fault planes during large earthquakes, 
Geophys. J. R. A .S., 29, 6578. 
McNamara, D. D., A. Lister, and D. J. Prior (2016), Calcite sealing in a fractured geothermal 
reservoir: Insights from combined EBSD and chemistry mapping, J. Volcanol. 
Geotherm. Res., 323, 3852, doi:10.1016/j.jvolgeores.2016.04.042. 
Meneghini, F., G. Di Toro, C. D. Rowe, J. C. Moore, A. Tsutsumi, and A. Yamaguchi (2010), 
Record of mega-earthquakes in subduction thrusts: The black fault rocks of Pasagshak 
Point (Kodiak Island, Alaska), GSA Bull., 122(78), 12801297. 
Menzies, C. D. (2012), Fluid Flow Associated with the Alpine Fault, South Island, New 
Zealand, University of Southampton. 
Menzies, C. D., D. A. H. Teagle, D. Craw, S. C. Cox, A. J. Boyce, C. D. Barrie, and S. Roberts 
(2014), Incursion of meteoric waters into the ductile regime in an active orogen, Earth 
Planet. Sci. Lett., 399, 113, doi:10.1016/j.epsl.2014.04.046. 
Menzies, C. D., D. A. H. Teagle, S. Niedermann, S. C. Cox, D. Craw, M. Zimmer, M. J. Cooper, 
and J. Erzinger (2016), The fluid budget of a continental plate boundary fault: 
Quantification from the Alpine Fault, New Zealand, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 445, 125
135, doi:10.1016/j.epsl.2016.03.046. 
Miller, S. A., C. Collettini, L. Chiaraluce, M. Cocco, M. Barchi, and B. J. P. Kaus (2004), 
Aftershocks driven by a high-pressure CO2 source at depth, Nature, 427(6976), 724
Mitchell, T. M., and D. R. Faulkner (2008), Experimental measurements of permeability 
evolution during triaxial compression of initially intact crystalline rocks and 
implications for fluid flow in fault zones, J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth, 113(11), 116, 
doi:10.1029/2008JB005588. 
Mitchell, T. M., and D. R. Faulkner (2009), The nature and origin of off-fault damage 
surrounding strike-slip fault zones with a wide range of displacements: A field study 
from the Atacama fault system, northern Chile, J. Struct. Geol., 31(8), 802816, 
doi:10.1016/j.jsg.2009.05.002. 
Mitchell, T. M., and D. R. Faulkner (2012), Towards quantifying the matrix permeability of 
fault damage zones in low porosity rocks, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 339340, 2431, 
doi:10.1016/j.epsl.2012.05.014. 
Mitchell, T. M., V. Toy, G. Di Toro, J. Renner, and R. H. Sibson (2016), Fault welding by 
pseudotachylyte formation, Geology, (12), G38373.1, doi:10.1130/G38373.1. 
Mithen, J. P., and R. P. Sear (2014), Computer simulation of epitaxial nucleation of a crystal 
on a crystalline surface, J. Chem. Phys., 140(8), 16, doi:10.1063/1.4866035. 
Mittempergher, S., G. Di Toro, J. P. Gratier, J. Hadizadeh, S. A. F. Smith, and R. Spiess (2011), 
Evidence of transient increases of fluid pressure in SAFOD phase III cores, Geophys. 
Res. Lett., 38(3), doi:10.1029/2010GL046129. 
Mizoguchi, K., T. Hirose, T. Shimamoto, and E. Fukuyama (2008), Internal structure and 
permeability of the Nojima fault, southwest Japan, J. Struct. Geol., 30(4), 513524, 
doi:10.1016/j.jsg.2007.12.002. 
Mller, P., V. Lders, J. Schrder, and J. Luck (1991), Element partitioning in calcite as a 
function of solution flow rate: a study on vein calcites from the Harz Mountains, 
Miner. Depos., 26(3), 175179, doi:10.1007/BF00209255. 
Mooney, W. D., Beroza, G. C., and Kind, R. (2009), Fault zones from top to bottom: a 
geophysical perspective, in Tectonic Faults: Agents of Change on a Dynamic Earth, vol. 
95, edited by H. M.R, H. G., and H. N., pp. 131133, Routledge. 
Mooney, W. D., and A. Ginzburg (1986), Seismic measurements of the internal properties of 
fault zones, Pure Appl. Geophys. PAGEOPH, 124(12), 141157, 
doi:10.1007/BF00875723. 
Morrow, C. A., D. A. Lockner, D. E. Moore, and S. Hickman (2014), Deep permeability of the 
San Andreas Fault from San Andreas Fault Observatory at Depth (SAFOD) core 
samples, J. Struct. Geol., 64, 99114, doi:10.1016/j.jsg.2013.09.009. 
Mortimer, N. (2000), Metamorphic discontinuities in orogenic belts: example of  the 
garnetbiotitealbite zone in the Otago Schist, New Zealand, Int. J. Earth Sci., 89(2), 
295306, doi:10.1007/s005310000086. 
Mortimer, N., and B. P. Roser (1992), Geochemical evidence for the position of the Caples
Torlesse boundary in the Otago Schist, New Zealand, J. Geol. Soc. London., 149(6), 
967977. 
Morton, N., G. H. Girty, and T. K. Rockwell (2012), Fault zone architecture of the San Jacinto 
fault zone in Horse Canyon, southern California: A model for focused post-seismic 
fluid flow and heat transfer in the shallow crust, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 329330, 71
83, doi:10.1016/j.epsl.2012.02.013. 
Muir, R. J., T. R. Ireland, S. D. Weaver, J. D. Bradshaw, J. A. Evans, G. N. Eby, and D. Shelley 
(1998), Geochronology and geochemistry of a Mesozoic magmatic arc system, 
Fiordland, New Zealand, J. Geol. Soc. London., 155(6), 10371053. 
Murrell, S. A. F. (1963), A criterion for brittle fracture of rocks and concrete under triaxial 
stress and the effect of pore pressure on the criterion, Rock Mech., 563577. 
Nara, Y., P. G. Meredith, T. Yoneda, and K. Kaneko (2011), Influence of macro-fractures and 
micro-fractures on permeability and elastic wave velocities in basalt at elevated 
pressure, Tectonophysics, 503(12), 5259, doi:10.1016/j.tecto.2010.09.027. 
Nielsen, S., G. Di Toro, T. Hirose, and T. Shimamoto (2008), Frictional melt and seismic slip, 
J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth, 113(1), 120, doi:10.1029/2007JB005122. 
Nishikawa, S., and S. Kikuchi (1928), Diffraction of Cathode Rays by Mica, Nature, 
121(3061), 10191020, doi:10.1038/1211019a0. 
Nollet, S., J. L. Urai, P. D. Bons, and C. Hilgers (2005), Numerical simulations of polycrystal 
growth in veins, J. Struct. Geol., 27(2), 217230, doi:10.1016/j.jsg.2004.10.003. 
Norris, R. J., and A. F. Cooper (2001), Late Quaternary slip rates and slip partitioning on the 
Alpine Fault, New Zealand, J. Struct. Geol., 23(23), 507520, doi:10.1016/S0191-
8141(00)00122-X. 
Norris, R. J., and A. F. Cooper (2003), Very high strains recorded in mylonites along the 
Alpine Fault, New Zealand: Implications for the deep structure of plate boundary 
faults, J. Struct. Geol., 25(12), 21412157, doi:10.1016/S0191-8141(03)00045-2. 
Norris, R. J., and A. F. Cooper (2007), The Alpine Fault, New Zealand: Surface Geology and 
Field Relationships, in A Continental Plate Boundary: Tectonics at South Island, New 
Zealand, edited by D. Okaya, T. A. Stern, and F. Davey, pp. 157175, American 
Geophysical Union. 
Norris, R. J., and V. G. Toy (2014), Continental transforms: A view from the Alpine Fault, J. 
Struct. Geol., 64, 331, doi:10.1016/j.jsg.2014.03.003. 
Okaya, D., N. Christensen, D. Stanley, T. Stern, South Island Geophysical Transect (, and S. I. 
G. T. (SIGHT) W. Group (1995), Crustal anisotropy in the vicinity of the Alpine Fault 
Zone, South Island, New Zealand, New Zeal. J. Geol. Geophys., 38(4), 579583, 
doi:10.1080/00288306.1995.9514686. 
Okaya, D. A., and N. I. Christensen (2002), Anisotropic effects of non-axial seismic wave 
propagation in foliated crustal rocks, Geophys. Res. Lett., 29(11), 1507, 
doi:10.1029/2001GL014285. 
Oliver, N. H. S. (1996), Review and classification of structural controls on fluid flow during 
regional metamorphism, J. Metamorph. Geol., 14(4), 477492, doi:10.1046/j.1525-
1314.1996.00347.x. 
Oliver, N. H. S., and P. D. Bons (2001), Mechanisms of fluid flow and fluidrock interaction 
in fossil metamorphic hydrothermal systems inferred from veinwallrock patterns, 
geometry and microstructure, Geofluids, 1(2), 137162, doi:10.1046/j.1468-
8123.2001.00013.x. 
Oomori, T., H. Kaneshima, Y. Maezato, and Y. Kitano (1987), Distribution coefficient of 
Mg2+ ions between calcite and solution at 1050C, Mar. Chem., 20(4), 327336, 
doi:10.1016/0304-4203(87)90066-1. 
Otsuki, K. (2003), Fluidization and melting of fault gouge during seismic slip: Identification in 
the Nojima fault zone and implications for focal earthquake mechanisms, J. Geophys. 
Res., 108(B4), 2192, doi:10.1029/2001JB001711. 
Pacchioni, G., L. Skuja, and D. . Griscom (2000), Defects in SiO2 and related dielectrics: 
Science and chemistry, in Defects in SiO2 and related dielectrics: Science and 
chemistry, p. 624, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht. 
Pagel, M., V. Barbin, P. Blanc, and D. Ohnenstetter (2000), Cathodoluminescence in 
Geosciences: An Introduction, in Cathodoluminescence in Geosciences, edited by M. 
Pagel, V. Barbin, P. Blanc, and D. Ohnenstetter, pp. 121, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 
Berlin, Heidelberg. 
Paquette, J., and R. J. Reeder (1995), Relationship between surface structure, growth 
mechanism, and trace element incorporation in calcite, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 
59(4), 735749, doi:10.1016/0016-7037(95)00004-J. 
Parsons, I., D. A. Steele, M. R. Lee, and C. W. Magee (2008), Titanium as a 
cathodoluminescence activator in alkali feldspars, Am. Mineral., 93(56), 875879. 
Passchier, C. W., and R. R. A. J. Trouw (2005), Microtectonics. 
Pec, M., H. Stnitz, R. Heilbronner, M. Drury, and C. de Capitani (2012), Origin of 
pseudotachylites in slow creep experiments, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 355, 299310, 
doi:10.1016/j.epsl.2012.09.004. 
Peng, Z., and Y. Ben-Zion (2006), Temporal changes of shallow seismic velocity around the 
Karadere-Dzce branch of the north Anatolian fault and strong ground motion, Pure 
Appl. Geophys., 163(23), 567600, doi:10.1007/s00024-005-0034-6. 
Phillips, W. J. (1972), Hydraulic fracturing and mineralization, J. Geol. Soc. London., 128(4), 
337359. 
Piazolo, S., D. J. Prior, and M. D. Holness (2005), The use of combined cathodoluminescence 
and EBSD analysis: a case study investigating grain boundary migration mechanisms in 
quartz, J. Microsc., 217(2), 152161, doi:10.1111/j.1365-2818.2005.01423.x. 
Platt, J. D., R. C. Viesca, and D. I. Garagash (2015), Steadily propagating slip pulses driven by 
thermal decomposition, J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth, 120(9), 65586591, 
doi:10.1002/2015JB012200. 
Poirier, J. P. (1985), Creep of crystals: High-temperature deformation processes in metals, 
ceramics and minerals, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge and New York. 
Pollard, D. D. (1976), On the form and stability of open hydraulic fractures in the Earths 
crust, Geophys. Res. Lett., 3(9), 513516, doi:10.1029/GL003i009p00513. 
Price, N. J., and J. W. Cosgrove (1990), Analysis of Geological Structures. 
Prieto, G. A., M. Florez, S. A. Barrett, G. C. Beroza, P. Pedraza, J. F. Blanco, and E. Poveda 
(2013), Seismic evidence for thermal runaway during intermediate-depth earthquake 
rupture, Geophys. Res. Lett., 40(23), 60646068, doi:10.1002/2013GL058109. 
Prior, D. J. (1988), Deformation processes in the Alpine Fault Mylonites, South Island, New 
Zealand, University of Leeds. 
Prior, D. J. et al. (1999), The application of electron backscatter diffraction and orientation 
contrast imaging in the SEM to textural problems in rocks, Am. Mineral., 84, 1741
1759. 
Prior, D. J., E. Mariani, and J. Wheeler (2009), EBSD in the Earth Sciences: Applications, 
Common Practice, and Challenges, edited by A. J. Schwartz, M. Kumar, B. L. Adams, 
and D. P. Field, pp. 345360, Springer US, Boston, MA. 
Putnis, A., and C. V. Putnis (2007), The mechanism of reequilibration of solids in the 
presence of a fluid phase, J. Solid State Chem., 180(5), 17831786, 
doi:10.1016/j.jssc.2007.03.023. 
Qian, G., Y. Li, and A. R. Gerson (2015), Applications of surface analytical techniques in Earth 
Sciences, Surf. Sci. Rep., 70(1), 83133, doi:10.1016/j.surfrep.2015.02.001. 
Ramsey, J., and M. Chester (2004), Hybrid fracture and the transition from extension 
fracture to shear fracture, Nature, 428, 6366, doi:10.1029/2001GL014320. 
Randle, V. (1992), Microtexture determination and its applications, Inst. Mater. 1992,, 174. 
Ray, S. K. (1999), Transformation of cataclastically deformed rocks to pseudotachylyte by 
pervasion of frictional melt: inferences from clast-size analysis, Tectonophysics, 
301(3), 283304, doi:10.1016/S0040-1951(98)00229-7. 
Reches, Z., and D. A. Lockner (2010), Fault weakening and earthquake instability by powder 
lubrication, Nature, 467(7314), 452455. 
Reed, J. J. (1964), Mylonites, cataclasites, and associated rocks along the Alpine fault, South 
Island, New Zealand, New Zeal. J. Geol. Geophys., 7(4), 645684, 
doi:10.1080/00288306.1964.10428124. 
Rempel, A. W., and J. R. Rice (2006), Thermal pressurization and onset of melting in fault 
zones, J. Geophys. Res., 111(B9), B09314, doi:10.1029/2006JB004314. 
Renard, F., J. P. Gratier, and B. Jamtveit (2000), Kinetics of crack-sealing, intergranular 
pressure solution, and compaction around active faults, J. Struct. Geol., 22(10), 1395
1407, doi:10.1016/S0191-8141(00)00064-X. 
Rhoades, D. A., and R. J. Van Dissen (2003), Estimates of the timevarying hazard of rupture 
of the Alpine Fault, New Zealand, allowing for uncertainties, New Zeal. J. Geol. 
Geophys., 46(4), 479488, doi:10.1080/00288306.2003.9515023. 
Rice, J. R. (2006), Heating and weakening of faults during earthquake slip, J. Geophys. Res. 
Solid Earth, 111(5), doi:10.1029/2005JB004006. 
Rice, J. R., and M. P. Cleary (1976), Some basic stress diffusion solutions for fluid-saturated 
elastic porous media with compressible constituents, Rev. Geophys., 14(2), 227241, 
doi:10.1029/RG014i002p00227. 
Rietbrock, A. (2001), P wave attenuation structure in the fault area of the 1995 Kobe 
earthquake, J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth, 106(B3), 41414154, 
doi:10.1029/2000JB900234. 
Rimstidt, J. D., A. Balog, and J. Webb (1998), Distribution of trace elements between 
carbonate minerals and aqueous solutions, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 62(11), 1851
1863, doi:10.1016/S0016-7037(98)00125-2. 
Rose, G. (1868), Ueber die im Kalkspath vorkommenden hohlen Canale., Abh. konigl. Akad. 
Wiss, 23, 5779. 
Rowe, C. D., J. C. Moore, F. Meneghini, and A. W. McKeirnan (2005), Large-scale 
pseudotachylytes and fluidized cataclasites from an ancient subduction thrust fault, 
Geology, 33(12), 937940, doi:10.1130/G21856.1. 
Rowe, K. J., and E. H. Rutter (1990), Palaeostress estimation using calcite twinning: 
experimental calibration and application to nature, J. Struct. Geol., 12(1), 117, 
doi:10.1016/0191-8141(90)90044-Y. 
Ruina, A. (1983), Slip instability and state variable friction laws, J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth, 
88(B12), 1035910370, doi:10.1029/JB088iB12p10359. 
Rutter, E. H. (1983), Pressure solution in nature, theory and experiment, J. Geol. Soc. 
London., 140(5), 725 LP-740. 
Rye, D. M., and H. J. Bradbury (1988), Fluid flow in the crust; an example from a Pyrenean 
thrust ramp, Am. J. Sci. , 288(3), 197235, doi:10.2475/ajs.288.3.197. 
Saffer, D. M., and C. Marone (2003), Comparison of smectite- and illite-rich gouge frictional 
properties: application to the updip limit of the seismogenic zone along subduction 
megathrusts, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 215(12), 219235, doi:10.1016/S0012-
821X(03)00424-2. 
Samuelson, J., D. Elsworth, and C. Marone (2009), Shear-induced dilatancy of fluid-
saturated faults: Experiment and theory, J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth, 114(12), 
doi:10.1029/2008JB006273. 
Sandstrm, B., and E. L. Tullborg (2009), Episodic fluid migration in the Fennoscandian 
Shield recorded by stable isotopes, rare earth elements and fluid inclusions in fracture 
minerals at Forsmark, Sweden, Chem. Geol., 266(34), 135151, 
doi:10.1016/j.chemgeo.2009.04.019. 
Sato, H., M. C. Fehler, and T. Maeda (2012), Seismic Wave Propagation and Scattering in the 
Heterogeneous Earth: Second Edition, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg. 
Scambelluri, M., G. Pennacchioni, and P. Philippot (1998), Salt-rich aqueous fluids formed 
during eclogitization of metabasites in the Alpine continental crust (Austroalpine Mt. 
Emilius unit, Italian western Alps), Lithos, 43(3), 151167, 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/S0024-4937(98)00011-5. 
Schleicher, A. M., R. Sutherland, J. Townend, V. G. Toy, and B. van der Pluijm (2015), Clay 
mineral formation and fabric development in the DFDP-1B borehole, central Alpine 
Fault, New Zealand, New Zeal. J. Geol. Geop., 58(1), 1321, 
doi:10.1080/00288306.2014.979841. 
Schmid, S., and M. Handy (1991), Towards a genetic classification of fault rocks: geological 
usage and tectonophysical implications, in Controversies in Modern Geology: Evolution 
of Geological Theories in Sedimentology, Earth History and Tectonics, edited by D. 
Mller, J. McKenzie, and H. Weissert, pp. 339361, London. 
Scholz, C. H. (1988), The brittle-plastic transition and the depth of seismic faulting, Geol. 
Rundschau, 77(1), 319328, doi:10.1007/BF01848693. 
Scholz, C. H. (2002), The Mechanics of Earthquakes and Faulting, second edi., University 
press, Cambridge. 
Segall, P., and J. R. Rice (1995), Dilatancy, compaction, and slip instability of a fluid-
infiltrated fault, J. Geophys. Res. Earth, 100(B11), 2215522171, 
doi:10.1029/95JB02403. 
Seward, D., and R. H. Sibson (1985), Fission-track age for a pseudotachylite from the Alpine 
Fault Zone, New Zealand, New Zeal. J. Geol. Geophys., 28(3), 553557, 
doi:10.1080/00288306.1985.10421207. 
Seward, G. G. E., D. J. Prior, J. Wheeler, S. Celotto, D. J. M. Halliday, R. S. Paden, and M. R. 
Tye (2002), High-temperature electron backscatter diffraction and scanning electron 
microscopy imaging techniques: in-situ investigations of dynamic processes., 
Scanning, 24(5), 23240, doi:10.1002/sca.4950240503. 
Seward, G. G. E., S. Celotto, D. J. Prior, J. Wheeler, and R. C. Pond (2004), In situ SEM-EBSD 
observations of the hcp to bcc phase transformation in commercially pure titanium, 
Acta Mater., 52(4), 821832, doi:10.1016/j.actamat.2003.10.049. 
Sharp, W. E. (1965), The deposition of hydrothermal quartz and calcite, Econ. Geol., 60(8), 
16351644. 
Shimamoto, T. (1989), The origin of S-C mylonites and a new fault-zone model, J. Struct. 
Geol., 11(1), 5164, doi:10.1016/0191-8141(89)90035-7. 
Shimamoto, T., and J. M. Logan (1981), Effects of simulated clay gouges on the sliding 
behavior of Tennessee sandston, Tectonophysics, 75(3), 243255, doi:10.1016/0040-
1951(81)90276-6. 
Shimamoto, T., and H. Nagahama (1992), An argument against the crush origin of 
pseudotachylytes based on the analysis of clast-size distribution, J. Struct. Geol., 14(8), 
9991006, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0191-8141(92)90031-Q. 
Sibson, R. H. (1973), Interactions between Temperature and Pore-Fluid Pressure during 
Earthquake Faulting and a Mechanism for Partial or Total Stress Relief, Nat. Phys. Sci., 
243(126), 6668, doi:10.1038/physci243066a0. 
Sibson, R. H. (1975), Generation of Pseudotachylyte by Ancient Seismic Faulting, Geophys. J. 
R. Astron. Soc., 43(3), 775794, doi:10.1111/j.1365-246X.1975.tb06195.x. 
Sibson, R. H. (1977), Fault rocks and fault mechanisms, J. Geol. Soc. London., 133(3), 191
213, doi:10.1144/gsjgs.133.3.0191. 
Sibson, R. H. (1986), Earthquakes and Rock Deformation in Crustal Fault Zones, Annu. Rev. 
Earth Planet. Sci., 14(1), 149175, doi:10.1146/annurev.ea.14.050186.001053. 
Sibson, R. H. (1990), Conditions for fault-valve behaviour, Geol. Soc. London, Spec. Publ. , 
54(1), 1528, doi:10.1144/GSL.SP.1990.054.01.02. 
Sibson, R. H. (2003), Thickness of the Seismic Slip Zone, Bull. Seismol. Soc. Am. , 93(3), 
11691178, doi:10.1785/0120020061. 
Sibson, R. H., and V. G. Toy (2006), The habitat of fault-generated pseudotachylyte: 
Presence vs. absence of friction-melt, , (Figure 1), 153166, doi:10.1029/170GM16. 
Sibson, R. H., J. M. M. Moore, and A. H. Rankin (1975), Seismic pumpinga hydrothermal 
fluid transport mechanism, J. Geol. Soc. London., 131(6), 653659. 
Sibson, R. H., S. H. White, and B. K. Atkinson (1981), Structure and distribution of fault rocks 
in the Alpine Fault Zone, New Zealand, Geol. Soc. London, Spec. Publ., 9(1), 197210, 
doi:10.1144/GSL.SP.1981.009.01.18. 
Simpson, C. (1985), Deformation of granitic rocks across the brittle-ductile transition, J. 
Struct. Geol., 7(5), 503511, doi:10.1016/0191-8141(85)90023-9. 
Skemer, P., I. Katayama, Z. Jiang, and S. Karato (2005), The misorientation index: 
Development of a new method for calculating the strength of lattice-preferred 
orientation, Tectonophysics, 411(1), 157167, doi:10.1016/j.tecto.2005.08.023. 
Smith, A. P., M. P. Fischer, and M. A. Evans (2014), On the homogeneity of fluids forming 
bedding-parallel veins, Geofluids, 14(1), 4557, doi:10.1111/gfl.12040. 
Smith, S. A. F., G. Di Toro, S. Kim, J. H. Ree, S. Nielsen, A. Billi, and R. Spiess (2013), 
Coseismic recrystallization during shallow earthquake slip, Geology, 41(1), 6366, 
doi:10.1130/G33588.1. 
Snoke, A. W., J. Tullis, and V. R. Todd (1998), Fault-related Rocks: A Photographic Atlas, 
Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey. 
Spray, J. G. (1992), A physical basis for the frictional melting of some rock-forming minerals, 
Tectonophysics, 204(3), 205221, doi:10.1016/0040-1951(92)90308-S. 
Spray, J. G. (1993), Viscosity determinations of some frictionally generated silicate melts: 
Implications for fault zone rheology at high strain rates, J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth, 
98(B5), 80538068, doi:10.1029/93JB00020. 
Spray, J. G. (1995), Pseudotachylyte controversy: fact or friction?, Geology, 23(12), 1119
1122, doi:10.1130/0091-7613(1995)023<1119:PCFOF>2.3.CO. 
Stern, T., S. Kleffmann, D. Okaya, M. Scherwath, and S. Bannister (2001), Low seismic-wave 
speeds and enhanced fluid pressure beneath the Southern Alps of New Zealand, Geol. 
, 29(8), 679682, doi:10.1130/0091-7613(2001)029<0679:LSWSAE>2.0.CO;2. 
Stern, T., D. Okaya, S. Kleffmann, M. Scherwath, S. Henrys, and F. Davey (2007), Geophysical 
Exploration and Dynamics of the Alpine Fault Zone, in A Continental Plate Boundary: 
Tectonics at South Island, New Zealand, pp. 207233, American Geophysical Union. 
Stevens-Kalceff, M. A. (2009), Cathodoluminescence microcharacterization of point defects 
in -quartz, Mineral. Mag., 73(4), 585605. 
Stevens-Kalceff, M. A. (2013), Cathodoluminescence microanalysis of silica and amorphized 
quartz, Mineral. Petrol., 107(3), 455469, doi:10.1007/s00710-013-0275-5. 
Sutherland, R. (1995), The Australia-Pacific boundary and Cenozoic plate motions in the SW 
Pacific: Some constraints from Geosat data, Tectonics, 14(4), 819831, 
doi:10.1029/95TC00930. 
Sutherland, R. (1999a), Basement geology and tectonic development of the greater New 
Zealand region: an interpretation from regional magnetic data, Tectonophysics, 
308(3), 341362, doi:10.1016/S0040-1951(99)00108-0. 
Sutherland, R. (1999b), Cenozoic bending of New Zealand basement terranes and Alpine 
Fault displacement: A brief review, New Zeal. J. Geol. Geophys., 42(2), 295301, 
doi:10.1080/00288306.1999.9514846. 
Sutherland, R., F. Davey, and J. Beavan (2000), Plate boundary deformation in South Island, 
New Zealand, is related to inherited lithospheric structure, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 
177(34), 141151, doi:10.1016/S0012-821X(00)00043-1. 
Sutherland, R. et al. (2007), Do great earthquakes occur on the Alpine Fault in central South 
Island, New Zealand?, edited by D. Okaya, T. Stern, and F. Davey, A Cont. Plate Bound. 
Tectonics South Island, New Zeal., 175, 235251, doi:10.1029/175GM12. 
Sutherland, R. et al. (2011), Operations and well completion report for boreholes DFDP-1A 
and DFDP-1B, Deep Fault Drilling Project, Alpine Fault, Gaunt Creek, New Zealand, 
Lower Hutt, NZ. 
Sutherland, R. et al. (2012), Drilling reveals fluid control on architecture and rupture of the 
Alpine fault, New Zealand, Geology, 40(12), 11431146, doi:10.1130/G33614.1. 
Sutherland, R. et al. (2015), Deep Fault Drilling Project (DFDP), Alpine Fault Boreholes DFDP-
2A and DFDP-2B Technical Completion Report. 
Sutherland, R. et al. (2017), Extreme hydrothermal conditions at an active plate-bounding 
fault, Nature, 546(7656), 137140. 
Swart, P. K. (1990), Calibration of the ion microprobe for the quantitative determination of 
strontium, iron, manganese, and magnesium in carbonate minerals, Anal. Chem., 
62(7), 722728, doi:10.1021/ac00206a015. 
Tanikawa, W., H. Mukoyoshi, O. Tadai, T. Hirose, A. Tsutsumi, and W. Lin (2012), Velocity 
dependence of shear-induced permeability associated with frictional behavior in fault 
zones of the Nankai subduction zone, J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth, 117(B5), n/a-n/a, 
doi:10.1029/2011JB008956. 
Tenthorey, E., and S. F. Cox (2006), Cohesive strengthening of fault zones during the 
interseismic period: An experimental study, J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth, 111(9), 
doi:10.1029/2005JB004122. 
Tenthorey, E., S. F. Cox, and H. F. Todd (2003), Evolution of strength recovery and 
permeability during fluid-rock reaction in experimental fault zones, Earth Planet. Sci. 
Lett., 206(12), 161172, doi:10.1016/S0012-821X(02)01082-8. 
Thielmann, M., A. Rozel, B. J. P. Kaus, and Y. Ricard (2015), Intermediate-depth earthquake 
generation and shear zone formation caused by grain size reduction and shear 
heating, Geology, 43(9), 791794. 
Tikoff, B., C. Teyssier, and C. Waters (2001), Clutch tectonics and the partial attachment of 
lithospheric layers, Stephan Mueller Spec. Publ. Ser., 1, 5773, doi:10.5194/smsps-1-
57-2002. 
Tingle, T. N., H. W. Green, C. H. Scholz, and T. A. Koczynski (1993), The rheology of faults 
triggered by the olivine-spinel transformation in Mg2GeO4 and its implications for the 
mechanism of deep-focus earthquakes, J. Struct. Geol., 15(9), 12491256, 
doi:10.1016/0191-8141(93)90167-9. 
The Engineering ToolBox. (2014), Water - Thermodynamic Properties, Eng. ToolBox.  
Available from: http://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/water-thermal-properties-
d_162.html (Accessed 20 April 2016). 
Townend, J., R. Sutherland, V. G. Toy, J. D. Eccles, C. Boulton, S. C. Cox, and D. McNamara 
(2013), Late-interseismic state of a continental plate-bounding fault: Petrophysical 
results from DFDP-1 wireline logging and core analysis, Alpine Fault, New Zealand, 
Geochemistry, Geophys. Geosystems, 14(9), 38013820, doi:10.1002/ggge.20236. 
Toy, V. G., D. J. Prior, and R. J. Norris (2008), Quartz fabrics in the Alpine Fault mylonites: 
Influence of pre-existing preferred orientations on fabric development during 
progressive uplift, J. Struct. Geol., 30(5), 602621, doi:10.1016/j.jsg.2008.01.001. 
Toy, V. G., D. Craw, A. F. Cooper, and R. J. Norris (2010), Thermal regime in the central 
Alpine Fault zone, New Zealand: Constraints from microstructures, biotite chemistry 
and fluid inclusion data, Tectonophysics, 485(14), 178192, 
doi:10.1016/j.tecto.2009.12.013. 
Toy, V. G., S. Ritchie, and R. H. Sibson (2011), Diverse habitats of pseudotachylytes in the 
Alpine Fault Zone and relationships to current seismicity, Geol. Soc. London, Spec. 
Publ., 359(1), 115133, doi:10.1144/SP359.7. 
Toy, V. G., D. J. Prior, R. J. Norris, A. F. Cooper, and M. Walrond (2012), Relationships 
between kinematic indicators and strain during syn-deformational exhumation of an 
oblique slip, transpressive, plate boundary shear zone: The Alpine Fault, New Zealand, 
Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 333334, 282292, doi:10.1016/j.epsl.2012.04.037. 
Toy, V. G., R. J. Norris, D. J. Prior, M. Walrond, and A. F. Cooper (2013), How do lineations 
reflect the strain history of transpressive shear zones? The example of the active 
Alpine Fault zone, New Zealand, J. Struct. Geol., 50, 187198, 
doi:10.1016/j.jsg.2012.06.006. 
Toy, V. G., T. M. Mitchell, A. Druiventak, and R. Wirth (2015a), Crystallographic preferred 
orientations may develop in nanocrystalline materials on fault planes due to surface 
energy interactions, Geochemistry, Geophys. Geosystems, 16(8), 25492563, 
doi:10.1002/2015GC005857. 
Toy, V. G. et al. (2015b), Fault rock lithologies and architecture of the central Alpine fault, 
New Zealand, revealed by DFDP-1 drilling, Lithosphere, 7(2), 155173, 
doi:10.1130/l395.1. 
Toy, V. V. G. (2007), Rheology of the Alpine Fault Mylonite Zone: deformation processes at 
and below the base of the seismogenic zone in a major plate boundary structure, 
University of Otago. 
Tse, S. T., and J. R. Rice (1986), Crustal earthquake instability in relation to the depth 
variation of frictional slip properties, J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth, 91(B9), 94529472, 
doi:10.1029/JB091iB09p09452. 
Tsutsumi, A., and T. Shimamoto (1997), Highvelocity frictional properties of gabbro, 
Geophys. Res. Lett., 24(6), 699702, doi:10.1029/97GL00503. 
Tulloch, A. J. (1982), Mineralogical Observations on Carbonate Scaling in geothermal wells 
at Kawerau and Broadland, New Zeal. Geotherm. Work. 4th, 131134. 
Ujiie, K., A. Tsutsumi, and J. Kameda (2011), Reproduction of thermal pressurization and 
fluidization of clay-rich fault gouges by high-velocity friction experiments and 
implications for seismic slip in natural faults, Geol. Soc. London, Spec. Publ., 359(1), 
267285. 
Upton, P., P. O. Koons, and C. P. Chamberlain (1995), Penetration of deformationdriven 
meteoric water into ductile rocks: Isotopic and model observations from the Southern 
Alps, New Zealand, New Zeal. J. Geol. Geophys., 38(4), 535543, 
doi:10.1080/00288306.1995.9514680. 
Verberne, B. A., C. J. Spiers, A. R. Niemeijer, J. H. P. De Bresser, D. A. M. De Winter, and O. 
Plmper (2014), Frictional Properties and Microstructure of Calcite-Rich Fault Gouges 
Sheared at Sub-Seismic Sliding Velocities, Pure Appl. Geophys., 171(10), 26172640, 
doi:10.1007/s00024-013-0760-0. 
Vernon, R. H. (1981), Optical microstructure of partly recrystallized calcite in some naturally 
deformed marbles, Tectonophysics, 78(1), 601612, doi:10.1016/0040-
1951(81)90031-7. 
Vidale, J. E., and Y.-G. Li (2003), Damage to the shallow Landers fault from the nearby 
Hector Mine earthquake, Nature, 421(6922), 524526. 
Viesca, R. C., and D. I. Garagash (2015), Ubiquitous weakening of faults due to thermal 
pressurization, Nat. Geosci., 8(11), 875879, doi:10.1038/ngeo2554. 
Violay, M., G. Di Toro, B. Gibert, S. Nielsen, E. Spagnuolo, P. Del Gaudio, P. Azais, and P. G. 
Scarlato (2014a), Effect of glass on the frictional behavior of basalts at seismic slip 
rates, Geophys. Res. Lett., 41(2), 348355, doi:10.1002/2013GL058601. 
Violay, M., S. Nielsen, B. Gibert, E. Spagnuolo, A. Cavallo, P. Azais, S. Vinciguerra, and G. Di 
Toro (2014b), Effect of water on the frictional behavior of cohesive rocks during 
earthquakes, Geology, 42(1), 2730. 
Vry, J., R. Powell, K. M. Golden, and K. Petersen (2010), The role of exhumation in 
metamorphic dehydration and fluid production, Nat. Geosci, 3(1), 3135. 
Vry, J. K., A. C. Storkey, and C. Harris (2001), Role of fluids in the metamorphism of the 
Alpine Fault Zone, New Zealand, J. Metamorph. Geol., 19(1), 2131, 
doi:10.1046/j.0263-4929.2000.00299.x. 
Walcott, R. I. (1998), Modes of oblique compression: Late Cenozoic tectonics of the south 
island of New Zealand, Rev. Geophys., 36(1), 126, doi:10.1029/97RG03084. 
Wallace, R. C. (1976), Partial fusion along the Alpine Fault Zone, New Zealand, Geol. Soc. 
Am. Bull., 87(9), 12251228, doi:10.1130/0016-7606(1976)87<1225:PFATAF>2.0.CO;2. 
Walther, J. V, and P. M. Orville (1982), Volatile production and transport in regional 
metamorphism, Contrib. to Mineral. Petrol., 79(3), 252257, 
doi:10.1007/BF00371516. 
Wannamaker, P. E., G. R. Jiracek, J. A. Stodt, T. G. Caldwell, V. M. Gonzalez, J. D. McKnight, 
and A. D. Porter (2002), Fluid generation and pathways beneath an active 
compressional orogen, the New Zealand Southern Alps, inferred from magnetotelluric 
data, J. Geophys. Res., 107(B6), 121, doi:10.1029/2001JB000186. 
Warr, L. N., and S. Cox (2001), Clay mineral transformations and weakening mechanisms 
along the Alpine Fault, New Zealand, Geol. Soc. London, Spec. Publ., 186(1), 85101, 
doi:10.1144/GSL.SP.2001.186.01.06. 
Warr, L. N., and B. A. van der Pluijm (2005), Crystal fractionation in the friction melts of 
seismic faults (Alpine Fault, New Zealand), Tectonophysics, 402(14 SPEC. ISS), 111
124, doi:10.1016/j.tecto.2004.12.034. 
Warr, L. N., B. A. van der Pluijm, D. R. Peacor, and C. M. Hall (2003), Frictional melt pulses 
during a ~1.1 Ma earthquake along the Alpine Fault, New Zealand, Earth Planet. Sci. 
Lett., 209(12), 3952, doi:10.1016/S0012-821X(03)00070-0. 
Warr, L. N., B. A. van der Pluijm, and S. Tourscher (2007), The age and depth of exhaumed 
friction melts along the Alpine fault, New Zealand, Geology, 35(7), 603606, 
doi:10.1130/G23541A.1. 
Waychunas, G. A. (2014), Luminescence Spectroscopy, Rev. Mineral. Geochemistry, 78(1), 
175217. 
Wellman, H. (1953), Data for the study of Recent and late Pleistocene faulting in the South 
Island of New Zealand, New Zeal. J. Sci. Technol., 34B, 270  288. 
Wells, A., M. D. Yetton, R. P. Duncan, and G. H. Stewart (1999), Prehistoric dates of the 
most recent Alpine fault earthquakes, New Zealand, Geology, 27(11), 995, 
doi:10.1130/0091-7613(1999)027<0995:PDOTMR>2.3.CO;2. 
Wendler, J., J. Kster, J. Gtze, N. Kasch, N. Zisser, J. Kley, D. Pudlo, G. Nover, and R. Gaupp 
(2012), Carbonate diagenesis and feldspar alteration in fracture-related bleaching 
zones (Buntsandstein, central Germany): possible link to CO2-influenced fluidmineral 
reactions, Int. J. Earth Sci., 101(1), 159176, doi:10.1007/s00531-011-0671-1. 
Wenk, H. R. (1978), Are pseudotachylites products of fracture or fusion?, Geology, 6(8), 
507511. 
Wheeler, J. (1992), Importance of pressure solution and coble creep in the deformation of 
polymineralic rocks, J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth, 97(B4), 45794586, 
doi:10.1029/91JB02476. 
White, J. C., and S. H. White (1983), Semi-brittle deformation within the Alpine fault zone, 
New Zealand, J. Struct. Geol., 5(6), 579589. 
Whitney, D. L., and B. W. Evans (2010), Abbreviations for names of rock-forming minerals, 
Am. Mineral., 95(1), 185187, doi:10.2138/am.2010.3371. 
Wibberley, C. A. J. (2002), Hydraulic diffusivity of fault gouge zones and implications for 
thermal pressurization during seismic slip, Earth, Planets Sp., 54(11), 11531171, 
doi:10.1186/BF03353317. 
Wibberley, C. A. J., and T. Shimamoto (2002), Internal structure and permeability of major 
strike-slip fault zones: The Median Tectonic Line in Mie Prefecture, Southwest Japan, 
J. Struct. Geol., 25(1), 5978, doi:10.1016/S0191-8141(02)00014-7. 
Wiersberg, T., and J. Erzinger (2007), A helium isotope cross-section study through the San 
Andreas Fault at seismogenic depths, Geochemistry, Geophys. Geosystems, 8(1), 
doi:10.1029/2006GC001388. 
Williams, J. N., V. G. Toy, C. Massiot, D. D. McNamara, and T. Wang (2016), Damaged 
beyond repair? Characterising the damage zone of a fault late in its interseismic cycle, 
the Alpine Fault, New Zealand, J. Struct. Geol., 90, 7694, 
doi:10.1016/j.jsg.2016.07.006. 
Wilson, J. E., J. S. Chester, and F. M. Chester (2003), Microfracture analysis of fault growth 
and wear processes, Punchbowl Fault, San Andreas system, California, J. Struct. Geol., 
25(11), 18551873, doi:10.1016/S0191-8141(03)00036-1. 
Wiltschko, D. V, and J. W. Morse (2001), Crystallization pressure versus crack seal as the 
mechanism for banded veins, Geol. , 29(1), 7982, doi:10.1130/0091-
7613(2001)029<0079:CPVCSA>2.0.CO;2. 
Wintsch, R. P. (1975), Feldspathization as a result of deformation, Bull. Geol. Soc. Am., 
86(1), 3538, doi:10.1130/0016-7606(1975)86<35:FAAROD>2.0.CO;2. 
Wintsch, R. P., and M.-W. Yeh (2013), Oscillating brittle and viscous behavior through the 
earthquake cycle in the Red River Shear Zone: Monitoring flips between reaction and 
textural softening and hardening, Tectonophysics, 587, 4662, 
doi:10.1016/j.tecto.2012.09.019. 
Wintsch, R. P., R. Christoffersen, and A. K. Kronenberg (1995), Fluid-rock reaction 
weakening of fault zones, J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth, 100(B7), 1302113032, 
doi:10.1029/94JB02622. 
Wogelius, R. A., D. G. Fraser, G. R. T. Wall, and G. W. Grime (1997), Trace element and 
isotopic zonation in vein calcite from the Mendip Hills, UK, with spatial-process 
correlation analysis, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 61(10), 20372051, 
doi:10.1016/S0016-7037(97)00065-3. 
Woodcock, N. H., and K. Mort (2008), Classification of fault breccias and related fault rocks, 
Geol. Mag., 145(3), 435440, doi:10.1017/S0016756808004883. 
Wu, F. T., L. Blatter, and H. Roberson (1975), Clay gouges in the San Andreas Fault System 
and their possible implications, Pure Appl. Geophys. PAGEOPH, 113(1), 8795, 
doi:10.1007/BF01592901. 
Xue, L. et al. (2013), Continuous Permeability Measurements Record Healing Inside the 
Wenchuan Earthquake Fault Zone, Science (80-. )., 340(6140), 15551559. 
Yamaji, A. (2015), How tightly does calcite e-twin constrain stress?, J. Struct. Geol., 72, 83
95, doi:10.1016/j.jsg.2015.01.008. 
Yardley, B. W. D. (1997), The Evolution of Fluids Through the Metamorphic Cycle, in Fluid 
Flow and Transport in Rocks: Mechanisms and effects, edited by B. Jamtveit and B. W. 
D. Yardley, pp. 99121, Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht. 
Yund, R. A., M. L. Blanpied, T. E. Tullis, and J. D. Weeks (1990), Amorphous material in high 
strain experimental fault gouges, J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth, 95(B10), 1558915602, 
doi:10.1029/JB095iB10p15589. 
Zoback, M., S. Hickman, W. Ellsworth, and S. S. Team (2011), Scientific Drilling Into the San 
Andreas Fault Zone-An Overview of SAFODs First Five Years, Sci. Drill., (11, March 
2011), 1428, doi:10.2204/iodp.sd.11.02.2011. 
