CHARACTERISATION OF THE PATHOPHYSIOLOGICAL AND 
IMMUNOLOGICAL RESPONSES TO SNAKE VENOM PROTEINS: 
AVENUES TO DESIGNING AND TESTING NOVEL THERAPIES 
Thesis submitted in accordance with the requirements of the 
University of Liverpool for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy 
Jaffer Alsolaiss 
23rd September 2019
Table of Contents 
ABSTRACT  i 
DEDICATION  iv 
ACKNOWLEGMENTS  v 
DECLARATION  vi 
ABBREVIATIONS  viii 
LIST OF FIGURES  x 
LIST OF TABLES  xii 
Chapter 1: General Introduction 
1.1 Snakebite is a neglected tropical disease 2 
1.2 Types and classes of snakes 3 
1.3 The development of envenoming mechanisms 7 
1.4 Snake venom  7 
1.4.1 Snake venom metalloproteinases (SVMPs) 7 
1.4.2 Snake venom phospholipase A2 (PLA2) 9 
1.4.3 Hyaluronidase 10 
1.4.4 Snake Venom Serine Proteases (SVSPs) 11 
1.4.5 L-amino acid oxidases (LAAO) 12 
1.4.6 C-type lectins (CTL) 12 
1.5 Snakebite envenoming pathology 14 
1.5.1 Local manifestations 14 
1.5.2 Systemic manifestations 15 
1.5.2.1 Neurotoxicity 16 
1.5.2.2 Haemotoxicity 17 
1.5.2.3 Cardiotoxicity 18 
1.6 Clinical treatment of snakebite envenoming  19 
1.6.1 First aid 19 
1.6.2 Antivenom and syndromic management of snakebite 20 
1.7 Rationale 28 
1.8 Project Aims 32 
1.9 References 33 
Chapter 2: A new bovine eye model of venom-induced ophthalmia reveals cellular 
damage is averted by rapid irrigation with water but not milk  
2.1 Introduction 48 
2.2 Materials and methods 51 
2.3 Results 58 
2.3.1 Assessment of corneas treated with negative and positive 
controls 
2.3.2 Assessment of corneas exposed to different concentrations 
of N. nigricollis venom 
2.3.3 Assessment of cornea exposed to different concentrations of 
N. haje venom 
2.3.4 Assessment of corneas exposed to different concentrations 
of N. nivea venom 
2.3.5 The effects of fresh venom from spitting and non-spitting 
cobra on the cornea 
2.3.6 Identification of the venom proteins penetrating the cornea 68 
2.3.7 Prevention of damage to cornea caused by venom 70 
2.4 Discussion  72 
2.5 Conclusions 74 
2.6 References 76 
Chapter 3: A new ex vivo human skin model of venom-induced dermonecrosis 
3.1 Introduction 80 
3.2 Material and methods 83 
3.3 Results 87 
3.3.1 Which venom proteins penetrate human skin tissue? 87 
3.3.2 Detection of SVMP and SVSP activities detected in culture 
media of venom-injected biopsies 
3.3.3 What is the anatomical consequence of injecting venom into 
this tissue? 
3.3.4 To what extent is cell apoptosis associated with this skin 
pathology? 
3.3.5 Does injection of skin with venoms from vipers, and spitting 
and non-spitting cobras stimulate distinct expression of pro-
inflammatory cytokines, chemokines and growth factors? 
3.4 Discussion 104 
3.5 Conclusions 111 
3.6 References 113 
Chapter 4: Defining acute phase and inflammatory responses to better understand the 
pathology of envenoming by medically important African snakes 
4.1 Introduction  123 
4.2 Material and methods 127 
4.3 Results 133 
4.3.1 Haematological analyses of envenomed mice 133 
4.3.1.1 RBC abnormalities suggest venom-induced haemolysis in 
4.3.1.2 N. nigricollis, N. melanoleuca, and B. arietans venoms cause 
neutrophilia in mice 
4.3.1.3 Mouse thrombocytosis following envenoming with six elapid 
venoms 
4.3.2 Acute phase and acute inflammatory responses in 
envenomed mice 
4.3.2.1 P-selectin involvement in acute inflammatory response 
activation in envenomed mice 
4.3.2.2 Envenomation-related immunoglobulin response. 141 
4.3.2.3 APR stimulation by Elapidae venoms 142 
4.3.2.4 Naja nigricollis venom causes rapid release of systemic 
inflammatory mediators 
4.3.3 Serum biochemistry following snake envenoming 144 
4.4 Discussion 146 
4.5 Conclusions 150 
4.6 References 151 
4.7 Supplementary information 159 
Chapter 5: Comparative value of different in vitro assays to predict the in vivo preclinical 
efficacy of new experimental antivenoms designed to improve treatment of envenoming 
by the most medically-important African snakes. 
5.1 Introduction 164 
5.2 Material and methods 167 
5.3 Results 174 
5.3.1 Time course ELISA of sheep sera 174 
5.3.2 IgG titres determined by end-point ELISA 176 
5.3.3 IgG avidity determined by chaotropic ELISA 180 
5.3.4 IgG specificity revealed by Western blotting  185 
5.3.5 Antivenomics profiling of venom protein and antivenom 
antibody interactions 
5.3.6 The venom neutralising efficacy of experimental antivenoms 193 
5.4 Discussion 196 
5.5 Conclusions 201 
5.6 References 202 
5.7 Supplementary information  207 
Chapter 6: Concluding discussion 
 ex vivo ocular envenomation model 215 
 ex vivo human dermonecrosis model 216 
 in vivo systemic envenomation model 217 
 Low molecular weight proteins 218 
 Neurotoxicity 219 
 Research priorities 220 
 References 222 
Abstract: 
Farmers living in deprived rural regions of south and southeast Asia, sub-Saharan Africa and 
Latin America are the primary group at risk from snakebite envenoming: a priority World 
Health Organization Neglected Tropical Disease. Depending on the toxins within the venom, 
and their physiological effects, envenomation can have acute local and systemic 
manifestations. With a focus upon the most medically-important snakes of sub-Saharan 
Africa, the present work seeks to address this knowledge gap by developing three new 
animals models of local and systemic envenoming. This enabled identification of the most 
pathogenic venom toxins and provided preliminary insights into pathophysiological 
mechanisms. The project culminates in a study to develop ovine antivenoms targeting the 
neurotoxic, haemorrhagic and coagulopathic systemic effects of envenoming by these 
snakes.   
I developed a new ex vivo bovine eye model to interrogate ophthalmic envenoming by 
spitting cobras. This model identified that corneal damage and opacification were caused by 
the venom of all cobras, irrespective of their spitting and or non-spitting traits. Notably, 
venom proteins from the venom of African spitting cobra (Naja nigricollis) and Asian non-
spitting cobra (N. naja) were identified as being capable of rapidly (five minutes after topical 
administration) penetrating through the multi-tissue layers of cornea. 
I next developed the ex vivo human skin model to examine the relative local tissue injuries 
exerted by the most medically-important snakes of sub-Saharan Africa. Using this 7-day, non-
perfused model of human envenoming allowed me to define the temporal progression of 
dermal damage for several snake species, identify the aetiological toxins and the extent to 
which they stimulate proinflammatory cytokines. Greatest dermal damage was affected by 
SVMPs and serine proteases (SVSPs) of the saw-scaled viper, E. ocellatus and the puff adder, 
B. arietans. Notable local tissue injury was induced by venoms of both N. nigricollis and 
Egyptian cobra, N. haje.  
Seeking to assess envenoming at the next stage in the envenoming process, I next developed 
the in vivo murine acute phase model. In addition to investigating snake species-specific 
effects upon the cardiovascular system and other key organs and tissues, I also examined the 
response to acute envenoming by acute phase reactants, including (Serum Amyloid A (SAA), 
P-selectin and haptoglobin), as well as acute inflammatory mediators such as cytokines. 
Severe systemic damage and inflammation were induced by venoms of N. nigricollis and the 
forest cobra, N. melanoleuca through the action of acute phase proteins and acute 
inflammatory mediators. 
I examined the relative venom-neutralising efficacies of experimental ovine antivenoms 
prepared by immunisation with different mixtures of neurotoxic venom, adjuvants and 
duration of immunisation  in comparison to the ovine equivalent of EchiTAB-PLUS-ICP. After 
a year of immunisation, the experimental anti-neurotoxic antivenoms proved substantially 
less efficacious and were highly species specific in their efficacy. This study identifies that 
snake venom-induced neurotoxicity poses the greatest snakebite therapeutic challenge in 
sub-Saharan Africa  and elsewhere.   
In summation, this PhD project has contributed new models to improve our understanding 
of the causative toxins and their mechanisms of action that lead to serious local and systemic 
effects of snake envenoming, and the role of acute phase reactant and cytokines in this 
neglected tropical disease. 
Dedication  
I wish to dedicate this work to the memory of my parents and my sister, who have always 
had a strong belief in my academic potential. Their belief has supported me throughout my 
studies, despite their absence. 
This work is also dedicated to my beloved wife, who is my constant rock through all the 
difficulties, to my dear siblings, as well as to my darling children, Hadi and Eyad, whom I 
love enormously. 
Last but not least, the work is dedicated to my family, my friends, and all the people who 
love, encourage and support me. 
Acknowledgments: 
Praise be to Allah, the Most Merciful and Compassionate, Lord of the world, and prayers and 
peace be upon Mohamed, His servant and messenger. 
I would like to express my supreme gratitude to Allah, the Ever-Magnificent, the Ever-Thank-
ful, for His blessings. His guidance has been essential in bringing this work to fruition. 
I am greatly thankful to a number of individuals who have provided me assistance through-
out this research, namely, my supervisors, Professor Robert Harrison, and Professor Nicholas 
Caseswell, who have been of enormous help in every stage of the research. I would also like 
to mention Professor Jose M. Gutierrez, Professor Juan Calvete, Dr Lorenzo Ressel, Dr Gail 
Leaming, Dr Riaz Aktar, and Genoskin France. 
I would like to thank all of the CSRI members for all advice and help during my work in the 
lab or during my writing.  
I would like also to thank Paul Rawley for all venom extractions and Mark Wilkinson for tech-
nical advice and assistance. 
Thank you to my sponsor Ministry of Higher Education in Saudi Arabia for funding and sup-
porting me during my PhD.  
I am indebted to all my dear friends and my family for their undying support during this aca-
demic journey for the achievement of a doctorate. Their constant love and prayers have been 
so helpful in emboldening me to finish the present doctoral work. 
I am particularly grateful to my wife, Nessrin, who has always encouraged me and sacrificed 
so much for me to be able to attain my doctoral degree. 
Declaration: 
Entitled Characterisation of the pathophysiological and immunological responses to snake 
venom proteins: avenues to designing and testing novel therapies, the present PhD work 
has been initiated and undertaken by myself in collaboration with my primary and second 
supervisors, Professor Robert Harrison and Professor Nicholas Casewell, respectively, who 
supervised my research and offered assistance with the experiments. Apart from a few 
exceptions, I carried out the work by myself. 
Chapter 2: Ethical approval was obtained for the collection of the eyes and I conducted every 
collection, optimisation and experiment on my own. The histopathological analysis of the 
dissected cornea was conducted at the University of Liverpool, while the veterinary 
pathologist Dr Gail Leaming undertook revision of the slide analysis that I conducted. Ahmed 
Kzali and Shaun Pennington assisted me in carrying out the measurements of opacity and 
fluorescent intensity.  
Chapter 3: Ethical approval was obtained for the collection and preparation of the skin 
sample, for which I worked together with Genoskin, France. I formulated, performed and 
validated the experiment design. Dr Gail Leaming supervised the histopathological 
examination of every injected skin sample, which was undertaken at the University of 
Liverpool. 
Chapter 4: Professor Robert Harrison undertook the process of blood sampling, while I 
undertook slide and serum separation and storage. Furthermore, I supervised an MSc 
student in the processing of the acute phase proteins and inflammatory markers. I undertook 
formulation and validation of every in vitro assay and biochemical assay. Revision of the work 
performed by the MSc student (Ms Chloe Evans) was conducted. 
Chapter 5: The work of this chapter is part of a major MRC-funded project to generate a new 
antivenomics approach to develop a single an antivenom effective against envenoming by 
sub-Saharan African snake species. To this end, I benefitted from the expertise of Professor 
Juan Calvate from Spain and Professor Jose M. Gutierrez from Costa Rica in performing 
antivenomics and investigating the capacity of the experimental antivenoms to counteract 
venom effects. I undertook the optimisation and performance of IgG purification and every 
immunological assay (ELISA endpoint titration, ELISA avidity and immunoblotting). 
Chapter 2-5 (Results chapters) are in manuscript form and yet to be published. Since the 
work is meant for publication, the introductory part to every chapter outlines the main 
themes, which are inevitably repetitive, but iterations have been minimised as much as 
possible. A methods section, and appropriate reference list is included in each chapter. 
Abbreviations: 
3FTxs Three Finger Toxins 
APP Acute Phase Protein 
APR Acute Phase Response 
CAM  Cell Adhesion Molecules 
CBC  Complete Blood Count 
CRP  C-reactive protein 
COX  Cyclooxygenase 
Cl Confidence Limits 
CTL C-type lectins 
DAMP  Damage Associated Molecular Patterns 
DALYs The disability- adjusted life year 
ELISA  Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay 
EDTA Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid 
ESR An erythrocyte sedimentation rate 
ED50 Effective dose prevents 50% death 
GM-CSF  Granulocyte-Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factor 
Hb haemoglobin 
Hp  Haptoglobin 
IFN  Interferon 
IL  Interleukin 
IgG Immunoglobulin G 
IgM Immunoglobulin M 
kDa Kilodalton 
LD50  Median Lethal Dose (50%) 
MCP-1  Monocyte Chemoattractant Protein 1 
MIP  Macrophage Inflammatory Protein 
MMP Matrix metalloproteinase 
NTD  Neglected Tropical Disease 
NO  Nitric Oxide 
PLA2  Phospholipase A2 
PAGE Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis 
PBS  Phosphate-Buffered Saline 
RBC  Red Blood Cells 
SVMPs  Snake Venom Metalloproteases 
SDS sodium dodecyl sulfate 
SVSPs Snake venom Proteases  
TBST tris-buffered saline Tween  
WB Western Blots 
WBC White Blood Cell 
WHO World Health Organization 
List of Figures 
Figure 1.1 Estimation of snakebites mortality in 138 countries and the annual 
estimated number of deaths. 
Figure 1.2 Examples of Viperidae snakes of medically importance snakes in Sub-
Saharan Africa 
Figure 1.3 Examples of Elapidae snakes of medically importance snakes in Sub-
Saharan Africa 
Figure 1.4 Structure and classification of SVMP classes 
Figure 1.5 Overview of the clinical symptoms presented by victims of snakebite 
envenoming 
Figure 2.1 Image of the exit orifice obtained by scanning electron micrographs of (A) 
non- spitting cobra N. kaouthia and (B) spitting cobra N. pallida. 
Figure 2.2 Experimental design of ex vivo bovine eye model to study the ocular 
envenomation after topical administration of lyophilised/ fresh venom 
from spitting and non-spitting cobra. 
Figure 2.3 Corneas treated with the positive and negative control 
Figure 2.4 Corneas treated with different doses of Naja nigricollis venom. 
Figure 2.5 Corneas treated with different doses of Naja haje venom 
Figure 2.6 Corneas treated with different doses of Naja nivea venom 
Figure 2.7 Characterisation of venom proteins penetrating the cornea after topical 
application of fresh venom. 
Figure 2.8 The intervention studies using water / milk following the topical application 
of fresh venom 
Figure 3.1 Identification and characterisation of venom proteins penetrating the skin 
Figure 3.2 The metalloprotease activities of venoms in the collected culture medium 
Figure 3.3 The serine protease activities of venoms in the collected culture medium. 
Figure 3.4 The macroscopic observation of the injected biopsies (pre and post the 
subcutaneous injection). 
Figure 3.4 Viability and structural integrity assessment following the subcutaneous 
injection of snake venoms 
Figure 3.5 Assessment of apoptotic cells following the subcutaneous injection of 
snake venoms. 
Figure 3.6 DNA fragmentation assessment following the subcutaneous injection of 
snake venoms. 
Figure 3.7 Dynamic changes in pro-inflammatory cytokine following subcutaneous 
injection by Viperidae venom (E. ocellatus and B. arietans) and Elapid 
venoms (N. nigricollis and N. haje). 
Figure 3.8 Dynamic changes in pro-inflammatory chemokines following subcutaneous 
injection by Viperidae venom (E. ocellatus and B. arietans) and Elapids 
venoms (N. nigricollis and N. haje). 
Figure 3.9 Dynamic changes in growth factors following subcutaneous injection by 
Viperidae venom (E. ocellatus and B. arietans) and Elapid venoms (N. 
nigricollis and N. haje). 
Figure 4.1 The Experimental outline of the in vivo murine acute phase model to study 
the acute envenoming by Acute Phase Reactants (APR) and acute 
inflammatory mediators. 
Figure 4.2 Abnormal red blood cell morphology and haemolysis induced by snake 
venoms. 
Figure 4.3 B. arietans, N. nigricollis, and N. melanoleuca venoms cause increased 
WBC counts and elevated neutrophils 
Figure 4.4 Elapids activate platelet aggregation. 
Figure 4.5 Venoms elicit different acute phase and inflammatory responses in the 
systemic circulation of mice 
Figure 4.6 Serum biochemistry parameters suggest acute hepatic and renal damage 
following N. nigricollis envenoming 
Figure S 4.1 Examples of platelet aggregation (x 100 objective) were observed in 
envenomed mice. 
Figure 5.1 Immune reactivity of sheep sera post 12 months immunisation to snake 
venoms 
Figure 5.2 ELISA End-Point Titration (EPT); Titration curves for poly-specific antibodies 
against antigen of IgGs purified from immunisation bleeds at six months 
Figure 5.3 ELISA End-Point Titration (EPT): Titration curves for poly-specific antibodies 
against antigen of IgGs purified from immunisation bleeds at twelve 
months 
Figure 5.4 Figure 5.4: Chaotropic ELISA (Avidity): Titration curves for IgGs purified 
from immunisation bleeds at six months 
Figure 5.5 Chaotropic ELISA (Avidity): Titration curves for IgGs purified from 
immunisation bleeds at and twelve months 
Figure 5.6 Percentage reduction of IgG titre (twelve months immunisation) after 
addition of 4M ammonium thiocyanate. 
Figure 5.7 Western blotting analysis 
Figure 5.8 Comparison of the antivenomics analysis of the immunoreactivity of 
experimental antivenoms (purified IgGs from immunisation bleeds at six 
months and twelve months). 
Figure 6.1 Summaries of the most significant findings in the current PhD, focusing on 
the pathologies induced by snake venom proteins 
List of Tables 
Table 1.1 Syndromic management of snakebites in sub-Saharan Africa 
Table 1.2 Antivenom reactions among individuals bitten by snakes 
Table 2.1 Details of snake venom and venom doses used to study the corneal damage 
induced by lyophilised and fresh venom from spitting and non-spitting cobras. 
Table 2.2 Observations of the pathology of corneas treated with fresh venom from 
Asian and African spitting and non-spitting cobras 
Table 3.1 Details of snake venoms species and doses used in the study 
Table 4.1 LD50 doses of African snake venoms in mice was used for blood and sera 
analyses 
Table 4.2. Grading of platelet aggregation in mice injected with medically important snake 
venoms 
Table S 4.1 Prior murine in vivo studies of the inflammatory response following dosing 
with snake venom. 
Table 5.1 Details of the venoms and adjuvants used for the generation of the 
experimental antivenoms after six months and twelve months by ovine 
immunisation 
Table 5.2 Estimation of LD50s of the venoms used in this study. 
Table 5.3 Values for the Median Effective Dose (ED50) 
Chapter 1 
General Introduction 
1.1 Introduction: 
1.1 Snakebite is a neglected tropical disease; 
Throughout the world, snakebite envenoming is a severe problem of such large proportions 
that national and regional health authorities need to accord it greater priority than they have 
done so far. Young people working in agriculture and living in deprived rural communities in 
developing nations of Africa, Asia, Latin America and Oceania are at greatest risk of being 
bitten by venomous snakes (Gutirrez 2012b; Gutirrez et al. 2017b; Gutirrez et al. 2010). 
This group of people are the primary income earners and food producers in their 
communities, which is why snakebite envenoming is known as a disease of poverty 
(Harrison et al. 2009). Snakebites estimated (Figure 1.1) at global level of almost 5.4 million, 
with more than 2.7 million envenoming cases and about 138,000 deaths and about 400,000 
disabled people/year. About 32,000 deaths annually at the level of the entire sub-Saharan 
Africa (Gutirrez et al. 2017b; WHO 2019). The majority of victims in these rural, remote 
communities take hours, sometimes days to access healthcare facilities. There are many 
reasons contributing to this delay, including peoples preference for traditional healing over 
hospital care, insufficient health centres, high costs of hospital treatment and the fact that 
many Africans distrust health centres and the equipment used to treat snakebites. 
Furthermore, despite being the sole treatment of incontrovertible efficiency, antivenom is 
not widely available, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa. This has prompted endeavours over 
the past ten years to make raise awareness of the burden of disease and paucity of 
antivenom supply  all in an effort to stimulate action making antivenom more accessible 
and to reduce health complications and mortality associated with envenomation (Brown 
2012; Habib 2013). The burden of disease posed by snakebite was highlighted in a paper 
demonstrating that the Disability Adjusted Life Years (DALYs) lost due to mortality and 
morbidity in 16 Western African countries was 0.32 million DALYs. This exceeds not only the 
approximated burden of Buruli ulcer, Echinococcosis, Leprosy, Trachoma, Yaws and Yellow 
Fever at global level, but also the burden of African Trypanosomiasis, Leishmaniasis and 
Onchocerciasis in those same sixteen West African countries (Habib et al. 2015). 
Figure 1.1: Estimation of snakebites mortality in 138 countries and the annual estimated 
number of deaths. Adopted from (Gutirrez et al. 2017b; Harrison et al. 2009) with some 
modification. Highest snakebites mortality (Darker colour).  
1.2 Types and classes of snakes 
Snakes are believed to have developed either from aquatic lizards (e.g. mosasaurs) or from 
burrowing lizards, with the second hypothesis having gained greater support thanks to 
molecular findings that have been recently produced (Vidal & Hedges 2004). At global level, 
the number of snake species exceeds 3,500, belonging to the order Squamata and the 
suborder Serpentes. Apart from Antarctica, New Zealand and Madagascar snakes live in a 
wide range of environments, including the Himalayan Mountains and the Pacific coral reefs. 
Some snakes are exclusively aquatic, others are terrestrial or live underground in cavities 
created by them or other animals, and others are arboreal. As regards reproduction, the 
majority of snakes are oviparous, although there are also certain species that are viviparous. 
Some species of oviparous snakes (e.g. python and king cobra) even keep watch over their 
eggs. All snake species feed solely on other animals, and numerous species can swallow prey 
that greatly exceeds their own size and bulk. Venomous snakes are also known as advanced 
snakes and all of them are members of the superfamily Colubroidea or Caenophidia. 
Atractaspididae, Elapidae, Viperidae and Colubridae are the four families of Colubroidea. The 
first three of these, as well as the Colubridae subfamily of sea snakes, Hydrophidae, comprise 
all the venomous snakes of medical importance. Furthermore, of the four families, the one 
with the highest number of species (approximately 1,700) is Colubridae (Lawson et al. 2005; 
Panfoli et al. 2010). Snakes in this family used to be considered non-dangerous to humans, it 
has been ascertained that more than 40 species can in fact envenom humans and even cause 
death (Ismail & Memish 2003; LIMPUS 2013; Vidal 2002). 
There are about 351 snake species that make up the Elapidae family and they are found in 
all continents apart from Europe and Antarctica. The Elapinae (e.g. coral snakes, cobras, 
mambas and kraits) and Hydrophiinae (e.g. sea snakes) are the two subfamilies of venomous 
Elapidae. All the Elapidae have fangs at the front of the mouth and the majority are medically 
important because of the potent neurotoxic venom they produce to immobilise their prey. 
There are about 311 species of Viperidae that can be found throughout North and South 
America, Africa, Europe and Asia [examples of medically importance snakes in Sub-Sharan 
Africa in figure 1.2 and 1.3]. The Viperinae (pit-less vipers such as Bitis, Cerastes, Echis and 
Vipera genera) and Crotalinae (pit-vipers such as Agkistrodon, Bothrops and Crotalus genera) 
are the two major subfamilies of Viperidae. The Viperidae possess hinged fangs at the front 
of the mouth and, like the Elapinae, are associated with considerable human mortality owing 
to their potent haemotoxic effects of their venom (O'Shea 2008). 
Figure 1.2:  Examples of Viperidae snakes of medically importance snakes in Sub-Saharan 
Africa (WHO, 2019) 
Figure 1.3:  Examples of Elapidae snakes of medically importance snakes in Sub-Saharan 
Africa (WHO, 2019). 
1.3 The development of envenoming mechanisms 
Elapidae, Viperidae and Atractaspididae produce and store venom in a large gland situated 
behind the orbit and wrapped in a fibrous sheath covered by muscles. Apart from these 
shared characteristics, however, the venom glands of these three families differ structurally 
(Jackson 2003). During biting, the venom is delivered to the tubular fangs via the venom 
ducts as a result of the compression to the venom gland applied by a compressor glandulae 
muscle presented by Elapidae, Viperidae and Atractaspididae. It is possible to view the 
occurrence of this muscle as a synapomorphy of true venomous snakes. However, this 
muscle is supplied with blood and innervated in each of the three families with a different 
external adductor muscle attached to the temporal skull plate (Jackson 2003, 2007). 
1.4 Snake venom  
Snake venom consists of different toxins designed to rapidly kill and immobilise prey or for 
defence against aggressors (Casewell et al. 2013). These toxins typically have more than one 
action. Furthermore, venom composition varies not only between venomous snakes of the 
same species but also within the same snake. Various enzymatic and non-enzymatic proteins 
account for the greatest proportions of snake venom toxins. Many different enzymatic toxins 
are present in just one sample of snake venom, but they are categorised into a handful of 
protein groups (McCue 2005). Apart from the enzymes L-amino acid oxidase, phospholipases 
A2 and phosphodiesterase, which are present in most snake venoms (Kang et al. 2011), the 
other enzymes are associated exclusively with specific snake taxonomic groups. For instance, 
the proteolytic enzymes endopeptidases, arginine ester hydrolases, thrombin-like enzymes, 
kininogenases and pro-coagulant enzymes are typically present in the venom of Viperidae 
and low proportion in the venom of Elapidae (< 5%) (Lomonte & Calvete 2017).  
The following section demonstrates that snake venoms contain a complex array of species-
specific enzymatic and non-enzymatic proteins that bind numerous different physiological 
targets to cause a variety of pathologies, including neurotoxicity, disruption of the 
cardiovascular system/haemostasis and specific effects upon different vital organs, including 
heart, kidneys and muscles.  
1.4.1 Snake venom metalloproteinases (SVMPs); 
The ability of snakes to adapt to various environments depends significantly on snake venom 
metalloproteinases (SVMPs) that consist of zinc-based enzymes of variable molecular mass. 
SVMPs represent the chief component in the venom of the majority of vipers (Calvete et al. 
2009; Gutirrez & Rucavado 2000; Sousa et al. 2013) and are capable of disruptive 
interaction with various proteins regulating haemostasis or tissues involved in key 
physiological activities in both prey and aggressors (Bernardoni et al. 2014; Moura-da-Silva, 
Butera & Tanjoni 2007). SVMPs are a multi-isoform family of great complexity owing to the 
considerable variability exhibited by their domain structure, tertiary confirmation and 
function. SVMPs can be categorised into four groups (Figure 1.4), namely, P-I, P-II, P-III and 
P-IV (Fox & Serrano 2008). With molecular masses of 60-100 kDa, the PI class SVMPs 
comprising solely immature propeptide and metalloproteinase domains and have the most 
basic structure. Proteolytic processing of the propeptide occurs in the enzymes that have 
achieved maturity. The highly conserved metalloproteinase domain with a canonical zinc-
binding motif is present in every SVMP (Herrera et al. 2015). Meanwhile, PII class SVMPs 
display a canonical disintegrin domain occurring in the immature protein, which is generally 
subjected to post-translational and proteolytic processing by the proteinase domain. It must 
be highlighted that, given their isolation from crude venom, apparent stability is exhibited 
by the proteolytic products, the proteinase domain and the disintegrin domain (Fox & 
Serrano 2008). PII SVMPs are divided into five subtypes: the PIIa class with proteolytic 
cleavage from the metalloproteinase domains of the disintegrin domain, which is typically 
distinguished by the occurrence of an RGD motif, resulting in a free disintegrin; the PIIb 
class with proteolytic processing of the disintegrin domain, which nevertheless stays integral 
to the enzyme structure; the PIIc class, which is a dimeric version of the PIIb class; and the 
PIId class and the PIIe class, which represent precursor enzyme forms yielding disintegrins 
with a content of homodimeric and heterodimeric RGD. The group P-III SVMPs comprise a 
structure consisting of sequential proteinase, disintegrin-like elements and cysteine-rich 
domains. The 68 kDa haemorrhagic toxin-a (HT), in the venom of C. atrox, is one example of 
this class of SVMPs (Markland & Swenson 2013). SVMPs primarily cause bleeding by 
damaging the integrity of capillaries and interfering with the blood coagulation system, 
which leads to coagulation plasma factors being consumed (Moura-da-Silva, Butera & 
Tanjoni 2007). Various targets are incorporated in the action mechanisms of different 
SVMPs, including coagulation Factor X activation (Siigur et al. 2001), Factor II activation 
(Modesto et al. 2005), fibrino(gen)olytic activity, as well as capillary binding and disruption 
(Baldo et al. 2010; Escalante et al. 2011). The venom pool of one species may contain SVMPs 
in interaction with specific haemostatic targets, causing disruption at the level of the entire 
haemostatic system and resulting in prey overpowering generally by shock (Kamiguti et al. 
1994). 
Figure 1.4: Structure and classification of SVMP classes (Fox & Serrano 2008). P=signal 
peptide, Pro= prodomain and S= spacer domain.  
1.4.2 Snake venom phospholipase A2 (PLA2); 
An esterolytic enzyme occurring in multi-molecular forms and present both at intracellular 
and extracellular level, phospholipase A2 (PLA2) undertakes the hydrolysis of fatty acids at 
the Sn-2 position of glycerophospholipids. It also has action on a range of natural substrates, 
including phosphotidyl choline, phosphotidyl ethanolamine, phosphotidyl serine, 
phosphotidyl inositol, plasmogen and platelet aggregation factor. Secretions produced by 
the pancreas of mammals and snake venoms are the two most abundant sources of PLA2 
(Kini 2005a). Furthermore, unlike the majority of proteins, the PLA2 enzyme is typically of 
small size and displays stability, most likely because of the many (6-7) intramolecular 
disulphide bridges that are present. Moreover, PLA2 can survive at extremes of temperature 
and pH. The molecular weight of PLA2 comprises 119-143 amino acid residues and usually 
varies between 12 and 16 kDa (Scott & Sigler 1994). PLA2 has come to be considered an 
extensive superfamily of different enzymes that are crucially involved in a range of biological 
activities. For example, in mammals, PLA2 is involved in the maintenance of cellular 
phospholipid pool, membrane repair, fertilisation, proliferation, inflammation and 
membrane homeostasis (Kini 1997). By contrast, PLA2 found in snake venom underpins 
neurotoxic, myotoxic, cardiotoxic and cytotoxic effects, suppresses or activates platelet 
aggregation, and is involved in haemolysis, anticoagulation, convulsion, hypotension, and 
oedema formation (Gutirrez & Ownby 2003; Kini & Evans 1989; Petan et al. 2005). 
According to the sequence of amino acids, 3D structure and disulphide bond patterns, there 
are two types of snake venom PLA2s, namely, group I and group II PLA2s. Present in the 
pancreas of mammals and the venom of Elapidae and Colubridae (Harris & Scott-Davey 
2013), group I PLA2s usually display a length of 115-120 amino acid residues with seven 
disulphide bridges. PLA2s in the venom of Elapidae and in mammalian pancreas are 
respectively distinguished by the so-called elapid loop, which links the catalytic -helix and 
the -wing, and the pancreatic loop, which is an extra extension of five amino acids. 
Meanwhile, group II PLA2s are found in the venom of Viperidae and generally have a length 
of 120-125 amino acid residues with seven disulphide bridges. Unlike group I, this group has 
an extra C-terminal extension instead of the elapid or pancreatic loop. According to the 
amino acid residue at the 49th position, several subtypes of group II PLA2s are recognised. 
D49 enzymes are group II PLA2s containing an aspartic acid residue. As noted by Scott et al. 
(1990), the majority of group II PLA2s conserve aspartic acid as it is essential for catalysis. 
Meanwhile, K49 (Maraganore et al. 1984), S49 (Polgar et al. 1996), N49 (Inn-Ho et al. 2004) 
and R49 (Chijiwa et al. 2006) enzymes are those respectively characterised by the 
replacement of the amino acid residue at the 49th position with lysine, serine, asparagine or 
arginine. Hydrolytic activity is poor or absent in enzymes with replacement of the aspartic 
acid residue, as this hinders cofactor Ca2+ from attaching to the Ca2+ binding loop 
(Maraganore & Heinrikson 1986). The envenomation capability of Elapidae is crucially 
dependent on neurotoxic PLA2s because they paralyse and therefore kill the victim.   
1.4.3 Hyaluronidase: 
An enzyme that breaks down hyaluronan, hyaluronidase represents an endoglycosidase 
believed to be a ubiquitous protein in snake venoms known as the spreading factor. 
Consisting of groups of glycosidases, hyaluronidase has recently attracted a great deal of 
interest owing to its hyaluronan (HA) substrate. Tu and Hendon (1983) reported that the 
local haemorrhagic effect of a toxin from the venom of Trimeresurus flaoviridis was 
supported by hyaluronidase, reflecting its spreading property. 
In the process of enzyme-facilitated spreading that occurs during snake envenomation, a 
crucial event is believed to be the breakdown of hyaluronan in the extracellular matrix of 
local tissues. Several studies have described how hyaluronan breaks down in vitro (Kudo & 
Tu 2001; Pukrittayakamee et al. 1988), while the degeneration of extracellular matrix in 
tissue samples from humans and other organisms has been discussed by Girish et al. (2004). 
This property is considered to aid other deadly toxins to spread rapidly. Therefore, ample 
attention has been paid to the ability of hyaluronidase to spread venom haemorrhagic toxins 
and this enzyme is thought to play an essential role in the activation of local tissue 
deterioration due to extracellular matrix breakdown. Hyaluronidase displays synergistic 
interaction with other venom toxins and this interaction has been identified as the source of 
its toxicity. This enzyme has been isolated and characterised from the venom of various 
snake species, including Agkistrodon acutus (Xu et al. 1982), Vipera russelii (Pukrittayakamee 
et al. 1988) and Agkistrodon contortrix contortrix (Kudo & Tu 2001). Furthermore, 
hyaluronidase isoenzymes were found by Girish et al. (2004) to be present in the venom of 
Naja naja (Girish et al. 2004). Whilst the amino acid sequences of the most pathogenic 
venom proteins show considerable species-specific variation, sequences encoding snake 
venom hyaluronidases are very conserved (Harrison et al. 2007).  
1.4.4 Snake Venom Serine Proteases (SVSPs) 
A non-homogeneous class of single-chain proteins (Evans, 1984), snake venom serine 
proteases have molecular masses in the range of (15-67) kDa. A number of additional 
enzymes represent multi-subunit proteins (Fry 1999; Zaganelli et al. 1996). Based on their 
structure, the SVSPs are considered to be either serine proteases or metalloproteases. Apart 
from Hydrophidae, the venoms of all snakes contain proteases. Proteolytic enzymes are 
thought to be particularly abundant in the venom of Viperidae and proteases are the source 
of most toxic effects of the venom of pit-vipers such as rattlesnakes, water moccasins and 
puff adders. The proteolytic enzymes are in fact hydrolases that have a digestive action since 
they are responsible for the degradation of proteins. Endopeptidases, peptidases, arginine 
ester hydrolases, kininogenases, procoagulants and anticoagulants are among the major 
proteolytic enzymes. Pharmacological effects have been attributed to some of these. For 
instance, local capillary damage and tissue necrosis are triggered by proteinase and arginine 
ester hydrolases (Gutirrez & Rucavado 2000; Gutirrez et al. 2005). Furthermore, coagulant 
and haemorrhagic effects have also been exhibited by proteases (Lu, Clemetson & Clemetson 
2005; Markland 1998). The pain and acute low blood pressure associated with the discharge 
of vasoactive peptides are triggered by enzymes that release kinin (kininogenase) (Felicori et 
al. 2003; Matsui, Fujimura & Titani 2000; White 2005). 
Procoagulant and anticoagulant mechanisms are employed by several venom proteases to 
break down fibrinogen and influence blood coagulation (Andrews, Gardiner & Berndt 2004; 
Markland 1998). Plasma coagulation is triggered by the proteases present in the venom of 
Trimeresurus flavovirides, Bitis gabanica, Cerastes vipera, Trimeresurus stejnegeri and 
Agkistrodon caliginosus (Hiremath et al. 2014). Meanwhile, plasma coagulation is extended 
by proteases present in the venom of Naja nigricollis, Bothrops castelnaudi, Echis carinatus 
and Vipera lebetina (Babaie, Salmanizadeh & Zolfagharian 2013).  
1.4.5 L-amino acid oxidases (LAAO): 
The flavoenzymes known as L-amino acid oxidases are present not only in the venom of 
Viperidae, Crotalidae and Elapidae, but also in organisms such as bacteria, fungi, algae, fish 
and snails (Costa et al. 2014). The concentration in which LAAOs occur in snake venom differs 
from one species to another and contributes to the level of venom toxicity. LAAOs manifest 
catalytic specificity for long chain hydrophobic and aromatic amino acids and can function at 
varying pH and temperature. Considerable variability is also exhibited by their structures, 
molecular masses and isoelectric points. They can alter platelet function, leading to local 
effects on plasma clotting abnormalities and other effects. Furthermore, as reported by 
Izidoro et al. (2014), LAAOs can cause different cell lines to die as well as exhibiting effects 
against microbes and parasites. Ande et al. (2008) even suggested that LAAOs may protect 
against natural, parasitic and bacterial agents. 
1.4.6 C-type lectins (CTL): 
Of the different haemorrhagic elements in snake venom, C-type lectin-like proteins are 
particularly significant. These proteins derive from the folding in classic C-type lectins (e.g. 
mannose-binding proteins and selectins), which represent a form of carbohydrate-binding 
proteins (Chou 1996). The C-type refers to the requirement of calcium ions for binding to the 
carbohydrate substrate. Various roles are fulfilled by proteins incorporating C-type lectin 
domains, such as adhesion between cells, anti-pathogenic immune response and cell death. 
Calcium dependence is displayed only by some binding interactions between C-type lectins 
and protein ligands, including the C-type lectins of coagulation factors IX/X, Von Willebrand 
factor (VWF) binding proteins and natural killer cell receptors. According to the manner in 
which the different protein domains are ordered in every protein, the C-type lectins were 
initially divided into seven subgroups (I-VII) before seven other groups (VIII-XIV) were added 
in 2002. Three additional subgroups (XV-XVII) were introduced more recently (Drickamer 
1999; Drickamer & Taylor 2002; Zelensky & Gready 2005). 
 Interaction occurs between several components of venom, especially the venom of Elapidae 
and Viperidae, and proteins of the coagulation cascade and fibrinolytic pathway. As 
previously mentioned, coagulation can either be promoted or inhibited by toxins in snake 
venom. Indeed, multiple such inhibitors or promoters or coagulation are present in the 
venom of numerous snake species. The venom proteins that causes coagulation are 
distinguished as pro-coagulant factors, anticoagulant factors and fibrinolysis (Kini 2005b). 
1.4.6.1 Factor V activator: 
A multifunctional glycoprotein that is essentially involved in both promotion and suppression 
of coagulation is factor V activator. Factor V is activated by thrombin through cleavage at 
Arg709, Arg1018 and Arg1545, resulting in the formation of factor Va, which is a heterodimer 
comprising a 105 kDa heavy chain and 72 or 74 kDa light chain doublet. In the activation of 
prothrombin catalysed by factor Xa, factor Va serves as cofactor and promotes a thousand-
fold increase in thrombin production. The venoms of Bothrops atrox, Doboia russelli, Vipera 
lebetina, Vipera ursine, Naja naja oxiana and Naja nigricollis nigricollis have all been reported 
to contain multiple factor V activators (Thorelli 1999).  
1.4.6.2 Factor X activator: 
The venoms of both Viperidae and Elapidae contain factor X activators, which are 
metalloproteinases or serine proteases (Tans & Rosing 2001). Ample research has been 
dedicated to human blood coagulation factor X (RVV-X), powerful activators of which have 
been found in the venom of Russells viper (Markland 1998). The venom of Bothrops atrox 
(Markland 1998). and that of a number of other species (e.g. Ophiophagus Hannah and 
Bungarus fasciatus) (Lee et al. 1995; Zhang, Xiong & Bon 1995)has also revealed factor X 
activators. RVV-X has been classified as a metalloproteinase, unlike the factor X activators 
from the venom of the Elapidae Ophiophagus hannah and Bungarus faciatus, which are 
serine proteinases (Tans & Rosing 2002). 
1.4.6.3 Prothrombin activators: 
Prothrombin or factor II is classified as a single-chain 72 kDa glycoprotein (Kini 2005b). 
Prothrombin activators are present in the venom of numerous snake species, transforming 
prothrombin into either meizothrombin or thrombin (Sachetto & Mackman 2019). There are 
four types of prothrombin activators, depending on their morphology, functionality and 
cofactor specifications. Group A prothrombin activators represent metalloproteinases that 
drive  prothrombin activation in the absence of cofactors, like phospholipids (PLs) or cofactor 
Va. Group B prothrombin activators are dependent upon Ca2+ and comprise two, non-
covalently linked subunits, namely, a metalloproteinase and a disulphide-linked dimmer 
similar to C-type lectin. The Group C prothrombin activators are serine proteases in the 
venom of Australasian Elapidae, whose bioactivity is dependent upon Ca2+, PLs or factor Va. 
Thus, Factor VII is activated by oscutarin from the venom of Oxyuranus scutellatus as well. 
Group D prothrombin activators are also serine proteases that exhibit a strong dependence 
on Ca2+, PL with negative charge and factor Va (Kini 2005b). 
1.4.6.4 Thrombin-like enzymes: 
A range of activities are attributed to thrombin and some snake venom enzymes are 
categorised as thrombin-like because they are capable of clotting fibrinogen (Hutton & 
Warrell 1993; Marsh 1994; Ouyang, Teng & Huang 1992). Thus, venombin A (from 
Calloselasma rhodostoma), venombin B (from Agkistrodon contortrix contortrix) and 
venombin AB (from Gaboon viper, Bitis gabonica) are the three types of thrombin-like 
enzymes (Markland 1998). Additionally, regarding their capability to convert fibrinogen, 
these enzymes are species-specific to some extent. Meanwhile, although serine protease 
inhibitors suppress thrombin-like enzymes, thrombin inhibitors (e.g. anti-thrombin III and 
hirudin) have no effect on them. Hence, thrombin-like enzymes present clinical potential as 
defibrinogenating agents because the fibrin they produce can be eliminated from circulation 
without difficulty (Kini & Koh 2016). 
1.5 Snakebite envenoming pathology 
Venom injection in the skin or muscle of an animal or human is called snake envenomation 
and it is associated with three pathologies. Two of them are hypotensive and paralytic 
strategies and are both designed to restrict the mobility of the prey/victim. In the third 
strategy, snake envenomation triggers internal tissue breakdown before the prey is even 
seized. Snake envenomation pathophysiology consists of a sequence of complex events 
mediated by the integrated effect of toxic and non-toxic elements (Aird 2002; Warrell 1996). 
It acts both at local and systemic levels (Figure 1.5). 
1.5.1 Local manifestations: 
A bite by a venomous snake is usually indicated by two puncture wounds, differing from the 
bite of a non-venomous snake, which takes the form of several, small puncture wounds with 
an arc-like distribution. The bite is typically instantly followed by burning, bursting or 
throbbing pain that disseminates upwards from the bite site. Soon after, draining lymph 
nodes begin to feel painful. However, the amount of pain and progression of pathology is 
dictated by different drivers, including the snake species, and amount of venom injected and 
the anatomical site of envenoming. For instance, no significant pain is associated with the 
bite of kraits and sea snakes, while the local response caused by the bite of vipers is of greater 
intensity compared to the bite of other snakes, with swelling occurring within 15 minutes 
and reaching extreme proportion on 2-3 days, lasting for 1-3 weeks (Mehta & Sashindran 
2002). The diffusion of the swelling from the bite site happens fast (minutes) and may affect 
not only the entire limb but the adjacent trunk as well. The development of regional 
lymphadenopathy is possible. Furthermore, ischaemia occurs if the envenoming site is a tight 
fascial segment, such as the pulp space of the digit or the anterior tibial segment. 
Envenomation is unlikely to have occurred if a bite by a viper does not cause swelling within 
two hours. Moreover, a couple of days after a viper bite, the tissue may appear bruised, 
develop blisters and start to necrotise. The bites of Asian pit vipers and certain rattlesnakes 
also cause severe necrosis. On the other hand, swelling is localised and tender and blisters 
form as a result of bites by Asian cobras, whereas no local response is generally triggered by 
krait bites. Venom ophthalmia may occur in the case of individuals that have been hit in the 
face by the venom of spitting elapids. Secondary infection develops as a result of the 
bacterial flora present in the snakes mouth (Warrell 1996). 
1.5.2 Systemic manifestations: 
The pathophysiological alterations triggered by the venom of specific snake species 
determine the systemic features of snakebite envenoming. The first signs of elapid 
envenoming emerge within five minutes or with a delay of up to ten hours (Mehta & 
Sashindran 2002), while the signs of viper envenoming occur usually within 20 minutes of 
the bite. By contrast, the myotoxic symptoms of sea snake venom, and some of the 
Australasian elapids, occur within two hours of the bite (Paul, Chawla & Jatana 1993). The 
type and concentration of toxins, their bioactivity and how fast they spread all determine 
the severity of systemic effects. Three classes of snakes were initially distinguished according 
to the major venom components, namely, neurotoxic (e.g. cobras and kraits), haemorrhagic 
(e.g. vipers) and myotoxic (e.g. sea snakes). This classification has been recently dismissed 
because a combination of manifestations can be generated by the venom of different species 
(Moura-da-Silva, Butera & Tanjoni 2007; Paul, Chawla & Jatana 1993). 
Figure 1.5: Overview of the clinical symptoms presented by victims of snakebite 
envenoming (Gold & Barish 1992; Wangoda, Watmon & Kisige 2004; Warrell 2010b). 
1.5.2.1 Neurotoxicity. 
The two main groups of neurotoxins are distinguished by their interaction with the 
neuromuscular junction. The -neurotoxins or presynaptic neurotoxins cause anatomic 
disruption of the the presynaptic site, while the -neurotoxins or postsynaptic neurotoxins 
bind to molecules releases from the postsynaptic site (Ranawaka, Lalloo & de Silva 2013; 
Rossetto et al. 2006).  
Presynaptic neurotoxicity: Two stages are usually involved in the presynaptic action. In the 
first stage, the toxin binds to receptors in the neuromuscular junction presynaptic site, and 
in the second stage, the neurotransmitter release is inhibited by physical destruction of the 
presynaptic membrane. In recent times, ample research has been dedicated to presynaptic 
neurotoxins, all of which are structurally PLA2s (Montecucco & Rossetto 2000; Schiavo, 
Matteoli & Montecucco 2000; Westerlund et al. 1992). Meanwhile, venoms contain 
monomeric as well as multimeric -neurotoxins. The single-chain toxins that have been 
extensively investigated include Notexin from the venom of Notechis scutatus, Caudoxin 
from Bitis caudalis and Ammodytoxin from Vipera ammodytes ammodytes, while the 
multimeric neurotoxins that have been the focus of numerous studies are Taipoxin, 
Textilotoxin from Pseudonaja textiles, Mojave toxin, Crotoxin and -bungarotoxin (Wilson et 
al. 1996).  Furthermore, as explained by Hodgson and Wickramaratan (2002), non-
depolarising inhibition of neuromuscular transmission is triggered by postsynaptic 
neurotoxins through their specific binding to the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAchR) at 
the motor end plate.  
Postsynaptic neurotoxicity: display competitive suppression of acetylcholine receptors, thus 
targeting the neuromuscular junction at extracellular level; however, administration of 
antivenom counteracts this effect. Group II PLA2s are predominant in the venom of Viperidae 
and some of them, like crotoxin and notexin, exhibit myotoxicity and are capable of triggering 
myonecrosis or system myotoxicity (Gopalakrishnakone et al. 1984; Mebs & Ownby 1990). 
Pro-inflammatory effects are manifested by other group II PLA2s; for instance, penetration 
of inflammatory cells is facilitated by PLA2 from the venom of Naja naja atra (Zhang & 
Gopalakrishnakone 1999), whereas macrophage phagocytosis is promoted by Asp49 and 
Lys49 PLA2s contained in the venom of Bothrops asper (Zuliani et al. 2005). 
1.5.2.2 Haemotoxicity 
Snakebite envenomation, especially by Viperidae, often results in haemotoxicity. Haemor-
rhage at local or systemic level taking the form of either external bleeding (e.g. from gums) 
or internal bleeding (e.g. intracranially) is an effect of venom-induced disruption of haemo-
stasis (Slagboom et al. 2017). Another pervasive and complicated effect of envenomation by 
Viperidae and some Elapidae and Colubridae (Mackessy & Modahl 2019) is snakebite-in-
duced coagulopathy, otherwise called venom-induced consumption coagulopathy (VICC). By 
increasing susceptibility to heavy bleeding, VICC is associated with a high mortality risk.  The 
common assumption is that administration of antivenom is the only solution that can help 
counteract the triggered pathophysiological effects of high complexity (Isbister et al. 2013; 
Maduwage & Isbister 2014). As explained by Isbister et al. (2009), the venom of some snake 
species contains procoagulant toxins that digest the clotting factors, causing the blood clot-
ting cascade to activate at excessively high levels and thus leading to the onset of VICC. The 
procoagulant toxins are so named because they promote the quick development of clots in 
vitro, despite the fact that they cause serious factor consumption and heighten haemorrhage 
probability in vivo. Known under various terms at different times, such as procoagulant co-
agulopathy, defibrination syndrome, and disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), VICC 
is understood to represent post-envenomation fibrinogen depletion (Maduwage & Isbister 
2014; Warrell 2010a). TLEs or fibrinogenases cleave the fibrinogen -chain or -chain, thus 
leading to the occurrence of fibrinogen consumption without fibrin development owing to 
fibrinopeptide A or B (Maduwage & Isbister 2014). The venom of certain species of snakes, 
such as the Echis spp., Elapidae found in Australia, and Russells viper, contains a number of 
factor deficiencies, like activators of factor X or of prothrombin, and they exert their effect 
higher up the clotting cascade (Slagboom et al. 2017) 
1.5.2.3 Cardiotoxicity 
The cardiotoxins in snake venom are very simple proteins of 5.5-7 kDa molecular mass and 
four disulphide cross-linkages (Munawar et al. 2014). They cause cardiac, skeletal and 
smooth muscles to contract and lose excitability by depolarising them. Furthermore, 
cardiotoxins participate in the fusion, haemolysis, and cytotoxicity of membranes, the 
apoptosis of particular tumour cells and suppression of the activity of protein kinase C 
(Gasanov, Dagda & Rael 2014). Barrington et al., (1986) reported that the cardiotoxicity of a 
basic PLA2 isolated from the venom of N. nigricollis manifested in the form of a rise in the 
concentration of intracellular calcium ions. Moreover, other studies described a number of 
polypeptides and PLA2 enzymes that also exhibit cardiotoxicity (Huang & Mackessy 2004; 
Torres et al. 2003; Xiao et al. 2017). 
1.5.2.3.1 Haemolytic effects 
Venom factors acting directly or via a complex mechanism comprising multiple steps can 
disrupt erythrocytes, a process called haemolysis. Snake venoms causing haemolysis can be 
grouped by their mechanism of action. Thus, all venom PLA2s have been reported capable of 
inducing indirect haemolysis (Williams et al. 2018), by the direct lytic venoms trigger the 
hydrolysis of phospholipids in various domains of the red blood cells to cause haemolysis. In 
contrast, the venom of Agkistrodon halys blomhoffi, Trimeresurus flavoviridis and Naja naja 
contain PLA2s capable of direct haemolysis (Daz et al. 2001; Wilson et al. 1997; Yamamoto 
et al. 2001). The mechanism of action of these enzymes likely involves membrane disruption 
with effect on the external as well as internal phospholipid bilayer leaflets  
1.5.2.3.2 Hypotensive effects 
Various strategies are used by many snake venoms to rapidly lower blood pressure, resulting 
in circulatory shock that immobilises the prey and eventually causes it to die. The release of 
autocoids with pharmacological activity, such as histamine, 5-hydroxy tryptamine and 
leukotrienes cause an abrupt decrease in blood pressure (Andrio-Escarso et al. 2002; Joseph 
et al. 2011; Lumsden et al. 2004). Hypotensive peptides of 5-13 amino acids that are N-
terminally blocked with pyroglutamic acid are present in the venom of numerous pit vipers. 
Since they can augment the hypotensive action of bradykinin, these peptides are usually 
called bradykinin-potentiating peptides (BPPs) (Pterfi et al. 2019). Huang and Lee (1984) 
and Andriao-Escarso et al. (2002) have attributed the low blood pressure to the acidic PLA2s 
in the venom of Bothrops jararacussu (BthA-I-PLA2) and Vipera russelii.  
 1.5.2.3.3 Convulsive effects 
Paralysis of the respiratory system and additional pre-agonal effects trigger asphyxia that in 
turn drives convulsive symptoms that frequently precedes death after envenoming by some 
cobras. Because of the high potassium ion influx, the supplies of acetylcholine are exhausted 
by snake venom components. This symptom is also caused by the aforementioned 
prevention of neurotransmitter release following the actions of presynaptic neurotoxins 
(Silva, Hodgson & Isbister 2017). The venoms of N. naja (Bhat & Gowda 1989), Vipera russelii 
(Jayanthi & Gowda 1990; Kasturi & Gowda 1989) and E. carinatus (Kamiguti et al. 1994) have 
all been reported to trigger convulsions. 
1.6 Clinical treatment of snakebite envenoming  
1.6.1 First aid 
Gaining immediate access to medical care is the most important step in managing snakebite 
envenoming (Warrell 2010b). Widely used measures such as application of a tourniquet or 
drawing out the venom by cleaning or cutting into the wound are not advised because they 
actually lack efficiency (Blaylock 2005). Another measure of doubtful efficiency is the 
Sutherland pressure immobilisation method in which compression bandage is applied to the 
bitten limb along a splinted support to slow down the spread of the venom. This method 
may be helpful in cases where venom spread relies on the lymphatic system. By contrast, 
experiments showed that venom transport was reduced by direct pressure pad application. 
However, the clinical efficiency of this approach is uncertain. What is more, the use of the 
methods outlined above by practitioners and first-aiders may do more harm than good due 
to a lack of proper education. For example, a tourniquet effect may be engendered by the 
excessively tight application of bandaging (Canale, Isbister & Currie 2009) and, apart from 
bites known to have been caused by species with neurotoxic venom (e.g. mambas), 
tourniquets should not be used as a first-aid measure. Furthermore, even when they are 
used, they should not be kept in place for more than an hour and a half, because they can 
generate ischaemic effects that aggravate tissue damage caused by cytotoxic envenomation, 
which occurs in 90% of bites in Africa (Blaylock 2005; Dreyer & Dreyer 2013). Therefore, 
tourniquets can lead to a long hospital stay and unfavourable outcomes. 
1.6.2 Antivenom and syndromic management of snakebite: 
Snakebite management is made difficult primarily by the inadequate availability of 
antivenom throughout the world and especially in rural areas. Nevertheless, because a range 
of clinical manifestations can be engendered by the different snake venom components, the 
management of these manifestations can be successful, regardless of the availability of 
antivenom. Indeed, in most cases where there is uncertainty about the species that caused 
the bite, symptom management is considered the best approach (Table 1.1). 
Snakebite envenoming can only be effectively treated with antivenom, but the use of this 
medication is associated with significant risks and often it is the adverse reactions to 
antivenom rather than the actual envenomation that is the cause of patient death. Thus, 
managing snakebite envenomation is a difficult task, even for medical practitioners with 
ample experience, because most cases occur in rural areas without access to emergency 
transportation, and therefore the envenomation effects are advanced by the time the 
victims arrive at a medical centre. Another reason making snakebite management 
challenging is peoples preference for traditional rather than modern treatments and 
reliance on traditional healers. Furthermore, the first-aid measures taken frequently do 
more harm than good, as people and healthcare practitioners in rural areas are inadequately 
educated. However, Dreyer and Dreyer (2013) refuted this argument, noting that 
envenomation by snakes with neurotoxic venom can cause respiratory failure and hypoxic 
death if treated late, while lack of treatment of envenomation by snakes with hemotoxic 
venom can result in fatal coagulopathy. 
The unavailability of antivenom and modern medical equipment aggravates the challenging 
task of snakebite management even more. Snakebite envenoming is particularly prevalent 
in rural regions of developing countries with an inadequate healthcare infrastructure and 
poor resources. Practitioners frequently have no antivenom at their disposal, so they are 
forced to come up with other methods of treating cases where envenomation has 
progressed significantly. Under such circumstances, the implementation of a systematic 
approach to the management of snakebite clinical manifestations is essential and could be 
efficient even in the absence of necessary resources (Blaylock 2005; Kasturiratne et al. 2008).  
Antivenom was first produced in 1894, when Mr Albert Calmette injected animals with small 
amounts of snake venom and then gradually with higher amounts, thus immunising them 
against venom and saving them. Currently, antivenom of animal origin is produced in 46 
laboratories at global level, although recent alterations to this number cannot be ruled out. 
Most laboratories are present in Asia, the Americas and Europe, with a couple in Africa and 
only one in Australia (Gutirrez 2019). Regarding production scale and antivenom properties, 
the existing laboratories differ considerably. Three types of producers can be distinguished, 
namely, national, regional and global producers, which respectively manufacture antivenom 
for use in their own countries, in their own countries and adjacent ones, and in countries 
throughout the world (Gutirrez 2012a). Another classification system of the laboratories is 
public laboratories, which number 31, and private laboratories, which number 15. A greater 
antivenom amount is generally manufactured by private than by public laboratories. 
Nevertheless, although some public laboratories produce just enough to satisfy the demand 
in their particular countries, a few manufacture substantial amounts as well. 
The available quality and amount of antivenom are less than ideal throughout the world. 
According to statistics, less than 5% to 20% of the antivenom required for treatment of 
snakebite envenomation cases is available in certain countries with low and middle income 
(Brown 2012; Chippaux & Habib 2015). To put it differently, the amount of antivenom 
available in Africa is only enough to treat about 80,000 patients (Brown 2012), whereas 
envenomation on this continent has an incidence of around 435,000 per year (Chippaux & 
Habib 2015; Gutirrez et al. 2017a). The real proportion of successful treatments is even 
lower because certain antivenoms vary in their efficacy or are not marketed adequately. 
Similarly, the amount of antivenom available worldwide is sufficient to treat approximately 
600,000 victims, but it is doubtful how effective the existing antivenoms are. Thus, it means 
that less than a third of the about 1.8 million people bitten by venomous snakes every year 
receive antivenom treatment, and over 100,000 victims would be saved if antivenom 
availability were higher (Brown 2012; Gutirrez et al. 2017a). The situation is further 
compounded by manufacture suspension by some producers and suboptimal regulation of 
novel antivenom quality, reducing the availability of antivenom of proven reliability. Both 
state and non-state bodies are partially responsible for this situation because they have 
failed to provide the funds needed to ensure proper monitoring and promote a healthy and 
competitive antivenom market.   
The development of an efficient and sustainable solution to the problem is significantly 
hindered by the fact that antivenom is highly expensive for the majority of envenomation 
victims. Indeed, disadvantaged individuals living in deprived areas will always struggle to 
afford antivenom treatment. In India, efficient antivenom treatment costs R1000-5000 on 
average (Vaiyapuri et al. 2013), while in Africa, antivenom treatment must cost less than 3 
to be affordable (Theakston & Warrell 2000). According to Brown (2012), in sub-Saharan 
Africa, a single antivenom vial costs $18-135, but the total cost can reach $60-640 if multiple 
vials are necessary for successful treatment. This effectively makes antivenom treatment 
inaccessible to the majority of victims. The situation is worsened by the fact that not all 
antivenoms are equally effective and of good general quality. Furthermore, some people 
may be attracted by the low cost of one antivenom vial, although the total cost can be 
astronomical if more than 20 vials are needed (Habib & Brown 2018). 
Antivenom efficiency exhibits a significant degree of variability and is mainly determined by 
the existing levels of particular antibodies targeting a specific venom. One or two ampoules 
must be administered for the most effective antivenoms to successfully counteract 
envenomation (Abubakar et al. 2010b), whereas more than 20 ampoules must be 
administered for antivenoms with poor efficiency but greater affordability to be effective 
(Das, Sankar & Dev 2015). Another issue is the commercialisation of fake or inefficient 
antivenoms in areas with snake species whose venom is not targeted by the supplied 
antivenom (Warrell 2008). By robbing health systems of their already scarce financial 
resources and increasing suspicion about what is otherwise reliable medical treatment, such 
fake and inefficient antivenoms can have widespread negative consequences. Given the 
above considerations, the formulation of envenomation treatments of extensive efficiency 
is considerably thwarted by the lack of homogeneity in venom components. 
All venomous snake species have a complex composition of venom toxins. This complexity is 
increased in cases of attempts to counteract the venom of more than one species, especially 
as toxins with multiple functions do not have the same immunogenicity. Thus, antivenom is 
usually effective only against species with venom employed as immunogen and occasionally 
against species of near affiliation whose venom contains enough similar toxins to activate 
the produced antibodies (Casewell et al. 2010; Segura et al. 2010; Williams et al. 2011a). It is 
important to comprehend how the venom of species of medical significance is constituted 
as venom composition variability is interspecific, intraspecific and ontogenetic (Casewell et 
al. 2014; Chippaux, Williams & White 1991; Gibbs et al. 2013). Such comprehension is helpful 
in estimating how effective an antivenom is likely to be against the venom of multiple species 
and, implicitly, the geographical range over which it can be used. Therefore, antivenom 
paraspecificity has been explored based on a combination of examinations of venom toxicity 
and pathology and venom proteomics, antivenomics and/or immunological analyses 
(Calvete et al. 2009; Madrigal et al. 2012; Pla et al. 2013). 
Besides the quantity in which antivenom is manufactured and the area over which it is made 
available, discrepancies exist with regard to certain technical features of antivenom 
development and manufacture as well. For immunisation purposes, horses are employed by 
the majority of producers, but sheep (WHO 2010b) and donkeys (Gutirrez et al. 2007) are 
respectively used by two producers. Based on the immunogen used in the manufacturing 
process, there are two types of antivenom, namely, monovalent antivenom, which is 
obtained through animal immunisation with the venom from just one specie, and polyvalent 
antivenom, which is obtained through immunisation with the venom of multiple species of 
medical significance from a certain geographical area. The latter promotes the generation of 
antibodies targeting multiple toxins in the venom of various species and prevents problems 
associated with administration of the incorrect antivenom owing to the absence of 
diagnostic protocols, thus overcoming the restricted paraspecific cross-reactivity of 
monovalent antivenoms (Abubakar et al. 2010a; O'leary & Isbister 2009). On the downside, 
polyvalent antivenoms present a higher risk of side-effects and may be more expensive and 
thus less accessible to poor people, as they must be administered in greater dosage to be 
efficient (Hoogenboom 2005; O'leary & Isbister 2009). F(ab)2 fragments constitute an active 
substance found in most antivenoms and are obtained by subjecting hyperimmune plasma 
to pepsin digestion and salting out processes to fractionate it. Meanwhile, entire IgG 
molecules make up the composition of other antivenoms and are produced by precipitating 
non-immunoglobulin plasma proteins with caprylic acid; papain digestion of ovine plasma 
immunoglobulins is another method for manufacturing Fab antivenoms (WHO 2010b). 
Additional differences among antivenoms may be related to the employed excipients and 
preservatives as well as to the final form they take (e.g. liquid, freeze-dried), which raises 
issues regarding how the antivenoms are stored and transported (e.g. a cold chain system is 
necessary for antivenoms in liquid form).  
Antivenom typically causes adverse reactions in over 10% of patients, and these reactions 
occur either immediately after administration or after a couple of days (Table 1.2). Although 
dosage is the main reason for the occurrence of antivenom reactions, there are some cases 
of sensitisation (IgE-mediated Type I hypersensitivity) to late serum sickness type reactions. 
Use of animal serum is what causes hypersensitivity and the risk of this is especially high 
among individuals who were previously exposed to animal serum. Several researchers 
recommended avoiding sensitivity tests prior to antivenom administration, because they 
lack accuracy and delay the treatment of individuals in critical condition (Dreyer & Dreyer 
2013; Warrell 2010a). 
Further research on polyvalent antivenoms is required to enhance the efficacy of these 
antivenoms by refining specificity and the ability to counteract venom effects, reducing costs 
and increasing safety compared to traditional antivenoms. Nevertheless, conversion of such 
research into concrete envenomation therapy requires better knowledge of the toxins 
targeted by the antivenoms. In particular, investigation of major pathogenic toxins with 
multiple functions from the venom of various species of medical significance is essential to 
develop, assess and improve novel envenomation treatments. 
Table 1.1: syndromic management of snakebites in sub-Saharan Africa (Blaylock 2005; 
Dreyer & Dreyer 2013; WHO 2010a). 
Syndrome Description Species bites Treatment 
Localised swelling 
accompanied by 
non-blood clotting 
Localised swelling is 
painful and spreads fast 
and is occasionally 
accompanied by blister 
formation and necrosis, 
with blood that does 
not coagulate (based on 
20WBCT detection) and 
bleeding from gums, 
nose, and 
gastrointestinal/urino-
genital tracts or 
bleeding at the bite site 
that does not stop. 
Saw-scaled or carpet  
vipers of the Echis 
species  
Desert horned-vipers 
(Cerastes cerastes). 
Certain types of puff 
adders (Bitis arietans)  
Monospecific Echis 
antivenom should 
be used for bites 
sustained south of 
the Sahara and 
north of the 
Equator, while 
polyspecific 
antivenom should 
be used in all other 
African regions. 
Progressive paralysis 
due to neurotoxic 
effect 
Local swelling is not 
significant but is 
accompanied by 
paralysis that typically 
progresses downwards. 
Cobra and mamba 
species with neurotoxic 
venom 
Polyspecific 
antivenom should 
be used or else 
anticholinesterase 
therapy may be a 
viable option as 
well. Breathing 
should be 
monitored closely, 
with intubation 
and support 
ventilation if/when 
required. 
Only moderate 
swelling 
It is usually limited to 
half of the bitten limb, 
with minor or lack of 
systemic 
manifestations. 
Night adders of the 
Causus species. 
Burrowing asps of the 
Atractaspis species. 
Certain dwarf, bush and 
desert vipers 
Antivenom is not 
required as 
symptomatic 
therapy is enough. 
Local swelling that is 
moderate and lack 
of blood coagulation 
An infrequent 
occurrence, it involves 
minor local swelling 
with blood that does 
not coagulate (based on 
20WBCT detection) and 
frequently systemic 
bleeding that occurs 
spontaneously. 
Boomslangs 
(Dispholidus typus). 
Vine snakes of the 
Thelotornis species 
(rare) 
Monospecific 
antivenom and 
supportive 
treatment should 
be used for 
boomslang and 
vine snake bites, 
respectively. 
Local swelling of 
moderate to 
significant degree 
with neurotoxic 
effect 
Local swelling is 
moderate to severe and 
is accompanied by 
neurotoxic effects. 
Despite being a rare 
clinical occurrence, it is 
particularly associated 
with the bite caused by 
the Berg adder (Bitis 
atropos). 
Dwarf adders, such as 
Pringueys desert or 
sidewinding adder (Bitis 
peringueyi). 
Desert mountain adders 
(B. xeropaga) 
Antivenom is 
unavailable, only 
symptomatic 
therapy can be 
used. 
Table 1.2: Antivenom reactions among individuals bitten by snakes (Morais & Massaldi 
2009; Warrell 2010a). 
Reaction (s) Clinical presentation 
Early anaphylaxis A series of symptoms within 10-180 minutes after antivenom 
administration, including itching, especially on the scalp, urticaria, 
dry cough, fever, nausea, vomiting, abdominal colic, diarrhoea and 
tachycardia.  
Anaphylaxis, including low blood pressure, bronchospasm and angio-
oedema, that may prove fatal is also developed by some patients.  
Antivenom reactions are more probably caused by complement 
activation by IgG aggregates or residual Fc fragments or else by 
direct stimulation of mast cells or basophils by antivenom protein. 
Pyrogenic 
(endotoxin) 
reactions 
Developing 1-2 hours post-administration, these reactions manifest 
as shaking chills (rigors), fever, vasodilatation, and hypotension. 
Children may experience intense febrile convulsions.  
Late reactions of the 
serum sickness type 
Developing 1-12 days post-administration, these reactions trigger 
fever, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, itching, recurrent urticaria, 
arthralgia, myalgia, lymphadenopathy, periarticular swellings, 
mononeuritis multiplex, proteinuria with immune complex nephritis, 
and, sometimes, encephalopathy.  
1.7 Rationale: 
The above literature review provides a detailed summary of the global distribution of 
venomous snakes, the bioactivity of the toxins within their venoms and the different 
pathologies they cause and culminates in a review of antivenom-treatment of snake 
envenoming. The latter identified that there exists an urgent need for research to develop 
new therapies with substantially improved: 
 Antivenom efficacy against multiple snakes within any given region: 
The efficacy of an antivenom is restricted to envenoming by the snake(s) whose venom(s) 
was used in production. Antivenoms should be produced with minimal immunising venoms 
but be capable of counteracting the maximum number of clinically relevant toxins. The 
efficacy of antivenoms manufactured by immunisation with multiple venom mixtures is 
affected by the significant within- and between-species variability in venom composition. 
Novel antivenoms can be introduced in a geographical area only after thorough assessment, 
such as through the mouse lethality test and other assays according to venom toxicology 
(Warrell et al. 2013), of their efficiency against the venom of the majority of clinically 
significant species in that area. For example, geographical intraspecific discrepancies in 
venom composition signify that antivenoms manufactured in India may have poorer 
efficiency against certain Nepalese species. This may be the reason why Indian polyvalent 
antivenoms have been poorly effective or ineffective against the venom of snake species in 
Sri Lanka (Shrestha et al. 2017). 
 Antivenom efficiency against envenomation-induced necrosis: Envenomation-
induced local tissue damage is primarily caused by hydrolases like metalloproteinases, PLA2s 
and potentially hyaluronidases. Cytotoxicity manifests as bite area pain and gradual swelling, 
followed by blistering and bruising, occasionally accompanied by hypovolaemic shock and 
other systemic effects (WHO 2010a). Local tissue damage frequently aggravates into 
necrosis, which, because antivenom is ineffective against local venom effects, necessitates 
debridement or amputation (Slagboom et al. 2017).  
The severity of local tissue damage increases rapidly, a significant issue because the majority 
of rural snakebite victims take several hours to access health facilities (Habib & Warrell 2013; 
Harrison & Gutirrez 2016) due to distance from homes to the nearest roads, lack of local 
ambulances, transport cost. Furthermore, efficient clinical management is rarely available in 
deprived areas. Toxin neutralisation by IgG and its fragments is another issue (Gutirrez, 
Theakston & Warrell 2006). Development of fast-acting, thermostable, affordable and 
polyspecific intervention to manage envenomation-induced tissue necrosis within field 
settings is also an important objective (Harrison & Gutirrez 2016). 
 Antivenom safety: Since they contain non-human immunoglobin, antivenoms can 
have side-effects and therefore proper production and quality control are essential in 
preventing inclusion of impurities, contaminants, immunoglobulin aggregates or 
deterioration products as well as excessively high levels of proteins, thus ensuring antivenom 
safety; additionally, negative reactions may also be induced by some preservatives in 
antivenoms (Chippaux et al. 2015). Early antivenom administration is vital for venom 
counteraction (Agarwal et al. 2005). The venom of Elapidae has poor antigenicity and fast 
absorption and therefore requires higher antivenom dosage. Irrespective of age, victims are 
administered an initial 100-200 ml equine antivenom dosage, triggering an immediate 
response, but also hypersensitivity reactions due to the equine serum. Higher dosage and 
intravenous injection increase antivenom response time (Mehta & Sashindran 2002). In up 
to 80% of cases, antivenom causes anaphylaxis, pyrogenic reactions, or serum sickness (Alirol 
et al. 2010; de Silva, Ryan & de Silva 2016), which is why health professionals in remote areas 
of India are reticent to manage envenomation. Furthermore, health professionals are 
mistrusted because of antivenom unaffordability and inefficiency, determining victims to 
prefer going to traditional healers, although the latters interventions are seldom safe and 
efficient (Harrison & Gutirrez 2016). Side-effects can be attenuated by better compliance 
with good manufacturing practices. 
 Antivenom affordability: Despite existing for over a century, immunotherapy has 
not advanced significantly due to funding unavailability, diminishing markets and lack of 
initiatives from public health entities. Snakebite envenomation is most efficiently treated 
with antivenom, but this is often unavailable to at-risk individuals in deprived rural areas of 
low- and middle-income countries (Williams et al. 2011b), even though the situation could 
be improved with only moderate investment. In Africa, antivenom scarcity has fostered the 
production of fake and inefficient products (Theakston & Warrell 2000; Theakston, Warrell 
& Griffiths 2003; Warrell 2008), which often escape detection by underfunded national 
regulatory agencies. Inexpensive but ineffective products are unfortunately preferred over 
costly but effective ones (Bregani, Maraffi & Van Tien 2011), resulting in severe antivenom 
scarcity and suboptimal treatment outcomes. A profitable black market has thus emerged, 
with prices for stolen antivenoms reaching US$3200 for one vial (Warrell 2008). 
Improvement of envenomation treatment requires novel omic' technologies and equal 
attention must be paid to making sure that antivenom products are safe, effective and 
affordable. For instance, a new treatment will be pointless if it is too costly for the rural 
inhabitants of low-income Asian and African countries who are most in need of it, despite 
having greater efficiency and safety than existing treatments. In the following part, an 
overview of the latest endeavours to enhance envenomation treatment with omic 
technologies is provided. 
 Improvement of antivenom dose efficiency through venom-affinity 
chromatography: antivenom IgGs can be made fully venom specific and efficiency 
can be increased five-fold by purifying IgGs. 
 Improvement of antivenom dose efficiency based on monoclonal antibodies: in 
theory, the therapeutic potential of all IgGs can be ensured by producing monoclonal 
antibodies with venom toxin specificity. The development of monoclonal antibodies 
capable of counteracting bleeding triggered by venom has been achieved. 
 Improvement of antivenom dose efficiency based on recombinant 
immunoglobulins: recombinant antivenom is characterised by full IgG specificity to 
venom toxins and its production involves isolation of B cells from animals immunised 
to venom, followed by sub-cloning of genes with expression of IgGs of particular 
specificity into bacteria, and generation of recombinant IgG at a certain 
concentration. 
 Development of antivenom with efficiency suitable for a particular area and snake 
species: so-called venomics methods have been devised owing to notable 
innovations in proteomic technology, facilitating detection of venom protein 
components. Furthermore, antivenomics' enables the development of mixtures for 
venom immunisation that comply with the clinical requirements in a particular area. 
 Development of antivenom with toxin specificity and with efficiency in broad areas 
and against multiple snake species through transcriptome-based creation of 
artificial immunogens: an obvious and reasonable strategy for enhancing dosage 
efficiency and, implicitly, safety and affordability, is antivenom with toxin specificity. 
However, this requires differentiation between pathogenic and non-pathogenic 
venom toxins. 
 Improvement of IgG purity by altering processes of antivenom production: this is a 
strategy that is not only cost-effective but can also eliminate certain contaminating 
viruses and enhance the IgG yield. 
 Possible improvement of antivenom efficiency based on the singular structure of 
camelid IgG: standard light chains are absent from more than half of their 
immunoglobulin. 
 Management of local pathological effects of venom based on peptide inhibitors of 
matrix metalloproteinases 
 Improvement of antivenom production cost-effectiveness: this can be achieved by 
replacing horses with animals that are cheaper to keep; for instance, most 
antivenoms, including EchiTabG, are now manufactured based on ovine 
immunisation. 
 Improvement of antivenom cost-effectiveness: various novel methods, such as 
antivenomics, could be used to make antivenom more cost-effective by 
implementing scale economies in its production. 
Measurement of the degree to which novel and traditional treatments eliminate venom from 
the circulatory system provides an impartial evaluation of how effective those treatments 
are, as well as facilitating the approximation of the extent of circulating treatments at a 
particular moment following intervention commencement. Assays endorsed by the WHO 
and by both pharmaceutical companies and national authorities must be conducted for 
testing all treatments prior to their application to human envenomation cases. These assays 
have two goals, namely, assessment of how effective treatments are in counteracting the 
effects of the venoms they have been designed to target and assessment of how safe the 
treatments are. Examples of such assays are lethality assays and lethality elimination assays, 
which are conducted on experimental models of different animals. Furthermore, antivenom 
resolution of pathologies caused by venom (e.g. haemorrhage, coagulopathy, 
defibrinogenation, local necrosis) can also be evaluated through various in vitro and in vivo 
tests. However, research is presently focused on the creation of other testing options as in 
vivo tests are harmful to experimental animals. Moreover, the pharmacokinetics of 
envenomation and treatment have been addressed in a large number of animal-based 
investigations, but these are not relevant to human envenomation due to the preference for 
intravenous injection of venom, whereas intradermal or intramuscular injection of venom is 
the norm in the case of human victims. 
1.8 Project Aims: 
The aim of this PhD project was therefore to develop new models enabling the research 
community to investigate mechanisms of envenoming to guide their strategies and test the 
efficacies of their candidate therapies.  
1. ex vivo bovine eye model seeks (i) to measure the opacity of bovine corneas exposed 
to snake venom from spitting and non-spitting cobra, (ii) to assess damage to corneal 
tissue using sodium fluorescein imaging, and to (iii) determine the anatomical depth 
of damage to the cornea using histopathology, and (iv) to identification and charac-
terisation of venom proteins penetrating the cornea and (v) seek for the ideal man-
agement strategies following the ocular envenomation.  
2.  ex vivo human skin model, to characterize the pathogenesis of dermonecrosis in-
duced by the venom of Viperidae and Elapidae. In addition, the toxins responsible 
for this effect were identified, and the potential role of inflammatory mediators re-
sponses in tissue damage. Finally, the efficacy antivenoms constituted to neutralize 
venom-induced dermonecrosis. 
3. To expand our knowledge of the systemic inflammatory and acute phase responses 
to African snake venoms. By assessing, in a mouse model, whether inflammatory and 
acute phase responses following snake envenomation is associated with snake ven-
oms causing distinct pathologies. 
4. A comparative serological and immunological analyses of ovine IgG post short and 
long immunisation protocol, to improve the immunogenicity, cross- reactivities and 
the neutralisation efficacy.  
1.9 References: 
Abubakar, I.S., Abubakar, S.B., Habib, A.G., Nasidi, A., Durfa, N., Yusuf, P.O., Larnyang, S., 
Garnvwa, J., Sokomba, E. & Salako, L. (2010a) 'Randomised controlled double-blind 
non-inferiority trial of two antivenoms for saw-scaled or carpet viper (Echis 
ocellatus) envenoming in Nigeria', PLoS Negl Trop Dis, vol. 4, no. 7, p. e767. 
Abubakar, S., Abubakar, I., Habib, A., Nasidi, A., Durfa, N., Yusuf, P., Larnyang, S., Garnvwa, 
J., Sokomba, E. & Salako, L. (2010b) 'Pre-clinical and preliminary dose-finding and 
safety studies to identify candidate antivenoms for treatment of envenoming by 
saw-scaled or carpet vipers (Echis ocellatus) in northern Nigeria', Toxicon, vol. 55, no. 
4, pp. 719-723. 
Agarwal, R., Aggarwal, A.N., Gupta, D., Behera, D. & Jindal, S.K. (2005) 'Low dose of snake 
antivenom is as effective as high dose in patients with severe neurotoxic snake 
envenoming', Emergency Medicine Journal, vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 397-399. 
Aird, S.D. (2002) 'Ophidian envenomation strategies and the role of purines', Toxicon, vol. 
40, no. 4, pp. 335-393. 
Alirol, E., Sharma, S.K., Bawaskar, H.S., Kuch, U. & Chappuis, F. (2010) 'Snake bite in South 
Asia: a review', PLoS neglected tropical diseases, vol. 4, no. 1, p. e603. 
Andrews, R.K., Gardiner, E.E. & Berndt, M.C. (2004) 'Snake venom toxins affecting platelet 
function', Platelets and Megakaryocytes: Volume 2: Perspectives and Techniques, pp. 
335-347. 
Andrio-Escarso, S.l.H., Soares, A.M., Fontes, M.R.M., Fuly, A.L., Corra, F.M.A., Rosa, J.C., 
Greene, L.J. & Giglio, J.R. (2002) 'Structural and functional characterization of an 
acidic platelet aggregation inhibitor and hypotensive phospholipase A2 from 
Bothrops jararacussu snake venom', Biochemical pharmacology, vol. 64, no. 4, pp. 
723-732. 
Babaie, M., Salmanizadeh, H. & Zolfagharian, H. (2013) 'Blood Coagulation Induced by Iranian 
Saw-Scaled Viper (Echis Carinatus) Venom: Identification, Purification and 
Characterization of a Prothrombin Activator', Iranian journal of basic medical 
sciences, vol. 16, no. 11, p. 1145. 
Baldo, C., Jamora, C., Yamanouye, N., Zorn, T.M. & Moura-da-Silva, A.M. (2010) 'Mechanisms 
of vascular damage by hemorrhagic snake venom metalloproteinases: tissue 
distribution and in situ hydrolysis', PLoS Negl Trop Dis, vol. 4, no. 6, p. e727. 
Bernardoni, J.L., Sousa, L.F., Wermelinger, L.S., Lopes, A.S., Prezoto, B.C., Serrano, S.M., 
Zingali, R.B. & Moura-da-Silva, A.M. (2014) 'Functional variability of snake venom 
metalloproteinases: adaptive advantages in targeting different prey and implications 
for human envenomation', PloS one, vol. 9, no. 10, p. e109651. 
Bhat, M.K. & Gowda, T.V. (1989) 'Purification and characterization of a myotoxic 
phospholipase A2 from Indian cobra (Naja naja naja) venom', Toxicon, vol. 27, no. 8, 
pp. 861-873. 
Blaylock, R. (2005) 'The identification and syndromic management of snakebite in South 
Africa', South African Family Practice, vol. 47, no. 9, pp. 48-53. 
Bregani, E.R., Maraffi, T. & Van Tien, T. (2011) 'Snake bites in Moyen Chari district, Chad: a 
five-year experience', Tropical doctor, vol. 41, no. 2, pp. 123-126. 
Brown, N.I. (2012) 'Consequences of neglect: analysis of the sub-Saharan African snake 
antivenom market and the global context', PLoS Negl Trop Dis, vol. 6, no. 6, p. e1670. 
Calvete, J.J., Sanz, L., Angulo, Y., Lomonte, B. & Gutirrez, J.M. (2009) 'Venoms, venomics, 
antivenomics', FEBS letters, vol. 583, no. 11, pp. 1736-1743. 
Canale, E., Isbister, G.K. & Currie, B.J. (2009) 'Investigating pressure bandaging for snakebite 
in a simulated setting: bandage type, training and the effect of transport', Emergency 
Medicine Australasia, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 184-190. 
Casewell, N.R., Cook, D.A., Wagstaff, S.C., Nasidi, A., Durfa, N., Wster, W. & Harrison, R.A. 
(2010) 'Pre-clinical assays predict pan-African Echis viper efficacy for a species-
specific antivenom', PLoS neglected tropical diseases, vol. 4, no. 10, p. e851. 
Casewell, N.R., Wagstaff, S.C., Wster, W., Cook, D.A.N., Bolton, F.M.S., King, S.I., Pla, D., 
Sanz, L., Calvete, J.J. & Harrison, R.A. (2014) 'Medically important differences in 
snake venom composition are dictated by distinct postgenomic mechanisms', 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 111, no. 25, pp. 9205-9210. 
Casewell, N.R., Wster, W., Vonk, F.J., Harrison, R.A. & Fry, B.G. (2013) 'Complex cocktails: 
the evolutionary novelty of venoms', Trends in ecology & evolution, vol. 28, no. 4, 
pp. 219-229. 
Chijiwa, T., Tokunaga, E., Ikeda, R., Terada, K., Ogawa, T., Oda-Ueda, N., Hattori, S., Nozaki, 
M. & Ohno, M. (2006) 'Discovery of novel [Arg49] phospholipase A2 isozymes from 
Protobothrops elegans venom and regional evolution of Crotalinae snake venom 
phospholipase A2 isozymes in the southwestern islands of Japan and Taiwan', 
Toxicon, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 672-682. 
Chippaux, J.-P. & Habib, A.G. (2015) Antivenom shortage is not circumstantial but structural, 
Oxford University Press. 
Chippaux, J.-P., Massougbodji, A., Diouf, A., Bald, C.M. & Boyer, L.V. (2015) 'Snake bites and 
antivenom shortage in Africa', The Lancet, vol. 386, no. 10010, pp. 2252-2253. 
Chippaux, J.-P., Williams, V. & White, J. (1991) 'Snake venom variability: methods of study, 
results and interpretation', Toxicon, vol. 29, no. 11, pp. 1279-1303. 
Chou, K.-C. (1996) 'Knowledge-based model building of the tertiary structures for lectin 
domains of the selectin family', Journal of protein chemistry, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 161-
Costa, T.R., Burin, S.M., Menaldo, D.L., de Castro, F.A. & Sampaio, S.V. (2014) 'Snake venom 
L-amino acid oxidases: an overview on their antitumor effects', Journal of Venomous 
Animals and Toxins including Tropical Diseases, vol. 20, no. 1, p. 23. 
Das, R.R., Sankar, J. & Dev, N. (2015) 'High-dose versus low-dose antivenom in the treatment 
of poisonous snake bites: a systematic review', Indian journal of critical care 
medicine: peer-reviewed, official publication of Indian Society of Critical Care 
Medicine, vol. 19, no. 6, p. 340. 
de Silva, H.A., Ryan, N.M. & de Silva, H.J. (2016) 'Adverse reactions to snake antivenom, and 
their prevention and treatment', British journal of clinical pharmacology, vol. 81, no. 
3, pp. 446-452. 
Dreyer, S. & Dreyer, J. (2013) 'Snake Bite: A review of Current Literature', East and Central 
African Journal of Surgery, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 45-52. 
Drickamer, K. (1999) 'C-type lectin-like domains', Current opinion in structural biology, vol. 9, 
no. 5, pp. 585-590. 
Drickamer, K. & Taylor, M.E. (2002) 'Glycan arrays for functional glycomics', Genome biology, 
vol. 3, no. 12, p. reviews1034. 1031. 
Daz, C., Len, G., Rucavado, A., Rojas, N., Schroit, A.J. & Gutirrez, J.M. (2001) 'Modulation 
of the susceptibility of human erythrocytes to snake venom myotoxic 
phospholipases A2: role of negatively charged phospholipids as potential membrane 
binding sites', Archives of biochemistry and biophysics, vol. 391, no. 1, pp. 56-64. 
Escalante, T., Rucavado, A., Fox, J.W. & Gutirrez, J.M. (2011) 'Key events in microvascular 
damage induced by snake venom hemorrhagic metalloproteinases', Journal of 
Proteomics, vol. 74, no. 9, pp. 1781-1794. 
Felicori, L.F., Souza, C.T., Velarde, D.T., Magalhaes, A., Almeida, A.P., Figueiredo, S., 
Richardson, M., Diniz, C.R. & Sanchez, E.F. (2003) 'Kallikrein-like proteinase from 
bushmaster snake venom', Protein expression and purification, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 32-
Fox, J.W. & Serrano, S.M. (2008) 'Insights into and speculations about snake venom 
metalloproteinase (SVMP) synthesis, folding and disulfide bond formation and their 
contribution to venom complexity', The FEBS journal, vol. 275, no. 12, pp. 3016-3030. 
Fry, B.G. (1999) 'Structurefunction properties of venom components from Australian 
elapids', Toxicon, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 11-32. 
Gasanov, S.E., Dagda, R.K. & Rael, E.D. (2014) 'Snake venom cytotoxins, phospholipase A2s, 
and Zn2+-dependent metalloproteinases: mechanisms of action and 
pharmacological relevance', Journal of clinical toxicology, vol. 4, no. 1, p. 1000181. 
Gibbs, H.L., Sanz, L., Sovic, M.G. & Calvete, J.J. (2013) 'Phylogeny-based comparative analysis 
of venom proteome variation in a clade of rattlesnakes (Sistrurus sp.)', PloS one, vol. 
8, no. 6, p. e67220. 
Girish, K., Shashidharamurthy, R., Nagaraju, S., Gowda, T.V. & Kemparaju, K. (2004) 'Isolation 
and characterization of hyaluronidase a spreading factor from Indian cobra (Naja 
naja) venom', Biochimie, vol. 86, no. 3, pp. 193-202. 
Gold, B.S. & Barish, R. (1992) 'Venomous snakebites. Current concepts in diagnosis, 
treatment, and management', Emergency medicine clinics of North America, vol. 10, 
no. 2, pp. 249-267. 
Gopalakrishnakone, P., Dempster, D.W., Hawgood, B.J. & Elder, H.Y. (1984) 'Cellular and 
mitochondrial changes induced in the structure of murine skeletal muscle by 
crotoxin, a neurotoxic phospholipase A2 complex', Toxicon, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 85-98. 
Gutirrez, J. (2019) 'Global availability of antivenoms: The relevance of public manufacturing 
laboratories', Toxins, vol. 11, no. 1, p. 5. 
Gutirrez, J., Solano, G., Pla, D., Herrera, M., Segura, ., Vargas, M., Villalta, M., Snchez, A., 
Sanz, L. & Lomonte, B. (2017a) 'Preclinical evaluation of the efficacy of antivenoms 
for snakebite envenoming: state-of-the-art and challenges ahead', Toxins, vol. 9, no. 
5, p. 163. 
Gutirrez, J.M. (2012a) 'Improving antivenom availability and accessibility: science, 
technology, and beyond', Toxicon, vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 676-687. 
Gutirrez, J.M. (2012b) 'Snakebite envenoming: a public health perspective', Public health-
methodology, environmental and systems issues. InTech, pp. 131-162. 
Gutirrez, J.M., Calvete, J.J., Habib, A.G., Harrison, R.A., Williams, D.J. & Warrell, D.A. (2017b) 
'Snakebite envenoming', Nature reviews. Disease primers, vol. 3, p. 17063. 
Gutirrez, J.M., Higashi, H.G., Wen, F.H. & Burnouf, T. (2007) 'Strengthening antivenom 
production in Central and South American public laboratories: report of a workshop', 
Toxicon, vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 30-35. 
Gutirrez, J.M. & Rucavado, A. (2000) 'Snake venom metalloproteinases: their role in the 
pathogenesis of local tissue damage', Biochimie, vol. 82, no. 9, pp. 841-850. 
Gutirrez, J.M., Rucavado, A., Escalante, T. & Daz, C. (2005) 'Hemorrhage induced by snake 
venom metalloproteinases: biochemical and biophysical mechanisms involved in 
microvessel damage', Toxicon, vol. 45, no. 8, pp. 997-1011. 
Gutirrez, J.M., Theakston, R.D.G. & Warrell, D.A. (2006) 'Confronting the neglected problem 
of snake bite envenoming: the need for a global partnership', PLoS medicine, vol. 3, 
no. 6, p. e150. 
Gutirrez, J.M., Williams, D., Fan, H.W. & Warrell, D.A. (2010) 'Snakebite envenoming from 
a global perspective: Towards an integrated approach', Toxicon, vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 
1223-1235. 
Gutirrez, J.M.a. & Ownby, C.L. (2003) 'Skeletal muscle degeneration induced by venom 
phospholipases A 2: insights into the mechanisms of local and systemic myotoxicity', 
Toxicon, vol. 42, no. 8, pp. 915-931. 
Habib, A.G. (2013) 'Public health aspects of snakebite care in West Africa: perspectives from 
Nigeria', Journal of Venomous Animals and Toxins including Tropical Diseases, vol. 
19, no. 1, p. 27. 
Habib, A.G. & Brown, N.I. (2018) 'The snakebite problem and antivenom crisis from a health-
economic perspective', Toxicon, vol. 150, pp. 115-123. 
Habib, A.G., Kuznik, A., Hamza, M., Abdullahi, M.I., Chedi, B.A., Chippaux, J.-P. & Warrell, D.A. 
(2015) 'Snakebite is Under Appreciated: Appraisal of Burden from West Africa', Plos 
Neglected Tropical Diseases, vol. 9, no. 9, pp. e0004088-e0004088. 
Habib, A.G. & Warrell, D.A. (2013) 'Antivenom therapy of carpet viper (Echis ocellatus) 
envenoming: effectiveness and strategies for delivery in West Africa', Toxicon, vol. 
69, pp. 82-89. 
Harris, J.B. & Scott-Davey, T. (2013) 'Secreted phospholipases A2 of snake venoms: effects 
on the peripheral neuromuscular system with comments on the role of 
phospholipases A2 in disorders of the CNS and their uses in industry', Toxins, vol. 5, 
no. 12, pp. 2533-2571. 
Harrison, R. & Gutirrez, J. (2016) 'Priority actions and progress to substantially and 
sustainably reduce the mortality, morbidity and socioeconomic burden of tropical 
snakebite', Toxins, vol. 8, no. 12, p. 351. 
Harrison, R.A., Hargreaves, A., Wagstaff, S.C., Faragher, B. & Lalloo, D.G. (2009) 'Snake 
envenoming: a disease of poverty', PLoS neglected tropical diseases, vol. 3, no. 12, p. 
e569. 
Harrison, R.A., Ibison, F., Wilbraham, D. & Wagstaff, S.C. (2007) 'Identification of cDNAs 
encoding viper venom hyaluronidases: cross-generic sequence conservation of full-
length and unusually short variant transcripts', Gene, vol. 392, no. 1-2, pp. 22-33. 
Herrera, C., Escalante, T., Voisin, M.-B., Rucavado, A., Morazn, D., Macdo, J.K.A., Calvete, 
J.J., Sanz, L., Nourshargh, S. & Gutirrez, J.M. (2015) 'Tissue localization and 
extracellular matrix degradation by PI, PII and PIII snake venom metalloproteinases: 
clues on the mechanisms of venom-induced hemorrhage', PLoS neglected tropical 
diseases, vol. 9, no. 4, p. e0003731. 
Hiremath, V., Yariswamy, M., Nanjaraj Urs, A., Joshi, V., Suvilesh, K., Ramakrishnan, C., 
Nataraju, A. & Vishwanath, B. (2014) 'Differential action of Indian BIG FOUR snake 
venom toxins on blood coagulation', Toxin Reviews, vol. 33, no. 1-2, pp. 23-32. 
Hoogenboom, H.R. (2005) 'Selecting and screening recombinant antibody libraries', Nature 
biotechnology, vol. 23, no. 9, p. 1105. 
Huang, P. & Mackessy, S.P. (2004) 'Biochemical characterization of phospholipase A2 
(trimorphin) from the venom of the Sonoran Lyre Snake Trimorphodon biscutatus 
lambda (family Colubridae)', Toxicon, vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 27-36. 
Hutton, R. & Warrell, D. (1993) 'Action of snake venom components on the haemostatic 
system', Blood reviews, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 176-189. 
Inn-Ho, T., Ying-Ming, W., Yi-Hsuan, C., Tein-Shun, T. & Ming-Chung, T.U. (2004) 'Venom 
phospholipases A2 of bamboo viper (Trimeresurus stejnegeri): molecular 
characterization, geographic variations and evidence of multiple ancestries', 
Biochemical Journal, vol. 377, no. 1, pp. 215-223. 
Isbister, G.K., Buckley, N.A., Page, C.B., Scorgie, F.E., Lincz, L.F., Seldon, M., Brown, S.G.A. & 
Investigators, A.S.P. (2013) 'A randomized controlled trial of fresh frozen plasma for 
treating venom-induced consumption coagulopathy in cases of A ustralian snakebite 
(ASP-18)', Journal of Thrombosis and Haemostasis, vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 1310-1318. 
Ismail, M. & Memish, Z. (2003) 'Venomous snakes of Saudi Arabia and the Middle East: a 
keynote for travellers', International journal of antimicrobial agents, vol. 21, no. 2, 
pp. 164-169. 
Jackson, K. (2003) 'The evolution of venom-delivery systems in snakes', Zoological Journal of 
the Linnean Society, vol. 137, no. 3, pp. 337-354. 
Jackson, K. (2007) 'The evolution of venom-conducting fangs: insights from developmental 
biology', Toxicon, vol. 49, no. 7, pp. 975-981. 
Jayanthi, G. & Gowda, T.V. (1990) 'Synergistic interaction of a protease and protease 
inhibitors from Russell's viper (Vipera russelli) venom', Toxicon, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 65-
Joseph, B., Raj, S.J., Edwin, B.T. & Sankarganesh, P. (2011) 'Pliarmacognostic and Biochemical 
Properties of Certain Biomarkers in Snake Venom'. 
Kamiguti, A., Slupsky, J., Zuzel, M. & Hay, C. (1994) 'Properties of fibrinogen cleaved by 
Jararhagin, a metalloproteinase from the venom of Bothrops jararaca', Thrombosis 
and haemostasis, vol. 72, no. 2, pp. 244-249. 
Kang, T.S., Georgieva, D., Genov, N., Murakami, M.T., Sinha, M., Kumar, R.P., Kaur, P., Kumar, 
S., Dey, S. & Sharma, S. (2011) 'Enzymatic toxins from snake venom: structural 
characterization and mechanism of catalysis', The FEBS journal, vol. 278, no. 23, pp. 
4544-4576. 
Kasturi, S. & Gowda, T.V. (1989) 'Purification and characterization of a major phospholipase 
A2 from Russell's viper (Vipera russelli) venom', Toxicon, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 229-237. 
Kasturiratne, A., Wickremasinghe, A.R., de Silva, N., Gunawardena, N.K., Pathmeswaran, A., 
Premaratna, R., Savioli, L., Lalloo, D.G. & de Silva, H.J. (2008) 'The global burden of 
snakebite: a literature analysis and modelling based on regional estimates of 
envenoming and deaths', PLoS medicine, vol. 5, no. 11, p. e218. 
Kini, R. (1997) 'Phospholipase A2: a complex multifunctional protein puzzle', Venom 
phospholipase A2 enzymes: structure, function and mechanism, pp. 1-28. 
Kini, R. & Koh, C. (2016) 'Metalloproteases affecting blood coagulation, fibrinolysis and 
platelet aggregation from snake venoms: definition and nomenclature of interaction 
sites', Toxins, vol. 8, no. 10, p. 284. 
Kini, R.M. (2005a) 'Structurefunction relationships and mechanism of anticoagulant 
phospholipase A 2 enzymes from snake venoms', Toxicon, vol. 45, no. 8, pp. 1147-
1161. 
Kini, R.M. (2005b) 'The intriguing world of prothrombin activators from snake venom', 
Toxicon, vol. 45, no. 8, pp. 1133-1145. 
Kini, R.M. & Evans, H.J. (1989) 'A model to explain the pharmacological effects of snake 
venom phospholipases A2', Toxicon, vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 613-635. 
Kudo, K. & Tu, A.T. (2001) 'Characterization of hyaluronidase isolated from Agkistrodon 
contortrix contortrix (Southern Copperhead) venom', Archives of biochemistry and 
biophysics, vol. 386, no. 2, pp. 154-162. 
Lawson, R., Slowinski, J.B., Crother, B.I. & Burbrink, F.T. (2005) 'Phylogeny of the Colubroidea 
(Serpentes): new evidence from mitochondrial and nuclear genes', Molecular 
phylogenetics and evolution, vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 581-601. 
Lee, W.-H., Zhang, Y., Wang, W.-Y., Xiong, Y.-L. & Gao, R. (1995) 'Isolation and properties of 
a blood coagulation factor X activator from the venom of king cobra (Ophiophagus 
hannah)', Toxicon, vol. 33, no. 10, pp. 1263-1276. 
LIMPUS, C.J. (2013) 'THE VENOM APPARATUS AND VENOM YIELDS OF SUB-TROPICAL 
QUEENSLAND', Toxins: Animal, Plant and Microbial, p. 39. 
Lomonte, B. & Calvete, J.J. (2017) 'Strategies in snake venomics aiming at an integrative 
view of compositional, functional, and immunological characteristics of venoms', 
Journal of Venomous Animals and Toxins including Tropical Diseases, vol. 23, no. 1, 
p. 26. 
Lu, Q., Clemetson, J. & Clemetson, K. (2005) 'Snake venoms and hemostasis', Journal of 
Thrombosis and Haemostasis, vol. 3, no. 8, pp. 1791-1799. 
Lumsden, N.G., Fry, B.G., Ventura, S., Kini, R.M. & Hodgson, W.C. (2004) 'The in vitro and in 
vivo pharmacological activity of Boiga dendrophila (mangrove catsnake) venom', 
Autonomic and Autacoid Pharmacology, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 107-113. 
Mackessy, S.P. & Modahl, C.M. (2019) 'Venoms of Rear-fanged Snakes: New Proteins and 
Novel Activities', Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution, vol. 7, p. 279. 
Madrigal, M., Sanz, L., Flores-Daz, M., Sasa, M., Nez, V., Alape-Girn, A. & Calvete, J.J. 
(2012) 'Snake venomics across genus Lachesis. Ontogenetic changes in the venom 
composition of Lachesis stenophrys and comparative proteomics of the venoms of 
adult Lachesis melanocephala and Lachesis acrochorda', Journal of proteomics, vol. 
77, pp. 280-297. 
Maduwage, K. & Isbister, G.K. (2014) 'Current treatment for venom-induced consumption 
coagulopathy resulting from snakebite', PLoS neglected tropical diseases, vol. 8, no. 
10, p. e3220. 
Maraganore, J.M. & Heinrikson, R.L. (1986) 'The lysine-49 phospholipase A2 from the venom 
of Agkistrodon piscivorus piscivorus. Relation of structure and function to other 
phospholipases A2', Journal of Biological Chemistry, vol. 261, no. 11, pp. 4797-4804. 
Maraganore, J.M., Merutka, G., Cho, W., Welches, W., Kezdy, F.J. & Heinrikson, R.L. (1984) 
'A new class of phospholipases A2 with lysine in place of aspartate 49. Functional 
consequences for calcium and substrate binding', Journal of Biological Chemistry, 
vol. 259, no. 22, pp. 13839-13843. 
Markland, F.S. (1998) 'Snake venoms and the hemostatic system', Toxicon, vol. 36, no. 12, 
pp. 1749-1800. 
Markland, F.S. & Swenson, S. (2013) 'Snake venom metalloproteinases', Toxicon, vol. 62, pp. 
3-18. 
Marsh, N. (1994) 'Snake venoms affecting the haemostatic mechanism--a consideration of 
their mechanisms, practical applications and biological significance', Blood 
coagulation & fibrinolysis: an international journal in haemostasis and thrombosis, 
vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 399-410. 
Matsui, T., Fujimura, Y. & Titani, K. (2000) 'Snake venom proteases affecting hemostasis and 
thrombosis', Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-Protein Structure and Molecular 
Enzymology, vol. 1477, no. 1, pp. 146-156. 
McCue, M.D. (2005) 'Enzyme activities and biological functions of snake venoms', Applied 
Herpetology, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 109-123. 
Mebs, D. & Ownby, C.L. (1990) 'Myotoxic components of snake venoms: their biochemical 
and biological activities', Pharmacology & therapeutics, vol. 48, no. 2, pp. 223-236. 
Mehta, S. & Sashindran, V. (2002) 'Clinical features and management of snake bite', Medical 
Journal, Armed Forces India, vol. 58, no. 3, p. 247. 
Modesto, A., Junqueira-de-Azevedo, I.L.M., Neves-Ferreira, A.G.C., Fritzen, M., Oliva, M.L.V., 
Ho, P.L., Perales, J. & Chudzinski-Tavassi, A.M. (2005) 'Insularinase A, a prothrombin 
activator from Bothrops insularis venom, is a metalloprotease derived from a gene 
encoding protease and disintegrin domains', Biological chemistry, vol. 386, no. 6, pp. 
589-600. 
Montecucco, C. & Rossetto, O. (2000) 'How do presynaptic PLA 2 neurotoxins block nerve 
terminals?', Trends in biochemical sciences, vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 266-270. 
Morais, V.M. & Massaldi, H. (2009) 'Snake antivenoms: adverse reactions and production 
technology', Journal of Venomous Animals and Toxins including Tropical Diseases, 
vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 2-18. 
Moura-da-Silva, A.M., Butera, D. & Tanjoni, I. (2007) 'Importance of snake venom 
metalloproteinases in cell biology: effects on platelets, inflammatory and endothelial 
cells', Current pharmaceutical design, vol. 13, no. 28, pp. 2893-2905. 
Munawar, A., Trusch, M., Georgieva, D., Hildebrand, D., Kwiatkowski, M., Behnken, H., 
Harder, S., Arni, R., Spencer, P. & Schlter, H. (2014) 'Elapid snake venom analyses 
show the specificity of the peptide composition at the level of genera Naja and 
Notechis', Toxins, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 850-868. 
O'leary, M.A. & Isbister, G.K. (2009) 'Commercial monovalent antivenoms in Australia are 
polyvalent', Toxicon, vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 192-195. 
O'Shea, M. (2008) Venomous snakes of the world, New Holland Publishers. 
Ouyang, C., Teng, C.-M. & Huang, T.-F. (1992) 'Characterization of snake venom components 
acting on blood coagulation and platelet function', Toxicon, vol. 30, no. 9, pp. 945-
Panfoli, I., Calzia, D., Ravera, S. & Morelli, A. (2010) 'Inhibition of hemorragic snake venom 
components: old and new approaches', Toxins, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 417-427. 
Paul, V., Chawla, D. & Jatana, V. (1993) 'Animal and insect bites', Medical emergencies in 
children, vol. 2. 
Petan, T., Krizaj, I., Gelb, M.H. & Pungercar, J. (2005) 'Ammodytoxins, potent presynaptic 
neurotoxins, are also highly efficient phospholipase A2 enzymes', Biochemistry, vol. 
44, no. 37, pp. 12535-12545. 
Pla, D., Sanz, L., Molina-Snchez, P., Zorita, V., Madrigal, M., Flores-Daz, M., Alape-Girn, A., 
Nez, V., Andrs, V. & Gutirrez, J.M. (2013) 'Snake venomics of Lachesis muta 
rhombeata and genus-wide antivenomics assessment of the paraspecific 
immunoreactivity of two antivenoms evidence the high compositional and 
immunological conservation across Lachesis', Journal of proteomics, vol. 89, pp. 112-
Polgar, J., Magnenat, E.M., Peitsch, M.C., Wells, T.N.C. & Clemetson, K.J. (1996) 'Asp-49 is 
not an absolute prerequisite for the enzymic activity of low-Mr phospholipases A2: 
purification, characterization and computer modelling of an enzymically active Ser-
49 phospholipase A2, ecarpholin S, from the venom of Echis carinatus sochureki 
(saw-scaled viper)', Biochemical Journal, vol. 319, no. 3, pp. 961-968. 
Pukrittayakamee, S., Warrell, D.A., Desakorn, V., McMichael, A.J., White, N.J. & Bunnag, D. 
(1988) 'The hyaluronidase activities of some Southeast Asian snake venoms', 
Toxicon, vol. 26, no. 7, pp. 629-637. 
Pterfi, O., Boda, F., Szab, Z., Ferencz, E. & Bba, L. (2019) 'Hypotensive Snake Venom 
ComponentsA Mini-Review', Molecules, vol. 24, no. 15, p. 2778. 
Ranawaka, U.K., Lalloo, D.G. & de Silva, H.J. (2013) 'Neurotoxicity in snakebite--the limits of 
our knowledge', Plos Neglected Tropical Diseases, vol. 7, no. 10, pp. e2302-e2302. 
Rossetto, O., Morbiato, L., Caccin, P., Rigoni, M. & Montecucco, C. (2006) 'Presynaptic 
enzymatic neurotoxins', Journal of neurochemistry, vol. 97, no. 6, pp. 1534-1545. 
Sachetto, A.T.A. & Mackman, N. (2019) 'Modulation of the mammalian coagulation system 
by venoms and other proteins from snakes, arthropods, nematodes and insects', 
Thrombosis research. 
Schiavo, G., Matteoli, M. & Montecucco, C. (2000) 'Neurotoxins affecting neuroexocytosis', 
Physiological reviews, vol. 80, no. 2, pp. 717-766. 
Scott, D.L. & Sigler, P.B. (1994) 'Structure and catalytic mechanism of secretory 
phospholipases A 2', Advances in protein chemistry, vol. 45, pp. 53-88. 
Segura, ., Villalta, M., Herrera, M., Len, G., Harrison, R., Durfa, N., Nasidi, A., Calvete, J.J., 
Theakston, R.D.G. & Warrell, D.A. (2010) 'Preclinical assessment of the efficacy of a 
new antivenom (EchiTAb-Plus-ICP) for the treatment of viper envenoming in sub-
Saharan Africa', Toxicon, vol. 55, no. 2-3, pp. 369-374. 
Shrestha, B.R., Pandey, D.P., Acharya, K.P., Thapa-Magar, C., Mohamed, F. & Isbister, G.K. 
(2017) 'Effective, polyvalent, affordable antivenom needed to treat snakebite in 
Nepal', Bulletin of the World Health Organization, vol. 95, no. 10, p. 718. 
Siigur, E., Tnismgi, K., Trummal, K., Samel, M., Vija, H., Subbi, J. & Siigur, J. (2001) 'Factor X 
activator from Vipera lebetina snake venom, molecular characterization and 
substrate specificity', Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-General Subjects, vol. 
1568, no. 1, pp. 90-98. 
Silva, A., Hodgson, W. & Isbister, G. (2017) 'Antivenom for neuromuscular paralysis resulting 
from snake envenoming', Toxins, vol. 9, no. 4, p. 143. 
Slagboom, J., Kool, J., Harrison, R.A. & Casewell, N.R. (2017) 'Haemotoxic snake venoms: their 
functional activity, impact on snakebite victims and pharmaceutical promise', British 
journal of haematology, vol. 177, no. 6, pp. 947-959. 
Sousa, L.F., Nicolau, C.A., Peixoto, P.S., Bernardoni, J.L., Oliveira, S.S., Portes-Junior, J.A., 
Mouro, R.H.V., Lima-dos-Santos, I., Sano-Martins, I.S. & Chalkidis, H.M. (2013) 
'Comparison of phylogeny, venom composition and neutralization by antivenom in 
diverse species of bothrops complex', PLoS Negl Trop Dis, vol. 7, no. 9, p. e2442. 
Tans, G. & Rosing, J. (2001) 'Snake venom activators of factor X: an overview', 
Pathophysiology of Haemostasis and Thrombosis, vol. 31, no. 3-6, pp. 225-233. 
Tans, G. & Rosing, J. (2002) 'Snake venom activators of factor X: an overview', 
Pathophysiology of Haemostasis and Thrombosis, vol. 31, no. 3-6, pp. 225-233. 
Theakston, R.D.G. & Warrell, D.A. (2000) 'Crisis in snake antivenom supply for Africa', The 
Lancet, vol. 356, no. 9247, p. 2104. 
Theakston, R.D.G., Warrell, D.A. & Griffiths, E. (2003) 'Report of a WHO workshop on the 
standardization and control of antivenoms', Toxicon, vol. 41, no. 5, pp. 541-557. 
Thorelli, E. (1999) 'Mechanisms that regulate the anticoagulant function of coagulation 
factor V', Scandinavian Journal of Clinical and Laboratory Investigation, vol. 59, no. 
229, pp. 19-26. 
Torres, A.M., Wong, H.Y., Desai, M., Moochhala, S., Kuchel, P.W. & Kini, R.M. (2003) 
'Identification of a novel family of proteins in snake venoms purification and 
structural characterization of nawaprin from naja nigricollis snake venom', Journal of 
Biological Chemistry, vol. 278, no. 41, pp. 40097-40104. 
Vaiyapuri, S., Vaiyapuri, R., Ashokan, R., Ramasamy, K., Nattamaisundar, K., Jeyaraj, A., 
Chandran, V., Gajjeraman, P., Baksh, M.F. & Gibbins, J.M. (2013) 'Snakebite and its 
socio-economic impact on the rural population of Tamil Nadu, India', PloS one, vol. 
8, no. 11, p. e80090. 
Vidal, N. (2002) 'Colubroid systematics: evidence for an early appearance of the venom 
apparatus followed by extensive evolutionary tinkering', Journal of Toxicology: Toxin 
Reviews, vol. 21, no. 1-2, pp. 21-41. 
Vidal, N. & Hedges, S.B. (2004) 'Molecular evidence for a terrestrial origin of snakes', 
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences, vol. 271, no. Suppl 
4, pp. S226-S229. 
Wangoda, R., Watmon, B. & Kisige, M. (2004) 'Snakebite management: experiences from 
Gulu Regional Hospital Uganda', East and Central African Journal of Surgery, vol. 9, 
no. 1. 
Warrell, D. (1996) Injuries, envenoming, poisoning and allergic reactions caused by animals. 
Weatherall, DJ, Ledingham, JGG, Warrell, DA, eds, Oxford Textbook of Clinical 
Medicine. 
Warrell, D.A. (2008) 'Unscrupulous marketing of snake bite antivenoms in Africa and Papua 
New Guinea: choosing the right productwhat's in a name?', Transactions of the 
Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, vol. 102, no. 5, pp. 397-399. 
Warrell, D.A. (2010a) 'Guidelines for the management of snake-bites', Guidelines for the 
management of snake-bites. 
Warrell, D.A. (2010b) 'Snake bite', The Lancet, vol. 375, no. 9708, pp. 77-88. 
Warrell, D.A., Gutirrez, J.M., Calvete, J.J. & Williams, D. (2013) 'New approaches & 
technologies of venomics to meet the challenge of human envenoming by snakebites 
in India', The Indian journal of medical research, vol. 138, no. 1, p. 38. 
Westerlund, B., Nordlund, P., Uhlin, U., Eaker, D. & Eklund, H. (1992) 'The three-dimensional 
structure of notexin, a presynaptic neurotoxic phospholipase A2 at 2.0  resolution', 
FEBS letters, vol. 301, no. 2, pp. 159-164. 
White, J. (2005) 'Snake venoms and coagulopathy', Toxicon, vol. 45, no. 8, pp. 951-967. 
WHO (2010a) 'Guidelines for the prevention and clinical management of snakebite in Africa'. 
WHO (2010b) 'WHO guidelines for the production, control and regulation of snake 
antivenom immunoglobulins', Geneva: WHO, vol. 134. 
WHO (2019) Neglected tropical diseases [Online], World Health Organization, Available from: 
http://www.who.int/neglected_diseases/diseases/en/ (Accessed: 19th September). 
Williams, D.J., Gutirrez, J.-M., Calvete, J.J., Wster, W., Ratanabanangkoon, K., Paiva, O., 
Brown, N.I., Casewell, N.R., Harrison, R.A. & Rowley, P.D. (2011a) 'Ending the 
drought: new strategies for improving the flow of affordable, effective antivenoms 
in Asia and Africa', Journal of proteomics, vol. 74, no. 9, pp. 1735-1767. 
Williams, H., Hayter, P., Ravishankar, D., Baines, A., Layfield, H., Croucher, L., Wark, C., 
Bicknell, A., Trim, S. & Vaiyapuri, S. (2018) 'Impact of Naja nigricollis Venom on the 
Production of Methaemoglobin', Toxins, vol. 10, no. 12, p. 539. 
Williams, S.S., Wijesinghe, C.A., Jayamanne, S.F., Buckley, N.A., Dawson, A.H., Lalloo, D.G. & 
de Silva, H.J. (2011b) 'Delayed psychological morbidity associated with snakebite 
envenoming', Plos Neglected Tropical Diseases, vol. 5, no. 8, pp. e1255-e1255. 
Wilson, H.A., Huang, W., Waldrip, J.B., Judd, A.M., Vernon, L.P. & Bell, J.D. (1997) 
'Mechanisms by which thionin induces susceptibility of S49 cell membranes to 
extracellular phospholipase A2', Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-Lipids and Lipid 
Metabolism, vol. 1349, no. 2, pp. 142-156. 
Wilson, J.M., Kalasinsky, K.S., Levey, A.I., Bergeron, C., Reiber, G., Anthony, R.M., Schmunk, 
G.A., Shannak, K., Haycock, J.W. & Kish, S.J. (1996) 'Striatal dopamine nerve terminal 
markers in human, chronic methamphetamine users', Nature medicine, vol. 2, no. 6, 
pp. 699-703. 
http://www.who.int/neglected_diseases/diseases/en/
Xiao, H., Pan, H., Liao, K., Yang, M. & Huang, C. (2017) 'Snake venom PLA2, a promising target 
for broad-spectrum antivenom drug development', BioMed research international, 
vol. 2017. 
Xu, X., Wang, X., Xi, X., Liu, J., Huang, J. & Lu, Z. (1982) 'Purification and partial 
characterization of hyaluronidase from five pace snake (Agkistrodon acutus) venom', 
Toxicon, vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 973-981. 
Yamamoto, C., Tsuru, D., Oda-Ueda, N., Ohno, M., Hattori, S. & Kim, S.T. (2001) 'Trimeresurus 
flavoviridis (habu snake) venom induces human erythrocyte lysis through enzymatic 
lipolysis, complement activation and decreased membrane expression of CD55 and 
CD59', Pharmacology & toxicology, vol. 89, no. 4, pp. 188-194. 
Zaganelli, G.L., Zaganelli, M.G., Magalhes, A., Diniz, C.R. & De Lima, M.E. (1996) 'Purification 
and characterization of a fibrinogen-clotting enzyme from the venom of jararacuu 
(Bothrops jararacussu)', Toxicon, vol. 34, no. 7, pp. 807-819. 
Zelensky, A.N. & Gready, J.E. (2005) 'The C-type lectin-like domain superfamily', Febs Journal, 
vol. 272, no. 24, pp. 6179-6217. 
Zhang, C. & Gopalakrishnakone, P. (1999) 'Histopathological studies of the acute 
inflammation in synovial tissue of rat knee joint following intra-articular injection of 
PLA2 from Chinese Cobra (Naja naja atra) venom', Toxicon, vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 783-
Zhang, Y., Xiong, Y.-L. & Bon, C. (1995) 'An activator of blood coagulation factor X from the 
venom of Bungarus fasciatus', Toxicon, vol. 33, no. 10, pp. 1277-1288. 
Zuliani, J.P., Gutirrez, J.M., e Silva, L.L.C., Sampaio, S.C., Lomonte, B. & Teixeira, C.d.F.P. 
(2005) 'Activation of cellular functions in macrophages by venom secretory Asp-49 
and Lys-49 phospholipases A2', Toxicon, vol. 46, no. 5, pp. 523-532. 
Chapter 2 
Title: A new bovine eye model of venom-induced ophthalmia reveals cellular damage is 
averted by rapid irrigation with water but not milk  
Jaffer Alsolaiss1, Gail leaming2, Ahmed Kazaili3, Shaun Pennington4, Paul Rowley1, Mark 
Wilkinson 1, Nicholas R Casewell1, Robert A Harrison1 
Affiliations:  
1Centre for Snakebite Research and Interventions, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, 
Liverpool, UK. 
2Institute of infection and Global Health, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L3 5RF, UK 
3Department of Mechanical, Materials and Aerospace Engineering, School of Engineering, 
University of Liverpool, L69 3GH, UK 
2.1 Introduction 
Snakebite envenoming (SBE) is a major cause of morbidity, mortality and economic hardship 
in many communities in the developing world. It adversely affects local and national 
productivity, with disability ratings that surpass many other endemic tropical diseases (Habib 
& Brown 2018). Snakebite envenoming is a potentially life-threatening condition that results 
from the snake injecting a mixture of different venom toxins into tissues (WHO 2019), that 
also includes ophthalmia that can occur when some snakes (mainly the spitting cobras) spit 
venom into the eyes of victims. 
The spitting cobras lie within the Elapidae and are believed to have undergone three 
separate evolutionary processes to attain their spitting trait (Wuester & Broadley 2007), 
namely, twice in the true cobras of the genus Naja and the third time in their closest-
related species, Hemachatus haemachatus, the sole species of the genus Hemachatus. 
Venom spitting is considered an evolutionary adaptation serving defensive purposes only  
spitting cobras do not spit at their prey, only aggressors.  The venom spitting trait is exhibited 
by every species of the subgenus Afronaja and the majority of species of the subgenus Naja, 
apart from the Asian N. kaouthia, N. naja and N. oxiana species (Wster & Thorpe 1992). The 
spitting mechanism is made possible by anatomic changes to the fang architecture such that 
the orifice in spitting cobras is uniquely forward facing and smaller than that of other 
venomous snakes (Figure 2.1). This adaptation ensures that the venom coursing down the 
duct is under unusually high pressure and thus ejected from the modified fang over a 
distance ranging from 2 to 5 metres (Chu et al. 2010). African spitting cobras of medical 
significance include N. nigricollis, N. mossambica, N. pallida, N. katiensis, N. ashei, N. nubiae, 
N. nigricincta and H. haemachatus and Asian species include N. sputatrix, N. philippinensis, 
N. sumatrana, N. mandalayensis, N. siamensis, N. samarensis and and possibly N. kaouthia. 
N. nigricollis is the species thought to be responsible for most incidents of venom ophthalmia 
(Chu et al. 2010).  
Figure 2.1:  Image of the exit orifice obtained by scanning electron micrographs of (A) non- 
spitting cobra N. kaouthia and (B) spitting cobra N. pallida (Young et al. 2004) 
The immediate clinical manifestations of venom entering the eye are identical for Asian and 
African spitting cobras. The victim feels an agonising burning sensation and the eye goes red 
and begins to weep. Complications are more likely to be serious if irrigation is not effected 
quickly. For example, the venom of Naja siamensis can result in mild bleparospasm and 
bilateral periorbital oedema, moderate conjunctival chemosis, and causes discrete vertical 
nebulous patches on the corneal epithelium (Ang, Sanjay & Sangtam 2014; Rita et al. 2011). 
Clinical reports of cases N. nigricollis ophthalmia describe an instant sharp stinging pain and 
conjunctival hyperaemia. After a few hours, the pain and irritation lessen and, after two or 
more days, blepharitis with little discharge may develop (Chu et al. 2010). Instant and severe 
pain, although apparently of lesser intensity compared to Naja nigricollis and Naja siamensis, 
also accompanies ocular envenoming by the African species N. pallida and H. haemachatus 
and the Asian Naja species (Chu et al. 2010; Fung et al. 2009; Rita et al. 2011). Furthermore, 
the eye is mildly irritated when coming into contact with the venom of other species, such 
as Rhabdophis tigrinus formosanus and the rattlesnake, Crotalus atrox. 
A few studies have explored ocular envenomation in animal models. Koch and Sachs 
employed dog and rabbit eyes to investigate the effects of venom spat by the African cobras 
N. nigricollis and H. haemachatus. Other studies used rabbit eyes to examine corneal 
opacification and subconjunctival haemorrhage by the venom of N. nigricollis, H. 
haemachatus and N. melanoleuca in both crude and fractionated venoms (fractions VIII) 
(Ismail & Ellison, 1986; Ismail et al., 1993). The former study examined temporary corneal 
oedema, extensive chemosis and pupillary due to N. nigricollis venom on albino and 
pigmented rabbits. Cham et al. (2006) also employed a rabbit model to study whether 
corneal injury caused by the venom of N. sumatrana could be treated with topical heparin, 
antivenom, tetracycline and dexamethasone.  
The selection of bovine cornea for this study is based on a comprehensive study by Hayashi 
et al. (2002) comparing the observation on corneas in mammals and amphibians which 
revealed that the bovine cornea has the closest morphology to the human cornea in terms 
of the thickness and measurements of different cornea layers (Bowmans membrane, 
diameter of collagen, thickness of Descemets membrane). Venom testing and toxicological 
screening are relevant procedures to comprehend how pathology is caused by venom and 
thus enabling novel approaches for treating snakebites or ocular envenoming (ophthalmia). 
This ex vivo bovine eye model also bypasses the frequent ethical concerns of the 
aforementioned studies, because the eyes were sourced from local abattoirs where the cows 
are used for meat production.  
Here, this ex vivo model was used to assess the precise corneal pathology caused by venoms 
from both spitting and non-spitting cobras, as well as an additional test substance. The 
metrics used to gauge pathogenicity were (i) reduced light transmission (opacity), (ii) greater 
penetration of sodium fluorescein dye (permeability), (iii) penetration of corneal layers by 
venom proteins and (iv) histopathological definition of the temporal progress of ocular 
damage. 
The comparative ocular-pathology analyses utilised lyophilised venoms, freshly extracted 
venoms of the most medically important African and Asian spitting and non-spitting cobras 
and culminated with an assessment of the optimal first aid strategy to reduce onset of 
venom ophthalmia after ocular envenoming.  
2.2 Materials and methods 
2.2.1 Eye collection and preparation; 
The killing of cattle intended for human consumption or other commercial purposes is 
usually carried out in slaughterhouses. Bovine eyes for research purposes are derived solely 
from healthy cattle deemed appropriate for human consumption. In this study they were 
sourced from Blacklidge Brothers Abattoir, Wigan, UK. Excision of the eyes was undertaken 
immediately after death, exsanguination and decapitation of the cows. Animal heads were 
rinsed with non-detergent solutions to avoid eye irritations. The eyes were immediately 
preserved and transported in cold (4-6 oC) Hanks Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS) or phosphate 
buffered saline (PBS) and corneas used immediately after delivery to the laboratory (less 
than 3-4 hours after dissection).  For the experimental outline see Figure 2.2.  
Figure 2.2 Experimental design of ex vivo bovine eye model to study the ocular 
envenomation after topical administration of lyophilised/ fresh venom from spitting and 
non-spitting cobra. (A) using whole eye and (B) using dissected cornea.  
2.2.2 Selection criteria and preparation of eyes and corneas 
The eyes were subjected to a detailed examination for any defects, scratches or 
neovascularisation. Every treatment group was made up of at least two eyes (i.e. one eye 
exposed to venom from spitting or non-spitting snakes, or the positive control and one eye 
as a negative control). Corneas without defects were positioned on a holder and washed 
thoroughly with 10 ml PBS. To ensure as normal physiological conditions as possible, the next 
step was equilibration at 323 C for a minimum of ten minutes (the in vivo corneal surface 
has a temperature of about 32C). It is advised to maintain this temperature by employing a 
water bath, with necessary measures, such as holder pre-warming, being taken to keep the 
temperature stable.  
2.2.3 Preparation of controls and snake venoms  
The Centre for Snakebite Research & Interventions at the Liverpool School of Tropical 
Medicine supplied the lyophilised and fresh venoms (spitting and non-spiting cobra) (Table 
2.1).  Lyophilised venom was resuspended in PBS at the different doses required (2.5 g and 
10 g), while fresh venom was extracted on the day of the experiment and applied at the 
quantity described (Table 2.1). 
Table 2.1: Details of snake venom and venom doses used to study the corneal damage 
induced by lyophilised and fresh venom from spitting and non-spitting cobras.  
Snake venom 
Origin 
Spitting/ 
spitting 
mechanism 
Lyophilised 
venom  
 Dose/ 100 
Fresh 
venom 
whole 
Fresh 
venom with 
dissected 
cornea 
(penetration 
experiment) 
Fresh 
venom  
Dose/ 10 
nigricollis 
Nigeria Spitting     1000 g 
Naja haje Uganda Non-spiting    - 
Naja nivea South 
Africa 
spitting 
    1000 g 
mossambica 
Tanzania Spitting   1000 g 
Naja pallida Tanzania Spitting  1000 g 
Naja nubiae Eastern 
Africa 
Spitting  1000 g 
Hemachatus 
haemachatus 
Southern 
Africa 
Spitting  1000 g 
siamensis 
Thailand Spitting  1000 g 
Naja naja India Non-
spitting 
 1000 g 
2.2.3 Exposure of corneas to snake venoms, and to negative and positive controls  
Negative control (PBS), positive control (NaOH) or a concentration of lyophilised or fresh 
snake venom was applied topically to the cornea for one-minute, followed by 100 l of 2% 
sodium fluorescein applied for one minute, after which the corneas were thoroughly washed 
with 10 ml PBS (it is essential that the epithelial surface is completely coated by the test 
substance, and then completely eliminated by thorough rinsing). Accordingly, a silicon O ring 
was positioned in the middle of the cornea and a micropipette was used to apply 100 l (or 
any other amount sufficient to cover the O ring fully) of the control or venom straight to the 
epithelial surface of the cornea. For using fresh venoms, a quantity of 10 l was used to 
replicate as closely as possible the amount of venom usually discharged through spitting. 
Because it lacks blood and lymphatic vessels, the cornea is classified as an immune-privileged 
tissue. Despite the lack of blood vessels, however, neovascularisation, scarring and corneal 
blindness can be induced by a range of conditions (Gandhi & Jain 2015). When a substance 
is applied topically, it usually causes damage to the epithelium as well as stromal oedema. 
Following Kuckelkorn et al. (2002) method an investigation into the mechanism of action of 
the main acidic and alkaline agents associated with severe damage to the eye, with emphasis 
on chemical type, volume, concentration, pH and exposure length. The assessment was 
carried out top-down, i.e. from the superior corneal layer (epithelium) to the stroma and 
endothelium, due to the topical application of the test substance. The manner of corneal 
layer penetration by the test substance determines how deep corneal damage can become.  
To assess the extent of corneal damage, we measured the opacity of bovine corneas exposed 
to varying concentrations of the positive and negative controls and snake venoms (N. 
nigricollis, N. haje and N. nivea at concentrations of 2.5 g, 10 g of lyophilised venom or 
freshly-extracted venom). The treated corneas were exposed to 2% sodium fluorescein and 
stained with haematoxylin and eosin to describe the histopathological damage to the corneal 
epithelium. The inclusion of the controls (NaOH and PBS) was intended to make it easier to 
interpret the results, with the negative control serving as the baseline for comparison of 
histopathological modifications.  
2.2.4 Evaluation of epithelial damage via confocal laser scanning fluorescence microscopy 
A Zeiss LSM880 confocal microscope was employed for fluorescence imaging. PBS and NaOH-
treated eyes were used for optimisation of 488 nm laser power (3.6%), gain (260), and virtual 
filters (493  624). The characteristics of the 15 images of 12-bit size obtained over a 760.78 
m section (with a 54.34 m interval), centring on the peak emission plane, were 10 
magnification, 0.6 digital zoom, and 1,024  1,024 resolution. The fluorescent intensities for 
all images were then measured using ImageJ software (Java-based image processing 
program). These setting measurements were applied for all selected areas (the area 
integrated intensity and mean grey value were selected), both for areas with fluorescence 
and areas without fluorescence (as background). The intensities for all selected regions were 
measured and the corrected total cell florescence (CTCF) was calculated [CTCF= Integrated 
Density- (Area of selected cell x Mean fluorescence of background reading)], and the reading 
then plotted using GraphPad. The P-value was calculated and compared with a cornea 
treated with the negative control (PBS). 
2.2.5 Measuring the cornea transparency  
To determine the light transmission in the visible region the method described previously by 
Doutch, Quantock and Meek (2007) was used with some modifications, the cornea was 
stored in PBS after the topical application of lyophilised or fresh venom and then mounted 
and clamped in specially constructed half cells, that possess flat, polished glass apertures. 
Each half chamber was filled with PBS with a refractive index similar to that of the cornea so 
as to minimise reflections. Both cells allow appropriate, positive hydrostatic pressure to be 
applied to the preparation. After application of the 2% sodium fluorescein, an opacimeter 
with a wavelength in the visible light range (370-800 mm) was employed to measure opacity. 
The beam size was adjusted to 1 x 1 mm using customised apertures fitted to the sample cell 
and reference beam. Measurements were taken at optical wavelengths in the 400-800 nm 
region. The baseline was the sample cell filled with PBS only. More light transmission 
indicated a healthy cornea and less light transmission indicated increased opacity of the 
cornea. The readings were reported in terms of percentage of opacity, using GraphPad.  
2.2.6 Evaluation of histopathology  
The bovine corneas were fixed in 10 % neutral buffered formalin solution and embedded in 
paraffin. Tissue sections were stained with haematoxylin and eosin (H&E), and the corneal 
epithelium keratocyte, condition of the endothelium and the extent of disorganisation of the 
stromal collagen all being examined. 
2.2.7 Identification of toxins from spitting and non-spitting fresh venoms penetrating the 
treated corneas 
Freshly collected corneas were examined and dissected before being placed in the top of a 
Franz diffusion cell. The corneas were sealed into the donor compartment and the receptor 
cell filled with 5 ml sterile PBS (Gibco, pH 7.4) and placed in a water bath at 32 oC for 10 
minutes before the venom was applied. 1 ml of PBS was collected (pre-sample), and the 
silicon O ring placed at the middle of the cornea before 10 l of freshly collected venom was 
applied. The supernatant was collected after five minutes, ten minutes and then every ten 
minutes until the end of the experiment (60 minutes after initial exposure).  
2.2.7.1 SDS-PAGE and Immunoblotting: 
20 l of the collected supernatant was diluted 2:1 with reduced SDS-PAGE loading buffer and 
boiled for five minutes at 100 oC. 8 g of this reduced sample was then loaded to 15% hand 
cast gel prepared following the manufacturers instructions. The gel was run for 55 minutes 
at 200 V and then stained for two hours on a rocker at room temperature (RT) and then de-
stained for one hour. For immunoblotting, the samples were prepared as described 
previously and the proteins in the gel electrophoretically transferred onto 0.45 um 
nitrocellose membrane (13A, 24A, for seven minutes), the membrane stained with Ponceau 
S (confirming protein transfer) and washed with Tris Buffered Saline Tween (TBST). The 
membrane was incubated overnight in 5% skimmed milk to block all proteins with weakly 
bound whey proteins. The membrane was next washed for 15 minutes in TBST (with three 
changes). SAIMR polyvalent antivenom (X02646, EXP Sep 2012) was used as the primary 
antibody diluted 1:2000 in blocking buffer (5% skimmed milk in TBST) for two hours at RT. 
Finally, the blots were washed with TBST as in the previous washing step, before being 
incubated at RT with secondary antibody (horseradish peroxidase- conjugated donkey anti-
sheep IgG; Sigma, UK) diluted 1:1800. The blots were then washed as before and visualised 
by the addition of DAB substrate for 25 seconds (50 mg 3', 3'-diaminobenzidine, 100 ml PBS, 
0.024% hydrogen peroxide; Sigma Aldrich, UK). 
2.2.7.2 In-gel digestion 
Gel slices from SDS-PAGE were washed (2 x 30 min) with 50% acetonitrile, 0.2M ammonium 
bicarbonate pH 8.9 and then dried in a rotary evaporator. The slices were re-swollen in RHB 
[2 M urea, 0.2 M ammonium bicarbonate pH 7.8] containing 0.1 g trypsin and incubated at 
37C overnight. Excess RHB was then removed to a second microfuge tube and peptides were 
extracted from the gel slices with 60% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA. The total peptide extract was 
then concentrated to 10 l in a rotary evaporator and then desalted using C18 ZipTips 
according to the manufacturers instructions. 
2.2.7.3 LC-MS/MS 
The desalted digests were delivered into a Triple TOF 6600 mass spectrometer (Sciex) by 
automated in-line reversed phase liquid chromatography (LC), using an Eksigent NanoLC 415 
System equipped with trap (nanoACQUITY Symmetry C18 trap column, 100 , 5 m, 180 m 
x 20 mm, Waters) and analytical column (nanoACQUITY BEH C18 column, 300 , 1.7 m, 75 
m X 250 mm, Waters). A NanoSpray III source was fitted with a 10 m inner diameter 
PicoTip emitter (New Objective). Samples were loaded in 0.1% formic acid onto the trap 
which was then washed with 2% ACN/0.1% formic acid for 10mins at 2 L/min before 
switching in-line with the analytical column.  A gradient of 2-50 % (v/v) ACN, 0.1 % (v/v) 
formic acid over 90 min was applied to the column at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Spectra were 
acquired automatically in positive ion mode using information-dependent acquisition 
powered by Analyst TF 1.7 software (Sciex), using mass ranges of 400-1500 atomic mass units 
(amu) in MS and 100-1600 amu in MS/MS. Up to 25 MS/MS spectra were acquired per cycle 
(approx 10 Hz) using a threshold of 300 counts per sec, with dynamic exclusion for 12 secs 
and rolling collision energy. 
2.2.8 Intervention strategy using water or milk following ocular envenoming; 
To assess the optimal irrigation of eyes subjected to venom, we considered that most rural 
victims would likely use either water or milk. The whole bovine eye was subjected to fresh 
venom from N. nigricollis applied topically to all eyes (16 eyes/ group), and then subjected 
to 10 ml of water/ milk 
Because these solutions might not be available immediately, we exposed the eyes to venom 
for different durations before rinsing with either water or milk, as follows: 1 minute, 5 
minutes, 10 minutes and every 10 minutes thereafter to a maximum of 60 minutes.  
In summary, this study seeks to answer the following questions: 
 Do venoms from spitting cobras exert greater ocular pathology than venoms from non-
spitting cobras?  
 What is the time scale and anatomical manifestation of venom-induced ocular 
pathology? 
 Does freshly-extracted venom exert greater ocular pathology than lyophilised venom 
(which is most often used in venom research)?  
 Do the multiple layers of the cornea prevent ingress of venom into the vascular 
circulation? If not- are all venom proteins capable of cornea-penetration? 
 What is the most effective first aid irrigation  water or milk? And is the rapidity of 
irrigation important? 
2.3. Results 
2.3.1 Assessment of corneas treated with negative and positive controls  
Evaluation of the epithelium was conducted by staining it transiently with 2% sodium 
fluorescein, following application of PBS to the cornea for a duration of one minute.  With 
PBS, the epithelium did not exhibit any damage or degeneration in either of the two corneas. 
The result was corroborated by measurement of opacity using a light transmittance method, 
which is indicative of the extent to which light penetrates the cornea and thus, inversely, of 
damage (Figure 2.3.1-A). NaOH (1M) was used as a potent positive control, instantly causing 
the colour of the cornea to change to a white pigment. The measurement of opacity 
indicated high opacity (59%). Furthermore, there was indication of severe corneal damage 
following treatment with NaOH, as confirmed by H&E staining of the cornea section. There 
was multifocal erosion of the squamous layer with multifocal vacuolation of the cells, and 
multifocal thickening of the epithelium with loss of eosinophilia. Polygonal cell cytoplasm 
exhibited increased eosinophilia and mild cytoplasmic vacuolation and nuclei were vesicular. 
In addition, oedema, keratocyte pyknosis and vacuolisation were the main manifestations of 
stromal damage, accompanying disruption of the regular structured array of extracellular 
collagen matrix fibres, which also has a direct correlation with corneal opacity (see Figure 
2.3-2A). 
Figure 2.3: Corneas treated with the positive and negative control. The whole eye was used to study the cor-
neal damage caused by PBS and NaOH. (1 - Aa) The opacity measurement following treatment with PBS: with 
no visual sign of opacity; (Ab) following treatment with NaOH the opacity appeared as a white pigment at the 
central part of the cornea. (1- B) Measurement of fluorescent intensities: (Ba) Sodium fluorescein did not per-
meate the cornea, indicating no damage. (Bb) Sodium fluorescein stained the cornea and permeation indicated 
extensive damage of the epithelium. (2) Histological results (2A) With PBS the epithelium did not exhibit any 
damage or degeneration. (2B) With NaOH multifocal erosion of the squamous layer with multifocal vacuolation 
of the cells was evident, alongside multifocal thickening of the epithelium with loss of eosinophilia. Polygonal 
cell cytoplasm exhibited increased eosinophilia with mild cytoplasmic vacuolation, and nuclei are vesicular.  
Significant P-value (***P  0.001). 
2.3.2 Assessment of corneas exposed to different concentrations of N. nigricollis venom 
To observe how venom caused corneal opacification, N. nigricollis venom was applied to the 
bovine corneas at different doses (2.5 g, 10 g and fresh) and at different durations of 
exposure (60 seconds and 30 minutes). The fluorescence intensities of the corneas after 
treatment showed a significant increase in corneas treated with fresh extracted venom after 
30 minutes - about 10-fold more than the cornea treated with NaOH. Opacity measurements 
revealed a significant increase for all treated corneas in comparison with corneas treated 
with PBS.  
The histopathological examination of stained sections revealed (Figure 2.4-2) that, at low 
doses of venom (2.5 g concentration), the corneal epithelium exhibited mild degeneration, 
with top-down assessment of the dissected cornea identifying mild fragmentation/sloughing 
of the squamous epithelium and mild swelling of the squamous epithelium with multifocal 
mild vacuolation. Tissue morphology remained more or less the same at both time points. 
The mild degeneration of the epithelium was validated by the sodium fluorescein staining 
and opacity measurement. The opacity was slightly lower (60 %) after 30 minutes with this 
dose. 
Meanwhile, at 10 g dose, the corneal epithelium exhibited mild to moderate alterations, 
with thinning and swelling of the squamous epithelium and moderate swelling of polygonal 
and squamous epithelium. There was also more widespread mild cytoplasmic vacuolation 
(perinuclear). The same doses of the venom with a longer cornea exposure revealed 
moderate cell swelling; more frequent foci than with corneas treated for one minute and 
cytoplasmic vacuolation seen in all cell layers of anterior epithelium. Nonetheless, structural 
integrity was maintained, and the effects did not differ greatly between the two exposure 
times. The stroma was mildly swollen and mild stromal collagen matrix vacuolisation was 
observed as well. When the corneas were stained with sodium fluorescein, it was observed 
that there was a significant increase in the aggregation of dead and apoptotic cells between 
the two-time points. 
After direct application of 10 l of fresh venom (a natural venom dose), the corneas sustained 
significant damage and, by comparison to PBS-treated cornea, manifest by substantial 
multifocal erosion and swelling of the squamous epithelium and fewer swollen polygonal 
cells. Focally extensive ulceration and stroma thickening were more significant. By contrast, 
the endothelium was not damaged. Consequently, the fluorescent dye could better 
permeate the epithelium. Furthermore, owing to coagulation and condensation, higher 
opacity was associated with this dose, which was confirmed by the increasing corneal 
cloudiness and loss of lustre at the half-hour time point. 
Figure 2.4: Corneas treated with different doses of Naja nigricollis venom. The whole eye was used to study 
the corneal damage caused by lyophilised and fresh venom. (1A) Opacity measurement following the topical 
application of the N.nigricollis venom, P-value significantly increased with all venom doses and exposure dura-
tions; (1B) Fluorescence intensities using 2% sodium fluorescein for corneas treated with different doses of N. 
nigricollis venom, lyophilised and fresh. More significant increase of the fluorescence intensity after treatment 
with NaOH and fresh venom in comparison with cornea treated with PBS. (2) Histopathological section (5 m) 
of (A) 2.5 g concentration N. nigricollis venom for 1 minute and (B) for 30 minutes. (C) 10 g of venom for one 
minute and (D) 30 minutes treatment with fresh venom. (A and B) show mild fragmentation and swelling of the 
squamous epithelium with a mild vacuolation with low dose of venom (2.5 ug); (C) shows mild thinning and 
swelling of the squamous epithelium and more widespread mild cytoplasmic vacuolation with the increase in 
the venom dose to 10 g; (D) shows extensive loss of anterior epithelium, splitting of the polygonal epithelium 
and separation between the Bowmans membrane and anterior epithelium with 10 l of fresh venom.  
Significant P-value (****P  0.0001) 
2.3.3 Assessment of cornea exposed to different concentrations of N. haje venom 
N. haje is a non-spitting cobra and its venom was used here as a negative control since, in 
nature, it is not associated with ocular envenoming. The opacity induced by different venom 
doses were compared with the negative control (PBS). Fluorescence measurement revealed 
a slight increase of the intensities with corneas treated with 10 g after both 1 minute and 
30 minutes of topical application, and with fresh venom after 30 minutes. This suggests mild 
damage of the corneal epithelium since the high fluorescein staining was indicative of cell 
apoptosis. 
The effects of N. haje venom were then assessed in the H& E section (Figure 2.5) and this 
revealed that with 2.5 g of N. haje venom the corneal section morphology was identical to 
that observed with N. nigricollis venom; corneal epithelium being only mild damaged, with 
mild multifocal thinning of the anterior epithelium, swelling of the squamous epithelium and 
mild erosion of the most superficial squamous epithelium. The damage was progressive with 
a longer treatment course (30 minutes), with full thickness loss of the anterior epithelium, 
although the endothelium was unaffected. On the other hand, at 10 g concentration for 1 
minute, the N. haje venom penetrated the middle layer of polygonal cells and showed a 
moderate cell swelling and cytoplasmic vacuolation in all cell layers of the anterior 
epithelium and splitting between the anterior epithelium and Bowmans membrane. Full 
thickness loss of the anterior epithelium was observed. After 30 minutes treatment, swelling 
of the anterior epithelium with scattered cytoplasmic vacuolation was noted. The fresh 
venom caused extensive variation in the thickness in the anterior epithelium, vesicle 
formation in the squamous epithelium with some swelling in adjacent polygonal cells. 
Moreover, by comparison to N. nigricollis venom, aggregation of dead and apoptotic cells, 
alongside reduced fluorescein staining, was revealed by cornea treatment with sodium 
fluorescein. The corneas treated with the three different concentrations exhibited a 
progressive increase in opacity, which was confirmed by alterations to cells, although 
cloudiness was not visible macroscopically. 
Figure 2.5: Corneas treated with different doses of Naja haje venom. The whole eye was used to study the cor-
neal damage caused by lyophilised and fresh venom. (1A) Opacity measurement following the topical application 
of the N. haje venom, P-value significantly  0.0001) increased with all venom doses.; (B) Fluorescence intensities 
using 2% sodium fluorescein for corneas treated with different doses of N. haje lyophilised and fresh venom for 
two exposure durations (1 minute and 30 minutes). Increase in the fluorescence intensity after treatment with 
NaOH, treatment with 10 g (30 minutes) and fresh venom (30 minutes) in comparison with corneas treated with 
PBS. (2) Histopathological section (5 m) of (A) 2.5 g of resuspended N. haje venom for 1 minute showing mild 
multifocal thinning of the anterior epithelium with swelling of the squamous epithelium; (B) 2.5 m for 30 
minutes, showing mild multifocal thinning (erosion) of the anterior epithelium, two foci of full thickness loss of 
anterior epithelium. (C) 1 minute treatment with 10 g of venom showing moderate cell swelling; more frequent 
foci, cytoplasmic vacuolation in all cell layers of anterior epithelium, focal full thickness loss of anterior epithelium 
(D) 30 minutes treatment with fresh venom showing increase in the corneal damage with extensive variation in 
thickness in the anterior epithelium ;multifocal vesicle formation in the squamous epithelium and some swelling 
in adjacent polygonal cells. Significant P-value (*P  0.05, and ****P  0.0001) 
2.3.4 Assessment of corneas exposed to different concentrations of N. nivea venom 
Despite its powerful neurotoxicity, N. nivea venom, like that of N. haje, is not known to cause 
eye damage. In the present study, this venom was used both in diluted form at 2.5 and 10 
g doses, and as a freshly extracted fresh venom, and was compared with the venom of the 
spitting N. nigricollis and the non-spitting N. nivea. Treatment of the corneas with 2% sodium 
fluorescein revealed no significant increase in fluorescence intensity with any of the corneas 
compared to corneas treated with PBS. There was slight increase (28%) in the opacity of the 
cornea treated with low venom doses (2.5 g) and significant increased (50-70%) with all 
other venom preparations (10 g and fresh venom) (Figure 2.6).  
The corneal morphology was altered by only moderate swelling/ballooning degeneration of 
the squamous epithelium and the superficial polygonal epithelium. The corneas treated for 
30 minutes showed a cellular swelling (intracellular oedema), cytoplasmic vacuolation and 
nuclear pyknosis indicating rapid necrotic cell degeneration. Higher venom concentrations 
led to some multifocal epithelial degeneration, slight stromal alterations and full thickness 
loss of the anterior epithelium (ulceration) adjacent to the altered anterior epithelium. Full 
thickness swelling/intracytoplasmic oedema was noted after 30 minutes after initial 
exposure. It was noted that the fresh venoms were highly viscous, and the corneal surface 
was coated in a sticky substance after topical application, which necessitated repeated 
thorough washing to be removed. The aggregation of dead cells in the treated area was 
validated by staining with sodium fluorescein. Overall however, the damage was superficial, 
and despite the fact that cells were lost, the epithelium was maintained with only very mild 
swelling of the superficial squamous epithelium. What is more, although the matrix collagen 
expanded to some extent, the endothelium was unaffected. 
Figure 2.6: Corneas treated with different doses of Naja nivea venom. The whole eye was used to study the corneal 
damage caused by lyophilised and fresh venom. (1A) Opacity measurement following the topical application of the 
N. nivea venom. The opacity significantly increased (P-value <0.0001) with all venom doses. (1B) Fluorescence inten-
sities using 2% sodium fluorescein for corneas treated with different doses of N. nivea, lyophilised and fresh venom, 
for two exposure durations (1 minute and 30 minutes). Although there was a significant increase of the fluorescence 
intensity after treatment with NaOH in comparison with corneas treated with PBS, no significant increase was ob-
served after topical treatment with lyophilised and fresh venom. (2) Histopathological section (5 m) of (A) 2.5 g of 
resuspended N nivea venom for 1 minute showing extensive moderate swelling/ballooning degeneration of the squa-
mous epithelium and also the superficial polygonal epithelium and mild vesicle formation within the squamous epi-
thelium; (B) 2.5 g for 30 minutes showing mild thinning (erosion) of the anterior epithelium and moderate cellular 
swelling, cytoplasmic vacuolation and nuclear pyknosis were observed; (C) 1-minute treatment with 10 g of venom 
showing cytoplasmic vacuolation in all cell layers of anterior epithelium and full thickness loss of anterior epithelium 
(ulceration), adjacent to altered anterior epithelium; (D) 30 minutes treatment with with 10 g of the N. nivea venom 
showing swelling/intracytoplasmic oedema. . Significant P-value (****P  0.0001) 
2.3.5 The effects of fresh venom from spitting and non-spitting cobra on the cornea 
Optimising experiments were conducted to establish the best venom concentration and 
exposure/incubation duration. To Investigate the effect of fresh venom of African and Asian 
spitting and non-spitting cobras on corneas, a comparative analysis of visually observable 
opacity and alterations in morphology induced by one-hour corneal exposure to fresh venom 
was undertaken.  
According to macroscopic observations, application of venom from both spitting and non-
spitting cobras caused the occurrence of opacification. The extent of corneal layer 
opacification and damage varied with each venom applied: Asian or African spitting or non-
spitting cobras (Table 2.2). Thus, the venom of the spitting cobras, N. pallida and H. 
haemachatus, gave rise to a similar sharp line in the centre of the cornea and the white 
pigment did not diffuse beyond the area where the venom was applied. The corneal 
epithelium was mildly to moderately damaged, as indicated by corneal morphology, by both 
snake venoms.  
Table 2.2; Observations of the pathology of corneas treated with fresh venom from Asian 
and African spitting and non-spitting cobras (scoring; Severe [+++], Moderate [++], Mild 
[+], and no effect [-]). 
The corneas exposed to the venom of the African spitting cobras, N. nigricollis and N. pallida, 
exhibited significant loosening of cells and damage to the superficial, middle and deep 
corneal layers. More specifically, the squamous epithelium exhibited marked ulceration, 
vacuolation and splitting due to exposure to fresh venom of N. nigricollis, whereas N. pallida 
venom caused significant separation in the anterior epithelium. Table 2.2 summarises the 
most significant findings observed following the topical application of fresh venom from 
PBS - - - - - 141.6 ( 9.39) - 895 ( 44.39)
NaoH +++ +++ + - +++ 175.3 ( 39.1) + 978 ( 39.1)
N.nigricollis +++ +++ +++ +++ +++ 128.6 ( 28.05) +++ 901 ( 84.72)
N. mossambica + + + - ++ 94.66 ( 29.48) - 1482 ( 130.47)
N. pallida +++ +++ +++ - - 158 ( 25.45) +++ 1385 ( 253.5)
N. nubia + + + - - 101 ( 16.30) ++ 1288 ( 84.44)
N. siamensis + + + - + 182 ( 21.96) - 1260 ( 49.81)
hemachatus 
haemachatus + + + - - 149 ( 44.95) - 1220.3 ( 105.7)
N.naja + + + - + 180 ( 14.165) - 1546 ( 196.0)
N. nivea + ++ + +++ - 205.6 ( 7.71) - 1062.3 ( 35.74)
species
Vaculation
Epithelium
Bowman's 
membrane
Stroma thickness 
m  (Mean SD)
Superficial layer 
(3-4 layers)
Middle layer 
(polygonal)
Deep later 
(basel cell)
Ulceration
Epithelium thickness 
m (Mean SD)
spitting and non-spitting cobra. Interestingly, the thickness of corneas treated with N. 
nigricollis showed reduced epithelial thickness and a normal stroma thickness, while other 
spitting and non-spitting venoms induced a significant increase in the thickness of both 
epithelium and stroma as a result of swelling and oedema.   
2.3.6 Identification of the venom proteins penetrating the cornea 
To detect whether venom proteins are capable of penetrating the multiple layers of the 
cornea (within one hour of the topical application of fresh venom), supernatants from prior 
experiments were collected and analysed. Freshly collected cobra venom was diluted in PBS 
and the protein concentration measured using Nanodrop spectrometry (A280). Based on this 
measurement, every 10 l of topically applied venom contains 1,000 ug of proteins. Based 
upon SDS-PAGE analysis (Figure 2.6), supernatants from eyes subjected to only N. nigricollis, 
N. siamensis and N. naja venoms contained venom proteins that had penetrated through the 
corneal layers five minutes after application. None of the other venoms had proteins with 
such capability.  
Two approaches were used to confirm the identified proteins. The first involved the use of 
western blots decorated with SAIMR polyvalent antivenom (manufactured with venoms 
from Bitis, Naja and Dendroaspis specuis) (Figure 2.7). Identification of two proteins was 
possible five minutes after topical application of N. nigricollis: band (1) and band (2), 
respectively classified as SVMP molecular weight (~55kDa) and Nerve Growth Factor (NGF) 
molecular weight (~25kDa). Furthermore, although no visible proteins were identified by 
SDS-PAGE in the supernatant derived from application of Asian N. siamensis venom, 
immunoblotting revealed clear detection of one protein with ~25kDa molecular weight, 
which was the same as the protein identified in the supernatant from N. nigricollis venom 
(NGF). Notably, extremely strong bands of two proteins were detected when analysing the 
supernatant from non-spitting N. naja venom but no equivalence could be established 
between these and the venom protein profile. In addition, extremely strong bands were 
identified by immunoblotting with smearing with the other time point (10-20 minutes). It 
was concluded that the venom proteins and corneal enzymes interacted with each other 
since both identified proteins had molecular weight that differed from the venom profile.  
The second approach involved the use the venom proteomic analysis using in-gel digestion 
and LC-MS/MS which identified that the two bands were PLA2 and 3FTx, respectively with 
analysing the supernatant from non-spitting N. naja venom.  Analysing the two detected 
bands from N. nigricollis venoms revealed, respectively classified as SVMP (band 1) and NGF 
(band 2).  
Figure 2.7: Characterisation of venom proteins penetrating the cornea after topical application of fresh 
venom. Dissected corneas were placed on a Franz diffusion cell and sealed on the top with a donor chamber. 
The receptor chamber was filled with 5 ml of PBS and incubated at 32 C for 5 minutes before the venom was 
applied. 10 l of fresh venom was applied to the central part of the cornea and the all supernatant collected 
and replaced with fresh PBS (Detailed in the method section. The collection of the supernatant was after 5 
minutes for the first collection and every 10 minutes for the rest of the collection period up to 60 minutes). (1) 
N. nigricollis African spitting cobra; (2) N. siamensis Asian spitting cobra and (3) N. naja Asian non-spitting cobra.  
(A) the dissected cornea after the treatment showing the spread of the visible white pigment after 60 minutes. 
(B) SDS-PAGE of all the supernatants with venom protein profiles and pre-sample. (C) western blots of all super-
natants and the venom to visualise the venom proteins. SAIMR polyvalent antivenom was used as the primary 
antibody. The red circle indicates venom proteins that had penetrated the cornea within 5 minutes of the topical 
application.  
2.3.7 Prevention of damage to cornea caused by venom 
Establishing the ideal strategy for managing eye exposure to fresh venom was the focus of 
this study. As explained in the method section, 10 ml water or milk were used to rinse several 
eyes for different lengths of time. The damage to the cornea was assessed based on 
macroscopic observation and alterations in morphology (Figure 2.8). The topically applied 
venom caused minor loss of lustre in every cornea. Corneal layers were only mildly damaged 
when rinsing with water was performed within 1-5 minutes of venom exposure. By contrast, 
damage was more significant and widespread when rinsing with water was performed later. 
On the other hand, the cornea was more likely to be damaged when it was rinsed with milk 
than with water, even if the procedure was performed early. One possible explanation for 
this may be that the milk and venom proteins interact in a way that prevents the milk 
proteins from inhibiting the damage-inducing toxins. 
Figure 2.8: The intervention studies using water / milk following the topical application of fresh venom. 10 
l of venom was applied followed by rinsing the cornea with 10 ml of water/ milk. The corneas were then 
visualised with H&E staining (1) cornea rinsed with water after (A) 1 minutes, (B) 5 minutes and (C) 10 minutes. 
Delay in rinsing the cornea with water was associated with increased tissue damage. For example, (1A) rinsing 
the cornea with water 1 minute after the fresh venom was applied was associated with multifocal mild to 
moderate cytoplasmic vacuolation in the mid to deep anterior epithelium and mild multifocal linear separation 
of the squamous epithelium. (1C) Rinsing 10 minutes after application of venom was associated with mild 
vacuolation and separation of the basal epithelium while the mid to deep anterior epithelium exhibits multi-
focal mild to moderate cytoplasmic vacuolation. The nuclei in the squamous epithelium are plump/rounded. 
Following irrigation with milk, meanwhile, the corneas exhibited moderate damage. For example (2C), moder-
ate multifocal cytoplasmic vacuolation and mild to moderate erosion of squamous epithelium. 
2.4 Discussion 
Deliberate spitting of venom for defence purposes is a defining characteristic of Elapidae. 
The Elapidae of medical importance are the African N. nigricollis, N. mossambica, N. pallida 
and N. nubiae, and the Asian N. siamensis, N. philippinensis, N. sumatrana and N. 
mandalayensis. The present study investigates the specific anatomical effects of spitting and 
non-spitting cobra venom on the eye in this ex vivo bovine eye model. This enabled 
determination of the most effective first aid strategies to reduce damage to the cornea. 
Systemic envenoming of patients with ocular envenoming has never been recorded. This 
suggests that the cornea acts as a barrier to prevent systemic envenoming.  
Three-finger toxins (3FTxs) constitute around 70% of the venom of Naja species, while 
phospholipases A2 and class III metalloproteases constitute the remaining 30% (Cardoso et 
al. 2019; Chong et al. 2019; Theakston & Reid 1983). Elapidae venom is rich in a class of 
single-chain, basic, short polypeptides of high hydrophobicity known as cytotoxins 
(cardiotoxins) (Munawar et al. 2018). Evidence exists that interaction occurs between Lys 
and Arg, the basic cytotoxin residues, and cell membrane phospholipids, contributing to 
potentially serious membrane damage and necrotic cell apoptosis by promoting the 
development of pores on cell membranes (Gasanov, Dagda & Rael 2014; Konshina et al. 
2011). Furthermore, probably owing to the ability of cytotoxins to bind to unknown 
membrane proteins or acidic phospholipids, there is temporary binding of the cytotoxin-PLA2 
complex to cell membranes, thus enabling phospholipid hydrolysis by PLA2. This leads to the 
secreted fatty acid tails encircling the cytotoxin areas of hydrophilicity and these molecular 
interactions then serve to free cytotoxin from the enzyme-toxin complex (Gasanov et al. 
1991).   
Covering the external ocular mucosal surfaces, the tear film is highly effective in protecting 
the eye surface against microbes of potential pathogenicity (Dartt & Willcox 2013). There is 
also interaction between this film and a protective glycocalyx that the cornea generates from 
membrane-spanning mucins present in the corneal cell apical membrane (Hodges & Dartt 
2013; Shirai & Saika 2015). The produced mucins mediate the removal of allergens, cell 
debris and pathogens from mucosal surfaces by capturing them. As Li et al. (2018) explained, 
Membrane-Associated Mucins (MAMs) play a role in adhesion prevention, lubrication, water 
retention, pathogen barrier and inflammation prevention. The ex vivo bovine model 
employed in this study clearly indicated that, in the context of topical application of spitting 
and non-spitting cobra venom, the venom proteins interacted with the external mucosal 
surface of the cornea, as reflected in the diminished corneal lustre and the lack of tear film 
and corneal epithelium following corneal exposure to both high and low venom dosage 
(Sridhar 2018). An alternative explanation is that the venom proteins undergo hydrolysis and 
cause the cornea to opacify, making the corneal epithelium more permeable and promoting 
apoptosis and squamous metaplasia. 
The results obtained by the present study suggest that the venom of spitting and non-spitting 
cobras have the same effects on the cornea. Use of a higher venom dosage or fresh venom 
led to a degree of damage in every cornea, as revealed by corneal morphology. Two-phased 
development of the damage induced by the venom of N. nigricollis, with vesicular and 
necrotising effects induced by venom toxins, followed by the action of the discharged pro-
inflammatory prostaglandins and leukotrienes. Consistent with such findings, this study 
observed that lyophilised venom caused mild to moderate corneal damage. While, fresh 
venoms caused severe damage and marked opacification of the corneas. An additional 
observation of this study is that mild to moderate corneal damage and marked augmentation 
of corneal opacification were caused by the venom of the African non-spitting N. nivea and 
N. haje, as well as the Asian N. naja. Based on this, it was deduced not only that the venom 
proteins interfaced with the surface of the cornea, but also that the venom could penetrate 
the corneal layers, thus having further deleterious effects. It must be noted that the venom 
of Asian Elapidae has not been reported to result in the complications associated with the 
venom of African Elapidae, such as ophthalmia, corneal ulceration, scarring and opacification 
(Chu et al. 2010). The present study confirmed that the venom of the Asian spitting cobra N. 
siamensis and non-spitting cobra N. naja did not lead to ulceration or scarring but did induce 
opacification and mild splitting of the squamous epithelium as well as cytoplasmic 
vacuolation.    
According to earlier research, eye pathology caused by the venom of African spitting Naja 
species in animal models was the outcome of venom cardiotoxins (Ismail et al. 1993). This is 
corroborated by the present study, which found that the cornea was damaged, and tissues 
were opacified and destroyed possibly owing to the action of PLA2 and 3FTx. As regards snake 
venom metalloproteinases (SVMPs), they trigger haemorrhage but not fast toxicity to 
endothelial cells (Fox & Gutirrez 2018; Gutirrez et al. 2016). The cornea was observed to 
be permeated by SVMPs and NGF five minutes after fresh venom of N. nigricollis was 
topically applied, implying that SVMPs and NGF triggered neither pathological effects nor 
corneal damage. This strongly suggested a future investigation of pathological effects of 
those proteins following penetrating the cornea layers. Drug administration in therapeutic 
doses at the intended site is made more difficult by such eye tissue barriers (Gaudana et al. 
2010). It is worth noting that corneal penetration was achieved by venom proteins within 
five minutes of application of non-spitting N. naja venom. Mass spectrometry validated that 
PLA2 and 3FTx caused damage to the cornea. This is consistent with other research that has 
reported the rapid penetration of membrane by cytotoxins, with subsequent activation of 
various biological effects within cells (Gasanov, Dagda & Rael 2014). 
Among the recommendations recently issued by the WHO for dealing with ophthalmia 
triggered by venom in Africa and South-East Asia (WHO 2010, 2016) are immediate 
administration of local anaesthetic in the form of eyedrops to open the eye and make it 
easier to undertake the subsequent procedure of rinsing the eye with water. In the present 
study, both tap water and fresh milk were used to rinse eyes exposed to fresh venom of N. 
nigricollis. It was found that eye rinsing with water within the first 5-10 minutes after 
exposure attenuated the effects of the venom on the cornea, ensuring that the damage did 
not become aggravated and thus making it more straightforward to manage. Conversely, late 
rinsing heightened damage severity. By contrast, corneal damage was not reduced by rinsing 
with milk. This result corroborates Delafontaine et al. (2018), who reported that damage was 
alleviated by rinsing with tap water.  
Damage and oedema persisted following exposure to venom, particularly in the case of the 
venom of African Naja. Although the findings supported the WHO guidelines regarding eye 
rinsing, they also emphasise the need to manage with greater specificity by an urgent 
irrigating the eyes and other mucous membrane following the incidence with copious 
quantities of water or any liquid (Warrell 2010). Furthermore, although the WHO suggests 
topical treatment in the event of corneal erosion, no particular treatment for venom-induced 
eye damage is available because antivenom can cause irritation if applied topically so it is 
contraindicated (Chu et al. 2010). Nevertheless, Cham et al. (2006) found that eye pathology 
in rabbit models was enhanced by topical application of diluted antivenom and heparin, but 
not of tetracycline.  
2.5 Conclusions 
Investigation of both specific management strategies and the mechanisms of venom 
ophthalmia is facilitated by the use of an ex vivo empirical model, which also averts animal 
suffering and costly long-term follow-up. This model can reproduce corneal opacification, 
the keratitis that precedes the development of ophthalmia induced by the venom of African 
Naja. The stromal structure, oedema, and cellular damage to the epithelium and 
endothelium can be evaluated based on measurement of the fluorescence intensity of the 
corneal epithelium and histological combined analysis. In the future, research should use 
lengthier follow-up to investigate corneal re-epithelisation and recovery after venom-
induced keratitis. The results of this study confirm that the venom of both spitting and non-
spitting cobras causes severe damage to the cornea if untreated; however, despite not being 
completely avoidable, damage can be attenuated by immediate rinsing with water, 
validating recently issued recommendations. Moreover, the results enhance knowledge of 
the process of venom keratitis resulting in ophthalmia and can serve as the basis for the 
development of treatment strategies of greater specificity and efficacy. 
2.6 References: 
Ang, L.J., Sanjay, S. & Sangtam, T. (2014) 'Ophthalmia due to spitting cobra venom in an 
urban setting-A report of three cases', Middle East African journal of 
ophthalmology, vol. 21, no. 3, p. 259. 
Cardoso, F.C., Ferraz, C.R., Arrahman, A., Xie, C., Casewell, N.R., Lewis, R.J. & Kool, J. (2019) 
'Multifunctional toxins in snake venoms and therapeutic implications: from pain to 
hemorrhage and necrosis', Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution, vol. 7, p. 218. 
Chong, H.P., Tan, K.Y., Tan, N.H. & Tan, C.H. (2019) 'Exploring the diversity and novelty of 
toxin genes in Naja sumatrana, the Equatorial spitting cobra from Malaysia through 
de novo venom-gland transcriptomics', Toxins, vol. 11, no. 2, p. 104. 
Chu, E.R., Weinstein, S.A., White, J. & Warrell, D.A. (2010) 'Venom ophthalmia caused by 
venoms of spitting elapid and other snakes: report of ten cases with review of 
epidemiology, clinical features, pathophysiology and management', Toxicon, vol. 
56, no. 3, pp. 259-272. 
Dartt, D.A. & Willcox, M.D.P. (2013) 'Complexity of the tear film: importance in 
homeostasis and dysfunction during disease', Experimental eye research, vol. 117, 
p. 1. 
Fox, J. & Gutirrez, J.M. (2018) Snake venom metalloproteinases, MDPI. 
Fung, H.T., Choy, C.H., Lau, K.H., Lam, T.S.K. & Kam, C.W. (2009) 'Ophthalmic injuries from a 
spitting Chinese cobra', Hong Kong Journal of Emergency Medicine, vol. 16, no. 1, 
pp. 26-28. 
Gandhi, S. & Jain, S. (2015) The anatomy and physiology of cornea, in, Keratoprostheses 
and Artificial Corneas, Springer, pp. 19-25. 
Gasanov, S.E., Dagda, R.K. & Rael, E.D. (2014) 'Snake venom cytotoxins, phospholipase A2s, 
and Zn2+-dependent metalloproteinases: mechanisms of action and 
pharmacological relevance', Journal of clinical toxicology, vol. 4, no. 1, p. 1000181. 
Gasanov, S.E., Kolusheva, S.O., Salakhutdinov, B.A., Beknazarov, U.M. & Aripov, T.F. (1991) 
The mechanism of cobra venom phospholipase A2 and cytotoxin synergistic action 
on phospholipid membrane structure, pp. 44-46. 
Gaudana, R., Ananthula, H.K., Parenky, A. & Mitra, A.K. (2010) 'Ocular drug delivery', The 
AAPS journal, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 348-360. 
Gutirrez, J., Escalante, T., Rucavado, A., Herrera, C. & Fox, J. (2016) 'A comprehensive view 
of the structural and functional alterations of extracellular matrix by snake venom 
metalloproteinases (SVMPs): novel perspectives on the pathophysiology of 
envenoming', Toxins, vol. 8, no. 10, p. 304. 
Habib, A.G. & Brown, N.I. (2018) 'The snakebite problem and antivenom crisis from a 
health-economic perspective', Toxicon, vol. 150, pp. 115-123. 
Hodges, R.R. & Dartt, D.A. (2013) 'Tear film mucins: front line defenders of the ocular 
surface; comparison with airway and gastrointestinal tract mucins', Experimental 
eye research, vol. 117, pp. 62-78. 
Ismail, M., Al-Bekairi, A.M., El-Bedaiwy, A.M. & Abd-El Salam, M.A. (1993) 'The ocular 
effects of spitting cobras: II. Evidence that cardiotoxins are responsible for the 
corneal opacification syndrome', Journal of Toxicology: Clinical Toxicology, vol. 31, 
no. 1, pp. 45-62. 
Konshina, A.G., Boldyrev, I.A., Utkin, Y.N., Omel'kov, A.V. & Efremov, R.G. (2011) 'Snake 
cytotoxins bind to membranes via interactions with phosphatidylserine head 
groups of lipids', PloS one, vol. 6, no. 4, p. e19064. 
Li, X., Kang, B., Woo, I.H., Eom, Y., Lee, H.K., Kim, H.M. & Song, J.S. (2018) 'Effects of topical 
mucolytic agents on the tears and ocular surface: a plausible animal model of 
mucin-deficient dry eye', Investigative ophthalmology & visual science, vol. 59, no. 
7, pp. 3104-3114. 
Munawar, A., Ali, S., Akrem, A. & Betzel, C. (2018) 'Snake venom peptides: Tools of 
biodiscovery', Toxins, vol. 10, no. 11, p. 474. 
Rita, P., Animesh, D.K., Aninda, M., Benoy, G.K., Sandip, H. & Datta, K. (2011) 'Snake bite, 
snake venom, anti-venom and herbal antidote. A review', Int J Res Ayurveda 
pharm, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 1060-1067. 
Shirai, K. & Saika, S. (2015) Ocular surface mucins and local inflammationstudies in 
genetically modified mouse lines, vol. 15, BioMed Central, p. 154. 
Sridhar, M.S. (2018) 'Anatomy of cornea and ocular surface', Indian journal of 
ophthalmology, vol. 66, no. 2, p. 190. 
Theakston, R.D.G. & Reid, H.A. (1983) 'Development of simple standard assay procedures 
for the characterization of snake venoms', Bulletin of the world health organization, 
vol. 61, no. 6, p. 949. 
Warrell, D.A. (2010) 'Snake bite', The Lancet, vol. 375, no. 9708, pp. 77-88. 
WHO (2010) 'Guidelines for the prevention and clinical management of snakebite in Africa'. 
WHO (2016) 'Guidelines for the Management of Snake Bites WHO. Regional Office for 
South-East Asia', World Health Organization. 
WHO (2019) Neglected tropical diseases [Online], World Health Organization, Available 
from: http://www.who.int/neglected_diseases/diseases/en/ (Accessed: 19th 
September). 
Wuester, W. & Broadley, D.G. (2007) 'Get an eyeful of this: a new species of giant spitting 
cobra from eastern and north-eastern Africa (Squamata: Serpentes: Elapidae: 
Naja)', Zootaxa, vol. 1532, no. 1, pp. 51-68. 
Wster, W. & Thorpe, R.S. (1992) 'Dentitional phenomena in cobras revisited: spitting and 
fang structure in the Asiatic species of Naja (Serpentes: Elapidae)', Herpetologica, 
pp. 424-434. 
Young, B.A., Dunlap, K., Koenig, K. & Singer, M. (2004) 'The buccal buckle: the functional 
morphology of venom spitting in cobras', Journal of Experimental Biology, vol. 207, 
no. 20, pp. 3483-3494. 
http://www.who.int/neglected_diseases/diseases/en/
Chapter 3 
Title: A new ex vivo human skin model of venom-induced dermonecrosis 
Jaffer Alsolaiss1, Gail Leaming2, Paul Rowley1, Nicholas R Casewell1, Robert A Harrison1 
Affiliations:  
1Centre for Snakebite Research and Interventions, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, 
Liverpool, UK. 
2Institute of infection and Global Health, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L3 5RF, UK 
3.1 Introduction 
Annually, up to 138,000 individuals die and over 400,000 individuals suffer life-altering 
disabilities as a result of the neglected tropical disease of snakebite envenoming. This disease 
is especially prevalent among deprived inhabitants of rural tropical regions, keeping them in 
a state of poverty (WHO 2019). Snake venom comprises a complex mixture of proteins with 
varying bioactive effects, which in human victims causes hemotoxic, neurotoxic and cytotoxic 
and other effects  depending upon the snake species responsible. The aetiological toxins 
include PLA2s, SVMPs, SVSPs and 3FTxs, acting on their own or in synergy. For instance, 
specific members of the PLA2 and 3FTx protein groups can cause neurotoxic effects leading 
to respiratory paralysis. Similarly, specific venom PLA2s, SVMPs, SVSPs, CTLs are responsible 
for haemorrhage and acute renal damage following envenoming by some but not all snakes 
(Gutirrez et al. 2017; Gutirrez & Rucavado 2000a; Gutirrez et al. 2005; Harris & Scott-
Davey 2013; Rivel et al. 2016). The venom of certain Elapidae and Viperidae trigger muscle 
damage at the bite site (Isbister 2010; Sitprija 2006) due to myotoxic non-catalytic PLA2 
proteins. Viper and elapid venom PLA2s, 3FTxs and SVMPs can result in local tissue damage 
(e.g. swelling, blisters, oedema, necrosis), which frequently necessitates tissue-debridement 
or limb-amputation (Gasanov, Dagda & Rael 2014; Isbister et al. 2013; Mehta & Sashindran 
2002).   
Symptoms of local envenoming can include instant radiating pain around the bite site, tender 
swelling that expands quickly and accompanied by hot inflammatory erythema within two 
hours of the envenomation, lymph vessel inflammation manifesting as red lines on the skin 
(lymphangitis), protracted haemorrhage from the puncture wounds caused by the fangs, 
blistering (bullae), bruising (ecchymosis), tenderness and an increase in the size of local 
lymph nodes, superficial necrosis of the soft tissue and muscles, and secondary infection 
such as cellulitis or abscess (Warrell 1999; Warrell 2004; Who 2010). Skip lesions and soft 
tissue necrosis often accompany envenoming by spitting cobras and some Asian elapids. 
Severe pain can be engendered by certain PLA2s, SVSPs and SVMPs through the activation of 
ion channels like transient receptor potential vanilloid type 1 (TRPV1) and acid-sensing ion 
channel (ASIC) to modulate pain pathways (Bohlen et al. 2011; Zhang et al. 2017) and/or 
through the activation of inflammatory mediators to cause pain sensitisation (Ferraz et al. 
2015; Mamede et al. 2016; Menaldo et al. 2013). Pain is triggered by certain mediators as 
well. By releasing ATP and activating purinergic receptors, sensory neurons associated with 
pain are excited by PLA2 homologues of catalytic inactivity (Rucavado et al. 2016; Zhang et 
al. 2017). Numerous studies have shown that both humans and experimental models 
experience pain or hyperalgesia due to the inflammation triggered by the venom of Elapidae 
and Viperidae (Bucaretchi et al. 2016; Hifumi et al. 2015; Kleggetveit, Skulberg & Jrum 2016; 
Mamede et al. 2016). 
 Eicosanoids, nitric oxide (NO), bradykinin, complement anaphylatoxins, histamine and 
cytokines are synthesised and released, resident macrophages and additional types of cells 
are activated, and leukocytes are mobilised in the context of the large-scale local 
inflammatory process triggered by envenomation of tissue (Teixeira et al. 2009; Teixeira et 
al. 2003). vessels become more permeable as a result of such an inflammatory process and 
the exudate that develops contains plasma proteins alongside intracellular and extracellular 
protein fragments, chemokines, cytokines and molecular patterns related to damage, which 
probably aggravate the inflammation and intensify tissue damage.  
The inflammatory reaction triggered by envenoming is underpinned by SVMPs, leading to 
the development of oedema, mobilisation of neutrophils, triggering of the complement 
system, and release of cytokines such as interleukins, IL-1, IL-6, and IL-10 and tumour 
necrosis factor  (TNF-) (Bernardes et al. 2015; Clissa et al. 2001; Farsky et al. 2000; Zychar 
et al. 2010). The PLA2s in snake venom, meanwhile, have been reported by many studies to 
promote inflammatory effects under various circumstances and the changes in physiology 
and immunity that they trigger are based on a series of major mechanisms that have been 
discovered through research (Teixeira et al. 2005). 
Both non-neurogenic and neurogenic (substance-P dependent) elements are associated with 
PLA2-triggered inflammation (Cmara et al. 2003; Zhang et al. 2017). The hydrolysis of 
membrane lipids producing powerful lipid mediators that promote inflammation is the main 
source of the non-neurogenic element (Costa, Camargo & Antunes 2017). PLA2s also trigger 
other non-neurogenic and neurogenic inflammations, but the complexity of their underlying 
mechanisms has so far precluded comprehensive understanding. Furthermore, PLA2s play a 
role in activating mast cells and the subsequent release of histamine and inflammatory 
mediators like platelet-activating factor, serine proteases, leukotrienes, and prostaglandins, 
which enhance their nociceptive action (Chiu, Chen & Teng 1989; Wang & Teng 1990; Wei et 
al. 2009). Oedema, skin rash, intestinal irritability and bronchoconstriction are among the 
local and systemic effects that can be induced by the released mediators, according to the 
location of the bite site (Camargo et al. 2005; Cmara et al. 2003; Ferreira et al. 2009; 
Landucci et al. 2000). 
Viperidae envenomation often results in blistering and ulceration. Using experimental mouse 
models, some researchers have documented the division of the dermis and epidermis and 
the ulceration reported clinically, showing how these are caused by haemorrhagic SVMPs, 
especially the ones belonging to the P-I class (Freitas-de-Sousa et al. 2017). Blistering 
probably develops due to protein hydrolysis at the interface between the dermis and 
epidermis, as suggested by the dermis-epidermis division alongside the occurrence of 
basement membrane protein fragments in exudates gathered after skin sectioning in mouse 
models administered P-I SVMP (Escalante et al. 2009). Furthermore, lasting sequelae 
accompanied by contractures or extensive fibrosis are a frequent outcome of the cutaneous 
necrosis caused by the venom of a number of cobras of the genus Naja, including the African 
spitting cobras Naja nigricollis and N. mossambica (Warrell 2017). The precise role of toxins 
and inflammatory responses in mediating the acute and longer-term local tissue pathologies 
remains uncertain. Further research is needed to shed more light on the development of the 
clinically significant local necrosis (Gutirrez et al. 2018). 
Our knowledge therefore of the pathology of local envenoming by African vipers and spitting 
cobras primarily derives from clinical observation studies, with very little input from animal 
models to better define the mechanism resulting in this pathology. Conversely, our 
knowledge on the mechanisms of local envenoming emanates primarily from subjecting 
murine models with venoms from Latin American snakes. In this study, we developed a new 
ex vivo human skin model that occupies the important research space between clinical 
observations and animal models. To address knowledge gaps on the local tissue-destructive 
effects of African vipers and spitting cobras, we utilised this new model of local envenoming 
to answer the following research questions: 
 Which venom proteins penetrate human skin tissue? 
 What is the anatomical consequence of injecting venom into this tissue? 
 To what extent is cell apoptosis associated with this skin pathology? 
 Does injection of skin with venoms from vipers, and spitting and non-spitting cobras 
stimulate distinct expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines, chemokines and 
growth factors? 
3.2 Material and methods: 
3.2.1 Skin collection procedure: 
Genoskin collected anonymised human skin samples from donors who had undergone an 
abdominoplasty procedure and who had given their written informed consent. Donors did 
not have any record of allergies or dermatological disorders and had not use glucocorticoid 
or steroid treatment. Full ethical approval for the study protocol was obtained from the 
French ethical research committee (Comite de Protection des Personnes) and authorisation 
was given by the French Ministry of Research. All studies were conducted according to the 
Declaration of Helsinki protocols. The biopsies were prepared in Genoskin France and 
delivered to the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM) the next day. The skin 
experiments were initiated that day.  
3.2.2 Snake venom and the injection doses;  
The Centre for Snakebite Research & Interventions at the Liverpool School of Tropical 
Medicine supplied the lyophilised venoms (Viperidae and Elapidae) from medically 
importance snakes (details in table 3.1).  The lyophilised venom was resuspended in PBS at 
the different doses required for the injection. 
Table 3.1: Details of snake venoms species and doses used in the study; 
Snake species Family Common name Origin Venom 
(MND50) dose 
Echis ocellatus Viperidae West African carpet viper Nigeria 120 g 
Bitis arietans Viperidae African puff adder Nigeria 195 g 
Naja nigricollis Elapidae Black-necked spitting cobra Nigeria 165 g 
Naja haje 
(Control venom) 
Elapidae The Egyptian cobra/ African 
banded cobra 
Uganda 156 g 
MND50: refers to the minimum amount of venom (in g) that shows a necrotic lesion (5 mm 
diameter) 72 hours after being injected intradermally in groups of mice. 
3.2.3 Culture and treatments for Hyposkin models: 
Hyposkin models (n=28) 15 mm diameter with 10 mm thick adipose tissue were produced 
from a female donor and cultured under cell culture conditions (37 C, 5% CO2 and max 
humidity) for six hours, 12 hours, 24 hours, 36 hours, 48 hours and biopsies at seven days 
with 2 ml standard NativeSkin medium renewed every day. Three venoms and one venom 
control (details and doses in Table 1) were tested, with the selected doses being based on 
the Minimum Necrotising Dose (MND50 performed in mouse model). 20 l venom was 
injected subcutaneously (at day 1) with a Hamilton LT 250 l syringe and 27G needle. Two 
Hyposkin models were left untreated (Negative control). Two fresh biopsies (referred to as 
the Uncultured control) from day 0 were fixed in 10% buffered formalin for 48 hours and 
processed for paraffin wax embedding (for later comparison).   
3.2.4 Sampling and histological analysis: 
The culture medium (2 ml) was collected daily and stored at -80 C. At each collection time 
point, the biopsies were split into two parts. One half was fixed in 10% buffered formalin for 
48 hours at room temperature (RT) and processed for paraffin wax embedding and 
histopathological analysis. The second half was stored in RNAlater solution for gene 
expression analysis (the method and the results not included in the study). Culture medium 
were collected, and histological analysis was performed for all samples as follows:  
3.2.5 Haematoxylin and Eosin staining  
Performed on 5 m thick cross sections with a transmitted light image being acquired with a 
Leica DMi1 microscope with 40x lens.  
3.2.6 Anti-active CASEPASE-3 fluorescence immunostaining: 
Performed on 5 m thickness skin cross sections incubated in blocking buffer (Goat serum) 
for 30 minutes at 37 C. Then rinsed with PBS for five minutes (three times) before being 
incubated overnight with primary antibody (Rabbit polyclonal; Abcam ab2302) at a dilution 
of 1:100 with gentle agitation. Next day, the section was washed as in the previous step and 
incubated with HRP-conjugated secondary antibody for one hour at RT. Following the 
incubation and rinsing, mounting medium (containing DAPI) was applied and the sample was 
examined under the microscope.   
3.2.7 TUNEL Assay for Detection of DNA Fragmentation and cellular Damage: 
The assay was performed using (ApopTag Fluorescein In Situ Apoptosis Detection Kit, Ref. 
S7110, Millipore). Briefly, 5 m thick skin cross sections were washed with a range of buffers 
(i) Xylene for five minutes (three changes), (ii) Absolute ethanol for five minutes (two 
changes); (iii) 95% ethanol (once); (iv) 70% ethanol for three minutes (once); (v) and a final 
washing with PBS for five minutes (one change). A freshly diluted digesting enzyme 
(proteinase K; 20 g/ml) was applied to the pre-treated tissues for 15 minutes at RT in a 
Coplin jar. Following incubation, the tissues were washed with PBS for two minutes (two 
changes), excess liquid was gently tapped off and equilibration buffer immediately applied 
directly to the tissues and incubated for at least ten seconds at RT. The excess liquid was 
gently tapped off and working strength TdT enzyme was immediately pipetted onto the 
sections and incubated for one hour at 37 C. The sections were then transferred to a Coplin 
jar containing a working strength stop/wash buffer with gentle agitation for 15 seconds and 
incubated at RT for ten minutes. After the incubation, the sections were washed with PBS 
for one minute (three changes), and warmed working strength Anti-Digoxigenin conjugate 
was applied to the slide and then incubated for 30 minutes at RT in a humidified chamber 
while avoiding exposure to the light. This was then washed with PBS for two minutes at RT 
(four changes), followed by applying a mounting medium containing (0.5-1.0 ug/ml) DAPI 
and microscopic examination using Leica DM5000, processed with ImageJ software.  
3.2.8 Quantification of human cytokines by multiplex bead array 
The Human Cytokine Magnetic 30-Plex Panel (based on xMAP technology) was used for 
quantifying human cytokines, chemokines and growth factors (EGF, Eotaxin, FGF basic, G-
CSF, GM-CSF, HGF, IFN-, IFN-, IL-1RA, IL-1, IL-2, IL-2r, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-7, IL-8, IL-10, IL-12 
(p40/p70), IL-13, IL-15, IL-17, IP-10, MCP-1, MIG, MIP-1, MIP-1, RANTES, TNF-, and VEGF) 
of the collected culture medium. The standards and samples were prepared and 
reconstituted following the kit manual. Briefly, antibody beads were added to each well and 
incubated on the magnet for 60 seconds before the liquid was decanted and washed twice 
with 200 l of washing buffer. 50 l of incubation buffer was added followed by 100 l of 
diluted standard and blank (PBS). 50 l of assay diluent was added before addition of 50 l 
of neat samples. The plate was covered to shield it from light and kept on the rocker 
overnight at 4 C. The following day, the plate washed as before and 100 l of biotinylated 
detector antibody was added and incubated for one hour at RT, followed by washing three 
times and the addition of 150 l of wash buffer. Luminex 100/200 technology (Mag-Plex-
Avidin Microspheres) was used for measuring bead fluorescence readings. xPonent Luminex 
software was used for the analysis of the results and the mean and standard error was 
calculated for each group.  
3.2.9 SDS-PAGE and western blot profiles of daily collected culture medium: 
20 l of the daily-collected culture medium were diluted 2:1 in reduced buffered, heated for 
five minutes at 100 C and 8 g of the reduced sample was loaded into 15% SDS-PAGE gel 
hand cast gels prepared following the manufacturers instructions. The gel was run for 55 
minutes at 200V, stained for two hours on the rocker at RT and then de-stained for one hour. 
For western blots, the samples were prepared as described previously and the proteins 
electrophoretically transferred from the gel to 0.45 m nitrocellose membrane (13A, 24A, 
for seven minutes). The membrane was stained using Ponceau S stain to confirm effective 
protein transfer and then washed with TBST. The membrane was incubated overnight in 5% 
non-fat skimmed milk. Next day, the membrane was washed for 15 minutes (three changes). 
SAIMR polyvalent antivenom (used against culture medium of Bitis arietans, Naja nigricollis 
and Naja haje) and SAIMR Echis antivenom (used against Echis ocellatus) were used as 
primary antibodies diluted 1:2000 in blocking buffer (5% skimmed milk in TBST) for two hours 
at RT. This was followed by washing with TBST as in the previous washing step, before the 
blots were incubated at RT with diluted 1:1800 secondary antibody (horseradish peroxidase-
conjugated donkey anti-sheep IgG; Sigma, UK). The blots then washed as before and 
visualised by addition of DAB substrate for 25 seconds (50 mg 3', 3'-diaminobenzidine, 100 
ml PBS, 0.024% hydrogen peroxide; Sigma Aldrich, UK). 
3.2.10 Quantification of the activities of snake venom metalloproteins and of serine 
proteases in collected culture medium; 
The SVMP activity of the venoms and of the daily-collected culture medium was measured 
using a quenched fluorogenic substrate (ES010, R&D Biosystems). Briefly, 10 l of the 
substrate (supplied as a 6.2 mM stock) was used per 5 ml reaction buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 
mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5). Reactions consisted of 10 l of venom (1 g/reaction) in PBS, or 10 l 
of undiluted culture medium sample and 90 l of substrate. The venom and the samples 
were incubated at 37 C for 30 minutes and then pipetted in triplicate onto 384-well plates 
(Greiner). A multichannel was used to dispense the substrate. The plate was run on an 
Omega FluoSTAR (BMG Labtech) instrument at an excitation wavelength of 320 nm and 
emission wavelength of 405 nm at 25 C for one hour. The means and average of duplicate 
or triplicate measurements with standard error (SE) were plotted using GraphPad Prism7. 
To determine the serine protease activity in the daily-collected culture medium, we used a 
chromogenic kinetic assay and the specific substrate S-2288 (Cambridge Biosciences). 5 l 
samples were plated onto 384-well plates and then overlaid with Tris buffer (100 mM Tris, 
100 mM NaCl, pH 8.5), and 6 mM of S-2288. Changes in absorbance were measured at 405 
nm for ~30 mins. Negative control readings were taken from PBS. The means and average of 
triplicate measurements with standard error (SE) were plotted using GraphPad Prism7. 
3.3 Results 
The following experiments were performed after week-long assay-standardising 
experiments were conducted by the PhD student with Genoskin colleagues in France. The 
following sections describe the results to the original research questions. 
3.3.1 Which venom proteins penetrate human skin tissue? 
The skin biopsies were injected intradermally with venom and the daily-collected culture 
medium examined for presence of venom proteins. Comparison of the protein profiles of 
each sample was undertaken against the venom protein profiles, untreated homogenies skin 
biopsy, and untreated control culture medium. 
In the initial 24 hours, there was extensive damage, as shown by the profiles of the treated 
Echis ocellatus biopsy (Figure 3.1), with natural tissue loss to the medium being a probable 
reason for the high molecular weight protein, similar to the untreated control. SDS-PAGE 
analysis of the culture medium identified two proteins with 25kDa molecular weight and 
proteins with 10kDa molecular weight were observed, with release up to the fifth day. The 
venom proteins in the samples were detected with the antivenom SAIMR Echis monovalent. 
Moreover, in the initial 24 hours, weak bands of proteins with 25kDa molecular weight were 
identified, but no additional specific proteins were identified with the culture medium 
material. 
Analysis of the culture medium of the biopsies injected with B. arietans venom identified 
further tissue damage in the initial two days. Interrogating immunoblots of the culture 
medium with SAIMR polyvalent revealed continuous release of venoms from the tissue into 
the culture medium for the duration of the 7-day experiment. The culture medium of the 
biopsy injected with N. nigricollis venom exhibited additional tissue deterioration which 
intensified until the third day. The use of the SAIMR polyvalent antivenom did not allow 
identification of any specific venom proteins. Skin tissue damage was not detected in the 
biopsy injected with N. haje venom, which was employed as a negative venom control at a 
dosage of 156 g. Tissue deterioration was not observed after the initial two days. A protein 
with low molecular weight of around 6-7 kDa and a protein with high molecular weight of 
around 25kDa, respectively indicative of 3FTx and NGF, were identified by the SAIMR 
polyvalent antivenom. 
with high molecular weight of around 25kDa, respectively indicative of PLA2 and NGF, were 
identified by the SAIMR polyvalent antivenom. 
Figure 3.1; Identification and characterisation of venom proteins penetrating the skin: 
Daily collected samples subjected to SDS-PAGE to identify the presence of venom toxins in 
the collected samples. (2:1) of samples treated with a reduce buffer and run in a handmade 
cast. (A) protein profiles of individual samples compared with homogenies skin (s), snake 
venom (v) and untreated samples (U). (B) immunoblotting of all collected samples against (1 
B) SAIMR Echis monospecific antivenom, (2B-4B) against SAIMR polyvalent. 
3.3.2 Detection of SVMP and SVSP activities detected in culture media of venom-injected 
biopsies 
The evaluation of the SVMPs (Figure 3.2) and SVSPs (Figure 3.3) activities was performed in 
all collected culture medium. The in vitro kinetic fluorescent assay was performed to 
measure the SVMP activity in the culture medium, followed by comparison of the outcomes 
against PBS and untreated biopsy (negative control) and the venom of B. arietans (as positive 
control). According to the results, only samples gathered in the first 24 hours and on the third 
day after injection with E. ocellatus venom exhibited significant SVMP activities. By contrast, 
the culture medium gathered from biopsies injected with the venom of B. arietans, N. 
nigricollis and N. haje did not identify any activity. Chromogenic assay was performed to 
measure the SVSPs activity of every sample, with B. arietans venom and PBS, respectively, 
serving as positive and negative controls. From the third to the seventh day a slight increase 
in SVSP activity was exhibited by the culture medium gathered from samples injected with 
E. ocellatus venom, whereas, during the same time frame, a significant increase was 
displayed in the SVSP activity in the culture medium gathered from samples injected with B. 
arietans venom. By contrast, injection with Elapidae venom was not associated with any 
increase in SVSP activity. 
Figure 3.2: The metalloprotease activities of venoms in the collected culture medium; All 
collected culture medium were subjected to a chromogenic kinetic assay. The samples 
collected after injection with venoms (A) Echis ocellatus; (B) Bitis arietans; (C) N. nigricollis and 
(D) N. haje. In each case one biopsy was injected with Echis ocellatus and another was injected 
with N. nigricollis, then followed after one hour by an antivenom interventions. The culture 
medium collected 48 hours after the injection was subjected to a quenched fluorogenic 
substrate and measured at an excitation wavelength of 320 nm and an emission wavelength 
of 405 nm at 25 C for 1 h. The results were compared with the results from culture medium 
collected from day 0. Significant values [****(<0.0001), *** (0.0001), ** (0.0045), * (0.0206)]. 
NGA (Nigeria), UGA (Uganda). 
Figure 3.3: The serine protease activities of venoms in the collected culture medium; All 
collected culture medium were subjected to a chromogenic kinetic assay. The samples collected 
after injection with venoms (A) Echis ocellatus; (B) Bitis arietans; (C) N. nigricollis and (D) N. haje. 
In each case one biopsy was injected with Echis ocellatus and another injected with N. nigricollis 
then followed after one hour by antivenom interventions. The culture medium collected 48 hours 
after the injection was subjected to chromogenic assays and measured at 405 nm for ~30 
minutes. The results were compared with the results from culture medium collected from day 0. 
Significant values [****(<0.0001), *** (0.0001), ** (0.0045), * (0.0206)]. NGA (Nigeria), UGA 
(Uganda). 
3.3.3 What is the anatomical consequence of injecting venom into this tissue? 
The experimental model presented in this study reproduces in explants of human skin the 
characteristic effects described in clinical cases of envenoming by Viperidae and Elapidae 
venoms. The clinical descriptions recount oedema, blistering and necrosis of the skin and 
subcutaneous connective tissue. Blistering forms are observed after seven days, followed by 
prominent necrosis of the dermis and loss of the epidermis. These effects are then followed 
by the sloughing of the epidermis, thus generating an ulcer, which is then filled with a hyaline 
fibrinoid material.  
The control skin samples (both the untreated controls and the negative venom controls 
(treated with N. haje venom)) had a normal macroscopic appearance. A progressive series of 
pathological events was observed in skin injected with E.ocellatus, B.arietans and N. 
nigricollis venom. Macroscopically, the ex vivo model showed evidence of mild damage in 
the epidermis and/or superficial dermis at seven days, which was most pronounced with B. 
arietans venom. The necrotic area was characterised by a faint brownish lesion surrounded 
by a whitish area.  
Figure 3.4: The macroscopic observation of the injected biopsies (pre and post the 
subcutaneous injection). 20 l of venom was injected and the macroscopic changes on the 
injected tissues were observed daily. Day 0 refers to before the subcutaneous injection and 
Day 7 to seven days after the injection. (A) untreated biopsy, and biopsies injected with 
venoms (B) E. ocellatus (120 g); (C) B. arietans (195 g); (D) N. nigricollis (165 g) and (E) N. 
haje (156 g). The macroscopic observations revealed that after seven days in culture, the 
untreated control and the biopsy treated with N. haje venom did not display any changes. All 
the other biopsies exhibited a slight darkness following the injection with venoms (E. ocellatus, 
B. arietans and N. nigricollis).  
Histopathological analysis of control biopsies at day 7 (both for untreated and N. haje venom-
treated samples) revealed an unaltered epidermis and dermis, including skin appendages 
(Fig. 3.4 A and E). All biopsies of venom-injected skin collected at day 7 showed evident 
pathological alterations. Loss of skin viability and structure was observed with all three 
venoms (E. ocellatus, B. arietans and N. nigricollis). The epidermis structure was preserved 
in a similar condition as seen in the non-injected control, although a few pyknotic nuclei were 
observed in epidermal crests (pyknotic nuclei could mean apoptotic or necrotic cells). These 
pyknotic nuclei were present in the deep dermis in both snake venom control, and all three 
snake venom experiments. There was separation of the epidermis from the dermis and 
blistering forms in biopsies injected with the three venoms (E. ocellatus, B. arietans and N. 
nigricollis). The dermis and epidermis exhibit pyknotic cells in biopsies injected with B. 
arietans and the biopsies injected with B. arietans and N. nigricollis exhibited ballooning 
degeneration of the epidermal cells. No morphological changes were observed with N. haje 
and untreated biopsy.  
Figure 3.4: Viability and structural integrity assessment following the subcutaneous 
injection of snake venoms. The H&E section of tissues obtained from day 7 after the 
injection. (A) Untreated control section; tissues treated with venoms (B) E. ocellatus (120 
g); (C) B. arietans (195 g); (D) N. nigricollis (165 g) and (E) N. haje (156 g). The 
examination revealed an important loss of skin viability and structure with three venoms 
(E. ocellatus, B. arietans and N. nigricollis) whereas no changes were detected in the 
tissues of the untreated control and the tissue treated with N. haje venom.  
3.3.4 To what extent is cell apoptosis associated with this skin pathology? 
The cytoplasm of cells whose nuclear morphology was indicative of apoptosis was selectively 
stained, indicating the presence of antibodies specific for active caspases-3. The cytoplasm 
of morphologically healthy-looking cells were also stained (Bressenot et al. 2009), however, 
thus suggesting that these antibodies recognised activated protein at the early stage of 
apoptosis. Active caspase-3 was occasionally detected in nuclei, thus indicating a 
translocation of the protein to the nucleus. Strikingly, our study showed evidence of 
apoptosis in all the biopsies subcutaneously injected with snake venoms, except the non-
injected control (Figure 3.5). It may be that this is due to the trauma of injection. 
DNA fragmentation usually results from either apoptosis or necrosis and, in apoptosis, is 
associated with ultrastructural changes in cellular morphology. The extent of such 
fragmentation can be studied using the TUNEL assay (Figure 3.6). When TUNEL staining was 
applied to our samples apoptotic cells were in all envenomed biopsies. The TUNEL staining 
results thus confirmed the presence of apoptotic cells and revealed the presence of necrotic 
cells, in particular the model injected with venoms only. Cell mortality was observed in all 
injected biopsies, albeit with different levels of TUNEL positive cells. Both cobra venoms (N. 
nigricollis and N. haje) showed less cell damage confirmed by TUNEL staining. While B. 
arietans venoms showed the presence of more necrotic and apoptotic cells in the collected 
sample  
Figure 3.5: Assessment of apoptotic cells following the subcutaneous injection of snake 
venoms. Anti-active caspase-3 fluorescence immunostaining was performed on 5 m thick skin 
collected at day 7 following the injection. (A) Untreated control section; tissues treated with 
venoms (B) E. ocellatus (120 g); (C) B. arietans (195 g); (D) N. nigricollis (165 g) and (E) N. 
haje (156 g). The examination revealed a few apoptotic cells (white arrow) in all injected 
conditions except untreated control. Similar levels of apoptosis were detected in all sections 
following the venom injection.   
Figure 3.6: DNA fragmentation assessment following the subcutaneous injection of snake 
venoms. TUNEL assay was performed on 5 m thick skin collected at day 7 after the injection 
using ApopTag Fluorescein In Situ Apoptosis Detection Kit. (A) Untreated control section; 
tissues treated with venoms (B) E. ocellatus (120 g); (C) B. arietans (195 g); (D) N. nigricollis 
(165 g) and (E) N. haje (156 g). TUNEL staining confirmed apoptotic cells (White arrow) 
presence and revealed the presence of necrotic cells (Yellow arrow) in biopsies injected with 
venom. Untreated biopsies did not present any dead cells.  
3.3.5 Does injection of skin with venoms from vipers, and spitting and non-spitting cobras 
stimulate distinct expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines, chemokines and growth 
factors? 
The cytokines, chemokines and growth factors arising from the local tissue damage caused 
by the venom were measured in order to examine in more detail the impact of venom on 
the employed human skin model. Glycoproteins are generated by inflammatory and 
epithelial cells, while cytokines are responsible for immune response regulation and 
underpin communication between cells, as well as being employed by inflammatory cells 
(e.g. neutrophils, macrophages, lymphocytes) for coordination of the whole inflammatory 
reaction process (Juhn et al. 2008). Local tissue damage pathogenesis relies most extensively 
on inflammatory cytokines, since these compounds affect most skin layer cells and influence 
the production of other inflammatory compounds and enzymes through intracellular 
pathways of signal transduction. There are 19 inflammatory cytokines with the major ones 
being G-CSF, GM-CSF, IL-1, IL-1RA and IL-12. Biopsies injected with the venom of E. ocellatus 
and B. arietans revealed a rapid increase in IL-1B in the first two days, which then declined 
somewhat by the fourth day, while biopsies injected with the venom of N. nigricollis and N. 
haje revealed an incremental increase in IL-1B in the first day, before reverting to normal by 
the third day.      
The pleiotropic effects of IL1 are modulated by the anti-inflammatory IL-1RA through 
competitive inhibition of its adherence to receptors on the cell surface (Arend & Guthridge 
2000). According to the results obtained, the same activities were associated with a marked 
increase in both IL-1RA and IL-1. Furthermore, the levels of granulocyte macrophage 
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), and granulocyte-colony stimulating factor 3 (CSF-3), 
both peaked early in the inflammatory cascade before rapidly declining so that the 
inflammation could not be clinically proven. Injection with viper venoms (E. ocellatus and B. 
arietans) led to an incremental rise in GM-CSF and CSF-3 in the first two days and then a 
rapid increase on the fifth day, whereas injection with elapid venoms (N. nigricollis and N. 
haje) led to an increase on the first and fifth days. Moreover, the immune response was 
significantly modulated by interleukin 12 (IL-12) (Sun et al. 2015). Compared to the normal 
control, all injected biopsies had marked elevation of IL-12, whereas some cytokines (e.g. IL-
4) did not exhibit a notable increase by contrast to the normal control (Figure 3.7). 
Figure 3.7. Dynamic changes in pro-inflammatory cytokines following subcutaneous 
injection by Viperidae venom (E. ocellatus and B. arietans) and Elapid venoms (N. nigricollis 
and N. haje). The Human Cytokine Magnetic 30-Plex Panel for the Luminex platform was 
performed to quantify the cytokines responses in the culture medium collected from the 
injected skin between Days 0 and 5.  Six cytokines analytes simultaneously showed 
responses; (A) IL1-, (B) IL-1RA, (C) IL-12, (D) G-CSF/CSF-3, (E) IL-4 and (F) GM-CSF. The sample 
collected from the untreated skin tissue was used to compare with the pro-inflammatory 
cytokines response following the subcutaneous injection. (Av= antivenom). 
Mobilisation of leukocytes at the infection or damage site is the main reason why cells 
generate pro-inflammatory chemokines. When cells release chemokines, however, immune 
cells can invade and damage vital tissues and organs (Turner et al. 2014). On stimulation by 
IL-1 or TNF, endothelial cells, fibroblasts and epithelial cells express monocyte chemotactic 
protein-1 (MCP-1) (Deshmane et al. 2009). Biopsies injected with E. ocellatus venom 
exhibited elevated levels of MCP-1 in the initial two days, before reverting to normal. 
Meanwhile, biopsies injected with B. arietans venom displayed an increase in MCP-1 at 12 
and 36 hours, whilst biopsies injected with N. nigricollis venom displayed maximum levels at 
three days, followed by a gradual decline to normal by the fifth day. Lastly, biopsies injected 
with N. haje venom showed an increase in MCP-1 on the first day. Moreover, injection with 
E. ocellatus, B. arietans and N. haje venom determined peak levels of the chemokines (Figure 
3.8) macrophage inflammatory protein MIP1-ALPHA, RANTES at two days, followed by 
gradual reversal to normal by the fifth day. In biopsies injected with N. nigricollis venom, 
these chemokines increased at three days and reverted to normal after a further two days. 
Figure 3.8. Dynamic changes in pro-inflammatory chemokines following subcutaneous 
injection by Viperidae venom (E. ocellatus and B. arietans) and Elapids venoms (N. nigricollis 
and N. haje). The Human Cytokine Magnetic 30-Plex Panel for the Luminex platform was 
performed in order to quantify the chemokines responses in the culture medium collected 
from the injected skin on Days 0 to 5. Four analytes simultaneously showed responses; (A) 
MCP-1, (B) RANTES, (C) MIP1-ALPHA, and (D) MIG. The sample collected from untreated skin 
tissue was used to compare with the pro-inflammatory chemokines response following the 
subcutaneous injection. (Av= antivenom). 
In order to proliferate and differentiate, myogenic cells rely on a number of growth factors 
and cytokines produced by myogenic and inflammatory cells and those secreted from 
storage sites within the extracellular matrix (ECM) constituents of muscle tissue (Gutirrez 
et al. 2018). These include hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) and fibroblast growth factor (FGF) 
(Karalaki et al. 2009). Biopsies injected with E. ocellatus and B. arietans venom, exhibited an 
increase in FGF after 12 hours and at two time points (one day and three days). Meanwhile, 
biopsies injected with N. nigricollis and N. haje venom, respectively, exhibited a minor FGF 
increase after 12-36 hours and no modification at all. It is notable that injection with B. 
arietans venom caused a significant increase in HGF (Figure 3.8). The development of blood 
vessels and vascular permeability are critically modulated by vascular endothelial growth 
factor (VEGF-A) and the related protein family (Shibuya 2011). Injection with E. ocellatus, B. 
arietans and N. nigricollis led to progressive increase in VEGF-A after two days, which peaked 
on the fourth day and reverted to normal on the fifth day. By contrast, injection with N. haje 
venom did not trigger a marked increase. The levels of proinflammatory cytokines, 
chemokines and growth factors reduced to normal levels after 48 hours of systemic and local 
injection of the antivenoms (both SAMIR polyvalent and SAIMR Echis a monovalent) in 
comparison with the samples collected from the skin injected with the venoms only.  
Figure 3.9. Dynamic changes in growth factors following subcutaneous injection by 
Viperidae venom (E. ocellatus and B. arietans) and Elapid venoms (N. nigricollis and N. haje). 
The Human Cytokine Magnetic 30-Plex Panel for the Luminex platform was performed to 
quantify the growth factor responses in the culture medium collected from the injected skin 
on Days 0 to 5.  three analytes simultaneously showed responses; (A) HGF, (B) FGF-Basic and 
(C) VEGF-A. The sample collected from untreated skin tissue was used to compare with the 
growth factors responses following the subcutaneous injection. (Av= antivenom). 
3.4 Discussion 
Strengths and weaknesses of the new ex vivo human skin model of envenoming 
As stated earlier, the new ex vivo human skin model occupies the research space between 
clinical observations and animal models. An obvious weakness of this model is the inability 
to mimic intravenous interventions, which, in the field of snakebite therapy, places clear 
limits on the utility of the model. The need for experimentation within a day of biopsy 
excision, and the costs of the human skin biopsies, will inevitably restrict experimentation to 
well-funded groups close to surgical facilities.  There were concerns that the lack of 
vascularisation of the ex vivo biopsies might exert physiological conditions restricting the 
duration of experiments and the cells/systems that can be validly examined. The distinctions 
between control and venom-injected biopsies in terms of skin morphology (histopathology 
analysis), cell death (caspase and TUNEL analysis) and skin-cell expression of a wide variety 
of cytokines, chemokines and growth factors (Multiplex luminex) identified that the biopsies 
were physiologically viable and responsive to tissue injury for at least six days after excision. 
The ability to capture these datasets from human skin tissue therefore represents a 
significant clinical-relevancy advance over the murine models of local envenoming. The 
ability to interrogate, for up to five to six days, physiological responses of biopsies subjected 
to injurious substances that would be ethically forbidden in patients illustrates the significant 
clinical research utility of this model. Nevertheless, we have been careful to factor the lack 
of vascularisation into our interpretations of the results gained using this model.  
Human skin responses to venoms of the most medically-important snakes of sub-Saharan 
Africa 
The pathophysiological response to skin injury is a complicated process whereby cells and 
the extracellular matrix (ECM) are exposed to toxic substances and inflammatory 
mechanisms, which, while designed to limit injury, can inflict additional tissue damage. 
Standard empirical instruments are inappropriate for gaining insight into these complex 
interactions. As our knowledge of the tissue pathology following African snake envenoming 
is limited to clinical observations, we used this new ex vivo human skin model to identify (i) 
the most pathogenic snake venoms and toxin groups, (ii) the temporal pathophysiological 
response to this venom injury and (iii) the efficacy of antivenom to neutralise skin pathology 
by adding antivenom into the venom-injected biopsy culture media  in an attempt to mimic 
intravenous antivenom treatment.  
The African snake venoms and toxin groups most pathogenic to ex vivo human skin 
The Group II PLA2, SVMP, SVSP, CTL, disintegrin toxin groups dominate the composition of 
Viperidae venoms (Gutirrez et al. 2017). By contrast, Group I PLA2s and 3FTxs are the major 
components of Elapidae venoms, alongside reduced concentrations of other types of 
proteins (Calvete 2011). Gutirrez et al. (2016) reported that the death of endothelial cells 
in culture was triggered by several SVMPs. Consistent with this, the present work observed 
that SVMPs and SVSPs were discharged by the venom of Viperidae into the culture medium. 
Functional biochemical assays confirmed that several toxic-enzymatic constituents were 
present in the culture medium. As noted by Kang et al. (2011), the occurrence of proteinases 
in venom can have a range of clinical effects during envenomation, including inflammatory 
events, tissue injury and abnormal coagulation and haemorrhage. Envenomation with E. 
ocellatus venom led to the release of abundant SVMPs in the skin, beginning in the initial 24 
hours and between the third and seventh days, implying that tissue and endothelial damage 
was induced by SVMP release. The haemorrhagic SVMPs in the venom of Viperidae initiate 
tissue ischaemia due to the extensive extravasation accompanying the induced capillary 
vessel damage, and therefore they are involved in the development of myonecrosis 
(Gutirrez & Rucavado 2000b).  
SVSPs resemble thrombin in their fibrinogenolytic functional activities and many are capable 
of breaking down fibrinogen into fibrinopeptides through proteolytic cleavage, which is why 
they are also known as thrombin-like enzymes (TLEs) (Phillips et al. 2010). SVSP functional 
activity was observed in the culture medium derived from skin biopsy exposed to the venom 
of B. arietans, with release from the third until the seventh day post-administration. It was 
thus concluded that SVSPs played a role in dermal permeation by the venom, leading to 
systemic envenomation. 
Empirical models have reported significant inflammation caused by PLA2 in venom (Teixeira 
et al. 2003). This protein has been implicated in various inflammation events, including 
oedema, infiltration of inflammatory cells and activation of mast cells (Wei et al. 2009). This 
could elucidate oedema formation in the present work. On the other hand, metalloproteases 
are known to have a role in both local and systemic effects of venom and may also induce 
oedema, as well as bleeding and muscle necrosis (Fernandes et al. 2007). Several authors 
have suggested that the defensive mechanisms of the body may be significantly reliant on 
oedema and inflammatory cell infiltration (Teixeira et al. 2003; Zuliani et al. 2005). In this 
work, the culture medium collected from N. nigricollis venom were subjected to 
immunoblotting, but PLA2 was not found to occur in the culture medium, implying its 
participation in the local tissue damage induced by the venom of N. nigricollis. 
Lysophospholipids and unsaturated fatty acids are produced through the hydrolysis of 
phospholipids with unsaturated fatty acid tails at the sn-position by PLA2 (Kang et al. 2011). 
In turn, the hydrolysis products can induce extensive cellular pathological effects by altering 
the physical properties of cell membranes and activating downstream signal transduction 
pathways (Gasanov, Dagda & Rael 2014). 
The temporal pathophysiological response of human skin to injury by venoms of African 
snakes 
Envenomation-related inflammation mechanisms can be distinguished based both on the 
pathologies formed after subcutaneous injection of the venom of Viperidae and Elapidae, 
but also through measurement of pro-inflammatory markers like cytokines, chemokines and 
growth factors. Such mechanisms can help to achieve a better understanding of how venom 
exerts its effects, leading to more effective management of envenomation cases (Boda et al. 
2018; Gutierrez et al. 2007; Moura-da-Silva, Butera & Tanjoni 2007). The chain of immune 
responses triggered by trauma, tissue injury or infection halts the damage, restricts external 
effects, inhibits microorganisms and induces repair mechanisms (Harris & Gelfand 1995). 
This section of the discussion explores the contribution of this study in each of these areas. 
Morphology: The reported clinical manifestations of the venom of Viperidae and Elapidae, 
including oedema, blistering and dermal and subdermal necrosis (WHO 2010), were among 
the alterations in skin structure and morphology that were observed in the present work 
after subcutaneous venom injection. Dermal oedema formed quickly, followed by blisters 
after one week and then significant dermal necrosis and epidermis loss (Gutirrez et al. 
2005). Subsequently, there was shedding of the epidermis and the greater part of the dermis, 
leading to the formation of an ulcer and permeation of the damaged site by a hyaline 
fibrinoid material. It can thus be deduced that; besides the direct cytotoxicity of the venom, 
the development of dermonecrosis may be promoted by ischaemia accompanying 
thrombosis and vascular damage. Necrosis followed by epidermis and dermis shedding is a 
more probable reason than venom metalloproteinase or endogenous MMP activity as to why 
a significant proportion of collagen is lost from the dermis. This is consistent with clinical 
evidence (Warrell 2017; WHO 2010). The dermonecrosis caused by the venom of N. 
nigricollis was investigated by Rivel et al. (2016), who reported that initial dermis oedema 
degenerated into blistering, skin appendage loss and a decrease in cellularity. Dermis 
necrosis became obvious by 24 hours, with loss of epidermis portions and permeation of the 
damaged sites by a fibrinoid hyaline material (Rivel et al. 2016). In the present work, 
subcutaneous injection of the human skin model did not produce any notable effects in the 
initial two days, highlighting that envenomation had distinct effects on human and animal 
and that more directly above. 
Cytokine responses: Envenomation causes local tissue damage by triggering the cellular 
immune response whereby tissue macrophages and blood monocytes activate a reaction 
chain. Cytokines such as IL-1 ( or ) and TNF- are among the key mediators released by 
activated macrophages (Akdis et al. 2011; Dinarello 2011). Cytokines participate in regulating 
every inflammatory response stage, hence they are crucial for interaction between cells 
(Arend & Gabay 2004). Cytokine involvement in local pathologies triggered by the venom of 
Viperidae and Elapidae was assessed in the current work based on the empirical model. 
In the context of inflammation, the immune response and tissue repair unfold with the 
involvement of anti- and pro-inflammatory cytokines and other proteins released by 
leukocytes. In this work, the occurrence of venom-triggered local pathologies was signalled 
by increases in the pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-1, IL-1RA, IL_12, G-CSF/CSF-3 and GM-
CSF. The pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-1 not only regulates prostaglandin synthesis and 
chemokine release, but also activates lymphocytes, stimulates macrophages and promotes 
leukocyte attachment to endothelial cells (Rucavado et al. 2002). In this work, injection of 
the venom of E. ocellatus and B. arietans led to IL-1 elevation two to three days afterwards, 
whereas the venom of N. nigricollis and N. haje increased IL-1 only slightly after the initial 
day, before a decrease on the next day. Hyperalgesia, expansion of peripheral oedema and 
allodynia can all be triggered by IL-1 release (Fink 2005; Kulmatycki & Jamali 2001). Escocard 
et al. (2006) reported that the proteolytic activity of metalloproteinases in Bothrops atrox 
venom enabled cleavage of IL-1, IL-6 and TNF-. In the current work, IL-1 was 20 times 
higher compared to untreated biopsy due to venom SVMPs.  
 IL-1RA likely inhibits additional IL-1 activity and participates in inflammatory response 
cessation as IL-1RA elevation occurs after IL-1 elevation in the inflammatory response. In a 
study employing a mouse model, Polin et al. (2011) found that inflammation in different 
conditions was diminished by IL-1ra administration. Furthermore, the involvement of anti-
inflammatory reactions in the regulation of inflammation is implied by the correlation of IL-
1RA increase and IL-1 increase. 
 Infection by different intracellular pathogens triggers IL-12 production by mature dendritic 
cells (DCs) (Brzoza, Rockel & Hiltbold 2004; Hunter 2005). IL-12 is considered a key mediator 
between the innate and adaptive immunity because it strongly affects activation of T cells, 
especially production of interferon gamma (IFN-), which is critically involved in intracellular 
pathogen eradication (Henry et al. 2008). In the present work, all biopsies injected with 
venom showed an increase in IL-12 until the fifth day post-injection. Moreover, with the 
venom of E. ocellatus and B. arietans, the effects of SVMP and SVSP on IL-12 maintained IL-
12 elevation on the fifth day after injection. Similarly, Delafontaine et al. (2017) indicated 
that IL-12 was targeted by SVMPs and SVSPs from Bothrops venom.  
Neutrophil progenitors proliferate, differentiate and survive based on the activity of the 
primary cytokine granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF). Mammalian mature 
neutrophils also rely on G-CSF for improved trafficking and immunological activities. 
Monocytes and macrophages, fibroblasts, endothelial cells and bone marrow stromal cells all 
generate G-CSF in humans (Katakura et al. 2019). Naito et al. (2009) reported that G-CSF 
therapy boosted repair and activation of established anabolic signalling pathways (e.g. Akt) 
in the skeletal muscle of mice injected with myonecrosis-inducing venom. This implies that 
muscle repair was promoted by elevated G-CSF, as attested by heightened levels of myogenic 
satellite cells. Pitzer et al. (2008) also noted that exogenous G-CSF therapy enhanced muscle 
repair and survival rates in a murine model of muscular dystrophy, while it also promoted 
motor function and increased muscle fibre size by 55% in a murine model of amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis. In the present work, G-CSF increased two days after administration of N. 
nigricollis venom. Additionally, G-CSF exhibited heightened levels on day three following E. 
ocellatus venom injection and a minor increase after injection with B. arietans and N. haje 
venom.  
Cells including macrophages, mast cells, T cells, fibroblasts and endothelial cells generate 
GM-CSF in reaction to the activation of an immune response and the release of pro-
inflammatory cytokines. As well as occurring in the majority of tissues, GM-CSF also occurs 
in the extracellular matrix and as an integral membrane protein (Shi et al. 2006). Pathologies 
like wounds, tumour stimulation or inflammatory skin conditions trigger keratinocytes to 
release GM-CSF into the skin. Infiltrating cells (e.g. monocytes, macrophages, neutrophils, 
eosinophils, mast cells) and resident skin cells are among the cells targeted by GM-CSF (Mann 
et al. 2001). Currently, research has not been able to specify how GM-CSF acts, but the 
cytokine has been employed in a clinical setting as a drug regimen to diminish drug 
treatment-induced apoptosis of hematopoietic cells in the context of HIV (Hewitt et al. 1993), 
while Kaplan et al. (1992) conducted an in vitro investigation showing that GM-CSF induced 
keratinocytes to proliferate and helped skin wounds to heal faster in cases of lepromatous 
leprosy. Furthermore, there is evidence that cytokine co-delivery improves cellular or 
humoral responses (Kim et al. 1997). In this work, GM-CSF increased within one to two days 
of administration of the venom of N. nigricollis and N. haje; GM-CSF secretion might be 
promoted by the high proportion of 3FTxs occurring in the venom of these two cobra species 
(Tasoulis & Isbister 2017). Based on the above observations, it is concluded that post-
envenomation wound healing is signalled and aided by high GM-CSF levels.  
Chemokines: Chemoattractants like chemokines are as important as adhesion molecules for 
the targeting processes of extravasation and tissue homing (Moser & Willimann 2004). 
Chemokines afford selective mediation of area-specific mobilisation of neutrophils, 
macrophages and lymphocytes owing to their property of target-cell specificity. 
Preferential attraction of neutrophils and, potentially, lymphocytes is exhibited by C-X-C 
chemokines like IL-8, growth-related oncogene  (GRO), and epithelial-derived neutrophil 
attractant-78 amino acids (ENA-78) with the glutamin acid-leucine-arginine motif (Rudack et 
al. 2003). Conversely, preferential attraction of lymphocytes is exhibited by C-X-C 
chemokines without the glutamin acid-leucine-arginine motif, such as monokine induced by 
interferon- (MIG) and interferon--inducible protein-10 (IP-10). Constituting the second 
chemokine subfamily, C-X-C chemokines encompass monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 
(MCP-1), macrophage inflammatory protein-1 and  (MIP-1 and ), and the regulated-on 
activation normal T cells expressed and secreted (RANTES). Regarding specificity for 
macrophages, lymphocytes and non-neutrophil granulocytes, a slight overlap is exhibited by 
this chemokine family (Morimoto et al. 2004; Widney et al. 2000). 
In this work, N. nigricollis venom heightened the levels of the c-c chemokines MCP-1, MIP1-
ALPHA and RANTES and the C-X-C chemokine MIG one day after being injected 
subcutaneously. The highest levels of MCP-1 and MIP1-ALPHA were recorded at two days, 
followed by reversal to normal on day three. B. arietans venom increased MIG at one day 
following injection before a gradual reversal to normal by day five. One reason for this is that 
different chemokine sets provide dynamic control of the movement and aggregation of key 
leukocytes in damaged areas, including neutrophils, monocytes/macrophages and 
lymphocytes, with fast upregulation immediately following wound formation. Employing a 
human blood model, Pitzer et al. (2008) observed that MIG and MCP-1 were generated in 
higher amounts due to the action of SVMPs from Bothrops pirajai venom. Empirical work 
based on incisional adult skin wounds revealed that robust MCP-1 expression, beginning 
from the second day, was indicative of macrophage migration (Pitzer et al. 2008). Engelhardt 
et al. (1998) reported a correlation between migration of lymphocytes and expression of 
MCP-1, MIG and IP-10 after day four. In human skin wounds, MCP-1 seems to function mainly 
to chemoattract and activate monocytes and macrophages, which subsequently initiate 
production of cytokines conducive to growth under stimulation by other signals. DiPietro et 
al. (1995) used a human model to show that, unlike skin wound healing in mice, the 
inflammatory network underpinning wound repair in humans depended greatly on basal 
keratinocytes within the neighbouring epidermis along with MCP-1 production. In a different 
study employing a mouse model, MCP-1 expression only started to increase after day 16 of 
C. adamanteus venom injection, due to the action of basic PLA2 in that venom (Samy et al. 
2014). Such observations imply that human skin displays a high level of sensitivity and is 
prone to inflammation after envenomation.  
Growth factors: Cells activate, differentiate and proliferate under stimulation by growth 
factors released by proteolytic processing of ECM constituents during inflammatory events, 
including insulin growth factor (IGF), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), fibroblast 
growth factor (FGF), transforming growth factor- (TGF-), hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), 
and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), (Arroyo & Iruela-Arispe 2010). In terms of 
angiogenesis, constituents that both promote (e.g. vascular endothelial growth factor, VEGF) 
and inhibit (e.g. endostatin, endorepelin) this process can be released due to SVMP activity. 
Various mediators may therefore be activated when SVMPs hydrolyse the ECM, resulting in 
more significant tissue changes, disruption of the interplay between cells and matrix, 
stimulation and suppression of cell proliferation, and repair activity in the context of 
complicated tissue interaction (Gutirrez et al. 2016). The present work observed that HGF, 
FGF and VEGF increased one day after injection of the venom of E. ocellatus and B. arietans. 
Such mediators signal the activity of SVMPs due to their targeting of the ECM. Meanwhile, 
VEGF increased only four days following injection of N. nigricollis venom, whilst N. haje 
venom did not elicit any modifications.  
The efficacy of antivenom to neutralise local skin pathology induced by African snake 
venoms  
The efficacy of antivenom in clinically counteracting dermonecrosis caused by N. nigricollis 
venom is unclear, with some researchers maintaining that such efficacy is usually poor 
(Warrell & Ormerod 1976), owing to suboptimal composition of antibodies targeting 
cytotoxins or PLA2s in the antivenom, or incompatibility between venom toxicokinetics and 
antivenom antibody pharmacokinetics, with local tissue damage occurring before antibodies 
reach the site (Rivel et al. 2016). The present work employed the non-specific antivenom 
SAIMR polyvalent and a specific antivenom to counteract N. nigricollis and E. ocellatus 
venom, respectively. The antivenoms were subcutaneously and systemically injected 60 
minutes after the venom was injected. Notably, there was no difference in local 
inflammatory response between the biopsies taken two days after administration of 
antivenom administration and those taken injection only with the venom. 
Real envenomation settings were mimicked through intravenous antivenom injection 
straight after intradermal venom injection. The challenges posed by delayed antivenom 
treatment, as is frequently the case in sub-Saharan Africa, were highlighted by the fact that 
dermonecrosis was solely partially counteracted by a high dosage of IgG antivenom delivered 
straight after envenomation (Chippaux 2009). Given the difficulty of using antivenom to 
counteract local dermonecrosis caused by the venom of Elapidae and Viperidae, antivenom 
delivery immediately post-envenomation and the identification of new viable suppressors 
should be prioritised in a public health setting. The results obtained indicate that 
dermonecrosis caused by the venom of Elapidae and Viperidae could be counteracted by 
early antivenom administration, since IgG and F(ab)2 antivenoms are available in Africa 
(Scheske, Ruitenberg & Bissumbhar 2015). 
3.5 Conclusions 
Acute tissue damage triggered by snake results in inflammation which aggravates that 
damage through fibrillar collagen hydrolysis by MMPs and other endogenous proteinases 
stemming from resident tissue cells or invading leukocytes, leading to extensive ECM 
breakdown. Physiologically active protein fragments derived from ECM hydrolysis are 
involved in tissue changes and processes of inflammation and repair. Furthermore, cell 
behaviour may be influenced by tissue biochemical alterations caused by PLA2 or/ and SVMP-
induced modifications in ECM stiffness. Under these circumstances, the identification of new 
SVMP or PLA2 inhibitors and inflammation modulators demands comprehension of how 
envenomation-induced ECM breakdown occurs. Local tissue damage may be mitigated, thus 
minimising the sequelae suffered by victims of Viperidae envenomation, through an 
integrated approach that consists of fast delivery of SVMP and PLA2 inhibitors alongside 
administration of inflammation inhibitors and antivenom. Moreover, tissue repair and 
regeneration can be enhanced by acquiring greater knowledge and comprehension of ECM 
damage caused by snakebite envenomation, thus diminishing the rate of morbidity that is 
associated with this neglected tropical disease. 
3.6 References: 
Akdis, M., Burgler, S., Crameri, R., Eiwegger, T., Fujita, H., Gomez, E., Klunker, S., Meyer, N., 
OMahony, L. & Palomares, O. (2011) 'Interleukins, from 1 to 37, and interferon-: 
receptors, functions, and roles in diseases', Journal of allergy and clinical 
immunology, vol. 127, no. 3, pp. 701-721. 
Arend, W.P. & Gabay, C. (2004) 'Cytokines in the rheumatic diseases', Rheumatic diseases 
clinics of North America, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 41-67. 
Arend, W.P. & Guthridge, C.J. (2000) 'Biological role of interleukin 1 receptor antagonist 
isoforms', Annals of the rheumatic diseases, vol. 59, no. suppl 1, pp. i60-i64. 
Arroyo, A.G. & Iruela-Arispe, M.L. (2010) 'Extracellular matrix, inflammation, and the 
angiogenic response', Cardiovascular research, vol. 86, no. 2, pp. 226-235. 
Bernardes, C.P., Menaldo, D.L., Mamede, C.C.N., Zoccal, K.F., Cintra, A.C.O., Faccioli, L.H., 
Stanziola, L., de Oliveira, F. & Sampaio, S.V. (2015) 'Evaluation of the local 
inflammatory events induced by BpirMP, a metalloproteinase from Bothrops pirajai 
venom', Molecular immunology, vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 456-464. 
Boda, F., Banfai, K., Garai, K., Curticapean, A., Berta, L., Sipos, E. & Kvell, K. (2018) 'Effect of 
Vipera ammodytes ammodytes Snake Venom on the Human Cytokine Network', 
Toxins, vol. 10, no. 7, p. 259. 
Bohlen, C.J., Chesler, A.T., Sharif-Naeini, R., Medzihradszky, K.F., Zhou, S., King, D., Snchez, 
E.E., Burlingame, A.L., Basbaum, A.I. & Julius, D. (2011) 'A heteromeric Texas coral 
snake toxin targets acid-sensing ion channels to produce pain', Nature, vol. 479, no. 
7373, p. 410. 
Bressenot, A., Marchal, S., Bezdetnaya, L., Garrier, J., Guillemin, F. & Plnat, F. (2009) 
'Assessment of apoptosis by immunohistochemistry to active caspase-3, active 
caspase-7, or cleaved PARP in monolayer cells and spheroid and subcutaneous 
xenografts of human carcinoma', Journal of Histochemistry & Cytochemistry, vol. 
57, no. 4, pp. 289-300. 
Brzoza, K.L., Rockel, A.B. & Hiltbold, E.M. (2004) 'Cytoplasmic entry of Listeria 
monocytogenes enhances dendritic cell maturation and T cell differentiation and 
function', The Journal of Immunology, vol. 173, no. 4, pp. 2641-2651. 
Bucaretchi, F., De Capitani, E.M., Vieira, R.J., Rodrigues, C.K., Zannin, M., Da Silva Jr, N.J., 
Casais-e-Silva, L.L. & Hyslop, S. (2016) 'Coral snake bites (Micrurus spp.) in Brazil: a 
review of literature reports', Clinical Toxicology, vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 222-234. 
Calvete, J.J. (2011) 'Proteomic tools against the neglected pathology of snake bite 
envenoming', Expert review of proteomics, vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 739-758. 
Camargo, E.A., Esquisatto, L.C.M., Esquisatto, M.A., Ribela, M.T.C.P., Cintra, A.C., Giglio, 
J.R., Antunes, E. & Landucci, E.C.T. (2005) 'Characterization of the acute 
pancreatitis induced by secretory phospholipases A2 in rats', Toxicon, vol. 46, no. 8, 
pp. 921-926. 
Chippaux, J.P. (2009) 'Snakebite in Africa: current situation and urgent needs', Handbook of 
venoms and toxins of reptiles, pp. 453-473. 
Chiu, H.-F., Chen, J. & Teng, C.-M. (1989) 'Edema formation and degranulation of mast cells 
by a basic phospholipase A2 purified from Trimeresurus mucrosquamatus snake 
venom', Toxicon, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 115-125. 
Clissa, P.B., Laing, G.D., Theakston, R.D.G., Mota, I., Taylor, M.J. & Moura-da-Silva, A.M. 
(2001) 'The effect of jararhagin, a metalloproteinase from Bothrops jararaca 
venom, on pro-inflammatory cytokines released by murine peritoneal adherent 
cells', Toxicon, vol. 39, no. 10, pp. 1567-1573. 
Costa, S.K.P., Camargo, E.A. & Antunes, E. (2017) 'Inflammatory Action of Secretory 
Phospholipases A 2 from Snake Venoms', Toxins and Drug Discovery, pp. 35-52. 
Cmara, P.R.S., Esquisatto, L.C.M., Camargo, E.A., Ribela, M.T.C.P., Toyama, M.H., 
Marangoni, S., De Nucci, G. & Antunes, E. (2003) 'Inflammatory oedema induced by 
phospholipases A2 isolated from Crotalus durissus sp. in the rat dorsal skin: a role 
for mast cells and sensory C-fibers', Toxicon, vol. 41, no. 7, pp. 823-829. 
Deshmane, S.L., Kremlev, S., Amini, S. & Sawaya, B.E. (2009) 'Monocyte chemoattractant 
protein-1 (MCP-1): an overview', Journal of interferon & cytokine research, vol. 29, 
no. 6, pp. 313-326. 
Dinarello, C.A. (2011) 'Interleukin-1 in the pathogenesis and treatment of inflammatory 
diseases', Blood, vol. 117, no. 14, pp. 3720-3732. 
Escalante, T., Rucavado, A., Pinto, A.F.M., Terra, R.M.S., Gutirrez, J.M. & Fox, J.W. (2009) 
'Wound exudate as a proteomic window to reveal different mechanisms of tissue 
damage by snake venom toxins', Journal of proteome research, vol. 8, no. 11, pp. 
5120-5131. 
Farsky, S.H.P., Gonalves, L.R.C., Gutirrez, J.M., Correa, A.P., Rucavado, A., Gasque, P. & 
Tambourgi, D.V. (2000) 'Bothrops asper snake venom and its metalloproteinase 
BaP1 activate the complement system. Role in leucocyte recruitment', Mediators 
of inflammation, vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 213-221. 
Fernandes, C.M., de Fatima Pereira Teixeira, C., Leite, A., Gutirrez, J.M. & Rocha, F.A.C. 
(2007) 'The snake venom metalloproteinase BaP1 induces joint hypernociception 
through TNF- and PGE2-dependent mechanisms', British journal of pharmacology, 
vol. 151, no. 8, pp. 1254-1261. 
Ferraz, C.R., Calixto-Campos, C., Manchope, M.F., Casagrande, R., Clissa, P.B., Baldo, C. & 
Verri Jr, W.A. (2015) 'Jararhagin-induced mechanical hyperalgesia depends on TNF-
, IL-1 and NFB in mice', Toxicon, vol. 103, pp. 119-128. 
Ferreira, T., Camargo, E.A., Ribela, M.T.C.P., Damico, D.C., Marangoni, S., Antunes, E., De 
Nucci, G. & Landucci, E.C.T. (2009) 'Inflammatory oedema induced by Lachesis 
muta muta (Surucucu) venom and LmTX-I in the rat paw and dorsal skin', Toxicon, 
vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 69-77. 
Fink, W.A. (2005) 'The pathophysiology of acute pain', Emergency Medicine Clinics, vol. 23, 
no. 2, pp. 277-284. 
Freitas-de-Sousa, L., Colombini, M., Lopes-Ferreira, M., Serrano, S. & Moura-da-Silva, A. 
(2017) 'Insights into the mechanisms involved in strong hemorrhage and 
dermonecrosis induced by atroxlysin-Ia, a PI-class snake venom metalloproteinase', 
Toxins, vol. 9, no. 8, p. 239. 
Gasanov, S.E., Dagda, R.K. & Rael, E.D. (2014) 'Snake venom cytotoxins, phospholipase A2s, 
and Zn2+-dependent metalloproteinases: mechanisms of action and 
pharmacological relevance', Journal of clinical toxicology, vol. 4, no. 1, p. 1000181. 
Gutierrez, J.M., Lomonte, B., Len, G., Rucavado, A., Chaves, F. & Angulo, Y. (2007) 'Trends 
in snakebite envenomation therapy: scientific, technological and public health 
considerations', Current Pharmaceutical Design, vol. 13, no. 28, pp. 2935-2950. 
Gutirrez, J., Escalante, T., Rucavado, A., Herrera, C. & Fox, J. (2016) 'A comprehensive view 
of the structural and functional alterations of extracellular matrix by snake venom 
metalloproteinases (SVMPs): novel perspectives on the pathophysiology of 
envenoming', Toxins, vol. 8, no. 10, p. 304. 
Gutirrez, J.M., Calvete, J.J., Habib, A.G., Harrison, R.A., Williams, D.J. & Warrell, D.A. (2017) 
'Snakebite envenoming', Nature reviews. Disease primers, vol. 3, p. 17063. 
Gutirrez, J.M. & Rucavado, A. (2000a) 'Snake venom metalloproteinases: their role in the 
pathogenesis of local tissue damage', Biochimie, vol. 82, no. 9, pp. 841-850. 
Gutirrez, J.M. & Rucavado, A. (2000b) 'Snake venom metalloproteinases: their role in the 
pathogenesis of local tissue damage', Biochimie, vol. 82, no. 9-10, pp. 841-850. 
Gutirrez, J.M., Rucavado, A., Escalante, T. & Daz, C. (2005) 'Hemorrhage induced by snake 
venom metalloproteinases: biochemical and biophysical mechanisms involved in 
microvessel damage', Toxicon, vol. 45, no. 8, pp. 997-1011. 
Gutirrez, J.M., Rucavado, A., Escalante, T., Herrera, C., Fernndez, J., Lomonte, B. & Fox, 
J.W. (2018) 'Unresolved issues in the understanding of the pathogenesis of local 
tissue damage induced by snake venoms', Toxicon, vol. 148, pp. 123-131. 
Harris, B.H. & Gelfand, J.A. (1995) The immune response to trauma, vol. 4, Philadelphia, PA: 
WB Saunders Co., c1992-, pp. 77-82. 
Harris, J.B. & Scott-Davey, T. (2013) 'Secreted phospholipases A2 of snake venoms: effects 
on the peripheral neuromuscular system with comments on the role of 
phospholipases A2 in disorders of the CNS and their uses in industry', Toxins, vol. 5, 
no. 12, pp. 2533-2571. 
Henry, C.J., Ornelles, D.A., Mitchell, L.M., Brzoza-Lewis, K.L. & Hiltbold, E.M. (2008) 'IL-12 
produced by dendritic cells augments CD8+ T cell activation through the production 
of the chemokines CCL1 and CCL17', The journal of immunology, vol. 181, no. 12, 
pp. 8576-8584. 
Hewitt, R.G., Morse, G.D., Lawrence, W.D., Maliszewski, M.L., Santora, J., Bartos, L., 
Bonnem, E. & Poiesz, B. (1993) 'Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of 
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor and zidovudine in patients with 
AIDS and severe AIDS-related complex', Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy, 
vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 512-522. 
Hifumi, T., Sakai, A., Kondo, Y., Yamamoto, A., Morine, N., Ato, M., Shibayama, K., 
Umezawa, K., Kiriu, N. & Kato, H. (2015) 'Venomous snake bites: clinical diagnosis 
and treatment', Journal of intensive care, vol. 3, no. 1, p. 16. 
Hunter, C.A. (2005) 'New IL-12-family members: IL-23 and IL-27, cytokines with divergent 
functions', Nature Reviews Immunology, vol. 5, no. 7, p. 521. 
Isbister, G.K. (2010) 'Antivenom efficacy or effectiveness: the Australian experience', 
Toxicology, vol. 268, no. 3, pp. 148-154. 
Isbister, G.K., Brown, S.G.A., Page, C.B., McCoubrie, D.L., Greene, S.L. & Buckley, N.A. (2013) 
'Snakebite in Australia: a practical approach to diagnosis and treatment', Medical 
journal of Australia, vol. 199, no. 11, pp. 763-768. 
Juhn, S.K., Jung, M.-K., Hoffman, M.D., Drew, B.R., Preciado, D.A., Sausen, N.J., Jung, T.T.K., 
Kim, B.H., Park, S.-Y. & Lin, J. (2008) 'The role of inflammatory mediators in the 
pathogenesis of otitis media and sequelae', Clinical and Experimental 
Otorhinolaryngology, vol. 1, no. 3, p. 117. 
Kang, T.S., Georgieva, D., Genov, N., Murakami, M.T., Sinha, M., Kumar, R.P., Kaur, P., 
Kumar, S., Dey, S. & Sharma, S. (2011) 'Enzymatic toxins from snake venom: 
structural characterization and mechanism of catalysis', The FEBS journal, vol. 278, 
no. 23, pp. 4544-4576. 
Karalaki, M., Fili, S., Philippou, A. & Koutsilieris, M. (2009) 'Muscle regeneration: cellular 
and molecular events', In vivo, vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 779-796. 
Katakura, F., Nishiya, K., Wentzel, A.S., Hino, E., Miyamae, J., Okano, M., Wiegertjes, G.F. & 
Moritomo, T. (2019) 'Paralogs of common carp granulocyte colony-stimulating 
factor (G-CSF) have different functions regarding development, trafficking and 
activation of neutrophils', Frontiers in immunology, vol. 10, p. 255. 
Kim, J.J., Ayyavoo, V., Bagarazzi, M.L., Chattergoon, M.A., Dang, K., Wang, B., Boyer, J.D. & 
Weiner, D.B. (1997) 'In vivo engineering of a cellular immune response by 
coadministration of IL-12 expression vector with a DNA immunogen', The Journal of 
Immunology, vol. 158, no. 2, pp. 816-826. 
Kleggetveit, I.P., Skulberg, P.K. & Jrum, E. (2016) 'Complex regional pain syndrome 
following viper-bite', Scandinavian journal of pain, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 15-18. 
Kulmatycki, K.M. & Jamali, F. (2001) 'Therapeutic relevance of altered cytokine expression', 
Cytokine, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 1-10. 
Landucci, E.C.T., de Castro, R.C., Toyama, M., Giglio, J.R., Marangoni, S., De Nucci, G. & 
Antunes, E. (2000) 'Inflammatory oedema induced by the Lys-49 phospholipase A2 
homologue piratoxin-i in the rat and rabbit: effect of polyanions and p-
bromophenacyl bromide', Biochemical Pharmacology, vol. 59, no. 10, pp. 1289-
1294. 
Mamede, C.C.N., de Sousa, B.B., da Cunha Pereira, D.F., Matias, M.S., de Queiroz, M.R., de 
Morais, N.C.G., Vieira, S.A.P.B., Stanziola, L. & de Oliveira, F. (2016) 'Comparative 
analysis of local effects caused by Bothrops alternatus and Bothrops moojeni snake 
venoms: enzymatic contributions and inflammatory modulations', Toxicon, vol. 
117, pp. 37-45. 
Mann, A., Breuhahn, K., Schirmacher, P., Wilhelmi, A., Beyer, C., Rosenau, A., zbek, S., 
Rose-John, S. & Blessing, M. (2001) 'Up-and down-regulation of 
granulocyte/macrophage-colony stimulating factor activity in murine skin increase 
susceptibility to skin carcinogenesis by independent mechanisms', Cancer research, 
vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 2311-2319. 
Mehta, S. & Sashindran, V. (2002) 'Clinical features and management of snake bite', 
Medical Journal, Armed Forces India, vol. 58, no. 3, p. 247. 
Menaldo, D.L., Bernardes, C.P., Pereira, J.C., Silveira, D.S.C., Mamede, C.C.N., Stanziola, L., 
de Oliveira, F., Pereira-Crott, L.S., Faccioli, L.H. & Sampaio, S.V. (2013) 'Effects of 
two serine proteases from Bothrops pirajai snake venom on the complement 
system and the inflammatory response', International immunopharmacology, vol. 
15, no. 4, pp. 764-771. 
Morimoto, J., Yoneyama, H., Shimada, A., Shigihara, T., Yamada, S., Oikawa, Y., 
Matsushima, K., Saruta, T. & Narumi, S. (2004) 'CXC chemokine ligand 10 
neutralization suppresses the occurrence of diabetes in nonobese diabetic mice 
through enhanced  cell proliferation without affecting insulitis', The Journal of 
Immunology, vol. 173, no. 11, pp. 7017-7024. 
Moser, B. & Willimann, K. (2004) 'Chemokines: role in inflammation and immune 
surveillance', Annals of the rheumatic diseases, vol. 63, no. suppl 2, pp. ii84-ii89. 
Moura-da-Silva, A.M., Butera, D. & Tanjoni, I. (2007) 'Importance of snake venom 
metalloproteinases in cell biology: effects on platelets, inflammatory and 
endothelial cells', Current pharmaceutical design, vol. 13, no. 28, pp. 2893-2905. 
Phillips, D.J., Swenson, S.D., Francis, S., Markland, J. & Mackessy, S.P. (2010) 'Thrombin-like 
snake venom serine proteinases', Handbook of venoms and toxins of reptiles, vol. 
139, p. 154. 
Pitzer, C., Krger, C., Plaas, C., Kirsch, F., Dittgen, T., Mller, R., Laage, R., Kastner, S., Suess, 
S. & Spoelgen, R. (2008) 'Granulocyte-colony stimulating factor improves outcome 
in a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis', Brain, vol. 131, no. 12, pp. 
3335-3347. 
Rivel, M., Solano, D., Herrera, M., Vargas, M., Villalta, M., Segura, ., Arias, A.S., Len, G. & 
Gutirrez, J.M. (2016) 'Pathogenesis of dermonecrosis induced by venom of the 
spitting cobra, Naja nigricollis: An experimental study in mice', Toxicon, vol. 119, 
pp. 171-179. 
Rucavado, A., Escalante, T., Teixeira, C.F.P., Fernandes, C.M., Diaz, C. & Gutierrez, J.M. 
(2002) Increments in cytokines and matrix metalloproteinases in skeletal muscle 
after injection of tissue-damaging toxins from the venom of the snake Bothrops 
asper, vol. 11, pp. 121-128. 
Rucavado, A., Nicolau, C., Escalante, T., Kim, J., Herrera, C., Gutirrez, J. & Fox, J. (2016) 
'Viperid envenomation wound exudate contributes to increased vascular 
permeability via a DAMPs/TLR-4 mediated pathway', Toxins, vol. 8, no. 12, p. 349. 
Rudack, C., Maune, S., Eble, J. & Schroeder, J.-M. (2003) 'The primary role in biologic 
activity of the neutrophil chemokines IL-8 and GRO- in cultured nasal epithelial 
cells', Journal of interferon & cytokine research, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 113-123. 
Samy, R.P., Kandasamy, M., Gopalakrishnakone, P., Stiles, B.G., Rowan, E.G., Becker, D., 
Shanmugam, M.K., Sethi, G. & Chow, V.T.K. (2014) 'Wound healing activity and 
mechanisms of action of an antibacterial protein from the venom of the eastern 
diamondback rattlesnake (Crotalus adamanteus)', PLoS One, vol. 9, no. 2, p. 
e80199. 
Scheske, L., Ruitenberg, J. & Bissumbhar, B. (2015) 'Needs and availability of snake 
antivenoms: relevance and application of international guidelines', International 
journal of health policy and management, vol. 4, no. 7, p. 447. 
Shi, Y., Liu, C.H., Roberts, A.I., Das, J., Xu, G., Ren, G., Zhang, Y., Zhang, L., Yuan, Z.R. & Tan, 
H.S.W. (2006) 'Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and T-
cell responses: what we do and don't know', Cell research, vol. 16, no. 2, p. 126. 
Shibuya, M. (2011) 'Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and its receptor (VEGFR) 
signaling in angiogenesis: a crucial target for anti-and pro-angiogenic therapies', 
Genes & cancer, vol. 2, no. 12, pp. 1097-1105. 
Sitprija, V. (2006) 'Snakebite nephropathy', Nephrology, vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 442-448. 
Sun, L., He, C., Nair, L., Yeung, J. & Egwuagu, C.E. (2015) 'Interleukin 12 (IL-12) family 
cytokines: Role in immune pathogenesis and treatment of CNS autoimmune 
disease', Cytokine, vol. 75, no. 2, pp. 249-255. 
Tasoulis, T. & Isbister, G. (2017) 'A review and database of snake venom proteomes', 
Toxins, vol. 9, no. 9, p. 290. 
Teixeira, C., Cury, Y., Moreira, V., Picolo, G. & Chaves, F. (2009) Inflammation induced by 
Bothrops asper venom, p. 988  
Teixeira, C.d.F.P., Fernandes, C.M., Zuliani, J.P. & Zamuner, S.F. (2005) 'Inflammatory 
effects of snake venom metalloproteinases', Memrias do Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, 
vol. 100, pp. 181-184. 
Teixeira, C.F.P., Landucci, E.C.T., Antunes, E., Chacur, M. & Cury, Y. (2003) 'Inflammatory 
effects of snake venom myotoxic phospholipases A2', Toxicon, vol. 42, no. 8, pp. 
947-962. 
Turner, M.D., Nedjai, B., Hurst, T. & Pennington, D.J. (2014) 'Cytokines and chemokines: at 
the crossroads of cell signalling and inflammatory disease', Biochimica et 
Biophysica Acta (BBA)-Molecular Cell Research, vol. 1843, no. 11, pp. 2563-2582. 
Wang, J.P. & Teng, C.M. (1990) 'Rat paw oedema and mast cell degranulation caused by 
two phospholipase A2 enzymes isolated from Trimeresurus mucrosquamatus 
venom', Journal of pharmacy and pharmacology, vol. 42, no. 12, pp. 846-850. 
Warrell, D.A. (1999) The clinical management of snake bites in the Southeast Asian region, 
Southeast Asian Journal of Tropical Medicine and Public Helath. 
Warrell, D.A. (2004) 'Snakebites in Central and South America: Epidemiology, clinical 
features, and clinical management. Bothrops lancelatus', The Venomous Reptiles of 
the Western Hemisphere. Cornell University, pp. 743-744. 
Warrell, D.A. (2017) Clinical toxicology of snakebite in Africa and the Middle East/Arabian 
Peninsula, in, Handbook of clinical toxicology of animal venoms and poisons, CRC 
Press, pp. 433-492. 
Warrell, D.A. & Ormerod, L.D. (1976) 'Snake venom ophthalmia and blindness caused by 
the spitting cobra (Naja nigricollis) in Nigeria', The American journal of tropical 
medicine and hygiene, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 525-529. 
Wei, J.-F., Wei, X.-L., Mo, Y.-Z. & He, S.-H. (2009) 'Induction of mast cell accumulation, 
histamine release and skin edema by N49 phospholipase A 2', BMC immunology, 
vol. 10, no. 1, p. 21. 
WHO (2010) 'Guidelines for the prevention and clinical management of snakebite in Africa'. 
WHO (2019) Neglected tropical diseases [Online], World Health Organization, Available 
from: http://www.who.int/neglected_diseases/diseases/en/ (Accessed: 19th 
September). 
Who, A. (2010) 'Guidelines for the prevention and clinical management of snake bite in 
Africa', http://www. afro. who. int/index. php? option= com_docman&task= 
doc_download&gid= 5529. 
Widney, D.P., Xia, Y.-R., Lusis, A.J. & Smith, J.B. (2000) 'The murine chemokine CXCL11 (IFN-
inducible T cell  chemoattractant) is an IFN--and lipopolysaccharide-inducible 
glucocorticoid-attenuated response gene expressed in lung and other tissues 
during endotoxemia', The Journal of Immunology, vol. 164, no. 12, pp. 6322-6331. 
Zhang, C., Medzihradszky, K.F., Snchez, E.E., Basbaum, A.I. & Julius, D. (2017) 'Lys49 
myotoxin from the Brazilian lancehead pit viper elicits pain through regulated ATP 
http://www.who.int/neglected_diseases/diseases/en/
http://www/
release', Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 114, no. 12, pp. 
E2524-E2532. 
Zuliani, J.P., Gutirrez, J.M., e Silva, L.L.C., Sampaio, S.C., Lomonte, B. & Teixeira, C.d.F.P. 
(2005) 'Activation of cellular functions in macrophages by venom secretory Asp-49 
and Lys-49 phospholipases A2', Toxicon, vol. 46, no. 5, pp. 523-532. 
Zychar, B.C., Dale, C.S., Demarchi, D.S. & Gonalves, L.R.C. (2010) 'Contribution of 
metalloproteases, serine proteases and phospholipases A2 to the inflammatory 
reaction induced by Bothrops jararaca crude venom in mice', Toxicon, vol. 55, no. 
2-3, pp. 227-234. 
Chapter 4 
Title: Defining acute phase and inflammatory responses to better understand the pathol-
ogy of envenoming by medically important African snakes 
Authors: Jaffer Alsolaiss1, Chloe A Evans1, Nicholas R Casewell1, Robert A Harrison1 
Affiliations:  
 Centre for Snakebite Research and Interventions, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, 
Liverpool, UK  
4.1 Introduction 
Snakebite is a neglected tropical disease (NTD) that affects over 5 million people each year 
(WHO 2019). Of those bites, around 138,000 people suffer from mortality, and over 400,000 
are disabled, disfigured or suffer from psychological disturbances (Chippaux 1998; Gutirrez 
et al. 2017; Gutirrez et al. 2010; WHO 2019). The burden of snakebite is greatest in the rural 
tropical regions of South and Southeast Asia, Latin America and sub-Saharan Africa 
(Kasturiratne et al. 2008). In Africa, over 32,000 deaths are thought to occur each year, and 
it suffers the greatest case fatality rate of any continent (Gutirrez et al. 2017). In part, this 
is due to the restricted availability of snakebite therapies known as antivenom. Although 
these medicines save thousands of lives every year, they are costly to produce, are not 
effectively distributed and are typically not subsidised by national Ministries of Health (Habib 
et al. 2015). In addition, antivenom has variable efficacy against bites by different snake 
species and cause high rates of adverse reactions (de Silva, Ryan & de Silva 2016). In cases 
where treatment is available, victims and their families are burdened by the substantial cost 
of treatment and often suffer an ensuing loss of income due to disability (Harrison et al. 
2009). Hence, in deprived rural tropical areas, poverty is both a cause and consequence of 
snakebite. 
Medically important venomous snakes can be broadly grouped into two major families: 
Elapidae and Viperidae (Tasoulis & Isbister 2017). The Echis (saw-scaled or carpet vipers) and 
Bitis (puff adders) species of the Viperidae family are the most important cause of snakebite 
in the most impoverished regions of Africa (Habib & Warrell 2013). The clinical symptoms of 
viper envenomation include local oedema, bleeding and necrosis, and if the venom 
disseminates into the systemic circulation, spontaneous bleeding, coagulopathy and 
cardiovascular shock can occur (Gutirrez et al. 2017). Dendroaspis (mambas) and Naja 
(spitting and non-spitting cobras) are medically important snake species from the Elapidae 
family. Venoms from this snake family are typically associated with a neurotoxic syndrome, 
typified by ptosis proceeding to respiratory paralysis. However, the spitting cobras (some 
snakes of the genus Naja) induce severe local cytotoxic effects, resulting in extensive swelling 
and local tissue damage. Pathogenesis in each of these groups is caused by the combined 
action of different venom components, most notably those from four major toxin families: 
the snake venom metalloproteinases (SVMPs), snake venom serine proteases (SVSPs), 
phospholipase A2 (PLA2), and three-finger toxins (3FTxs) (Tasoulis & Isbister 2017). Venom 
variation is inherent among snake species, and major differences occur between snake 
families (e.g. viperid venoms are abundant in SVMP, SVSP and PLA2 vs the 3FTx and PLA2 
toxins abundant in elapid venoms) (Casewell et al. 2014a; Tasoulis & Isbister 2017). 
One of the first observed effects of snake envenoming is local inflammation at the bite site, 
manifesting as heat, pain, redness and/or swelling within two hours (Warrell 2005). This 
response is a fundamental part of the bodys defence system, intended to generically protect 
against injury and stimulate tissue repair, whilst hindering the systemic spread of foreign 
bodies. During this protective physiological process, myriads of inflammatory mediators are 
released at the inflammation site, including alarmins, histamines, chemokines and cytokines 
(e.g. interleukin 1 [IL-1], interleukin 6 [IL-6], and tumour necrosis factor alpha [TNF-]) 
(Arango Duque & Descoteaux 2014). These mediators cause increased vascular permeability, 
vasodilation and chemotaxis, which ultimately facilitates the diffusion of plasma and 
leucocytes to the interstitial tissue (Teixeira et al. 2003). In addition, a non-specific systemic 
reaction termed the acute phase response (APR) is also initiated in responses to injury, which 
results in major alterations in the concentration of liver-generated plasma proteins (Gruys et 
al. 2005). Two types of plasma proteins encompass this response: positive acute-phase 
proteins, which are elevated during APR (e.g. C-reactive protein [CRP], serum amyloid A 
(SAA), fibrinogen and -globulins), and negative acute-phase proteins, which are reduced 
(e.g. albumin) (Cray, Zaias & Altman 2009). Quantification of individual acute-phase proteins 
can provide relative insight into the magnitude of the triggering event, although the most 
pertinent acute-phase proteins differ amongst species (Cray, Zaias & Altman 2009). In 
addition, various physiological and biochemical modifications accompany the APR, including 
increased levels of circulating leucocytes, activation of complement and blood coagulation, 
and biosynthesis of adreno-corticotropic hormones (Baumann & Gauldie 1994; Stone et al. 
2013). 
Human inflammatory responses to snakebite envenomation have been comprehensively 
examined in relatively few studies (Avila-Aguero et al. 2001; Barraviera et al. 1995b; Stone 
et al. 2013), and only Barraviera et al. (1995) investigated standard acute phase responses. 
Stone et al. (2013) found envenoming by Daboia russelii (Russells viper; n=113) to be 
associated with elevations in anaphylatoxins and pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines [IL-6 
and interleukin-10 (IL-10)], whilst Avila-Agero et al. (2001) identified elevations in IL-6, TNF-
, and IL-8 in just nine of eighteen victims of Bothrops (pit viper) envenoming in their study. 
Barraviera et al. (1995) assessed several parameters in victims of Bothrops (n=16) and 
Crotalus (n=15) envenoming and detected elevated levels of IL-6 and IL-8, but no significant 
change in IL-1 in either type of envenoming. The authors also reported marked leucocytosis 
with neutrophilia and lymphopenia and significant changes in Acute Phase proteins (APPs), 
although only four patients were assessed for changes in C-reactive protein (CRP)  a key 
biomarker of the APR and inflammation in humans  and no other APPs were investigated 
(Sproston & Ashworth 2018).  
Due to the frequency of envenomation, slightly more research effort relates to responses in 
veterinary cases of snakebite, including some examples from snake species of medical 
importance to Africa (de sousa-e-Silva et al. 2003; Langhorn et al. 2014; Lobetti & Joubert 
2004; Nagel et al. 2014; Nogueira & Sakate 2006). Utilising CRP as a marker of systemic 
inflammation, Laghorm et al. (2014) investigated three groups of dogs envenomed by Vipera 
berus (European Viper; n=24), Bitis arietans (African puff adder; n=5) and Naja annulifera 
(snouted cobra; n=9), and found that the median CRP value increased significantly from 
admission to 12 hours post-admission amongst all groups, corresponding to a time-
dependent systemic inflammatory response in 83%, 100%, and 86% of dogs in each 
respective group. Nagel et al. (2014) also investigated the haemostatic and inflammatory 
responses in dogs envenomed by the African puff adder (n=9) and snouted cobra (n=9) at 
admission and 24 hours later, and the study showed systemic fibrinogen and CRP 
concentrations were significantly elevated in both groups.  
Supplementing these relatively sparse clinical studies is data from in vivo studies using animal 
models of envenoming (summarised in Supplementary Table S 4.1). For example, two studies 
previously used mouse models of Bothrops atrox (common lancehead) envenoming to 
elucidate the mechanism by which venom-induced local pathologies associated with 
inflammation are caused (Rucavado et al. 2016). Rucavado et al. (2016) performed 
proteomic analysis of wound exudate following B. atrox injection into mice, and found an 
abundance of cytokines, chemokines and damage associated molecular patterns (DAMPs). 
DAMPs are endogenous molecules, derived from the proteolysis of proteins by venoms 
toxins and host proteinases, and they generate most of their activity through interaction with 
toll-like receptors (TLRs). When a TLR4 antagonist was used as a pre-treatment in mice, 
reduced vascular permeability was observed. Further to this, Moreira et al. (2016) injected 
wild-type and TLR2 gene knockout mice with B. atrox venom, and found the knockout mice 
had higher levels of IL-6 and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (CCL2), as well as an 
accumulation of polymorphonuclear cells. Together, these findings indicate that venom 
proteins induce and modulate inflammation at the wound site through TLR4 and TLR2 
signalling respectively, and this signalling pathway offers some level of regulation. However, 
to our knowledge, the systemic responses to envenoming in this model remain unknown, 
and the majority of these experimental small animal studies (Supplementary Table 1) relate 
to envenoming by snakes of just two genera (Crotalus and Bothrops).  
Consequently, our study utilised a murine model of envenoming to characterise the acute 
inflammatory and acute phase responses associated with medically-important African snake 
venoms that cause distinct pathologies. In addition, we supplemented these experiments 
with human in vitro whole blood assays to assess whether our murine findings could be 
replicated in models representative of human envenoming. Here we show that N. nigricollis 
and N. melanoleuca venoms drive a strong APR in mice, and we present evidence of the 
complex diversity of pathologies that can manifest following envenoming, including 
haemostatic changes, haemolysis, and damage to vital organs. This data provides evidence 
that inflammation is a systemic pathology of snake envenomation that is not restricted to 
cytotoxic snake venoms, and a further understanding of these processes could facilitate 
future effective treatment of snakebite. 
4.2 Materials and methods 
4.2.1 Snake venoms 
Lyophilised venoms from medically-important African snake species were donated by 
Biological E. Limited, India. The venoms were from: (i) four vipers: Bitis gabonica (Gaboon 
viper), B. arietans (puff adder), Echis ocellatus (West African saw-scaled viper) and E. 
leucogaster (white-bellied carpet viper), and, (ii) six elapids: Naja haje (Egyptian cobra), N. 
melanoleuca (forest cobra), N. nigricollis (black-necked spitting cobra), Dendroaspis polylepis 
(black mamba), D. viridis (Western green mamba) and D. jamesoni (Jamesons mamba). 
Lyophilised venoms were stored long-term at 4C, before reconstitution in phosphate-
buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.2) ready for use, with stocks stored short-term at -20C. 
* Note: N. melanoleuca snake has been split up recently into four species by Wster et al. 
2018. The venom used in this study is now from Naja subfulva.  
4.2.2 Animals and research design 
Murine in vivo experiments were undertaken with approvals from The Animal Welfare and 
Ethical Review Boards of the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine and the University of 
Liverpool, and the UK Home Office, under the Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986. In 
keeping with assay recommendations by WHO (2016), first the median lethal dose (LD50) for 
each venom was determined by intravenously (tail vein) injecting different venom doses in 
100 l volumes into groups of five male CD-1 mice (20-22 g; Charles River, UK). In addition, a 
control group (n=2) received 100 l of PBS instead of venom. Experimental animals were 
monitored for the duration of the experiment for signs of severe envenoming and were 
euthanised if external signs of haemorrhage, seizure, pulmonary distress or paralysis were 
observed. Survival was documented six hours post-envenomation (end of experiment). 
Following euthanasia, either due to the effects of envenoming or at the end of the 
experiment, blood samples were collected via cardiac puncture and stored in sterile conical 
vials with no anticoagulant. Immediately after blood collection, a thin blood film (n = 50) was 
processed for every mouse that survived until the end of the experiment, while the 
remainder of the blood sample (n = 50) was centrifuged for 10 minutes (9,600 x g at 4C) and 
sera collected and stored in aliquots at -20C. For serum and blood film analysis, we selected 
the LD50 (See Table 4.1). 
Figure 4.1. The Experimental outline of the in vivo murine acute phase model to study the 
acute envenoming by Acute Phase Reactants (APR) and acute inflammatory mediators. 
(details of the experiment see 4.2.2). 
Table 4.1: LD50 doses of African snake venoms in mice was used for blood and sera analyses 
Venom LD50 doses (g/mouse) 
(95 CI) 
Bitis gabonica 18.4 (17.4- 19.53) 
Bitis arietans 17.7 (17.24- 18.29) 
Echis leucogaster 56 (31.1- 100.5) 
Echis ocellatus 58 (33.01- 101.94) 
Naja haje 6.96 (5.36- 9.07) 
Naja melanoleuca 14.5 (13.57- 15.51) 
Naja nigricollis 27.5 (25.23- 29.97) 
Dendroaspis polylepis 11.5 (10.524- 12.576) 
Dendroaspis viridis 13.2 (11.79- 14.82) 
Dendroaspis jamesoni 54 (46.99- 61.81) 
4.2.3 Blood film preparation and haematological analysis 
After initial collection, blood films were left to air-dry overnight, fixed for 60-seconds in 
methyl alcohol and stained with 10% Giemsa. A Leica ICC50W microscope was used to 
morphologically profile the resulting films, including manual counting of leucocytes, 
erythrocytes and platelets in a cell monolayer, with documentation of cell irregularities, such 
as erythrocyte agglutination or platelet aggregation. As we were unable to generate total 
platelet counts as platelets were often aggregated for accurate estimation, we qualitatively 
assessed the levels of platelet clumping using the following grading system: i) no aggregation, 
<1 small colony/field; ii) mild aggregation, 2-5 colonies/field and/or small colonies only; iii) 
moderate aggregation, 2-8 colonies/field and/or small and medium colonies; iv) marked 
aggregation, >5 colonies/field and/or medium and large colonies present. Small, medium 
and large colonies were defined as 2-10 platelets, 11-20 platelets and >20 platelets, 
respectively. 
4.2.4 Quantification of C-reactive protein and cytokines by multiplex bead array 
The CRP Mouse ProcartaPlex Simplex Kit was used for serum CRP analysis, while the 
Th1/Th2 Cytokine 11-Plex Mouse ProcartaPlex Panel (both ThermoFisher Scientific, Vienna, 
Austria) was employed for serum cytokine analysis. All samples and standards were run in 
duplicate and for both approaches we used the manufacturers instructions with minor 
modifications, as follows: (i) Universal Assay Buffer (1x) was used for three-fold dilutions of 
the sera samples for the CRP simplex immunoassay, but the samples were not diluted for the 
cytokine multiplex immunoassay, (ii) every incubation step involved shaking the 96-well 
plate at 220 rpm, and (iii) after beads,  serum, standards and PBS were added, the mixture 
was left to incubate overnight. Luminex 100/200 technology (Mag-Plex-Avidin 
Microspheres) was used for measuring bead fluorescence, and if the count did not exceed 
100 or was not within the identifiable range, the data was excluded from downstream 
analysis. ProcartaPlex Analyst software was used for the analysis of results and the mean and 
standard deviation for each group was calculated.  
4.2.5 Quantification of serum amyloid A, P-selectin and murine IgM by ELISA 
The PHASE SAA Murine Assay Kit (Tridelta Development Limited, Ireland), P-selectin Mouse 
ELISA Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, Vienna, Austria) and Mouse IgM ELISA Ready-SET-Go  
Kit (Invitrogen eBioscience, ThermoFisher Scientific, Vienna, Austria) were used in 
accordance with manufacturers guidelines to quantify serum amyloid A, P-selectin and 
murine IgM. Sera dilutions were performed in the supplied buffers for SAA, P-selectin and 
IgM at 1:200, 1:500 and 1:20, respectively. All samples were analysed in duplicate. Resulting 
absorbance measurements were taken at 450 nm (SAA, P-selectin) and 570 nm (murine IgM) 
using the LT-4500 microplate absorbance reader (BMG LabTech). The mean values and 
standard deviation for each group was recorded. 
4.2.6 Quantification of haptoglobin by colorimetric assay 
We used the colorimetric PHASE Haptoglobin Assay (Tridelta Development Limited, 
Ireland) to quantify serum haptoglobin. The supplied stock calibrator and diluent were used 
for manual preparation of haptoglobin standards. Samples were not diluted before 
assessment and each sample was run in duplicate. After the samples were incubated with 
chromogen for five minutes, absorbance was read at 620 nm with an LT-4500 automatic 
microplate absorbance reader. For each group, the mean and standard deviation was 
calculated. 
4.2.7 Standard biochemical analysis of serum samples 
To quantify markers related to liver function, cardiac damage and renal function, we used an 
automated clinical chemistry analyser (Roche cobas c 701). All enzymatic and colorimetric 
reagent kits, calibrators and controls were supplied from Roche Diagnostics UK Ltd. The 
mouse sera were diluted 1:20 before duplicate analysis alongside non-envenomed controls. 
Recording of the following analytes were performed using colorimetric and enzymatic 
methods: (i) liver function tests; alanine aminotransferase (ALT), total protein (TP), albumin 
and total bilirubin (TB); (ii) cardiac enzymes; creatine kinase (CK), lactate dehydrogenase 
(LDH), aspartate aminotransferase (AST); (iii) renal function tests; creatinine (CRT). 
4.2.8 Collection of human blood for in vitro assays  
Blood samples were collected from healthy human volunteers in to tubes containing 
different anticoagulants (acid citrate dextrose adenine [ACD-A] and 
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid [K3-EDTA]).  Blood samples were obtained according to 
ethically approved protocols (LSTM research tissue bank, REC ref. 11/H1002/9), and all 
volunteers confirmed they had not taken any anticoagulant treatments for at least three 
months prior to blood collection.  
4.2.8.1 Quantifying venom haemolytic activity with human erythrocytes 
Fresh human whole blood from healthy volunteers was collected and used to determine 
venom toxicity to erythrocytes. The red blood cells (RBCs) were collected in K3-EDTA and 100 
l of RBCs were first washed three times with 3 ml of PBS. Next, 100 l of washed RBCs were 
resuspended with 3 ml PBS and added (100 l/well) to 96-well microtiter plates (Nunc). Next, 
the RBCs in each well were overlaid with the LD50 dose of each venom in 100 l PBS in 
duplicate. The plates were incubated for 3 hours at 37C and then centrifuged for five 
minutes at 1000 x g. Following this, 100 l of culture medium from each sample was 
transferred to new 96-well microtiter plate (Nunc) and an LT-4500 automatic microplate 
absorbance reader was used to generate haemolysis readings at 405 nm.  
4.2.8.2 Quantifying venom-induced platelet aggregation with human platelets 
To separate platelets, plasma and other blood components from human blood, we used a 
standard platelet-rich plasma (PRP) separation technique (Dhurat and Sukesh, 2014), 
whereby ACD-A blood samples were subjected to an 11-minute centrifugation step at 150 x 
g. Following collection of the culture medium, platelets were manually counted to confirm 
normal levels (350 x 109 platelets per microliter of blood) (Daly 2011). For the platelet 
aggregation assay, 96-well microtiter plates (Nunc) were loaded with 72 l/well platelet-rich 
plasma and incubated with 8 l of the LD50 dose of each venom in duplicate. Next, we used 
a FLUOstar Omega microplate reader for kinetic measurement of the absorbance of the wells 
at 405 nm (40 mins at 37oC). Samples containing venom only and platelets only served as 
negative controls, while 72 l of platelet was incubated with 8 l of 50 g/ml human 
placenta collagen (Sigma-Aldrich, United Kingdom) served as positive control. Absorbance 
was plotted against time and platelet aggregation was measured by calculating the mean 
AUC of mean readings. 
4.2.8.3 Quantification of venom-induced release of human haemoglobin via colorimetric 
assay  
Cyanmethemoglobin techniques were employed for haemoglobin (Hb) measurements. First, 
a standard curve was prepared by diluting different concentrations of commercial 
Cyanmethemoglobin Standard Solution (180 mg/ml, 120 mg/ml, 60 mg/ml and blank) of 
appropriate haemoglobin in Drabkins Solution (used for quantitative, colorimetric 
determination of haemoglobin). The mixture was then incubated at room temperature for 5 
minutes and before absorbance was read at 540 nm using an LT-4500 automatic microplate 
reader (BMG LabTech). The resulting absorbances were plotted to produce a standard curve 
(absorbance vs cyanmethemoglobin concentration (mg/ml). For venom experiments, human 
blood from healthy volunteers was collected in 4 ml ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid [K3-
EDTA] tubes. Subsequently, the collected RBCs in EDTA were washed (three times in PBS). 
Washed RBCs were then resuspended in PBS (1:1), and 100 l aliquots were incubated with 
100 l of the LD50 dose (Table 4.1) of each venom  for 60 minutes at 37C. High (21 g/dl) and 
low (6.0 g/dl) controls of Hb (Sigma-Aldrich, United Kingdom) and washed RBCs with no 
venom were also used. All samples were mixed before 10 l of each sample was added to 
625 l Drabkins solution (Sigma-Aldrich, United Kingdom) in duplicate and incubated for 
20 mins at room temperature. The resulting absorbances were measured at 540 nm using an 
LT-4500 automatic microplate reader (BMG LabTech). The formula from the standard 
calibration curve was used to quantitate the Hb levels in each sample. 
4.2.9 Statistical analyses 
For all analyses, the significance of the differences of mean values between experimental 
groups was assessed by analysis of variance (ANOVA), followed by Dunnetts multiple 
comparison test to compare means between experimental groups (mice injected with 
venom) and controls (mice injected with PBS). A P value < 0.05 was considered significant for 
all statistical tests. All analyses were conducted using GraphPad Prism 7.0. 
4.3 Results 
4.3.1 Haematological analyses of envenomed mice 
4.3.1.1 RBC abnormalities suggest venom-induced haemolysis in mice 
Groups of mice were injected with LD50 dose of ten medically important snake venoms and 
after 6 hours, blood samples were taken from each mouse and used to generate blood films. 
We microscopically analysed blood films (100x objective) of PBS-injected mice (normal 
control group) to generate a standard for RBC morphology (Figure 4.2A). Comparison of 
these with envenomed murine samples revealed prominent changes in the cytological 
features of RBCs, indicating various pathophysiological mechanisms. For example, B. arietans 
(Figure 4.2B) envenoming caused echinocyte (spiculated RBC) formation which is likely due 
to phospholipase-induced membrane abnormalities (Walton et al. 1997), and D. jamesoni 
(Figure 4.2C) venom caused dacrocyte (tear-drop RBC) formation, which are typical of 
mechanical trauma. The most pronounced pathology however, was hyperchromic 
microspherocytosis (RBC whose diameter is less than normal, but thickness is increased), 
which was observed in 8 out of the 10 species investigated (both Bitis species, E. ocellatus, 
all three Naja species, and D. viridis and D. jamesoni), though this was most prominent in N. 
nigricollis (Figure 4.2D) and N. melanoleuca envenomed mice. These findings are indicative 
of red blood cell destruction, which can occur within the vascular system (intravascular 
haemolysis) or within the spleen or liver (extravascular haemolysis). Ghost cells (post-
haemolytic cell-like structure) were also observed in all cases exhibiting spherocytosis, 
suggesting a loss of haemoglobin in to the extracellular space (Hoffman 1992). 
To relate these findings to direct venom activity, we incubated human red blood cells with 
the same venom doses determined from our murine in vivo study (Table 4.1) and used 
separate in vitro assays to quantify: (i) the haemolytic activity of each of the venoms on RBCs, 
and (ii) the Hb content of venom-treated RBCs. Our findings demonstrated that all ten snake 
venoms caused a decrease in Hb compared to the control (RBCs incubated with PBS) (Figure 
4.2E). While these reductions are relatively small (e.g. 86.9-97.7 % of the control), eight of 
the ten venoms (B. arietans, E. ocellatus, N. haje, N. melanoleuca, N. nigricollis, D. polylepis, 
D. viridis, D. jamesoni) were found to be statistically significant (P < 0.05; one-way ANOVA, 
Dunnetts multiple comparisons test). For the haemolysis assay, PBS and Triton X-100 were 
used to generate negative and positive controls respectively, representing 0% and 100% 
haemolysis (Figure 4.2F). N. nigricollis venom caused marked haemolytic activity (86.8 %) 
which was significantly greater than the negative control (P < 0.05; one-way ANOVA, 
Dunnetts multiple comparisons test). All other venoms exhibited a low level of direct 
haemolytic activity at these doses (1.7-5.3 %), none of which were significantly elevated 
compared with the negative control.  
Figure 4.2 Abnormal red blood cell morphology and haemolysis induced by snake venoms. 
Mice were injected with venom or PBS (normal), and after 6 hours, thin blood smears were 
made, and RBC morphology was observed at x 100 objective. Representative blood smears are 
shown. (A) non-envenomed control. (B) B. arietans envenoming caused RBC membrane 
abnormalities, illustrated by echinocytes (E) and helmet cells (H), and cell fragmentation 
[schistocytes (Sch)]. Ghost cells (G) are present, indicating loss of hemoglobin due to hemolysis; 
(C) D. jamesoni venom caused codocyte (C), stomatocyte (St), and dacrocyte (D) formation; (D) 
N. nigricollis venom shows hyperchromic microspherocytosis. Human RBCs were incubated with 
the same LD50 dose of venom and used in vitro absorbance assays to: (E) determine haemoglobin 
levels (cyanmethemoglobin technique), which were slightly decreased in most cases (B. 
arietans, E. ocellatus, N. haje, N. melanoleuca, N. nigricollis, D. polylepis, D. viridis, D. jamesoni) 
compared to the negative control (RBCs incubated with PBS); and (F) determine the percentage 
of direct haemolysis, using PBS (0% activity) and Triton X-100 (100% activity) as negative and 
positive control respectively. N. nigricollis venom caused significant haemolysis (86.8 %) 
compared to the PBS control, whilst all other venoms caused low level of haemolytic activity 
(1.7-5.3 %). Key: Venoms; BG (B. gabonica), BA (B. arietans), EL (E. leucogaster), EO (E. ocellatus), 
NH (N. haje), NM (N. melanoleuca), NN (N. nigricollis), DP (D. polylepis), DV (D. viridis), DJ (D. 
jamesoni). Parameters from venom-incubation groups (n = 3) were compared to those from the 
negative control (PBS) by Dunnetts multiple comparison test.  Significant values are indicated 
by *P  0.05, **P  0.01, ***P  0.001, and ****P  0.0001. Bars represent means of triplicate 
measurements, and error bars represent.  
4.3.1.2 N. nigricollis, N. melanoleuca, and B. arietans venoms cause neutrophilia in mice 
White blood cells (WBCs) are major components of the inflammatory process and as such, 
estimation of the total WBC count and differentiation of cell types is typically used as an early 
indicator of the APR (Chmielewski & Strzelec 2018). We analysed blood films at  40x objective 
for total WBC counts, and then at 100x objective to generate an absolute WBC count 
describing the differential WBCs (Figure 4.3). The control group had a mean total count of 
12,400/l with a distribution of differential cell types within the reference range for mice: 
7276% lymphocytes, 1112% neutrophils, 79% monocytes, 67% basophils, and <1% 
eosinophils (assessed online https://phenome.jax.org/strains/12). We found that WBC 
counts were greatly reduced (P < 0.05; one-way ANOVA, Dunnetts multiple comparisons 
test) in mice envenomed with N. haje, D. polylepis, D. viridis, D. jamesoni and B. gabonica 
venoms, with N. haje venom resulting in the lowest mean count (3,480/l) (Figure 4.3A). 
With the exception of D. viridis, for which there was a high level of inter-group variation 
observed, all of the aforementioned venoms also caused a significant reduction in the 
number of lymphocytes (Figure 4.3B; P < 0.05) compared to the control and, with the 
addition of E. leucogaster venom, all of these venoms also caused decreased basophil counts 
(Figure 4.2C; P < 0.05). Contrasting with these findings, the total WBC counts for B. arietans, 
N. melanoleuca and N. nigricollis envenomed animals were elevated (Figure 4.3A), and their 
venom caused significant increases in neutrophil counts which were 3-5 times higher than 
the control (Figure 4.3D; P < 0.05). In the case of N. nigricollis, absolute monocyte counts 
were also significantly elevated (Figure 2E; P < 0.05). Furthermore, the eosinophil levels were 
highly elevated only in mice injected with N. nigricollis and D. viridis compared to the control 
group (Figure 4.3F). 
https://phenome.jax.org/strains/12
Figure 4.3. B. arietans, N. nigricollis, and N. melanoleuca venoms cause increased WBC counts 
and elevated neutrophils. Groups of mice were envenomed with ten medically important snake 
venoms and after 6 hours blood samples were used to make blood smears, which were stained 
with Giemsa and observed at x 40 objective to complete the (A) total white blood cell (WBC) 
count, and x 100 objective to complete the absolute counts of (B) neutrophils, (C) lymphocytes, 
(D) monocytes, (E) basophils, and (F) eosinophils (number of cells per l blood). B. gabonica, N. 
haje, D. polylepis, D. viridis, and D. jamesoni caused significant reductions in the total levels of 
circulating leucocytes, which for all, except D. viridis, also caused a significant reduction in the 
number of lymphocytes. Basophil levels were also decreased in all of these groups. Meanwhile, 
B. arietans, N. melanoleuca, and N. nigricollis caused increased total WBC counts, including 
significant elevations in neutrophils in all cases and elevated monocytes in mice injected with N. 
nigricollis venom. Eosinophils were low in all cases. Venoms: BG (B. gabonica), BA (B. arietans), 
EL (E. leucogaster), EO (E. ocellatus), NH (N. haje), NM (N. melanoleuca), NN (N. nigricollis), DP 
(D. polylepis), DV (D. viridis), DJ (D. jamesoni). Parameters from envenomed groups were 
compared to those from the control group (Normal: injected with PBS) by Dunnetts multiple 
comparison test. Significant values are indicated by *P  0.05, **P  0.01, ***P  0.001, and 
****P  0.0001. Bars represent means of duplicate counts, and error bars represent. 
4.3.1.3 Mouse thrombocytosis following envenoming with six elapid venoms 
Platelets are active cells in inflammation and haemostasis, and are known to exert their 
effects on lymphocytes, neutrophils and monocytes (Ferrer-Acosta et al. 2014). 
Consequently, we examined the effect of venoms on platelet aggregation via the analysis of 
blood films sourced from envenomed mice. As murine platelets have a propensity to clump 
(O'Connell et al. 2015), we were unable to accurately estimate total platelet counts, as the 
normal samples studied here had artifactually low counts due to a high level of platelet 
clumping. Instead, we qualitatively assessed the level of platelet clumping, with the results 
displayed in Table 4.2. The normal had marked platelet clumping, as described by either 2 to 
3 small colonies (5-8 platelets/colony). For B. gabonica. N. melanoleuca, N. nigricollis, and D. 
jamesoni envenomed mice (3+ colonies per field, and/or medium (11-20 platelets/colony), 
and thus we cannot determine whether envenoming affected platelet aggregation. 
Contrastingly, B. arietans and B. gabonica venom appeared to potently inhibit platelet 
aggregation, as there were less than one small colonies per field. E. leucogaster and N. haje 
venoms also caused inhibition, as only mild platelet aggregation was observed, whilst E. 
ocellatus, D. polylepis, and D. viridis venom caused a small reduction in aggregation 
compared with the control (Supplementary Figure S 4.1 examples of platelet aggregation 
observed in the blood film). 
Snake species 
Platelet aggregation 
Comments 
No Mild Moderate Marked 
Normal  +   
Mild platelet aggregation 
(2 colonies/field, small 
colonies) 
Bitis gabonica -    No platelet aggregation  
Bitis arietans -    No platelet aggregation 
Echis 
leucogaster 
Mild platelet aggregation 
(2 colonies/field, small-
medium colonies) 
Echis 
ocellatus 
Mild/ No platelet 
aggregation (<1 
colonies/field, small 
colonies) 
Naja haje  +   
one small (2-8 
platelets/colony) colonies 
per field 
melanoleuca 
Marked platelet 
aggregation (3-4 
colonies/field, small, and 
medium colonies) 
nigricollis 
Moderate platelet 
aggregation (>2 
colonies/field, small and 
medium colonies) 
Dendroaspis 
polylepis 
Mild platelet aggregation 
(2-3 small colonies/field, 
medium and large 
colonies) 
Dendroaspis 
viridis 
Mild platelet aggregation 
(3-4 colonies/field, small 
colonies) 
Dendroaspis 
jamesoni 
Marked platelet 
aggregation (3-4 
colonies/field, small, and 
medium colonies) 
Table 4.2. Grading of platelet aggregation in mice injected with medically important snake 
venoms. Platelet aggregation was recorded according to relative size and distribution of platelet 
colonies per field of view (x 100 objective): i) no aggregation, <1 small colony/field; ii) mild 
aggregation, 2-5 colonies/field and/or small colonies only; iii) moderate aggregation, 2-8 
colonies/field and/or small and medium colonies; iv) marked aggregation, >5 colonies/field and/or 
medium and/or large colonies present. Small, medium and large colonies were defined as 2-10 
platelets, 11-20 platelets and >20 platelets, respectively. 
To confirm this, we employed an in vitro assay (Figure 4.4) to study venom-induced platelet 
aggregation or inhibition in human plasma. Compared to the control group, all venoms 
caused a degree of platelet aggregation (5-25%) greater than negative control (PBS). There 
was a significantly increased of platelet aggregation caused by N. nigricollis venom 10% 
greater than positive control. Some Viperidae venoms (B. gabonica, B. arietans, and E. 
leucogaster) shows a low level of aggregation (> 10%) compared to E. ocellatus venom that 
induced a significant level of aggregation. All elapids in (Naja and Dendroaspis species) 
caused the greatest levels of platelet aggregation (15-24%) compared to the negative 
control. 
Figure 4.4 Elapids activate platelet aggregation. To measure levels of platelet aggregation induced by directly 
by venoms, a platelet aggregation in vitro assay was performed, to measure levels of platelet aggregation 
induced by directly by venoms, using PBS as a negative control and collagen as a positive control. All results 
were compared to collagen, as the negative control was standardised at 0% activity. All venoms caused greater 
levels of platelet aggregation than the negative control, and N. nigricollis venom caused platelets to aggregate 
significantly more than the positive control. With the exception of E. ocellatus, venoms form species of the 
Elapidae family caused the greatest levels of platelet aggregation. Venoms: BG (B. gabonica), BA (B. arietans), 
EL (E. leucogaster), EO (E. ocellatus), NH (N. haje), NM (N. melanoleuca), NN (N. nigricollis), DP (D. polylepis), 
DV (D. viridis), DJ (D. jamesoni). Parameters were compared by Dunnetts multiple comparison test. Significant 
values are indicated by *P  0.05, **P  0.01, ***P  0.001, and ****P  0.0001. Mean  SD of replicate counts 
shown. 
4.3.2 Acute phase and acute inflammatory responses in envenomed mice 
4.3.2.1 P-selectin involvement in acute inflammatory response activation in envenomed 
Following an inflammatory stimulus, several molecules cause platelets and endothelial cells 
to become activated, leading to the surface expression of the transmembrane protein P-
selectin. P-selectin is then shed into the systemic circulation through cleavage, giving rise to 
a soluble form (Lorant et al. 1993). Consequently, we used a commercial ELISA assay to 
quantify soluble P-selectin in the sera of envenomed mice, as a proxy for the level of 
endothelial cell and platelet activation (Figure 4.5A). Mice injected with PBS had soluble P-
selectin concentrations of 544  84 ng/ml (mean  SD), whereas those envenomed with N. 
melanoleuca and N. nigricollis venom exhibited around a two-fold increase (1197  68 ng/ml 
and 907  78 ng/ml, respectively; P < 0.01 vs control). Conversely, envenoming by B. arietans 
resulted in significant decreases in P-selectin levels (147  79 ng/ml; P < 0.01 vs control), 
while none of the remaining venoms exhibited significant differences in P-selectin levels 
when compared with the PBS control. 
4.3.2.2 Envenomation-related immunoglobulin response. 
Pathogens and toxins are detected by natural IgM antibodies. When an antigen-antibody 
complex forms, the classical complement pathway can become activated, heightening the 
antibody response (Baumgarth, Tung & Herzenberg 2005; Ochsenbein et al. 1999). 
Consequently, we next used a specific ELISA to quantify the levels of systemic IgM in the sera 
of the envenomed mice (Figure 4.5B). We found that treatment with B. gabonica venom led 
to marked increases (46 %) in circulating IgM (P < 0.05), while significant reductions in IgM 
with B. arietans (66 %), E. leucogaster (60 %), D. viridis (60 %), and D. jamesoni (66 %) venoms 
caused (all P < 0.05). No significant differences were observed when comparing IgM levels 
caused by the other snake venoms in comparison with the control samples. 
4.3.2.3 APR stimulation by Elapidae venoms 
The APR is an innate, non-specific, systemic reaction to local or systemic disturbances. When 
stimulated, there are detectable and quantifiable changes in acute phase reactants in 
comparison to baseline: namely, positive acute phase proteins will increase and negative 
acute phase proteins will decrease (Quinton et al., 2009). In this study we quantified levels 
of haptoglobin, SAA and CRP in mice envenomed with the 10 African snake venoms and 
compared these with non-envenomed controls. We observed five-fold increases in 
haptoglobin levels with those mice dosed with N. melanoleuca and N. nigricollis venoms (P 
< 0.0001 vs control), while all other venoms caused haptoglobin levels to decrease (Figure 
4.5C). While these reductions were modest, they were significant in the case of B. gabonica, 
B. arietans, E. leucogaster, D. polylepis, and D. jamesoni. Interestingly, N. melanoleuca 
venom caused SAA to increase (P < 0.0001), but none of the other venoms, including that of 
N. nigricollis, resulted in significant changes compared with the control (Figure 4.4D). We 
observed no significant changes in the levels of CRP across the different envenomed mice 
groups, which may the result of CRP not being a major acute phase protein in mice (Pathak 
& Agrawal 2019), and although albumin appeared to decrease slightly in most groups treated 
with snake venom, no significant reductions were identified when compared to the control. 
4.3.2.4 Naja nigricollis venom causes rapid release of systemic inflammatory mediators 
Cytokines are a diverse array of signalling peptides released by cells, and they are key 
regulators of the inflammatory and acute phase response. Once released, cytokines trigger 
many biological processes including cell activation, proliferation, growth, differentiation, 
migration and apoptosis (Faqi 2016). We investigated the levels of circulating cytokines in 
the different groups of mice dosed with African snake venoms via multiplex analysis of the 
resulting sera (Figure 4.5E). The control group (PBS only) exhibited untraceable levels of most 
of the cytokines investigated, although low levels of IFN- (2.08 pg/ml) and interleukin (IL)-
1 (0.15 pg/ml) were detected. Noticeably, experimental animals dosed with N. nigricollis 
venom exhibited increased levels of several pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-5, IL-6, IL-13, IL-
18, GM-CSF, TNF-). However, of these, significant elevations were only detected for IL-6 
(P<0.0001 vs control), where a dramatic increase was detected (119.57  4.6 pg/ml vs 0 
pg/ml). Elevations of IL-6 were also detected in mice envenomed with E. leucogaster, E. 
ocellatus, N. haje, N. melanoleuca, and D. polylepis venoms, although these increases were 
modest (not significant vs control), and still represented low circulating levels. No statistically 
significant differences in TNF-, IL-1, IL-13, IL-5, GM-CSF, IL-12p70, IL-2, Il-4, IL-18 and IFN-
 levels were caused by any of the different snake venoms. With exception, IFN- significantly 
elevated with D. polylepis venom and IL-18 was significantly elevated in mouse envenomed 
with N. nigricollis venom.  
4.3.3 Serum biochemistry following snake envenoming 
Figure 4.5 Venoms elicit different acute phase and inflammatory responses in the systemic 
circulation of mice. Sera was obtained from mice six hours post-injection of different snake venoms 
and APPs were quantified. (A) P-selectin was significantly elevated in mice dosed with N. 
melanoleuca and N. nigricollis venoms, and significantly reduced in those dosed with Bitis arietans 
venom. (B) B. gabonica appears to increase circulating IgM compared to the normal, whilst B. 
arietans, E. leucogaster, D. viridis, and D. jamesoni caused significant reductions in the levels of 
circulating IgM. (C) Hp was significantly elevated in mice inoculated with Naja melanoleuca and 
Naja nigricollis venom, as quantified by a colorimetric assay, whilst (D) SAA was found to be 
elevated in mice injected with N. melanoleuca venom only, as quantified by ELISA). (E) Sera from 
mice were assayed for 11 cytokines using a multiplex Th1/Th2 immunoassay kit. Cytokines in the 
normal mouse sera (control) were low or undetected in all cases, and all other groups were 
compared to this control. Darker red indicates high elevation, pink indicates moderate elevation 
and white indicates minor or no change (see colour legend). Venoms: BG (B. gabonica), BA (B. 
arietans), EL (E. leucogaster), EO (E. ocellatus), NH (N. haje), NM (N. melanoleuca), NN (N. 
nigricollis), DP (D. polylepis), DV (D. viridis), DJ (D. jamesoni). Values found to be significant 
compared to the normal control (PBS only) are indicated by *P  0.05, **P  0.01, ***P  0.001, and 
****P  0.0001. 
Blood biochemistry is one of the most fundamental diagnostic indicators of muscle 
breakdown and organ failure. Consequently, we assessed a range of biochemical parameters 
to gain insight into the acute pathologies induced by this diverse groups of ten African snake 
venoms (Figure 4.6). The first marker measured was bilirubin, which accumulates in the 
systemic circulation as a breakdown product of RBCs during haemolysis and/or a functional 
failure of the liver to assist in its excretion (Kalakonda & John 2018). We found that all 
venoms caused a significant elevation of total bilirubin, with the exception N. haje and N. 
melanoleuca (Figure 4.6A). Quantification of the total protein (Figure 4.6B) and albumin 
levels (Figure 4.6C) in the sera of the envenomed mice revealed no changes from the control, 
with the exception of animals dosed with B. arietans venom, which caused significant 
reductions in both levels, suggesting acute liver and renal problems. Similarly, only one 
venom resulted in significant changes to AST (Figure 4.6D) and ALT (Figure 4.6E). The venom 
of N. nigricollis venom induced notable increases to both markers, indicating hepatocellular 
damage, and the combination of significant elevated (2-10 folds) levels of AST, along with 
LDH (Figure 4.6F) and CK (Figure 4.6G) caused by this venom is suggestive of cardiac damage. 
Finally, N. melanoleuca venom appeared to affect renal function, as creatine levels were 
moderately raised (indication as poor clearance of creatinine by the kidneys) (Figure 4.6H) 
while significant increases in LDH (as indication of haemolysis), in a comparable manner to 
N. nigricollis, were observed (Figure 4.6F). Aside from bilirubin levels, and a couple of other 
exceptions, the venoms of B. gabonica, E. leucogaster, E. ocellatus, N. haje and the three 
Dendroaspis spp. had little effect on the serum biochemistry of the envenomed mice under 
the experimental conditions used here (Figure 4.6). 
Figure 4.6 Serum biochemistry parameters suggest acute hepatic and renal damage following N. 
nigricollis envenoming. Mice were injected with ten medically important snake venoms and after six 
hours, blood and sera samples were obtained. Several biochemical markers were then quantified 
using an automated clinical chemistry analyser and compared to sera obtained from the normal 
group (mice injected with PBS). We found that (A) total bilirubin was elevated in all cases of viper 
envenoming and also by N. nigricollis and Dendroaspis spp., and (B) total protein was significantly 
decreased following dosing with B. arietans venom. (C) B. arietans venom also caused albumin to 
reduce compared to the normal control. N. nigricollis venom caused significant elevations in AST (D) 
and ALT (E) levels. (F) Both N. melanoleuca and N. nigricollis caused significant elevations in the sera 
levels of LDH, while (G) N. nigricollis venom caused significant alterations to CK levels (elevated more 
than nine times). (H) Creatine levels were mostly comparable to the normal, with the exception that 
both Echis species caused significant reductions. Venoms: BG (B. gabonica), BA (B. arietans), EL (E. 
leucogaster), EO (E. ocellatus), NH (N. haje), NM (N. melanoleuca), NN (N. nigricollis), DP (D. 
polylepis), DV (D. viridis), DJ (D. jamesoni). Values found to be significant compared to the normal 
(PBS inoculation only) are indicated by *P  0.05, **P  0.01, ***P  0.001, and ****P  0.0001. 
4.4 Discussion 
Snake venoms are extremely diverse in their composition, both interspecifically and 
intraspecifically (Casewell et al. 2014b). It is this variation in venom composition that 
mediates the diverse array of clinical symptoms presented by snakebite victims (Gutirrez et 
al. 2017). Both in vitro and in vivo research indicates that inflammatory processes may 
exacerbate the local and systemic pathologies caused by elapid and viperid envenomation. 
Here, we report that snake venoms prompt very diverse responses in mice following acute 
envenoming, and that the venom of two African cobra venoms in particular  N. nigricollis 
and N. melanoleuca  cause marked inflammatory and non-specific acute phase responses. 
We also report venom-induced haemolytic activity in several cases of envenoming. The 
variable findings presented herein emphasise the importance of understanding the acute 
responses that manifest following envenoming, and further research in this area may 
facilitate new diagnostic and treatment approaches, which in turn may lead to better clinical 
outcomes for affected individuals. 
Despite the clinical relevance of cobra (Naja spp.) envenoming in Africa, there have been few 
studies on the pathogenesis of inflammation-associated local tissue damage caused by such 
species (Iddon, Theakston & Ownby 1987; Rivel et al. 2016) and there is a paucity of 
knowledge on the systemic response to these venoms. IL-6, TNF- and IL-1 are known to 
be the primary mediators of the APR (Heinrich 1990), and we found that serum IL-6 was 
dramatically elevated in mice injected with N. nigricollis venom. However, serum levels of 
TNF- and IL-1 remained close to baseline. Elevated serum IL-6 has been reported in human 
snakebite victims, and although this correlated with non-specific clinical symptoms (nausea, 
vomiting, headache, abdominal pain, diarrhoea) in one case (Stone et al. 2013), there does 
not appear to be any significant clinical association between elevated serum cytokine 
concentration and severity of envenoming (Avila-Aguero et al. 2001). Additionally, anti-
cytokine antibodies (anti-TNF-, anti-IL-1, anti-IL-6) failed to reduce lethality, haemorrhage, 
necrosis and oedema following Bothrops venom injection. This said, there is a lack of 
literature regarding these responses in cobra envenoming. 
Once cytokines become systemically distributed, they can act on the bone marrow to modify 
leucocyte production, and IL-6 has been shown to be important in leucocyte recruitment and 
neutrophil migration during the inflammatory response (Rosales 2018). We found that 
envenoming by both N. nigricollis and N. melanoleuca caused significant changes to the 
leukocyte profile in circulation, with a significantly higher ratio of neutrophils to lymphocytes 
compared to the control within only six hours of envenomation. This response is typical of 
acute stress syndrome and inflammation, and while this has previously been reported in 
human snakebite victims following viper envenoming (Barraviera et al. 1995a; Santoro et al. 
2008), it is unreported for elapid envenoming. The number of leukocytes and their subtypes 
has been recognised as a marker of inflammation in disease (Fest et al. 2018) and the 
neutrophil:lymphocyte ratio has been reported as a risk factor for the severity of outcome 
of snakebite (Aktar et al. 2016; Elbey et al. 2017). Aktar and Tekin, (2017) investigated several 
parameters in 142 children with snakebite, and those that were grouped as severe had 
significantly higher leucocytes and neutrophils than the other groups. The clinical symptoms 
of these children were distinct in that they suffered extensive swelling extending to the 
trunk, necrosis or compartment syndrome, as well as clinical signs of systemic effects 
(systemic bleeding, hypotension, disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) or renal 
failure, cerebral haemorrhage, or multi-system failure).  
Another fundamental part of the acute phase response occurs when inflammatory mediators 
stimulate hepatocytes to alter the production of certain proteins. Haptoglobin is an acute 
phase protein in humans and mice, and although its key role is to bind free haemoglobin 
following haemolysis to prevent oxidative damage (Williams, 2018), haptoglobin will also 
increase rapidly in response to infection and/or injury, exhibiting a range of 
immunomodulatory properties (Eckersall et al. 2001; Shapiro & Black 1992). In support of 
our previous findings, we identified physiologically relevant elevations in haptoglobin in mice 
injected with both N. melanoleuca and N. nigricollis venoms. SAA is also a major acute phase 
protein, although it is produced in a time-dependent manner and typically reaches its peak 
after 24-72 hours. We found SAA to be elevated in mice envenomed with N. melanoleuca 
venom, although the reasons for a lack of increase observed in mice envenomed with N. 
nigricollis venom remain unclear. Contrastingly, haptoglobin levels in mice envenomed with 
the viper venoms from B. gabonica and B. arietans envenomed mice, were significantly lower 
than the normal control, suggesting a predominantly haemolytic response. Low levels of 
haptoglobin has been used as a marker of coagulopathy in snakebite victims previously (Kim 
et al. 2008), and both B. gabonica and B. arietans venoms have been shown to cause 
consumption coagulopathy (Maduwage & Isbister 2014). Interestingly, in B. gabonica 
envenoming, we found IgM to be elevated and serum albumin to be decreased, which has 
been shown to be characteristic of endothelium disturbances induced by haemotoxic snake 
venoms, allowing fluid to leak into the interstitial space and contributing to oedema. 
Biochemical analysis of serum also indicated that mice envenomed with N. nigricollis and N. 
melanoleuca venoms showed unique pathological characteristics in comparison with the 
other venoms tested. Both groups had significantly elevated LDH, which is indicative of 
intravascular haemolysis (Barcellini & Fattizzo 2015), and marked spherocytosis was 
apparent in the blood film analysis. Spherocytes are damaged cells that are highly susceptible 
to destruction. Typically, they can be found in all haemolytic anaemias to some degree  a 
medically relevant consequence of snakebite  and occur following complement and/or 
immunoglobulin fixation (immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia [IMHA]) or due to direct 
damage (McCullough 2003). Secondary IMHA has been reported in dogs following elapid 
envenomings with tiger snake (Notechis scutatus) based on similar diagnostic parameters to 
those included in this study (e.g. evidence of haemolysis (ghost cells), marked spherocytosis, 
and raised AST, ALT and total bilirubin) (Ong et al. 2015). Our findings here suggest that IMHA 
is the direct result of the action of venom toxins. Supporting this hypothesis is evidence from 
Tambourgi et al. (1994), who performed in vitro haemolysis assays using sheep RBCs, and 
found that both N. nigricollis and N. melanoleuca venoms caused lysis of cells. On the other 
hands, with the in vitro direct haemolysis assays, N. nigricollis show a significant haemolysis. 
While, N. melanoleuca wasnt and that maybe due to the dose dependent effects.  This 
activity may be the result of the high content of cytotoxic 3FTx and PLA2 in these venoms 
(Lauridsen et al. 2017), particularly since such PLA2 toxins have previously been shown to 
cause haemolysis in vivo (Arce-Bejarano, Lomonte & Gutirrez 2014; Fernndez et al. 2018). 
Biochemical analysis of serum from mice injected with N. nigricollis venom also showed 
dramatically elevated CK levels, with a ten-fold increase compared with control exceeding 
the five-fold threshold used as a clinical indicator in humans for the presence of 
rhabdomyolysis (Cleary 2016). These findings were also supported by elevations in LDH in 
the same experimental animals, as LDH is a marker of muscle breakdown (Torres et al. 2015). 
Rhabdomyolysis is a major pathology that can occur following bites by a variety of elapid and 
viperid snakes (e.g. Australian red-bellied black snake (Pseudechis porphyriacus) and can lead 
to the accumulation of muscle breakdown products that cause damage to the kidneys (Lim, 
Singh & Isbister 2016). Vikrant et al. (2017) investigated acute injury in 121 snakebite victims 
in India and found intravascular haemolysis and rhabdomyolysis to be the most important 
risk factors for developing acute kidney injury. Additionally, those who died (9.1 %) had 
elevated WBC counts, elevated bilirubin, and low levels of albumin compared to the surviving 
group  all of which were identified in the N. nigricollis envenomed mice used in this study. 
Furthermore, elevations in ALT, AST and total bilirubin in the N. nigricollis envenomed mice 
are also indicative of acute hepatocellular damage; a finding which is in line with the findings 
of James et al. (2013) who used rat models to investigate pathology caused by N. nigricollis 
venom. Liver injury is to be said one of the most common and serious symptoms of cobra 
snake envenomation (N. haje). Several mechanisms have been proposed to explain how such 
damage develops, dependent on venom type (Gutirrez et al. 2017).  
Thrombosis and haemostasis are vital cellular processes, and different snake venoms disrupt 
these processes in a variety of ways. Thrombocytopenia, which is a reduction in the platelet 
count, is a common clinical observation in snakebite victims and is thought to be caused by 
venom-induced hyper-aggregation of platelets, particularly in those bitten by vipers (Cheng 
et al. 2017; Lavonas et al. 2002; Odeleye et al. 2004; Santoro et al. 2008). However, a wide 
variety of snake venom toxins have been demonstrated to interact with platelets, and act via 
various mechanisms to either inhibit or promote their aggregation (Slagboom et al. 2017). 
We found that elapid venoms caused the greatest level of platelet aggregation, whilst viperid 
venoms appeared to minimise platelet aggregation (B. arietans and E. leucogaster). 
Platelets are the major source of soluble P-selectin (Tscharre et al. 2019), which is shed into 
the circulation to dampen the inflammatory potential of the cell. N. melanoleuca and N. 
nigricollis envenomation caused elevated levels of P-selectin in the systemic circulation, 
suggesting high levels of platelet activation and endothelial dysfunction. P-selectin has rarely 
been documented in snakebite models, apart from a comprehensive physiological 
investigation conducted by Sun et al. (2016). The authors reported that P-selectin is 
physiologically involved in the neutralisation of venom-induced coagulopathy following 
Crotalus atrox envenoming. Both cobra venoms discussed in this study have potent 
anticoagulant effects (Bittenbinder et al. 2019) and have been shown here to stimulate 
inflammatory responses, suggesting that high levels of circulating P-selectin could perhaps 
stimulate some protective responses against systemic coagulopathy (Dole et al. 2005). 
Interestingly, we found that B. arietans envenomation significantly reduced P-selectin levels 
compared to the control and, as such, we propose that the venom somehow interferes with 
the function and/or activation of platelets, preventing shedding. These findings also 
correlate with our blood film analysis, which revealed that B. arietans caused markedly 
decreased levels of platelet clumping compared with the controls. Indeed, it is well-
established that B. arietans and E.ocellatus venom contains several anti-platelet peptides, 
including arietin (from B.arietans) and Echistatin (from E.ocellatus), which suppresses 
platelet aggregation by interacting with fibrinogen receptors on platelet membranes (Huang 
et al. 1991; Smith et al., 2002) and platelet aggregation has also previously been shown to 
be strongly suppressed by whole B. arietans venom in vitro (Strydom et al. 2016). Given the 
importance of platelet receptors for platelet function, we suggest that anti-platelet toxins in 
B. arietans venom are interacting and/or overlapping with the binding sites of those 
receptors, thus preventing both their activation and their downstream functions (de Queiroz 
et al. 2017). 
4.5 Conclusion 
The present study used a murine model to detect inflammatory and acute phase markers in 
the systemic circulation in response to envenoming by ten snake venoms of medical 
importance in Africa. We also assessed the biochemical profile of envenomed mice and 
completed haematological analyses of blood to further elucidate the clinicopathological 
mechanisms of snakebite envenoming. We found that N. melanoleuca and N. nigricollis 
venoms  whose venoms are typically associated with neurotoxic and cytotoxic clinical 
pathologies respectively  exhibit a similar systemic response that can readily be detected 
only 6 hours post-envenomation. We also identified major systemic pathologies associated 
with diverse envenomings, including variable. In addition, we find that SAA and haptoglobin 
show promise for exploring further for their potential clinical value as biomarkers  to assess 
acute responses in the early stages of envenoming, particularly since these tests would be 
substantially faster and cheaper than measuring the standard biomarker of CRP, and since 
evidence from other studies suggests they may be more effective markers for assessing acute 
responses in other clinical scenarios (Christensen et al. 2014; Watson, Round & Hamilton 
2012). Despite highlighting novel insights into the acute phase and inflammatory responses 
occurring immediately after African snake envenoming, much remains unknown about the 
mechanisms involved in the induction and development of the immediate systemic response 
to the venoms under study, in particular the specific venom toxins that initiate the reaction 
and their respective mechanisms of action. The variable findings reported here strongly 
advocate for further research effort on this topic to aid the future treatment and clinical 
management of African snakebite victims.  
4.6 References: 
Aktar, F., Aktar, S., Yolbas, I. & Tekin, R. (2016) 'Evaluation of risk factors and follow-up 
criteria for severity of snakebite in children', Iranian journal of pediatrics, vol. 26, 
no. 4. 
Arango Duque, G. & Descoteaux, A. (2014) 'Macrophage cytokines: involvement in 
immunity and infectious diseases', Frontiers in immunology, vol. 5, p. 491. 
Arce-Bejarano, R., Lomonte, B. & Gutirrez, J.M. (2014) 'Intravascular hemolysis induced by 
the venom of the Eastern coral snake, Micrurus fulvius, in a mouse model: 
Identification of directly hemolytic phospholipases A2', Toxicon, vol. 90, pp. 26-35. 
Avila-Aguero, M., Paris, M.M., Hu, S., Peterson, P.K., Gutierrez, J.M., Lomonte, B., 
Faingezicht, I. & The Snakebite Study, G. (2001) Systemic cytokine response in 
children bitten by snakes in Costa Rica, p. 425  
Barcellini, W. & Fattizzo, B. (2015) 'Clinical applications of hemolytic markers in the 
differential diagnosis and management of hemolytic anemia', Disease markers, vol. 
2015. 
Barraviera, B., Lomonte, B., Tarkowski, A., Hanson, L. & Meira, D.A. (1995a) 'Acute-phase 
reactions, including cytokines, in patients bitten by Bothrops and Crotalus snakes in 
Brazil', Journal of Venomous Animals and Toxins, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 11-22. 
Barraviera, B., Lomonte, B., Tarkowski, A., Hanson, L.. & Meira, D.A. (1995b) 'Acute-phase 
reactions, including cytokines, in patients bitten by Bothrops and Crotalus snakes in 
Brazil', Toxicon, vol. 33, p. 283. 
Barros, S.F., Friedlanskaia, I., Petricevich, V.L. & Kipnis, T.L. (1998) 'Local inflammation, 
lethality and cytokine release in mice injected with Bothrops atrox venom', 
Mediators Of Inflammation, vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 339-346. 
Baumann, H. & Gauldie, J. (1994) The acute phase response, Great Britain, p. 74. 
Baumgarth, N., Tung, J.W. & Herzenberg, L.A. (2005) 'Inherent specificities in natural 
antibodies: a key to immune defense against pathogen invasion', Springer Seminars 
In Immunopathology, vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 347-362. 
Bittenbinder, M.A., Dobson, J.S., Zdenek, C.N., op den Brouw, B., Naude, A., Vonk, F.J. & 
Fry, B.G. (2019) 'Differential destructive (non-clotting) fibrinogenolytic activity in 
Afro-Asian elapid snake venoms and the links to defensive hooding behavior', 
Toxicology in Vitro. 
Casewell, N.R., Wagstaff, S.C., Wster, W., Cook, D.A.N., Bolton, F.M.S., King, S.I., Pla, D., 
Sanz, L., Calvete, J.J. & Harrison, R.A. (2014a) 'Medically important differences in 
snake venom composition are dictated by distinct postgenomic mechanisms', 
Proceedings Of The National Academy Of Sciences Of The United States Of America, 
vol. 111, no. 25, pp. 9205-9210. 
Cheng, C.-L., Mao, Y.-C., Liu, P.-Y., Chiang, L.-C., Liao, S.-C. & Yang, C.-C. (2017) 
'Deinagkistrodon acutus envenomation: a report of three cases', Journal of 
venomous animals and toxins including tropical diseases, vol. 23, no. 1, p. 20. 
Chippaux, J.P. (1998) Snake-bites: appraisal of the global situation, p. 515  
Chmielewski, P.P. & Strzelec, B. (2018) 'Elevated leukocyte count as a harbinger of systemic 
inflammation, disease progression, and poor prognosis: a review', Folia 
morphologica, vol. 77, no. 2, pp. 171-178. 
Christensen, M.B., Langhorn, R., Goddard, A., Andreasen, E.B., Moldal, E., Tvarijonaviciute, 
A., Kirpensteijn, J., Jakobsen, S., Persson, F. & Kjelgaard-Hansen, M. (2014) 
Comparison of serum amyloid A and C-reactive protein as diagnostic markers of 
systemic inflammation in dogs, vol. 55, pp. 161-168. 
Cleary, M.A. (2016) 'Creatine kinase, exertional rhabdomyolysis, and exercise-associated 
hyponatremia in ultra-endurance athletes: A critically appraised paper'. 
Cray, C., Zaias, J. & Altman, N.H. (2009) 'Acute phase response in animals: a review', 
Comparative medicine, vol. 59, no. 6, pp. 517-526. 
de Queiroz, M.R., de Sousa, B.B., da Cunha Pereira, D.F., Mamede, C.C.N., Matias, M.S., de 
Morais, N.C.G., de Oliveira Costa, J. & de Oliveira, F. (2017) 'The role of platelets in 
hemostasis and the effects of snake venom toxins on platelet function', Toxicon, 
vol. 133, pp. 33-47. 
de Silva, H.A., Ryan, N.M. & de Silva, H.J. (2016) 'Adverse reactions to snake antivenom, and 
their prevention and treatment', British journal of clinical pharmacology, vol. 81, 
no. 3, pp. 446-452. 
de sousa-e-Silva, M.C., Tomy, S.C., Tavares, F.L., Navajas, L., Larsson, M.H., Lucas, S.R., 
Kogika, M.M. & Sano-Martins, I.S. (2003) 'Hematological, hemostatic and clinical 
chemistry disturbances induced by Crotalus durissus terrificus snake venom in 
dogs', Human & experimental toxicology, vol. 22, no. 9, pp. 491-500. 
Dole, V.S., Bergmeier, W., Mitchell, H.A., Eichenberger, S.C. & Wagner, D.D. (2005) 
'Activated platelets induce Weibel-Palade-body secretion and leukocyte rolling in 
vivo: role of P-selectin', Blood, vol. 106, no. 7, pp. 2334-2339. 
Eckersall, P.D., Gow, J.W., McComb, C., Bradley, B., Rodgers, J., Murray, M. & Kennedy, 
P.G.E. (2001) 'Cytokines and the acute phase response in post-treatment reactive 
encephalopathy of Trypanosoma brucei brucei infected mice', Parasitology 
international, vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 15-26. 
Elbey, B., Baykal, B., Yazgan, .C. & Zengin, Y. (2017) 'The prognostic value of the 
neutrophil/lymphocyte ratio in patients with snake bites for clinical outcomes and 
complications', Saudi journal of biological sciences, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 362-366. 
Faqi, A.S. (2016) A comprehensive guide to toxicology in nonclinical drug development, 
Academic Press. 
Fernndez, M.L., Quartino, P.Y., Arce-Bejarano, R., Fernndez, J., Camacho, L.F., Gutirrez, 
J.M., Kuemmel, D., Fidelio, G. & Lomonte, B. (2018) 'Intravascular hemolysis 
induced by phospholipases a2 from the venom of the eastern coral snake, micrurus 
fulvius: Functional profiles of hemolytic and non-hemolytic isoforms', Toxicology 
letters, vol. 286, pp. 39-47. 
Ferrer-Acosta, Y., Gonzlez, M., Fernndez, M. & Valance, W.A. (2014) 'Emerging roles for 
platelets in inflammation and disease', Journal of infectious disease and therapy, 
vol. 2, no. 4. 
Fest, J., Ruiter, R., Ikram, M.A., Voortman, T., van Eijck, C.H.J. & Stricker, B.H. (2018) 
'Reference values for white blood-cell-based inflammatory markers in the 
Rotterdam Study: a population-based prospective cohort study', Scientific reports, 
vol. 8, no. 1, p. 10566. 
Gruys, E., Toussaint, M.J.M., Niewold, T.A. & Koopmans, S.J. (2005) 'Acute phase reaction 
and acute phase proteins', Journal of Zhejiang University. Science. B, vol. 6, no. 11, 
p. 1045. 
Gutirrez, J.M., Calvete, J.J., Habib, A.G., Harrison, R.A., Williams, D.J. & Warrell, D.A. (2017) 
'Snakebite envenoming', Nature reviews. Disease primers, vol. 3, p. 17063. 
Gutirrez, J.M., Williams, D., Fan, H.W. & Warrell, D.A. (2010) 'Snakebite envenoming from 
a global perspective: Towards an integrated approach', Toxicon, vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 
1223-1235. 
Habib, A.G., Kuznik, A., Hamza, M., Abdullahi, M.I., Chedi, B.A., Chippaux, J.-P. & Warrell, 
D.A. (2015) 'Snakebite is under appreciated: appraisal of burden from West Africa', 
PLoS neglected tropical diseases, vol. 9, no. 9, p. e0004088. 
Habib, A.G. & Warrell, D.A. (2013) 'Antivenom therapy of carpet viper (Echis ocellatus) 
envenoming: effectiveness and strategies for delivery in West Africa', Toxicon, vol. 
69, pp. 82-89. 
Harrison, R.A., Hargreaves, A., Wagstaff, S.C., Faragher, B. & Lalloo, D.G. (2009) 'Snake 
envenoming: a disease of poverty', Plos Neglected Tropical Diseases, vol. 3, no. 12, 
pp. e569-e569. 
Hoffman, J.F. (1992) On red blood cells, hemolysis and resealed ghosts, in, The Use of 
Resealed Erythrocytes as Carriers and Bioreactors, Springer, pp. 1-15. 
Huang, T.-F., Wang, W.-J., Teng, C.-M. & Ouyang, C. (1991) 'Mechanism of action of the 
antiplatelet peptide, arietin, from Bitis arietans venom', BBA - General Subjects, vol. 
1074, pp. 144-150. 
Iddon, D., Theakston, R.D.G. & Ownby, C.L. (1987) 'A study of the pathogenesis of local skin 
necrosis induced by Naja nigricollis (spitting cobra) venom using simple histological 
staining techniques', Toxicon, vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 665-672. 
Kalakonda, A. & John, S. (2018) Physiology, Bilirubin, in, StatPearls [Internet], StatPearls 
Publishing. 
Kasturiratne, A., Wickremasinghe, A.R., de Silva, N., Gunawardena, N.K., Pathmeswaran, A., 
Premaratna, R., Savioli, L., Lalloo, D.G. & de Silva, H.J. (2008) 'The global burden of 
snakebite: a literature analysis and modelling based on regional estimates of 
envenoming and deaths', PLoS medicine, vol. 5, no. 11, p. e218. 
Kim, J.S., Yang, J.W., Kim, M.S., Han, S.T., Kim, B.R., Shin, M.S., Lee, J.I., Han, B.G. & Choi, 
S.O. (2008) 'Coagulopathy in patients who experience snakebite', The Korean 
journal of internal medicine, vol. 23, no. 2, p. 94. 
Langhorn, R., Persson, F., blad, B., Goddard, A., Schoeman, J.P., Willesen, J.L., Tarnow, I. & 
Kjelgaard-Hansen, M. (2014) 'Myocardial injury in dogs with snake envenomation 
and its relation to systemic inflammation', Journal of veterinary emergency and 
critical care, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 174-181. 
Lauridsen, L.P., Laustsen, A.H., Lomonte, B. & Gutirrez, J.M. (2017) 'Exploring the venom 
of the forest cobra snake: Toxicovenomics and antivenom profiling of Naja 
melanoleuca', Journal of proteomics, vol. 150, pp. 98-108. 
Lavonas, E.J., Tomaszewski, C.A., Ford, M.D., Rouse, A.M. & Kerns Ii, W.P. (2002) 'Severe 
puff adder (Bitis arietans) envenomation with coagulopathy', Journal of Toxicology: 
Clinical Toxicology, vol. 40, no. 7, pp. 911-918. 
Lim, A.Y.L., Singh, P.N. & Isbister, G.K. (2016) 'Severe rhabdomyolysis from red-bellied black 
snake (Pseudechis porphyriacus) envenoming despite antivenom', Toxicon, vol. 
117, pp. 46-48. 
Lobetti, R.G. & Joubert, K. (2004) 'Retrospective study of snake envenomation in 155 dogs 
from the Onderstepoort area of South Africa', Journal Of The South African 
Veterinary Association, vol. 75, no. 4, pp. 169-172. 
Lomonte, B., Tarkowski, A. & Hanson, L.A. (1993) Host Response to Bothrops asper Snake 
Venom: Analysis of Edema Formation. Inflammatory Cells, and Cytokine Release in 
a Mouse Model, PLENUM PUBLISHING CORPORATION, United States, p. 93. 
Lorant, D.E., Topham, M.K., Whatley, R.E., McEver, R.P., McIntyre, T.M., Prescott, S.M. & 
Zimmerman, G.A. (1993) 'Inflammatory roles of P-selectin', The Journal Of Clinical 
Investigation, vol. 92, no. 2, pp. 559-570. 
Maduwage, K. & Isbister, G.K. (2014) 'Current treatment for venom-induced consumption 
coagulopathy resulting from snakebite', PLoS neglected tropical diseases, vol. 8, no. 
10, p. e3220. 
McCullough, S. (2003) 'Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia: understanding the nemesis', 
Veterinary Clinics: Small Animal Practice, vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 1295-1315. 
Menaldo, D.L., Bernardes, C.P., Zoccal, K.F., Jacob-Ferreira, A.L., Costa, T.R., Del Lama, 
M.P.F.M., Naal, R.M.Z.G., Frantz, F.G., Faccioli, L.H. & Sampaio, S.V. (2017) 'Immune 
cells and mediators involved in the inflammatory responses induced by a P-I 
metalloprotease and a phospholipase A2 from Bothrops atrox venom', Molecular 
Immunology, vol. 85, pp. 238-247. 
Moreira, V., Dos-Santos, M.C., Nascimento, N.G., Borges da Silva, H., Fernandes, C.M., 
D'Imprio Lima, M.R. & Teixeira, C. (2012) 'Local inflammatory events induced by 
Bothrops atrox snake venom and the release of distinct classes of inflammatory 
mediators', Toxicon: Official Journal Of The International Society On Toxinology, vol. 
60, no. 1, pp. 12-20. 
Moreira, V., Teixeira, C., Da Silva, H.B., Lima, M.R.D.I. & Dos-Santos, M.C. (2016) 'The role of 
TLR2 in the acute inflammatory response induced by Bothrops atrox snake venom', 
Toxicon, vol. 118, pp. 121-128. 
Nagel, S.S., Schoeman, J.P., Thompson, P.N., Wiinberg, B. & Goddard, A. (2014) 'Hemostatic 
analysis of dogs naturally envenomed by the African puffadder (Bitis arietans) and 
snouted cobra (Naja annulifera)', Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care, 
vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 662-671. 
Nogueira, R.M.B. & Sakate, M. (2006) 'Clinical and hematological alterations in dogs during 
experimental envenomation with Crotalus durissus terrificus venom and treated 
with antiophidic serum', Journal of Venomous Animals and Toxins including Tropical 
Diseases, no. 2, p. 285. 
O'Connell, K.E., Mikkola, A.M., Stepanek, A.M., Vernet, A., Hall, C.D., Brown, D.E., Sun, C.C., 
Yildirim, E., Lee, J.T. & Staropoli, J.F. (2015) 'Practical murine hematopathology: A 
comparative review and implications for research', Comparative Medicine, vol. 65, 
no. 2, pp. 96-113. 
Ochsenbein, A.F., Fehr, T., Lutz, C., Suter, M., Brombacher, F., Hengartner, H. & Zinkernagel, 
R.M. (1999) 'Control of early viral and bacterial distribution and disease by natural 
antibodies', Science, vol. 286, no. 5447, pp. 2156-2159. 
Odeleye, A.A., Presley, A.E., Passwater, M.E. & Mintz, P.D. (2004) 'Rattlesnake venom-
induced thrombocytopenia', Annals of Clinical & Laboratory Science, vol. 34, no. 4, 
pp. 467-470. 
Ong, H.M., Witham, A., Kelers, K. & Boller, M. (2015) 'Presumed secondary immune-
mediated haemolytic anaemia following elapid snake envenomation and its 
treatment in four dogs', Australian veterinary journal, vol. 93, no. 9, pp. 319-326. 
Pathak, A. & Agrawal, A. (2019) 'Evolution of C-reactive protein', Frontiers in immunology, 
vol. 10, p. 943. 
Petricevich, V.L., Teixeira, C.F.P., Tambourgi, D.V. & Gutirrez, J.M.a. (2000) 'Increments in 
serum cytokine and nitric oxide levels in mice injected with Bothrops asper and 
Bothrops jararaca snake venoms', Toxicon, vol. 38, no. 9, pp. 1253-1266. 
Rivel, M., Solano, D., Herrera, M., Vargas, M., Villalta, M., Segura, ., Arias, A.S., Len, G. & 
Gutirrez, J.M. (2016) 'Pathogenesis of dermonecrosis induced by venom of the 
spitting cobra, Naja nigricollis: An experimental study in mice', Toxicon, vol. 119, 
pp. 171-179. 
Rosales, C. (2018) 'Neutrophil: a cell with many roles in inflammation or several cell types?', 
Frontiers in Physiology, vol. 9, p. 113. 
Rucavado, A., Escalante, T., Teixeira, C.F.P., Fernandes, C.M., Diaz, C. & Gutierrez, J.M. 
(2002) Increments in cytokines and matrix metalloproteinases in skeletal muscle 
after injection of tissue-damaging toxins from the venom of the snake Bothrops 
asper, vol. 11, pp. 121-128. 
Rucavado, A., Nicolau, C., Escalante, T., Kim, J., Herrera, C., Gutirrez, J. & Fox, J. (2016) 
'Viperid envenomation wound exudate contributes to increased vascular 
permeability via a DAMPs/TLR-4 mediated pathway', Toxins, vol. 8, no. 12, p. 349. 
Santoro, M.L., Sano-Martins, I.S., Fan, H.W., Cardoso, J.L.C., Theakston, R.D.G. & Warrell, 
D.A. (2008) 'Haematological evaluation of patients bitten by the jararaca, Bothrops 
jararaca, in Brazil', Toxicon, vol. 51, no. 8, pp. 1440-1448. 
Shapiro, S.Z. & Black, S.J. (1992) 'Identification of an acute-phase reactant in murine 
infections with Trypanosoma brucei', Infection and immunity, vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 
3921-3924. 
Slagboom, J., Kool, J., Harrison, R.A. & Casewell, N.R. (2017) 'Haemotoxic snake venoms: 
their functional activity, impact on snakebite victims and pharmaceutical promise', 
British journal of haematology, vol. 177, no. 6, pp. 947-959. 
Sproston, N.R. & Ashworth, J.J. (2018) 'Role of C-Reactive Protein at Sites of Inflammation 
and Infection', Frontiers In Immunology, vol. 9, pp. 754-754. 
Stone, S.F., Isbister, G.K., Shahmy, S., Mohamed, F., Abeysinghe, C., Karunathilake, H., 
Ariaratnam, A., Jacoby-Alner, T.E., Cotterell, C.L. & Brown, S.G.A. (2013) 'Immune 
response to snake envenoming and treatment with antivenom; complement 
activation, cytokine production and mast cell degranulation', PLoS neglected 
tropical diseases, vol. 7, no. 7, p. e2326. 
Strydom, M.A., Bester, J., Mbotwe, S. & Pretorius, E. (2016) 'The effect of physiological 
levels of South African puff adder (Bitis arietans) snake venom on blood cells: an in 
vitro model', Scientific Reports, vol. 6, pp. 35988-35988. 
Smith, J.B., Theakston, R.D.G., Coelho, A.L.J., Barja-Fidalgo, C., Calvete, J.J. and 
Marcinkiewicz, C., 2002. Characterization of a monomeric disintegrin, ocellatusin, 
present in the venom of the Nigerian carpet viper, Echis ocellatus. FEBS letters, 
512(1-3), pp.111-115. 
Tasoulis, T. & Isbister, G. (2017) 'A review and database of snake venom proteomes', 
Toxins, vol. 9, no. 9, p. 290. 
Teixeira, C.F.P., Zamunr, S.R., Zuliani, J.P., Fernandes, C.M., Cruz-Hofling, M.A., Fernandes, 
I., Chaves, F. & Gutirrez, J.M. (2003) 'Neutrophils do not contribute to local tissue 
damage, but play a key role in skeletal muscle regeneration, in mice injected with 
Bothrops asper snake venom', Muscle & Nerve: Official Journal of the American 
Association of Electrodiagnostic Medicine, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 449-459. 
Torres, P.A., Helmstetter, J.A., Kaye, A.M. & Kaye, A.D. (2015) 'Rhabdomyolysis: 
pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treatment', Ochsner Journal, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 58-69. 
Tscharre, M., Vogel, B., Tentzeris, I., Freynhofer, M.K., Rohla, M., Wojta, J., Weiss, T.W., Ay, 
C., Huber, K. & Farhan, S. (2019) 'Prognostic impact of soluble P-selectin on long-
term adverse cardiovascular outcomes in patients undergoing percutaneous 
coronary intervention', Thrombosis and haemostasis, vol. 119, no. 02, pp. 340-347. 
Walton, R.M., Brown, D.E., Hamar, D.W., Meador, V.P., Horn, J.W. & Thrall, M.A. (1997) 
'Mechanisms of echinocytosis induced by Crotalus atrox venom', Veterinary 
pathology, vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 442-449. 
Wanderley, C.W.S., Silva, C.M.S., Wong, D.V.T., Ximenes, R.M., Morelo, D.F.C., Cosker, F., 
Arago, K.S., Fernandes, C., Palheta-Jnior, R.C., Havt, A., Brito, G.A.C., Cunha, F.Q., 
Ribeiro, R.A. & Lima-Jnior, R.C.P. (2014) 'Bothrops jararacussu snake venom-
induces a local inflammatory response in a prostanoid- and neutrophil-dependent 
manner', Toxicon: Official Journal Of The International Society On Toxinology, vol. 
90, pp. 134-147. 
Warrell, D.A. (2005) 'Treatment of bites by adders and exotic venomous snakes', British 
Medical Journal, vol. 331, no. 7527, pp. 1244-1247. 
Watson, J., Round, A. & Hamilton, W. (2012) 'Raised inflammatory markers', BMJ: British 
Medical Journal, vol. 344, no. 7843, p. 43. 
WHO (2019) Neglected tropical diseases [Online], World Health Organization, Available 
from: http://www.who.int/neglected_diseases/diseases/en/ (Accessed: 19th 
September). 
WSTER, W., Chirio, L., Trape, J.F., Ineich, I., Jackson, K., Greenbaum, E., Barron, C., 
Kusamba, C., Nagy, Z.T., Storey, R. and Hall, C., 2018. Integration of nuclear and 
mitochondrial gene sequences and morphology reveals unexpected diversity in the 
forest cobra (Naja melanoleuca) species complex in Central and West Africa 
(Serpentes: Elapidae). Zootaxa, 4455(1), pp.68-98. 
Zamuner, S.R., Zuliani, J.P., Fernandes, C.M., Gutirrez, J.M. & de Ftima Pereira Teixeira, C. 
(2005) 'Inflammation induced by Bothrops asper venom: release of 
proinflammatory cytokines and eicosanoids, and role of adhesion molecules in 
leukocyte infiltration', Toxicon: Official Journal Of The International Society On 
Toxinology, vol. 46, no. 7, pp. 806-813. 
http://www.who.int/neglected_diseases/diseases/en/
4.7 Supplementary Information 
Snake 
species 
Whole 
venom/venom 
toxin 
Target species 
(Mouse strains) 
Inflammatory 
mediators (time post-
envenomation in 
hours) 
Observed pathologies Reference 
Bothrops 
asper 
Whole venom Swiss mice 
Pro-inflammatory 
cytokines: IL-6 (1-3), 
TNF- (1-6) 
Eicosanoids pathway: 
LTB (0.5-1), TXB (0.5-
Leucocyte infiltrate 
(neutrophils) 
(Zamuner et al. 
2005) 
Myotoxic PLA, P-I 
metalloproteinase 
Swiss mice 
Pro-inflammatory 
cytokines: IL-1 (1-6), 
IL-6 (1-6) 
Not reported 
(Rucavado et al. 
2002) 
Whole venom, 
myotoxic PLA 
isoform 
Swiss mice 
Pro-inflammatory 
cytokines: IL-6 (3-6) 
Leucocyte infiltrate 
(neutrophils, 
mononuclear cells), 
reduced platelets, 
oedema 
(Lomonte, 
Tarkowski & 
Hanson 1993) 
Whole venom BALB/c mice 
Pro-inflammatory 
cytokines:  IL-1 (2-24), 
IL-6 (2-6), IFN-, TNF- 
(2-18) 
Anti-inflammatory 
cytokines: IL-10 (4-24) 
Other: NO (2-24) 
Not reported 
(Petricevich et 
al. 2000) 
Bothrops 
atrox 
Whole venom Swiss mice 
Pro-inflammatory 
cytokines: IL-6 (1-4), 
IL-12p70 (4-8), TNF- 
Anti-inflammatory 
cytokines: IL-10 (8) 
Chemokines: CCL-2 (1-
Eicosanoid pathway: 
Vascular permeability, 
leucocyte infiltration 
(mononuclear and 
polymorphonuclear 
leucocytes) 
(Moreira et al. 
2012) 
Supplementary Table S 4.1. Prior murine in vivo studies of the inflammatory response 
following dosing with snake venom. Key: IL-1/-6/-8/-10/-12p70: Interleukin-1/-6/-8/-10/-12p70; 
TNF-: Tumour Necrosis Factor-; Interferon-: IFN-; TXB2 /4; Thromboxane B2/4; NO: Nitric 
Oxide; LTB4: Leukotriene B4; CCL2: Monocyte Chemotactic Protein-1; COX-2: Cyclooxygenase-2; 
PGE2/D2: Prostaglandin E2/D2; CysLTs: Cysteinyl Leukotriene Receptors. 
COX-2 (1-4), LTB (1), 
PGD (1), PGE (1-4), 
TXB (1) 
Whole venom BALB/c 
Pro-inflammatory 
cytokines: IL-6 (1-6), 
IFN- (1-12), TNF- (1-
Anti-inflammatory 
cytokines: IL-10 (1-18) 
Other: NO (1-24) 
Leucocyte infiltration 
(polymorphonuclear 
cells), skeletal muscle 
disruption, oedema, 
erythema, 
haemorrhage and 
local tissue necrosis 
(Barros et al. 
1998) 
P-I metalloprotease, 
C57BL/6 
Pro-inflammatory 
cytokines: IL-1 (4, P-I 
metalloprotease only), 
IL-6 (1-2, PLA; 2, P-I 
metalloprotease)  
Anti-inflammatory 
cytokines: IL-10 (1, 
PLA; 1-2, P-I 
metalloprotease 
Eicosanoid pathway: 
CysLTs (1-2, PLA 
only), LTB (4, PLA 
only), PGE (4, both 
toxins) 
Leucocyte infiltration 
(neutrophils, 
mononuclear cells) 
(Menaldo et al. 
2017) 
Whole venom C57BL/7 
Pro-inflammatory 
cytokines: IL-1 (4.5), 
IL-6 (4.5) 
Anti-inflammatory 
cytokines: IL-10 (4.5) 
Chemokines: CCL-2 
(4.5) 
Eicosanoid pathway: 
LTB (4.5), COX-2 (4.5), 
Leucocyte infiltration 
(mononuclear and 
polymorphonuclear 
leucocytes) 
(Moreira et al. 
2016) 
Bothrops 
jararaca 
Whole venom BALB/c mice 
Pro-inflammatory 
cytokines:  IL-1 (4-24), 
IL-6 (4-18), TNF- (2-
18), IFN- (2-24) 
Anti-inflammatory 
cytokines: IL-10 (4-24 
hours) 
Not reported 
(Petricevich et 
al. 2000) 
Bothrops 
jararacaussu 
Whole venom Swiss mice 
Pro-inflammatory 
cytokines: IL-1 (4.5), 
TNF- (4.5) 
Eicosanoid pathway: 
COX-2 (4.5) 
Leucocyte infiltration 
(neutrophils), 
oedema, 
haemorrhage, and 
necrosis 
(Wanderley et 
al. 2014) 
Supplementary Figure S 4.1: Examples of platelet aggregation (x 100 objective) 
were observed in blood film of envenomed mice. Arrow indicated the platelet 
aggregation colonies compared to normal blood film.  
Chapter 5 
Title: Comparative value of different in vitro assays to predict the in vivo preclinical 
efficacy of new experimental antivenoms designed to improve treatment of envenoming 
by the most medically-important African snakes 
Authors: Jaffer Alsolaiss1, Juan Calvate 2, Jose M. Gutierrez 3, Nicholas R Casewell1, Robert A 
Harrison1 
Affiliations: 
1Centre for Snakebite Research and Interventions, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, 
Liverpool, UK. 
2Laboratorio de Venomica Estructural y Funcional, Instituto de Biomedicina de Valencia, 
CSIC, Valencia, Spain 
3Instituto Clodomiro Picado, Facultad de Microbiologa, Universidad de Costa Rica, San Jos 
11501-2060, Costa Rica 
5.1 Introduction 
Snakebite is one of the worlds most under-researched, high-mortality, high-morbidity 
neglected tropical diseases (NTD). Global estimates suggest that as many as 2.7 million 
people are envenomed annually, resulting in around 81,000, or perhaps as many as 138,000, 
(WHO, 2019) deaths worldwide. The tropics and sub-tropics of South/Southeast Asia, Latin 
America and sub-Saharan Africa are the areas with the highest frequency of snakebite; here 
incidence rates can be as high as 11-13 per 100,000 people (Chippaux 2011; Warrell 2010b). 
In sub-Saharan Africa, perhaps the most neglected region in terms of tackling snakebite, the 
annual incidence is thought to be more than 314,000 cases per annum, of which 7,300 are 
thought to be lethal and 6,000 result in amputation (Chippaux 2011). Moreover, snakebite-
associated Disability Adjusted Life Years (DALYs) calculated for 16 West African countries 
have been estimated to be approximately 320,000 (Chippaux 2011; Habib et al. 2015). 
Hence, in addition to being a major cause of mortality, snakebite envenoming can rapidly 
and drastically reduce the quality of life of the envenomed victim, placing substantial 
economic, physically-debilitating and/or psychological burdens on both them and their wider 
family, thus contributing to and exacerbating the poverty of people in rural areas (Harrison 
& Gutirrez 2016). Furthermore, it is often the most impoverished people, particularly those 
in the economically important age bracket of 10-30 years old, who are the most likely to die 
or suffer life-changing injuries as a result of snakebite envenomation.  The burdens of 
snakebite envenoming are therefore substantially higher (0.35 million DALYs) than many 
other neglected tropical diseases (e.g., leishmaniasis, onchocerciasis, trypanosomiasis and 
schistosomiasis) (Habib et al. 2015). 
Antivenom is the first-choice treatment of snakebite envenoming and is included in the 
World Health Organizations (WHO) List of Essential Medicines, meaning that antivenoms 
should be readily available in primary healthcare centres in areas with high snakebite 
prevalence (WHO 2019). Antivenoms are among the least affordable of tropical disease 
medications, with treatment costing as much as US$400-700 (Harrison & Gutirrez 2016; 
Harrison et al. 2009). There is therefore an urgent need for the development of antivenoms 
that combine safety and effectiveness with affordability if the vulnerable people of the 
tropics who suffer the greatest risk of snakebite are to be treated in sufficient numbers. 
Polyspecific antivenoms contain antibodies generated by immunising donor animals (horses 
or sheep) with a mixture of venoms from several snake species. Intravenously administered 
antivenom antibodies bind to and neutralise venom components. Laboratory assessment of 
the immune response of the venom-immunised animals is essential to identify poor 
responders and determining the optimal time to harvest antibodies (Gutirrez et al. 2017c).  
A variety of in vitro immunological assays can be used to quantify antibody-venom binding 
and the strength or specificity of that binding (e.g. end-point ELISA, relative avidity ELISA, 
immunoblotting, small scale affinity purification (Casewell et al. 2010) and antivenomics 
(Calvete et al. 2016). WHO and pharmacopoeia guidelines (WHO 2010) recommend that in 
vivo preclinical tests be undertaken to ensure that immune-binding of antivenom 
immunoglobulins translates into venom-neutralising efficacy. 
The gold standard method for validating the preclinical efficiency of antivenom remains the 
murine effective dose 50 (ED50) assay (Warrell et al. 2013). This method challenges 
experimental animals (CD1 mice) with antivenom premixed with lethal doses of venom for 
extended periods of time (7-24 hrs) (e.g. (Bolton 2017; Casewell et al. 2010; Cook et al. 2010). 
The high costs of these in vivo assays to experimental mice necessitates greater 
implementation of the 3Rs principles (Replacement, Reduction, Refinement) (Bolton 2017; 
Gutirrez et al. 2017a; Gutirrez et al. 2017b). There is a compelling need for research 
identifying alternative in vitro tests to assess antivenom efficacy of antivenoms. This aim is 
exceedingly difficult to attain, however, since venom is a complex mixture of bioactive agents 
which act on multiple different physiological targets both locally and systemically (Gutirrez 
et al. 2017b; Warrell 2010a; Warrell et al. 2013). 
 In this study, we undertake a comparative assessment of a variety of immunological in vitro 
assays to determine which best predicts efficacy outcomes of in vivo preclinical testing of 
antivenom. This study was part of a major CSRI research project to identify the most potent 
mixture of elapid venoms to generate antivenom with greatest efficacy against envenoming 
by neurotoxic snakes of sub-Saharan Africa.  
The first experiment immunised groups of sheep (2 sheep/group) with a variety of venoms 
and adjuvants (see Table 5.1) to identify the optimal combination of venoms and adjuvants.  
Three experimental antivenoms (IgGs) from sheep immunised with different combinations 
of venoms from the neurotoxic N. melanoleuca, N. nivea and Dendroaspis polylepis snake 
venoms and Freunds and glycan adjuvants. As a control equivalent to the equine EchiTAb-
PLUS-ICP (mentioned previously in this thesis), we also immunised sheep with venoms from 
the haemotoxic/cytotoxic E. ocellatus, B. arietans and N. nigricollis snakes. Based upon highly 
encouraging serology results and experimental costs, the PI terminated the experiment at 6 
months. In a dramatic contrast to the serology results, the preclinical, in vivo venom-
neutralising efficacy results identified that none of the sheep IgGs were effective. This 
necessitated a repeat experiment, with a slightly revised immunisation protocol (Table 5.1), 
for a longer duration. I used the 12 months samples for research in this chapter.  Sera from 
these groups of sheep were tested using a panel of in vitro immunological approaches to 
investigate antibody-venom protein interactions, including (i) end-point ELISA to quantify 
antibody-venom binding, (ii) avidity ELISA to quantify the strength of these binding 
interactions, (iii) immunoblotting to visualise the cross-reactivity of antibodies to venom 
proteins and (iv) second generation antivenomics to determine the components of snake 
venom that are, or are not, effectively captured by antivenoms. Finally, we compared the 
results of these experiments with gold-standard preclinical assessments of venom 
neutralisation, the murine in vivo ED50 assay, to determine whether this ethically challenging 
protocol can be replaced by in vitro alternatives. 
5.2 Material and methods 
5.2.1 Snakes and venom 
The venom samples used in this study were collected from snakes maintained in the Centre 
for Snakebite Research and Interventions (CSRI) herpetarium at the Liverpool School of 
Tropical Medicine. The snakes are all medically-important species from sub-Saharan Africa; 
the vipers E. ocellatus (Nigeria) and Bitis arietans (Nigeria), and the elapids Naja nigricollis 
(Nigeria), N. melanoleuca (Cameron), N. nivea (South Africa) and Dendroaspis polylepis 
(Tanzania). Venom samples were collected, lyophilised and stored at 4 C prior to use. 
* Note: N. melanoleuca snake has been split up recently into four species by (Wster et al. 
2018). The venom used in this study is now from Naja subfulva.  
5.2.2 Ovine immunisation 
We investigated sera from the two immunisation experiments. In the first experiment, in 
order to generate the experimental antivenoms, we immunised (A) three groups of sheep 
(n=2) for six months with different immunising mixtures of venom and adjuvants. 
 (B) four groups of sheep (n=2) immunised for 12 months with a further set of different 
mixtures of venoms and adjuvants (Table 5.1). In part, this experimental design was applied 
to take account of the variable immunogenicity of distinct venom toxin families (e.g. high 
molecular weight snake venom metalloproteinases that are often abundant in viper venoms 
vs low molecular weight three-finger toxins that typically dominate elapid venoms). One of 
the generated antivenoms was defined as an anti-haemotoxic/necrotic antivenom and was 
produced using venoms (from E. ocellatus, B. arietans, N. nigricollis) that cause 
haemorrhagic, coagulopathic and/or necrotic pathologies in envenomed victims in sub-
Saharan Africa. The remaining three antivenoms were generated against snakes responsible 
for potent neurotoxicity (D. polylepis, N. melanoleuca and N. nivea). One was made using D. 
polylepis and N. melanoleuca venom, while the remaining three antivenoms used D. polylepis 
and N. nivea venom but were mixed with different adjuvants for immunisation (Table 5.1). 
Sheep were sequentially immunised with 125 g, 250 g and 750 g venom for the first 
three-month immunisations and 1 mg venom for all subsequent monthly immunisations 
(until 20 weeks). Each immunisation contained equal ratios of those venoms used for each 
group, as defined in Table 5.1 (1:1:1 or 1:1). Equal quantities of venom and Freunds 
Complete Adjuvant (for primary immunisations) or Freunds Incomplete Adjuvant (for all 
subsequent boosting immunisations) were used to prepare the venom immunogens. 
However, for one of the immunised animals (group C) we emulsified venom with glucan 
particles and for another (group D) the immunising venoms were mixed with glucan particles 
and Freunds Complete/Incomplete Adjuvant (as above Complete for initial, Incomplete for 
boosters). To induce rapid seroconversion, venom immunisations were administered at the 
following sites: 0.05 ml/site into five sites for the first and second immunisations; 0.05 
ml/site into ten sites for the third immunisation, and 0.05 ml/site into twenty sites for the all 
remaining immunisations. In all cases, the sites of immunisation were close to major draining 
lymph nodes in the neck, chest and groin. Blood samples were taken every 30 days to 
monitor seroconversion. Once antibody titres had reached a plateau (determined by end-
point titration ELISA, see details below), one litre of blood was collected, allowed to clot at 
room temperature (RT), separated via centrifugation, and the sera stored at -20 C. 
Sheep 
groups  
Source venom Origin Adjuvant (s)  Experimental  
antivenom 
Primary Secondary Duration of 
immunisation  
Group A  Dendroaspis polylepis 
(Dpol) 
Naja melanoleuca 
(Nmel) 
Tanzania 
Cameroon 
Freunds 
Complete and 
Freunds 
Incomplete 
Freunds 
Incomplete 
Anti-NmelDpol 6 months 
Group B Dendroaspis polylepis 
(Dpol) 
Naja nivea (Nniv) 
Tanzania 
South Africa 
Freunds 
Complete and 
Freunds 
Incomplete 
Freunds 
Incomplete 
Anti-NnivDpol.1 6 months 
Group C Dendroaspis polylepis 
(Dpol) 
Naja nivea (Nniv) 
Tanzania 
South Africa 
glucan/venom 
particles 
anti-NnivDpol.2 6 months 
Group D Dendroaspis polylepis 
(Dpol) 
Naja nivea (Nniv) 
Tanzania 
South Africa 
glucan/venom 
particles & 
Freunds 
Complete and 
Freunds 
Incomplete 
Freunds 
Incomplete 
anti-NnivDpol.3 6 months 
Group E Echis ocellatus (Eoc) 
Bitis arietans (Bar) 
Naja nigricollis (Nnig) 
Nigeria 
Nigeria 
Nigeria 
Freunds 
Complete and 
Freunds 
Incomplete 
Freunds 
Incomplete 
Anti-EocBarNnig 6 months 
Group F Dendroaspis polylepis 
(Dpol) 
Naja melanoleuca 
(Nmel) 
Tanzania 
Cameroon 
Freunds 
Complete and 
Freunds 
Incomplete 
Freunds 
Incomplete 
Anti-NmelDpol 12 months 
Group G Dendroaspis polylepis 
(Dpol) 
Naja nivea (Nniv) 
Tanzania 
South Africa 
Freunds 
Complete and 
Freunds 
Incomplete 
Freunds 
Incomplete 
Anti-NnivDpol 12 months 
Group H Dendroaspis polylepis 
(Dpol) 
Naja melanoleuca 
(Nmel) 
Naja nivea (Nniv) 
Tanzania 
Cameroon 
South Africa 
Freunds 
Complete and 
Freunds 
Incomplete 
Freunds 
Incomplete 
Anti-
NmelNnivDpol 
12 months 
Group I Echis ocellatus (Eoc) 
Bitis arietans (Bar) 
Naja nigricollis (Nnig) 
Nigeria 
Nigeria 
Nigeria 
Freunds 
Complete and 
Freunds 
Incomplete 
Freunds 
Incomplete 
Anti-EocBarNnig 12 months 
Table 5.1: Details of the venoms and adjuvants used for the generation of the 
experimental antivenoms after six months and twelve months by ovine immunisation; 
5.2.3 Caprylic acid purification of IgG immunoglobulins 
Prior to the purification of IgG antibodies, ovine sera were diluted (1:1) with 0.90% saline. 
We then used caprylic acid (Sigma, UK), at a final concentration of 6%, to precipitate non-IgG 
proteins, facilitated by stirring vigorously for 60 minutes (Rojas et al., 1994). The mixture was 
centrifuged at 13,000 RPM for 60 min at 4 C, and culture medium containing the 
immunoglobulin dialysed to remove residual acid (Snakeskin Dialysis Tubing, ThermoFisher 
Scientific) and three changes of sodium citrate buffer saline (SCS) (pH 6.0) at RT and one at 4 
C overnight. The resulting IgG preparations were lyophilised, reformulated to 50 mg/ml in 
PBS (pH 7.4), before storage at -20 C. As a comparator and positive control for our newly-
generated antivenoms, we used the SAIMR Polyvalent snake antivenom (batch number 
X02646; Exp 2012; South African Vaccine Producers, South Africa), which is generated by 
immunising horses with venoms from snakes of the genera Bitis, Dendroaspis and Naja ( B. 
arietans, B. gabonica, D. polylepis, D. jamesoni, D. angusticeps, N. nivea, N. melanoleuca, N. 
annulifera, N. mossambica, and Hemachatus haemachatus). We also standardised this 
antivenom to the same concentration (50 mg/ml) for use in the immunological assays 
described below. 
5.2.4 In vitro immunological assays 
5.2.4.1 Time course ELISA of sheep sera and End-point ELISA of sheep IgGs.  
The immune response of sera (1:5000 dilution) from each sheep was assessed by ELISA 
throughout the experiment. The purified IgG of each sheep at the 6- and 12-month time 
points was assessed by end-point titration ELISA. 
Briefly, ninety-six well ELISA plates (ThermoFisher Scientific) were coated with 100 ng of each 
venom (1 mg/ml) in coating buffer (100 mM Bicarbonate/ carbonate buffer, pH 9.6) and 
incubated at 4 C overnight to allow the venom to bind to the plate (Casewell et al. 2010). 
The plate was then washed with TBST (0.01 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5; 0.15 M NaCl; 0.1% Tween 20) 
three times with three changes (and a five-minute incubation period between each change) 
to remove the unbound protein. The plate was then blocked with 5% non-fat milk in TBST 
and incubated at RT for three hours. Subsequently, the blocking buffer was removed by again 
washing three times with TBST. The plates were next incubated (in triplicate) with each 
antivenom at an initial dilution of (1:5000) for time course ELISA (a single dilution) or 1500 
for experimental IgG, followed by 15-fold serial dilutions across the plate, and incubated at 
4 C overnight. The plates were then washed again and incubated for three hours at RT with 
horseradish peroxidase-conjugated donkey anti-sheep IgG (for all experimental antivenoms) 
and rabbit anti-horse IgG (for the SAIMR Polyvalent positive control antivenom) (Sigma, UK) 
at a dilution of 11000. The results were visualised by adding the substrate (0.2% 2,2/-azino-
bis (2-ethylbenzthiazoline-6-sulphonic acid) to a citrate buffer (0.5 M, pH 4.0 containing 
0.015% hydrogen peroxide (Sigma, UK)) and measured at an optical density (OD) of 405 nm, 
15 minutes after the addition of the substrate. 
5.2.4.2 Relative avidity ELISA 
Relative avidity ELISAs were performed as per the end-point ELISA assays protocols described 
above (Casewell et al. 2010), but with the addition of ammonium thiocyanate (NH4SCN) after 
the primary antibodies were washed from the plates. A range of concentrations (0-8 M) of 
NH4SCN were added to the plates in triplicate for 15 minutes at RT. The plates were then 
washed with TBST and the remainder of the protocol undertaken (addition of secondary 
antibodies, wash and visualisation). As with the end-point ELISA, the plates were measured 
at an OD of 405 nm 15 minutes after the addition of the substrate.    
5.2.4.3 Immunoblotting 
For SDS-PAGE, we used 10 g (1 mg/ml) of each reconstituted snake venom and incubated 
them at a 1:1 ratio with a reducing protein loading buffer (2xPLOB containing 2, 
mercaptoethanol) at 100 C for 12 minutes in order to denature venom proteins.  We then 
ran the samples, alongside 5 l of protein marker (Promega), on 15% SDS-PAGE gels (hand 
cast gels) prepared according to the manufacturers instructions) at 200 volts for 55 minutes, 
using a Bio-Rad mini-protean electrophoresis system. The resulting resolved venom proteins 
were then either stained overnight in Coomassie blue staining (R-250) or transferred to 0.2 
m nitrocellulose membranes using a mini turbo Bio-Rad transfer system as per the 
manufacturers instructions. The resulting immunoblots were blocked overnight with 5% 
non-fat milk in TBST at 4 C, and then washed three times every five minutes with TBST. 
Nitrocellulose membranes were then incubated at RT for three hours with 30 ml of primary 
antibody (antivenoms) diluted to 1:5,000 in 5% non-fat milk in TBST. The immunoblots were 
then washed six times in TBST (with a five minute incubation period between each wash), 
and incubated with 30 ml of horseradish peroxidase-conjugated donkey anti-sheep IgG (for 
all experimental antivenoms) and rabbit anti-horse IgG (for the SAIMR polyvalent positive 
control antivenom) (both Sigma, UK) diluted to 1: 2,000 in PBS for three hours at RT. The 
immunoblots were then washed again (as above) before being developed by DAB substrate 
(50 mg 3,3- 222 diaminobenzidine, 100 ml PBS and 0.024% hydrogen peroxide; Sigma) by 
placing the membrane into the substrate for 30 seconds.   
5.2.4.4 Antivenomics 
A second generation antivenomics approach (Pla, Gutirrez & Calvete 2012) was applied in 
our collaborator Prof Juan Calvetes laboratory in Valencia in order to examine the 
immunoreactivity of the ovine IgGs contained in our experimental antivenoms against each 
of the venoms used for immunisation (Table 5.1). Antivenom IgG affinity columns were 
prepared in batches of 3 ml. To this end, CNBr-activated Sepharose 4B (Ge Healthcare) matrix 
was packed in ABT columns and washed with 10x matrix volume of cold 1 mM HCl, followed 
by 2x matrix volume of 0.2 M NaHCO3, 0.5 M NaCl, pH 8.3 (coupling buffer) to adjust the pH 
to 7.0-8.0. Purified ovine antivenom IgGs were dialysed against MilliQ water, lyophilised, 
and reconstituted in coupling buffer. The concentrations of the stock solutions were 
determined spectrophotometrically using an extinction coefficient of 1.36 for a 1 mg/mL 
concentration of IgG at 280 nm using a 1 cm light path length cuvette. One hundred mg of 
each experimental antivenom IgG was dissolved in 2x matrix volume of coupling buffer and 
incubated for four hours at RT. The coupling yields, which were estimated by measuring A280 
before and after coupling of the antivenoms, were 31.3 (Anti-NmelDpol), 32.6 (Anti-
NnivDpol), and 32.2 (Anti-EocBarNnig) mg/ml. After coupling, any remaining active groups 
were blocked with 6 ml of 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, at RT for four hours. The affinity columns 
were then alternately washed with three matrix volumes of 0.1 M sodium acetate containing 
0.5 M NaCl, pH 4.0-5.0, and three matrix volumes of 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5. This procedure 
was repeated six times.  
The affinity columns were next equilibrated with 5 x matrix volumes of 20 mM phosphate 
buffer, 135 mM NaCl, pH 7.4 (PBS). For the immunoaffinity assays, individual columns 
containing 9 mg of antivenom IgG coupled to 300 l matrix were incubated with 200 g 
venom dissolved in  matrix volume of PBS and incubated for one hour at 25 C using an 
orbital shaker. Non-retained fractions were collected with 5 x matrix volume of PBS, and the 
immunocaptured proteins were eluted with 5 x matrix volume of elution buffer (0.1 M 
glycine-HCl, pH 2.0) and neutralised with 1 M Tris-HCl, pH 9.0. The non-binding and the 
immunocaptured venom fractions were dried up to 40 l. As specificity controls, 300 l of 
CNBr-activated Sepharose 4B matrix, mock or with 9 mg of immobilised control (nave) 
sheep/horse IgGs, were incubated with each one of the venoms and developed in parallel to 
the immunoaffinity assays.  
Unbound and bound (immunoretained) fractions were fractionated by reverse-phase HPLC 
on a Discovery BIO Wide Pore C18 (15 cm x 2.1 mm, 3 m particle size, 300  pore size) 
column using an Agilent LC 1100 High Pressure Gradient System equipped with a DAD 
detector. The column was run at a flow rate of 0.4 ml/min and proteins eluted with a linear 
gradient of 0.1% TFA in MilliQ water (solution A) and 0.1% TFA in acetonitrile (solution B), 
isocratically (5% B for 1 min), followed by 5-25% B for 5 min, 25-45% B for 35 min, and 45-
70% B for 5 min. Protein was detected at 215 nm with a reference wavelength of 400 nm. 
Proteins were identified by running samples of whole venoms under identical 
chromatographic conditions that have been previously characterised by venomic analysis 
(Calvete, 2014). The percentage of non-immunocaptured toxin i (% NRtoxini) was 
calculated as the ratio between the chromatographic areas of the same peak recovered in 
the non-retained fraction (NRtoxini) and in the injected crude reference venom (Vtoxini), 
using the equation %NRtoxini = (NRtoxini/Vtoxini) x 100. 
5.2.5 In vivo neutralisation studies 
The in vivo animal experiments were performed in our collaborator Prof Jose-Maria 
Gutierrezs laboratory in Costa Rica using CD-1 male mice (18-20 g body weight). 
Experimental protocols were approved by the Committee for the Use and Care of 
Experimental Animals (CICUA) of the University of Costa Rica (CICUA-27-14) as a 
collaboration between Liverpool school of Tropical Medicine and The University of Costa 
Rica. The toxicity of venoms was first assessed using the Median Lethal Dose 50 (LD50) assay 
(Theakston & Reid 1983). Various amounts of each venom, dissolved in 200 L of 0.12 M 
NaCl, 0.04 M phosphates, pH 7.2 (PBS), were injected by the intravenous (i.v.) route (caudal 
vein) to groups of five mice. Deaths occurring during 24 h were recorded and the LD50 was 
calculated by Probit analysis (Finney 1952).  
For neutralisation experiments, we initially screened the various antivenoms using a single 
predefined venom/antivenom ratio, which corresponded to 0.2 mg venom/ml antivenom for 
the neurotoxic venoms (N. nivea, N. melanoleuca and D. polylepis) and antivenoms (Anti-
NmelDpol, Anti-NnivDpol.1, Anti-NnivDpol.2 and Anti-NnivDpol.3), and 0.5 mg venom/mL 
antivenom for the haemorrhagic/cytotoxic venoms (E. ocellatus, B. arietans and N. 
nigricollis) and corresponding antivenom (Anti-EocBarNnig). Throughout this initial screen, 
we used a challenge dose that corresponded to 3 x the LD50 dose. The resulting mixtures of 
venom and antivenom were prepared in 200 L doses of PBS and incubated at 37 C for 30 
min before i.v. injection into the caudal vein of groups of four mice. Deaths that occurred 
during 24 h were recorded. Control groups included mice receiving venom incubated with 
PBS instead of antivenom. In the case of the neurotoxic venoms and antivenoms, an 
additional set of experiments was performed using a challenge dose of twice the LD50 dose, 
under otherwise identical conditions. When neutralisation was observed in these initial 
screening assays, the Median Effective Dose (ED50) of the antivenoms was determined by 
preparing mixtures of a fixed amount of venom with variable volumes of antivenom, using 
PBS to attain a final volume of the mixture (200 l). Resulting mixtures were incubated and 
injected i.v. as described above, and the ED50 calculated based on survival after 24 h using 
Probit analysis (Finney 1952).  
5.3 Results 
5.3.1 Time course ELISA of sheep sera 
This assay was undertaken to compare the ability of the different venom-immunisation 
protocols to initiate and sustain seroconversion.  The sheep in all the groups after 12 months 
responded to venom immunisation with a high IgG titre. All the sera samples showed a rapid 
response to the venom immunisation. We ran the sera with a dilution of 1:5000 for pre 
samples and sera collected at every second immunisation. The ELISA (Figure 5.1) showed a 
high titre response from the second immunisation (six weeks after the first immunisation) 
and continue to reach a plateau.  Three venoms (N. melanoleuca, N. nigricollis and B. 
arietans) showed an unexplained drop in ELISA titre at the tenth immunisation but all 
showed a rapid recovery at the twelve immunisations. There was clear evidence of cross 
reactivities of the sera tested against homologues and heterologous venoms with a high titre. 
There were no differences between any of the animals in response to immunisation (based 
on results of in vitro immunological assays). 
Figure 5.1; Immune reactivity of sheep sera post 12 months immunisation to snake venoms. Time course 
ELISA was employed for the sera (from each sheep in the group) collected for every second immunisation. 
(A) Dendroaspis polylepis (Dpol), (B) Naja melanoleuca (Nmel), (C) Naja nivea (Nniv), (D) Echis ocellatus 
(Eoc), (E) Bitis arietans (Bar), (F) Naja nigricollis (Nnig). Each venom was tested against all sera collected 
from immunised animals. Details of the immunisation protocols are in Table 5.1.   
5.3.2 IgG titres determined by end-point ELISA 
Following the standardisation of each experimental antivenom (anti-neurotoxic) and (anti- 
haemorrhagic, coagulopathic and/or necrotic) to 50 mg/ml, we quantified venom protein-
antibody binding levels for each antivenom via end-point ELISA. Our protocols compared the 
immune response of the sheep six months after the first immunisation and twelve months 
post immunisation with those obtained with the following controls: commercial antivenom 
(SAIMR polyvalent), normal sheep IgG (sourced from non-immunised animals), and PBS. The 
titre plateau of the twelve-month IgGs was greatly extended in comparison with the six-
months IGgs. Although the resulting IgG titres exhibited considerable variation, we observed 
the greatest binding levels between those venoms used as immunogens, as anticipated 
(Figure 5.2 and 5.3). 
Six months after the immunisation, both experimental anti-neurotoxic antivenoms [Anti-
NmelDpol (group A) and Anti-NnivDpol (group B)] exhibited the greatest binding against the 
homologous neurotoxic venoms from D. polylepis, N. melanoleuca and N. nivea, although 
cross reactivity against the heterologous elapid venom of N. nigricollis was also observed. 
Significantly, the venom of E. ocellatus, B. arietans and N. nigricollis was potently recognised 
by the anti-EocBarNnig (group E) IgG targeting haemorrhagic and/ or coagulopathic venom 
(Figure 5.2), Thus, the efficiency of anti-venom IgG titres was the same, or even greater, than 
the clinically effective antivenom employed in sub-Saharan Africa (SAIMR polyvalent). 
Although the resulting IgG titres exhibited considerable variation, we observed the greatest 
binding levels between those venoms used as immunogens, as anticipated (Figure 5.2). For 
example, the experimental antivenoms Anti-NnivDpol.3 (group D) exhibited greatest binding 
against the homologous venoms from D. polylepis, N. melanoleuca and N. nivea, although 
cross reactivity against the heterologous elapid venom of N. nigricollis was also observed. 
However, binding levels obtained with anti-NnivDpol.2 (group C) were low, and the IgG titre 
declined rapidly even against the venoms used for immunisation. These findings suggested 
that the sheep immune response directed against these venom proteins was not effectively 
promoted by the glucan particles used as an adjuvant, or that an immunisation course longer 
than 20 weeks is required to stimulate high titres of antibodies.  
With twelve-months immunisation (the results illustrated in Figure 5.3) the responses 
continued and were cross-reactive with a higher titre, recording outcomes that were even 
higher than the SAIMR polyvalent antivenom (positive control). The new group of sheep 
immunised with a mixture of neurotoxic purified only from twelve months Anti-NmelNivDop 
(group H) show a good response against N. melanoleuca venoms, similar to Anti-NmelDopl 
(group F) and Anti-NnivDopl.1 (group G) but with a slightly lower titre against D.  polylepis 
and N. nivea. Notably, the titre of IgG Anti-EocBarNning (group I) increased rapidly against 
homologous venoms with no remarkable change in respect to heterologous venoms. 
Interestingly, all four groups immunised for twelve months showed a higher seroconversion 
in comparison with similar groups that had been immunised with the same immunogens but 
for a shorter duration (Figure 5.1). These also showed a higher titre and responses than 
SAIMR polyvalent. 
Figure 5.2: ELISA End-Point Titration (EPT): Titration curves for poly-specific antibodies against antigen of IgGs 
purified from immunisation bleeds at six months. Experimental antivenoms (IgGs) (Anti-NmelDpol (group A), 
Anti-NnivDpol.1 (group B), Anti-NnivDpol.2 (group C), Anti-NivDpol.3 (group D),and Anti-EocBarNnig (group E)), 
SAIMR polyvalent (positive control) and normal sheep IgG (negative control) were serially diluted by a factor of 
five and tested by ELISA (EPT) as described in the Experimental Section, against neurotoxic venoms (D. polylepis 
(A), N. melanoleuca(B) and N. nivea(C)) and hemotoxic / coagulopathic venoms (E. ocellatus (D), B. arietans (E), N. 
nigricollis (F)).  
Figure 5.3: ELISA End-Point Titration (EPT): Titration curves for poly-specific antibodies against antigen 
of IgGs purified from immunisation bleeds at twelve months. Experimental antivenoms (IgGs) (Anti-
NmelDpol (group F), Anti-NnivDpol.1 (group G), Anti-NmelNnivDpol (group H) and Anti-EocBarNnig (group 
I)), SAIMR poly (positive control) and normal sheep IgG (negative control) were serially diluted by a factor 
of five and tested by ELISA (EPT) as described in the Experimental Section, against neurotoxic venoms (D. 
polylepis (A), N. melanoleuca(B) and N. nivea(C)) and hemotoxic / coagulopathic venoms (E). ocellatus (D), 
B. arietans (E), N. nigricollis (F)).  
5.3.3 IgG avidity determined by chaotropic ELISA 
In view of the therapeutic intent of the experimental antivenoms, it is important to 
determine the binding strength (avidity) of the venom / antivenom interaction. The strength 
of binding between antivenom IgG and venom proteins can be determined by measuring IgG 
titres in the presence of a chaotropic agent that disrupts binding. Consequently, the various 
anti-neurotoxic (Anti-NmelDpol, Anti-NnivDpol) and anti-haemotoxic (Anti-EocBarNnig) 
standardised antivenoms (1:10,000 dilution of 50 mg/ml IgG) were subjected to chaotropic 
ELISA experiments with each of the venoms, in the presence of different concentrations of 
NH4SCN. The results of greatest immunological relevance were obtained based on 
comparison between the percentage reduction in OD values of the IgGs in the absence of 
NH4SCN and at 4 M NH4SCN (Figures 5.4 & 5.5). Four experimental antivenoms obtained from 
six months and twelve-months samples were compared with homologous and heterologous 
venoms. There was a clear improvement in the titration curve between the six months and 
twelve-months samples after the addition of higher concentrations of ammonium 
thiocyanate. The addition of 4 M ammonium thiocyanate led to a clear difference in terms 
of the binding between the venom and the IgG.  
Among all the six-months experimental antivenoms, the highest cross-snake species IgG-
venom binding avidity was demonstrated by the Anti-NmelDpol (group A), Anti-NnivDpol.1 
(group B), Anti-NnivDpol.3 (group D) and Anti EocBarNnig (group E) antivenoms (Figure 5.2). 
By contrast, the cross-species venom-binding avidity displayed by Anti-NnivDpol.2 (group C) 
was the lowest. Furthermore, compared to the IgG titre results, the chaotropic ELISA assay 
indicated that IgG binding avidity and efficiency were more closely associated. Notably, the 
IgG-binding avidity of various anti-neurotoxic antivenoms (Anti-NmelDpol, Anti-NnivDpol.1, 
Anti-NnivDpol.3), and that of the anti-haemotoxic antivenom (Anti-EocBarNnig), were higher 
than that of the SAIMR polyvalent control. 
There was a clear improvement in the IgG purified through prolonged immunisation (twelve 
months), and less reduction of IgG titre. Anti-NmelDpol (group F) and Anti-NnivDpol (group 
G) showed less reduction in IgG titre against homologous venoms and a significant protection 
against heterologous venom (E. ocellatus, N. nigricollis and B. arietans). Anti-NmelNnivDpol 
(group H), meanwhile, showed a strong binding against (D. polylepis, N. melanoleuca and N. 
nivea) and heterologous venom N. nigricollis, with a reduction in the IgG titre of less than 
10%. This IgG showed a lower binding strength against two viper venoms (E. ocellatus and B. 
arietans), however. The binding of anti-EocBarNnig (group I) against the three haemotoxic 
coagulopathic venoms (E. ocellatus, B. arietans and N. nigricollis) was improved with twelve 
months immunisation. The reduction in titre was less than 10 % with this group and less than 
20% against the neurotoxic venoms not included in the immunisation protocol.  
Figure 5.4: Chaotropic ELISA (Avidity): Titration curves for IgGs purified from immunisation bleeds at 
six months against homologous and heterologous venoms after addition of different concentrations 
(1,2,3,4,6 and 8 moles) of ammonium thiocyanate (NH4SCN). Experimental antivenoms (IgGs) of (Anti-
NmelDpol (group A), Anti-NnivDpol.1(group B), Anti-NnivDpol.2 (group C), Anti-NnivDpol.3 (group D), and 
Anti-EocBarNnig (group E)), SAIMR poly (as a positive control) and normal sheep IgG (as a negative 
control) were tested by ELISA assay as described in the Experimental Section, against neurotoxic venoms 
(D. polylepis, N. melanoleuca and N. nivea)and haemotoxic / coagulopathic venoms (E. ocellatus, B. 
arietans, N. nigricollis). 
Figure 5.5: Chaotropic ELISA (Avidity): Titration curves for IgGs purified from immunisation bleeds at and 
twelve months against homologous and heterologous venoms after addition of different concentrations 
(1,2,3,4,6 and 8 moles) of ammonium thiocyanate (NH4SCN) with different concentration (1,2,3,4,6 and 8 
moles). Experimental antivenoms (IgGs) of (Anti-NmelDpol (group F), Anti-NnivDpol.1( group G), Anti-
NmelNnivDpol (Group H) and Anti-EocBarNnig (group I)), SAIMR poly (as a positive control) and normal sheep 
IgG (as a negative control) were tested by ELISA assay as described in the Experimental Section, against 
neurotoxic venoms (D. polylepis, N. melanoleuca and N. nivea) and haemotoxic / coagulopathic venoms (E. 
ocellatus, B. arietans, N. nigricollis). 
Figure 5.6: Percentage reduction of IgG titre (twelve months immunisation) after addition of 4M 
ammonium thiocyanate. The experimental IgGs (A) Anti-NmelDpol, (B) Anti-NnivDpol.1, (C) Anti-
NelNnivDpol and (D) Anti-EocBarNnig were employed against immunised homologous and 
heterogenous venoms. IgGs purified from immunisation bleeds at six months and twelve months were 
diluted (1:10,000) and subjected to different concentrations of ammonium thiocyanate (0-8 M). 4 M of 
the chaotropic agent was used to calculate the percentage of reduction. 
5.3.4 IgG specificity revealed by Western blotting  
Analysis of the protein profiles of resuspended venoms using 15% SDS-PAGE revealed a clear 
variation in the venom protein profiles between elapid and viperid venoms. The elapid 
venoms (e.g. D. polylepis, N. melanoleuca, N. nivea and N. nigricollis) predominantly contain 
phospholipase A2 (PLA2), representative of the three finger toxins family (3FTx), in addition 
to lower amounts of proteins from other families. In contrast, venoms from Viperidae (E. 
ocellatus and B. arietans) are predominately composed of various proportions of PLA2, zinc-
dependent metalloproteinases (SVMP) and serine proteinases, as well as varying amounts of 
C-type lectin-like proteins, disintegrins and other types of proteins (Gutirrez et al. 2018). 
A panel of venoms were resolved by SDS-PAGE and then blotted and probed with the ovine 
IgGs (Our experimental antivenoms). Significant cross reactivities were observed between 
heterologous and homologous venoms and the experimental antivenoms. As can be 
observed (Figure 7), the ovine IgGs reacted with a large numbers of venom components (5-
200 KDa). Anti-NmelDpol (group A and group F) successfully recognised its homogenous 
venoms (D. polylepis and N. melanoleuca) as well as N. nivea and N. nigricollis. Prolonging 
the immunisation period did not appear to result in any significant changes in the 
recognition, with the exception of B. arietans venoms, where more proteins appeared in the 
Western blotting.  
Six months following the immunisation, the experimental antivenoms Anti-NmelDpol (group 
A), Anti-NnivDpol (group B) and Anti-EocBarNnig (group E) recognised well D. polylepis 
venom proteins. While, N. melanoleuca proteins were strongly recognised by all 
experimental antivenoms. The majority of our experimental antivenoms bound strongly to 
N. nivea venoms except Anti-EocBarNning (Group E). It is evident that the antivenom Anti-
EocBarNnig generated by immunisation of three venoms (E. ocellatus, N. nigricollis and B. 
arietans) strongly recognised proteins of E. ocellatus and B. arietans and, less strongly, 
proteins of N. nigricollis. Both experimental antivenoms, Anti-NnivDpol (group C) and Anti-
NiviDpol (group D) poorly recognised homologous and heterologous venoms.  
Anti-NnivDpol produced after prolonged immunisation for twelve months (group G), 
however, did exhibit an improvement, with high intensity and recognition of proteins 
encompassing most of the venom proteins from the elapids and Viperidae. Interestingly, 
however, the combination of the three elapids to generate Anti-NmelNinvDpol (group H) 
showed low binding in comparison with the other two IgG groups. It was noticeable also that 
Anti-EocBarNnig antivenom strongly reacted with components of homologous venom 
proteins that had both low and high molecular weight, with no significant changes apparent 
after prolonged immunisation. B. arietans showed a strong recognition and binding with 
Anti-EocBarNnig antivenom, to be even higher than SAIMR Polyvalent, which is included 
(Naja, Bitis and Dendroaspis) in the immunisation protocol of this commercial antivenom. In 
comparison, to SAIMR Polyvalent, our experimental antivenoms included in the 
immunisation protocol poly-specific antivenoms which are Naja, Bitis and Dendroaspis. Our 
experimental antivenom Anti-EocBarNing reacted strongly against Echis, Bitis, while, Anti-
NmelDpol (group F) and Anti-NnivDpol (group G) showed a high IgG-venom intensity against 
homogenous and heterologous venoms compared to SAIMR Polyvalent. No reactivities were 
observed with the normal sheep IgG.  
Figure 5.7: Western blotting analysis of neurotoxic venoms (D. polylepis, N. melanoleuca and N. nivea) and 
haemotoxic / coagulopathic venoms (E. ocellatus, B. arietans, N. nigricollis) against four antivenoms (IgGs) 
(Anti-NmelDpol, Anti-NnivDpol, Anti-NmelNnivDpol and Anti-EocBarNnig) and compared with SAIMR poly (as 
a positive control) and normal sheep IgG (as a negative control). The proteins contained in 10 g of the obtained 
venoms were separated on 15% acrylamide gels under reducing conditions, and the immunoreactivity of 
antivenoms was assessed as described in the Experimental Section. Figures (A) Coomassie Brilliant Blue staining 
of venom profiles: (B) purified IgGs from immunisation bleeds at six months (C) 12 months; (1) Anti-NmelDpol, 
(2) Anti-NivDpol, (3) Anti-NmelNinvDpol and (4) Anti-EocBarNnig. All IgGs against homologous and 
heterologous venoms, (D) immunoblots of (1) SAIMR Polyvalent (positive control and (2) normal sheep IgG.  
5.3.5 Antivenomics profiling of venom protein and antivenom antibody interactions 
The immunoreactivity of the experimental antivenoms in relation to the employed selection 
of neurotoxic and haemotoxic coagulopathic venoms was assessed through ELISA, avidity 
ELISA and western blot analysis. These assays were supplemented with second-generation 
antivenomics. Reverse-phase HPLC chromatograms of whole venom and immunoaffinity 
column eluates were quantitatively compared, being both qualitatively and quantitatively 
informative about the series of toxins carrying epitopes detected by antivenoms, as well as 
about toxins with suboptimal, incomplete or unsatisfactory immunoreactivity. The 
comparative antivenomics assessment was focused on determining how effective the four 
antivenoms of Anti-NmelDpol, Anti-Nnivdpol, Anti-NmelNinivDpol and Anti-EocBarNnig 
were in terms of immunocapturing separate toxins from three neurotoxic venoms and three 
haemotoxic coagulopathic venoms of sub-Saharan African snake species. Both homologous 
and heterologous venoms were employed in the assessment so as to comprehend the 
efficacy and development of antivenoms more clearly, and to understand better the binding 
between venom and antivenom. The working premise was that the ability of antivenom to 
counteract the effect of a venom reflected the level of toxin immunorecognition of that 
antivenom. Findings revealed that, apart from Anti-EocBarNning, which exhibited partial 
retention of most homologous venoms (E. ocellatus, B. arietans and N. nigricollis), All 
experimental antivenoms produced six months after immunisation displayed no 
immunorecognition with low affinity.  
Over a longer term of one-year of immunisation Immunoreactivity was enhanced, however. 
According to the antivenomics, one-year purification of IgGs led to better binding of 3FTx 
molecules (peaks 1-12). The Anti-NnivDpol IgGs exhibited partial binding of 3FTx molecules, 
with minimal or lack of recognition by P-III SVMP (peaks 14-15). Suboptimal immunocapture 
of the proteins from D. polylepis species was displayed by Anti-NmelDpol and Anti-
EocBarNnig. The main immunodominant proteins (3FTx, PLA2, 3FTx, CRISP and PII-SVMP) 
from the venom of N. nivea and N. nigricollis were revealed by the chromatographic profiles 
of entire components. The IgGs of every experimental antivenom demonstrated suboptimal 
retention or recognition of the N. nivea venom proteins 3FTx and PLA2, whilst they showed 
partial retention (80-98%) of P-III-SVMP and LAO molecules (peaks 11-13). An 
immunoaffinity binding yield of 3FTx (peaks 1-3, 9), CRISP (peak 10) and P-III SVMP (peaks 
11-13), however, was exhibited by Anti-NnivDpol. None of the antivenoms detected PLA2. 
Nevertheless, all three antivenoms targeting the neurotoxic venom of N. nigricollis (Anti-
NmelDpol, Anti-NnivDpol and Anti-NmelNnivDpol) partially detected 3FTx, CRIPS and SVMP 
molecules. Furthermore, most proteins had partial binding of Anti-EocBarNning. 
The maximum extent of antivenom binding to the PLA2, CTL and SVMP molecules from the 
venom of E. ocellatus was also investigated via antivenomics, with the non-specific 
antivenoms Anti-NmelDpol, Anti-NivDpol and Anti-NmelNnivDpol showing inadequate or 
lack of detection of the main venom proteins. By contrast, partial immunocapture of PLA2 
(peak 3) and CTL (peak 5), and strong binding of SVMP molecules were displayed by the 
specific antivenom Anti-EocBarNning. Disintegrins, SVSP and SVMPs were revealed through 
reverse-phase HPLC separation of the profiles of the proteins from B. arietans venom. 
According to the analysis of antivenom immunoreactivity in relation to this venom, none of 
the experimental antivenoms demonstrated efficient protein detection and 
immunoprecipitation. Anti-EocBarNning constituted an exception, however, showing strong 
binding and detection of the main proteins of B. arietans venom, namely, PLA2, SVSP and 
SVMP, providing evidence of its efficiency in counteracting the actions of highest toxicity. 
Figure 5.8: Comparison of the antivenomics analysis of the immunoreactivity of experimental antivenoms 
(purified IgGs from immunisation bleeds at six months and twelve months) towards neurotoxic venoms (A) 
D. polylepis, (B) N. melanoleuca, and (C) N. nivea) and haemotoxic coagulopathic/ necrotic venoms (D) E. 
ocelltus, (E) B.aritens and (F) N. nigricollis). The reverse phase separation of the whole venoms (A1, B1, C1, 
D1, E1 and F1) and the percentage of immunocaptured (retained) protein fractions are calculated in the table 
(A2, B2, C2, D2, E2 and F2). The details of these results are included in the supplementary section (Figures S 
5.1-S 5.6) 
5.3.6 The venom neutralising efficacy of experimental antivenoms 
In vivo neutralisation of venom 
We assessed whether the experimental antivenoms were able to prevent the lethal effects 
of the venom in the WHO-recommended mouse model. We compared the neuralisation 
activities of purified IgG from six months and twelve-months immunisations with homologue 
venoms.  
When challenged with a dose of 3 x LD50s of D. polylepis venom, the various experimental 
antivenoms generated from immunisation bleeds at six months using D. polylepis venom as 
an immunogen (Anti-NmelDpol, Anti-NnivDpolanti) were found to be completely ineffective 
at neutralising venom lethality at ratios of 0.2 mg venom per ml antivenom. Next, a venom 
challenge dose of only 2 x LD50s of D. polylepis was used. This venom dose resulted in 100% 
lethality in the control no antivenom group. When using this challenge dose of venom, the 
same antivenoms (Anti-NmelDpol, Anti-NnivDpol) were able to protect against the lethal 
effects of D. polylepis venom, with the exception of Anti-NnivDpol.2 (Table 5.3). In contrast, 
the same antivenoms failed to neutralise the lethality of N. melanoleuca venom at the lowest 
venom/antivenom ratio tested (0.2 mg venom per ml antivenom) when using challenge 
doses of venom of 3 or 2 x LD50s. We did not test the neutralising capability of the various 
anti-neurotoxic antivenoms against N. nivea venom, as lethality testing revealed that 
experimental animals did not succumb to the lethal effects of the venom alone at the highest 
dose tested (25 g venom/mouse) (Table 5.2). The neutralisation of the 
haemotoxic/cytotoxic venoms (Echis ocellatus, Bitis arietans and Naja nigricollis) by the Anti-
EocBarNnig (group E) antivenom was assessed by using a challenge dose of venom of 3 x 
LD50. The experimental antivenom was ineffective at neutralising the lethal activity of these 
three venoms when tested at ratios of 0.5 mg venom/ml antivenom. Considering commercial 
monovalent and polyvalent antivenoms typically neutralise more than 3 mg of E. ocellatus 
venom per ml antivenom (Calvete et al. 2018), lower venom/antivenom ratios were not 
tested, and the antivenom was considered ineffective for neutralising the lethal effects of 
these venoms. 
The IgGs from immunisation bleeds at twelve months, were assessed in the context of 
venoms which were neutralised at an ED50 value higher than 0.25 mg venom/ml antivenom. 
Three venom/antivenom ratios were assessed, i.e. 0.25 mg/ml, 0.5 mg/ml and 0.75 mg/ml 
for N. melanoleuca and D. polylepis, and 0.75 mg/ml, 1.00 mg/ml and 2.00 mg/ml for N. 
nivea, using the same challenge dose of 3 LD50s of venom and the same incubation and 
injection protocol. Anti-NmelDpol (group F), generated with immunisation against N. 
melanoleuca and D. polylepis) transpired to be ineffective at neutralising N. melanoleuca 
venom and D. polylepis venom, although it was effective (albeit with an ED50 higher than 0.75 
mg /ml) at neutralising N. nivea, which was not included in the immunisation. The antivenom 
(group G) generated by immunisation of N. nivea and D. polylepis (Anti-NnivDpol.1) was 
ineffective against these venoms. The mixture of three neurotoxic venoms to generate Anti-
NmelNnivDpol (group H) was effective at neutralising homologue venoms used for 
immunisation (N. melanoleuca, N. nivea and D. polylepis). Here, the ED50 for N. melanoleuca 
venom was 0.67 mg/ml (95% confidence limits: 0.50  0.80), for N. nivea it was > 2.00 mg 
venom/ml antivenom and for D. polylepis venom 0.75 mg/ml. The neutralisation ability of 
Anti-EocBarNning (group I) against E. ocellatus, B. arietans and N. nigricollis venoms, 
meanwhile, showed the highest neutralisation of these homologous venoms at a challenge 
dose of 3 LD50s (Table 5.3). 
Table 5.2. Estimation of LD50s of the venoms used in this study. 
Venom (s) LD50 (g/mouse) 
D. polylepis 6.2 (95 CI: 3.1  10.2) 
N. melanoleuca 5.6 (95% CI: 3.1  7.0) 
N. nivea > 25 (no mice died at the highest dose tested (25 g)  
E. ocellatus 17.85 (95% CI: 12.46  28.53). 
B. arietans 21.60 (95% CI: 15.96  31.60). 
N. nigricollis 27.81 (95% CI: 22.53  41.62). 
Table 5.3: Values for the Median Effective Dose (ED50) 
Venom Immunisation Anti-
NmelDpol 
Anti-NivDpol Anti-
NmelNnivDpol 
Anti-
EocBarNnig 
melanoleuca 
6 months  <0.25 <0.05 ND  
12 months  <0.25 <0.25 0.67(0.5-0.8) 
D. polylepis 6 months  0.34 (0.152-
0.485) 
0.673(0.416-
0.836) 
12 months  <0.25 0.39 (0.24-
0.48) 
>0.75 
N. nivea 6 months  ND 
12 months  2.0 mg >2.0 >2.0 
E. ocellatus 6 months   
12 months  1.2(0.75-1.7) 
B. arietans 6 months  <0.5 
12 months  4.4 (3.2-6.1) 
N. nigricollis 6 months  <0.5 
12 months  1.47 (0.16-2.1) 
*ED50 of Experimental antivenom [ mg venom/ ml antivenom (95 CI)]. 
*ND (Not determined). 
5.4 Discussion 
The most significant outcome of this study was that antivenom ELISA IgG titres and avidity 
results must never be used alone as a predictor of antivenom efficacy. This outcome is very 
important as other groups have published papers with titles such as Development of an 
ELISA assay to determine neutralising capacity of horse serum following immunisation with 
Daboia siamensis venom in Myanmar (Khaing et al. 2018). These assays are useful 
immunological tools, particularly when coupled with results of antivenom specificity (e.g. 
immunoblotting) for several purposes other than efficacy prediction. The paucity of effective 
and affordable antivenom in many areas has galvanised endeavours to develop antivenom 
with efficacy against multiple snakes  pan-specific antivenom. The consequent economies 
of scale improve commercial manufacturing incentives (Gutirrez et al. 2005; 
Ratanabanangkoon et al. 2016; Williams et al. 2011). Achieving this snakebite-therapy 
panacea has proved very problematic.  
Selection of immunogens and immunisation protocols  
Venoms are chosen as immunogens for antivenom manufacture on the basis of their medical 
significance (WHO 2016a). Venoms of different snake species do not have the same 
immunogenic profile. Indeed, venom protein composition and hence antigenicity can vary 
even within one snake species as a consequence of geographic and age distinctions (Alape-
Girn et al. 2008; Fry et al. 2003). The immunogenicity of venoms depends on the structural 
characteristics of every protein family, including molecular mass, tertiary and quaternary 
structures, glycosylation extent, and additional post-translational changes. Moreover, 
venom immunogenicity is also determined by the proportion of each protein in the venom. 
When antivenom is developed, immunoglobulins are usually derived from equine or ovine 
species, especially horses. Although it was previously thought that the safety of ovine 
antivenoms exceeded that of equine antivenoms (Landon & Smith 2003), the very limited 
clinical evidence does not support the belief that one type of antivenom has more side-
effects than the other (Abubakar et al. 2010). As a highly glycosylated immunoglobulin, 
however, equine IgG(T) is considered to have a greater probability of side-effects, 
particularly serum sickness, because its immunogenicity is higher compared to ovine IgG 
(Landon & Smith 2003; Sjostrom et al. 1994). Based on the evidence from earlier research, 
clinical observations and financial considerations, the antivenoms in this study were 
therefore developed from ovine sources. 
For the production of an antivenom efficient against neurotoxicity, this work employed the 
neurotoxic venoms of three clinically significant sub-Saharan African Elapidae (WHO 2016b), 
namely, Dendroapsis polylepis, Naja melanoleuca and Naja nivea, as immunogens. 
Meanwhile, for the production of antivenom efficient against haemotoxicity and base dermal 
necrosis, this work employed the haemotoxic venoms of Echis ocellatus, Bitis arietans and 
Naja nigricollis. In this study, it was noticed that creating a mixture of the venoms with the 
gold standard adjuvants, namely, Freunds Complete and Freunds Incomplete, resulted in a 
satisfactory IgG titre being derived from ovine immunisation. On the other hands, using a 
glucan particle did not show any improvements in the IgG titre after six months immunisation 
compared to the sheep immunised with the same venoms and different adjuvants. 
Furthermore, no risks were associated with employing multiple venoms in immunisation. 
Casewell et al. (2010) reported similar observations, indicating that IgG reached a plateau at 
16 weeks following ovine immunisation. Incontrovertible improvement and increased 
immunogenicity are yielded by immunisation procedures of long duration (6-12 months).  
Assessing the immune responses of the experimental antivenoms against homologous and 
heterologous venoms  
Envenomation constitutes an antigen challenge that triggers the adaptive immunity of 
vertebrates to counteract the effects of the venom by increasing the antibody levels. More 
specifically, the venom toxins can be counteracted by antibodies attaching to them and 
preventing the antigen from manifesting its toxicity, or by isolating the antigen in the 
circulatory system until the toxins are eradicated through lysosomal breakdown (Cheng et 
al. 2009). When it comes to counteracting the effects of venoms, an important property is 
antibody cross-reactivity. In relation to polyclonal antivenom, OLeary et al. (2007) explained 
cross-reactivity as the capability of whole antivenom to bind more than one antigen. This is 
a highly sought-after property and can be attained by employing venom from a range of 
different snake species during the immunisation stage of antivenom development.  
In vitro assays such as immunoblotting, immunodiffusion and ELISA can help to determine 
whether or not a venom and an antivenom have cross-binding. The relevance of such 
techniques stems from the fact that, if they determine cross-binding to be absent. If in vitro 
assays indicate the presence of cross-reactivity, however, it will not necessarily mean that 
cross-neutralisation has taken place, but only that the antivenom antibodies can detect and 
bind the toxins in the venom (Ledsgaard et al. 2018; Len et al. 2018). The reason why cross-
neutralisation is not always signalled by cross-reactivity (Kornalik & Taborska 1989; Ownby 
& Colberg 1990) is that the antibodies produced through immunisation depend on antigenic 
variations. For instance, in an investigation of the ability of Bothrops jararaca antivenom to 
counteract the effects of the venoms of nine Bothrops species, Ferreira et al. (1992) found 
that the actions induced by the PLA2 from the venom of B. alternatus or B. erythromelas were 
not counteracted by PLA2 from B. jararaca venom. The shortcomings of cross-neutralisation 
have been researched in the past and have been clearly highlighted for whole venoms of 
snakes from the families of Viperidae, Crotalidae and Elapidae (Arce et al. 2003; 
Chinonavanig et al. 1988; Kornalik & Taborska 1989).  
In the current study, the immunological assays that were carried out clearly pointed to robust 
binding and also suggested that the antivenoms displayed immunoreactivity against both 
homologous and heterologous venoms. This experiment clearly identified that glucan 
particles are not as effective adjuvants as the conventional Freunds adjuvants. According to 
the results obtained, a longer duration of immunisation clearly improved avidity and binding 
between the venom proteins and IgGs. In particular, cross-reactivity against the venom of 
the spitting N. nigricollis, which was not used in immunisation, was exhibited by three anti-
neurotoxic IgGs (Anti-NmelDpol, Anti-NivDpol.1 and Anti-NmelNnivDpol) derived from ovine 
immunisation with the venom of the non-spitting N. melanoleuca and N. nivea. It can thus 
be deduced that, owing to the similar proteomic profiles of the venoms of the above species, 
antivenoms can counteract the effects of the venoms of minor species in the genera, or 
species who bite less frequently compared to other species in the same taxonomic category 
(WHO 2016a).  
Moreover, in the initial six months, the venom of Elapidae such as D. polylepis exhibited a 
weaker response, although this became better after one year. One reason for this is that 
proteins like 3FTx and PLA2 with low molecular weight (6-9 kDa) dominate the composition 
of Elapidae venom, and they have low immunogenicity, which constitutes a significant issue 
for the production of antibodies (Len et al. 2011). On the other hand, strong antibodies 
were generated by the venom of Viperidae like E. ocellatus. The composition of the proteins 
in the venom of Echis species may explain this high immunogenicity. To give an example, the 
main proteins in the venom of vipers are SVMPs, which contribute significantly to making 
this venom toxic (Tasoulis & Isbister 2017). Compared to P-I SVMPs, P-III SVMPs with high 
molecular mass yield a higher antibody response, so the structural characteristics of SVMPs 
have a major impact on their immunogenicity (Gutirrez & Len 2009). Furthermore, P-III 
SVMPs undergo glycosylation, whereas P-I SVMPs do not (Fox & Serrano 2009).  
The findings of the immunological assays therefore showed that the antivenoms 
demonstrated immunogenicity and cross-reactivity against the venoms of a number of snake 
species. These findings were contradicted by the second-generation antivenomics, however. 
Relying on proteomics, the method of antivenomics helps to define the immunological 
profile and degree of cross-reactivity exhibited by antivenoms to venoms qualitatively and 
quantitatively in the context of in vivo and in vitro preclinical testing (Calvete et al. 2018; 
Gutirrez 2012). According to the antivenomics conducted in the present study, there was 
weak binding between the venoms of the species of Elapidae (N. melanoleuca, N. nivea and 
D. polylepis) and anti-neurotoxic antivenoms, whereas partial-to-good binding was exhibited 
by those antivenoms to the venom of the Viperidae species E. ocellatus. Increasing the 
duration of immunisation helped to enhance the antigenicity. Furthermore, in comparison 
to proteins with a high molecular weight, proteins with a low molecular weight displayed a 
lower immunogenicity. It is challenging to generate antibodies against such proteins because 
they are small in size and consequently make suboptimal antigens.   
Antivenomics confirmed the suboptimal binding and immunogenicity of proteins in the 
venom of the Elapidae Naja and Dendroaspis with low molecular weight. Moreover, possible 
reasons for cross-reactivity can also be derived from antivenomics; for instance, 
antivenomics can indicate whether two particular venoms contain the same subfamily of key 
toxins, therefore allowing an effective antivenom to be produced using only one of the two 
venoms (Gutirrez et al. 2014). The toxic elements present in the venom of mamba species 
(Dendroaspis) are called dendrotoxins and fasciculins (Harvey 2009; Heyborne & Mackessy 
2009) and they have low molecular mass of 6-9 kDa, which means that their immunogenicity 
is poor, posing an issue for antibody production (Len et al. 2011). SVMPs and Anti-
EocBarNnig, however, had good binding, according to the antivenomics conducted in this 
study. Compared to P-I SVMPs, P-III SVMPs with high molecular mass yielded a higher 
antibody response, so the structural characteristics of SVMPs have a major impact on their 
immunogenicity. Furthermore, the antigenic attributes of venom antigens depend to a 
significant extent on their molecular mass. For example, good immunogens include the 
proteins P-III SVMPs and LAO, which have a molecular mass higher than 70 kDa. On the other 
hand, apart from elements of Ophiophagus hannah venom, which has low molecular mass 
(~25 kDa) but high immunogenicity, the neurotoxins, PLA2, P-I SVMPs and disintegrins in the 
venom of Elapidae have low molecular mass (5-30 kDa) and therefore lower immunogenicity 
(Chotwiwatthanakun et al. 2001; Gutirrez et al. 2009; Ownby & Colberg 1990). 
 Preclinical evaluation of the efficacy of the experimental antivenoms by gold standard in 
vivo assays  
In vivo evaluation of cross-reactivity is based on the gold standard for definition of venom 
neutralisation, namely, evaluation of whether an antivenom is capable of counteracting the 
lethal effects of various venoms in mouse models (Ledsgaard et al. 2018). In vivo data should 
be used to reinforce in vitro cross-reactivity experiments, since precise empirical work of 
venom neutralisation can only be performed in vivo. Such empirical work is based on the 
gold standard of assessment of the ability of antivenom to counteract the toxic effects of 
venom. The procedure implemented to achieve this involves injection of mouse models with 
venom in various concentrations to calculate the median lethal dose (LD50), followed by 
determination of the amount of antivenom required to counteract the lethality of a series of 
median lethal doses. Such experiments yield an ED50, which is indicative of how capable the 
antivenom is in respect to cross-neutralisation of the lethal effects of venom (Gutirrez et al. 
2017a; Ledsgaard et al. 2018). Neurotoxins and PLA2s with low molecular mass and weak 
antigenicity are the major components of the venom of Elapidae. Most antivenoms targeting 
the venom of species in this snake family therefore exhibit ED50 values for lethality 
neutralisation of 0.5-1.5 mg/ml, with a higher degree of potency attained in some cases 
(Herrera et al. 2012; Laustsen et al. 2015). On the other hand, SVMPs are the major 
components in the venom of Viperidae, so antivenoms targeting this venom exhibit potency 
of at least 2 mg/ml (Segura et al. 2010), with some exceptions (Snchez et al. 2015).   
The antivenoms used in the current experiments to target the venom of Elapidae exhibited 
suboptimal neutralisation capacity with six-months immunisation, but this capacity 
improved with twelve-months immunisation, with doses of 0.67-2 mg/ml demonstrating 
potency. To give an example, homologous venoms of N. melaleuca and D. polylepis were 
poorly neutralised by Anti-NmelDpol, but N. nivea venom was counteracted by this 
antivenom when administered in a dose greater than 0.76 mg/ml. N. nivea venom was also 
efficiently counteracted by the neurotoxic antivenoms Anti-NnivDpol and Anti-
NmelNinivDpol at values greater than 2 mg/ml; meanwhile, N. melanoleuca and D. polylepis 
venoms were counteracted by these two antivenoms at ED50 values greater than 0.67 mg/ml 
and 0.39 mg/ml, respectively. This is consistent with the findings obtained by Laustsen et al. 
(2015) regarding neutralisation of D. polylepis venom by VINS African antivenom. Thus, it 
was concluded that efficient anti-neurotoxic antivenoms could be developed by using a 
combination of three neurotoxic Elapidae venoms with extended immunisation. Additional 
research is required to determine how effective the created experimental antivenoms are at 
counteracting the effects of heterologous venoms, such as those of Naja and Dendroaspis 
species.  
The homologous venoms of E. ocellatus, Bitis arietans and N. nigricollis were weakly or 
moderately counteracted by Anti-EocBarNnig, with ED50 doses of <1.45 mg/ml, >4 mg/ml and 
<0.43 mg/ml, respectively. Extension of the immunisation protocol led to better 
neutralisation, however. These findings are consistent with those obtained by Segura et al. 
(2010) for antivenom EchiTAB-Plus-ICP, although the present study employed a challenge 
dose of 3 LD50 and 5 LD50 for tests on ovine samples and standard quality control based on 
equine samples, respectively. Furthermore, regarding Anti-NmelNnivDpol, the antivenomics 
and neutralisation assessment were inconsistent, with the latter indicating satisfactory 
neutralisation capacity. Such findings do not fully agree with the discrepancies among the 
experimental antivenoms in terms of counteracting lethality, which may be attributed to the 
fact that antibodies do not have the same affinity to major venom elements, or in other 
words, antibodies capable of detecting toxins in the affinity column may not extend that 
capability to neutralising the toxic effects.  
5.5 Conclusions: 
The results of this study revealed robust immunological responses in vitro, which were 
enhanced by extension of the immunisation protocol. Antivenomics showed that the four 
experimental antivenoms demonstrated immunoreactivity with most elements of 
homologous and heterologous venoms. By contrast, the antivenoms differed significantly in 
their ability to counteract venom toxicity; thus, Anti-NmelDpol lacked efficiency in 
counteracting lethal effects, but was capable of effective neutralisation in the context of in 
vitro assays. Such findings suggest that, to understand antivenom preclinical efficiency 
better, antivenomics and lethality neutralisation assays should be integrated. Furthermore, 
the findings demand that WHO and national regulation bodies should implement a minimal 
appropriate threshold of antivenom neutralisation of venom toxicity in sub-Saharan Africa. 
In vitro immunological assays are therefore significant for three reasons: assessment of the 
immunogenicity of each protein in venom composition against particular antivenoms; 
creation of a hierarchy of protein efficiency according to the significance of the proteins for 
pathophysiology; and investigation of protein glycosylation, which is a key variable for the 
development of antibodies that contain particular glycoforms of potential relevance in terms 
of attaining the targeted efficiency for treatment. 
5.6 References: 
Abubakar, S., Abubakar, I., Habib, A., Nasidi, A., Durfa, N., Yusuf, P., Larnyang, S., Garnvwa, 
J., Sokomba, E. & Salako, L. (2010) 'Pre-clinical and preliminary dose-finding and 
safety studies to identify candidate antivenoms for treatment of envenoming by 
saw-scaled or carpet vipers (Echis ocellatus) in northern Nigeria', Toxicon, vol. 55, 
no. 4, pp. 719-723. 
Alape-Girn, A., Sanz, L., Escolano, J., Flores-Diaz, M., Madrigal, M., Sasa, M. & Calvete, J.J. 
(2008) 'Snake venomics of the lancehead pitviper Bothrops asper: geographic, 
individual, and ontogenetic variations', Journal of proteome research, vol. 7, no. 8, 
pp. 3556-3571. 
Arce, V., Rojas, E., Ownby, C.L., Rojas, G. & Gutirrez, J.M.a. (2003) 'Preclinical assessment 
of the ability of polyvalent (Crotalinae) and anticoral (Elapidae) antivenoms 
produced in Costa Rica to neutralize the venoms of North American snakes', 
Toxicon, vol. 41, no. 7, pp. 851-860. 
Bolton, F. (2017) Incorporating the 3Rs (Refinement, Replacement and Reduction of animals 
in research) into the preclinical assessment of snake venom toxicity and antivenom 
efficacy, University of Liverpool.  
Calvete, J.J., Arias, A.S., Rodrguez, Y., Quesada-Bernat, S., Snchez, L.V., Chippaux, J.P., Pla, 
D. & Gutirrez, J.M. (2016) 'Preclinical evaluation of three polyspecific antivenoms 
against the venom of Echis ocellatus: Neutralization of toxic activities and 
antivenomics', Toxicon, vol. 119, pp. 280-288. 
Calvete, J.J., Rodrguez, Y., Quesada-Bernat, S. & Pla, D. (2018) 'Toxin-resolved 
antivenomics-guided assessment of the immunorecognition landscape of 
antivenoms', Toxicon, vol. 148, pp. 107-122. 
Casewell, N.R., Cook, D.A., Wagstaff, S.C., Nasidi, A., Durfa, N., Wster, W. & Harrison, R.A. 
(2010) 'Pre-clinical assays predict pan-African Echis viper efficacy for a species-
specific antivenom', PLoS neglected tropical diseases, vol. 4, no. 10, p. e851. 
Cheng, L.W., Stanker, L.H., Henderson, T.D., Lou, J. & Marks, J.D. (2009) 'Antibody 
protection against botulinum neurotoxin intoxication in mice', Infection and 
immunity, vol. 77, no. 10, pp. 4305-4313. 
Chinonavanig, L., Billings, P.B., Matangkasombut, P. & Ratanabanangkoon, K. (1988) 
'Antigenic relationships and relative immunogenicities of venom proteins from six 
poisonous snakes of Thailand', Toxicon, vol. 26, no. 9, pp. 883-890. 
Chippaux, J.-P. (2011) 'Estimate of the burden of snakebites in sub-Saharan Africa: a meta-
analytic approach', Toxicon, vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 586-599. 
Chotwiwatthanakun, C., Pratanaphon, R., Akesowan, S., Sriprapat, S. & Ratanabanangkoon, 
K. (2001) 'Production of potent polyvalent antivenom against three elapid venoms 
using a low dose, low volume, multi-site immunization protocol', Toxicon, vol. 39, 
no. 10, pp. 1487-1494. 
Cook, D.A., Owen, T., Wagstaff, S.C., Kinne, J., Wernery, U. & Harrison, R.A. (2010) 'Analysis 
of camelid IgG for antivenom development: serological responses of venom-
immunised camels to prepare either monospecific or polyspecific antivenoms for 
West Africa', Toxicon, vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 363-372. 
Finney, D.J. (1952) Probit analysis: a statistical treatment of the sigmoid response curve, 
Cambridge university press, Cambridge. 
Fox, J.W. & Serrano, S.M.T. (2009) 'Timeline of key events in snake venom 
metalloproteinase research', Journal of proteomics, vol. 72, no. 2, pp. 200-209. 
Fry, B.G., Winkel, K.D., Wickramaratna, J.C., Hodgson, W.C. & Wster, W. (2003) 
'Effectiveness of snake antivenom: species and regional venom variation and its 
clinical impact', Journal of Toxicology: Toxin Reviews, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 23-34. 
Gutirrez, J., Solano, G., Pla, D., Herrera, M., Segura, ., Vargas, M., Villalta, M., Snchez, A., 
Sanz, L. & Lomonte, B. (2017a) 'Preclinical evaluation of the efficacy of antivenoms 
for snakebite envenoming: state-of-the-art and challenges ahead', Toxins, vol. 9, 
no. 5, p. 163. 
Gutirrez, J.M. (2012) 'Improving antivenom availability and accessibility: science, 
technology, and beyond', Toxicon, vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 676-687. 
Gutirrez, J.M., Calvete, J.J., Habib, A.G., Harrison, R.A., Williams, D.J. & Warrell, D.A. 
(2017b) 'Snakebite envenoming', Nature reviews. Disease primers, vol. 3, p. 17063. 
Gutirrez, J.M. & Len, G. (2009) 'Snake antivenoms. Technological, clinical and public 
health issues', Animal Toxins: State of the Art. Perspectives in Health and 
Biotechnology, pp. 393-421. 
Gutirrez, J.M., Lomonte, B., Leon, G., Alape-Giron, A., Flores-Diaz, M., Sanz, L., Angulo, Y. 
& Calvete, J.J. (2009) 'Snake venomics and antivenomics: proteomic tools in the 
design and control of antivenoms for the treatment of snakebite envenoming', 
Journal of proteomics, vol. 72, no. 2, pp. 165-182. 
Gutirrez, J.M., Rojas, E., Quesada, L., Len, G., Nez, J., Laing, G.D., Sasa, M., Renjifo, J., 
Nasidi, A. & Warrell, D.A. (2005) 'Pan-African polyspecific antivenom produced by 
caprylic acid purification of horse IgG: an alternative to the antivenom crisis in 
Africa', Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, vol. 99, 
no. 6, pp. 468-475. 
Gutirrez, J.M., Rucavado, A., Escalante, T., Herrera, C., Fernndez, J., Lomonte, B. & Fox, 
J.W. (2018) 'Unresolved issues in the understanding of the pathogenesis of local 
tissue damage induced by snake venoms', Toxicon, vol. 148, pp. 123-131. 
Gutirrez, J.M., Solano, G., Pla, D., Herrera, M., Segura, ., Vargas, M., Villalta, M., Snchez, 
A., Sanz, L. & Lomonte, B. (2017c) 'Preclinical Evaluation of the Efficacy of 
Antivenoms for Snakebite Envenoming: State-of-the-Art and Challenges Ahead', 
Toxins, vol. 9, no. 5, p. 163. 
Habib, A.G., Kuznik, A., Hamza, M., Abdullahi, M.I., Chedi, B.A., Chippaux, J.-P. & Warrell, 
D.A. (2015) 'Snakebite is under appreciated: appraisal of burden from West Africa', 
PLoS neglected tropical diseases, vol. 9, no. 9, p. e0004088. 
Harrison, R. & Gutirrez, J. (2016) 'Priority actions and progress to substantially and 
sustainably reduce the mortality, morbidity and socioeconomic burden of tropical 
snakebite', Toxins, vol. 8, no. 12, p. 351. 
Harrison, R.A., Hargreaves, A., Wagstaff, S.C., Faragher, B. & Lalloo, D.G. (2009) 'Snake 
envenoming: a disease of poverty', Plos Neglected Tropical Diseases, vol. 3, no. 12, 
pp. e569-e569. 
Harvey, A.L. (2009) 'Fasciculins: toxins from mamba venoms that inhibit 
acetylcholinesterase', Handbook of venoms and toxins of reptiles, pp. 317-324. 
Herrera, M., Fernndez, J., Vargas, M., Villalta, M., Segura, ., Len, G., Angulo, Y., Paiva, 
O., Matainaho, T. & Jensen, S.D. (2012) 'Comparative proteomic analysis of the 
venom of the taipan snake, Oxyuranus scutellatus, from Papua New Guinea and 
Australia: Role of neurotoxic and procoagulant effects in venom toxicity', Journal of 
proteomics, vol. 75, no. 7, pp. 2128-2140. 
Heyborne, W.H. & Mackessy, S.P. (2009) '16 Cysteine-Rich Secretory Proteins in Reptile 
Venoms', Handbook of venoms and toxins of reptiles, p. 325. 
Kornalik, F. & Taborska, E. (1989) 'Cross reactivity of mono-and polyvalent antivenoms with 
Viperidae and Crotalidae snake venoms', Toxicon, vol. 27, no. 10, pp. 1135-1142. 
Landon, J. & Smith, D.S. (2003) 'Merits of sheep antisera for antivenom manufacture', 
Journal of Toxicology: Toxin Reviews, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 15-22. 
Laustsen, A.H., Lomonte, B., Lohse, B., Fernndez, J. & Gutirrez, J.M. (2015) 'Unveiling the 
nature of black mamba (Dendroaspis polylepis) venom through venomics and 
antivenom immunoprofiling: Identification of key toxin targets for antivenom 
development', Journal of proteomics, vol. 119, pp. 126-142. 
Ledsgaard, L., Jenkins, T., Davidsen, K., Krause, K., Martos-Esteban, A., Engmark, M., 
Rrdam Andersen, M., Lund, O. & Laustsen, A. (2018) 'Antibody cross-reactivity in 
antivenom research', Toxins, vol. 10, no. 10, p. 393. 
Len, G., Snchez, L., Hernndez, A., Villalta, M., Herrera, M., Segura, A., Estrada, R. & 
Maria Gutierrez, J. (2011) 'Immune response towards snake venoms', Inflammation 
& Allergy-Drug Targets (Formerly Current Drug Targets-Inflammation & Allergy), 
vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 381-398. 
Len, G., Vargas, M., Segura, ., Herrera, M., Villalta, M., Snchez, A., Solano, G., Gmez, 
A., Snchez, M., Estrada, R. & Gutirrez, J.M. (2018) 'Current technology for the 
industrial manufacture of snake antivenoms', Toxicon: Official Journal Of The 
International Society On Toxinology, vol. 151, pp. 63-73. 
Ownby, C.L. & Colberg, T.R. (1990) 'Comparison of the immunogenicity and antigenic 
composition of several venoms of snakes in the family Crotalidae', Toxicon, vol. 28, 
no. 2, pp. 189-199. 
Pla, D., Gutirrez, J.M. & Calvete, J.J. (2012) 'Second generation snake antivenomics: 
comparing immunoaffinity and immunodepletion protocols', Toxicon, vol. 60, no. 4, 
pp. 688-699. 
Ratanabanangkoon, K., Tan, K.Y., Eursakun, S., Tan, C.H., Simsiriwong, P., Pamornsakda, T., 
Wiriyarat, W., Klinpayom, C. & Tan, N.H. (2016) 'A simple and novel strategy for the 
production of a pan-specific antiserum against elapid snakes of Asia', PLoS 
neglected tropical diseases, vol. 10, no. 4, p. e0004565. 
Segura, ., Villalta, M., Herrera, M., Len, G., Harrison, R., Durfa, N., Nasidi, A., Calvete, J.J., 
Theakston, R.D.G. & Warrell, D.A. (2010) 'Preclinical assessment of the efficacy of a 
new antivenom (EchiTAb-Plus-ICP) for the treatment of viper envenoming in sub-
Saharan Africa', Toxicon, vol. 55, no. 2-3, pp. 369-374. 
Sjostrom, L., Al-Abdulla, I.H., Rawat, S., Smith, D.C. & Landon, J. (1994) 'A comparison of 
ovine and equine antivenoms', Toxicon, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 427-433. 
Snchez, L.V., Pla, D., Herrera, M., Chippaux, J.P., Calvete, J.J. & Gutirrez, J.M. (2015) 
'Evaluation of the preclinical efficacy of four antivenoms, distributed in sub-
Saharan Africa, to neutralize the venom of the carpet viper, Echis ocellatus, from 
Mali, Cameroon, and Nigeria', Toxicon, vol. 106, pp. 97-107. 
Tasoulis, T. & Isbister, G. (2017) 'A review and database of snake venom proteomes', 
Toxins, vol. 9, no. 9, p. 290. 
Theakston, R.D.G. & Reid, H.A. (1983) 'Development of simple standard assay procedures 
for the characterization of snake venoms', Bulletin of the world health organization, 
vol. 61, no. 6, p. 949. 
Warrell, D.A. (2010a) 'Guidelines for the management of snake-bites', Guidelines for the 
management of snake-bites. 
Warrell, D.A. (2010b) 'Snake bite', The Lancet, vol. 375, no. 9708, pp. 77-88. 
Warrell, D.A., Gutirrez, J.M., Calvete, J.J. & Williams, D. (2013) 'New approaches & 
technologies of venomics to meet the challenge of human envenoming by 
snakebites in India', The Indian journal of medical research, vol. 138, no. 1, p. 38. 
WHO (2010) 'WHO guidelines for the production, control and regulation of snake 
antivenom immunoglobulins', Geneva: WHO, vol. 134. 
WHO (2016a) 'Guidelines for the Management of Snake Bites WHO. Regional Office for 
South-East Asia', World Health Organization. 
WHO (2016b) Snake antivenoms [Online], World Health Organization, Available from: 
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs337/en/# (Accessed: April 2016). 
Williams, D.J., Gutirrez, J.-M., Calvete, J.J., Wster, W., Ratanabanangkoon, K., Paiva, O., 
Brown, N.I., Casewell, N.R., Harrison, R.A. & Rowley, P.D. (2011) 'Ending the 
drought: new strategies for improving the flow of affordable, effective antivenoms 
in Asia and Africa', Journal of proteomics, vol. 74, no. 9, pp. 1735-1767. 
WSTER, W., Chirio, L., Trape, J.F., Ineich, I., Jackson, K., Greenbaum, E., Barron, C., 
Kusamba, C., Nagy, Z.T., Storey, R. and Hall, C., 2018. Integration of nuclear and 
mitochondrial gene sequences and morphology reveals unexpected diversity in the 
forest cobra (Naja melanoleuca) species complex in Central and West Africa 
(Serpentes: Elapidae). Zootaxa, 4455(1), pp.68-98. 
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs337/en/
5.7 Supplementary Figures 
Chapter 6 
Concluding discussion 
The first-choice treatment of snakebite envenoming is antivenom and yet this Neglected 
Tropical Disease still, annually, causes up to 138,000 deaths and 400,000 disabilities in 
surviving victims. This disease burden primarily affects the most economically and medically 
disadvantaged farming communities of Asia, sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America (Harrison 
et al. 2009; WHO 2019)). While the many barriers victims face to rapidly access effective 
treatment partly explains this disease burden, the quality of antivenom treatment is also a 
significant contributor, because: 
 Antivenoms are weakly effective (only 10-15% of antivenom immunoglobulins bind 
venom) multiple vials are needed to effect cure  and each additional vial induces higher 
levels of adverse effects, and increases treatment costs 
 Antivenom efficacy is restricted to the snake whose venom was used in manufacture, 
and most affected regions are home to several different snake species, most 
manufacturers use multiple snake venoms to produce poly-specific antivenoms. But 
much higher doses of poly-specific antivenom are required to treat envenoming by any 
one of these snakes  exacerbating adverse effects and treatment costs 
 Antivenom is ineffective in treating venom-induced tissue destruction, unless 
administered within minutes after envenoming (rural tropical victims take hours getting 
to hospital treatment) 
 The high costs of antivenom explain why demand by governments is low, and why 
antivenom is rarely available in the rural hospitals that need it most 
 The poor safety profile of antivenoms necessitate additional medicines and specific 
clinical skills  often unavailable in remote rural hospitals 
Effectively treating tropical snakebite is therefore very challenging and emphasises the 
urgent, compelling need for research to develop therapies that are: 
 more effective against both local and systemic envenoming by all medically-important 
snakes in any given region of the world  a pan-specific treatment donating commercially 
attractive economies of scale to the manufacturers  
 safer than current antivenom treatment - enabling treatment to be administered at 
community level; before onset of severe life- and limb-threatening pathologies 
 affordable - costs of new treatments must be affordable to governments and victims to 
ensure they become available in the rural regions in greatest need  
Research into new snakebite therapeutics is starting, including as a major research focus for 
LSTM, but does require models that provide more pathophysiological information, and 
clinical relevance, than the current murine preclinical systems. My research therefore 
focussed upon the development and standardising of three new models to support this 
therapeutic research. 
Widespread tissue necrosis, and associated possibility of debridement and amputation (Hsu 
et al., New mols eye model  its utility 
ex vivo ocular envenomation model: Apart from some clinical observations studies, over the 
past 20 years venom-induced ocular damage has mainly been studied using live animals. This 
approach poses significant ethical concerns, even aside from the fact that some of these 
studies involve experiments lasting for more than a month. There is therefore an urgent need 
to develop an ex vivo model to identify the mechanistic causes and consequences of ocular 
envenoming. It is in this context that our study has developed an ex vivo bovine model to 
compare fresh venoms from spitting and non-spitting cobras in terms of their ocular 
envenomation effects. The model revealed that all the cobra venoms caused major injury to 
the cornea and epithelial necrosis. The venom of the African N. nigricollis caused complete 
Figure 6.1: Summaries of the most significant findings in the current PhD, focusing on the 
pathologies induced by snake venom proteins. Four models were developed in this PhD; ex vivo 
ocular envenomation model, ex vivo human dermonecrosis model, in vivo systemic envenomation 
model and designing a novel therapy to treat snakebites. The findings revealed that the most 
significant pathologies were caused by direct or indirect mechanism of low molecular weight 
proteins present in the venom (3FTx and/ or PLA2). These proteins induced local and systemic 
damage, while their poor immunogenicity had direct effects on antivenom efficacy.  
corneal opacification, while the venom of the non-spitting cobras, N. naja and N. nivea, from 
Asia and Africa, respectively, also caused corneas to become opaque. The present work is 
the first to discover that proteins from the fresh venom of both spitting and non-spitting 
cobras that were previously not known to induce eye damage, actually permeated the 
cornea within five minutes of their administration. Immunoblotting and mass spectrometry 
analyses identified these proteins as SVMP and NGF. This finding suggested that those venom 
proteins with low molecular weight such as 3FTx and PLA2 directly causes local corneal tissue 
damage. One of the very important finding in this study was flushing the eye with water 
immediately (less than five minutes following the accident) prevents the venom from causing 
corneal damage.   
All previous studies that have been performed on animal models have reported that the 
venom of H. haemachatus, N. nigricollis, N. nivea and N. melanoleuca contains cardiotoxic 
fractions responsible for significant chemosis, blepharitis and opacification of the cornea, 
along with corneal and subconjunctival neovascularisation. Compared to the venom of N. 
nigricollis, which causes the cornea to lose epithelial cells and become opaque (Grntzig et 
al. 1985; Ismail et al. 1993; Ismail & Ellison 1986), the venom of H. haemachatus induced the 
same effects during local application to rabbit eyes. The penetration research conducted by 
Ismail and Ellison (1986), using albino and pigmented eyes, revealed that, in the former case, 
labelled venom of N. nigricollis exhibited binding primarily to the corneal stroma, whilst in 
the latter case, there was suboptimal corneal binding and penetration. The association 
between our findings and all previous studies based on live animal models shows the benefits 
of developing an ex vivo model, for studying venom-induced ocular damage and for 
identifying the best intervention approach following ocular envenomation.  
ex vivo human dermonecrosis model  Venom contains toxic proteins that result in acute 
local effects. The tissue damage caused around the bite area by the venom of certain species 
of Elapidae and Viperidae initially takes the form of oedema, pain, redness and blistering. In 
severe cases, these manifestations may be followed by necrotic damage to the skin and 
muscle, which may necessitate debridement and even amputation. Phospholipases A2 and 
zinc-dependent metalloproteinases are the chief components responsible for these kinds of 
local effects, which occur quickly following envenomation and can degenerate into severe 
tissue damage and irreversible impairment if treatment is not administered as soon as 
possible. A new ex vivo model was devised in this work to investigate in detail over seven 
days the envenomation-induced skin necrosis and immune response. The major local effects 
manifested within an hour of envenomation, and oscillations over time were observed in the 
levels of a number of cytokines, chemokines and growth factors. Interrogating immunoblots 
of the culture medium with SAIMR polyvalent antivenom and SAIMR Echis monovalent 
antivenom revealed that venom was continuously released from the tissue into the culture 
medium for the duration of the seven-day experiment. This finding suggested that, following 
injection, the venom causes local tissue damage and releases proteins that can cause 
systemic damage. The present work observed that PLA2 from the venom of N. nigricollis 
caused cell apoptosis, disrupted the integrity of the dermal structure, and triggered 
significant tissue inflammation. Although it is still unclear exactly how cytotoxins (e.g. 
cytotoxic PLA2) disrupt the membrane, there is a possibility that this occurs due to the 
attachment of toxin hydrophobic areas to membrane anionic phospholipids and subsequent 
membrane permeation (Bilwes et al. 1994; Forouhar et al. 2003). Although damage-
associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) arise when the extra cellular matrix is subjected to 
the action of proteases and hydrolases originating from necrotic cells, there is so far little 
evidentiary support that the pathology of envenomation by Viperidae is significantly 
underpinned by DAMPs (Sunitha et al. 2015). It can be concluded that this ex vivo skin model 
provides researchers with a tool to investigate the toxicity and efficacy of new therapies (e.g. 
antivenom or small molecule therapeutics). 
in vivo systemic envenomation model  Envenomation by Viperidae manifests clinically as 
local oedema, haemorrhage and necrosis, as well as spontaneous haemorrhage, 
coagulopathy and cardiovascular shock if the venom enters the systemic circulation. 
Envenomation by Dendroaspis and Naja species of Elapidae also induces neurotoxicity, 
taking the form of ptosis followed by respiratory paralysis. The major concerns of existing 
studies are reports of envenomation in people and livestock and the local inflammatory 
effects of the venom at the bite site. So far, no study has established a correlation between 
inflammation and APR in vivo and only a limited range of snake genera have been used in 
empirical work on inflammatory processes. For instance, even though it is known that 
envenomation by Naja species causes inflammation the mechanisms of that inflammation 
have not been investigated. Since inflammation is also a confirmed effect of envenomation 
by the majority of vipers from Latin America, it is distinctly possible that envenomation by 
other species of snakes can trigger inflammation as well.  
According to the findings of the present study, besides the direct action of venom toxins, 
stimulation of immune constituents can also promote systemic effects after envenomation. 
For example, the activation of acute phase and acute inflammatory response are linked to 
the occurrence of major heart and hepatic damage, and irregularities and increases in the 
levels of white blood cells and platelets. The present work is the first to investigate the acute 
inflammatory and acute phase responses induced by the venom of African snake species of 
medical importance. In particular, it was noted that the proteins PLA2 and 3FTx from the 
venom of N. nigricollis and N. melanoleuca were mainly responsible for the systemic damage. 
Furthermore, it was observed that very severe local cytotoxicity was caused by cobra venom, 
leading to widespread swelling and local tissue injury. Such pathological effects are the 
outcomes of the combined action of four main venom toxins, namely, snake venom 
metalloproteinases (SVMPs), serine proteases (SVSPs), phospholipase A2 (PLA2), and three-
finger toxins (3FTxs). As highlighted by several authors, however, these toxins do not occur 
at the same levels in the venom of different snake species, with SVMPs, SVSPs and PLA2 
occurring in high levels in the venom of Viperidae, while the venom of Elapidae is rich in 
3FTxs and PLA2 (Casewell et al. 2014a; Chippaux, Williams & White 1991; Tasoulis & Isbister 
2017). The findings from this study help to arrive a better understating of systemic 
envenomation and thus are a step forward in the design of better therapies and intervention 
approaches.  
Low molecular weight proteins- The pathological effects exhibited in both the ex vivo and in 
vivo models developed in this study might have been partly triggered by local and systemic 
damage and inflammatory events engendered by venom proteins with low molecular 
weight. The venom of Elapidae are primarily comprised of 3FTx and PLA2 toxins, whose 
neurotoxic or cytotoxic effects account for clinical outcomes of envenoming among both 
spitting and non-spitting cobras, as well as for the cardiac damage, systemic damage and 
inflammatory events shown in mouse models, and local tissue damage in the ex vivo human 
dermonecrosis models.  
Hydrolysis of phospholipids from the cellular plasma membrane is undertaken by PLA2s. The 
precise mechanism through which membrane disruption is caused by cytotoxins remains 
uncertain, but it is likely that it is related to the binding of toxin hydrophobic sections to 
membrane anionic phospholipids, followed by penetration of the membrane, as claimed by 
Bilwes et al. (1994) and Forouhar et al. (2003). This process makes the production of 
antibodies difficult because the low immunogenicity of the proteins present in the venom of 
Elapidae mean that they are not suitable antigens. Despite possessing neutralisation 
potential, venom proteins that are poorly immunogenic have low glycosylation, which is 
adverse for cross-reactivity.  
Neurotoxicity- The primary effect of envenomation by Elapidae is neurotoxic, with the facial 
bulbar, respiratory and limb muscles becoming paralysed due to the blockage of 
neuromuscular junctions, which can cause respiratory failure and death (Gutirrez et al. 
2010; Ranawaka, Lalloo & de Silva 2013)). To give an example, serious neurotoxic effects (e.g. 
paralysis, respiratory failure) can be caused by certain PLA2s and 3FTxs affecting pre- or post-
synaptic junctions by antagonists of ion channels and nicotinic or muscarinic receptors 
(Casewell et al. 2013; Fry et al. 2003; Harris & Scott-Davey 2013; Lynch 2007; Tsetlin 2015). 
Antivenoms currently have only limited ability to counteract the neurotoxic effects of pre-
synaptic toxins like PLA2, therefore. Local tissue damage is the primary issue related to the 
efficiency of antivenoms. More specifically, the neutralising antibodies present in 
antivenoms cannot keep up with the incredibly fast emergence of local pathological effects, 
so that permanent injury develops before the antibodies can reach the affected site.  
Meanwhile, proteins from the venom of Elapidae are poorly immunogenic because they have 
a low molecular mass, which means they constitute suboptimal antigens, making the 
production of antibodies more challenging. Toxins can be made more immunogenic, and 
anti-toxin titres can be enhanced, by creating an adequate combination of immunogens, 
encompassing a range of key toxins with low molecular mass in a sufficient quantity, 
alongside, or in the absence of, small polypeptide cross-linking.  A significant obstacle to the 
development of antivenom is that venoms are highly diverse biochemically and, implicitly, 
immunologically. This is because, even though there are only a few types of proteins in snake 
venoms, not all venoms have the same levels of every protein type and numerous iso- and 
proteo-forms with characteristic toxicological and immunological properties are 
encompassed in just one type of protein (Casewell et al. 2014b; Fernndez et al. 2011; Petras 
et al. 2016)  
In summary, several observations were derived from the empirical research conducted on 
the pathological and immunological reactions to the venom proteins. First, eye pathologies 
were caused by the venom of both spitting and non-spitting cobras, with corneal penetration 
by certain proteins. Secondly, inflammatory response and dermal cell apoptosis were caused 
by the venom of both Viperidae and Elapidae, with systemic effects arising due to the 
infiltration of the venom proteins into the circulation. Thirdly, systemic pathologies were 
caused by the venom of N. nigricollis and N. melanoleuca, as well as by stimulation of 
immune constituents in certain instances. Last, but not least, the development of 
antivenoms with cross-reactivity was challenging since the neurotoxic venom proteins with 
low molecular weight were poorly immunogenic. 
6.2 Research priorities: 
No methodical research has been dedicated to the complicated processes of protein 
formations in the venom of sub-Saharan African snakes, but this can be changed by 
technological innovations in proteomics underpinned by mass spectrometry. The proteomic 
analysis of venoms is known as venomics and constitutes the basis for the formulation of an 
approach known as antivenomics, which is geared towards the identification of all venom 
constituents by the antibodies contained in antivenoms. The antivenomics conducted in this 
work revealed that more in-depth knowledge of how venom proteins and antivenom interact 
can be derived by applying this technology. By separating and investigating the various toxins 
in different empirical models, it is possible to gain a better understanding of how they work 
and how the physiopathology of envenomation unfolds, thus enhancing the comprehension 
of snake venoms and related pathologies in the human body.  
To investigate how the toxic effects of venom develop in empirical animal models, methods 
such as histology, immunohistochemistry, immunofluorescence and the proteomic analysis 
of inflammatory exudates must be applied to complete venoms and their individual 
constituents. The novel models that have been proposed minimise reliance on the use of live 
animals; for example, the ocular model can contribute to the formulation of better 
treatments by improving knowledge not only of the pathological effects of both spitting and 
non-spitting cobra venom, but also of the pathological effects of proteins isolated from 
species of medical significance. Meanwhile, the progress of necrosis and inflammation can 
be examined for up to one week based on the new dermonecrosis human skin model, which 
has potential for use in the investigation of proteins from the venom of various Viperidae 
and Elapidae from sub-Saharan Africa and their pathological effects.   
Ex vivo or in vitro models should be created to improve knowledge of how the venom-
induced neurotoxic, hemotoxic and coagulopathic effects manifest. The outcomes of such 
models can then aid the formulation of better treatments for deprived areas of sub-Saharan 
Africa as well as for other parts of the world. In the short-term, it is impractical to develop 
antivenoms based on therapeutic biotechnology products like recombinant human 
antibodies or related fragments (e.g. scFv) generated in different prokaryotic or eukaryotic 
expression systems because the industrial production of components that meet the 
specifications of an injectable product is expensive and because the complexity of venom 
composition would necessitate the creation of a mixture of recombinant antibodies or 
fragments. Nevertheless, these kinds of antidotes still have potential for use in neutralising 
the effects of the venoms of some species of Elapidae.   
Based on the findings of this research, antivenoms, as a gold standard of treatment, will likely 
be refined progressively rather than abruptly. The techniques through which 
immunoglobulins are processed, purified and stabilised demonstrate ever-greater efficiency, 
so these techniques are the most probable source of antivenom improvement in the short 
term. Meanwhile, immunisation approaches capable of addressing the immunogenicity 
shortcomings of certain venom toxins of clinical importance can contribute to make 
antivenom treatment more efficient. Furthermore, the geographical range in which 
antivenoms are efficient can be expanded through in-depth investigations of the 
constituents of venoms from snake species in different regions coupled with the production 
of novel antigenic formulas. As a result, antivenom treatment can become more broadly 
available in areas where it is currently not, leading to improvement in the high mortality and 
morbidity rates associated with envenomation in such areas. Last but not least, in spite of 
the lack of funding and backing from big international pharmaceutical organisations, there is 
potential to introduce certain non-immunological blockers targeting particular toxins into 
clinical practice, as long as the medical community dedicates more effort to the performance 
of controlled clinical studies. 
6.3 References: 
Bilwes, A., Rees, B., Moras, D., Menez, R. & Menez, A. (1994) 'X-ray Structure at 1 55  of 
Toxin , a Cardiotoxin from Naja nigricollis Venom: Crystal Packing Reveals a Model 
for Insertion into Membranes', Journal of molecular biology, vol. 239, no. 1, pp. 
122-136. 
Casewell, N.R., Wagstaff, S.C., Wster, W., Cook, D.A.N., Bolton, F.M.S., King, S.I., Pla, D., 
Sanz, L., Calvete, J.J. & Harrison, R.A. (2014a) 'Medically important differences in 
snake venom composition are dictated by distinct postgenomic mechanisms', 
Proceedings Of The National Academy Of Sciences Of The United States Of America, 
vol. 111, no. 25, pp. 9205-9210. 
Casewell, N.R., Wagstaff, S.C., Wster, W., Cook, D.A.N., Bolton, F.M.S., King, S.I., Pla, D., 
Sanz, L., Calvete, J.J. & Harrison, R.A. (2014b) 'Medically important differences in 
snake venom composition are dictated by distinct postgenomic mechanisms', 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 111, no. 25, pp. 9205-9210. 
Casewell, N.R., Wster, W., Vonk, F.J., Harrison, R.A. & Fry, B.G. (2013) 'Complex cocktails: 
the evolutionary novelty of venoms', Trends in ecology & evolution, vol. 28, no. 4, 
pp. 219-229. 
Chippaux, J.-P., Williams, V. & White, J. (1991) 'Snake venom variability: methods of study, 
results and interpretation', Toxicon, vol. 29, no. 11, pp. 1279-1303. 
Fernndez, J., Alape-Girn, A., Angulo, Y., Sanz, L., Gutirrez, J.M., Calvete, J.J. & Lomonte, 
B. (2011) 'Venomic and antivenomic analyses of the Central American coral snake, 
Micrurus nigrocinctus (Elapidae)', Journal of proteome research, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 
1816-1827. 
Forouhar, F., Huang, W.-N., Liu, J.-H., Chien, K.-Y., Wu, W.-g. & Hsiao, C.-D. (2003) 
'Structural basis of membrane-induced cardiotoxin A3 oligomerization', Journal of 
Biological Chemistry, vol. 278, no. 24, pp. 21980-21988. 
Fry, B.G., Wster, W., Kini, R.M., Brusic, V., Khan, A., Venkataraman, D. & Rooney, A.P. 
(2003) 'Molecular evolution and phylogeny of elapid snake venom three-finger 
toxins', Journal of molecular evolution, vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 110-129. 
Grntzig, J., Lenz, W., Berkemeier, B. & Mebs, D. (1985) 'Experimental studies on the 
spitting cobra ophthalmia (Naja nigricollis)', Graefe's archive for clinical and 
experimental ophthalmology, vol. 223, no. 4, pp. 196-201. 
Gutirrez, J.M., Williams, D., Fan, H.W. & Warrell, D.A. (2010) 'Snakebite envenoming from 
a global perspective: Towards an integrated approach', Toxicon, vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 
1223-1235. 
Harris, J. & Scott-Davey, T. (2013) 'Secreted phospholipases A2 of snake venoms: effects on 
the peripheral neuromuscular system with comments on the role of 
phospholipases A2 in disorders of the CNS and their uses in industry', Toxins, vol. 5, 
no. 12, pp. 2533-2571. 
Harrison, R.A., Hargreaves, A., Wagstaff, S.C., Faragher, B. & Lalloo, D.G. (2009) 'Snake 
envenoming: a disease of poverty', Plos Neglected Tropical Diseases, vol. 3, no. 12, 
pp. e569-e569. 
Ismail, M., Al-Bekairi, A.M., El-Bedaiwy, A.M. & Abd-El Salam, M.A. (1993) 'The ocular 
effects of spitting cobras: I. The ringhals cobra (Hemachatus haemachatus) venom-
induced corneal opacification syndrome', Journal of Toxicology: Clinical Toxicology, 
vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 31-41. 
Ismail, M. & Ellison, A.C. (1986) 'Ocular effects of the venom from the spitting cobra (Naja 
nigricollis)', Journal of Toxicology: Clinical Toxicology, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 183-202. 
Lynch, V.J. (2007) 'Inventing an arsenal: adaptive evolution and neofunctionalization of 
snake venom phospholipase A 2 genes', BMC evolutionary biology, vol. 7, no. 1, p. 
Petras, D., Heiss, P., Harrison, R.A., Sssmuth, R.D. & Calvete, J.J. (2016) 'Top-down 
venomics of the East African green mamba, Dendroaspis angusticeps, and the black 
mamba, Dendroaspis polylepis, highlight the complexity of their toxin arsenals', 
Journal of proteomics, vol. 146, pp. 148-164. 
Ranawaka, U.K., Lalloo, D.G. & de Silva, H.J. (2013) 'Neurotoxicity in snakebite--the limits of 
our knowledge', Plos Neglected Tropical Diseases, vol. 7, no. 10, pp. e2302-e2302. 
Sunitha, K., Hemshekhar, M., Thushara, R.M., Santhosh, M.S., Sundaram, M.S., Kemparaju, 
K. & Girish, K.S. (2015) 'Inflammation and oxidative stress in viper bite: an insight 
within and beyond', Toxicon, vol. 98, pp. 89-97. 
Tasoulis, T. & Isbister, G. (2017) 'A review and database of snake venom proteomes', 
Toxins, vol. 9, no. 9, p. 290. 
Tsetlin, V.I. (2015) 'Three-finger snake neurotoxins and Ly6 proteins targeting nicotinic 
acetylcholine receptors: pharmacological tools and endogenous modulators', 
Trends in pharmacological sciences, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 109-123. 
WHO (2019) Neglected tropical diseases [Online], World Health Organization, Available 
from: http://www.who.int/neglected_diseases/diseases/en/ (Accessed: 19th 
September). 
http://www.who.int/neglected_diseases/diseases/en/
