Final Emily E Stanton Theorising the Practical Knowledge of Grassroots and Civil Society Peacebuilding.pdf
Theorising	the	Practical	Wisdom	of		
Grassroots	and	Civil	Society	Peacebuilding		
in	Northern	Ireland	(1965	to	2015)	
Emily	Elizabeth	Stanton		
B.A.	(Earlham	College);	M.A.	(Eastern	Mennonite	University)	
Faculty	of	Arts,	Humanities	and	Social	Science	at	Ulster	University	
Thesis	submitted	to	fulfil	requirements	for	the	degree	
Doctor	of	Philosophy	(PhD)	
May	2018	
I	confirm	that	the	word	count	of	this	thesis	is	less	than	100,000	words.		
Table	of	Contents	
Acknowledgements	
There	are	many	people	whom	I	wish	to	acknowledge	as	having	played	an	important	
role	in	the	genesis,	development	and	completion	of	this	doctoral	thesis.	Firstly,	I	
would	like	to	thank	my	research	supervisory	team:	Professor	Duncan	Morrow,	
Professor	Brandon	Hamber	and	Granne	Kelly.	At	every	step	of	the	research,	their	
guidance,	insight,	critique	and	support	has	been	critical.	Each	member	of	the	team	
brought	unique	strengths	and	perspectives	that	were	useful	and	necessary.	Their	
on-going	support,	along	with	others	at	Ulster	University	such	as	Jackie	Reilly,	
became	particularly	important	when	I	faced	an	unexpected	medical	condition	that	
necessitated	taking	a	leave	of	absence	for	six	months.	I	want	to	publicly	thank	them	
not	only	for	their	academic	mentorship,	but	their	personal	support.		
Secondly,	I	wish	to	thank	all	the	practitioners	who	participated	in	the	field	research	
by	agreeing	to	be	interviewed	and	attend	theory-building	workshops.	Practitioners	
were	generous	with	their	time	and	as	a	result,	interviewee	data	was	extremely	rich.	
Their	wisdom	affirmed	for	me	the	value	of	practitioner-based	knowledge	and	the	
need	for	it	to	be	used	more	routinely	and	purposefully	to	strengthen	both	
peacebuilding	theory	and	practice.	My	hope	is	that	this	thesis	can,	in	some	way,	
contribute	to	that	increased	knowledge	exchange.	
Finally,	I	wish	to	thank	my	family	and	friends	who	have	each	played	different	but	
important	roles	helping	me	to	cross	the	milestones	of	the	doctoral	marathon.	My	
extended	circle	of	friends	stepped	up	on	multiple	occasions	to	offer	play	dates	and	
extra	school	runs	to	give	me	time	to	write.	My	mother	Jane	Stanton	and	my	father	
Robert	Stanton	each	showcased	their	own	academic	prowess	and	were	diligent	in	
proofing	both	my	ideas	and	the	written	thesis	chapters.	My	two	boys,	Liam	and	
Rhys	cheered	me	on	when	I	got	discouraged,	and	gracefully	accepted	my	
disappearances	at	weekends	to	allow	me	to	write	without	interruption.	Last	but	not	
least,	I	want	to	thank	my	husband	Hedley.	Not	only	has	he	shown	practical	support	
by	taking	on	all	domestic	and	childcare	responsibilities,	but	his	patience	and	
understanding	has	been	enduring	as	I	worked	to	complete	the	dissertation.		
Abstract	
Scholars	and	practitioners	increasingly	advocate	that	attention	be	paid	to	bottom-
up	grassroots	and	civil	society	peacebuilding	to	ensure	legitimacy,	relevance	and	
sustainability.		Northern	Ireland	is	well	positioned	to	add	insights	from	its	own	50-
year	history	of	bottom-up	efforts.	However,	despite	its	length	and	a	substantial	
financial	investment	from	donors,	knowledge	from	practical	peacebuilding	has	been	
underutilised.	Local	practitioners	have,	instead,	been	described	in	academic	
literature	as	lacking	in	strategy	and	coherence.	Seeking	to	address	this	gap,	this	
research,	using	a	qualitative	inductive	approach,	investigated	what	peacebuilders	
have	learned	from	their	applied	practice	spanning	the	years	1965-2015.		
Insights	from	the	research	findings	were	found	to	echo	scholarly	debates	about	
knowledge	production	for	peace,	such	as:	Whose	knowledge	counts?	What	kind	
of	knowledge	matters?		Critical	peace	scholars,	identifying	a	technocratic	turn	in	
liberal	peacebuilding,	argue	that	it	privileges	international	actors	and	thematic	
knowledge	over	local	actors	and	local	knowledge.	In	Northern	Ireland	peacebuilding	
was	locally-led;	however,	tensions	associated	with	professionalisation	remain	and	
at	times,	are	viewed	to	subordinate	practical	knowledge.		
This	thesis	argues	that	grassroots	and	civil	society	peacebuilders	hold	valid	and	
valuable	knowledge	but	to	understand,	explain	and	maximise	its	use	-	an	
epistemological	rediscovery	is	necessary.		The	Aristotelian	term,	phronesis	(practical	
wisdom)	is	adopted	as	an	explanatory	frame	and	conceptualised	as	a	form	of	
nuanced	context-knowledge	gained	by	experience.	Phronesis	was	evidenced	in	the	
fieldwork	data	as	necessary	to	lever,	lubricate	and	catalyse	social	change.	As	a	
conceptual	frame,	its	salience	for	knowledge	production	was	proven	by:	adding	
explanatory	power;	as	a	source	for	innovation;	and	for	theory	building.	Importantly,	
phronesis	also	amplifies	debates	demonstrating	why	local	knowledge	is	necessary	
for	peacebuilding	relevancy.	This	thesis	concludes	that	evidence	demonstrates	the	
importance	of	the	conceptualisation	of	phronesis	for	expanding	current	scholarship	
on	bottom-up,	grassroots	and	civil	society	peacebuilding	in	Northern	Ireland	and	
internationally.	
List	of	Abbreviations	
ACT-	All	Children	Together	
CAJ-	Committee	for	the	Administration	of	Justice	
CDC-	Community	Development	Centre		
CfND-	Centre	for	Neighbourhood	Development	
CFNI-	Community	Foundation	for	Northern	Ireland	
CNR-	Catholic/Nationalist/	Republican	
CRC-	Community	Relations	Council		
CSJ-				Campaign	for	Social	Justice		
DWP-	Derry	Women	for	Peace		
EMU-	Education	for	Mutual	Understanding	
HTR-	Healing	Through	Remembering	
INGO-	International	Non-governmental	Organisation		
INLA-	Irish	National	Liberation	Army	
IRA-	Irish	Republican	Army	
MNI-	Mediation	Northern	Ireland	
NGO-	Non-governmental	Organisation	
NIACRO-	Northern	Ireland	Association	for	the	Care	and	Resettlement	of	Offenders	
NICRA-	Northern	Ireland	Civil	Rights	Association		
OIRA-Official	Irish	Republican	Army	
PACE-	Protestant	and	Catholic	Encounter		
PIRA-	Provisional	Irish	Republican	Army	
PRG-	Peace	and	Reconciliation	Group	
PSNI-	Police	Service	of	Northern	Ireland	
PUL-Protestant/Unionist/	Loyalist	
QPEP-	Quaker	Peace	Education	Project	
RUC-	Royal	Ulster	Constabulary	
UDA-	Ulster	Defence	Association		
UVF-	Ulster	Volunteer	Force		
VSS-	Victim	and	Survivors	Service	
WAVE-	Women	Against	Violence	Everywhere	
WT-	Women	Together	
I	hereby	declare	that	with	effect	from	the	date	on	which	the	thesis	is	deposited	in	
Ulster	University	Doctoral	College,	I	permit:		
1.	The	Librarian	of	the	University	to	allow	the	thesis	to	be	copied	in	whole	or	in	part	
without	reference	to	me	on	the	understanding	that	such	authority	applies	to	the	
provision	of	single	copies	made	for	study	purposes	or	for	inclusion	within	the	stock	
of	another	library.		
2.	The	thesis	to	be	made	available	through	the	Ulster	Institutional	Repository	
and/or	EThOS	under	the	terms	of	the	Ulster	eTheses	Deposit	Agreement	which	I	
have	signed.	*		
IT	IS	A	CONDITION	OF	USE	OF	THIS	THESIS	THAT	ANYONE	WHO	CONSULTS	IT	MUST	
RECOGNISE	THAT	THE	COPYRIGHT	RESTS	WITH	THE	AUTHOR	AND	THAT	NO	
QUOTATION	FROM	THE	THESIS	AND	NO	INFORMATION	DERIVED	FROM	IT	MAY	BE	
PUBLISHED	UNLESS	THE	SOURCE	IS	PROPERLY	ACKNOWLEDGED.		
As	we	attempt	to	analyse	dialogue	as	a	human	phenomenon,	we	
discover	something	which	is	the	essence	of	dialogue	itself:	the	word	
Within	the	word	we	find	two	dimensions,	reflection	and	action,	in	such	
radical	interaction	that	if	one	is	sacrificed-even	in	part-	the	other	
immediately	suffers.	There	is	no	true	word	that	is	not	at	the	same	time	a	
praxis.	Thus	to	speak	a	true	word	is	to	transform	the	world.	
	(Freire,	P.	1970	p.75)	
Prologue:		episteme,	techne	but	no	phronesis	
The	small,	stuffy	office	was	overcrowded	and	dim	with	one	frosted	window	
overlooking	the	school	playground.	Three	chairs	were	squeezed	awkwardly	in	the	
corner		two	facing	each	other	and	the	third	in	between		an	attempt	to	mimic	
textbook	mediation	seating	arrangements.	One	in	each	chair,	two	girls	Kerry	and	
Jenny	sat	eyeing	each	other	warily.	Nervous	but	excited,	the	newly	minted	
mediator,	armed	with	a	toolbox	of	theories	and	skills	and	a	masters	degree	in	
conflict	transformation,	sat	down	and	smiled.	Having	spoken	with	each	girl	
separately	on	several	occasions	and	already	obtained	their	agreement	to	meet	face-
to-face,	the	mediator	reminded	both	girls	of	the	rules.	Dont	interrupt,	each	person	
will	get	a	chance	to	tell	their	own	side	of	the	story,	after	each	person	has	spoken	
there	will	be	a	chance	to	ask	questions	and	look	for	joint	solutions.	The	structure	of	
how	the	dialogue	should	go	was	clear.		
Who	would	like	to	begin?	the	mediator	asks	innocently.	Kerrys	voice	was	loud	
and	accusatory.	Miss,	its	all	her	fault,	she	was	slabbering	behind	my	back	to	all	the	
girls	and	telling	them	I	fancied	John,	but	I	dont	and...	Her	story	was	cut	off	mid-
sentence	by	a	strong	rebuttal	from	Jenny.	Wise	up	ya	wee	tart	I	never	was	
slabbering	about	youse,	I	dont	give	a	toss	about	who	Ya	were	Ya	wee	
slabbering	liar	Kerry	volleyed	back.	The	mediator	used	her	stern	voice,	at	pains	
to	remember	what	she	had	learned	about	which	techniques	to	employ	when	
emotions	peaked.	Now	girls,	listen.	We	went	over	all	this,	you	have	to	listen	to	
each	other	first.	Panic	set	in.	The	girls	paid	no	attention	to	the	mediator	and	
continued	their	row,	voices	becoming	louder	and	louder	in	the	tiny	room	as	the	
speed	of	the	conflict	accelerated	to	breakneck.	Thats	it	Im	not	staying	here	and	
listening	to	this	wee	slabbering	tart	Im	leaving	Making	a	dramatic	exit,	Jenny	
stormed	from	the	room,	sped	down	the	hall	and,	without	glancing	back,	marched	
through	the	front	door	and	out	of	the	school.	The	mediator,	having	run	after	her,	
lingered	at	the	door	and	watched	helplessly	and	wordlessly	at	the	girls	retreating	
back.	
Personal	background	to	the	research	
I	first	came	to	Northern	Ireland	in	1992	from	the	United	States	as	part	of	an	
academic	programme	sponsored	by	my	small	Quaker	universitys	peace	studies	
department.	We	lived	in	Derry-Londonderry	for	the	first	three	months	(we	were	
advised,	of	course,	to	recognise	its	name	was	contested),	moving	on	later	to	Ulster	
Universitys	Jordanstown	campus	for	the	remaining	three	months.	The	purpose	of	
the	academic	programme	was	to	explore	peace	studies	from	the	perspective	of	
those	living	in	conflict,	and	to	learn	from	organisations	engaged	in	grassroots	
peacebuilding.	I	still	have	my	personal	journal	and	all	my	academic	notes	taken	
during	that	six-month	period.	Looking	back	from	2017,	twenty-five	years	later,	my	
first	impressions	remind	me	how	much	life	in	Northern	Ireland	has	changed.	The	
cringe-worthy	accounts	of	the	angst	of	my	21	year-old	self	is	peppered	with	my	
impressions	of	local	people,	their	stories	and	about	life	as	I	found	it	over	those	six	
months.			
In	my	journal	reflections	I	found	accounts	of	some	of	the	tragic	events	that	
unfolded.	For	example,	eight	construction	workers	were	killed	in	a	roadside	bomb	
at	Teebane	near	the	town	of	Cookstown	in	County	Tyrone	soon	after	our	arrival.	It	
also	included	my	discomfort	and	alarm	at	meeting	heavily	armed	soldiers	as	I	
rounded	a	corner,	and	on	hearing	a	bomb	explode.	Yet,	daily	I	was	surprised	at	the	
friendliness,	openness	and	curiosity	extended	to	us	as	a	group	of	outsiders.	Life	for	
the	city	residents	had,	despite	conflict,	a	rhythm	of	the	ordinary	life.	My	journal	
excerpts	recall	exploits:	pub	hopping,	singing	karaoke,	and	having	great	craic.	Such	
experiences	were	interwoven	in	parallel	with	late	night	conversations	with	local	
students	about	life	in	Northern	Ireland,	or	experiences	in	confrontations	with	the	
army.	I	journalled	about	my	host,	a	single-mother	raising	three	children,	who	
wondered	whether	she	would	stay	in	Northern	Ireland	because	she	wasnt	sure	she	
wanted	her	children	growing	up	in	conflict.	The	paradox	of	normalcy	among	the	
abnormal	was	illustrated	soon	after	we	had	arrived.	Driving	past	a	heavily	fortified	
Army	vehicle	called	Saracens,	one	of	our	local	hosts	remarked	that	she	didnt	even	
notice	them	anymore,	she	had	gotten	used	to	it.	From	the	vantage	of	today,	
nearly	twenty-five	years	later,	I	can	see	now	that	what	I	was	observing	in	Derry-
Londonderry	was	a	level	of	conflict	fatigue,	and	perhaps	a	necessary	immunity	to	
living	in	a	context	of	protracted	violence	and	conflict,	yet	also	an	attempt	to	resist	
the	oppressive	nature	of	daily	tragedy.		
Set	amongst	this	set	of	paradoxical	circumstances,	I	came	to	know,	work	amongst,	
and	become	deeply	involved,	with	a	surprisingly	vibrant	civil	society	at	the	
community	level.	Reflecting	on	my	journal	entries	and	documents	that	I	have	saved	
from	that	period	of	time	in	1992,	I	recognise	many	names	who	were	involved	in	civil	
society	social	peacebuilding	and	social	change	projects	that	are	still	active	today	in	
peacebuilding,	if	not	at	the	same	level.	In	those	early	days	I	watched,	eager	to	learn	
what	was	happening	on	the	ground	and	how	it	fit	into	my	peace	studies	academic	
training.	When	my	undergraduate	studies	were	completed	I	returned	to	Northern	
Ireland	to	work	for	a	year	as	a	volunteer	at	the	Corrymeela	Community,	a	long-
standing	reconciliation	organisation.	The	announcement	of	ceasefires	came	during	
my	year	on	placement-	a	deeply	emotional	moment	for	the	local	volunteers	with	
whom	I	was	working.	My	motivation	to	learn	enhanced	by	the	year	of	intense	
dialogue	and	group	work,	I	pursued	a	masters	degree	in	conflict	transformation.	I	
aimed	to	both	increase	my	own	skill	level,	and	find	a	theoretical	home	for	the	
practice	I	had	observed	and	learned	while	working	in	Northern	Ireland.		With	my	
expanded	toolkit	I	returned	once	again	to	Northern	Ireland	and	since	2009	have	
continued	to	work	as	a	practitioner	within	grassroots	peacebuilding	projects	as	a	
facilitator	and	trainer.		
In	many	respects,	this	research	question	has	been	living	in	me	for	the	last	twenty-
five	years.	Consequently,	I	recognise	that	I	am	intimately	imprinted	into	this	
research	in	deeper	ways	than	I	may	even	be	aware.	While	I	view	myself	as	both	an	
outsider	and	an	insider,	I	recognise	that	role	has	changed	over	the	years.	For	
example,	having	married	locally	and	now	raising	a	family	here,	I	have	increasingly	
become	over	time	more	embedded	within	Northern	Ireland.	While	my	experience	is	
subjective	and	informs	my	perspective	of	the	shape	of	the	landscape,	I	believe	this	
view	has	given	me	a	useful	vantage	point	for	generating	insights	and	observations	
over	the	last	twenty-five	years.	Likewise,	my	own	oscillation	between	theory	and	
practice	is	woven	within	this	thesis	and	reflects	my	own	experiences.	After	
acquiring	my	toolkit	of	skills	in	mediation	and	conflict	analysis,	my	intention	was	to	
put	such	skill	into	practice-	instead	I	found	them	to	be	incomplete.	The	episode	
described	in	the	prologue	was	based	on	my	own	experience	trying	to	mediate	in	a	
local	secondary	school	situated	along	one	of	the	contested	interfaces	in	North	
Belfast.			
As	I	reflect	on	myself	as	an	outside	intervener	in	Northern	Ireland,	what	is	now	
more	clear	to	me	is	that	my	challenges	(such	as	the	example	in	the	prologue)	were	
not	entirely	based	on	being	an	outsider.	What	was	problematic	was	my	adherence	
to	the	learned	mediation	technique	which	in	hindsight	obscured	my	ability	to	
make	a	good	judgement	about	what	form	of	intervention	was	needed	in	that	
particular	situation.	I	had	theories,	skills	and	yet	I	was	still	missing	a	necessary	form	
of	knowledge.	Gained	by	experience	and	guided	by	multiple	ways	of	knowing,	this	
knowledge	might	have	helped	increase	my	ability	to	judge	the	nuances	of	the	
particular	context	for	action-	knowledge	which	I	have	now	come	to	know	as	
practical	wisdom	or	phronesis.	
Chapter	1:	Introduction		
1.1	Background		
In	his	seminal	book	Building	Peace:	Sustainable	Reconciliation	in	Divided	Societies	
John	Paul	Lederach	(1997),	a	leading	peacebuilding	practitioner-academic,	was	one	
of	the	first	in	his	field	to	begin	to	articulate	a	premise	that,	in	order	for	protracted	
social	conflict	to	be	transformed,	peacebuilding	initiatives	needed	to	involve	
multiple	levels	of	society	working	across	all	lines	of	division.	Since	then,	this	
understanding	has	gained	significant	traction	within	peacebuilding	scholarly	
research,	non-governmental	organisations	(NGOs)	working	in	conflict	areas,	and	
those	working	to	influence	policy	within	a	post-conflict	society.	A	body	of	scholarly	
literature	has	begun	to	develop	which	focuses	specifically	on	the	necessity	for,	and	
impact	of,	grassroots	and	civil	society	peacebuilding	as	an	important	contribution	
toward	a	more	comprehensive,	integrated,	locally	owned,	and	sustainable	peace	
(Diamond	and	McDonald,	1996;	Lederach,	1997;	Fitzduff,	2002;	Schirch,	2004;	
Zelizer	and	Rubenstein,	2009;	Donais,	2009;	2012;	Zelizer,	2013).	As	a	result	there	is	
now	a	greater	appreciation	for	the	importance	of	embedding	any	negotiated	peace	
agreement	within	a	society	that	is	likely	to	accept	and	support	peace	on	the	ground.	
In	this	respect,	Northern	Ireland	has	much	to	offer	to	illustrate	or	test	this	theory,	
since	bottom	up	initiatives	to	build	peace	have	operated	at	the	grassroots	level	
and	within	civil	society	for	more	than	50	years	despite	and	throughout	years	of	
protracted	conflict	and	violence.	
Attempting	to	provide	background	to	the	conflict	in	Northern	Ireland	is	a	daunting	
task.	Unsurprisingly,	both	its	cause	and	consequences	is	a	source	of	dispute	and	can	
be	said	to	traced	back	as	early	as	831	CE	with	the	invasion	of	Vikings	or	as	recently	
as	1968-1969	depending	on	where	one	chooses	to	start.	Furthermore,	it	is	not	only	
the	conflict	time	frame	that	is	a	matter	of	dispute;	the	conflicts	very	nature	is	
similarly	contested	and	considered	to	include	multiple	saliently	divisive	dimensions	
including	those	which	are	theological,	economic,	cultural,	political	and	ethnic	
(McGarry	and	OLeary,	1995).		
McMaster	(1994),	in	exploring	the	roots	of	division	between	Catholic	and	Protestant	
communities	in	Northern	Ireland	makes	several	key	points,	which	offers	a	view	into	
this	complex	and	contradictory	conflict	narrative	(McMaster,	1994	pp.	3-20).	
McMaster	writes	that	the	arrival	of	Anglo-Normans	in	the	1100s	came	at	the	
bequest	of	the	deposed	Irish	King	Dermot	MacMurragh,	and	highlights	that	Henry	II,	
then	king	of	England,	came	to	Ireland	with	Pope	Adrian	IVs	blessing,	investing	him	
with	the	right	to	rule	Ireland.	However,	during	the	next	several	centuries,	the	desire	
to	preserve	the	power	base	of	the	English	Protestant	church	and	state	in	a	wider	
context	of	European	power	struggles	played	out	in	Ireland	through	the	plantation	of	
Ulster	of	1609,	the	native	uprising	of	1641	and	Cromwells	reprisal,	and	the	
Williamite	wars	of	the	1690s	-often	to	the	detriment	of	native	Irish	Catholic	
populations	(ibid).		
Penal	Laws	established	after	the	Williamite	wars	and	not	fully	repealed	until	1829	
institutionalised	discrimination	against	Catholics	barring	them	from	land	ownership,	
freedom	of	worship,	Catholic	education,	and	the	holding	of	public	office.	While	
some	of	these	laws	also	adversely	affected	Presbyterians,	McMaster	argues	that	the	
discrimination	of	the	Penal	Laws	for	Catholics	effectively	served	to	create	an	
association	between	Protestants,	ascendency	and	British	rule	(ibid,	p.	11).	Darby	
(1983)	describes	of	the	Penal	Laws:	
[t]heir	main	effects	were	to	entrench	the	divide	between	Catholics	and	
Protestants,	to	strengthen	Irish	Catholicism	by	adding	a	political	
component	to	it,	and	to	drive	underground	some	aspects	of	the	Catholic	
Gaelic	culture	notably	education	and	public	worship	(Darby,	1983	p.16).			
Political	reforms	that	overturned	the	institutionalised	discrimination	were	not	to	
emerge	until	the	late	1790s	and	after	the	Catholic	Emancipation	Act	of	1829.	
Agitation	against	discrimination	was	not	the	sole	domain	of	native	Catholics.	There	
was	also	disenchantment	from	Presbyterians	who,	although	not	as	
comprehensively,	also	suffered	political	discrimination	as	they	were	barred	by	the	
Penal	Laws	from	holding	public	office.	The	cause	for	independence	from	Britain	
found	common	support	in	the	1790s	-albeit	a	short-lived	one-	as	a	unifying	issue	
for	both	radical	Presbyterians	and	fellow	Catholics.	This	alliance	led	to	the	forming	
of	the	Society	of	United	Irishmen	and	the	joining	of	forces	in	the	rebellion	of	1798.	
Its	subsequent	failure,	however,	ended	such	endeavours;	judicial	investigations	of	
the	rebellious	Presbyterian	clergy	led	to	three	hangings	and	seven	imprisoned	(Boyd	
cited	in	Darby,	1983,	p.	16).	The	short-lived	alliance	was	instead	replaced	by	a	re-
aligned	relationship	between	Presbyterians	and	the	ruling	Anglican	Protestants		
(McMaster,	1994).		However,	tensions	over	land	ownership	and	self-determination	
would	continue.	McMaster	outlines	that:	
[T]he	first	half	of	the	[19
]	century	was	dominated	by	Daniel	OConnells	
campaign	for	Catholic	emancipation	and	for	the	repeal	of	the	union(t)he	
second	was	dominated	by	agrarian	agitation	and	unrest	and	the	demand	
for	Home	Rule	(McMaster,	1994	p.	14).	
All	Ireland	tensions	were	furthered	by	the	economic	prosperity	of	the	north	of	the	
island	as	it	benefited	from	an	enhanced	industrial	relationship	with	Britain	(Darby,	
1983	p.18).	Darby	suggests	this	served	to	further	separate	the	southern	from	the	
northern	parts	of	Ireland;	for	example,	the	potato	famine	of	the	1840s	had	a	much	
greater	impact	with	far	greater	consequences	in	the	former	than	the	latter.	
Northern	industrial	prosperity	was	by	and	large	controlled	and	of	greatest	benefit	
to	Protestant	communities	(McKittrick	and	McVea,	2012,	p.	2).		As	the	19
	century	
drew	to	a	close	increased	pressure	for	Home	Rule	for	Ireland	generated	alarm	
among	Protestant	Unionists	in	Ulster	who,	according	to	authors	McKittrick	and	
McVea,	viewed	it	as	a	threat	to	the	union	with	Britain	fearing	it	would	lead	to	Irish	
independence	and	an	end	to	their	ascendancy	(ibid,	p.	3).		Two	Home	Rule	bills	
introduced	in	Britain	during	the	early	part	of	the	20
	century	were	diverted	by	the	
onset	of	World	War	I	but	agitation	both	for	and	against	the	possibility	of	more	
political	autonomy	for	Ireland	remained.	For	example,	the	Ulster	Volunteer	Force,	a	
Protestant	militia	was	formed	in	anticipation	of	having	to	defend	the	right	to	remain	
part	of	the	union.	Instead,	their	military	training	was	redirected	towards	service	in	
the	British	Army	fighting	in	World	War	I	-	and	is	particularly	associated	with	the	
Battle	of	the	Somme	of	1916.	
In	Ireland	with	Home	Rule	put	on	hold,	the	Easter	of	1916	saw	a	small	group	of	
Republicans	in	Dublin	stage	an	armed	rebellion	against	continued	British	rule.	While	
quickly	quelled,	it	was	the	public	execution	of	its	leaders-	considered	an	
overreaction	by	the	British-	that	galvanised	local	support	(McKittrick	and	McVea,	
2012).	The	newly	formed	Irish	Republican	Army	began	an	armed	guerrilla	campaign	
against	the	British	state	over	the	next	several	years	that	led	to	the	eventual	
partition	of	the	island	of	Ireland	and	the	first	Northern	Ireland	parliament	elected	in	
1921.	Northern	Ireland	was	to	include	six	of	the	nine	traditional	counties	of	the	
historical	province	of	Ulster-	divided	so	as	to	maintain	a	Protestant	majority	(Darby,	
1983).		
The	newly	formed	Northern	Ireland	state	was	born	amid	bloodshed	and	communal	
disorder	(Darby,	1983	p.21)	and	for	the	first	few	years,	remained	fractious.	
Protestant	Unionists,	two-thirds	of	the	population	at	the	time,	became	the	majority	
against	a	Catholic	minority.	Politically,	Unionism	dominated	Northern	Ireland	for	the	
next	fifty	years	and	established	a	hegemonic	grip	in	particular	through	
gerrymandering	and	abolishing	proportional	representation	in	local	councils.		
Economic	deprivation	was	more	acutely	felt	among	Catholic	communities	who	
faced	employment	discrimination;	for	example,	during	the	period	of	Unionist-
dominated	government,	only	10%	of	the	civil	service	was	Catholic	(McKittrick	and	
McVea,	2013	p.13).	In	addition	to	Nationalist	views	rejecting	partition,	
discrimination	in	employment,	housing	and	voting	rights	would	form	the	bedrock	of	
grievances	Catholic	communities	held	for	the	Unionist	controlled	government	of	
Northern	Ireland.	These	fault	lines	would	erupt	in	the	early	sixties	as	discriminatory	
practices	were	highlighted	and	surfaced	by	civil	rights	activists	advocating	for	social	
reform.	Non-violent	civil	rights	marches	were	opposed,	occasionally	violently,	by	
Loyalist	counter-protests	and	excessive	force	used	by	police	in	managing	the	
marching.	Unionist	politicians	were	divided	among	themselves	on	political	reforms	
(ibid,	pp.48-49).		As	a	result,	a	view	was	reinforced	among	many	local	Catholics	that	
the	state	was	unwilling	to	reform.		
Turbulent	communal	unrest	saw	British	soldiers	arrive	to	re-establish	order.	
However,	they	would	soon	become	protagonists	in	the	conflict	against	a	re-engaged	
Official	Irish	Republican	Army	(OIRA)	and	latterly	the	Provisional	Republican	Armys		
(PIRA)	armed	campaign	in	the	early	1970s.	Loyalist	paramilitaries	also	became	
galvanised	by	the	eruption	of	what	they	viewed	as	a	terrorist	campaign	viewing	
their	own	violence	as	a	necessary	defence	to	protect	their	own	communities.	The	
protracted	conflict	would	stretch	on	in	low-intensity	communal	and	ethnic	violence	
over	the	next	twenty-five	years.	Leaving	a	legacy	of	over	3700	deaths	(McKittrick	
and	McVea,	2012)	and	over	47,000	injured	from	1969-2003	(CAIN,	2018),	the	armed	
conflict	was	brought	to	an	end	following	the	ceasefires	of	armed	combatants	in	
1994-1995	and	political	negotiations	leading	to	the	signing	of	the	Good	Friday	Peace	
Agreement	in	1998.	Since	1998,	while	conflict	related	violence	has	largely	been	
ameliorated-the	region	remains	deeply	contested	with	a	continued	legacy	of	
communal	division.	Post	conflict	power-sharing,	part	of	the	political	solution	offered	
by	the	Good	Friday	Agreement,	can	be	characterised	as	stop-start.	The	Northern	
Ireland	Executive,	at	the	time	of	writing	is	currently	suspended-	and	political	power-
sharing	has	appeared,	in	many	ways,	to	have	had	a	polarising	influence	between	
those	who	support	the	reunification	of	the	island	of	Ireland	and	those	that	seek	to	
remain	part	of	the	United	Kingdom.		
Despite	its	power-sharing	difficulties,	Northern	Ireland	continues	to	be	held	out	as	
an	example	of	successful	conflict	transformation.	Those	seeking	to	evaluate	
Northern	Ireland,	however,	predominately	focus	on	the	political	peace	and	
scholarship	has	largely	bypassed		bottom	up	grassroots	and	civil	societys	role,	or	
instead	tied	it	to	its	political	impact.		Scholars	who	have	analysed	it	have	identified	
its	importance	primarily	in	the	lead-up	to	the	political	negotiations	of	the	Good	
Friday	Agreement-viewing	it	as	positive,	but	primarily	operating	in	the	background,	
creating	a	climate	conducive	to	negotiations	(McCartney,	1999;	Fitzduff,	2002;	
Cochrane,	2001a,	2001b,	2006;	Cochrane	and	Dunn,	2002;	Guelke,	2003).		
Despite	the	lack	of	scholarly	attention,	practical	initiatives	to	tackle	communal	
discord	and	animosity	have	operated	within	communities	and	in	civil	society,	as	
mentioned	earlier,	for	over	50	years.	In	particular,	these	efforts	expanded	after	
Republican	and	Loyalist	ceasefires	in	1994	and	the	Good	Friday	Agreement	signed	in	
1998,	when	the	European	Union	and	other	philanthropists	pledged	peace	and	
reconciliation	funds	aimed	at	supporting	peace	at	the	community	level.	A	recent	
report	produced	by	the	Northern	Ireland	Council	for	Voluntary	Action	(NICVA)	
found	that	out	of	a	total	of	6,127	voluntary	groups,	495	continue	to	consider	
community	relations,	one	kind	of	peacebuilding,	as	a	main	area	of	work	(NICVA,	
2015).	Funds	to	support	peacebuilding,	while	recently	experiencing	contraction,	
have	overall	represented	a	significant	financial	investment.	For	example,	total	
funding	allocated	for	Northern	Ireland	and	the	six	border	counties	by	the	Special	
Programme	for	Peace	and	Reconciliation	from	Peace	I-IV	(spanning	years	1995-
2020)	will	total	2.265	billion	(Wilson,	2016).	Given	its	population	of	1.8	million	
people	these	funds	can	be	considered	an	impressive	financial	contribution	to	
Northern	Ireland.	
This	investment	has	been	influential	in	facilitating	the	emergence	of	a	local	
professionalised	field	of	peacebuilding,	bringing	the	potential	to	harness	innovation	
and	creativity	and	to	become	a	testing	ground	to	build	local	practice-informed	
theory.	However,	while	organisations	may	maintain	internal	reports,	there	is	a	
notable	absence	of	evidence	of	lessons	learned	from	this	practice	in	the	broader	
academic	literature	in	the	field	of	conflict	transformation	and	peace	studies	
(Stanton	and	Kelly,	2015;	Kelly	and	Braniff,	2016).	While	peacebuilding	practice	has	
been	influenced	by	theory	generated	locally	(Wilson,	1990;	Eyben	et	al,	1997;	
Bloomfield,	1997;	Fitzduff,	1992,1993,	2002;	Liechty	and	Clegg,	2001;	Hamber	and	
Kelly,	2004;	Craig	2005)	with	limited	exceptions,	these	have	emerged	from	
academia	rather	than	directly	and	inductively	derived	from	practice.	
When	considering	reasons	for	the	absence	of	locally-built	practice-generated	
theory,	several	possible	explanations	emerge.	Firstly,	academics	have	described	a	
lack	of	clarity	and	coherency	about	peacebuilding	practice	(Cochrane,	2001b;	
Cochrane	and	Dunn,	2002;	Kelly,	2012).	Cochrane	(2001b)	and	Cochrane	and	Dunn	
(2002)	purport	that	practitioners	involved	with	peacebuilding	in	Northern	Ireland	
have	lacked	a	strategic	approach,	and	Kelly	(2012)	and	Kelly	and	Braniff	(2016)	note	
that	there	has	been	a	lack	of	organisational	learning	and	clarity	about	what	
interventions	or	methodologies	have	been	effective.	Given	contractions	in	funding	
experienced	by	the	sector	over	the	more	recent	years	as	international	philanthropic	
grant-making	reduces	its	involvement	in	Northern	Ireland	(Wilson,	2016),	there	is	
further	concern	that	any	organisational	learning	that	has	been	acquired	is	
increasingly	at	risk	of	being	lost	due	to	lack	of	current	documentation	and	
dissemination	(Kelly	and	Braniff,	2016).	A	second	possible	explanation	for	the	
absence	of	practitioner-based	theory	development	is	that	there	is	an	undervaluing	
of	practical	knowledge	as	a	source	of	knowledge	creation.	Exacerbated	by	
knowledge	hierarchies	which	privilege	research	over	practice	and	bureaucratic	
technocratic	forms	of	knowledge,	peacebuilding	practice	in	Northern	Ireland	is	
increasingly	viewed	as	service	delivery,	rather	than	as	a	location	for	learning	or	
knowledge	building	(Stanton	and	Kelly,	2015).	
This	trend	is	particularly	problematic	when	Northern	Ireland	is	held	up	as	a	model	
of	positive	conflict	transformation	and	yet,	simultaneously,	contains	significant	
dimensions	left	unresolved.	Practical	knowledge,	if	harnessed,	could	be	used	to	help	
secure	ambitious	social	policy	goals,	for	example,	to	bring	peace	walls	down	by	
2023	as	outlined	in	Together:	Building	a	United	Community	(The	Executive	Office,	
2013	p.6)	and	to	pursue	remaining	difficult	and	sensitive	unresolved	conflict	
legacies.	Kelly	and	Braniff	argue	that	in	order	for	such	learning	to	become	
prioritised	by	funders,	policy-makers,	academics,	and	by	practitioners	themselves,	
what	is	needed	is	a	paradigm	shift	in	how	practitioners	knowledge	and	experience	
is	valued	and	utilized	(Kelly	and	Braniff,	2016	p.21).		
From	the	outset,	this	research	hypothesised	that	practitioners	involved	in	
peacebuilding	at	the	grassroots	level	and	within	civil	society	had	gained	valuable	
and	valid	usable	knowledge	through	their	efforts	living	and	working	to	build	peace	
in	a	context	of	protracted	violent	conflict,	and	that	a	deeper	examination	would	
reveal	that	a	significant	understanding	of	applied	peacebuilding	practice	had	been	
developed,	including	factors	necessary	for	change.			The	research	question	asked:		
What	have	actors	working	at	the	grassroots	level	and	within	civil	society	
initiatives	learned	as	a	result	of	their	peacebuilding	and	conflict	
transformation	practice,	and	what	might	this	knowledge	add	to	current	
peacebuilding	theory	and	practice	locally	and	globally?	
It	aimed	to	address	this	knowledge	gap	by	interviewing	forty	reflective	
practitioners	(Lederach	et	al,	2007	and	defined	in	Chapter	5)	who	had	worked	
between	the	years	of	1965	to	2015	to	build	peace	and	transform	conflict	primarily	
at	a	grassroots	and	within	civil	society	in	Northern	Ireland.	This	investigation	has	
defined	grassroots	and	civil	society	activity	to	include	those	working	within	and	
between	grassroots	communities,	but	it	also	included	activities	undertaken	by	
actors	affiliated	with	civil	society	NGOs	who,	at	times,	were	involved	in	
peacebuilding	activity	that	Lederach	refers	to	as	middle-range	(Lederach,	1997).	
Both	the	terms	grassroots	and	civil	society	are	explored	as	they	are	understood	
within	the	peacebuilding	literature	in	Chapter	2.	The	timeframe	1965-2015	was	
chosen	to	trace	the	development	of	peacebuilding	in	Northern	Ireland	against	the	
cycle	of	conflict.	The	sixties	were	chosen	as	a	beginning	point	because	the	social	
change	momentum	during	this	time	saw	both	formal	and	informal	efforts	made	by	
grassroots	and	civil	society	to	surface	structural	injustices	and	to	promote	greater	
social	and	communal	reconciliation	and	integration.	During	the	latter	part	of	the	
decade,	as	the	armed	conflict	began	to	be	formed	and	to	escalate,	sustained	
grassroots	efforts	were	also	employed	to	try	to	de-escalate	the	growing	conflict.	
The	end	point	of	2015	was	chosen	to	consider	learning	and	practice	development	
over	a	period	of	50	years	inclusive	of	a	post-Agreement	and	power-sharing	context.	
The	arc	of	this	development	of	peacebuilding	covering	this	50-year	period	of	time	
will	be	a	topic	more	illustrated	fully	in	Chapter	4.		
	It	was	viewed	that	knowledge	gained	from	the	research	might	positively	impact	
practice,	policy	and	academia	by:	1)	addressing	the	concerns	over	peacebuilding	
coherency	in	order	to	strengthen	both	practice	and	social	policy	implementation;	
and	2)	making	a	contribution	to	peacebuilding	theory	by	building	experience-based	
and	practice-informed	theories	directly	with	practitioners.	Practice-based	theory	
was	viewed	as	important	not	only	to	close	knowledge	gaps,	but	also	to	equip	future	
practitioners	with	robust	theory	more	adequately	suited	to	addressing	the	
complexities	of	building	sustainable	peace	and	transforming	violent	conflict	
particularly	within	grassroots	communities	and	within	civil	society.	
1.2	Knowledge	for	peacebuilding		
As	the	research	process	unfolded,	insights	emerged	which	opened	up	new	
understanding,	and	consequently	moved	the	direction	of	the	research	in	
unanticipated	ways.	The	first	discovery	emerged	out	of	a	convergence	of	the	
literature	reviews	undertaken	during	the	first	year,	creating	new	ideas	and	research	
pathways.	Three	initial	literature	reviews	were	undertaken.	The	first	review	focused	
on	peacebuilding	theory	development	including	those	concerned	with	approaches	
described	as	bottom-up,	grassroots	and	within	civil	society.	A	second	review	
covered	Northern	Ireland	peacebuilding	practice	in	order	to	understand	its	
development.	The	third	literature	review	covered	dimensions	of	knowledge	
creation.	Collectively,	there	was	a	similarity	to	the	debates	arising	within	the	
literature.	Of	particular	resonance	were	arguments	that	concerned	whose	
knowledge	was	considered	valuable,	and	what	types	of	knowledge	counted	within	
professionalised	peacebuilding	theory	and	practice.			
To	summarise,	peace	theory	literature	(which	I	review	extensively	in	Chapter	2)	
highlighted	tensions	that	have	emerged	over	the	applied	practice	of	peacebuilding.	
Associated	primarily	with	scholars	from	a	critical	peace	tradition,	the	debate	
centres	on	how	the	international	practice	of	peacebuilding	has	been	
instrumentalised	by	the	United	Nations	and	other	global	bodies.	Viewing	such	
practices	as	promoting	a	liberal	peace,	the	literature	suggests	interventions	are	
dominated	by	western	institutions	intent	on	embedding	neo-liberal	economic	and	
social	norms	through	interventions	in	the	name	of	state	building	and	democracy.	
Critics	identify	concerns	about	liberal	peace	for	a	variety	of	reasons,	for	example:	
that	it	adopts	a	universalised	template	and	a	generic	approach	(Mac	Ginty,	2006);	
that	it	disempowers	locally-based	peacebuilders	and	impacts	local	ownership	
(Donais,	2009,	2012;	Mac	Ginty,	2013);	that	it	obscures	the	macro-micro	dynamics	
of	localised	regional	disputes	and	their	role	in	a	national	conflict	(Odendaal,	2013);	
and	privileges	thematic	and	technical	knowledge	over	local	knowledge	(Autessere,	
2014).	
However,	the	critical	peace	school	has	likewise	been	criticised	for	its	wariness	of	
globalised	forms	of	peacebuilding	intervention	suggesting	that	this	has	resulted	in	a	
broader	ambivalence	about	the	merits	of	peacebuilding	practice	(Paffenholz,	2015).	
Suggesting	it	may	be	throwing	the	liberal	peace	baby	out	with	the	bathwater,	
scholars	advocate	instead	that	focus	should	include	ways	international	practice	
might	be	reformed	(Paris,	2010).	Locally	led	solutions	have	been	described	as	the	
antidote	to	addressing	the	worst	excesses	of	the	liberal	peace.	However,	scholars	
also	noted	that	local	knowledge	faces	difficulties	in	being	taken	seriously.	
Hellmller	(2014)	eloquently	describes	that	local	knowledge,	even	when	it	is	utilised	
by	international	non-governmental	organisations	(INGOs),	is	not	viewed	as	valuable	
knowledge	or	deemed	instrumental	to	guiding	appropriate	action,	but	as	only	as	
information.	
When	investigating	the	literature	on	peacebuilding	at	the	grassroots	level	and	
within	civil	society	in	Northern	Ireland,	it	revealed	there	were	permutations	of	
some	of	these	same	questions:	whose	knowledge	is	valid	and	what	kind	of	
knowledge	is	valuable	for	peacebuilding?	Primarily	peacebuilding	in	Northern	
Ireland	has	been	locally	led,	but	tensions	remained	evident	in	discussions	of	its	
applied	practices,	and	its	overall	value	and	contribution.	Literature	reflects	
ambivalence	about	whether	civil	society	in	Northern	Ireland	can	be	a	location	for	
peacebuilding	when	it	is	so	deeply	entrenched	within,	and	reflective	of,	sectarian	
division	(Belloni,	2010;	Acheson	et	al,	2011).	Other	scholars	suggest	that	the	notion	
of	civil	society	peacebuilding	is	a	misnomer	given	the	dependence	of	voluntary	
sector	NGOs	on	governmental	sources	for	funding	(Knox	and	Quirk,	2000).	For	those	
who	suggest	civil	society	in	Northern	has	played	a	role	in	peacebuilding,	the	
majority	focus	primarily	on	its	impact	on	the	political	process.	This	is	characterised	
in	muted	tones,	not	altogether	unimportant-	especially	when	playing	a	stretcher	
bearing	role	during	decades	of	high	violence	(Cochrane,	2001;	Cochrane	and	Dunn,	
2002;	McCartney,	1999).	Scholars	note	that	civil	society	involvement	was	important	
also	for	generating	democratic	debate	prior	to	the	Good	Friday	Agreement	during	
Initiative	92	and	when	securing	a	Yes	vote	during	the	subsequent	referendum	
(Guelke,	2003;	Mac	Ginty	and	Darby,	2002).		
However,	tensions	were	also	evident	in	the	literature	on	peacebuilding	practice	in	
Northern	Ireland,	with	claims	made	it	had	become	increasingly	bureaucratic	and	
technocratic,	particularly	after	the	expansion	of	international	grant	aid	from	the	EU	
and	the	United	States	beginning	in	the	latter	half	of	the	nineties	(Byrne	et	al.	2008;	
Atashi,	2011;	Hall,	2013).		Literature	revealed	that	increasingly	professionalisation	
had	compromised	local	grassroots	volunteerism	and	at	times,	local	relevancy	
(Atashi,	2011).	Compounding	this,	as	the	sector	contracted	organisations	working	
steadily	since	the	early	days	of	conflict	increasingly	lost	funding	and	key	personnel.	
Evidence	suggested	that	practical	peacebuilding	knowledge	was	not	being	well	
captured,	documented,	or	disseminated-	neither	validated	nor	valorised	(Kelly	and	
Braniff,	2016).	
Finally,	the	third	literature	review	undertaken	to	inform	the	research	question	
focused	on	theories	and	debates	on	the	topic	of	knowledge	production.	This	review	
was	useful	to	consider	why	practical	knowledge	might	be	under-utilised	and	to	
determine	its	potential	for	building	theory,	an	explicit	aim	of	the	research	design.	
Scholars	writing	on	professional	practice	were	explored	in	order	to	conceptualise	
what	practitioners	might	bring	to	theory-building	for	the	research	design	and	to	
begin	to	theorise	practical	knowledge	(Argyls	and	Schn,	1974;	Schn,	1983,	1987;	
Eraut,	1994,	2000,	2009).	While	exploring	this	literature,	one	article	produced	by	
scholars	affiliated	with	the	School	of	Urban	Studies	at	Massachusetts	Institute	of	
Technology	(MIT)	was,	unexpectedly,	to	become	pivotal	to	the	research	and	the	
production	of	this	thesis.	Advocating	that	in	order	to	address	real	world	problems,	
urban	planners	must	collaborate	with	practitioners	the	article	argued	theory	and	
practice	were	unnecessarily	pitted	against	each	other:	
We	would	argue	that	such	a	division	between	theory	builders	and	
practitioners	is,	at	best,	false	and	at	worst	maliciousThe	integration	of	the	
type	of	knowledge	that	arises	from	research	that	is	formal	and	taught	in	
academic	institutions,	with	the	type	of	knowledge	that	resides	in	the	work	
and	minds	of	local	practitioners,	is	critical	for	improving	society	because	it	
brings	together	two	complementary	views	of	the	world	(McDowell	et	al,	
2005	p.	30).	
Eager	to	learn	more	of	the	work	being	done	at	MIT,	research	investigating	the	Urban	
Studies	curriculum	proved	to	be	an	important	next	step-the	discovery	of	the	reference	to	
Flyvbjergs	(2001)	Making	Social	Science	Matter.	This	book,	authored	by	urban	studies	
scholar	Bent	Flyvbjerg,	now	based	at	Sad	School	of	Business	at	the	University	or	Oxford,	
introduced	a	concept	of	knowledge	that	was	to	become	central	to	this	thesis.		
Flyvbjergs	text,	while	primarily	a	critique	of	the	science	wars	(natural	science	versus	
social	science),	centrally	argues	that	these	two	sciences	are	each	suited	to	different	
virtues	of	knowledge	and	should	not	be	pitted	against	each	other	(Flyvbjerg,	2001).		
He	advances	the	argument	by	introducing	Aristotelian	virtues	of	knowledge	to	consider.	
Episteme,	is	described	as	being	closest	to	scientific	knowledge	and	is	considered	context-
independent,	universally	logical,	rational,	predictive	and	explanatory.	Techne,	is	
referenced	as	artistic,	craft	or	skill-based	knowledge	forms	and	the	root	of	the	modern	
words	technical	and	technology.	Finally,	a	third	virtue	of	knowledge	discussed	was	
phronesis	or	practical	knowledge	or	wisdom	(also	translated	as	prudence	and	common	
sense).	Phronesis	is	described	as	a	form	of	context-dependent	knowledge	used	for	
practical	action.	Flyvbjerg	notes	that	while	episteme	and	techne	have	modern	derivations,	
phronesis	has	been	lost	from	modern	lexicon	(Flyvbjerg,	2001).	Nonetheless,	Flyvbjerg	
argues	that	phronesis	is	the	virtue	of	knowledge	for	which	the	social	sciences	should	
aspire,	and	for	which	he	argues,	it	is	better	suited.	Able	to	produce	the	kind	of	knowledge	
for	action	and	for	a	particular	specific	case,	as	he	states:		Phronesis	is	the	intellectual	
activity	most	relevant	to	praxis	(Flyvjberg,	2001	p.57).			
Flyvjbergs	investigation	of	phronesis	intersected	with	reflective	practice	literature.	
Describing	practitioners	who	have	learned	to	navigate	the	world	of	complexity,	Schn	
(1983),	while	not	using	the	word	phronesis	described	similar	context-driven	knowledge.	
Gained	from	experience	in	swampy	lowland	where	situations	are	confusing	messes	
incapable	of	technical	solution,	these	locations	demanded	that	practitioners	learned	
from	experience	and	trial	and	error		(Schn,	1983	pp.42-43).	Weaving	together	insights	
from	Schn	with	Flyvjberg,	phronesis	began	to	take	shape	as	a	form	of	experience-based	
practical	knowledge	gained	about	how	to	make	judgements	in	a	particular	situation	
deemed	necessary	in	shifting,	complex	and	unstable	contexts.	
1.3	Conceptualising	phronesis		
Phronesis	was	viewed	as	potentially	illuminating	in	two	different	ways.	Firstly,	it	
described	the	type	of	knowledge	that	conceivably	those	working	within	the	
grassroots	level	and	within	civil	society	may	have	gained	as	a	result	of	their	
experiences	situated	in	the	context	of	complexity,	uncertainty	and	instablity	
endemic	to	protracted	violent	conflicts.		Secondly,	it	suggested	itself	as	a	macro-
conceptual	framework	that	might	validate	this	type	of	practical,	context-derived	
knowledge	as	important	in	its	own	right.		
An	intriguing	question	arose:	if	phronesis	were	recognised	as	a	valid	and	valuable	
source	of	knowledge	(as	Aristotle	believed),	how	might	that	affect	peacebuilding	
both	in	theory	and	in	practice?	Conceptualising	phronesis	as	a	valid	and	valuable	
form	of	context-dependent	knowledge	could	be	useful	for	building	an	argument	
that	practitioners	and	those	who	hold	practical	knowledge	should	be	viewed	as	
knowledge	creators,	and	used	in	knowledge	building	for	peace.	Phronesis	as	a	
concept	illuminated	the	type	of	knowledge	generated	from	practice.	Given	its	
context-dependent	nature,		it	might	also	generate	useful,	nuanced	and	relevant	
insights	about	a	particular	conflict	context.	The	concept	of	phronesis	was	thus	
theorised	for	this	purpose	to	serve	as	a	conceptual	underpinning	for	the	research	
design	to	explain	why	practitioners	should	be	involved	in	knowledge	production.		
However,	the	conceptualising	of	phronesis	for	peacebuilding	covered	in	the	thesis	
in	Chapter	3,	in	many	respects,	opened	up	still	more	unexpected	intellectual	doors.		
In	particular,	by	conceptualising	phronesis	for	peacebuilding,	it	established	a	bridge	
back	to	the	debates	concerning	local	knowledge	voiced	from	within	the	school	of	
critical	peace.	In	fact,	phronesis,	viewed	as	a	form	of	context-dependent	knowledge	
gained	by	lived	experience,	had	the	potential	to	bolster	the	concept	of	local	
knowledge	so	that	it	could	less	likely	be	dismissed	as	information	(Hellmller,	
2014).		Local	knowledge	instead	might	be	better	understood	as	including	phronesis	
and	thus	viewed	as	valid	and	valuable	knowledge	for	producing	nuanced	insights	
about	context	and	judgement	of	context	for	peacebuilding.	Likewise,	phronesis	
might	also	intersect	with	recent	scholarship	on		everyday	forms	of	peacebuilding,	
tying	in	with	the	idea	that	ordinary	people	living	in	divided	societies	learned	ways	to	
navigate	their	passage	through	a	deeply	divided	society	(Mac	Ginty,	2014	p.549)	
with	a	view	that	this	too	may	be	a	type	of	phronetic	knowledge.		
1.4	Evidence	of	phronesis	
During	the	field	research	as	will	be	discussed	in	Chapter	5,	the	interview	questions	
focused	primarily	on	stories	of	practice,	asking	practitioners	to	reflect	on:	their	
motivations	for	being	involved	in	peacebuilding;	influences	on	their	practice;	and	
stories	of	interventions-both	what	had	worked	and	what	was	challenging.	Stories	
allowed	for	a	deeper	interrogation	of	practice	insights	and,	most	importantly,	it	
created	the	opportunity	to	ask	why	a	particular	intervention	had	either	been	
challenging,	or	had	worked	well.		It	was	the	answers	given	to	the	question	of	
why?	that	became	the	most	revealing,	illustrating	judgement	and	a	deep	
understanding	about	context.	Furthermore,	the	question	why	illustrated	a	
nuanced	and	ecological	view	of	context	including	an	understanding	of	particular	
places,	history,	symbolic	and	worldview	frames	and	relationships.	The	ecological	
view	illustrated	an	understanding	of	how	these	particulars	interacted	together,	
formed	threats	and	created	fault	lines	(terms	which	will	be	all	defined	fully	in	
Chapter	6).	As	these	dimensions	of	context	took	shape	in	the	form	of	patterns,	the	
data	suggested	that	practitioners	used	phronesis	and	judgement-in-context-for-
action	in	their	peacebuilding	practice.		
However,	the	prevalence	of	the	overall	pattern	and	its	evidence	as	significantly	
salient	within	the	data	became	most	clear	as	data	analysis	reached	its	conclusion	
(see	Chapters	6	and	7).	What	emerged	as	a	result	was	the	finding	that	phronesis	
was	more	than	just	a	kind	of	knowledge	that	might	be	generated	from	practice.	In	
fact,	phronesis	could	be	viewed	as	an	orienting	epistemological	position,	with	
ontological	dimensions	which	informed	views	and	practices	of	grassroots	and	civil	
society	peacebuilding,	a	finding	which	will	be	discussed	in	detail	in	Chapter	8.	Data	
suggested	phronesis	was	a	primary	source	of	knowledge	utilised	and	deemed	
important	and	necessary,	to	ensure	relevancy	for	local	peacebuilding.	For	this	
reason,	the	salience	of	phronesis	became	evident	as	a	concept	that	held	significant	
scope	for	knowledge	creation	and	knowledge	production	for	peacebuilding.	In	
particular,	as	will	be	discussed	in	Chapter	8,	phronesis	added	an	explanatory	power	
to	better	understand	the	role	of	grassroots	and	civil	society	peacebuilding.		
Furthermore,	research	suggested	that	phronesis	had	great	potential	as	a	source	of	
knowledge	creation:	as	a	potential	tool	of	analysis,	by	demonstrating	its	use	for	
innovation;	and	also	indicating	potential	for	theory	building.		As	a	result,	the	thesis	
concludes	by	arguing	that	on	the	basis	of	evidence	provided	and	elaborated	
throughout,	phronesis	is	a	useful	concept	that	holds	particular	significance	for	
affording	better	understanding	of	grassroots	and	civil	society	peacebuilding,	and	is	a	
fruitful	location	for	relevant	knowledge	production	that	yields	valid	and	valuable	
forms	of	knowledge	for	peacebuilding.	
1.5	The	structure	of	the	thesis	
The	thesis	will	unfold	in	the	following	manner:		Chapter	2	serves	as	an	introduction	
to	the	development	of	the	main	theoretical	concepts	within	peace	studies	and	then	
moves	to	significant	debates	relevant	to	the	research	question,	particular	those	
addressing	knowledge	production	for	peacebuilding.	Chapter	3	introduces	
phronesis,	and	begins	to	conceptualise	the	term	for	peacebuilding	using	a	multi-
disciplinary	set	of	literature.		Literature	was	also	explored	in	order	to	locate	where	
the	concept	may	best	fit	within	the	current	academic	peacebuilding	literature.	
Chapter	4	looks	at	the	historical	account	of	grassroots	and	civil	society	
peacebuilding	practice	in	Northern	Ireland	over	a	fifty-year	span	of	time	(1965-
2015).	Its	purpose	is	to	both	to	demonstrate	that	such	a	body	of	activity	exists,	and	
to	investigate	what	insights	might	be	generated	viewing	the	activity	through	the	
lens	of	phronesis.	It	concludes	by	determining	whether	new	insights	are	generated	
about	the	role	of	peacebuilding	at	the	grassroots	and	within	civil	society	in	Northern	
Ireland	when	viewed	through	this	frame.		Chapter	5	describes	the	research	design	
and	includes	discussion	of	methodological	influences	and	choices.	Chapter	6	is	the	
first	of	two	chapters	that	will	introduce	the	salient	findings	from	fieldwork	research	
and	analysis.	It	will	begin	by	demonstrating	the	evidence	of	phronesis	as	an	
epistemology	of	practice.	Building	on	from	these	findings,	Chapter	7	next	
demonstrates	from	the	data	ways	that	phronetic	knowledge	was	used	by	
practitioners	to	progress	social	change.	Chapter	8	is	a	discussion	chapter	that	
investigates	the	strengths	and	limitations	on	the	findings	and	the	utility	of	building	
the	conceptual	frame	of	phronesis	for	peacebuilding	knowledge	production.	Finally,	
Chapter	9	concludes	the	thesis	by	asking	what	has	this	research	contributed	to	the	
body	of	knowledge	and	considers	what	implications	are	generated	for	
peacebuilding	theory	and	practice	both	locally	and	globally.	
Chapter	2:	Literature	review		
Introduction	
In	order	to	inform	the	research,	theoretical	literature	was	examined	to	provide	an	
understanding	of	the	conceptual	building	blocks	which	frame	the	research	question.	
In	doing	so,	this	chapter	intends	to	survey	the	landscape	to	highlight	significant	
ways	in	which	both	theoretical	and	practice	development	in	peacebuilding	have	
emerged	and	intersected	and	where	this	piece	of	research	may	sit	within	current	
debates.	Given	its	focus	on	actors	who	have	primarily	worked	within	peacebuilding	
at	the	grassroots-	level	and	within	civil	society,	particular	attention	is	paid	to	
literature	identifying	key	debates	pertinent	to	those	working	at	those	levels	to	
progress	social	change,	which	in	the	literature	can	at	times	be	referred	to	as	
bottom-up	peacebuilding.	The	chapter	concludes	with	questions	that	such	debates	
generate	for	the	study	and	practice	of	peacebuilding	and	conflict	transformation	
generally	but	which	also	frame	the	background	to	this	thesis	in	particular.	
2.1	The	emergence	of	peace	research		
While	the	aspiration	for	peace	could	be	considered	timeless,	the	systematic	
investigation	of	conditions,	processes	and	influencing	factors	in	building	peace	has	
been	a	much	more	recent	phenomenon.	Emerging	out	of	the	height	of	Cold	War	
anxieties,	and	increased	by	the	development	of	nuclear	weapons,	social	scientists	in	
the	late	1940s	began	to	turn	their	attention	towards	the	problems	of	war,	its	causes	
and	consequences;	and	the	human	propensity	towards	violence	as	a	means	to	
resolve	conflict.	Academics	such	as	Kenneth	and	Elise	Boulding	in	the	United	States,	
and	Johan	Galtung,	a	Norwegian	social	scientist	in	Europe,	were	highly	influential	in	
shaping	the	development	of	what	was	first	known	as	peace	research,	and	would	
later	become	the	academic	field	of	peace	studies	(Miall	et	al,	1999).		
One	of	Galtungs	early	significant	contributions	was	to	develop	a	wider	definition	of	
both	the	concepts	of	peace	and	violence,	beyond	those	previously	used.		Galtung	
conceptualised	peace	in	two	ways,	positive	peace	and	negative	peace.	Negative	
peace	was	characterised	as	the	absence	of	organized	violence	between	peoples	
and	groups,	while	positive	peace	was	contrasted	as	a	pattern	of	cooperation	and	
integration	between	major	human	groups	(Galtung,	1975	p.	29).	Explaining	that	it	
is	possible	to	have	an	absence	of	war	without	a	state	of	positive	peace,	Galtung	
describes	negative	peace	as	a	form	of	co-existence	that	lacks	true	cooperation	and	
integration	but	exists	without	war	(ibid).	Galtung	also	redefines	violence,	stating,	
violence	is	present	when	human	beings	are	being	influenced	so	that	their	actual	
somatic	and	mental	realizations	are	below	their	potential	realizations	(Galtung,	
1975	p.110).	Thus,	violence	was	not	only	understood	as	a	form	of	personal	and	
direct	physical	harm	referred	to	as	direct	violence,	but	also	embedded	within	
society	through	unjust	and	inequitable	systemic	domination	which	limited	the	
potential	development	of	individuals	and	groups	as	structural	violence.		
Expanding	the	concepts	of	peace	and	violence	created	several	fundamental	
distinctions	and	played	a	pivotal	role	in	the	further	development	of	the	study	of	
peace.	Firstly,	the	conceptual	development	of	positive	peace	and	negative	peace	
reflected	that	lack	of	violence	or	war	was	not	necessarily	an	indicator	of	peace,	or	
an	indicator	of	a	lack	of	conflict.	Conflict	and	violence	may	exist	within	structures	in	
latent	forms	and	emerge	in	later	stages	as	direct	violence	or	manifest	conflict.	
However,	violence	-	whether	structural	or	direct	-	can	also	be	disaggregated	from	
conflict,	and	conflicts	can	be	resolved	without	using	violence.	Galtungs	work	has	
thus	been	important	to	the	field	as	it	has	argued	that	peace	research	needs	not	only	
to	focus	on	the	manifestations	of	direct	violence,	but	also	to	explore	structures	
which	have	embedded	violence	through	multiple	forms	of	domination,	
marginalisation	and	isolation	which	prevents	groups	and	individuals	from	reaching	
their	full	potential	(Galtung,	1975).		
These	theoretical	developments	enabled	future	practitioners	and	academics	to	gain	
a	better	appreciation	for	the	ways	in	which	direct	and	structural	violence	play	
interdependent	functions,	fuelled	by	the	role	of	cultural	violence,	a	concept	Galtung	
used	to	explain	how	forms	of	direct	and	indirect	violence	come	to	be	viewed	as	
justified.		Miall	et	al.	(1999)	describe	this	interrelationship	as;	We	end	direct	
violence	by	changing	conflict	behaviours,	structural	violence	by	removing	structural	
conditions	and	injustices,	and	cultural	violence	by	changing	attitudes	(Miall	et	al,	
1999	p.15).	
Galtung		(1996)	is	also	associated	with	the	development	of	an	analytical	tool	to	
distinguish	how	attitudes,	behaviours,	and	what	he	initially	calls	conflicts	but	later	
refers	to	as	contradictions,	contribute	to	and	become	a	culmination	of	conflict.	
These	concepts	illustrated	intersecting	areas	of	conflict;	a	contradiction	between	
disputants	escalates	when	attitudes	and	behaviours	also	are	affected,	and	spirals	
back	into	greater	and	increased	conflict.	Galtung	describes	three	different	
mechanisms	that	may	serve	as	intervention:	peacekeeping,	which	seeks	to	control	
the	destructive	behaviour;	peace-making	which	seeks	to	transform	attitudes	and	
assumptions	by	embedding	the	actors	in	a	new	formation;	and	peacebuilding	by	
engaging	with	the	contradiction	at	the	root	of	the	conflict	formation	(Galtung,	
1996	p.103).	Peacebuilding,	as	articulated	by	Galtung,	therefore	implies	an	attempt	
at	addressing	the	root	of	the	issues	at	the	heart	of	conflict.	Ramsbotham	(2007)	
summarising	Galtung,	describes	the	differences-	peacekeeping	aims	to	stop	or	
reduce	manifest	violence	associated	with	conflict	through	the	intervention	of	
military	forces	in	an	interpository	role;	peacemaking	is	directed	at	the	use	of	
mediation,	negotiation,	arbitration	and	conciliation	to	reconcile	political	differences	
or	produce	agreements,	and	peacebuilding	is	peaceful	social	change	focused	on	
social	and	economic	reconstruction	and	development	(Ramsbotham,	2007).		
2.1.1	Conflict:	management,	resolution	and	transformation	
Authors	describe	a	similar	but	initially	separate	path	on	which	the	practice	of	
conflict	transformation	developed	(Kriesberg,	1997;	Miall	et	al,	1999).	The	
development	of		integrative-bargaining	pioneered	by	Mary	Parker	Follett	within	
labour	relations	in	the	early	1940s	is	seen	as	influential	in	promoting	a	shift	away	
from	zero-sum	outcomes	(Kriesberg,	1997).	These	ideas	began	to	be	adapted	for	
use	in	national	and	international	disputes	with	the	help	of	those	trained	in	third	
party	intervention,	in	the	form	of	mediation	and	problem-solving	workshops.	
Coined	Track	II,	these	approaches	were	used	to	describe	methods	of	diplomacy	
that	were	outside	the	formal	governmental	system	(Diamond	and	McDonald,	1996	
p.	1).	Developed	as	an	alternative	to	traditional	Track	I	diplomacy,	using	academics	
initially	instead	of	diplomats,	and	working	with	mid-level	political	actors	in	
international	conflict	zones,	problem-solving	workshops	were	perceived	to	be	
useful	as	they	offered	private,	lower-profile	opportunities	for	disputing	parties	to	
explore	underlying	positions	and	needs	without	losing	face.	Several	academics	were	
early	pioneers	of	Track	II	approaches,	for	example,	John	Burton	was	one	of	the	
earliest	to	advance	this	approach	in	the	late	1960s	(Kelman,	1997;	Rothman,	1998,	
Miall	et	al.,	1999).	Burtons	problem-solving	method	was	underpinned	by	his	
development	of	a	theory	of	human	needs	influenced	by	his	own	work	in	the	field	of	
international	relations.	Burton	argued	that	deep-rooted	conflicts	contained	non-
negotiable	basic	human	needs	(such	as	identity,	security,	and	belonging)	which	
needed	to	be	met	in	order	that	conflicts	are	resolved.	Any	negotiation	that	failed	to	
consider	the	underlying	needs	of	disputants	would	likely	fail.	Problem-solving	
workshops	became	a	method	for	uncovering	underlying	basic	needs	and,	as	needs	
are	not	necessarily	mutually	exclusive,	it	was	believed	that	opportunities	to	meet	
needs	in	an	integrative	process	may	hold	promise	to	unlock	long-standing	deep-
rooted	conflicts.		
2.1.2	Protracted	social	conflicts	and	identity-based	conflict	theory	
Burtons	influence	on	the	field	has	been	significant	and	has	been	credited	with	the	
introduction	of	the	theory	of	deep-rooted,	protracted	or	intractable	social	conflict.	
Authors	suggest	Burtons	ideas	were	the	most	important	theoretical	developments	
of	that	period	and	best	characterise	the	type	of	conflict	most	prevalent	in	todays	
global	context	(Miall	et	al,	1999	p.	49).	Each	of	the	terms	has	theoretical	roots	
heavily	influenced	by	social	psychology:		
The	term	deep-rooted	often	refers	to	conflicts	based	on	strife	regarding	the	
satisfaction	of	human	needs	by	people	sharing	collective	identitiesthe	
term	protracted	connotes	simply	long	lasting,	but	often	linked	to	ethnic	or	
other	identity-based	conflict.	The	term	intractable	suggests	never	
endingthose	that	are	resistant	to	settlement	(Kriesberg,	1998	p.332).	
Burtons	contribution	of	theories	of	social	psychology	into	the	field	of	international	
relations	(IR),	has	been	described	by	Kelman	as	a	necessary	lens	to	explain	what	the	
realist	or	neorealist	schools	could	not	capture,	believing	any	theory	of	IR	that	did	
not	acknowledge	social-psychological	dimensions	was	incomplete	(Kelman,	1997	
p.192).	Kelman	argued	that	international	conflict	viewed	through	a	social-
psychological	lens	created	a	broadened	understanding	of	international	conflict	as:	
a	process	driven	by	collective	needs	and	fears	(in	contrast	to	simply	calculated	
national	interests	as	many	realist	theorists	would	posit),	an	intersocietal	process	
(rather	than	merely	interstate	or	intergovernmental),	a	multi-faceted	process	of	
mutual	influence	(not	only	a	contest	of	coercive	power)	and	finally	an	interactive	
process	with	an	escalatory,	self-perpetuating	dynamic,	not	merely	a	sequence	of	
action	and	reaction	by	stable	actors	(ibid,	p.194).	
Miall	et	al.	(1999)	view	that	Edward	Azars	research	on	protracted	social	conflicts	
conducted	throughout	the	1970s	and	1980s	is	also	considered	to	have	made	a	
significant	contribution	to	the	development	of	a	greater	understanding	of	this	new	
type	of	conflict.	Azar	identified	that	protracted	conflicts	often	featured	communal	
identities	that	were	used	to	meet	ontological	needs	for	identity,	security,	and	
recognition	(Miall	et	al.,	1999	pp.72-74).	The	growing	understanding	of	identity	
introduced	by	social	psychology	opened	up	interest	in	the	relationships	between	
adversaries,	and	how	relationships	might	influence	identity	to	become	threatened	
in	conflict:	When	a	conflict	between	or	among	parties	involves	a	core	sense	of	
identity	(and	therefore	predictability	of	the	world)	the	conflict	tends	to	be	
intractable	(Northrup,	1989,	p.55).	Critiquing	many	of	the	rationalist-oriented	
negotiation	techniques	at	that	time,	Northrup	argues	that	they	neglected	to	
consider	the	impact	of	identity,	assuming	that	adversaries	negotiated	out	of	the	
same	worldview.		
Seeking	to	more	fully	explain	factors	that	lead	to	intractability,	Northup	argued	that	
intractability	in	identity-based	conflicts	was	diminished	when	changes	occur	at	the	
level	of	identity,	particularly	if	they	involve	core	aspects	of	identity	related	to	the	
conflict.	Interestingly	she	argued	that	conflicts	involving	parties	with	threatened	
identities	are	highly	unlikely	to	be	changed	from	within,	or	to	be	willing	or	able	to	
cooperate	to	come	to	resolution	(ibid,	p.80).	However,	approaches	that	begin	to	
build	up	relationships	such	as	dialogue	groups	may	have	some	impact	over	time	if	
they	are	not	perceived	to	directly	threaten	identity	(ibid,	p.	81).		
Faced	with	growing	inter-ethnic	disputes	at	the	end	of	the	Cold	War,	these	new	
insights	and	enlarged	paradigms	of	understanding	for	handling	conflict	were	viewed	
as	necessary	new	tools	and	frameworks	to	inform	interventions	when	addressing	
long-standing,	ethnic	or	identity-based	conflicts	(Zelizer,	2013	p.6).		As	such,	
increasingly	in	the	1990s	peacebuilding	began	to	emerge	as	a	field	when	such	
approaches	were	required	to	respond	to	shifts	from	inter-state	to	intra-state-based	
conflicts,	for	example	in	Bosnia-Herzegovina,	Rwanda	and	in	the	Caucasus	(ibid).		
2.2	Lederach	and	sustainable	peacebuilding	
In	the	mid-1990s,	terminology	in	the	field	began	to	expand	in	tandem	with	new	
conceptual	developments,	influenced	in	significant	ways	by	the	work	of	John	Paul	
Lederach,	a	practitioner	and	latterly	an	academic.	Lederachs	ideas	were	
significantly	shaped	by	his	experiences	as	a	mediator	in	Central	America	in	the	
1980s,	as	well	as	experiences	intervening	in	conflicts	in	Somalia,	Colombia,	
Northern	Ireland,	and	the	Philippines,	among	others.	This	body	of	experience	
influenced	him	to	adopt	the	terminology	of	conflict	transformation	instead	of	
conflict	resolution,	which	in	his	words,	may	conceptually	and	subtly	promote	the	
impression	that	conflict	is	undesirable	and	should	be	eliminated	or	at	least	
reduced	(Lederach,	1995	p.16).	Conflict	instead	could	be	viewed	as	part	of	human	
life,	with	the	potential	to	promote	positive	change,	and	not	always	necessarily	
destructive	or	violent	(ibid,	p.9).	
Lederach	(1995)	proposed	that	conflict	may	emerge	out	of	contexts	of	injustice	
which	need	to	be	addressed,	and	that	a	danger	in	conflict	resolution	was	to	paper	
over	legitimate	justice	concerns:	If	change	increasing	justice	has	not	occurred	
because	the	root	structural	causes	of	conflict	remain	untouched,	then	reducing	or	
eliminating	the	overt	expression	of	conflict	may	be	an	exercise	in	co-optation	(ibid,	
p.16).	Writing	in	1995,	Lederach	attributes	the	term	conflict	transformation	to	
others	in	the	field	(Kriesberg,	1989;	Ruppesinghe,	1994;	and	Curle,	1991	as	cited	in	
Lederach,	1995	p.	17),	advocating	it	as	a	more	apt	description	of	the	dynamics	of	
social	conflict	and	the	opportunity	it	presents	to	unearth	root	causes	of	conflict	in	
order	to	produce	positive	social	change	outcomes.	
Lederach	acknowledges	that	his	own	conceptual	development	and	understanding	
of	conflict	transformation	built	upon	the	work	of	Adam	Curle,	a	British	Quaker	
mediator	and	the	founder	of	the	University	of	Bradfords	Department	of	Peace	
Studies	(Lederach,	1997).	Curle,	influenced	by	Galtung,	Boulding	and	his	own	
experiences	as	a	mediator,	emphasised	the	importance	of	relationships	as	
Woodhouse	notes:	
[I]t	is	this	focus	on	relationships	as	the	subject	of	peace	which	above	all	
distinguishes	and	characterises	his	work	Peace	was	concerned	then	not	
with	the	containment	of	conflict,	but	pre-eminently	with	building	
relationships	(Woodhouse,	2010	p.3).			
Lederach	explicitly	references	Curles	1971	model	Progression	of	conflict	in	his	own	
work	and	builds	upon	it	to	illustrate	that	conflict	transformation	may	require	that	
different	roles	are	needed	at	different	times	in	order	for	conflict	to	be	transformed	
from	latent	conflict	to	sustainable	peace	(Lederach,	1995	p.13).	Thus,	at	latent	
stages,	advocacy	may	be	needed	to	help	educate	and	increase	awareness	of	
injustice	and	unpeaceful	relationships	in	asymmetrical	relations	in	order	to	help	
increase	a	balance	of	power;	and	forms	of	conflict	may	need	to	be	created	through	
non-violent	advocacy	to	highlight	the	existence	of	injustice.	However,	once	this	
awareness	is	achieved	and	relationships	and	power	are	in	greater	balance,	dialogue,	
negotiation	and	mediation	may	be	better	utilised.	Curles	model	was	helpful	for	
Lederach:		
[As]	a	paradigm	for	a	long-term	view	of	conflict,	one	that	contemplates	both	
a	vision	of	where	we	are	going	and	a	multiplicity	of	activities	to	get	us	
there.	and	that	the	longer-longer	term	progression	of	conflict	toward	
increased	justice	and	peaceful	relations	must	integrate	and	view	these	
activities	as	necessary	and	mutually	interdependent	in	the	pursuit	of	just	
change	and	peaceful	transformation	(Lederach,	1995	pp.14-15).	
Fundamental	to	Lederachs	understanding	of	conflict	transformation	concerned	the	
need	to	simultaneously	address	systemic,	personal	and	relational	change	by	tackling	
root	causes	and	overt	expressions	of	conflict,	and,	at	the	same	time,	increase	
justice,	reduce	violence	and	restore	relationships	through	a	multiplicity	of	
approaches,	variety	of	activities	and	operating	at	all	levels	of	society.	
2.2.1	Outsider	interveners,	elicitive	approaches	and	local	knowledge		
Another	key	component	of	Lederachs	approach	to	conflict	transformation	that	
differed	at	the	time	from	many	of	the	problem-solving	methods	within	the	conflict	
resolution	school	was	new	ideas	about	the	role	of	the	intervener	within	conflict.	
Lederach	(1995)	described	that	through	his	international	practice	he	found	that	
North	American	models	of	mediation	and	conflict	resolution,	particularly	the	role	of	
the	neutral	outsider	was	a	role	more	culturally	aligned	to	Western	societies.	
However,	in	Latin	America	he	found	that	disputants	favoured	what	he	termed	an	
insider-partial	mediator,	led	by	those	who	were	already	known	and	trusted	by	
each	of	the	parties	(Wehr	and	Lederach,	1991).	
These	practice-gained	insights	generated	new	thinking	about	how	to	work	across	
different	cultural	traditions	using	an	elicitive	rather	than	prescriptive	approach	
(Lederach,	1995	p.7).	This	was	important,	he	argued,	in	order	to	build	on	the	
indigenous	or	pre-existing	cultural	understandings	of	conflict	and	peace	(ibid).	
Drawing	heavily	on	the	work	of	Paolo	Freire	and	popular	education,	Lederach	took	
the	view	that	training	or	intervention	approaches	could	and	should	be	
emancipatory	and	dialectical	rather	than	one	way.	Importantly,	local	people	are	
resources	whose	knowledge	should	be	valued.	Summarising	his	central	ideas	on	this	
topic,	he	states:		
1)	People	in	their	setting	are	a	key	resource,	not	recipients	
2)	Indigenous	knowledge	is	a	pipeline	to	discovery,	meaning,	and	appropriate	action	
3)	Participation	of	local	people	in	the	process	is	central	
4)	Building	from	available	local	resources	fosters	self-sufficiency	and	sustainability	
5)	Empowerment	involves	a	process	that	fosters	awareness-of-self	in	context	and	
validates	discovery,	naming	and	creation	through	reflection	and	action	
	(Lederach,	1995	p.31).	
Lederachs	approach	to	intervention	facilitated	a	new	understanding	of	ways	to	
address	conflict	with	those	from	within	the	conflict-setting,	using	their	implicit	
knowledge	and	experiences	of	social	conflict	as	described	using	their	own	language	
and	metaphors.	Elicitive	approaches	utilised	the	trainer	as	a	catalyst	rather	than	as	
an	expert	(Lederach,	1995,	pp.	55-62).	Importantly,	Lederachs	text	emphasised	that	
while	there	was	a	role	for	an	outsider	to	play	in	intervening	in	conflict,	his	
development	of	the	elicitive	training	model	prioritised	the	necessity	to	both	value	
and	use	local	culture	and	knowledge.	This	theoretical	development	is	what	
Paffenholz	refers	to	as	the	first	local	turn	(Paffenholz,	2015).	
2.2.2	Strategic,	integrated	and	multi-tracked	approaches	to	peacebuilding		
Lederachs	(1997)	next	text	Building	Peace:	Sustainable	Reconciliation	in	Divided	
Societies	built	upon	his	earlier	work	defining	conflict	transformation	and	expanded	
it	by	introducing	his	conceptualisation	of	the	term	peacebuilding.	Lederach	
distinguishes	his	own	perspective	from	that	of	Boutros-Boutros	Ghalis	1992	
Agenda	for	Peace,	and	rather	than	viewing	peacebuilding	as	post-accord,	defines	it	
[A]	comprehensive	concept	that	encompasses,	generates,	and	sustains	the	
full	array	of	processes,	approaches,	and	stages	needed	to	transform	conflict	
toward	more	sustainable,	peaceful	relationships.	The	term	thus	involves	a	
wide	range	of	activities	and	functions	that	both	precede	and	follow	formal	
peace	accords.	Metaphorically,	peace	is	seen	not	merely	as	a	stage	in	time	or	
a	condition.	It	is	a	dynamic	social	construct	(Lederach,	1997	p.20).	
Lederachs	work	contributed	to	a	conversation	beginning	to	surface	that	sought	to	
move	beyond	a	view	of	either	top-down	or	bottom-up	peacebuilding.	This	added	to	
a	growing	body	of	literature	on	multiple	forms	of	diplomacy	known	as	multi-track	
as	developed	the	previous	year	by	Diamond	and	McDonald	(1996).	Multi-track	
diplomacy	expanded	peace	activities	beyond	Track	I	and	II	to	include	nine	different	
tracks:	business,	private	citizens,	research,	training	and	education,	activism,	
religion,	funding,	communications,	and	the	media.	Commenting	on	this	expanded	
direction,	Gawerc	describes:	
The	relatively	new	interest	in	comprehensive	multi-dimensional,	multi-level,	
and	multi-track	approaches	to	peace	is	due	to	the	limited	success	of	
traditional	diplomacy	and	military	intervention	to	control	protracted	conflicts	
let	alone	achieve	peace	(Gawerc,	2006	p.440).	
Of	particular	importance	in	unpacking	the	conceptual	and	practical	outworking	of	a	
broader	understanding	of	peacebuilding	was	Lederachs	analytical	model	Actors	
and	Approaches	to	Peacebuilding	described	as	an	analytical	framework	for	
describing	the	levels	of	an	affected	population	(Lederach,	1997	p.37).	The	model	
shown	below	sought	to	delineate	common	patterns	of	peace	activity	emerging	at	
different	levels	of	society	and	who	might	be	involved	(Beyond	Intractability,	2003).		
Figure	1.	Actors	and	approaches	to	peacebuilding	in	Lederach	(1997)	cited	from	
Beyond	Intractability	(2003).		
Illustrated	in	Figure	1,	the	model	focuses	on	strategic	leadership	at	the	top-level,	
middle-range	level	and	at	the	grassroots-level,	and	seeks	to	portray	constraints	and	
opportunities	for	peacebuilding	leadership	both	descriptively	and	prescriptively.	
Descriptively	it	seeks	to	illustrate	that	top-level	leadership	is	often	the	least	affected	
by	conflict	but	is	the	most	politically	powerful	and	the	most	often	viewed	as	
responsible	for	the	task	of	addressing	or	resolving	conflict.		Being	most	visible,	
however,	top-level	leaders	are	often	least	able	to	take	risks	for	peace	for	fear	of	
losing	face	or	the	support	of	their	own	constituencies	in	negotiations.	By	contrast,	
those	at	the	grassroots	level	at	the	bottom	of	the	triangle	may	be	most	directly	
affected	by	conflict,	but	have	least	access	to	top	level	leadership	and	consequently	
lack	power	to	influence	the	resolution	of	the	conflict.	The	middle-range	level	of	
leadership	is	described	as	those	who	have	connections	to	both	grassroots	
communities	and	are	known	to	top-level	leadership,	for	example,	members	of	civil	
society	such	as	religious	leaders,	non-governmental	organisations,	academics,	
womens	groups	or	other	respected	local	leaders.	Leaders	in	the	middle-range	level	
of	society	are	also	less	directly	affected	violence	and	conflict	than	those	at	the	
grassroots.	They	are	also	less	visible	in	the	public	eye,	and,	due	to	the	nature	of	
their	positioning	between	the	two,	have	potential	to	become	conduits	and	
communicate	on	the	ground	realities	to	top-level	actors.	Leadership	at	the	middle-
range	level	is	positioned	to	enable	relationships	across	lines	of	division	through	
professional	relationships	and	social	networks	that	cross	identity	lines	of	division	
(Lederach,	1997	pp.	41-42).	The	model	depicts	a	range	of	approaches	that	each	
level	may	undertake	to	advance	peacebuilding.	However,	Lederach	contends	that	
middle-range	level	leaders	hold	a	unique	potential	within	conflict	settings	due	to	
their	ability	to	connect	vertically	both	with	grassroots	constituencies	and	top-level	
leadership,	while	also	holding	horizontal	relationships	across	the	lines	of	divisions.	
Lederach	refers	to	this	as	middle-out	peacebuilding	and	describes	it	as	
strategically	important	to	connect	issues	with	systems	both	vertically	and	
horizontally	within	different	levels	of	peacebuilding	(ibid,	p.151).	
2.2.2.1	Levels	of	peacebuilding:	grassroots	and	civil	society		
Lederachs	framework	was	one	of	the	first	to	conceptually	link	how	levels	of	
peacebuilding	could	be	integrated	more	holistically	in	order	to	strategically	build	a	
platform	for	long-term	processes	to	build	peace.	From	this	perspective,	each	level	
contained	actors	and	activities	that	could	make	a	contribution	towards	
peacebuilding,	with	the	middle-range	level	offering	a	particularly	unique	position.	
The	framework	outlines	that	the	grassroots	represents	the	greatest	masses	of	
people,	and	as	Lederach	states:		life	at	this	level	is	characterized,	particularly	in	
settings	of	protracted	conflict	and	war,	by	a	survival	mentality	(ibid,	p.	42).	Local	
grassroots	leaders	operating	at	this	level,	he	argues,	understand	the	level	of	
suffering	and	fear	of	those	affected	by	the	conflict,	know	their	community	micro-
politics	and	usually	reflect	the	sharpest	ends	of	divided	identity	lines	living	at	the	
coalface	between	warring	communities	(ibid,	p.43).		
While	Lederach	uses	the	terms	middle-range	and	grassroots-level	peacebuilding,	
another	term	used	in	recent	years	is	civil	society	peacebuilding-	a	term	scholars	
readily	admit	is	ill	defined	and	obscure:		
Civil	society	resists	easy	definition,	especially	when	discussing	it	as	a	global	
development.	Every	society	has	its	own	distinct	forms	of	social	organization,	
cultural	and	political	traditions,	as	well	as	contemporary	state	and	economic	
structures	-	all	of	which	are	central	to	the	development	of	civil	society	and	
shape	its	specific	featuresMost	broadly	understood,	however,	civil	society	
refers	to	the	web	of	social	relations	that	exist	in	the	space	between	the	state,	
the	market	(activities	with	the	aim	of	extracting	profit),	and	the	private	life	of	
families	and	individuals	(Barnes,	2006b	p.	7).		
Barnes	(2006a)	writes	that	civil	society	can	be	expressed	through	associations	that	
represent	the	values,	needs	and	interests	within	society,	containing	potential	either	
for	contributing	to	war	or	peace.	She	argues	that	civil	society,	most	often	the	
victims	and	casualties	of	conflict	often	desire	ways	to	address	conflict:	Living	
alongside	the	armed	actors	they	have	greater	need	and	greater	potential	to	take	
part	in	peacebuilding	(Barnes,	2006a	p.7).	However,	others	scrutinise	the	tensions	
associated	with	involving	civil	society	in	peacebuilding.	The	main	critique	to	surface	
involves	the	nature	of	civil	society	itself	and	whether	it	can	be	so	neatly	categorised	
or	indeed	model	pluralistic	democratic	structures	in	contexts	of	deep	societal	
divides.	Writing	of	civil	society	peacebuilding	in	Sri	Lanka,	Orjuela	(2003)	states:		
The	assumption	that	civil	society	is	democratically	organized,	and	thus	in	
itself	contributes	to	the	building	of	a	society	in	which	conflicts	are	handled	
non-violently	and	democratically,	must	be	scrutinized.	Authoritarian	
structures	and	democratic	deficits	characterize	many	civil-society	groups	in	
Sri	Lanka	(Orjuela,	2003	p.210).	
Likewise,	authors	writing	about	divided	societies	recognise	that	civil	society	also	
includes	what	might	be	termed	uncivil	which	can	be	instrumental	in	mobilising	for	
war	as	much	as	for	peace,	and	reflect	the	divisions	that	form	and	inform	conflict	
dynamics	(Orjuela,	2003;	Barnes,	2005;	Acheson	et	al.,	2011).		Consequently,	there	
is	amongst	some	scholars,	the	suggestion	that	expectations	for	civil	society	
peacebuilding	may	be	at	times	unrealistic	considering	deep	ethnic	and	identity	
divides		(Belloni,	2009;	White,	2011;	Acheson,	et	al.,	2011).	
Marchetti	and	Tocci	(2009)	approach	the	conundrum	of	civil	and	uncivil	society	by	
shifting	terms,	framing	civil	society	in	conflict	zones	as	conflict	society	(Marchetti	
and	Tocci,	2009	p.	206).		Eschewing	what	they	see	as	a	normative	trap,	their	view	is	
that	their	term	better	illustrates	that	civil	society	contains	both	civil	and	uncivil	
elements.	They	assert	there	are	three	roles	civil	society	may	play	in	conflict:	fuelling	
conflict,	holding	conflict,	and	peacemaking.	These	are	determined	by	context,	
identity,	goals,	and	frameworks	for	action	that	are	subject	to	specific	political	
contexts	(ibid	p.	216).		Paffenholz	(2010)	concurs	that	the	conflict	context	is	a	
crucial	determinant	in	whether	or	not	civil	society	can	play	a	constructive	role	in	
peacebuilding.	She	outlines	six	influencing	factors:	1)	the	behaviour	of	the	state,	its	
governance	structures	and	role	in	the	conflict;	2)	the	level	of	violence;	3)	the	
freedom	of	the	media	to	report	in	a	balanced	manner;	4)	diversity	within	civil	
society	and	the	nature	of	existing	conflict	divisions;	5)	the	behaviour	of	external	
actors;	and	6)	the	roles	of	donors	engaged	in	peacebuilding	(Paffenholz,	2010	
p.405).	She	concludes	that	the	levels	of	violence	and	the	behaviours	of	the	state	are	
the	two	most	significant	determinants	that	influence	the	potential	for	action	within	
civil	society,	but	also	that	the	greater	polarisation	or	radicalisation	that	exists	within	
civil	society,	the	more	difficult	it	is	to	act	in	common	cause	for	peacebuilding	(ibid,	
pp.	423-424).		
In	another	chapter	from	the	same	text,	Paffenholz	(2010,	pp.43-61),	concerned	over	
the	lack	of	empirical	evidence	informing	theories	of	civil	society	peacebuilding,	
outlines	the	results	from	26	empirical	studies.	She	finds	three	main	trends:	Firstly,	
that	the	practice	of	civil-society	peacebuilding	was	influenced	by	two	differing	
schools	of	thought	which	she	characterised	as,	liberal	peacebuilding	and	
sustainable	peacebuilding	with	the	former	exemplified	by	international	global	
institutions	such	as	the	UN	and	World	Bank,	and	the	latter	sustainable	school	
influenced	by	Lederach.	She	contends	that	much	of	the	practice	that	reflects	
Lederachs	approach	emphasises,	in	particular,	his	middle-out	approach	which	has	
created	a	mushrooming	of	conflict	resolution	training	and	dialogue	initiatives,	
executed	mostly	by	international	and	national	NGOs	which	receive	the	majority	of	
funding	(ibid,	pp.	59-60).		Secondly,	she	asserts	that	there	was	a	growing	
recognition	that	national	actors	should	play	the	primary	role	in	peacebuilding	and	a	
more	limited	one	should	be	taken	up	by	outside	interveners,	with	actors	within	civil	
society	having	as	an	important	a	role	to	play	in	building	peace	as	those	involved	
with	official	or	unofficial	negotiations.	However,	despite	its	importance,	her	reviews	
found	that	local	actors	were	being	crowded	out	by	both	national	and	international	
NGO-based	initiatives	within	civil	society	peacebuilding.	She	writes	that	in	some	
places	donor-driven	NGO	civil	society	initiatives	have	limited	the	capacity	to	create	
domestic	social	capital	and	ownership	for	the	peace	process	(Paffenholz,	2010	
pp.59-60).	This	last	criticism	echoes	other	scholars	who	suggest	that	the	recent	
interest	in	civil	society	peacebuilding	is	fuelled	in	part	by	a	state-building	agenda	
that	uses	NGOs	as	tools	in	a	democratising	agenda	(Richmond,	2005;	Pouligny,	
2005).	These	emerging	sets	of	concerns	dovetail	with	literature	affiliated	with	the	
school	of	critical	peace,	which	the	next	section	will	detail	more	fully	which	
describe	civil	society	peacebuilding	interventions	as	mechanisms	to	establish	what	
is	now	termed	a	liberal	peace.	
2.3.	Liberal	peace	and	the	critical	peace	school		
Boutros	Boutros	Ghalis	commitment	to	post-conflict	peacebuilding	as	articulated	in	
An	Agenda	for	Peace	in	1992	aimed	to	support	states	after	a	cessation	of	violence	
and	a	negotiated	peace	agreement	had	been	secured.	It	sought	to	use	
peacebuilding	to	promote	post-conflict	recovery	and	prevent	the	re-emergence	of	
conflicts.	Growing	in	a	parallel	track	was	an	increasing	recognition	by	those	in	the	
international	arena	that	human	insecurity,	poverty,	and	conflict	often	exacerbated	
each	other,	hence,	a	need	to	become	more	skilful	and	conflict-sensitive	to	consider	
ways	that	overlapping	issues	could	be	tackled	together.	This	development	increased	
an	interest	in	the	expansion	of	peacebuilding	to	augment,	complement	and	
enhance	existing	aid	and	relief,	poverty	alleviation	and	development	programmes.	
This	expanded	activity	created	both	opportunities	and	tensions	for	practitioners	
and	academics	in	the	field	of	peace	studies.	Recognition	of	the	relevance	of	
peacebuilding	to	areas	of	global	concern	such	as	international	aid	and	development,	
human	security	and	-particularly	after	the	events	of	9-11	to	prevent	terrorism,	has	
broadened	its	previous	scope	(Zelizer,	2013).	In	this	regard,	needless	to	say,	many	
worthy	initiatives	have	benefited	by	the	increased	profile	given	to	peacebuilding	
efforts.		
However,	this	same	expansion	has	been	the	subject	of	a	growing	critique.	One	
assertion	is	that	the	very	term	peace	is	contested,	and	is	not,	nor	ever	has	been	
value	or	interest-free	(Richmond,	2005).		The	argument	portends	that	the	move	
towards	an	expanded	global	peacebuilding	mandate	has	served	to	create	
institutionalised	and	bureaucratic	formations	of	peace	which	valorise	a	specific	
form	-	a	liberal	peace.	A	further	critique	is	that	globalised	peacebuilding	lends	
itself	to	a	technocratic	blueprint	approach	to	intervention	in	order	to	tackle	conflict-
prone,	post-conflict	or	failed-states	(Richmond,	2005,	2009;	Mac	Ginty,	2006,	
Goetschel	and	Hagmann,	2009)	and	undermines	local	agency.	Conceptually	and	in	
practice,	the	liberal	peace	is	viewed	as	both	promoting	and	reflective	of	the	
interests	and	normative	values	of	liberal	democratic	states.	
2.3.1	Technocratic	peacebuilding	and	its	undermining	of	the	local		
Several	strands	of	the	liberal	peace	critique	particularly	impact	upon	peacebuilding	
at	the	grassroots	and	within	civil	society.	While	as	mentioned,	certainly	the	profile	
raised	for	international	peacebuilding	has	undoubtedly	given	worthy	grassroots	and	
civil	society	initiatives	much	needed	resources	and	recognition.		There	is	however,	
an	accusation	that	its	globalised	form	has	advertently	or	inadvertently	marginalised	
and	side-lined	local	actors-	operating	without	adequate	involvement,	consultation,	
and	respect	for	local	knowledge	(Anderson	and	Olsen,	2003;	Pouligny,	2005;	Doe,	
2009;	Paffenholz,	2010).	Under-involving	local	actors	has	led	to	problematic	results	
in	places	for	example	in	Bosnia	after	the	Dayton	Accords	(Donais,	2009),	and	the	
Democratic	Republic	of	Congo	(DRC)		(Odendaal,	2013	p.22)	leaving	instead,	as	Mac	
Ginty	describes,	a	no-war	peace;	a	shallow	and	superficial	form	of	negative	peace	
imposed	from	outside:	
Elements	of	the	liberal	democratic	peace	have	undergone	a	process	of	
commodification	into	pre-packaged	templates	delivered	as	part	of	
internationally	supported	peace	accord	implementation	plansComponent	
parts	of	this	preferred	model	of	peace	are	standardised	into	peace-support	
programmes	and	projects	that	differ	little	whether	the	implementation	
location	is	Bosnia	or	Rwanda.	Peace	under	the	liberal	democratic	peace	
model,	becomes	formulaic	and	its	reduced	to	time-limited	events	(two	or	
three	year	projects	on	refugee	repatriation,	livelihood	generation	and	
democracy	training)	aside	from	the	issue	of	the	quality	of	peace	such	
standardised	approaches	deliver,	the	commodification	of	peace	in	
internationally	supported	peace	interventions	is	an	antithesis	to	the	view	
that	peace	is	a	process	(Mac	Ginty,	2006	p.18).	
A	second	concern	shared	by	scholars	and	practitioners	of	the	liberal	peace	is	a	
privileging	of	bureaucratic	and	technocratic	externally	derived	measures	of	success	
over	locally	determined	peace	criteria	(Donais	2009;	Goetschel	and	Hagmann,	2009;	
Mac	Ginty,	2012).	Under	pressure	from	donor	countries	and	regional	funding	bodies	
now	willing	to	invest	in	peacebuilding	initiatives,	those	implementing	peacebuilding	
activities	have	to	account	for	funds	and	produce	maximum	impact	to	demonstrate	
value	for	money.	Practitioners	in	particular	argue	that	such	templates,	more	
familiar	to	international	relief	and	development	efforts,	do	not	necessarily	lend	
themselves	well	to	peacebuilding,	as	causal	attributions	are	hard	to	establish	within	
the	fluidity	of	conflict	contexts	(Anderson	and	Olsen,	2003;	Nuefeldt,	2007).	
Furthermore,	reducing	local	ownership	serves	to	compound	war-aggravated	
traumas	and	disempowerment	already	suffered	by	local	populations	(Donais,	2009).	
Donais	(2009)	suggests	this	approach	in	part	stems	from	the	tendency	to	
pathologise	conflict	states,	thus	justifying	a	need	to	control	the	intervention	and,	
where	permitted	at	all		local	ownership	unfolds	under	the	careful	supervision	of	
responsible	outsiders,	who	set	the	broad	parameters	of	what	is	and	is	not	
permissible	(Donais,	2009	p.8).	Building	on	the	last	point,	it	is	argued	that	at	best	
outsider-driven	peace	agendas	may	have	no	real	impact	on	local	conflict	dynamics,	
but	at	worse	can	exacerbate	violence,	failing	to	understand	or	obscure	local	conflict	
drivers.	Conversely,	a	better	understanding	of	local	micro-dynamics	and	the	
regional,	territorial	or	community	histories	that	fuel	violence	might	aid	local	
peacebuilding	(Odendaal,	2013).		Locals,	however	side-lined,	may	themselves	
assert	agency	to	resist	such	imposition	creating	hybridised	forms	of	peacebuilding.	
However,	Autesserres	(2014)	scholarship	suggests	local	agency	is	routinely	
structurally	subordinated	due	to	types	of	knowledge	valued	in	international	
peacebuilding	practice,	a	view	discussed	in	more	detail	below.	
2.3.2	Everyday	peace	and	the	politics	of	peacebuilding	knowledge		
Autesserres	(2014)	examination	of	the	everyday	practices	of	international	
peacebuilding	interveners	takes	the	critical	peace	literature	even	deeper	into	the	
politics	of	intervention	and	knowledge	production.	The	thrust	of	the	argument	
claims	that	the	technocratic	and	bureaucratic	nature	of	international	peacebuilding	
(exemplified	by	INGOS	such	as	the	United	Nations	and	The	World	Bank)	has	created	
everyday	practices	that	ultimately	make	such	interventions	less	effective.	
Recognising	that	this	is	in	part	due	to	the	tensions	produced	by	imposition	of	the	
western	liberal	peace,	and	informed	by	her	own	research	in	DRC,	Kosovo	and	
South	Sudan,	she	counters	that	everyday	practices	of	international	peacebuilders	
are	also	part	and	parcel	of	the	problem.	These	practices,	such	as	regularly	rotating	
ex-patriate	(expat)	employees	from	short-term	assignments	in	one	conflict	zone	to	
another,	creates	a	subculture	of	transglobal	expats	who	in	most	cases	do	not	know	
the	local	cultures,	languages	or	customs	of	their	host	countries.	Autesserre	
pinpoints	that	one	of	the	main	reasons	that	such	practices	occur	is	due	to	the	fact	
that	thematic	or	technical	knowledge	is	valued	over	local	knowledge	or	in-country	
expertise	(Autesserre,	2014	pp.	68-96).	This	elevation	of	technical	and	thematic	
knowledge	is	evident	she	argues,	for	example,	in	the	hiring	practices	of	
international	institutions	and	INGOs	as	they	prioritise	technical	skills	or	academic	
credentials	over	country-specific	knowledge	such	as	local	languages,	or	area	
expertise	gained	by	years	of	experience	working	in-country.	While	Autessere	is	of	
the	perspective	that	both	thematic	and	local	knowledge	are	important,	in	the	
practices	of	knowledge	production	within	international	peacebuilding,	she	argues	
that	the	former	subordinates	the	latter.	The	result	leads	to	ill-equipped	interveners	
who	lack	the	necessary	information	to	understand	the	nuances	of	the	conflict	
context,	and	reinforce	power	imbalances	and	a	view	of	expat	as	expert	and	local	
stakeholder	as	less	sophisticated	and	more	parochial	(Autessere,	2014	p.	84).	
The	everyday	has	also	been	discussed	within	academic	literature	as	a	lens	of	
analysis	to	describe,	locate	and	explain	different	forms	of	agency	among	local	
populations	living	in	divided	societies.	Scholarship	generated	about	everyday	
agency	used	to	navigate	conflict	are	also	primarily	associated	with	the	critique	of	
the	liberal	peace	to	offset	what	has	been	described	by	Mac	Ginty	(2016)	as	binary	
and	dichotomised	views	of	ordinary	people	in	conflict	zones	(Mac	Ginty,	2016	
pp.13-14).	In	part	this	was	to	contribute	to	a	debate	that	he	construed	was	divorced	
from	his	own	experience	of	growing	up	in	Northern	Ireland:	
My	father	came	into	my	mind	as	I	saw	the	debate	on	academic	agency	and	
the	liberal	peace	take	shape.	It	was	yet	another	case	of	academic	debates	in	
seminar	rooms,	conference	panels	and	journals	not	reflecting	what	I	had	seen	
from	my	own	experience.	The	debate	on	agency	in	peacebuilding	contexts	
seemed	to	suggest	that	there	were	two	options:	that	people	could	comply	
with	internationally	sponsored	peacebuilding	or	that	they	could	resist	it.	A	
normative	subtext	accompanied	this	debate	and	seemed	to	suggest	that	
compliance	was	for	the	weak,	cowed	or	powerless,	or	those	in	cahoots	with	
power.	Resistance,	on	the	other	hand,	was	seen	as	normatively	positive	and	in	
keeping	with	the	thinking	of	ideological	preferences	of	those	critiquing	the	
liberal	peace	(ibid,	p.13).	
The	outcome	of	some	of	this	scholarship	has	led	to	a	rethinking	of	types	of	agency	
within	conflict,	serving	to	blur	lines	and	reflect	more	of	the	grey	areas	of	nuance	
that	those	living	in	deeply	contested	societies	may	experience.	Instead	of	fitting	into	
ideal	normative	categories	the	everyday	contains	a	greater	awareness	of	the	
multitude	of	ways	human	ingenuity,	particularly	those	living	within	conflict	contexts	
utilise	when	managing	on	a	day-to-day	basis,	and	what	may	inform	choices	about	
how	best	to	live	in	such	a	context.		
While	coping	mechanisms	may	be	construed	as	living	within	a	negative	peace,	it	is	
argued	that	the	everyday	despite	limitations	is	also	a	potential	location	for	
transformation	(Mac	Ginty,	2014).	Thus,	in	an	attempt	to	move	away	from	
technocratic	peacebuilding	this	literature	has	led	to	a	reconsideration	of	standard	
and	normative	peacebuilding	Design,	Monitoring	and	Evaluation	(DME)	practices	in	
order	to	retune	them	to	monitor	a	wider	array	of	everyday	indicators	of	peace	as	
defined	by	local	populations	(Mac	Ginty,	2013;	Mac	Ginty	and	Firchow,	2016).		
2.4	Tensions	and	debates	about	knowledge	for	peacebuilding		
There	are	two	main	tensions	evident	in	the	literature	that	intersects	with	this	thesis,	
particularly	as	they	speak	to	issues	of	knowledge	production	for	peace.	These	
tensions	could	be	essentialised	as:	Who	is	a	peacebuilder?	What	types	of	knowledge	
do	they	have	or	need	to	have,	to	build	peace?	The	fact	that	these	two	questions	
have	emerged	as	pressing	debates	within	the	field	is	revealing	of	the	development	
of	both	peacebuilding	practice	and	the	academic	field.	The	first	question,	who	is	a	
peacebuilder,	asks	who	is	best	placed	to	intervene	as	a	peacebuilder	and	in	doing	so	
debates	the	role	of	insiders	(locals)	and	outsiders	(external	interveners)	and	to	what	
effect?	Lederach	(as	noted	earlier)	from	the	early	and	mid-1990s	advocated	the	
value	of	local	knowledge	citing	its	importance	for	conflict	transformation	
interventions	and	training,	and	that	it	remains	a	much-discussed	topic	is	
noteworthy.	Paffenholz	(2015)	describes	Lederachs	scholarship	as	the	first	of	two	
local	turns	in	peacebuilding	literature.	Describing	the	first	turn	as	originating	with	
Lederach	and	other	early	conflict	resolution	theorists,	Paffenholz	characterises	it	as	
a	school	of	thought	associated	with	sustainable	peacebuilding.		By	contrast,	she	
views	the	second	turn	as	associated	with	the	school	of	critical	peace	and	
influenced	by	a	post-colonial	and	post-structuralist	theoretical	framework	
(Paffenholz,	2015	p.1).	While	both	local	turns	may	be	lodged	in	different	
theoretical	orientations,	there	remains	a	shared	set	of	concerns	that	speak	to	the	
tensions	concerning	knowledge	production	for	peacebuilding.	
Firstly,	interventions	may	intentionally	or	unintentionally	reinforce	global	power	
inequities	with	the	dominance	of	outsider	approaches	(often	the	global	north	over	
the	global	south)	which	disempowers	and	marginalises	local	people.	Secondly,	that	
outsider-based	interventions	ultimately	impact	the	success	and	utility	of	sustainable	
peacebuilding.	While	the	critical	peace	school	may	focus	on	the	detriment	of	
outside	intervention	as	a	form	of	neo-colonial	imposed	peace,	the	sustainable	
school	emphasises	the	lack	of	legitimacy	or	sustainability	of	such	approaches.	
However,	a	further	charge	reflects	concerns	over	both	power	and	sustainability	by	
claiming	that	outsider	interventions	utilise	externalised	concepts	and	ideas	which	
are	masked	as	universal	but	are	in	fact	embedded	with	liberal	western	norms.		
Therefore,	outsider	interventions	may	be	both	a	tool	of	domination	and	embedded	
with	outsider	norms	that	lack	utility	and	relevance.		
Providing	that	the	local	is	considered	a	source	of	knowledge,	literature	asks	within	
a	given	conflict	context,	whether	peacebuilding	at	the	grassroots	and	within	civil	
society	is	a	valid	and	valuable	location	of	knowledge	for	peace,	or	if	day-to-day	
survival	is	too	urgent.	Lederach	(1997)	describes	the	grassroots-level	as	the	
masses,	the	base	of	society	that	are	often	focused	on	everyday	survival	and	in	
worse	cases	trying	to	meet	basic	needs	for	shelter,	food	and	safety	(Lederach,	1997	
p.42).	However,	he	includes	grassroots	leaders	as	important	in	his	peacebuilding	
framework.	Lederach	does	not	use	the	term	civil	society	but	lists	NGOs	within	his	
middle-range	leadership	level	(ibid).		Brewer	(2010)	distinguishes	between	
grassroots	and	civil	society,	stating	that	grassroots	are	not	usually	the	
peacebuilders:	
But	what	work	there	is	done	in	peace	processes	tends	not	to	come	from	the	
grassroots.	The	grassroots	are	amorphous,	unorganized	if	not	disorganized	
and	poor.	With	weak	social	capital	and	suffering	from	social	exclusion	the	
grassroots	lacks	the	skills,	resources	and	motivations	found	in	civil	society	
(Ibid,	54).	
By	contrast,	Mac	Ginty	(2013;	2014)	as	mentioned	previously,	has	highlighted	the	
ingenuity	of	the	grassroots		everyday	peacebuilding	and	advocates	for	bottom-up	
indicators	of	peace	impact	at	the	community	level	(ibid).	Barnes	occupies	a	middle-
ground	by	stating:	While	it	is	rare	for	grassroots	efforts	to	transform	wider	systems	
of	conflict	and	war;	it	is	also	not	possible	for	these	wider	systems	to	be	transformed	
without	stimulating	changes	at	the	community	level	(Barnes,	2006b	p.	9).			As	
these	views	suggest,	there	is	on-going	debate	about	how	much	agency	is	afforded	
to	grassroots	peacebuilding	and	within	civil	society.	
One	of	the	most	significant	differences	between	the	sustainable	peace	school	and	
the	critical	peace	school	is	the	role	of	the	intervener.	While	the	sustainable	school	
sees	a	role	for	the	outsider,	providing	they	take	an	elicitive	approach	(Lederach,	
1997)	the	critical	peace	school	takes	a	much	more	negative	view	of	the	outsider	as	
an	intervener.	It	could	be	argued	that	the	one	cause	of	the	disenchantment	with	
intervention	has	been	exacerbated	by	the	manner	by	which	peacebuilding	has	
expanded	and	professionalised.		
	For	example,	a	shift	in	discourse	away	from	more	idealistic	and	utopian	
conceptualisations	of	peace	towards	a	view	of	strategic	peace	may	have	helped	to	
move	views	of	intervention	in	conflict	away	from	zero	sum	debates	between	hawk	
and	dove.	However,	it	may	be	that	peacebuilding	also	became	a	victim	of	its	own	
success	(Stanton	and	Kelly,	2015).	Put	another	way,	the	same	promising	
developments	that	helped	to	build	a	professionalised	body	of	knowledge	and	
research	in	peace	studies	have	also	played	a	role	in	creating	some	of	the	complaints	
at	the	source	of	the	liberal	peace	critique.	For	example,	the	strategic	frameworks	
proposed	in	Lederachs	second	book,	Building	Peace:	Sustainable	Reconciliation	in	
Divided	Societies	(1997),	while	advancing	analytical	tools	for	peacebuilding	may	also	
have	become	a	potential	blueprint	for	INGOs	or	the	UN.	As	Paffenholz	(2010)	found	
in	her	review	of	civil	society	peacebuilding,	many	INGOs	had	adopted	Lederachs	
middle-out	approach.	With	the	best	of	intentions,	promising	academic	theoretical	
peacebuilding	developments	can	become	bureaucratic	instruments	that	run	
counter	to	their	very	intention.	While	not	negating	any	of	its	significance,	it	is	
interesting	to	consider	what	might	have	been	the	outcome	for	the	field	if	
Lederachs	first	book	Preparing	for	Peace	(1995)	had	been	his	definitive	signature	
text	with	its	strong	emancipatory	approach,	rather	than	the	text	that	followed	it	
Building	Peace:	Sustainable	Reconciliation	in	Divided	Societies	(1997)	with	its	subtle	
shift	towards	strategic	and	possibly	more	technically	oriented	approaches	to	
building	peace.		
The	professionalisation	of	peace	has	no	doubt	played	a	role	in	co-producing	an	
orientation	towards	the	more	technocratic	peace	(Mac	Ginty,	2012;	Chandler,	2017)	
and,	in	turn,	what	type	of	knowledge	is	most	valuable	for	peacebuilding.	The	debate	
charges	that	due	in	part	to	the	professionalisation	and	bureaucratic	development	of	
peace	interventions,	thematic,	skilled	or	technical	knowledge	is	privileged	over	local	
knowledge,	as	the	former	is	claimed	to	be	more	transferable	across	differing	
contexts	(Autesserre,	2014).	Autesserres	argument	is	that	everyday	international	
peacebuilding	practice	employs	knowledge	hierarchies	that	privilege	the	outsider	
knowledge	as	the	neutral	and	un-biased	expert,	while	viewing	local	knowledge	
holders	as	at	best	parochial,	and	at	worst	biased	and	self-serving.	Autesserre	
quoting	Barnett	describes	how	knowledge	hierarchies	reinforce	professionalisation,	
so	that:	In	modern	society	credentialed	knowledge	trumps	local	and	practical	
knowledge	(ibid,	p.75).	Thus,	Mac	Gintys	development	of	everyday	peace	
indicators	(Mac	Ginty,	2013)	reflects	this	growing	interest	in	enabling	local	people	
to	build	capacity,	or	to	use	Autesserres	term,	author	their	own	peacebuilding	
(Autesserre,	2014).		
2.4.1	Knowledge	debates	in	Northern	Ireland		
In	the	case	of	Northern	Ireland,	tensions	over	knowledge	production	for	
peacebuilding	focus	less	on	whether	local	or	external	actors	are	best	placed	to	
intervene.	Given	that	most	intervention	has	been	locally	led	and	driven,	the	role	of	
outsiders	is	a	much	less	highly	charged	issue;	however,	there	are	related	sets	of	
concerns	surrounding	the	role	and	impact	of	peacebuilding	conducted	by	grassroots	
actors	within	civil	society.	In	this	regard,	an	unnamed	corollary	exists-	if	its	impact	is	
indeterminable-	then	consequently	there	is	little	valuable	knowledge	held	about	
peacebuilding	by	those	involved.		Furthermore,	the	literature	focused	on	grassroots	
and	civil	society	peacebuilding	impact	in	Northern	Ireland	primarily	judges	impact	
against	their	role	in	securing	or	supporting	the	political	peace	(McCartney,	1999;	
Cochrane,	2001a,	2001b,	2006;	Cochrane	and	Dunn,	2002;	Guelke,	2003;	Belloni,	
2010;	White,	2011).	When	considered	against	this	yardstick,	the	scholarship	
primarily	draws	a	lukewarm	picture.	Exceptions	to	this	are	in	the	minority,	but	are	
noteworthy.	Fitzduff	and	Williams	(2007)	take	a	case-study	approach	to	research	
factors	that	may	have	helped	Northern	Ireland	move	towards	peace	and	find	that	
civil-society	based	activities	account	for	over	half	of	the	initiatives	deemed	most	
important	to	that	effort.	Similarly,	Kilmurray	(2016)	seeks	to	take	the	spotlight	off	
the	achievements	of	the	political	actors	with	an	exhaustive	chronicle	of	the	efforts	
of	community-level	activism	throughout	the	Troubles.			
Northern	Ireland	is	more	often	offered	as	an	illustration	of	a	conflict	society	based	
on	the	argument	that	conflict	societies	can	be	rallied	for	conflict	or	peace	
(Marchetti	and	Tocci,	2009).	Belloni	(2009)	cites	as	an	example	the	popularity	of	
both	the	Orange	Order	and	the	Gaelic	Athletic	Association	(GAA)	two	organisations	
that	have	held	exclusionary	policies	and	practices	and	that	also	manifest	the	
divisions	in	the	community	(Belloni,	2009).	White	(2011)	critiques	Northern	Ireland	
for	similar	reasons,	arguing	that	if	civil	society	peacebuilding	is	positively	correlated	
to	social	capital,	Northern	Ireland	may	suffer	from	excessive	bonding	capital	but	not	
enough	bridging	capital.	He	extends	the	critique	stating	that	the	prospect	for	
developing	a	robust	cross-communal	civil	society	is	thwarted	by	consociationalism	
and	as	a	result,	civil	society	is	likely	to	become	more,	rather	than	less,	entrenched	
within	their	respective	communities.		Similarly,	Acheson	et	al.	conclude	
expectations	about	the	effective	role	of	civil	society	organisations	should	be	scaled	
back	(Acheson	et	al,	2011	pp.18-19).		
	More	optimistic	views	from	scholars	on	its	role	on	securing	the	political	peace	was	
that	efforts	made	at	a	grassroots	level	and	within	civil	society	created	a	favourable	
backdrop	for	Track	1	political	actors	during	negotiations	(Cochrane,	2001a;	2001b;	
2006;	Cochrane	and	Dunn,	2002;	Fitzduff,	2002;	McCartney,	1999;	Knox,	2011;	Knox	
and	Quirk,	2000).	Guelke	(2003)	in	particular	acknowledges	the	role	of	Initiative	92	
and	the	YES	campaign	as	influential	to	political	negotiations	and	in	helping	the	
referendum	to	pass,	but	also	articulates	that	a	case	can	be	made	that	efforts	of	civil	
society	has	had	little	influence	on	changing	societal	attitudes	and	that,		even	as	a	
background	factor,	civil	society	tends	to	be	credited	with	little	influence	upon	
events	or	attitudes	(Guelke,	2003	p.68).		
Cochrane	(2001a,	2001b;	2006)	and	Cochrane	and	Dunn	(2002)	cover	the	most	
territory	on	the	role	of	grassroots	and	civil	society	based	peacebuilding	efforts	led	
by,	what	they	term	Peace	and	Conflict	Resolution	Organisations	(P/CROs).	These	
authors	argue	that	such	groups	and	their	associated	activity	was	indirectly	
important	and	primarily	acknowledge	the	support	role	that	local	voluntary	groups	
played	in	holding	society	together	during	the	worst	of	the	violence	(Cochrane,	
2001a,	2001b,	2006;	Cochrane	and	Dunn,	2002).	They	state	there	is	a	view	that	
without	such	groups	Northern	Ireland	would	have	been	much	worse:		
As	well	as	playing	a	stretcher-bearer	and	acting	as	a	comfort	for	the	worst	
aspects	of	the	conflict,	these	groups,	for	all	their	inadequacies,	provided	
evidence	for	the	desire	for	peace	in	Northern	Ireland	(Cochrane	and	Dunn,	
2002	p.179).		
As	mentioned	previously,	in	light	of	the	question	of	what	knowledge	has	been	
gained	about	peacebuilding,	a	critique	is	implied	in	the	discussion	of	its	role	and	
impact-	but	the	critique	is	also	made	explicitly.	Grassroots	and	civil	society	
peacebuilding	groups	are	viewed,	as	expanded	below,	as	suffering	from	a	lack	of	
strategy	and	coherency.	Cochrane	(2001b)	suggests	a	perception	that	the	sector	has	
been	accused	of	being		muddle-headed	peaceniks	(Cochrane,	2001b	p	99).	One	
explanation	offered	by	these	authors	for	this	perception	is	that	peacebuilding	
approaches	are	informed	by	two	different	theoretical	perspectives	-	with	one	view	
believing	that	relational	and	behavioural	approaches	are	needed	to	tackle	issues	of	
prejudice	and	sectarianism,	while	the	other	prioritises	structural	dimensions,	such	
as	inequality,	social	deprivation	or	justice	issues.	Incoherence	is,	in	part,	a	product	
of	these	different	theoretical	orientations.	However,	blame	is	also	attributed	to	the	
organisations	and	individuals	themselves	suggesting	they	lack	coordination,	sharing	
of	practice	and	had	conflicting	strategies:	
It	would	be	fair	to	say	that	the	P/CRO	sector	itself	shares	some	
responsibility	for	its	own	shortcomings	and	cannot	simply	blame	funders,	
policy	makers	or	the	media	for	difficulties	it	faces.	There	is	a	need	for	these	
organisations	to	think	in	a	much	more	coordinated,	holistic	and	strategic	
way	about	they	are	trying	to	achieve	(Cochrane	and	Dunn,	2002	p.171).	
Implicitly	stated	is	the	view	that	if	civil	society	peacebuilding	had	been	built	upon	
and	demonstrated	an	agreed-upon	consolidated	theoretical	coherence,	it	would	be	
more	strategic	and	therefore,	demonstrate	more	impact.	Given	these	views	of	
grassroots	level	and	civil	society	peacebuilding	in	Northern	Ireland	as	lacking	in	
strategy,	coherence	and	impact	-	it	unsurprising	to	find	that	grassroots	and	civil	
society	practitioners	are	perceived	as	muddle-headed	or	as	neglected	within	
knowledge	production	for	peacebuilding.			
This	point	speaks	to	another	dimension	of	knowledge	that	bears	some	resemblance	
to	the	broader	debates	in	the	field:	what	type	of	knowledge	is	valuable	for	
peacebuilding?	Concerns	exist	in	Northern	Ireland	that	are	echoed	in	the	broader	
critique	of	liberal	peace,	that	peacebuilding	particularly	since	1995	as	greater	
funding	arrived,	has	become	overly	bureaucratic.	Buchanan	(2011)	writes	that	
overly	technical	funding	applications	became	burdensome	for	small	organisations	
that	struggled	with	administrative	requirements.	She	describes	how	European	
funding	included	technocratic	requirements	that	increasingly	shifted	peacebuilding	
away	from	meeting	needs	towards	project	delivery,	and	demanded	a	different	set	
of	skills	and	professionalised	training:	
Peace	II	was	characterised	by	excessive	bureaucracy,	to	the	extent	that	it	
distracted	attention	away	from	the	programmes	overarching	aims	and	fixed	
attention	instead	on	operational	delivery.	The	application	process	became	a	
source	of	disempowerment	for	many	as	the	lack	of	capacity	in	the	voluntary	
and	community	sector	and	the	need	for	adequate	and	properly	trained	
support	was	simply	disregarded	(Buchanan,	2011	p.176).		
The	local	professionalisation	of	peace	was	a	concern	identified	from	as	early	as	
1995.	Lampen	(1995)	writes	that	early	peace	pioneers	sometimes	felt	pushed	
aside	by	what	they	see	as	the	increasing	professionalism	and	intellectualism	of	the	
field	(Lampen,	1995	p.144).	Local	peacebuilders	worried	that	professionalisation	
would	bring	externally-based	criteria	for	measuring	outcomes	that	local	
peacebuilders	might	feel	may	or	may	not	accurately	reflect	realities	on	the	ground,	
or	that	a	need	for	hard	empirical	results	would	direct	the	work	in	ways	that	would	
impede,	rather	than	progress,	peacebuilding:	
[T]he	demand	for	evaluation	may	lead	to	inappropriate	activities,	just	
because	they	are	easier	to	evaluate	There	may	be	a	danger	of	people	saying,	
Oh	well,	if	thats	what	they	wantYet	facilitating	a	dialogue	between	two	
hardline	community	leaders	in	a	flashpoint	area	may	be	far	more	valuable	
than	attracting	a	hundred	people	to	a	cross-community	football	match	
(Lampen,	1995	p.147).	
Stanton	and	Kelly	(2015)	suggest	that	the	tensions	produced	by	an	increasingly	
technocratic	thrust	of	professionalised	peacebuilding	are	one	part	of	the	
explanation	for	the	perceived	theoretical	incoherence	of	local	peacebuilders:		
in	the	Northern	Ireland	context,	evidence	seems	to	be	emerging	that	the	
techno-rational	thrust	of	professionalization	and	the	bureaucratization	of	
peace,	exacerbated	by	the	institutionalized	dominance	of	research	over	
practice	within	academia,	has	led	to	the	absence	of	practical	knowledge	and	
experience	used	as	a	valid	source	of	knowledge	creation	(Stanton	and	Kelly,	
2015	p.44).	
However,	a	second	explanation	these	same	authors	argue	is	that	epistemic	
knowledge	(theories)	and	technical	knowledge	(skills)	are	privileged	over	practical	
knowledge,	in	academia,	for	example.		One	result	these	authors	suggest	is	that	
research	has	been	privileged	over	practice	in	academia,	and	therefore,	Northern	
Ireland	practitioners	have	not	been	viewed	as	knowledge	producers	(ibid).	
Conclusion	
In	summary,	it	is	evident	from	the	literature	reviewed	that	debates	over	whose		
knowledge	counts	and	what	types	of	knowledge	matter	for	peacebuilding	are	
echoed	at	the	academic,	practice	level	and	also	are	live	debates	on	the	ground	both	
internationally	and	locally	in	Northern	Ireland.	Literature	reviewed	demonstrated	
the	developments	in	the	academic	discipline,	and	the	shifting	schools	of	thought	in	
both	theory	and	practice.	In	doing	so	it	contrasted	tensions	surrounding	the	two	
local	turns	as	outlined	by	Paffenholz	(2015).	The	first	turn	advocated	by	Lederach	
(1995)	whose	practice	rested	on	the	approach	that	outsiders	could	be	useful	
particularly	if	using	an	elicitive	rather	than	prescriptive	approach	which	valued	local	
knowledge.		The	second	turn,	associated	with	the	school	of	critical	peace	takes	a	
much	more	sceptical	stance	towards	any	outside	intervention,	viewing	intervention	
as	containing	embedded	normative	values	that	risk	a	hegemonic	liberal	peace.	Still	
others	debate	whether	domestic	civil	society	actors	or		locals	can	be	expected	to	
effectively	build	peace	given	conflict	societys	predispositions	towards	excessive	
bonding	rather	than	bridging	social	capital.	
The	literature	on	grassroots	and	civil	society	peacebuilding	in	Northern	Ireland	was	
investigated	and	reflected	similar	tensions.		The	literature	suggested	reasons	and	an	
explanation	as	to	why,	despite	the	longevity	of	practical	activities,	actors	working	at	
the	grassroots	and	within	civil	society	peacebuilding	in	Northern	Ireland	have	not	
been	involved	in	theory	building	and	have	remained	under-utilised	in	knowledge	
creation.	Theoretical	incoherence	or	muddle-headedness,		professionalised	
technocratic	practices,	and	knowledge	hierarchies	between	academia	and	practice	
were	all	suggested	to	explain	why	practitioners	have	been	underutilised	as	
peacebuilding	knowledge	producers.	However,	to	advance	the	argument	that	this	is	
an	oversight,	and	that	this	body	of	knowledge	may	generate	important	
understanding	of	applied	peacebuilding	practice	if	developed,	it	is	first	necessary	to	
conceptualise	the	nature	of	practical	knowledge	as	it	may	be	applicable	for	
peacebuilding;	this	is	the	task	given	to	the	next	chapter.		
Chapter	3:	Phronesis	as	an	epistemology		
Introduction	
The	research	question	asks	what	actors	working	at	the	grassroots	and	within	civil	
society	have	learned	from	50	years	of	peacebuilding	practice.	This	question	rests	on	
an	argument	that	those	with	practical	lived	experience	used	to	build	peace	and	
social	change	in	Northern	Ireland	have	valid	and	valuable,	but	currently	
underutilised,	knowledge.	Adopting	Aristotles	term,	phronesis,	or	practical	
wisdom,	this	thesis	holds	that	practical	knowledge	is	both	valid	and	valuable,	and	
that	those	holding	phronetic	knowledge	are	uniquely	equipped	to	contribute	to	
knowledge	production	for	peacebuilding.	The	purpose	of	this	chapter	is	to	begin	to	
make	this	argument	by	illustrating	the	concept	of	phronesis	and	demonstrating	its	
validity	and	value.	
The	chapter	seeks	to	identify	the	concept	of	phronesis	within	extant	literature	and	
from	this	basis	moves	to	build	a	conceptual	framework	to	assess	its	relevance,	
particularly	in	light	of	current	debates	surrounding	knowledge	for	peacebuilding	as	
outlined	in	Chapter	2.	Establishing	the	validity	and	value	of	phronesis	is	important	in	
order	to	strengthen	the	argument	that	such	knowledge	be	included	and	prioritised	
for	knowledge	production.	Logic	follows	that	if	such	knowledge	is	valued,	
practitioners	may	more	readily	be	tasked	with	reflecting	on	their	experience.	While	
that	proposition	may	sound	intuitive,	it	does	not	always	follow	that	those	who	
engage	in	practical	efforts	and	intervention	in	social	change	are	tasked	with	
reflecting	on	their	work	theoretically,	or	by	such	efforts	make	a	contribution	to	the	
academic	community.	Practitioners	are	not	only	often	overlooked	by	academia	but	
also	devalued,	not	only	excluded	from	the	knowledge	creation	process	but	
assumed	to	suffer	from	knowledge	deficiency	(Eraut,	1994	p.54).	As	a	result	theory	
and	practice	can	operate	in	silos	with	little	interaction.		
The	chapter	begins	with	an	overview	of	literature	most	explicitly	concerning	and	
intersecting	with	the	concept	of	phronesis.		While	phronesis	is	linked	to	several	
different	but	not	completely	unrelated	sets	of	scholarship,	such	as	classical	studies,	
ethics	and	philosophy,	those	viewed	as	most	relevant	to	peacebuilding	were	
explored.	This	included	Aristotles	Nichomachean	Ethics	followed	by	literature	
covering	professional	education	and	practice	(Schn	and	Argyris,	1974;	Schn,	1983,	
1987;	Eraut	1994,	2009;	Kinsella	and	Pitman,	2012).	Insights	gained	from	authors	of	
professional	practice	literature	such	as	Michael	Eraut	and	Donald	Schn	proved	
particularly	salient.		This	literature	uncovered	ways	that	experience	generates	
knowledge	and	considered	how	and	why	practical	knowledge	became	elided	and	
divisions	created	between	academia	and	practitioners.	Consequences	of	this	
division	are	relevant	in	light	of	a	growing	professionalised,	bureaucratic	and	
technocratic	field	of	peacebuilding		(Mac	Ginty,	2012;	Stanton	and	Kelly,	2015).	
However,	many	practitioners	taking	part	in	this	research	were	not	professional	
peacebuilders,	but	using	their	own	practical	knowledge	to	guide	their	activities.		
Therefore,	it	was	also	useful	to	explore	complementary	scholarship	in	order	to	
begin	to	build	a	conceptual	frame	for	phronesis	relevant	for	peacebuilding.		
Consequently,	the	chapter	moves	from	Aristotelian	and	professional	practice	
literature	to	a	more	diverse	literature	review	across	disciplines.	Useful	insights	were	
gained	from	scholarship	on	feminist	epistemologies,	sociology,	and	psychology	to	
further	understand	phronesis	as	a	distinct	type	of	knowledge	and	how	it	may	
demonstrate	value.	The	chapter	moves	toward	closure	by	using	these	broad	
insights	to	construct	a	conceptual	frame	for	phronesis	for	peacebuilding.	Once	
constructed,	the	chapter	concludes	by	seeking	to	determine	whether	or	where	the	
concept	intersects	or	contributes	to	current	debates	to	determine	if	phronesis,	
conceptualised	for	peacebuilding,	demonstrates	added	value.		
3.1	The	Aristotelian	view:	practical	knowledge,	a	neglected	virtue?	
The	nature	of	knowledge	has	been	a	key	topic	for	philosophers	since	antiquity	and	
remains	a	source	of	debate	and	discussion	to	the	present	day.	The	topic	is	of	
concern	to	scholars	from	as	diverse	disciplines	as	sociology,	critical	theorists,	
feminist	scholars,	as	well	as	postmodernists.	Each	are	interested	in	interrogating	
the	nature	of	knowledge-	what	can	be	known,	whose	knowledge	is	considered	
valued	and	valuable,	and	for	what	purpose.	While	many	schools	of	thought	
continue	to	interrogate	the	nature	of	knowledge,	it	could	be	argued	that	by	its	
formative	nature,	early	antiquity	has	played	a	significant	role	in	shaping	some	of	the	
basic	landscape	out	of	which	those	debates	have	emerged	and	left	a	sizable	
conceptual	and	linguistic	imprint.	Of	particular	interest	here	is	how	early	
conceptualisations	of	knowledge,	as	described	in	Aristotles	Nicomachean	Ethics,	
both	illuminated	forgotten	and	excluded	forms	of	knowledge	and	at	the	same	time	
may	have	planted	seeds	of	tensions	between	them.			
Aristotle,	in	the	Nicomachean	Ethics,	sets	out	a	discussion	on	three	forms	of	
knowledge,	which	he	describes	as	virtues,	dividing	them	initially	between	what	is	
invariable	(what	he	calls	scientific)	and	variable	(what	he	calls	calculative).		
Discussing	first	the	invariable,	scientific	knowledge	or	episteme,	Aristotle	asserts	
that	this	form	of	knowledge	is	of	universals,	and	is	able	to	be	proven	through	
processes	of	deduction	or	induction	producing	demonstrated	truth:	
[n]ow	what	scientific	knowledge	is,	if	we	are	to	speak	exactly	and	not	follow	
mere	similarities,	is	plain	from	what	follows.	We	all	suppose	that	what	we	
know	if	not	even	capable	of	being	otherwise;	of	things	capable	of	being	
otherwise,	we	do	not	know,	when	they	have	passed	outside	our	observation,	
whether	they	exist	or	not.	Therefore	the	object	of	knowledge	is	of	necessity.	
Therefore	it	is	eternal;	for	things	that	are	of	necessity	in	the	unqualified	sense	
are	eternal;	and	things	that	are	eternal	are	ungenerated	and	imperishable		
(Aristotle,	Nicomachean	Ethics,	1139b	18-25).	
It	is	from	episteme	that	the	word	epistemology	is	derived.	He	contrasts	this	
invariable	universal	scientific	knowledge	with	the	next	two	types	of	knowledge	
described	as	variable,	things	made	and	things	done	(Aristotle,	Nichomachean	
Ethics	1140a).		The	first	of	these	variable	forms	of	knowledge,	techne,	is	described	
as	knowledge	of	how	things	are	made	such	as	the	production	of	art,	or	craft.	Techne	
is	the	root	of	the	modern	words	technology	and	technique,	and	is	understood	as	
art,	craft	or	skill-based	knowledge:		
All	art	is	concerned	with	coming	into	being,	i.e.	with	contriving	and	
considering	how	something	may	come	into	being	which	is	capable	of	either	
being	or	not	being,	and	whose	origin	is	in	the	maker	and	not	in	the	thing	
made	(Aristotle,	Nic.	Ethics,	1140a	11-14)	
Finally,	Aristotle	discusses	a	third	virtue	of	knowledge	that	is	also	variable,	what	he	
calls	phronesis,	commonly	understood	as	practical	knowledge,	or	practical	wisdom.	
It	is	also	a	form	of	variable	knowledge,	because	it	is	context-dependent.	Phronesis	is	
knowledge	needed	for	action	and	involves	making	judgements	about	what	might	be	
the	right	action	to	take	in	a	particular	context	or	situation.	However	what	is	
considered	the	right	action	to	take,	according	to	Aristotle,	is	action	with	an	end	
towards	what	is	good	for	ones	self.	Furthermore,	not	only	are	those	using	
phronesis	able	to	deliberate	on	what	is	good	for	their	own	well	being,	but	what	
sorts	of	things	conduce	to	the	good	life	in	general	(Aristotle,	Nic.Ethics,	1140a	26-
27).	In	particular,	according	to	Aristotle,	this	type	of	knowledge	is	needed	for	acting	
for	the	well-being	of	both	individuals	and	for	groups	of	people.	He	expands	by	
suggesting	that	Pericles	(an	esteemed	leader	credited	for	leading	Athens	at	the	
height	of	its	power	and	influence)	is	an	example	of	a	man	with	phronesis:	
It	is	for	this	reason	that	we	think	Pericles	and	men	like	him	have	practical	
wisdom,	namely,	because	they	can	see	what	is	good	for	themselves	and	
what	is	good	for	men	in	general;	we	consider	that	those	can	do	this	who	are	
good	at	managing	households	or	states(Aristotle,	Nic.	Ethics,	1040b-7-10).			
Those	who	are	said	to	have	practical	wisdom	are	able	to	show	good	judgement	and	
to	deliberate	well	for	the	end	result	of	well	being,	human	flourishing	and	the	good	
life,	or	(in	Greek)	eudemonia.	Phronesis	is	described	by	Aristotle	as	knowledge	
needed	for	good	deliberation	or	what	might	be	termed	as	judgment-in-context-for-
action	aimed	towards	a		flourishing	life.		
Reflecting	more	on	the	differences	between	these	forms	of	knowledge,	Aristotle	
argues	that	philosophical	wisdom	is	scientific,	but	not	the	same	thing	as	practical	
wisdom	and	that	one	can	be	admired	because	they	know	things	that	are	
remarkable,	admirable,	difficult,	and	divine,	but	useless	(ibid,	1141b	7).	By	
contrast,	practical	wisdom	is	action	oriented	and	gained	by	an	accumulated	
knowledge	of	particulars	and	experience.	Giving	an	example	to	illustrate,	Aristotle	
states	that	one	might	know	a	rule	or	theory-	for	example,	that	all	light	meats	are	
wholesome	(episteme),	but	lack	the	practical	knowledge	of	eating	chicken	to	
understand	or	know	that	chicken	had	light	meat.	He	contrasts	this	with	one	who	
had	practical	and	particular	knowledge	that	chicken	was	healthy	without	knowing	
the	theory	or	rule	to	explain	scientifically	why.		
His	belief	was	that	all	forms	of	knowledge	were	necessary	but	practical	wisdom	may	
be	more	important	because	phronesis	may	also	include	knowing	when	to	use	
aspects	of	the	other	two	forms	of	knowledge	to	achieve	the	good	life.	Aristotle	
placed	emphasis	on	the	fact	that	practical	wisdom	is	gained	through	knowledge	of	
an	accumulation	of	particulars,	and	through	experience	over	time.	As	a	result,	he	
correlates	age	and	phronesis	and,	in	doing	so,	views	young	people	as	lacking	
experience	and,	consequently,	phronesis.	Interestingly,	phronesis	has	dropped	out	
of	the	modern	lexicon,	and	there	is	no	modern	derivation	for	phronesis	(Flyvbjerg,	
2001).			
In	summary,	Aristotle	articulates	that	scientific	knowledge	(episteme),	art	or	craft	
knowledge	(techne),	and	practical	wisdom	(phronesis)	are	all	different	forms	of	
knowledge.	He	believed	that	each	were	necessary	for	the	effective	functioning	of	
society,	but	considered	that	phronesis	may	be	the	most	important.	This	was	
because	when	phronesis	was	present,	both	techne	and	episteme	were	also	being	
utilised	(Flyvbjerg,	2001	p.60).	However,	while	Aristotle	articulated	the	value	of	all	
the	virtues,	and	emphasised	that	those	using	phronesis	encompassed	the	others,	he	
may	have	nonetheless	laid	foundations	in	the	divide	between	these	forms	of	
knowledge.	Aristotle	asserted	that	phronesis	could	not	become	scientific	knowledge	
(which	he	states	is	always	concerned	with	universals)	because	phronesis	is	
concerned	with	variables	that	necessitate	deliberation.	Phronesis	therefore,	is	
always	context-dependent-	used	to	make	a	judgment	about	action.	This	set	of	
distinctions	suggests	that	phronesis	due	to	its	variable	nature	cannot	be	considered	
scientific	or	universally	generalisable,	and	therefore	cant	be	theorised.	It	may	also	
help	explain	how	and	why	phronesis	has	come	to	be	elided	as	part	of	knowledge	
production.	
3.2	Phronesis:	insights	from	the	professional	practice	literature	
The	emergence	of	the	Enlightenment	is	often	viewed	as	a	watershed	in	
championing	scientific	progress,	technology,	and	empiricism.	It	may	also	shine	light	
on	how	knowledge	considered	phronetic	begins	to	disappear	from	view.	Indirectly	
building	on	Aristotles	concepts	of	episteme,	techne	and	phronesis,	Donald	Schn	
(1983)	attributes	divisions	in	knowledge	production	to	the	emergence	of	positivism	
in	the	early	19
	century	and	to	a	subsequent	division	of	labour	associated	with	it.	
Under	the	influence	of	positivism,	social	sciences	attempted	to	replicate	and	model	
themselves	after	the	same	type	of	knowledge	as	was	produced	by	the	natural	
sciences.	According	to	Schn,	positivist	influence	on	the	academy	resulted	in	the	
dominance	of	an	understanding	of	knowledge	as	scientific	only	when	it	could	be	
measured	empirically,	when	it	valued	rationality	over	intuition,	and	objectivity	over	
subjectivity	(Schn,	1983	pp.31-37).	Schn	argued	that	as	positivism	took	hold	
within	academic	institutions	such	as	universities	in	the	early	20th	century,	this	
epistemology	became	embedded	into	its	knowledge	production	practices	(ibid).		
As	a	result,	a	division	of	labour	emerged	such	that	scientific	research	was	located	
only	in	the	higher	education	institutions	of	the	universities,	rather	than	the	lower	
professional	schools.	Therefore,	building	theory	was	the	designated	job	of	scientists	
and	scholars.	By	contrast,	it	was	the	role	of	the	professions	to	test	theory	and	bring	
it	back	to	the	scientists	to	refine.	In	this	division,	scientific	theoretical	knowledge	
was	privileged	over	practical	knowledge.	As	Schn	states:		
Research	is	institutionally	separate	from	practice,	connected	by	carefully	
define	relationships.		Practitioners	bring	researchers	the	problems	for	
studythe	researchers	role	is	distinct	from,	and	usually	considered	superior	
to,	the	role	of	the	practitioner	(ibid,	p.26).	
When	universities	expanded	to	include	professional	training	within	their	disciplines,	
the	dominant	model	was	retained	and	professional	knowledge	remained	
subordinate	as	Schn	describes:	
They	[professionalizing	occupations]	paid	a	price.	They	had	to	accept	the	
Positivist	epistemology	of	practice	which	was	now	built	into	the	very	tissue	
of	the	universities.	And	they	had	to	accept	the	fundamental	division	of	
laborIt	was	to	be	the	business	of	university-based	scientists	and	scholars	to	
create	the	fundamental	theory	which	professionals	and	technicians	would	
apply	to	practice.	But	this	division	of	labor	reflected	a	hierarchy	of	kinds	of	
knowledge	which	was	also	a	ladder	of	statusthus	were	planted	the	seeds	
of	the	Positivist	curriculum.	and	the	roots	of	the	now-familiar	split	
between	research	and	practice	(ibid	p.37).	
3.2.1	The	dominance	of	a	technical-rational	epistemology	of	practice	
Schn	asserts	that	as	positivism	influenced	the	development	of	professional	
practice,	it	resulted	in	the	dominance	of	what	he	terms,	Technical-Rationality		
within	many	professions	(Schn,	1983).	In	the	Technical-Rationality	epistemology	of	
practice,	professional	activity	consists	in	instrumental	problem	solving	made	
rigorous	by	the	application	of	scientific	theory	and	critique	(ibid	p.21).	As	a	result,	
Technical	Rationality	became	the	model	of	professional	knowledge	which	has	
most	powerfully	shaped	both	our	thinking	about	the	professions	and	the	
institutional	relations	of	research,	education,	and	practice	(Schn,	1983	p.21).			
Schns	classic	text,	The	Reflective	Practitioner	(1983)	identified	a	growing	distrust	
of,	and	waning	confidence	both	within	professions	and	of	professionals.	He	
attributes	this	distrust	in	part	to	the	divorce	between	practice	and	theory,	which	he	
stated	had	left	practitioners	ill	equipped	to	handle	an	increasingly	complex,	multi-
varied,	unstable	and	unpredictable	world	of	practice.	These	complexities	defy	the	
logic	of	the	Technical-Rational	problem-solving	paradigm.		Schn	quoting	Ackoff	
describes	them	as,	dynamic	situations	that	consist	of	complex	systems	of	changing	
problems	that	interact	with	each	other.	I	call	these	situations	messes	(ibid,	p.16).	
Schn	ultimately	argues	that	professions	have	become	overly	dependent	on	
techniques	(techne),	but	that	their	technical	skills	are	letting	them	down	as	they	
cannot	predict	and	account	for	the	increasingly	complexity	of	practice.	He	suggests,	
however,	that	some	practitioners	have	been	able	to	navigate	this	dynamic	
environment	by	using	different	sources	of	knowledge,	having	acquired	this	ability	to	
excel	amidst	complexity	by	reflecting	on	their	own	theories-in-use	and	
interrogating	assumptions	they	bring	to	their	practice.	Drawing	upon	different	
sources	of	knowledge,	these	practitioners	are	willing	to	tackle	problems	that	exist	in	
the	swampy	lowland	where	situations	are	confusing	messes	incapable	of	technical	
solution	(ibid,	pp.	42-43)	and	in	such	places	practitioners	learn	from	experience,	
trial	and	error,	intuition	and	muddling	through	(ibid).	
However,	a	dilemma	exists	for	practitioners	who	have	operated	effectively	in	the	
face	of	a	complex	and	unstable	environment	when	trying	to	describe	how	they	
knew	what	to	do,	because	what	counts	as	knowledge	when	judging	a	context	does	
not	count	within	an	empirical	Technical-Rational	model	of	practice.	Thus	the	very	
skills	and	abilities	that	are	needed	to	practice	well	in	complex,	variable	contexts,	
and	which	should	be	highlighted	as	important,	are	made	invisible	by	the	dominance	
of	the	Technical-Rational	empirical	model.	While	not	naming	it	directly	Schns	
description	of	the	type	of	knowledge	practitioners	use,	and	their	ability	to	make	a	
judgment-in-context-for-action,	suggests	phronesis:		
Professionals	have	been	disturbed	to	find	that	they	cannot	account	for	
processes	they	have	come	to	see	as	central	to	professional	competence.	It	is	
difficult	for	them	to	imagine	how	to	describe	and	teach	what	might	be	meant	
by	making	sense	of	uncertainty,	performing	artistically,	setting	problems,	and	
choosing	among	competing	professional	paradigms,	when	these	processes	
seem	mysterious	in	the	light	of	prevailing	model	of	professional	knowledge.	
we	are	bound	to	an	epistemology	of	practice	which	leaves	us	at	a	loss	to	
explain,	or	even	to	describe,	the	competence	to	which	we	now	give	
overriding	importance	(ibid,	pp.19-20).	
3.2.2	Navigating	the	swampy	low-land	
While	not	naming	phronesis	per	se,	Schns	insights	on	implicit	and	tacit	forms	of	
knowledge	to	make	sense	of	uncertainty	(ibid,	p.	20),	which	he	calls	theories-in-
use	and	knowledge-in-action	gained	through	experience	working	in	a	swampy	
lowland	(ibid,	p.	42)	helps	to	shed	further	light	on	the	type	of	practical	implicit	but	
usable	knowledge	which	practitioners	may	hold.	Given	the	instability	and	fluidity	
which	permeate	conflict	settings,	knowledge	of	how	to	navigate	this	type	of	context	
is	exactly	what	Schn	is	referring	to	when	he	describes	knowledge	gained	while	
working	in	complex	and	dynamic	changing	messes.	However,	as	he	describes,	
articulating	the	criteria	for	judging	a	context	is	often	difficult.	Practitioners	may	
know	what	to	do	without	necessarily	knowing	why.	He	describes	the	phenomena	as	
knowing-in-action(Schn,	1983	p.59)	and	likens	it	to	a	baseball	player	who	knows	
how	to	judge	his	pitch	in	the	moment	to	maximise	a	batters	weakness,	changing	his	
pace	accordingly.	In	later	works,	he	likens	it	an	accomplished	jazz	musician	who	
improvises	with	his	fellow	musicians	who	feel	where	the	music	is	going	and	adjust	
their	playing	accordingly	(Schn,	1987	p.30).		Judgment,	which	aids	this	form	of	
practice,	according	to	Schn,	is	formed	by	knowledge	held	tacitly	and	implicitly	of	
which	they	may	be	unable	to	easily	articulate,	or	be	explicitly	aware.	In	his	
scholarship	on	the	topic,	Polanyis	(1966)	development	of	the	concept	of	tacit	
knowledge	is	used	to	explain	how		practitioners	may	use	judgment	and	knowledge	
implicitly	(Schn	and	Argyris,	1974	pp.	10-11).	Tacit	knowledge	underpins	knowing-
in-action	and	theories-in-use	(Argyris	and	Schn,	1974	pp.10-11;	Schn	1983	pp.	
49-51,	Schn,	1987	pp.	22-25).	As	he	puts	it:	
In	his	day-to-day	practice	he	[the	professional]	makes	innumerable	
judgments	of	quality	for	which	he	cannot	state	adequate	criteria,	and	he	
displays	skills	for	which	he	cannot	state	the	rules	and	procedures.	Even	when	
he	makes	conscious	use	of	research-based	theories	and	techniques,	he	is	
dependent	on	tacit	recognitions,	judgement	and	skilful	performances		
(Schn,	1983	p.50).	
For	this	reason,	knowing-in-action	and	judgments	made	about	practice	are	made	
even	when	a	practitioner	is	unable	to	articulate	why.	Striving	to	make	what	is	tacitly	
known	more	explicit	is,	for	Schn,	a	key	to	reflective	practice.		
Drawing	together	Schns	ideas	and	that	of	another	scholar	of	professional	practice,	
Elizabeth	Kinsella	(2012),	further	scope	is	provided	for	considering	phronesis	as	a	
form	of	knowledge	which	uses	what	is	being	termed	here,	judgment-in-context-for-
action.	Kinsella	concurs	with	Schns	descriptions	adding	that	practitioners	may	also	
employ	what	she	calls	embodied	reflection	when	making	judgements	(Kinsella,	
2012	pp.39-41).	Kinsella	views	embodied	reflection	as	a	form	of	tacit	knowledge	
that	extends	beyond	the	cognitive,	and	which	actively	rejects	body	and	mind	
dualisms	(ibid,	p.41).		
Michael	Eraut,	an	educational	scholar	writing	about	professional	learning,	sheds	
further	light	on	tacit	knowledge	in	practice.	Writing	about	the	nature	of	work-based	
learning,	Eraut	reflects	that	the	process	of	developing	tacit	knowledge	is	an	
important	part	of	professional	competency.	He	compares	it	to	those	entering	into	a	
new	job,	stating	that	much	of	workplace	learning	is	informal	and	occurs	as	a	by-
product	of	engaging	in	work	processes	and	activities	(Eraut,	2009	p.1).	Learning	for	
practice,	he	writes,	entails	not	only	the	importance	of	personal	capabilities,	but	also	
how	to	read	the	context	in	order	to	be	able	to	do	the	right	thing	at	the	right	time	
(ibid).	In	order	to	do	this	he	suggests,	there	is	a	need	for	the	practitioner:	
1) to	understand	both	the	general	context	and	the	specific	situation	you	are	
expected	to	deal	with,		
2) to	decide	what	needs	to	be	done	by	yourself	and	possibly	also	by	others,	
3) 	implement	what	you	have	decided,	individually	or	as	a	group,	through	
performing	a	series	of	actions	(ibid).	
Examining	the	first	of	these	points	primarily,	Eraut	expands	on	the	ability	to	read	
the	context	more	fluently	in	his	discussion	of	how	new	professionals	use	informal	
learning	to	acquire	tacit	knowledge.	To	do	so	he	highlights	the	work	of	Dreyfus	and	
Dreyfus	(1986)	who	systematised	the	progression	route	of	informal	learning	from	
experience	in	five	levels	(Eraut,	2009	p.3).	The	model	is	briefly	summarised	and	
paraphrased	from	Dreyfus	(2004).	
Figure	2:	The	Five-Stage	Model	of	Adult	Skill	Acquisition	(Dreyfus	and	Dreyfus,	
1986;	Dreyfus,	2004)	
The	Five-Stage	Model	of	Adult	Skill	Acquisition		
Level	1	Novice:	Adherence	to	taught	rules	or	plans,	the	novice	uses	learned	rules	to	
guide	action.	Novice	practitioner	has	little	experience	for	understanding	context	for	
action.	
Level	2		Advanced	Beginner:	With	some	gained	experience,	Advanced	Beginner	is	able	
but	still	limited	to	distinguishing	similarities	in	a	similar	context.		
Level	3	Competent:	At	competent	stage,	one	is	now	able	to	prioritize	as	a	mechanism	to	
cope	with	crowded	sets	of	choices.	Goal	planning	implemented	to	organise	action	
around	prioritisation	in	given	context.		
Level	4	Proficient:	Has	now	gained	ability	to	see	what	is	most	important	and	able	to	
grasp	bigger	picture,	operating	more	holistically.	Decisions	come	more	easily	as	patterns	
built	up	from	previous	experiences	and	contexts	begin	to	emerge.		Greater	intuitive	
decision	used	in	conjunction	with	problem-solving.	
Level	5	Expert:	Not	reliant	on	guidelines	or	taught	rules	but	on	deep	tacit	level	intuitive	
understanding.	Expert	is	able	to	perform	without	conscious	deliberation	in	holistic	and	
embodied	ways,	utilising	analytic	reasoning	only	in	more	novel	cases.	
Eraut	emphasises	that	throughout	all	five	levels,	competency	is	developed	in	
reading	the	context,	but	that	at	the	latter	stages	forms	of	judgment	and	
deliberation	begin	to	happen	more	intuitively,	based	on	the	tacit	application	of	
tacit	rules	(Eraut,	2000	p.127).	Eraut	describes	the	model	as	helpful	for	
understanding	the	development	of	tacit	knowledge,	and	in	particular	how,	once	
tacit	knowledge	is	developed,	it	can	be	difficult	to	unlearn	(Eraut,	2009	p.4).		
Polanyi	(1966),	the	philosopher	most	directly	associated	with	the	development	of	
the	term	tacit	knowledge	also	sees	it	as	something	more	innate	and	the	source	of	
human	beings	highest	creative	powers	(Polanyi,	1966	p.15).	Linking	innate	
competencies	and	sources	of	human	innovation	to	tacit	knowledge,	he	gives	the	
example	of	the	ability	to	recognise	faces	without	being	able	to	describe	how	they	
can	be	recognised.	In	other	words,	if	just	a	nose	or	a	mouth	or	eyes	were	shown	
independent	of	the	face	it	would	be	a	challenged	to	identify,	but	when	features	
were	seen	together,	the	face	could	be	recognised	(Polanyi	1966,	pp.	4-5).	Viewing	
this	as	a	collection	of	particulars	which	generate	meaning	and	recognition,	Polanyi,	
similar	to	Kinsella,	linked	tacit	knowledge	to	a	form	of	sensory	knowledge	and	
perception	which	is	incorporated	into	our	body	(ibid,	p.16).		
3.3	Phronesis	as	judgment	of	the	particular		
Michael	Polanyis	articulation	of	how	humans	carry	innate	ability	to	know	more	
than	we	can	tell	illustrated	through	our	tacit	ability	to	recognise	a	collection	of	
particulars,	helps	to	build	the	next	conceptual	bridge	towards	phronesis	for	
peacebuilding	(Polanyi	1966	p.4).	Tacking	away	from	the	professional	practice	
literature	towards	those	involved	in	looking	at	phronesis	from	a	broader	social	
science	perspective,	Schwartz	and	Sharpe	(2010)	describe	phronesis	as,	in	part,	
developed	by	our	in-built	ability	to	recognise	collections	of	particulars	and	
recognise	patterns	over	time	as	a	result	of	our	accumulated	sets	of	experiences.	In	
their	text,	Practical	Wisdom:	The	Right	Way	to	Do	the	Right	Thing	(2010)	calling	for	
Aristotelian	ethics	to	be	re-examined	for	modern	professions	and	institutions,	
Schwartz	and	Sharpe	describe	phronesis,	practical	wisdom,	as	an	innate	human	
capacity	for	wisdom	(Schwartz	and	Sharpe,	2010	p.52).			
Drawing	from	recent	developments	in	neurobiology	and	psychology,	Schwartz	and	
Sharpe	(2010)	focus	on	how	humans	use	accumulated	experience	to	make	sense	
and	create	order	through	pattern	recognition.	They	describe	the	ability	to	perceive	
patterns	as	an	unconscious	activity	that	allows	navigation	of	everyday	life	without	
conscious	awareness.	However,	importantly,	experience	shapes	and	influences	
which	patterns	are	retained	and	how	sense	is	made	from	them.	In	other	words	
[W]hat	counts	as	a	pattern	worth	recognising	depends	on	our	experience	
(Schwartz	and	Sharpe,	2010	p.84).	Summarising	their	discussion	on	pattern	
recognition	(ibid	pp.	82-91),	they	identify	that	exercising	practical	wisdom	stems	in	
part	from	developing	an	expertise	of	lived	or	practical	experience	that	allows	one	
the	ability	to	recognise	patterns	quickly	and	intuitively	over	time.	Moreover,	this	
intuited	pattern	recognition	informs	judgment	when	considering	what	to	do	in	a	
particular	set	of	circumstances.	Judgment	of	the	particular	is	held	up	against	the	
patterns	of	lived	experienced	to	determine	how	similar	or	different	this	particular	
may	be	from	other	similar	experiences.	It	is	this	sequence	that	helps	determine	
what	might	be	done	or	should	be	done	in	a	given	situation.	Similar	to	Polanyi,	
Schwartz	and	Sharpe	(2010)	reflect	that	this	sequencing	can	be	difficult	to	verbalise	
but	that	pattern	recognition	guides	judgment	of	the	ways	a	case	is	both	similar	and	
different	within	a	particular	situation.	Schwartz	and	Sharpe	(2010)	view	their	
argument	for	practical	wisdom	from	the	perspective	of	ethics,	articulating	that	
developing	phronesis	is	important	in	order	to	exercise	judgment	in	the	particular,	
when	universal	rules	do	not	always	apply.	In	fact,	in	their	view	universal	rules	may	
obscure	judgment	about	what	is	the	right	thing	to	do	in	a	given	particular	situation:	
The	fact	that	many	of	the	patterns	we	recognise	are	not	easily	captured	in	
language	has	important	implications	when	it	comes	to	thinking	about	moral	
rules	as	guides	to	conduct.If	we	rely	on	rules	to	tell	us	what	to	do,	then	we	
shut	ourselves	off	from	the	information	and	understanding	we	may	have	that	
cannot	be	put	into	words.	And	doing	that	may	deprive	us	of	the	opportunity	
to	make	for	more	nuanced	judgments	than	any	rules	would	allow	(Schwartz	
and	Sharpe,	2010	pp.85-86).	
Finally,	Schwartz	and	Sharpe	(2010)	argue	that	pattern	recognition	is	also	learned	
through	trial	and	error,	suggesting	that	cognitive	networks	play	a	role	in	helping	
humans	to	learn	through	experience	over	time.	Furthermore,	because	cognitive	
networks	are	forged	by	experience,	learning	to	make	good	judgments	is	also	a	
consequence	of	making	bad	judgments.	By	considering	how	a	new	situation	or	
context	may	be	similar	or	different	from	one	previously	encountered,	the	process	of	
pattern	recognition	uses	those	experiences	to	build	up	judgment,	intuitively	
steering	away	from	choices	made	on	previous	occasions	of	bad	judgment	
(Schwartz	and	Sharpe,	2010	p.	88).	Interestingly,	these	insights	on	pattern	
recognition	mimic	in	part	the	Dreyfus	and	Dreyfus	model	of	informal	learning	
(Dreyfus	and	Dreyfus,	1986;	2004),	a	model	which	also	includes	the	view	that	
pattern	recognition	becomes	intuitive	over	time	as	experience	is	accumulated.	
3.3.2	Ways	of	knowing:	insights	from	feminist	epistemologies	
Phronesis,	viewed	as	knowledge	gained	from	patterns	of	tacit	knowledge	learned	
from	accumulated	experiences	navigating	particular	contexts	and	situations,	can	be	
further	illustrated	by	insights	from	feminist	scholarship.	From	the	early	1980s,	
significantly	influenced	by	the	work	of	Carol	Gilligan	(1982)	in	her	groundbreaking	
book	In	A	Different	Voice,	feminist	scholars	have	argued	for	multiple	ways	of	
knowing.	Gilligans	work	critiqued	the	established	psychological	models	produced	
by	the	leading	theorists	such	as	Piaget	and	Kohlberg	whose	work	sought	to	measure	
universal	stages	of	human	development	and	morality.	Gilligans	critique	was	that	
these	models	were	inherently	embedded	with	values	most	commonly	associated	
with	western	male	patriarchal	ways	of	thinking	and	acting.	Gilligan,	initially	a	
researcher	with	Kohlberg,	ultimately	came	to	critique	his	model	after	her	own	
research	with	women	led	her	to	take	an	alternate	view	of	how	women	understood	
issues	of	judgment	and	decision-making.	Gilligans	research	uncovered	that	women	
demonstrated	an	alternative	way	of	conceptualising	decision-making,	morality,	and	
judgment,	which	stemmed	from	a	relational	orientation	in	their	thinking.		Gilligan	
argued	that	Kohlbergs	model	was	embedded	in	patriarchal	values	that	valorised	
individual	freedom,	autonomy	and	adherence	to	abstract	principles	as	the	pinnacle	
of	human	development.	Gilligans	research	found	the	model	failed	to	account	for	
how	women	understood	their	judgment	as	reflected	by	their	lived	experience.	This	
lived	experienced	included	knowledge	and	understanding	formed	by	being	
embedded	within	a	particular	situation,	and	within	a	context	of	particular	
relationships.	Rather	than	following	abstract	rules	or	universals	(episteme)	to	make	
decisions,	Gilligans	research	found	that	women	considered	the	relationships	
involved	and	how	decisions	made	might	impact	these	relationships,	and	more	often	
took	the	particular	context	or	situation	into	consideration	to	determine	what	to	do	
or	how	to	act.	Indeed	context	itself	was	viewed	as	an	interdependent	set	of	
relationships	that	needed	to	be	considered	in	decision-making	(Gilligan,	1982).	
Gilligan	reflected	that	this	relational	way	of	thinking	didnt	measure	up	on	human	
development	scales	since	the	scale	itself	was	conceptualised	within	a	set	of	
patriarchal	and	hierarchical	values:	autonomy	and	separation	of	self	over	
connection	and	relationship	with	others.		
This	hierarchy	served	to	both	obscure	and	diminish	womens	experiences	of	the	
importance	of	relationships	and	subsequently,	the	ways	in	which	women	
conceptualised	their	possible	choices	for	action.	Reflecting	the	discussion	of	how	
episteme	and	techne	came	to	obscure	phronesis,	there	are	echoes	of	a	similar	
pattern	of	subordination	of	differing	forms	of	knowledge.	In	fact,	Gilligans	work	
illustrates	this	similarity.	Discussing	a	research	study	involving	eleven-year	old	
school	children,	Jake	and	Amy,	Gilligan	(1982)	contrasts	Jakes	patriarchal	
epistemology	of	logic-based	universal	rules	against	Amys	more	particular	and	
relational	epistemology.	Using	a	fictitious	ethical	dilemma	to	evaluate	their	
responses	against	the	model	of	moral	development	advanced	by	Kohlberg	(1958),	
she	writes:		
[T]hese	two	children	see	two	very	different	moral	problems-	Jake	a	conflict	
between	life	and	property	that	can	be	resolved	by	logical	deduction,	Amy	a	
fracture	of	human	relationship	that	must	be	mended	with	its	own	thread	
(Gilligan,	1982	p.30).		
Gilligan	proceeds,	making	the	point	that	the	Kohlberg	model	advances	a	view	that	
the	pinnacle	of	human	moral	development	is	an	adherence	to	abstract	universal	
moral	principles.		As	such,	the	model	itself	implicitly	elevates	Jakes	epistemological	
position	but	obscures	Amys	response.	Amys	response	doesnt	measure	up	because		
Amy	demonstrates	an	entirely	different	orientation	towards	judgment	and	
decision-making:		
Asking	different	questions	that	arise	from	different	conceptions	of	the	moral	
domain,	the	children	arrive	at	answers	that	fundamentally	diverge,	and	the	
arrangement	of	these	answers	as	successive	stages	on	a	scale	of	increasing	
moral	maturity	calibrated	by	the	logic	of	the	boys	response	misses	the	
different	truth	revealed	in	the	judgment	of	the	girl.	To	the	question,	What	
does	he	see	that	she	does	not?	Kohlbergs	theory	provides	a	ready	response,	
manifest	in	the	scoring	of	Jakes	judgments	a	full	stage	higher	than	Amys	in	
moral	maturity;	to	the	question,	What	does	she	see	that	he	does	not?	
Kohlbergs	theory	has	nothing	to	say.	Since	most	of	her	responses	fall	through	
the	sieve	of	Kohlbergs	scoring	system,	her	responses	appear	from	his	
perspective	to	lie	outside	the	moral	domain	(ibid,	p.30).		
This	relational	orientation	was	the	different	voice	that	in	Gilligans	view	needed	to	
be	heard,	and	valued:			
The	different	voiceis	a	relational	voice:	a	voice	that	insists	on	staying	in	
connection	so	that	psychological	separations	which	have	long	been	
justified	in	the	name	of	autonomy,	selfhood,	and	freedom	no	longer	appear	
as	the	sine	qua	non	of	human	development	but	as	a	human	problem	(ibid,	
p.	xiii).	
Gilligans	recognition	of	the	existence	and	validity	of	the	relational	voice	(oriented	
as	it	was	towards	the	complexity	of	particulars	and	contexts	of	relationships	rather	
than	abstract	rules)	generated	and	extended	further	epistemic	exploration	in	the	
ensuing	years.	For	example,	generating	alternative	views	within	social	science	as	to	
what	was	considered	valuable	knowledge,	what	might	be	considered	an	established	
truth,	as	well	as	questioning	the	quest	for	objectivity	over	subjectivity	(Stanley	and	
Wise,	1993;	Belenky	et	al,	1986).	For	the	sake	of	retaining	this	chapters	focus	on	
conceptualising	phronesis,	discussions	of	these	implications	for	social	science	
research	will	be	sidestepped	and	revisited	in	chapter	five	on	research	methodology.		
Inspired	by	Gilligans	work,	Belenky	et	al,	(1986)	built	upon	these	ideas	to	conduct	
further	studies	of	feminist	epistemologies,	writing	to	describe	differing	ways	of	
knowing	as	subjective,	connected,	separate,	and	constructed.	Subjective	knowledge	
is	portrayed	as	the	inner	voice,	intuitively	tuned	into	the	gut	as	a	source	of	
knowledge	and	decision-making	(ibid,	pp.	53-54).	Listening	to	the	inner	voice	for	
subjective	knowers	can	often	be	viewed	as	a	reaction	against	and	a	rejection	of,	an	
externalised	voice	of	authority.	Subjective	knowledge	may	at	its	core	adopt	a	rigid	
understanding	of	truth;	however,	it	is	a	truth	which	lies	within,	gained	from	an	inner	
source	of	authority	as	a	result	of	experiences	(ibid,	pp.	52-75).	
In	addition	to	subjective	knowing,	connected	and	separate	knowing	are	
understood	as	recognition	of	external	truths	but	with	different	approaches	to	
determining	validity.		Separate	epistemologies	use	impersonal	procedures	for	
establishing	truth	while	those	using		connected	epistemologies,	echoing	Gilligans	
insights,	see	that	knowledge	and	truth	are	in	a	context	of	relationship	that		
emerges	through	care	(ibid,	p.102).	In	this	view,	connected	knowing	is	
conceptually	closer	to	understanding	while	separate	knowing	is	closer	to	
knowledge,	the	former	including	a	greater	intimacy	between	knower	and	subject	
and	the	latter	containing	more	distance	(ibid,	pp.	100-101).		
Connected	knowing	as	a	form	of	knowing	proposed	by	Belenky	et	al	(1986),	was	
not	seen	as	determined	by	gender,	although	it	is	suggested	that	it	may	be	more	
often	found	in	women.	Similar	to	subjectivism,	connected	knowers	viewed	
experience	as	the	most	trustworthy	source	of	the	knowledge.	Rather	than	trusting	
outside	experts,	connected	knowers	sought	to	understand	their	own	first-hand	
experiences,	and	viewed	hearing	from	others	about	their	first-hand	experiences	as	a	
key	to	understanding	(Belenky	et	al,	1986:	pp.	112-113).	The	purpose	was	not	to	
debate	(as	separate	knowers	might)	abstract	principles	or	positions	but	to	
understand	the	personal	subjective	experience	contained	in	differing	perspectives,	
because	by	understanding	experiences	it	became	possible	to	understand	why.	As	a	
result,	for	connected	knowers:	
The	world	becomes	warmer	and	more	orderly.	Connected	knowers	begin	
with	an	interest	in	the	facts	of	other	peoples	lives,	but	gradually	shift	the	
focus	to	other	peoples	ways	of	thinkingSeparate	knowers	learn	through	
explicit	formal	instruction	how	to	adopt	a	different	lens-how,	for	example,	to	
think	like	a	sociologist.	Connected	knowers	learn	through	empathy.	Both	
learn	to	get	out	from	behind	their	own	eyes	and	use	a	different	lens,	in	one	
case	the	lens	of	a	discipline,	in	the	other	the	lens	of	another	person	(ibid,	
115).	
Connected	knowers	view	expertise	as	relevant	and	credible	only	when	it	stems	from	
those	from	a	shared	commonality	of	experience	(ibid,	p.113).		In	this	way,	only	
those	who	have	shared	the	same,	or	similar	experiences,	have	a	right	to	judge	and	
evaluate.	By	contrast,	separate	knowers	adhere	to	traditional	understandings	of	
expertise	as	generated	by	those	whose	status	determines	their	authority	(ibid,	pp.	
118-119).			
Finally,	constructed	knowledge	is	explained	as	recognition	of	these	multiple	forms	
of	knowledge	as	part	and	parcel	of	knowledge	creation.	Constructed	knowledge	is	
viewed	as	an	ability	to	integrate	the	varied	types	of	knowledge	and	recognise	the	
internal	validity	of	ones	own	voice	and	experience	while	at	the	same	time	
integrating	knowledge	learned	from	outside	the	self.	Belenky	et	al	(1986)	describes	
constructed	knowledge	as:	
Weaving	together	the	strands	of	rational	and	emotive	thought	and	of	
integrating	objective	and	subjective	knowing.	Rather	than	extricating	the	self	
in	the	acquisition	of	knowledge,	these	women	used	themselves	in	rising	to	a	
new	way	of	thinkingYou	let	the	inside	out	and	outside	in		
(ibid,	p.135).	
Constructed	knowers	begin	to	understand	that	multiple	truths	are	possible,	that	
different	truths	may	co-exist	and	even	contradict	each	other;	it	demands	a	wider	
acceptance	of	complexity	and	ambiguity	and	resistance	to	dualistic	thinking	as	
truths	may,	in	part,	be	context-dependent	(ibid,	p.150).	
3.3.3	Links	between	ways	of	knowing	and	phronesis	
When	insights	gained	from	feminist	epistemologies	are	woven	with	the	conceptual	
strands	that	identify	phronesis	as	formed	by	the	use	of	intuitive	pattern	recognition	
and	tacit	knowledge-	the	view	of	phronesis	sharpens.	Those	who	view	judgment	not	
in	abstract	rules	but	in	the	particular,	in	context,	demonstrate	a	relational	
orientation.	However,	this	orientation	has	axiological,	analytical	and	explanatory	
implications	because	descriptively	it	illustrates	a	view	and	an	understanding	that	
context	is	both	patterned	and	relational.	For	example,	those	who	adopt	phronetic	
epistemologies	may	be	implicitly	using	this	patterned	way	of	thinking	about	their	
choices	for	action,	because	their	experience	of	context	is	that	it	is	embedded	in	an	
ecology	of	relationships.		Therefore,	a	phronetic	epistemology	may	in	part	also	be	
adopted	or	formed	when	lived	experience	of	externalised	rules	or	authorities	have	
not	been	helpful	in	navigating	the	context.	Instead,	the	subjective	inner	voice	is	
utilised	for	making	a	judgment,	drawn	from	tacit	knowledge	of	the	patterns	of	lived	
experience.		
Consequently,	phronetic	knowledge	adopts	and	utilises	a	much	broader	set	of	ways	
of	knowing	to	judge.	It	draws	from	forms	of	knowledge	that	cannot	be	easily	
measured,	or	might	be	considered	as	subjective,	embodied	in	gut	feelings,	intuition,	
or	emotions	and	empathy.	In	fact,	it	may	be	that	these	more	subjective	truths	are	
more	readily	relied	upon	if	they	have	proved	themselves	useful	in	the	lived	
experience	on	previous	occasions.		However,	there	is	one	more	conceptual	bridge	
to	be	built	in	order	to	demonstrate	how	phronetic	knowledge	(built	from	
accumulated	embodied	experiences	and	embedded	in	an	ecology	of	relationships)	
may	be	used	to	navigate	context.	
3.4	Phronesis	as	knowledge	of	context-for-action	
Sociologist	Pierre	Bourdieus	(1990)	scholarship	using	the	concept	of	habitus	is	
helpful	to	gather	insights	into	ways	those	employing	practical	wisdom,	phronesis,	
use	it	to	navigate	their	contextual	terrain.	While	not	identical,	the	two	concepts	of	
habitus	and	phronesis	are	compatible	and	share	some	overlapping	similarities.	In	
particular,	habitus	is	useful	to	better	understand	ways	in	which	practical	knowledge	
may	draw	from	tacit	understandings	of	the	webbed	relational	nature	of	context	to	
inform	choices	of	action.	
Bourdieus	concept	of	habitus	emerged	in	part	to	better	explain	how	individual	
agency	and	social	structures	both	shaped	social	reality	rather	than	sitting	in	
opposition	to	each	other,	suggesting	that	while	we	are	products	of	our	social	
background	and	culture	we	have	some	choice	as	to	how	they	are	expressed	
(Bourdieu	and	Wacquant,	1992	p.19).	However	that	set	of	choices	is	also	generated	
from	and	set	within	the	limitations	of	our	social	backgrounds	and	culture.	
Bourdieus	concept	of	habitus	was	influenced	and	formed	in	part	as	a	reaction	
against	the	reductionism	of	Marxist	and	structuralism,	as	well	as	by	his	
anthropological	study	of	the	traditional	native	Algerian	society	of	the	Kabyle	in	the	
early	1960s	(Swartz,	1997).	In	observing	the	Kabyle,	Bourdieu	noticed	that	their	
behaviour	was	not	regulated	through	explicitly	codified	rules	but	by	internalised	
understandings	of	concepts	such	as	justice	and	honour,	and	these	concepts	served	
both	to	influence	their	agency	but	also	shape	their	behaviour	(Swartz,	1997	pp.	98-
100).	Bourdieus	definition	of	habitus	is	dense	and	somewhat	impenetrable:	
The	conditionings	associated	with	a	particular	class	of	conditions	of	
existence	produce	habitus,	systems	of	durable,	transposable	dispositions,	
structured	structures	predisposed	to	function	as	structuring	structures,	that	
is,	as	principals	which	generate	and	organize	practices	and	representations	
that	can	be	objectively	adapted	to	their	outcomes	without	presupposing	a	
conscious	aiming	at	ends	or	an	express	mastery	of	the	operations	necessary	
in	order	to	attain	them.	Objectively	regulated	and	regular	without	being	in	
any	way	the	product	of	obedience	to	rules,	they	can	be	collectively	
orchestrated	without	being	the	product	of	the	organizing	action	of	a	
conductor	(Bourdieu:	1990	p.53).	
While	perhaps	all	translations	suffer	such	difficulties,	Swartz	examining	the	work	of	
Bourdieu	provides	a	more	accessible	definition:	
Habitus	results	from	early	socialization	experiences	in	which	external	
structures	are	internalized.	As	a	result,	internalized	dispositions	of	broad	
parameters	and	boundaries	of	what	is	possible	or	unlikely	for	a	particular	
group	in	a	stratified	social	world	develop	through	socialization.	Thus,	on	the	
one	hand,	habitus	sets	structural	limits	for	action.	On	the	other	hand,	habitus	
generates	perceptions,	aspirations,	and	practices	that	correspond	to	the	
structuring	properties	of	earlier	socialization	(Swartz,	1997	p.103).	
Such	structuring	can	become	a	deeply	embedded	determinant	of	action	and	can	
therefore,	becomes	tacit	practice.	Swartz	writes	that	Bourdieu:	
(E)mploys	the	language,	practical	knowledge	and	sense	of	practice	to	
describe	this	fundamentally	non-formalized,	practical	dimension	of	
actionactors	are	not	rule	followers	or	norm	obeyers	but	strategic	
improvisers	who	respond	dispositionally	to	the	opportunities	and		
constraints	offered	by	various	situations	(Swartz,	1997	p.100).	
However	according	to	Bourdieu	(1990),	actions	and	practices	are	limited	by	the	
social	conditioning	and	the	influences	that	correspond	to	class,	position,	cultural	
background,	and	context.	Therefore,	while	individual	agency	is	a	possibility,	in	most	
cases	it	is	agency	set	within	the	context	of	the	habitus.	Moreover,	because	habitus	
has	a	generative	function,	it	contains	within	it	an	internal	logic	that	is	both	past	and	
future	oriented.	Consequently,	actions	that	do	not	correspond	with	the	past	are	not	
considered	for	the	future.	As	a	result,	habitus	regenerates	itself	continually	by	
limiting	future	actions.	Bourdieu	describes	this	as:	
[B]eing	the	product	of	a	particular	class	of	objective	regularities,	the	
habitus	tends	to	generate	all	the	reasonable,	common-sense	behaviours	
(and	only	these)	which	are	possible	within	the	limits	of	these	regularities,	
and	which	are	likely	to	be	positively	sanctioned	because	they	are	objectively	
adjusted	to	the	logic	characteristic	of	a	particular	field,	whose	objective	
future	they	anticipate	(Bourdieu,	1990	p.56).		
Habitus	as	a	generative	form	shapes	behaviour	and	actions	such	that	individuals	
choose	future	actions	that	feel	congruent	with	the	past.	Bourdieu	uses	this	to	
explain	why	groups	of	people	who	are	in	subordinated	roles	maintain	this	
subordinated	position,	actively	excluding	things	that	are	not	for	the	likes	of	us	
(ibid).	This	fluid	movement	of	past	and	future	dictates	current	choices	of	action:		
The	dispositions	of	habitus	predispose	actors	to	select	forms	of	conduct	are	
most	likely	to	succeed	in	light	of	their	resources	and	past	experience.	Habitus	
orients	action	according	to	anticipated	consequences	(Swartz,	1997	p.106).	
Phronesis	as	knowledge	used	to	navigate	habitus	in	the	context	of	peacebuilding	
may	account	for	ways	in	which	practical	knowledge	works	in	a	given	environment	to	
determine	and	shape	judgments	about	courses	of	action	in	a	particular	set	of	
circumstances,	or	to	determine	what	courses	of	action	are	most	relevant	in	a	
particular	moment	in	time.	It	may	also	help	to	illuminate	perceptions	of	the	barriers	
that	exist	within	a	given	context,	and	how	those	perceptions	inform	the	scope	
decision-making	and	self-enforced	limitations.		
3.5	Building	a	conceptual	frame	for	phronesis		
Phronesis	or	practical	wisdom,	established	here	through	insights	grounded	in	
Aristotelian	philosophy	but	supported	by	a	range	of	fields	within	social	science,	
begins	to	take	shape	as	an	epistemology.	It	emerges	as	a	form	of	knowledge	that	
draws	heavily	from	lived	experience.	Using	multiple	forms	of	knowing	which	
demonstrate	an	integration	of	both	subjective	and	objective	experience,	phronesis	
draws	on	explicit	but	also	tacitly	held	pattern	recognition	of	context	to	guide	action	
for	the	particular.	Context,	however,	may	be	better	understood	in	this	regard	as	a	
form	of	habitus	or	ecology.	Judgments	about	what	to	do	are	drawn	from	the	tacit	
recognition	of	patterns	of	context	that	are	used	to	make	choices	in	particular	
situations,	and	processed	fluidly	and	intuitively	against	what	may	or	may	not	be	
viewed	as	possible	in	the	given	habitus.	Difficult	to	name	explicitly	or	to	easily	
describe	in	words,	such	judgements	illustrate	a	nuanced	understanding	of	the	
context	for	action.	Flyvbjerg	refers	to	this	as	a	knowledge	that	has	qualities	that	
can	supplement	and	take	over	from	analysis	and	rationality.	These	properties	
include	context	judgement,	practice,	trial	and	error,	experience,	common	sense,	
intuition	and	bodily	sensation	(Flyvbjerg,	2001	p.23).		
Phronesis,	is	therefore,	conceptualised	here	as	both	an	embedded	and	embodied	
form	of	knowledge,	with	the	following	five	dimensions:	
 Experience:	Practical	wisdom	draws	heavily	from	and	values	knowledge	
gained	from	experience.	Accumulated	experiences	allow	the	building	up	of	
patterns	over	time.	The	most	trustworthy	sources	of	knowledge	within	a	
phronetic	epistemology	are	those	who	share	common	experiences,	or	who	
demonstrate	embedded	or	context-knowledge.	If	experience	is	lacking,	
trustworthy	exemplars	are	used	as	models	of	what	to	do.	
 Embodied:	Uses	multiple	forms	of	knowing	which	demonstrate	an	
integration	of	both	subjective	and	objective	experiences.	Gut	instinct,	
bodily	sensations	and	affective	experiences	are	valued;	phronesis	resists	
mind-body	dualism.	
 Organically	Developed	through	Experimentation:		Learning	generated	by	
navigating	uncertain	and	complex	contexts	using	trial	and	error	approaches,	
recognises	and	acknowledges	non-linearity	in	outcomes	and	attributes	
value	to	action	even	if	outside	of	techno-rational	paradigm	or	metrics	of	
measurability.	
 Tacit	Recognition	of	Context	Patterns:	Context	is	viewed	as	an	ecology	of	
relationships	that	form	patterns	in	a	given	habitus.	Patterns	of	context	may	
be	initially	invisible,	implicit	or	tacit,	but	capable	of	being	drawn	upon	in	
reflection	and	recognised	explicitly.		
 Context-Relational	Judgments:	Judgments	about,	what	to	do,	or	to	make	
sense	of	uncertain	contexts	are	drawn	from	tacit	recognition	of	
accumulated	patterns	of	particulars	gained	from	previous	experiences.	In	
cases	where	there	is	little	experience,	rules	for	navigation	are	made	
through	trial	and	error,	or	gained	explicitly	by	others	as	exemplars.	As	
experience	accumulates,	judgments	are	processed	fluidly	and	intuitively	
against	what	may	or	may	not	be	viewed	as	possible	in	the	given	habitus	or	
given	the	patterns	of		particular	contexts.	As	a	result,	judgments	are	
viewed	as	context-dependent,	given	that	abstract	rules	may	be	unable	to	
generate	or	reflect	navigational	nuance.		
3.6.	Phronesis:	valued-added	for	peacebuilding	knowledge	debates?	
This	next	and	final	section	of	the	chapter	asks	what	value	phronesis	brings	to	
peacebuilding	knowledge	debates?		An	article	by	Annette	Jorgensen	(2006)	on	
changes	within	organic	food	production	in	Ireland	illustrates	knowledge	debates	
similar	to	those	that	have	surfaced	in	the	field	of	peacebuilding.		Jorgensen	
highlights	the	tensions	between	the	advancement	of	technical	and	scientific	
standardised	food	production	processes	against	local	tacit	knowledge	handed	down	
by	generations	of	farmers	sharing	knowledge	of	sustainable	food	growing	practices.	
She	describes	such	tacit	local	knowledge	as	developing:	
[F]rom	an	intimate	relationship	with	the	local	natural	world,	the	local	
natural	conditions	and	the	species...This	type	of	knowledge	was	local	and	it	
developed	over	generations	through	the	practical	experience	of	working		
with	the	soil	and	animals.	Such	tacit	local	knowledge	could	not	be	explained	
through	words	alone,	but	had	to	be	demonstrated	in	practice.	It	applied	only	
to	specific	place	it	has	been	developed,	and	made	sense	as	part	of	a	wider	
understanding	of	ones	relationship	to	ones	land	holdings	(Jorgensen,	2006	
pp.120-121).	
The	article	contrasts	this	form	of	knowledge	with	the	rise	of	technical	chemical	
fertilisers	able	to	be	spread	universally	across	any	type	of	land,	while	local	learning	
and	knowledge	came	to	be	replaced	with	a	reliance	on	expert	scientific	advice	and	
instruction.	Using	the	Aristotelian	terms,	the	local	organic	farmer	utilised	phronesis,	
practical	wisdom,	while	the	agro-business	relied	on	episteme,	universal	science	and	
techne,	technical	skills.	Jorgensens	example,	although	used	for	farming,	echoes	
well-established	critiques	of	the	international	practice	of	peacebuilding	and	its	
failure	to	prioritise	local	knowledge	or	local	peacebuilders	(Richmond,	2005;	Donais,	
2009;	Mac	Ginty,	2012,	2013;	Autessere,	2014;	Hellmller,	2014).	While	a	part	of	
the	focus	of	the	critique	centres	on	issues	of	power,	and	how	peacebuilding	
imposed	on	local	people	lacks	legitimacy	and	ownership	(Donais,	2009;	2011),	
equally	important	but	less	often	discussed	as	comprehensively	however,	is	how	
knowledge	gaps	hinder	peacebuilding	relevancy.		
As	has	been	shown,	relevancy	requires	context-knowledge.	However,	several	
examples	from	the	literature	illustrate	how	local	knowledge	is	not	viewed	as	a	key	
source	of	important	context-based	knowledge.	Furthermore,	even	when	context-
knowledge	is	understood	as	important	it	has	been	conceptualised	more	
superficially,	as	knowledge	able	to	be	acquired	technically,	without	lived-
experience.		The	conceptualisation	of	phronesis	further	amplifies	how	and	why	
these	assumptions	are	problematic.		
Hellmller	describes,	for	example,	that	barriers	to	cooperation	between	local	and	
international	NGOs	in	the	Democratic	Republic	of	Congo	(DRC)	were	exacerbated	
when	different	knowledge	capacities	were	valued	and	context-knowledge	dismissed	
as	information	(Hellmller,	2014	p.15).	In	this	example,	international	agencies	
prioritised	their	own	thematic	knowledge	and	technical	expertise	while	
simultaneously	failing	to	see	the	locals	who	brought	deep	context-knowledge	as	a	
valuable	resource,	necessary	to	ensure	relevancy.	This	perspective	rests	on	the	
assumption	that	technical	expertise	and	knowledge	are	more	valuable	than	context-
knowledge:	
The	international	actors	present	themselves	as	the	technicians	bringing	
expertise	on	different	topics.	Thereby,	the	context	knowledge	of	local	
peacebuilding	actors	is	usually	considered	as	information,	rather	than	
knowledgeThe	question	is	asked	not	what	peace	looks	like	from	a	local	
perspective,	but	how	the	peace	that	is	designed	outside	the	country	can	best	
be	implemented	locallyThis	explains	why	peacebuilding	processes	are	more	
strongly	influenced	by	outside	expertise	than	knowledge	of	what	works	in	a	
given	setting,	what	already	exists	in	this	context	and	what	people	having	
lived	through	the	conflict	might	prioritize	(Hellmller,	2014	pp.15-16).	
This	report	continues	by	citing	an	example	of	a	mediation	training	held	in	DRC	by	an	
international	organisation	to	build	conflict	resolution	skills.	Attendees	at	the	
training	stated	that	although	they	had	successful	non-formalised	experiences	in	
mediation,	they	were	made	to	feel	as	though	their	own	previous	approaches	were	
wrong	and	they	did	not	have	the	right	techniques.	Hellmller	concludes	that	local	
capacities	in	mediation	which	are	adapted	to	the	context	are	often	overlooked	and	
it	is	often	forgotten	that	these	actors	conduct	mediations	on	a	daily	basis	without	
their	capacities	being	recognised	(ibid,	pp.	16-17).	Their	ability	to	adapt	their	own	
processes	to	the	context	is	overlooked	because	context-knowledge	is	often	valued	
as	less	important	than	thematic	knowledge	(ibid,	p.	15).	This	point	echoes	my	own	
experiences	as	profiled	in	the	prologue.	My	own	deference	to	the	theory	and	the	
skills	of	mediation	that	I	had	been	taught	in	my	academic	courses	caused	me	to	
subordinate	and	ignore	my	own	instincts	and	observations	which	could	have	helped	
me	to	read	the	context	between	the	two	particular	disputants.		
A	second	problematic	assumption	concerning	context-knowledge	is	its	reduction	to	
technique-	as	a	skill	of	analysis	that	can	be	gained	without	local	experience.	
Acknowledging	the	necessity	for	both	technical	thematic	knowledge	and	local	
context-knowledge,	Autesserre	(2014)	reflects	on	a	clear	in-balance	between	the	
two	in	international	practice	(Autesserre,	2014	p.72).	She	gives	a	sobering	example	
of	being	sent	first	to	the	DRC	and	later	to	Afghanistan	as	a	context-analyst	without	
any	previous	knowledge	of	either	country:		
[I]n	charge	of	analyzing	political,	military,	social,	and	humanitarian	conditions	
on	the	groundI	had	no	pre-existing	knowledge	of	either	country,	and	I	
learned	personally	how	frustrating	it	was	to	feel	that	I	was	not	properly	
equipped	to	provide	the	kinds	of	analyses	that	were	key	to	helping	
beneficiaries	(Autesserre,	2014	p.80).	
Clearly,	the	view	that	context-knowledge	can	be	reduced	to	a	technique	without	
any	corollary	lived	experience	is	problematic.	The	conceptualisation	of	phronesis	
however,	clarifies	that	judgment	for	relevancy	requires	tacit	and	explicit	sources	of	
knowledge.	However,	the	former	can	only	be	gained	through	experience	over	time.	
To	recognise	that	both	tacit	and	explicit	forms	of	knowledge	are	necessary	for	
ensuring	peacebuilding	and	conflict	transformation	relevancy	is	not	new.	From	as	
early	as	1995,	Lederach	advocated	strongly	that	in	order	for	any	intervention	to	be	
relevant	it	should	tap	into	and	use	the	implicitly	held	local	knowledge	of	context	
using	an	elicitive	approach	(Lederach,	1995).	His	first	text,	Preparing	for	Peace	
(1995),	clearly	adopted	Freirian	emancipatory	perspectives	on	knowledge,	power	
and	intellectual	hegemony.		Lederach	argued	that	training	should	be	dialectical,	
viewing	local	people	as	primary	resources	of	relevant	knowledge.	While	covered	in	
the	literature	review	it	is	worthwhile	to	review	his	central	ideas	on	this	topic,	he	
states:		
1. People	in	setting	are	a	key	resource,	not	recipients.	
2. Indigenous	knowledge	is	a	pipeline	to	discovery,	meaning,	and	appropriate	
action.	
3. Participation	of	local	people	in	the	process	is	central.	
4. Building	from	available	local	resources	fosters	self-sufficiency	and	
sustainability.	
5. Empowerment	involves	a	process	that	fosters	awareness-of-self	in	context	
and	validates	discovery,	naming	and	creation	through	reflection	and	action		
(Lederach,	1995	p.31).	
In	an	elicitive	training	model,	participants	themselves	are	in	charge	of	their	learning,	
directing	the	process	according	to	their	own	needs.	For	Lederach,	those	in	context	
hold	the	greatest	level	of	knowledge	about	their	own	conflict	and	therefore	are	best	
suited	as	the	drivers	of	any	intervention	by	outsiders:		
By	knowledge-as-resource	I	refer	to	the	often	implicit	but	rich	understanding	
people	have	about	their	setting.	Included	is	their	knowledge	about	how	
conflict	emerges	and	develops	among	them	and	about	how	people	try	to	
handle	and	manage	that	conflict.	Also	included	are	their	understandings	
about	what	things	mean;	that	is,	how	language,	perception,	interpretation,	
and	meaning	are	constructed	around	events	and	interactions	in	their	context	
(ibid,p.31).	
Lederachs	model	of	intervention	is	accompaniment;	the	local	is	in	the	driver	seat	
steering	the	car,	while	the	outside	intervener	provides	the	petrol	money	and	some	
ideas	about	maps	that	could	be	useful.	In	fact,	at	several	junctures	during	the	trip,	
the	intervener	gets	into	the	back	seat	and	starts	taking	notes	about	how	to	change	
his	maps,	learning	new	routes	from	the	driver	with	local	knowledge	of	the	roads.	
As	an	example,	Lederachs	conceptualisation	of	the	insider-partial	developed	from	
working	with	groups	in	Latin	America	who	critiqued	his	mediation	model	as	being	
too	gringo	(Lederach,	1995	p.38).	This	critique	led	to	a	rethinking	of	the	role	of	
the	mediator	in	order	to	re-conceptualise	it	to	become	more	reflective,	useful	and	
relevant	to	the	context.	Instead	of	a	neutral	outsider,	the	insider-partial	mediator	
used	those	who	were	known	to	and	trusted	by	disputants	(Wehr	and	Lederach	1991	
p.87).	Lederach	modelled	his	own	elicitive	approach	to	intervention	by	
deconstructing	and	reconstructing	his	model,	arguably	because	it	lacked	context-
knowledge.	
The	conceptualisation	of	phronesis	demonstrates	its	complementarity	to	Lederachs	
elicitive	model	of	conflict	transformation	training.	Lederach	writes	that	the	elicitive	
approach	begins	by	using	implicit	forms	of	knowledge	of	conflict	and	ways	it	is	
managed	as	a	starting	point	in	training	and	that	making	the	implicit	explicit	is	key:		
Throughout	the	training	process,	serious	effort	is	made	to	foster	a	level	of	
innovation	and	creativity	that	permits	participants	to	make	explicit	and	take	
ownership	in	the	approaches	and	models	that	emerge	from	their	implicit	
understandings.	The	movement	from	implicit	to	explicit	knowledge	is	
discovery	(Lederach,	1995	p.60).		
While	Lederachs	development	of	the	elicitive	approach	is	framed	as	a	cross-cultural	
model	of	intervention,	the	conceptualisation	of	phronesis	illuminates	that	in	fact,	
the	elicitive	model	uses	phronesis.	For	example,	the	elicitive	model	taps	into	this	
phronetic	form	of	knowledge	which	he	describes	as	implicit	knowledge	of	conflict	
that	is	common-sense	taken	for	granted		(Lederach,	1995	p.57).	The	elicitive	
approach	uses	the	implicit	common-sense	understandings	of	conflict	in	a	given	
locale,	formed	from	tacit	recognition	of	patterns	of	context	and	judgment-of-the-
context-for	action,	as	a	starting	point.	This,	as	he	states,	is	an	important	key	for	
innovation	and	creativity	in	working	towards	approaches	germane	to	the	given	
context.		
The	priority	given	to	taking	an	elicitive	approach,	it	could	be	argued,	was	not	
however,	as	strongly	emphasised	in	Lederachs	next	text	Building	Peace:	
Sustainable	Reconciliation	in	Divided	Societies	(1997)	published	two	years	later.		
While	the	text	continues	to	refer	to	the	need	to	build	upon	local	knowledge	and	
cultural	resources,	it	also	marks	a	shift	in	terminology,	using	word	such	as:	
strategic	(ibid,	p.	109),	design	for	social	change	(ibid,	p.77),		integrated	
framework	for	peacebuilding	(ibid,	p.73),	and		reconciliation	infrastructure	(ibid,	
pp.105-106).	Such	language	he	viewed	was	necessary	to	build	a	case	for	the	long-
term	vision	needed	for	the	transformation	of	conflict.	Writing	in	the	prologue	he	
states:		
Metaphorically,	peace	is	seen	not	merely	as	a	stage	in	time	or	condition.	It	is	a	
dynamic	social	construct.	Such	a	conceptualization	requires	a	process	of	
building,	involving	investment	in	materials,	architectural	design	and	
coordination	of	labor,	laying	a	foundation,	and	detailed	finish	work,	as	well	as	
continuing	maintenance	(ibid,	20).	
The	preceding	quote	is	illustrative	of	two	tensions	that	in	many	ways	still	exist;	the	
first	sentence	speaks	to	the	view	of	peace	as	organic,	process-driven	and	change-
embracing,	while	the	second	conceptualises	peace	as	a	solid	structure,	permanent,	
requiring	regular	maintenance,	but	a	solid	structure	in	design	and	build	nonetheless.	
While,	such	shift	in	discourse	was	likely	necessary	at	the	time	and	useful	for	bridging	
and	expanding	debate	beyond	the	traditional	statist	diplomacy	(ibid,	xvi),	it	could	
be	argued,	however,	that	such	terminology	lent	itself	towards	a	more	technical	
conceptualisation	of	peace.		One	characterisation	might	be	that	having	proved	
valuable,	the	prototype	model	of	peacebuilding	intervention	was	given	resources	and	
moved	into	mass	production.	Going	back	to	the	driver	and	passenger	metaphor,	
there	was	no	longer	just	one	car	out	on	the	road	but	many.	Mass	production	
increased	both	professionalisation	and	the	need	for	technical	expertise.	Strategic	
planning	ushered	in	peacebuilding	design	and	a	need	to	ensure	accountability	and	
value	for	money.	Using	the	metaphor,	mass	production	may	have	opened	the	door	
for	blueprint	maps,	and	in	some	cases,	for	interveners	to	take	over	the	driving	
completely.	There	is	some	evidence	of	this	dynamic;	research	suggests	there	is	a	
proliferation	of	Lederachs	middle-out	approach		(Paffenholz	2010,	pp.	59-60).	While	
strategic	peace	discourse	in	tandem	with	professionalisation	opened	the	door	for	a	
technical	peace,	as	mentioned	previously,	this	has	been	to	the	detriment	at	times	to	
the	necessary	nuanced-context	knowledge	needed	for	relevancy	(Autessere,	2014;	
Hellmller,	2014).	
Revisiting	Lederachs	Preparing	for	Peace	with	the	additional	conceptualisation	that	
local	knowledge	includes	phronesis	has	the	potential	to	amplify	why	local	
knowledge	is	as	important	as	technical	knowledge.	In	fact,	phronesis	may	also	add	a	
depth	and	nuance	necessary	such	that	local	knowledge	itself	wouldnt	be	dismissed	
as	information.	Finally,	the	conceptualisation	of	phronesis	demonstrated	in	this	
chapter	could	potentially	prevent	context-knowledge	from	becoming	merely	another	
technical	skill	to	be	acquired	with	no	lived	experience	of	a	given	context.	
Conclusion		
The	purpose	of	this	chapter	was	to	introduce	phronesis	and	to	illustrate	the	concept	
with	examples	from	academic	literature	in	order	to	consider	both	its	validity	and	
value.	It	was	refined	further	with	the	aid	of	social	science	scholars	of	professional	
practice		(Schn	and	Argyris,	1974;	Schn,	1983;	Eraut,	1994;	Kinsella,	2012),	urban	
planning	(Flyvbjerg,	2001),	psychology	and	philosophy	(Schwartz	and	Sharpe,	2010;	
Polanyi,	1966),	feminist	epistemology	(Gilligan,	1982;	Belenky,	et	al.,	1986)	and	
sociology	(Bourdieu,	1990;	Swartz,	1997).	
	Drawing	from	these	sources,	phronesis	was	conceptualised	as	an	epistemology	and	a	
form	of	context-dependent	knowledge	that	draws	heavily	from	lived	experience.	
Using	multiple	forms	of	knowing	which	demonstrate	an	integration	of	both	
embodied	subjective	and	objective	experience.	Phronesis	draws	on	explicit	but	also	
tacitly	held	pattern	recognition	of	context	to	guide	action,	built	up	over	time.	
Context,	however,	is	not	static	but	may	be	better	understood	as	a	web	of	
relationships,	a	habitus	or	ecology.	Judgments	about	what	to	do	are	drawn	from	the	
tacit	recognition	of	patterns	of	context,	and	used	to	make	choices	in	particular	
situations,	processed	fluidly	and	intuitively	against	what	may	or	may	not	be	viewed	
as	possible	in	the	given	habitus,	evidenced	by	a	nuanced	understanding	of	the	
context-for-action.		
Phronesis,	particularly	in	its	Aristotelian	definition,	is	a	concept	compatible	with	the	
aspiration	to	build	peace.	Embedded	in	his	discussion	on	conduct	and	virtues	for	
living	a	good	life,	Aristotle	argues	that	through	this	combination	of	experience	and	
judgment,	those	with	phronesis	are	able	to	determine	what	course	of	action	will	lead	
to	well-being	or	eudemonia.	Eudemonia	is	considered	important,	not	just	for	
individuals,	but	for	groups:	
Now	it	thought	to	be	a	mark	of	a	man	of	practical	wisdom	to	be	able	to	
deliberate	well	about	what	is	good	and	expedient	for	himself,	not	in	some	
particular	respect,	e.g.	about	what	sorts	of	thing	conduce	to	health	or	to	
strength,	but	what	sorts	of	thing	conduce	to	the	good	life	in	general	
(Aristotle,	Nicomachean	Ethics	1140a	25-30).				
Eudemonia	is,	in	many	respects,	what	those	working	to	build	peace	and	transform	
systemic	destructive	conflicts	are	aiming	toward.	However,	what	seems	crucial	in	this	
discussion	is	that	phronesis,	or	those	who	may	utilise	phronetic	knowledge,	use	this	
form	of	knowledge	as	a	source	of	deliberation	and	judgment	in	relation	to	action.	
According	to	Aristotle	good	deliberation	for	action	takes	both	the	universal	and	
particular	situation	into	consideration	when	determining	what	to	do	and	will	lead	to	
the	good	life:	Practical	wisdom,	then,	must	be	a	reasoned	and	true	state	of	capacity	
to	act	with	regard	to	human	goods	(Nic.	Ethics,	1140b	20-21).			
The	concept	of	phronesis	can	be	considered	to	engage	with	current	tensions	that	
exist	in	the	field	and	within	academia	about	the	nature	of	intervention	(action)	and	
knowledge	(deliberation	and	judgment)	for	peacebuilding.	Furthermore,	phronesis,	if	
conceptualised	and	re-introduced,	also	has	potential	to	add	an	important	
contribution	to	current	peacebuilding	debates	if	viewed	as	a	necessary	source	of	
knowledge	to	cultivate	in	practice	and	academia.	In	particular	it	may	help	build	
bridges	to	further	support	the	local	turn.	Authors	have	suggested	that	currently,	
local	context-knowledge	is	subordinated	to	thematic	(technical)	knowledge	and	
theoretic	(epistemic)	knowledge	(Autesserre,	2014;	Hellmller,	2014).	Phronesis	
however	helps	to	explain	why	local	knowledge	is	a	necessary	form	of	knowledge	for	
peacebuilding,	revealing	a	much	more	nuanced	understanding	of	a	conflict	context-
gained	through	tacit	knowledge	and	lived	experience.	Phronesis	may	also	be	argued	
to	have	a	greater	reach	and	may	potentially	do	more	to	empower	the	aims	contained	
within	the	local	turn.	Viewing	local	knowledge	as	containing	phronesis	amplifies	local	
knowledge	by	including	judgment	of	what	to	do	in	the	given	particular	situation	
and	context.	The	view	of	expertise	thus	shifts	from	those	who	hold	the	technical	
knowledge	to	those	who	have	context-knowledge	and	more	importantly,	can	
demonstrate	deliberation	and	judgment	of	the	context-for-action.	By	including	
judgment,	this	shift	in	emphasis	towards	a	question	of	who	has	relevant	context-
knowledge	legitimises	and	necessitates	local	knowledge	beyond	that	of	
information,	paving	the	way	for	greater	recognition	of	both	its	validity	and	value.		
Aristotles	development	of	phronesis	saw	it	as	a	virtue	necessary	for	both	individuals	
and	groups	in	order	to	be	able	to	live	a	good	life.	However,	thus	far,	phronesis	has	
been	elided	in	much	of	everyday	life,	and	is	not	a	word	used	currently	in	our	modern	
lexicon.	Despite	this,	it	is	a	concept	that	is	useful	to	be	rediscovered,	particularly	for	
its	utility	in	peacebuilding	and	conflict	transformation	theory	and	practice.	Crucial	for	
relevant	peacebuilding	intervention,	re-introducing	phronesis	may	support	and	
amplify	why	local	context-knowledge	is	vital.	Thus,	it	offers	a	challenge	to	the	
predominance	of	the	techno-rational	(Schn,	1983)	and	technocratic	(Mac	Ginty,	
2012)	epistemologies	of	practice,	and	most	importantly,	to	better	equip	practitioners	
to	navigate	the	complex,	dynamic	terrain	of	conflict.		
Finally,	given	that	phronesis	has	been	a	form	of	knowledge	that	has	been	lost	to	our	
modern	lexicon	and	more	generally	elided,	the	value	of	conceptualising	phronesis	for	
peacebuilding	also	lies	in	the	act	of	naming-	of	making	the	invisible	visible.	To	recap,	
phronesis,	is	conceptualised	in	this	chapter	as	a	form	of	knowledge	that	is:	
 Experienced		
 Embodied		
 Organically	developed	through	experimentation	
 Built	upon	over	time	using	tacit	recognition	of	context	patterns		
 Using	context-relational	judgements		
Having	thus	conceptualised	phronesis,	the	next	chapter	will	seek	to	use	this	
conceptualisation	of	phronesis	as	a	benchmark	and	a	tool	of	analysis.	To	do	so,	50	
years	of	grassroots	and	civil	society	peacebuilding	practice	will	be	reviewed.	The	
purpose	of	the	chapter	is	two-fold.	Firstly,	it	seeks	to	provide	a	background	to	the	
time-span	of	the	research	question	which	covers	50	years	of	grassroots	and	civil	
society	peacebuilding	in	Northern	Ireland.	Given	the	priority	within	the	
conceptualisation	of	phronesis	to	the	importance	of	a	deep	and	nuanced	view	of	
context,	this	is	important.	Secondly,	given	the	invisibility	of	phronesis	prior	to	this	
conceptualisation,	it	will	consider	whether	or	how	using	a	lens	of	phronesis	may	alter	
current	views	of	the	impact	and	value	of	this	body	of	peacebuilding	activity	
Chapter	4:	Grassroots	and	civil	society	peacebuilding	in	Northern	Ireland,	1965-
Introduction		
As	described	in	Chapter	2,	the	literature	on	grassroots-level	and	civil	society-based	
peacebuilding	efforts	in	Northern	Ireland	on	the	whole	presents	a	tepid	picture	
when	measured	against	its	impact	on	building	the	political	peace	(Brewer,	2011).	
Peacebuilding	practice	has	been	described	as	lacking	in	strategy	(Cochrane	and	
Dunn,	2002;	Cochrane,	2001b)	with	a	conclusion	primarily	drawn	that	its	impact	on	
political	peace	has	been	indirect-	helpful	perhaps	for	creating	a	warmer	climate	for	
political	negotiations	(McCartney,	1999;	Cochrane	and	Dunn,	2002;	Cochrane,	
2001b).	Given	such	assessments,	it	is	unsurprising	that	any	possible	learning	from	
such	activities	has	not	been	prioritised	or	viewed	as	valuable,	preventing	wider	
lessons	being	learnt	through	documentation,	distillation	or	dissemination	(Kelly	and	
Braniff,	2016).	
The	conceptualising	of	phronesis	in	Chapter	3,	however,	suggests	an	alternative	
explanation	to	view	what	might	look	incoherent.	Practical	knowledge	
conceptualised	as	phronesis	is	context-dependent	and	concerned	with	particulars.	
This	suggests	that	peacebuilding	initiated	by	grassroots-level	and	civil	society-based	
peacebuilders	becomes	most	clear	when	considered	within	a	particular	context	and	
what	was	deemed	possible	in	that	situation.	As	Schwartz	and	Sharpe	(2010)	
suggest:	
Answering	the	question	What	should	I	do	almost	always	depends	on	the	
particulars	of	the	situationto	imagine	the	consequencesto	figure	whats	
possible	and	not	just	ideal	(Schwartz	and	Sharpe,	2010	p.8).	
Rather	than	measuring	by	the	yardstick	of	the	political	peace,	this	chapter	will	use	
phronesis	as	a	tool	of	analysis.	Providing	a	snapshot	view	of	some	of	the	practical	
activities	undertaken	at	the	grassroots-level	and	within	civil	society	in	Northern	
Ireland	over	a	50-year	time-period		(1965	to	2015),	this	chapter	has	a	three-fold	
purpose.		Firstly,	to	demonstrate-	albeit	in	small	scale-	a	range	of	activities	taken	
over	different	phases	of	time;	secondly,	to	consider	what	these	actions	may	have	
contributed	within	their	own	particular	situation	or	context;	and	thirdly,	to	reflect	
upon	any	recurring	patterns	that	may	demonstrate	learning	acquired	about	social	
change	processes	in	deeply	divided	contexts	which	may	serve	to	deepen	current	
understanding	of	such	initiatives.		
In	order	to	begin	any	description	of	practical	peacebuilding	activities	in	Northern	
Ireland	from	the	perspective	of	a	50-year	period	of	time	(1965-2015)	several	
caveats	are	needed.	The	first	caveat	is	that	history	in	the	context	of	a	divided	
society	is	contested	and	any	interpretation	is	subject	to	dispute.	Differences	in	
historical	interpretations	of	both	causes	and	consequences	of	the	conflict	exist.		
Attempts	to	strive	for	balance	have	been	made	by	drawing	upon	a	variety	of	
authors,	and	where	possible,	including	sources	from	authors	based	in	civil	society	in	
order	to	help	maintain	a	broader	and	more	horizontal	view.	Secondly,	as	stated,	this	
chapter	will	only	paint	broad	strokes	of	practice.	Accounts	are	not	intended,	nor	
would	it	be	possible	to	be,	exhaustive.	Any	discussion	of	practical	activities	also	
necessitates	decisions	about	what	should	be	defined	as	peacebuilding	activities.	As	
Richmond	(2005)	suggests,	peace	is	a	contested	term;	therefore,	explicit	definitions	
are	helpful.	This	chapter	employs	Lederachs	(1997)	conceptualisation	of	
peacebuilding	and	conflict	transformation	previously	discussed	in	Chapter	2,	as	
long-term	processes	concerned	both	with	addressing	the	root	causes	of	conflict	and	
their	manifestations	within	structures	and	relationships.	Given	that	the	focus	of	this	
thesis	concerns	grassroots	and	civil	society	peacebuilding,	attention	in	this	chapter	
primarily	rests	on	practical	activities	which	intersect	with	the	bottom	two	levels	of	
Lederachs	pyramid	of	peacebuilding	(see	Figure	1	in	Chapter	2)	which	is	defined	as	
grassroots-level	and	middle-range	level	(Lederach,	1997).		A	third	caveat	is	that	the	
chapter	assumes	some	knowledge	of	the	wider	context	of	conflict	in	Northern	
Ireland,	its	main	protagonists	and	the	broad	issues	of	dispute.	
A	chronological	approach	has	been	taken	to	examine	activities	within	six	
timeframes	influenced	by	Curle	(1971),	Galtung	(1975),	and	Lederach	(1995,	1997),	
which	as	mentioned,	views	peacebuilding	as	not	only	seeking	to	end	physical	
violence	but	address	root	causes	of	division.	The	chapter	is	organised	by	stages	of	
conflict	and	by	six	phases	of	peacebuilding.	Where	possible,	the	titles	of	
peacebuilding	phases	were	taken	directly	from	common	everyday	phrases	found	in	
the	research	data,	either	in	desk-research	or	mentioned	by	interviewees.	Shown	
also	as	a	table	(Table	1),	the	peacebuilding	timeframe	is	outlined	in	six	phases:		
Phase	One:	Increasing	the	volume	on	the	conflict	radio		
(latent	conflict	from	1965	to	1968)	
Phase	Two:	Crisis	response	and	fire	fighting		
(early	eruption	of	manifest	conflict	from	1969	to	1972)	
Phase	Three:	Holding	societal	threads	together		
(conflict	escalation	from	1973	to	1979)	
Phase	Four:	Getting	on	with	it			
(conflict	normalisation	from	1980	to	1991)	
Phase	Five:	Tilling	the	soil	for	political	agreement		
(ceasefires,	negotiations	and	political	agreement	from	1992	to	1998)	
Phase	Six:	Two	steps	forward	one	step	back			
(post-agreement	and	power-sharing	from	1999	to	2015)		
Table	1:	Grassroots	and	civil	society	peacebuilding	timeframe	1965-2015	
Years		 Stage	of	Conflict		 Phase	of	Peacebuilding	 Types	of	Activity/Examples	
1965-
Latent	 Phase	One:	Increasing	the	volume	on	
the	conflict	radio	
Advocacy	for	civil	rights,	non-violent	
demonstrations	and	civil	disobedience		
Promoting	reconciliation		
1969-
Early	Eruption	of		
Manifest	Conflict		
Phase	Two:	Crisis	response	and		
fire	fighting	
De-escalating	conflict		
Maintaining	cohesion		
Anti-intimidation	in	the	workplace		
Protesting	direct	violence		
1973-
Conflict	Escalation		
Phase	Three:	Holding	societal	
threads	together	
Political	intermediaries		
Community	development		
Rallying	the	public	for	non-violence	
1980-
Conflict	Normalisation		
Anglo-Irish	Agreement	
(1985)		
Phase	Four:	Getting	on	with	It	
Human	rights	advocacy		
Supporting	prisoners		
First	integrated	school,	peace	education		
Shared	inter-faith	communities		
Mediation	introduced			
Supporting	victims	
1992-
Ceasefire,	Negotiations	and	
Agreement	
Ceasefires	(1994-1995)	
GFA	(1998)	
Phase	Five:	Tilling	the	soil	for	political	
agreement	
Back-channel	private	dialogue		
Public	inquiry	and	dialogue		
De-militarisation	GRIT	model		
Interface-focused	engagement		
YES	campaign	for	Good	Friday	Agreement	
referendum		
1999-
Post-Agreement		
Power-sharing	
Phase	Six:	Two	steps	forward	one	
step	back	
Police	reform	training	and	support	
Restorative	justice	practice	introduced		
Dialogue	and	storytelling	projects	
4.1	Phase	1:	Increasing	the	volume	on	the	conflict	radio	(1965	to	1968)	
When	considering	peacebuilding	that	emerged	during	this	phase	it	is	possible	to	see	
the	confluence	of	both	a	local	and	global	social	political	milieu	on	peacebuilding	
activists.	In	Northern	Ireland,	in	what	can	be	described	as	a	latent	stage	of	conflict	
practice	demonstrated	a	desire	to	surface	and	dismantle	the	conflicts	structural	
dimensions	as	well	as	to	encourage	the	bridging	of	relational	divides.	With	
expectations	on	the	rise	after	the	arrival	of	the	more	moderate	Captain	Terence	
ONeill	as	the	Prime	Minister	of	Northern	Ireland	in	1963,	Darby	(1983)	suggests	
hope	for	social	and	political	reform	in	Northern	Ireland	increased.	This	more	
progressive	outlook	chimed	with	the	times	as	globally	progressive	trends	emerged	
across	parts	of	Europe	and	the	United	States.		
Advocacy	activities	were	used	to	address	imbalances	of	power	and	discriminatory	
practices	embedded	in	local	political	governance	structures,	while	ecumenism	and	
interfaith	reconciliation	sought	to	explore	relational	divisions	and	counter	historic	
inter-communal	mistrust	between	Catholic	and	Protestant.	Looking	outwards,	
inspiration	and	models	for	social	intervention	were	found	globally	and	replicated	
locally.	For	example,	local	civil	rights	campaigners	adopted	tactics	of	direct	action	
modelled	by	the	US	civil	rights	movement,	and	inter-faith	efforts	were	influenced	by	
wider	ecumenist	trends	of	reconciliation	ushered	in	by	the	World	Council	of	
Churches	and	Vatican	II.			
In	the	local	context	however,	communal	tensions	and	fault	lines	remained.	Changes	
promised	by	the	new	Prime	Minister	ONeill	were	perceived	as	either	too	slow	for	
Nationalists	or	too	fast	for	political	Unionists	(Barritt,	1982).	Civil	rights	
demonstrations	aimed	at	bringing	attention	to	institutional	discrimination	mainly	
faced	by	the	Nationalist	community	were	initially	non-violent.	Viewed	as	a	
necessary	tool	of	advocacy	to	pressure	government	by	Nationalists,	Unionists	
viewed	activities	with	suspicion,	as	a	Trojan	horse	for	the	Irish	Republican	Army	
(IRA)	whose	border	campaign	had	only	recently	ended.	Likewise,	ecumenical	efforts	
were	accused	of	diluting	religious	orthodoxies	and	traditions	and	promoting	a	
Rome-ward	trend	(Taggart,	2004).	Consequently,	this	phase	was	important	
because	action	that	might	have	initially	been	aimed	at	peacebuilding	to	address	
root	conflict,	also	arguably	played	a	role	in	shifting	the	conflict	context.	By	the	end	
of	this	phase	Northern	Ireland	had	moved	from	a	primarily	structurally	violent	
phase	of	conflict	towards	an	eruption	into	physical	violence.	While	this	period	
began	with	hope,	optimism	and	rhetoric	of	change,	by	its	end,	Northern	Ireland	was	
poised	on	the	brink	of	civil	war.	
Turning	up	the	volume	with	advocacy	for	civil	rights		
The	Campaign	for	Social	Justice	(CSJ),	started	by	Dungannon	Doctor	Conn	
McCluskey	and	his	wife	Patricia,	had	since	its	formation	in	January	1964	sought	to	
increase	pressure	for	change	by	lobbying	Westminster	directly.	The	aim	of	CSJ	was	
to	highlight	institutional	discrimination	in	public	housing	allocation,	employment,	
and	unfair	electoral	practices	that	disproportionately	affected	the	Catholic	
population.	According	to	Hennessey	(2005),	CSJ	was	different	in	that	it	sought	to	
use	letter-writing	campaigns	directed	toward	MPs	in	the	House	of	Commons,	
targeting	MPs	with	Irish	constituencies	believing	that	the	incoming	Labour	
government	of	Harold	Wilson	might	be	more	sympathetic	to	their	concerns	
(Hennessey,	2005).	However,	by	the	late	1960s,	frustration	began	to	mount,	as	
legislative	pressure	was	perceived	as	having	little	effect.	With	social	justice	and	civil	
rights	concerns	appearing	not	to	be	successful	in	gaining	political	ground	within	
Unionist	dominated	local	government,	the	Northern	Ireland	Civil	Rights	Association	
(NICRA)	was	formed	in	February	1967	to	use	non-violent	civil	disobedience	to	
address	issues	such	as	social	housing	and	unemployment	(Arthur,	1980).	Accusing	
the	ONeill	government	of	not	living	up	to	its	promises	of	reform,	NICRA	planned	its	
first	march	for	August	1968,	to	simulate	the	US	civil	rights	march	from	Selma	to	
Birmingham	by	marching	from	Coalisland	to	Dungannon.	Two	thousand	protestors	
assembled	in	Dungannon	and	were	faced	by	1500	Loyalist	counter-demonstrators,	
led	by	Ian	Paisley.	Despite	the	counter-protests,	this	initial	march	passed	off	
without	any	serious	disruption.		
One	reason	to	reflect	with	greater	detail	on	the	civil	rights	movement	is	to	consider	
how	using	non-violent	civil	disobedience	(a	tool	of	peacebuilding	used	to	address	
structural	injustices,	see	Sharp,	1973;	Albert,	1985;	Burrowes,	1996)	played	a	partial	
role	in	shifting	the	conflict	context	from	latent	to	manifest.	For	this	reason	the	
second	civil	rights	march	held	in	Derry-Londonderry	on	October	5,	1968	is	
considered	pivotal	(Taggart,	2004;	Prince	and	Warner,	2012)	with	authors	
suggesting	that	on	that	day:			
More	than	any	other	single	event,	the	march	and	the	public	reaction	to	it	
can	be	said	to	have	launched	the	Troubles	(Taggart,	2004	p.26).	
[A]	strong	claim	to	being	the	second	most	significant	date	in	twentieth	
century	Irish	history.	The	fifth	October	1968	did	not	just	mark	the	shift	
from	one	era	of	history	to	another,	it	was	essential	to	bringing	about	that	
shift	(Prince	and	Warner,	2012	p.	4).		
Planned	in	Belfast	but	held	in	Derry-Londonderry,	scholars	Prince	and	Warner	
(2012)	suggest	that	shifting	organisational	dynamics	impacted	preparation	for	the	
second	march.	Noting	that	Derry-Londonderry-based	organisers	were	more	radical,	
Prince	and	Warner	quote	Eamonn	McCann,	a	local	activist,	as	saying	our	conscious,	
if	unspoken,	strategy	was	to	provoke	the	police	into	overreaction	and	thus	spark	off	
mass	reaction	against	the	authorities	(Prince	and	Warner,	2012	p.34).	Prince	and	
Warner	argue	that	Derry-Londonderry		radicals	were	well	known	to	the	local	police	
commanders	within	the	Royal	Ulster	Constabulary	(RUC),	but	that	Belfast-based	
NICRA	leadership	were	not	as	aware	of	local	dynamics	(ibid).		
The	march	route	was	perceived	by	some	as	controversial	and	nearly	led	to	its	
cancellation	after	parts	of	the	route	were	banned	by	the	Home	Affairs	minister	who	
claimed	it	would	clash	with	local	Protestant/Loyalist	populations.	The	fact	that	parts	
of	the	route	were	banned	served	as	a	rally	cry,	forcing	key	politicians	within	
Nationalism	to	support	the	march,	but	causing	a	split	with	organisers.	Deciding	to	
defy	the	ban,	the	march	went	ahead.	400	marchers	were	met	by	a	police	line	at	
Craigavon	Bridge	and	prevented	from	continuing	on.	NICRA	leaders	attempted	
unsuccessfully	to	get	the	crowd	to	disperse,	and	asked	marchers	to	go	home.	Those	
attempting	to	disperse	were	then	caught	between	two	police	cordons	and,	
according	to	Prince	and	Warner,	were	met	by	RUC	officers	with	heavy	and	
disproportionate	force.	According	to	Arthur	(1980),	77	civilians	and	11	policemen	
were	injured	that	day	during	the	march	and	in	subsequent	rioting	in	Derry.	The	
scenes	were	filmed	by	camera	crews,	and	brought	international	attention	to	
Northern	Ireland.		
Following	the	events	of	that	day,	a	chain	of	events	both	at	grassroots-level	and	
political-levels	was	set	into	motion.	Student	activists	involved	in	a	sit-down	protest	
over	the	police	brutality	in	Derry-Londonderry	formed	the	more	radical	Peoples	
Democracy,	and	the	Nationalist	party	officially	withdrew	from	Stormont.	Over	the	
subsequent	weeks,	civil	rights	marches	continued	with	increasing	numbers	and	by	
the	end	of	November	1968,	met	with	success	as	pressure	for	change	stimulated	by	
the	advocacy	was	met	by	a	package	of	legislative	reforms	(Darby,	1983).	Despite,	
and	perhaps	as	a	result	of	legislative	advances,	tensions	and	pressures	remained	
high.	Moderate	members	of	the	civil	rights	movement	called	for	a	break	from	public	
demonstrations	to	give	the	Stormont	government	time	to	prove	willing	to	make	the	
changes,	and	take	the	heat	out	of	the	situation	(Barritt,	1982).		
This	was	the	time	for	the	demonstrators	to	leave	the	streets	to	consolidate	
their	considerable	gains.	The	civil	rights	movement,	having	tasted	success,	
was	in	no	mood	to	sit	back	and	leave	the	Unionist	Government	in	peace.	In	
many	of	the	minority,	who	harbour	grievances,	having	had	no	effective	
political	voice	for	half	a	century,	resentment	builds	up	until	measures	which	
once	would	have	given	satisfaction,	if	they	had	been	freely	granted,	are	now	
seen	to	be	too	little	and	too	late	(Barritt,	1982	p.8).	
Instead,	civil	rights	marches	over	the	next	six	months	would	increasingly	experience	
violent	confrontations	with	local	Protestant	Loyalist	counter-protesters	and	further	
accusations	of	police	heavy	handedness.	Authors	suggest	that	violence	within	the	
movement	increased	because	civil	rights	leaders	could	not	control	their	own	
people	(Prince	and	Warner,	2012	p.124).		
While	it	does	not	do	justice	to	leapfrog	over	important	events	that	consolidated	the	
shift	from	latent	phase	into	manifest	violent	conflict,	for	the	sake	of	brevity	it	is	
necessary.	Several	authors	writing	about	these	times	suggest	that	the	period	
between	October	1968	and	August	1969	was	pivotal	in	setting	a	trajectory	for	the	
Troubles.	Events,	such	as	the	Peoples	Democracy	march	that	was	attacked	by	
counter-demonstrators	and	off-duty	B-Specials	at	Burntollet	Bridge,	became	
watersheds	that	shifted	the	context	of	the	conflict	(Barritt,	1982;	Taggart,	2004;	
Bleakley,	1972;	McKeown,	1984).	As	violence	escalated,	those	with	more	moderate	
views	left	the	movement	and	NICRA	increasingly	was	unable	to	maintain	its	initial	
commitment	to	non-violence.	The	result	was:	
The	period	October	1968-January	1969	was	the	last	moment	in	the	history	
of	Northern	Ireland	when	restraint	might	have	prevailed,	reform	been	won,	
and	sectarian	passions	kept	dormant.	After	that,	there	was	little	anyone	
could	do	until	those	passions	had	expended	themselves,	or	proved	their	
murderous	unreason	(McKeown,	1984	p.44).		
Finding	a	frequency	for	reconciliation	
The	relational	dimensions	of	the	conflict,	described	above	as	sectarian	passions,	
were	also	of	concern	to	civil	society	actors	wishing	to	turn	up	the	volume	for	
change	during	this	phase.	In	particular,	faith-based	responses	in	Northern	Ireland	
were	in	part	a	result	of	increased	local	support	for	ecumenism.	Prior	to	this,	one	
description	of	the	history	of	inter-church	relations	was	that:	
[A]nti-Romanism	was	an	entrenched	feature	of	Irish	Protestantism,	anti-
Protestantism	was	a	marked	feature	of	Irish	Catholicism,	and	each	side	was	
content	in	its	isolationism	(Hurley	cited	in	Taggart,	2004	p.84).		
For	example,	the	Presbyterian	Church	demonstrated	a	softening	stance	by	issuing	a	
statement	to	the	Catholic	Church	asking	for	forgiveness	for	historical	injustices.		The	
development	of	ecumenical	all-Ireland	bodies	such	as	the	Irish	Council	of	Churches	
also	sparked	a	wider	interest	in	human	rights	and	reforms	in	Northern	Ireland	(ibid,	
p.24).	It	was	also	at	this	stage	that	a	new	kind	of	local	peace	group	emerged,	as	up	
until	this	point,	active	local	peace	groups	such	as	the	Fellowship	of	Reconciliation	
(FOR)	were	pacifists	with	a	focus	on	international	anti-war	activities	rather	than	
local	issues	of	conflict	(Mitchell,	1978).	The	Corrymeela	Community,	the	first	faith-
based	organisation	to	be	focused	on	reconciliation,	was	founded	in	1965	(ibid,	1978	
pp.34-35).		
Corrymeela	was	galvanised	by	the	same	social	milieu	that	produced	student	leaders	
in	the	civil	rights	movement,	influenced	by	the	growth	in	student	activism	and	
political	awareness	at	Queens	University	Belfast	in	the	early	1960s.	Ray	Davey,	the	
Presbyterian	Chaplain	at	Queens	University	who	would	become	the	founder	and	
first	leader	of	Corrymeela,	drew	also	from	his	own	personal	experiences	of	conflict	
and	war.	A	chaplain	during	World	War	II,	Davey	had	been	taken	Prisoner	of	War	and	
then	appointed	chaplain	in	the	prison	camp.	This	experience,	he	writes,	was	to	
affect	him	in	profound	ways	and	provide	a	model	for	building	community	and	
dialogue	in	a	context	of	difference	and	division	(Davey,	1993	pp.	57-64).	Drawing	
inspiration	from	intentional	communities	used	to	progress	social	change	such	as	the	
Iona	Community	in	Scotland	and	the	Agape	Community	in	Italy,	the	Corrymeela	
Community	was	founded	when	Davey	and	his	students	raised	funds	to	buy	premises	
on	the	north	coast	of	Northern	Ireland.	Early	reconciliation	activities	included	work	
camps	and	conferences	with	a	focus	on	bringing	people	together	from	different	
political	and	religious	traditions	to	provide	a	space	to	meet,	learn	about	each	other,	
and	build	trust	(Mitchell,	1978	pp.	34-35).		Reflecting	on	the	context	of	the	time,	
Ray	Davey	writes	that	among	his	students	there	was	growing	dissatisfaction	with	
the	political	and	social	status	quo	and	that	communal	polarisation	was	increasing.	
As	the	Troubles	unfolded,	Corrymeela	was	viewed	as	an	alternative	space	for	
dialogue:	
Soon	it	became	clear	that	a	choice	was	opening	up.	For	the	Nationalist	the	
choice	was	between	pursuing	a	peaceful	way	of	working	for	change,	or	
getting	involved	in	violence	and	the	armed	struggle'.	For	the	student	from	
a	Unionist	background	the	choice	again	was	either	to	follow	a	peaceful	
process	for	change	or,	as	many	did,	just	to	opt	out	and	live	a	private	life.	
Very	quickly	we	began	to	grasp	the	importance	of	our	existence	as	an	
alternative	to	violence	and	apathy,	by	offering	the	way	of	co-operation	
between	the	two	traditions.	[o]ur	task	was	to	try,	even	in	a	small	way,	to	
make	this	alternative	visible	(Davey,	1993	p.	80).	
Now	Northern	Irelands	oldest	reconciliation	group,	Corrymeela	has,	since	its	
founding,	played	a	variety	of	roles.	For	example,	it	offered	emergency	
accommodation	for	families	as	respite	from	the	violence	in	the	early	1970s,	
facilitated	the	growth	of	grassroots-led	efforts	to	aid	victims	of	conflict	(the	Cross	
Group),	supporting	the	introduction	of	mediation		(Mediation	Northern	Ireland)	
peace	education	(Community	Relations	in	Schools),	and	the	founding	of	Northern	
Irelands	first	integrated	school	(Lagan	College)	in	the	1980s.	However,	at	the	time	
of	its	founding	in	1965,	it	was	a	first	sustained	effort	at	creating	a	joint	location	with	
the	sole	purpose	of	building	inter-communal	relationships.	It	was	also	important	in	
the	context	of	the	physical	and	geographic	segregation	of	communities	to	establish	
a	shared	space	and	community	with	the	sole	intention	to	build	relationships	and	
encourage	dialogue	in	a	context	that	was,	as	Morrow	states,	a	conflict	rapidly	
evolving	from	a	stage	of	cold	war	(Morrow,	1995	p.39)	towards	manifest	and	
violent	confrontation.		
Another	similar	early	reconciliation	effort,	albeit	non-residentially	based,	was	
Protestant	and	Catholic	Encounter	(PACE).	PACE	began	in	January	1969,	when,	out	
of	concern	about	a	potential	Protestant	backlash	emerging	from	the	unfolding	civil	
rights	movement	Desmond	Mock	an	English	Presbyterian	Minister,	wrote	to	the	
press	with	a	suggestion	that	interdenominational	groups	should	meet.	According	to	
Barritt,	PACE	was	officially	launched	in	March	1969	with	30	members	through	a	
conference	on	Understanding	Each	Other	(Barritt,	1982	p.102).	Sub-groups	were	
formed	across	the	province	and	co-chaired	by	a	Protestant	and	Catholic,	the	
purpose	was	to	get	to	know	one	another,	learn	to	work	together,	and	prevent	
violence	from	breaking	out	(ibid).	Barritt	records	that	PACE	members	met	with	
ONeill	to	propose	that	government	form	an	official	public	body	dedicated	to	
improving	communal	relationships	and	suggests	this	may	have	had	some	influence	
on	the	governments	development	of	the	Ministry	of	Community	Relations,	and	the	
independent	Community	Relations	Commission	later	that	summer	(Barritt,	1982		
p.102).	PACE	persisted	in	their	efforts	throughout	subsequent	phases	and	was	
active	in	promoting	ecumenical	reconciliation	until	1995.		
Reflecting	overall	on	the	early	reconciliation	efforts	and	faith-based	activities	of	this	
period,	these	activities	were	primarily	oriented	towards	relationship-building	and	
dialogue-building	activities	such	as	work	camps,	inter-church	meetings	and	
conferences.	However,	a	criticism	of	ecumenical	groups	was	that	they	sometimes	
lacked	representation	from	communities	most	directly	affected	by	communal	
divisions	or	violence,	and	that	support	for	ecumenism	from	local	area	congregations	
and	parishes	was	not	strong	(Taggart,	1971).	In	a	letter	to	the	editor	of	the	Belfast	
Telegraph	from	1971,	Taggart	in	his	role	as	organising	secretary	of	the	Irish	Council	
of	Churches	responded	to	criticism	aimed	at	the	churches	for	their	lack	of	response	
to	escalating	events:	
Cooperation	at	certain	level	of	leadership	exists	within	the	churches	[but	
relationships	at	the	local	level	are]	depressing,	characterized	by	ecumenical	
timidity,	indifference	and	even	hostility.What	can	be	done	about	this?	I	am	
afraid	that	the	ICC	can	help	little	at	this	all-important	level	with	its	part	time	
staff	already	stretched.	PACE	groups,	Peace	Committees	and	an	assortment	
of	similar	local	groups	are	a	recent	encouraging	development.	One	would	
have	to	say	however	that	the	prospects	for	local	ecumenics	are	not	very	
encouraging	in	many	areas	(Taggart,	1971	p5).			
Another	tension	in	inter-church	activities	according	to	Taggart	(2004)	which	would	
become	increasingly	challenging	during	the	next	timeframe	of	peacebuilding	was	
trying	to	find	a	balanced	response	against	a	context	of	rising	paramilitarism	and	
sectarian	conflict.	He	describes	that	government	security	policies	in	particular,	
produced	internal	tensions	for	ecumenical	bodies.	For	example,	in	later	years	when	
internment	was	introduced	(discussed	as	part	of	the	next	phase)	it	was	condemned	
by	the	Catholic	leadership	but	initially	supported	by	the	three	main	Protestant	
churches.	Such	tensions	would	surface	again	among	other	organisations	trying	to	
work	inter-communally	and	will	be	revisited	in	subsequent	sections	of	this	chapter.	
Conclusion		
Reflecting	on	this	phase	of	peacebuilding	with	a	view	towards	phronesis	and	to	
consider	what	such	activities	may	mean	as	efforts	to	promote	change	within	a	
particular	context,	several	points	are	suggested.	The	pace	and	timing	of	societal	
change	was	simultaneously	perceived	as	either	too	fast	and	too	slow.	Straddling	any	
space	between	was	a	challenge-	particularly	when	the	middle	ground	decreased.		If	
phronesis	is	understood	as,	in	part,	acquired	by	experience-	this	period	may	
evidence,	both	an	absence	of	experience	and	practical	consideration	for	the	
localised	context.		
The	civil	rights	movement,	for	example,	borrowed	a	model	of	civil	disobedience	that	
was	not	germane	to	Northern	Ireland	and	lacked	the	years	of	preparation	that	had	
accompanied	its	use	in	the	United	States.	Without	such	training,	maintaining	a	
commitment	to	nonviolence	was	arguably	challenged	from	the	beginning-	for	
example,	the	historical	valorisation	of	armed	struggle	had	been	recently	marked	
with	a	celebration	in	1966	of	the	50	year	anniversary	of	the	Easter	rising.		
Ruane	and	Todd	(1996)	note	that	the	leadership	within	the	civil	rights	movement	
did	not	factor	in	the	sectarian	geography	of	Northern	Ireland.	Belfast-based	civil	
rights	organisers	were	unaware,	for	example,	of	local	marching	routes	during	the	
second	civil	rights	march	on	October	5,	1968	in	Derry-Londonderry.	It	is	suggested	
that	one	consequence	was	that	the	route	taken	may	have	played	a	role	in	
exacerbating	communal	tensions	(Prince	and	Warner,	2012).	Finally,	Barritt	
suggests	that	civil	rights	marchers	could	have	paused	their	efforts	after	securing	
political	reforms	in	November	1968	but	chose	to	press	onwards,	a	decision	that	he	
suggests	began	to	alienate	moderate	Protestants	and	Nationalists	(Barritt,	1982	
p.8).	
4.2	Phase	2:	Crisis	response	and	firefighting		(1969-1972)		
The	period	of	time	between	1969	and	1972	can	be	viewed	as	a	period	of	rapid	
escalation	of	violent	conflict.	The	dramatically	changing	environment	saw	clashes	
between	civil	rights	protesters	and	counter-protestors,	and	a	summer	of	communal	
upheaval	in	Belfast	and	Derry-Londonderry	that	led	to	the	arrival	of	British	troops	in	
August	1969.	An	awakened	Irish	Republican	Army	(IRA)	bombing	campaign,	by	the	
end	of	1970	paved	the	way	for	internment	without	trial,	controversially	established	
in	August	1971.	Rather	than	containing	it,	internment	increased	the	violence	
(McKittrick	and	McVea,	2013).		
Recruiting	for	paramilitarism	increased	in	tandem	with	the	heightened	intensity	of	
the	armed	campaign.	Bombs	planted	by	the	IRA	in	mainly	Protestant	communities-	
two	pubs	on	the	Shankill	Road,	a	British	Legion	Hall	in	the	small	enclave	of	Suffolk	in	
west	Belfast,	and	along	early	morning	marching	routes	on	the	twelfth	of	July	were	
perceived	as	the	specific	targeting	of	Protestants.	As	a	result,	recruitment	increased	
for	Loyalist	paramilitaries;	by	the	end	of	August	1971,	local	defence	associations	
came	together	under	a	central	council	known	as	the	Ulster	Defence	Association	
(UDA)	(Hall,	1988:	p	28).	The	growth	of	Loyalist	paramilitarism	was	also	
accompanied	by	increasingly	violent	rhetoric	and	actions	of	extremists	within	
Unionism.	At	a	monster	rally	(Hall,	1988	p.33)	of	the	militant	Unionist	movement	
the	Ulster	Vanguard	attended	by	50,000	people	in	late	1971,	its	leader	the	former	
minister	for	home	affairs	William	Craig	is	quoted	as	saying:	
We	must	build	up	a	dossier	of	the	men	and	women	who	are	a	menace	to	
this	country,	because	if	and	when	the	politicians	fail	us,	it	may	be	our	job	to	
liquidate	the	enemy	(ibid).	
1972	arrived	ominously	with	the	killing	of	unarmed	civil	rights	marchers	(known	as	
Bloody	Sunday)	in	Derry-Londonderry	and	within	three	months	Stormont	was	
prorogued.	The	culmination	of	such	events	was	to	mark	this	as	a	context-shifting	
year.	It	would	notoriously	also	be	known	as	the	most	violent	year	of	the	Troubles	
with	500	killings,	10,000	shootings,	2000	explosions	and	5000	injured	(McKittrick	
and	McVea,	2013).		
As	the	pace	of	violent	communal	conflict	accelerated,	Catholic	and	Protestant	
communities	faced	intimidation	and	displacement.	Previously	mixed	
neighbourhoods	became	increasingly	physically	and	geographically	polarised.	The	
degree	of	the	rapid	displacement	is	well	captured	by	Murtagh:	
[T]he	biggest	period	of	segregation	in	Belfast	was	between	1969	and	1974	
when	it	is	estimated	that	some	60,000	people	left	their	home	as	a	result	of	
the	violence.	That	period	and	the	massive	movement	and	sorting	of	
population	back	into	already	established	ethnic	space	was,	until	the	outbreak	
of	the	Yugoslavian	conflict,	the	biggest	mass	movement	of	civilian	population	
since	the	war	in	Europe	(Murtagh	quoted	in	Hall,	1998	p.	4).		
Practical	peacebuilding	activities	in	this	volatile	period	reflected	reactive,	crisis	
response	and	fire-fighting	approaches.	Local	peace	activists,	trade	unionists,	and	
clergy	sought	to	stem	these	dangerous	and	polarising	trends	by	attempting	to	
maintain	cohesion	in	mixed	areas,	and	to	de-escalate	violence	in	their	own	locales,	
workplaces	and	domains.	Particularly	impacted	by	violence	in	the	everyday	lives	of	
families	and	communities,	women	also	became	visible	activists	(Hammond	
Callaghan,	2006;	2007).			Such	efforts	were	at	times	fraught	with	difficulties	and	
came	at	a	personal	cost.		
Responding	to	the	experience	of	living	in	crisis	
The	development	of	peace	committees	began	in	the	summer	of	1969	after	
communal	violence	began	to	escalate	throughout	flashpoint	areas	during	the	
summer	marching	season.	Formed	to	de-escalate	potential	rioting	and	protect	
homes,	Bleakley	(1972)	describes	that	peace	committees	operated	a	24-hour	
service	out	of	church	halls	and	were	equipped	with	a	telephone	line	to	receive	calls	
by	anyone	needing	assistance,	with	instructions	to	dial	58507	for	peace.	Peace	
committees	attempted	to	saturate	the	area	with	peace	patrols,	and	focused	on	
dispelling	rumours	of	violence	between	areas	in	order	to	prevent	intercommunal	
violence	(Bleakley,	1972	p.93).	Wearing	distinctive	white	armbands,	members	of	
the	patrol	went	for	walks	in	teams	between	the	hours	of	7:30pm	and	1:30am.	If	
there	was	local	disturbance	the	committee	took	action	to	calm	the	riots.	In	some	
cases	they	formed	a	human	chain	around	those	in	danger,	or	by	using	clergy	to	
negotiate	and	de-escalate	tensions.	According	to	Bleakley,	peace	bulletins	were	
used	to	spread	a	sense	of	unity	and	pride	to	discourage	local	rioting	(ibid,	p.	94).	
Writing	about	the	containment	of	rioting	in	Belfast	in	August	1969,	Liam	Kelly	
(2009;	2011)	attributes	some	success	to	peace	committees,	which	he	states,	in	
certain	areas,	mitigated	localised	rioting.	Peace	committees,	he	writes,	were	
particularly	effective	in	areas	of	Belfast	where	members	of	the	committee	had	
formed	good	relationships	with	the	local	police	(ibid).	By	the	end	of	1969	there	
were	a	number	of	peace	committees	that	remained	in	operation,	but	Bleakley	
writes	that	the	height	of	their	activity	occurred	in	the	autumn	of	1969.	
Trade	unions	were	also	considered	important	during	this	phase	in	efforts	to	prevent	
violence	on	the	streets	from	invading	the	workplace	(Bleakley,	1972).	Particular	
credit	is	given	to	shop	stewards	in	the	shipyard	for	their	role	in	preventing	incidents	
of	intimidation	against	Catholic	employees	(Bleakley,	1972).	In	one	particular	
example,	on	August	15,
1969	one	day	after	an	upsurge	in	rioting	had	left	residents	
in	Belfast	intimidated	out	of	their	homes	and	led	to	several	deaths,	a	mass	open-air	
meeting	of	8,000	workers	was	called.	Describing	the	event	as	touch	and	go	due	to	
the	tensions	in	the	crowd	Bleakley	(1972)	recalled	that	a	turning	point	came	when	
Reverend	Eric	Gallagher,	a	local	Methodist	minister,	intervened:	
	[A]	forthright	Christian	message	[was	given]	which	somehow	or	other	got	
through	to	the	men.	It	was	an	astonishing	and	moving	contribution,	striking	
the	right	prayer	to	unite	them	all.	Those	who	attended	the	meeting	agree	
that	this	was	the	turning	point	that	prepared	a	new	mood	(Bleakley,	1972	
p.72).		
Bleakley	cites	that	chief	shop	steward,	Sandy	Scott,	reinforced	the	case	on	
pragmatic	economic	grounds	and	emphasised	that	nobody	benefited	from	a	
disrupted	workplace	and	destroyed	industry.	Management	followed	up	producing	
notices	displayed	to	warn	workers	that	if	any	threats	were	made	to	other	
employees	it	would	be	grounds	for	immediate	dismissal.	Bleakley	describes	that	
union	leadership	within	the	Northern	Committee	of	the	Irish	Congress	of	Trade	
Unions	(ICTU)	also	coordinated	such	efforts	across	the	province.	Writing	in	1972,	
Bleakely	acknowledged	that	the	unions	continued	to	be	put	under	pressure	when	
acting	to	keep	workplaces	free	from	sectarianism.	Trade	union	activism	would	
continue	throughout	the	conflict	in	efforts	to	deter	intimidation	of	workers;	a	tricky	
navigation	at	times	when	membership	took	more	extremist	positions.	For	example,	
during	the	spring	of	1971,	when	4000	shipyard	workers	backed	politicians	calling	for	
internment	(Hall,	1988	pp.	25-27),	and	in	1974	when	a	strike	organised	by	the	Ulster	
Workers	Council	organised	Protestant	workers	to	bring	down	the	first	power-
sharing	government.	Finally,	creating	sectarian-free	workplaces	was	also	
challenging	as	some	types	of	employment	(i.e.	working	for	the	British	Government	
or	military	bodies)	became	considered	as	legitimate	targets	by	the	Provisional	Irish	
Republican	Army	(PIRA).		
Maintaining	relationships	and	social	cohesion	within	a	fraying	social	fabric	was	
another	area	of	concern	and	practical	activity.	The	Good	Neighbour	Campaign	
began	in	1972	by	those	who	had	been	involved	several	years	earlier	in	the	east	
Belfast	peace	committees.	Disturbed	by	seeing	the	mass	relocation	taking	place	
across	the	city	as	residents	moved	out	of	mixed	areas	into	single	identity	
communities,	the	campaign	urged	citizens	to	build	good	relationships	and	give	
assurances	to	those	who	were	fearful.	Barritt	(1982)	writes	that	over	a	period	of	
some	three	years,	10,000	signatures	were	collected.	While	the	initiative	seems	to	
have	been	short-lived,	those	involved	remained	active	through	the	work	of	another	
group	formed	out	of	the	same	campaign-	the	East	Belfast	Community	Council-	
known	since	1996	as	the	East	Belfast	Community	Development	Agency.			
Growing	peace	networks	became	particularly	important	in	the	unfolding	context	of	
conflict,	polarisation	and	militarism.	Barritt	recalls	that	groups	worked	together,	for	
example,	in	circulating	peace	petitions	and	organising	peace	rallies,	describing	that	
an	early	peace	rally	in	the	Ormeau	Park	in	1971	had	attracted	between	8,000-
10,000	attendees	(Barritt,	1982).	However,	by	contrast,	as	mentioned	previously	
the	Ulster	Vanguard	a	militant	and	extremist	Unionist	group	attracted	over	50,000	
people	to	the	same	location	six	months	later.	By	1974,	peace	groups	had	formed	an	
umbrella	group	known	as	the	Peace	Forum	in	order	to	coordinate	and	maximise	
their	collective	efforts.	The	Peace	Forum	represented	a	wide	approach,	united	by	a	
desire	to	stop	violence	but	not	necessarily	united	in	pacifism	(Barritt,	1982	p.115).	
Over	subsequent	years	this	group	used	the	network	for	conferences,	consultation,	
for	visits	to	the	Northern	Ireland	Office,	and	to	meet	with	the	army	and	police	in	
order	to	give	input	on	relevant	issues.	
Women,	a	constituency	highly	impacted	in	their	everyday	lives	by	the	escalating	
violent	conflict,	also	became	peace	activists	within	their	own	communities	as	well	
as	within	efforts	to	bolster	inter-communal	relationships	(Hammond	Callaghan,	
2002,	2006).	Distressed	by	the	escalating	sectarian	violence	which	caused	Catholic	
neighbours	to	leave	her	area,	Ruth	Agnew,	a	retired	cleaner,	felt	women	had	a	
unique	role	and	needed	to	speak	out	against	the	violence.	Speaking	at	an	event	
sponsored	by	another	peace	group,	PACE,	Agnew	is	paraphrased	as	saying,	that	
what	was	needed	was	not	discussions	in	a	college	but	to	get	the	women	together	
women	who	lived	in	the	riot	areas	and	knew	at	first	hand	what	violence	meant	
(Barritt,	1982	p.104).	From	this	event	Women	Together	(WT)	(1970	to	2001)	was	
formed.	Their	approach	was	to	meet	informally,	placing	emphasis	on	getting	to	
know	one	another,	arranging	respite	holidays	for	those	most	affected,	and	running	
playgroups.	At	times	this	also	involved	taking	direct	action	when	violence	erupted	in	
their	area	by	forming	a	human	shield	to	stop	attacks	on	people	or	property.	
According	to	Barritt	(1982)	by	1977	there	were	seven	WT	groups	in	Belfast	and	two	
more	in	Lisburn	and	Whitehead.		While	clearly	there	was	motivation	to	meet	
together	to	build	relationships,	Hammond	Callaghan	(2006)	offers	a	critique	that	
women	involved	with	WT	avoided	discussing	controversial	topics,	for	example,	
internment.	However,	the	critique	is	followed	by	an	acknowledgement	that	given	
the	mixed	nature	of	the	group,	such	topics	may	have	jeopardised	intra-communal	
solidarity.	
Women	living	in	Nationalist	areas	highly	impacted	by	violence	between	armed	
groups	and	police	and	army	were	likewise	involved	in	anti-violence	protests	during	
this	phase	(Hammond	Callaghan,	2002).	Two	incidents	in	particular	set	off	efforts	to	
mobilise	peace	activism.	The	first	incident,	in	early	April,	was	the	death	of	Martha	
Crawford,	a	mother-of-ten	living	in	west	Belfast-	killed	in	the	crossfire	of	shooting	
between	the	PIRA	and	the	army.	Over	the	next	several	weeks	local	women	began	
circulating	anti-violence	petitions.	Speaking	to	the	media,	they	called	for	the	leader	
of	the	PIRA	Sen	MacStofin	to	move	his	family	to	their	area	rather	than	make	
decisions	from	the	safety	of	Dublin,	where	he	was	based.	Peace	petitions	circulated	
over	the	next	several	months	had,	by	June	1972,	received	thousands	of	signatures.	
Martha	Crawfords	death	was	followed	by	an	incident	in	Derry-Londonderry	in	May,	
when	an	off-duty	army	officer	Ranger	William	Best,	was	killed	by	the	Official	Irish	
Republican	Army.	Best,	a	Catholic	and	a	native	of	the	Nationalist	area	of	Creggan	
had	been	killed	while	home	on	leave	to	visit	his	family	(Hammond	Callaghan,	2002).	
Appalled	that	the	paramilitaries	would	target	a	local	boy	home	to	see	his	mother,	
200	women	marched	to	the	headquarters	of	the	Official	Irish	Republican	Army	
(OIRA)	to	protest	(Hall,	1988).	Hammond	Callaghan,	described	their	motives	as:	
[A]	maternal	response	as	well	as	a	nationalist	response	to	Bests	death;	a	
contradiction	of	the	Official	IRAs	claim	to	represent	them	in	killing	Best;	
and	an	overall	opposition	to	IRA	offensive	military	strategies	(Hammond	
Callaghan,	2002	p.39).		
The	Irish	News	reported	at	the	time	that	several	days	later	a	rally	organized	by	the	
women	in	Creggan	drew	1000	supporters	demanding	that	the	OIRA	leave	the	area	
(Irish	News,	1972b).	By	the	end	of	May,	three	weeks	after	Ranger	Best	was	killed,	
the	OIRA	had	called	a	ceasefire.	Bowyer	Bell	(1993)	views	the	ceasefire	as	largely	a	
by-product	of	splits	in	Republican	ideology	but	considers	these	actions	may	have	
also	been	of	some	influence.	This	group,	which	became	known	as	Derry	Women	for	
Peace	(DWP),	in	early	June,	also	held	meetings	with	the	PIRA		(as	did	moderate	
Nationalists	John	Hume	and	Paddy	Devlin)	and	the	Secretary	of	State	William	
Whitelaw.	Hammond	Callaghan	cites	that	Hume	later	told	the	women	their	efforts	
had	opened	the	door	for	him	to	begin	conversations	with	Whitelaw.	She	also	
contends	that	these	efforts	may	have	had	some	influence	on	the	PIRAs	decision	to	
announce	a	ceasefire	(albeit	short-lived)	in	June.		The	DWP	worked	together	until	
the	late	1970s,	and	during	this	time	undertook	a	number	of	activities,	for	example	
the	group:	
[M]et	regularly	in	each	others	homes,	organised	a	peace	petition,	
attended	local	community	meetings,	liaised	with	other	peace	groups	in	
Belfast	such	as	Women	Together	for	Peace.negotiated	with	the	RUC	for	
the	release	of	internees,	prevented	further	arrests,	and	lobbied	a	host	of	
political	agents	in	the	conflict,	from	the	Provisional	IRA	leaders,	the	RUC,	
and	British	military	officials	to	representatives	from	British,	Northern	Irish	
and	Southern	Irish	(Republic)	governments	(Hammond	Callaghan,	2002	
p.42).	
While	the	DWP	worked	together	until	the	late	1970s	on	anti-violence	efforts,	they	
often	were	the	targets	of	criticism	from	within	their	own	community	(Hammond	
Callaghan,	2002).	As	Kilmurray	(2016)	explains,	in	a	context	of	high	polarisation,	
there	was	an	increased	pressure	to	maintain	intra-communal	solidarity:	
For	those	activists	resident	in	single	identity	communities	certain	levels	of	
dissent	were	acceptable	provided	it	did	not	stray	into	areas	where	it	could	
be	exploited	by	outsiders.	When	this	happened	the	reaction	was	often	
punitive,	as	experienced	by	the	Peace	Women	in	Derry,	who	were	
attacked	due	to	their	outspoken	opposition	to	violence	(Kilmurray,	2016	
p.141).	
While	Kilmurray	is	speaking	of	the	DWP,	an	incident	in	west	Belfast	draws	a	similar	
illustration.	During	a	peace	meeting	initiated	by	local	women	after	mother-of-ten	
Martha	Crawford	was	killed	in	April	of	1972,	local	Republican	activists	disrupted	
proceedings.	Their	protest	was	in	part,	a	reaction	against	the	presence	of	members	
of	Women	Together	(WT)	who	had	learned	of	the	incident	and	had	come	to	the	
meeting	in	support.	Letters	to	the	editor	of	the	Irish	News	shortly	afterwards	reveal	
some	of	the	tensions.	The	first	letter	by	a	local	woman	criticised	Women	Together	
for	a	lack	of	condemnation	of	state-base	violence,	stating	that	everyone	wants	
peace,	but	peace	with	justice.	The	second	letter,	written	by	the	local	west	Belfast	
organisers	of	the	original	meeting	calling	themselves	Peace	within	the	Community	
Group	(Irish	News,	1972a	p.	4),	then	proceeded	to	dissociate	themselves	from	
Women	Together	explaining	that	WT	had	arrived	uninvited	to	the	gathering.	They	
maintained	that	the	meeting	had	been	organised	by	those	impacted	by	the	death	of	
their	friend	Martha	Crawford,	and	merely	wished	to	do	something	(ibid).	The	fact	
that	the	peace	organisers	felt	the	need	to	write	to	the	paper	to	explain	reflects	the	
difficult	balance	of	maintaining	intra-communal	relationships	in	a	context	where	
ones	families	and	neighbours	are	both	victims	and	perpetrators	of	violence;	the	
space	for	intra-communal	dissent	begins	to	shrink.		
One	final	peacebuilding	initiative	to	highlight	during	this	phase,	similar	to	others,	
had	its	genesis	in	violence.	In	July	1972,	after	a	short-lived	ceasefire	had	broken	
down	the	PIRA	stepped	up	its	campaign	by	planting	15	bombs	in	Belfast	in	what	
became	known	as	Bloody	Friday.	Nine	people	were	killed	and	130	people	injured	as	
bomb	warnings	came	in	too	late,	were	not	acted	upon	at	all,	or	served	to	only	shift	
people	from	one	danger	spot	to	another	(Bowyer	Bell,	1993).	Two	months	later,	in	
September	1972	Reverend	Joe	Parker,	a	Church	of	Ireland	minister	who	had	lost	his	
only	son	as	a	result	of	a	bomb	on	Bloody	Friday,	began	a	fast	in	front	of	City	Hall.	
Frustrated	by	the	continuing	violence,	Parker,	invited	others	to	join	him	and	
become	a	witness	for	peace	(Barritt,	1982).	These	efforts	expanded	to	include	
circulating	petitions,	printing	bumper	stickers	and	badges	and	to	create	a	visible	
sign	of	the	human	cost-	by	planting	white	crosses	in	the	front	of	Belfast	City	Hall-	
one	for	each	person	who	had	died	in	the	Troubles.	A	relatively	short-lived	effort,	
Reverend	Parker	moved	to	Canada	in	1975,	discouraged	by	the	continuing	violence	
and	a	decreasing	support	for	peace.	Fitzduff	and	Williams	(2007)	acknowledge	the	
ephemeral	nature	of	such	actions	but	nonetheless	reflected	it	was	an	important	and	
visible	witness	to	the	human	consequence	of	violence:	Joseph	Parkers	placing	of	
crossestouched	a	human	note	about	how	humans	treat	each	other	(Fitzduff	and	
Williams,	2007	p.	35).	
Conclusion	
Reflecting	on	this	second	phase	of	peacebuilding	in	this	particularly	volatile	period,	
several	points	can	be	made	about	the	practical	wisdom	or	phronesis	demonstrated	
by	interventions.	Firstly,	much	of	the	activity	was	crisis	responsive	and	reactive,	and	
borne	of	tragedy-	neighbours	intimidated	out	of	a	shared	neighbourhood,	or	the	
death	of	a	child	or	a	mother.	In	this	increasingly	polarised	and	rapidly	changing	
context,	fight	or	flight	instincts	may	reflect	a	sense	of	urgency-		an	emotional	gut	
response	to	do	something.	Initiatives	such	as	peace	committees	sent	out	to	patrol	
tense	neighbourhoods	was	viewed	later	as	useful	in	particular	localised	situations	to	
halt	the	momentum	of	violence,	and	according	to	Kelly,	their	presence	explains	
variances	in	communal	rioting	in	the	summer	of	1969	(Kelly,	2009;	2011).	
Importantly,	he	notes	that	those	committees	that	were	most	effective	knew	their	
local	context,	and	had	built	up	strong	relationships.	In	this,	and	other	examples	such	
as	within	the	unions,	key	people	in	leadership	such	as	clergy	and	shop	stewards	in	
each	context	had	credibility	and	were	used	as	a	moral	authority	to	de-escalate	
potential	problems	on	the	streets	and	workplaces.		
Efforts	to	maintain	social	cohesion	in	such	a	polarised	context	suggest	a	gradual	
orientation	towards	informal	activities	rather	than	public	events	such	as	rallies.	
Practical	approaches,	taken	by	groups	like	Women	Together	or	DWP	meeting	
together	over	cups	of	tea,	organising	respite	breaks	and	supporting	those	in	areas	
most	impacted	had	a	longer	life	span	than	petition-signing	or	even	rallies	for	peace.	
Given	the	increasing	militarised	context,	lower-profile	activity	was	presumably	
safer.	It	may	have	also	served	to	normalise	meeting	together	in	a	context	where	
such	activities	were	increasingly	becoming	more	dangerous	and	abnormal.		
A	critique	that	mixed	groups	did	not	bring	up	controversial	topics	like	internment	
may	also	be	evidence	of	phronesis	given	a	polarised	atmosphere.	For	groups	trying	
to	maintain	cohesion,	talking	about	topics	that	would	be	considered	controversial	
might	be	counter-productive.	The	rapidly	changing	context	also	impacted	inter-
communal	relationships	as	intra-communal	loyalty	became	prioritised.	As	
polarisation	increased,	women	involved	in	anti-violence	peace	efforts	from	within	
the	Nationalist	community	found	their	efforts	created	a	backlash	from	their	own	
community.		This	backlash	exposed	both	the	contested	nature	of	peace,	and	that	
those	who	may	dissent	from	the	predominant	community	definition	of	peace	
came	at	a	cost.		
4.3	Phase	3:	Holding	societal	threads	together	(1973-1979)		
Direct	rule,	according	to	Cochrane	and	Dunn	(2002),	left	a	democratic	deficit	that	
was	significantly	important	to	the	development	of	the	breadth	and	width	of	
community	and	civil	societys	more	formalised	involvement	in	peacebuilding	and	in	
the	formation	of	a	community	and	voluntary	sector.	Political	efforts	at	the	time	
became	stalled	-	initially	by	a	coordinated	effort	by	Loyalist	workers	who	
successfully	collapsed	a	short-lived	power-sharing	executive	in	1974,	and	again	in	
1975,	when	the	Constitutional	Convention	was	wound	up	after	six	months	with	no	
agreement.		Civil	society	and	community	level	activists	began	to	organise	on	behalf	
of	themselves.	In	an	effort	to	support	social	and	political	problem	solving	and	to	
keep	society	stitched	together,	this	phase	of	peacebuilding	found	civil	society:	
forging	networks,	engaging	in	political	intermediation	with	armed	combatants,	and	
establishing	community	development	as	a	tool	of	engagement.	Finally,	in	an	
emotional	response	to	a	particularly	tragic	episode	that	led	to	the	deaths	of	three	
children,	the	Peace	People	movement	rallied	the	public	to	mass	mobilisation	to	
promote	a	philosophy	of	non-violence.		
Responding	out	of	instinct		
In	December	1974,	roughly	seven	months	after	the	collapse	of	the	short-lived	
Sunningdale	power-sharing	government,	a	group	of	clergy	arranged	a	secret	
meeting	with	members	of	the	PIRA	in	Feakle,	County	Clare.	These	talks	established	
a	line	of	communication	between	PIRA	and	the	British	government	through	a	group	
of	senior	Protestant	clergy	(Brewer	et	al.,	2011).	It	is	noteworthy	that	one	of	the	
clergy	involved	in	the	secret	meeting	was	the	same	minister	who	had	spoken	to	
shipyard	workers	in	the	summer	of	1969	-	the	Methodist	minister	Reverend	Eric	
Gallagher,	a	man	whose	name	reappears	regularly	in	subsequent	years	in	multiple	
types	of	peacebuilding	activities.	Describing	the	secret	meeting	as	an	initiative	that	
was	highly	risky	at	that	time,	Brewer	et	al,	record	that	it	met	with	some	limited	
success	and	suggest	it	led	to	a	six-month	ceasefire.	Once	the	meeting	became	
publicly	known,	the	clergy	who	had	attended	came	under	heavy	criticism	and	
received	abusive	phone	calls	and	death	threats	(ibid,	p.196).	Such	was	the	level	of	
threat	issued	that	it	was	many	years	before	Protestant	clergy	met	the	IRA	again	in	
systematic	dialogue,	although	casual	contacts	were	kept	(ibid).		
Intermediation	efforts	were	also	the	focus	of	Quaker	activity	(the	Religious	Society	
of	Friends)	who,	although	Protestant,	were	generally	viewed	as	neutral	(Bass,	
2009).	As	early	as	1972,	intermediation	efforts	paved	a	path	that	eventually	led	in	
later	years	to	the	Belfast	based	conciliation	project	known	as	Quaker	House.	
Financially	supported	by	Quakers	in	Great	Britain	and	on	the	island	of	Ireland,	
Quaker	House	became	a	neutral	venue	where	key	players	in	the	conflict	could	meet	
privately,	share	a	meal	and	listen	to	opposing	views	in	order	to	widen	their	
contacts.	Purposely	taking	no	position	on	the	constitutional	issue,	instead	the	aim	
was	to	be	responsive	to	the	political	and	community	events		(Bennett,	2009	
pp.91-92).	Over	a	time	period	of	25	years	Quaker	House	was	led	by	a	sequence	of	
volunteer	hosts,	often	married	couples,	who	volunteered	to	act	as	intermediaries.	
Six	teams	of	hosts	over	the	years	progressively	built	upon	relationships	established	
by	their	predecessors	(ibid).		
According	to	Bennett	several	key	accomplishments	of	Quaker	House	in	the	early	
years	were	to	establish	trust	with:	politicians,	paramilitary	groups,	prisoners,	peace	
groups,	church	representatives,	and	cross-community	groups.	Bennett	writes	that	
as	relationships	evolved,	individual	politicians,	paramilitary	leaders	came	regularly	
to	Quaker	House	to	talk	about	the	situation,	clarify	their	thinking	and	explore	the	
views	of	others	(ibid	p.94).	Over	decades,	Quaker	House	would	remain	involved	as	
a	conduit	working	between	local	political	parties	within	Northern	Ireland,	between	
paramilitaries,	and	unofficially	between	Unionists	and	Dublin	politicians.	Having	a	
conduit	for	information	sharing	became	particularly	useful	in	the	late	1980s	after	
the	signing	of	the	Anglo-Irish	Agreement,	when	the	official	position	taken	by	
Unionist	parties	was	to	oppose	the	Agreement.	In	a	context	where	there	was	little	
direct	contact	between	local	politicians	of	opposing	parties	and	no	official	
communication	protocols,	Quaker	House	representatives	helped	politicians	build	
insight	into	other	parties	political	thinking,	build	networks,	and	widen	
communication.	
With	local	political	level	leaders	absent	during	this	phase,	the	development	of	
community	leadership	and	community	empowerment	also	became	important	
(Cochrane	and	Dunn,	2002).	Cochrane	and	Dunn	argue	that	the	combination	of	the	
democratic	deficit	and	economic	deprivation	within	Catholic	and	Protestant	
working-class	areas	led	to	an	increased	politicisation	around	socio-economic	issues	
(ibid).	Self-help	and	empowerment	were	concepts	familiar	to	Nationalist	
communities	who	had,	years	earlier,	developed	a	tradition	of	self-help	in	response	
to	the	inequalities	of	the	Stormont	regime.	Nationalists	had	never	looked	to	it	
[Stormont]	for	political	or	social	leadership,	[they	had]	consequently	developed	a	
tradition	of	community	activism	and	self-help	(Cochrane	and	Dunn,	2002	p.63).	The	
same	authors	suggest	that	Protestant	and	Loyalist	communities	viewed	that	they,	
by	contrast,	had	to	play	catch-up.		
Community	development	approaches	had	been	introduced	years	earlier	by	the	
Community	Relations	Commission	-	a	body	set	up	in	1969	by	the	local	government	
prior	to	direct	rule.	The	early	aim	from	the	commission	had	been	to	use	community	
development	to	reach	out	to	alienated	communities,	redress	previous	state	neglect	
and	build	confidence	that	grievances	were	being	heard	(Robson,	2000).	Maurice	
Hayes,	the	first	Commissioner,	had	been	highly	influenced	by	a	visit	to	the	US	where	
he	saw	the	approach	being	undertaken	with	communities	as	part	of	Johnsons	war	
on	poverty	in	the	aftermath	of	violence	in	the	black	community	(Robson,	2000;	
Morrow	2013;	Rolston,	1980).	Consequently,	his	view	was	that	community	
development	might	be	considered	a	first	step	towards	building	up	intra-communal	
confidence	and	as	a	prelude	towards	ultimately	building	better	cross-community	
relations.	As	violence	escalated	rapidly	in	the	early	1970s,	the	commission,	through	
its	community	development	officers	(CDOs),	became	actively	involved	in	providing	
assistance	to	grassroots	communities	experiencing	intimidation	or	who	were	unable	
to	get	access	from	statutory	services	as	a	result	of	widespread	street	turmoil.	The	
early	work	of	the	Commission,	however,	was	viewed	with	suspicion.	Among	
Unionists	it	was	viewed	as	a	form	of	impunity	for	rioting	nationalists	(Robson,	
2000	p.143),	while	Nationalists	viewed	it	as	a	Trojan	horse	for	the	British	
government	(Morrow,	2013).		The	Commission	closed	in	1975	during	the	
Sunningdale	phase	of	power	sharing,	viewed	by	politicians	as	no	longer	necessary	in	
a	power-sharing	context	although	Robson	suggests	there	was	concern	it	was	
becoming	too	independent	(Robson	2000;	Bass,	2009).	Interestingly,	three	of	the	
original	CDOs	(Derick	Wilson,	Joe	Camplisson,	and	Niall	Fitzduff)	would	continue	in	
future	years	to	remain	significantly	involved	in	forms	of	peacebuilding.	Wilson	as	
co-founder	of	peacebuilding	research	think-tank	Future	Ways,	Camplisson	leading	a	
conflict	transformation	project	Moldovan	Initiative	Committee	of	Management	
(MICOM)	with	work	based	in	Northern	Ireland	and	Moldova,	and	Fitzduff	as	the	
founder	of	Rural	Community	Network,	an	important	regional	community	
development	NGO.		
One	example	of	a	model	of	community	development	emerging	in	this	phase	was	
the	Centre	for	Neighbourhood	Development	(1975-1992)	an	organisation	begun	in	
response	to	the	Community	Relations	Commission	being	wound	up.	Two	individual	
CDOs	from	the	Community	Relations	Commission	from	a	Quaker	background	were	
interested	in	continuing	the	community	development	work	which	the	Commission	
had	started.	Together	with	other	Quakers	and	representatives	from	different	areas	
of	Belfast,	they	began	to	meet	together	to	plan	the	project	(Bass,	2009	pp.65-67).	
An	organisational	strength	of	the	Centre	for	Neighbourhood	Development	was	that	
it	took	both	a	local	and	centralised	approach	(Kilmurray,	2016	p.132).	Community	
development	workers	were	employed	from	Catholic	and	Protestant	communities	
within	six	primarily	interface	areas	of	Belfast,	but	all	shared	a	central	office.	
Important	to	its	efficacy	and	relevancy	was	that	employees	were	recruited	from	the	
local	neighbourhood	with	the	view	that	those	living	there	were	best	placed	to	
understand	the	pertinent	issues	(ibid).	Supported	financially	initially	by	Quakers,		
Quaker	practices	influenced	the	formation	of	the	organisation	(Bass,	2009	p.63).	For	
example,	all	decisions	were	made	by	consensus	and	a	flat	pay	structure	was	
adopted	for	all	staff.		Kilmurray	and	Bass	both	highlight	names	of	particular	staff	
who	were	important	to	organisational	success	due	to	the	personal	relationships	
they	had	built	in	the	local	area	for	which	they	were	responsible.		While	the	
organisation	was	wound	up	in	1992,	Kilmurray	writes	that	as	a	model	of	practice,	its	
use	of	a	neighbourhood	worker	was	widely	regarded	as	successful	and	
subsequently	adopted	by	Belfast	City	Council	(Kilmurray,	2016	p.135).	
Finally,	it	was	during	this	phase	that	one	of	the	local	peace	initiatives	most	well-
known	internationally	began.	While	public	demonstrations	and	rallies	used	to	
protest	direct	violence	and	promote	peace	had	not	typically	gathered	large	crowds,	
efforts	initiated	by	the	Peace	People	by	the	latter	part	of	the	1970s	enjoyed	much	
larger	numbers	with	greater	public	participation,	albeit	for	a	short-lived	period	of	
time.	Arguably	one	of	the	better	known	and	documented	grassroots	efforts	to	
promote	non-violent	conflict	resolution,	efforts	attracted	high	numbers	during	its	
first	several	months	of	rallies	followed	just	over	a	year	later	by	being	awarded	the	
Nobel	Peace	Prize.	Similar	to	Witness	for	Peace,	Peace	People	initiatives	were	born	
out	of	an	experience	of	tragedy.	In	August	1976,	a	mother	and	her	three	children	
were	hit	by	a	car	that	had	been	stolen	by	an	PIRA	volunteer.	The	three	children	
were	killed	after	the	cars	driver	was	shot	as	he	was	chased	by	the	Army,	which	then	
crashed	into	the	family.	Fairmichael	(1987)	notes	that	the	PIRA	was	primarily	
blamed	for	the	death	of	the	children	in	the	incident,	although	it	had	been	the	British	
Army	who	shot	the	driver.		A	few	days	after	the	incident,	a	witness	to	the	car	crash,	
Betty	Williams,	knocked	on	doors	to	petition	the	public	to	condemn	the	violence.	
The	childrens	aunt,	Mairead	Corrigan	also	made	a	public	appeal	for	non-violence-	
and	shortly	afterwards	the	two	joined	together	in	support.	Over	the	next	several	
months	a	series	of	rallies	and	marches	were	held	across	the	province.	Numbers	
were	higher	than	at	previous	periods,	with	the	first	march	attracting	50,000	or	more	
at	Ormeau	Park	(McKeown,	1984	p.147).	Subsequent	marches	held	in	symbolic	
locales	such	as	the	Shankill	Road	saw	25,000-35,000	people	marching	and	at	the	
Falls	Road	march	numbers	were	estimated	at	10,000	people	(Fairmichael,	1987).		
By	October	1977	it	was	announced	that	Betty	Williams	and	Mairead	Corrigan	would	
receive	the	Nobel	Peace	Prize	for	their	efforts,	which	ironically	marked	the	
beginning	of	the	end	of	the	mass	rallies	staged	by	the	organisation.	Heightened	by	
great	media	attention,	support	for	the	group	began	to	wane	and	rumours	and	
complaints	circulated	over	too	many	overseas	trips,	personality	clashes,	and	where	
the	Nobel	money	was	being	spent	(Fairmichael,	1987;	Bowyer	Bell,	1993;	Barritt,	
1982).	Furthermore,	splits	began	to	surface	when	attempts	were	made	to	move	
beyond	generic	anti-violence	efforts	towards	taking	stands	on	matters	of	security	
policy	such	as	Emergency	Powers	Act	and	the	use	of	Diplock	courts	(Fairmichael,	
1987).	One	complaint	was	that	the	Peace	People	focused	on	the	violence	of	
paramilitaries	more	than	state-based	violence,	however	one	profile	of	the	
organisation	suggests	this	accusation	was	primarily	as	a	result	of	the	way	the	media	
had	covered	the	organisation	(Fairmichael,	1987	p.10).		Fairmichael	writes	that	at	
the	start	of	the	movement	the	media	emphasised	their	anti-paramilitarism	but	
when	the	Peace	People	began	to	criticise	state-based	violence	the	media	began	to	
focus	instead	on	the	internal	dissent	within	the	organisation	(ibid).	Fairmichael	
concludes	that	splits	were	the	result	of	a	lack	of	clarity	about	what	peace	meant	
also	noting	that	the	philosophy	of	nonviolence	was	not	a	unifying	concept	in	and	of	
itself	as	most	of	the	membership	would	not	have	held	a	strong	pacifist	conviction	
(Fairmichael,	1987).	While	officially	the	originating	members	of	the	Peace	People	
split	in	1980,	the	organisation	remained	active	in	lower	profile	project	work	led	by	
Mairead	Maguire.		
Though	the	Peace	People	were	regarded	as	making	little	influence	on	conflict	
cessation,	one	impact	was	a	proliferation	of	other	peace	groups,	which	cumulatively	
added	to	the	peacebuilding	constituency	(Fairmichael,	1987).	For	example,	in	the	
early	1980s	former	members	of	the	Peace	People	became	active	in	founding	several	
new	organisations:	the	Committee	on	the	Administration	of	Justice	(CAJ)	a	
prominent	human	rights	organisation;	Kilcranny	House,	a	residentially-based	farm	
and	rural	education	centre;	and	the	Peace	and	Reconciliation	Group	(PRG)	who	
were	re-constituted	by	those	involved	with	the	local	Derry-Londonderry	based-
affiliate	of	the	Peace	People.	Similarly,	in	the	late	1980s	early	support	for	mediation	
and	negotiation	were	generated	when	Peace	People	affiliated	members	became	
involved	with	the	first	mediation	organisation,	the	Northern	Ireland	Conflict	
Mediation	Association	(now	Mediation	Northern	Ireland).	Interestingly,	though	
making	no	direct	correlation,	McKittrick	and	McVea	conclude	a	discussion	of	this	
timeframe	with	recognition	that	violence	dropped	after	this	phase	and	describing	it	
as	the	end	of	the	most	violent	stage	of	the	Troubles	(McKittrick	and	McVea,	2012).		
Conclusion	
During	this	phase	of	peacebuilding	the	context	of	a	democratic	deficit	enabled	
members	of	civil	society	to	step	forward	(Cochrane	and	Dunn,	2002;	Barritt,	1982).	
Evident	were	examples	whereby	local	clergy	(Feakle	talks)	and	Quakers	stepped	
into	roles	of	leadership	as	intermediaries	-	the	former	trusted	due	to	their	status	
and	the	latter	due	to	perceived	neutrality.	It	is	striking	that	Eric	Gallagher	again	is	
mentioned	as	playing	a	role	in	the	behind-the-scenes	negotiations	at	Feakle,	
perceived	as	a	credible	conduit.	This	suggests	that	in	part,	he	had	credibility	and	
was	selected	as	an	intermediary	due	to	his	previous	experiences	and	networks	of	
key	relationships.		
The	importance	of	understanding	the	nuances	of	a	given	localised	context	of	
conflict	also	surfaces	in	the	work	of	those	initiating	community	development.	In	
examples	taken	both	from	the	Community	Relations	Commission	and	the	Centre	
for	Neighbourhood	Development	a	localised	approach	was	considered	key	to	its	
success.	Its	importance	presumably	linked	to	Barritts	comment	that:	
The	effect	of	violence	in	Northern	Ireland	on	each	individual	depends	very	
much	on	where	he	lives,	which	in	turn	is	largely	governed	by	who	he	is	and	
by	his	socio-economic	standing	(Barritt,	1982	p.68).	
Thus,	drawing	individual	staff	from	specific	areas	was	identified	as	important,	
especially	in	the	Centre	for	Neighbourhood	Development	-	prompted	by	the	view	
that	locally-based	staff	with	strong	context-knowledge	(phronesis),	would	
understand	and	identify	the	most	relevant	issues.	Literature	highlights	particular	
individuals	who,	because	of	their	networks	of	relationships	within	the	local	context	
became	important,	for	example,	as	conduits	working	between	and	within	interface	
communities	(Kilmurray,	2016	p.133).	Finally,	Fairmichaels	analysis	of	the	Peace	
People	echoes	some	of	the	tensions	in	the	discussion	of	non-violence	that	had	
surfaced	during	the	civil	rights	movement,	that	the	universal	(episteme)	value	of	
non-violence	lacked	a	local	contextual	frame.	Fairmichael	highlights	the	absence	of	
a	shared	commitment	to	pacifism,	and	views	that	the	lack	of	unity	on	the	
philosophy	of	non-violence	may	have	ultimately	played	a	role	in	limiting	the	life-
span	of	the	public	mass	movement	stage	the	Peace	People	(Fairmichael,	1987).		
4.4	Phase	4:	Getting	on	with	It	(1980-1991)	
According	to	McKittrick	and	McVea	(2012)	levels	of	violence	dropped	in	the	late	
1970s,	and	continued	to	do	so	over	this	next	phase	of	peacebuilding.	However,	
even	if	by	purely	quantitative	measures	incidents	of	violent	deaths	had	decreased,	
iconic	events	made	a	significant	impact	and	prompted	civil	society	to	generate	new	
activities	and	take	on	new	roles.	For	example,	even	as	internment	was	phased	out,	
changed	security	policies	such	as	the	decision	made	in	1975	to	withdraw	special	
category	status	for	prisoners,	and	the	continued	use	of	Diplock	courts	and	trial	
without	jury	served	to	increase	concern	and	accusations	of	state-perpetrated	
human	rights	abuses.	Changes	in	political	status,	rejected	by	those	who	considered	
themselves	politically	motivated,	set	into	motion	a	series	of	protests	within	the	
prisons	that	eventually	led	to	the	hunger	strikes	of	1981	and	the	death	of	ten	
hunger-strikers.	Increasingly	tense	prison	life	in	this	context	found	civil	society,	for	
example	Quakers,	taking	on	roles	mediating	between	prison	staff,	prisoners	and	
their	families	(Blair,	2009).		
The	rise	in	support	for	the	PIRA	and	Sinn	Fein	as	a	result	of	the	hunger	strikes	
caused	concern	for	both	politicians	in	the	Republic	of	Ireland	and	for	Margaret	
Thatcher	and	laid	the	groundwork	for	increased	communication	between	the	two	
countries	(McKittrick	and	McVea,	2012).	A	tangible	sign	of	the	improved	
relationship	was	the	1985	Anglo-Irish	Agreement.	Considered	important	in	the	
history	of	Anglo-Irish	relations,	it	formally	established	a	consultative	role	for	the	
Republic	of	Ireland	within	the	affairs	of	Northern	Ireland,	and	for	this	reason,	was	
rejected	by	Unionist	politicians	and	members	of	Protestant/Unionist/Loyalist		(PUL)	
civil	society.	Rallies	and	days	of	action	under	the	rallying	cry	of	Ulster	Says	No,	
followed	but	without	the	disruption	of	the	earlier	UWC	strike	in	the	previous	
decade.		
More	than	a	decade	into	the	Troubles,	others	in	civil	society	began	to	take	the	long-
view-	getting	on	with	it	to	progress	desired	change.	Tired	of	waiting	for	local	
political	progress	in	the	vacuum	of	direct	rule,	activists	took	it	upon	themselves	to	
tackle	institutional	segregation	within	education	by	founding	the	first	integrated	
school,	Lagan	College,	and	in	the	latter	part	of	the	1980s,	by	introducing	new	skills	
and	ways	to	think	about	conflict	with	the	introduction	of	mediation	(Campbell,	
2000).	Faith	leaders,	frustrated	at	the	polarisation	of	segregated	communal	living,	
created	new	ecumenical	lived	communities	(Wells,	1999).	Finally,	concerned	that	
those	bereaved	as	a	result	of	the	Troubles	had	no	support,	groups	began	to	
organise	concrete	practical	help	for	those	facing	trauma	by	working	with	victims	of	
the	conflict.	
Learning	by	doing	
In	the	early	1980s	civil	society	activists	began	organising	to	monitor	human	rights.	In	
1975,	Secretary	of	State	Mervyn	Rees	had	instigated	several	changes	to	security	
matters:	internment	was	to	be	phased	out	by	the	end	of	1975	and	special	category	
status	for	prisoners	convicted	of	terrorism-related	crimes	ended.	Those	convicted	of	
terrorist	offences	after	March	1976	were	thus	categorised	as	criminals.	Fuelled	by	
growing	opposition	to	the	special	extra-judicial	methods	used	by	the	state	in	its	
attempt	to	maintain	security,	activists	concerned	that	civil	liberties	and	human	
rights	were	being	jeopardised	called	for	mechanisms	to	monitor	potential	abuses.	
The	most	prominent	example	of	this	time	was	the	Committee	on	the	Administration	
of	Justice	(CAJ),	a	human	rights	charity	that	emerged	in	1981	out	of	networks	
loosely	affiliated	with	those	who	had	been	involved	with	the	Peace	People	
(Fairmichael,	1987	p.16).	The	organisation	was	established	to	advocate	and	monitor	
abuses	occurring	as	a	result	of	special	emergency	legislation	which	granted	special	
powers	for	detaining	and	arresting	those	suspected	of	having	committed	terrorist	
offences,	or	being	part	of	armed	paramilitary	combatant	organisations	(Cochrane	
and	Dunn,	2002).	Primarily	with	the	aid	of	legal	skills	and	advocacy	tools,	the	main	
focus	of	the	CAJ	during	its	formation	amounted	to	a	campaign	against	the	civil	
liberties	and	human	rights	abuses	inherent	in	the	existing	emergency	provisions	
legislation	(Cochrane	and	Dunn,	2002	p.30).	CAJs	role	in	the	context	of	the	time	it	
was	founded	suggests	several	noteworthy	points	about	civil	society	peacebuilding.	
Against	the	context	of	the	PIRA	armed	campaign,	it	could	be	argued	that	it	was	
important	that	legal	redress	was	viewed	as	an	effective	tool	to	challenge	human	
rights	abuses	or	institutionalised	discriminatory	practices	perpetrated	by	the	state.	
This	demonstrated	the	efficacy	of	non-violent	mechanisms	such	as	the	law	for	
redressing	political	and	structural	injustices.	Furthermore,	by	adopting	a	watchdog	
function	to	track	such	abuses	another	level	of	democratic	accountability	was	
created.	Finally,	these	efforts	also	consolidated	the	importance	of	human	rights	as	a	
central	tenet	in	building	a	peaceful	society	-	concepts	that	would	eventually	also	
feature	in	the	content	of	the	Good	Friday	Agreement.	
The	recommendation	for	the	removal	of	political	status	for	incoming	prisoners	in	
1976	was	particularly	controversial.	Many	prisoners	viewed	themselves	not	as	
criminals	but	as	fighting	a	war,	and	thus	politically	motivated.	Unsurprisingly,	the	
policy	decision	was	met	with	opposition,	with	prisoners	refusing	to	wear	uniforms	
in	the	blanket	protests	and	latterly	a	dirty	protest,	so	named	for	the	refusal	to	
slop	out	(Barritt,	1982).	To	add	pressure,	Republican	prisoners	shifted	tactics	and	a	
hunger	strike	led	to	the	death	of	Bobby	Sands	in	May	1981	followed	by	the	deaths	
of	nine	fellow	Republican	hunger-strikers	(ibid).	These	deaths	generated	both	
sympathy	and	recruits	to	Republicanism,	fuelling	animosities	aimed	at	the	British	
(McKittrick	and	McVea,	2012).	Views	of	Thatcher	as	inflexible	and	iron-fisted	on	
the	issue	of	political	status	ultimately	generated	a	bevy	of	radicalised	new	recruits	
for	the	IRA:	
The	hungerstrikes	had	lasting	effects,	most	of	which	were	bad	for	the	
authorities	and	for	almost	everyone	apart	from	the	republican	movement.	For	
one	thing,	the	extended	trauma	of	the	months	of	confrontation	seared	deep	
into	the	psyches	of	large	numbers	of	people,	stirring	many	troubling	
emotions.	Community	divisions	had	always	been	deep,	but	now	they	had	a	
new	rawness	(McKittrick	and	McVea,	2012	p.170).	
In	the	context	of	a	new	rawness,	Quakers,	who	have	historically	worked	for	
improved	welfare	in	prisons,	found	an	increased	need	to	offer	support	to	prisoners	
and	their	families.	Quaker	involvement	in	the	prisons	began	in	1971	in	response	to	
internment.	A	request	was	made	to	the	Ministry	of	Home	Affairs	to	be	allowed	to	
set	up	a	visitors	centre	at	the	Maze/Long	Kesh	to	support	families	who	had	
interned	relatives.	At	the	start	this	consisted	of	a	canteen,	but	by	1975	included	a	
minibus	service,	an	advice	centre,	and	a	childrens	playgroup	for	families	visiting	the	
prison.	By	1982	the	visitors	centre	at	the	Maze	was	running	six	days	a	week	and	
became	an	integral	part	of	the	strategy	of	Quaker	peacebuilding.		
The	practical	Quaker	presence	in	the	prisons	was	key	to	eventually	gaining	trust	
with	both	families	and	prison	officials	and,	in	time,	allowed	them	to	share	concerns	
over	areas	needing	improvements	such	as	access	to	prisoners	and	services	for	
visitors	(Blair,	2009).	While	the	advice	centres,	caf	and	playgroup	for	children	were	
recognised	as	innovative	at	the	time,	just	as	importantly,	this	practical	activity	
helped	to	forge	relationships.	During	the	years	of	the	blanket	protest	and	hunger	
strikes,	this	would	prove	even	more	important	as	relationships	within	the	prison	
broke	down.	Blair	(2009)	recounts	that	visitor	centre	organiser	Martie	Rafferty	was	
particularly	successful	in	developing	a	network	between	prison	staff	and	prisoners	
that	allowed	her	to	advocate	for	improvements	to	prison	welfare	policy.	During	this	
time	she	built	up	contacts	with	key	Loyalist	and	Republican	prisoners,	and	was	able	
to	relay	concerns	held	by	the	prisoners	to	officials	that	they	felt	were	not	being	
addressed.	Raffertys	role	as	an	interlocutor	is	also	profiled	in	Shirlow	and	McEvoys	
(2008)	discussion	of	the	formation	of	early	prisoner	groups.	They	describe	early	
efforts	as	groundbreaking	and	highlight	that	Rafferty	played	a	key	role	in	helping	
develop	relationships	between	the	two	groups	(Shirlow	and	McEvoy,	2008	pp.64-
In	addition	to	their	role	in	prisons,	Quaker	civil	society	activists	also	supported	
peace	education	initiatives,	for	example,	by	joining	with	others	to	support	the	
founding	of	Lagan	College.			Recognising	that	separate	schooling	of	children	
contributed	to	communal	divisions,	several	voluntary	grassroots-based	efforts	were	
begun	in	the	early	1980s	to	improve	links	between	communities	through	education.	
All	Children	Together	(ACT),	a	group	comprised	of	parents	who	had	lobbied	
government	since	1974	to	provide	joint	integrated	educational	for	children,	was	
finally	successful	getting	such	provision	passed	into	law	in	1978.	Frustrated	by	the	
subsequent	lack	of	governmental	action,	several	members	of	ACT	raised	their	own	
funds	to	start	Lagan	College.		
In	addition	to	integrated	education,	civil	society	groups	had	an	interest	in	
promoting	a	peace	education	curriculum	within	the	predominately	divided	
education	system.	The	adoption	of	a	new	policy	education	curriculum	Education	for	
Mutual	Understanding	(EMU)	saw	Quakers	collaborating	with	the	University	of	
Ulster,	(now	Ulster	University)	and	the	Centre	for	Study	of	Conflict	to	run	an	action-
research	project	known	as	the	Quaker	Peace	Education	Project	(QPEP).		
Spearheaded	by	Jerry	Tyrrell,	QPEP,	amongst	other	accomplishments,	introduced	
school-based	peer	mediation	into	Northern	Ireland.		Mediation,	a	new	import	at	the	
time,	was	received	with	mixed	response	upon	its	arrival	to	Northern	Ireland.	Jerry	
Tyrrell	wrote	on	the	initial	resistance	to	this	American	import:		
Fresh	back	from	the	USA,	I	enthused	about	this	particular	mediation	
training	course,	and	was	met	with	polite	interest,	but	a	definite	impression	
that	I	had	attempted	to	teach	my	granny	to	suck	eggs,	and	yet	
simultaneously	introduce	something	that	was	peculiar	to	America	and	not	
worthy	of	import	(Tyrell,	1988	p.4).	
Tyrells	experience	selling	mediation	locally	was	echoed	by	others	involved	in	
peacebuilding.		Campbell,	one	of	the	first	to	be	officially	trained	on	the	island,	wrote	
of	both	his	discomfort	and	opportunity	this	American	import	created	(Campbell,	
2000).	The	first	mediation	training,	aimed	at	local	youth	workers	and	peace	
activists,	came	after	American	Mennonite	mediator	Ron	Kraybill	received	a	joint	
invitation	from	Pax	Christi	(a	Catholic	Peace	organisation)	and	a	small	group	of	
Dublin-based	Mennonites	(Campbell,	2000	p.98).		Reflecting	on	those	early	days	of	
mediation,	Campbell	writes	that	while	the	ideas	generated	enthusiasm,	several	
issues	surfaced	during	implementation.	The	model	and	materials	were	viewed	as	
overly	American	and	rested	on	the	assumption	that	local	disputants	would	want	to	
sit	down	face-to-face	stating,	Irish	people	find	it	difficult	to	speak	with	and	face	
directly	those	with	whom	they	disagree	(ibid	p.100).			
Despite	the	challenges,	training	attendees	agreed	to	form	a	network	to	support	the	
development	of	mediation	skills	across	the	region.	This	network	formalised	as	the	
Northern	Ireland	Conflict	Mediation	Association	(NICMA)	in	1986.	Early	years	of	the	
development	of	mediation	was	significantly	supported	by	American	Mennonites.	
For	example,	in	1987,	Kraybills	colleague	Barry	Hart,	also	a	Mennonite	mediator,	
came	for	a	year	to	build	local	capacity	by	training	other	trainers	as	well	as	the	
Probation	Board	of	Northern	Ireland	(Sampson,	2000	p.263).	The	aim	of	the	
Mediation	Network	was	to	spread	the	newly	acquired	mediation	skills	to	address	
conflict	more	positively	across	five	special	interest	areas:	neighbourhood	work,	
cross	cultural	development,	family	work,	international	relations,	and	education.	The	
seeds	of	this	initiative	became	formalised	in	1990	when	the	first	local	mediation	
NGO,	the	Mediation	Network	for	Northern	was	established,	now	known	as	
Mediation	Northern	Ireland.		
Mediation	over	the	years	has	become	more	widespread	and	in	some	cases	formally	
mainstreamed	into	statutory	bodies	such	as	the	housing	authority	to	handle	
neighbourhood	disputes,	within	family	law	to	handle	divorce	and	separation,	and	as	
mentioned,	in	schools	in	the	form	of	peer	mediation.	It	has	also	been	used	more	
substantially	with	issues	of	contentious	parading.	For	example,	in	1995	sixteen	
hours	of	mediation	led	to	a	short-lived	negotiated	accommodation	over	Drumcree	
in	Portadown	(Campbell,	2000	p.102)	and	in	subsequent	years	between	local	
communities	such	as	the	Holy	Cross	and	Cluan	Place	disputes	in	the	early	2000s.	
Reflecting	on	the	introduction	of	mediation	at	the	time	it	was	introduced,	it	is	clear	
that	it	was	viewed	as	a	new	and	fresh	approach	in	a	context	of	growing	conflict	
fatigue.	Campbell	writes:	[M]ediation	was	taking	root	in	Northern	Ireland	within	a	
community	that	was	experiencing	some	horrendously	violent	acts.	Here	was	a	sign	
of	hope,	a	new	way	of	resolving	conflict	taking	root,	not	by	flight	or	fight	but	by	
insight	(ibid).	
The	growing	conflict	fatigue	of	relentless	violence	also	set	a	backdrop	against	which	
three	ecumenical	residential	lived	communities	were	founded,	each	within	several	
years	of	each	other.	Two	of	the	ecumenical	communities	were	based	in	Belfast	and	
both	began	in	1983	-	Cornerstone	situated	on	the	peace	line	interface	on	the	
Springfield	Road	in	West	Belfast,	and	the	Columbanus	Community	in	North	Belfast.	
Cornerstone	was	begun	by	those	involved	in	an	ecumenical	prayer	group	that	had	
regularly	met	together	in	Clonard	Monastery	since	1978.	Cornerstone	was	
intentionally	set	up	on	the	interface	in	West	Belfast	as	symbol	of	a	[D]eep	desire	to	
break	down	those	insidious	walls	of	sectarianism,	born	in	the	mind	and	heart,	and	
still	physically	expressed	by	the	many	so	called	Peace	Walls	throughout	the	city	of	
Belfast	and	particularly	prominent	on	the	Springfield	Road	(The	Community	of	the	
Cross	of	Nails,	2014).	Activities	of	the	community	over	the	years	included	dialogue	
groups,	seniors	luncheon	clubs,	after	school-clubs,	and	as	a	space	for	sensitive	
discussion.	For	example,	Garland	profiles	that	ex-Ulster	Volunteer	Force	(UVF)	
commander	Gusty	Spence	on	regular	occasions	met	local	priests	and	John	Hume	at	
Cornerstone	as	part	of	emerging	Loyalist	dialogue	processes	prior	to	the	ceasefires	
(Garland,	2001	pp.272-274).	Cornerstone	closed	in	the	spring	of	2012	after	almost	
30	years	of	shared	residential	community	witness	on	the	peace	line	citing	its	
accomplishments	over	the	years	as:		
Having	an	open	house	and	a	safe	space	for	sensitive	and	difficult	
conversations	to	take	place	between	Churches,	political	opponents,	ex	
paramilitaries	and	ex	prisoners	from	both	sides,	the	Orange	Order	and	the	
local	residents,	became	an	often	hidden	but	important	contribution	to	the	
peace	process.	The	house	also	provided	a	comfortable	place	for	visitors	to	
stay,	as	well	as	a	listening	ear	for	local	people,	many	of	whom	were	
themselves	victims	of	the	Troubles	and	had	a	story	to	tell	(ibid).		
Similarly,	Columbanus,	another	lived	community	was	set	up	in	1983	in	North	Belfast	
by	Father	Michael	Hurley,	a	Jesuit	priest.	Hurley,	a	scholar	of	ecumenism	and	the	
founder	and	director	of	the	Irish	School	of	Ecumenics,	successfully	recruited	a	
religiously	mixed	group	of	people	to	live	together	in	order	to	challenge	the	
prevailing	norm.	Instead	he	hoped	to	create	a	model	to	challenge	the	prevalent	
sectarianism,	injustice,	and	violence	in	Northern	Ireland	society	simply	by	having	
men	and	women	from	different	Christian	traditions	living	together	in	simplicity	and	
peace	(Wells,	1999	p.108).	In	addition	to	the	symbolism	of	living	together	and	
managing	a	household	together	as	a	community,	members	prayed	together	and	
volunteered	their	time	outside	the	community	with	peace	groups,	the	Travelling	
community,	ministry	with	prisoners,	and	work	in	schools.		
At	the	first	joint	service	of	Columbanus	held	on	November	23,	1983	attended	by	
inter-faith	leaders	Cardinal	Toms	OFiaich,	Reverend	Ken	Newell,	and	David	
Bleakley	of	the	Irish	Council	of	Churches,	Cardinal	OFiaich	is	reported	to	have	
reminded	the	group	that	their	commitment	was	unusual	in	the	current	context.	
Days	earlier	the	Irish	National	Liberation	Army	(INLA)	had	attacked	a	Pentecostal	
church	in	a	rural	farming	community	in	Darkley	in	South	Armagh	during	worship	
and	had	killed	three	people.	Darkley	was	a	significant	incident	and	such	efforts	to	
model	a	contrast	were	deemed	important,	as	OFiaichs	comments	at	the	time	
suggest:		
At	a	time	when	some	people	are	saying,	you	can	no	longer	trust	your	
Catholic	neighbor	(or	your	Protestant	neighbor,	as	they	case	may	be,)	this	
noble	and	self-sacrificing	group	of	trusting	people	have	such	confidence	in	
each	other	in	the	power	of	God	to	unite	that	they	are	moving	in	to	live	with	
each	other	(Wells,	1999	p.108).	
Similar	to	other	ecumenical	communities,	members	felt	that	modelling	a	different	
reality	than	was	the	pervasive	norm	at	the	time	was	a	testimony	to	live	out	their	
faith	and	as	call	for	reconciliation.	Columbanus	remained	a	lived	ecumenical	
community	until	the	early	2000s.	
Lastly,	the	Columba	Community	based	in	Derry-Londonderry	was	by	formed	in	1981	
by	Father	Neal	Carlin.	Seeking	to	use	common	tenets	within	Christianity	for	
reconciliation	and	to	address	areas	of	practical	concern,	the	Columba	Communitys	
aim	was	to:	
[R]everse	the	traditionally	divisive	role	of	religion	in	Northern	Ireland.	
Instead	of	focusing	on	the	differences	in	religion	between	Protestants	and	
Catholics,	its	leaders	focused	on	their	similarities	and	used	those	teachings	to	
address	real	community	issues	(Kelleher	and	Johnson,	2008	p.160).	
Initial	activities	included	the	creation	of	a	counselling	service	for	those	experiencing	
trauma	as	a	result	of	the	Troubles,	repentance	services	to	promote	
acknowledgement	of	mutual	harms,	and	to	pray	for	healing	and	forgiveness.	For	
example,	a	repentance	service	held	on	Good	Friday	in	1985	included	members	from	
all	main	churches.	They	carried	a	cross	from	the	Columba	house	to	the	Guildhall	in	
Derry-Londonderry	and	in	front	of	a	public	audience	of	400	heard	confession	of	sin	
from	Catholic,	Protestant	and	British	representatives.	Forgiveness	was	asked	for	the	
sins	of	the	communities	they	represented;	Protestants	asked	for	forgiveness	for	
gerrymandering	practices	of	local	government	and	the	misuse	of	the	democratic	
process.	Catholics	confessed	their	glorification	of	violence	and	aspiration	for	a	
united	Ireland	that	became	idolatrous,	and	British	representatives	confessed	the	
sins	of	neglect	and	ignorance	of	governmental	and	employment	based	
discrimination	(ibid).	Columba	continues	its	work	into	the	present.	In	addition	to	
reconciliation,	there	is	now	an	expanded	focus	to	include	outreach,	youth	work,	
education	and	issues	of	addiction.	While	the	activism	of	ecumenical	communities	
may	be	viewed	at	times	as	symbolic,	the	importance	of	such	symbolism	needs	to	be	
set	within	its	own	context.	Committing	to	inter-faith	cohesion	through	sharing	a	
home,	or	public	acknowledgment	of	a	confession	of	culpability	for	historic	harms	
can	all	be	viewed	as	counter-hegemonic.		
While	this	phase	of	time	marks	a	period	of	decreasing	levels	of	violence,	up	to	this	
point	and	throughout	all	the	earlier	years	of	intense	violence,	there	was	little	
support	offered	to	those	left	traumatised	and	impacted-most	of	whom	were	
civilians	(Fay	et	al,	1999).		For	example,	no	specific	statutory	bodies	were	tasked	
with	serving	or	aiding	those	with	physical	or	emotional	trauma.	Grassroots-based	
voluntary	groups	began	to	emerge	in	the	late	1970s	operating	on	a	small	scale,	such	
as	the	Cross	Group	in	1975	and	Lifeline	established	after	the	La	Mon	hotel	bombing	
in	1978	(Fairmichael,	1987).	Academics	suggest	that	as	late	as	1999	it	was	the	
voluntary	sector	that	acted	as	the	major	service	provider	for	victims	of	Troubles	
related	trauma	(Fay	et	al,	1999).	Early	grassroots	organisations	such	as	WAVE	
(originally	known	as	Widows	Against	Violence	Empower)	Trauma	Centre,	begun	in	
1991,	became	involved	in	befriending,	providing	counselling	and	practical	welfare	
advice	(Fay	et	al,	1999	p.206).	The	Good	Friday	Agreement	would	solidify	the	
importance	of	victims,	mandating	a	commitment	to	acknowledge	and	address	
victims.	While	spearheaded	at	the	grassroots	level,	such	support	would	eventually	
become	a	statutory	level	responsibility	of	the	Victims	and	Survivors	Service	(VSS)	
and	the	Victims	Commission	(VC).	Recently	Victims	and	Survivors	Service	(VSS)	listed	
55	different	organisations	that	were	funded	to	carry	out	work	specifically	with	
victims	of	the	conflict	(VSS,	2017)	engaging	in	group	work,	respite	and	
complementary	therapy,	counselling	as	well	as	advocacy	for	justice	and	truth	
recovery.		However,	much	of	the	early	work	of	these	voluntary	groups	paved	the	
way	by	identifying	the	support	victims	needed	to	help	cope	with	both	the	practical	
and	emotional	impact	of	trauma,	a	need	that	up	to	that	point,	was	left	neglected	
and	unaddressed.	
Conclusion	
Reflecting	on	this	phase	of	peacebuilding,	civil	society	activism	demonstrated,	even	
in	small	measures,	a	desire	and	a	willingness	to	grasp	the	nettle	of	change	and	get	
on	with	it	whether	by	advocating	for	human	rights,	starting	up	the	first	integrated	
school,	or	by	bringing	new	skills	to	deal	with	conflict	such	as	mediation.	Getting	on	
with	it	necessitated,	however,	a	degree	of	phronetic	trial	and	error	and	
experimentation.	The	result	was	to	create	and	model	new	norms	that	challenged,	
even	on	small	scale,	the	hegemony	of	societal	polarisation.	For	example,	creating	
shared	ecumenical	communities	straddling	highly	contested	interface	communities.	
Finally,	civil	society	actors	offered	practical	support		for	example,	to	victims	of	
conflict	as	well	as	to	prisoners	families.	Such	practical	support	and	investment	in	
relationships	made	trust	tangible,	and	paid	off	in	times	of	tension,	enabling	for	
example,	Quaker	staff	to	act	as	intermediaries	within	the	prisons	during	the	hunger-
strikes.	
Finally,	it	is	useful	to	make	a	brief	comparison	between	the	importing	of	mediation	
in	the	late	1980s	to	tactics	of	civil	rights	in	the	late	1960s.	The	first	observation	is	
that	while	these	are	two	different	stages	of	conflict,	one	similarity	is	that	in	both	
cases	outside	knowledge,	tactics	and	skills	which	might	be	construed	as	techniques	
are	sought	to	progress	change.	A	seemingly	banal	but	an	important	difference	
between	the	importation	of	mediation	in	the	1980s	and	the	techniques	of	non-
violence	direct	action	in	the	late	1960s,	was	the	training	and	mentoring	which	
accompanied	mediation.	Such	mentoring	and	training	over	time	served	to	build	
local	capacity	and	helped	those	who	were	initially	sceptical	to	find	ways	to	
indigenise	mediation	in	order	to	increase	its	contextual	relevance.	
4.5	Phase	5:	Tilling	the	soil	for	political	agreement	(1992-1998)		
Moving	into	its	third	decade	of	the	Troubles,	civil	society	in	Northern	Ireland	in	
1992	is	described	as	becoming	accustomed	to	violence	with	so	called	tit	for	tat	
killings	a	regular	feature	of	life.	Inter-party	political	talks	initiated	by	Northern	
Ireland	Secretary	of	State	Peter	Brooke	wound	up	without	political	progress	in	July	
of	1991	(McKittrick	and	McVea,	2012	p.330)	leaving,	by	one	observation,	a	sense	
that	the	people	of	Northern	Ireland	were	being	reduced	to	mere	spectators	at	
their	fate	(Pollak,	1993	p.391).	Out	of	this	context	came	initiatives	seeking	to	
widen	and	support	the	space	for	debate	and	to	re-engage	society	to	promote	civic	
dialogue,	facilitate	the	possibility	of	an	end	to	armed	conflict	at	political	and	
community	levels,	and	once	negotiations	got	underway,	to	help	encourage	and	
consolidate	political	progress.	Middle-range	leaders	(Lederach,	1997)	acted	as	
intermediators	and	creative	innovators	and	were	used	at	times	to	encourage	both	
the	grassroots	communities	and	political	leadership	to	build	peace.	They	drew	from	
their	knowledge	of	their	respective	contexts	and	communities,	trusted	networks	
and	learning	gained	from	previous	experiences	in	order	to	progress	peace	and	limit	
violence.			
Initiative	92,	for	example,	provided	a	unique	and	unprecedented	creative	exercise	
for	ordinary	people	to	weigh-in	with	their	own	views	on	how	the	conflict	might	be	
transformed.	Conversations	also	occurred	also	less	publicly,	built	upon	contacts	and	
networks	forged	over	previous	years.	For	example,	in	Derry-Londonderry	one	peace	
organisation	with	established	links	to	both	the	British	Army	and	PIRA	worked	to	
promote	a	localised	de-escalation	process	to	scale	back	military	operations	(Lampen	
and	Lampen,	2005;	Moloney,	2002).	Backchannel	support	between	Catholic	clergy	
and	Republicans	aimed	to	try	to	help	secure	an	end	to	the	armed	campaign,	and	
Protestant	clergy	and	Republican	leadership	met	regularly	in	an	effort	to	better	
understand	respective	worldviews	(Brewer	et	al,	2011).		
Conversations	continued	despite	and	amidst	such	tragedies	as	the	Shankill	bomb	
and	subsequent	retaliatory	shootings	in	Greysteel.	Even	as	both	Republican	and	
Loyalist	paramilitaries	moved	into	ceasefires	in	1994	and	1995,	community	tensions	
remained	high.	Localised	disputes	over	parading,	particularly	in	interface	areas,	
remained	unresolved.	This	period	was	marked	by	continued	tensions	in	the	
marching	season;	the	summers	between	1995	and	1997	were	particularly	
tumultuous	as	stand-offs	between	local	residents	and	the	Orange	Order	in	
Portadown,	and	the	Tour	of	the	North	in	Belfast	led	to	local	disturbances	and	at	
times	spread	wider.	Creative	approaches	mitigated	localised	tensions	when	local	
grassroots	activists	developed	the	idea	of	using	a	network	of	shared	mobile	phones	
to	increase	communication	and	dispel	rumours	(CDC,	1999;	Jarman,	2005).	Finally,	
as	ceasefires	took	hold	and	political	negotiations	got	underway,	civil	society	activists	
continued	to	take	steps	to	support	political	leaders	by	encouraging	them	to	take	
risks	to	sit	down	with	former	enemies.	Once	the	Good	Friday	Agreement	was	
signed,	civil	society	actors	remembering	mistakes	of	Sunningdale,	worked	to	rally	
and	secure	popular	support	for	a	Yes	vote	in	the	island-wide	referendum	(Guelke,	
2003).		
Navigating	the	context	and	learning	from	experience	
A	particularly	violent	two-week	period	in	March	1988	began	with	the	controversial	
killing	of	three	alleged	PIRA	volunteers	in	Gibraltar	by	British	SAS	and	followed	by	
an	attack	on	mourners	at	their	funeral	by	loyalist	Michael	Stone.	In	the	following	
days	two	off-duty	British	Army	corporals,	caught	in	the	funeral	cortege	of	those	
killed	by	Michael	Stone,	subsequently	were	attacked	by	a	mob	of	mourners	and	
killed.	McKittrick	and	McVea	described	the	period:	
The	year	1988	brought	no	statistical	rise	in	violence,	but	it	included	some	
terrible	incidents	which	have	remained	in	the	memory	of	many	who	lived	
through	them[I]n	particular,	in	March	of	that	year	will	always	be	
associated	with	one	of	the	darkest	and	most	traumatic	periods	of	the	
troubles,	when	for	a	time	violence	seemed	to	be	spiralling	completely	out	of	
control		(McKittrick	and	McVea,	2012	p.202).	
Father	Alec	Reid,	a	member	of	the	Redemptorist	Order	based	at	Clonard	Monastery	
who	had	attended	the	funerals	of	those	killed	by	Michael	Stone,	unsuccessfully	
attempted	to	stop	the	soldiers	from	being	killed.	He	was	later	photographed	giving	
last	rites	to	one	of	the	Army	corporals,	David	Howes.	Unbeknownst	at	the	time,	Reid	
was	acting	as	a	conduit	and	carrying	a	secret	document	of	proposals	to	initiate	talks	
between	Sinn	Fein	and	the	Social	Democratic	Labour	Party	(SDLP)	which	later	
become	a	foundation	to	the	Hume-Adams	talks	(Little,	2013).	For	years	previously,	
priests	associated	with	Clonard	Monastery	had	been	involved	in	inter-faith,	
reconciliation	and	background	dialogue	efforts.	For	example,	the	previously	
described	Cornerstone	Community	was	an	outgrowth	of	inter-faith	meetings	that	
had	been	taking	place	at	Clonard	Monastery	since	1978.			
Reid	has	been	described	as	the	main	architect	of	the	behind-the-scene	talks	
between	Hume	and	Adams	(Brewer	et	al,	2011	pp.	110-112).	Meetings	with	Father	
Reid	begun	in	1987,	were	often	held	at	Clonard-	considered	important	not	only	for	
privacy,	but	because	it	implied	tacit	support	from	the	church	for	the	effort	(ibid,	
p.112).	At	the	same	time,	because	they	were	operating	under	the	radar	church	
officials	could,	if	necessary,	deny	knowledge	of	involvement.	Reids	network	of	
church	officials	enabled	necessary	information	to	be	passed,	for	example,	to	the	
Secretary	of	State	Peter	Brooke	and	the	British	and	Irish	government-	a	role	viewed	
as	highly	significant.	Under	Reids	influence	Albert	Reynolds	advocated	to	President	
Clinton	to	grant	Adams	his	first	Visa	to	the	United	States.	As	Brewer	et	al	write:	
Religious	peacemakers	were	therefore	at	the	centre	of	an	extensive	network,	with	
Father	Alec	Reid	at	the	hub	(ibid,	p.	114).	Protestant	clergy	were	also	involved	in	
regular	meetings	with	Republicans	throughout	the	early	1990s,	again	linked	through	
Clonard	Monastery.	On-going	dialogue	was	viewed	as	important	to	create	mutual	
sounding	boards	to	better	understand	Unionist	and	Republican	mindsets.	This	
dialogue,	over	time,	also	enabled	slowly	to	build	relationships	which	according	to	
one	Presbyterian	Minister	John	Dunlop,	became	important	in	creating	an	
environment	where	negotiations	have	been	possible	(ibid,	p.101).	
While	backchannel	conversations	may	have	been	on-going	in	private	quarters,	the	
early	1990s	is	portrayed	as	a	time	that	in	public	there	was	a	perception	that	little	
political	progress	was	being	made	(Pollak,	1993).		Civil	society	itself	was	
characterised	as	paradoxically	experiencing	both	impotence	and	helplessness	in	
the	face	of	nearly	a	quarter	a	century	political	violence	and	deadlock	and	
simultaneously	demonstrating	resilience	of	spirit	and	creativity	and	a	desire	to	
engage	in	dialogue	(Opsahl,	1993	p.4).	The	latter	perhaps	was	a	product	of	the	
former.	Frustrated	at	the	lack	of	progress	being	made	in	the	Brooke-Mayhew	inter-
party	talks,	a	local	journalist	Robin	Wilson,	and	an	academic	from	Queens	
University	Simon	Lee,	spearheaded	a	plan	for	a	a	citizens	inquiry.	Referred	to	as	
Initiative	92,	it	was	conceived	as	an	independent	commission	which	would	invite	
submissions	on	ideas	of	the	way	forward	-	aiming	to	solicit	views	as	widely	as	
possible	from	across	the	whole	of	the	region	to	ensure	none	were	excluded.	
Launched	in	May	1992	and	concluded	in	January	1993,	the	project	held	29	public	
meetings	with	a	range	of	civil	society	groups	such	as:	churches,	womens	groups,	
businesses,	trade-unionists,	students,	youths,	schools	and	community	groups	across	
Northern	Ireland.		
Pollak,	the	lead	campaign	coordinator,	wrote	that	one	of	the	most	significant	
difficulties	faced	was	the	reluctance	and	suspicion	amongst	many	within	society	at	
the	time	to	submit	their	ideas	to	an	unknown	group	of	people,	even	one	which	
described	itself	as	independent.	This	was,	in	his	view,	due	to	the	lack	of	societal	
trust.		Republican	suspicions	were	attributed	to	a	history	of	political	vetting	and	
reluctance	to	sign	ones	name	to	documents	viewed	as	reminiscent	of	forced	
confession	under	police	interrogation.	Similarly,	the	commission	failed	to	win	the	
trust	of	border	Protestants	and	was	unable	to	gain	these	views,	due	to	their	belief	
that	the	commission	was	not	adequately	representative	of	Unionists	perspectives	
(Pollak,	1993	p.393).		
According	to	Pollak,	special	effort	had	been	made	to	reach	those	who	might	be	
most	reluctant	with	focus	groups	in	areas	such	as	the	Shankill	Road	in	Belfast,	South	
Armagh,	South	Tyrone,	rural	Mid-Ulster	and	the	Waterside	area	of	Derry-
Londonderry.	Focus	groups	were	recruited	by	known	outreach	workers	and	
encouraged	to	participate	by	trusted	local	intermediaries.	He	wrote	at	the	time:		
In	Northern	Ireland	trust	between	people	is	a	great	commodity.	Many	
people,	especially	in	the	areas	most	affected	by	violence,	will	do	something	
for	a	person	or	an	organisation	only	if	they	personally	know	and	trust	that	
person	or	organisation	(Pollak,	1993	p.	394).	
At	final	count	by	the	end	of	the	project,	Initiative	92	had	received	554	written	
submissions	involving	3000	people-	its	results	were	published	in	the	1993,	referred	
to	as	the	Opsahl	Report.	Reflecting	on	its	importance,	several	scholars	highlight	
Initiative	92	for	its	role	in	promoting	a	forum	to	house	inclusive	and	democratic	
dialogue	(Cochrane	and	Dunn,	2002	pp.	156-7)	and	to	credit	it	for	the	introduction	
into	the	political	discourse	the	phrase	parity	of	esteem(Guelke,	2003	p.70).	Parity	
of	esteem	was	a	phrase	that	would	be	adopted	into	the	Good	Friday	Agreement	
and	subsequently	also	exported	to	other	conflict	regions.	Finally,	Guelke	views	that	
the	context	of	the	initiative	was	important	because	at	that	stage	political	talks	had	
stalled.	As	a	result,	an	achievement	of	the	process	of	public	debate	generated	by	
Initiative	92	was	that	in	attempting	to	capture	a	wide	breadth	across	society,	it	
demonstrated	that	broader	views	and	voices	might	help,	rather	than	hinder	political	
negotiations	(Ibid).		
In	roughly	the	same	period	of	the	early	1990s,	and	much	less	public,	local	
conversations	began	in	order	to	try	to	reduce	hostilities	between	the	British	Army	
and	the	PIRA.	Authors	describe	local	de-militarisation	initiatives	were	used	by	the	
PIRA	and	Army	to	begin	to	reduce	their	military	presences	in	Derry-Londonderry	
(Lampen	and	Lampen,	2005;	Moloney,	2002).	John	Lampen,	involved	in	the	
initiative,	described	that	the	Peace	and	Reconciliation	Group	(PRG)	over	a	10-year	
period	had	played	an	intermediary	role	between	Nationalist	communities,	the	RUC	
and	the	British	Army	(Lampen	and	Lampen,	2005).	Initiatives	originally	started	as	an	
effort	to	improve	RUC	handling	of	complaints	made	by	the	Catholic	Nationalist	
community-	but	that	over	time	the	PRG	became	a	trusted	interlocutor.	This	
involvement	extended	to	regular	consultations	with	incoming	troops	to	offer	advice	
on	how	they	could	patrol	the	city	with	greater	sensitivity.	Members	of	the	PRG	met	
incoming	troops	to	provide	insight	into	the	communities	they	would	be	patrolling	to	
help	them	better	understand	how	they	would	be	perceived.	These	efforts	were	
viewed	as	successful	with	the	result	that		the	British	Army	began	to	soften	its	
profile	in	Derry	(Moloney,	2002	p.365)	and	is	credited	for	changes	in	Army	
practices.	For	example,	changes	in	how	public	complaints	were	received	and	
followed	up,	the	introduction	of	berets	instead	of	helmets,	and	by	encouraging	
soldiers	not	to	use	telescopic	lens	rifles	for	patrolling	as	it	appeared	too	threatening	
to	civilians.	Lampen	and	Lampen	write:	
The	local	army	commanders	increasingly	consulted	the	PRG,	particularly	
the	ex-paramilitaries,	about	operational	matters.	Advice	was	given	on	
public	order	problems	such	as	IRA	funerals	and	political	and	traditional	
marches,	and	also	on	lesser	matters	such	as	whether	people	would	
respond	better	to	soldiers	if	they	wore	berets	rather	than	steel	helmets	
and	camouflage	paint	on	their	faces	(Lampen	and	Lampen,	2005	p.584).			
Lampen	and	Lampen	suggest	that	the	PRGs	increasingly	trusted	position	held	with	
the	Army	and	the	IRA	allowed	them	to	begin	discussions	to	advocate	the	use	of	a	
violence	reduction	strategy	known	as	GRIT	(graduated	reciprocation	in	tension-
reduction)	to	signal	intentions	towards	de-escalating	violence.	The	same	authors	
contend	that	the	PRG	subsequently	negotiated	a	proposal	in	consultation	with	Sinn	
Fein,	the	Northern	Ireland	Office	(NIO),	the	Army	and	RUC	which	included	a	series	
of	moves	that	over	time	if	taken	by	the	Army	and	local	IRA,	would	signal	goodwill	
and	lead	to	a	gradual	reduction	of	military	presence.	Referred	to	by	the	British	Army	
as	the	Derry	experiment,	the	existence	of	the	GRIT	proposal	was	later	denied	by	
Martin	McGuinness	when	it	was	referred	to	publicly	in	the	Opsahl	Report	in	1993	
(Lampen	and	Lampen,	2005).	According	to	authors	this	public	disavowal	was	in	part	
due	to	the	fact	that	it	was	a	locally	based	initiative	and	not	widely	known	about	
among	rank	and	file	IRA,	or	at	higher	levels	such	as	the	Army	Council	(Moloney,	
2002	p.371;	Lampen	and	Lampen,	2005	p.586).	As	a	result	credibility	was	lost	and	a	
message	was	sent	to	the	PRG	that	John	Lampen	was	persona	non	grata	with	his	
previous	Republican	contacts.		Despite	this,	Moloney	contends	that	GRIT	did	lead	to	
a	mutual	de-escalation	process	in	Derry-Londonderry.	
An	analysis,	by	the	author,	of	operations	carried	out	by	the	Derry	Brigade	
shows	that	the	IRA	also	responded	to	the	PRG	paper.	Figures	supplied	by	
the	IRA	itself	in	the	weekly	columns	of	An	Phoblacht-Republican	News,	
reveal	a	dramatic	falloff	in	activity	in	the	months	and	years	after	the	PRG	
de-escalation	proposals	were	submitted.	Between	1986	and	1989	the	Derry	
IRA	accounted	for	an	annual	average	of	13	percent	of	all	IRA	operations,	
whereas	between	1990	and	1993,	after	the	PRG	initiative	had	been	
launched,	the	average	fell	to	just	under	5	percent,	a	reduction	of	more	than	
60	percent	(Moloney,	2002	p.370).	
Political	developments	followed	in	1993	when	the	British	and	Irish	and	
governments	under	John	Major	and	Albert	Reynolds	issued	the	Downing	Street	
Declaration.	Significantly,	it	declared	on	the	British	side	no	strategic	interest	in	
Ireland	and	Northern	Ireland.	For	its	part,	the	Republic	of	Ireland	indicated	its	
willingness	to	change	articles	2	and	3	of	its	constitution,	removing	its	territorial	
claim	to	Northern	Ireland.	Each	government	affirmed	the	democratic	right	of	self-
determination	of	constitutional	status	by	the	majority	of	people	of	Northern	
Ireland.	In	August	of	1994	the	first	Republican	ceasefire	was	issued,	followed	
several	months	later	by	a	ceasefire	called	by	the	Combined	Loyalist	Military	
Command,	an	umbrella	group	of	loyalist	paramilitaries.	In	1995	British	and	Irish	
Governments	set	out	principles	and	parameters	in	the	Framework	Document	(1995)	
that	would	help	shape	the	basis	for	any	future	peace	agreement	creating	provision	
for	powersharing	and	north-south	and	east-west	dimensions.	President	Bill	Clintons	
support	of	the	political	process	was	demonstrated	both	through	a	visit	in	1995	and	
with	the	appointment	of	George	Mitchell	as	envoy	to	Northern	Ireland.	
Momentum,	however,	was	set	back	when	the	PIRAs	first	ceasefire	was	broken	in	
February	1996	with	the	bombing	of	Canary	Wharf	in	London.	
Despite,	or	perhaps	as	a	result	of,	this	transitional	political	context	at	the	macro	
level	during	the	summers	of	1995	to	1997,	local	parading	disputes	became	
increasingly	the	source	of	escalated	community	tensions	and	conflict.	Problems	
surfaced	in	Portadown	during	the	summer	of	1995	when	the	Orange	Order	was	
banned	from	marching	on	the	return	leg	of	one	of	its	traditional	routes	through	the	
Nationalist	Garvaghy	Road.	The	decision	resulted	in	several	days	standoff	between	
the	RUC	and	Orangemen	with	a	solution	reached	after	intervention	by	Mediation	
Northern	Ireland	mediators	to	allow	for	a	negotiated	return.	The	same	march	was	
banned	the	following	summer	in	1996	however;	mounting	Loyalist	protests	saw	the	
decisions	reversed.	Nationalist	outrage	at	the	reversal	led	to	serious	community-
wide	rioting	across	Northern	Ireland.		
During	the	summer	of	1996	a	feeder	parade	known	as	the	Tour	of	the	North	was	
one	of	the	earliest	to	be	associated	with	violence.	The	parade	route	through	
contested	areas	of	North	Belfast	made	it	vulnerable	to	interface	inter-communal	
disturbances	and,	as	a	result,	became	one	of	the	worst	impacted	due	to	violence	
and	intimidation	(Jarman	2005	p.	435).	Activists	working	in	these	areas	had	to	
become	increasingly	resourceful	and	innovative	and	one	example	of	this-was	the	
development	of	a	mobile	phone	network.		The	idea	behind	the	mobile	phone	
network	came	directly	from	practitioners	working	with	the	Community	
Development	Centre	(CDC),	a	locally	based	NGO	working	across	interface	areas	in	
North	Belfast.	The	summer	of	1996,	due	to	local	violence,	had	left	a	financial	cost	of	
10	million	and	over	100	families	displaced	(Jarman	and	CDC,	1999).	Eager	to	
prevent	a	future	reoccurrence,	in	its	aftermath,	community	activists	and	
practitioners	sought	practical	means	to	improve	communication	and	dispel	rumours	
that	escalated	tensions	and	often	erupted	into	inter-communal	rioting.	Better	
communication	was	viewed	as	necessary	for	violence	prevention	as	police	
responding	to	riots	were	often	accused	of	making	matters	worse,	while	other	
statutory	bodies	were	perceived	as	inaccessible	to	those	facing	the	upheaval	
(Jarman,	2005;	Jarman	and	CDC,	1999).		As	Jarman	describes:	
During	the	chaos	accompanying	the	violence,	lines	of	communication	within	
communities,	between	communities,	and	between	communities	and	
government	agencies	providing	essential	public	services	collapsed.	This	
meant	that	rumors	circulated	freely,	with	the	corresponding	escalation	of	
suspicion	and	unrest,	facilitating	further	violence	and	retaliation	(Jarman,	
2005	p.	436).	
Having	consulted	with	other	community	organisations	and	statutory	bodies	it	was	
agreed	that	a	proactive	plan	was	needed	to	prepare	for	the	following	summer	to	
increase	and	improve	communication,	networking,	and	violence	prevention.	
However,	at	the	time	the	perception	was	that	sharing	direct	phone	numbers	across	
the	interface	was	too	risky.	To	mitigate	such	risk,	staff	at	the	CDC	proposed	the	idea	
that	mobile	phones-	new	technology	at	the	time-	might	be	used	to	facilitate	a	hub	
of	community	interface	networks.	A	pilot	project	was	secured	to	equip	local	
community	groups	with	mobile	phones	to	be	available	24	hours	a	day	in	order	to	
keep	lines	of	communication	open	between	key	community	activists	in	volatile	
areas.	Rather	than	having	the	phones	associated	with	individuals,	they	were	instead	
shared	among	groups	and	passed	to	volunteers	on	duty.	The	hope	was	that	once	
rumours	began,	they	might	be	quickly	verified	and	dispelled	prior	to	leading	to	any	
conflict	escalation	(Jarman	and	CDC,	1999;	Hall,	2003;	Jarman,	2005).		Such	was	its	
success	at	dispelling	brewing	conflict	that	the	subsequent	summer	the	initiative	
became	replicated	in	other	interface	areas	of	the	city.	While	the	CDC	closed	in	2001	
due	to	funding	cuts,	mobile	phone	networks	since	have	become	important	ways	for	
interface	workers	to	maintain	communication,	to	dispel	rumours	and	to	prevent	
localised	violence	from	escalating.			
After	the	PIRA	ceasefire	breakdowns	in	1996,	another	ceasefire	was	reinstated	in	
July	1997,	and	by	September	Sinn	Fein	had	signed	up	to	the	Mitchell	principles	that	
required	a	commitment	and	adherence	to	fundamental	principles	of	democracy	
and	non-violence	(Mitchell,	1999	p.35).	More	specifically	this	included:	the	broad	
renunciation	of	the	use	of	force	to	resolve	political	issues,	a	commitment	to	
democratic	and	peaceful	means	to	alter	political	agreements,	a	commitment	to	
disarmament,	and	an	end	to	punishment	beatings	and	killings	(Ibid,	pp.35-36).	Civil	
society	groups,	anticipating	the	need	to	help	combatants	anchor	the	move	from	
armed	conflict,	began	to	involve	ex-combatants	in	scoping	the	potential	for	
restorative	justice	to	be	used	as	an	alternative	to	punishment	violence.	These	
efforts		will	be	discussed	again	more	fully	in	the	final	phase	of	peacebuilding.	
Encouraged	at	the	progress	being	made	in	negotiations,	but	remembering	the	
short-lived	power-sharing	executive	in	1974	brought	down	by	Loyalist	workers,	
peace	activists	were	concerned	that	any	agreement	would	be	a	hard	sell	for	
politicians	among	their	most	suspicious	and	hard-line	constituencies.	With	the	
recognition	that	risk-taking	leadership	would	require	public	support,	the	Yes	
campaign	was	an	independent	initiative	conceived	by	a	composite	of	voluntary	
sector	and	business	leaders.	In	anticipation	of	a	possible	political	agreement	the	
campaign	was	assembled	quickly	in	March	1998,	roughly	one	month	prior	to	
agreement	being	reached.	Officially	launched	on	April	27,	the	campaign	aimed	to	
generate	support	for	securing	a	yes	vote	for	the	island-wide	referendum	to	be	held	
on	May	22,	1998.		
Guelkes	view	is	that	while	political	parties	largely	ignored	the	campaign,	it	gave	the	
appearance	of	unity	at	the	heart	of	the	pro-Agreement	cause	(Guelke,	2003	p.	
73).	Cochrane	and	Dunns	view	was	more	overtly	enthusiastic;	describing	the	
success	of	the	Yes	campaign	was	evidenced	by	the	success	of	the	referendum	
itself:		
[T]he	eventual	vote	of	71	percent	in	favour	of	the	Good	Friday	Agreement	in	
the	May	1998	referendum	would	have	been	significantly	lower	had	it	not	
been	for	its	contribution	to	the	political	process	(Cochrane	and	Dunn,	2002	
p.	182).	
While	it	is	not	possible	to	determine	its	veracity,	the	statement	seems	reasonable	
given	that	the	PIRA	had	not	yet	decommissioned,	episodic	violence	continued,	and	
there	existed	lower	levels	of	Protestant	support	for	the	agreement.	Those	who	took	
it	upon	themselves	to	organise	the	Yes	campaign,	took	nothing	for	granted.	
Conclusion	
This	phase	of	peacebuilding,	it	could	be	argued,	is	built	upon	experience	gained	from	
earlier	periods.	Initiative		92	and	the	Yes	campaign	both	sought	to	animate	civic	
debate	beyond	the	political	level.	This	recognition	may	have	come	in	part	from	
experiences,	such	a	Sunningdale	in	1974,	when	grassroots	loyalist	communities	in	
protest	prevented	power-sharing.	Creating	space	for	inclusive	public	debate	may	
have	been	in	part	to	expand	the	stage	in	the	hope	that	by	ensure	all	voices	could	
contribute,	any	future	settlement	would	stand	greater	chance	of	success.		Another	
example	of	learning	from	experience	is	demonstrated	by	those	involved	in	building	
up	relationships	and	networks	through	the	mobile	phone	networks.	Anticipating	the	
fault	lines	of	conflict	within	interface	area,	processes	were	put	into	place	to	try	to	
improve	relationships,	prevent	violence,	and	build	trust.		
	Trust,	however,	as	Pollak	writes	of	his	experience	in	Initiative	92	was,	at	the	time,	
in	short-supply,	and	more	easily	lost	than	gained.	His	prescient	observation	that		
Many	people,	especially	in	the	areas	most	affected	by	violence,	will	do	something	
for	a	person	or	an	organisation	only	if	they	personally	know	and	trust	that	person	or	
organisation	suggests	also	the	consequences	of	broken	trust		(Pollak,	1993	p.394).	
This	dynamic	was	subsequently	well	illustrated	by	the	loss	of	credibility	for	members	
of	the	PRG	John	and	Diana	Lampen	after	their	submission	mentioned	the	GRIT	
initiative,	and	was	published	in	the	Opsahl	report.	Lampen	and	Lampen	(2005)	in	
their	own	account,	suggest	that	they	consequently	they	became	persona	non	grata	
and	a	year	later,	for	different	reasons,	left	Northern	Ireland.	Having	read	the	
submission	in	the	Opsahl	report,	one	observation	is	that	information	is	less	revealing	
than	accounts	suggest	-	and	the	reaction	disproportionate.	On	the	other	hand,	that	
any	part	of	the	GRIT	strategy	should	have	been	shared	publicly	may	also	have	been	
indicative	of	a	lack	of	attention	to	the	fragility	of	any	trust	gained	and	not	enough	
regard	paid	to	the	consequences	of	lost	credibility.	
4.6.	Phase	6:	Two	steps	forward	one	step	back	(1999-2015)		
Despite	the	success	of	the	Good	Friday	Agreement,	political	and	social	instability	
remained	high.	Solidarity	shown	after	a	dissident	Republican	bombing	in	Omagh	in	
August	1998	soon	became	strained	over	negotiations	over	the	logistics	and	
timetables	for	PIRA	decommissioning.	McKittrick	and	McVea	(2012)	described	the	
early	days	of	this	period	as	marked	by	a	series	of	political	and	security	crises.	For	
most	of	the	time	the	peace	process	was	in	question	(McKittrick	and	McVea,	2012	
p.	269).	Difficulties	over	de-commissioning	and	allegations	of	an	PIRA	spy	ring	at	
Stormont	saw	power-sharing	ended	and	direct	rule	reinstated	from	2002	to	2007	
(ibid).	Power-sharing	would	remain	mothballed	until	the	St.	Andrews	Agreement	of	
2006	saw	the	DUP	historically	agree	to	share	power	with	Sinn	Fein	and	form	an	
Executive.	
Community-level	instability	echoed	political	instability	in	the	early	2000s.	A	Loyalist	
feud	resulted	in	local	intimidation,	deaths	and	the	forced	relocation	of	families,	
particularly	in	North	Belfast.	Interface	communities	such	as	Short	Strand/Cluan	
Place	and	Ardoyne/Glenbryn	in	East	and	North	Belfast	and	in	Harryville	on	the	
outskirts	of	Ballymena,	all	experienced	disruptive	localised	conflicts	over	territory	
and	historic	grievances.	Civil	society	organisations	intervened	in	a	variety	of	ways	-	
as	mediators,	peace	monitors,	and	to	promote	dialogue	and	community	
development.	Beyond	a	reactive	role,	grassroots	and	civil	society	actors	in	the	early	
part	of	this	phase	were	involved	in	vanguarding	change	through	police	reform,	
through	promoting	restorative	justice,	and	in	efforts	to	determine	how	to	
memoralise	the	legacy	of	conflict.	While	the	Good	Friday	Agreement	had	
established	a	political	framework,	its	practical	implementation	benefited	from	civil	
society-based	forethought.		
Two	steps	forward:	changing	the	context	
While	official	policing	reforms	negotiated	in	the	Good	Friday	Agreement	came	after	
the	release	of	the	Report	of	the	Independent	Commission	for	Policing	in	Northern	
Ireland	(1999)	known	as	the	Patten	report,	unofficially	organisational	reform	had	
already	begun.	From	1993,	Mediation	Northern	Ireland	had	worked	within	the	RUC	
to	help	rank	and	file	police	better	understand	the	Nationalist	community	through	
their	Community	Awareness	Programme	(CAP).	At	the	request	of	senior	members	
of	the	RUC,	CAP	led	to	an	expanded	and	ambitious	initiative	aimed	at	internal	
organisational	reform.		A	three-year	programme	Policing	Our	Divided	Society,	was	
subsequently	designed	by	Mediation	Northern	Ireland	and	a	local	research	think-
tank	Future	Ways,	to	explore	and	lay	groundwork	for	internal	organisational	
change.	The	project	examined	aspects	of	police	culture	and	considered	ways	
sectarian	attitudes	or	practices	explicitly	or	implicitly	were	reinforced	by	their	
organisational	culture.	International	exemplars	were	used	to	build	knowledge	of	
alternative	models	of	policing,	for	example,	community-based	policing.	Senior	level	
officers	travelled	to	countries	that	had	also	experienced	division	between	the	
community	and	police,	or	where	ethnic	integration	within	the	police	force	had	itself	
been	a	previous	difficulty.	Deliberately	low	profile	to	protect	its	sensitive	nature,	
this	project	involved	a	considerable	risk	for	those	involved.	Given	that	police	and	
those	who	worked	with	police	were	each	considered	legitimate	targets	by	the	
Provisional	IRA	and	other	Republican	paramilitaries,	this	was	a	significant	but	lesser-
known	contribution	made	by	a	civil	society-based	organisation.		In	fact,	scholars	
note	that	Pattens	suite	of	recommendations	has	been	fully	implemented	by	the	
PSNI	and	that	the	transformation	of	the	police	service	has	been	signaled	as	one	of	
the	successes	of	the	political	peace	process	(Dickson,	2006;	Bayley,	2008).	
Therefore,	it	seems	reasonable	to	surmise	that	these	concerted	efforts	made	a	
contribution	to	that	success.	
Another	example	of	the	vanguard	role	of	civil	society	is	found	in	the	early	work	in	
restorative	justice	within	both	Loyalist	and	Republican	communities-	albeit	this	
development	occurred	separately	in	each.	Forward-thinking	individuals	within	a	
local	prisoner	support	NGO	the	Northern	Ireland	Association	for	the	Care	and	
Resettlement	of	Offenders	(NIACRO),	began	to	consider	what	might	be	needed	to	
help	move	communities	and	armed	combatants	to	transition	away	from	violence.	In	
1996,	NIACRO	began	to	research	restorative	justice	as	a	possible	way	to	provide	a	
role,	status	and	mechanism	for	former	combatants	wishing	to	transition	from	
violence	and	to	positively	impact	their	communities.	Restorative	justice	also	
instrumentalised	commitments	made	by	armed	groups	to	move	away	from	
prevalent	practices	of	punishment-based	violence,	part	of	the	Mitchell	Principles	
and	served	as	a	de-facto	form	of	DDR	(Disarmament,	Demobilisation	and	Re-
integration)	for	early	release	prisoners.	McEvoy	and	Mika	(2002)	explain:	
These	[restorative	justice]	projects	were	established	in	large	part	to	
facilitate	paramilitaries	moving	away	from	violent	punishment	system	
developed	over	the	last	three	decades.	Community-based	restorative	
justice	based	projects	were	designed	to	allow	such	paramilitaries	to	(in	
their	terms)	disengage	responsibly	from	such	acts,	handing	dispute	
resolution	responsibility	back	to	the	local	communities	from	which	the	
conflicts	emanate	(McEvoy	and	Mika,	2002	p.	535).	
As	an	example,	Shankill	Alternatives	began	in	1998	after	NIACRO	and	ex-political	
prisoner	Group	EPIC	conducted	a	community-based	research	project	with	local	
residents,	paramilitaries	and	statutory	representatives	to	consider	alternatives	to	
punishment	shootings.	Writing	about	its	formation,	staff	member	Billy	Drummond	
states	the	organisation	came	into	being,	[N]ot	as	an	alternative	to	the	formal	
justice	system	or	to	undermine	or	replace	the	police.	Its	aim	was	to	offer	a	non-
violent	approach	to	dealing	with	anti-social	activity	(Drummond,	quoted	in	Hall,	
2000	p.5).		Alternatives,	initially	focused	on	the	Shankill,	are	currently	run	in	five	
locations	in	Belfast.	Since	2005	it	has	also	operated	in	cooperation	with	statutory	
agencies	such	as	the	Public	Prosecution	Service	of	Northern	Ireland,	Youth	Justice	
Agency	and	PSNI	(Northern	Ireland	Alternatives,	2017).		
	Grappling	with	the	reintegration	and	support	for	ex-prisoners	was	just	one	aspect	
of	a	broader	set	of	tensions	on	the	radar	for	civil	society	activists	and	peacebuilders	
within	a	post-Agreement	context.	Such	discussions	predated	official	governmental	
efforts	such	as	the	Consultative	Group	on	the	Past,	which	was	established	in	2007.	
Educational	exchanges	in	the	late	1990s	with	other	post-conflict	countries,	for	
example,	South	Africa	brought	activists	together	to	consider	how	to	grapple	with	
the	legacy	of	conflict	and	its	impact	on	society.	In	particular,	a	visit	to	Northern	
Ireland	by	Alex	Boraine	in	1999	initiated	a	series	of	conversations	engaging	this	very	
question.	Meeting	with	61	groups	and	individuals,	Boraine,	as	the	Deputy	Chairman	
of	the	South	African	Truth	and	Reconciliation	Commission	was	asked	to	share	his	
insights	on	truth	recovery	after	a	legacy	of	conflict.	The	hosting	of	Boraines	visit	was	
sponsored	by	an	unusual	but	important	pairing	of	organisations	whose	
constituencies	had	been	highly	impacted	by	the	conflict-	Victim	Support	Northern	
Ireland	and	the	previously	discussed	prisoner	support	agency,	NIACRO	(HTR,	2017).	
All	Truth	is	Bitter,	a	report	produced	about	the	consultation,	acknowledges	from	the	
start	this	unique	pairing	and	the	perspective	it	generated	(NIACRO	and	Victim	
Support	Northern	Ireland,	2000).	Written	jointly	by	chairpersons	of	both	
organisations,	the	reports	preface	states	that	while	their	own	constituencies	have	
been	uniquely	impacted,	efforts	to	address	causes	and	consequences	of	conflict	
must	be	shared	with	the	broader	society:		
As	organisations	working	with	ex-prisoners	and	victims,	NIACRO	and	
Victim	Support	are	profoundly	aware	of	the	impact	and	consequences	
of	that	violence	to	individuals	and	their	families.	While	there	are	
many	remarkable	examples	of	both	victims	and	perpetrators	who	
have	been	able	to	move	beyond	the	past,	we	have	been	left	with	a	
huge	legacy	of	unresolved	hurt	and	hatred.		We	also	share	a	belief	
that	our	whole	community	must	seek	to	understand	and	share	
responsibility	for	the	complex	causes	as	well	as	the	cost	of	our	conflict	
before	we	can	move	on	together	(ibid,	2000	p.3).		
The	report	recommended	that	wide-ranging	discussions	take	place,	and	that	they	
be	broad	and	inclusive	in	order	that	multiple	perspectives	and	complexity	be	
captured.	Momentum	generated	after	the	consultation	led	to	the	organisation	
Healing	Through	Remembering	(HTR)	being	established	in	2001.	HTR	describes	itself	
as	a	member-driven	voluntary	initiative	whose	purpose	is	to	provide	as	much	
opportunity	and	learning	as	possible	in	order	to	inform	broader	debate	about	
dealing	with	the	legacy	of	the	conflict	(HTR,	2017).	Several	key	themes	have	been	
identified	as	areas	of	focus:	storytelling,	truth	recovery	and	acknowledgment,	a	
living	memorial	museum,	the	day	of	reflection,	and	commemorations	(ibid).	These	
themes	have	generated	a	variety	of	activities	such	as:	Everyday	Objects	
Transformed	by	Conflict,	an	art	exhibition	which	featured	submissions	from	the	
public	of	artefacts	which	had,	during	the	conflict,	taken	on	new	or	altered	
significance.	HTR	also	spearheaded	The	Day	of	Reflection,	an	annual	
commemoration	held	on	June	21	to	remember	lives	lost	in	the	conflict	-	chosen	for	
its	symbolism	as	the	longest	day	of	the	year.	One	hallmark	of	HTRs	approach	is	that,	
rather	than	aiming	for	uniformity	by	offering	a	prescribed	event	for	the	Day	of	
Reflection,	instead	heterogeneity	of	activities	is	encouraged	to	reflect	the	
complexity	of	the	conflict.		
One	final	example	of	civil	society	adopting	a	vanguard	role	can	be	illustrated	by	an	
initiative	that	built	upon	the	successful	intervention	within	a	local	contentious	
parade	in	west	Belfast.	In	the	early	2000s,	working	with	police	and	republican	
communities,	staff	from	Interaction	facilitated	the	introduction	of	peaceful	protests	
by	Nationalists	to	a	Loyal	Order	parade	on	the	Whiterock	Road	-	previously	a	long-
standing	dispute.	This	success	led	to	a	dialogue	project	piloted	between	district	
command	police	units	and	local	Republicans	in	west	Belfast	known	as	the	
Managing	Change	Project	that	ran	from	2004	to	2006.	Considered	a	useful	
prototype,	the	project	was	subsequently	scaled	up	regionally	across	Northern	
Ireland	once	Sinn	Fein	had	agreed	to	give	their	support	to	policing	in	2007.	The	
project	that	ran	from	2007	to	2010	used	what	was	described	as	a	trust-building	
process	between	Republicans,	Loyalist	activists	and	the	PSNI.	According	to	
organisational	documents,	for	example	from	June	2007	through	to	April	2008	the	
programme	delivered	a	total	of	nine	two-day	workshops	to	a	total	of	144	senior	
managers	in	the	PSNI,	senior	Republican	activists	including	Sinn	Fein	members	of	
DPPs,	Loyalists	and	the	PSNI	(Interaction	2014	p.9).	Writing	about	the	success	of	
this	and	other	similar	projects,	Interactions	CEO	Roisin	McGlone	states:	
Our	experience	would	demonstrate	that	once	participants	have	made	that	
psychological	leap,	significant	progress	can	be	made	as	was	seenin	all	of	the	
trust-building	processes	we	have	developed.		Furthermore	changes,	which	
were	initially	seen	as	negative,	are	now	highlighted	as	examples	of	how	
participants	have	changed	and	developed	positively.	Trust-building	
processes	can	be	greatly	enhanced	at	an	early	stage	by	the	development	and	
implementation	of	dedicated	trust	building	and	action	planning	processes	
between	former	enemies,	which	will	expose	and	interrogate	underlying	
prejudicial	attitudes	in	a	constructive	and	progressive	manner	and	contribute	
to	effective	planning	in	the	future	(ibid,	p.	10-11).	
Efforts	such	as	these	it	could	be	argued	may	have	helped	pave	the	way	for	policing	
to	become	more	acceptable	within	Republican	circles	and	for	local	policing	
partnerships	to	operate	with	reduced	hostilities.	Sinn	Fein	took	their	place	on	the	
Policing	Board	in	2007	after	power-sharing	was	restored	when	Ian	Paisley	and	
Martin	McGuinness	became	First	and	deputy	First	Minister	and	justice	matters	
became	devolved.	Dialogue	projects	such	as	Managing	Change,	having	operated	
behind	the	scene	to	prototype	new	relationships	between	local	Republican	and	
PSNI,	once	scaled-up,	likely	played	a	role	in	helping	to	streamline	this	transition.		
The	return	in	2007	of	a	power-sharing	executive	ushered	a	period	of	symbolic	
firsts.	Two	historic	visits	were	made	by	Queen	Elizabeth	II-	her	first	visit	to	the	
Republic	of	Ireland	in	2011	saw	the	Queen	greet	the	President	of	Ireland,	Mary	
McAleese	in	Irish.	This	was	followed	in	the	next	year	by	a	trip	to	Northern	Ireland	
where	famously,	she	shook	hands	with	deputy	First	Minister	Martin	McGuinness.	
Symbolic	gestures	were	not	only	the	source	of	rapprochement,	but	controversy.	
The	following	year,	in	December	2012	the	decision	to	shift	the	flying	of	the	Union	
flag	outside	City	Hall	from	365	days	a	year	to	a	policy	of	designated	days	led	to	
street	protests	and	riots	within	some	majority	Protestant	working	class	
communities.	At	its	height	from	17-23	of	December	2012	reports	suggest	10,000	
people	were	involved	in	street	protests	across	Northern	Ireland	(Nolan	et	al,	2014).	
Thus,	despite	political	progress	the	latter	half	of	the	phase	ends	marked	by	
continuing	areas	of	communal	unrest.	
One	step	back:	the	contraction	of	civil	society	peacebuilding	
As	this	chapter	has	sought	to	demonstrate	throughout	a	50-year	span,	individuals	
and	groups	at	the	grassroots	and	within	civil	society	have	been	involved	in	
initiatives	aimed	at	peacebuilding.	Initially	primarily	grassroots-led,	efforts	were	
aided	by	financial	investment	made	by	international	donors	and	from	the	European	
Union	(EU).	While	funding	had	been	available	to	Northern	Ireland	and	from	the	
1970s	through	independent	charitable	sources	such	as	the	Joseph	Rowntree	
Charitable	Trust	and,	in	1989	through	the	International	Fund	for	Ireland,	after	the	
ceasefires	much	greater	sums	of	monetary	support	arrived	from	the	European	
Union	as	an	investment	in	the	fledgling	peace	process.	This	investment	enabled	a	
substantial	expansion	of	grassroots	and	civil	society	peacebuilding.	
The	EU	Special	Support	Programme	for	Peace	and	Reconciliation	or	Peace	I,	for	
example,	invested	500	million	to	address	unemployment,	build	infrastructure	and	
to	support	cross-border	projects	from	1995	to	1999	(Hayward	et	al,	2011	p.195).	
Administered	locally,	Peace	I	received	31,000	applications	with	15,000	gaining	
approval	(Byrne	et	al,	2008	p.110).	This	level	of	funding	was	to	expand	over	the	next	
years	during	Peace	II	(2000	to	2006)	and	Peace	III	(2007	to	2013)	with	a	total	influx	
of	funds	from	Peace	I	to	Peace	III	reaching	1.524	million	Euro	over	the	course	of	
two	decades	(Hayward	et	al,	2011	p.195).	A	snapshot	to	view	the	similar	expansion	
of	peacebuilding	activity	can	be	illustrated	by	a	1986	report	on	community-based	
peace-focused	activities	listing	45	community	relations	or	reconciliation	groups	
funded	either	by	private	philanthropy,	or	by	central	government	through	the	
Department	of	Education	(Frazer	and	Fitzduff,	1986	p.7).	By	contrast,	using	data	
gathered	by	Northern	Ireland	Council	for	Voluntary	Action	(NICVA)	in	2009,	Acheson	
and	Stringer	(2011)	cite	3500	to	5000	voluntary	organisations	(where	much	of	
formalised	peacebuilding	is	now	housed)	and	found	that	over	half	were	estimated	
to	have	been	established	after	1986	(Acheson	and	Stringer,	2011	p.20).	Though	this	
expansion	was	certainly	not	only	attributable	to	the	influx	of	peace	funding,	it	is	not	
unreasonable	to	suggest	that	it	has	played	a	role.		
The	peacebuilding	sector	having	expanded	as	a	result	of	the	influx	of	peace	funding	
from	1995	to	2013,	has	in	more	recent	years	began	to	contract	as	international	
funds	were	reduced	or	withdrawn	(Wilson,	2016).	In	an	increasingly	scaled-back	
funding	environment,	esteemed	organisations	viewed	for	years	as	stalwarts	of	
peacebuilding	were	forced	to	shut.		Gaps	in	funding	cycles,	particularly	from	the	EU	
after	the	conclusion	of	Peace	III	as	well	as	cuts	in	governmental	funding,	for	
example	in	the	Department	of	Educations	funds	for	community	relations,	have	
ushered	in	the	closure	of	long-standing	peacebuilding	organisations.	The	Peace	and	
Reconciliation	Group	(1976	to	2015)	closed	its	doors	in	2015	after	more	than	35	
years	of	local	behind	the	scenes	mediation	and	cross-community	work;	the	Spirit	of	
Enniskillen	(1989	to	2013)	a	cross-community	reconciliation	NGO	established	after	
the	1987	Enniskillen	bomb	in	youth	leadership	development;	the	Northern	Ireland	
Childrens	Enterprise	(NICE),	begun	in	1978	to	organised	respite	holidays	for	
children	and	evolved	in	later	years	to	promote	school-based	peacebuilding	and	
youth	development,	closed	down	in	2017;	the	Workers	Education	Association	
(WEA)	an	adult	and	community	education	organisation	aimed	at	community	
empowerment	and	founded	in	1910,	shut	their	doors	in	2014	due	to	cuts	from	the	
Department	of	Education	(BBC	News	Northern	Ireland,	2014).	While	it	could	be	
argued	that	these	organisations	have	worked	themselves	out	of	a	job,	it	could	also	
be	argued	that	organisations	became	inflated	due	to	unsustainable	expansion.		
There	is	also	evidence	to	suggest	that	organisations	became	overstretched	by	
overly	bureaucratic	administrative	burdens	that	became	too	restrictive	and	
determinative.	Akashi	writes:	
Initially,	some	organisations	were	pleased	with	availability	of	funding,	
especially	considering	the	history	of	the	poorly	funded	civil	society	sector.	
However,	soon	after	EU	funds	began	to	be	delivered,	aimed	at	diverse	
projects,	questions	were	raised	as	to	the	efficiency	and	direction	of	funds.	
Many	residents	particularly	in	interface	areas,	regarded	funds	as	being	
misused	and	their	communities	exploited	(Akashi,	2011	p.216).		
While	this	phase	has	experienced	tensions	associated	with	professionalisation	and	
increased	bureaucracy,	it	also	evidences	examples	of	practitioners	and	organisations	
opting	to	go	their	own	way	in	order	to	remain	relevant.	One	community-based	
foundation	that	has	intentionally	reduced	its	reliance	on	European	grant	funding	is	
the	Community	Foundation	for	Northern	Ireland	(CFNI).	Serving	as	an	intermediary	
funding	body	for	Peace	I	and	II,	CFNI	were	tasked	with	administering	EU	funds	to	
local	projects	but	when	Peace	III	funds	arrived,	purposefully	took	a	decision	to	
reduce	its	role.	In	order	to	innovate	and	take	calculated	risks	CFNI	took	a	decision	
that	more	independent	funding	and	autonomy	was	necessary	(Stephenson	and	
Zanetti,	2012	p.60).	Considering	what	influenced	the	decision,	CFNIs	CEO	at	the	
time	Avila	Kilmurray,	is	quoted	suggesting	the	decision	was	influenced	by	how	the	
burdens	of	bureaucracy	impacted	practice	decisions:	
[N]either	social	justice	issues	nor	effective	community	action	are	likely	to	be	
progressed	through	time-limited,	micro-managed	programmes	that	at	times	
seem	more	answerable	to	the	auditor	than	to	the	policymaker	(ibid,	p.61).	
Conclusion	
This	final	phase	of	peacebuilding	in	some	respects	illustrated	another	significant	
context	change	as	Northern	Ireland	experienced	both	political	and	social	transitions	
post-Agreement.	Peacebuilding	examples	profiled	here	demonstrated	a	prescience	
that	served	to	vanguard	change.	The	latter	half	of	the	1990s	saw	civil	society	
peacebuilders	leant	on	heavily	as	service	delivery	agents	for	peace,	which	generated	
a	proliferation	of	pilot	projects	and	activity.	However,	the	sector	by	the	end	of	the	
phase	began	to	experience	a	contraction	of	funding.	Increasingly,	practitioners	
identified	that	administrative	burdens	associated	with	bureaucratic	and	the	
professionalising	of	peace	directed	practice	choices,	and	at	times	this	compromised	
relevancy.		Esteemed	organisations,	struggling	at	the	contraction	increasingly	found	
themselves	unable	to	remain	viable,	a	loss	not	only	to	livelihoods,	but	also	creating	a	
loss	of	phronetic	learning	about	years	of	practical	peacebuilding.	
4.7	Lessons	learned	from	50	years	of	practical	peacebuilding	
One	of	the	purposes	of	the	chapter	was	to	provide	a	snapshot	of	the	range	of	
activities	taken	over	a	fifty-year	timespan	and	to	consider	what	these	actions	may	
have	been	contributed	within	their	own	context.	However,	it	was	also	to	reflect	
upon	possible	accumulated	learning	from	examples	of	practice	and	consider	
whether	insights	gained	provide	a	different	perspective	than	that	which	current	
literature	holds.	It	is	important	to	note	that	while	some	peacebuilding	actors	were	
predominately	intervening	to	influence	their	own	communities	or	broader	society,	
others	were	involved	with	activities	targeted	at	structures	or	institutions,	and	
others	focused	on	both.	Despite	variances,	from	this	history	three	overarching	
themes	surface	about	civil	society	and	grassroots-led	peacebuilding	in	Northern	
Ireland:		
1)	Close	attention	to	process	is	important	but	may	require	invisibility.		
2)	Relationships	are	crucial	but	paradoxical	-	they	both	extend	and	limit	
agency	and	impact.			
3)	Viewed	in	the	short-term	peacebuilding	may	look	ephemeral,	but	in	the	
long-term	has	potential	to	become	peacebuilding	capital	and	a	generative	
vanguard	for	social	change.		
1)	Close	attention	to	process	is	important	but	may	require	invisibility.	
A	theme	found	across	different	phases	of	peacebuilding	was	the	importance	of	
paying	close	attention	to	process-	its	importance	most	noticeable	when	absent.	
Lederach	writes:	[T]he	pursuit	of	change	involves	some	form	of	confrontation.	
Confrontation	brings	the	conflict	to	the	surface	(Lederach,	1997	p.65).		One	
potential	learning	gained	from	the	civil	rights	movement	was	that	the	process	of	
how	conflict	is	created	and	confrontation	is	managed	is	important.	It	could	be	
argued	that	non-violent	demonstrations	had	the	potential	to	address	root	causes	of	
conflict	if	they	had	remained	non-violent	and	had	gained	representation	from	
Protestants	and	Catholic,	Unionist	and	Nationalist.		
Instead,	it	could	be	argued	that,	paradoxically,	demonstrations	played	some	role	in	
the	shifting	the	context	of	conflict	towards	the	likelihood	of	violent	confrontations.	
Borrowing	this	technique	from	a	different	context	contained	inherent	problems.	
The	tactics	of	non-violent	protest	used	by	the	civil	rights	movement	in	the	US	was	
adopted	as	a	template	within	Northern	Ireland	but	without	commensurate	training	
and	preparation.	The	nature	of	sectarian	geography	in	Northern	Ireland	was	not	
fully	considered	with	examples	whereby	Belfast-based	civil	rights	organisers	were	
unaware	of	local	sectarian	geography	dynamics	and	planned	marching	routes	may	
have	played	a	role	in	exacerbating	communal	tensions.		
Evident	in	early	stages	of	the	conflict	was	also	the	dynamic	and	adrenaline	of	
physical	violence.	Once	ignited,	physical	violence	became	easily	flammable	and	
accelerates	quickly	within	densely	populated	communities.	Examples	of	containing	
conflict	flammability	surface	in	the	work	of	peace	committees	in	the	1970s	and	
within	interface	areas	in	the	1990s.	Whether	Dialling	58507	for	peace	or	using	
mobile	phone	networks	across	interface,	each	reflects	knowledge	of	the	context	
and	how	rumours	can	light	a	conflict	fuse.	Such	flammability	suggests,	therefore,	
paying	attention	to	process,	pacing	and	to	the	visibility	of	change	were	important.	
Change	needs	carefully	managed.		
Examples	also	demonstrated	that	at	times	paying	attention	to	process	meant	
becoming	invisible.	Invisibility	offered	greater	protection	for	risk-taking,	useful	to	
those	operating	as	a	backchannel	of	communication,	whether	that	be	with	
politicians,	armed	actors,	or	within	the	prison.	As	the	GRIT	process	from	Derry-
Londonderry	demonstrated	once	it	was	exposed	in	the	Opsahl	Report,	hard	won	
trust	and	credibility	could	be	easily	lost.		Invisibility	served	to	mitigate	risk	by	
offering	creative	ambiguity	and	the	ability	to,	if	necessary,	deny	knowledge.	For	
example,	the	perception	of	tacit	approval	by	the	Catholic	church	of	the	behind	the	
scenes	negotiations	between	Father	Reid	and	Adams	was	useful	to	politicians,	but	
its	invisibility	meant	the	church	could	also	deny	any	official	knowledge	of	such	
activities.		
2)	Relationships	are	crucial	but	paradoxical;	they	both	extend	and	limit	agency	and	
impact.	
A	second	theme	that	emerges	over	time	for	grassroots-level	and	civil	society	actors	
is	the	need	adopt	a	Janus-face	to	balance	intra	and	inter-communal	relationships,	
simultaneously	looking	both	forwards	and	backwards.	Across	phases,	it	was	evident	
that	peacebuilding	activity	was	impacted	by	the	balancing	act	of	maintaining	
relationships,	and	that	relationships	both	extended	and	limited	agency.	For	
example,	when	the	Nationalist	Derry	Women	Peace	(DWP)	took	a	stand	in	1972	
against	the	OIRA	it	was	a	challenge	to	their	neighbours.	Such	efforts	were	difficult	
to	sustain	and	came	with	a	price	(Hammond	Callaghan,	2002).	Hammond-Callaghan	
describes	it	as	a	structural	bind	between	the	identity	of	being	a	mother	and	being	
Nationalist	which	ultimately	limited	the	parameters	of	their	peace	activism.	She	
quotes	an	ex-members	disappointment	and	a	sense	of	isolation	within	their	own	
community	as	a	result	of	their	efforts:	
When	I	look	back	on	it,	at	the	way	I	neglected	my	home	and	my	husband	
and	my	youngsters	for	other	people,	to	try	and	bring	peace	and	have	a	
better	community	in	our	town,	and	got	nothing	but	abuse	for	it	(Hammond	
Callaghan,	2002	p.45).	
Nonetheless,	Hammond	Callaghan	concludes	that	the	efforts	of	this	group	may	
have	had	some	role	in	facilitating	early	diplomatic	links	between	the	catholic	
Nationalist	community	and	British	officials,	played	a	role	expanding	the	Republican	
discourse	towards,	peace	with	justice	and		pressuring	the	Republican	leadership,	
who	above	all	relied	on	their	communities	support	to	explore	diplomatic	
possibilities	for	resolving	the	conflict	(Hammond	Callaghan,	2002	p.45).			
A	further	example	of	how	the	Janus-face	limited	peacebuilding	agency	is	evidenced	
by	the	work	of	Women	Together.	Hammond	Callaghans	analysis	of	Women	
Together	surfaces	a	critique	that	internment	was	not	actively	denounced,	and	the	
topic	avoided	in	cross-community	meetings	(Hammond	Callaghan,	2006).	However,	
one	might	suggest	that	this	criticism	does	not	account	for	the	polarised	context	of	
the	time.	Just	two	years	earlier	during	the	summer	of	1969,	3000	people	fled	their	
homes	(Darby,	1983	p.	27).	The	tensions	of	maintaining	relationships	in	a	polarised	
context	consequently	limiting	what	can	be	addressed.	This	offers	another	
explanation	of	why	internment	was	not	discussed	as	leaders	may	have	viewed	it	as	
counter-productive	to	cross-community	cohesion.	In	fact,	in	such	a	highly	divided	
and	polarised	context,	those	who	step	out	beyond	their	own	tribe	are	quickly	
accused	of	being	traitors,	touts,	and	Lundys.	For	example,	church	leaders	who	
ventured	at	Feakle	to	meet	members	of	the	PIRA	were	subject	to	the	most	criticism	
from	their	own	community	(Brewer	et	al,	2011).		
However,	an	examination	of	these	phases	also	evidences	that	when	a	Janus	
approach	successful	balanced	intra-and	inter-communal	credibility,	this	extended	
peacebuilding	agency.	When	key	interveners	were	viewed	as	credible,	this	Janus-
faced	approach	could	at	times	deter	violence;	build	networks	and	usher	in	change.	
For	example,	violence	de-escalation	initiatives	such	as	peace	committees	were	
viewed	as	helpful	in	particular	localised	situations,	their	presence	explaining	
variances	in	communal	rioting	in	the	summer	of	1969	(Kelly,	2009;	2011).	Kelly	
notes	that	those	committees	that	were	most	effective	had	built	up	strong	
relationships	in	their	local	areas.	In	this	and	other	examples,	key	people	in	
leadership	such	as	clergy	and	shop	stewards	were	used	as	a	moral	authority	to	de-
escalate	potential	problems	on	the	streets	and	workplaces.		Similarly,	Quakers	
initiatives	in	prisons	and	in	political	intermediation	demonstrated	the	pivotal	nature	
of	relationships	in	building	networks	and	the	length	of	time	needed	to	build	the	
necessary	trust.	Early	work	meeting	with	families	in	the	visitors	centre	was	viewed	
as	an	important	first-step	in	the	early	seventies.	This	continued	in	the	eighties	
during	the	Hunger	Strikes,	when	established	networks	were	used	to	help	prisoners.	
Blair	writes	of	Quaker	staff	Martie	Rafferty,	Martie	had	direct	access	to	a	number	
of	prison	governors	and	was	able	to	raise	matters	quickly	and	perhaps	help	to	
ameliorate	some	potentially	violent	reactions	during	these	turbulent	years	(Blair,	
2009	p.	45).	Cumulatively	over	time,	these	relationships	and	networks	built	a	
foundation	that	in	later	years	created	another	platform	for	joint	Republican	Loyalist	
dialogue	(Shirlow	and	McEvoy,	2008	pp.64-68;	Williams	and	Fitzduff,	2007	p.21).		
3)	Viewed	in	the	short-term	peacebuilding	may	look	ephemeral,	but	holds	potential	
to	become	peacebuilding	capital	and	a	generative	vanguard	for	social	change.		
Writing	about	civil	society	peacebuilding	Cochrane	and	Dunn	(2002)	have	described	
that	high	profile	anti-violent	movements	were	often	viewed	as	ephemeral.	
However,	one	overlooked	dimension	of	such	ephemeral	activities	has	been	their	
generative	functions.	The	Peace	People,	for	example,	might	have	been	considered	
more	ephemeral;	it	mobilised	demonstrations	in	the	autumn	of	1976	which	
attracted	numbers	as	high	as	50,	000	but	soon	saw	these	numbers	evaporate	in	the	
subsequent	months	(Fairmichael,	1987).	Despite	this,	as	was	profiled	in	phase	3	of	
peacebuilding,	four	organisations	emerged	directly	and	indirectly	from	networks	
affiliated	with	the	Peace	People	(ibid).	Therefore,	it	may	seem	that	organisations	
and	initiatives	appear	ephemeral,	but	often	peacebuilding	initiatives	continue	in	
another	form.	For	example,	Reverend	Eric	Gallagher	was	connected	to	many	
different	initiatives	reflected	in	this	account.	He	first	appears	in	Bleakleys	(1972)	
account	of	August	of	1969	giving	a	speech	to	workers	at	Harland	and	Wolff	
shipyards	(Phase	2)	to	persuade	them	not	to	riot.	He	features	again	in	the	Feakle	
Talks	(Phase	3),	and	again	in	Initiative	92	(Phase	5).	It	could	be	speculated	that	
gathering	a	range	of	experience	throughout	different	stages	of	conflict	might	
constitute	a	form	of	peacebuilding	capital.		
Building	from	the	previous	observation,	the	suggestion	is	that	with	the	right	timing,	
this	form	of	capital	could	be	utilised	and	act	as	a	vanguard.	Several	examples	
throughout	peacebuilding	phases	illustrate	that	prescient	individuals	in	civil	society	
and	within	organisations	anticipated	peacebuilding	and	political	developments	and	
acted	fortuitously.	For	example,	the	development	of	restorative	justice	in	many	
respects	became	a	vehicle	to	reintegrate	ex-combatants	within	the	communities	
transitioning	from	violence.	As	mentioned,	restorative	justice	work	was	initiated	in	
1996	by	NIACRO,	a	local	NGO	not	long	after	the	ceasefires	but	before	the	Good	
Friday	Agreement.	Restorative	justice,	it	could	be	argued,	helped	society	begin	to	
plan	for	the	reality	of	prisoner	release	and	need	for	working	towards	their	
reintegration.	Furthermore,	youth	justice	statutory	bodies	have	now	also	adopted	
restorative	justice	and	work	with	community-based	restorative	bodies	to	deter	
youths	from	anti-social	behaviours.	As	another	example,	work	undertaken	with	the	
RUC	in	the	early	1990s	by	Mediation	Northern	Ireland	enabled	a	wider	project	of	
institutional	RUC	reform	to	be	undertaken	several	years	later,	but	prior	to	official	
police	reforms.	As	mentioned,	this	may	have	played	a	contributing	role	in	the	
successful	implementation	of	the	reforms	when	they	became	mandatory.	Fitzduff	
and	Williams	(2007)	while	not	using	the	terms	peacebuilding	capital	suggest	it	as	an	
explanation	for	why	civil	society	actors	were	important	in	Northern	Ireland	for	
progressing	peace:		
It	was	civil	society	who	had	a	low	enough	profile	and	sufficient	enough	
credibility	to	make	contact,	build	trust	and	convene	discussion	across	the	
divide	with	prisoners,	paramilitaries,	government	ministers,	community	
leaders,	and	civil	servants.	This	became	important	at	a	later	stage,	when	key	
actors	were	testing	whether	it	had	become	acceptable	to	entertain	contact	
with	previously	marginalised	figures	(Fitzduff	and	Willams,	2007	p.31).		
Conclusion	
Using	a	different	yardstick	to	measure	the	impact	of	grassroots	and	civil	society	
peacebuilding	has	generated	new	insights.	Viewing	the	activity	over	this	time-span	
with	the	lens	of	phronesis	provides	an	alternative	view	than	much	of	the	current	
literature.	Focusing	instead	on	the	particular	activities	in	their	own	context,	the	
investigation	has	illustrated	that	many	of	its	strengths	are	also	what	make	it	hard	to	
measure.	Firstly,	the	ability	to	stay	under	the	radar,	and	take	a	low	profile	and	at	
times	become	invisible	is	a	key	strength.	Secondly,	relationships	are	vitally	
important	in	civil	society	peacebuilding.	However,	grassroots	and	civil	society	actors	
are,	in	fact,	embedded	in	communities	and	this	may	limit	or	exponentially	expand	
what	can	be	achieved.	The	balancing	act	of	maintaining	a	Janus-faced	approach	can	
present	a	polarity	of	counterweights.	It	can	be	challenging	for	civil	society	actors	as	
they	seek	to	hold	tension	between	both	maintaining	intra-communal	credibility	and	
inter-communal	relationships	necessary	for	progressing	peace.	Finally,	such	activity,	
when	viewed	over	the	short-term	may	seem	ephemeral,	and	fall	short	of	achieving	
impact.	However	when	viewed	over	the	long-term,	and	particularly	when	
peacebuilding	capital	is	counted	as	impact,	the	generative	role	and	vanguard	
potential	for	civil	society	peacebuilding	is	increasingly	illuminated.		
The	next	chapter	continues	this	investigation	into	what	peacebuilding	practitioners	
have	learned	from	practice	by	introducing	the	research	design	and	methodology.	It	
outlines	all	stages	of	the	research	process	and	details	relevant	decisions	that	
through	the	course	of	the	research	took	an	iterative	turn.	The	chapter	will	explain	
initial	research	decisions	and	design	choices	and	why;	it	will	likewise	discuss	
changes	made	and	why.	Finally,	the	chapter	seeks	to	extend	the	discussion	of	the	
concept	of	phronesis	by	demonstrating	how	its	emergent	conceptualisation	
intersected	and	impacted	the	research	process	at	broad	points	across	the	research	
methodology.	
Chapter	5:	Methodology		
Introduction:	Research	as	an	iterative	and	creative	process	
Not	long	after	undertaking	the	doctoral	programme,	one	of	the	research	
supervisors,	Professor	Brandon	Hamber,	reflected	that	research	was	by	its	nature	
an	unfolding	process	and	it	was,	at	times,	necessary	to	allow	space	for	creativity	
and	not	knowing.		This	comment	may	have	been	generated	by	my,	at	times,	rigid	
view	of	what	I	imagined	was	a	necessary	and	stiff	formality	in	the	academic	pursuit	
of	a	PhD	and	it	came	as	a	breath	of	fresh	air.	This	freedom	allowed	me	to	engage	
deeply	with	the	research	and	become	responsive	to	the	unexpected,	even	when	it	
deviated	from	the	original	design.	This	chapter	describes	the	iterative	process	the	
research	has	taken.	It	begins	by	outlining	the	original	research	design	and	how	the	
research	was	initially	executed;	however,	it	then	highlights	how	the	emerging	data	
began	to	reshape	subsequent	research	choices	and	plans.		This	is	described	as	one	
of	the	strengths	of	using	an	iterative	approach:		
The	role	of	iteration,	not	as	a	repetitive	mechanical	task	but	as	a	deeply	
reflexive	process	is	key	to	sparking	insight	and	developing	meaning.	
Reflexive	iteration	is	at	the	heart	of	visiting	and	revisiting	the	data	and	
connecting	them	with	emerging	insights,	progressively	leading	to	refined	
focus	and	understandings	(Srivastava	and	Hopwood,	2009	p.77).		
My	original	hypothesis	when	undertaking	the	research	was	that	grassroots	
peacebuilding	practitioners	had	gained	usable	knowledge	(Schn,	1987)	through	
their	efforts	living	and	working	to	build	peace	in	a	context	of	protracted	violent	
conflict,	and	a	deeper	examination	would	reveal	that	a	significant	understanding	of	
applied	peacebuilding	practice	had	been	developed.	I	proposed	that	if	consolidated,	
such	knowledge	would	add	coherency	to	improve	local	practice,	and	had	the	
potential	to	strengthen	social	policy	implementation	when	promoting	social	
cohesion,	shared	space	and	addressing	areas	of	division	by	shedding	light	on	the	
sets	of	circumstances	that	support	peace	on	the	ground.		
Therefore	the	original	aim	of	the	research	was	firstly,	to	address	the	gaps	within	the	
peacebuilding	academic	literature	by	exploring	what	practitioners	working	within	
grassroots	and	civil	society	in	Northern	Ireland	had	learned	from	their	practice	(over	
the	span	of	50	years	1965-2015)	which	might	contribute	to	academic	peacebuilding	
theory,	and	consider	what	experience-based	theory	might	add	to	the	international	
and	local	fields	to	address	practice-theory	gaps.			Secondly,	to	address	the	
incoherency	in	local	peacebuilding	practice	by	consolidating	knowledge	about	
methodologies,	exploring	implicitly	held	assumptions	and	theories	of	change,	and	
by	harnessing	knowledge	gained	from	a	wide-variety	of	approaches	taken	at	
different	stages	of	the	conflict.		Consequently,	the	purpose	of	the	research,	as	
initially	envisioned,	was	to	explore	the	localised	theories	and	models	of	
peacebuilding	emerging	from	grassroots-level	and	civil	society-based	peacebuilding	
practice	with	the	following	research	question:		
What	have	actors	working	at	the	grassroots	level	and	within	civil	society-
based	initiatives	learned	as	a	result	of	their	peacebuilding	and	conflict	
transformation	practice?		In	particular,	have	practitioners	gained	knowledge	
of	factors	which	they	would	identify	as	being	catalytic	in	building	peace	and	
transforming	conflict,	and	if	so,	what	might	this	knowledge	add	to	current	
peacebuilding	theory	and	practice	locally	and	globally?	
Having	articulated	the	research	question,	the	decision	was	made	to	use	a	two-
phased	qualitatively	based	inductive	approach	to	answer	the	research	question.	
Phase	1	would	be	used	to	conduct	interviews	with	40	practitioners	who	had	worked	
within	grassroots-level	and	civil	society-based	initiatives	to	build	peace	within	the	
time	frame	of	fifty	years,	from	1965-2015.	The	choice	of	this	time	frame	was	made	
after	the	initial	literature	review	was	undertaken	which	focused	on	local	
peacebuilding	practice.	It	was	at	this	stage	the	decision	was	made	that	much	of	the	
roots	of	practice	development	had	their	origins	at	earlier	stages.	Therefore	it	was	
decided	to	use	the	wider	span	of	time	to	comprehensively	outline	stages	of	
development.	Using	this	broader	span	of	time	brought	challenges,	for	example,	the	
concern	to	adequately	cover	such	a	widespread	development	of	diverse	practices	
within	civil	society	peacebuilding.	However,	it	was	felt	that	these	would	be	
outweighed	by	the	advantage	of	viewing	development	and	learning	from	practice	
over	a	broader	arc	of	the	cycle	of	conflict.	
In	Phase	2,	I	had	planned	to	build	theory	using	the	concepts	and	data	collected	from	
interviews.	Practically,	I	planned	to	meet	with	6-8	peacebuilding	practitioners	on	
two	occasions,	drawn	from	any	interviewees	from	phase	1	who	indicated	an	
interest	in	theory	building.	The	aim	of	the	group	was	to	work	collectively	with	the	
salient	concepts	drawn	from	the	data	to	build	theory.	Using	an	iterative	approach,	
emerging	theoretical	conceptualisations	generated	in	the	first	session	would	
subsequently	be	further	developed	by	the	research	team,	composed	of	my	three	
doctoral	supervisors	(Professor	Duncan	Morrow,	Professor	Brandon	Hamber	and	
Granne	Kelly)	and	then	brought	back	to	the	practitioner-group	during	a	second	
meeting	for	further	refining.		
The	research	design	was	conceptualised	using	a	knowledge	production	model	
created	for	the	URBAN	project,	an	affiliate	of	Co-Lab	housed	at	the	school	of	Urban	
Planning	at	The	Massachusetts	Institute	of	Technology	(MIT).	Designed	to	co-
produce	knowledge	with	community	groups	in	public	planning,	a	MIT	Co-Lab	
concept	paper	described	that	the	model		rested	on	four	pillars:	
1)	Recognition	of	the	value	and	importance	of	non-technical	expertise;	
2)	Seeking	to	work	beyond	disciplinary	silos;	
3)	Knowledge-creation	judged	both	on	the	basis	of	its	practical	utility	and	its	contribution	to	
theory;	and	
4)	A	cyclic	or	spiral	planning-action-observation-reflection	process,	involving	
multiple	stakeholders	and	disciplines	(MIT-Co-Lab,	2012	p.3).	
Viewed	as	having	compatible	goals	with	the	purposes	and	aims	for	knowledge	
production	with	practitioners	included	in	this	research,	the	model	was	later	
adapted	for	theory	building	with	these	purposes	in	mind	(see	Appendix	1).	
	However,	the	conceptualisation	of	phronesis	began	to	emerge	during	latter	stages	
of	data	analysis	and	following	the	first	group	theory-building	sessions	led	to	a	
decision	to	truncate	the	original	research	design.		This	shift	will	be	more	fully	
explored	in	this	chapter	at	section	5.4	detailing	phase	two	of	the	research	process.	
In	brief,	throughout	data	analysis	and	during	theory-building	groups	I	was	struck	by	
the	way	practitioners	thought	about	their	peacebuilding	choices,	how	they	used	
their	judgment	to	know	what	to	do,	and	in	particular	what	it	revealed	both	about	
their	judgment	(sources	of	knowing)	and	their	context.	Given	that	it	had	emerged	as	
one	of	the	most	salient	themes	from	the	data,	it	began	to	shed	light	on	why	context	
might	be	important.	While	I	had	not	set	out	to	look	for	phronesis,	its	evidence	in	the	
data	became	a	lens	that	created	an	unexpected	layer	of	insight	and	explanation.	At	
this	stage,	after	consultation	with	the	research	team,	a	decision	was	made	to	
discontinue	the	theory-building	as	it	had	been	originally	outlined	in	the	research	
design	and	instead	focus	on	what	seemed	to	be	emerging	-	phronesis	as	an	
epistemology	of	practice.	This	chapter	therefore,	outlines	the	roadmap	of	this	
research	project	describing	each	stage	of	the	research,	what	choices	and	decisions	
were	made	at	different	points	as	they	were	informed	by	and	informing	of,	each	
subsequent	stage.		
5.1	Research	timeline	
The	research	investigation	included	six	stages	of	activity	that	will	each	be	
summarised	and	can	be	viewed	as	a	table	in	the	Appendix	(see	Appendix	Number	
2).	Research	included	the	following	stages:	design	stage;	phase	1	fieldwork	which	
included	conducting	40	interviews;	transcribing	and	reviewing	all	interviews;	coding	
and	analysis;	phase	2	fieldwork	involving	theory-building	with	practitioners;	and	
thesis	write-up.	The	research	design	stage	covered	roughly	one	year	and	included	
the	production	of	three	separate	literature	reviews,	the	designing	of	the	research	
question,	and	ethical	approval	sought	and	obtained.	Shortly	thereafter,	phase	1	of	
fieldwork	commenced	which	involved	recruiting	and	interviewing	40	practitioners	
and	lasted	just	over	seven	months.	After	all	interviews	had	been	completed,	each	
was	transcribed,	reviewed	and	verified	by	interviewees	over	the	span	of	sixteen	
months.	Next,	coding	and	analysis	of	all	transcribed	interviews	was	accomplished	
over	six	months	and	led	to	phase	2	fieldwork,	theory-building	with	practitioners.	
This	stage	lasted	two	months	-	truncated	to	proceed	to	the	final	stage	of	the	
research,	the	writing	of	the	thesis.		
5.2	Design	stage	
The	design	stage	of	the	research	spanned	the	time	frame	of	a	year	and	as	noted	
included	the	production	of	three	separate	literature	reviews,	the	development	of	
the	research	question,	consideration	of	methodological	choices	and	ethical	
approval	sought	and	gained.	
5.2.1	Literature	Review		
Several	desk-based	literature	reviews	were	undertaken	in	order	to	inform	the	
development	of	the	research	question,	to	make	appropriate	methodological	
choices,	and	contextualise	the	research	within	extant	literature.	Three	themes	in	
particular	were	explored:	peacebuilding	and	conflict	transformation	theory	and	
practice;	grassroots-level	and	civil-society	based	peacebuilding	practice	literature	
both	locally	and	internationally;	and	literature	concerned	with	knowledge	
production.	The	literature	on	peacebuilding	and	conflict	transformation	theory	and	
practice	was	used	to	trace	the	development	of	the	field,	define	relevant	concepts	
employed	in	the	research	question;	for	example,	conflict	transformation	(Lederach,	
1995)	sustainable	and	integrated	peacebuilding	(Lederach,	1997);	positive	and	
negative	peace	(Galtung,	1975)	and	stages	of	conflict	(Curle,	1971).	The	same	
review	covered	recent	scholarly	debate	concerned	with	bottom-up,	grassroots-level	
and	civil-society-based	intervention	both	locally	and	globally.	A	second	literature	
review	covered	the	period	of	1965-2015	in	order	to	provide	a	historical	context	to	
better	situate	peacebuilding	practice	and	development	in	Northern	Ireland.	The	
third	literature	review	considered	the	acquisition	of	professional	knowledge,	
reflective	practice,	and	knowledge	for	social	change,	as	well	its	intersections	with	
philosophical	and	epistemological	roots	from	diverse	sources	from	the	fields	of	
education,	urban	planning	and	ancient	philosophy.		Once	a	research	question	was	
constructed,	literature	reviewed	focused	on	qualitative	research	methodologies	to	
determine	which	might	be	most	appropriate.		A	brief	summary	of	these	main	
methodological	influences	will	be	given	to	highlight	the	contribution	of	each	
towards	main	choices	within	the	overall	research	design.			
5.2.1	Building	the	research	question:	methodological	choices		
Galtung,	one	of	the	earliest	theorists	to	influence	peace	research,	was	conscious	in	
his	early	writing	on	peace	research	that	research	even	in	the	name	of	peace	had	the	
potential	to	become	exploitative	and	inadvertently	reinforce	structural	violence	
(Galtung,	1975).	From	the	outset,	this	research	sought	to	mitigate	that	possibility.	
Furthermore,	given	that	at	its	heart	the	research	question	took	the	perspective	that	
practitioners	had	been	under-utilised	and	under-valued	as	knowledge	creators,	this	
point	was	particularly	salient.	For	this	reason,	my	conscious	approach	in	conducting	
the	research	was,	as	feminist	researchers	Stanley	and	Wise	(1983)	advise,	to	avoid	
making	research	choices	that	might	further	exacerbate	knowledge	subordination.	
This	is	identified	as	approaches	that	position	the	researcher	in	a	knowledge	
hierarchy	with-	or	rather	over-	those	they	research	(Stanley	and	Wise,	1983	p.7).	
Given	that	theory	building	with	practitioners	had	been	one	of	the	intended	
outcomes	of	the	research	process,	at	every	step	of	the	way	I	was	eager	to	build	
opportunities	to	demonstrate	commitment	to	the	view	that	practitioner-based	
knowledge	was	of	value.		While	I	did	not	elicit	the	research	question	from	my	
participants	or	seek	to	solve	a	problem	jointly	identified,	the	aspirations	of	action	
research	to	impact	real	world	concerns	was	also	germane.		Texts	outlining	the	need	
to	bring	research	and	practice	closer	together,	such	as	those	promoted	in	action	
research	through	participatory	approaches	informed	my	background	reading	
(Heron,	1996;	Lundy	and	McGovern,	2006;	Fetherston	and	Kelly	2007;	Swantz,	
Reason	and	Bradbury,	2008).		
Finally,	research	methodology	was	influenced	by	ideas	promoted	by	Bent	Flyvbjerg,	
who,	alongside	fellow	social	science	scholars	(Schram	and	Caterino,	2006;	Flyvbjerg	
et	al,	2012)	has	utilised	the	concept	of	phronesis,	albeit	for	a	different	purpose	and	
scale.	Particularly	relevant	to	scrutinise	my	own	aspiration	to	build	theory	within	
the	research,	Flyvbjergs	argument	made	at	the	macro-level	takes	aim	at	social	
science	and	critiques	its	aspiration	for	generalisable	and	cumulative	theory	
(Flyvbjerg,	2001).	
In	his	persuasive	text,	Making	Social	Science	Matter	Flybvjerg	makes	the	case	that	
social	science	is	essentially	competing	in	a	battle	which	he	refers	to	as		the	science	
wars,	it	will	never	win	(Flyvbjerg,	2001	p.1).		His	argument	also	draws	from	
Aristotles	discussion	of	the	virtues	of	knowledge,	arguing	that	social	sciences	is	
currently	modelled	after	the	natural	sciences	which	he	compares	to	Aristotles	
understanding	of	episteme,	capable	of	producing	generalisable	universal	theory	
that	is	cumulative	and	predictive.	However,	as	he	views	it,	social	science	can	never	
hope	to	be	cumulative	or	universally	predictive	because	it	deals	with	human	
subjectivity,	context	and	complexity.	As	he	puts	it:	
The	study	of	social	phenomena	is	not,	never	has	been,	and	probably	never	
can	be,	scientific	in	the	conventional	meaning	of	the	word	science;	that	is,	
in	its	epistemic	meaning.	We	will	also	see	that	it	is	therefore	not	meaningful	
to	speak	of	theory	in	the	study	of	social	phenomena,	at	least	not	in	the	
sense	that	theory	is	used	in	natural	science	(Flyvbjerg,	2001	p.25).	
He	instead	suggests	that	the	concept	of	phronesis	is	a	better	fit	for	social	science	as	
it	offers	a	match	for	the	type	of	knowledge	social	science	can	produce.	Social	
science	should,	therefore,	defer	from	aspiring	toward	episteme	and	turn	instead	
toward	phronesis,	knowledge	for	practical	action	for	the	wellbeing	of	human	affairs.	
For	Flyvbjerg,	aspiring	towards	a	phronetic	social	science	also	necessitates	a	need	to	
balance	what	he	describes	as	value-rationality	with	instrumental	rationality.	In	this	
way,	social	science	can	better	play	to	its	strengths	as	it	is	better	equipped	at	
producing	knowledge	which	answers	value-rational	questions	such	as,	Where	are	
we	going?	Is	it	desirable?	What	should	be	done?	(Flyvbjerg,	2001	p.60).	
Conceptually,	these	key	questions	tied	into	my	aspiration	that	the	research	might	
generate	usable	knowledge	built	from	practical	experience,	but	also	challenged	it	
further	by	asking	whether	unifying	theory	was	a	laudable	aspiration	for	peace	
research.		I	considered	that	reflections	on	this	question	might	be	uncovered	by	the	
research.	At	the	initial	design	stage	I	anticipated	that	theory	generated	would	likely	
not	be	considered	grand	theory	but	rather	more	similar	to	what	Lederach	
describes	as	middle-range	theory	such	as	the	development	of	a	conceptual	
framework	(Lederach,	1997),	or	possibly	a	locally-based	theory	of	peacebuilding.		
Finally,	as	mentioned	in	the	introduction	of	this	thesis,	from	the	outset	I	recognised	
my	own	subjectivity	within	the	research	question.	In	this	regard	this	research	design	
adopted	the	constructivist	perspective	that	feminist	researchers	and	other	social	
scientists	have	argued,	namely	that	the	quest	for	complete	objectivity	and	that	
researchers	do	not	bring	their	own	perspectives	and	subjective	lenses	into	their	
research	is	a	misnomer	(Gilligan,	1982,	Stanley	and	Wise,	1983;	Charmaz	2006;	
Braun	and	Clarke,	2013).	In	fact,	such	authors	suggest	subjectivity	can	be	
considered	a	source	of	knowledge	from	which	to	draw,	but	in	doing	so,	necessitates	
conscious	reflexivity.		
Practically	speaking,	the	outcome	of	such	influences	was	to	build	into	the	research	
design	opportunities	to	demonstrate	at	all	stages	a	participatory	ethos,	open	and	
transparent	communication,	and	an	inclusive	sharing	of	information.	I	aimed	to	be	
diligent	in	my	communication	and	to	demonstrate	trustworthiness	in	my	actions.	
This	intention	was	built	into	the	research	design	and	evidenced,	for	example,	by	not	
only	offering	interviewees	anonymity	but	to	give	each	a	copy	of	their	own	transcript	
to	review	and	sign	off	its	accuracy.	There	were	practical	implications	involved	in	
taking	this	approach,	some	of	which	were	challenging.	For	example,	I	had	to	send	
multiple	reminder	emails	to	interviewees	to	ask	that	transcripts	be	approved.	Most	
practitioners	were	responsive	to	my	requests;	however,	there	were	a	handful	that	
never	responded.	For	these	interviewees	I	included	a	paragraph	that	stated	if	I	did	
not	hear	from	them	I	would	consider	that	they	approved	of	the	transcript.	However,	
in	order	to	err	on	the	side	of	caution,	I	have	chosen	to	minimise	the	use	of	quotes	
by	any	of	the	interviewees	from	whom	I	did	not	receive	transcript	approval	and	
confirmation.		While	this	limited	some	of	my	choices	of	evidence,	it	had	a	minimal	
impact	as	the	majority	of	interviewees	did	approve	their	transcripts.	Thus,	
advantages	of	taking	such	a	participatory	approach	outweighed	the	disadvantages	
proving	particularly	important	when	interviews	revealed	that	previous	experiences	
of	collaboration	with	academics	had	not	always	been	successful.	
5.2.2	Research	design	
As	the	research	question	became	solidified,	this	clarity	generated	a	next	series	of	
design	decisions.	For	example,	I	decided	that	because	the	nature	of	my	question	
was	quite	broadly	focused	on	what	had	been	learned	about	change	it	was	more	
suitable	for	qualitative	and	inductive	approaches.		Sampling	decisions	were	made	in	
order	to	choose	criteria	for	interviewee	selection	among	practitioners	and	tools	
developed	to	ensure	a	broad	and	representative	sample	from	a	wide-range	of	
peacebuilding	practices.	Interviews	were	selected	as	the	best	method	for	capturing	
the	data	with	considerations	towards	eliciting	and	encouraging	open-ended	
discussions	on	learning	from	practice.	Ethical	considerations	were	addressed	during	
the	design	stage	in	order	to	identify,	prevent	and	minimise	potential	risks	
associated	with	the	research.	Each	of	these	points	will	be	discussed	more	fully	
below.	
5.2.2.1	Qualitative	and	inductive	research	approaches	
As	a	result	of	many	of	the	epistemological	and	theoretical	influences,	choices	were	
made	early	on	that	taking	a	qualitative	and	inductive	approach	would	best	serve	to	
answer	the	research	question.		As	Braun	and	Clarke	(2013)	write,	qualitative	
research	differs	from	quantitative	approaches	because	it	is	centrally	interested	in	
capturing	meaning	not	numbers:	
At	its	core,	qualitative	research	is	about	capturing	some	aspect	of	the	
social	or	psychological	world.	It	records	the	messiness	of	real	life,	puts	an	
organising	framework	around	it	and	interprets	it	in	some	way	(Braun	and	
Clarke,	2013	p.20).	
Having	determined	that	practitioners	voices	had	not	been	adequately	captured	by	
the	academic	literature	in	any	consolidated	manner,	the	research	question	posited	
that	stories	of	practice	contained	potential	insights	for	knowledge	creation	from	
lived	experience.	However,	as	has	been	suggested,	data	gathered	would	not	likely	
produce	a	single	answer	but	would	contain	more	than	one	possible	way	to	make	
meaning	in	the	data	generated	and	therefore,	well	suited	within	the	qualitative	
paradigm	(ibid).	In	order	to	gain	the	widest	sets	of	insights	into	practice,	the	
research	necessitated	representation	that	spanned	a	variety	of	types	of	
peacebuilding	activity.	For	this	reason,	an	inductive	approach	was	selected	to	try	to	
investigate	possible	theoretical	underpinnings	in	change	processes.	It	was	hoped	
that	themes	generated	through	taking	such	an	inductive	approach	would	serve	as	
building	blocks	for	theory	building	with	practitioners.		
While	not	strictly	following	methods	outlined	for	inductive	grounded	research,	
theorists	such	as	Charmaz	(2006)	who	describes	her	approach	as	using	
constructivist	grounded	theory	were	also	drawn	upon.	Charmaz	writes:	
I	chose	the	term	constructivist	to	acknowledge	subjectivity	and	the	
researchers	involvement	in	the	construction	of	data.My	position	aligns	
well	with	social	constructivists[who]	stress	social	contexts,	interaction,	
sharing	viewpoints,	and	interpretative	understandings.	These	constructivists	
view	knowing	and	learning	as	embedded	in	social	life	(Charmaz,	2006	p.	14).	
Grounded	approaches	were	also	useful	for	distilling	the	related	sets	of	concepts	that	
were	embedded	in	practitioners	experiences	of	peacebuilding.	Distillation	of	key	
underpinning	concepts	would,	I	imagined,	serve	to	form	a	cluster	of	ideas	to	shape	
the	skeleton	of	the	theory-building	process.	Charmazs	constructivist	approach	
informed	my	understanding	that	even	this	distillation	process	which	germinated	
from	coded	themes	would	be	determined	by	my	own	lens.	Thus,	reflexivity	was	built	
into	the	research	design	by	memo	writing	after	interviews,	during	transcribing	and	
at	subsequent	stages	of	analysis.	Furthermore,	memo	writing	became	an	important	
first	step	in	tracking	my	own	analytical	thinking	and	formulation	of	ideas	which	
would,	at	later	stages,	impact	coding	decisions.	In	one	particular	example,	early	
memo	writing	led	to	questions	and	insights	that	I	pursued	in	an	email	exchange	with	
one	interviewee,	thus	generating	a	deeper	level	of	understanding	and	in	this	
particular	case,	evidencing	their	phronetic	epistemology	of	practice	(see	section	7.1).	
5.2.2.2	Purposive	snowball	sampling	and	research	tools		
In	order	to	begin	to	answer	the	research	question,	I	chose	a	purposive	approach	by	
establishing	the	goal	of	interviewing	40	practitioners	who	had	primarily	worked	
within	grassroots	and	civil	society	peacebuilding	between	the	years	of	1965-2015,	
and	who	might	be	considered	reflective	practitioners.		
I	defined	peacebuilding	using	Lederachs	and	Galtungs	conceptualisations	to	
include	those	working	to	address	both	systemic	violence	and	direct	violence	and	
inclusive	of	multiple	types	of	approaches	to	building	peace.	Lederach	expansively	
defines	his	understanding	of	peacebuilding	as:	
A	comprehensive	concept	that	encompasses,	generates,	and	sustains	the	
full	array	of	processes,	approaches,	and	stages	need	to	transform	conflict	
toward	more	sustainable,	peaceful	relationships.	The	term	thus	involves	a	
wide	range	of	activities	and	function	that	both	precede	and	follow	formal	
peace	accordsa	comprehensive	approach	to	the	transformation	of	conflict	
that	addresses	structural	issues,	social	dynamics	of	relationship	building,	and	
the	development	of	a	supportive	infrastructure	for	peace	(Lederach,	1997	
pp.	20-21).	
Practitioner	was	a	term	that	I	loosely	defined	to	represent	anyone	who	was	
engaged	in	purposeful	practical	activities	aimed	at	peacebuilding	using	Lederachs	
definition.	The	term	practitioner,	therefore,	was	not	exclusive	to	those	engaging	in	
peacebuilding	from	a	professional	capacity,	and	included	those	whose	involvement	
was	voluntary.	Within	the	list	of	interviewees,	while	some	might	have	linked	their	
peacebuilding	directly	to	its	intersection	with	their	chosen	profession,	for	others	it	
was	linked	more	indirectly.	
I	defined	reflective	practitioner	using	a	description	provided	by	Lederach,	Neufeldt	
and	Culbertson	(2007)	from	Reflective	Peacebuilding.	These	authors	identified	a	
reflective	practitioner	as:	a	person	who	includes	time	to	dig	into	and	elaborate	the	
too-often	implicit	theories	of	change	that	guide	his	or	her	daily	activity	and	
projects	(Lederach	et	al,	2007	p.3).		For	my	purposes,	this	was	stream-lined	as	a	
practitioner	who	demonstrated	critical	thinking	about	their	work,	questioning	their	
own	assumptions	about	what	works	and	why.			
Snowball	sampling	using	maps	of	local	peacebuilding	
In	order	to	locate	potential	interviewees,	snowball	sampling	was	also	selected	as	an	
approach	that	dovetailed	well	with	using	this	sampling	criterion.	While	the	doctoral	
research	supervisors	Professor	Duncan	Morrow,	Professor	Brandon	Hamber	and	
Granne	Kelly	were	well	known	to	local	peacebuilding	practitioners,	it	was	
determined	that	snowball	sampling	maximised	the	ability	to	gain	trust	with	
potential	interviewees.		Snowball	sampling	has	been	argued	to	be	particularly	
effective	in	conflict	contexts	to	gain	entry	with	interviewees	who	may	be	naturally	
more	distrustful	of	those	who	are	unknown	to	them	(Cohen	and	Arieli,	2011).		
These	authors	writing	about	this	method	of	data	collection	state:	
A	central	factor	in	gaining	access	to	and	enlisting	the	cooperation	of	
subjects	is	trustThe	knowledge	that	the	researcher	was	referred	by	a	
trusted	person	increases	the	potential	for	trust	and	cooperation	in	providing	
data	(Cohen	and	Arieli	p.	428).	
The	disadvantages	of	snowball	sampling	mirror	its	strengths	as	it	may	lack	sampling	
representation.		However,	it	was	decided	that	the	development	of	field	mapping	
tools	could	counteract	this	potential	deficiency.	Snowball	sampling	was	also	useful	
to	gain	recommendations	about	who	was	considered	reflective.	This	was	important	
given	the	variety	of	sectors	of	practice	involved	and	it	complemented	the	
knowledge	of	the	field	held	by	members	of	the	research	team.	
As	mentioned,	in	order	to	maximise	representation	that	reflected	this	expansive	
definition	of	peacebuilding,	and	to	simultaneously	ensure	practitioner	
representation	in	regards	to	geography,	gender,	age,	ethno-communal/	religious	
background,	as	well	as	length	of	time	in	practice,	I	developed	and	tested	three	
mapping	tools	to	both	guide	and	to	use	within	data	gathering.		The	first	map	in	
some	respects	corresponds	to	the	broadest	categories	of	practice	identified	in	
Chapter	4,	and	was	intended	initially	to	conceptualise	and	gain	representation	from	
the	different	sectors	(Appendix	3),	the	second	map	grafted	the	practice	sectors	
identified	in	the	first	map	onto	Lederachs	diagram	Actors	and	Approaches	to	
Peacebuilding	(Lederach,	1997	p.39)	within	levels	of	peacebuilding	engagement:	
grassroots,	mid-range	and	political	(Appendix	4).
Finally,	the	third	map	was	
developed	to	add	nuance	to	account	for	differing	levels	of	conflict	impact	among	
civil	society,	for	which	I	used	the	term	saturation	(Appendix	5).	This	was,	in	part,	to	
investigate	whether	change	processes	and	levels	of	saturation	had	any	
corresponding	relationship.	
The	sector-based	maps	(maps	1	&	2)	included	thirteen	sectors	of	peacebuilding	
practice	that	carried	areas	of	overlap	but	were	largely	indicative	of	the	range	of	
issues,	the	peacebuilding	constituencies	involved,	and	the	variety	of	extant	local	
peacebuilding	approaches	germane	to	Northern	Ireland	(see	Table	2	below).	After	
initially	trying	all	three,	I	eliminated	the	first	as	redundant	and	used	only	map	2	
(based	on	Lederachs	diagram)	and	map	3	(conflict	saturation)	with	the	majority	of	
interviewees.	
Table	2:	Sectors	involved	in	peacebuilding	activity	in	Northern	Ireland	
Sectors	 Types	of	Peacebuilding	
Education	and	
Research	
Practitioners	working	both	with	formal	primary	and	post-primary	schools	(i.e.	controlled,	
maintained	and	integrated),	non-formal	education	and	youth	works,	as	well	as	research	and	
teaching	within	universities.	This	category	also	included	those	working	within	prison	education.	
Economics	 Practitioners	working	with	the	Trade	Unions	or	the	business	communities	to	promote	
peacebuilding	from	an	economic	basis.	Trade	Unions	involvement	also	includes	advocacy	and	
mobilising	demonstrations	against	violence	or	sectarianism	committed	against	members	of	the	
workforce.	
Justice	and	
Equality	
Practitioners	working	to	promote	human	rights,	security	reforms,	and	within	restorative	justice.		
Community	
Relations/Social	
Cohesion	
Practitioners	working	within	mediation,	reconciliation	and	community	and/or	good	relations,	
primarily	working	to	promote	attitudinal	changes,	increased	contact	and	skills	to	manage	and	
build	improved	relationships.	
Community	
Development	
Practitioners	working	within	intra-communal	and/or	inter-communal	geographical	settings	to	
address	local	capacity,	infrastructure	and	development	needs	including	environmental	and	
community	regeneration.	
Contested	and	
Shared	
Spaces/Interfaces		
Practitioners	working	to	address	geographically	based	issues	or	manage	disputes	concerned	
with	contested	space	such	as	interfaces,	peace-walls,	parading	and	flag	flying	disputes	and/or	
how	to	build	increased	shared	public	space.	
Dealing	with	the	
Practitioners	who	were	primarily	focused	on	promoting	dialogue	or	engagement	to	address	
unresolved	legacy	issues,	or	engaged	in	archival,	commemoration	or	storytelling	activities.		
Culture:	Media,	
Arts	and	Sports		
Practitioners	who	use	a	variety	of	arts	(drama,	visual,	music,	film)	language,	or	sport-based	
approaches	to	address	or	promote	peacebuilding.	
Gender	 Practitioners	focused	on	working	to	highlight	the	role	of	gender	in	conflict,	promote	gender	
inclusion	and	equality.	Often	also	included	are	activities	to	womens	personal	development,	
increase	agency	and	capacity	and	to	build	greater	social	cohesion	across	divided	communities.	
Former	
Combatants	
Practitioners	working	with-	and	often	from-	backgrounds	as	former	combatants	and	involved	in	
a	number	of	sectors	i.e.	restorative	justice,	community	development	and	regeneration,	dialogue	
groups	and	interface	management.	For	the	purpose	of	this	research	with	its	focus	on	civil	
society,	this	category	only	included	non-state	armed	actors.	
Funders	 Practitioner	funders	have	helped	co-design	peacebuilding	development	or	take	an	active	
oversight	role	in	building	capacity	within	local	communities	with	the	aim	of	longer-term	
sustainability.	
Faith-based		 Practitioners	from	a	faith-based	imperative	(Catholic,	Protestant	Ecumenist,	Para-church	group)	
who	become	involved	in	peacebuilding	activities,	either	in	an	official	or	unofficial	capacity.	
Victims	 Practitioners	whose	work	primarily	promotes	support	and	advocacy	to	address	needs	of	victims	
harmed	and	suffering	as	a	result	of	the	legacy	of	direct	violence	and/or/both	the	systemic	state	
violence	as	a	result	of	the	conflict.	
5.2.2.3	Methods	of	data	collection:	semi-structured	interviews	
In	order	to	elicit	substantial	and	rich	data	from	practitioners	about	their	practice,	
semi-structured	interviews	were	chosen	as	the	most	appropriate	method	for	
gathering	data.		A	semi-structured	approach	was	considered	most	suitable	in	order	
to	allow	for	the	greatest	amount	of	flexibility	within	the	interview	for	pulling	out	
theoretical	salience.		The	interview	was	divided	into	roughly	seven	parts	and	
included:	1)	how	interviewees	had	entered	peacebuilding;	2)	main	influences	on	
approaches	taken	or	methodologies;	3)	stories	of	practice	including	both	challenges	
and	successes;	4)	observations	of	change	processes	and	change	catalysts;	5)	views	
on	reflective	practice;	6)	practice	knowledge	value,	creation	and	dissemination;	7)	
interacting	with	analytical	maps	on	sectors	of	practice	(for	interview	questions	see	
Appendix	6).			While	all	sections	were	viewed	as	important,	the	core	thrust	of	the	
interview	was	to	capture	the	stories	of	practice	and	what	interviewees	had	learned	
about	social	change	processes.		
In	order	to	best	capture	this	information,	a	decision	was	made	in	the	research	
design	stage	to	ask	practitioners	to	tell	stories	of	practice	and	to	share	examples	of	
interventions	or	initiatives	in	which	they	had	been	involved	that	they	viewed	as	
successful	or	had	gone	as	they	hoped,	as	well	as	stories	of	practice	failures	or	
cases	that	had	not	met	their	expectations.		These	practice	stories	were	given	
priority	in	the	interviews	because	it	was	believed	they	could	contain	ideas	
important	for	generating	theoretical	insights	from	practice.	Furthermore,	design	
decisions	to	prioritise	story	telling	were	influenced	in	part	by	literature	which	
profiled	learning	from	practice.	Particularly	insightful	was	a	case	study	published	by	
Catholic	Relief	Services	which	outlined	a	story-telling	process	undertaken	with	
fieldworkers	in	East	Timor	(Catholic	Relief	Services,	2004).		In	the	case-study,	
knowledge	gained	from	practice	was	explored	through	workshops	with	fieldworkers	
who	used	their	own	written	stories	as	a	tool	of	analysis	to	synthesise	key	learning	
insights	which	latterly	guided	field	planning	in	the	region	(Lederach	et	al,	2007	p.69;	
Catholic	Relief	Services,	2004).	When	asked	why	this	approach	was	taken,	Philip	
Visser	the	architect	of	the	process	reflects:		
I	asked	myself	where	does	the	knowledge	reside?	Eventually	the	
idea	came	that	those	with	experience,	the	fieldworkers	who	stand	
in	the	interface	between	aid	and	people,	should	tell	a	story	to	
capture	their	knowledge	(Lederach	et	al.,	2007	p.69).		
Further	insights	on	the	potential	for	using	storytelling	were	gained	from	literature	
that	focused	on	a	monitoring	and	evaluation	approach	described	as	The	Most	
Significant	Change	technique	(Davies	and	Dart,	2005).	Created	for	assessing	impact	
associated	with	international	development	programmes,	the	approach	uses	
storytelling	to	assess	what	stakeholders	viewed	as	most	important	changes	from	a	
given	intervention.	Davies	and	Dart	describe	this	technique	as	a	better	tool	to	use	in	
complex	contexts	to	qualitatively	understand	what	has	been	learned	by	change	
initiatives	(Davies	and	Dart,	2005	pp.12-13).	They	also	indicate	that	this	approach	
lends	itself	well	to	analysis	because	storytellers	have	to	explain	why	they	believe	
certain	changes	were	more	important	than	others,	and	is	useful	in	portraying	a	rich	
picture	of	what	is	happening	(ibid:	p.12).	Given	that	the	research	question	was	
hoping	to	discern	what	practitioners	had	learned	about	influencing	social	change	
processes	and	to	interrogate	theoretical	underpinnings,	telling	stories	of	what	had	
or	had	not	worked	I	believed	would	allow	for	deeper	probe	of	the	nuanced	details	
within	their	examples.		
In	order	to	elucidate	aspects	of	change	that	might	not	be	easily	verbalised,	I	chose	to	
include	a	question	that	asked	interviewees	to	think	about	changes	they	had	
observed	or	helped	to	bring	about-	and	to	find	a	metaphor	that	might	best	describe	
their	view	of	that	change.		Metaphors	are	described	as	useful	tools	for	providing	an	
insight	into	worldviews,	and	creating	new	understandings	as	they	juxtapose,	
combine,	and	transfer	meaning	from	two	initially	unrelated	ideas	(Barrett	and	
Cooperrider,	1990;	Lederach,	1995).	Metaphor	can	be	useful	when	language	itself	
cannot	adequately	capture	experience.	As	Barrett	and	Cooperrider	describe	it:	
Good	metaphors	provoke	new	thought,	excite	us	with	novel	perspectives,	vibrate	
with	multi-vocal	meaning,	and	enable	people	to	see	the	world	with	fresh	
perceptions	not	possible	in	any	other	way	(Barrett	and	Cooperrider,	1990	pp.	222-
223).	This	question	generated	useful	insights	beyond	my	initial	planning,	and	when	
combined	with	stories	of	practice,	yielded	a	substantial	level	of	nuance,	detail	and	
insight	that	proved	highly	relevant	during	the	stages	of	data	analysis.	
5.2.2.4	Ethical	considerations		
An	application	was	made	for	ethical	approval	to	conduct	the	research;	it	outlined	
the	focus,	aims	and	its	intended	outcomes	and	included	all	ethical	considerations.	
Submitted	initially	in	July	2014,	it	was	granted	approval	by	Ulster	University	in	
October	2014.	Below	all	ethical	considerations	are	discussed.	
Given	that	the	focus	of	fieldwork	was	to	interview	practitioners	the	research	was	
deemed	low-risk.	However,	given	that	the	research	involved	human	subjects,	I	
followed	all	standard	ethical	procedures	such	as	using	only	participants	who	have	
signed	informed	consent	documents	(Appendix	7),	provided	subject	information	
outlining	the	research	(Appendix	8),	and	only	interviewed	those	over	the	age	of	
eighteen.	In	addition,	there	were	specific	ethical	issues	within	the	current	research	
design	that	I	felt	also	need	to	be	considered	carefully.	The	first	was	to	anticipate	
that	practitioners	interviewed	may	worry	that	candid	discussions	of	their	
professional	practice	may	include	self-criticism	contained	in	stories	of	failures	which	
may	negatively	impact	their	own	funding	streams.	Likewise,	working	from	a	small	
and	closely	connected	practice	environment,	this	might	have	a	more	detrimental	
impact.	Similarly,	because	I	was	known	and	knew	personally	and	professionally	
many	local	peacebuilding	practitioners	it	was	possible	that	I	might	know	those	who	
are	referred	as	potential	interviewees,	and	therefore,	navigating	potential	conflicts	
of	interest	with	transparency	was	important.		
In	order	to	facilitate	addressing	these	concerns,	all	research	participants	were	
assured	anonymity.	During	the	second	phase	of	the	research	which	involved	
working	with	theory	development	groups	(to	be	addressed	in	discussion	of	Phase	
2),	I	asked	for	the	Chatham	House	Rule	to	be	agreed	to	and	a	second	consent	form	
signed	(Appendix	9).	While	theory-building	meetings	were	recorded,	this	
information	was	only	used	for	the	purpose	of	tracking	accuracy	and	stages	of	theory	
development	process.		
A	second	associated	ethical	issue	stems	from	earlier	points	made	about	tensions	
within	knowledge	creation	processes	experienced	by	practitioners.	This	was	the	
perception	among	practitioners	that,	at	times,	academic	researchers	conduct	their	
research	without	due	consideration	taken	for	those	providing	the	data.	For	
example,	by	not	adequately	acknowledging	that	information	gained	was	made	
possible	by	the	practitioner,	or	feeding	back	to	those	involved	outcomes	of	the	
research.	It	was	therefore	important	that	this	research	did	not	add	to	this	
perception	of	disempowerment,	but	instead	hold	a	possibility	of	validating	
knowledge	gained	from	working	within	this	sector	about	what	has	been	learned	
about	the	task	of	peacebuilding.			
In	order	to	address	these	perceptions	and	to	engender	more	collaborative	and	
participatory	approaches,	at	all	stages	of	the	research	I	intentionally	chose	to	be	as	
transparent	as	possible	about	each	step	of	the	research	process	during	all	
interviews,	focus	groups,	emails	and	interactions.		I	emphasised	that	participants	
contributions	were	integral	to	the	research	aims	to	distil	knowledge	gained	from	
practice.		Furthermore,	I	reiterated	that	a	potential	outcome	of	the	research	was	to	
use	insights	to	inform	and	impact	social	policies	which	affected	their	practice.		As	
mentioned	previously,	a	practical	outworking	of	this	intentional	commitment	to	
transparency	was	to	have	all	transcripts	sent	back	to	the	interviewees	for	their	
approval,	and	to	give	them	an	opportunity	to	review	again	what	had	been	recorded.		
At	all	stages	of	the	research	I	emphasised	that	participants	involvement	in	the	
research	had	the	potential	to	strengthen	the	effectiveness	of	the	field	of	
peacebuilding	both	in	theory	and	in	practice	in	a	local	and	international	context.	
From	the	outset,	I	indicated	my	willingness	to	work	with	groups	or	individuals	
wishing	to	use	any	materials	generated	through	the	research	process,	and	to	find	
ways	to	collaborate	as	long	as	that	does	not	infringe	on	any	Intellectual	Property	
rights	criteria	or	parameters	which	I	had	already	agreed	to	as	a	doctoral	student	
with	Ulster	University.	Finally,	I	informed	them	of	my	intention	to	hold	a	feedback	
seminar	as	the	research	concluded	to	share	final	results,	and	plan	to	distribute	
copies	of	my	thesis	and/or	relevant	chapters,	to	any	practitioners	who	would	wish	
to	have	a	copy.			
5.3	Fieldwork	phase	1		
The	first	phase	of	fieldwork	is	discussed	below	and	covers	the	mechanics	of	data	
collection	including:	1)	the	initial	selecting	and	recruiting	of	interviewees	including	
efforts	made	to	ensure	representation	2)	reflections	on	the	interview	process	itself	
and	the	3)	transcribing,	coding	and	analysis	stages	of	fieldwork.	
5.3.1	Data	collection:	recruitment	of	interviewees	
Using	the	mapping	tools,	the	local	peacebuilding	expertise	of	the	doctoral	research	
supervisors	was	consulted	to	build	an	initial	representative	list	of	fifteen	
interviewees.		The	subsequent	twenty-five	interviewees	were	referrals	from	
practitioners	and	selected	based	on	efforts	to	achieve	the	greatest	degree	of	overall	
balance	with	the	aforementioned	diversity	of	actor	and	sectors	represented.		In	
some	cases,	given	that	the	focus	of	the	research	was	on	individual	practitioners	
rather	than	types	of	practice	or	organisations,	decisions	were	made	to	prioritise	
certain	individuals	and	their	experiences	over	gaining	the	ideal	balances.		
Furthermore,	the	practice	field	in	Northern	Ireland	has	fluidity	which	means	that	
there	were	practitioners	who	could	have	easily	fit	into	multiple	categories.	This	was	
especially	true	for	those	who	had	been	engaged	in	peacebuilding	for	the	longest	
amount	of	time;	for	example	25	of	the	40	interviews	(or	62%)	had	18+	years	
experience.	Overall,	one	of	the	most	important	aims	was	to	ensure	the	gender	and	
religious/political/ethnic	background	were	not	overly	weighted	in	one	direction.	On	
several	occasions,	recommendations	of	potential	practitioners	to	interview	were	
made	but	not	taken	up	if	that	sector	had	already	a	surplus	representation	in	either	a	
particular	gender	or	community	background.		The	following	two	tables	give	a	
breakdown	of	representation	by	gender	and	community	background	(Table	3)	and	
by	sectors	of	practice,	gender,	background,	region	and	years	in	practice	(Table	4).		
Table	3:	Gender	and	community	background	of	interviewees	
Table	4:	Representation	of	interviewees	
Sectors:		
(Total	
Interviewed)	
Gender	 Background	
(Protestant	
Catholic/	Other)	
Geography	 Years	in	Practice	
<10	years		(Power-sharing)	
10-17	years			(Post-GFA)	
18+	years							(Pre-GFA)	
Education	and	
Research:	
3	(F)			
3	(PUL)		
2	(CNR)	
1	(Other)		
5	Regional	
Derry/Londonderry	
3				(10-17)	
3					(18+)	
Economics:	
2	(M)	 1	(C/P)	
1	(CNR)	
Derry/Londonderry	
1	Regional	
2			(10-17)	
Justice	and	
Equality:	
1		(F)		
2	(M)	
1	(PUL)		
1	(CNR)	
1	(Other)	
2	Belfast	
1	Regional		
2	(18+)	
1	(10-17)	
Community	
Relations/	
Social	Cohesion:	
2	(F)	
1	(M)	
1	(CNR)	
2	(Other)	
2	Regional	
1	Belfast	
2	(18+)	
1	(10-17)	
Community	
Development:	
3	(F)	
1	(M)	
2	(CNR)	
2	(Other)	
2	Regional	
2	Belfast	
4	(18+)	
Female	 Male	
PUL	 CNR	 Other/Unknown	 Total	 PUL	 CNR	 Other/Unknown	 Total		
6	 6	 5	 17	 8	 12	 3	 23	
Culture:	Media,	
Arts	&	Sports:	
1	(F)	
3	(M)	
2	(PUL)	
2	(CNR)	
4	Regional	
2	(10-17)	
2	(18+)	
Contested	and	
Shared	Spaces/	
Interfaces:	
1	(F)	
1	(M)	
2	CNR	 2	Belfast	 1	(18+)	
1	(<	10)		
Dealing	with	the	
Past	(Archival	and	
Storytelling):	
2	(F)	 2	(PUL)	 1	
Derry/Londonderry	
2	Regional	
1	(10-17)	
1	(18+)	
Gender:	
1	(F)	 Unknown	 1	Belfast/Regional	 18+	
Former	
Combatants:	
3	(M)	 2	(PUL)	
1	(CNR)	
1	Belfast	
1	Lisburn	
1	Regional	
1	(18+)	
2	(10-17)	
Funders:	
2	(M)	
1	(F)	
	3	(CNR)	 1	Fermanagh	
2	Regional	
3	(18+)	
Faith-based:	
2	(F)	
2	(M)	
3	(PUL)	
1	(CNR)	
2	Regional	
2	Belfast	
3	(18+)	
1	(10-17)	
Victims:	
3	(M)	 2	(CNR)	
1	(PUL)	
2	Regional	
1	Belfast	
1	(<10)	
2	(+18)	
5.3.2	Interviews	with	practitioners	
After	being	recommended	by	either	the	research	team	or	an	interviewee,	all	
potential	interviewees	were	contacted	initially	through	email	or	through	direct	
telephone	calls.	The	purpose	of	the	initial	contact	was	to	introduce	myself,	explain	
the	purpose	of	the	research,	and	ascertain	potential	willingness	to	take	part,	
explaining	that	initially	the	first	phase	would	involve	being	interviewed.	
Recruitment	of	interviewees	was	not	overly	difficult,	particularly	once	I	was	able	to	
establish	that	they	had	been	referred	to	me	by	a	fellow	practitioner,	or	a	member	
of	the	research	team.	Several	of	the	practitioners	suggested	through	snowball	
sampling	were	known	to	me	through	my	own	previous	practice	experiences.	Given	
my	background	in	the	field	of	peacebuilding	and	the	small	size	of	this	field	in	
Northern	Ireland,	it	was	not	surprising	that	I	knew	several	of	my	interviewees.	On	
the	whole	I	considered	my	prior	knowledge	of	the	field	an	asset	to	the	research,	
however,	where	possible	I	only	pursued	my	own	contacts	when	another	
practitioner	had	also	suggested	their	name.		
Once	agreement	has	been	established	and	an	interview	time	and	place	agreed,	I	
followed	up	the	contact	by	sending	a	research	consent	form	and	a	subject	
information	sheet.	When	meeting	for	an	interview,	I	either	travelled	to	the	
interviewee	at	the	location	of	their	choice	or	a	mutually	agreed	upon	venue.		Each	
session	was	recorded	with	a	digital	recorder	after	permission	was	gained	and	
consent	forms	signed.	Each	interview	lasted	on	average	1.5	hours,	with	the	longest	
lasting	just	under	three	hours.	I	found	practitioners	eager	to	talk	about	their	
practice	experiences,	and	generous	in	their	time.	On	one	occasion	I	had	to	return	to	
the	interviewee	for	a	second	interview	as	I	realised	the	battery	had	died	on	the	
recorder.	The	practitioner	was	graciously	able	to	accommodate	my	error.	Many	
practitioners	reflected	that	it	was	fruitful	to	talk	through	experiences	of	practice,	
and	to	consider	what	they	had	learned	as	a	result.		
After	interviews,	I	took	notes	of	my	own	impressions	of	the	interview	that	helped	in	
memo	keeping.	Each	recorded	audio	file	was	downloaded	onto	my	own	personal	
laptop	and	latterly	stored	securely	on	University	computers.		
5.3.3	Transcribing	the	interviews	
Transcribing	the	audio	files	was	conducted	manually	for	the	first	13	interviewees,	
double	checked	for	accuracy	and	sent	off	to	interviewees	to	be	verified.		The	
remaining	27	were	transcribed	professionally	located	through	the	University	and	
agreement	of	confidentiality	signed.	As	I	had	initially	planned	to	transcribe	all	
interviews	myself	I	contacted	all	27	interviewees	again	to	gain	permission	for	their	
interview	to	be	professionally	transcribed.	Those	interviews	that	were	
professionally	transcribed	once	received,	were	checked	again	for	accuracy	and	also	
sent	for	verification	to	the	interviewees.		All	transcripts	were	verified	by	
interviewees,	with	the	exception	of	four	interviewees,	three	who	never	responded	
to	their	received	transcript	and	one	who	passed	away	prior	to	receiving	it.	In	my	
correspondence	to	all	interviewees	I	indicated	that	if	I	received	no	response	I	would	
construe	they	were	satisfied	with	the	accuracy	of	the	transcript.	However,	I	have	
chosen	to	use	minimal	direct	quotes	from	any	of	the	transcripts	that	were	not	
signed	off	by	the	interviewee.	One	interviewee	verified	the	transcript	but	asked	that	
he	not	be	quoted	at	all	as	his	work	had	become	too	sensitive.	Others	too	asked	for	
minor	changes	or	retractions	on	information	that	practitioners	felt	had	become	too	
sensitive	to	be	shared.		Given	my	priority	to	work	collaboratively	and	transparently,	
I	worked	as	diligently	as	possible	to	respect	such	wishes.	
5.3.4.	Coding	and	analysing	the	data	
As	the	research	took	an	inductive	approach,	in	order	to	code	and	analyse	the	data	I	
used	a	combination	of	methods	influenced	by	grounded	theory	and	thematic	
analysis	to	elicit	and	examine	recurring	themes	and	patterns	that	emerged	from	the	
data.	While	coding	decisions	and	categories	were	conducted	manually,	I	used	NVivo	
software	as	a	tool	to	organise	the	coded	information	and	to	further	aid	the	data	
analysis	process.	Transcripts	were	coded	with	both	inductively	determined	
analytical	codes	(which	inferred	meaning	from	a	passage)	and	with	codes	containing	
topics	(i.e.	categories	of	questions).		At	the	initial	open	coding	stage,	each	line	of	
transcript	was	read	and	categorised	to	represent	an	idea	related	to	either	type	of	
code.	As	Charmaz	describes,	during	open	coding	or	what	she	describes	as	initial	
coding,	researchers:		
[R]emain	open	to	exploring	whatever	theoretical	possibilities	we	can	discern	
in	the	data.	This	initial	step	in	coding	moves	us	toward	later	decisions	about	
defining	our	core	conceptual	categories	(Charmaz,	2006	p.	116).	
Charmaz	states	that	open	coding	cannot	be	as	absent	of	pre-conceived	ideas	as	
traditional	grounded	theorists	once	suggested,	but	advises	to	try	to	remain	as	open	
as	possible	about	what	the	data	is	suggesting	(ibid,	p.117).	After	open	coding,	
further	refining	process	was	taken	to	distil	yet	again	how	the	initial	codes	could	
begin	to	be	aggregated	into	broader	set	of	ideas	and	categories.	As	the	research	
question	broadly	focused	on	knowledge	gained	about	change	processes	for	
peacebuilding	and	aspired	to	build	theory,	the	next	set	of	categories	reflected	
interlinked	concepts.		I	referred	to	this	stage	of	distillation	as	axial	coding	and	used	
it	to	discern	core	salient	concepts	identified	frequently	in	the	transcripts	that	had	
an	overarching	thematic	relationship	to	the	research.	The	use	of	NVivo	software	
enabled	me	to	verify	my	own	insights	as	to	which	of	my	codes	indicated	possible	
saliency	through	either	number	of	references,	or	the	numbers	of	interviewees	
coded	at	any	one	particular	code/node	for	example,	as	shown	below.	The	first	
column	represents	interviewees	and	the	second	the	number	of	references	made.						
Figure	3:	NVivo	Screenshot	Axial	Coding	Stage	Salient	Concepts	and	Themes	
As	mentioned	previously,	NVivo	software	was	used	to	verify	my	own	emerging	
insights	gained	through	the	stages	of	conducting	interviews,	transcribing,	reviewing,	
coding	and	memo	writing.	Salient	themes	that	might	be	contenders	for	theory	
building	with	practitioners	were	written	up	and	discussed	with	the	research	team	
regularly.		Several	themes	became	promising	and	discussed	with	the	research	team	
for	their	potential	for	carrying	theoretical	weight.		The	top	two	themes	evident	
within	my	own	manual	analysis	and	verified	using	NVivo	to	both	track	the	number	
of	interviewees	and	references	to	the	code	were:	1)	trust	coded	to	30/40	
interviewees	with	91	references,	2)	context-based	peacebuilding	coded	to	27/40	
interviewees	and	74	references	(to	view,	see	above	Figure	3).	While	either	might	
have	been	useful	for	theory	building,	the	initial	theme	that	had	been	most	heavily	
reflected	in	the	interviews	and	indicated	scope	for	peacebuilding	theory	building	
was	that	of	trust.	The	trust	theme	included	a	constellation	of	related	sub-themes	
such	as	transparency,	accountability,	integrity,	credibility	and	counter-themes	such	
as	distrust,	mistrust,	betrayal,	and	suspicion.		After	consultation	with	the	doctoral	
research	supervisors	in	August	2016,	it	was	determined	that	trust/distrust	was	the	
most	salient	topic	to	pursue	over	the	subsequent	months	with	practitioners	for	
theory	building.	This	decision	was	made	due	to	not	only	the	frequency	issues	of	
trust	were	mentioned	but	also	for	their	salience	as	reoccurring	themes	within	
stories	of	practice	concerning	factors	influencing	success	and	challenges.	
5.3.5	Preparation	for	phase	2:	matrix	building	and	case	study	creation	
At	this	stage,	another	level	of	analysis	was	undertaken	to	begin	to	conceptualise	the	
relationships	that	the	sub-themes	had	with	the	dominant	theme.		This	entailed	
going	back	to	the	original	data	and	the	transcripts	to	pull	together	all	coded	
material	at	those	related	subthemes	and	review	how	interviewees	spoke	about	and	
conceived	the	inter-relationships	of	the	ideas.			In	order	to	aid	this	process	a	matrix	
was	developed	which	sought	to	identify	quotes	revealing	or	indicating	trust/distrust	
dimensions	across	four	levels:	individual,	community,	institutions,	and	state	(see	
Appendix	10).		This	layer	of	analysis	was	useful	in	gaining	a	clearer	picture	of	implicit	
and	explicit	ways	trust	and	distrust	were	understood	and	being	talked	about,	as	well	
as	to	begin	to	visualise	its	importance	to	peacebuilding	in	the	eyes	of	those	
interviewed.	It	was	also	useful	to	gain	insight	into	the	systemic	nature	of	
trust/distrust	as	examples	were	given	which	spread	across	the	four	domains	from	
individual	up	to	state.	Insights	gained	from	the	matrix	became	important	in	my	
preparations	for	laying	the	groundwork	to	aid	theory	building	with	practitioners.		
In	addition,	several	documents	were	created	to	work	with	groups	and	to	serve	as	
discussion	tools	for	phase	2,	theory	building.		Two	case	studies	were	developed	to	
use	with	practitioners	in	theory-building	to	generate	thinking	and	discussion.	These	
two	case	studies	were	a	composite	of	the	types	of	stories	shared	during	the	
interviews	of	practice	challenge	and	success	but	constructed	with	the	key	
dimensions	of	trust/distrust	embedded	into	the	story.	The	purpose	of	creating	the	
case	studies	was	to	allow	practitioners	to	discuss	the	cases	and	to	discover	whether	
they	conceptualised	trust/distrust	concepts	in	ways	similar	congruent	with	my	own	
groupings	(for	case-studies	see	Appendix	11	and	12).	Finally,	using	ideas	generated	
by	the	trust	matrix	which	I	hoped	the	case	studies	would	elicit,	I	developed	a	visual	
aid	of	diagrams	and	definitions	of	the	key	concepts	as	a	handout	to	use	to	stimulate	
further	discussion	(Appendix	13).		
5.4	Fieldwork	phase	2:	theory-building	with	practitioners	
In	addition	to	developing	case	study	and	discussion	materials,	preparation	for	
theory	building	involved	recruitment	for	participation	from	the	original	group	of	40	
interviewees.	To	this	end,	all	interviewees	were	contacted	again	through	email	to	
ascertain	who	may	be	interested	in	taking	part.	I	outlined	that	involvement	would	
entail	meeting	together	on	at	least	once	or	possibly	twice	for	two-three	hours.		
There	was	a	strong	response	from	practitioners,	with	21/40	indicating	that,	
depending	on	the	time	frame	involved,	they	had	an	interest	in	participating	in	
theory	building.	All	interested	practitioners	were	contacted	again	via	Doodle,	a	
scheduling	application,	and	three	dates	were	chosen	which	allowed	everyone	who	
had	indicated	interest	a	possible	date	for	involvement.		By	this	stage	15	
practitioners	had	confirmed	participation.	Of	the	15	scheduled,	several	
subsequently	contacted	me	to	ask	to	rearrange	and	attend	one	of	the	other	three	
dates,	and	the	three	dates	were	reduced	to	two	with	five	participants	to	attend	the	
first	session	and	10	to	attend	the	second	date.		In	the	end,	due	to	cancellations,	
only	one	practitioner	attended	the	first	theory-building	group	while	nine	attended	
the	second	scheduled	day.	On	each	occasion,	meetings	lasted	roughly	2.5	hours.		
In	many	cases	several	of	the	participants	knew,	or	knew	of	one	another.	For	this	
reason,	prior	to	beginning	the	session	each	participant	signed	a	second	
confidentiality	agreement	and	agreed	to	use	the	Chatham	House	Rule.	I	also	
obtained	agreement	to	record	the	sessions	but	highlighted	that	they	would	be	used	
primarily	for	my	own	reference	of	the	sessions.		The	structure	of	the	meeting	was	to	
spend	the	greatest	amount	of	time	working	with	the	case	studies,	followed	up	by	
the	discussion	with	the	handouts	that	I	had	developed	on	emerging	themes.		The	
first	case-study	entitled	Ballykillrural	mimicked	several	of	the	challenges	
evidenced	by	the	data	from	interviews	and	the	second	case-study	Newtowncastle	
evidenced	more	of	the	dynamics	that	had	been	evident	in	composite	ways	in	
practice	stories	that	had	met	with	success	(again	see	Appendix	11	and	12).	
The	discussion	questions	asked	each	group	to	consider	change	barriers,	how	they	
had	or	had	not	been	overcome,	what	might	happen	next,	and	what	learning	the	
case	might	have	generated.	Finally,	if	positive	changes	had	occurred,	they	were	
asked	what	they	believed	might	have	been	most	important	in	encouraging	such	
changes.		As	mentioned	previously,	the	purpose	was	to	use	the	discussion	to	
determine	whether	patterns	identified	were	linked	conceptually	by	practitioners	in	
ways	similar	to	each	other	and	to	my	own	analysis.		Discussion	was	aided	by	the	
presence	of	a	white	board	and,	as	participants	reflected,	I	was	able	to	take	notes	of	
the	discussion.	I	later	photographed	each	white	board	to	track	what	themes	the	
discussion	generated	(for	one	example	see	Appendix	14).	
5.4.1	Challenges	and	practicalities	of	working	with	theory	building	groups	
Reflecting	on	how	initial	planning	for	this	stage	was	executed,	several	observations	
can	be	made.	My	wish	was	to	work	with	the	groups	in	a	democratic	approach	and	
adopt	what	John	Heron	describes	as	a	model	of	co-operative	inquiry.	He	writes	
about	this	approach:	
[E]veryone	gets	into	the	experience	and	action	that	is	being	explored;	
everyone	is	involved	in	making	sense	and	drawing	conclusions;	thus	
everyone	involved	can	take	initiative	and	exert	influence	on	the	processThe	
inquiry	group	members	work	together	through	cycles	of	action	and	
reflection,	developing	their	understanding	and	practice	by	engaging	in	what	
we	have	called	an	extended	epistemology	of	experiential,	presentational,	
propositional	and	practical	ways	of	knowing	(Heron	and	Reason,	2008	
p.366)	
Initially	I	imagined	that	my	own	practical	facilitation	skills	would	prepare	me	to	
engage	in	groupwork	using	the	initial	salient	themes	and	concepts	that	had	
emerged.	While	the	co-inquiry	model	was	theoretically	compatible	with	my	
research	aims,	practically	it	presented	difficulties.	One	such	difficulty	was	that	I	
recognised	there	was	a	need	to	introduce	the	salient	findings	but	do	so	in	a	way	
that	would	allow	the	group	to	interact	with	the	concepts	for	themselves.	However,	I	
also	knew	time	was	precious.	I	was	conscious	that	practitioners	were	participating	
voluntarily,	and	I	wanted	the	experience	not	to	be	wasteful	for	either	them	or	for	
the	purpose	of	the	research.		
The	decision	to	use	case	studies	to	generate	discussion	came	after	I	realised	an	
open	ended-conversation	may	have	the	above	drawbacks.	In	a	conversation	with	
another	academic,	however,	the	suggestion	was	made	to	write	a	fictional	case	
study	and	embed	the	concepts	within.		The	case	studies	could	then	be	a	
springboard	for	discussion.	This	became	a	more	useful	tool	than	I	had	initially	
anticipated.	It	created	a	live	case	with	which	to	engage	and	which	ultimately	
became	useful	to	demonstrate	the	thinking	and	judgment	practitioners	used	to	
make	decisions.	Likewise	it	also	highlighted	the	different	contexts	and	subsequent	
frames	of	interpretation	and	analysis	practitioners	applied	to	their	practice.			
The	aspiration	to	work	elicitively	and	democratically	was	also	impacted	by	group	
dynamics	in	theory-building	groups.	While	each	meeting	generated	fruitful	
discussion	they	also	presented	challenges.	There	was	a	contrast	between	the	two	
sessions	held,	in	one	meeting	while	four	were	anticipated,	only	one	participant	
attended.	It	therefore,	in	some	respect	took	the	form	of	an	interactive	interview.	
The	second	group	was	well	attended	with	nine	attendees,	which	was,	in	retrospect,	
too	large	a	group.	As	a	result	it	required	a	need	to	manage	those	who	were	more	
talkative	in	order	to	hear	from	everyone	equally.		
It	is	possible	that	all	of	these	challenges	would	have	been	worked	out	if	we	had	met	
again	as	was	originally	planned.	However,	as	the	next	section	describes,	theory-
building	sessions	were	truncated	at	this	stage.	
5.4.2	Shift	of	focus	towards	the	epistemology	of	phronesis	
Charmaz	writes	of	working	with	research	data	as	the	process	of	entering	an	
interactive	space,	and	that	going	deep	into	the	data	can	challenge	your	earlier	
preconceptions	and	hunches.	See	what	you	can	learn	(Charmaz,	2006	p.	116).	
Richards	offers	similar	advice	for	qualitative	researchers:		
[T]here	is	no	imperative	for	the	qualitative	researcher	that	the	design	or	
approach	should	be	constant	throughout	the	project[t]he	tools	of	the	
qualitative	trade	are	often	developed	with	such	feedback	loops	as	the	
project	develops.	Adjusting	the	research	approach	is	entirely	proper,	and	
some	adjustment	is	usually	required	(Richards,	2009	p.84).	
Such	advice	accurately	reflects	my	experience	of	this	research	process,	particularly	
as	it	moved	from	the	end	of	phase	1	into	the	start	of	phase	2.		As	mentioned	
previously,	during	phase	1	data	collection	coding	and	analysis	had	highlighted	two	
significant	themes	emerging	from	the	grounded	inductive	approach	that	broadly	
addressed	the	research	question	concerning	what	practitioners	had	learned	
through	practice	about	peacebuilding	social	change	processes.	This	was	1)	the	
importance	of	building	trust	within	change	processes;	and	2)	the	primacy	of	context	
and	context-knowledge	for	ensuring	relevancy	and	to	facilitate	change.		Initial	
decisions	had	been	made	to	pursue	the	first	theme	of	trust	building	for	theory-
building	and	further	data	analysis	undertaken	to	support	this	decision.			
However,	the	overlapping	combination	of	further	data	analysis,	writing	and	
conceptual	thinking	were	to	shift	the	direction	away	from	this	initial	research	design	
after	the	beginning	of	phase	2	theory	building.		Directly	influencing	this	shift	were	
insights	gained	during	the	process	of	writing	when	considering	and	exploring	the	
theoretical	basis	for	the	concept	of	phronesis.		Given	that	the	term	had	not	been	
used	in	any	significant	manner	in	conjunction	with	peacebuilding,	conceptualising	
the	term	was	necessary.	However,	as	I	began	to	conceptualise	phronesis	and	write	
about	it	describing	it	as	judgment-in-context-for-action,	an	embedded	and	
embodied	form	of	knowledge	gained	from	experience	which	included	tacit	and	
explicit	recognition	of	patterns	of	context,	examples	that	illustrated	the	concept	
surfaced	naturally	within	the	data.	Furthermore,	conceptualising	phronesis	began	
to	shed	light	on	the	second	most	salient	theme	context-based	peacebuilding,	
demonstrating	why	it	was	so	important	to	success	and	relevancy	for	change	
processes	in	local	peacebuilding.	
Furthermore	when	reflecting	on	group	discussions,	and	re-reading	transcripts	of	
theory-building	sessions,	I	found	additional	evidence	of	what	might	be	termed	
phronetic	knowledge	and	how	such	thinking	influenced	particular	choices	in	
peacebuilding	amongst	the	practitioners.	In	sum,	greater	conceptual	clarity	of	
phronesis	increased	my	own	insights	about	civil-society	peacebuilding	and	
demonstrated	an	explanatory	power.		Viewing	phronesis	as	a	lens	of	analysis	also	
produced	insights	on	two	interrelated	and	interdependent	aspects	of	peacebuilding	
I	had	not	previously	considered:	practitioners	judgment	(decision-making	gained	
from	experience	and	embedded	knowledge)	and	context	(defined	here	as	
knowledge	and	understanding	of	patterns	in	context:	place-space,	relationships,	
time/timing,	and	frame).	In	conclusion,	phronesis,	once	conceptualised,	became	a	
lens	that	allowed	me	to	view	and	analyse	the	data	in	a	new	way,	helped	to	explain	
salient	themes,	and	provided	illuminating	insights	that	served	to	more	broadly	
answer	the	research	question.	The	diagram	below	illustrates	in	colour	that	
phronesis	as	a	conceptual	term	was	aggregated	with	most	number	of	codes,	and	
visually	illustrates	in	part	why	this	decision	was	taken.	
Figure	4:	Screenshot	of	phronesis	as	most	aggregated	concept	
After	discussions	were	held	with	the	research	team,	a	decision	was	made	to	shift	
the	research	design	to	allow	for	greater	exploration	of	phronesis	as	a	concept	for	
peacebuilding.	To	this	end,	all	theory-building	group	participants	were	contacted	
and	informed	of	the	shift	in	direction	in	the	research	in	order	to	keep	them	
informed	and	to	thank	them	for	their	participation	thus	far.	At	this	stage	phase	2	
was	concluded	and	the	writing-up	period	commenced.	
Conclusion		
Having	begun	the	research	from	the	outset	with	the	intention	to	build	theory	with	
practitioners	the	decision	to	shift	and	focus	instead	on	conceptualising	phronesis	
was	not	entirely	easy.	I	had	found	the	first	explorations	with	the	theory-building	
groups	to	be	fruitful	and	stimulating.	It	also	occurred	to	me	that	there	was	a	danger	
that	I	had	created	expectations	for	the	group	of	practitioners	that	I	was	not	able	to	
fulfil.	For	both	these	reasons	I	was	reluctant	to	truncate	the	group	theory	building,	
and	I	ruefully	compared	the	decision	to	having	two	children	but	that	one	had	to	be	
put	up	one	for	adoption.	Metaphors	aside,	it	had	become	clear	to	me	that	if	I	could	
present	a	strong	argument	in	conceptualising	phronesis	then	it	may	pave	the	way	
for	practitioners	to	become	more	routinely	and	regularly	prioritised	in	knowledge	
production	practices.	Therefore,	while	I	was	reluctant	to	set-aside	the	theory	
building,	I	considered	that	in	doing	so,	I	could	also	build	a	stronger	case	for	
substantive	collaborative	theory	building	with	practitioners	in	the	future.	The	next	
chapter	progresses	that	aim	by	illustrating	the	concept	of	phronesis	as	it	surfaced	in	
the	data	from	interviews	as	an	epistemology	of	practice	and	an	important	
knowledge-source	which	practitioners	used	and	relied	upon	to	know	how	to	
influence	social	change	processes.	
Chapter	6:	Phronesis	as	an	epistemology	of	practice	in	Northern	Ireland	
Introduction	
Fieldwork	research	and	analysis	of	the	interviews	generated	four	findings	that	are	
correlated	and	interdependent.	The	first	finding	is	the	existence	of	phronesis	as	an	
epistemology	of	practice	in	Northern	Ireland.	This	finding	is	importantly	linked	to	
the	second	finding,	that	phronesis,	or	practical	wisdom	is	evidenced	as	a	significant	
epistemology	which	influences	peacebuilding	actors	judgement	in	their	efforts	to	
effect	social	change	processes.	The	third	finding	which	links	to	the	previous	two,	is	
that	practitioners	in	their	efforts	to	promote	peacebuilding	social	changes,	use	
phronesis	and	the	deep	context	knowledge	it	contains,	to	navigate,	enhance,	lever	
and	lubricate	change	processes	on	the	ground.	In	particular,	practitioners	described	
building	trust	and	behaviours	that	demonstrated	trustworthiness	were	catalytic	to	
progressing	change.	These	three	findings,	correlated	and	interdependent,	support	
the	fourth	finding,	which	is	the	significance	of	identifying	phronesis	as	a	concept	
important	to	gain	a	deeper	understanding	of	peacebuilding	practice	located	at	the	
grassroots	and	within	civil	society	in	Northern	Ireland.		
The	aim	of	Chapter	6	and	Chapter	7	is	to	introduce	the	data	and	demonstrate	how	it	
serves	to	substantiate	these	four	findings.	Chapter	6	will	begin	by	briefly	outlining	
the	two	salient	inductive	themes	that	emerged	during	the	analysis	of	research	
fieldwork	-	context	and	trust.	The	importance	of	these	themes,	however,	became	
clearer	in	light	of	the	conceptual	development	of	phronesis	which	adds	explanation	
to	their	salience.	For	this	reason,	the	remainder	of	Chapter	6	will	focus	on	
demonstrating	the	existence	of	phronesis	as	an	epistemology	of	practice,	and	its	
significance	as	a	form	of	judgment	for	peacebuilding	practice.	It	will	do	this	by	
focusing	on	phronesis	as	a	way	of	knowing	and	learning,	and	as	containing	nuanced	
context-knowledge.		
Chapter	7	will	build	upon	the	data	provided	in	Chapter	6	to	evidence	the	finding	
that	practitioners	in	their	efforts	to	promote	peacebuilding	social	changes	use	
phronesis	and	the	deep	context	knowledge	it	contains,	to	navigate,	enhance,	lever	
and	lubricate	change	processes	on	the	ground.	In	particular	the	importance	of	trust	
building	and	the	demonstration	of	trustworthiness	are	discussed	as	key	to	
catalysing	change	processes.	Chapter	7	moves	towards	the	conclusion	by	reflecting	
on	tensions	described	by	practitioners	using	a	phronetic	epistemology	of	practice	
and	ends	by	drawing	on	the	evidence	from	both	chapters	to	substantiate	the	fourth	
finding	that	phronesis	is	conceptually	important	in	order	to	gain	a	deeper	
understanding	of	grassroots	and	civil	society	peacebuilding	practice	in	Northern	
Ireland.	
6.1	Salient	themes	emerging	from	the	interview	data:	context	and	trust		
The	importance	of	using	context-knowledge	in	promoting	change		
As	stated,	two	salient	themes	emerged	inductively	from	the	fieldwork	and	the	
interview	data	analysis	that	speak	to	what	has	been	learned	about	change	
processes	from	peacebuilding	practice	experience.	The	first	theme,	coded	as	
context,	refers	to	the	primacy	given	to	knowledge	gained	by	experience	(phronesis),	
and	its	use	to	build	context-knowledge	in	order	to	promote	social	change,	rather	
than	theory	(episteme)	or	technique	(techne).	Explicitly	named	by	practitioners	and	
demonstrated	implicitly	in	their	transcripts,	in	the	open	coding	stage	of	analysis,	27	
of	40	(67%)	of	interviewees	made	72	references	to	context	and	demonstrated	that	
context-knowledge	was	important	to	practice.		Context-knowledge	gained	by	
personal	experience	was	deemed	important	to	orient	practitioners	and	also	used	to	
explain	formative	influences	on	practice.	This	included	personal	motivations	for	
involvement	in	peacebuilding,	as	well	as	a	rationale	for	their	interpretation	of	the	
possibilities	for	change.	The	importance	afforded	to	context-knowledge	to	progress	
social	change	was	particularly	evident	in	stories	of	practice.	For	example,	at	times	
by	adopting	contextually	relevant	pragmatic	approaches	in	order	to	implement	
peacebuilding	on	the	ground.	At	times	this	was	through	incentivising	or	appealing	
to	self-interest,	finding	areas	of	common	concern	or	using	levers	or	hooks	that	
generated	motivation	and	buy-in	for	peacebuilding.	Context-knowledge	was	viewed	
as	a	means	of	ensuring	ownership,	maximising	relevancy	and	considered	necessary	
for	impact.		
Trust	and	trustworthiness	as	change	catalysts		
One	of	the	research	objectives	was	to	determine	if	there	were	factors	within	
peacebuilding	initiatives	that	practitioners	might	identify	as	important	to	catalysing	
change.	The	research	findings	indicated	that	peacebuilding	social	change	has	been	
most	effective	when	practitioners	have	navigated	context	effectively.	In	Northern	
Ireland,	illustrated	both	explicitly	in	transcripts	of	interviewees	and	embedded	
implicitly	in	their	stories,	evidence	from	this	research	suggests	practice	is	embedded	
in	a	context	of	deep	systemic	distrust,	and	as	a	result,	navigating	this	distrust	by	
engendering	trust	and/or	being	perceived	as	trustworthy	were	considered	
important	to	catalyse	change	processes.		The	importance	of	trust	was	spoken	about	
explicitly	by	30	of	the	40	interviewees	(75%)	with	over	91	references.	
Trustworthiness	was	also	evidenced	in	stories	of	practice,	and	linked	to	concepts	
such	as	accountability,	transparency,	credibility,	and	integrity.	The	research	analysis	
indicated	that	it	was	important	that	both	practitioners	and	the	processes	of	
peacebuilding	of	which	they	are	associated	were	perceived	as	trustworthy,	as	both	
were	associated	with	facilitating	change.	This	was	true	across	the	spectrum	of	
sectors	with	eleven	of	thirteen	sectors	of	practice	reflecting	that	demonstrations	of	
trustworthiness	and	engendering	trust	was	important	to	practice,	the	only	two	
practice	sectors	who	did	not	rate	trust	as	important	were	those	involved	in	gender-
focused	peacebuilding	practice	and	funders.	Trust	and	behaviours	associated	with	
trustworthiness	featured	particularly	strong	among	practice	sectors	associated	with	
former	combatants,	social	cohesion,	contested	spaces,	community	development	
and	faith-based	peacebuilding.	The	overall	importance	of	this	salient	theme	of	trust	
will	be	addressed	in	Chapter	7	which	outlines	how	phronesis	is	used	by	practitioners	
to	promote	social	change.		
6.2	Evidence	of	phronesis	as	an	epistemology	of	practice	
The	aim	of	the	remainder	of	this	chapter	is	to	demonstrate	the	existence	of	
phronesis	and	its	evidence	as	a	primary	epistemology	of	practice	among	those	
interviewed.	As	previously	stated,	its	presence	adds	explanatory	power	to	the	data	
in	relation	to	the	two	salient	themes,	context	and	trust.	I	have	structured	my	
analysis	using	the	five	dimensions	of	phronesis	which	I	have	conceptualised	in	
chapter	3.	Phronetic	knowledge	is	recapped	as	knowledge	which	is:	experienced,	
embodied,	organically	developed	through	experimentation,	holds	tacit	recognition	
of	context	patterns,	and	demonstrates	context-relational	judgments.	These	five	
dimensions	will	be	evidenced	under	two	broader	headings	phronetic	ways	of	
knowing	and	learning	(Section	6.2.1)	and	phronesis	as	nuanced	context-knowledge	
(Section	6.3).		
6.2.1	Phronetic	ways	of	knowing	and	learning		
Phronesis,	or	practical	wisdom,	as	I	have	conceptualised	here	draws	heavily	from	
and	values	knowledge	gained	from	accumulated	experiences	that	create	pattern	
recognition	over	time.	Learning	is	generated	through	experience	navigating	
uncertain	and	complex	contexts	using	organic	experimentation,	or	trial	and	error	
approaches.	When	reading	and	navigating	the	context	multiple	forms	of	knowing	
are	employed	in	order	to	recognise	patterns	of	context,	using	an	integration	of	
both	subjective	and	objective	experiences.	This	embodied	knowing	recognises	gut	
instincts,	bodily	sensations,	affective	experiences,	and	resists	mind-body	dualisms.	
When	there	is	little	experience,	others	who	are	considered	to	have	similar	contexts	
may	be	sought	out	and	used	as	exemplars,	as	the	most	trustworthy	source	of	
knowledge	within	a	phronetic	epistemology	are	those	with	shared	common	
experiences.	Finally,	viewing	practice	as	organic	and	context	as	fluid,	value	is	
attributed	to	action	even	if	outside	of,	or	not	easily	quantifiable	under,	techno-
rational	paradigms	or	metrics	of	measurability.	These	dimensions	are	
demonstrated	in	the	data	below	as	phronetic	ways	of	knowing	and	learning.	
Gained	by	experience	
When	asked	to	first	reflect	on	how	they	became	involved	in	peacebuilding,	the	
majority	of	interviewees,	with	the	exception	of	those	not	originally	from	Northern	
Ireland,	were	able	to	trace	their	involvement	to	being	either	directly	or	indirectly	
affected	by	growing	up	or	living	in	the	context	of	conflict	in	Northern	Ireland.		One	
practitioner	noted:		
My	mum	had	two	brothers	that	were	involved	in	the	conflict	in	the	
Republican	movement	and	spent	considerable	amounts	of	time	in	jail	and	
my	grandmothers	house	would	have	been	the	target	of	the	British	Army,	
and	so	my	mum	would	have	been	there,	would	have	grown	up	around	that	
home	in	a	neighbourhood	that	that	was	the	context	of	which	we	grew	up	
(Practitioner	29,	Victims	Sector,	Interviewed	15/5/15).		
Six	interviewees	described	a	direct	impact,	with	three	describing	themselves	as	
involved	in	combatant	or	paramilitary	affiliated	roles,	while	three	interviewees	
identified	themselves	as	either	a	victim	of	direct	violence,	or	having	a	lost	a	close	
relative	as	a	result	of	the	Troubles.	For	the	ex-combatants,	each	saw	their	
involvement	in	peacebuilding	as	part	of	an	evolution	of	the	conflict	transformation	
process	that	began	with	their	involvement	in	ex-prisoner	groups	but	extended	
beyond	into	community	development,	restorative	justice,	local	community	politics,	
and	efforts	at	reintegration	or	reconciliation.	One	in	particular	saw	his	work	as	an	
outgrowth	of	his	Republican	politics	and	commitment	to	the	end	of	an	armed	stage	
of	conflict.	Still	others	articulated	it	as	a	logical	reflection	of	their	organising	skills	
and	previous	combatant	leadership	roles,	commenting:		
You	naturally	have	leaders	within	communities.	there	are	shepherds	and	
sheep.		[I]t	was	just	the	next	stage	of	the	process,	you	know,	the	military	
armed	process	had	ended.So	you	know,	you	had	natural	leaders,	the	
people	that	were	educated	people	but	didnt	have	formal	educationI	was	a	
great	organiser	in	a	conflict	situation,	so	I	am	a	naturally	good	
organiser.but	I	transferred	my	organisational	skills	into	a	conflict	
transformation	remit.	[S]o	those	skills	that	I	had	then,	I	transferred	them	
into	a	peace	setting	(Practitioner	8,	Loyalist	Ex-Combatant	interviewed	
12/2/15).	
I	suppose	when	I	came	out	of	prison.	Looking	around	me	thinking	like	what	
is	there	for	our	community,	what	has	the	community	achieved,	what	do	
they	need	to	achieve.And	I	would	be	listening	to	people,	I	drove	a	taxi	for	a	
while	so	I	was	listening	to	them	and	things	had	changed,	and	I	wasnt	in	
prison	for	a	long	time,	only	for	a	few	years	but	people	were	talking	about	
they	needed	their	bins	emptied,	stuff	like	that	(Practitioner	38,	Restorative	
Justice,	Interviewed	16/6/15).		
Those	who	described	their	involvement	in	peacebuilding	as	having	originated	or	
intersected	with	their	experiences	of	being	victims	either	through	bereavement	or	
injury	reflected	that	it	was	one	of	the	primary	motivating	factors,	but	not	a	
straightforward	path.		For	example,	one	interviewee,	a	Protestant	whose	spouse	
had	been	killed	by	the	PIRA,	articulated	that	in	hindsight	their	peacebuilding	had	
begun	with	volunteer	work	in	a	local	faith-based	organisation	in	Republican	and	
Nationalist	areas	prior	to	the	death.	However,	for	this	interviewee	bereavement	
halted	this	involvement	due	to	the	difficulty	of	facing	members	of	the	Republican	
community	after	the	PIRA	claimed	responsibility	for	the	death.	The	interviewee	
described	a	chance	meeting	later	with	one	young	person	known	from	this	voluntary	
work	whose	previous	friendship	had	opened	their	eyes	to	the	experiences	of	young	
Nationalists	and	Republicans.	At	the	chance	meeting,	this	young	man	offered	
condolences,	but	also	justification	for	the	death.	The	interviewee	described	this	as	a	
blow:	
He	came	over	and	first	of	all	said	look,	sorry	to	hear	about	[your	spouse]	
and	I	said	yeah	and	he	said	do	you	want	to	join	us	to	sit	down	and	have	a	
burger	and	then	he	sat	and	basically	justified	the	bomb	and	it	was	really,	
really	hard	to	hear	and	this	was	like	a	week	after	the	bombing	(Practitioner	
25,	Victims	Sector,	Interviewed	8/5/2015).	
This	interviewee	went	on	to	describe	a	number	of	the	different	twists	and	turns	on	
their	path	towards	peacebuilding.	This	was	not	a	straightforward,	and	at	times	
fraught	with	cognitive	dissonance;	trying	to	reconcile	previous	experiences	of	
friendships	with	Republicans	with	the	death	of	a	spouse	killed	by	the	PIRA.	However	
for	another	interviewee	from	the	victims	sector,	learning	that	his	own	brother	had	
been	killed	by	the	police	under	suspicious	circumstances-	strengthened,	solidified	
and	took	the	work	they	had	already	begun	to	address	structural	violence	issues	into	
new	directions.		This	personal	loss	further	motivated	their	pursuit	of	community-
based	human	rights	and	victims	oriented	advocacy.	Three	others	from	the	
Catholic/Nationalist/Republican	background	in	particular	spoke	of	being	the	victim	
of	discrimination	and	structural	injustices	in	the	workplace	as	part	of	their	conflict	
related	experiences	that	had	some	impact	on	their	own	practice.		
While	perhaps	more	indirectly	impacted	by	the	conflict,	eleven	interviewees	
reflected	on	formative	experiences	of	specific	events	that	led	them	in	different	
ways	towards	their	involvement	in	peacebuilding	practice.	Specific	temporal	turning	
point	events	such	as	the	Civil	Rights	era	were	cited	as	an	important	time	of	political	
awakening.	One	Nationalist	interviewee	at	age	of	eleven	was	present	at	Bloody	
Sunday.	This	practitioner	described	the	experience	as	pivotal	both	personally	and	
for	the	city,	articulating	that	everything	had	changed	that	day.	In	later	years,	this	
practitioner	held	jobs	that	brought	him	into	regular	and	close	contact	with	the	army	
and	police,	giving	him	new	insights	into	the	Protestant	community.	Such	
experiences	were	cited	as	important	and	considered	helpful	in	later	life	when	this	
practitioner	was	involved	in	negotiating	parading	disputes.		
The	1981	Hunger	Strikes	were	another	significant	formative	experience	for	some.	
One	practitioner	reflected	on	the	experience	of	being	in	school	with	the	brother	of	
a	hunger	striker,	describing	the	lack	of	acknowledgement	by	school	officials	that	his	
classmates	brother	was	dying.	This	practitioner	now	creates	digital	arts	
programmes	for	schools	in	order	to	address	the	history	of	the	Troubles:		
There	is	a	hunger	strikers	brother	sitting	beside	me,	do	you	know	what	I	
mean?	But	this	isnt	really	happening	officially.	We	talked	about	it	in	the	
playground.He	is	sitting	near	me	and	everyday	I	am	coming	in	and	thinking	
your	brother	is	getting	closer	and	closer	to	death		(Practitioner	1,	Arts-
based,	Interviewed	27/11/14).	
For	some	it	was	discriminatory	experiences	that	impacted	their	practice	approaches.	
Two	interviewees	recounted	personal	experiences	of	discrimination	and	
intimidation.		One,	an	ex-prisoner	who	now	works	within	a	Republican-based	
restorative	justice	project	reflected	on	a	pivotal	experience	he	had	as	a	young	
person	which	had	left	him	determined	never	to	be	ignorant	to	anyone	regardless	
of	their	background.	Recalling	his	first	job	as	a	delivery-boy,	he	was	told	by	a	
Protestant	co-worker	that	he	was	not	allowed	to	take	his	tea	break	with	colleagues,	
but	instead	expected	to	take	it	in	the	store	cupboard.	This	experience	motivated	him	
in	the	ways	he	worked	with	others,	whether	that	be	when	partnering	with	Loyalist	
organisations,	or	when	forging	relationships	with	both	police	and	statutory	agencies:	
I	wont	be	sitting	drinking	my	tea	in	a	cupboard.		But	it	had	a	profound	
effect	on	me		I	think	from	that	I	learnt,	I	probably	didnt	even	think	about	
learning	it	but	if	I	was	in	a	room	and	was	making	tea	in	any	circumstances	or	
anywhere	no	matter	who	was	there,	should	it	be	the	devil	himself.	you	can	
fight	with	them,	you	can	kill	each	other	and	all	that	but	if	youre	in	a	room	
you	cant	be	ignorant,	you	just	cant	be,	you	can	put	your	position	out	and	
stuff	like	that	but	you	can	do	it	still	without	being	discourteous	
(Practitioner	38,	Restorative	Justice,	Interviewed	16/6/15).		
By	contrast,	one-third	of	interviewed	practitioners	traced	their	initial	involvement	in	
peacebuilding	practice	as	a	means	of	professional	employment.	Interestingly,	some	
of	those	younger	practitioners	who	described	their	entry	point	into	practice	as	
beginning	with	employment	stated	that	though	they	hadnt	necessarily	trained	or	
planned	to	become	involved	in	peacebuilding,	it	had,	to	quote	one	practitioner,	
gotten	under	their	skin	(Practitioner	9,	Sports-based	peacebuilding,	Interviewed	
20/2/15).			
As	one	younger	practitioner	described	the	work	helped	make	sense	of	her	own	
childhood	experiences:	
No	real	other	background	in	the	work	bar	just	when	I	came	into	the	post.	
Sometimes	you	can	feel	a	bit	bad	about	that	because	it	wasnt	like	a	burning	
thing	that	I	followed	from	a	kid	or	anything.	But	saying	that,	I	always	was	
aware	of	conflict	as	many	people	were,	particularly	living	in	South	Armagh	
and	theres	all	the	helicopters	and	the	police	and	everything	that	goes	with	
that,	and	just	like	not	understanding	it	or	wondering	why,	and	just	the	news.	I	
remember	the	news	always	being	like	very,	(pause)	I	suppose	you	might	say	
influential	in	the	stories	it	carried	and	you	would	pick	up	on	what	your	parents	
would	say	and	stuff	about	the	news	and	God,	not	again,	not	again,	not	again,	
you	know.	And	it	just	was	like	what	the	hell	is	going	on	(Practitioner	30,	
Education/	Schools,	Interviewed	15/	5/	15).	
Another	younger	practitioner,	described	that	having	a	career	in	
community	relations	was	not	something	that	had	been	emphasised	in	
their	grammar	school	education,	and	it	wasnt	until	they	had	met	other	
practitioners	that	they	realised	it	was	an	option.	This	is	not	surprising	
considering	that	the	opportunities	to	earn	a	wage	in	peacebuilding	in	
Northern	Ireland	primarily	arrived	in	the	last	twenty	years,	as	the	sector	
professionalised	and	funds	made	more	readily	available	to	support	
regular	employment.		
Models	and	exemplars	as	trustworthy	sources	of	knowledge		
Interviewees	were	asked	to	reflect	on	how	they	learned	to	do	peacebuilding?	In	
addition	to	lived	experience,	the	broadest	category	of	responses	focused	on	
relational	influences	such	as	important	people	and	organisations,	including	both	
locals	and	outsiders	that	became	mentors,	models	or	exemplars.	Likewise,	some	
cited	the	influence	of	the	role	modelling	of	parents	who	made	deliberate	decisions	
to	form	relationships	with	those	from	other	traditions.	One	interviewee	whose	
father	was	a	minister	involved	in	ecumenism	recalled:	I	always	kind	of	joked	that	if	
there	werent	pickets	outside	church	I	thought	we	were	doing	something	wrong	
(Practitioner	21,	Archival	and	Storytelling,	interviewed	24/4/15).	Another	
interviewee	involved	in	human	rights	advocacy,	cited	the	influence	of	hearing	
stories	about	discrimination	faced	by	his	parents	from	a	mixed-marriage	who	
found	themselves	unable	to	visit	relatives	or	family	members	and	whose	extended	
family	were	targeted	regularly	for	security	force	raids.	Such	experiences	played	a	
shaping	role	in	the	awareness	of	the	raw	issues	of	structural	violence	and	prejudice.	
Roughly	one-third	of	those	interviewed	named	specific	people	and/or	organisations	
as	important	in	shaping	their	peacebuilding	ideas	and	practice.	These	included	those	
who	were	considered	local	and	international.	Local	Individuals	named	as	having	
influenced	their	practice	were	spoken	of	as	inspirational	for	their	vision,	
commitment,	skill	and	know-how.	Specific	faith-based	leaders	named	were	Alec	
Reid,	Harold	Good	and	Eric	Gallagher,	and	Ray	Davey	and	John	Morrow	from	the	
Corrymeela	Community.	Organisations	were	also	cited	as	exemplars:	Community	
Relations	in	Schools	(CRIS),	St.	Columbs	Park	House	in	Derry,	174	Trust,	The	Spirit	of	
Enniskillen,	Clonard	Monastery,	and	Cornerstone	Community	were	all	cited	as	
examples	of	places	supporting	the	growth	of	peacebuilding	practice.		Interviewees	
described	being	mentored	by	watching	others:		
They	were	the	two	great	gurus	of	that	time	and	John	Morrow,	people	like	
that,	Eric	Gallagher	who	was	my	minister,	those	were	the	people	who	inspire	
you.	Because	I	mean	Eric	went	to	Feakle	you	know,	and	I	think	theyre	the	sort	
of	people	who	model	but	also	they	show	you	how	to	do	things,	you	know,	
there	was	nothing	like	sitting	down	with	Ray	[Davey]	and	hed	sit	down	and	
hed	talk	to	you	like	you	were	the	most	important	person	in	the	world	and	
then	hed	send	you	off	to	do	something	and	you	wouldnt	realise	it.		And	
those,	certainly	experiences	in	Corrymeela	in	the	early	days,	I	mean	there	was	
so	much	learning	there	(Practitioner	17,	Education/Research,	Interviewed	
16/4/15).	
Father	Alec	became	identified	withenabling	dialogue	where	there	was	
none,	enabling	political	dialogue	where	politics	had	broken	down	and	thats	
a	role	of	the	church	as	well	and	its	not	its	professional	role	but	it	happened	
to	be	here	a	very	important	role	because	of	the	stalemates	(Practitioner	37,	
Faith-based,	Interviewed	15/6/15).		
Several	interviewees	also	spoke	of	local	academics	that	were	involved	in	hands-on	
ways	within	practice	in	community	relations,	peacebuilding,	and	community	
development	work.	For	example	one	interviewee	specifically	recalled	being	
mentored	by	John	Malone,	an	educational	reformer	who	pioneered	peacebuilding	
in	schools	in	the	early	1970s,	while	others	spoke	of	researchers	involved	with	Ulster	
Universitys	International	Conflict	Research	Institute	(INCORE).	
Roughly	one	quarter	of	interviewees	spoke	of	influential	international	
peacebuilders	that	had	come	to	spend	time	in	Northern	Ireland,	describing	them	as	
individuals	who	either	brought	insights,	skills	or	external	perspectives	that	were	
useful	to	practitioners.	For	example,	academic	and	peace	practitioners	such	as	John	
Paul	Lederach,	Brian	Currin	(a	South	African	lawyer	involved	with	the	Truth	and	
Reconciliation	Commission),	Roel	Kaptein	(a	Dutch	Girardian-influenced	theologian	
who	had	worked	extensively	with	Corrymeela)	and	Steve	Wessler	(an	American	
anti-bias	educator),	were	all	spoken	of	as	useful	outsiders	who	brought	a	helpful	
lens	of	analysis	to	local	practice.		International	organisations	such	as	The	Arbinger	
Institute,	The	Mastery	Foundation,	and	Interaction	Associates	were	also	named	by	
practitioners	as	providing	useful	conceptual	frameworks	to	draw	upon	at	various	
times.	These	relationships	provided	opportunities	to	reflect	on	practice	with	helpful	
outsiders	selected	by	the	practitioner	to	play	a	mentoring	role:	
Obviously,	Interaction	Associates	has	a	massive	impact	on	my	practice	and	
you	know,	what	they	do	was,	after	we	finished	the	training	for	about	two	
years,	they	rang	me	once	a	month	from	America,	and	talked	through	with	me	
for	about	half	an	hour,	forty-five	minutes	just	about	my	practice	and	what	I	
was	doing	(Practitioner	2,	Interface-based,	Interviewed	4/12/2014).		
Two	practitioners	spoke	of	the	opportunity	to	spend	time	internationally	and	to	
learn	about	other	conflict	areas	and	peacebuilding	models.	Observing	other	
approaches	to	practice	gave	a	framework	for	one	practitioner	to	rethink	how	the	
model	would	need	to	ensure	local	relevancy	with	grassroots	communities:		
I	think	the	opportunity	to	work	abroad	and	to	see	there	are	international	
models	of	practice	that	has	resonance	here,	the	key	to	it	I	think	is	just	not	to	
parachute	them	in,	but	to	take	the	principles	and	the	theories	and	adapt	
them	or	indigenise	them	into	this	setting,	so	its	not	just	about	transferring	
an	American	model	or	a	South	African	model	or	whatever,	its	about	seeing	
what	works	here	and	then	ultimately	I	do	think	it	becomes	indigenous	to	
here,	you	begin	to	use	the	theories,	use	the	principles	but	the	practice	is	
shaped	around	local	culture	(Practitioner	24,	Restorative	Justice,	
Interviewed	5/4/15).	
While	international	experiences	or	inputs	were	cited	as	useful,	the	data	revealed	
that	external	individuals	were	invited	in,	with	learning	exchanges	initiated	by	the	
local	practitioners,	thus	locally	owned	rather	than	imposed.	This	point	is	particularly	
important	in	light	of	the	current	academic	debates	about	local	knowledge	versus	
outside	intervention	discussed	in	Chapter	2.	This	research	found	it	was	important	
that	interviewees	were	able	to	choose	their	own	exemplars	determined	by	what	
was	important	in	their	own	context	to	maximise	relevancy.	It	suggests	that	such	
intervention	can	be	helpful	if	it	sought	out	by	those	holding	local	context-
knowledge,	and	if	due	regard	and	credit	if	given	to	those	who	have	the	local	
context-knowledge	for	its	priority.	
Embodied	ways	of	knowing		
Describing	what	had	influenced	and	guided	their	approaches	across	a	variety	of	
circumstances	the	language	respondents	used	spoke	of	subjective	perceptions,	
intuition,	gut	reactions	and	a	degree	of	instinctively	knowing.	This	demonstrated	
a	much	more	embodied	epistemology	which	was	tacitly	used	a	source	of	
knowledge-an	innate	pre-conceptual	way	of	knowing	what	to	do.	Over	a	third	of	
interviewees	(16/40)	used	the	words	instinctive,	gut	instincts,	or	referred	to	
intuitive	processes	when	describing	decision-making	about	practice	choices:	
So	all	this	messy,	again,	all	the	process	started	just	as	a	mess	and	its	not	that	
you	go	from	any,	you	go	to	affect	change	and	its	almost	instinctive	I	suppose	
to	anything	thats	a	definitive	roadmap	(Practitioner	14,	Community	
Regeneration	Sector,	Interviewed	9/4/14).			
Would	I	have	called	that	peacebuilding?	Certainly	not	at	the	time,	I	would	
have	just	seen	that	as	community	development	work.	In	terms	of	a	
theoretical	base	for	that	sorta	stuff,	I	mean	it	was	always	really	gut	reaction	
to	try	and	look	at	the	bigger	picture	not	to	be	involved	but	see	really	what	
potential	you	could	have	to	make	a	difference	maybe	for	the	lives	of	young	
people	there.	Um,	not	in	any	kind	of	missionary	way,	just	as	a	gut	response	
to	what	was	going	on	at	the	time	(Practitioner	3,	Community	Development	
Interviewed	8/12/14).	
	[O]ften	in	strange	circumstances	or	in	uncertain	circumstances	or	just	as	
people	make	new	relationships,	your	feet	or	your	body	moves	first	often	in	
these	new	directions	and	your	head	follows	and	I	think	that	makes	sense	for	
me,	a	lot	of	work	of	reconciliation	I	would	say	probably	a	lot	of	us	we	did	
things	and	then	made	sense	of	it		For	me	looking	back,	I	mean	our	human	
condition	knows	about	unease	and	dis-ease,	maybe	we	obviously	get	that	
from	bad	relationships	weve	been	part	of,	if	were	relational	beings	and	
weve	been	brought	up	in	relationships	that	have	harmed	us	we	will	carry	that	
unease	or	dis-ease	around	with	us	but	I	think	its	more	than	that.	Theres	
something	about	the	human	condition	that	wants	to	be	in	equilibrium	that	
wants	to	be	in	balance,	theres	something	about	our	gut,	I	suppose	Im	only	
learning	a	bit	about	that	now	(Practitioner	39,	Education/Research,	
Interviewed	16/6/15).	
An	interviewee	whose	work	with	an	NGO	dedicated	to	dealing	with	conflict	legacy	
issues	described	how	their	approach	for	creating	space	for	dialogue	evolved	in	
similarly	natural	and	instinctive	directions.	The	group	intentionally	sought	to	draw	
in	a	diverse	range	of	perspectives	for	informal	roundtable	discussions;	however,	as	
dialogue	unfolded	suspicion	and	anxiety	was	evident	as	many	did	not	want	to	be	in	
the	same	room	with	those	who	were	viewed	as	former	enemies.	A	decision	was	
made	to	directly	address	the	sources	of	the	suspicion	head-on.	The	practitioner	
referred	to	this	approach	as,	being	in	the	room	with	the	coats	onmeaning	that	
there	was	open	acknowledgment	that	participants	were	distrustful	of	one	another.	
When	asked	about	how	the	interviewee	knew	this	was	the	right	approach,	their	
response	illustrated	that	decision-making	was	influenced	by	instincts	about	how	
best	to	manage	the	distrust	in	the	room:		
So	I	think	(pause),	I	dont	know,	but	I	would	imagine	it	arrived	as	the	first	
difficulty	was	they	didnt	want	to	be	in	the	room	together	and	they	named	
why,	so	it	was	almost	they	kind	of	said	I	dont	want	to	be	in	the	room	with	his	
coat	or	her	coat,	so	that	was	where	we	began	[W]e	actually	said	ok,	lets	
look	at	each	of	these	coatsand	that	just	became	how	we	did	stuff[Its]	not	
shutting	down	when	somebody	says	terrorist	campaign	or	warand	
somebody	else	in	the	room	says	thats	not	what	we	call	it,	and	the	kind	of	
natural	instinct	by	everybody	is	to	say	ok,	lets	move	on.	And	I	think	part	of	
what	were	about	is	about	saying	why,	you	know,	why?	Why	are	you	getting	
so	annoyed	about	that	word,	why	are	you	insisting	on	the	use	of	that	word?	
So	there	is	something	about	opening	up	the	dark	corners	as	they	appear	Its	
not	about	running	round	going	oh	theres	a	dark	corner,	lets	poke	into	it	But	
its	about	oh	hang	on	a	minuteweve	hit	a	bump	in	the	road,	lets	look	at	the	
bump	(Practitioner	21,	Storytelling	and	Archival	Sector,	Interviewed	
24/4/15).	
This	quote	illustrates	how	the	practitioners	instinct	is	used	both	to	navigate	the	
tacit	knowledge	about	rule	crossing	(the	instinct	is	to	avoid)	but	also	as	a	guide	
about	what	might	also	dispel	the	anxiety-naming	the	distrust.	It	also	illustrates	a	
counter-hegemonic	approach	by	deliberately	talking	about	something	that	natural	
instincts	(or	tacit	knowledge)	might	have	told	them	to	ignore.	However,	the	
navigation	of	this	line	is	pursued	subtly	and	instinctively,	not	to	provoke	matters	by	
poking	into	dark	corners	but	allowing	them	to	emerge	naturally	and	addressing	
them.		It	also	highlights	the	unplanned	way	this	approach	of	being	in	the	room	with	
the	coats	on	developed.	By	being	responsive	in	the	particular	moment	and	paying	
attention	to	process,	a	new	approach	was	stimulated.	
Learning	through	organic	development	and	experimentation		
While	a	third	of	interviewees	articulated	that	their	own	lived	experience	and	
subjective	knowledge	had	directly	influenced	their	approaches,	there	was	also	a	
strong	emphasis	on	learning	on	the	job,	or	having	stumbled	into	peacebuilding.	
Those	articulating	the	importance	of	learning	on	the	job	spoke	of	the	
developmental	nature	of	their	practice	rather	than	a	strategic	or	technical	(techne)	
or	theoretical	(episteme)	conceptualisation.	For	example,	one	practitioner	involved	
in	the	early	days	of	restorative	justice	which	had	emerged	in	the	late	1990s,	
described:	
I	became	involved	in	terms	of	the	origin	of	[Restorative	Justice]	and	we	didnt	
know	what	we	were	going	to	call	it	and	we	didnt	know	nothing	about	
restorative	practices	when	we	started	out.		So	you	were	sort	of	going	along	
and	learning	this	on	the	hoof	(Practitioner	38,	Interviewed	16/6/15).		
Speaking	of	early	work	in	communities	in	1969,	one	community	development	
practitioner	(a	term	the	practitioner	stated	had	not	been	conceptualised	at	that	
stage)	described	learning	on	the	job	in	the	context	of	a	growing	conflict:	
Now,	it	wasnt	co-ordinated	at	all	but	at	the	end	of	those	nights,	I	found	
myself	up	with	other	people	trying	to	de-escalate	riots	and	we	formed	a	youth	
group	in	Ballymurphy.	There	[were]	some	key	figures.[a]	community	
infrastructure	was	slowly	building.	I	think	one	of	the	things	that	I	developed	
very	quickly	was	the	sense	that	networks	were	important,	then	I	didnt	call	
them	networks,	but	a	sense	that	there	was	a	space	that	hadnt	been	
colonised,	that	most	things	were	sectarian	and	they	were	increasingly	
becoming	so	(Practitioner	23,	Community	Development,	Interviewed	
30/4/15).	
While	this	practitioner	was	speaking	about	the	context	of	the	development	of	his	
practice	in	the	late	sixties,		learning	on	the	job	was	also	evident	within	more	
recent	stories	of	practice.	Approaches	were	shaped	not	by	technique	or	theory	but	
what	worked.	One	practitioner	involved	in	ex-combatant	dialogue	and	interface	
conflict	management	described	his	own	style	of	practice	with	the	phrase,	in	your	
face	approach	which	he	described	as	being	upfront	and	directly	tackling	conflict	
issues	head-on.	Learning	about	what	worked	necessitated	experimentation	and	
was	shaped	in	response	to	need.	In	some	cases	the	need	was	clear-cut,	for	
example-	to	address	and	respond	to	prevent	interface	violence-	but	the	best	
method	for	doing	so	less	clear.	For	one	practitioner,	the	originator	of	the	idea	of	
the	mobile	network,	this	was	a	practical	means	to	increase	communication	across	
a	conflict	prone	interface.	For	others,	responding	to	need	was	described	as	a	more	
organic,	chaotic	or	messy	process	that	defied	any	pre-planned	templates	or	steps	
to	success:		
[W]e	didnt	know	what	we	were	doing,	we	began	chaotically,	people	out	
there	will	say	[organisation]	are	brilliant,	they	knew	we	needed	to	deal	with	
the	past	14	years	before	the	rest	of	us	and	I	was	here	from	the	beginning	and	I	
didnt	know	(Practitioner	21	Archival	and	Storytelling	Sector,	Interviewed	
24/4/15).	
A	theatre-based	practitioner	readily	described	her	approach	as	entirely	organic-	an	
unplanned	approach	that	often	achieved	relevancy	beyond	her	own	expectations.	
To	illustrate	this	point,	she	recalled	that	she	had	created	a	theatre	piece	addressing	
global	issues	of	discrimination	against	homosexuality.	Serendipitously,	the	
production	began	at	the	same	time	as	a	local	case	of	discrimination	emerged	in	the	
headlines,	and	marriage	equality	legislation	began	to	emerge	in	the	Republic	of	
Ireland:		
Given	the	local,	national	and	international	context	I	couldnt	have	timed	
the	production	better	to	maximise	impact.	Like	if	somebody	had	said	to	me	
3	years	ago	why	dont	you	do	The	Ballad	of	Reading	Jail	in	2015,	theres	no	
way	Id	have	known	the	Asher	cake	thing	was	going	to	happen,	theres	no	
way	that	Id	have	known	the	same	sex	marriage	referendum	was	going	to	
happen.	So	I	now	had	a	piece	of	theatre	that	had	such	pertinence	and	such	
relevance	only	because	I	was	receptive	to	it.	Do	you	know	what	I	mean?	I	
mean	its	not	that	its	any	great	plan	(Practitioner	31,	Theatre-based,	
Interviewed	26/5/15).	
Organic	approaches,	as	this	example	illustrates,	were	viewed	as	less	
mechanistic	and	more	trustworthy	sources	of	knowledge	to	draw	from	to	
enhance	relevancy.	Several	practitioners	articulated	discomfort	or	
ambivalence	of	template	approaches	that	might	be	viewed	as	having	an	
agenda,	or	that	might	take	a	reductionist	approach	to	the	complexities	of	
conflict	transformation:	
I	think	sometimes	its	largely	by	example	that	people,	people	seeing	it	
working	or	they	get	involved	in	it	and	pick	up	the	lessons	themselves	and	
become	a	bit	more	interested	in	it	and	it	develops	that	way.	I	suppose	I	am	
always	wary	a	wee	bit	about	how,	you	know,	the	theory	of	what	worked	at	
this	will	become	the	sort	of	five	easy	steps	to	end	conflict	in	another	
situation	(Practitioner	7,	Republican	Ex-Combatant,	Interviewed	9/2/15).	
An	organic	approach	was	more	responsive	according	to	practitioners	as	it	was	
difficult	to	know	whether	one	might	take	the	same	approach	from	one	situation	to	
the	next	as	the	context	may	have	changed:		
[I]ts	all	about	you	knowing	the	temperature	of	your	group,	kind	of	where	
your	group	are	and	what	the	next	logical	step	for	them	is	and	to	constantly	
just	keep	pushing	them	in	the	right	direction.	So	I	would	be	reluctant	to	
have	a	resource	around	heres	a	6-week	community	relations	programme,	
you	take	your	little	sectarian	bigots	at	the	start	and	by	the	end	theyll	be	
wonderfully	huggy	and	all	this	kind	of	stuff.	Put	this	in	at	the	start	and	they	
come	out	at	the	end,	because	each	group	needs	to	move	at	its	own	pace	
(Practitioner	26,	Youth	/Faith	sector,	Interviewed	11/5/15).		
I	only	know	how	we	are	going	to	start	the	meeting	tonight,	I	dont	know	
what	else	I	am	going	to	do	with	it.	But	I	will	know	when	I	am	there[Its]	to	
know	the	difference	between	playing	Irish	traditional	music	on	the	fiddle	
and	playing	classical	violin.	So	the	classical	violin	is	to	have	the	musical	
score,	they	will	be	able	to	read	music,	they	understand	the	theory.	Now,	
they	have	art	in	it	of	course	because	they	still	have	to	play	it,	like.	But	they	
are	following	the	score,	whereas	the	traditional	fiddler	is	playing	from	
somewhere	in	there	(pointing	to	heart)	there	is	no	sheet	music	with	them,	
its	like	playing	jazz	its	very	extemporaneous.	Listen	to	the	other	and	you...	
and	thats	my,	very	much	my	approach	to	mediation,	now	its	not	the	only	
approach,	but	its	more	of	how	I	have	done	it	(Practitioner	4,	Mediation	
interviewed	8/12/2014).	
While	lived	experience	and	learning	on	the	job	was	highlighted	as	important,	it	is	
not	to	say	that	this	left	a	completely	atheoretical	articulation	of	practice.	In	fact,	a	
third	of	the	interviewees	spoke	of	attending	third	level	education	and	at	least	four	
interviewees	held	doctorates.	With	few	exceptions,	formal	codified	theory	
(episteme)	was	largely	absent	from	discussions	about	practice	influences.	However,	
other	interviewees	saw	a	disconnection	between	theory	and	practice,	viewing	
theory	as	describing	something	already	being	done	but	being	made	unnecessarily	
inaccessible	and	complex:	
Ive	done	my	masters	obviously	and	studied	different	methodologiesand	
I	have	to	say	to	you	most	of	them	Ive	forgotten	about.	Ive	read	John	Paul	
Lederachs	book	my	goodness,	thats	what	I	was	studying		Ive	never	put	
that	stuff	into	practice	(laughs)	[M]aybe	I	do	need	to	get	more	time	for	
theories	and	all	that	kind	of	stuff.	Part	of	me	kind	of	kicks	against	that	as	
well,	if	Im	being	honest	with	you	because	I	kind	of	think	that	you	can,	
whats	the	word,	make	something	very	complex	which	is	really	not	very	
complex	I	think	the	academics	and	that	sort	get	their	hands	on	stuff	then	
everything	becomes	a	method,	a	theory,	do	you	know	what	I	mean?	And	I	
kind	of	wonder	was	it	ever	really	meant	to	be	that	difficult?	(Practitioner	
25,	Victims	Sector,	Interviewed	8/5/2015).	
Im	not	sure,	for	example,	whether	people	who	are	involved	in	cross-
community	work	read	much	practice	or	read	much	theory,	or	know	much-	
even.		A	lot	of	the	stuff	that	I	suppose	is	called	theory,	when	you	look	at	it-	
you	think	I	do	that.	[I]ts	not	as	if	theyre	taking	the	theory	and	theyre	
applying	it	and	saying	oh	look,	that	contact	theorist	said	this	and	he	said	this	
is	the	way	to	resolve	conflict	and	Im	going	to	take	guidance	from	him	and	
allow	him	to	direct	my	practice-	I	dont	think	theres	very	much	of	that,	but	I	
do	think	for	example,	when	workers	go	on	courses	or	they	familiarise	
themselves	with	theories	go	aye,	I	do	that,	yeah	I	do	that,	thats	something	I	
do,	I	just	dont	call	it	that-	I	dont	have	that	academic	word	to	call	it	that	
there	but	thats	something	I	do	(Practitioner	28,	Interface-based,	
Interviewed	14/5/15.)	
Exceptions	included	those	who	had	used	particular	theorist	or	theorists	to	inform	
their	conflict	analysis	or	peacebuilding,	and	in	these	cases	theory	and	practice	
where	equally	emphasised.	For	example,	one	practitioner	spoke	of	reading	Gandhi	
and	Martin	Luther	Kings	writings	on	non-violence	as	inspiration.	Paolo	Freire	was	
also	mentioned	by	two	practitioners	involved	with	prison	education	as	influencing	
their	ideas	about	education	and	for	deconstructing	the	links	between	power	and	
oppression.	Three	interviewees,	all	members	of	the	Corrymeela	Community	
reflected	explicitly	that	Rene	Girards	theories	of	mimesis	was	influential	in	their	
understanding	of	conflict,	analysis,	and	peacebuilding	approaches.	However,	by	and	
large	for	interviewees,	theories	were	described	as	informing	background	
frameworks	rather	than	providing	a	particular	prescription	for	action.	One	
exception	included	a	practitioner	who	described	utilising	a	specific	multi-
stakeholder	process	to	engender	inclusion	learned	studying	for	his	masters	degree	
in	communications,	however	it	is	was	an	outlier	by	comparison.	
Finally,	the	organic	developmental	approach	was	evident	in	how	practitioners	
conceptualised	how	they	measured	failure	and	success.	The	interviewees	were	
asked	as	part	of	the	research	to	identify	what	had	been	learned	from	practice	
success	and	failure	or	challenges.	Two	faith-based	practitioners	described	that	the	
question	of	success	and	failure	was	itself	problematic	as	they	did	not	categorise	or	
conceptualise	their	activities	as	such.	Instead,	they	either	described	that	they	do	
not	see	anything	as	failure,	that	each	experience	had	inherent	learning,	and	
sometimes-unexpected	things	emerge	out	of	what	might	have	been	initially	thought	
of	as	a	failure:		
I	suppose	the	first	thing	I'd	say	is	that	I	find	it	really	difficult	to	think	of	one	
that	didn't	go	the	way	I	intended,	now	not	because	everything	has	been	hunky	
dory	but	because	of	the	kind	of	process	method	that	I	have-	I	don't	see	the	
end	from	the	beginning.		So	I	become	convinced	that	there	are	some	things	
that	need	to	be	done	.in	the	hope	that	maybe	something	will	happen	but	
more	often	than	not	the	something	I	hope	will	happen,	well	it	isn't	achieved	
but	something	else	happens.So	it's	difficult	to	think	of	one	that	just	didn't	
work	because	it's	not	about	working	or	not	working,	it's	about	doing	
(Practitioner	27,	Faith-based,	Interviewed	12/5/15).		
Such	a	perspective	was	not	unusual,	but	found	itself	more	at	odds	with	
quantitative	output-based	metrics,	a	point	that	will	be	discussed	again	
(see	Chapter	7)	as	one	of	the	challenges	of	a	phronetic	epistemology	of	
practice.	Finally,	two	interviewees	may	be	seen	as	organic	by	the	very	fact	
that	their	peacebuilding	was	wholly	integrated	into	their	practice	without	
explicit	peacebuilding	intent.	These	interviewees,	referred	by	others	
through	snowball	sampling,	did	not	even	see	themselves	as	intentionally	
engaged	in	peacebuilding.	One	was	a	practitioner	involved	with	
transitional	justice	work	in	communities	who	described	an	active	
discomfort	with	the	term	peacebuilding	due	to	her	own	preconceptions	of	
the	term.	The	other	interviewee	was	an	academic	who	used	Freirean	
pedagogy	while	teaching	in	prisons,	who	did	not	know	why	she	was	being	
interviewed	as	she	felt	she	was	not	purposively	setting	out	to	create	
change	but	saw	her	role	primarily	as	an	educator.		
6.2.2	Phronesis	as	containing	nuanced	context-knowledge		
Moving	back	to	its	conceptualisation,	phronesis	is	described	and	illustrated	in	this	
thesis	as	containing	nuanced	context-knowledge	accumulated	over	time.	Context,	
however,	is	not	static	but	does	contain	evidence	of	patterns.	Initially	tacit,	
knowledge	of	these	context	patterns	are	capable	of	being	drawn	upon	in	reflection	
and	recognised	explicitly.	In	this	regard,	judgements	about,	what	to	do,	or	to	
make	sense	of	uncertain	contexts	are	drawn	from	tacit	recognition	of	accumulated	
patterns	of	particulars	gained	from	previous	experiences.	Where	there	is	little	
experience,	rules	for	navigation	are	made	through	trial	and	error,	or	gained	
explicitly	by	others.	As	experience	accumulates,	judgments	are	processed	fluidly	
and	intuitively	against	what	may	or	may	not	be	viewed	as	possible	in	the	given	
habitus	or	given	the	patterns	of	particular	contexts.	As	a	result,	judgments	are	
viewed	as	context-dependent	because	abstract	rules	may	be	unable	to	generate	or	
reflect	navigational	nuance.	Tacit	knowledge	of	patterns	of	context	accumulated	
through	experience	and	over	time	as	found	in	the	interview	data	will	be	evidenced	
below.	
6.2.2.1	Context	patterns	in	Northern	Ireland	
While	it	may	seem	obvious	to	state,	Northern	Ireland	is	a	geographically	small	
region	in	size	with	population	of	just	over	1.8	million	residents	living	per	5,456	
square	miles	(NISRA,	2014).	Despite	its	size,	experiences	of	conflict	have	been	
varied.	Scholars	suggest	that	during	the	Troubles	there	were	regional	differences	in	
the	patterns	of	violence	and	that	regions,	locales	and	neighbourhoods	were	
impacted	by	the	conflict	differently.	As	Fay	et	al,	write:	
There	has	not	been	one	uniform	conflict	in	Northern	Ireland,	rather	the	
Troubles	are	a	mosaic	of	different	types	of	conflict.	Accordingly	the	reality	
of	the	Troubles	is	different	for	people	in	different	locations	and	in	different	
occupations	(Fay	et	al,	1999	p.136).		
It	is	not	surprising,	therefore,	that	these	differences	would	produce	varying	
contexts	of	conflict	and	necessitate	different	approaches	to	peacebuilding.	
Interviews	revealed	tacit	and	at	times,	explicit	knowledge	of	context	patterns	which	
in	turn	were	used	to	inform,	explain,	predict	and	judge	the	context-for-action	to	
ensure	relevancy.	For	example,	interviewed	practitioners	reflected	a	nuanced	
understanding	of	the	way	relationships	were	formed	and	situated	historically	in	a	
given	locale.	These	different	locales	were	informed	by	what	might	be	called	place,	
or	geography.	For	example	whether	the	location	was	an	urban	or	rural	context	and	
its	proximity	to	the	border.		Intersecting	with	place	was	how	communities	
populated	the	space-including	proximities	and	densities	of	minority	community	to	
majority	communities.	In	the	thesis	the	terms	are	conflated	together	as	place-
space.	Each	place-space	influenced	local	identity	construction,	meaning-making	and	
cultural	norms	which	might	be	understood	as	frames	and	also	held	histories	and	
episodes	of	conflict-	understood	here	as	time-timing	and	fault	lines.	Each	of	the	
above	intersected	with	relationships	in	a	particular	context.	Therefore,	
consideration	of	these	nuanced	dimensions	of	context	tacitly	and	explicitly	became	
a	source	of	knowledge	used	to	inform	actions	aimed	at	peacebuilding.		Nuanced	
context-knowledge,	not	just	local	knowledge,	was	important	for	practice	flexibility	
and	relevancy	and	effectiveness	in	designing	appropriate	interventions:	
[I]n	terms	of	why	we	have	done	so	well	and	why	we	have	succeeded	I	think	
its	probably	because	(pause)	we	have	been	incredibly	flexible	and	
responsive	to	the	environment.	So	I	think	reading,	scanning	the	landscape,	
understanding	and	being	able	to	see	whats	coming	down	the	road	and	
being	able	to,	without	compromising	your	principles	or	who	you	are,	
respond	to	that	in	positive	ways.	I	think	that	has	been	one	of	the	key	things	
for	usI	think	scanning	the	landscape,	not	changing	your	practice	but	
adapting	your	practice	and	adapting	your	approaches	to	suit	(Practitioner	
24,	Restorative	Justice,	Interviewed	5/4/15).	
[T]he	reason	I	put	it	[analysis	of	dynamics	of	parading-based	dispute]	around	
the	walls	was,	every	group	that	came	in	here,	and	we	would	have	groups	in	
here	everyday,	I	was	saying	to	them,	look	do	you	agree	with	this	analysis,	do	
you	agree	with	the	things,	and	they	would	add	things	to	it.	They	would	say,	
ah,	you	didnt	think	about	the	paramilitarism	in	the	parade	or	you	didnt	think	
of	the	fact	that	parade,	the	protest	is	Sinn	Fin	orientated	(Practitioner	2,	
Interface	based,	interviewed	4/12/2014).	
For	this	thesis	these	five	intersecting	dimensions	of	the	patterns	of	context	are	
described	as:	place-space,	frames,	time-timing,	fault-lines	and	relationships,	and	
each	will	be	demonstrated	in	the	data	from	interviews.	
Place-Space	
Several	practitioners	addressing	the	dimension	of	context	named	here	as	place-
space	spoke	of	the	proximity	to	the	border	between	Northern	Ireland	and	the	
Republic	of	Ireland	as	a	dimension	that	impacted	on	perspectives,	and	that	those	
living	closest	to	the	border	had	experienced	the	conflict	differently.	Some	describe	
that	distance	from	Belfast	created	an	orientation	towards	taking	a	county	or	
regional	approach	to	look	after	themselves	to	make	things	happen;	others,	given	its	
proximity,	looked	towards	the	Republic.		
For	one	practitioner,	growing	up	near	to	the	conflict-prone	border	county	of	
Armagh	had	played	a	role	in	shaping	her	perspective	on	the	nuances	of	navigating	
relationships.	Her	proximity	to	the	border	had	meant	regular	contact	with	British	
soldiers-	contact	that	had	left	mixed	feelings.	Simultaneously	she	felt	empathy	for	
the	soldiers	and	viewed	them	as	young	men	far	from	home,	while	also	angry	at	
their	treatment	of	her	family	and	friends.	Furthermore	there	was	an	awareness	of	a	
tacit	threat	that	to	be	seen	to	be	too	friendly	might	lead	to	an	accusation	of	
collaborating.	Skills	in	reading	the	nuances	of	such	a	context	was	illustrated	in	this	
same	practitioners	stories	of	practice	and	demonstrated	an	awareness	of	
navigating	the	nuances	of	working	between	urban	and	rural	locales.	This	
practitioner,	now	working	in	peace	education	described	how	knowing	how	to	read	
differing	emotional	sensibilities	influenced	her	decision-making	about	how	she	
might	shape	her	approach	in	different	locales:	
I	think	with	North	Belfast	because	its	their	daily	life	and	the	walls	and	the	
atmosphere	and	the	environment,	its	on	their	sleeve	and	theyll	talk	about	it	
readily.	Whereas	Cookstown,	youve	got	to	dig,	youve	definitely	got	to	dig.	
Theres	a	personality	that	goes	with	each	area	even	in	terms	of	the	group	
work,	and	I	dont	mean	to	stereotype	or	anything	but	the	North	Belfast	ones	
theres	a	lot	of	hilarity,	theres	a	lot	of	messing	about	and	craic	and	banter	and	
talking	over	each	other	but	its	always	difficult	to	facilitate	but	its	like	
amazingthey	have	built	up	such	resiliency,	they	can	have	such	a	personality	
and	theyll	cry	in	front	of	each	other	and	theyll	be	ok	with	that,	emotions	and	
everything	is	just	right	there.	In	Cookstown	theres	more	like	a	politeness	and	
theres	definitely	avoidance	until	people	are	feeling	sufficiently	comfortable		
(Practitioner	30,	Education/Schools,	Interviewed	15/5/16).		
As	another	example,	practitioners	working	primarily	in	urban	environments	
recognised	the	degree	to	which	different	neighbourhoods	and	parts	of	a	city	
contained	their	own	distinctive	nuanced	dynamics	of	place-space.	One	interviewee	
cited	that	how	space	was	occupied	within	place	by	minority/majority	variances	also	
impacted	and	shaped	the	approaches	taken	across	different	interfaces	within	
Belfast.	Describing	the	differences	between	the	interface	communities	of	Short	
Strand/Lower	Newtownards	Road	in	East	Belfast	from	that	of	Suffolk/Lenadoon	in	
West	Belfast,	the	former	was	described	as	an	island	of	green	in	a	sea	of	orange.	For	
the	latter,	the	opposite	applied.	These	dynamics	produced	sensitivities	that	
influenced	what	was	judged	possible	in	terms	of	inter-communal	sharing	of	
resources,	as	sharing	for	the	minority	group	was	perceived	and	framed	as	loss.	As	
one	practitioner,	a	local	Catholic	from	the	West	Belfast	interface	of	Suffolk-
Lenadoon	put	it:	
Thats	a	massive	issue	as	well	when	youre	doing	cross	community	work,	
the	fact	that	theres	an	estate	with	only	730	people	in	it	and	the	other	
estate	is	10,000,	part	of	a	bigger	70,000,	80,000.	So,	some	people	in	Suffolk,	
a	lot	of	people	in	Suffolk	would	say	yes,	this	is	far	better	the	way	it	is	here	
now,	look	at	the	services	that	we	had	that	we	once	didnt	but	then	theres	
other	people	in	Suffolk	would	say	no,	actually	we	liked	it	better	when	it	was	
just	a	big	dilapidated	building	because	it	was	ours,	when	we	share	we	lose	
because	of	the	disparity	in	numbers.	If	we	share	we	lose	(Practitioner	28,	
Interface	Sector,	Interviewed	14/5/15).	
In	this	example,	this	practitioner	recognised	that	shared	space	initiatives	could,	in	
some	circumstances,	mean	one	area	losing	space	that	held	symbolic	and	tangible	
meaning	for	certain	communities,	particularly	where	they	were	already	in	the	
minority.	This	was	particularly	potent	in	contexts	where	communities	had	already	
experienced	a	reduction	of	space.	This	practitioner	understood	and	judged	
reluctance	to	share	space	within	this	context.	Change,	even	if	holding	the	potential	
for	peacebuilding,	also	contained	the	potential	for	loss.	
Frames	
	As	alluded	to	above,	interviewees	evidenced	knowledge	and	judgement	in-context	
in	light	of	frame	interpretation.	Examples	included	anticipating	how	those	either	in	
ones	own	or	another	community	may	view	or	interpret	a	particular	set	of	actions.	
This	knowledge	was	predicated	upon	understanding	the	symbolic	meanings	of	
events,	history,	narratives	and	family	and	community	bonds	deemed	important	
culturally,	in	order	to	be	able	to	anticipate	the	interpretative	framing.	In	the	
example	below	the	interviewed	practitioner,	a	Loyalist	who	was	part	of	an	ex-
combatant	dialogue	group	reflected	his	view	that	a	significant	conflict	was	avoided	
after	explaining	how	a	planned	protest	would	be	perceived:	
Another	example	would	be	when	the	Royal	Irish	Regiment	was	
given	the	Freedom	of	Belfast	City,	com[ing]	back	from	Afghanistan	
and	Sinn	Fin	said	they	were	going	to	have	a	black	flag	protest	in	
Royal	Avenue	and	it	was	a	case	of	listen,	get	into	this	room,	close	
the	door,	do	youse	realise	what	youse	are	doing	here,	literally	the	
blood	will	flow	on	the	street.	These	arent	the	UDR	coming	home	
from	South	Armagh,	youve	got	to	understand	these	are	young	
men	coming	home	from	Iraq	and	Afghanistan	and	youre	going	to	
stop	their	mothers	welcoming	thisbut	they	still	had	their	protest,	
they	done	it	a	couple	of	miles	away	and	I	think	honestly	that	one	
intervention,	I	think	it	saved	livesSee	having	that	one	
conversation	and	saying	youse	dont	realise	what	youre	doing	
here,	they	thought	they	were	playing	to	the	masses	of	the	Royal	
Irish	is	the	old	UDR,	its	not	like	that	and	its	a	case	of	this	is	what	
will	happen	(Practitioner	32,	Ex-Combatant/Social	Economy,	
Interviewed	2/6/15).	
Again,	what	is	being	illustrated	is	the	judgement	of	how	the	proposed	protest	action	
organised	will	be	interpreted	by,	in	this	case,	the	Loyalist	community.	He	frames	his	
interpretation	of	how	he	thought	Sinn	Fin	may	have	intended	it	to	play	to	their	
own	masses	as	if	it	was	the	UDR	coming	from	South	Armagh.	Describing	that	that	
context	has	shifted,	this	event	was	not	that	context	but	a	new	one.	This	is	the	
new	context,	soldiers	coming	from	Iraq	and	Afghanistan	and	it	holds	a	different	
symbolic	meaning,	not	part	of	the	old	previous	contested	context.	Likewise,	
recognising	that	you	are	going	to	stop	their	mothers	welcoming	this	implicitly	
speaks	to	importance	of	the	pride	Loyalist	mothers	would	have	of	sons	who	might	
join	the	army,	which	if	denied,	could	be	a	touchstone	for	conflict.		
Another	example	of	frame	interpretation	was	evidenced	by	practitioners	at	the	
forefront	of	getting	Loyalist	and	Republican	restorative	justice	programmes	off	the	
ground	in	the	late	1990s.	Interviewed	separately,	each	practitioner	articulated	an	
understanding	of	the	importance	of	the	consideration	of	the	frame	by	which	both	
Loyalist	and	Republican	paramilitaries	viewed	change:	
So	what	we	were	in	danger	of	particularly	Emily	within	Loyalism	was	to	say	
to	people	give	up	your	guns	and	go	away.	Now,	give	up	your	guns	and	go	
away	to	men	who	had	a	stake	in	society,	who	had	a	role	in	society	and	
whose	time	and	energy	were	all	about	taking	care	of	their	community,	albeit	
in	a	violent	way,	that	wasnt	good	enough.	That	gap	and	that	vacuum	had	to	
be	filled	with	something	and	the	IRA	and	Sinn	Fein	did	a	really	good	job	
because	they	were	able	to	fill	it	with	a	political	model.	That	wasnt	the	case	
in	Loyalism,	the	DUP,	the	Ulster	Unionists	didnt	want	us,	so	communities	
had	to	mobilise	and	communities	had	to	find	a	way	to	bring	about	change	in	
a	healthy	and	a	positive	way	but	in	a	transformative	way	(Practitioner	24,	
Restorative	Justice,	interviewed	5/4/15).	
Republicans	say,	You	dont	tell	us	who	is	going	to	do	such	a	job.	They	
approached	us	then	through	a	person	who	was	an	employee	of	ours	but	was	
a	long-term	activist	for	them,	retired	as	it	were,	and	heavily	involved	in	
getting	kids	out	from	under	punishment	violence.	[T]hat	was	kind	of	a	
formal	approach,	you	know	the	first	meeting	was	a	series	of	ranks	of	people	
in	Conway	Mill.	And	that	worked,	but	I	mean	it	was	senior	kind	of	IRA	figures	
involved	in	that	as	well	and	reporting	back	to	the	movement.	But	you	see	it	
was	taken	for	granted,	oh	we	can	delve	into	Republican,	no,	you	bloody	
cant.	Not	on	your	initiative	you	cantRepublicans	would	be	quite	imbued	
with	the	concept	that	the	army	council	of	the	IRA	is	the	legitimate	
government	of	Ireland.		I	mean	thats	at	one	level	daft,	but	at	another	level	
it	just	explains	the	idea	of	authority	and,	yeah,	in	a	way,	we	are	in	control,	
we	are	the	state,	so	we	decide	(Practitioner	5,	Justice/Human	Rights,	
Interviewed	3/2/2015).	
Both	quotes	identify	the	importance	of	understanding	the	interpretive	frame	when	
promoting	a	change	process.	In	this	first	quote,	the	practitioner	firstly	reflects	an	
understanding	of	how	Loyalist	paramilitaries	saw	themselves,	as	protectors	of	the	
community.	Secondly,	those	who	had	a	role	in	conflict	would	continue	to	need	a	
role,	but	the	interviewee	claimed	Loyalism	did	not	contain	the	same	opportunities	
found	in	Republicanism	to	transition	towards	political	representation.		The	second	
quote	reflects	the	necessity	for	practitioners	to	understand	the	Republican	
worldview	including	its	views	on	lines	of	control	and	authority.	In	the	latter	case,	
this	practitioner	articulated	that	this	knowledge	was	learned	through	experience,	
as	processes	were	stymied	until	Republicans	decided	they	were	ready	to	engage.			
Time	and	timing	
Time	and	timing	was	also	featured	in	practice	stories	as	a	dimension	of	context	as	it	
might	impact	practice.	Was	it	the	right	time	to	tell	a	certain	story,	to	challenge	a	
norm,	or	to	move	a	group	towards	a	more	risky	form	of	engagement?	Timing	in	this	
regard	was	about	judging	whether	there	was	enough	preparation,	or	whether	
enough	understanding	had	already	been	established	to	move	to	the	next	stage	of	
practice	engagement	with	groups	of	people,	enough	capacity	had	been	built	or	
whether	there	was	the	right	leadership	necessary	to	produce	ripeness	for	change.	
Several	interviewees	reflected	on	time	itself	as	an	ingredient	to	change	and	
reflected	that	the	amount	of	time	it	took	to	progress	change	and	its	pacing	was	
important	to	consider,	as	it	often	did	not	work	to	move	too	fast.		
Timing	was	also	considered	important	as	a	condition	for	readiness.	As	one	
practitioner	described	it	you	might	have	all	the	resources	in	place	but	if	the	time	
was	wrong	a	given	intervention	still	be	unsuccessful:	
Time,	thats	the	thing,	you	need	more	time.		Also	nothing	will	work	if	its	in	
the	wrong	time,	timing	is	one	of	the	most	ignored	concepts.	You	can	have	all	
the	resources	and	money	of	the	day	but	if	its	not	its	right	time	then	it	wont	
work	but	you	can	have	very	little	resources	and	produce	some	big	things	
(Practitioner	15,	Community	Development,	Interviewed	15/4/2015)	
For	some,	readiness	was	established	through	trial	and	error	with	judgment	required	
to	make	this	assessment.	Reflecting	on	a	practice	failure,	one	practitioner	working	
in	Victims	sector	described	an	initiative	designed	to	bring	former	soldiers	and	
policemen	together	with	families	from	the	Nationalist	community	who	had	been	
bereaved	through	state-based	violence.	Although	preparation	had	been	undertaken	
and	all	had	initially	agreed	to	participate,	interaction	had	not	gone	well,	with	both	
sides	reacting	defensively	during	the	meeting.	The	meeting	was	terminated,	and	
ultimately	it	was	judged	by	this	practitioner	as	probably	too	early	for	these	families	
for	this	type	of	engagement.	A	practitioner	who	used	theatre	to	engage	with	
conflict	legacy	themes	described	that	knowing	when	and	how	to	challenge	the	
conflict	narratives	is	partly	about	judging	the	timing,	and	when	an	audience	is	able	
hear	a	story	that	contains	complexity	and	nuance	about	humanity	in	conflict:		
[I]f	you	get	those	narratives	right	and	the	timing	of	when	you	tell	the	
narrative	right	then	the	power	of	them	is	greatly	enhanced	-	the	context	in	
which	you	produce	something	is	absolutely	key.	There	are	certain	stories	its	
not	the	right	time	to	tell	because	youre	going	to	preach	to	the	converted,	
they	will	fall	on	deaf	ears	and	the	core	issue	will	be	lost		people	have	to	be	
ready	to	hear	a	narrative,	not	simply	listen	but	rather	hear	and	fully	engage.	
Production	timing	is	key	(Practitioner	31,	Theatre	Arts,	Interviewed	
26/5/15).	
Fault	lines	
Data	from	interviewees	also	evidenced	a	nuanced	understanding	of	the	systemic	
patterns	of	fault	lines	of	conflict	and	the	ways	in	which	micro-disputes	at	the	
grassroots	and	within	civil	society	and	those	at	the	political	level	impacted	each	
other.	Examples	were	shared	of	disputes	whose	epicentre	began	at	a	political	level	
but	these	disputes	interfered	with	grassroots	progress	on	peacebuilding,	also	the	
converse.	One	interviewee	used	a	metaphor	of	an	oil	rig	to	describe	how	he	
conceptualised	this		inter-relationship,	describing	the	state	as	the	platform	and	civil	
society	as	the	supporting	legs:		
Because	of	the	sensitivities	here,	because	of	a	divided	society	effectively,	it	
doesnt	need	a	big	crisis	in	one	of	the	legs	for	people	to	talk	about	the	
institutions	coming	down,	you	know?...	[T]hings	that	happen	in	civil	society	or	
that	are	about,	particularly,	the	interaction	of	the	state	and	the	people	have,	
you	know,	those	relationships	need	to	be	stable	in	order	to	keep	the	politics	
stable	(Practitioner	5,	Human	Rights,	Interviewed	3/2/2015).	
As	the	research	spanned	such	a	broad	length	of	time	(1965-2015)	interviewees	
identified	within	their	stories	of	practice	a	number	of	examples	which	
demonstrated	both	horizontal	and	vertical	fault	lines.	At	times	the	eruption	would	
have	its	epicentre	in	the	grassroots	as	a	localised	generated	dispute	with	tensions	
travelling	along	fault	lines	to	threaten	progress	made	politically	(vertically).	At	other	
times,	the	opposite	would	occur.	Tensions	at	the	political	level	were	shown	to	
escalate	simmering	disputes	at	the	grassroots,	gaining	velocity	and	momentum	
before	moving	again	to	further	de-stabilise	top-level	political	progress.		The	
presence	of	fault	lines	meant	that	when	space	for	engagement	contracted	at	either	
political	or	community	level,	a	ripple	effect	was	created	vertically	at	political	levels	
and	horizontally	beyond	their	own	locale.	
For	example,	interviewees	named	local	communal	micro-disputes	over	contentious	
parades	in	the	1990s	(Drumcree	and	Dunloy),	or	between	neighbouring	Belfast	
interface	communities	in	parts	of	East	Belfast	(Cluan	Place)	and	North	Belfast	(Holy	
Cross	Dispute	in	the	2000s;	Ardoyne/Twaddell	in	2013)	to	the	broader	Flag	Protest	
of	2012	as	examples	of	disputes	which	had	impacted	practice	in	part	because	
disputes	extended	widely	beyond	their	epicentre	of	localised	origin.	Examples	
shared	illustrated	that	concurrent	disputes	in	different	regions	but	both	at	the	
grassroots	level	could	serve	to	destabilise	each	other,	as	failure	to	make	progress	in	
one-	jeopardised	the	other.	For	example,	one	interviewee	shared	that	failure	to	
make	progress	in	a	parading	dispute	in	the	small	village	of	Dunloy	in	County	Antrim	
had	contributed	to	an	increased	escalation	of	tensions	60	miles	away	in	Portadown	
at	a	Local	Orange	Order	dispute	at	Drumcree	during	the	same	period.	The	same	
practitioner,	who	had	also	intervened	in	a	interface	communal	dispute	East	Belfast	
in	the	early	2000s	(Cluan	Place)	to	resolve	tensions	between	local	residents	on	
either	end	of	that	peace	wall,	recalled	that	the	discovery	of	intelligence	files	at	Sinn	
Fins	Stormont	offices	containing	information	about	Protestant	Loyalist	community	
activists	had	resulted	in	a	withdrawal	of	local	Loyalists	in	the	local	Cluan	Place	
negotiations.		
A	more	recent	illustration	of	fault	lines	was	discussed	within	the	research	was	the	
impact	created	by	a	regional	dispute	that	began	in	December	2012,	locally	known	
as	the	Flag	Dispute.	While	the	epicentre	of	the	conflict	concerned	a	decision	as	to	
whether	the	Union	Flag	would	continue	to	fly	365	days	a	year	outside	of	Belfast	City	
Hall,	the	reverberations	were	felt	much	more	widely	across	the	region	with	areas	
experiencing	localised	rioting	and	protests	over	the	decision	by	the	City	Council	to	
use	a	policy	of	designated	days.		
Given	that	interviewees	represented	a	wide	range	of	civil	society	peacebuilding	
practice,	insights	were	gained	from	practitioners	on	the	impact	of	the	Flag	Dispute	
on	a	variety	of	activities:	youth	and	school-based	partnership	work,	cross-
community	activities,	ex-combatant	dialogue,	efforts	to	promote	non-sectarian	
sports,	restorative	justice,	human	rights	based	advocacy,	and	practice	focused	on	
commemorating	and	acknowledging	the	legacy	of	the	past,	to	name	but	a	few.	
Those	working	mostly	within	grassroots	peacebuilding	described	a	polarising	affect	
within	the	communities	and	a	marked	increase	in	mistrust	and	loss	of	hard-won	
relationships.	One	interviewee,	a	Loyalist	practitioner	involved	in	a	dialogue	project	
between	Republican	and	Loyalist	ex-combatants	described	the	sense	of	betrayal	he	
felt	by	Republican	colleagues	in	the	group	because	they	had	not	consulted	with	
Loyalists	about	the	impact	changing	the	flag	might	have	produced	with	Loyalism	
stating:		
[W]e	thought	communities	are	moving	on	really	well,	we	had	a	reasonably	
settled	assembly	and	then	boom,	the	flag	came	down,	it	came	down	on	the	
Monday	night	and	the	Saturday	we	were	already	agreed	to	go	to	an	event	in	
Dundalk	to	talk	about	the	Maze	prison	siteand	then	this	
happened.[C]onsidering	some	of	the	things	weve	been	through	together	
in	the	past,	really	serious	community	tensions	where	discussions	were	had	
to	head	things	off	so	things	didnt	happen,	I	felt	a	certain	amount	of	almost	
betrayal	that	wed	worked	so	closely	on	things	at	great	personal	risk	and	
then	this	happened	(Practitioner	32,	Ex-Combatant/Social	Economy,	
Interviewed	2/6/15).		
The	dispute	was	perceived	not	only	to	have	setback	practice	at	the	grassroots,	but	
gained	momentum	to	become	a	source	of	contention	to	destabilise	political	level	
negotiations.	For	example	according	to	one	interviewee,	substantial	progress	made	
to	negotiate	the	building	of	a	Conflict	Transformation	Centre	at	the	site	of	the	
former	Maze/Long	Kesh	prison	with	which	they	had	been	closely	involved,	
subsequently	collapsed	as	a	result.		While	the	epicentre	had	been	Belfast,	the	
symbolic	fault	lines	represented	by	the	removal	of	the	flag	hit	a	nerve	within	
Loyalism.	Energised	by	the	grassroots	this	led	to	a	broader	set	of	reverberations	
vertically	to	the	political	level	when	the	DUP	decided	to	completely	pull	the	
Maze/Long	Kesh	development.	Unsurprisingly,	practitioners	evidenced	an	
understanding	that	efforts	at	peacebuilding	initiatives	became	more	limited	when	
this	dynamic	was	set	into	motion	as	space	for	peacebuilding	engagment	contracted.	
Relationships	
All	of	these	dimensions	of	context	describe	up	to	this	point:		place-space,	frames,	
timing,	and	fault	lines	all	deeply	impacted	relationships.	One	practitioner	used	the	
metaphor	of	an	archaeological	dig	and	that	each	layer	uncovered	a	previous	layer	
of	contextual	history:		
Its	personalities,	its	the	family	feuds,	its	individual	actions	that	then	run	
down	through	the	generations	and	in	fact,	in	terms	of	some	of	the	
neighbouring	villages	the	perception	of	this	place	is	its	always	feuding.	I	
think	the	issues	were	always	so	deep	seated	that	it	was	always	going	to	take	
much	more	to	keep	things	going	and	the	slightest	thing	to	push	things	back	
(Practitioner	16,	Community	Development,	interviewed	15/4/15).	
Throughout	transcripts	practitioners	evidenced	the	tacit	knowledge	that	practice	
was	situated	in	contexts	of	systemic	relational	distrust.	During	open	coding	30	of	
the	40	interviewees	made	a	total	of	90	references	to	issues	of	trust	making	it	the	
highest	referenced	analytical	category	of	all	transcripts.	In	fact,	as	mentioned	at	the	
beginning	of	this	chapter,	the	significance	of	trust	building	within	practice	was	
deemed	one	of	the	most	salient	themes	emerging	in	the	research,	and	chosen	for	
theory-building	with	practitioners	as	referenced	in	the	discussion	in	Chapter	5.		
Distrust	and	therefore	trust-building	was	referenced	at	multiple	levels	of	practice	
intervention.	These	patterns	were	most	highlighted	after	a	matrix	was	used	(see	
Appendix	10)	to	map	references	to	distrust	and	trust	at	multiple	levels:	individual,	
inter-	and	intra-group	and	community,	institutional	and	political.	The	matrix	
evidenced	distrust	as	pervasive.	Therefore,	particular	attention	and	investment	in	
building	a	base	level	of	trust	was	necessary	to	progress	change.	While	that	may	
sound	patently	obvious	given	the	divided	nature	of	Northern	Ireland,	it	was	still	
nonetheless	striking	to	see	the	comprehensive	nature	of	the	distrust	evidenced.	For	
example,	distrust	was	evidenced	in	the	form	of	gossip	in	one-to-one	encounters	at	
the	individual	level,	described	by	practitioners	as	a	means	for	testing	loyalty	or	
integrity:	
In	the	more	negative	end	of	things,	they	did	all	pretty	much	all	without	
exception	test	us	in	one	way	or	another,	sometimes	very	subtly	and	
sometimes	very	obviously.	One	of	the	things	that	some	of	the	more	highly	
placed	tended	to	do	was	to	give	us	a	kinda,	racy	bit	of	information,	that	was	
false	with	the	understanding	on	both	of	our	parts	that	if	it	turned	up	
somewhere	they	would	know	it	came	from	us	(Practitioner	11,	Mediation	
Interviewed	31/3/15).	
At	the	community	level	distrust	was	evidenced	throughout	stories	told	by	
practitioners	who	described	paranoia	and	suspicion	when	groups	met	for	the	first	
time,	evidencing	knowledge	of	why	this	might	be	expected,	given	the	context:	
There	was	an	awful	lot	of	mistrust	in	rural	Fermanagh	and	quite	rightly	
because	people	had	been	killing	one	another	for	decades,	people	had	been	
killing	one	another	and	sometimes	they	pointed	to	their	neighbours	five	fields	
across	and	did	they	know	that	was	going	to	happen	to	me	that	day?		Or	who	
brought	those	guys	into	this	community,	how	did	they	know	where	such	and	
such	lived,	you	know	[I]f	you	look	at	Co.	Fermanagh,	many	incidents	are	
burnt	into	peoples	psyche,	right	across	the	county	(Practitioner	34,	Funding	
and	Social	Economy,	Interviewed	8/6/15).	
Peacebuilding	organisations	also	experienced	distrust	from	members	of	the	
communities	in	which	they	worked,	especially	if		they	worked	too	closely	with	those	
who	were	distrusted.	One	practitioner	told	a	story	of	having	their	premises	fire-
bombed	because	community	members	viewed	their	NGO	as	having	worked	too	
closely	with	a	statutory	agency:	
But	if	the	City	Council	or	if	the	police	are	involved	and	move	a	bonfire	on	or	
whatever,	often	we	get	the	blame	for	that	as	an	agency	because	they	think	
that	were	acting	as	touts	and	were	passing	on	information.	So	last	summer	
was	very	difficult	particularly	in	East	Belfast	where	City	Council	had	removed	
several	bonfires,	where	police	were	involved	in	some	situations	and	it	just	
became	very	tense	and	very	difficult	to	the	extent	that	just	after	the	12th	
our	East	Belfast	premises	were	fire-bombed	by	young	people	who	felt	that	
we	were	too	close	to	them	and	wed	taken	that	information	and	wed	
passed	it	onto	the	system	(Practitioner	24,	Restorative	Justice,	Interviewed	
5/4/15.	
Importantly,	one	seasoned	mediation	practitioners	experience	working	between	
senior	police	and	a	local	Republican	community	led	to	a	nuanced	theoretical	insight	
on	the	limits	middle-range	actors	may	have	as	conduits	between	grassroots	and	
senior	level	leadership.	Lederach	views	middle-range	actors	as	useful	to	maintain	
both	horizontal	and	vertical	relationships,	referred	to	as	a	middle-out	approach	to	
peacebuilding	(Lederach,	1997	pp.41-42).	While	on	some	occasions	this	approach	had	
been	effective	in	Northern	Ireland,	in	particular	locales	and	at	particular	times	there	
was	such	heightened	distrust	that	those	who	had	contacts	with	both	top	level	and	
grassroots	actors	became	suspect-	with	the	belief	that	they	must	be	working	to	
someones	agenda.	Thus,	while	integrated	peacebuilding	at	all	levels	of	society	is	
considered	important	in	peacebuilding	(Lederach,	1997),	this	example	illustrated	that	
in	highly	polarised	contexts,	those	attempting	to	maintain	networks	may	themselves	
become	a	source	of	suspicion	and	distrust	because	they	sought	intentionally	to	adopt	
a	middle-out	approach.	The	nature	of	this	pervasive	distrust	and	the	lengths	
necessarily	taken	to	mitigate	its	impact	on	practice	is	a	topic	that	will	feature	
significantly	in	Chapter	7.	
Conclusion	
This	chapter	sought	to	present	the	evidence	of	phronesis	as	an	epistemology	of	
practice	and	demonstrate	it	as	a	significant	epistemology	and	source	of	knowledge	
used	by	peacebuilding	actors	to	make	judgment	about	peacebuilding	decisions.	
Gained	by	personal	history	experience,	organic	development	and	experimentation-	
phronesis	was	formed	by	both	objective	and	subjective	embodied	forms	of	
knowing.	Conceptualised	as	a	form	of	context-dependent	knowledge,	when	
examined	for	this	research,	data	evidenced	among	those	practitioners	interviewed-	
a	tacit	recognition	of	nuanced	context	patterns.		Five	patterns	of	context	were	
evidenced	and	named	as:	place-space,	frame,	time-timing,	fault	lines	and	
relationships	(discussed	in	this	chapter	as	systemic	relational	distrust).	Chapter	7	
seeks	to	build	and	extend	insights	from	the	data	presented	in	this	chapter.	To	do	so,	
it	takes	as	a	primary	focus	on	evidence	found	in	the	data	about	ways	that	
practitioners	use	phronesis	to	progress	social	change	processes.	In	particular,	this	
will	include	phronetic	knowledge	is	used	to	used	to	navigate	the	context	of	systemic	
distrust	through	by	seeking	to	build	trust	and	demonstrate	trustworthiness.		
Chapter	7:	Using	phronetic	knowledge	to	progress	peacebuilding	
Introduction		
Having	established	evidence	of	phronesis	as	a	primary	epistemology	of	practice	in	
the	previous	chapter,	the	aim	of	this	chapter	is	to	demonstrate	how	practitioners	
use	phronetic	knowledge	to	progress	peacebuilding	social	change.	In	particular,	this	
chapters	focus	is	on	ways	that	phronetic	knowledge	was	used	to	navigate	a	context	
of	deep	systemic	distrust.	The	salience	of	trust	as	a	theme	that	emerged	inductively	
from	the	data	is	the	thrust	of	much	of	this	discussion	and	the	chapter	will	illustrate	
the	mechanisms	of	trustworthiness	that	serve	to	mitigate	risk.	The	chapter	next	
moves	back	to	phronesis	as	an	epistemology	of	practice	to	consider	not	only	
successes	but	also	the	challenges	and	tensions	this	epistemology	of	practice	
presents	in	the	current	technocratic	(Mac	Ginty,	2012;	Chandler,	2017)	climate	of	
peacebuilding.	Finally,	the	chapter	concludes	with	a	discussion	of	the	importance	of	
identifying	and	conceptualising	phronesis	for	affording	a	better	understanding	of	
grassroots	and	civil	society	peacebuilding	in	Northern	Ireland.	
7.1	Using	phronesis	to	navigate	context	to	promote	change		
The	ability	to	navigate	context	is	an	important	attribute	of	phronesis	or	practical	
wisdom	as	it	is	conceptualised	in	this	research.	As	stated	in	Chapter	6	the	third	
finding	of	the	research	is	that	according	to	practitioners,	change	processes	are	
enhanced	when	using	this	form	of	knowledge	to	influence	change	processes.	Or	in	
other	words,	peacebuilding	success	was	enhanced	when	practitioners	used	the	
context	to	change	the	context.	How	to	understand,	scan	and	navigate	the	context	
was	a	topic	referenced	by	practitioners	in	the	interviews.		Spoken	of	as	reading	the	
situation	and	scanning	the	landscape,	context	navigation	was	illustrated	both	in	
stories	of	practice	but	also	linked	to	interviewees	recollections	of	early	formative	
experiences	which	had	influenced	their	practice.	Interviewees	for	example,	told	of	
experiences	trying	to	make	sense	of	rules	for	everyday	life	that	contained	
paradoxes,	contradictions	and	exceptions.	For	some,	it	was	why	they	couldnt	
regularly	visit	family	members	who	lived	in	an	East	Belfast	when	they	lived	in	West	
Belfast.	For	others	it	was	the	difference	between	public	and	private	faces.	For	
example,	one	interviewee	reflected	her	clergyman	fathers	church	being	regularly	
picketed	by	Ian	Paisley.	However,	she	recalled	confusion	when	during	face-to-face	
encounters,	Paisley	was	affable,	personable	and	friendly.	Mixed	messages	and	
learning	nuances	of	context	were	tricky	but	perhaps	necessary.	One	practitioner,	a	
Catholic	who	grew	up	in	South	Armagh,	reported	confusion	as	a	child	about	how	to	
relate	to	both	her	own	Nationalist/Republican	community	and	the	other	side,	in	
this	case,	British	soldiers.	This	interviewee	recalled	that	while	she	was	taught	to	be	
polite	and	respectful	to	a	British	soldier,	her	parents	explained	that	this	rule	held	
exceptions.	For	example,	not	to	greet	a	soldier	in	front	of	a	neighbour:		
	[I]f	youre	passing	a	soldier	or	a	policeman	or	whatevermake	sure	and	say	
hello	because	thats	someones	son	or	a	father	or	brother	or	whatever,	and	
quite	often	especially	the	fellas	from	overseas	who	dont	even	know	why	
theyre	here,	but	if	a	car	is	coming	dont	be	seen	to	be	saying	hello.		And	my	
dad	always	would	have	said	its	the	people	in	our	own	community	we	need	
to	be	more	worried	about	in	terms	of	the	IRA	and	the	say	nothing	thing...So	
I	always	would	have	been	aware	who	do	you	trust	and	who	is	on	your	
side?	(Practitioner	30,	Education/Schools,	interviewed	15/5/15)	
This	same	practitioner,	in	stories	of	their	peacebuilding	efforts,	evidenced	a	similar	
ability	to	read	nuances	between	how	practice	differed	depending	on	the	context,	
reflecting	an	ability	to	distinguish	the	particularities	and	variances	of	people	and	
their	sensitivities	to	conflict	across	different	locales.		
Given	the	salience	of	the	theme	of	trust	to	the	research,	this	next	section	drills	
down	to	illustrate	ways	practitioners	found	it	necessary	to	use	context-dependent	
judgement	to	navigate	systemic	distrust	by	gaining	trust.		The	importance	of	
engendering	trust	both	personally	and	in	their	associated	peacebuilding	
intervention	can	be	broadly	discussed	within	four	dimensions.		These	are	named	as:		
 Point	of	entry	trust-	the	importance	of	personal	credibility	of	a	practitioner	
and	peacebuilding	change	initiative.			
 Proxy-trust-	relationships	built	with	key	credible	indigenous	leaders.			
 Process	trust-	gained	through	demonstrations	of	trustworthiness	and	
trustworthy	behaviours	and	sometimes	by	operating	under	the	radar.		
 Pragmatic	trust-	the	usage	of	relationships	and	networks	for	pragmatic	
reasons,	or	as	a	means	of	incentivising	change.		
Each	of	the	following	four	elements	will	be	subsequently	described	and	illustrated	
by	the	data.	
7.1.1	Point	of	entry	trust	
Data	from	interviewees	described	peacebuilding	practice	significantly	enhanced	by	
the	ability	of	a	practitioner	to	garner	trust	with	relevant	stakeholders,	for	example,	
local	residents,	community-based	groups	or	institutions	involved	in	change	and/or	
reform	(such	as	schools,	prisons	and	the	police).	According	to	practitioners	trust	
was	built	in	a	number	of	ways	and	was	important	for	demonstrating	personal	
integrity	and	credibility.	Examples	used	by	interviewees	included:	investing	time	
getting	to	know	people	as	individuals,	committing	to	a	long-term	relationship,	
demonstrating	integrity	by	leading	out	on	risky	projects,	admitting	mistakes,	and	
also	by	challenging	others	when	necessary-	especially	members	of	ones	own	
community.	Without	established	personal	integrity	and	credibility,	practitioners	
reflected	that	peacebuilding	interventions	were	challenged	from	the	beginning:		
Another	significant	part	of	that	is	your	willingness	to	take	responsibility	when	
you	make	an	error	and	everybody	makes	errors,	so	to	be	willing	to	say	hands	
up,	I	got	that	wrong	is	a	big	thingI	think	those	kinds	of	behaviours	make	
change	possible	because	people	will	say	that	what	you're	talking	about	has	
enough	integrity	to	change	for,	if	you	know	what	I	mean?	So	maybe	that's	
about	the	credibility	of	the	direction	in	which	you're	headed	and	what	helps	
people	to	buy	into	that	and	it	makes	it	credible	enough	for	them	to	buy	in	and	
I	think	your	behaviour	helps	to	make	that	change	(Practitioner	27,	Faith-
based,	Interviewed	12/5/15).	
In	addition	to	proving	personal	integrity,	trust	was	also	gained	according	to	
practitioners	by	starting	where	people	were	at,	by	taking	a	non-judgmental	
listening	approach,	or	demonstrating	respect	for	established	internal	protocols.	For	
this	reason,	for	some	practitioners	the	concept	of	a	theory	of	change	contained	a	
troubling	paradox	containing	an	implicit	imposition	that	a	person	was	required	to	
change,	which	jarred	with	taking	a	non-judgmental	approach.	For	several	
practitioners,	the	conscious	desire	to	be	non-judgmental	was	important	because	if	
peacebuilders	came	across	as	about	trying	to	change	people	it	was	actually	counter-
productive.	Behaviour	that	could	be	construed	as	judgmental,	for	those	who	held	
this	view,	was	described	as	ineffective	and	served	to	harm	building	relationships.	
One	interviewee	squared	this	circle	by	describing	his	theory	of	change	in	
emancipatory	language	emphasising	process	more	than	outcome:	
[T]he	theory	of	change	is	underpinned	by	a	belief	that	people	with	find	their	
own	way	in	these	things	and	so	me	pushing	my	belief	will	not,	will	not	actually	
work	in	fact	it	may	only	bring	peoples	defences	up	more.	In	that	sense	the	
theory	of	change	is	trusting	the	individuals	ability	to	take	their	own	journey	
and	trusting	in	the	process	of	what	you	are	doing	rather	than	necessarily	the	
outcome	(Practitioner	6	Youth	and	Schools/Community	Relations,	
Interviewed	6/2/2015).	
I	think	Im	very	resistant,	I	think	my	difficulty	with	all	this	is	that	Im	very	
resistant	to	the	notion	that	youre	going	inyoure	trying	to	build	peace	
because	it	sounds	as	if	youre	being	manipulative	and	it	sounds	as	if	you	are	
going	in	to	do	things	to	people.	What	youre	doing,	youre	not	actively	
making	that	your	main	aim,	youre	doing	your	job	and	youre	doing	it	to	the	
best	of	your	ability	but	youre	not	trying	to	manipulate	the	situation.	If	they	
want	to	end	up	peacebuilding	thats	great	and	it	certainly	would	be	very	nice	
if	they	did	but	that	has	to	be	their	decision[Y]ou	could	go	in	full	of	self-
righteousness	deciding	exactly	what	you	thought	of	people	who	were	in	a	jail	
and	thats	not	actually	the	way	to	change	anything	(Practitioner	17,	
Prison-based	Education,	Interviewed	16/4/15)	
Finally,	demonstrating	commitment,	patience	and	perseverance	were	highlighted	as	
important	ingredients	to	helping	to	build	up	trust	and	credibility	irrespective	of	
whether	success	was	gained:	
[T]he	dissidents	had	a	protest	in	the	Prisons	around	2010,	and	they	had	
wrecked	Roe	House	and	whatever	and	then	they	sent,	asked	me	to	represent	
them	and	see	if	we	could	get	the	conditions	changed.	So	I	and	a	colleague	
spent	a	lot	of	timethree	years	now,	so	I	deal	a	lot	with	them	in	Roe	House	
in	the	prison	there	and	negotiating	with	the	prison	service	there	and	the	
government	about	how	they	should	be	treated.	And	of	course	its	not	just	
altruism	that	does	that	for	me.	I	also	have	a	view	that	if	I	can	build	up	that	
relationship,	get	them	to	trust	me,	do	XY,	at	the	same	time	looking	after	the	
prison	officers	and	have	a	conflict	free	place	in	prison,	a	conflict-free	zone	
then	I	can	go	on	to	the	next	stage	that	they	should	de-commission.	Are	you	
with	me?	Because	building	up	that	trust	its	a	long	process	(Practitioner	12,	
Economic	Sector,	Interviewed	2/4/15).	
7.1.2	Proxy	trust	
Of	the	40	practitioners	interviewed,	all	but	six	were	from	Northern	Ireland.	
However,	there	was	recognition,	even	among	those	from	the	region	that	general	
local	knowledge	wasnt	always	enough.	Practice	relevancy	was	predicated	on	
having	a	good	understanding	of	the	particular	localised	context.		If	not	germane	to	
the	area,	a	credible	point	of	entry	to	the	specific	locale	or	group	was	important	in	
order	to	be	seen	as	relevant	and	to	help	engender	buy-in.		This	was	particularly	true	
when	working	in	institutional	reform.	As	an	example,	one	practitioner	involved	in	
policing	reform	involving	senior	leadership	and	rank	and	file	police	officers,	
attributed	some	of	the	projects	success	to	having	secured	the	trust	of	the	senior	
leadership.	Worth	noting	is	his	distinction	between	gaining	trust	but	not	becoming	
allies	in	order	to	retain	credibility.	This	was	accomplished	over	time	by	investing	in	
the	relationship,	proving	to	ensure	confidentiality,	and	by	respecting	the	extant	
boundaries	and	organisational	culture,	while	at	the	same	time	not	shying	away	from	
challenging	its	practices:	
But	at	the	same	time	we	had	his	trust.	[T]here	was	an	agreement	to	treat	
one	another	respectfully	but	it	was	a	testing	and	testy	agreement	for	about	
the	first	6	or	7	months	and	then	we	came	to	a	point	whererelationships	
between	us	somehow	clicked.	Now,	we	were	never	his	friends,	we	were	never	
his	allies	and	we	never	expected	him	to	be	our	friend	or	our	ally,	otherwise	
the	whole	project	would	lose	its	credibility.	It	was	a	critical	dialogue	project,	
but	he	acknowledged	that	we	had	convinced	him	of	our	bona	fides,	and	we	
acknowledged	to	him	that	he	was	probably	one	of	the	toughest	police	officers	
wed	ever	had	to	deal	with	but	wed	also	knew	that	hed	also	been	through	
some	very	tough	situations	himself	and	we	honoured	what	he	was	doing	
(Practitioner	39,	Education/Research	16/6/15).	
Building	strong	relationships	with	contextually	important	leaders	was	identified	as	
important	to	success,	which	one	practitioner	described	as	pied	pipers.	The	concept	
was	illustrated	again	by	other	practitioners	who	when	speaking	of	practice	
success.	Gaining	the	support	of	particular	people	was	important,	because	whether	
as	a	result	of	their	status,	personal	charisma	or	set	of	networks,	the	pied	pipers	
were	able	to	introduce,	lever	and	build	support	for	introducing	change.	Their	status	
also	allowed	them	to	critique	their	own	community,	and	in	some	cases	help	
facilitate	and	persuade	more	resistant	groups	members.	
The	decision	to	use	ex-combatants	in	youth-based	restorative	justice	was	cited	as	
an	example	of	involving	pied	pipers	to	ensure	buy-in	with	communities.	When	
asked	to	further	expound	upon	why	this	was	important	when	initiating	restorative	
justice	programmes,	one	interviewee	reflected	on	their	own	judgement:	
[It	was]	important	in	this	context	we	needed	to	empower	local	
communities	to	have	a	voice,	to	move	away	from	violence	and	to	grasp	the	
relevance	of	peacebuilding	for	their	context.	[I]t	wasnt	enough	for	us	just	
to	hire	local	youth	workers	with	really	good	skills,	yeah.	We	did	some	of	that	
because	we	needed	that	but	we	also	tried	to	hire	people	that	young	people	
listened	to	in	a	positive	way	and	could	have	influence	over	that.	So	that	was	
the	scary	bit	of	our	model	and	the	quite	risky	bit	of	our	model	but	its	now	
become	probably	good	practice	even	in	the	States	that	ex-offenders	are	the	
people	on	the	street	who	have	credibility	and	resonance	with	young	people	
(Practitioner	24,	Restorative	Justice,	Interviewed	5/4/15).		
Reviewing	the	quote	again	as	an	illustration	of	the	use	of	phronesis	suggests	that	
the	practitioner	believed	that	those	with	the	technical	skills,	youth	workers	were	
not	enough.	There	was	another	type	of	knowledge	needed	that	she	believed	would	
carry	weight	with	the	young	people,	and	build	capacity	to	help	establish	restorative	
justice.	This	instinct	to	utilise	those	with	ex-combatant	backgrounds	with	internal	
community	sway	from	the	beginning	has	been	described	as	a	part	of	the	success	of	
the	development	of	restorative	justice	in	both	Loyalist	and	Republican	communities	
(Shirlow	and	McEvoy,	2008	pp.	126-132).	
Similar	to	the	above	example,	other	practitioners	used	pied	pipers	by	bringing	
individuals	perceived	to	be	resistant	to	change-	to	lead	and	vanguard	change.	The	
story	below	describes	a	dialogue	initiative	between	senior	Republicans	and	police	
which	emerged	after	the	Patten	reforms	in	order	to	build	support	for	community	
policing	in	Republican	and	Nationalist	areas.	The	project	was	successful	in	its	pilot	
stage	and	was	rolled	out	across	Northern	Ireland	after	Sinn	Fin	joined	the	Policing	
Board:	
We	had	a	police	team	with	us	as	well	we	had	a	group	of	officers	who	
worked	quite	closely	with	us	from	each	rank,	and	one	of	them	[Policeman	A],	
his	dad	had	been	killed	by	the	IRA.	We	made	sure	we	had	officers	that	they	
werent	the	soft	end	they	were	the	hard	hard	end	of	policing.	We	had	
[Policeman	X	]	who	was	known	as	swamp	clearance.	[Policeman	X	]	was	
English,	moustache	and	when	you	saw	him,	he	was	hate	figure	[Policeman	
X]		became	District	Commander	here	and	he	completely	bought	into	the	
project,	so	we	had	[Police	X]	we	had	[Police	A],	whose	father	had	been	
killed[Also]	one	of	the	things	that	[Police	X]	did	which	I	think	was	critically	
important,	was	that	he	went	to	the	police	family,	he	went	to	the	disabled	
police	officers	and	to	the	Red	Cross,	the	George	Cross	Association,	the	Police	
Widows	and	he	met	with	them	and	he	told	them	what	we	were	doing	
because	he	brought	them	into	the	process	(Practitioner	2,	Interface	based,	
interviewed	4/12/2014).	
As	this	quote	describes,	the	initiative	was	further	enhanced	when	the	wider	
networks	in	the	police	family	were	also	engaged	such	as	the	disabled	police	officers	
and	police	widows	associations.	In	cases	such	as	this,	proxy-trust	developed	with	
affiliated	groups	such	as	an	extended	network	and/or	families	had	a	generative	
effect.	One	schools-based	peacebuilding	practitioner	described	that	once	trust	had	
developed	with	parents-	a	result	of	specifically	focused	group	work	with	parents-	it	
further	raised	the	projects	credibility	with	certain	School	Principals.	Parents,	in	this	
case,	became	a	source	of	proxy-trust,	which	provided	an	entry-point	for	the	
practitioner	to	ensure	buy-in	with	senior	school	leadership.	Practitioners	
intervening	in	prisons	found	similarly	that	building	trust	with	prisoner	families	
helped	to	build	proxy-trust	with	prisoners.		Following	from	this,	trust	built-up	with	
prisoners	aided	the	practitioners	credibility	with	the	group	perceived	to	be	least	
trusting,	in	this	case,	prison	officers.		
One	practitioner,	a	Republican	ex-hunger-striker	recognised	that	he	also	had	these	
qualities.	His	status	as	a	former	hunger	striker	earned	him	credibility,	which	he	
subsequently	used	at	times,	to	promote	change:	
There	has	been	a	couple	of	times	where	I	have	written	to	An	Phoblacht.	I	
wrote	an	article	saying	about	when	I	was	at	the	vigil	which	was	outside	of	
City	Hall	for	Ronan	Kerr	who	was	killed.		I	said	about	standing	there	feeling	a	
bit	uncomfortable	because	you	know,	I	am	standing	with	these	other	people	
who	I	know	that	I	am	former	IRA	and	looking	at	you	and	going	Oh	Aye	but	
then	at	the	end	of	the	day	feeling	that	I	should	be	there	and	it	was	right	that	
I	was	there	(Practitioner	7,	Republican	Ex-Combatant	interviewed	
9/2/2015).			
Interviewees	evidenced	nuanced	understandings	of	why	trusted	leadership	was	so	
important-	as	well	as	the	risks	associated	with	promoting	change.	Two	phrases	aptly	
sum	up	knowledge	of	these	dilemmas.	The	first,	putting	your	head	above	the	
parapet	was	spoken	of	regularly	in	interviews	when	referring	to	those	who	were	
willing	to	take	a	risk,	articulating	that	individuals	who	advocated	for	change	often	
did	so	at	personal	cost.	The	cost,	particularly	when	this	phrase	was	used,	was	often	
an	attack	or	potential	ostracisation	or	scapegoating	by	members	of	their	own	
community.	For	example,	one	interviewee	working	in	the	area	recalled	that	one	of	
the	women	who	had	been	instrumental	in	developing	shared	community	
development	and	regeneration	between	the	Suffolk	and	Lenadoon	interface	had	
been	the	recipient	of	abuse	and	targeted	because	of	her	cross-community	work.		
Other	practitioners	told	similar	stories	that	illustrated	the	high	degree	of	risk	that	
those	taking	leadership	decisions	made	which	at	times	were	unpopular	with	others.	
One	practitioner,	an	experienced	mediator,	recounted	several	stories	whereby	local	
community	leaders	and	those	affiliated	with	the	Orange	Order	who	involved	in	
negotiating	parading	disputes	had	followers	who	had	turned	against	them:		
At	the	end	of	the	process,	we	went	and	facilitated	a	meeting	in	the	hall	with	
the	Nationalists,	and	it	was	stormy	but	they	came	on	their	word.	The	
Orangemen	who	did	the	deal	with	us	were	savaged.	A	crowd	came	in	buses	
packed	the	meeting	chased	them	out	into	the	hall,	pinned	them	against	the	
wall	with	tables,	scared	the	bejeezus	out	of	them	(Practitioner	4,	Mediation,	
Interviewed	8/12/2014).	
In	this	particular	example,	the	interviewee	recalled	that	he	had	been	in	contact	with	
one	of	the	Orangemen	six	years	after	the	event	and	later	learned	that	the	
individuals	children	had	suffered	harassment	at	school,	his	house	had	been	
targeted,	and	the	experience	had	dissuaded	him	of	future	involvement	in	similar	
peacebuilding	negotiations	or	efforts.			
These	stories	indicate	an	implicit	and	explicit	knowledge	of	the	fine	line	between	
being	prepared	to	take	leadership	and	the	need	to	maintain	credibility	at	ones	base	
and	can	be	applied	both	to	leaders	at	the	community	or	organisational	level.	It	also	
illustrates	one	of	the	concepts	that	surfaced	in	chapter	4	(in	the	historical	account	
of	practice)	which	was	described	as	a	Janus	face	approach	to	relationships.	The	
Janus	face	necessitates	an	ability	to	step	forward	into	a	change	process	while	
maintaining	credibility	within	ones	own	community.	David	Ervine,	a	progressive	
Loyalist	politician	who	participated	in	the	Good	Friday	Agreement	negotiations,	was	
for	example,	mentioned	by	three	different	interviewees	as	an	example	of	a	leader	
who	was	able	to	walk	a	line	between	maintaining	credibility	within	his	own	
community	while	advocating	change.	Ultimately,	practitioners	reflected	that	
leadership	for	change	necessitated	buy-in	from	followers,	requiring	leaders	who	
could	adequately	connect	to	and	reflect	the	concerns	of	those	least	open	to	change	
in	their	own	community.		
7.1.3	Process	trust	
Highly	visible	in	stories	of	peacebuilding	practice	success	and	failure,	processes	
themselves	also	needed	to	be	perceived	as	trustworthy.	Despite	utilising	differing	
methodological	approaches,	such	as	drama,	dialogue,	sport,	restorative	practices,	
mediation,	or	community	development,	practitioners	reflected	an	awareness	of	the	
importance	of	building	into	the	peacebuilding	intervention	or	activities	assurances	
to	demonstrate	trustworthiness.	For	example,	dimension	of	process	named	as	
particularly	important	for	success	and	for	ensuring	ownership	was:	being	as	
inclusive	as	possible,	emphasising	the	importance	of	being	open	to	listening	to	all	
viewpoints,	and	ensuring	that	processes	included	transparency	accountability,	and	
reliability.	Finally,	conversely	practitioners	cited	as	important	that	at	times	
processes	demanded	invisibility-	to	operate	under	the	radar	so	as	not	to	
jeopardise	hard	won	trust	from	being	lost.	
To	illustrate	the	first	of	these	points	on	inclusiveness-	examples	were	shared	which	
highlighted	the	importance	of	spending	time	to	get	to	know	and	involve	those	who	
had	previously	been	excluded,	or	who	might	be	viewed	as	potential	spoilers	in	
peacebuilding	intervention.	Instead	of	being	viewed	as	a	problem,	interviewees	
described	that	such	potential	spoilers	needed	to	be	listened	to,	included	and	
involved	in	peacebuilding.	Examples	of	the	significance	of	process	trust	included:	
the	purposeful	engagement	with	politically	motivated	prisoners	in	the	Maze	in	the	
1980s,	community	development	and	peacebuilding	work	with	community	
gatekeepers	in	the	small	village	of	Harryville	outside	of	the	town	of	Ballymena	in	the	
North	East	of	the	region	during	a	localised	community	dispute	in	the	early	2000s,	to	
more	recent	efforts	to	involve	Loyalists	in	deterring	racist	hate	crime	by	integrating	
new	migrants	into	local	communities.	In	one	example,	an	educator	in	an	integrated	
school	felt	that	a	key	to	his	success	in	a	school-based	mediation	stemmed	from	the	
fact	that	those	with	the	most	extreme	views,	and	who	had	been	continuing	to	
create	conflict	and	discord	in	the	school,	were	included	in	the	process.	Allowing	all	
voices	to	be	heard	was	echoed	strongly	by	practitioners	so	that	the	complexity	
could	be	fully	acknowledged.	
Practitioners	described	that	efforts,	even	after	extensive	involvement	with	
stakeholder	groups	could	be	stymied	by	powerful	individuals	who	blocked	change.	
However,	processes	ultimately	gained	by	striving	to	be	inclusive,	working	with	
possible	gatekeepers	from	the	outset.	Several	practitioners	told	stories	that	
illustrated	judgment	calls	about	how	to	work	to	include	those	who	have	the	power	
to	block	progress.	The	following	story	sheds	some	light	on	one	practitioners	
reflective	process	and	the	subsequent	changes	in	her	judgment	and	practice,	based	
on	learning	from	the	experience	that	peacebuilding	was	enhanced	working	with	
potential	gatekeepers:	
[W]e	had	a	local	project	worker..	On	the	surface	some	things	seemed	to	
be	going	well,	and	we	felt	we	were	making	slow	progress,	till	her	house	was	
shot	up.	And	she	had	to	get	out	under	police	protectionThat	was	after	a	
few	years,	and	I	went,	weve	done	something	really	wrong	here,	Im	not	sure	
what	it	is	but	I	have	to	sit	down	and	analyse	it	and	see	where	we	are	going.	
So	that	was	something	that	did	not	work	well	I	concluded	that	actually,	I	
had	maybe	colluded	with	some	of	the	authorities	by	saying,	If	that	persons	
involved	or	that	persons	involved	we	arent	touching	it,	and	there	will	be	
no	services	put	in	or	whatever.	[C]ertain	people	werent	round	the	table.	
That	was	big	learning	for	me,	to	say,	actually	that	conversation	should	have	
been	going	on	parallel	from	the	outsetand	[I	should	have	been]	trying	to	
get	to	know	them,	and	understand	them.	Trying	to	explain	what	you	were	
trying	to	do[T]hat	was	where	my	learning	was-	that	from	then	[on]since,		
right	from	the	outset.	No	those	people	have	to	be	around	the	table,	and	it	
did	workAnd	the	difference	that	that	made	and	the	journey	since	has	been	
quite	incredible	on	the	estate.		So,	it	went	from	having	every	other	house	
boarded	up	to	now	a	waiting	list	to	get	into	the	estate.		So,	it	ended	up	being	
a	success	story	but	it	was	a	disaster	at	the	time	(Practitioner	3	Community	
Development,	interviewed	8/12/2014).	
Practitioner	stories	demonstrated	that	when	participants	were	widely	included	in	
consultation	and	decision-making	processes,	this	helped	to	build	ownership.		One	
practitioner	who	worked	to	promote	inclusivity	and	anti-sectarian	behaviour	in	
International	football	attributed	a	great	deal	of	the	projects	success	to	a	careful	
process	of	including	fans	representing	all	of	the	supporters	clubs	in	all	stages	of	the	
process.	He	articulated	that	initially	fans	were	surprised	to	be	asked	to	participate	
but	had	stepped	up	and	taken	ownership	of	working	to	transform	the	atmosphere	
at	the	football	matches	in	creative	ways.		However,	he	attributed	that	change	to	
fans	that	had	been	included	from	the	beginning-which	in	his	perception	was	the	key	
to	ensuring	ownership:	
I	think	that	was	probably	the	turning	point	for	actually	getting	them	on	
board	and	nobody	had	ever	invited	them,	it	was	a	simple	thing	like	inviting	
them	into	the	IFA	building	and	putting	on	food	for	them	was	like,	the	fans	
couldnt	believe	that	was	happening,	it	was	a	funny	moment.		But	I	think	that	
was	a	bit	of	a	turning	point,	just	talking	to	them	direct	and	I	said	to	them	at	
one	point	during	the	meetings,	we	cannot	achieve	this	without	the	
supporters,	you	know,	this	whole	thing	will	fall	on	its	face	if	you	guys	dont	
buy	into	it	and	they	sort	of	took	it	and	run	with	it.		And	in	the	early	days	of	
Football	For	All	it	was	seen	more	as	a	fans	initiative	than	an	IFA	initiative	and	
I	was	happy	about	that	because	thats	what	you	wanted,	that	was	a	sign	that	
it	was	working	I	think	(Practitioner	35,	Sports-based,	Interviewed	9/6/15).	
In	addition	to	being	inclusive,	listening	was	also	considered	an	important	
component	of	building	up	trustworthy	processes.	While	it	may	be	perceived	as	
basic,	listening	opportunities	were	described	at	times	as	a	most	important	and	
necessary	dimension	in	establishing	trusting	relationships,	reducing	fear,	and	re-
humanising	each	other.	One	Republican	ex-combatant,	now	involved	in	restorative	
justice	reflected	that	in	the	context	of	working	with	those	he	would	traditionally	
considered	enemies,	such	as	the	police,	listening	to	understand	had	become	
increasingly	important	to	his	practice:	
For	me,	I	think	the	biggest	key	to	peacebuilding	in	this	whole	place	is	
listening	to	people,	everybody	listening	to	each	other,	no	matter	what,	how	
bad	it	is	or	how	brutal	its	going	to	be,	going	into	the	room	and	sitting	down	
and	having	the	conversation	and	trying	to	see	it	from	the	other	persons	
point	of	view.	You	dont	always	agree	but	you	say	I	hadnt	really	thought	of	it	
like	that	but	we	can	agree	to	disagree	but	at	least	were	sitting	here	talking.	
And	I	think	that	helpedSo	I	think	really	about	what	Ive	learnt	is	listening	to	
people	and	that	might	sound	as	if	its	a	script	but	for	me	its	true	
(Practitioner	38,	Restorative	Justice,	Interviewed	16/6/15).	
Behaviours	which	demonstrated	transparency,	accountability	and	reliability	were	
also	cited	by	several	practitioners	as	important	to	building	process	trust,	by	being		
straight-forward,	and	not	to	blow	smoke	but	only	promise	what	could	be	
delivered.	To	explain	why	it	was	so	important	to	be	as	straightforward	as	possible,	
another	practitioner	attributed	it	to	the	experience	of	conflict	which	is	often	
fuelled	by	rumour	and	innuendo.	Consequently,	straightforwardness	was	a	
natural	antidote		(Practitioner	27,	Faith-based,	Interviewed	12/5/15).	
Finally,	practitioners	also	described	the	necessity	to,	at	times,	purposefully	operate	
under	the	radar	at	times	and	to	become	more	invisible	if	certain	contexts	deemed	
too	risky	or	threatening	to	be	more	explicit	about	peacebuilding.	The	metaphor	of	
the	Trojan	horse	was	used	by	several	practitioners	across	different	sectors,	in	
particular	those	that	used	other	mediums	to	deliver	peacebuilding	aims	such	as	
through	arts	and	sports-based	activities.	In	discussion	with	a	practitioner	of	digital	
arts,	film	and	technology,	they	explained	that	twenty	years	ago	they	had	been	
commissioned	to	produce	a	childrens	cartoon	of	the	mythological	story	of	
Cuchulainn	the	Irish	Celtic	Warrior.	They	began	showing	the	film	in	local	schools	as	
part	of	the	outreach,	finding	that	Protestant	schools	particularly	receptive	to	the	
animated	story	and	a	non-threatening	way	to	look	at	culture	and	identity.	The	
interviewee	recalled	the	conversation	he	had	with	the	teacher:	
[T]his	is	a	new	experience	for	us.	And	as	well	as	that	thanks	for	coming	with	
Celtic	mythology	because	we	cant	deal	with	that	stuff,	but	we	can	as	a	
cartoon		So,	that	was	a	light	bulb	moment	for	us.	If	we	do	stuff	about	
history	and	cultural	identity	and	mythology	and	things	here	in	animation	
then	it	wont	be	seen	as	coming	in	as	propaganda	for	Republicanism	and	all	
this	type	of	stuff.that	kids	didnt,	that	teachers	didnt	find	this	threatening	
(Practitioner	1,	Arts	and	Culture	Sector,	Interviewed	27/11/15).	
The	under	the	radar	approach	was	one	they	continued	to	adopt	in	their	practice,	
teaching	digital	arts	but	doing	so	in	ways	that	encouraged	an	interrogation	of	ideas,	
to	disturb	monolithic	notions	of	identity.	An	under	the	radar	approach	was	also	
particularly	spoken	about	in	circumstances	whereby	keeping	activities	quiet	was	a	
necessity	for	their	continuance,	implying	that	there	was	a	certain	level	of	tacit	
approval	for	such	activities.		
In	other	circumstances	the	under	the	radar	approach	was	used	as	a	conflict	
prevention	tool	to	keep	tensions	from	escalating.	One	practitioner	involved	in	
interface	work	described	that,	It	takes	an	awful	lot	of	work	for	nothing	to	happen	
(Practitioner	32,	Loyalist	Ex-Combatant/	Social	Economy	interviewed	26/5/14)	and	
that	many	quiet	behind	the	scenes	conversations	needed	to	take	place	at	times	to	
de-escalate	potential	micro-level	conflicts.	Practitioners	involved	in	inter-communal	
dialogue	spoke	of	occasions	when	in	order	to	get	certain	people	together	in	the	
same	room,	they	had	to	obscure	the	true	purpose	of	the	meeting:	
So	the	parades,	the	North	and	West	Belfast	Parades	forum	was	set	up	to	try	
to	and	have	a	cover	thing		[To]	find	a	way,	that	the	Orange	Order	can	be	
involved	in	discussions	with	the	residents	groups.	So,	the	North	and	West	
Belfast	Parades	Forum	was	set	up,	the	Orange	Order	are	in	that	along	with	
the	paramilitaries,	that	became	the	way	that	they	could	talk	(Practitioner	2,	
Interfaces,	Interviewed	4/12/204).	
Similarly	those	working	with	ex-combatants	on	restorative	justice	projects	
articulated	a	similar	indirect	approach	in	order	to	gain	their	support	for	approaches	
moving	away	from	violence:	
We	were	doing	the	work	with	young	people	but	also	as	part	of	that	we	were	
educating	paramilitaries	about	a	different	way	of	being	but	it	was	happening	
Emily	very	informally,	we	knew	it	was	happening	and	we	were	doing	it	
deliberately	but	we	were	engaging	them	in	very	informal	ways	that	they	
werent	actually	aware	that	the	process	was	good	for	them	(Practitioner	24,	
Restorative	Justice	Sector,	Interviewed	5/4/15).	
Under	the	radar	was	seen	to	be	an	effective	way	to	introduce	change	processes	
that	might	otherwise	cause	threat.	It	was	reflected	that	while	it	allowed	work	to	
progress	at	times	of	higher	risk,	paradoxically	having	to	keep	a	low	profile	also	may	
at	times	contain	the	types	of	changes	that	can	take	place.		
7.1.4	Pragmatic	trust	
Building	relationships	and	developing	key	networks	were	strongly	linked	to	practice	
success.	Once	built,	networks	could	be	instrumentalised	for	a	variety	of	purposes.	
Networks	were	mentioned	explicitly	as	an	important	and	necessary	ingredient	in	
peacebuilding	initiatives	by	17	sources	and	evidenced	also	in	the	stories	of	practice,	
in	fact	several	stories	overlapped.	In	the	sample	of	40	there	was	noteworthy	
repetition	of	key	names	and	evidence	of	colloborations	and	connections	between	
interviewees	who	would	not	have	known	they	were	both	being	interviewed.		
Interviewees	who	spoke	of	the	importance	of	networks	commented	on	them	as	
important	as	a	conduit	to	achieving	shared	goals.	One	interviewee	involved	in	the	
prisons	in	the	1980s	described	the	relationships	and	networks	established	during	
those	years	with	political	prisoners	representing	paramilitary	organisations.	Their	
view	was	that	this	early	work	helped	to	pave	the	way	for	contacts	to	be	built	across	
paramilitary	structures	which	built	a	foundation	later	strengthened	and	formalised	
during	and	after	the	ceasefires	and	peace	negotiations.	That	insight	prompted	the	
mediator	to	adopt	the	principle,	Build	networks	before	you	need	them	
(Practitioner	11,	Mediation	interviewed	31/3/15).	For	this	interviewee	having	
networks	in	place	meant	that	when	the	timing	was	right,	the	people	infrastructure	
was	already	in	place.	
Other	stories	of	practice	featured	a	reflection	on	the	general	location	of	civil	society	
organisations	as	a	conduit.	One	practitioner	working	in	the	human	rights	field	
described	adopting	a	role	acting	as	a	translator	between	different	levels	of	society.		
His	practice	story	described	working	with	both	paramilitary	leaders	and	officials	in	
the	Northern	Ireland	Office	prior	the	Good	Friday	Agreement	on	discussions	on	
matters	relating	to	prisoner	releases:	
[O]ne	of	the	interesting	things	about	both	thatwas	the	intermediary	role	
of	civil	society	actors.	I	mean	there	is	a	phrase	I	have	used,	the	ability	to	
move	between	different	worlds	of	experience	and	understanding.	So,	you	
know,	you	be	talking	effectively	to	the	IRA	in	the	morning	and	talking	to	the	
NIO	in	the	afternoon	on	the	same	subject	but	you	kind	of	use	different	
languageI	dont	mean	just	terminology	but	how	you	kind	of	structured	
the	argument,	you	know	(Practitioner	5,	Human	Rights,	Interviewed,	
3/2/15).		
Finally,	networks	were	featured	as	important	vehicles	for	sharing	information;	
connecting	community-based	initiatives	as	exemplars	to	draw	inspiration	from	and	
learn	from	each	others	practice,	to	bolster	opportunities	to	impact	policy	at	a	wider	
level,	or	more	pragmatically	to	improve	the	quality	of	life	and	resources	in	the	local	
community.	Practitioners	spoke	explicitly	and	implicitly	of	the	hooks	or	carrots	that	
networks	created	that	brought	people	into	a	peacebuilding	activity	or	process	
either	by	the	promise	of	increased	resources	(access	to	new	technology,	sports	
experiences,	community	halls,	trips)	or	with	the	prospect	that	involvment	would	
generate	a	tangible	positive	outcome	for	institutions,	communities,	or	individuals.		
Several	practitioners	working	in	interface	areas	describe	that	building	networks	had	
resulted	in	positive	benefits	for	the	whole	area.	Decreased	violence	often	meant	
that	residents	could	remove	boards	from	their	windows,		it	increased	access	to	
shops,	created	new	economic	activity	in	the	area,	or	led	to	increased	housing	
values.	One	practitioner	describing	improvements	tackling	interface	tensions	
commented	these	tangible	outcomes	helped	to	build	commitment	for	
peacebuilding	intercommunal	trust-building	dialogue:	
When	they	took	that	wood	down,	and	they	were	able	to	let	light	in	their	
house,	that	is	a	tangible	result	for	those	people.	Whenever,	the	gate	can	
open	later,	that	is	a	tangible	result.	Whenever	there	isnt	stones	being	
thrown,	whenever	kids	arent	going	in	and	attacking,	whenever	windows	
arent	being	broken,	thats	tangible	(Practitioner	2,	Interface	based,	
interviewed	4/12/14).	
These	two	communities	coming	together	initially	in	the	early	1990s	and	
that	was	kind	of	the	background	of,	it	was	before	the	ceasefire	so	the	
political	conditions	werent	as	conducive	then	as	they	are	now.	[T]he	initial,	
securing	the	buy-in	of	the	community	you	had	to	appeal	to	peoples	own	
self-interest.	So	you	werent	saying	oh	lets	work	with	the	other	side	or	lets	
get	involved	in	this	project	because	its	the	right	thing	to	do,	because	we	
want	a	shared	future	and	because	morally	its	the	right	thing	to	do,	no,	
actually	its	going	to	benefit	our	community	(Practitioner	28,	Interface-
based,	Interviewed	14/5/15).	
Practitioners	indicated	there	were	positive	outcomes	when	networks	were	used	for	
pragmatic	reasons.		Recent	shrinking	budgets	in	the	statutory	sector	(i.e.	education,	
policing)	have	made	it	economically	prudent	to	take	advantage	of	additional	
resources.		Practitioners	who	identified	using	pragmatic	networks	as	a	lever	found	it	
useful	in	schools,	for	example,	to	engender	support	for	peacebuilding	as	it	provided	
additional	support	and	educational	resources	to	the	institution:	
I	think	its	probably	one	of	the	most	sectarian	towns	in	Northern	Ireland	and	
go	back	five	years	ago	there	wouldve	been	no	contact	between	the	schools	
whatsoever..but	they	now	share	classes,	our	kids	go	to	their	school	and	
their	kids	come	to	our	school.	For	the	simple	reason	that	they	cant	provide	
the	curriculum	on	their	own	because	they	havent	got	enough	pupils,	so	the	
only	way	they	can	actually	recruit	them	is	to	come	to	our	school,	the	only	
way	they	can	get	A	level	subjects	is	to	come	to	our	school	and	we	go	to	their	
school	for	some.	Now,	five	years	ago	that	would	have	been	unheard	of;	it	
hasnt	yet	changed	the	sectarian	dynamics	of	the	town	that	much	but	its	
happening,	you	know,	and	it	brings	you	back	into	this	thing	around,	the	
balance	between	the	attitudinal	approach	which	has	to	be	there	as	well,	but	
you	actually,	you	need	to	have	this	thing	about	changing	behaviour	and	using	
whatever	levers	you	have	at	your	disposal	to	change	it	(Practitioner	18,	
Funding/Community	Relations	Interviewed	17/4/15).		
However,	practitioners	also	commented	on	the	downside	of	using	networks	for	
purely	pragmatic	purposes,	particularly	where	it	has	been	attached	to	money	and	
funding.	In	these	cases,	there	was	strong	feeling	that	the	incentivisation	to	build	
relationships	to	receive	funds	meant	that	there	was	a	greater	likelihood	of	both	a	
given		project	and	associated	relationships	ending	when	funding	concluded.	
7.2		Challenges	associated	with	phronetic	epistemologies	of	practice	
There	were	several	themes	that	emerged	within	the	data	that	speak	to	tensions	and	
challenges	for	practitioners	using	a	phronetic	epistemology	of	practice.	Stories	of	
practice	failures	were	particularly	instructive	in	gaining	a	clearer	picture	of	what	
did	not	work	and	why	in	a	given	intervention.	While	it	is	not	surprising	that	
interventions	faced	challenges,	it	was	noteworthy	that	there	were	broad	areas	of	
agreement	about	sources	of	tension	across	the	variety	of	sectors	of	practice.	Once	
again,	the	conceptualisation	of	phronesis	as	a	way	of	knowing	and	learning,	as	a	
form	of	nuanced	context-knowledge,	and	a	source	of	knowledge	used	to	promote	
relevant	change,	lent	explanatory	power	and	consequently	will	be	used	again	as	a	
structuring	device	in	this	section.		
7.2.1	Professionalisation	and	reflective	practice	
Professionalisation	of	the	field	of	peacebuilding	was	described,	by	practitioners,	as	
having	impacted	and	influenced	practice	in	both	positive	and	negative	ways.	Those	
who	highlighted	benefits	spoke	of	growing	partnerships	with	statutory	bodies	and	
being	viewed	as	both	credible	and	legitimate.	For	example,	restorative	justice	
practitioners	working	in	the	field	since	the	late	1990s	recognised	that	it	was	their	
expertise	that	had	been	tapped	when	youth	justice	agencies	mainstreamed	
restorative	conferencing,	and	it	was	their	organisations	that	had	trained	most	of	the	
statutory	justice	sector.	One	arts-based	organisation	spearheading	digitally	based	
culture	and	history	conflict	education	resources	became	the	lead	agency	to	develop	
a	new	digital	arts	A	level	in	Northern	Ireland	for	the	Education	Authority.		
However,	some	practitioners	described	that	partnerships	with	statutory	bodies	and	
funders	led	to	increased	pressures	to	prove	effectiveness	and	impact.	In	some	
cases,	this	was	linked	to	having	to	translate	their	more	organic	non-linear	views	of	
practice	into	metrics	that	measured	outputs	and	outcomes.	As	one	practitioner	
described:	
[S]oft	outcomes	are	really	those	things	that	really	you	cant	really	measure,	
its	like	increased	confidence.	theyre	anecdotal	kind	of	things	and	I	think	
thats	the	kind	of	currency	that	we	work	in.	[I]	get	a	bit	annoyed	when,	
even	though	Ive	described	it	myself	as	a	soft	outcome-	thats	the	way	
professionals	and	funders	would	describe	them.	I	think	that	to	see	
somebody	grow	in	confidence	and	being	able	to	do	stuff	that	they	couldnt	
do	previously,	I	dont	see	that	as	being	soft	myself.we	work	at	that	very	
human	level	and	with	people	the	change	is	very	gradual,	its	very	
gradual(Practitioner	25,	Victims-based	sector,	Interviewed	8/5/15).	
Several	practitioners	described	that	funding	practices,	especially	those	associated	
with	the	European	peace	funding	involved	a	bureaucracy	that	necessitated	levels	of	
administration	that	consequently	increased	professionalisation.	Two	particular	
points	were	made	on	this	topic;	firstly	that	this	increasing	attracted	individuals	
motivated	more	by	a	wage	than	by	values.	Secondly,	greater	professionalisation	
decreased	voluntarism	as	projects	became	outsourced	to	professionals	described	
by	some	as	creating	a	peace	industry:	
[W}ould	much	less	money	have	helped?	Yes,	but	nobody	was	putting	their	
hands	up	to	say	give	us	less	[In]	the	voluntary	sector	and	so	called	
peacebuilding	[sector],	we	were	all	managing,	programming,	in	the	wake	of	
the	peace	programmes	and	I	think	that	was	a	bit	of	a	distortionI	mean,	
that	switched	the	context	dramatically	in	that	time[T]he	Peace	
programmes	came	along	and	more	professional	workers	were	and	people	
came	for	jobs,	not	because	they	came	with	that	belief	and	commitment,	
they	came	because	they	needed	a	job.	So	suddenly	you	felt	that	at	points,	
Id	think	gosh,	you	actually	didnt	come	because	you	had	a	real	commitment	
here,	you	came	because	there	was	a	job	(Practitioner	23,	Community	
Development,	Interviewed	30/4/15).	
[E]verybody	was	an	expert,	we	have	more	community	relations	experts.In	
a	lot	of	areas	the	whole	voluntary	nature	of	community	relations	
disappeared	because	everybody	had	a	paid	official	and	often	the	paid	
officials	werent	from	the	area,	you	know,	so	you	lost	something;	the	whole	
rationale	of	our	policy	around	community	relations	was	local	volunteers,	its	
everyone	got	involved.		But	once	you	brought	a	professional	in	everybody	
said	well	weve	got	somebody	to	do	the	work,	we	can	all	sit	back	and,	you	
know,	you	just	lost	that	sense	of	voluntary	initiative	and	that	changed	quite	
dramatically	(Practitioner	18,	Funding/Community	Relations,	Interviewed	
17/4/15).	
The	loss	of	volunteerism	and	reliance	on	professionals	articulated	in	these	quotes	
meant	that	there	was	a	perception	that	increasingly	practice	was	predicated	on	
whether	there	was	funding	available	to	pay	for	the	professionals,	run	the	
organisations,	or	create	programmes	attractive	to	participants.	Practitioners	now	
experiencing	a	contraction	of	funding	articulated	an	observation	that	activities	and	
practices	were	now	substantially	more	limited.	Three	practitioners	in	particular	
reflected	that	a	shortage	of	funds	narrowed	what	they	could	offer	to	potential	
participants,	and	caused	them	to	cease	some	of	the	activities	they	had	earlier	
implemented:	
[W]hen	I	started	here,	Im	here	just	over	5	years	and	when	we	started	here	
we	were	very	fortunate	with	the	resources,	financial	resources	that	we	had	
at	our	disposal[T]hat	funder	has	went,	weve	lost	a	lot	of	jobs,	weve	lost	a	
lot	of	money	to	deliver	programmes,	were	very	limited	on	what	we	can	do	
now	were	able	to	do	a	lot	of	activities	because	we	had	money	to	do	
activities,	we	had	money	to	bring	them	to	places	of	political	interest	here	in	
Ireland	and	across	the	water.	We	had	money	to	explore	their	differences	
and	explore	their	similarities,	take	them	out,	wed	so	much	stuff	but	we	
dont	have	those	resources	anymore	(Practitioner	28,	Interface-based,	
Interviewed	14/5/15).	
Becoming	too	funding	reliant	also	meant	in	some	cases,	organisational	mission	drift	
when	gaps	in	funding	or	shortages	generated	activity	less	directly	connected	to	
practice	sector	expertise.	Similarly,	funding	shortages	was	offered	as	an	explanation	
for	a	lack	of	reflection	of	peacebuilding	practice,	coupled	with	the	perception	that	
funders	werent	necessarily	interested	or	prioritised	practice-generated	reflection.	
In	these	cases,	there	was	a	view	that	pressure	to	deliver	on	promised	aims	and	
objectives,	and	meeting	funding	requirements	within	timeframes	naturally	limited	
thinking	about	what	you	might	be	able	to	achieve	beyond	that.	One	interviewee	
who	had	worked	with	sports-based	peacebuilding	for	a	number	of	years	linked	a	
lack	of	reflection	to	grant	chasing,	and	a	loss	of	vision,	goals	and	self-confidence	in	
the	sector:	
I	think	in	Northern	Ireland	weve	become	sort	of	indoctrinated	and	in	the	
community	sector	weve	been	so	trained	to	go	after	the	grant	that	we	
actually	lost	sight	of	what	was	right	for	Northern	Ireland.	If	were	being	really	
reflective,	we	need	a	really	fresh	approach,	we	need	new	blood	and	we	need	
new	thinking	and	we	need	to	break	the	old	ways.	I	think	thats	a	symptom	of	
Northern	Ireland,	we	dont,	we	need	to	be	stronger	and	to	be	confident	
enough	to	say	this	is	whats	right	for	Northern	Ireland	(Practitioner	35,	
Sports-based,	Interviewed	9/6/15).	
Others	saw	reflection	as	a	luxury	unable	to	be	indulged	when	time	and	resources	
were	at	a	premium	and	described	decreased	reflection	when	funding	was	
uncertain,	or	shorter	term	in	nature	as	more	time	gets	spent	fire-fighting.	This	
was	echoed	across	all	sectors,	with	those	in	the	voluntary	and	community	sector	
most	vocal	about	recent	funding	shortages,	financial	insecurity	and	burn	out.	
Several	interviewees	who	were	waged	employees	felt	reflection	was	also	not	
always	prioritised	by	their	employers	or	that	reflection	had	no	avenue	for	feeding	
back	to	inform	decision-making,	likewise,	there	were	those	who	saw	that	formal	
reporting	for	reflection	was	sometimes	also	perceived	to	be	a	mandatory	tick-box	
exercise.		
For	those	interested	in	learning	from	their	practice	and	who	valued	knowledge	
which	had	been	gained	about	practice,	frustration	was	articulated	about	whether	
their	knowledge	had	avenues	for	dissemination	in	order	to	impact	organisations,	
social	policy	and/or	academic	knowledge	production.	Across	the	board	practitioners	
unequivocally	voiced	the	view	that	knowledge	which	practitioners	had	gained	was	
not	valued	and	utilised	to	its	potential.	Dissatisfaction	with	government	and	policy	
makers	for	their	disinterest	in	their	experience	and	expertise	was	voiced,	but	
likewise,	several	practitioners	blamed	their	own	organisations	and	sector-based	
bodies	for	not	doing	enough	to	facilitate	and	to	consolidate	organisational	learning	
from	peacebuilding	practice:	
[W]hen	it	comes	to	like	things	like	the	Community	Relations	Council,	the	
Equality	Commission,	OFM/dFM,	to	me	they	really	missed	a	trick	not	
capturing	that,	that	information	and	actually	coming	up	with	youth,	like	in	
Northern	Ireland	it	would	make	sense	to	have	like	a	sport	and	peacebuilding	
centre.	To	me	that	would	be,	the	rest	of	the	world	would	be	interested	in	
that	and	we	would	have	some	really	interesting	case	studies.But	there	
seems	to	be	a	reluctanceSo	yeah,	I	feel	probably	let	down	I	would	say	by	
the	likes	of	the	Sports	Council,	Community	Relations	Council,	Equality	
Commission,	OFM/dFM	they	just	seem	to	move	at	a	snails	pace	on	these	
things	(Practitioner	35,	Sports-based,	Interviewed	9/6/15).	
Interestingly,	practitioners	whose	methodologies	or	programmes	had	influenced	
policy	or	which	had	become	mainstreamed	also	reported	dissatisfaction.	This	was	
due	to	the	fact	that	practice	had	only	been	replicated	in	part	and	not	in	its	entirety,	
missed	elements	perceived	as	key	to	project	success,	or	even	that	due	credit	was	
not	given.	For	example,	though	several	interviewed	practitioners	had	work	featured	
in	the	governments	peacebuilding	policy	strategy	Together:	Building	a	United	
Community	(The	Executive	Office,	2013),	one	respondent	felt	that	what	was	in	the	
policy	was	very	different	than	what	had	been	submitted,	while	another	felt	
acknowledgement	for	the	practice-inspired	policy	development	had	not	been	given.	
An	interviewee	had	been	at	the	forefront	of	initiatives	to	reimage	political	conflict	
murals-	a	practice	replicated	at	statutory	levels-	summed	up	these	sentiments:	
[W]e	were	the	people	that	led	on	all	the	murals	and	negotiated	with	
communities	on	all	the	muralsSo	we	gave	the	idea.		You	know	the	one	
thing	in	the	voluntary	and	community	sector	is	that	Ive	learnt	in	my	
the	R	and	D	and	then	once	the	penny	drops	and	resources	become	slightly	
more	or	an	organisation	says	maybe	we	should	try	that,	youre	kind	of	
then	pushed	out	of	the	equation	but	youre	like	the	poor	relation,	you	
deliver	the	work	but	youre	not	branded	and	youre	the	technical	assistants	
and	youre	kind	of	elbowed	out	(Practitioner	14,	Environmental/	
Community	Regeneration,	Interviewed	9/4/14).	
While	blame	was	laid	with	policy-makers	and	the	sector	itself,	practitioners	
reported	more	mixed	experiences	with	academia.	Several	lauded	their	relationships	
with	academics	and	reported	on	positive	experiences	of	collaboration	that	
illustrated	a	view	of	separate	but	compatible	roles.	For	those	practitioners,	strong	
relationships	with	local	academics	was	viewed	as	beneficial	to	those	less	interested	
in	theorising,	making	them	content	to	outsource	that	role.	The	majority	however,	
thought	that	the	relationship	was	not	symmetrical,	with	those	on	the	more	positive	
end	welcoming	greater	collaboration	viewing	it	as	a	way	to	strengthen	their	
practice:	
There	are	loads	of	levels	at	which	we	can	make	the	relationship	between	
academia	and	the	artist	more	exciting	and	less	one-way	traffic.	I	would	
really	welcome	that.	Also	when	you	look	at	the	legacy	of	a	project	and	when	
you	look	at	maximising	the	impact	of	projects,	which	is	what	we	all	believe	
in,	then	the	role	of	the	academic	in	facilitating	reflective	practice	but	in	a	
manner	that	is	not	simply	for	the	artist	but	for	a	more	structured	
assessment	of	methodology	is	invaluable	(Practitioner	31,	Theatre	Arts,	
Interviewed	26/5/15).	
Other	practitioners	held	less	positive	views	as	a	result	of	their	experiences	
collaborating	with	academics-	believing	the	partnership	was	not	necessarily	win-
win,	or	that	the	academic	role	came	with	a	higher	status	than	practitioner.	As	an	
example,	one	interviewee	described	collaborating	with	a	local	academic	to	produce	
research	but	stated	their	input	had	received	no	mention	in	the	publication.	While	it	
had	not	put	them	off	working	with	academics,	it	created	an	impression	that	
academics	were,	at	times,	self-serving.	In	another	example,	an	arts-based	
practitioner	described	that	while	his	organisation	had	more	recently	built	better	
relationships	with	academia,	his	view	was	that	previously	the	work	hadnt	merited	
attention	or	been	viewed	as	worth	learning	from:	
Its	only	really	almost	in	very	very	recent	years	that	the	University	would	
even	see	us	as	anything	at	a	level	that	they	would	partner	with.	We	always	
always	felt	they	have	an	ivory	tower	approach	(Practitioner	1,	Arts-based	
Sector,	Interviewed	11/27/14).	
Finally,	one	practitioner	involved	in	community	development	in	particular	felt	that	
in	academic	courses	there	could	be	better	utilisation	of	practice-based	skills	and	
knowledge.	Their	critique	was	that	a	lack	of	practical	hands-on	training	left	new	
graduates	in	community	development	ill-equipped	for	the	field.	A	conclusion	was	
drawn	that	inclusion	of	practice-generated	experience	could	contribute	more	to	
academia	that	was	currently	being	offered:	
[I]t	could	be	about	getting	practitioners	to	come	in	and	talk	to	students.	I	
have	real	concerns	about	how	community	development	is	being	taught	in	
our	universities	and	how	community	relations	is	being	taught	in	our	
universities	and	how	there	is	a	massive	lack	of	experience	in	terms	of	
practice	experience	for	those	coming	through	the	other	end	I	was	shocked	
at	times,	things	like	negotiation,	mediation	and	conflict	resolution	werent	
built	in	as	part	of	community	development	training.	To	me,	thats	a	no-
brainer,	it	should	be	part	and	parcel	of	community	development	training	
and	its	not,	and	how	can	that	be.	And	particularly	when	you	are	doing	
community	development	in	areas	where	there	is	conflict	(Practitioner	3,	
Community	Development	Sector,	Interviewed	8/12/2014).	
In	summary,	there	was	a	general	recognition	that	peacebuilding	practitioners	
working	within	civil	society	were	not	widely	viewed	as	important	knowledge	
producers.	Given	that	over	half	the	group	had	more	than	20	years	experience	
engaged	in	peacebuilding	activities	but	that	such	knowledge	was	not	perceived	by	
interviewees	to	have	been	adequately	utilised,	is	striking.	Evidence	from	transcripts	
illustrated	that	practitioners	did	draw	lessons	from	their	own	accumulated	
knowledge	of	a	variety	of	peacebuilding	interventions.	However,	while	stories	
shared	in	interviews	demonstrated	usage	of	insights	gained	over	years,	
interviewees	identified	that	there	were	few	structured	or	formalised	pathways	to	
systematise	practice	reflections	or	to	pass	on	knowledge	to	share	lessons	learnt.	
Bureaucratic	practices	and	administrative	burdens	which	accompanied	current	
funding	programme	requirements	were	cited	as	partially	to	blame	for	a	lack	of	
reflection	that	might	engender	more	knowledge	shared	and	utilised.	However,	
those	that	had	an	interest	in	participating	in	knowledge	production	voiced	concerns	
that	even	within	their	own	organisations	there	was	a	failure	to	capitalise	on	
learning	that	had	been	generated.	While	practitioners	stated	that	some	of	their	
own	learning	had	been	shared	through	research	conducted	by	interested	academics	
and	had	positive	experiences	of	working	with	academia,	others	felt	this	relationship	
lacked	symmetry	and	wished	for	greater	opportunities	for	practice-generated	
knowledge	to	be	given	greater	credit.	
Overall,	dismay	was	voiced	that	without	such	recognition,	in	an	increasingly	
depleted	and	under-resourced	civil	society,	hard-won	knowledge	gained	from	
experiences	in	the	worst	and	most	difficult	times	of	the	Troubles	was	at	risk	of	
being	lost.	Practitioners	described	disillusionment	that	those	who	had	been	creative	
and	innovative	for	years	during	the	worst	of	times	were	now	facing	their	
organisations	funds	drying	up,	watching	as	organisational	histories	including	
memories	and	knowledge	of	what	had	been	learned	and	achieved,	fading	without	
due	recognition:	
I	look	around	at	people	who	were	like	practitioners	when	I	was	young	
who	were	kind	of	inspirational	and	now	they're	kind	of	moving	into	
retirement.	[T]hey	are	quite	disillusioned	and	the	disillusionment	takes	a	
number	of	forms,	it	can	be	"What	was	it	all	about,	did	I	really	make	any	
difference"	or	it	can	be	"I	knew	what	I	was	doing,	why	did	nobody	
listen."[F]or	people	who	were	in	the	vanguard	of	trying	to	make	peace	
back	in	the	day,	I	don't	know.	maybe	we	didn't	value	them	or	know	how	
to	listen	to	them,	maybe	they	were	cutting	through	the	ice	at	the	sharp	
end	of	the	ship	and	those	of	us	at	the	back	end	of	the	ship	didn't	know	
what	a	struggle	that	was	or	how	to	listen	to	what	they'd	learnt,	equally	
maybe	they	were	just	staying	alive,	it's	what	had	to	be	done	rather	than	
finding	ways	to	tell	us	what	was	going	on.	But	no,	not	valued	enough	
(Practitioner	27,	Faith-based	sector,	Interviewed	12/5/15).	
7.2.2.		Relevancy	and	incentivisation	
The	data	suggests	that	practitioners	use	phronetic	knowledge	to	read	the	context	
and	that	context	is	necessary	to	ensure	relevancy.	Stories	of	practice	success	and	
failures	highlighted	tensions	that	existed	between	responding	to	felt	need	in	order	
to	be	relevant,	and	balancing	this	with	meeting	expectations	associated	with	pre-
planned	funding	requirements.	Featured	in	stories	of	peacebuilding	failures,	one	
quarter	of	all	interviewees	shared	stories	that	demonstrated	that	relevance	was	
perceived	as	reduced	or	constrained	when	practitioner	judgment	was	superseded	
by	funding	requirements	that	either	dictated	particular	programmatic	themes	or	
required	particular	geographic	locales	to	be	matched.		
One	interface	practitioner	described	two	cross-community	dialogue	projects	to	
illustrate	this	point.	One	focussed	on	a	joint	social	history	programme	perceived	as	
less	contentious	as	it	examined	local	families,	businesses	and	pastimes	of	the	area.	
This	was	followed	by	a	more	politically	oriented	programme,	which	explicitly	
focused	on	national	identity.	The	former	had	generated	much	interest	with	standing	
room	only,	while	the	second,	more	politically	oriented	programme	had	almost	no	
attendees.	While	the	practitioner	was	unsure	why	the	second	political	programme	
had	not	generated	interest,	he	speculated	that	most	ordinary	people	were	not	too	
interested	in	politics	but	rather	with	programmes	that	were	perhaps	less	
contentious	such	as	local	social	history.	However,	in	his	experience	funding	was	
more	readily	available	if	you	could	be	seen	to	be	addressing	harder	topics.	This	led	
to	tension	between	expressed	need	and	what	funders	required,	with	an	embedded	
implicit	assumption	that	the	harder	topics	needed	to	be	addressed.	While	this	may	
be	true-	this	approach	lacked	the	flexibility	to	consider	that,	for	example,	an	
interface	community	that	had	borne	a	brunt	of	a	traumatic	conflict	might	be	best	
moved	forward	towards	peace	in	less	direct	ways	using	less	contentious	topics:		
[T]hats	one	of	the	issues	in	this	whole	sector	as	well	because	often	you	
have	funding	requirements	which	are	pushing	you	away	from	the	expressed	
needs	and	interest	of	the	communities,	I	think.	Its	much	easier	to	get	
funding	for	the	big	political	stuff,	personally	thats	the	stuff	that	Im	really	
interested	in	but	perhaps	the	community	is	much	more	interested	in	and	
sees	much	more	value	in	doing	stuff	that	will	actually	develop	them	
personally	and	socially	(Practitioner	28,	Interface-based,	Interviewed	
14/5/15).	
Several	practitioners	recalled	stories	whereby,	as	a	result	of	funding	requirements,	
they	had	been	diverted	to	involve	groups	or	constituencies	they	would	not	have	
immediately	seen	as	relevant	to	their	core	purpose.	Often	these	examples	were	tied	
into	European	funding	requirements	to	include	border	regions	in	peacebuilding	
initiatives.	While	some	authentic	connections	to	conflict	issues	could	be	
established,	examples	also	illustrated	that	motivations	at	times	were	more	
economically	based:		
There	was	a	section	for	cross-border	work,	and	[Name	of	organisation]	had	
contacted	us	and	actually	came	to	us	and	said,	this	was	way	back	in	say	99,	
right?	And	said,	weve	got	a	wee	bit	of	money	and	wed	really	like	you	to	do	
a	project,	its	very	short	term	and	I	didnt	want	to	do	it.	I	didnt	want	to	do	
it	because	I	didnt	see	that	it	fitted	in	with	our	ethos,	not	our	ethos,	but	it	
didnt	fit	in	with	our	programme	and	it	didnt	fit	in	as	far	as	I	could	see	with	
our	vision.	But	I	went	to	the	board	and	their	response	to	me,	which	was	
right,	which	was	if	its	bringing	money	into	this	area,	if	its	employing	people,	
take	it	(Practitioner	2,	Interface-based	sector,	Interviewed	12/4/14).	
The	outcome	when	relevancy	was	compromised	was	a	perception	(as	referenced	
earlier	by	the	sports-based	peacebuilding	practitioner)	that	practice	could	become	a	
grant	chasing	exercise.	Those	interviewed	who	recalled	this	dynamic	reflected	that	
they	had	found	creative	ways	to	try	to	increase	relevancy	even	when	funding	
requirements	did	not	match.	However,	others	described	decisions	taken	not	to	
pursue	funding	that	included	such	requirements-for	example,	by	deliberately	
seeking	out	more	independent	funding	sources	that	used	or	validated	practitioner-
based	judgment.		
Similarly,	those	receiving	peace	funding	through	the	EU	described	that	pressure	to	
deliver	constricted	the	time,	and	that	trust	and	relationship	building	which	was	
necessary	to	ensure	sustainability,	was	rushed.	This	was	exacerbated	when	funding	
was	used	to	incentivise	and	motivate	groups	to	come	together	without	a	genuine	
readiness,	preparation	and	support	for	engagement.	For	example,	a	cross-
community	keep	fit	class	sponsored	by	two	victims	organisations	led	to	a	respite	
trip	where	one	of	the	groups	sectarian	behaviour	ultimately	led	to	the	dissolution	
of	the	partnership.	Retrospectively	this	practitioner	felt	that	there	had	not	been	
enough	preparation,	or	professionalism	shown	in	particular	by	the	partner	
organisation.	It	was	viewed	that	such	incentivising	peacebuilding	also	led	to	short-
term	efforts	with	a	short	shelf	life.	If	funding	ended	it	had	not	at	times,	resulted	in	a	
genuine	rebuilding	of	relationships	but	seen	as	a	means	to	an	end:			
[T]he	community	halls	that	had	signed	up	to	inclusive	mechanisms,	wed	
gone	through	work	for	a	number	of	years	to	ensure	openness	or	whatever,	
and	you	saw	them	drifting	back	into	segregation	and	think	well,	what	is	that	
about,	I	mean,	people	actually	came	through	a	whole	process	where	they	
signed	up,	but	of	course,	they	signed	up	because	there	was	money.	[L]ater,	
I	used	to	say	when	I	went	to	meet	groups,	just	for	the	hell	of	it,	not	for	the	
grant,	to	see	what	really	people	wanted	to	achieve	within	their	communities	
for	themselves,	because	we	became	a	very	dependent	grant	culture	
(Practitioner	23,	Community	Development,	Interviewed	30/4/15).	
7.2.3	Fault	lines	and	gatekeepers	
Phronesis	is	conceptualised	in	this	thesis	as	using	nuanced	context-knowledge	and	
drawn	on	to	promote	and	lubricate	change,	referred	to	earlier	as	using	the	context	
to	change	the	context.	However,	at	times	practitioners	reflected	on	tensions	that	
may	also	be	attributed	towards	taking	this	approach.		In	particular	this	surfaced	for	
practitioners	working	most	closely	and	directly	with	grassroots	communities-	for	
example,	in	interface	areas,	or	practices	involved	in	intervening	or	mediating	across	
contested	spaces,	negotiating	parading	and	marching	routes,	or	developing	flag-
flying	protocols.		In	these	cases,	being	responsive	to	context	at	times	meant	a	
period	of	waiting	until	tensions	died	down.	However,	several	examples	of	practice	
failures	highlighted	that	when	localised	conflicts	rippled	out	among	contextual	
fault	lines	it	could	also	close	doors	permanently.	
In	these	interviews,	stories	of	practice	failure	evidenced	similar	patterns.	Often	
the	issue	causing	contestation	(described	as	fault	lines	Chapter	6)	began	as	a	
localised	dispute	and	quickly	led	to	community	conflict,	rioting	or	violence.	The	
impact	of	such	events	along	historical	fault	lines	disrupted	or	impacted	progress	
made	of	peacebuilding.	The	most	recent	example	of	this	was	the	previously	
mentioned,		Flag	Dispute	of	2012-2013.	For	example,	fifteen	practitioners	spoke	of	
work	having	to	be	either	halted	entirely	for	a	period	of	time	during	the	Flag	Dispute,	
or	that	it	had	been	set	back	and	momentum	lost.	These	interviewees	spanned	
multiple	sectors	(youth-work,	school-based	peacebuilding,	cross-community	
activities,	ex-combatant	dialogue,	efforts	to	promote	non-sectarian	sports,	
restorative	justice,	human	rights	based	advocacy,	storytelling	and	commemoration)	
and	all	spoke	unsolicited	of	the	impact	of	the	Flag	Dispute	on	their	practice.	It	is	
noteworthy	that	not	only	inter-communal	peacebuilding	but	also	intra-communal	
work	was	impacted.	As	one	practitioner	involved	in	efforts	to	shift	sectarian	
attitudes	within	sports	commented:	
I	would	feel	the	flags	dispute	had	a	massive	impact	it	hardened	a	lot	of	
the	supporter	base	and	actually	a	lot	of	the	good	guys	who	were	involved	in	
Football	For	All,	a	lot	of	those	guys	from	the	fans	base	actually	left	their	
supporters	clubs	and	got	a	bit	disillusioned.	[W]e	noticed	some	of	those	guys	
stopped	volunteering	around	about	that	time	and	I	think	that	set	us	back,	
that	sort	of	flags	issue	sort	of	set	back	the	momentum	and	there	was	a	
hardening	within	that	sort	of	community	and	I	think	in	recent	years	there	is	
even	more	mistrust	around	what	community	relations	and	what	
peacebuilding	means	(Practitioner,	Sports	Based,	Interviewed	9/6/15).	
Likewise,	another	practitioner	involved	in	supporting	dialogue	in	his	local	area,	the	
Suffolk	Lenadoon	interface	in	West	Belfast,	mentioned	that	the	Flag	Dispute	had	
caused	a	retraction	of	cross-community	engagement-	reportedly	the	result	of	
intimidation	within	Loyalist	communities	not	to	attend.	This	same	practitioner	living	
in	the	Lenadoon	area	recollected	that	in	the	late	1990s	when	the	conflict	in	
Drumcree	had	been	at	its	height,	the	area	had	been	similarly	deeply	affected	by	
rioting.		A	similar	story	was	relayed	by	a	practitioner	working	at	the	time	in	North	
Belfast		another	area	highly	charged	due	to	the	volatility	sparked	by	the	conflict	at	
Drumcree.	Such	stories	all	surfaced	independently	of	each	other	without	any	direct	
questions	to	elicit	such	examples,	and	each	evidenced	a	similar	conflict	pattern	and	
dynamic	that	impacted	local	and	regional	peacebuilding.	
Finally,	practitioners	also	found	that	while	some	community	leaders	might	be	
credible	leaders	and	exhibit	charisma	allowing	them	to	become	pied	pipers,	still	
others	may	use	power	to	gate-keep,	maintain	status	and	block	change.		Several	
interviewees	reflected	that	paramilitarism	in	some	communities	acts	as	a	
restraining	factor	to	involvement	in	peacebuilding.	One	particular	schools-based	
practitioner	working	in	North	Belfast	had	to	halt	work	for	six	months	in	2014	due	to	
a	threat	issued	by	local	paramilitaries.	Tackling	the	issues	head-on,	this	practitioner	
met	with	local	paramilitary	leaders	to	determine	the	nature	of	the	threat.	After	
paramilitary	leaders	refuted	the	credibility	of	the	threat	work	was	restarted	with	
the	schools.	Once	the	work	had	restarted	with	an	enthusiastic	response	from	local	
parents,	this	practitioner	viewed	the	high	participation	as	a	vote	of	protest	against	
the	on-going	nature	of	living	in	an	atmosphere	of	control	and	intimidation.	
Recognising	it	was	not	always	safe	to	voice	aloud	support	for	peacebuilding;	she	
nevertheless	interpreted	their	increased	presence	in	programmes	as	a	sign	of	their	
desire	for	change:		
Oh	my	God,	they	came	in	the	door,	they	came	in	the	door63	people	came	
out	to	that	event,	loads	of	men	tooBoth	sides.		They	basically	for	want	of	
another	term,	were	voting	with	their	feet	that	they	wanted	it	to	continue	
and	I	think	the	problems	in	the	atmosphere,	lets	say,	made	them	realise	
they	probably	needed	this	more	than	ever.	The	sense	that	we	got	from	
some	of	the	ones	that	spoke	on	that	day	was	very	much,	I	want	to	support	
my	school,	my	kid	and	what	the	schools	are	doing.		Here	to	support	my	kid.	
Here	to	support	my	kid.	I	think	it	was	one	of	the	earliest	times	in	the	year	
that	weve	ever	had	anyone	very	strongly	talk	about	bitterness	and	hatred	
and	how	this	was	something	that	would	help	with	that.	(Practitioner	30,	
Education/	Schools,	interviewed	15/5/15)	
	Similar	stories	offered	by	other	practitioners	from	across	sectors	recognised	that	in	
certain	communities,	paramilitary	presence	exerted	control	and	produced	fear	and	
intimidation-	making	peacebuilding	for	some,	a	continued	risk:		
I	am	just	hearing	from	some	people	that	they	have	a	stranglehold.the	
intimidation,	do	you	know	what	I	mean?	As	though	they	are	still	something.	
And	its	hard	to	tackle	that,	its	hard	to	go	face	on	with	that	I	dont	mind	
doing	it,	do	you	know	what	I	mean,	but	if	there	were	ever	repercussions	on	
my	family	or	anything	thats	a	fear.	I	dont	really	careSo	you	have	to	be	sorta	
careful	as	well,	because	if	these	people	dont	like	you	making	peace,	but	it	
sorta	puts	them	out	of	a	job.	They	are	running	the	show,	they	are	power.	You	
are	up	against	that	too	when	you	are	building	peace,	you	just	have	to	be	
careful	(Practitioner	10,	Victims	Sector,	Interviewed	24/2/15).	
These	examples	illustrate	that	while	using	a	phronetic	approach	can	enhance	
sensitivity	to	localised	dynamics,	at	times	it	may	limit	the	activities	of	peacebuilding.	
It	is	also	interesting	to	consider	whether	it	is	possible	that	being	too	context-
dependent	may	inadvertently	reinforce	powerful	gatekeepers.	These	last	two	
examples	paint	a	picture	of	the	hold	that	paramilitaries	continue	to	have	on	
community.	One	could	argue	that	cancelling	programmes,	or	being	very	careful	as	
the	last	quote	suggests,	serves	only	to	reinforce	this	power-base	without	due	
challenge.	In	this	regard,	those	taking	a	phronetic	approach	could	be	accused	of	
avoiding,	or	lacking	the	courage	to	confront	abuses	of	power.		
Conclusion	
Chapter	7,	building	from	the	evidence	provided	in	Chapter	6,	sought	to	
demonstrate	that	practitioners	in	their	efforts	to	promote	peacebuilding	social	
change,	use	phronesis	and	the	deep	context	knowledge	it	contains,	to	navigate,	
enhance,	lever	and	lubricate	change	processes	on	the	ground.	It	was	demonstrated	
that	personal	experiences	living	in	a	context	of	division	and	conflict	often	played	a	
formative	role	in	honing	phronetic	knowledge.		Evidence	of	the	necessity	to	
navigate	pervasive	distrust	through	demonstrating	traits	of	trustworthiness	both	
personally	and	in	peacebuilding	processes	were	described	by	interviewees	as	were	
catalytic	to	practice.	Trust	building	was	discussed	across	four	areas	as:	point	of	
entry	trust,	proxy-trust,	process-trust	and	pragmatic	trust.	Each	was	considered	as	
important	ways	that	practitioners	working	at	grassroots	used	phronetic	knowledge	
to	mitigate	risk	and	use	context-knowledge	to	build	support	for	peacebuilding	social	
changes.	The	chapter	concluded	by	highlighting	broader	sets	of	tensions	described	
by	practitioners	when	using	a	phronetic	epistemology	of	practice.	The	discussion	
focused	on	the	ways	phronetic	epistemologies	are	challenged	under	the	
increasingly	professionalised	peacebuilding	requirements-straining	relevancy,	
reducing	volunteerism	and	reflective	practice.	Likewise,	using	a	phronetic	approach	
and	being	responsive	to	the	context	may	mean	peacebuilding	activities	are	halted	
under	threats	from	community	gatekeepers.				
Taken	as	a	whole,	the	aims	of	Chapters	6	and	7	were	to	comprehensively	serve	to	
evidence	the	four	broad	findings	that	emerged	from	the	field	research	and	the	data	
analysis	in	order	to	demonstrate	the	salience	of	phronesis	for	affording	a	better	
understanding	of	grassroots	and	civil	society	peacebuilding	practice.	The	next	
chapter	uses	these	findings	to	continue	to	build	a	discussion	and	in	particular	to	
take	into	consideration	what	implications	the	findings	suggest	to	current	debates	in	
the	academic	and	practice	field	of	peacebuilding	locally	in	Northern	Ireland	and	
globally.	
Chapter	8:	Discussion	
Introduction	
The	evidence	emerging	from	this	research	has	identified	that	the	concept	of	
phronesis	is	important	in	affording	a	better	understanding	of	grassroots	and	civil	
society	peacebuilding	practice.	Evidenced	among	the	interview	data	as	a	significant	
influencing	epistemology	of	practice,	phronesis	included	a	nuanced	understanding	
of	patterns	of	context.	Research	for	this	thesis	identifies	that	practitioners	use	
phronesis	(at	times	out	of	necessity)	to	navigate,	enhance,	lever	and	lubricate	
change	processes	on	the	ground	in	Northern	Ireland.	Furthermore,	trust	building	
mechanisms	were	deemed	catalytic	to	promote	change	in	a	context	of	pervasive	
systemic	distrust.	Up	to	now,	phronesis	as	a	form	of	knowledge	necessary	for	
peacebuilding	has	been	elided.	In	light	of	the	evidence,	in	this	chapter	I	will	argue	
that	phronesis	is	a	pertinent	and	useful	form	of	knowledge	and	its	conceptualisation	
is	important	to	the	academic,	theoretical	and	practical	applications	of	the	fields	of	
peace	studies	and	conflict	transformation.		
This	is	not	to	negate	the	importance	of	theory	(episteme)	or	technical	skills	needed	
for	peacebuilding.	It	is,	however,	to	suggest	that	without	phronesis	these	two	forms	
of	knowledge	are	incomplete,	and	that	peacebuilding	which	does	not	consider	and	
use	phronesis-	is	inherently	limited.	Phronesis	is	a	necessary	form	of	knowledge	for	
peacebuilding	in	order	to	ensure	contextual	relevancy.	Peacebuilding	at	the	
coalface	of	conflict	and	division	may	mean	a	day-to-day	navigation	of	the	conflict	
contexts-	of	the	particulars,	including	understanding	the	nuances	of	people	and	
their	place,	histories,	relationships,	frames	and	fault-lines.	For	this	reason,	
phronesis	may	be	an	epistemological	position	most	germane	to	bottom-up	
peacebuilding	and	those	working	at	grassroots	and	within	civil	society.		
The	chapter	will	unfold	with	a	discussion	of	the	findings	by	first	expanding	on	the	
explanatory	dimensions	of	the	concept	of	phronesis	by	touching	on	ontological	and	
epistemological	insights.	This	is	followed	by	an	exploration	of	the	knowledge	
production	possibilities	of	phronesis	by:	1)	considering	phronesis	as	a	set	of	lenses	
for	conflict	analysis;	2)	for	practice	innovation;	and	3)	to	build	relevant	theory	which	
if	not	used,	may	impede	or	short-change	peacebuilding	in	policy	and	practice.	The	
chapter	will	next	consider	the	particular	salience	of	phronesis	as	a	conceptual	lens	
for	knowledge	in,	of,	and	for,	a	better	understanding	of	grassroots	and	civil	society	
peacebuilding.	In	particular,	this	will	be	considered	in	light	of	issues	raised	in	the	
literature	review	on	whose	knowledge	counts	and	what	kind	of	knowledge	matters	
for	building	peace.	After	a	discussion	of	its	utility,	and	the	merit	and	insights	
generated	for	peacebuilding	theoretical	literature	debates,	the	chapter	concludes	
with	recognition	of	the	limitations	of	the	concept	including	dimensions	that	may	
necessitate	further	research.	
8.1.	Phronesis:	ontological	and	epistemological	explanatory	power	
While	not	anticipated	from	the	outset	of	this	research,	when	applied	to	the	
evidence	generated	by	the	data,	phronesis	shed	a	useful	and	explanatory	
light	on	grassroots	and	civil	society	peacebuilding.	It	further	unpacked	the	
nature	of	how	judgments	and	decisions	of	what	to	do	are	made,	in	context.	
Findings	from	this	research	identified	that	phronetic	context-knowledge	was	
important	as	a	determinant	for	relevant	peacebuilding	choices	above	the	
adoption	of	particular	theory	or	universals	(episteme)	and	over	a	mastery	of	
skill	(techne).	In	making	visible	the	primacy	of	judgement-in-context	as	
determinants	of	action,	scrutiny	shifts	to	both	context	and	judgement	as	
units	of	analysis.	Such	scrutiny	opens	up	each	term	by	elaborating	on	their	
interrelationship	and	producing	both	ontological	and	epistemological	
insights.	
For	example,	many	interviewees	revealed	that	their	own	experiences	growing	up	
and	living	in	a	context	of	conflict	had	shaped	their	ontology	and	their	epistemology	
of	practice	in	peacebuilding.	When	interviewees	were	asked	to	first	reflect	on	how	
they	became	involved	in	peacebuilding	(with	the	exception	of	those	not	originally	
from	Northern	Ireland)	the	majority	were	able	to	trace	their	initial	involvement	to	
being	either	directly	or	indirectly	affected	by	growing	up	or	living	in	a	context	of	
conflict.	Additionally,	one-third	explicitly	stated	that	these	experiences	had	directly	
shaped	their	own	approach	in	their	peacebuilding	practice.	For	example,	one	
practitioner	critiqued	their	own	experience	attending	an	integrated	school	because	
contentious	topics	were	avoided,	a	practice	he	states	he	intentionally	challenges	in	
his	own	peacebuilding	work.	
Ontological	influences	also	became	apparent	as	practitioners	described	being	born	
into	a	particular	context	of	conflict.	In	local	areas	such	as	the	Bogside	in	Derry-
Londonderry	in	the	late	1960s,	interface	areas	of	Belfast,	and	South	Armagh	in	the	
early	1970s,	practitioners	described	how	living	in	these	environments	necessitated	
navigation	of	the	conflict	terrain	to	manage	and	mitigate	risk.	This	included	learning	
how	to	distinguish	between	the	universal	and	the	particular	context,	as		
universal	rules	governing	everyday	life	did	not	always	apply.	Judgments	and	
decisions	had	to	be	made	day	and	daily	about	which	rules	could	and	could	not	be	
followed,	these	conflict	rules	were	sometimes	learned	explicitly,	through	the	advice	
and	warnings	from	parents,	and	at	other	times,	learned	tacitly.	To	comfort	someone	
whose	brother	is	dying	is	typically	a	universal,	but	one	interviewee	spoke	of	the	
confusion	when	there	was	no	open	acknowledgment	that	his	classmates	brother	
was	close	to	death.	However,	as	this	occurred	during	the	contexts	of	the	Hunger	
Strikes,	the	practitioner	described	that	an	open	acknowledgement	of	such	events	
within	school	was	tacitly	forbidden.	Parents	issued	rules	to	one	interviewee	to	be	
polite	to	a	soldier	but	also	that	such	rules	had	to	be	bent	to	mitigate	threat,	only	
if	no	one	was	watching	as	openly	expressed	empathy	might	generate	suspicion	of	
being	a	tout	among	neighbours.	Perhaps	a	common	feature	of	a	context	of	
internal	domestic	or	civil	wars,	neighbours	who	in	theory	should	be	trusted-	may	
instead	be	accused	of	informing	on	one	another,	or	responsible	for	sharing	
information	to	target	each	other:		
There	was	an	awful	lot	of	mistrust	in	rural	Fermanagh	and	quite	rightly	
because	people	had	been	killing	one	another	for	decades,	people	had	been	
killing	one	another	and	sometimes	they	pointed	to	their	neighbours	five	
fields	across	and	did	they	know	that	was	going	to	happen	to	me	that	day?	
(Practitioner	34,	Funding	and	Social	Economy,	Interviewed	8/6/15).	
The	research	data	revealed	an	ontological	view	of	self	deeply	embedded	in	context,	
and	that	what	was	acceptable	in	one	context,	might	be	dangerous	in	another.	
Mitigating	risk	was	predicated	upon	being	able	to	understand	how	to	navigate	
context.		Understanding	this	ontological	orientation	affords	greater	insight	into	how	
and	why	an	epistemological	perspective	might	emerge	among	civil	society	actors	
which	views	judgement	and	agency	as	context-dependent.	Individual	actions	
needed	to	be	context-dependent,	with	judgments	of	what	to	do	best	understood	
against	the	parameters	of	being	embedded	in	a	particular	context.	For	many	
holding	such	an	ontological	position	judgment	of	what	to	do	necessitated	using	
experience	as	a	guide	to	identify	the	contextual	terrain	identified	in	the	previous	
chapter:	place-space,	frame,	time-timing,	fault	lines	and	relationship.	Knowledge	
was	guided	by	both	explicit	(visible)	and	tacit	(invisible)	knowledge	and	judgment	of	
a	particular	conflict	context	using	patterns	accumulated	with	experience	over	time.	
Conflict	navigation	depended	on	the	ability	to	read	the	context,	understand	how	
the	patterns	of	context	fit	together,	and	know	ones	place	within	it-determining	
agency	for	action	or	inaction.	When	experience	had	not	yet	been	generated,	others	
shared	the	rules.	Childhood	stories	from	practitioners	evidenced	and	illustrated	
explicit	learning	of	tacit	rules	of	conflict.	If	phronesis	is	conceptualised	as	a	product	
of	accumulated	experience	over	time,	which	places	high	value	on	the	subjective	
knowledge	such	an	experience	might	generate-	it	is	unsurprising	to	find	that	this	
body	of	knowledge	is	most	valued	and	highly	drawn	upon	by	practitioners.	
Ontologically	speaking,	practitioners	demonstrated	a	view	of	self-embedded	in,	not	
separate	from	context,	a	possible	explanation	of	why	phronesis	was	evidenced	as	
the	primary	epistemology	of	practice.	
As	mentioned	earlier,	one	third	of	all	interviewees	articulated	their	own	lived	
experience	had	directly	shaped	their	own	peacebuilding	practice.	Given	the	
complex	conflict	terrain	it	could	even	be	suggested	that	experiences	of	living	and	
working	within	conflict	afforded	unique	knowledge	and	understandings	in	how	to	
build	peace.	For	example,	one	practitioner	from	a	Nationalist	background	involved	
in	negotiating	parading	disputes	attributed	his	success	to	years	of	employment	as	a	
first	responder	within	mainly	Protestant	statutory	services	which	liaised	heavily	
with	the	police.	Working	closely	with	police	and	other	first	responders	in	the	
aftermath	of	conflict	incidents	had	improved	his	understanding	of	the	Protestant	
community	worldviews.	These	insights	had,	in	later	years,	according	to	the	
interviewee,	proved	useful	for	his	efforts	at	parade	negotiations.		
The	concept	of	phronesis,	therefore,	helps	explain	why	there	was	a	greater	reliance	
on	lived	subjective	experiences	over	use	of	theories	or	techniques	as	neither	would	
or	could	approximate	for	the	nuances	needed	to	navigate	a	particular	context.	Even	
practitioners	using	theories	and	techniques	such	as	mediation	and	restorative	
justice	recognised	that	relevancy	was	linked	to	their	ability	to	use	the	context	by	
drawing	on	phronetic	knowledge	to	embed	theories	and	techniques	for	relevancy.	
As	one	practitioner	described:		It	wasnt	enough	to	hire	someone	with	skills	
(Practitioner	24,	Interviewed	5/4/15).	In	their	view	it	was	particular	people	who	
would	enable	communities	to	see	peace	as	relevant,	in	this	case,	ex-combatants.	
The	following	excerpt	with	an	interviewee	provides	an	example	of	the	ways	
phronetic	context-knowledge	is	used	to	direct	methods	(techne)	and	theories	
(episteme)	to	inform	action.	This	interviewee,	a	seasoned	local	mediation	
practitioner,	shared	a	story	in	their	interview	about	being	asked	to	join	a	
consultation	of	European	INGOs	to	offer	advice	on	another	conflict	in	the	region.	
Reflecting	afterwards	on	the	transcript,	I	was	struck	with	the	sequence	of	their	
thinking	because	it	outlined	an	understanding	of	the	importance	of	using	context	as	
a	determinant	of	action.	While	clearly	this	practitioner	was	not	germane	to	the	
context	they	were	advising	upon	or	possessing	of	the	necessary	local	phronetic	
knowledge,	nonetheless	the	advice	in	the	consultation	reflects	an	understanding	of	
its	importance.	As	the	excerpt	will	illustrate,	it	was	their	view	that	knowledge	of	
context	(phronesis)	determined	the	form	the	universal	(episteme)	would	take	to	
determine		what	to	do.	Strategies	(techne)	of	how	to	direct	the	intervention	came	
last.	I	reflected	on	this	difference	and	shared	my	initial	analysis	with	the	practitioner	
through	email.		What	follows	is	the	summary	of	the	story	and	the	exchange.		
Describing	first	the	initial	discussion	held	during	the	consultation	at	the	European	
Peace	INGO,	my	interviewee	reflected:		
I	said	[to	the	other	professional	from	Peace	INGO],	we	have	to	help	them	
[the	disputants]	go	from	impulse	to	method,	He	says,	No,	I	think	we	have	
to	help	them	go	from	impulse	to	strategy	to	method,	and	I	was	thinking	No,	
thats	not	how	it	works,	thats	how	it	looks.	Because	there	were	times	when	
I	would	have	drawn	a	strategic	development	chart	that	for	me	starts	with	
the	abstract	idea,	like	mediation,	then	you	apply	it	to	the	context,	which	is	
say	Northern	Ireland,	it	could	be	criminal	justice	system,	it	could	be	victims	
work,	so	when	you	apply	the	abstract	idea	which	is	a	universal	idea	to	a	
context,	out	of	that	you	get	a	concept.	And	when	you	have	conceptual	
clarity	what	it	is	you	are	about,	you	then	begin	to	test	it,	and	that	it	where	
you	are	experimenting	with	modalities,	or	methodology	you	do	things.	And	
then	when	you	have	an	idea	about	what	it	is,	what	your	tools	are,	and	which	
is	your	method,	you	then	develop	strategy	(Practitioner	4,	Mediation	
Sector,	Interviewed	8/12/15).	
My	own	notes	accompanying	the	transcript	reflect	my	interpretation	of	the	
difference	in	the	two	approaches:	
It	strikes	me	this	is	a	different	sequence.		The	[INGO]	is	following	an	
understandable	logic	pattern:	Impulse-Strategy-Method.	It	follows	logically	
and	reminds	me	of	the	research	process.	Define	the	scope	of	the	research-	
distil	my	question,	out	of	my	question	determines	the	methods	of	how	best	to	
answer	the	question.	What	[my	interviewee]	is	saying	however	is	different
he	is	saying	start	with	the	idea.	Mediation	for	example.	Next	you	take	it	to	the	
contextthe	judgement	about	context	then	determines	the	concept	of	what	
you	are	about	as	he	says-	in	other	words	the	concept	is	the	result	of	the	
equation	of	the	idea	against	the	limits	by	which	you	have	to	work	within.	
Or	put	mathematically:	
	IDEA  Judgment	of	what	will	work	in	Context	(what	I	am	calling	Phronetic	
Knowledge)=	Concept	(Which	may	be	his	theory	of	change)	
"#$%&%'(=	Concept	
After	defining	the	concept	then	you	figure	out	which	models	or	methods	work	
with	the	concept,	then	you	develop	a	strategy	of	what	to	do.		
Concept x  "#$%&'"#$%&'('	=	Strategy	
The	difference	that	I	see	he	is	making	is	that	context	judgment	comes	first	in	
determining	how	the	idea	translates	conceptually.	This	then	yields	the	
methods	or	models	tested	to	experiment	about	which	methods	work	best	or	
which	models	might	work	best	in	context.	The	strategy	flows	from	knowing	
how	to	direct	the	methods	most	effectively.	
What	becomes	clear	in	this	discussion	is	the	definitive	importance	that	context	
judgment	plays	in	building	a	conceptual	framework	to	determine	relevant	action	or	
how	one	might	intervene.	Furthermore,	judgment	of	the	context	also	determines	
the	methods,	or	technique.	Reframing	within	the	Aristotelian	terms,	phronesis	is	
the	primary	and	unifying	source	of	knowledge	which	determines	how	the	universal	
(epistemic)	idea,	mediation	in	this	case,	is	to	be	made	relevant.	Once	this	judgment	
has	been	reached,	methods	or	techniques	(techne)	may	also	be	chosen	which	are	
deemed	most	appropriate.	However,	the	process	does	not	end	there,	as	my	
interviewee	reminded	me	in	the	email	exchange.	Continually	questions	are	asked	of	
the	context	to	work	out	whether	the	prototype	makes	sense	in	the	given	context,	or	
as	my	interviewee	put	it,	[W]e	pay	more	attention	to	the	context	and	what	it	is	
telling	us	about	relevance,	credibility,	what	appears	to	work	and	what	doesnt	
(ibid).	Given	that	context	is	not	static	but	ever	changing,	this	process	lends	itself	
towards	iterative	reflexivity.		
The	need	to	understand	context	and	to	acquire	context-knowledge	was	viewed	
important	by	the	practitioner	for	maximising	relevancy	and	as	a	source	of	
legitimacy.	Other	interviewees	alluded	to	context	knowledge	as	important	but	
instead	used	the	term	local.	Drilling	down	into	how	the	term	was	used,	local	was	
more	than	a	geographical	locality.	Local	was	used	to	describe	those	who	had,	over	
time,	acquired	the	necessary	embeddedness	to	demonstrate	the	relevant	context-
knowledge-	this	too	suggests	phronesis.	The	following	exchange	taken	from	my	
interview	with	a	community	development	practitioner	provides	an	illustration:	
Emily:	if	you	had	to	pinpoint	some	of	the	things	again,	if	you	had	to	choose	
three	things	that	has	made	that	[project]	so	successful	or	even	pinpoint	fewer	
than	that?	
Practitioner	8:	Yeah,	I	could.	Local	community	ownership	of	the	process	from	
zero	to	implementation	thats	one.	Two,	a	local	person	from	the	area	as	the	
project	worker	in	that	area.	
Emily:	And	why	does	that	matter?	
Practitioner	8:	That	matters	because	he	already	has,	he	or	she	already	has	
the	trust	of	the	people	in	that	area.	Fullstop.	
Emily:	He	has	the	trust	because?	
Practitioner	8:	Because	he	lives,	hes	from	there,	hes	lived	there	thirty	
years	
Emily:	And	he	is	still	living	there?	
Practitioner	8:	He	is	still	living	there,	he	lives	on	the	street	with	them,	he	lives	
in	the	[named	geographic]	area.	Its	not	rocket	science		
(Practitioner	8,	Ex-combatant/Community	Development,	Interviewed	
12/2/2015).	
What	both	examples	also	illustrate	is	that	often	the	language	of	context	or	local	
can	be	used	without	its	more	phronetic	elements	understood.	The	terms	context	
and	local	by	themselves	are	useful	at	denoting	aspects	of	phronesis	but	lack	the	
nuance	that	the	fuller	conceptualisation	brings.	For	example,	neither	local	nor	
context	by	themselves	recognise	the	presence	and	importance	of	tacit	knowledge	
which	can	only	be	acquired	by	experience.	It	is	the	tacit	dimension,	however	
according	to	philosopher	Polanyi	that	contains	much	of	human	beings	highest	
creative	powers	(Polanyi,	1966	p.15).		For	this	reason,	as	I	will	argue	in	the	next	
section,	it	is	important	for	peacebuilding	knowledge	to	include	the	tacit	dimension,	
and	in	this	way	the	conceptualisation	of	phronesis	both	deepens	and	extends	
beyond	the	current	ways	that	both	context	and	local	are	viewed	and	used	in	
discussions	of	peacebuilding.	This	next	section	continues	by	illustrating	phronetic	
knowledge	as	a	unique	location	for	knowledge	creation	and	production.	
8.2	Utility	for	knowledge	production:	phronesis	as	a	set	of	lenses		
This	research	found	that	practitioners	use	phronesis	and	the	deep	context	
knowledge	it	contains	not	only	to	navigate,	but	also	to	enhance,	lever	and	lubricate	
change	processes.	Stories	of	practice	demonstrated	ways	that	explicit	and	tacit	use	
of	phronetic	knowledge	became	a	tool	of	conflict	analysis	and	innovation	for	conflict	
transformation	and	peacebuilding.		This	can	be	described	as	a	set	of	lenses	used	to	
aid	judgment	in	peacebuilding,	or	what	do	to	in	the	particular	situation.	For	the	
sake	of	clarity,	these	dimensions	are	first	defined	and	then	illustrated	by	a	diagram	
(See	next	page).	
The	Phronetic	Lenses	
Relationships:		The	dynamics	of	people,	families,	and	communities	including	roles,	
and	importance,	who	hold	credibility	and	networks,	as	well	as	patterns	of	cohesion,	
conflict,	trust	and	mistrust.	
Place-Space:	The	geography	of	locality	and	how	communities	are	physically	situated	
within	that	space,	including	urban	and	rural,	proximity	to	the	border,	and	whether	a	
community	was	minority/majority	in	a	given	locale.	
Time-Timing:	Past,	present	and	future	are	important	elements	of	reading	context,	
the	present	can	become	collapsed	with	the	past,	similarly	the	present	can	reshape	
interpretations	of	both	past	and	future.	
Fault	lines:	Recognition	of	patterns	of	conflict	and	how	they	are	triggers,	e.g.	
marching	seasons,	patterns	of	riots,	symbolic	triggers,	flags,	tension	that	cause	inter	
and	intra	communal	space	to	contract.	
Frames:	All	of	the	above	dimensions	influence	local	identity	construction,	meaning-
making	and	cultural	norms	and	include	and	interact	with	discursive	and	non-
discursive	symbolic	worldviews.	
Figure	5:	The	Phronetic	Lenses	
			Relationship	
Relationship	
Place	
Space	
Fault	lines	
Place	
Space	
Time	 Fault	lines	
Frame	Frame	
Frame	 Frame	
8.2.1	Phronetic	lenses	as	a	tool	of	analysis		
As	the	data	has	shown,	interviewees	recounted	that	for	many	practical	
peacebuilding	activity	operated,	at	least	initially,	organically.	Nevertheless	the	
evidence	illustrates	that	both	implicitly	and	explicitly	phronetic	knowledge	was	used	
to	analyse,	predict,	and	explain	the	conflict	landscape	in	order	to	determine	how	to	
challenge	norms	as	part	of	promoting	change.	For	example,	revisiting	a	previous	
quote	describing	how	a	potential	conflict	between	Loyalist	and	Republicans	was	
averted	through	dialogue	(as	recounted	in	the	previous	chapter)	can	be	further	
analysed	for	its	use	of	the	phronetic	lenses:		
[W]hen	the	Royal	Irish	Regiment	was	given	the	Freedom	of	Belfast	City,	
com[ing]	back	from	Afghanistan	and	Sinn	Fin	said	they	were	going	to	have	a	
black	flag	protest	in	Royal	Avenue	and	it	was	a	case	of	listen,	get	into	this	
room,	close	the	door,	do	youse	realise	what	youse	are	doing	here,	literally	
the	blood	will	flow	on	the	street.	These	arent	the	UDR	coming	home	from	
South	Armagh,	youve	got	to	understand	these	are	young	men	coming	home	
from	Iraq	and	Afghanistan	and	youre	going	to	stop	their	mothers	welcoming	
thisthey	still	had	their	protest,	they	done	it	a	couple	of	miles	away	and	I	
think	honestly	that	one	intervention,	I	think	it	saved	livesSee	having	that	
one	conversation	and	saying	youse	dont	realise	what	youre	doing	here?	
They	thought	they	were	playing	to	the	masses	of	the	Royal	Irish,	it	is	the	old	
UDR.	Its	not	like	that	and	its	a	case	of-	this	is	what	will	happen.	
(Practitioner	32,	Ex-Combatant/Social	Economy,	Interviewed	2/6/15).	
A	deeper	examination	of	the	quote	illustrates	a	nuanced	grasp	of	the	context-for-
action	and	can	be	discussed	as	evidencing	use	of	the	phronetic	lenses.	For	example,	
at	stake	in	the	negotiation	is	the	need	to	manage	a	fault	line	that	has	the	potential	
to	erupt.		The	interviewee,	part	of	an	ex-combatant	dialogue	group	reflected	an	
understanding	of	relationships	involved,	not	only	between	potential	protesting	
Republicans,	but	also	of	Loyalist	mothers	and	their	sons.	The	quote	also	illustrates	
the	understanding	of	the	importance	of	both	the	place	and	space	of	Belfast	City	Hall	
as	the	potential	location	of	protest.		Belfast	City	Hall	carries	significance	as	the	
location	of	the	cenotaph,	the	war	memorial	where	the	homecoming	would	take	
place.		The	narrative	frame	of	Loyalism	holds	strong	historical	ties	to	the	battles	of	
World	War	I	which	creates	a	potent	symbolism.	Finally,	this	interviewee	also	
reflects	his	understanding	of	time	and	timing	in	his	statement	that	this	is	not	the	
UDR	(local	army	who	were	considered	legitimate	targets	by	the	PIRA)	and	therefore	
these	soldiers	are	not	the	enemy,	these	soldiers	are	coming	home	from	Iraq	and	
Afghanistan.	This	pattern	makes	up	the	context	for	action	and	demonstrates	a	
layered	phronetic	understanding	used	to	direct	judgement	about	the	potential	for	
fault-lines	to	erupt.	As	this	example	illustrates,	a	potential	extension	of	the	
phronetic	lenses	would	be	to	use	it	as	a	tool	of	conflict	analysis.	In	this	case,	used	to	
analyse	the	context	for	intervention	given	the	inherent	ripeness	for	conflict.	
Phronetic	lenses	might	also	be	used	to	analyse	whether	particular	intervention	
techniques,	may	or	may	not	work	in	a	given	context.	As	discussed	in	Chapter	4	while	
the	civil	rights	movement	was	effective	in	highlighting	structural	violence	and	
resulted	in	legislative	success,	it	was	unable	able	to	maintain	its	original	nonviolent	
approach	and	was	moved	towards	violence.	Ruane	and	Todd	(1996)	suggest	that	
the	tactics	of	nonviolent	civil	disobedience	were	problematic	in	part	because	they	
were	not	germane.	Marches	while	inspired	by	the	US	African	American	civil	rights	
movement,	in	the	context	of	Northern	Ireland	caused	confusion	and	were	
disturbing	to	unionists:	
The	civil	rights	movement	could	not	easily	be	fitted	into	unionist	
tactic	of	the	march	increased	the	problems	for	unionists.	Although	an	
accepted,	even	celebrated	mode	of	non-violent	protest	in	the	1960s,	its	
role	in	Northern	Ireland	was	problematic	(Ruane	and	Todd,	1996	p.	127).		
The	same	authors	elaborate	that	the	sectarian	geography	and	the	history	of	
Protestant	marching	meant,		Civil	rights	marches	which	traversed	Protestant	
territory,	or	any	territory	not	seen	as	exclusively	Catholic,	were	perceived	as	a	direct	
challenge	(ibid,	p.127).	The	result	was	that	flashpoints	areas	created	tensions	and	
opportunities	for	escalated	conflict.	Bew	and	Gillespie	(1999)	suggest	that	the	civil	
rights	movement	may	have	also	suffered	from	a	lack	of	Protestant	leadership	and	
Protestants	believed	that	civil	rights	movement	to	be	merely	a	front	for	the	IRA.	
Although	NICRA	included	Republicans,	other	members	were	linked	to	the	Wolfe	
Tone	Society,	Trade	Unionist	Movement,	Communist	Party,	moderate	reformers	
and	one	young	Unionist	(Hall,	1988	p.3).	In	hindsight,	a	question	may	be	asked	
whether	more	representation	from	Protestants	would	have	served	in	some	way	to	
mitigate	Protestant	suspicions.	
Likewise,	a	micro-contextual	case-study	of	October	5,	1968,	described	as	a	pivotal	
turning	point	of	the	civil	rights	movement	(Taggart,	2004;	Prince	and	Warner,	2012),	
when	considered	through	the	phronetic	lenses	may	generate	insights.	Below	each	
dimension	is	featured	to	demonstrate	phronesis	as	a	tool	of	analysis	to	view	the	
context	of	events	surrounding	October	5,	1968.	
Table	5:	Phronetic	lenses	as	a	tool	of	analysis	
Relationships:	 Protestants	viewed	the	leadership	of	NICRA	with	suspicion	in	part	due	
to	the	lack	of	Protestant	leadership	(Bew	and	Gillespie,	1999).	Derry	
civil	rights	organisations	were	known	to	local	RUC	commanders	with	
each	were	well	aware	of	the	others	tactics	and	approaches,	by	contrast	
those	from	the	NICRA	leadership	were	Belfast-based	and	therefore	
didnt	know	the	local	situation	(Prince	and	Warner,	2012).	Ruane	and	
Todd	suggest	clashes	between	marchers	and	loyalists	forced	RUC	to	
take	sides	stating	RUC	were	defenders	of	the	Protestant	community	
first,	defenders	of	the	Protestant	state	second,	and	normal	policemen	
third	(Ruane	and	Todd,	1996).	
Place-Space:	 Sectarian	geography	enhanced	the	potential	for	marches	to	become	
flashpoints	(Ruane	and	Todd,	1996).		
Time-Timing		
Many	of	the	events	of	the	civil	rights	era	happened	in	a	short	window	
of	time	(October	5th-	December	1968).	By	December	of	1968,	Bleakley	
writes	that	the	emotional	context	required	a	cooling	off	period	
(Bleakley,	1972).		
Fault	lines:	
Prince	and	Warner	(2012)	argue	that	Derry-Londonderry	civil	rights	
organisers	were	more	radical	and	thus	deliberately	planned	a	
marching	route	that	might	provoke	a	strong	reaction	by	moving	from	
the	Protestant	Waterside	area	up	to	the	city	centre	near	the	war	
memorial	(Prince	and	Warner,	2012).		
Frame	
Using	civil	disobedience	as	a	tool	may	have	challenged	Protestants	
viewing	it	as	a	protest	against	the	state.	Walker	has	suggested	that	
Protestants	were	culturally	socialised	to	identify	with	and	defend	the	
state	rather	than	challenge	the	laws	of	the	state	(Walker,	2012).	Also,	
Ruane	and	Todd	describe	that	there	was	little	interpretative	frame	by	
which	to	understand	marching	as	a	form	of	non-violent	protest	and	
that	civil	rights	as	not	easily	be	fitted	into	unionist	conceptual	
categories(Ruane	and	Todd,	1996	p.127).	
After	applying	a	phronetic	lens,	light	is	shed	on	the	context	surrounding	October	5,	
1968	suggesting	it	was	ripened	for	a	rapid	escalation	of	conflict.		Overall,	it	suggests	
the	possibility	that	techniques	chose	to	advance	social	justice	through	civil	rights	
marches	and	demonstrations	and	modelled	after	the	US	civil	rights	context,	may	
have	inadvertently	escalated	tensions	when	used	in	Northern	Ireland.	This	
combustive	context	may	be	a	partial	explanation	for	the	volatility	and	dramatic	
escalation	into	violent	manifestation	of	conflict,	a	turn	of	events	that	shifted	the	
momentum	in	an	increasingly	dangerous	and	deadly	direction.			
8.2.2	Phronetic	lenses:	innovation	in	practice	
Writing	about	professional	practice,	since	the	early	1970s	Argyris	and	Schn	have	
explored	the	processes	by	which	practitioners	become	knowledge	creators.		
Describing	that	practitioners	employ	tacitly	theories-in-use	in	practice	which	guide	
their	choices	and	judgment,	they	argue	that	making	such	knowledge	explicit	is	key	
to	reflective	practice	and	that	when	we	formulate	our	theories-in-use	we	make	
explicit	what	we	already	know	tacitly:	we	can	test	our	explicit	knowledge	against	
our	tacit	knowledge(Argyris	and	Schn,	1974	p.11).	Such	perspectives	on	the	
interplay	between	tacit	and	explicit	forms	of	knowledge	echo	a	critique	by	authors	
Nonaka	et	al,	writing	about	knowledge	production	within	organisations.	The	thrust	
of	their	critique	is	that	traditional	western	epistemologies	view	knowledge	as	
absolute	and	static	and	fails	to	capture	what	they	describe	as	the	relative,	
dynamic,	and	humanistic	dimensions	of	knowledge	(Nonaka	et	al.,	2001	p.14).		
These	authors	contrast	this	with	the	Japanese	concept	of	Ba,	which	holds	a	view	of	
knowledge	as	fluidly	dynamic	and	as	emergent.	It	is	their	view	that	innovative	
knowledge	creation	occurs	out	of	a	particular	context	and	is	a	convergence	of	
explicit	and	tacit	forms	of	knowledge,	writing:		Understanding	this	reciprocal	
relationship	between	explicit	knowledge	and	tacit	knowledge	is	key	to	
understanding	the	knowledge-creation	process	(ibid).		While,	the	above	authors	
are	writing	about	knowledge	production	from	a	business	management	perspective,	
their	conceptualisation	of	the	potential	of	using	both	tacit	and	explicit	forms	of	
context	knowledge	is	nonetheless	relevant	because	it	elucidates	the	innovative	
potential	of	using	phronetic	knowledge	for	peacebuilding.		
Stories	of	practice	which	emerged	from	interviews	for	this	research	provided	
examples	and	evidence	of	such	innovation.	The	following	story	describes	the	
emergence	of	the	idea	for	the	mobile	telephone	network,	an	initiative	which	
distributes	mobile	phones	to	key	volunteers	and	workers	on	either	sides	of	
flashpoints	to	allow	them	to	remain	in	contact	to	dispel	rumours,	share	information	
to	de-escalate	tensions	particularly	along	interface	areas	(Jarman	and	CDC,	1999;	
Hall,	2003;	Jarman,	2005;	profiled	in	Section	4.5).	This	initiative	has	been	viewed	as	
a	successful	development	in	the	management	of	communal	interface	tensions:	
I	was	sitting	one	day	and	I	was	talking	to	activist	from	the	Nationalist	
community,	and	I	said	I	said,	Look	can	we	not	get	a	telephone	tree,	where	
everybody	gets	each	others	numbers	and	they	can	ring	each	other?	And	
this	old	guy	[Name	omitted]	he	saidlet	me	tell	you	a	wee	story,	he	said	
people	dont	want	to	give	their	numbers	across.	He	said	there	was	a	guy,	he	
was	a	milkman	and	he	was	delivering	milk	around	North	Belfast,	to	both	
Protestant	[and]	Catholic	and	he	used	to	go	and	collect	the	money	and	he	
came	to	one	house	and	the	woman,	Protestant	woman	said	to	him,	Look	
my	son	or	my	daughter	is	seeing	someone	from	the	other	community.	Can	
you	give	me	a	contact	with	Sinn	Fin	so	I	can	check	my	child	is	safe	going	
into	that	area?	
	[H]e	said	he	didnt	know	anything	about	Sinn	Fin	but	he	went	back	into	his	
community	and	he	got	a	number	for	an	incident	centre	and	went	back	to	the	
woman	and	said,	theres	the	number	if	you	ring	them	they	might	be	able	to	
help	you.		This	word	got	out	and	it	was	assumed	by	the	Loyalist	Unionist	
side	that	this	guy	was	connected	with	Sinn	Fin	and	he	was	shot	dead.	
[T]hats	the	kinda	story	that	means	we	will	not	give	each	other	personal	
details.		
So	I	thought	about	this	Emily,	for	a	long	time.	What	if	we	could	get	mobile	
phones	and	we	could	give	the	mobile	phones	into	an	area,	so	it	wasnt	
identified	and	we	would	give	people	the	numbers	and	they	would	know	I	
could	ring	you	and	we	wouldnt	know	who	was	on	the	other	end	and	say,	is	
it	true	[verifying	rumour]	thats	where	the	mobile	phone	network	came	
from.	(Practitioner	2,	Interface-based	peacebuilding,	Interview	12/4/2014)	
The	story	illustrates	the	use	of	phronesis	to	innovate	against	the	context	of	deep	
distrust,	fear	and	danger	originating	from	a	lived	experience	of	inter-communal	
betrayal.	The	recounting	of	the	story	of	the	death	of	a	local	milkman	uncovers	
knowledge	which	presumably	at	the	time	of	the	death	was	known	explicitly	by	
those	living	in	the	local	area,	but	which	over	time,	becomes	tacit.		The	lesson	
learned	from	the	experience	for	those	in	the	community	was	that	it	was	unsafe	to	
share	personal	information	across	the	communal	divide.	In	fact,	it	will	get	you	
killed.	Once	the	story	becomes	explicit,	the	practitioner	is	able	to	use	what	was	
formerly	tacit	knowledge	in	combination	with	explicit	knowledge	to	innovate.	The	
practitioner	acknowledges	the	barriers	that	exist	but	seeks	a	creative	way	to	
mitigate	risk	to	find	a	practical	solution	to	address	the	problem	of	a	lack	of	direct	
communication.	The	diagram	(Figure	5)	and	outline	describe	the	ways	that	using	
both	forms	of	knowledge,	tacit	and	explicit,	leads	to	innovation	using	the	following	
process:	
		Phronetic	knowledge	creation	cycle	for	innovation		
1. Lived	experience	of	intercommunal	betrayal	(knowledge	is	explicit).	
2. Knowledge	over	time	becomes	tacit	(knowledge	becomes	a	pattern	of	context).	
3. Possibilities	judged	from	tacit	context	(patterns	held	tacitly	in	story).	
4. Shared	story	made	explicit	(tacit	pattern	examined).	
5. Critical	reflection	(Space	for	exchange	and	new	information	to	be	considered).	
6. Innovation	through	developing	a	mobile	phone	network		(using	tacit	knowledge	
made	explicit).	
Figure	5:	Phronetic	knowledge	creation	cycle	for	innovation		
1.	Lived	Experience	of	
Inter-communal	
Betrayal	
(Knowledge	is	explicit)	
2.	Knowledge	Over	
Time	Becomes	Tacit	
(Patterns	of	context)	
3.	Possibilities	
Judged	from	Tacit	
Context		
(Patterns	held	
tacitly	in	story)	
4.	Shared	Story	
Made	Explicit		
(Tacit	pattern	
examined)		
5.	Critical	
ReGlection:		
Space	for	exchange	
and	new	
information	
6.	Creative	
Innovation:	
Mobile	Phone	
Network			
(Using	tacit		
knowledge	made	
explicit)	
This	knowledge	creation	cycle	is	not	dissimilar	from	Lederachs	(1995)	models	of	
elicitive	training	(Lederach,	1995	p.57).	In	fact,	both	utilise	implicit	and	tacit	
knowledge	as	a	source	of	discovery.	Lederachs	model	describes	building	on	implicit	
understandings	of	conflict	to	build	relevancy	into	training,	while	the	above	model	
demonstrates	that	tacit	and	explicit	knowledge	are	used	to	produce	innovation,	in	
this	example,	a	mobile	phone	network.	Each	affirm	the	validation	of	the	extant	
knowledge	of	those	with	practical	lived	experience	of	conflict.	As	Lederach	writes:	
It	is	trusting	that	participants	have	the	capacity	and	creativity	to	identify,	name,	
critique,	and	recreate	models	that	correspond	to	needs	they	experience	and	
identify	(ibid).	In	order	to	increase	relevancy	for	innovation	or	training,	it	is	
however,	necessary	to	first	build	upon	tacit	knowledge.	It	may	next	move	into	
explicit	knowledge	through	a	process	of	critical	reflection.	This	cycle	further	
explains	why	interviewees	reflected	that	outside	intervention	and	exemplars	could	
be	useful	when	a	space	was	created	for	critical	reflection	as	often	an	outsider	can	
ask	questions	that	elicit	important	tacit	knowledge.	Making	tacit	knowledge	explicit	
in	a	space	of	reflection	was	important	for	generating	new	insights.	
8.2.3	Using	phronesis	to	build	relevant	theory		
As	it	was	originally	designed,	this	research	aimed	to	build	theory	with	practitioners.	
While	this	aspect	of	the	research	design	was	not	carried	out	to	the	degree	planned,	
theory	building	with	practitioners	took	place	on	two	occasions.	While	the	
mechanics	of	these	meetings	were	discussed	in	the	methodology	chapter,	this	
subsection	will	consider	how	these	discussions	contributed	towards	advancing	
possible	theoretical	development.		As	mentioned	in	the	methodology	chapter,	the	
aim	of	theory	building	with	practitioners	using	phronetic	context-knowledge	was,	
from	the	outset,	modest.		Rather	than	aiming	for	universal	explanatory	power	the	
aspiration	was	instead	focused	on	building	locally	relevant	mid-range	theory,	not	
dissimilar	from	how	Lederach	conceptualises	his	theoretical	contributions	
(Lederach,	1997).	
	The	salience	of	the	topic	of	trust,	described	in	inductive	stages	of	data	analysis	as	
catalytic	to	practice,	made	it	the	topic	deemed	most	appropriate	and	rich	for	theory	
building.	Stories	of	practice	had	evidenced	that	when	peacebuilding	had	been	
deemed	successful,	engagement	had	necessitated	a	degree	of	trust	built	and/or	
trustworthiness	demonstrated.	For	example,	establishment	of	trustworthiness	
through	credibility	(one	concept	linked	to	trustworthiness)	was	considered	
important	both	for	the	particular	practitioner	and	any	process	of	intervention.	After	
using	a	matrix	to	track	and	map	the	locations	of	trust	and	distrust	mentioned,	it	
became	clear	that	the	practice	identified	that	deep	systemic	distrust	operated	at	all	
levels	of	society	(Appendix	10).	This	provided	salience	and	explanation	as	to	why	
both	perceptions	and	evidence	of	trustworthiness	might	be	important.	Data	
analysis	revealed	that	when	trust	and	trustworthiness	was	discussed	it	included	
four	different	usages,	which	I	described	as:	1)	point-of-entry	trust,	2)	proxy-trust,	3)	
pragmatic	trust,	and	4)	process	trust	(see	Chapter	7,	section	7.1).		
In	order	to	generate	discussion	in	the	theory-building	sessions,	two	fictional	case	
studies	were	used	to	generate	initial	discussion	on	dimensions	of	trust.		Insights	
gained	were	then	followed	up	and	contrasted	against	the	models	of	systemic	
distrust	to	interrogate	and	elucidate	the	model	(For	case-studies	and	theory	
building	handout	see	Appendixes	11-13).		What	emerged	over	the	course	of	these	
discussions	was	further	conceptual	development	to	elucidate	why	trust	was	
important	to	practice.	This	included	the	theoretical	insight	that	trust	involved	a	
calculation	of	risk,	an	element	that	had	not	featured	in	the	previous	model.		As	one	
of	the	theory-building	participant	asked,	Enough	trust	for	what?	Recognition	was	
given	that	gender,	age,	and	locality	were	all	factored	into	micro-calculations	of	
particular	risk	levels	and	consequently,	what	level	of	trust	was	required.	Discussions	
with	the	group	also	confirmed	that	the	concepts	of	trustworthiness	that	I	had	
identified	were,	in	part,	used	to	mitigate	against	the	perceived	risk.	For	example,	if	
a	credible	leader	(using	what	I	described	as	proxy-trust)	was	involved	in	a	
peacebuilding	project,	the	overall	risk	was	mitigated	as	they	had	established	bona	
fides	in	their	context.	Similarly,	pragmatic	trust	was	used	to	establish	a	conditional	
basis	for	joint	inter-communal	projects	with	tangible	and	material	gain	such	as	
employment,	regeneration,	safer	areas,	or	financial	investment;	therefore	the	risk	
of	engagement	was	mitigated.		Practitioners	reflected	that	when	the	risk	level	
increased,	the	space	for	engagement	retracted.	Risk	sharing	was	identified	as	one	
way	to	progress	change	when	leadership	might	otherwise	face	isolation	or	become	
scapegoated.	Finally,	distinctions	were	discussed	between	distrust	and	mistrust	and	
whether	in	fact,	what	was	understood	as	trust	might	be	better	understood	as	
managing	distrust.	The	following	diagrams	represented	in	Figure	6	and	Figure	7	
reflect	additional	insights	that	theory-building	discussions	generated,	evidencing	
the	development	of	the	ideas	gained	as	a	result	of	working	with	practitioners	as	
part	of	a	knowledge	production	process.	
Figure	6:	Distrust-trust	theory	building	model	(post-practitioner	input)	
Figure	7:	Distrust-trust	theory	building	model	(post-practitioner	input)	
Theory	building	with	practitioners	was	truncated,	with	more	future	work	needed	to	
more	fully	elucidate	and	exploit	the	knowledge	creation	possibilities	of	these	
groups,	however,	these	indicators	were	promising	in	their	relevancy.	As	mentioned	
previously	the	theory	building	with	practitioners	had	not	necessarily	intended	to	
produce	broadly	universal	or	explanatory	models	but	speak	to	the	local	context	and	
the	practice	environment.	The	relevancy	of	the	topic	of	trust	was	reinforced	one	
month	after	the	completion	of	the	theory-building	workshops	(held	in	November	
2016),	when	on	January	9
	2017	Deputy	First	Minister	Martin	McGuinness	resigned	
from	his	position,	citing	a	lack	of	trust	and	accountability	in	the	handling	of	a	
renewable-energy	scheme	set	up	by	the	First	Minister	in	her	previous	role	as	
Minister	for	the	Economy	(Irish	Times,	2017).	As	a	result,	the	power-sharing	
collapsed	and	Northern	Ireland	remains	at	the	time	of	writing,	without	a	functioning	
power-sharing	Executive	or	Legislative	Assembly	at	Stormont.	The	collapse	of	the	
Executive	came	as	a	surprise	to	many.	For	example,	a	local	publication	established	
to	document	and	review	peacebuilding	progress	in	Northern	Ireland	the	Peace	
Monitoring	report,	in	its	2016	edition	began	with	a	foreword	by	its	chairperson,	
who	wrote:		
Devolution	appears	more	secure	than	at	any	time	in	most	peoples	living	
memory.	And	it	is	a	power-sharing	devolution-	a	genuine	partnership	
between	the	largest	political	parties	representing	opinion	across	the	
community	(Osborne	cited	in	Wilson,	2016	p.5).	
Five	months	later,	in	early	January	2017,	this	genuine	partnership	had	ended.	This	
quote	is	not	used	to	fault	those	tasked	with	monitoring	the	peace	with	their	lack	of	
political	prescience,	merely	to	highlight	that	such	a	task,	despite	hard	data	
indicators	will	never	capture	the	full	contextual	picture	in	societies	transitioning	
from	violent	conflict.	Likewise,	it	also	serves	to	illustrate	that	there	are	deep	
fragilities	that	remain	even	when	peace	seems	to	have	stabilised.	While	the	focus	of	
this	research	was	on	grassroots	and	civil	society	based	practitioners,	the	
pervasiveness	of	the	systemic	distrust	was	evidenced	as	widespread.	Thus,	it	is	
should	not	be	surprising	to	see	its	permutation	at	a	political	level.		
Interestingly,	specific	attention	to	the	topic	of	trust	and	mechanisms	to	build	trust	
or	to	demonstrate	trustworthiness	is	generally	under-theorised	within	the	
peacebuilding	literature	-	a	surprising	omission	given	its	pertinence	to	post-conflict	
societies.	However,	initial	exploration	into	the	literature	on	post	conflict	trust	
building	suggests	the	two	bear	some	inter-relationship	systemically.	According	to	
Stiefel:	
Societies	emerging	from	war	face	a	range	of	problems,	all	connected	and	
urgent.	But	one	overshadows	and	affects	all	the	others:	the	destruction	of	
relationships	and	the	loss	of	trust,	confidence,	dignity	and	faithIf	people	
do	not	trust	each	other	and	lack	trust	and	confidence	in	government	and	in	
the	rebuilding	process	in	general,	then	the	best	rebuilding	strategies	are	
likely	to	fail	(Stiefel,	2001	pp.255-56).		
Hamber	and	Kellys	(2004)	work	theorising	reconciliation	is	one	of	the	examples	of	
peacebuilding	theory	that	specifically	mentions	trust.	The	definition	refers	to	the	
need	to	address	issues	of	trust	in	strand	three	and	in	strand	four	of	its	five-stranded	
definition	which	defines	reconciliation	as:	
1. Developing	a	shared	vision	of	an	interdependent	society	
2. Acknowledging	and	dealing	with	the	past	
3. Building	positive	relationships	
4. Significant	cultural	and	attitudinal	change	
5. Substantial	social,	economic,	and	political	change		
(Hamber	and	Kelly,	2004	p.7)	
An	extended	explanation	of	strand	three,	Building	Positive	Relationships	states	
that	reconciliation	involves:	
Relationship	building	or	renewal	following	violent	conflict	addressing	issues	
of	trust,	prejudice,	intolerance	in	this	process,	resulting	in	accepting	
commonalities	and	differences,	and	embracing	and	engaging	with	those	
who	are	different	to	us	(Hamber	and	Kelly,	2004	p.4).	
The	second	reference	is	made	under	strand	four,	Significant	Cultural	and	
Attitudinal	Change	where	they	write	that	reconciliation	may	need	to	involve:	
Changes	in	how	people	relate	to,	and	their	attitudes	towards,	one	another.	The	
culture	of	suspicion,	fear,	mistrust	and	violence	is	broken	down	and	opportunities	
and	space	opened	up	in	which	people	can	hear	and	be	heard	(Ibid).	It	is	important	
that	trust	and	mistrust	is	mentioned	within	the	definition	of	reconciliation.	
However,	given	the	salience	of	the	findings	that	Northern	Ireland	operates	out	of	a	
context	of	deep	systemic	distrust,	it	could	be	argued	that	a	more	significant	
emphasis	needs	placed	on	trust	and	trustworthiness	as	catalytic	components	
necessary	to	underpin	reconciliation.		While	it	could	be	argued	that	trust	is	
important	in	each	strand,	its	salience	to	reconciliation	could	be	made	more	explicit	
by	adding	it,	for	example,	into	strand	three	stating	specifically	building	positive	
relationships	characterised	by	trust	and	benchmarks	of	trustworthiness.	An	
elaborated	explanation	of	the	addition	could	include	linked	concepts	such	as	
integrity,	credibility,	accountability,	transparency,	inclusivity	and	commitment	as	
benchmarks	of	trustworthiness	that	would	help	to	build	trust.		Without	such	trust,	
reconciliation	is	certainly	unlikely	or	perhaps	even	impossible.		
Issues	of	trust	have	also	received	little	attention	from	politicians	or	policymakers.	A	
search	of	The	Programme	for	Government	Consultation	Document	2016-2021	(PfG)	
found	only	two	times	that	trust,	distrust,	or	mistrust	is	mentioned	where	it	states	
that:	
Respect	underpins	a	cohesive	and	peaceful	society	and	reflects	equality	
and	human	rights	principles.	It	relates	to	trust,	relationship	building	and	
collaboration.	It	is	therefore	much	more	than	just	tolerance,	lack	of	abuse	
and	lack	of	discrimination	(Northern	Ireland	Executive,	2016	p.	120).	
Clearly	while	there	is	acknowledgement	of	the	relationships	between	respect	and	
trust,	the	nature	of	the	relationship	is	ill-defined,	with	the	term	respect	receiving	a	
greater	emphasis	in	the	document.	The	document	proposes	the	development	of	a	
respect	index	to	measure	progress	in	its	promotion	(Northern	Ireland	Executive,	
2016	p.121).	While	respect	is	clearly	a	vital	part	of	building	reconciliation	and	
necessary	for	peacebuilding,	a	brief	view	comparing	both	terms	in	references	made	
by	interviewees	finds	that	trust	was	spoken	of	one-third	more	often	than	respect-	
although	respect	is	a	topic	that	is	much	more	broadly	prominent	in	the	PfG.	The	fact	
that	trust	only	received	two	references	in	the	PfG	consultation	document,	suggests	
an	underestimation	of	the	degree	by	which	effective	governance	and	social	
cohesion	may	rely	upon	its	durability	and	ductility.	Building	civil	society	trust	in	
post-accord	and	post	conflict	societies	is	noted	as	important	by	Pouligny	who	
writes:	
[Post-conflict	peacebuilding	has]	traditionally	focused	more	on	economic	
and	physical	infrastructures	or	on	formal	institutional	processes,	but	have	
tended	to	forget	that	wars	destroy	not	only	buildings	and	bodies	but	also	
trust,	hope,	identity,	family	and	social	ties.	In	other	words,	insufficient	
attention	has	been	paid	to	the	radical	transformations	in	political	cultures	
and	codes	of	conduct	of	the	individuals	and	communities	who	have	
experienced	mass	violence,	and	the	way	these	basic	values	and	beliefs	affect	
the	way	a	state	is	conceived	and	governed	(Pouligny,	2005	p.	496).	
In	contrast	to	the	PfG	a	recent	report,	Galvanising	the	Peace	(2017)	produced	
through	a	period	of	consultation	across	the	region	with	networks	of	peacebuilding	
practitioners,	highlights	the	need	to	rebuild	trust,	as	well	as	promote	respect	and	
reconciliation	as	its	number	one	recommendation.	The	report	states:	
There	is	still	a	diverse	array	of	civil	society	organisations	that	continue	to	
work	to	build	peace,	both	on	their	own	and	in	partnership	with	other	
organisations,	as	well	as	with	political	parties,	the	institutions	of	governance	
and	with	statutory	bodies.	What	they	have	in	common	is	a	belief	that	
sustainable	peace	can	only	be	based	on	relationships	built	on	trust	and	
respect	and,	through	this,	it	will	be	possible	to	foster	reconciliation,	while	at	
the	same	time	tackling	the	hard	issues	within	a	framework	of	ethnic,	social,	
political	and	cultural	diversity	(Galvanising	the	Peace	Network,	2017	pp.	10-
It	is	clear	that	peacebuilding	practitioners	and	policymakers	are	not	addressing	the	
issue	of	trust	similarly.	However,	the	latter	group	are	nonetheless	producing	policy	
with	ambitious	peacebuilding	goals,	which,	if	prioritised	could	be	enhanced	by	trust.	
Instead,	the	Galvanising	the	Peace	report	highlights	that	that	the	timetable	for	the	
permanent	dismantlement	of	peace	walls	by	2023,	a	policy	goal	mandated	by	
government	through	T:	BUC	(2013)	has	caused	anxieties	in	some	communities	
(Galvanising	the	Peace	Network,	2017).	While	the	removal	of	walls	is	a	laudable	
policy	goal,	it	might	be	better	facilitated	if	communities	had	trusted	relationships	
with	those	in	charge	of	statutory	provisions	in	their	communities.	Where	a	deficit	of	
trust	already	exists,	distrust	may	more	readily	be	extended	to	those	charged	with	
guiding	the	removal	of	peace	walls.	Likewise,	a	lack	of	consultation	or	engagement	
on	such	issues	may	consequently	reinforce	and/or	will	likely	be	reinforced	by,	a	
view	that	statutory	bodies	are	not	trustworthy.	The	analysis	of	the	data	from	this	
doctoral	research,	particularly	after	using	the	trust	matrix,	suggests	that	this	is	a	
sentiment	that	already	exists.		
Initial	reflections	generated	from	the	data	in	this	research	suggest	that	
demonstrations	of	trustworthiness	such	as:	wide	access	and	inclusivity;	mechanisms	
to	ensure	transparency,	accountability	and	culpability;	and	reliability	and	
commitment	are	all	important	process	dimensions	necessary	to	build	trust.	
Benchmarking	markers	of	trustworthiness	may	be	a	necessary	and	useful	
consideration	for	policy-makers	whose	task	in	governance	is	compounded	in	
multiple	ways	by	its	post-conflict	context.	Such	matters	will	be	increasingly	
significant	if	bodies	and	mechanisms	for	dealing	with	historical	legacy	issues	
outlined	in	the	Stormont	House	Agreement	(SHA)	are	to	be	implemented,	such	as	
the	Historical	Investigation	Unit,	Independent	Commission	on	Information	Retrieval,	
and	the	Oral	History	Archive	(SHA,	2014).	Bodies	such	as	these,	in	order	to	be	
considered	legitimate	will	likely	rely	on	demonstrations	and	evidence	of	their	
trustworthiness.			
8.3.	Revisiting	key	debates	on	knowledge	for	peacebuilding	
In	light	of	arguments	presented	here	that	the	conceptualisation	of	phronesis	is	
important	for	peacebuilding	and	that	it	holds	explanatory	power	for	a	better	
understanding	of	civil	society	and	grassroots	peacebuilding,	as	well	as	scope	for	
knowledge	creation,	it	is	now	useful	to	consider	how	each	of	these	arguments	
relate	to,	or	provide	new	insights	concerning	the	key	debates	identified	in	the	
literature	review	from	Chapter	2.		Specifically,	these	debates	centred	on:	Who	is	a	
peacebuilder,	and	what	type	of	knowledge	do	they	have	or	need	to	have,	to	build	
peace?	The	first	question,	who	is	a	peacebuilder,	focused	on	whether	the	grassroots	
and	civil	society	is	a	viable	location	for	producing	valid	and	valuable	knowledge	for	
peace,	or	whether	as	issues	of	day-to-day	survival	are	too	urgent	as	Brewer	
suggests	(Brewer,	2010	p.54)	or	too	biased	and	entrenched-	too	uncivil	(Belloni,	
2010).	This	question	is	made	more	important	by	traction	and	interest	generated	in	
bottom-up	locally-led	approaches,	as	such	approaches	will	be	will	be	meaningless	
if	those	at	the	bottom	are	not	valued	for	their	judgement	or	knowledge	for	peace.	
The	findings	of	this	research	can	make	a	contribution	to	this	debate	by	concluding	
that	those	involved	in	grassroots	and	civil	society	peacebuilding	hold	valid	and	
valuable	knowledge	for	peace.	In	fact,	they	are	uniquely	equipped	to	do	so,	because	
their	location	at	the	coalface	places	them	at	the	intersection	of	both	the	deep	
challenges	and	possibilities	for	change.	However,	to	fully	understand	and	explain	
the	nature	of	this	location,	and	to	better	appreciate	its	value	and	validity,	an	
epistemological	rediscovery	is	necessary.		Hence,	phronesis,	when	considered	as	an	
epistemology	of	practice	provides	a	conceptual	lens	to	sharpen	the	view.	As	a	
frame,	phronesis	provides	explanatory	power	and	knowledge	creation	capabilities.	
Phronesis	as	a	term	brings	attention	to	a	deeper	understanding	of	nuances	of	
context	held	both	tacitly	and	explicitly,	and	how	context	is	judged	(embodied	in	
multiple	ways	of	knowing).	Importantly,	the	research	has	identified	that	those	
working	to	promote	changes	in	civil	society	and	at	the	grassroots	use	this	form	of	
knowledge	to	increase	relevancy	and	efficacy.		
Phronesis	as	a	concept	helps	to	explain	but	not	necessarily	avoid,	tensions.	
Ontological	insights	from	phronesis,	however,	brings	a	fresh	perspective	illustrating	
that	judgments	about	what	to	do,	agency	and	actions	aimed	at	peacebuilding	are	
contingent	upon	ones	view	of	their	particular	context.	In	this	regard,	research	
findings	shed	light	on	the	inherent	tensions	this	location	brings.	Speaking	out	in	
such	small	socially	dense	quarters	can	have	profound	implications,	for	example,	if	
ones	neighbour	is	involved	as	a	protagonist	in	armed	conflict,	peacebuilding	
activism	may	be	gauged	accordingly.	Peacebuilding	in	the	context	of	division	
requires	a	nuanced	navigation	and	balancing	act.	As	one	practitioner	working	with	a	
mixed	community	noted,	people	can	have	a	great	friendship	with	their	neighbours	
and	get	on,	but	on	another	level-	cant	stand	one	another.	This	complexity	echoes	
Poulignys	critique	that	too	often	notions	of	civil	society	can	serve	to	take	a	
reductionist	and	narrow	view,	missing	a	richness	of	diversity	and	social	ties	that	
exist	within	civil	societies	facing	conflict	(Pouligny,	2005).	Pouligny	describes	this	as	
fluidity	that	individual	domestic	actors	may	have	within	their	societal	networks.	
Domestic	actors,	it	is	argued,	may	hold	multiple	roles,	for	example,	a	local	
community	worker	may	also	be	part	of	networks	affiliated	with	aligned	political	
movements	(Pouligny,	2005	p.	499).	For	this	reason,	scope	for	peacebuilding	
changes	at	this	level	are	inevitably	weighed	up	against	the	inherent	risks	or	
consequences	involved	for	oneself	and	ones	embedded	networks.		As	an	
illustration,	one	interviewee	working	within	trade	unions	from	a	Catholic	Nationalist	
background,	recalled	that	his	own	father	had	slammed	the	door	in	his	face	when	he	
took	a	public	position	supporting	the	newly	formed	Police	Service	of	Northern	
Ireland	(PSNI).		
Practice	stories	also	illustrated	the	necessity	for	understanding	and	working	with	
this	type	of	complexity	when	aiming	to	promote	and	support	change	processes	
within	organisations.	One	practitioner	recalled	working	with	high-ranking	members	
of	both	the	police	and	the	Orange	Order,	two	institutions	accused	of	historical	
intransigence	to	change.	One	insight	generated	by	such	experiences	was	the	need	
to	work	systemically	and	to	build	trust	and	buy-in	within	each	part	of	the	system	
otherwise	progress	would	be	blocked.	This	was	important	because	if	individual	
leaders	were	willing	to	take	risks	but	did	not	have	the	trust	of	others	in	the	system,	
they	would	find	themselves	scapegoated	for		sticking	their	head	above	the	parapet	
by	their	own	networks.		
This	latter	point	also	speaks	to	another	insight	generated	from	the	research	that	
carries			paradoxical	implications.	Lederachs	conceptual	development	of	integrated	
peacebuilding	describes	that	activity	and	leadership	is	necessary	at	all	levels	of	
society	(Track	I,	II,	and	III).	Each	level	is	viewed	as	offering	scope	for	multiple	
peacebuilding	processes	and	approaches	aimed	at	working	across	all	lines	of	
division	in	a	conflict	setting	(Lederach,	1997).	As	covered	in	Chapter	2,	Lederach	
allocates	a	particular	role	to	those	at	the	middle-range	level	(Track	II)	viewing	this	
location	as	one	that	holds	the	potential	to	connect	both	the	grassroots	and	political	
levels	in	peacebuilding.	This	research	found	evidence	that	mid-level	leadership	can	
be	a	successful	conduit,	for	example,	as	profiled	in	the	back	channel	negotiations	
detailed	in	Chapter	4.	As	a	model,	integrated	peacebuilding	may	nevertheless	
underestimate	the	difficulty	for	building	and	maintaining	horizontal	and	vertical	
relationships	in	contexts	of	a	pervasive	systemic	distrust.	Middle-range	leaders	who	
aim	to	connect	levels	of	peacebuilding	may	find	the	very	relationships	they	have	
painstakingly	developed,	if	openly	known,	also	subject	them	to	distrust	and	
suspicion.	As	mentioned	in	Chapter	6,	one	interviewee	recounted	that	when	he	
demonstrated	that	he	had	contacts	both	within	local	communities	and	with	high-
level	senior	police,	this	individual	became	a	source	of	distrust	because	each	viewed	
that	the	practitioner	had	to	be	working	to	someones	agenda	(Practitioner	4,	
Mediation,	Interviewed	8/12/14).	In	conclusion,	evidence	from	this	research	finds	
that	actors	are	involved	in	effective	peacebuilding	at	the	local	level.	However,	truly	
integrated	peacebuilding	may	be	more	limited	if	and	when	interveners	are	both	
embedded	in	and	work	within	contexts	of	deep	systemic	distrust.	Mitigated	at	times	
by	evidence	of	trustworthiness,	peacebuilding	agency	may	also	be	curtailed	due	to	
being	perceived	as	untrustworthy	in	a	given	particular	conflict	context.	However	the	
very	knowledge	which	may	limit	agency	at	times,	is	however,	valid	and	valuable	in	
order	for	peacebuilding	to	be	considered	contextually	relevant	and	impactful.	
A	second	debate	in	the	literature,	as	outlined	in	Chapter	2,	considered	what	type	of	
knowledge	was	most	valuable	for	peacebuilding.	The	debate	charges	that	due	in	
part	to	the	professionalisation	and	bureaucratic	development	of	peace	
interventions,	thematic,	skilled	or	technical	knowledge	are	privileged	over	local	
knowledge,	as	the	former	is	claimed	to	be	more	transferable	across	differing	
contexts	(Autesserre,	2014).	The	literature	has	placed	this	debate	as	an	
international	and	globalized	outgrowth	of	the	liberal	peace	agenda,	and	given	that	
the	bulk	of	the	peacebuilding	in	Northern	Ireland	had	been	locally-led	the	debate	
over	international	outsider	versus	local	insider	is	not	exactly	germane.	Despite	this,	
within	the	community	of	peacebuilders	in	Northern	Ireland	questions	of	ownership	
remain.	There	is	a	perception,	particularly	since	the	influx	of	EU	funds,	among	some	
interviewees	that	a	professionalised	peace	industry	has	been	created.	As	one	
interviewee	for	this	research	stated:	
I	sort	of	decry	the	professionalising	of	community	relations	work,	you	
know,	its	become	I	think,	everybody's	become	a	community	relations	
expert,	more	people	running	community	relations	and	conflict	resolution	
programmes.	But	the	really	successful	relationships	have	a	very	high	level	of	
community	involvement,	are	not	professionalised	to	the	same	extent.	I	think	
to	a	large	extent	the	European	programme	was	responsible	for	that,	they	
created	this	huge	kind	of,	I	mean	the	number	of	people	employed	through	
those	programmes	as	professionals	is	unbelievable	(Practitioner	18,	
Funding	Sector,	Interviewed	17/4/15).		
As	mentioned	previously,	twenty	years	ago,	Lampen	(1995)	acknowledged	a	
concern	even	at	that	stage,	that	professionalism	and	intellectualism	could	
displace	local	grassroots	activists	(Lampen,	1995	p.144).	Fears	were	also	voiced	that	
professionalisation	would	bring	externally-based	criteria	for	measuring	outcomes	
that	local	peacebuilders	feel	may	or	may	not	accurately	reflect	realities	on	the	
ground,	or	that	a	need	for	hard	empirical	results	would	direct	the	work	in	ways	that	
would	impede	rather	than	progress	peacebuilding.		
Community	activists	have	described	that	rising	professionalisation	and	bureaucratic	
nature	of	funding	has	privileged	organisations	with	technical	and	administrative	
knowledge,	over	insider,	more	localised	knowledge.	Professionalising	meant	that	
paid	positions	called	for	specialized	knowledge	that	locals	did	not	have,	which	
meant	those	filling	the	jobs	came	from	outside	the	area	and	did	not	always	know	
the	more	nuanced	conflict	dynamics.	One	local	well-known	community-based	peace	
activist,	May	Blood	(made	a	Baroness	because	of	her	years	of	grassroots	
peacebuilding)	quoted	by	Hall	in	2005,	describes	this	dynamic:	
As	funding	grew	bigger	and	bigger	in	the	1990s	organizations	were	forced	
to	become	more	and	more	professional.	Then	it	eventually	came	about	that	
community	development	in	an	area	was	no	longer	done	by	local	people:	you	
had	a	consultant	who	came	in	and	told	you	how	it	should	be	done	and	then	
you	had	four	or	five	professional	people-	who	in	some	cases	didnt	live	in	
the	area-who	took	the	jobs	and	they	in	turn	told	you	what	should	be	done	
(Hall,	2005	p.9).	
A	concern	is	that	the	technocratic	thrust	of	a	professionalised	peace	may	either	
obscure	or	elide	the	type	of	knowledge,	phronesis,	that	practitioners	have	found	
useful	in	their	peacebuilding	but	that	may	not	measure	up	by	a	technocratic	
yardstick.	Revisiting	Schn	(1983),	it	could	be	characterised	that	the	
professionalization	of	peacebuilding,	embedded	with	the	dominance	of	technical-
rational	positivist	epistemology	has	inadvertently	obscured	and	subordinated	the	
practical	knowledge	of	those	who	had	been	working	over	the	years	locally.		
Going	back	to	a	metaphor	used	earlier	about	who	is	in	the	peacebuilding	driver	seat	
in	Northern	Ireland,	one	might	suggest	that	while	the	locals	were	in	the	driver	seat,	
an	influx	of	significant	level	of	funding	in	a	relatively	short	amount	of	time	shifted	
the	practice	context	towards	more	bureaucratic	trends	associated	with	
professionalisation.	The	influx	of	funds	did	two	things	to	thwart	the	use	of	phronetic	
knowledge;	firstly	it	attracted	a	flurry	of	new	drivers	eager	to	take	over	the	wheel,	
but	perhaps	lacking	some	of	the	vocational	commitment	or	phronetic	knowledge	
gained	previously.	Secondly,	accompanied	by	a	more	burdened	administrator	in	the	
passenger	seat,	local	peacebuilders	could	not	drive	the	route	they	thought	best	
because	it	was	a	toll	road	and	three	comparative	quotes	were	necessary	first	to	
justify	value	for	money.	It	might	even	be	suggested	progress	was	diverted	and	
stunted	when	continuous	stops	had	to	be	made	to	fill	out	the	necessary	paperwork.	
Such	a	dynamic	has	become	increasingly	problematic	as	funding	has	begun	to	
contract	(Wilson,	2016	p.141).		
Clearly,	the	politics	of	peacebuilding	knowledge	production	should	not	aim	to	
privilege	context-knowledge	over	technical	or	theoretical	knowledge.	It	is	more	to	
point	that	each	are	important	and	bring	strengths	to	peacebuilding.	However,	even	
in	the	context	of	Northern	Ireland	which	has	had	locally-led	peacebuilding,	
increasingly	funding	practices	and	professionalisation	may	inadvertently	steered	
peacebuilding	away	from	paying	attention	to	or	shaping	peacebuilding	that	is	
responsive	to	context.	If	peacebuilding	is	only	viewed	as	the	job	of	a	professional,	
local	ownership	and	relevancy	are	likewise	reduced.	
8.4	Challenges	of	phronesis	as	an	epistemology	of	practice	
While	the	thrust	of	the	argument	in	this	chapter	was	aimed	at	demonstrating	the	
validity	and	usefulness	of	phronesis	and	discussing	its	contribution	to	key	debates,	
every	concept	has	its	limitations.	For	example,	does	a	reliance	on	experience	and	
situational	knowledge	(thus	appearing	muddle-headed	and	incoherent),	limit	its	
transferability	or	its	broader	explanatory	power?	Does	its	organic	fluidity	and	
circularity	defy	current	neo-liberal	techno-rational	paradigms	concerned	to	
demonstrate	outcomes,	measurability	and	value	for	money?	Likewise,	in	practice	
contexts,	might	the	concept	be	prone	to	greater	parochialism,	knowledge	gate-
keeping	or	more	problematically	lend	itself	to	replication	of	status	quo	conflict	
dynamics,	or	by	reifying	oppressive	social	structures?	Or	even	provide	an	excuse	for	
lazy	practitioners	to	avoid	a	healthy	interrogation	of	their	own	practice?	
8.4.1	Phronesis	appears	incoherent	and	doesnt	measure	up	
From	the	outset	this	research	was	interested	to	build	and	consolidate	theory	from	
lived	experience	and	applied	peacebuilding	practice.	In	the	original	research	design	
one	of	the	articulated	aims	of	the	research	project	was	to	consolidate	and	add	
coherency	to	what	had	been	learned	by	practitioners	working	on	the	ground.	It	was	
hoped	that	the	research	might	address	the	lack	of	coherency	and	consolidation	in	
the	local	field,	a	key	challenge	identified	in	peacebuilding	practice	(Kelly,	2012;	
Cochrane,	2001a;	Cochrane	and	Dunn,	2002).	Consolidated	theory	was	not,	in	the	
end,	an	outcome	of	this	research.	However,	the	discovery	of	phronesis	as	a	guiding	
epistemology	of	practice	has	added	a	coherency	to	this	named	incoherency.	In	
other	words,	its	incoherency	is	explained	as	a	priority	given	not	to	universals	but	to	
the	particular	contexts.	This	insight	has	given	us	an	alternative	way	of	viewing	
peacebuilding	practice	in	both	its	historical	role	and	impact	as	described	in	
Chapter	4.	However,	it	also	has	afforded	explanation	as	to	why	impact	is	difficult	
to	measure	when	using	a	phronetic	epistemology	of	practice.	It	also	offers	another	
explanation	for	a	lack	of	methodological	clarity	as	to	what	has	worked	and	why	in	
local	peacebuilding	practice	(Kelly,	2012).		With	an	emphasis	on	judging	context	as	a	
primary	determinant	and	drawing	on	embodied	and	embedded	forms	of	knowing,	
viewing	outcomes	more	organically,	a	phronetic	orientation	in	practice	challenges	
and	resists	linear	notions	of	impact	or	methodological	consolidation.	This	finding	
extends	and	augments	previously	identified	barriers	preventing	practitioners	or	
academics	from	building	localised	theory	such	as	increased	professionalisation	or	
academic	disregard	for	practice	(Stanton	and	Kelly,	2015).		The	epistemology	of	
phronesis	may	act	as	a	natural	self-limiting	barrier	to	theoretical	or	methodological	
consolidation,	with	some	practitioners	actively	rejecting	a	normative	desire	for	
generalisability.	
As	stated	earlier,	peacebuilding,	as	it	has	become	increasingly	professionalised	has	
taken	on	a	techno-rational	or	technocratic	thrust	(Mac	Ginty,	2012;	Chandler,	
2017).	Theoretical	coherence,	demonstrable	evidence	of	impact	is	part	and	parcel	
of	building	an	evidence	base	to	justify,	account	for	and	measure	peacebuilding.	
While,	demonstrating	value	for	public	monies	or	to	private	donors	is	a	necessary	
expectation,	there	are	dimensions	of	phronesis	that	do	not	easily	measure	up.	
However,	this	is	not	to	say	they	are	not	valuable.	In	fact,	it	may	be	that	what	is	not	
easily	measured	may	be	of	importance	but	not	easily	seen.	For	example,	context	is	
not	easily	measurable.	Practitioners	reflected	a	nuanced	understanding	of	their	
context	as	one	of	deep	distrust,	evident	through	the	data	analysis	and	by	using	a	
trust	matrix.	However,	such	a	finding	ran	in	contrast	to	common	perceptions,	as	
mentioned	devolved	government	had	been	perceived	to	be	its	most	stable	in	living	
memory	(Osborne	quoted	in	Wilson,	2016	p.5).	An	official	opposition	had	been	
established	during	the	previous	local	election	period	and	politically	speaking,	there	
was	reason	to	believe	the	political	power-sharing	arrangements	had	stabilised.	
While	not	easily	measurable	initially,	the	deep	distrust	became	more	clearly	visible	
several	months	later	in	December	2016	as	the	Renewable	Heating	Initiative	(RHI)	
led	to	the	January	resignation	of	Deputy	First	Minister	Martin	McGuinness.	
8.4.2	Phronesis	risks	insularity	
The	purpose	of	identifying	phronesis	is	not	to	advocate	for	its	privileging	to	the	
exclusion	of	techne	and	episteme,	skills	and	theories,	but	to	equally	validate	
phronesis.	If	amplifying	and	empowering	phronesis	resulted	in	the	subordination	of	
episteme	and	techne	it	would	be	counter-productive	and	potentially	problematic.		
Such	a	reversal	could	manifest	as	parochialism	in	its	more	benign	form,	or	on	the	
more	nefarious	end	of	the	spectrum	it	could	serve	as	a	form	of	knowledge	gate-
keeping	with	an	aim	toward	power	and	control.	Those	intent	on	maintaining	power	
and	the	status	quo	may	challenge	normative	universals	as	not	being	contextually	
relevant	or	to	justify	and	maintain	or	perpetrate	harms	and	injustices.	Importantly,	
Northern	Ireland	is	no	stranger	to	the	experience	of	gate-keepers	looking	to	
maintain	control	in	communities	through	fear	and	intimidation,	whose	interests	it	
would	serve	to	have	a	mechanism	to	legitimise	their	own	prejudices,	biases	or	
power	base.	For	example,	such	a	critique	has	been	levied	against	individuals	who	
wear	two	hats	by	claiming	to	advocate	for	their	communities	but	doing	so	while	
retaining	links	to	paramilitarism	(Galvanising	the	Peace	Network,	2017	p.15).	
A	related	concern	and	limitation	emerges	in	considering	again	the	concept	of	
habitus	(Bourdieu,	1990)	which	I	have	used	in	this	conceptualisation	of	phronesis.	
Habitus	has	a	generative	function	that	serves	to	restructure	itself;	therefore,	
phronesis	used	as	a	source	of	knowledge	for	change	initiatives	may	carry	inherent	
growth	inhibitors-	avoiding	choices	that	do	not	make	sense	in	the	context.	Eraut	
writes	that	for	those	who	have	reached	a	high	level	of	tacit	knowledge	and	
expertise,	it	can	present	a	challenge	when	there	is	a	need	to	change	long	
established	approaches	to	situation	understanding,	rapid	decision-making	and	
routine	practices	(Eraut,	2009	p.4).	This	may	lead	to	a	discarding	of	ideas	or	
initiatives	that	might	not	seem	relevant	or	congruent	with	the	habitus	but	that	
might	have	actually	been	helpful.	It	may	result	in	tried	and	true	practice	replicated	
beyond	its	use,	and	a	fresh	engagement	in	a	new	and	developing	context.	For	
example,	one	of	the	practitioners	interviewed	for	this	research	alluded	to	such	a	
dynamic	by	reflecting	that	using	a	non-alcoholic	venue,	for	residentially-based	
group-work	with	ex-combatant	dialogue	was,	although	possibly	more	appropriate,	
could	be	a	challenge.	Their	perception	was	that	such	group-work	would	be	more	
likely	to	work	better	in	a	hotel	which	had	access	to	a	bar	as	that	was	a	feature	that	
might	impact	participation	otherwise.		
8.4.3.	Phronesis	as	reinforcing	oppression	or	unreflective	practice?	
A	final	limitation	and	possible	critique	of	phronesis	runs	in	a	parallel	track	to	the	
limitations	posed	by	habitus,	but	is	more	specifically	informed	by	the	Marxist	
thinkers.		For	example,	Gramsci	(1971)	considered	that	common	sense	was	both	
inclusive	of	embedded	oppressions	and	a	product	of	them.	In	this	view,	hegemony	
maintained	through	the	production	of	culture,	values	and	ideas	which	all	filtered	
down	to	become	common-sense	serving	to	preserve	the	status	quo.		This	created	
an	internal	contradiction	with	the	every-day	lives	and	realities	of	the	peasants	and	
working-class,	leaving	them	valuing	that	which	they	could	not	have,	and	served	to	
maintain	the	status	quo.	For	Gramsci,	this	contradiction	created	a	false-
consciousness	and	a	fragmented	identity	for	the	working-class	masses	of	society:		
And	is	it	not	frequently	the	case	that	there	is	a	contradiction	between	ones	
between	thought	and	action	cannot	but	be	the	expression	of	profounder	
contrast	of	a	social	historical	order	this	same	group	has,	for	reasons	of	
submission	and	intellectual	subordination,	adopted	a	conception	which	is	
not	its	own,	but	borrowed	from	another	group		(Gramsci,	1971	pp.	326-
Recognising	that	only	those	who	have	become	awake	to	their	own	oppression	can	
work	for	their	emancipation	he	expanded	his	view	of	intellectuals,	arguing	that	
what	is	needed	in	order	to	create	counter-hegemony	is	organic	intellectuals	within	
the	working-class.	Only	those	who	have	recognised	the	inherent	contradictions	
between	their	everyday	lives	and	the	values	and	norms	they	have	absorbed	through	
the	dominant	cultural	and	social	hegemony	of	the	ruling	elites	can	become	organic	
intellectuals,	critiquing	the	common-sense	of	their	oppression.		
In	this	conceptualisation,	phronesis	if	understood	as	similar	to	Gramscis	view	of	
common-sense,	may	also	be	considered	to	be	embedded	in	oppressive	structures	
and	relationships	that	needed	to	be	critically	challenged	in	order	to	become	
emancipatory.	However,	if	organic	intellectuals	become	activists	and	remain	with	
their	own,	they	are	often	better	placed,	Gramsci	suggests,	to	know	how	to	animate	
and	organise	more	effectively	at	this	level.	Strictly	speaking	one	might	argue	that	
organic	intellectuals	are	able	to	use	their	phronetic	knowledge	for	critical	action	as	
a	result	of	their	consciousness	raising	and	therefore	collectively	challenge	aspects	of	
common-sense	that	are	oppressive.	In	this	regard,	phronetic	knowledge,	it	could	
be	argued,	could	be	both	the	source	and	necessary	response	to	challenge	and	
interrogate	internalised	forms	of	oppression.	One	example	of	someone	perceived	
able	to	take	such	a	role	was	the	late	David	Ervine,	a	Northern	Irish	politician	and	
progressive	Loyalist.	Ervine	was	cited	several	times	by	interviewees	who	viewed	him	
as	an	example	of	a	leader	uniquely	able	to	speak	credibly	to	his	own	Loyalist	
constituency,	critique	Unionism	and	bridge	build	with	Republican	activists.	
A	final	critique	is	that	by	defining	and	conceptualising	phronesis	as	a	form	of	
knowledge	that	does	not	rely	on	theory	or	skills	(which	are	more	easily	and	
objectively	measured),	a	danger	may	exist	that	it	could	be	used	to	avoid	practice	
interrogation.	Phronesis,	if	used	to	the	exclusion	of	theory	and	skill,	would	certainly	
as	mentioned	previously,	risk	serving	to	reinforce	oppressions,	maintain	power	
imbalances,	and	could	perpetuate	poor	or	ineffectual	practice.		If	abused,	phronesis	
could	become	an	excuse	used	to	explain	why	a	particular	practice	is	unquestioningly	
replicated,	or	methodologies	germane	in	earlier	years	are	left	stale	and	
unexamined.	Therefore,	necessary	accountability	mechanisms	to	prevent	lazy	or	
ineffective	practice	would	need	considered.	However,	it	is	also	true	that	if	phronesis	
were	as	equally	valued	for	knowledge	production	as	techne	and	episteme,	it	would	
be	more	likely	therefore	to	be	more	deeply	interrogated	through	knowledge	
production.	If	practitioners	were	valued	for	their	knowledge	production,	it	could	be	
argued	that	they	would	become	more	reflective	and	accountable,	as	knowledge	
production	would	require	interrogation	about	why	and	how	particular	practice	
decisions	and	judgments	are	made.	
Conclusion	
This	chapter	was	intended	to	consider	the	utility	of	the	concept	of	phronesis	and	
consider	what	it	may	add	to	the	practice	and	theory	of	peacebuilding	and	conflict	
transformation.	The	chapter	has	argued	that	as	a	concept	phronesis	offers	an	
explanatory	power	and	expands	current	discussion	on	the	agency	of	actors	working	
within	grassroots	and	civil-society	peacebuilding.		In	this	regard,	it	argued	that	those	
working	and	living	within	their	own	conflict	context	cannot	necessarily	depend	on	
universal	rules	but	use	phronesis	in	their	daily	judgments	to	navigate	particular	
conflict	contexts.	Phronesis	was	also	argued	to	have	knowledge	production	value	
and	a	demonstration	of	its	role	in	innovation	was	given	with	the	development	of	
mobile	phone	for	peacebuilding	by	using	an	interaction	between	forms	of	tacit	and	
explicit	knowledge.		Its	value	for	theory	production	was	also	explored	by	discussing	
theory	building	with	practitioners	and	how	their	knowledge	was	used,	in	reaction	to	
a	fictional	case	study,	to	expand	and	develop	conceptual	understandings	of	
necessary	dimensions	of	trust	needed	in	an	intervention.	Finally,	the	chapter	
considered	new	insights	gained	on	current	knowledge	debates	in	light	of	the	
introduction	of	the	concept	of	phronesis	and	concluded	by	acknowledging	areas	of	
tensions	and	its	limitations.	
Chapter	9:	Implications	and	conclusions		
Introduction	
After	considering	the	concept	for	its	utility,	strengths	and	weaknesses,	the	
conclusion	has	been	reached	that	the	conceptualising	of	phronesis	has	important	
relevance	for	knowledge	production	in	the	fields	of	peace	studies	and	conflict	
transformation.	This	final	chapter	seeks	to	offer	summary	reflections	and	
elaboration	of	this	view	and	as	well	as	to	consider	possible	implications	for	both	
academic	theory	and	practice.	It	begins	by	recapping	the	findings	of	the	research,	
moves	toward	exploring	how	the	research	informs	and	augments	current	academic	
and	practice	debates	and	finally,	concludes	with	considerations	for	future	research.	
Phronesis,	or	practical	wisdom	as	a	concept	developed	in	this	thesis	through	
insights	grounded	in	Aristotelian	philosophy	but	supported	by	multidisciplinary	
literature	within	social	science,	is	conceptualised	as	a	form	of	knowledge	that	is:	
 Experienced		
 Embodied		
 Organically	developed	through	experimentation	
 Uses	tacit	recognition	of	context	patterns	and	
 Context-relational	judgements		
Phronesis	draws	heavily	from	lived	experience.		Employing	multiple	forms	of	
knowing,	it	is	an	epistemology	that	utilises	an	integration	of	both	subjective	and	
objective	experience.	Knowledge	is	embodied	and	gut	instincts	and	intuitive	
knowledge	are	valued.	This	responsiveness	is	a	necessary	tool	for	scanning	and	
reading	the	nuances	of	context	and	lends	itself	to	experimentation	and	organic,	
fluid	development.	Phronesis,	reading	nuance,	draws	on	explicit	but	also	tacitly	held	
pattern	recognition	of	context	to	guide	action	for	the	particular.	Context,	however,	
may	be	better	understood	in	this	regard	as	an	ecology	of	relationships	which	form	
patterns	in	a	given	habitus.	Judgments	about	what	to	do	are	drawn	from	the	tacit	
recognition	of	meaning	drawn	in	the	interpretation	of	the	patterns	of	context.	
Pattern	recognition	informs	choices	in	particular	situations,	and	is	processed	fluidly	
and	intuitively	against	what	may	or	may	not	be	viewed	as	possible	in	the	given	
context.	Difficult	to	name	explicitly	or	to	easily	describe	in	words,	such	judgments	
illustrate	an	understanding	of	the	context	for	action.		
Thus	conceptualised,	phronesis	was	evidenced	in	the	findings	of	the	research	as	a	
primary	epistemology	of	practice	used	by	grassroots	and	civil	society	peacebuilders	
to	enhance,	lever	and	lubricate	social	change.		The	research	also	evidenced	the	
value	of	phronetic	forms	of	knowledge	for	peacebuilding,	demonstrating	its	
usefulness	for	explanation,	as	a	tool	of	analysis,	innovation	and	for	theory	building.	
Discussion	identified	that	while	phronesis	brought	valuable	local	context	knowledge	
it	did	not	negate	the	need	for	robust	interaction	with	other	forms	of	knowledge-
such	as	skills-based	and	theory-based	knowledge,	as	it	could	be	clearly	problematic	
to	solely	rely	on	phronesis	to	inform	peacebuilding.	However,	while	each	form	of	
knowledge	is	important,	research	evidences	that	currently	phronesis	is	invisible,	
subordinated	and	undervalued.	Practitioners	interviewed	for	the	research	stated	
their	insights	generated	from	practical	knowledge	are	currently	elided	and	
sidelined.	This	may	be	exacerbated	by	technocratic	epistemologies	of	practice,	
which	currently	dominate	the	field.	The	current	invisibility	of	the	concept	of	
phronesis	is	problematic	as	it	leaves	an	important	form	of	knowledge	deemed	
necessary	for	practice,	unidentified.		The	conceptualisation	of	phronesis,	therefore,	
has	been	an	important	outcome	of	this	thesis.	
9.1	Implications	for	peacebuilding	theory	
It	is	also	argued	here	that	the	conceptualisation	of	phronesis	and	its	evidence	as	a	
primary	epistemology	of	practice	by	actors	working	within	grassroots	and	within	
civil	society	makes	an	important	contribution	to	key	scholarly	debates	on	
knowledge	for	peacebuilding.	Phronesis	levels	the	knowledge	production	field	in	
order	to	anchor	practical,	experience-based	local	knowledge	with	context-	while	
simultaneously	extending	both	conceptualisations.	It	may	address	a	critique	levelled	
at	the	critical	peace	school	that	while	liberal	peacebuilding	has	it	flaws,	the	baby	
should	not	be	thrown	out	with	the	bathwater,	but	instead	as	Paris	suggests,	seek	to	
consider	alternate	modes	or	methods	of	intervention	within	a	liberal	peacebuilding	
framework	(Paris,	2010	p.	356).	For	example,	if	phronesis	is	considered	as	a	form	of	
nuanced	local	context-knowledge	which	must	be	given	equal	value	alongside	theory	
and	skill	(episteme	and	techne)	interventions	could	be	designed	to	maximise	their	
collective	strength.	That	all	forms	are	necessary	is	a	point	made	clearer	by	the	
discussion	of	the	ways	that	phronesis	could	be	abused	to	reinforce	oppressions,	to	
serve	to	legitimise	power-bases,	or	excuse	unreflective	practice.	Naming	phronesis	
opens	the	door	to	both	its	inherent	insights	and	necessary	critiques.	This	may	serve	
to	meet	some	challenge,	for	example,	on	the	nature	of	the	local	that	more	
research	is	needed	on	the	sources	of	local	legitimacy	in	peacebuilding	(Paris,	2010	
pp.	356-357)	that	avoids	simplistic	bromides	about	the	need	for	greater	local	
ownership	or	emancipation	(ibid,	pp.363-364).	
Phronesis-	now	conceptualised,	offers	views	from	a	perspective	previously	invisible.	
Considering	first	the	phronetic	lens	and	its	contribution	to	academic	investigations,	
the	broad	implication	is	that	this	lens	creates	new	insights	on	civil	society	
peacebuilding	practice	and	its	potential	for	knowledge	production.	However,	by	
expanding	knowledge	to	include	ways	of	knowing	that	are	subjective,	embodied	
and	formed	by	experience,	informed	by	the	location	and	perspective	of	being	
embedded,	the	views	now	visible	from	the	phronetic	lens	demonstrate	nuanced	
insights	of	both	judgment	and	context.	These	new	insights	reveal	more	complex	
understandings	of	context	as	understood	from	an	embedded	location	of	five	
intersecting	dimensions:	relationships,	place-space,	time-timing,	frame	and	fault-
lines.		The	knowledge	of	how	these	dimensions	of	context	fit	together	
demonstrates	both	explicit	and	implicit	forms	of	knowledge	of	patterns	of	context.		
Pattern	recognition,	viewed	from	within	the	embedded	location,	in	part,	informs	
and	determines	judgment	about	the	context-for-action.		
This	more	nuanced	view	of	context	does	two	things	for	grassroots	and	civil	society	
peacebuilding	that	both	speak	to	questions	of	whose	knowledge	counts	and		what	
kind	of	knowledge	matters	in	peacebuilding.	It	adds	explanation	to	the	complexity	
of	this	location,	and	establishes	the	necessity	of	the	knowledge	these	actors	bring	to	
peacebuilding	change	processes.	In	other	words,	it	explains	the	constraints	and	the	
parameters	of	action	for	those	who	are	embedded,	for	example,	local	actors	
working	within	their	own	contexts.	Knowing	the	relationships	they	hold	with	others	
and	how	they	are	situated	may	either	increase	or	decrease	agency	or	choices	of	
what	may	seem	possible.	However,	it	also	highlights	the	transformative	dimensions	
of	this	same	deep-context	knowledge,	which	holds	great	potential	to	increase	
relevant	and	sustainable	local	peacebuilding.			
Consequently,	contributions	made	by	phronesis	to	an	increased	understanding	of	
civil	society	peacebuilding	also	create	implications	for	the	debate	on	local	
knowledge.	In	effect,	this	finding	amplifies	the	need	to	use	local	knowledge,	as	it	is	
a	necessary	component	in	order	to	build	the	type	of	in-depth	nuanced	context-
knowledge	contained	in	phronesis.	Phronesis	also	adds	weight	to	the	argument	for	
using	local	knowledge	with	the	additional	lens	it	offers	to	explain	how	context	
informs	the	judgment-of-action.	However,	it	also	extends	our	understanding	of	
context	to	include	tacit	forms	of	knowledge.	Judgement-of-action	contains	
necessary	tacit	knowledge	of	context-gained	by	experience.	For	this	reason,	
implications	from	this	research	have	the	potential	to	make	a	contribution	to	the	
peacebuilding	literature	that	looks	at	bottom-up	peacebuilding	and	debates	over	
local	knowledge	and	everyday	peacebuilding	(Donais,	2009;	2012;	Odendaal,	2013;	
Mac	Ginty,	2012,	2013;	Autessere,	2014;	Mac	Ginty	and	Firchow,	2016).	
Of	particular	relevance	is	the	argument	that	those	who	are	living	in	conflict	zones	
have	developed	the	ability	to	adapt	and	innovate	to	manage	day-to-day	life.		By	
demonstrating	that	phronetic	knowledge	is	used	and	useful	as	a	lens	for	
explanation,	analysis,	innovation	and	theory	building,	evidence	is	provided	to	
further	demonstrate	the	creativity	and	ingenuity	to	which	Mac	Ginty	refers	(Mac	
Ginty,	2014).	In	doing	so,	it	affirms	that	this	type	of	knowledge	employed	in	
navigating	the	conflict	terrain	is	also	a	body	of	knowledge	that	can	be	tapped	to	
produce	and	create	relevant	and	innovative	knowledge	for	peacebuilding.	
Demonstrating	its	knowledge	production	value	for	peacebuilding,	however,	is	not	
its	sole	significance.	Actors	working	at	the	civil	society	and	grassroots	level	cite	this	
form	of	knowledge	as	of	primary	importance	when	seeking	to	make	relevant	and	
contextually	appropriate	judgments	about	what	to	do	to	facilitate	change.	This	view	
suggests	optimism,	demonstrating	Mac	Gintys	argument	that	the	local	knowledge	
of	the	everyday	peace	does	hold	potential	for	peace	formation	beyond	a	negative	
peace	(Mac	Ginty,	2014).	Examples	from	this	research	suggest	that	using	context-
knowledge	gained	from	the	everyday	has	the	potential	to	be	transformative,	
providing	practitioners	with	knowledge	they	have	found	vital	for	knowing	how	to	
use	the	context	to	change	the	context.	In	fact,	Mac	Gintys	typology	of	Everyday	
Peace	Activity	(Mac	Ginty,	2014)	can	be	augmented	by	using	examples	from	this	
research	to	illustrate	(Figure	7).	In	some	cases,	this	may	mean	making	tacit	
knowledge	explicit	as	part	of	a	transformation	process.	
Figure	8:	Augmented	Typology	of	Everyday	Peace	Activity	(Adapted	from	Mac	Ginty,	2014)	
Mac	Ginty	(2014)	 Mac	Ginty	(2014)	 Examples	of	Phronetic	Usage	for	Transformation	
Avoidance	 Contentious	topics	
of	conversation		
Offensive	displays		
High	risk	people	
and	place		
Escapism	into	
subcultures		
Not	drawing	
attention	to	oneself		
Live	in	the	present	
 Peacebuilding	intervention	encourages	dialogue	by	asking	
individual	to	keep	contentious	ethnic/identity	visible-	Their	
coats	on	[ethnic	identifiers]	and	use	language	they	would	
normally	avoid	in	mixed	company,	i.e.	the	war	or	terrorist	
campaign	to	better	understand	different	experiences	and	
worldviews.	
 Deliberate	risk	taken	to	gain	credibility	for	peacebuilding	
change	(i.e.	former	combatants	brought	on	board	to	
restorative	justice	projects	as	transition	from	conflict	or	DDR)	
 Acknowledging	and	engaging	the	reality	of	high	risk	can	lead	
to	innovation	(i.e.	mobile	phone	networks	in	interface	areas).	
 Use	of	under	the	radar	to	build	networks	that	provide	space	
for	new	or	potentially	risky	ideas	to	be	explored	at	incubation	
stages;	informal	meetings	and	ideas	can	be	tested	for	
example,	in	pre-negotiation	years.		
 Networks	can	also	be	useful	conduits	for	information	or	for	
gauging	how	out-group	may	react	prior	to	formalizing	
peacebuilding.	
Ambiguity	 Concealing	
signifiers	of	identity		
Non-observance	or	
not	seeing			
Dissembly	in	
speech	and	actions	
 Non-observance	and	not	seeing	allows	those	who	would	not	
normally	be	expected	to	work	together	or	trust	one	another	
due	to	their	backgrounds,	political	affiliations,	or	family	
connections	to	work	on	jointly	beneficial	projects	(i.e.	women	
whose	husbands	were	former	enemy	combatants	and/or	a	
victims	of	conflict	together	to	advocate	on	cross-cutting	issues	
or	family	support).	Each	know	but	dont	talk	about	the	past.		
Ritualised	
Politeness	
System	of	Manners	  Creates	rituals	across	divides	that	can	yield	important	
symbolic	power	such	as	hospitality	gestures	(cups	of	tea	
offered	to	former	enemies),	eating	meals	together,	attending	
former	enemies	funerals	or	vigils	(Ex-hunger	striker	attending	
a	vigil	for	a	Catholic	Policeman	shot	by	dissident	Republicans).	
Telling	 Ethnically	informed	
identification	and	
social	ordering	
 Interpretation	and	insights	into	worldview	framing	that	can	
act	to	de-escalate	potential	conflict	or	create	empathy	across	
divides,	particularly	useful	to	explain	each	sides	own	
community	view	of	issues	or	understand	view	of	other.	
Blame	Deferring	 Shifting	blame	to	
outsiders	to	appear	
more	socially	
acceptable	
 Face	saving	mechanism	to	keep	potential	change	catalysts,	
Pied	pipers	or	gatekeepers	on	board	who	might	otherwise	act	
to	block	progress.		
It	is	hoped	that	by	demonstrating	the	value	and	validity	of	locally-based	practical	
knowledge,	as	part	and	parcel	of	phronesis	that	it	creates	a	bridge	back	to	practice.	
The	literature	that	germinates	from	the	critical	peace	school	is	compelling,	
challenging,	and	insightful.	However,	given	the	grave	need	there	is	remaining	day	
and	daily	for	locally-authored	and	contextually	relevant	peacebuilding,	if	phronesis	
could	coax	such	minds	to	move	from	a	perceived	ambivalence	(Paffenholz,	2015),	it	
would	likely	create	an	even	richer,	more	relevant	and	profound	peacebuilding	
scholarship	and	practice.	
Likewise,	the	conceptualisation	of	phronesis	has	demonstrated	relevance	to	
scholarly	debates	about	the	role	of	grassroots	and	civil	society	in	peacebuilding	in	
the	case	of	Northern	Ireland.	The	literature	on	Northern	Ireland	primary	suggests	an	
inconclusive	view	as	to	the	role	of	civil	society	peacebuilding,	particularly	when	
judged	by	its	role	in	the	political	peace	process.	As	previously	stated,	scholars	
describe	the	role	of	civil	society	peacebuilders	as	not	unimportant-	but	limited	
(Cochrane	and	Dunn,	2002;	Guelke,	2003;	McCartney,	1999;	Potter,	2006).		
The	conceptualisation	of	phronesis	challenges	this	view	(as	explained	in	Chapter	4).	
It	builds	an	alternative	perspective	and	illustrates	that	peacebuilding	agency	is	a	
calculation	of	the	context-for-action,	and	judgment	is	informed	by	fluctuating	sets	
of	variables.	Variables	include	a	nuanced	understanding	of	context	named	as:	place-
space,	judgments	of	time	and	timing,	dynamics	of	relationships	and	frames	of	
meaning,	all	of	which	are	considered	against	local	fault	lines.		While	agency	for	
peacebuilding	in	this	context	may	operate,	as	Mac	Ginty	states,	under	the	radar	out	
of	necessity,	this	research	suggests	that	there	is	also	wisdom	being	demonstrated	
when	assessing	what	is	needed	to	shift	context	in	order	to	progress	social	change.	
Taking	such	context	change	into	consideration,	the	task	of	peacebuilding	necessarily	
as	Lederach	suggests,	becomes	a	longer	endeavour	and	requires	decade	thinking,	as	
he	writes:	Decade	thinking	is	not	easy,	but	in	my	mind,	is	absolutely	critical	for	
peacebuilding	(Lederach,	1995	p.13).	The	metaphor	used	frequently	in	interviews,	
two-step	forwards	one	step-back	implies	that	even	when	the	pace	of	change	is	
slow-	movement	continues,	and	according	to	Aristotle,	time	and	experience	builds	
phronesis.	Fitzduff	and	Williamss	(2007)	research	which	presents	one	of	the	more	
optimistic	view	of	the	role	and	importance	of	civil	society	activity	suggests	that	this	
long-term	view	was	important	in	building	commitment	towards	peace	in	Northern	
Ireland:	
Several	interlocutors	upheld	the	importance	of	basing	peace	work	on	
criteria	other	than	immediate	impact.	They	pointed	to	the	long	years	and	
faithful	endeavour	of	groups	like	Corrymeela,	of	sectors	like	community	
development	and	trade	unions,	of	the	slow	growth	of	integrated	education,	
and	so	many	individuals	who	asked	that	their	loved	ones	death	not	be	
avenged	so	that	the	cycle	of	violence	might	end.	In	their	view,	some	of	the	
impact	really	is	cumulative,	it	comes	with	quiet	determination	over	a	long	
time	by	people	whose	names	may	never	be	known.	The	visible	initiatives	
have	impact	against	a	backdrop	changed	by	small	acts	of	courage	(Fitzduff	
and	Williams,	2007	p.27).	
	In	Northern	Ireland	the	commitment	of	individuals	and	groups	over	the	long-term,	
enabled	their	credibility	to	become	established	and	was	called	on	over	the	years	at	
sensitive	times	to	oversee	decommissioning,	intervene	in	local	long-standing	
parading	disputes,	mediate	in	prisons,	and	shepherd	consultations	on	grappling	
with	the	legacy	and	aftermath	of	the	Troubles.		These	individuals	were	not	(always)	
chosen	for	their	mediation	expertise	or	skills	or	the	strongest	grasp	on	peace	
theories	but	for	their	personal	integrity	established	and	gained	by	experience-	
chosen	for	their	practical	wisdom.	
9.2.		Implications	for	practice		
The	finding	that	practitioners	use	phronetic	knowledge	to	navigate,	design,	lever	
and	lubricate	change	processes	emphasises	the	primacy	of	context-knowledge	to	
judge	and	guide	appropriate	action	in	regards	to	the	implementation	of	grassroots	
and	civil	society	peacebuilding.	Consequently,	this	priority	placed	on	context	has	
implications	not	only	for	theory	but	also	for	practice.	While	it	may	be	a	common-
place	practice	in	professionalised	peacebuilding	to	take	context-sensitive	
approach,	this	conceptualisation	falls	far	short	of	what	the	research	is	suggesting	
has	been	important	to	facilitate	change	processes.	Practitioners	interviewed	for	this	
research	identified	that	context	played	a	much	larger	and	determinant	role	in	
practice.	Indeed,	context-knowledge	as	demonstrated	in	this	research	was	much	
richer,	as	it	also	contained	tacit	forms	of	knowledge-	producing	a	more	nuanced	
dimension	than	commonly	understood.	A	more	nuanced	grasp	of	context	may	
explain	resistance	to	templates,	the	lack	of	uniformity	in	approaches,	and	a	view	
that	what	might	work	in	one	context	may	not	work	for	another,	and	as	mentioned	
earlier,	why	the	peacebuilding	sector	has	appeared	incoherent	and	inconsistent.	
However,	the	conceptualisation	of	phronesis	has	brought	clarity	and	coherence	to	
the	incoherence.	This	thesis	concludes	that	given	the	prevalence	of	a	phronetic	
epistemology	of	practice	in	Northern	Ireland,	the	quest	for	uniformity	in	
peacebuilding	is	itself	neither	desirable	nor	likely	possible.		Stathis	Kalyvas,	in	his	
tome,	The	Logic	of	Violence	in	Civil	War	argues	that	civil	wars	themselves	lack	
uniformity.	Locales	differ	in	the	impact	and	patterns	of	violence	as	a	result	of	
contextual	micro-dynamics	such	as	population	density	and	micro-relationships	that	
differ	from	one	area	to	the	next	(Kalyvas,	2006).		Individuals	in	Northern	Ireland	
have	not	had	a	uniform	experience	of	conflict	(Fay	et	al.,	1999).	This	may	signify	and	
necessitate	a	lack	of	uniformity	in	peacebuilding.	The	implications	of	embracing	an	
idiographic	versus	nomothetic	approach	to	peacebuilding	however,	may	risk	looking	
incoherent	and	muddled,	because	it	legitimises	different	approaches	being	used	
across	differing	contexts.	In	an	intriguing	presentation	made	to	the	Conflict	
Research	Society	annual	conference	in	September	2016,	Kalyvas	made	a	further	
comparison.	Reflecting	on	recent	breakthroughs	in	cancer	research	which	use	
immunotherapy	to	treat	cancers	particularistic	nature,	he	reflected	that	perhaps	
civil	wars	should	be	viewed	similarly.	Taking	this	to	the	next	logical	step	further,	if	
conflicts	can	be	viewed	as	idiographic	in	nature,	presumably	peacebuilding	may	also	
need	a	similarly	particular	and	idiographic	approach.	Scholars	such	as	Chandler	
(2017)	suggest	that	increasingly	there	has	been	a	shift,	even	at	the	level	of	UN	
peacebuilding,	towards	what	he	describes	as	a	pragmatist	orientation	which	
recognises	greater	fluidity,	non-linearity	and	the	context-specific	nature	of	conflict	
(Chandler,	2017).	
Research	undertaken	in	2014	across	six	interface	areas	in	Derry-Londonderry	makes	
a	similar	such	recommendation.	The	research	investigated	what	might	be	needed	to	
begin	to	consider	the	removal	of	peace	walls	and	to	increase	positive	relationships	
across	interface	divides.	The	first	key	finding	was	that:	The	lack	of	uniformity	in	
responses	for	almost	all	the	questions	evidence	the	need	for	tailored	approaches	to	
each	community	according	to	their	specific	needs	(St.	Columbs	Park	House,	2014).	
The	point	was	reinforced	by	a	further	key	finding	in	respect	to	the	issue	of	the	flying	
of	flags	and	painting	of	kerbstones,	suggesting	that	[T]here	is	a	need	to	discuss	
these	practices	on	an	area	by	area	basis	to	ensure	that	communities	views	on	the	
issues	are	being	considered	when	formulating	policy	on	the	issues	(ibid).		While	the	
practice	and	policy	implications	of	such	an	approach	may	be	challenging,	the	
research	suggests	that	it	may	be	beneficial	to	build	in	flexibility	within	peacebuilding	
approaches	to	accommodate	differences	across	contexts.	Reflecting	the	five	
dimension	of	context	identified	in	this	research	as	the	phronetic	lenses	(place-
space,	frame,	time-timing,	fault	lines	and	relationship)	this	view	of	conflict	contains	
nuance.	Therefore,	suggesting	that	in	a	given	locale,	a	tailored	approach	that	retains	
flexibility	is	actually	necessary	to	move	that	particular	context	forward.			
Finally,	the	conceptualisation	of	phronesis	makes	visible	why	there	is	discomfort	
about	the	current	techno-rational	professional	peacebuilding	paradigm.	Concepts	
such	as	peacebuilding,	at	their	core	are	concerned	with	relationships	or	action	for	
well-being	and	human	flourishing,	as	Aristotle	suggests,	perhaps	can	never	be	
truly	understood	purely	as	techne	or	episteme.	Such	a	paradigm	transforms	organic	
process-driven	relational	concepts	into	techno-rational	instruments.	Hamber	and	
Kelly	(2008),	writing	about	the	adoption	of	the	five-strand	model	of	reconciliation	as	
an	instrument	for	funding	purposes	in	2008,	reflect	that	the	model	began	to	be	
viewed	by	those	receiving	funding	as	a	hoop-jumping	exercise	and	less	for	its	
potential	for	analysis:	
[B]ut	for	many	community	and	voluntary	groups	their	primary	view	of	the	
definition	is	now	fairly	mechanical	and	funding	driven.	They	are	interested	in	
the	definition	in	so	far	as	it	might	impact	on	their	funding	application	rather	
than	reflecting	on	its	wider	applicability	and	assessing	their	approach	to	
reconciliation	(Hamber	and	Kelly,	2008	p.15).	
Thus,	while	practitioners	on	the	whole	evidenced	a	valuing	of	phronetic	forms	of	
knowledge,	and	a	phronetic	way	of	thinking	about	their	practice,	their	responses	
suggested	that	they	are	operating	in	a	paradigm,	particularly	in	regards	to	funding,	
monitoring	and	evaluation	mechanisms,	that	does	not.	Concepts	such	as	
reconciliation	originally	developed	to	represent	a	fluid,	dynamic	and	organic	
relational	processes	runs	the	risk	of	becoming	a	technocratic	yardstick.		
There	are	however,	signs	that	more	phronetic	oriented	paradigms	could	emerge.	
For	example,	as	mentioned	above,	Chandler	summarising	a	recent	review	report	
produced	by	the	UN	of	the	United	Nations	Peacebuilding	Architecture	reflects	that	
there	has	been	a	more	recent	shift	in	language	and	a	recognition	that	previous	
approaches	were	overly	technocratic	(Chandler	2017	p.	7	citing	UN,	2015	p.12).	
Chandler	writes:		
Today,	the	UN	argues	that	peacebuilding	needs	to	be	replaced	by	a	more	
general	and	amorphous	conception	of	sustaining	peace.rather	than	
peacebuilding	occurring	after	conflict,	problems	have	to	be	engaged	with	
along	an	arc	or	continuum,	from	prevention	to	reconstruction:	sustaining	
peace	is	a	complex	process	not	a	set	of	discrete	linear	stages	(Chandler,	
2017	p.	8).	
Phronetic	peacebuilders	may	find	this	to	be	an	encouraging	trend	if	critiques	of	
technocratic	approaches	continue	to	gain	traction.	For	example,	a	preliminary	
investigation	identifies	a	similar	development	in	social	change	philanthropy-	
described	as	emergent	philanthropy.	Emergent	philanthropy	seeks	to	move	away	
from	strategic	philanthropy	because	it	is	not	viewed	as	a	good	fit	for	the	
complexity	of	social	change.	Strategic	philanthropy	is	critiqued	as	a	cut-and-dried	
approach		clear	goals,	data-driven	strategies,	heightened	accountability	and	
rigorous	evaluations		[that]	doesnt	fit	the	complexities	of	social	change	(Hartnell	
et	al.,	2014).	An	emergent	approach	may	be	a	better	fit	for	those	working	
phronetically.		
As	an	example,	Catalyst	for	Peace,	a	small	philanthropy	based	in	Portland	Maine,	
USA,	has	explicitly	taken	forward	this	emergent	approach.	Funding	just	one	project,	
Fambul	Tok,	a	locally-led	reconciliation	and	dialogue	program	in	Sierra	Leone	over	a	
long-term	timeframe,	they	describe	their	philosophy	of	funding	driven	by	the	belief	
that	those	who	are	most	impacted	by	violence	and	conflict	have	both	capacity	and	
the	wisdom	necessary	to	determine	(suggestive	of	Autesseres	term	authoring)	
their	own	peacebuilding.		Summarising	their	philosophy	of	funding,	it	is	to	create	
space	in	several	ways:	by	developing	and	empowering		potential	with	a	focus	on	
process	not	only	product,	by	funding	the	building	of	conceptual	and	organisation	
platforms	of	local	authorship,	committing	to	long-term	and	flexible	funding	which	
involves	recipients	in	decision-making	about	funding	decisions,	funding	across	
firewalls	to	generate	honest	dialogue	between	funders,	involving	both	practitioners	
and	recipients	to	encourage	mutual	learning,	and	finally	to	fund	in	ways	that	allow	
for	genuine	connection	rather	than	prioritizing	money	(Catalyst	for	Peace,	2017).	As	
Catalyst	for	Peace	organisational	literature	states:		
Mobilizing	local	solutions	isnt	outside	experts	swooping	to	tell	people	
what	to	do	(or	worse,	doing	it	for	them).	What	is	needed	is	a	way	for	local	
wisdom,	will,	expertise	and	leadership	to	emerge	and	grow.	Those	outside	
the	local	community	have	a	critical	role:	to	create	space	for	the	local	
resources,	knowledge,	and	capacities	to	be	mobilized	and	manifested.		And	
when	local	leaders	and	outside	partners	work	together	in	ways	that	honor	
the	wisdom,	resources	and	capacities	of	both,	the	results	are	
transformative-	for	all	parties.		This	is	how	we	build	peace:	from	the	inside-
out	(Catalyst	for	Peace,	2017).	
Approaches	to	funding	such	as	those	taken	by	Catalyst	for	Peace	are	encouraging	
for	multiple	reasons	when	considering	ways	to	use	phronetic	knowledge,	one	in	
particular,	is	however	is	worth	highlighting.	Given	that	phronesis	is	developed	
through	trial	and	error	and	experimentation,	such	long-term	commitment	and	
flexibility	allows	for	learning	from	failure.	Peacebuilding	needs	failure	in	order	to	
learn.	However,	when	failure	is	penalised,	learning	is	stunted.	Furthermore,	when	
peacebuilding	is	viewed	as	only	service	delivery	(an	increasingly	prevalent	trend	in	
professionalised	peacebuilding	in	Northern	Ireland)	peace	runs	the	risk	of	being	
viewed	as	only	techne,	a	product.	Peace,	when	viewed	as	a	product	may	increase	
the	likelihood	for	risk	avoidance	for	fear	of	project	failure.	Consequently,	the	space	
for	learning	from	such	failures	is	subsequently	lost-	a	detriment	to	both	practice	
and	theory	alike.		
9.3	Future	avenues	for	research	and	conclusions	
From	the	outset	this	research	was	motivated	by	the	desire	to	learn	from	the	lived	
experience	and	practice	of	those	who	had	worked	to	build	peace	within	grassroots	
communities	and	in	civil	society.	It	was	an	attempt	to	rectify	what	had	been	
identified	as	a	deficit,	a	contention	those	with	practical	skills	and	knowledge	were	
not	being	valued	or	included	in	knowledge	production.		In	the	desire	to	build	theory	
(episteme)	with	practitioners,	the	research	uncovered	phronesis,	practical	wisdom.	
Built	over	time	and	gained	by	embodied	and	embedded	experience,	evidence	was	
provided	that	such	knowledge	contained	deep	understandings	of	patterns	of	
context,	learned	both	explicitly	and	tacitly	but	important	for	navigating	and	
promoting	peacebuilding	change	processes	while	living	and	working	in	a	deeply	
divided	context.	The	concept	was	demonstrated	to	produce	knowledge	that	could	
be	used	to	explain	judgment,	innovate	for	change,	provide	a	lens	of	analysis,	and	to	
build	locally-based	theory.	Furthermore,	phronesis	was	shown	as	an	epistemology	
that	may	be	germane	to	conflict	regions,	and	which	might	more	easily	adapt	to	the	
fluid,	complex	and	emergent	dynamics	of	societies	transitioning	from	protracted	
violence	and	conflict.	
However,	the	research	also	evidenced	current	tensions	in	maximising	the	
knowledge	production	potential	of	those	who	use	a	phronetic	approach	as	their	
predominant	epistemology	of	practice.	This	is	because	it	runs	counter	to	the	current	
technocratic	paradigm	of	peacebuilding.	Furthermore,	this	paradigm	is	a	part	of	a	
much	wider	phenomenon	and	can	be	viewed	as	a	global	trend,	and	in	many	
respects	it	could	be	argued,	is	an	outgrowth	of	neoliberalism.	Measurability,	hard	
data,	and	quantifiable	outcomes	are	valued	in	a	diversity	of	arenas,	fuelling	drives	in	
education	to	produce	test	results	or	within	higher	education	for	accreditation	
purposes,	to	demonstrate	impact,	all	which	serve	to	make	airtight	cases	of	value	
for	money.	Public	sector	spending	similarly	relies	on	demonstrating	value	for	
programmes	dependent	on	the	public	purse.	While	necessary	and	desirable,	
unfortunately	such	a	reductionist	view	of	accountability	lends	itself	to	bureaucratic	
number	crunching	focusing	on	outputs	but	is	more	demonstrably	problematic	when	
it	comes	to	peacebuilding	practice.	In	this	research,	the	majority	of	interviewees	
viewed	peacebuilding	as	an	inherently	more	organic,	failure-prone,	risky,	
unpredictable	and	process-driven	endeavour.	This	is	not	said	to	belabour	points	
made	earlier	about	technocratic	and	bureaucratic	driven	peacebuilding,	only	to	say	
that	if	phronetic	forms	of	knowledge	were	to	be	afforded	greater	value,	it	may	
necessitate	a	shift	in	current	definitions,	practices	and	measures	of	accountability.	
For	example,	phronesis	is	conceptualised	here	as	including	both	objective	and	
subjective	forms	of	knowledge	which	are	valuable	when	determining	the		
judgment-in-context-for	action.	However,	judgment	consequently	may	include	
aspects	of	context	knowledge	that	are	not	easy	to	define	or	to	account	for	within	
traditional	monitoring	or	evaluation	criteria.	This	research	found	examples	when	
the	space	closed	down	for	peacebuilding	due	to	micro-macro	context	dynamics	
such	as	the	flag	dispute	or	tensions	along	conflict	prone	interfaces.	One	interviewee	
reflected	that	work	in	their	area	was	effectively	halted	for	six	months,	with	all	
activity	having	to	halt	due	to	the	impact	of	issues	generated	by	the	localised	
context.	In	that	example,	the	practitioner	was	able	to	explain	why	project	targets	
werent	met.	At	other	times,	it	may	be	more	difficult	to	understand	why	ideas	that	
seem	feasible	on	paper,	dont	generate	any	interest	on	the	ground.	Within	a	
techno-rational	paradigm	of	accountability,	where	risk	is	costly	or	includes	financial	
penalties,	risk	is	either	avoided	or	practitioners	may	learn	to	lie	to	funders.	Neither	
serves	to	generate	innovation	or	learning	from	failure.	
Future	research	could,	however,	strengthen	recognition	for	the	value	of	phronetic	
epistemologies	of	practice.	Rather	than	prioritising	service	delivery	functions,	
evidence	of	the	strength	of	phronesis	as	a	source	of	knowledge	necessary	for	
peacebuilding	could	enhance	opportunities	for	practice	to	be	equally	viewed	as	an	
opportunity	for	learning,	reflection	and	knowledge	creation.	The	further	exploration	
of	the	way	phronetic	knowledge	is	necessary	for	peacebuilding,	particularly	in	light	
of	a	focus	on	bottom-up	and	the	everyday	could	expand	upon	insights	generated	
in	this	thesis.	For	example,	the	knowledge	creation	cycle	demonstrated	in	Chapter	8	
(section	8.2.2)	could	be	used	with	grassroots	communities	in	purposeful	ways	to	
build	from	their	tacit	knowledge	to	innovate	in	ways	that	might	sharpen	the	
relevancy	of	local	peacebuilding	efforts.		Working	with	grassroots	and	civil	society	
practitioners	to	build	local	theory	could	also	be	further	extended.	As	this	thesis	
demonstrated,	the	pervasiveness	of	the	context	of	distrust	was	ripe	for	theory	
building	and	while	truncated	for	this	research,	the	initial	work	with	practitioners	
was	promising.		It	would	be	important	to	revisit	outcomes	from	initial	theory	
building	sessions	on	how	trust	and	demonstrations	of	trustworthiness	are	used	in	
peacebuilding	practice.	Insights	gained	could	shed	further	light	on	mechanisms	that	
could	be	built	into	policies	to	benchmark	trustworthiness	to	compliment	the	focus	
given,	for	example,	on	strategies	to	increase	respect	and	support	reconciliation	
already	included	in	government	policy	strategies	such	as	Draft	Programme	for	
Government	(PfG)	(Northern	Ireland	Executive	Office,	2016)	and	Together	Building	
a	United	Community	(T:BUC)	(Northern	Ireland	Executive	Office,	2013).	
It	would	also	be	useful	to	take	the	conceptualisation	of	phronesis	developed	in	this	
thesis	to	test	in	other	conflict	context	to	determine	its	robustness	beyond	Northern	
Ireland	and	to	investigate	its	relevance	beyond	its	basis	of	origin.	For	example,	
would	phronetic	context-knowledge	utilise	the	same	patterns	of	context	identified	
in	this	research	as	the	five	dimensions	of	place-space,	time-timing,	frames,	fault	
lines	and	relationships?	Might	other	conflict	contexts	contain	different	sets	of	
patterned	tacit	knowledge?	Finally,	building	on	from	the	Augmented	Typology	of	
Everyday	Peace	Activity	profiled	in	section	9.1	(Figure	7)	such	a	typology	could	be	
extended	through	investigations	to	better	understand	the	conditions	that	maximise	
or	limit	the	potential	of	the	everyday	to	become	a	catalyst	for	transformation.		
Moving	towards	conclusion,	the	conceptualisation	of	phronesis	makes	a	necessary	
form	of	knowledge	for	peacebuilding,	visible.	It	affirms	that	human	beings	have	the	
ability	and	potential	to	be	innately	wise-	a	knowledge	which	at	times	can	be	
obscured	by	the	acquisition	of	theories	and	skills.	Phronesis	is	a	form	of	knowledge	
which	is	valuable	and	valid	for	knowing	what	to	do	when	techniques,	rules	and	
universal	theories	can	not	or	will	not	apply.	Revisiting	the	story	told	in	the	prologue,	
Episteme,	Techne,	and	no	Phronesis	what	I	did	not	learn	learn	in	my	academic	
training	but	now	understand-	is	to	identify,	recognise,	develop	and	value	all	of	these	
forms	of	knowledge-	as	each,	Artistotle	suggests,	are	virtues	of	knowledge.	
Appendices	
Appendix	1:	Adapted	theory-building	model	(original	from	MIT	Co-Lab,	2012)	
Appendix	2:	Timeframe	of	the	stages	of	the	research	investigation	
Appendix	3:	Sector-based	peacebuilding	map	
Appendix	4:	Peacebuilding	sector	and	level	map	
Appendix	5:	Conflict	saturation	map	
Appendix	6:	Interview	Questions	
Appendix	7:	Subject	Consent	Form	
Appendix	8:	Subject	Information	Sheet	
Appendix	9:	Consent	form	Theory	Development	Reference	Group	
Appendix	10:	Distrust/Trust	Matrix		
Appendix	11:	Case	study	1,	Ballykillrural	
Appendix	12:	Case	study	2,	Newtowncastle	
Appendix	13:	Theory	Building	Session	Handout	
Appendix	14:	Photo	from	Theory	Building	Session		
Appendix	1:	Adapted	theory-building	model	(original	from	MIT	Co-Lab,	2012)	
Building	Theory	from	Phrone2c	Prac2cal	
Knowledge	A	Model	of	Theory	Construc2on	
STAGE&2:&
Initial&theory&generated&
with&Theory&
Construction&Group&
STAGE&3:&&
Theory&refined&by&
research&team&
STAGE&4:&&
Theory&refined&
further&by&&
Theory&
Construction&
Group&
STAGE&5:&&
Theory&reviewed&
by&theory&validityC
testing&group&
STAGE&6:&&
Final&Refining&of&
Theory&
STAGE&1:&&
Initial&concepts&identified&from&
interviews&and&brought&to&first&
meeting&of&theory&construction&
group&
Appendix	2:	Timeframe	of	the	stages	of	the	research	investigation	
Research	Stage	 Dates	 Outcomes	
Design	Stage	 October	2013	to	October	2014	
Desk-based	literature	reviewed	
Research	question	designed	
Ethical	approval	gained	October	2014		
Phase	1:	Fieldwork	
Interviews		
November	27th	2014	to	June	17th	
40	Interviews	completed	
Memo-writing	
Transcribing	and	Reviewing		
Memo-writing	
January	to	June	2015	
August	2015	to	May	2016	
13	Transcribed	interviews	completed		
27	Professionally	transcribed	and	each	
reviewed	for	accuracy.		
After	review,	transcribed	interviews	
sent	to	practitioners	for	approval.	
Coding/	Analysis	 April	2016	to	September	2016	 All	transcribed	interview	coded.		
Initial	analysis	of	salient	themes	for	
theory	building	identified.	
Phase	2	Theory-building		
Theory	building	preparation	
Theory	building	meetings		
October	2016	to	November	2016	 Theory-building	themes	further	
refined,	mock	case-studies	developed.		
Two	theory-building	sessions	with	
practitioners.	
Writing	up	and	revising	 December	2016-	January	2018	
May	2018	
Draft	thesis	produced	
Final	thesis	submitted	
Appendix	3:	Sector-based	peacebuilding	map	
Peacebuilding at Grassroots 
and Civil Society Level in 
Northern Ireland
Justice/Equality Reforms
Human Rights and Advocacy
Restorative JusticeCNR
Faith-based
Ecumenism
Inter and Intra Work (Contact, 
Paired Work )
Ex-Combatants State
Non-state Republican
Loyalist
EducationFormal
Integrated Schools
Controlled
Maintained
Shared 
Research and Higher Education 
Non-formal (Youthwork)
Contested /Shared Spaces 
Interfaces
Peace Walls 
Parading
Housing Estates
Flags
Gender based workWomens GroupsPUL
Cross Community
Mens groups?
Community Development 
Both PUL/CNR
Environment/Green Spaces
Cultural Music
Art Drama
Sports
Funders 
VictimsState 
Non State
Social Cohesion/Community 
Relations/Good Relations
Reconcilation
Diversity: Anti-Bias and Anti-
Sectariansim
Ethnic Minorities Work
Mediation and Dialogue
Economic Actors
Trade Unions
Business Community
Dealing with the Past Commemoration
Storytelling, Archiving
Transitional Justice/Truth Recovery
Appendix	4:	Peacebuilding	sector	and	level	map
Appendix	5:	Conflict	saturation	map	
Conflict	
Saturation	
MEDIUM	
LOWER	
Appendix	6:	Interview	questions	
Entry	Points	
People	have	entered	the	field	in	different	ways	and	at	different	stages	of	the	conflict	here	in	Northern	
Ireland:	
1.	Can	you	tell	me	how	you	got	involved	in	peacebuilding	and	if	that	is	the	term	you	would	use	to	
describe	your	work?	
Methodologies	
2.	What	are	the	main	methods	that	you	use	in	your	work	(practice)	and	how	have	they	developed?	
What	or	who	has	most	influenced	your	practice	in	peacebuilding	work?	(Models	or	theories,	learning	
from	others,	evidence	of	success,	values	and	beliefs)	
3.	Thinking	again	about	the	methods,	what	types	of	changes	do	you	expect	to	see	as	a	result	of	the	
methods	that	you	use,	or	the	way	you	work?		Have	you	seen	the	changes	that	you	expect?	Why	or	
why	not?	
Stories	of	Practice:	
The	research	hopes	to	glean	from	practitioners	what	they	have	learned	on	the	job	about	building	
peace	as	a	result	of	their	work/practice.	Sometimes	we	learn	as	much	from	failure	as	we	do	from	
success.	The	next	two	questions	ask	you	to	talk	about	your	work,	understanding	that	it	can	be	
sensitive,	feel	free	to	change	any	names/identifiers	if	you	want	to	protect	anonymity.	
4.	Would	you	share	a	story	of	your	involvement	in	a	peacebuilding	initiative	that	you	believe	worked	
well,	and	had	an	impact?	[This	could	be	a	project,	programme,	intervention,	over	any	span	of	time]	
Why	did	it	work	well,	what	impact	did	it	have,	what	did	you	learn,	and	how	has	that	learning	
affected	your	practice?	What	did	you	do	with	that	knowledge?	
5.	Similarly,	can	you	share	a	story	from	your	own	practice	of	when	a	peacebuilding	initiative	that	you	
were	involved	with	didnt	go	well,	or	didnt	go	as	you	expected.	Why	do	you	think	it	didnt	work,	
what	did	you	learn	from	that	experience,	and	how	(if	at	all)	has	it	affected	your	practice?	What	did	
you	do	with	that	knowledge?	
Change	Processes	
The	research	also	hopes	to	discover	if	there	are	factors	that	practitioners	have	identified	as	being	
most	significant	in	bring	about	peacebuilding	changes	with	people	on	the	ground	at	the	
grassroots/community/civil	society	level.	
7.	Thinking	back	to	examples	where	you	have	observed	changes	connected	with	your	work/practice	
at	the	grassroots,	have	their	been	factors	that	were	important	in	helping	that	change	to	occur?	If	so,	
what	was	the	significant	factor	and	what	type	of	change	do	you	feel	was	created?	
7a.	If	you	were	to	use	a	metaphor	to	explain	your	experience	of	change	processes	(again	primarily	
focusing	on	within	grassroots/community/civil	society)	what	might	it	be?	
Reflective	Practice:	
8.	How	do	you	learn	from	your	practicedo	you	have	formal	process?	What	works	for	you	to	reflect	
on	your	own	work?	(Conferences,	supervision?)			
8a.	How	does	reflection	affect	your	practice	and	how	much	do	you	feel	in	general	practitioners	here	
do	reflect	on	their	work?		
Capturing	Knowledge:	
Part	of	the	background	to	this	research	is	that	I	was	struck,	given	the	length	of	time	of	peacebuilding	
initiatives	(1965-2015),	and	how	much	money	has	been	spent	(just	under	2.5	billion	since	1987)	it	
seems	there	has	been	limited	conflict	transformation	and	peacebuilding	theory	developed	from	local	
practice.		My	research	hypothesis	is	that	practitioners	here	have	gained	practical	knowledge	from	
their	experience	of	working	to	build	peace	in	a	context	of	protracted	violence,	and	that	if	
consolidated,	this	could	potentially	build	a	locally-based	theory	of	peacebuilding.		
9.	How	have	you	built	upon	and	captured	your	learning	from	practice,	and	do	you	think	practitioners	
value	the	knowledge	they	gain	from	practice?		Where	does	learning	gained	about	on	the	ground	
peacebuilding	get	shared?	What	supports	and	impedes	sharing	practice	developed	knowledge	
amongst	practitioners,	academia,	within	social	policy	and	internationally?	
Mapping	the	Field	of	Peacebuilding	in	Northern	Ireland	
Analytical	Tools:	
Work	that	can	be	described	as	peacebuilding	in	Northern	Ireland	falls	under	many	different	names:	
community	relations,	good	relations,	community	development,	cross-community	work,	equality	and	
human	rights,	and	conflict	transformation	just	to	name	a	few.	I	have	three	maps	that	I	have	
developed	to	map	the	field	and	the	final	set	of	questions	will	ask	you	to	interact	with	these	maps.	
10.	Using	the	triangle	and	sector-based	peacebuilding	maps,	where	would	you	place	your	work?	Do	
you	feel	the	maps	accurately	reflect	the	current	field	or	is	something	missing	or	misplaced	from	your	
perception?	
10a.	Using	the	conflict	saturation	scale	and	reflecting	on	the	majority	of	groups	with	which	you	have	
worked,	what	level	of	impact/saturation	from	the	conflict	would	you	say	most	represents	the	
majority	of	these	groups?	11.	Using	the	sector-based	peacebuilding	map	can	you	recommend	other	
reflective	practitioners	that	you	would	recommend	me	speaking	with	for	this	research?	
Appendix	7:	Subject	consent	form	
Interview	Consent	Form	
Indigenous	Theories	and	Models	Emerging	from	Grassroots	Peacebuilding	Practice	in	Northern	
Ireland	
Title	of	Project		
Duncan	Morrow,	Senior	Lecturer	of	Politics,	University	of	Ulster		
Name	of	Chief	Investigator		
 I	confirm	that	I	have	been	given	and	have	read	and	understood	the	information	sheet	for	
the	above	study	and	have	asked	and	received	answers	to	any	questions	raised.	
 I	understand	that	my	participation	is	voluntary	and	that	I	am	free	to	withdraw	at	any	time	
without	giving	a	reason	and	without	my	rights	being	affected	in	any	way.	
 I	understand	that	the	researchers	will	hold	all	information	and	data	collected	securely	and	
in	confidence	and	that	all	efforts	will	be	made	to	ensure	that	I	cannot	be	identified	as	a	
participant	in	the	study	(except	as	might	be	required	by	law)	and	I	give	permission	for	the	
researchers	to	hold	relevant	personal	data.	
 I	agree	to	take	part	in	the	above	study.	
Name	of	Subject																																		Signature											 	 	 																										Date		
__________________________________________________________________________________	
Name	of	person	taking	consent										Signature			 	 	 																												Date		
_________________________________________________________________________________	
Name	of	researcher		 																			Signature	 	 	 																													Date	
One	copy	for	the	subject;	one	copy	for	the	researcher
Appendix	8:	Subject	information	sheet	
Subject	Information	Sheet-	Interviews,	Phase	1	
Study	Title:	Indigenous	Theories	and	Models	Emerging	from	Grassroots	
Peacebuilding	Practice	in	Northern	Ireland		
You	are	being	invited	to	take	part	in	a	research	study	being	undertaken	to	fulfil	
requirements	as	part	of	a	Doctoral	Programme	with	the	School	of	Politics,	
Criminology	and	Social	Policy.	Please	read	the	following	information	and	do	not	
hesitate	to	ask	any	questions	about	anything	that	might	not	be	clear	to	you.	Thank	
you	for	taking	the	time	to	consider	this	invitation.		
The	purpose	of	the	study	is	to	investigate	what	practitioners	who	have	been	
working	within	peacebuilding	initiatives	at	the	grassroots	level	and	within	civil	
society	(between	the	years	1965-2015),	have	learned	as	a	result	of	their	practice.	
You	have	been	chosen	as	one	of	forty	potential	participants	to	take	part	in	the	
research	because	you	were	identified	by	either	members	of	the	Research	Team									
(Dr.	Duncan	Morrow,	Professor	Brandon	Hamber,	Grainne	Kelly	and	Emily	Stanton)	
or	by	another	interviewee	as	a	reflective	practitioner	and	representative	of	one	of	
the	sectors	involved	in	peacebuilding.		
The	research	will	be	conducted	in	two	stages.	This	information	sheet	pertains	to	the	
first	stage	of	the	research	and	is	inviting	you	to	take	part	in	one-to-one	interviews	at	
mutually	agreed	time	and	location	lasting	roughly	one	hour.	The	interview	will	be	
tape	recorded	with	your	permission	as	detailed	on	the	consent	form.	Following	the	
interviews,	you	may	be	asked	if	you	would	be	willing	to	be	involved	in	the	second	
phase	of	research	which	involves	participation	in	a	practitioner	reference	group	to	
test	potential	theories	emerging	from	the	stage	one	interviews.	If	you	are	asked	to	
be	involved	in	stage	two	you	will	receive	an	additional	information	sheet	and	
consent	form	to	sign	prior	to	your	participation.		
The	benefits	in	taking	part	in	the	research	include	the	opportunity	to	reflect	upon,	
solidify	and	validate	implicit	knowledge	gained	through	peacebuilding	practice.	It	is	
hoped	that	lessons	learned	locally	can	also	potentially	amplify	practitioner-based	
input	on	relevant	social	policy	implementation,	and/or	affect	future	funding	
processes	and	procedures	to	enhance	local	practice.	It	is	also	expected	that	
analytical	materials	and	models	will	emerge	from	the	research	that	could	be	useful	
to	practitioners	in	their	work	and	opportunities	for	future	collaboration	will	be	
welcomed,	with	all	efforts	made	to	share	and	disseminate	findings	locally	in	keeping	
with	University	Intellectual	Property	Rights	agreement.	Likewise,	any	practitioner	
who	would	wish	to	receive	copies	or	the	final	thesis,	or	relevant	chapters,	will	be	
provided	with	them.	
It	is	not	anticipated	that	any	significant	risk	will	be	involved	in	participating	in	this	
research.	Those	taking	part	are	able	to	withdraw	from	the	study	at	any	time.	The	
University	of	Ulster	has	procedures	in	place	for	reporting,	investigating,	recording,	
and	handling	adverse	events	and	complaints	are	taken	seriously	and	should	be	
made	to	the	Chief	Investigator,	Duncan	Morrow,	or	directly	to	the	University	of	
Ulster.	All	data	will	be	held	securely	and	in	confidence	and	any	identifiers	will	be	
removed	prior	to	publication	as	required	under	Data	Protection	legislation.	At	the	
conclusion	of	the	study,	all	recorded	interviews	will	be	stored	on-site	at	the	
University	of	Ulster	per	research	ethic	protocols.	However	freedom	of	information	
legislation	will	allow	access	to	certain	non-personal	or	generalized	data.		Likewise	it	
should	be	understood	that	where	criminal	behaviour	likely	to	harm	others	is	
disclosed	researchers	have	a	duty	to	report	this	to	the	police.		
	Thank	you	for	considering	participating	in	this	research.	
Contact	details	for	those	involved	with	the	study	are:	
Investigator:	Emily	Stanton	 PhD	Doctoral	Candidate:	Stanton-
E@email.ulster.ac.uk	
Supervisory	Investigators:	Dr.	Duncan	Morrow:	dj.morrow@ulster.ac.uk,	Professor	
Brandon	Hamber:	b.hamber@ulster.ac.uk,		and	Ms	Grainne	Kelly:	
g.kelly@ulster.ac.uk	
Appendix	9:	Consent	form	theory	development	reference	group	
Theory	Development	Reference	Group	Consent	Form	
Indigenous	Theories	and	Models	Emerging	from	Grassroots	Peacebuilding	Practice	
in	Northern	Ireland	
Title	of	Project		
Duncan	Morrow,	Senior	Lecturer	of	Politics,	University	of	Ulster		
Name	of	Chief	Investigator		
 I	confirm	that	I	have	been	given	and	have	read	and	understood	the	information	sheet	for	
the	above	study	and	have	asked	and	received	answers	to	any	questions	raised.	
 I	understand	that	my	participation	is	voluntary	and	that	I	am	free	to	withdraw	at	any	time	
without	giving	a	reason	and	without	my	rights	being	affected	in	any	way.	
 I	understand	and	consent	to	this	theory-building	reference	groups	meeting	being	
recorded	to	ensure	accuracy	and	to	track	theory-development	stages	for	the	research	
team.		I	understand	that	the	researchers	will	hold	all	information	and	data	collected	
securely	and	in	confidence	and	that	all	efforts	will	be	made	to	ensure	that	I	cannot	be	
identified	as	a	participant	in	the	study	(except	as	might	be	required	by	law)	and	I	give	
permission	for	the	researchers	to	hold	relevant	personal	data.	
 I	agree	to	participate	in	the	Theory	Development	Reference	Group	and	use	the	Chatham	
House	Rule	while	taking	part.		
 I	agree	to	take	part	in	the	above	study.	
Name	of	Subject																																		Signature											 	 	 Date		
_________________________________________________________________	
Name	of	person	taking	consent										Signature				 	 												Date		
_____________________________________________________________________	
Name	of	researcher		 	 	 		Signature	 	 	 	 Date	
One	copy	for	the	subject;	one	copy	for	the	researcher
Appendix	10:	Distrust/trust	matrix		
DISTRUST	/TRUST						
TOWARDS	
INDIVIDUALS	
TOWARDS	
COMMUNITY/
GRASSROOTS	
TOWARDS	
ORGANISATION	
TOWARDS	STATE	OR	
INSTITUTION	
INDIVIDUALS	 	 	 	 	
COMMUNITY/GRASSROOTS	 	 	 	 	 	
INTER		 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
INTRA		 	 	 	 	
ORGANISATION	 	 	 	 	 	 	
INTRA		 	 	 	 	
INTER		 	
STATE/INSTITUTIONS	 	 	 	 	
INTER		 	 	 	 	 	
INTRA	 	 	 	 	
Appendix	11:	Case	study	1,	Ballykillrural		
Ballykill	Rural	is	a	small	village	west	of	the	Bann.	Like	many	rural	areas,	its	
population	is	dropping,	local	jobs	are	increasingly	hard	to	find,	and	schools	are	
finding	it	harder	to	attract	pupils	due	to	the	drop	in	numbers	of	young	families	
staying	in	the	area.		In	fact,	several	are	at	risk	of	closure.	Its	rural	location	has	meant	
that	over	the	years--	though	it	wasnt	too	far	from	the	border,	the	impact	of	the	
Troubles	was	not	as	directly	experienced	as	in	more	urban	areas.	This	does	not	
mean,	however,	it	was	not	affected.	Over	the	years	of	the	conflict,	local	families	lost	
family	members	and	friends	either	directly	or	indirectly	as	a	result	of	the	Troubles.		
While	the	village	is	considered	mixed	in	reality	there	remains	to	this	day	a	strong	
sense	of	division	in	part	due	to	the	history	of	harm	that	both	communities	feel.	
Recently,	a	small	community-based	dialogue	group	calling	themselves	Harmony	
Now,	has	been	established	to	begin	to	reflect	on	how	they	might	overcome	some	of	
these	divisions	in	order	to	revitalize	their	community.	As	part	of	this	effort	they	
have	decided	to	reflect	on	the	past	in	order	to	move	toward	the	future.		They	have	
decided	to	look	at	local	experiences	of	the	Troubles	with	a	view	to	trying	to	better	
understand	how	each	side	viewed	the	incidents	that	have	impacted	them	both.		
As	part	of	this	new	initiative,	last	week	they	decided	to	organise	a	public	event	
focused	on	Dealing	with	the	Past.	They	put	together	a	panel	discussion	to	address	
personal	experiences	of	the	Troubles	and	their	impact,	this	included:	one	speaker	
from	a	predominately	Republican	background	will	speak	about	how	his	father	was	
interned	because	of	mistaken	identity,	as	a	result	lost	his	job	and	was	never	able	to	
work	in	that	career	again.	Another	panelist	from	a	PUL	community	background	will	
speak	about	how	shrapnel	from	a	local	bomb	injured	her	and	left	her	with	severely	
damaged	vision.		A	third	panelist	from	a	mixed	background	will	speak	about	their	
experience	not	being	able	to	visit	family	members	who	lived	in	the	other	
community	for	fear	of	putting	either	family	at	risk.		
Two	days	before	the	event	was	due	to	go	ahead,	the	organisers	received	a	call	to	
alert	them	that	several	groups	were	planning	to	come	to	protest	the	event	on	the	
night.	Gradually	over	the	next	24	hours,	as	more	people	learned	of	the	planned	
protests,	tensions	began	to	mount	locally	and	rumours	began	to	spread.	There	is	
even	talk	that	ones	from	the	next	town	over	are	renting	buses	to	come	protest.	The	
morning	of	the	event,	members	of	Harmony	Now	come	to	find	that	windows	in	
their	office	have	been	broken	and	a	threatening	message	spray-painted	on	the	
door.	The	police	are	brought	in	to	investigate	and	now	there	are	concerns	that	
tensions	will	lead	to	localised	rioting	on	the	night.	The	event	that	was	planned	did	
not	go	ahead	and	was	cancelled	by	its	organisers.	
As	a	result	of	the	awakened	tensions	which	the	proposed	event	stirred,	there	is	a	
now	a	new	heightened	awareness	of	local	divisions,	and	a	perception	that	as	a	
result	work	that	was	beginning	to	develop--	is	now	threatened.		For	example,	a	new	
mums	and	tots	group	that	had	been	set	up	between	the	local	Catholic	school	and	
State	school	which	had	looked	promising	and	started	out	with	high	numbers,	has	
now	has	dwindled	to	just	a	few	people,	and	the	school	Principals	are	worried	about	
whether	continuing	the	group	is	a	good	idea.	The	two	Principals	had	hoped	that	this	
work	might	lead	to	greater	sharing	between	the	schools	which	might	in	turn	bring	in	
more	money	and	shared	resources	and	ultimately	attract	more	pupils.		They	are	
unsure	what	to	do,	Harmony	Now	is	also	considering	its	options,	and	the	whole	
future	of	this	initiative	is	in	doubt.	
Questions:	
What	has	happened	to	create	barriers	to	change	in	this	case?	
What	learning	is	there	about	this	case?	
What	thoughts	do	you	have	about	what	might	have	been	done	differently	or	what	
might	need	to	happen	next?	
Appendix	12:	Case	study	2,	Newtowncastle	
Newtowncastle	is	city	located	east	of	the	Bann.	It	was	considered	one	of	the	
epicenters	of	conflict	during	the	Troubles	and	its	residents,	particularly	those	in	the	
North	and	South	parts	of	the	city,	would	have	been	highly	impacted.		One	particular	
area	Urban	Island,	became	known	for	the	regular	rioting	over	the	years	of	the	
Troubles.	Historically,	it	had	been	one	the	first	areas	affected	in	the	early	days	of	
the	conflict,	with	a	mass	relocation	of	residents	in	1969,	and	as	a	result,	one	of	the	
earliest	with	a	Peace	Wall.	The	wall,	which	runs	along	the	interface	between	
Catholic	and	Protestant	homes,	was	known	for	many	many	years	as	one	of	the	most	
violent	interfaces.	The	tensions	were	always	particularly	high	during	the	marching	
season	when	local	lodges	and	accompanying	bands	marched	on	traditional	routes	
near	the	interface,	though	quite	often	problems	occurred	at	other	times	of	the	year	
as	well.	As	a	result	there	was	little	inter-community	contact,	other	than	the	
recreational	rioting	between	the	young	people	of	the	area	for	many	years.	Derelict	
housing	in	the	areas	closest	to	the	interface	seemed	to	attract	more	trouble,	and	
residents	complained	of	feeling	unsafe	after	dark	due	to	the	anti-social	behaviour	at	
night.			However,	over	the	last	number	of	years	things	have	begun	to	change.		
Looking	back	some	think	that	progress	can	be	traced	to	efforts	started	fifteen	year	
ago	to	get	a	speedhumps	installed	in	a	the	main	road	that	ran	through	the	interface.		
That	effort	had	been	started	by	two	mums	worried	about	road	safety.	With	the	
support	of	petitions	collected	in	both	communities,	they	began	working	together	to	
get	the	Road	Service	Department	to	address	the	matter.	Eventually	after	many	
meetings	the	speed	hump	was	installed	on	the	road.		However,	while	there	was	a	
certain	degree	of	success	in	achieving	something	for	the	area,	there	remained	much	
suspicion,	and	regular	recreational	rioting	for	many	more	years.	After	one	
particularly	bad	summer	10	years	ago,	two	teachers,	worried	about	how	this	might	
continue	into	the	new	school	year	started	to	talk	about	what	might	be	done.	A	
sports	scheme	between	the	local	Catholic	and	Protestant	school	was	set	up,	and	the	
children	bussed	to	each	others	schools	even	though	they	were	at	two	ends	of	the	
same	street.	This	programme	has	continued	on	for	the	last	ten	years	and	has	even	
brought	some	of	the	local	parents	together.	Several	parents	interested	in	
supporting	their	kids	have	begun	to	get	coaching	training	and	are	now	volunteer	
coaches	for	the	cross-community	sports	program.	The	teachers	have	also	started	a	
choir	between	the	two	schools.	
Most	recently,	in	the	past	five	years	other	influential	local	community	members,	
some	from	ex-combatant	backgrounds	have	begun	to	work	together	to	look	at	how	
they	might	tackle	the	tensions	that	emerge	every	summer.		At	first,	even	
negotiating	who	would	be	involved	in	the	group	was	challenging.	Local	Republicans	
were	wary	of	talking	to	the	police,	and	Orange	Order	representatives	were	also	
wary	of	involvement	with	Republicans.	While	local	members	of	a	range	of	ex-
combatant	organisations	were	involved,	intra	organizational	feuding	also	created	
high	suspicion.	Everyone	was	sure	the	other	had	an	agenda.		However,	in	the	end	it	
was	decided	that	a	local	priest	and	Presbyterian	minister	should	act	as	conveners	
for	the	group,	and	it	should	include	as	many	different	stakeholders	as	possible.	The	
group	have	been	meeting	every	fortnight	for	the	past	five	years.			
After	three	years	of	difficult	discussions,	this	group	was	able	to	negotiate	a	specific	
set	of	protocols	for	the	sequencing	of	both	the	parades	and	any	counter	protests.	
Monitors	were	also	put	into	place	to	ensure	that	each	did	what	they	said	they	
would	do.	For	the	most	part	this	has	worked	although	there	have	been	at	times	
breaches	of	the	protocol.		However,	these	breaches	were	handled	in	the	group,	and	
people	took	responsibility	for	them.		Several	members	of	the	group	comment	that	
they	try	to	be	as	straight-forward	as	possible	and	dont	promise	what	they	cant	
deliver.		
The	fortnightly	meeting	has	also	included	regular	communication	to	report	on	any	
anti-social	behaviour	occurring	between	the	communities.	Everyone	who	was	
involved	has	been	responsible	for	reporting	back	to	and	negotiating	on	behalf	of	
those	they	represent,	and	each	session	includes	a	time	where	any	unresolved	issues	
get	reported	back	to	the	wider	group	of	stakeholders.	For	the	last	two	years,	this	
has	led	to	peaceful	parades	and	protocols	were	followed	without	breaches.		
Residents	have	started	to	comment	that	they	feel	safer	coming	out	at	night,	and	
police	cite	a	decrease	in	anti-social	behaviour.	While	things	are	not	perfect,	Urban	
Island	residents	are	beginning	to	experience	some	changes	to	their	area.	
Questions:	
What	has	happened	to	create	opportunities	for	change	in	this	case?	What	barriers	
were	there	and	how	were	they	overcome?	
If	you	had	to	choose,	what	are	the	most	important	things	that	have	helped	change	
to	happen	in	this	case	in	your	opinion?	
What	thoughts	do	you	have	about	what	might	need	to	happen	next?	
Appendix	13:	Theory	building	session	handout	
Emily	Stanton,	Ulster	University	Draft	Copy	Not	for	Circulation,	November	8,	2016		
DIStrust	
				DISTRUST	Permeates	the	System.	Trust	and	Distrust-----	Operate	Systemically.	
Change	processes	are	operating	in	a	deeply	distrustful	context.	
Emily	Stanton,	Ulster	University	Draft	Copy	Not	for	Circulation,	November	8,	2016		
Systemic/Political	
Subsytem	
(	Institutions,	NGOs)		
Community	
Family	
Individual		
In	the	context	of	deep	systemic	Distrust,	change	processes	were	challenged	due	to	multi-layered	embedded	
distrust	but	catalyzed	with	an	experience	of	built	up	trust,	aided	by	a	perception	of	trustworthiness	and	
display	of	trustworthy	behaviours.	However	gains	could	be	disrupted	by	episodes/experiences	of	distrust	in	
rest	of	system.	
CONCEPTS	to	EXPLORE:		Change	Processes	in	DISTRUST	System	
Suspicion/Mistrust:	A	perception	that	there	is	a	default	wariness	or	suspicion	that	presents	
when	presenting	new	ideas	or	new	people,	or	embarking	on	change	processes.	
Betrayal	/Disloyalty:		A	perception	that	fear	of	being	perceived	to	betray	your	side	acts	
as	a	barrier	to	change	processes.		Applicable	to	both	institutions	and	people.		
Pragmatism,	Leverage,	Gain:	Practitioners	refer	to	reflections	that	initially	change	
processes	are	sometimes	aided	when	there	is	a	pragmatic	reason	to	do	so.	This	may	involve	
anything	from	money,	gaining	more	of,	access	to,	or	consolidation	of,	resources.	Likewise,	
also	involvement	is	perceived	to	have	the	ability	to	leverage	other	sets	of	relationships.		
Credibility	and	Legitimacy:	Perception	of	Credibility	(including	and/of	Change	Leadership):	
Someone	in	community	who	holds	power	either	through	their	status	or	role	or	due	to	their	
personal	characteristics	(Pied	Piper)	or	values	which	have	established	them	as	someone	
worthy	of	trust.		
Legitimacy:	Practitioners	spoke	about	organisations	gaining	legitimacy	as	trustworthy.	
Access	and	inclusion	(often	by	governmental	bodies)	were	evidences	of	trust	being	
extended	from	these	bodies	to	other	institutions.		Perception	that	proving	over	time	
organizational	credibility	and	integrity	has	been	key	in	gaining	that	trust.	
Perception	of	Integrity:		Practitioners	speak	about	the	importance	of	being	perceived	as	
having	integrity.	Associated	with	an	individual	mostly	but	referred	to	process	having	
integrity	as	well.		A	very	important	element	spoken	about	by	many	practitioners	was	doing	
what	you	say	you	are	going	to	do.		
Transparency:	Refers	to	openness	with	people	about	processes.	Paradoxically--,	a	theme	
emerged	that	at	times	work	needs	to	be	coming	in	the	back	door	or	quieter,	without	
drawing	attention	to	itself.	When	being	referred	to	in	micro-contexts	it	was	referred	to	as	
straightforwardness,	being	upfront,	not	promising	what	could	not	being	delivered,	and	a	
perception	that	there	was	no	agenda.	
Inclusivity,	Inclusive	Thinking,	Access:	Themes	emerged	that	processes	that	were	inclusive	
of	a	range	of	people,	without	excluding	those	who	potentially	might	be	seen	as	spoilers	was	
important	in	building	trust	(credibility)	in	change	process.	Being	given	access	to	key	people	
was	interpreted	as	evidence	of	trust	and	of	having	gained	legitimacy	(see	Legitimacy).	
Accountability,	Culpability,	Taking	Responsibility:	Measures	taken	to	formalize	practices,	
clarify	responsibilities,	admit	mistakes,	and	challenge	inter	and	intra	group	norms.	.	
Agency,	Power,	Control,	Ownership:		Power	utilized	in	processes	or	by	people	in	order	to	
facilitate	ownership	as	expression	of	trustworthiness	or	to	increase	or	maintain	control	in	
context	of	distrust.	
Time:	Time,	Commitment:		Reflections	on	the	length	of	time	involved	in	building	trust	and	
get	to	know	the	parties	involved,	time	and	commitment	over	time	often	expressed	
together.	Timing/	Pacing:	Refers	to	differences	in	timing	of	different	parts	of	the	system	to	
engage.	Recognition	that	a	range	of	factorsinternal	and	external	influence	when	each	
group	feels	comfortable	engaging.	This	makes	it	difficult	to	manage	and	maintain	the	
willingness	to	engage	at	same	sequencing	point/concurrent	pacing	with	groups.		Under	the	
radar	may	be	component	of	timing.	
Change	Processes-	Building	Trusting	Societal	Relations	and	
Trustworthy	Institutions:	
Data	suggests	that	change	processes	hinged	on	whether	trust	was	able	to	be	built	
within	the	system	in	a	number	of	dimensions:	
 Point	of	entry	Trust:	Credibility/Legitimacy,	Identity	(initially	the	right	
one),	Integrity,	Rank,	Pied	Piper	and	Trusted	Social	or	Family	Networks)	
Sources	of	distrust	(identity,	networks)	in	point	of	entry	needed	
overcome.	
 Proxy	Trust:	Piggybacking	on	established	trusted	relationship.	Likewise,	
relationship	tainted	(credibility	threatened	by	a	proxy	mistrusted	
relationship).	
 Pragmatic	Trust:	We	can	do	business	together	yields	material,	symbolic	
or	relational	gain.		
 Process	Trust:	Inclusivity,	Transparency,	Accountability,	Taking	
Responsibility,	Straight-forwardness	and	Honesty,	Commitment,	
Ownership,	Reliability,	Exemplars,	Empathy,	Anticipating	Worldview.	
 Personal	Trust:	Integrity,	Personality,	Charisma	
Appendix	14:	Photo	from	theory	building	session		
References	
Acheson,	N.	and	Milofsky,	C.	and	Stringer,	M.	(2011)	Understanding	the	role	of	non-
aligned	civil	society	in	peacebuilding	in	Northern	Ireland:	towards	a	fresh	approach.	
In:	Power,	M.	ed.	Building	peace	in	Northern	Ireland.	Liverpool:	Liverpool	University	
Press,	18-36.		
Albert,	D.H.	(1985)	People	power:	Applying	nonviolence	theory.	Philadelphia:	New	
Society.		
Anderson,	M.B.,	Olson,	L.	with	Doughty,	K.	(2003)	Confronting	war:	critical	lessons	
for	peace	practitioners.	Cambridge,	Massachusetts:	Collaborative	for	Development	
Action	(CDA).	
Argyris,	C.,	and	Schn,	D.	(1974)	Theory	in	practice:	increasing	professional	
effectiveness.	San	Francisco:	Jossey-Bass.		
Aristotle	translated	by	Ross,	D.	(2009)	The	nicomachean	ethics.	New	York:	Oxford	
University	Press.		
Arthur,	P.	(1980)	Political	realities:	government	and	politics	of	Northern	Ireland.	
Essex:	Longman	Group.	
Atashi,	E.	(2011)	Peace	dividends	the	role	of	external	funds	in	peacebuilding.	In:	
Power,	M.,	ed.	Building	peace	in	Northern	Ireland.	Liverpool:	Liverpool	University	
Press,	209-227.	
Autessere,	S.	(2014)	Peaceland:	conflict	resolution	and	the	everyday	politics	of	
international	intervention.	New	York:	Cambridge	University	Press.	
Barnes,	C.	(2005)	Weaving	the	web:	civil-society	roles	in	working	with	conflict	and	
building	peace.	In:	van	Tongeren,	P.,	Brenk,	M.,	Hellema,	M.,	and	Verhoeven,	J.,	eds.	
People	building	peace	II:	successful	stories	of	civil	society.	Boulder,	Colorado:	Lynne	
Reiner,	7-24.		
Barnes,	C.	(2006a)	Agents	for	change:	civil	society	roles	in	preventing	war	and	
building	peace.	The	Netherlands:	European	Centre	for	Conflict	Prevention.		
Barnes,	C.	(2006b)	Governments	and	civil	society	organisations:	issues	in	working	
together	towards	peace,	discussion	paper	for	Global	Partnership	for	the	Prevention	
of	Armed	Conflict	(GOPAC),	The	Netherlands:	European	Centre	for	Conflict	
Prevention.		
Barrett,	F.,	and	Cooperrider,	D.	(1990)	Generative	metaphor	intervention:	a	new	
approach	for	working	with	systems	divided	by	conflict	and	caught	in	defensive	
perception.	The	Journal	of	Applied	Behavioral	Science,	26	(2),	219-239.	
Barritt,	D.	(1982)	Northern	Ireland:	a	problem	to	every	solution.	London:	Quaker	
Peace	&	Service.	
Bass,	D.	(2009)	The	centre	for	neighbourhood	development.		In:	Le	Mare,	A.	and	
McCartney,	F.,	ed.	Coming	from	the	silence.	York:	William	Sessions,	61-90.	
Bayley,	D.H.	(2008)	Post-conflict	police	reform:	is	Northern	Ireland	a	model?	
Policing:	A	Journal	of	Policy	and	Practice,	2	(2),	233-240.		
BBC	News	Northern	Ireland	(2014)	WEA	centre	shuts	doors	after	100	years	
empowering	adults.	BBC	News	[Online],	9	June.	Available	from:	
http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-northern-ireland-27760313	[Accessed	26	January	
2018].	
Belenky,	M.F.,	Clinchy,	B.M.,	Goldberger,	N.R.	and	Tarule,	J.M.	(1986)	Womens	
ways	of	knowing.	Reissued	with	new	preface,	New	York:	Basic	Books.	1997.	
Belloni,	R.	(2009)	Shades	of	orange	and	green:	civil	society	and	the	peace	process	in	
Northern	Ireland.	In	Cox.,	M.(ed)	Social	capitol	and	peace-building.	Abington:	
Routledge,	5-21.			
Belloni,	R.	(2010)	Northern	Ireland:	civil	society	and	the	slow	building	of	peace.	In:	
Paffenholz,	T.,	(ed.)	Civil	society	and	peacebuilding:	a	critical	assessment.	Boulder:	
Lynne	Rienner	Publishers,	105-128.	
Bennett,	A.	(2009)	Quaker	house	Belfast.	In:	Le	Mare,	A.	and	McCartney,	F.,	ed.	
Coming	from	the	silence.	York:	William	Sessions,	91-120.	
Bew,	P.	and	Gillespie,	G.	(1999)	Northern	Ireland:	a	chronology	of	the	troubles,	
1968-1999.	Dublin:	Gill	&	Macmillan.	
Beyond	Intractability	(2003)	Levels	of	Action.	Boulder,	Colorado:	Conflict	
Information	Consortium.	Available	from:	
http://www.beyondintractability.org/essay/hierarchical-intervention-levels	
[Accessed	23	July	2014)	
Blair,	R.	(2009)	Ulster	Quaker	Service.	In:	Le	Mare,	A.	and	McCartney,	F.,	ed.	Coming	
from	the	silence.	York:	William	Sessions,	33-60.	
Bleakley,	D.	(1972)	Peace	in	Ulster.	Oxford:	A.R.	Mowbray	and	Company.		
Bloomfield,	D.	(1997)	Peacemaking	strategies	in	Northern	Ireland:	building	
complementarity	in	conflict	management	theory.	Basingstoke:	Palgrave	Macmillan	
Press.	
Bourdieu,	P.	(1990)	The	logic	of	practice.	Stanford:	Stanford	University	Press.		
Bourdieu,	P.	and	Wacquant,	D.	(1992)	An	invitation	to	reflective	sociology.	Chicago:	
University	of	Chicago	Press.	
Bowyer	Bell,	J.	(1993)	The	Irish	Troubles:	a	generation	of	violence	1967-1992.	
Dublin:	Gill	and	Macmillan.	
Braun	and	Clarke	(2013)	Successful	qualitative	research:	a	practical	guide	for	
beginners.	London:	SAGE.	
Brewer,	J.	(2010)	Peace	Processes	a	Sociological	Approach,	Cambridge:	Polity.		
Brewer,	J.,	Higgins,	G.	and	Teeney,F.		(2011)	Religion,	civil	society,	&	peace	in	
Northern	Ireland.	Oxford:	Oxford	University	Press.		
Buchanan,	S.	(2011)	Examining	the	peacebuilding	policy	framework	of	the	Irish	and	
British	governments.	In:	Power,	M.,	ed.	Building	peace	in	Northern	Ireland.	
Liverpool:	Liverpool	University	Press,	172-191.		
Burrowes,	R.J.	(1996)	The	strategy	of	nonviolent	defense:	a	Gandhian	perspective.	
New	York:	State	University	of	New	York	Press.		
Byrne,	S.,	Thiessen,	C.,	Fissuh,	E.,	Irvin,	C.	and	Hawranik,	M.	(2008)	Economic	
assistance,	development	and	peacebuilding:	the	role	of	the	IFI	and	EU	Peace	II	fund	
in	Northern	Ireland,	Civil	Wars,	10(2),	106-124.		
CAIN	(2008)	Fact	sheet	for	the	conflict	in	and	about	Northern	Ireland.	Derry-
Londonderry:	CAIN	
http://cain.ulst.ac.uk/victims/docs/group/htr/day_of_reflection/htr_0607c.pdf.	
[Accessed	7	April	2018].	
Campbell,	J.	(2000)	Partnering	with	Mennonites	in	Northern	Ireland.		In:	Sampson,	
C.	and	Lederach,	J.P.	eds.	From	the	ground	up:	Mennonite	contributions	to	
international	peacebuilding.	Oxford:	Oxford	University	Press,	97-103.	
Catalyst	for	Peace	(2017)	Our	Approach.	Portland,	Maine:	Catalyst	for	Peace.	
Available	from:	http://www.catalystforpeace.org/about/our-approach/	[Accessed	
26	January	2018.	
Catholic	Relief	Services	(2004)	Conflict	as	the	beginning	of	peace.	Jakarta:	CRS.	
Chandler,	D.	(2017)	Peacebuilding:	the	twenty	years'	crisis	1997-2017.	Cham,	
Switzerland:	Springer	Nature.	
Charmaz,	K.	(2006)	Constructing	grounded	theory:	a	practical	guide	through	
qualitative	analysis.	2
	ed.	London:	Sage	Publications.		
Cochrane,	F.	(2001a)	Unsung	heroes?	the	role	of	civil	society	in	the	Northern	Ireland	
conflict.	In:	McGarry,	J.,	ed.	Northern	Ireland	and	the	Divided	World.	Oxford:	Oxford	
University	Press,	137-156.	
Cochrane,	F.	(2001b)	Unsung	heroes	or	muddle-headed	peaceniks?	A	profile	and	
assessment	of	NGO	conflict	resolution	activity	in	the	Northern	Ireland	'Peace	
Process'		Irish	Studies	in	International	Affairs,	12,	97-112.	
Cochrane,	F.	(2006)	Two	cheers	for	the	NGOs:	building	peace	from	below	in	
Northern	Ireland.	In:	Cox,	M.,	Guelke,	A.	and	Stephen,	F.,	eds.	A	farewell	to	arms?	
Beyond	the	Good	Friday	Agreement.	Second	ed.	Manchester:	Manchester	University	
Press,	253-267.	
Cochrane,	F.	and	Dunn	S.	(2002)	People	power?	The	role	of	the	voluntary	and	
community	sector	in	the	Northern	Ireland	conflict.	Cork:	Cork	University	Press.	
Cohen,	N.	and	Arieli,	T.	(2011)	Field	research	in	conflict	environments:	
Methodological	challenges	and	snowball	sampling.	Journal	of	Peace	Research,	48	
(4),	423-435.		
Committee	for	the	Administration	of	Justice	(CAJ)	(2018)	About	CAJ.	Belfast:	CAJ.	
Available	from:	https://caj.org.uk/about/	[accessed	7	January	2018].	
Community	of	the	Cross	of	Nails	(2014)	A	review	of	the	almost	thirty	years	of	the	
ministry	of	cornerstone	community.	Coventry,	UK:	Community	of	the	Cross	of	Nails.	
Available	originally	from:		http://www.crossofnails.org/a-review-of-the-almost-
thirty-years-of-the-ministry-of-cornerstone-community/	[Accessed	on	21	August	
2014	but	no	longer	available	as	of	7	January	2018].			
Craig,	C.	(2005)	Pathway	to	reconciliation.	In:	Kelly,	G.	and	Hamber,	B.	eds.	
Reconciliation:	rhetoric	or	relevant?	Report	17,	Belfast:	Democratic	Dialogue,	13-19.	
Curle,	A.	(1971)	Making	peace.	London:	Tavistock	Publication.	
Darby,	J.	ed.	(1983)	Northern	Ireland:	the	background	to	the	conflict.	Belfast:	The	
Appletree	Press.	
Dart,	J.	and	Davies,	R.	(2003)	A	dialogical,	story-based	evaluation	tool:	The	'Most	
Significant	Change'	technique.	American	Journal	of	Evaluation,	24	(2),	137-155.		
Davey,	R.	(1993)	A	channel	of	peace.	London:	Marshall	Pickering.	
Davies,	R.	and	Dart,	J.	(2005)	The	Most	Significant	Change	(MSC)	technique.	A	
guide	to	its	use.	UK:	Care	International.	
Diamond,	L.	and	McDonald,	J.W.	(1996)	Multi-track	diplomacy:	A	systems	approach	
to	peace.	West	Hartford,	CT:	Kumarian	Press.		
Dickson,	B.	(2006)	New	beginnings?	Policing	and	human	rights	after	the	conflict.	In:	
Cox,	M.,	Guelke,	A.	and	Stephen,	F.,	eds.	A	farewell	to	arms?	Beyond	the	Good	
Friday	Agreement.	Second	ed.	Manchester:	Manchester	University	Press,	170-186.	
Doe,	S.G.	(2009)	Indigenizing	post-conflict	state	reconstruction	in	Africa:	a	
conceptual	framework.	Africa	Peace	and	Conflict	Journal,	2	(1),	1-16.		
Donais,	T.	(2009)	Empowerment	or	imposition?	Dilemmas	of	local	ownership	in	
post-conflict	peacebuilding	processes.	Peace	&	Change,	34	(1),	3-26.		
Donais,	T.	(2012)	Peacebuilding	and	local	ownership:	post-conflict	consensus	
building,	Abington:	Routledge.	
Dreyfus,	S.	(2004)	The	five-stage	model	of	adult	skill	acquisition.	Bulletin	of	Science,	
Technology	&	Society,	24	(3),	177-181.	Sage	Publications:	DOI	
10.1177/0270467604264992:		
Eraut,	M.	(1994)	Developing	professional	knowledge	and	competence.	London:	The	
Falmer	Press.		
Eraut,	M.	(2000)	Non-formal	learning	and	tacit	knowledge	in	professional	work.	
British	Journal	of	Educational	Psychology.	70,	113-136.	
Eraut,	M.	(2009)	How	professionals	learn	through	work.	University	of	Surrey.	
Available	from:	http://learningtobeprofessional.pbworks.com/How-professionals-
learn-through-work.	[Accessed	7	January	2018].	
European	Centre	for	Conflict	Prevention	(1999)	People	building	peace:	35	inspiring	
stories	from	around	the	world.	The	Netherlands:	European	Centre	for	Conflict	
Prevention.	
Eyben,	K.,	Morrow,	D.,	and	Wilson	D.	(1997)	A	worthwhile	venture?	Practically	
investing	in	equity,	diversity	and	interdependence.	Coleraine:	University	of	Ulster.	
Fairmichael,	R.	(1987)	The	Peace	People	experience.	DAWN	Train,	(5),	3-48.	
Fay,	M.,	Morrissey,	M.	and	Smyth,	M.	(1999)	Northern	Ireland's	Troubles:	The	
human	costs.	London:	Pluto	Press.	
Fetherston,	B.,	and	Kelly,	R.	(2007)	Conflict	resolution	and	transformative	pedagogy:	
A	grounded	theory	research	project	on	learning	in	higher	education.	Journal	of	
Transformative	Education,	5(3),	262-285.	doi:10.1177/1541344607308899		
Fitzduff,	M.	(1992)	Community	conflict	skills:	A	handbook	for	group	work	in	
Northern	Ireland.	2nd	ed.	Belfast:	Express	Litho.		
Fitzduff,	M.	(1993)	Approaches	to	community	relations	work.	Belfast:	Community	
Relations	Council.	
Fitzduff,	M.	(2002)	Beyond	violence:	conflict	resolution	process	in	Northern	Ireland.	
New	York:	United	Nations	University	Press.	
Fitzduff,	N.	and	Williams,	S.	(2007)	Reflecting	on	peace	practice	project	cumulative	
impact	case	study:	How	did	Northern	Ireland	move	towards	peace?	Cambridge,	MA:	
Collaborative	Learning	Projects	(CDA).	
Flyvbjerg,	B.	(2001)	Making	social	science	matter.	Cambridge:	Cambridge	University	
Press.		
Flyvbjerg,	B.,	Landman,	T.	&	Schram,	S.	eds.	(2012)	Real	social	science:	applied	
phronesis.	Cambridge:	Cambridge	University	Press.	
Frazer,	H.	and	Fitzduff,	M.	(original	1986;	1994)	Improving	community	relations.	
Third	Edition,	Belfast:	Community	Relations	Council.	
Freire,	P.	(1970)	Pedagogy	of	the	oppressed.	London:	Penguin	Books.	
Galtung,	J.	(1975)	Essays	in	peace	research.	Copenhagen:	Ejlers.		
Galtung,	J.	(1996)	Peace	by	peaceful	means:	peace	and	conflict,	development	and	
civilisation.	Oslo:	International	Peace	Research	Institute	(PRIO).	
Galvanising	the	Peace	Network	(2017)	Galvanising	the	peace:	The	future	for	conflict	
transformation	in	Northern	Ireland.	Belfast:	Community	Dialogue.	
Garland,	R.	(2001)	Gusty	Spence.	Belfast:	Blackstaff	Press.	
Gawerc,	M.I.	(2006)	Peace-building:	theoretical	and	concrete	perspectives.	Peace	&	
Change,	31	(4),	435-478.		
Gilligan,	C.	(1982)	In	a	different	voice:	psychological	theory	and	womens	
development.	Reissued	with	new	preface,	Cambridge,	MA:	Harvard	University	Press,	
1993.	
Goetschel,	L.	and	Hagmann,	T.	(2009)	Civilian	peacebuilding:	peace	by	bureaucratic	
means?	Conflict,	Security	&	Development,	9	(1),	55-73.		
Gramsci,	A.	(1971)	Selections	from	the	Prison	Notebooks	of	Antonio	Gramsci.	Edited	
and	translated	by	Hoare,	Q.	and	Nowell	Smith,	G.	New	York:	International	
Publishers.	
Guelke,	A.	(2003)	Civil	society	and	the	Northern	Irish	peace	process.	Voluntas:	
International	Journal	of	Voluntary	and	Nonprofit	Organizations.	14	(1):	61-78.		
Hall,	M.	(1988)	20	years:	a	concise	chronology	of	events	in	Northern	Ireland	from	
1968-1988.	Newtownabbey:	Island	Publications.	
Hall,	M.	(1998)	Report	of	a	series	of	seminars	organised	by	the	Springfield	Inter-
Community	Development	Project:	interface	Issues,	tackling	anti-social	behaviour,	
marching	and	rights.	Belfast:	Springfield	Inter-Community	Development	Project	
(SICDP).	
Hall,	M.	(2000)	Restoring	relationships:	a	community	exploration	of	anti-social	
behaviour,	punishment	beatings	and	restorative	justice.	Newtownabbey:	Island	
Publications.	
Hall,	M.	(2003)	It's	good	to	talk:	the	experiences	of	the	Springfield	mobile	phone	
network.	Newtownabbey:	Island	Publications.	
Hall,	M.	(2005)	Grassroots	leadership	(1)	recollections	by	May	Blood	and	Joe	
Camplisson.	Newtownabbey:	Island	Publications.	
Hall,	M.	(2013)	Towards	a	shared	future	(3):	Irreconcilable	identities?	Belfast:	Island	
Publications/Farset	Community	Think	Tanks	Project.	
Hamber,	B.	and	Kelly,	G.	(2004)	Reconciliation:	a	working	definition.	Belfast:	
Democratic	Dialogue.	
Hamber,	B.	and	Kelly,	G	(2008)	The	challenge	of	reconciliation:	translating	theory	
into	practice.	In:	Community	Relations	Council.,	eds.	A	sustainable	peace?	Research	
as	a	contribution	to	peace-building	in	Northern	Ireland.	Belfast:	CRC,	3-26.	 
Hammond	Callaghan,	M.	(2006)	Bombings,	burnings	and	borders:	remembering	
women's	peace	groups	under	internment.	The	Canadian	Journal	of	Irish	Studies,	32	
(1)	32-45.	
Hammond	Callaghan,	M.	(2002)	Surveying	politics	of	peace,	gender,	conflict	and	
identity	in	Northern	Ireland:	the	case	of	the	Derry	Peace	Women	in	1972.	Womens	
Studies	International	Forum,	25	(1),	3349.		
Hartnell,	C.,	Hodgson,	J.	and	Knight,	B.	(2014)	Strategic	or	emergent:	why	are	we	
stuck	in	the	swimming	pool?	Alliance.	Available	from:	
http://www.alliancemagazine.org/analysis/strategic-or-emergent-why-are-we-
stuck-in-the-swimming-pool	[Accessed	24	January	2018].	
Hayward,	K.	McCall,	C.	and	Damkat,	I.	(2011)	Building	peace	and	crossing	borders:	
the	north/south	dimension	of	reconciliation.	In:	Power,	M.,	ed.	Building	peace	in	
Northern	Ireland.	Liverpool:	Liverpool	University	Press,	191-208	
Healing	Through	Remembering	(2017)	History.	Belfast:	Healing	Through	
Remembering.	Available	from:	http://healingthroughremembering.org/who-we-
are/history	[Accessed	23	June	2017]	
Hellmller,	S.	(2014)	International	and	local	actors	in	peacebuilding:	why	don't	they	
cooperate?	Bern,	Switzerland:	Swiss	Peace.	
Hennessy,	T.	(2005)	Northern	Ireland:	the	origins	of	the	Troubles.	Dublin:	Gill	and	
MacMillan.	
Heron,	J.	(1996)	Co-operative	inquiry:	research	into	the	human	condition.	London:	
SAGE.	
Interaction	(2014)	Interaction	Submission	to	the	TBUC.	Belfast:	Northern	Ireland	
Assembly.	Available	from:	
http://www.niassembly.gov.uk/globalassets/documents/ofmdfm/inquiries/building
-a-united-community/written-submissions/interaction-belfast.pdf		[Accessed	7	
January	2018].	
Irish	News	(1972a)	Peace	aims	of	the	women	of	Andersonstown.	Irish	News,	10	
April,	4.	
Irish	News	(1972b)	We	abhor	violence	say	1000	at	meeting.	Irish	News,	24	May,	3.	
Irish	Times	(2017)	Full	text	of	Martin	McGuiness	resignation	letter.	Irish	Times	
[online],	9	January.	Available	from:	https://www.irishtimes.com/news/politics/full-
text-of-martin-mcguinness-s-resignation-letter-1.2930429	[Accessed	26	January	
2018].	
Jarman,	N.	and	Community	Development	Centre	(CDC)	(1999)	Drawing	back	from	
the	edge:	community	based	response	to	violence	in	North	Belfast.	Belfast:	CDC.	
Jarman	N.	(2005)	Managing	conflicts	by	phone:	the	mobile	phones	network	in	
Northern	Ireland.	In:	van	Tongeren,	P.,	Brenk,	M.,	Hellema,	M.	and	Verhoeven,	J.,	
eds.	People	building	peace	II:	successful	stories	of	civil	society.	Boulder,	CO:	Lynne	
Rienner,	435-440.	
Jorgensen,	A.	(2006)	Fields	of	knowledge.	In:	(eds)	Corcoran,	M.	and	Peillon.	M.	
Uncertain	Ireland:	A	Sociological	Chronicle,	2003-2004.	Maynooth	Ireland:	Institute	
for	Public	Administration,	117-126.	
Kalyvas,	S.N.	(2006)	The	logic	of	violence	in	civil	war.	Cambridge:	Cambridge	
University	Press.	
Kelleher,	A.	and	Johnson,	M.	(2008)	Religious	communities	as	peacemakers:	A	
comparison	of	grassroots	peace	processes	in	Sudan	and	Northern	Ireland.	Civil	
Wars,	10	(2),	148-172.	
Kelly,	G.	and	Hamber,	B.	(eds)(2005)	Reconciliation:	rhetoric	or	relevant?	Belfast:	
Democratic	Dialogue.		
Kelly,	G.	(2012)	Progressing	good	relations	and	reconciliation	in	post-agreement	
Northern	Ireland,	Derry-Londonderry:	INCORE.	
Kelly,	G.	and	Braniff,	M	(2016)	A	dearth	of	evidence:	tackling	division	and	building	
relationships	in	Northern	Ireland.	International	Peacekeeping,	23	(3),	442-467.	
Kelly,	L.	(2009)	One	remarkable	fact:	why	most	of	Belfast	remained	at	peace.		
History	Ireland,	17	(4),	40-42.	
Kelly,	L.	(2011)	Belfast,	August	1969:	the	limited	and	localised	patterns	of	violence.	
In:	Sheehan,	W.	and	Cronin,	M.	eds.	Riotous	assemblies:	rebels,	riots	and	revolts	in	
Ireland.	Cork:	Mercier	Press,	228-41.	
Kelman,	H.	(1997)	Social-psychological	dimensions	of	international	conflict.	In	
Zartman	I.W.	and	Rasmussen	J.L.	eds.	Peacemaking	in	international	conflict,	
Washington	DC:	United	States	Institute	of	Peace,	191-23.		
Kilmurray,	A.	(2016)	Community	action	in	a	contested	society:	the	story	of	Northern	
Ireland.	Bern,	Switzerland:	Peter	Lang	AG	International	Academic	Publishers.	
Kinsella,	E.A.	and	Pitman,	A.	eds.	(2012)	Phronesis	as	professional	knowledge:	
practical	wisdom	in	the	professions.	Rotterdam:	Sense	Publishers.	
Kinsella,	E.A.	(2012)	Practitioner	reflection	and	judgement	as	phronesis.	In:	Kinsella,	
E.A.	and	Pitman,	A.	eds.	Phronesis	as	professional	knowledge:	practical	wisdom	in	
the	professions.	Rotterdam:	Sense	Publishers,	163-172.		
Knox,	C.,	and	Quirk,	P.	(2000)	Peace	building	in	Northern	Ireland,	Israel	and	South	
Africa:	transition,	transformation	and	reconciliation.	London:	Macmillan.	
Knox,	C.	(2011)	Peace	building	in	Northern	Ireland:	a	role	for	civil	society.	Social	
Policy	and	Society,	10	(01),	13-28.	
Kriesberg,	L.	(1997)	The	development	of	the	conflict	resolution	field.	In:	Zartman,	
I.W.	and	Rasmussen,	J.L.	eds.	Peacemaking	in	international	conflict.	Washington	DC:	
United	States	Institute	of	Peace,	51-77.		
Kriesberg,	L.	(1998)	Intractable	conflicts.	In:	Weiner,	E.	ed.	The	handbook	of	
interethnic	coexistence.	New	York:	Continuum,	332-342.		
Lampen,	J.	(1995)	Building	the	peace:	good	practice	in	community	relations	work	in	
Northern	Ireland.		Belfast:	Community	Relations	Council.		
Lampen,	J.	and	Lampen,	D.	(2005)	Facilitating	a	mutual	de-escalation	process:	
Quakers	and	the	Peace	and	Reconciliation	Group	in	Northern	Ireland.	In:	van	
Tongeren,	P.,	Brenk,	M.,	Hellema,	M.	and	Verhoeven,	J.,	eds.	People	building	peace	
II:	successful	stories	of	civil	society.	Boulder,	CO:	Lynne	Rienner,	582-587.	
Lederach,	J.P.	(1995)	Preparing	for	peace:	conflict	transformation	across	cultures.	
Syracuse	University	Press.	
Lederach,	J.P.	(1997)	Building	peace:	sustainable	reconciliation	in	divided	societies.	
Washington	DC:	United	States	Institute	of	Peace.	
Lederach,	J.P.,	Neufeldt,	R.,	and	Culbertson,	H.	(2007)	Reflective	peacebuilding:	a	
planning,	monitoring	and	learning	tool	kit,	Notre	Dame:	The	Joan	B	Kroc	Institute	
for	International	Peace	Studies.	
Liechty,	J.	and	Clegg,	C.	(2001)	Moving	beyond	sectarianism:	religion,	conflict	and	
reconciliation	in	Northern	Ireland.	Dublin:	Columba	Press.	
Liechty,	J.	(2000)	Mennonites	and	conflict	in	Northern	Ireland:	1970-1998.	In:	
Sampson,	C.	and	Lederach,	J.P.	eds.	From	the	ground	up:	Mennonite	contributions	
to	international	peacebuilding.	Oxford:	Oxford	University	Press,	77-96.	
Liechty,	J.	and	Clegg,	C.	(2001)	Moving	beyond	sectarianism:	religion,	conflict	and	
reconciliation	in	Northern	Ireland.	Dublin:	Columba	Press.	
Linehan,	C.	(2015)	The	Good	Friday	agreement:	integrated	education	a	historical	
perspective.	BBC	Home	[online]	
http://www.bbc.co.uk/northernireland/schools/agreement/reconciliation/support/
rec2_c031.shtml	[accessed	20	August	2014].	
Little,	I.	(2013)	Fr	Alec	Reid	death:	It	was	a	photo	that	shocked	the	world,	but	from	
that	dark	day	a	sliver	of	light	appeared	on	the	horizon.	Belfast	Telegraph	[online],	
23	November.	Available	from:	http://www.belfasttelegraph.co.uk/news/northern-
ireland/fr-alec-reid-death-it-was-a-photo-that-shocked-the-world-but-from-that-
dark-day-a-sliver-of-light-appeared-on-the-horizon-29777931.html	[Accessed	from	
6	January	2018].	
Lundy,	P.,	and	McGovern,	M.	(2006)	Participation,	truth	and	partiality:	Participatory	
action	research,	community-based	truth-telling	and	post-conflict	transition	in	
Northern	Ireland.	Sociology,	40(1),	71-88.	doi:10.1177/0038038506058431		
Mac	Ginty,	R.	and	Darby,	J.	(2002)	Guns	and	government:	the	management	of	the	
Northern	Ireland	peace	process.	Basingstoke:	Palgrave.	
Mac	Ginty,	R.	(2006)	No	war,	no	peace.	London:	Palgrave	Macmillan.		
Mac	Ginty,	R.	(2012)	Routine	peace:	technocracy	and	peacebuilding.	Cooperation	
and	Conflict,	47	(3),	287-308.		
Mac	Ginty,	R.	(2013)	Taking	anecdotal	evidence	seriously:	an	alternative	view	of	
peace	indicators,	Shared	Space,	Issue	16,	21-35.	
Mac	Ginty,	R.	(2014)	Everyday	peace:	bottom-up	and	local	agency	in	conflict-
affected	societies.	Security	Dialogue,	45	(6),	548-564.		
Mac	Ginty,	(2016)	What	was	I	thinking?	The	Journal	of	Intervention	and	
Statebuilding,	10	(1)13-14.	
Mac	Ginty	R.	and	Firchow,	P.	(2016)	Top	down	and	bottom	up	narratives	in	peace	
and	conflict.	Politics,	36(3)	1-16.	
Mac	Ginty,	R.,	and	Richmond,	O.	(2013)	The	local	turn	in	peace	building:	a	critical	
agenda	for	peace.	Third	World	Quarterly,	34	(5).	763-783.	
Marchetti,	R.	&	Tocci,	N.	(2009)	Conflict	society:	understanding	the	role	of	civil	
society	in	conflict.	Global	Change,	Peace	&	Security,	21	(2),	201-217.		
Massachusetts	Institute	of	Technology	(MIT)	Co-Lab	(2012).	URBAN	Concept	Paper.	
Boston:	Massachusetts	Institute	of	Technology	(MIT)	Co-Lab.	Available	from:	
http://urbanresearchnetwork.org/wp	
content/uploads/2013/10/URBAN_Concept_Paper.pdf		[Accessed	18	February	
2014].	
McCartney,	C.	(1999)	The	role	of	civil	society.	ACCORD,	Issue	No.	89.	Available	from:	
http://cain.ulst.ac.uk/events/peace/docs/accord99.htm#society.	[Accessed	21	
January	2013].		
McDowell,	C.L.,	Nagel,	A.,	Williams,	S.M.	and	Canepa,	C.	(2005).	Building	knowledge	
from	the	practice	of	local	communities.	KM4D	Journal,	1(3),	30-40.	
McEvoy,	K.	and	Mika,	H.	(2002)	Restorative	justice	and	the	critique	of	informalism	in	
Northern	Ireland.	British	Journal	of	Criminology,	42	(3):	534-562.	doi:	
10.1093/bjc/42.3.534.	
McEvoy,	K.	and	Shirlow,	P.	(2011)	Encumbered	by	data:	understanding	politically	
motivated	former	prisoners	and	the	transition	to	peace	in	Northern	Ireland.	In:	
Power,	M.,	ed.	Building	Peace	in	Northern	Ireland.	Liverpool:	Liverpool	University	
Press,	111-130.	
McGarry,	J.	and	O'Leary,	B.	(1993)	The	politics	of	ethnic	conflict	regulation.	London:	
Routledge.	
McGarry,	J.	and	O'Leary,	B.	(1995)	Explaining	Northern	Ireland.	Oxford:	Blackwell	
Publishers.	
McKeown,	C.	(1984)	The	passion	of	peace.	Belfast:	Blackstaff	Press.	
McKittrick,	D.	and	McVea,	D.	(2012)	Making	sense	of	the	Troubles.	London:	Penguin.	
McMaster,	J.	(1994)	Historical	perspectives	on	a	divided	community.	Belfast:	Youth	
Link.	
Miall,	H.,	Ramsbotham,	O.,	and	Woodhouse,	T.	(1999)	Contemporary	conflict	
resolution.	Cambridge:	Polity	Press.		
Mitchell,	R.	(1978)	Peace	groups	since	the	'Thirties.'	DAWN,	(38-39),	18-24.	
Mitchell,	G.J.	(1999)	Making	peace.	New	York:	Alfred	Knopf.			
Moloney,	E.	(2002)	A	secret	history	of	the	IRA.	London:	Penguin	Books.	
Morrow,	D.	(2013)	Tracing	the	meaning	of	community	relations	in	Northern	Ireland	
since	1969.	Belfast:	Community	Relations	Council.	
Morrow,	J.	(1995)	Journey	of	Hope.	Belfast:	Corrymeela	Press.	
Neufeldt,	R.C.	(2007)	''Frameworkers''	and	"circlers:"	exploring	assumptions	in	
peace	and	conflict	impact	assessment.	Berlin:	Berghof	Research	Center	for	
Constructive	Conflict	Management.	Available	from:	
http://edoc.vifapol.de/opus/volltexte/2011/2577/pdf/neufeldt_handbook.pdf	
[Accessed	14	January	2018]. 
Nolan,	P.,	Bryan,	D.,	Dwyer,	D.,Hayward,	K.,	and	Radford,	K.	(2014)	The	flag	dispute:	
anatomy	of	a	protest.	Belfast:	Queen's	University.	
Nonaka,	I.,	Konno,	N.	and	Toyama,	R.	(2001)	Emergence	of	ba.	In:	Nonaka,	I.	and	
Nishiguchi,	T.	eds.	Knowledge	emergence:	Social,	technical,	and	evolutionary	
dimensions	of	knowledge	creation.	Oxford:	Oxford	University	Press,	13-29.		
Northern	Ireland	Alternatives	(2017)	Protocol	for	community	based	restorative	
justice.	Belfast:	Northern	Ireland	Alternatives.	Available	from:	
http://www.alternativesrj.org/protocol/	[Accessed	24	June	2017]	
Northern	Ireland	Association	for	the	Care	and	Resettlement	of	Offenders	(NIACRO)	
and	Victim	Support	(2000).	All	truth	is	bitter.	Belfast:	NIACRO	and	Victim	Support.	
Northern	Ireland	Council	for	Voluntary	Action	(NICVA)	(2015)	State	of	the	sector.		
Belfast:	NICVA.	Available	from	http://www.nicva.org/stateofthesector.	[Accessed	24	
June	2017].		
Northern	Ireland	Executive	Office	(2013)	Together:	building	a	united	community	
strategy.	Belfast:	Northern	Ireland	Executive	Office.	Available	from:	
https://www.executiveoffice-
ni.gov.uk/sites/default/files/publications/ofmdfm_dev/together-building-a-united-
community-strategy.pdf	[Accessed	20	January	2018].	
Northern	Ireland	Executive	Office	(2016)	The	consultation	document	draft	
programme	for	government	framework,	2016-2021.	Belfast:	Northern	Ireland	
Office.	Available	from:	
https://www.northernireland.gov.uk/sites/default/files/consultations/newnigov/pf
g-consulation-document.pdf	[Accessed	23	January	2018]	
Northern	Ireland	Office	(1998)	The	Belfast	Agreement.	Belfast:	Northern	Ireland	
Office.	Available	from:	https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-belfast-
agreement	[Accessed	7	January	2018].	
Northern	Ireland	Office	(2014)	The	Stormont	House	agreement	(SHA)	Belfast:	The	
Northern	Ireland	Office.	Available	from:	
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/3
90672/Stormont_House_Agreement.pdf	[Accessed	23	January	2018]	
Northern	Ireland	Statistics	and	Research	Agency	(NISRA)	(2014)	Northern	Ireland	
Census	2011.	Belfast:	National	Statistics	Publication.		
Northrup,	T.A.	(1989)	The	dynamic	of	identity	in	personal	and	social	conflict.	In:	
Kriesberg,	L.,	Northrup,	T.A.	and	Thorson,	S.J.	eds.	Intractable	conflicts	and	their	
transformation.	Syracuse:	Syracuse	University	Press,	55-82.	
Rolston,	B.	(1980)	Community	politics.	In:	O'Dowd,	L.	Rolston,	B.	Tomlinson,	M.,	eds.		
Northern	Ireland:	between	civil	rights	and	civil	war.	London:	CSE	Books,	148-177.	
Odendaal,	A.	(2013)	A	crucial	link:	local	peace	committees	and	national	
peacebuilding.	Washington,	DC:		United	States	Institute	of	Peace	Press.	
Opsahl,	T.	(1993)	Introduction.	In:	Pollak,	A.	ed.	(1993)	A	citizens'	enquiry:	the	
Opsahl	report	on	Northern	Ireland.	Dublin:	Lilliput	Press,	3-7.	
Orjuela,	C.	(2003)	Building	peace	in	Sri	Lanka:	a	role	for	civil	society?	Journal	of	
Peace	Research,	40	(2),	195-212.		
Paffenholz,	T.	and	Reychler,	L.	(2001)	Peacebuilding:	a	field	guide.	Boulder,	CO:	
Lynne	Rienner	Publishers.		
Paffenholz,T.	(2010)	Civil	society	and	peacebuilding.	In:	Paffenholz,	T.	ed.	Civil	
Society	&	Peacebuilding:	A	Critical	Assessment.	London:	Lynne	Rienner	Publishers,	
105-128.		
Paffenholz,	T.	(2014)	International	peacebuilding	goes	local:	analysing	Lederach's	
conflict	transformation	theory	and	its	ambivalent	encounter	with	20	years	of	
practice.	Peacebuilding,	2(1),	11-27.		
Paffenholz,	T.	(2015)	Unpacking	the	local	turn	in	peacebuilding:	a	critical	
assessment	towards	an	agenda	for	future	research.	Third	World	Quarterly,	36	(5),	
857-874.		
Paris,	R.	(2010)	Saving	liberal	peacebuilding.	Review	of	International	Studies,	36	(2),	
337-365.	
Polanyi,	M.	(1966)	The	tacit	dimension.	Chicago:	University	of	Chicago	Press.	
Pollak,	A.	ed.	(1993)	A	citizens'	enquiry:	the	Opsahl	report	on	Northern	Ireland.	
Dublin:	Lilliput	Press.	
Potter,	M.	(2006)	Small	steps	or	giant	leaps?	Defining	reconciliation	in	the	transition	
from	conflict	in	Northern	Ireland.	Australasian	Journal	of	Human	Security,	2(2),	41-
Pouligny,	B.	(2005)	Civil	society	and	post-conflict	peacebuilding:	ambiguities	of	
international	programmes	aimed	at	building	'new'	societies.	Security	Dialogue,	36	
(4),	495-510.		
Prince,	S.	and	Warner,	G.	(2012)	Belfast	and	Derry	in	revolt.	Dublin:	Irish	Academic	
Press.	
Richards,	L.	(2009)	Handling	qualitative	data:	a	practical	guide.	Second	Edition.	
London:	Sage	Publications.		
Richmond,	O.P.	(2005)	The	transformation	of	peace.	Houndsmills:	Palgrave	
Macmillan.		
Richmond,	O.P.	(2009)	A	post-liberal	peace:	Eirenism	and	the	everyday.	Review	of	
International	Studies,	35	(03),	557-580.	
Robson,	T.	(2000)	The	state	and	community	action.	London:	Pluto	Press.	
Rothman,	J.	(1998)	Dialogue	in	conflict:	past	and	future.	In	Wiener,	E.	(ed)	The	
handbook	of	interethnic	coexistance.	New	York:	Abraham	Fund.	
Ruane	J.	and	Todd,	J.	(1996)	The	dynamics	of	conflict	in	Northern	Ireland:	power,	
conflict	and	emancipation.	Cambridge:	Cambridge	University	Press.	
Sampson	C.	(2000)	Local	assessments	of	Mennonite	peacebuilding.	In:	Sampson,	C.	
and	Lederach,	J.P.	(2000)	From	the	ground	up:	Mennonite	contributions	to	
international	peacebuilding,	Oxford:	Oxford	University	Press.	256-274.	
St.	Columb's	Park	House	(2014)	Peace	walls	community	voices	research	report	
executive	summary.	Derry-Londonderry:	St.	Columb's	Park	House.	
Schirch,	L.	(2004)	The	little	book	of	strategic	peacebuilding.	Intercourse,	PA:	Good	
Books.	
Schn,	D.	(1983)	The	reflective	practitioner.	Farnham:	Ashgate.	
Schn,	D.	(1987)	Educating	the	reflective	practitioner.	San	Francisco,	CA:	Jossey	
Bass.	
Schram,	S.F.	&	Caterino,	B.	(2006)	Making	political	science	matter:	Debating	
knowledge,	research,	and	method.	New	York:	New	York	University	Press.		
Schwartz,	B.	and	Sharpe,	K.	(2010)	Practical	wisdom:	the	right	way	to	the	do	the	
right	thing.	New	York:	Riverhead	Books.		
Sharp,	G.	(1973)	Power	and	struggle.	Boston:	Porter	Sargent	Publishers.	
Shirlow,	P.	and	McEvoy,	K.	(2008)	Beyond	the	wire:	former	prisoners	and	conflict	
transformation	in	Northern	Ireland.	London:	Pluto	Press.		
Srivastava,	P.	and	Hopwood,	N.	(2009)	A	practical	iterative	framework	for	
qualitative	data	analysis.	International	journal	of	qualitative	methods,	8	(1),	76-84.	
Stanley,	L.	and	Wise,	S.	(1993)	Breaking	out	again:	feminist	ontology	and	
epistemology.	London:	Routledge.	
Stanton,	E.	and	Kelly,	G.	(2015)	Exploring	barriers	to	constructing	locally	based	
peacebuilding	theory.	International	Journal	of	Conflict	Engagement	and	Resolution,	
3	(1)33-52.	
Stephenson,	M.	and	Zanotti,	L.	(2012)	Peacebuilding	through	community	based	
NGOs:	paradoxes	and	possibilities.	Sterling:	Kumarian	Press.	
Stiefel,	M.	(2001)	Participatory	action	research	as	a	tool	for	peacebuilding:	the	WSP	
experience.	In:	Reychler,	L.	and	Paffenholz,	T.	(2001)	Peacebuilding:	a	field	guide.	
Boulder	CO:	Lynne	Rienner,	265-276.	
Swartz,	D.	(2012)	Culture	and	power:	the	sociology	of	Pierre	Bourdieu.	Chicago:	
University	of	Chicago	Press.	
Swantz,	M.L.,	Reason,	P.	and	Bradbury,	H.	(2008)	Participatory	action	research	as	
practice.	The	Sage	handbook	of	action	research:	participative	inquiry	and	practice,	
31-48.		
Taggart,	N.	(2004)	Conflict,	controversy	and	co-operation:	the	Irish	Council	of	
Churches	and	'The	Troubles'	1968-1972.	Dublin:	The	Columba	Press.	
Taggart,	N.	(1971)	Letters	to	the	editor.	Belfast	Telegraph,	6	January,	5.		
Thompson,	J.	(1973)	The	civil	rights	movement	of	Northern	Ireland.	Dissertation,	
(Masters	Department	of	Political	Science).	Belfast:	Queens	University.	
The	Independent	Commission	for	Policing	in	Northern	Ireland	(1999)	A	new	
beginning:	policing	in	Northern	Ireland,	the	report	of	the	independent	commission	
for	policing	in	Northern	Ireland.	Belfast:	Northern	Ireland	Office.	
Tyrrell,	J.	(1988)	An	introduction	to	mediation.	DAWN	Train,	(6),	3-4.	
Victims	and	Survivors	Service	(VSS)	(2017)	Funded	organisations.	Belfast:	Victims	
and	Survivors	Service.	Available	from:	http://www.victimsservice.org/site/wp-
content/uploads/2017/05/_Funded_Organisations_2017-18.pdf	[Accessed	26	June	
2017].	
Walker,	B.	(2012)	A	political	history	of	the	two	Irelands:	from	partition	to	peace.	
Basingstoke:	Palgrave	Macmillan.	
Wehr,	P.	and	Lederach,	J.P.	(1991)	Mediating	conflict	in	Central	America.		Journal	of	
Peace	Research,	28	(1),	85-98.		
Wells,	R.	(1999)	People	behind	the	peace.	Grand	Rapids,	MI:	William	B.	Eerdmans	
Publishing.	
White,	M.	(1986)	The	rise	and	fall	of	the	Northern	Ireland	Peace	People:	a	
sociological	analysis.	Dissertation,	(MPhil).	Jordanstown:	University	of	Ulster.	
White,	T.	(2011)	The	role	of	civil	society	in	promoting	peace	in	Northern	Ireland.	In	
Power,	M.	ed.	Building	peace	in	Northern	Ireland.	Liverpool:	University	of	Liverpool.	
37-52.		
Willetts,	J.	and	Crawford,	P.	(2007)	The	most	significant	lessons	about	the	most	
significant	change	technique.	Development	in	Practice,	17	(3),	367-379.		
Wilson,	D.	(1990)	Understanding	conflict	and	finding	ways	out	of	It.	Coleraine:	
University	of	Ulster.	
Wilson,	R.	(2016)	Northern	Ireland	peace	monitoring	report	number	four.	Belfast:	
Community	Relations	Council	(CRC).	
Woodhouse,	T.	(2010)	Adam	Curle:	radical	peacemaker	and	pioneer	of	peace	
studies.	Journal	of	Conflictology,	1	(1),	1-7.	
Zelizer,	C.	and	Rubinstein,	R.	eds.	(2009)	Building	peace:	practical	reflections	from	
the	field.	Sterling:	Kumarian	Press.	
Zelizer,	C.	(2013)	Integrated	peacebuilding:	innovative	approaches	to	transforming	
conflict.		Boulder:	Westview	Press.	
