ACTIONS OF NOVEL HYBRID PEPTIDES ON 
HYPERGLYCAEMIA AND IMMUNOMODULATION IN 
EXPERIMENTAL DIABETES 
W. A. OFOSU 
Ph.D. 
ACTIONS OF NOVEL HYBRID 
PEPTIDES ON HYPERGLYCAEMIA 
AND IMMUNOMODULATION IN 
EXPERIMENTAL DIABETES 
WENDY AMY OFOSU 
A thesis submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements of the University of 
East London for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy   
January 2020 
ABSTRACT 
Type 2 diabetes (T2D) represents one of the major disease challenges worldwide, 
with epidemic proportions of more than 400 million affected across the globe. 
Therapeutic agents for disease management are often met by challenges such as the 
inability to restore long-term glucose homeostasis; highlighting the need for novel 
agents with increased potency or better therapeutic efficacy. The discovery of 
exendin-4, a compound isolated from venom of the Gila monster lizard (Heloderma 
suspectum) and developed into a potent anti-diabetic drug, further motivated 
interests in the search animal sources for novel therapeutic agents.  
Over the last decade, much attention has been drawn towards amphibian skin 
peptides, which have uncovered their previously unexplored anti-diabetic actions. 
Among many other peptides, tigerinin-1R (isolated from  Hoplobatracus rugulosus) 
and magainin-AM2 (isolated from Xenopus amieti) have been extensively 
characterised for their anti-diabetic actions both in vitro and in vivo, showing 
promise for further investigations. In the context of T2D, a recently explored 
approach yielding pre-clinical success is based on the creation of hybrid peptides 
with established anti-diabetic components into a single molecular entity. The 
rationale for this concept is the generation of hybrids presenting features of their 
individual components, while introducing additional beneficial effects.  
This study characterised the in vitro potential of novel hybrid peptides, designed by 
combining established anti-diabetic agents, exendin-4 and d-Ala2-GIP, with the 
amphibian peptides tigerinin-1R and magainin-AM2. After assessing their 
insulinotropic actions in the clonal pancreatic cells, BRIN-BD11, and in isolated 
primary islets, specific modulators of insulin secretion were employed to elucidate 
the mechanism of action of the peptides. This screening revealed that combining 
magainin-AM2 with exendin-4 produced the best augmented and non-toxic actions 
on insulin secretion from BRIN-BD11 cells and isolated islets through the activation 
of the ATP-dependent pathway of insulin secretion. Metabolomic analysis under 
hyperglycaemic conditions, using 1H-NMR and GC-MS, along with gene expression 
studies further highlighted the anti-diabetic actions of these peptides. A reduction in 
lipid abundance as well as an increase in glucose metabolism were observed. Gene 
expression studies revealed increase in the genes encoding for insulin and beta-cell 
proliferation, further expanding on the anti-diabetic potential of these compounds. 
Finally, by considering the inflammatory component associated with T2D, 
characterisation of the peptides actions on bone-marrow derived dendritic cells 
(BM-DCs) revealed, for the first time in this model, reduction of perpetuating 
inflammatory signals, in favour of an anti-inflammatory environment.  
Taken together, these studies revealed that combining the selected amphibian skin 
peptides with exendin-4 significantly enhanced the therapeutic promise of these 
peptides and encourage further analysis of their in vivo actions as well as further 
development into a clinically available therapy for type 2 diabetes.  
Declaration 
I declare that the work reported in this thesis was carried out in accordance with the 
regulations of the University of East London.  
Wendy Amy Ofosu 
4.4.2  The role of KATP-channel in the insulinotropic actions of E-TGN and E-MAM2 88 
6.4.2 The hybrid peptides modulated genes involved in insulin secretion (INS-1, 
6.4.3 Exendin-4 related peptides decrease NFkB expression, with no changes is NO2- 
7.4.2 Exendin-4 and the hybrid peptides do not alter the expression of BM-DCs surface 
7.4.5 Peptide modulation of IL-10 and IL-12 release in BM-DCs in the presence of LPS
LIST OF FIGURES 
Chapter 1 
Chapter 2 
Figure 2.2. Determination of optimal primer concentration for (A) beta-actin and (B) 
Figure 2.3. Titration for optimal primer concentration for (A) PDX and GLP-1 and (B) 
Chapter 3 
Figure 3.2. HPLC profile for samples with no peptide (A), exendin-4 (B), E-TGN (C) and E-
Figure 3.3. HPLC profiles for samples with no peptide (A), GIP (B), G-TGN (C) and G-
Chapter 4 
Figure 4.2. Effects of KATP channel modulators on the insulinotropic actions of (A) E-TGN 
Figure 4.3. Effect of Ca2+ on the insulinotropic actions of (A) E-TGN or (B) E-MAM2. ... 92 
Figure 4.4. Effect of VDCC inhibition on the insulinotropic actions of (A) E-TGN or (B) E-
Chapter 5 
Figure 5.4. 1H-NMR spectra of BRIN-BD11 cell supernatants displaying differences in 
Figure 5.5.1H-NMR spectra of BRIN-BD11 cell supernatants comparing (A) untreated with 
Figure 5.6. TICs displaying intracellular (A) organic and (B) aqueous metabolites at 
Figure 5.7. TICs for intracellular metabolites in the (A) organic and (B) aqueous phase at 
Figure 5.8. TICs displaying high glucose concentrations in the (A) organic and (B) aqueous 
Chapter 6 
Figure 6.1. Gene expression levels for genes involved in proliferation: GLP-1R (A) and 
Figure 6.2. Effects on exendin-4 and hybrid peptides on the mRNA expression of INS-1(A), 
Figure 6.4. Effects of native exendin-4 and hybrid peptides on nitrite (NO2-) release from 
Chapter 7 
Figure 7.3. BM-DCs pre-treated with vehicle (0.001 N HCl) or peptides retained expression 
Figure 7.4. Pre-treatment of BM-DCs with the vehicle control, exendin-4, E-TGN or E-
Figure 7.5. Pre-treatment of BM-DCs with vehicle control, exendin-4, E-TGN or E-MAM2 
Figure 7.6. LPS increases release of IL-10 (A) and IL-12 from untreated and vehicle-treated 
Figure 7.7. (A) exendin-4 and E-MAM2 treatment of BM-DCs increased the release of IL-
LIST OF TABLES 
Chapter 2 
Chapter 3 
List of accompanying material 
Accepted publication during the PhD period prior to thesis submission: 
 Ofosu W.A., Mohamed D., Corcoran O., Ojo O.O. (2019) The Role of 
Oestrogen Receptor Beta (ER) in the Aetiology and Treatment of Type 2 
Diabetes Mellitus. Curr Diabetes Rev., 15(2):100-104. https://doi: 
10.2174/1573399814666180119141836. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Ofosu%20WA%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=29357808
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Mohamed%20D%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=29357808
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Corcoran%20O%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=29357808
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Ojo%20OO%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=29357808
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29357808
Abbreviations 
1H-NMR  proton nuclear magnetic resonance 
AA  Aminoacid 
AAT  Aminoacid transporter 
ABCC8  ATP-binding cassette, subfamily C, member 8 
ACK  Ammonium-chloride-potassium 
ADP  Adenosine Diphosphate 
AMDIS  Automated Mass spectral Deconvolution and Identification System 
AMP  Adenosine Monophosphate 
ANOVA  Analysis of Variance 
APC  Allophycocyanin 
ATP  Adenosine Triphosphate 
BCAA  Branched-Chain Amminoacid 
BM-DC  Bone-Marrow Derived Dendritic Cells 
BMRB  Biological Magnetic Resonance Bank 
BSA  Bovine Serum Albumin 
cAMP  Cyclic Adenosine Monophosphate 
CCK  Cholecystokinin  
CD  Cluster differentiation 
CDF  Computable document format 
D2O  deuterium oxide 
DC  Dendritic Cell 
DMSO  Dimethylsulphoxide 
DPP-4  Dipeptidyl Peptidase 4 
ECM  Extracellular Matrix 
EGTA  Egtazic Acid 
Epac  Exchange Protein Activated By cAMP 
FA  Fatty acid 
FACS  Flow activated cell sorting 
https://www.pnas.org/content/104/7/2519
FBS  Ftal Bovine serum 
FDA  Food And Drug Administration 
FITC  Fluorescein isothiocyanate 
GAVIN  GC-MS Assignment Validator and Integrator 
GC  Gas chromatography 
GC-MS  Gas chromatography-mass spectrometry 
GIP  Glucose-Dependent Insulinotropic Peptide 
GIPR  Glucose-Dependent Insulinotropic Peptide Receptor 
GK - Glucokinase 
GLP-1  Glucagon-Like Peptide 1 
GLP-1R  Glucagon-Like Peptide 1 Receptor 
GLP-1RA  Glucagon-Like Peptide 1 Receptor Agonist 
GLUT2 - Glucose Transporter 2 
GM-CSF  Granulocyte-Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factor  
GPCR  G-Protein Coupled Receptor 
GPR40  G-Protein Coupled Receptor 40 
HBSS  Hanks Balanced Salt Solution 
HPLC  High Performance Liquid Chromatography 
HRP  Horseradish peroxidase 
HMDB  Human Metabolome Database 
IBMX  (3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine) 
INS1  Insulin 1 
IP3  Inositol Triphosphate 
KATP  ATP-Dependent Potassium Channel 
KIR6.2  Potassium Inward Rectifier Subunit 6.2 
KRB  Krebs Ringer buffer 
LC-MS  Liquid Chromatography  Mass Spectrometry 
LDH  Lactate Dehydrogenase 
LPS  Lipopolysaccharide 
MALDI-TOF  Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization Time-Of-Flight 
MAM2  Magainin-AM2 
MHC  Major Histocompatibility Complex 
MOX  Methoxamine 
MTBSTFA  N-tert-Butyldimethylsilyl-N-methyltrifluoroacetamide  
MTT  3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide 
NADH  Reduced Nicotinamide Adenine Dinucleotide                  
NEDH  New England Deaconess Hospital 
NFkB  Nuclear factor kB 
NMR  Nuclear magnetic resonance 
NO  Nitric Oxide 
PBM  Probability based match 
PBMC  Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cell 
PDX-1  Pancreatic duodenal homeobox 1 
PEG  Polyethylene Glycol 
PKA  Protein Kinase A 
RPMI-1640  Roswell Park Memorial Institute 1640 
SEM  Standard Error Mean 
SUR1  Sulfonylurea Receptor -1 
T2D - Type 2 Diabetes 
TCA  Tricarboxylic Acid 
TEA  Triethanolammine 
TFA  Trifluroacetic acid 
TGN  Tigerinin-1R 
Th1  Type 1 T-Helper 
Th2  Type 2 T-Helper 
TIC  Total ion chromatogram 
TLR  Toll-Like Receptor 
TMB  3,3,5,5-Tetramethylbenzidine  
TNF-  Tumor Necrosis Factor Alpha 
TSP  Trimethylsilylpropanoic acid 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Di-
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Methyl
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thiazole
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phenyl
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11938023
VDCC  Voltage-Dependent Calcium Channel 
ZDF  Zucker Diabetic Fatty 
Acknowledgments 
There are so many people I want to thank. Friends and family who NEVER doubted 
I could get this far. That has always kept me going and I am very grateful. I would 
like to acknowledge my supervisory team, Dr Ojo, Dr Lesley Smyth and Prof Olivia 
Corcoran for their guidance in this project and for the unique experience of growth 
provided. Dr Volker Behrends for introducing me to the metabolomic network and 
sharing his incredible expertise in GC-MS and labelling experiments. I acknowledge 
Prof Hector Keun for the collaboration and privilege to use his equipment (GC-MS 
and NMR instruments) at Imperial College London, Hammersmith Campus.  
A big thanks to all the special people I met during this journey  my friend Monica, 
who shared her expertise in immunology to help me with my experiments, and 
Pegah who I see as a little sister and thank for always putting a smile on my face. 
Takashi from Mercodia, who has become a dear friend through the years and has 
always had a positive quote to share with me when I was anxious or worried I could 
not make it. My dear and beloved friends in Italy, who I hold very close and who 
have showed me the true meaning of friendship.  
I would like to acknowledge my sister Whitney who has always supported her 
piccolino My partner Kamal for encouraging me through the tough times and 
always being positive and loving.  
My mum Tina who has been through a lot in life and especially in the past 4 years. 
The time, money and love invested in me are beyond imagination. This PhD and 
who I am today are especially dedicated to her. 
And to everyone that has ever shared a word of wisdom and encouragement during 
this rollercoaster of emotions. Whether it was a stranger or someone I am very close 
I have been extremely fortunate to have this incredible support system around me, 
but it is time I also thank myself.  
I MADE IT 
For the things we have to learn before we can do them, we learn by doing them. 
- Aristotle
CHAPTER 1 
INTRODUCTION 
1. BACKGROUND 
1.1 Type 2 Diabetes (T2D): the challenge of a metabolic disorder 
Diabetes is a metabolic disease mainly characterized by hyperglycaemia and 
glucose intolerance, due to disorders ranging from insufficient insulin production by 
pancreatic beta-cells, ineffective use of the hormone and their combination with 
several environmental factors (Stumvoll et al., 2005; Kahn et al., 2014).  
Despite having similar outcomes, two main types of diabetes have been 
classified based on their pathogenesis: type 1, caused by insufficient production of 
insulin, and type 2 which results from a combination of insulin-resistance, sedentary 
lifestyle and genetic predisposition, among others (Kahn et al., 2014). Type 2 
Diabetes (T2D) represents the focus of this work as the disease represents a global 
issue, with socio-economical implications (Hu, 2011), and underlying causes yet to 
be fully established. 
T2D accounts for the majority (around 90-95%) of diabetes cases globally 
(Stumvoll et al., 2005; Vetere et al., 2014), with the prevalence of 415 million people 
predicted for 2030 already being reached at present (Chatterjee et al., 2017). 
Associated complications, such as microvascular complications leading to 
amputations, and increased risk of macrovascular events associated with the disease 
(Sicree et al., 2011) add to its complexity. From a biochemical perspective, persistent 
high glucose levels react with extracellular proteins generating advance glycation 
end-products (AGEs), which modify collagen in the extracellular matrix, altering 
blood vessel function (Brownlee, 2001). This causes release of a number of stress-
associated mediators, ultimately leading to beta-cell failure (Boland et al., 2017) and 
a chronic inflammatory state (Donath & Shoelson, 2011). 
Given the pandemic nature of the disease, the complexity of both its diagnosis 
and treatment, T2D and its associated complications are at the fore-front of 
biomedical research and translational medicine, with a view to improving global 
health and alleviating the socio-economical burdens it carries. 
1.2 Insulin synthesis and mechanism of secretion 
Insulin is a peptide hormone synthesized by pancreatic beta-cells, where it is 
stored in cytoplasmic vesicles in its most densely packed form and released upon 
interaction with intracellular calcium ions (MacDonald and Rorsman, 2006). Both its 
transcription and translation are regulated by glucose. In the short term (8 hours), 
glucose stimulates proinsulin to be processed to its mature form, replenishing the 
depleted stores following insulin secretion. On the long term (24 hours), 
transcriptional regulation occurs, and the mRNA levels of insulin can be affected by 
circulating levels of glucose (Boland et al., 2017). 
The mechanism of insulin secretion is a continuous process occurring due to an 
oscillatory electrical activity of depolarization and repolarization within beta cells. 
This is associated with variations in the concentration of calcium ions mainly caused 
by glucose metabolism (Kanno et al., 2002; MacDonald and Rorsman, 2006).  In 
healthy humans, pancreatic beta-cells are sophisticated glucose sensors with the 
ability to regulate insulin secretion, according to circulating blood glucose levels, 
owing to the action of the GLUT1 and GLUT3 transporters. The importance of 
GLUT1 in the secretory process has been confirmed by using a selective inhibitor for 
this isoform, which caused a 50% decrease in glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in 
human islets (Pingitore et al., 2017). In the cytoplasm, glucose is phosphorylated by 
the glucokinase enzyme (GK) to yield glucose-6-phosphate. This critical step for 
glycolysis ultimately leads to the production of pyruvate, NADH and ATP, which all 
contribute to insulin release (Kalwat and Cobb, 2017).  
The main pathway for insulin secretion, known as the triggering pathway, is 
activated by an increase in ATP concentration, mostly deriving from the TCA cycle. 
It has in fact been reported that pancreatic beta-cells possess lower levels of lactate 
dehydrogenase in their cytoplasm to favour the entry of pyruvate into the TCA cycle, 
for an aerobic generation of ATP (Macdonald et al., 2005). The increase in the 
ATP/ADP ratio causes the closure of the ATP-dependent potassium channels (KATP), 
resulting in cell depolarization. The voltage-dependent calcium channels open, 
increasing the intracellular levels of the ion and the process culminates in the release 
of insulin from its pre-formed granules (Figure 1.1). Potassium and calcium channels 
play important roles in balancing electrical activity in beta cells. Following insulin 
release, the intracellular calcium ions have a net action of repolarizing the cell 
membrane by both depleting ATP (Kanno et al., 2002) and directly favouring the 
opening of the potassium channels after a firing potential (Zhang et al., 2005).  
The activity of alpha and beta cells within the pancreatic islets are also 
controlled by sympathetic and parasympathetic neuronal innervations, which 
contribute to the amplification pathway. Pioneering studies linking stimulation of 
sympathetic innervation via the splanchnic nerve to glucose homeostasis were 
performed in dogs, where stimulation at low (2.0 c/s) and high (10 c/s) frequency 
showed a positive correlation with increases in plasma glucose concentrations and a 
near-total inhibition of insulin secretion over a 30-minute period (Bloom and 
Edwards, 1975). Suggesting sympathetic stimulation inhibits insulin release, this 
mechanism was later attributed to a calcium-independent action performed at distal 
sites of insulin secretion in rat pancreatic beta-cells, which showed a reversible 
suppression of insulin secretion in the absence of extracellular calcium (Yajima et 
al., 2001). Given autonomic control in beta-cells between humans and other 
mammals are very similar (Rosario et al., 2016), these networks and pathways 
highlight the complexity of the regulation of insulin secretion and prompt research 
towards agents directed towards multiple targets. 
Besides glucose, insulin is also released in response to other stimuli such as 
amino acids and fatty acids. Beta cells possess transport systems for amino acids, 
and these stimulate insulin secretion either by direct metabolism, resulting in an 
increase of ATP, due to their cationic nature or through co-transportation with 
sodium ions that directly depolarize the cell membrane (McClenaghan et al., 1996b). 
Free fatty acids promote acute insulin secretion by binding and activating the Gq 
subunit of a G-coupled receptor protein, GPR40, expressed in beta cells (Itoh et al., 
2003). Considering they also promote an increase in the glycolytic flux in the 
mitochondria (Cen et al., 2016), these findings might come across as striking, as the 
presence of free fatty acids is naturally associated with obesity, an established risk 
factor for T2D. In Zucker fatty (ZF) rats, which represent a non-diabetic model of 
hyperlipidaemia and insulin resistance, lipid signalling has been reported to work 
synergistically with GLP-1 in glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, however, 
prolonged exposure might be responsible for beta cell failure (Nolan et al., 2006). 
With regards to the dynamics of insulin granule exocytosis, linking insulin to a 
yellow fluorescent protein also revealed the importance of cyclic AMP (cAMP) in 
the process. In fact, this secondary messenger can directly activate Epac, a protein 
involved in processes of exocytosis (Cheng et al., 2008), and promote both docking 
of the granules in proximity of the plasma membrane and exocytosis (Shibasaki et 
al., 2007).  These aspects emphasize the complexity of the mechanism of insulin 
secretion (Figure 1.1) and the contribution of different factors to the maintenance of 
glucose homeostasis. Notably, compounds which can serve as insulin secreting 
agents also have extra-pancreatic actions (Kastin and Akerstrom, 2003; Ojo et al., 
2013). With this project, we also aim to take these effects into consideration, with a 
view of evaluating how they could potentially aid in preventing and tackling the 
consequences of T2D. 
Figure 1.1. Mechanism of insulin secretion. 
Glucose, fatty acids and aminoacids belong to the triggering pathway of insulin secretion 
(highlighted in grey). Mechanisms responding to the activation of the G-protein coupled 
receptors (GPCRs) and activation of intracellular messengers such as cyclic AMP (cAMP) 
belong to the amplification pathway of insulin secretion (highlighted in yellow). 
1.3 Metabolomics: unravelling biological complexity  
Metabolomics analysis, defined as a characterisation of small metabolites 
resulting from chemical reactions within a system (Tzoulaki et al., 2014), represents 
a recent approach for assessing and understanding the underlying features of 
biological complexity. Both quantitative and qualitative information obtainable from 
metabolomic analysis carry diagnostic potential for complex diseases such as 
coronary heart disease, cancer and diabetes (Gowda et al., 2008). For T2D, the 
importance of detecting early changes in metabolites lies in the notion that these take 
place before overt diabetes is established (Zeng et al., 2009; Sas et al., 2015). Interest 
in establishing the power of metabolomics in both the prediction and the prognosis 
of T2D (Klein and Shearer, 2016) led to several studies in this field.  
With regards to establishing predictive metabolites, correlating the 
concentration of branched-chain amino acids (BCAA), such as leucine, valine, 
tyrosine and phenylalanine with the onset and progression of T2D has positive 
association (Langenberg and Savage, 2011). A study found that manipulation of the 
foregut, defined as stomach and duodenum in rats, determined a reduction of 
tyrosine conversion to levodopa (L-DOPA) and dopamine (DA), neurotransmitters 
that inhibit insulin secretion as a mechanism for protection from hypoglycaemia 
(Korner et al., 2019), suggesting measurements of metabolites could potentially be 
exploited for therapeutic interventions. This is further supported by the possibility to 
detect changes in levels of these compounds about a decade before the onset of T2D 
via liquid chromatography-mass spectroscopy (LC-MS) (Wang et al., 2011). 
Metabolites have also been studied in further understanding the outcome of the 
disease. This task is even more challenging, considering the association of T2D with 
co-morbodities such as retinopathy, renal and cardiac dysfunction that might 
contribute to altered metabolism (Klein and Shearer, 2016). The limited number of 
prospective studies in this area show that metabolites, such as BCAA and -
hydroxybutyric acid increased (Klein and Shearer, 2016), which seems to contradict 
what was observed in predictive studies. This highlights the need to optimize the 
analysis of metabolites, highlighting differences preceding and following anti-
diabetic treatments.  
1.4 Therapeutic agents for T2D management 
The discovery of insulin in 1921 (Best and Scott, 1923) represents the 
foundation of diabetes medicine, embodying the first, necessary step towards life-
compatible management therapies for the disease. Several anti-diabetic drugs 
currently on the market for T2D management are aimed at lowering circulating 
glucose levels to a physiological range (Kahn et al., 2014). Despite being historically 
classified as non-insulin dependent, in many cases T2D patients rely on insulin 
administration where glycaemic control is not achieved by lifestyle interventions 
alone (Wu et al., 2014).  
Among the eight classes of current drugs used, the most common are 
biguanides (e.g. metformin), -Glucosidase inhibitors, insulin secretagogues, 
thiazolidinediones and incretin mimetics. Biguanides and -glucosidase inhibitors, 
often administered in combination, have positive effects on glycaemic reduction. The 
biguanide metformin (traded under the name of Glucophage, Bristol-Myers 
Squibb, Princeton, NJ) preserves sensitivity to glucose and reduces gluconeogenesis 
whereas the -glucosidase inhibitor, Acarbose (Precose, Bayer Health-Care 
Pharmaceuticals Inc, Wayne, NJ) slows gastric emptying, giving the pancreas more 
time to fulfil the increasing demand for insulin (Nyenwe et al., 2011). The class of 
thiazolidinediones act by regulating storage of free fatty acids via the peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptors (PPAR), favouring glucose metabolism over storage 
of excess fat in the form of adipose tissue (Nanjan et al., 2018). 
Ideally, an effective anti-diabetic therapy would target beta-cell function 
directly, by enhancing its residual ability to secrete insulin (Vetere et al., 2014), 
while also preventing development of associated complications. Although large 
clinical trials evaluating the effects of antidiabetic drugs on cardiovascular risk have 
shown some benefit, as for metformin (Lamanna et al., 2011; Boussageon et al., 
2012), or have yielded controversial results, as in the case of thiazolidinediones 
(Lago et al., 2007; Koska et al., 2013), substantial evidence is presented for GLP-1 
receptor agonists. A randomized trial with administration of Semaglutide for 104 
weeks showed treatment decreased macrovascular complications by 26% (Marso et 
al., 2016). 
The extra-pancreatic actions of these drugs are relevant to the management of 
diabetes, and some of these actions will be taken into consideration in this study, 
with a view to improving the pathophysiology of the disease.  
1.5 Incretins and incretin-based anti-diabetic agents 
The discovery and characterisation of incretins occurred followed the finding 
that oral glucose administration stimulated insulin secretion to a greater extent, 
compared to an intravenous challenge (Drucker, 2006). Incretins are accountable for 
half of the insulin produced following oral glucose load (Kim & Egan 2008; Hansen 
et al., 2010). 
There are two known incretins conserved among mammals, both acting mainly 
through G-protein coupled receptors, the glucose-dependent insulinotropic 
polypeptide (GIP) and glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1), which are released from the 
K and L-type cells of the intestine, respectively. However, both incretins are subject 
to early degradation by dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4), an enzyme naturally 
occurring in the bloodstream which keeps their half-life between 1 and 1.6 minutes 
(Hansen et al., 2010). Different modifications of both GIP and GLP-1 have been 
studied with a view to overcoming DPP-4 degradation while retaining the anti-
diabetic potential of the native forms (Irwin and Flatt, 2013). This approach has 
shown promising results for both GIP and GLP-1, which we are going to discuss 
separately below. 
1.5.1 Glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) 
Initially isolated from a porcine model as an inhibitor of gastric acid secretion 
(Seino et al., 2010), levels of released GIP have been reported to remain unaltered in 
T2D (Aaboe et al., 2009), even though earlier studies supported the inability of GIP 
to retain insulinotropic activities in T2D (Nauck et al., 1993). 
More recent evidence has pointed to an improvement in glucose tolerance and 
adipose tissue metabolism following disruption of the GIP receptor in high-fat fed 
mice (Irwin and Flatt, 2009), further opposing any antidiabetic effect related with the 
peptide. However, the truncated form of GIP (GIP(1-30)) was later found to 
stimulate insulin secretion, without promoting GIP signalling in 3T3-L1 adipocytes, 
and restored glucose metabolism for up to 48 hours  in obese, diabetic rats in which 
the native GIP had little effect (Widenmaier et al., 2010). This strongly suggests that 
the GIP(1-30) form could have anti-diabetic effects while preventing lipid 
metabolism impairment. 
Alongside this, chemical modifications allowed for enhanced activity or 
resistance to degradation, providing further evidence for pre-clinical success of GIP. 
N-terminus modifications (N-acetyl-GIP and N-pyroglutamil-GIP) have contributed 
to increasing the half-life of the peptide above 24 hours and confer improved glucose 
tolerance to diabetic mice, compared to the native form of GIP (OHarte et al., 
2002). 
Receptor binding studies in Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO) cells transfected 
with the GIP receptor (GIPR) enabled the characterisation of amino-acid 
substitutions yielding DPP-4 resistant peptides and retaining binding affinity to 
GIPR (Hinke et al., 2002). One of the analogues, termed d-Ala2-GIP(1-30) in its 
truncated form retaining insulinotropic activity in vitro, enhanced glycaemic control 
in diabetic mice, further highlighting the effectiveness of this analogue (Gault et al., 
2011).  
The ability of incretins to stimulate insulin release in a glucose-dependent 
fashion, together with the discovery of new, more potent analogues of GIP, could 
have potential to be exploited for therapeutic purposes in diabetes. To this end, we 
selected the stable analogue d-Ala2-GIP(1-30) as a component of the hybrid peptides 
selected for this study, in order to extend its potential to different aspects of the 
pathogenesis of T2D. 
1.5.2 Glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) 
The role of GLP-1 in regulating beta-cell function and metabolism has been 
extensively characterised. It is known to decrease the production of glucagon from 
alpha-cells, to promote beta-cell proliferation and preservation while controlling ER 
stress (Yusta et al., 2006). The main downstream signalling pathway from the 
activation of its receptor (GLP-1R) involves the activation of cyclic AMP (cAMP), 
PKA and the increase of intracellular Ca2+ via channels found on the cell surface 
membrane and those gating intracellular stores (IP3 receptors) on the endoplasmic 
reticulum (Jones et al., 2018) (Figure 1.2). 
The presence of GLP-1R in several different tissues, including the central 
nervous system and the duodenum, allows for the actions of GLP-1 to relate to the 
gut-brain axis, with regulation of some behaviour such as food intake and sense of 
satiety as evidenced by the response of vagal neurons to different degrees of 
proximal intestine distention (Drucker 2018). Moreover, the production of the gut 
hormone gherlin, which is involved in stimulating appetite and food intake, 
undergoes a significant reduction following GLP-1 administration. Although this 
appears to be an indirect effect, correlating with the levels of insulin rather than 
GLP-1 itself (Hageman et al., 2007), GLP-1 and gherlin levels have been found to be 
good predictors of lipid reduction as a measure of cardiovascular risk control, as well 
as good predictors of the outcome of GLP-1R agonists therapy (Babenko et al., 
2019).  
The identification of another pathway downstream of the GLP-1 receptor 
involving the activation of -arrestins via the GS-subunit of the receptor, which are 
also critical in the insulin-secretion process (Zhang et al., 2015) hints to the 
possibility of creating biased agonists with functional selectivity towards one of 
the signals downstream of the receptor, with a view to controlling existing 
therapeutic side effects. However, the success of GLP-1R agonists as therapeutic 
option for T2D is met with the limitation of not being effective for about 30-50% of 
patients, who are not able to restore normoglycaemia and insulin sensitivity 
(Babenko et al., 2019). 
Figure 1.2. Main pathway for GLP-1 receptor signalling. 
GLP-1 binds to its G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) causing the activation of protein 
kinase A (PKA). This messenger activates both intracellular (IP3) and cell membrane Ca2+ 
receptors, causing an increase of Ca2+ within the cells and consequently increased insulin 
release.  
1.6.Naturally occurring peptides as therapeutic agents for Type 2 Diabetes 
1.6.1 The importance of exendin-4 
In the early 90s, chemical assays identified exendin-4, which caused pancreas 
enlargement and triggered insulin release from beta-cells (National Institute of 
Health, 2017). Originally isolated from the saliva of the Gila monster lizard (H. 
suspectum) (Eng et al., 1992), exendin-4 is a biologically active compound 
harbouring 53% of homology with GLP-1 (Drucker 2006; Hansen et al., 2010) and is 
an FDA approved anti-diabetic drug since 2005 (Byetta , AstraZeneca).  
Following the identification of exendin-4, early studies focused on comparing 
its action to that of native GLP-1 using in vitro and in vivo models to also take into 
consideration pharmacokinetics differences between the two peptides. With regards 
to insulin secretion, exendin-4 was more efficient in stimulating insulin secretion in 
vitro (both static and perfusion incubations with rat islets), and in vivo, with the 
biggest differences being observed for exendin-4 as opposed to GLP-1 (Parkes et al., 
2001). Another important difference between the two compounds is that exendin-4 is 
considered a poor substrate for DPP-4 and other endopeptidases. In pigs, it has been 
shown that exendin-4 is mainly cleared by glomerular filtration, as opposed to GLP-
1 that is enzymatically cleaved (Simonsen et al., 2006). 
The generation of this drug came as a result of two apparently unrelated 
events: the development of the incretin concept and the ongoing research on 
compounds in the Gila monster venom (Furman, 2012). This discovery caused two 
important shifts, in terms of diabetes therapy. One is the study and design of GLP-1 
receptor agonists to mimick the effects of exendin-4, and the other is the screen of 
animal-derived compounds, in search for potent and targeted biological activities. 
Studies conducted on human subjects evaluating the effects of synthetic exendin-4 
(Exenatide) on vascular function and metabolism showed that acute postprandial 
vascular dysfunction in diabetes can be rescued by GLP-1 receptor agonists via an 
increased production of NO (Torimoto et al., 2015). Exendin-4 also promotes extra-
cellular matrix (ECM) remodelling by modulating the Akt/GSK-3 signalling in 
ventricular and atrial cardiomyocytes (Robinson et al., 2015).  
Again, a synthetic form of exendin-4, AC2993, was reported to reduce plasma 
fasting and postprandial levels of glucose in T2D patients, through its multiple 
effects on reducing glucagon secretion and slowing gastric emptying (Kolterman et 
al., 2003). Reduction of glucagon secretion is independent of the insulinotropic 
action of the peptides (Ahrn 2005), further highlighting the multiple actions of this 
important GLP-1RA. 
These reports and the documented use of Exenatide in the clinic (Advani et al., 
2013; Kim and Egan 2008) with minor adverse effects (Hansen et al., 2010) 
demonstrate the power of incretin-based therapies in T2D and highlights the 
potential therapeutic benefits of naturally occurring compounds.  
1.6.2 Amphibian skin peptides with anti-diabetic potential 
Research focusing on the pharmacological potential of amphibian skin 
peptides was initiated in the 1980s, when Erspamer and Melchiorri (1980) 
chemically assayed skin extracts and found a vast array of bioactive compounds 
belonging to different families, including bradykinins, caerulins and bombesins. 
These drew much attention due to the presence, in most cases, of mammalian 
counterparts belonging to the gut-brain axis (Erspamer and Melchiorri, 1980; 
Marenah et al., 2006). Biological actions of amphibian skin peptides have been 
extensively studied and exhibit anti-inflammatory and antimicrobial effects (Pukala 
et al., 2006). An important example of this was the discovery of xenopsin-like 
peptide in mammals. Naturally present in the amphibian skin secretion, similar 
compounds have been found in rats and avian models and immunohistochemical 
studies show the presence of a similar peptide in the human gut, specifically with the 
six C-terminal amino acids identical to xenopsin. More importantly, this peptide, 
denoted xenin-25, is secreted into the bloodstream in response to a glucose-load and 
has a stimulatory effect on the exocrine pancreas (Feurle et al., 1992). 
Given the involvement of the gut in the regulation of insulin secretion and 
energy regulation (Marenah et al., 2004; Irwin and Flatt 2013), amphibian skin 
peptides have also been considered for potential anti-diabetic actions. Preliminary 
studies on skin secretions of the toad Bombina variegata were conducted with a 
focus on establishing the role of bombesin-like peptides in stimulating insulin release 
in vitro. Results from this analysis showed that the mammalian counterpart retained 
homology with the C-teminus, which contains the biological activity of bombesin, 
and stimulated insulin release to an extent comparable to those of other gut-
associated secretagogues such as GIP, GLP-1 and cholecystokinin (CCK) (Marenah 
et al., 2004). 
However, not all peptides with insulinotropic actions are antimicrobial 
peptides. In fact, a member of the phylloseptin family, phylloseptin-L2, was found to 
stimulate insulin secretion to levels comparable of tolbutamide and GLP-1, despite 
not having any gut mammalian counterpart or a strong antimicrobial activity (Abdel-
Wahab et al., 2008), suggesting different peptides could be potential candidates for 
insulinotropic studies.  Fractions from the skin of the Rana saharica frog were 
chromatographed twice to reveal 4 peptides belonging to the brevinin (brevinin-1E 
and -2EC) and esculentin (esculentin-1 and -1B) families with insulinotropic actions.  
The results from studies of these peptides, which are known for antimicrobial 
activities, led to further characterization of other species of frogs and toads, in order 
to exploit the variety of pharmacologically active peptides in the quest for new 
therapeutic options for diabetes (Marenah et al., 2006). 
Brevinin-2-related peptide, for example, isolated from Lithobathes 
septentrionalis was reported for its insulinotropic actions, and its analogue with 
increased cationicity generated by AspLys substitution was associated with 
increased antimicrobial and insulinotropic activity (Abdel-Wahab et al., 2010). This 
suggests that the action of amphibian peptides might be potentiated by increasing 
their cationicity, possibly due to a better interaction with the phospholipid bilayer of 
cell membranes. 
1.6.2.1 Tigerinin-1R (TGN)  
In light of the successful isolation and characterization of different frog skin 
secretions with insulin-releasing potential, such as brevinin-1 (Marenah et al., 2004) 
and phylloseptin-L2 (Abdel-Wahab et al., 2008), the same rationale was applied to 
other species of frogs producing dermal secretions with biological activities. Skin 
extracts of the Asian common lowland frog (Hoplobatrachus rugulosus) were 
purified and screened for insulinotropic peptides. Purification by HPLC revealed a 
peptide displaying insulinotropic activities which were not associated with increased 
cytotoxicity. The identified peptide presented structural similarities to the tigerinin 
family and was termed tigerinin-1R (Ojo et al., 2011). Tigerinin-1R stimulated 
insulin secretion in the clonal BRIN-BD11 cell line, at concentrations as low as 0.1 
nM at both physiological (5.6 mM) and high (16.7 mM) glucose concentrations (Ojo 
et al., 2011), an essential feature for a valid candidate for T2D therapy.  
The acute anti-diabetic actions of tigerinin-1R, were further supported by 
enzymatic stability assays and long-term in vivo studies. Tigerinin-1R remained 
intact up to 8 hours when incubated with plasma enzymes and despite not having 
effects on food intake behaviour, as with GLP-1 receptor agonists, tigerinin-1R 
improved glucose tolerance. This was achieved by reducing plasma glucose and 
increasing insulin over 60 min following treatment, and long-term studies also 
showed no association to toxicity (Ojo et al., 2015c), highlighting its role in 
maintaining safe glucose homeostasis. 
Structure-activity studies also determined the importance of structural 
properties within tigerinin-1R in exerting its biological activities. With regards to 
insulin release, increase in cationicity by aminoacid substitution to generate [S4R] 
and [H12K] analogues of tigerinin resulted in a greater maximum response in both 
BRIN-BD11 cell line and primary pancreatic islets (Srinivasan et al., 2014). 
Increased hydrophobicity of tigerinin-1R was also shown to favour the anti-diabetic 
actions of the peptides. The effectiveness and potency of the in vitro actions of the 
[I10W] substitution were extended in vivo. In high-fat fed NIH Swiss mice, 
[I10W]tigerinin-1R had the additional benefit of determining weight loss as part of 
its anti-diabetic action following twice daily administration (Srinivasan et al., 2016). 
Taken together, these results show the potential of tigerinin-1R and its 
modified analogues for further studies in the field of T2D therapy, exploiting the 
properties and findings described above as a strong rationale for these investigations. 
1.6.2.2 Magainin-AM2 
Within the family of Xenopus, the African claw frog, a class of glycine-
leucine-amide peptides (PGLa) orthologs, termed magainins, were isolated. 
Specifically, in X. amieti, the peptides had been initially characterised for their 
antimicrobial activity (Matsuzaki, 1998), with magainin-AM1 being the most potent, 
and magainin-AM2 being the most abundant (Conlon et al., 2010). With regards to 
insulin secretion, magainin-AM1 and magainin-AM2 exhibited insulinotropic actions 
in vitro, with magainin-AM2 yielding a superior result (Ojo et al., 2015a). 
Magainin-AM2 (MAM2) stimulated insulin release in BRIN-BD11 cells in a 
concentration-dependent manner, in range from 3 nM to 3 M, with no associated 
cytotoxicity (Ojo et al., 2015a). The stability of the peptide in murine plasma for at 
least 8 hours, also corresponded to potent in vivo actions. Glucose tolerance was 
improved through a 20% reduction in plasma glucose following peptide 
administration, and as a 1.8-fold increase in insulin secretion in high-fat fed mice. 
(Ojo et al., 2015a). 
Further to this, the ability of amphibian skin peptides such as TGN and MAM2 
to induce secretion of GLP-1 was also investigated. Both peptides were found to 
increase the secretion of GLP-1 from a proglucagon precursor in the GLUTag cell 
line (Ojo et al., 2013). This strengthens the anti-diabetic potential of these peptides 
and opens the possibility of both TGN and MAM2 causing the long-term actions on 
beta-cell function that could be further investigated and exploited in vivo (Ojo et al., 
2013). 
1.7 The therapeutic potential of peptides 
After its decline in the late 90s, due to a general preference in using biologics 
such as antibodies, the use of peptide leads in drug discovery is currently gaining 
momentum and peptide hormones, including oxytocin, desmopressin and modified 
versions of GLP-1 are currently on the market (Henninot et al., 2017). Large and 
small pharmaceutical companies are investing in peptide drug discovery, especially 
venom peptides, due to both their potent and targeted activities but also their cyclic 
structure that confers stability (Henninot et al., 2017, Table 1.1). 
Though peptides can elicit acute biological function and rapid cell responses, 
an important limitation identified in the field of peptide drug discovery is their short 
half-life (Wang et al., 2019). Numerous efforts have been made to increase peptides 
half-life, by conjugation with larger molecules serving as protection against 
enzymatic cleavage. An example of efforts in prolonging half-life in antidiabetic 
peptides was presented with xenin-25(Lys13PAL). This analogue of the anti-diabetic 
agent naturally occurring in human duodenum (Craig et al., 2018) possesses a 
derivatised fatty acid chain strategically positioned as to not mask the regions crucial 
for peptide activity. Xenin-25(Lys13PAL), maintained the anti-diabetic actions of its 
native peptide xenin-25 whilst being resistant to plasma degradation in vitro (Gault 
et al., 2015), providing strong support to the therapeutic potential of this modified 
peptide. Moreover, an additional stimulatory effect towards (d-Ala2)-GIP actions 
both in vitro and in diabetic mice models in vivo was reported for the modified 
peptide (Martin et al., 2012). 
Another promising option for higher peptide efficacy is the conjugation of 
polyethylene glycol (PEG), a biologically inert and hydrophilic molecule, to a 
known bioactive compound. By taking into consideration the ability of PEG-
conjugates to remain intact in circulation and be released only in situ by activating 
mechanisms such as pH and enzymatic activity, the potential of these modified 
polymers could have enormous fields of application (Banerjee et al., 2012). The 
increased half-life in vivo, together with reduced immunogenicity, makes 
PEGylation an interesting option for T2D therapies, especially given that these are 
the limitations often known to cause treatment failure (Harris and Chess, 2003). GIP 
was selected for PEGylation due to its early degradation by the DPP-4 enzyme, but 
especially for the rapid renal clearance of its metabolites, which had not been fully 
addressed (Gault et al., 2008). As a strategy to avoid possible immunogenicity of 
conjugates, a mini-PEGylated form of GIP was tested for its anti-diabetic potential in 
comparison to its native counterpart. GIP[mPEG] maintained the glucose-lowering 
potential of GIP alone, with the added advantage of increased bioactivity, measured 
as a lower EC50 for cAMP production (Gault et al., 2008). 
The enzymatically stable cholecystokinin (pGlu-Gln)-CCK-8 conjugated with 
a mini-PEG molecule, did not display a reduction in appetite control compared to the 
native, unPEGylated form. Further to this, the modified (pGlu-Gln)-CCK-8[mPEG] 
conferred prolonged metabolic control, and a twice-daily administration did not 
induce tolerance that could diminish its efficacy in vivo (Irwin et al., 2013). In light 
of these properties, PEGylation was also explored in the creating hybrid peptides.  
One of the first promising examples in this context was the idea of creating a 
potent GLP-1 receptor agonist that could also antagonise the actions of glucagon, 
known to increase gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis and increase glycaemic 
levels. After detailed structure-activity studies, a GLP-1 agonist and a glucagon 
antagonist were joined without significantly affecting their receptor binding activity. 
C-terminal PEGylation of the novel hybrid peptide allowed for an increased half-life, 
by masking the enzymatic cleavage site, and preventing renal filtration (Pan et al., 
2006).  
A GLP-1:CCK fusion protein, designed with a mini-PEG linker 
interconnecting the two peptides was studied following previous knowledge of  safe 
and synergistic anti-diabetic effects of a similar hybrid (Irwin et al., 2015). 
The synergistic effect was confirmed and by keeping the functional C-terminus 
of CCK untouched, a greater action on food intake reduction was observed in GLP-
1R KO mice (Hornigold et al., 2018), suggesting that the available portion for CCK 
might bind to its receptor and contribute to the additive effect. 
Taken together, these findings represent a promising route in peptide drug 
discovery for type 2 diabetes, encouraging studies that lead into the rationale for our 
peptide design for this project.  
1.8 T2D and inflammation  
Inflammation represents an important aspect of T2D (Wellen and Hotamisligil, 
2005; Nunemaker, 2016; ONeill et al., 2013), through which the disease can also be 
viewed as an exacerbation of a metabolic syndrome characterised by a chronic 
inflammatory state (Eguchi and Nagai, 2017). Overall, this feature is hypothesised to 
be either the cause or the consequence of the observed cellular stress (Donath and 
Shoelson, 2011) reflected in the increasingly sedentary lifestyle (Kolb and Mandrup-
Poulsen, 2010) of people living with the disease. At the molecular level, in altered 
lipid metabolism, cytokines released by the adipose tissue serve as ligands for Toll-
like receptors (TLR) in the activation of an immune response (Nicolajczyk et al., 
2011). Moreover, cardiovascular complications arising from diabetes have 
inflammatory nature, as components found in the atheroma of plaques are involved 
in the process (Yao et al., 2011), further supporting the role of lipogenic factors in 
perpetuating diabetes associated complications. 
However, it is important to take into consideration the consequences of 
abnormal glucose tolerance and hyperglycaemia on the immune system. In fact, the 
inflammatory milieu deriving from the increase in adipose tissue mass in obese 
individuals represents a risk factor for T2D, but not a direct causality. Inflammation 
in T2D can have different causes, including hypoxia where the shortage of oxygen 
promotes angiogenesis (Donath and Shoelson, 2011), and beta-cell dysfunction 
itself. In vitro, the creation of a type 2 diabetic environment by treating pancreatic 
clonal cell lines MIN-6 and INS-1 with 33 mM glucose concentrations or palmitate 
(0.5 mM) resulted in about 2-fold increase of inflammatory cytokines, including IL-6 
and IL-8 (Ehses et al., 2007). This same result was also observed in islets directly 
isolated from type 2 diabetic patients highlighting the role of islets in mediating the 
inflammatory response in diabetes and increasing the number of circulating 
macrophages (Ehses et al., 2007).  
A human prospective study evaluating the effects of cytokines on the risk of 
developing type 2 diabetes highlighted the importance of IL-1 and IL-6 as 
contributors to reduced glucose-stimulated insulin secretion and to beta-cell failure 
(Spranger et al., 2003). Actions of cytokines in normo-glycaemic conditions are not 
directly linked to the pathogenesis of the disease (ONeill et al., 2013). This indicates 
the importance of studying inflammation as an environment where changes in both 
antigen-presenting ability of immune cells and cytokines play significant roles in the 
development of type 2 diabetes. 
The decline in beta-cell function associated with macrophage infiltration has 
been extensively related to obesity (Ying et al., 2019), however another 
inflammatory mechanism is activated in response to chronic hyperglycaemia as well. 
Evaluating its contribution to gene expression patterns and cytokine release, 
hyperglycaemia was in fact shown to directly induce inflammation after a 6-week 
culture of macrophages in the presence of 25 mM glucose (Morey et al., 2019). 
These findings indicate that T2D and inflammation are linked by both obesity and 
free fatty acids, and chronic high blood glucose concentrations.  
The role of inflammation in the pathophysiology of T2D was first described as 
a link to obesity. Evaluating the role of cytokines in metabolic disease, specifically 
starting from the adipose tissue, was prompted by the role of adipocytes in energy 
storage and metabolism (Hotamisligil et al., 1993). Increased mRNA levels of TNF-
 from the adipose tissue of obese, diabetic (db/db) mice were detected, and 
antagonizing the TNF- receptor resulted in improved insulin sensitivity in vivo. 
Though this model links obesity to insulin resistance, subsequent studies extended 
the inflammatory component of diabetes beyond the adipose tissue. The activation of 
the inflammatory pathway of NFkB following exposure of rodent islets to the 
inflammatory cytokine IL-1 was attributed to high glucose concentrations (33 mM) 
in human islets of T2D patients (Maedler et al., 2002). The induction of IL-1 was 
also shown to accompany development of T2D in Psammomys obesus, when 
switched to the high energy diet for the generation of the disease (Maedler et al., 
2002). Overall, the increased metabolic activity of beta-cells generated by high 
glucose concentrations disrupts their secretory function, ultimately leading to their 
distruction in conjunction with an exacerbated inflammatory state (Donath et al., 
2019). 
For these reasons, anti-inflammatory agents have been considered as therapeutic 
options for T2D and have already been studied in clinical trials. The anti-
inflammatory compound, salicylate, was shown to stimulate insulin secretion in 
obese, non-diabetic patients (Koska et al., 2009). Similarly, following treatment with 
anakinra, a drug used to treat rheumatoid arthritis, glycaemic control and beta-cell 
secretory function improved in T2D subjects by the drugs antagonist action on IL-1 
receptor (Larsen et al., 2009). 
Given their function in protecting amphibians from environmental pathogens 
(Mangoni, 2011), the recently uncovered anti-diabetic effects of frog skin peptides 
have been investigated for similar potential in modulating inflammatory responses. 
Amphibian skin peptides present chemoattractant properties towards phagocytes in 
human peripheral blood cells, and they are known to also participate in skin repair 
and to activate macrophages and cellular mediators of the immune response in 
mammals (Pantic et al., 2017). 
1.8.1 Anti-diabetic peptides and inflammation 
The main features observed under the chronic inflammatory state that 
characterizes T2D include the infiltration of immune cells, and more specifically 
islet macrophages. Evidence was provided by studies considering the number of 
infiltrating macrophages within pancreatic cells from db/db, Goto-Kakizaki and high 
fat fed mice, and by the role of the cellular environment created by T2D in releasing 
pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-6 and IL-1 (Ehses et al., 2007). 
As inflammation is also defined by an environment where changes in both 
antigen-presenting ability of immune cells and cytokines play significant roles 
(Banchereau and Steinman, 1998), anti-diabetic agents have also been studied for 
their ability to modulate immune responses. 
By considering the feature of wound healing, often compromised and leading 
to ulcers in T2D (Wu et al., 2014), it was found that exendin-4 promotes wound 
healing in Zucker diabetic fatty mice (ZDF) fibroblasts (Wolak et al., 2019). The 
same peptide displays anti-inflammatory actions in both the nervous (Teramoto et 
al., 2011) and the cardiovascular system (Advani et al., 2013), highlighting its 
systemic anti-inflammatory actions.  
Given their function in protecting amphibians from environmental pathogens 
(Mangoni, 2011), the recently uncovered anti-diabetic effects of frog skin peptides 
have been investigated for similar potential in modulating inflammatory responses. 
Amphibian skin peptides present chemoattractant properties, they are known to 
participate in skin repair also in mammals and to activate macrophages and cellular 
mediators of the immune response (Pantic et al., 2017). Among the amphibian 
peptides with anti-diabetic properties characterized also for their ability to modulate 
inflammation, esculentin-2CHa increased the production of the pro-inflammatory 
cytokine, TNF-, from murine macrophages only where these were not activated by 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and with no effect on IL-1 or IL-6. In the same study, the 
production of anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 was increased in both the absence or 
presence of the activating stimulus for the release of this cytokine, concanavalin A 
(Attoub et al., 2013). This suggests esculentin-2CHa could potentially reduce 
inflammatory markers during infection, while potentiating the innate immune 
response (Attoub et al., 2013). 
Similarly, TGN increased the production of IL-10 both in murine peritoneal 
macrophages and human PBMCs, suggesting the anti-inflammatory actions of the 
peptides are not organism or specific to one cellular model (Pantic et al., 2014). This 
prompted us to focus on the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 in a cellular model 
that is different from macrophages, in order to understand whether the actions 
observed for the aforementioned peptides were applicable to our novel hybrids and 
could be extended to yet another cellular model of antigen-presenting cell, as 
discussed in the sections that follow. 
1.9 Cellular models used for the study 
1.9.1 BRIN-BD11 cell line 
The BRIN-BD11 cell line was created by cellular electrofusion between 
RINm5f cells (rat insulinoma) and New England Deaconess Hospital (NEDH) 
pancreatic islets. This reflected the need to explore features of a tumorigenic cell 
line, such as immortality and rapid expansion, together with an uncompromised 
insulin biosynthesis machinery (McClenaghan et al., 1996a; McClenaghan, 2007). 
In fact, this cell line is reported to overcome the long-term variation in 
insulinotropic potential observed in primary cells due to progressive degradation of 
insulin stores in these models (McClenaghan and Flatt, 1999). 
With an intact glucose-sensing mechanism, confirmed by the presence of 
GLUT2 and glucokinase (McClenaghan et al., 1996b), BRIN-BD11 also responds to 
depolarising agents such as KCl (McClenaghan et al., 1996a) and amino acids 
(McClenaghan et al., 1996b). Charged amino acids such as L-lysine and L-arginine 
directly induce cell depolarisation (McClenaghan et al., 1996b), while the neutral L-
Alanine displays insulinotropic activity by co-transport with Na+, resulting in an 
overall more efficient cell depolarisation (McClenaghan et al., 1998; Cunningham et 
al., 2005). Early studies using the amphibian peptide brevinin-1 in this cellular 
model allowed a bioassay-led purification of insulinotropic fractions from crude 
extract of R. Palustris frogs (Marenah et al., 2004), paving the way to numerous 
studies using similar experimental conditions as part of an initial peptide screen (Ojo 
et al., 2011; Moore et al., 2015; Ojo et al., 2015a; Conlon et al., 2018; Tapadia et al., 
2019; Mechkarska et al., 2019). 
Studies regarding broader metabolic reprogramming, by investigating changes 
in parameters such as lactate production and ATP content in the presence of exendin-
4 were also successfully performed in BRIN-BD11 cells (Carlessi et al., 2017). The 
extensive characterisation of this cell line and the efficient glucose and peptide 
responsiveness of this cell line justifies our choice in selecting it for the majority of 
the studies here reported, starting from the initial screen for insulinotropic actions of 
the novel peptides.  
1.9.2 Primary mouse pancreatic islets 
Though the properties of isolated primary cell cultures have a limited life span 
in vitro as opposed to immortalised cell lines, they represent a more sophisticated 
model for extending observations performed on a tumorigenic cell line. We aimed to 
take into consideration how the peptides function in isolated islets, which are made 
up of a more heterogenous population of cells including alfa, beta, delta and epsilon 
cells. A commonly used protocol for pancreatic islet isolation was initially defined 
by Lernmark (1974) and details of its adaptation to our study are described in in 
section 2.1.5.With this technique, islets were dispersed from their connective tissue 
and they can be individually picked and assayed for insulin release under different 
conditions. 
1.9.3 Bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (BM-DCs) 
Dendritic cells (DCs) are potent antigen-presenting cells produced by the 
haemopoietic bone marrow in an immature state. Extensive characterisation is 
reported for type 1 diabetes, where a small proportion of dendritic cells, together 
with macrophages are shown to uptake beta-cell antigens deriving from secretory 
granules and present them to CD4+ T-cells (Calderon et al., 2014). DCs are generally 
responsible for maintaining immune system homeostasis, directing innate and 
immune responses (Mbongue et al., 2017). The mechanism by which DCs present 
antigens exploits their ability to internalise, process and present antigens upon 
maturation. The activation of DCs is accompanied by the upregulation of their 
surface markers major histocompatibility complex II (MHC II), CD80 and CD86 and 
determines their maturation and migration towards spleen and lymph nodes to 
present antigens to nave T-cells. This process involves the secretion of cytokines, 
mainly IL-10 and IL-12, that determine polarisation of T-cells towards and anti-
inflammatory or pro-inflammatory type (Mbongue et al.,2017) (Figure 1.3).  
One of the shortcomings of using dendritic cells to study antigen-presenting 
ability, as well as the cytokine environment they generate, is their small number and 
expense associated with their isolation (Roney, 2013).  
Alternative methods have been generated, which are based on the induction of 
bone-marrow derived monocytes into a population of cells bearing phenotypical 
features of dendritic cells using the granulocyte/macrophage colony stimulating 
factor (GM-CSF) (Inaba et al., 1992). Details of the protocol used for the study are 
described in section 2.5.1. 
The possibility to generate millions of cells from one mouse makes this 
technique particularly advantageous for studying the response of this class of 
antigen-presenting cells to different stimuli (Inaba et al., 1992). In our study this 
model was particularly relevant for the establishing the effects of the hybrid peptides 
on the phenotype and cytokine release associated with DCs activation. 
Figure 1.3. Schematic representation of DC activation. 
Upon activation, DCs release cytokines associated with the stimulation of a Th1 or Th2 
polarization of T-helper cells. These are associated with a pro-inflammatory and anti-
inflammatory response, respectively. 
AIM & OBJECTIVES OF THE STUDY 
The aim of the study is to characterize the anti-diabetic potential of novel 
hybrid peptides, created by joining exendin-4 or d-Ala2-GIP with the selected 
amphibian skin peptides TGN and MAM2. The rationale behind this study is the 
possibility of enhancing the anti-diabetic actions of previously established incretin 
analogues.  Specific objectives include: 
1) Assessment of the insulinotropic actions of the peptides and how they 
compare to their native incretins (exendin-4 or d-Ala2-GIP), in both BRIN-BD11 
cells and primary islets. Loss of cell viability and cytotoxicity were also be 
considered 
2) Evaluation of the mechanism of action of the peptides. This will consist in 
establishing the insulinotropic activities of the peptides in the presence of modulators 
of insulin secretion, or in the absence of extracellular calcium to gain insight on their 
mechanism of action. 
3) Studying the action of exendin-4 on metabolites in both intracellular and 
extracellular spaces. Metabolomics analysis in BRIN-BD11 using gas 
chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) for intracellular metabolites and 
proton nuclear magnetic resonance (1H-NMR) for metabolites in the supernatant. 
4) Gene expression analysis using real-time PCR (RT-PCR) on genes related 
to the main pathway of insulin secretion, and comparison to the actions of exendin-4. 
5) Immunomodulatory studies to assess the effects of the peptides on the 
activation of the antigen-presenting model of bone marrow derived dendritic cells 
(BM-DCs). The actions were assessed according to the phenotype of BM-DCs, as 
well as their cytokine release profile. 
CHAPTER 2 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
2.1 PEPTIDE SCREENING 
2.1.1 Peptide structural design and synthesis 
The peptides used in this study contain different combinations of known 
incretin analogues (exendin-4 (E) and d-Ala-GIP (G)), and selected amphibian skin 
peptides with reported insulinotropic activities (tigerinin (TGN) and magainin-AM2 
(MAM2). Peptide design was conducted with a view to maintaining basic structural 
properties of the native peptides while potentiating their activity by combination. 
The inert polyethylene glycol (PEG) molecule was chosen as a linker between 
peptides. Following the design, amino acid sequences for each peptide were 
commercially synthesised (Synpeptide Co. Ltd., Shanghai, China). Details about the 
peptides sequence are presented in Table 2.1. 
Table 2.1 List of peptides synthesised for the study by Synpeptide Co. Ltd. 
Peptide 
Peptides joined Sequence Mass (Da) 
exendin-4 exendin-4 only HGEGTFTSDLSKQMEEEAVRLFIEWLK
NGGPSSGAPPPS-NH2 
4186.63 
E-TGN exendin-4 + 
tigerinin-1R 
HGEGTFTSDLSKQMEEEAVRLFIEWLK
N-(PEG)3-RVCSAIPL 
PWCH-NH2 
4847.84 
E-MAM2 exendin-4 + 
magainin-AM2 
HGEGTFTSDLSKQMEEEAVRLFIEWLK
N-(PEG)3-
GVSKILHSAGKFGKAFLGEIMKS 
5873.02 
GIP d-Ala-GIP(1-30) only YAEGTFISDYSIAMDKIHQQDFVNWLL
AQK-NH2 
3531.99 
G-TGN d-Ala-GIP(1-30) + 
tigerinin-1R 
YAEGTFISDYSIAMDKIHQQDFVN-
(PEG)3-RVCSAIPLPWCH-NH2 
4345.22 
G-MAM2 d-Ala-GIP(1-30) + 
magainin-AM2 
YAEGTFISDYSIAMDKIHQQDFVN-
(PEG)3-
GVSKILHSAGKFGKAFLGEIMKS 
5370.41 
TGN tigerinin-1R only RVCSAIPLPWCH 1380.70 
MAM2 magainin-AM2 only GVSKILHSAGKFGKAFLGEIMKS 2405.89 
2.1.2 Peptide purity check 
The purity of commercially synthesised peptides was checked by reverse-phase 
high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), using an Agilent Technologies 
1200 system. Peptides were chromatographed on a C18 column (ZORBAX Eclipse 
XDB-C18) equilibrated with 0.12% TFA/water (solvent A). The solvent for peptide 
separation was 0.1%/29.9/%70% TFA/water/acetonitrile solvent (B). The columns 
temperature was kept at 20C. Peptides were reconstituted in 0.001N HCl, at a 
concentration of 1 mM or 100 M. For each peptide, a 50-minutes run was 
performed in triplicates with the concentration of acetonitrile increasing from 0% to 
21% over 10 minutes and from 21% to 56% over the following 25 minutes at a flow 
rate of 1 mL/min. The concentration was increased to 70% over 5 minutes and 
maintained constant for the same amount of time. Absorbance was monitored by UV 
detection at wavelengths of 254 and 280 nm. Peaks were analysed using Agilent 
Technologies 1200 offline software. 
2.1.3 BRIN-BD11 cell culture 
Clonal pancreatic beta cell line, BRIN-BD11 (p18) was kindly donated by 
Professor Peter R. Flatt (Ulster University, Coleraine, Northern Ireland). Cells were 
preserved in liquid nitrogen and revived by rapid thaw at 37C, resuspended in about 
10 mL of complete RPMI-1640 media supplemented with 11mM glucose, 10% (v/v) 
foetal bovine serum (FBS  Gibco) and 50 U/mL penicillin and 50 g/mL 
streptomycin (Pen Strep  ThermoFisher). Following a 5 min centrifugation (1800 
rpm), the cell pellet was resuspended in 5 mL, added to 10mL of pre-warmed media 
and cultured overnight in a T25 flask (Jet Biofil) at a density of 106 cells. 
Sub-culturing took place every 3 days, by removing media and washing cells 
with 5 ml of Hanks Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS). The addition of 1 mL of 1X 
Trypsin-EDTA (Gibco) for 10 minutes at 37C allows cell detachment from flask 
surface. Following resuspension of detached cells in about 10 mL of media to dilute 
the enzyme, cells were pelleted by centrifugation (1800 rpm, 5 minutes), 
resuspended in 10 mL of media and counted by Trypan Blue exclusion. Cells from 
each flask were then split into three new T75 flask, each containing a 10:1 ratio 
between fresh media and cell suspension. Maintenance of the cells occurred in an 
RSBiotech incubator with 5% CO2, 95% air at 37C. 
2.1.4 In vitro insulin release studies 
In this study, concentrations of insulin secreted by BRIN-BD11 cells following 
incubation with peptides or other agents were measured by acute insulin tests, 
following a previously described protocol (McClenaghan et al., 1999; Ojo et al., 
2013). Cells (P20-35) were seeded at a density of 1.5x105 cells/well in a 24-well 
plate and left to adhere overnight in complete RPMI-1640 media. After 18 hours, the 
medium was removed from each well and replaced with 1 mL of Krebs Ringer 
Bicarbonate (KRB) buffer (115 mM NaCl, 4.7 mM KCl, 1.28 mM CaCl2, 1.2 mM 
MgSO4, 1.2 mM KH2PO4, 25 mM HEPES, 8.4% (w/v) NaHCO3 and 1% bovine 
serum albumin) (pH 7.4) supplemented with 1.1mM glucose for 40 min. Following 
the pre-incubation step, the buffer in each well was replaced with KRB buffer 
containing 5.6mM glucose and supplemented with graded concentrations of peptides 
(1 and 3 M) or known insulin secretion modulators. 
After a 20-minute incubation with the test solutions at 37C, aliquots from 
each well were collected and stored at -20C until insulin release was measured by 
ELISA (Ultrasensitive Rat Inuslin ELISA  Mercodia AB, Uppsala, Sweden), 
according to the manufacturers protocol. For ELISA, samples and standards (25 L) 
were added to the antibody pre-coated plates in the presence of the enzyme 
conjugate for 2 hours at room temperature. Following 6 washes, 200 L of substrate 
were added to the wells for 15 minutes and the reaction was stopped with 0.5M 
H2SO4. Absorbance was recorded at 450 nm. 
2.1.5 Mouse pancreatic islet isolation 
Islets were isolated from whole mice pancreata (aged 6-8 weeks) by the 
method of Lernmark (1974). Excised pancreata were re-suspended in Krebs-Ringer-
HEPES solution (115 mM NaCl, 4.7 mM KCl, 1.28 mM CaCl2, 1.2 mM MgSO4 X 
7H2O, 1.2 mM KH2PO4, 25 mM HEPES, 8.4% (w/v) NaHCO3 and 1% bovine serum 
albumin) and cut into small pieces in a petri dish. The suspension was transferred 
into a vial containing Collagenase P from Clostridium histolyticum 
(1mg/mL/pancreas, Cat. No. 11 213 857 001  Roche) and placed to digest in a 
water bath at 37C for 8 minutes or until the solution appeared homogenous. The 
activity of the enzyme was interrupted by adding 10mL of ice-cold Hanks Balanced 
Salt Solution (HBSS)-HEPES solution containing 0.4 g/l KCl, 0.06 g/l KH2PO4, 8 
g/l NaCl, 0.09 g/l Na2HPO4 X 7H2O, 1 g/l glucose, 10 mM HEPES, 1% BSA. Two 
washes with this solution were performed by spinning cell suspension at 900 rpm for 
5 minutes and discarding the supernatant. Pellet was resuspended in 10 mL of 
complete RPMI-1640 media and cultured overnight. 
2.1.6 Acute test on isolated mouse islets 
Within 24 hours from isolation, intact pancreatic islets (3 to 5 per tube) were 
manually picked and placed into 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes for acute insulin release 
studies. Islets were subjected to a 40-minutes pre-incubation with KRB buffer 
supplemented with 1.1mM glucose. Test solutions were made up in KRB buffer 
containing either 5.6 or 11.1mM glucose and graded peptide concentrations (either 1 
or 3 M). Following incubation with test agents for 1 h, supernatant was retrieved 
and stored at -20C for insulin ELISA.  
2.1.7 Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) assay 
The level of LDH, an enzyme exclusively present in the cytoplasm in normal 
conditions, is a reliable indicator of cellular membrane integrity (Chan et al., 2013). 
The effect of peptides and other test agents on cell membrane integrity was assessed 
by measuring the levels of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) released by BRIN-BD11 
cells following incubation with peptides. This was carried out using a commercially 
available CytoTox 96 Non-radioactive assay kit (Promega), according to the 
manufacturers protocol. Supernatants (50 L) retrieved from acute insulin tests 
(described in Section 2.4) were added to a 96-well plate, together with an equal 
volume of substrate mix (reconstituted in 12 mL of buffer). Following incubation in 
the dark for 30 min, the reaction was stopped by the addition of 50 L of stop 
solution and absorbance was measured at 490 nm.  
2.1.8 Thiazolyl Blue Tetrazolium Bromide (MTT) assay 
The ability of living cells to convert a dye, Thiazolyl Blue Tetrazolium 
Bromide (MTT  Merck Cat. No. M2128), into a formazan product was used as an 
index of cell viability, following a procedure described by Asalla et al (2016). 
Optimal cell density was confirmed by performing the assay using a range of cell 
densities (103-2X105) and verifying that with the suggested seeding density (2.5x104 
cells/well), the relationship between the cell count and the absorbance measured was 
linear (Figure 2.2). Cells (2.5x104 cells/well) were seeded in a 96-well plate and left 
to adhere overnight. The following day, the media was discarded and replaced with 
fresh media supplemented with 1 or 3 M of each peptide for 24 hours. After 
treatment, the supernatant was discarded and replaced with MTT solution. A stock of 
MTT was prepared in HBSS buffer at a concentration of 1 mg/mL and diluted with 
media in each well to a final concentration of 0.2 mg/mL. Cells were then placed at 
37C for 4 hours, following which MTT solution was removed, leaving the insoluble 
crystals on the plate. These were dissolved in slightly acidified isopropanol (in 0.001 
N HCl) and absorbance was read at 570 nm. 
Recent reports using the MTT assay in BRIN-BD11 cells as an index of cell 
viability upon pharmacological treatment justifies the choice of this assay for our 
screen (Asalla et al., 2016). Despite the existence of newer technologies (Carlessi et 
al., 2015), the MTT assay still represents a valid high throughput screening method 
for in vitro peptide cytotoxicity (Kiely et al., 2007; Asalla et al., 2016). 
Figure 2.1. Optimal cell count for MTT assay in BRIN-BD11 cells. 
Cell titration was performed in cells to verify the seeding density corresponded to the linear 
portion of the graph, where absorbance, measured at 540 nm, is directly proportional to the 
number of cells. 
2.2 MECHANISM OF ACTION STUDIES 
To elucidate underlying mechanisms through which selected peptides stimulate 
insulin secretion, established modulators of insulin secretion were used alongside 
novel hybrid peptide, as previously described (Vasu et al., 2017).  Cells were seeded 
at a density of 1.5x105 cells/well in a 24-well plate and left to adhere overnight. Prior 
to the experiment, cells were pre-incubated with KRB buffer (115 mM NaCl, 4.7 
mM KCl, 1.28 mM CaCl2, 1.2 mM MgSO4, 1.2 mM KH2PO4, 25 mM HEPES, 8.4% 
(w/v) NaHCO3 and 1% bovine serum albumin) (pH 7.4) supplemented with 1.1 mM 
glucose. Supernatants were discarded and cells were incubated with KRB buffer 
supplemented with 300 M diazoxide, 200 M tolbutamide, 200 M IBMX or 50 
M in the absence or presence of the sub-optimal, stimulatory peptide concentration. 
Other incubations were performed using KRB buffer containing 30 mM KCl and 
16.7 mM glucose.  
In another set of experiments, the effect of calcium on insulin secretion was 
evaluated by incubating cells in the absence of extracellular calcium (by using a 
calcium free KRB buffer containing 115 mM NaCl, 4.7 mM KCl, 10 mM EGTA, 1.2 
mM MgSO4. 7H2O, 1.2 mM KH2PO4, 25 mM HEPES, 8.4% (w/v) NaHCO3 and 1% 
bovine serum albumin) (pH 7.4). All the other test solutions were made up in KRB 
buffer (115 mM NaCl, 4.7 mM KCl, 1.28 mM CaCl2, 1.2 mM MgSO4 X 7H2O, 1.2 
mM KH2PO4, 25 mM HEPES, 8.4% (w/v) NaHCO3 and 1% bovine serum albumin) 
(pH 7.4). Insulin test was performed as detailed in section 2.1.4. 
2.3 METABOLOMICS STUDIES 
2.3.1 Sample preparation for metabolomics analysis 
The analysis of metabolite extracts was performed using the BRIN-BD11 cells. 
These were cultured in RPMI-1640 medium containing 11.1 mM glucose, 10% (v/v) 
foetal bovine serum (FBS  Gibco) and 50 U/mL penicillin and 50 g/mL 
streptomycin (Pen Strep  ThermoFisher), at 37C in a 5% CO2, 95% air sterile 
environment. Cells (5x105/well) were seeded in a 6-well plate and pre-treated with 
5.6 or 25 mM glucose, in the absence or presence of exendin-4 (3 M). After 20 hrs, 
media was discarded and replaced with KRB buffer (2 ml) supplemented with 13C-
labelled glucose (14 mM) for 1 hour. Following glucose challenge, the supernatant 
was harvested and 25 l were used for insulin ELISA and the remaining stored at -
80C for analysis nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). The cells were also processed 
for metabolite extraction and GC-MS analysis. Metabolomic experiments were 
performed at Imperial College London, Hammersmith Campus. 
2.3.2 Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) 
A popular technique employed for studies on metabolites deriving from an 
array of samples including cell supernatants (Behrends et al., 2019) is nuclear 
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. For NMR metabolite extraction, 420 L 
of supernatant were added to 120 l of deuterium oxide (D2O) containing 1 mM 
trimethylsilylpropanoic acid (TSP), 25 mM sodium azide (NaN3) and 60 L of 
phosphate buffer (500 mM). Samples were mixed and transferred to 5mm glass 
NMR tubes. Using the Brucker Biospin NMR flow-injection system (located at 
Imperial College London, Hammersmith Campus), 1H-NMR spectra were acquired 
over 5 minutes (16 scans) and measured at a frequency of 600 MHz, at a temperature 
of 300 K. TSP was used as in internal reference (0.0 ) for signal intensity. 
2.3.3 Gas Chromatography  Mass Spectrometry (GC-MS) 
Gas-Chromatography Mass Spectrometry (GC-MS) allows separation and 
characterization of molecular entities within a sample. Based on the ability of 
volatile compounds to be separated and the possibility to derivatise samples to 
enable them to do so, GC-MS is highly reproducible across different platforms 
(Huang and Joseph, 2012), with patterns and retention times usually being consistent 
across experiments (Sas et al., 2015). By using labelled isotopomers, a comparison 
between the natural abundance of sugars and amino acids, combined with the 
amount of the labelled species incorporated at a given metabolic step, can also 
provide information around metabolite fluxes within a pathway (Koubaa et al., 
2012). 
For this analysis, BRIN-BD11 cells in the 6-well plates were washed with ice-
cold KRB buffer before undergoing methanol quenching, which consisted in the 
addition of 2 ml of methanol to each well and scraping cells from the wells, on ice. 
Samples were dried using a speedvac for 1.5 hrs. A chloroform-methanol extraction 
was performed by adding a CHCl3/MeOH 2:1 solution to the dried pellet, on ice, 
followed by centrifugation to separate the two phases (16,000 g, 10 minutes). The 
aqueous phase was dried to pellet and derivatised by methoximation. MOX reagent 
(20 L, 2% methoxyamineHCl in pyridine, ThermoFisher) was added to the 
samples, before placing them on a heat block at 30C for 90 minutes (900 rpm). This 
was followed by methyl-sylylation with N-methyl-N-(tert-
butyldimethylsilyl)trifluoroacetamide (MTBSTFA). MTBSTFA (80 l) were added 
to the samples, which were placed on a heat block at 70C for 60 minutes. Samples 
were spun in a speedvac with no vacuum to separate insoluble material. Supernatants 
were transferred to GC-MS glass vials for analysis (aqueous extract). 
The organic phase was dried to pellet and lipids were transmethylated for 1 hr 
at room temperature by addition of 300 L of a toluene/methanol 1:1 solution and 
200 L of sodium methoxide. After stopping the reaction (500 L of NaCl (1 M) and 
20 L of conc. HCl), hexane extraction was performed. After the addition of 500 L 
of hexane, layers were separated by centrifugation and the top organic layer was 
added to 10 g of MgSO4 in a glass vial. Samples were dried under N2 before 
derivatization by addition of 40 l of both acetonitrile and MTBSTFA, and place on 
a heat block at 70C for 1 hr. Insoluble material was excluded by centrifugation and 
the top layer was transferred to a clean glass vial (organic extract). 
Samples were run in triplicates on the Agilent Technologies 7890A GC 
System, with the Agilent 5975 mass selective detector (MSD) system (located at 
Imperial College London, Hammersmith Campus), using a time-of-flight GC-MS 
with electon impact ionization. Separation took place in a polysiloxane column (0.32 
mm ID, 30 m) and metabolites were carried by a mobile phase gas (Helium) at a 
flow of 1ml/min and a temperature of 250C for a total of 40 mins.  
Peaks resulting from the total ion chromatograms (TICs) were identified using 
the PBM library on the instrument. For the labelling experiment, the raw data was 
acquired from the ChemStation software, and deconvoluted using the Automated 
Mass spectral Deconvolution and Identification System (AMDIS) software. The 
resulting data was imported as computable document format (CDF) file in the GC-
MS Assignment Validator and Integrator (GAVIN) script for Matlab. This matrix 
allows for metabolite integration and discrimination of co-eluting peaks differing 
only by the number of ions (Behrends et al., 2011).  Correction for natural 
abundance of 13C is also integrated within the matrix (Behrends et al., 2019). 
2.4 GENE EXPRESSION STUDIES 
2.4.1 Treatment of BRIN-BD11 cells and RNA isolation 
We studied alterations in gene expression following treatment of BRIN-BD11 
cells with hybrid peptides. Cells were seeded at a density of 2.5x105 cells/well in a 
12-well plate and upon adhesion, media was replaced with RPMI-1640 
supplemented with exendin-4, E-TGN, E-MAM2 or MAM2 (3 M) for 24 h. 
Following the incubation, cells were pelleted and air-dried for total RNA isolation 
using Isolate II RNA Mini Kit (Bioline, London, UK) following the 
manufacturers recommended protocol. Cells were lysed with lysis buffer (350 L) 
and -mercaptoethanol (3.5 L) and lysate was filtered by centrifugation at 11,000 g 
for 1 minute. RNA was precipitated with the addition of 70% ethanol and bound to a 
silica membrane by a 30-second centrifugation (11,000 g). Residual DNA was 
digested with DNAse solution, the silica membrane was de-salted, washed and dried 
by successive 30-seconds centrifugation steps (at 11,000 g). RNA was finally eluted 
in a volume of 40 L RNAse-free water and quantified using Nanodrop 1000 
(ThermoScientific). The instrument measured the concentration of each sample 
(ng/L), the 280/260 and 260/230nm absorbance ratios.  
2.4.2 cDNA synthesis 
cDNA synthesis was achieved using Sensifast cDNA Synthesis 
kit (Bioline, London, UK) according to manufacturers protocol. For each 
reaction, 1g of RNA, 4L of TransAmp buffer, 1 L of Reverse-Trascriptase (RT) 
and RNase-free water were added to RNAse-free PCR tubes, to a final volume of 20 
L. The thermal cycles for the reaction were a 10-minute primer annealing at 25C, 
15-minute reverse transcription at 42C, followed by a 5-minute inactivation at 
85C. Samples were stored at -20C until qPCR reaction. 
2.4.3 Primer quality check and Real time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR)  
Changes in the expression of genes involved in insulin secretion, beta-cell 
proliferation and inflammation were quantified using real time quantitative PCR 
(RT-qPCR). Optimal primer concentration supplied by manufacturer (Eurofins, 
Luxemburg) (Table 2.2) was validated with a conventional PCR (MyFi DNA 
polymerase  Bioline, London, UK) by running untreated samples (100 ng) with 
each primer set on a 2% agarose gel (Figure 2.2 and 2.3). PCR cycles are as follows: 
a 1-minute cycle of initial denaturation at 95C, followed by 30 cycles of 15 sec 
denaturation, 15 sec annealing at the same temperature, and an extension step at 
72C for another 15 sec. PCR products on the gel were visualised using 
ChemiDoc Gel Imaging System (BioRad). 
For each gene, a standard curve of cDNA was performed in the range of 0.1-
100ng.  A reaction contained 1X Sensifast SYBR NO-ROX (Bioline, London, 
UK), 400-500 nM of forward and reverse primers for the given gene, 100 ng of 
cDNA and deionized water to a final volume of 20L. A no-RT control with the 
primers for the housekeeping gene (-actin) and a no template control was 
included for each gene of the differentially treated cDNA samples.  
The qPCR reaction was performed using the AriaMx Real-time PCR System 
(Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) with the following cycles: a hot 
start at 95C for 3 minutes, 40 amplification cycles of 5 and 10 seconds, at 95C 
and 60C respectively. A melt-curve cycle was also added to detect any other 
amplification products in the reaction, with steps of 30 seconds each at 95C, 63C 
and back to 95C. 
Table 2.2 List of primers for gene expression studies 
Gene Common name Sequence Prod. 
B-actin Beta actin F  
TACAACCTTCTTGCAGCTCCTC 
R - CATACCCACCATCACACCCTG 
195 60 
Ins1 Insulin 1 F- AGCACCTTTGTGGTCCTCAC 
R- CCAAGGTCTGAAGATCCCCG 
159 60 
Abcc8 ATP-binding cassette, 
subfamily C, member 8 
F  CTCATCTACTGGACCCTGGC 
GCTTTACTTCCCTTGGTGTCTTG 
199 60 
Glp1r GLP-1 receptor F  CGAGCACTGTCCGTCTTCAT 
R - TCCTGATACGAGAGGAGCCC 
98 60 
Pdx-1 Pancreatic and 
duodenal homeobox 1 
F  AAGAGGACCCGTACAGCCTA 
R  TCCACTTCATGCGACGGTTT 
166 60 
NFkB1 Nuclear factor kappa B 1 F  TGGACGATCTGTTTCCCCTC 
R - CCCTCGCACTTGTAACGGAA  
118 60 
Figure 2.2. Determination of optimal primer concentration for (A) beta-actin and (B) 
ABCC8 (bands on the right) and INS-1 (bands on the left) and using PCR. 
Untreated cDNA samples (100 ng), obtained from cells incubated in 5.6 mM glucose, were 
run on a 2% agarose gel, using the above stated concentrations of primers. Concentrations 
corresponding to visible bands were chosen for the experiment (400-500 nM).  
Figure 2.3. Titration for optimal primer concentration for (A) PDX and GLP-1 and (B) 
NFkB using PCR. 
Untreated cDNA samples (100 ng), obtained from cells incubated in 5.6 mM glucose, were 
run on a 2% agarose gel, using the above stated concentrations of primers. Concentrations 
corresponding to visible bands were chosen for the experiment (400-500 nM). 
2.5 NITRIC OXIDE METABOLITE PRODUCTION 
Production of the nitric oxide metabolie NO2- was used as in index of nitric 
oxide release from BRIN-BD11 following cell treatment. This represented a link 
between the gene expression studies on NFkB and studies regarding 
immunomodulatory effects of the peptides on the dendritic cell antigen-presenting 
model. 
NO2- release in the extracellular space was determined using the Griess 
reagent, as reported previously (Kiss et al., 2010) (Figure 11.1), according to the 
manufacturers protocol (Sigma). BRIN-BD11 cells grown in KRB buffer, 
supplemented with 11.1 mM glucose and 10% FBS. Cells were seeded in a 96-well 
plate (2.5x104 cells/well) and treated with peptides (3 M) for 24 hours. Following 
treatment, 50 l of cell supernatants were collected and added to another 96-well 
plate, complemented by 50 l of assay buffer for the detection of NO2-. 
Additional 10 l of both nitrate reductase and enzyme co-factors were added, 
yielding a final volume of 100 l. Griess reagents A and B were added to all wells 
(50 l) for 5 and 10 minutes, respectively, before absorbance was read at 540 nm. 
2.6 IMMUNOMODULATION STUDIES 
2.6.1 Isolation of bone marrow dendritic cells and treatment 
Bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (BM-DCs) were generated from tibias 
and femurs of C57/BL6 mice. The ends of each bone were cut to expose the 
medullary cavity. Using a 27G,  needle (BD Microlance 3), the bones were 
flushed with plain RPMI-1640 media and the flow-through was filtered with a 70 m 
cell-strainer (Falcon). Cells were pelleted by centrifugation (1800 rpm, 5 minutes), 
the supernatant was discarded and cells were treated with 500 L/pair of legs of 
Ammonium-Chloride-Potassium (ACK) buffer (1X) for red blood cells lysis for 30 
seconds. The reaction was terminated by addition of 10 mL of plain media and 
centrifugation (1800 rpm, 5 minutes). A negative selection in the presence of the 
following antibodies (300 L/pair of legs) was performed: M5-114 (anti-MHC II, 
American Type Culture Collection (ATCC), RA3-3A1 (anti-B220, ATCC), YTS 
191 (anti-CD4, ATCC) and YTS 169 (anti-CD8, ATCC). Cell suspension was 
incubated in the presence of the antibodies for 30 min at 4C, with shaking. Mouse 
depletion Dynabeads CD4 (Invitrogen) were placed on a magnet (300 L/pair of 
legs) and washed twice with plain media prior to incubation with cell suspension (30 
min at 4C). The bone-marrow derived cells resulting from the negative selection 
were centrifuged, resuspended in dendritic cell (DC) media (AIM V + AlbuMAX 
(BSA) 1X, 50 M -ME, 1 mM HEPES) and seeded in a 24-well plate, at a density 
of 1x106 cells/well. 
Cell feeding with fresh DC media took place on day 3 and 5 from plating and 
on day 7 precursor cells would have matured into DCs, for pre-treatment with 
peptides for 24-hours. Following pre-treatment, supernatants were collected for 
cytokine analysis and cells were harvested for surface markers staining and flow 
cytometry analysis. To study the effect of the peptides in the presence of activated 
DCs, commercially sourced Lipopolysaccharide (LPS from E. coli 0111:B4, Lot. 
No. 095M4165V, Sigma) was added to the cells (200 ng/mL) following pre-
treatment, for another 18 hours. The supernatant was then collected for cytokine 
analysis and cells were stained for surface markers expression. 
2.6.2 DCs staining for surface markers 
DCs were harvested with a syringe plunge and washed with FACS buffer, 
before being counted on a haemocytometer by Trypan blue exclusion. An equal 
number of cells (0.9-1X105) were seeded in a U-bottom 96-well plate and pelleted by 
centrifugation (1800 rpm, 5 minutes). Prior to cell staining, the Fc portion of the cell 
surface antibodies was blocked for 30 minutes at 4C. This was performed by 
addition of a CD16/CD32 antibody (clone 93, eBioscience), diluted 1:100 in 
FACS buffer (2% Foetal Calf Serum (FCS), 2Mm EDTA in PBS). 
Following the 30-minute incubation period, cells were pelleted (1800 rpm, 5 
minutes) and supernatant was discarded. The antibodies used for this study were 
raised against the surface markers involved in the antigen-presenting process (Table 
2.3). They were prepared in FACS buffer, in a 0.5:100 dilution and added to the cells 
for 30 minutes at 4C. After a couple of wash steps with FACS buffer, cells were 
fixed with 1X CellFIX (BD Bioscience) and ran on the flow cytometer the next 
Table 2.3 Antibodies used for DCs staining. 
Antibody name Target Working 
concentration 
Fluorochrome Company 
CD16/CD32 
Monoclonal 
Antibody (clone 93) 
receptors  
1:100 None eBioscience 
APC anti-mouse 
CD11c antibody 
CD11c 0.5:100 APC eBioscience 
MHC Class II (I-Ab, 
FITC, clone: AF6-
120.1) 
MHC II 0.5:100 FITC eBioscience 
CD80 (B7-1), clone: 
10-10A1 
CD80 0.5:100 FITC eBioscience 
CD86 (B7-2) clone: 
CD86 0.5:100 FITC eBioscience 
2.6.3 Flow cytometry 
Flow cytometry was employed to evaluate the expression of DCs surface 
makers under the different test conditions. The instrument (BD Accuri C6) excites 
the APC and FITC fluorochromes conjugated to the antibodies by using FL-4 and 
FL-1 lasers, respectively. 
The distinct emission wavelengths of the excited fluorochromes (660 nm for 
APC and 520 nm for FITC) allowed simultaneous use when staining for the surface 
markers (conjugated with FITC) within the CD11c positive population (conjugated 
with the APC dye). Results were analysed using the CFlow Plus Analysis software.  
2.6.4 Cytokine measurement 
The supernatant collected from DCs pre-treated with the peptides in the 
presence or absence of LPS were assayed for the measurement of pro- and anti-
inflammatory cytokine levels (IL-12 and IL-10, respectively), according to the 
manufacturers protocol. For IL-12 (Mouse IL-12 (p70) ELISA MAX Deluxe), 
plates were coated with a capture antibody overnight before being blocked with the 
assay diluent for 1 hour the following day. Prior to addition of samples and standards 
(100 L), plate was washed 4 times (with PBS + 0.05% Tween-20). After a 2-hour 
incubation with shaking, samples unbound samples were washed off and a 100 L of 
Avidin-HRP solution were added to each well, for a 30-minute incubation. This was 
followed by another round of washes, before adding 100 L of substrate solution and 
stopping the reaction after 15 minutes with 2N H2PO4. 
Similarly, IL-10 (IL-10 Mouse Uncoated ELISA Kit  Invitrogen) plates were 
coated with capture antibody overnight before blocking with 1X ELISPOT diluent 
(100 L for 1 hour). Following 4 washes (with PBS + 0.05% Tween-20), samples 
and standards were added (100 L), together with an equal volume of 1X ELISPOT 
and incubated overnight at 4C for maximum sensitivity. The following day, 4 
washes were performed prior to the addition of 100 L of detection antibody for 1 
hour at room temperature. Preceded and followed by another series of 4 washes, 
streptavidin-HRP (100 L) was added to each well.  After the final was step, the 
plate was coated with 1X substrate TMB for 15 minutes, in the dark, and the reaction 
was terminated by adding 2N H2PO4. The plates were read at a wavelength of 450 
2.7 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS 
Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism 3. For MTT, LDH, 
acute insulin assays and metabolite labelling abundance, a one-way analysis of 
variance (ANOVA) followed by the Newman-Keuls post-hoc test was employed to 
compare test samples with controls. For mechanism of action assays, multiple 
unpaired t-tests were performed comparing each sample with control (treated with 
5.6 Mm glucose) and with respective incubation in the absence of the peptide. For 
gene expression studies, relative gene expression quantification (R) was corrected by 
the AriaMx Software as detailed in section 5.3.2. For changes in the expression of 
genes, in DCs surface markers and cytokine measurements, a one-way ANOVA 
followed by Newman-Keuls post-hoc test were employed to compare all sets of data. 
CHAPTER 3 
PEPTIDE SCREENING 
3.1 BACKGROUND 
The confirmation of insulinotropic actions of newly designed hybrid peptides 
is essential prior to other characterization of their anti-diabetic actions or the 
investigation of their mechanisms of actions. Therefore, the screening strategy 
employed in this study involves the incubation of BRIN-BD11 cells, as well as 
primary mouse islets, with newly synthesized peptides and parent peptides to 
examine their insulin releasing effects. The efficacy of this approach in selecting 
active peptides from a library has been proved by previous studies (Marenah et al., 
2006; Ojo et al., 2015d; Moore et al., 2015). 
Peptides found in crude skin extracts of amphibians were purified by HPLC, 
screened for acute insulinotropic activity and their ability in preserving cell 
membrane integrity or any other cytotoxic effect. This approach allowed 
identification and characterization of an insulinotropic peptide isolated from Rana 
palustris skin secretions (Marenah et al., 2004). An initial skin extract containing 80 
fractions was probed for acute insulinotropic actions in BRIN-BD11 cells. 
Successive rounds of chromatographic purification of the single insulinotropic 
fractions, along with sequence and mass analysis, allowed identification of Palustrin-
1c, carrying 48% homology with Brevinin-1. This finding highlighted the 
importance of the previously identified class of brevinin/esculentin peptides and 
motivated successive studies in the field. 
Considering cationicity as an important component of the biological activity of 
amphibian-derived peptides, when comparing esculentin-2CHa, isolated from the 
Lithobates ciricahuensis frog, with its cationic analogues, insulinotropic screening 
was performed in both the BRIN-BD11 cell line and primary mouse pancreatic 
islets, in the presence of 5.6 and 16.7 mM glucose, respectively (Ojo et al., 2015d). 
A lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) assay for cytotoxicity was also performed to rule out 
the possibility of cell membrane rupture. The combination of these studies revealed 
the most promising candidates of this class, the [L28K] and [C21S] analogues, 
which had a higher potency at 3 M compared to native esculentin (Ojo et al., 
2015d). 
The amphibian peptides adopted in our study, tigerinin-1R (TGN) and 
magainin-AM2 (MAM2) were also selected using a funnel-like screening based on 
insulinotropic action lacking cytotoxicity (Figure 3.1) as described above. For 
tigerinin-1R, skin extracts of H. rugulosus were purified and separated by HPLC and 
individual peptides were screened for both insulin releasing actions and LDH release 
contributions, which allowed cytotoxic peptides to be discarded. With this criterion, 
the selected peptide was further characterized using Edman degradation and 
MALDI-TOF and identified as tigerinin-1R, which yielded a maximal insulinotropic 
activity at 3 M (Ojo et al., 2011). 
Magainin-AM2, which we also selected as a component of our hybrid peptides, 
is one of two orthologs present in skin secretions of X. amieti, along with magainin-
AM1. Activities of the peptides were measured at both physiological (5.6 mM) and 
stimulatory (16.7 mM) concentrations of glucose in BRIN-BD11 cells and mouse 
islets, respectively. Results showed a maximal response at 3 M for magainin-AM2 
which was double that of magainin-AM1 in BRIN-BD11 cells. Though to a lower 
extent, a similar trend was observed also in primary pancreatic mouse islets (Ojo et 
al., 2015a). 
Following promising results from plasma degradation studies, both the 
activities of TGN and MAM2 were also studied in vivo in diabetic mouse models, 
where lack of cytotoxicity was maintained and anti-diabetic actions such as 
controlled glycaemia following co-administration of the peptides with a glucose load 
(Ojo et al., 2011; Ojo et al., 2015b) highlighted their potential for further 
development into anti-diabetic agents. 
Figure 3.1. Peptide screening rationale for insulinotropic candidates. 
3.1.1 Hybrid peptides 
Exendin-4 and d-Ala2-GIP were PEGylated with the amphibian skin peptides 
TGN and MAM2, as detailed in Chapter 2 (Table 1) with a view to enhancing the 
action of these incretins while revealing possible novel anti-diabetic potential 
originating from the conjugation.  
In the field of T2D, a similar rationale has been already been proven successful 
in several studies (Fourmy, 2017). For instance, by searching for a molecule acting 
as a GLP-1 agonist and a glucagon antagonist, different hybrids were screened for 
their receptor-binding activity, followed by an optimization that allowed 
identification of the most potent among these hybrids, peptide A10. The peptide 
retained insulinotropic activity at 8 mM glucose, equivalent to that of GLP-1 alone, 
while having an increased stability in mouse plasma, due to amino acid substitution. 
By eliminating cleavage site for the DPP-4 enzyme, in vivo glucose tolerance was 
improved for up to 17 h post injection (Pan et al., 2006). 
In our study, we chose polyethylene glycol (PEG) as a linker for peptide 
conjugation. Its ability to prolong half-life in vivo, together with its reduced 
immunogenicity make it an attractive option for type 2 diabetes therapies, given 
these are the limitations often known to cause treatment failure (Harris and Chess, 
2003). An important result for synergistic effects of a PEGylated peptides was 
confirmed in the GLP-1:CCK fusion protein, where by keeping the functional C-
terminus of CCK untouched a greater reduction of food intake was observed in GLP-
1R-KO mice (Hornigold et al., 2018). This strongly suggests that the available 
portion for CCK might bind to its receptor and contribute to the additive effect. 
These findings, along with the idea of hybrid peptides having novel, additional 
effects compared to their single components, represent a promising route in peptide 
drug discovery for type 2 diabetes, supporting the rationale of peptide design for this 
project.  
3.2 AIM AND OBJECTIVES 
The aim of this chapter was to screen newly synthesized parent and hybrid 
peptides for their beneficial antidiabetic actions and to select peptides to be used in 
subsequent studies, based on their insulinotropic potency. Specific objectives of the 
study conducted in this chapter included: 
1. Confirmation of peptide purity by reversed phase HPLC. 
2. Assessment of in vitro acute insulin releasing effects of newly 
synthesized peptides, comparing them to the actions of native exendin-4. 
3. Assessment of cytotoxic effects of newly synthesized peptides by 
LDH and MTT assays. 
As a means of validating our screen in house, the known insulinotropic agents 
TGN and MAM2 were tested alongside exendin-4 and d-Ala-GIP hybrids. 
3.3 RESEARCH DESIGN 
3.3.1 Reverse-phase HPLC 
Reverse-phase HPLC was performed as detailed in Section 2.1.2. Each peptide 
(exendin-4, E-TGN, E-MAM2, GIP, G-TGN, G-MAM2, TGN and MAM2) was 
resuspended in 0.001N HCl to a final concentration of 1 M and 5L were used for 
HPLC analysis.  Separation was achieved using a ZORBAX Eclipse XDB-C18 
column kept at 20C and at a flow rate of 1 ml/min over a period of 50 mins. 
Analysis were performed in triplicates for each peptide. The concentration of 
acetonitrile in the elution solution was increased gradually from 0% to 21% over 10 
minutes and from 21% to 56% over the following 25 minutes. The gradient was 
increased to 70% over 5 minutes and maintained constant for the same amount of 
time. A final decrease to 0% over the following 3 minutes was maintained until the 
conclusion of the run. Peptide elution was monitored using a UV detector by 
measuring absorbance at 254 and 280 nm. Peaks were analysed using the Agilent 
Technologies 1200 software. 
3.3.2 Acute insulin secretion test on BRIN-BD11 cells 
BRIN-BD11 cells were grown and maintained in sterile T75 flasks, as 
described in section 2.1.3, and all solutions were prepared in KRBB as detailed in 
section 2.1.4. Prior to the experiment, cells were seeded into a 24-well plate at a 
density of 1.5X105 cells/well for overnight attachment. Following a 40-minute pre-
incubation with 1.1 mM glucose, cells were incubated with KRB buffer 
supplemented with 5.6 mM glucose in the presence or absence of alanine (10 mM) 
or peptides (1 M and 3M) for 20 minutes. 
3.3.3 Mouse pancreatic islet isolation 
Mouse pancreatic islets were isolated as described in section 2.1.5. Briefly, 
whole pancreata were cut in pieces and resuspended in Krebs-Ringer-HEPES 
solution. Following an 8-minute digestion in the presence of Collagenase P at 37C 
until homogeneous appearance, the activity of the enzyme was interrupted by adding 
10mL of ice-cold Hanks Balanced Salt-HEPES solution. Two washes with this 
solution were performed and pellet was resuspended in 10 mL of complete RPMI-
1640 media for overnight culture.  
3.3.4 Insulin release assay in mouse primary islets 
Acute insulin test on isolated mouse islet was performed as specified in section 
2.1.6. Within 24 hours from isolation, intact pancreatic islets were placed into 1.5 
mL Eppendorf tubes and subjected to a 40-minutes pre-incubation with KRB buffer 
supplemented with 1.1mM glucose. Test solutions were made up in KRB buffer 
containing 11.1mM glucose and peptide concentrations of either 1 or 3 M. 
Following pre-incubation, 1 h test incubation was performed and supernatant was 
retrieved for insulin ELISA and LDH assays. To assess total insulin content in 
primary islets, islet cells were lysed with 100L of lysis buffer (1.5% HCl in 70% 
EtOH) and placed in the fridge for insulin ELISA assay.  
3.3.5 Determination of insulin concentration by ELISA 
Insulin ELISA was performed using an Ultrasensitive Insulin ELISA kit 
(Mercodia AB, Uppsala, Sweden) according to manufacturers protocol. Briefly, 
following the addition of samples or calibrators (25L), 100L of enzyme conjugate 
buffer containing the insulin antibody were added to each well for a 2-hour 
incubation at room temperature. Plates were washed 6 times and completely dried 
before a 30-minute incubation in the presence of Substrate TMB. The reaction was 
terminated by addition of H2SO4 (0.5 M) and absorbance was measured 450 nm. 
Samples were prepared in triplicates, for each experiment (n=3). 
For pancreatic islets, the assay was performed following a 10-fold dilution of 
original samples. Insulin assayed in the supernatants of these samples was expressed 
as percentage of insulin content, which was also assayed using the same technique. 
Experiment was performed twice (n=2), in quadruplicates for each experiment. 
3.3.6 Cell viability assay (MTT) 
Details on the MTT assay were described in section 2.1.8.  BRIN-BD11 cells 
were seeded in a 96-well flat-bottomed plate at a density of 2.5x104 cells/well and 
left overnight to adhere. The culture media was discarded the following day and 
replaced with 200L of media containing either DMSO (50% v/v), vehicle (0.001N 
HCl), or peptides (1 and 3 M) followed by incubation for further 24 hrs. Cell 
supernatants were discarded and replaced with MTT solution (0.2 mg/mL) followed 
by incubation at 37C for 4 hours. The insoluble formazan crystals left on the plate 
after MTT solution removal were solubilised using 40 mM HCl isopropanol and 
absorbance was measured at 570 nm. Samples were prepared in triplicates, for each 
experiment (n=3). 
3.3.7 Lactate dehydrogenase assay 
LDH assay was performed using the CytoTox 96 non-radioactive assay kit 
(Promega, Madison, Wisconsin USA), according to the manufacturers protocol, as 
detailed in section 2.1.7. Briefly, 50L of both cell supernatants from the insulin 
acute test and substrate mix were added to a 96-well plate. Following a 30 min 
incubation in the dark, the reaction was stopped with 50L of stop solution and 
absorbance read at 490 nm. Samples were prepared in triplicates, for each 
experiment (n=3). 
3.3.8 Statistical analysis 
Values were presented as mean  SEM with n=3, unless otherwise specified. 
Data obtained for peptide treatment groups were compared to data obtained for 
untreated control (5.6 mM glucose) using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) 
with a Newman-Keuls post-hoc test. Results were considered significant if P<0.05. 
3.4 RESULTS 
3.4.1 Confirmation of the purity of commercially synthesised peptides  
The chromatogram obtained following the HPLC analysis of commercially 
synthesized exendin-4 and its related hybrids are shown in Figure 3.2.  Compared to 
the chromatogram obtained for reagent blank (Figure 3.2A), results obtained for 
native exendin-4 (Figure 3.2B), E-TGN (Figure 3.2C), and E-MAM2 (Figure 3.2D) 
revealed a single peak for each of the peptides. This is indicative of the absence of 
other peptide impurities. The retention time observed for native exendin-4, E-TGN 
and E-MAM2 were 22.598 min, 25.654 min and 27.648 min respectively.   
Similarly, analysis of purity conducted for GIP-related peptides (Figures 3.3) 
indicated single peaks for GIP (Figure 3.3B) and G-MAM2 (Figure 3.3D). Retention 
times obtained for GIP and G-MAM2 were 21.280 min, and 22.906 min, 
respectively. For G-TGN (Figure 3.3C), a major peak at a retention time of 20.964 
min and a minor peak at 21.847 min were observed. Purity of commercially 
synthesized native tigerinin-1R (Figure 3.4A) and magainin-AM2 (Figure 3.4B) were 
also assessed.  Results revealed prominent single peaks for tigerinin-1R (retention 
time = 17.111min) and magainin-AM2 (retention time = 19.297 min). 
The early eluting peaks detected a few minutes after the start of each run were 
considered as background, given their presence in the vehicle only (0.001N HCl) 
chromatogram (top panel). With this study, we assessed the presence of unique 
chromatographic peaks in each sample as a qualitative measure of peptide purity and 
confirmed their suitability for the studies that follow, starting from the acute insulin 
test screen. 
Figure 3.2. HPLC profile for samples with no peptide (A), exendin-4 (B), E-TGN (C) 
and E-MAM2 (D).  
Elution profiles were obtained using an Eclipse XDB-C18 (4.6 x 150mm, 5m) column. 
Absorbance was read at 254 nm. 
Figure 3.3. HPLC profiles for samples with no peptide (A), GIP (B), G-TGN (C) and G-
MAM2 (D).  
Elution profiles were obtained using an Eclipse XDB-C18 (4.6 x 150mm, 5m) column. 
Absorbance was read at 254 nm. 
Figure 3.4. HPLC profile for samples with no peptide (A), TGN (B) and MAM2 (C). 
Elution profiles were obtained using an Eclipse XDB-C18 (4.6 x 150mm, 5m) column. 
Absorbance was read at 254 nm. 
3.4.4 In vitro insulinotropic activities of the peptides 
3.4.4.1 Actions at physiological glucose concentrations 
Basal insulin release from BRIN-BD11 cells in the presence of 5.6 mM 
glucose was 0.44  0.09 ng/L. As expected, the addition of the established 
secretagogue alanine increased insulin output to 1.1  0.06 (P<0.05). The 
insulinotropic effects of peptides were assessed at concentrations of 1 and 3 M. 
With regards to the exendin-4 related peptides, the parent peptide exendin-4 
stimulated insulin release at 1 M by 1.7-fold (P<0.05), compared to glucose alone. 
This was increased to 3.9-fold (P<0.001) at a concentration of 3 M (Figure 3.5A). 
The hybrid E-TGN generated a 1.88-fold increase at a concentration of 1 M 
(P<0.05). At 3 M, the peptide stimulated insulin secretion by 4.87-fold (P<0.001) 
of basal rate of insulin release. This increase in insulin release was the highest found 
among this class of peptides (Figure 3.5B).  Insulin secretion in the presence of E-
MAM2 increased by 2.89- (P<0.01) and 4.59-fold (P<0.001) at 1 and 3 M, 
respectively (Figure 3.5C). 
The same assessment was performed for GIP and its related hybrids (Figure 
3.6). Incubation of cells with GIP, G-TGN and G-MAM2 (1 M) increased insulin 
output from 0.44  0.09 to 1.15  0.29 ng/L (P<0.05), 0.95  0.16 ng/L (P<0.05) and 
0.65  0.01 ng/L respectively (Figure 3.6A-C). At 3M peptide concentration, 
insulin secretion increased to 2.08  0.45 ng/L (P<0.001, GIP, Figure 3.6A), 1.80  
0.22ng/L (P<0.001, G-TGN, Figure 3.6B) and 1.34  0.25 ng/L (P<0.001, G-MAM2, 
Figure 3.6C).   
Native TGN stimulated insulin secretion by 0.82  0.19 and 1.6  0.5 ng/L 
(P<0.001) at 1 and 3 M respectively (Figure 3.7A and B). For MAM2, insulin 
release observed was 2.54  0.38 (P<0.001) and 2.7  0.35ng/L (P<0.001) at 1M 
and 3M respectively (Figure 3.7A and B). 
This experiment represents the initial screen on which we based the choice of 
peptides to further investigate in our study. By comparing the insulinotropic 
activities of the incretins exendin-4 and GIP to their respective hybrids (Figure 3.8), 
we found that E-MAM2 stimulated a 1.7-fold higher insulin secretion at 1 M 
(**P<0.01, Figure 3.8A), compared to exendin-4 alone. E-TGN was 1.4-fold more 
potent at 3 at M (*P<0.05, Figure 3.8B) compared to exendin-4.  
For GIP hybrids, the actions of the hybrids were comparable to those of the 
incretin alone, therefore we decided to carry on further studies by focusing on the 
exendin-4 related hybrids (Figure 3.8A and B). 
None Alanine
(10 mM)
Exendin-4
   (1 M)
Exendin-4
   (3 M)
Additions to 5.6 mM glucose
Figure 3.5.A. Exendin-4 (A) induced insulin secretion in BRIN-BD11 cells. 
BRIN-BD11 cells were challenged with 5.6 mM glucose alone, or in the presence of Alanine 
(10 mM), or 1 and 3 M of exendin-4, as shown above, for 20 minutes. Following the 
incubation, cell supernatant was assayed for insulin release using ELISA. Values are mean  
SEM (n=3). *P<0.05, ***P<0.01 compared to 5.6mM glucose. 
None  Alanine
(10 mM)
E-TGN
(1 M)
E-TGN
 (3 M)
Additions to 5.6 mM glucose
Figure 3.5.B. E-TGN (B) stimulated insulin secretion from BRIN-BD11 cells.  
Cells were challenged with 5.6 mM glucose in the presence of absence of Alanine (10 mM), 
or 1 and 3 M E-TGN, as shown above, for 20 minutes. Following the incubation, cell 
supernatant was assayed for insulin release using ELISA. Values are mean  SEM (n=3). 
*P<0.05, ***P<0.01 compared to 5.6mM glucose. 
None  Alanine
(10 mM)
E-MAM2
 (1 M)
Additions to 5.6 mM glucose
E-MAM2
 (3 M)
Figure 3.5.C. E-MAM2 (C) has insulinotropic actions on BRIN-BD11 cells.  
Cells were challenged with 5.6 mM glucose, in the presence or absence of Alanine (10 mM) 
for 20 minutes. The same glucose concentration was used to test 1 and 3 M of E-MAM2, as 
shown above. Following the incubation, cell supernatant was assayed for insulin release 
using ELISA. Values are mean  SEM (n=3). **P<0.01, ***P<0.01 compared to 5.6mM 
glucose. 
None  Alanine
(10 mM)
(1 M)
Additions to 5.6 mM glucose
(3 M)
Figure 3.6.A. GIP (d-Ala2-GIP, A) induced insulin secretion in BRIN-BD11 cells.  
In a 20-minute acute test, BRIN-BD11 cells were treated with 5.6 mM glucose in the 
presence of Alanine (10 mM or 1 M and 3 M of GIP, as stated above. Following the 
incubation, cell supernatant was collected and insulin release was measured by ELISA. 
Values are mean  SEM (n=3). *P<0.05, ***P<0.001 compared to 5.6mM glucose. 
None  Alanine
(10 mM)
  G-TGN
(1 M)
Additions to 5.6 mM glucose
  G-TGN
(3 M)
Figure 3.6.B. G-TGN (d-Ala2-G-TGN, B) stimulates insulin secretion in BRIN-BD11 
cells.  
Cells were challenged with 5.6 mM glucose in the presence of absence of Alanine (10 mM), 
or 1 and 3 M of G-TGN, as shown above, for 20 minutes. Following the incubation, cell 
supernatant was assayed for insulin release using ELISA. Values are mean  SEM (n=3). 
*P<0.05, ***P<0.01 compared to 5.6mM glucose. 
None  Alanine
(10 mM)
  G-MAM2
(1 M)
Additions to 5.6 mM glucose
  G-MAM2
(3 M)
Figure 3.6.C. G-MAM2 (d-Ala2-G- MAM2, C) induced insulin secretion in BRIN-BD11 
cells.  
Cells were challenged with 5.6 mM glucose alone, or in the presence of Alanine (10 mM), or 
1 and 3 M of exendin-4, as shown above, for 20 minutes. Following the incubation, cell 
supernatant was assayed for insulin release using ELISA. Values are mean  SEM (n=3). 
***P<0.01 compared to 5.6mM glucose. 
None  Alanine
(10 mM)
 (1 M)
Additions to 5.6 mM glucose
 (3 M)
None  Alanine
(10 mM)
(1 M)
Additions to 5.6 mM glucose
(3 M)
Figure 3.7. TGN (A) and MAM2 (B) induced insulin secretion in BRIN-BD11 cells. 
BRIN-BD11 cells were treated with 5.6 mM glucose in the absence (white bar) or presence 
of Alanine (10 mM, checked bar), or 1 M and 3 M of exendin-4, as stated above. 
Following a 20 minutes incubation, cell supernatants were collected and insulin release was 
measured by ELISA. Results are shown as mean  SEM (n=3). ***P<0.001, compared to 
5.6mM glucose alone. 
Peptides (1 M)
Ex-4 E-TGN E-MAM2 G-TGN G-MAM2GIP
Additions to 5.6 mM glucose
Ex-4 E-TGN G-TGNE-MAM2 G-MAM2GIP
Additions to 5.6 mM glucose
Peptides (3 M)
Figure 3.8. Comparative analysis of the insulinotropic effects of hybrid peptides at 1 
M (A) and 3 M (B) in BRIN-BD11 cells.  
Values are mean  SEM with n=3 . *P<0.05, ***P<0.001 compared to exendin-4. 
3.4.4.2 Insulin secretion at high glucose concentration 
Following the establishment of insulinotropic activities in BRIN-BD11 cells at 
5.6 mM and the choice of exendin-4 hybrids for subsequent studies, we assessed 
whether their actions were maintained at a higher glucose concentration, namely 
11.1 mM.  
Under this condition, insulin output was 0.87  0.14 ng/L. The vehicle treated 
samples maintained this value in the same range, reaching 1.04  0.08 ng/L but 
without a statistically significant difference compared to control (Figure 3.9). 
In the presence of exendin-4 at the concentrations of 1 and 3 M, insulin 
release was measured at 1.41  0.29 and 1.45  0.19 ng/L (P<0.001), respectively 
(Figure 3.9A). 
The insulinotropic action of E-TGN was not statistically significant at 1 M, 
(1.14  0.23 ng/L) compared to 11.1 mM glucose control, but generated an increase 
in insulin release up to 1.77  0.44 ng/L (P<0.001, Figure 3.9B) at 3 M. At a 
concentration of 1 M, E-MAM2 generated a 1.68-fold increase in insulin secretion 
(1.46  0.47 ng/L, P<0.05) compared to control. This was further increased to 1.78  
0.48 ng/L (P<0.001) in the presence of 3 M peptide (Figure 3.9C).  
Additions to 11.1 mM glucose
None     Vehicle
(0.001 N HCl)
Exendin-4
  (3 M)
Exendin-4
  (1 M)
*** ***
Additions to 11.1 mM glucose
None     Vehicle
(0.001 N HCl)
E-TGN
(3 M)
  E-TGN
  (1 M)
Additions to 11.1 mM glucose
None     Vehicle
(0.001 N HCl)
E-MAM2
 (3 M)
  E-MAM2
   (1 M)
Figure 3.9. Insulinotropic activities of exendin-4 (A), E-TGN (B) and E-MAM2 (C) at 
high glucose concentrations.  
BRIN-BD11 cells were incubated with 5.6 mM glucose, in the presence or absence of the 
vehicle control (0.001 N HCl). After a 20-minute incubation, insulin release was measured 
in the supernatant buffer. Values are mean  SEM (n=3).  
3.4.4.3 Actions in mouse pancreatic islets 
The effects of the peptides in the presence of high glucose (11.1mM) were also 
investigated in primary mouse islets (Figure 3.10). In untreated islets, basal insulin 
release was 5.47  1.57% of total insulin content. A vehicle control (0.001N HCl) 
was included in the study, where insulin secretion was recorded at 5.59  1.05%. 
Insulin release increased to 5.59  1.05%, 7.72  3.65% and 10.95  3.87% 
(P<0.05) in the presence of 1 M exendin-4 (Figure 10A), E-TGN (Figure 3.10B) 
and E-MAM2 (Figure 3.10C) respectively. At a peptide concentration of 3 M, 
significant increase in insulin secretion was observed, ranging from 10.64  5.13% 
(P<0.05) for exendin-4 (Figure 3.10A), to 13.9  5.35% (P<0.01) for E-TGN (Figure 
10B), and 13.16  4.08% (P<0.01) for E-MAM2 (Figure 3.10C).  
Additions to 11.1 mM glucose
None  Ex-4
(1 M)
(3 M)
Additions to 11.1 mM glucose
None  E-TGN
 (1 M)
 E-TGN
 (3 M)
Additions to 11.1 mM glucose
None  E-MAM2
  (1 M)
 E-MAM2
  (3 M)
Figure 3.10. Insulinotropic actions of exendin-4-related peptides on isolated islets.  
In a 20-minute test, 3-4 islets/well were treated with 11.1 mM glucose in the presence of Alanine 
(10 mM), 1 or 3 M of exendin-4 (A), E-TGN (B) or E-MAM2 (C), as stated above. Following 
the incubation, cell supernatant was collected and insulin release was measured by ELISA. 
Values are mean  SEM (3 replicates). *P<0.01, compared to 5.6mM glucose. 
3.4.5 Cytotoxicity and cell viability assessment 
To assess whether the newly synthesised peptides had cytotoxic effects LDH 
and MTT assays were performed. The LDH concentrations present in the assay 
buffers retrieved from BRIN-BD11 cells incubated with glucose alone or in 
combination with peptides were similar. LDH release from cells incubated with 
glucose alone was set to 100  0.01% and the values resulting from the other 
treatment samples were expressed as a percentage of this value. There was no 
significant LDH release in all incubations performed for established secretagogues 
and test agents in this study (Table 3.1).  
LDH release measured in treated and untreated pancreatic islets were 
statistically similar. The maximum value of 110  38.5% obtained in the presence of 
E-MAM2 is not statistically different compared with control incubations  at 11.1 mM 
glucose (Table 3.2). 
Data obtained for MTT assay with BRIN-BD11 cells is shown in Table 3.3.  
Cell viability in cells incubated with glucose alone at 5.6mM was set at 100  9.96%. 
In the presence of DMSO (50% v/v), cell viability decreased to 13  5.35% 
(P<0.001). Treatment with the peptides did not significantly affect cell viability. 
Values obtained ranged between 92  10.6% for E-TGN and 116  18.4% for 
MAM2. These values were not significantly different from those obtained for control 
cells in the presence of glucose (5.6mM). 
Table 3.1. LDH release from BRIN-BD11 cells 
Following the 20-minute acute test at 5.6 mM glucose under the different conditions 
(stated above), supernatant was assayed for LDH release. Values are  SEM, n=3. 
Addition to 5.6 
mM glucose Concentration (M) 
LDH release at (% of 
control) Significance? 
No peptide - 100  0.01 - 
Alanine 10 000 90  15.6 - 
KCl 30 000 108  20 - 
exendin-4 
1 87  8.9 - 
3 111  27.1 - 
E-TGN 
1 95  14.7 - 
3 100  0.8 - 
E-MAM2 
1 110  38.5 - 
3 92  14.5 - 
1 114  10.8 - 
3 90  14.5 - 
G-TGN 
1 88  3.3 - 
- 3 91  1.3 
G-MAM2 
1 104  22 - 
3 101  18.5 - 
1 91  11.4 - 
- 3 101  6 
1 90  16.4 - 
3 90  16.3 - 
Table 3.2. LDH release from isolated mouse islets 
Effects of peptides on lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) release from isolated mouse islets 
treated with either 1 or 3 M of exendin-4 related hybrids, in the presence of 11.1mM 
glucose. Values are  SEM, n=3. 
Addition to 
11.1 mM 
glucose 
Concentration 
LDH release at 
(% of control) Significance? 
No peptide - 100  1.8 - 
exendin-4 
1 87  8.9 - 
3 111  27.1 - 
E-TGN 
1 95  14.7 - 
3 100  0.8 - 
E-MAM2 
1 110  38.5 - 
3 92  14.5 - 
         Table 3.3. MTT assay for cell viability in BRIN-BD11 cells. 
The ability to reduce 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide 
(MTT) to insoluble formazan was considered an index of cell viability. Cells were 
pre-treated under the different conditions (stated above) for 24 hours before 
undergoing MTT analysis. Viability is expressed as percentage of control (5.6 mM 
glucose). Values are  SEM, n=3.***P<0.001. 
Addition to 5.6 mM 
glucose 
Concentration 
(M) MTT (% of control) Significance? 
No peptide - 100  9.96 - 
DMSO (50%) - 13  5.35 ***p<0.001 
Vehicle (0.001 N HCl) - 99  13 - 
exendin-4 
1 100  16.82 - 
3 107  17.8 - 
E-TGN 
1 92  10.6 - 
3 96  17.8 - 
E-MAM2 
1 93  18.1 - 
3 102  11 - 
1 100  13.7 - 
3 108  26 - 
G-TGN 
1 97  12.8 - 
3 112  20.4 - 
G-MAM2 
1 107  18.4 - 
3 98  19.2 - 
1 99  13.6 - 
3 94  13.4 - 
1 116  25 - 
3 116  18.4 - 
3.5 DISCUSSION  
Novel hybrid peptides (Table 2.1) were designed and created by PEGylation of 
the known insulinotropic agents exendin-4 and d-Ala2-GIP (here termed GIP) with 
selected amphibian skin peptides (TGN and MAM2). The rationale behind the 
creation of such hybrids lies firstly in the extensive characterisation of incretins and 
their pre-clinical/clinical values (Irwin and Flatt, 2015) and secondly, in the good 
knowledge regarding the receptor signalling actions of such peptides (Martin et al., 
2013). By combining these activities with previously characterised amphibian skin 
peptides, namely TGN and MAM2, this study aimed to establish whether hybrid 
peptides possessed additional and more potent insulinotropic actions compared to the 
respective incretins alone.  
The purity confirmation of synthesized peptides conducted in this study ruled 
out the presence of possible additional components in the compounds generated 
during chemical synthesis. According to profiles obtained from our HPLC 
experiment, samples with exendin-4, E-TGN, E-MAM2, GIP, G-MAM2 and MAM2 
suggest peptide purity. For G-TGN, an additional, lower peak was detected (21.847 
min), and for TGN an additional peak was detected right after the one eluting at 
17.176, opening the possibility that these peptides could have been degraded during 
the HPLC run. However, previous reports detailed the presence of disulphide bonds, 
between cysteine residues at the carboxyterminal of TGN, leading to the formation 
of a cyclic version of TGN (Sai et al., 2001; Ojo et al., 2011). According to Ojo et al 
(2011), the presence of both cyclic and non-cyclic versions of TGN may lead to the 
observation of double peaks, similar to the chromatograms observed in this study. 
This could also explain the shoulder-peak observed also within the E-TGN run, 
bringing us to the conclusion that additional peaks in these samples could represent 
disulphide bonds within the TGN peptide as opposed to degraded products. 
However, to validate this hypothesis further studies using mass-spectrometry are 
needed. Determining the mass corresponding to the individual peaks and comparing 
it to the calculated theoretical masses of the peptides (listed in Table 1, Chapter 2) 
would expand on this supposition. 
With regards to insulin secretion, increased insulin output generated by alanine 
is consistent with previous studies using similar experimental conditions 
(McClenaghan et al., 1996a; Abdel-Wahab et al., 2008; Owolabi et al., 2017).  
Though exendin-4 and GIP have been shown to be insulinotropic in BRIN-
BD11 cells at concentrations as low as 1 pM (Irwin et al., 2015) and 1 M (Martin et 
al., 2013), respectively, we chose 1 and 3 M for our studies based on previous 
reports on the insulinotropic effects of TGN and MAM2. In fact, the maximum 
stimulatory effect on insulin secretion, in the absence of cytotoxicity was previously 
observed at 3 M for both TGN (Ojo et al., 2011) and MAM2 (Ojo et al., 2015a).  
Therefore, we aimed to obtain the most potent effects of the hybrids under these 
conditions. Consistent with this hypothesis, all peptides stimulated insulin release in 
a concentration-dependent fashion. As the concentration of the peptides increased 
from 1 to 3 M, insulin secretion increased accordingly, with E-TGN producing the 
highest stimulatory effects at a physiological glucose concentration. 
Comparing the activities of GIP with those of its hybrids, this study showed 
that at both concentrations, insulinotropic actions of GIP decreased, although not 
significantly, in conjugation with TGN or MAM2. This indicates that PEGylation 
with the amphibian skin peptides might have modified the insulinotropic actions of 
GIP, despite not abolishing them, as it has been reported that PEG molecules may 
cause a reduction of the biological activity of the compound they are attached to 
(Hadadian et al., 2015).  
For exendin-4 and its hybrids, this study showed that at 1 M, exendin-4 and 
E-TGN displayed similar insulinotropic activities. PEGylation of Exendin-4 with the 
amphibian peptide MAM2 nearly doubled the effects of the known GLP-1 receptor 
agonist and validated the hypothesis that conjugating exendin-4 with MAM2 will 
improve the original insulinotropic actions of the peptide. At 3 M, the differences 
between the insulinotropic activities of exendin-4 and its related peptides were 
further amplified. The additional effect of TGN and MAM2 on exendin-4 showed 
promise for compounds that might enhance the anti-diabetic actions of a validated 
and approved therapeutic agent, such as exendin-4, for type 2 diabetes.  
To further support this, the additive effects observed in BRIN-BD11 cells were 
found detected under hyperglycaemic conditions in isolated primary islets, which 
represent a more comprehensive pancreatic cell model for the assessment of anti-
diabetic activities in vitro (Owolabi et al., 2017; Vasu et al., 2017). 
This study also investigated cytotoxic effects that may be associated with the 
novel peptides, given the insulin-release peptides previously identified in amphibians 
have anti-microbial and anti-fungal properties (Conlon et al., 2017). Lactate 
Dehydrogenase (LDH) and Thiazolyl Blue Tetrazolium Bromide (MTT) assays 
served as high throughput cytotoxicity tests. Measuring levels of LDH, an enzyme 
confined to the cytoplasm under normal conditions, has been reported as a reliable 
indicator of cellular membrane integrity (Chan et al., 2013). Within our screen, this 
parameter was exceptionally relevant for two reasons. The first resides in the 
evidence that cationic peptides of natural origin, such as those of the TGN family, 
are known to exert their main cytotoxic effects towards bacteria by permeabilizing 
the cell membrane (Sai et al., 2001). The lack of LDH release in cells incubated with 
the peptides in this study therefore strongly suggest that cell membrane integrity was 
not affected by peptide treatment. This result is consistent with findings of several 
previous studies involving animal-derived peptides with anti-diabetic potential 
(Moore et al., 2015; Ojo et al., 2011; Ojo et al., 2015b).  
The second reason that justifies the use of LDH assay relates to the presence of 
insulin in pre-formed granules within the cytoplasm. Cell membrane rupture would 
lead to an increase in insulin levels measured in the assay buffer even in the absence 
of insulinotropic stimulus. In that case, insulin release would not be informative of 
the peptides activity or of existing cellular mechanisms. The lack of cytotoxicity 
and the preserved cell viability following all treatments were consistent. The MTT 
assay provided additional confirmation of the in vitro safety of the peptides, as no 
differences between peptide-treated samples and our control was detected, indicating 
the insulinotropic actions observed are a result of an active cell mechanism. 
A limitation of this study is the lack of data regarding the use of combination 
of both peptides, as a cocktail, on BRIN-BD11 cells under these conditions. This 
experiment would validate and prove the concept of the hybrid peptides having a 
validated advantage over the use of the single, individual hybrids. In this study, we 
only compared the action of the peptides to their native incretins. Though the actions 
of TGN and MAM2 alone are more potent than those of the hybrids, we focused on 
the increased potency they confer to the native incretin Exendin-4 which is, among 
the peptides tested, the only peptide approved for anti-diabetic therapy. 
Given the potential of E-TGN and E-MAM2, showing higher insulinotropic 
activity compared to exendin-4 in vitro, these peptides were selected for further 
mechanistic studies. Subsequent studies will investigate how the actions of these 
peptides are modulated by higher glucose concentrations, and by the presence of 
insulin secretion modulators. In addition, exendin-4 was also selected for further 
studies, in comparison with the hybrids, and details on its role in modulating 
metabolism are presented in Chapter 5. 
Chapter 4 
MECHANISM OF ACTION STUDIES 
4.1 BACKGROUND 
4.1.1 Glucose and insulin secretion 
In healthy organisms, pancreatic beta-cells are sophisticated glucose sensors 
with the ability to regulate insulin secretion, according to circulating blood glucose 
levels. Glucose-stimulated insulin secretion (GSIS) is considered the central feature 
for metabolic homeostasis, as it also indirectly regulates the actions of other 
secretagogues such as fatty acids, amino acids and incretins (Newsholme and 
Krause, 2012). 
In pancreatic beta-cells, the GLUT2 transporter allows glucose flow by 
facilitated diffusion in a physiologically relevant range (2-20 mmol/L) (Newsholme 
and Krause, 2012). Once in the cytoplasm, glucose is phosphorylated, by the 
glucokinase enzyme to yield glucose-6-phosphate. This critical step for glycolysis 
ultimately leads to the production of pyruvate, NADH, ATP and other metabolic 
coupling factors, which all contribute to insulin release. Insulin release is biphasic, 
with the first phase using a pool of readily available granules in the cell membrane 
proximity (Straub and Sharp, 2004). The second phase, involving recruitment of 
deeper intracellular pools, is responsible for the majority of insulin released, which is 
abrogated in type 2 diabetes (Kalwat et al., 2017). 
The main pathway leading to insulin secretion is triggered by an increase in 
ATP concentration, mostly deriving from the TCA cycle. Pancreatic beta-cells 
possess low levels of lactate dehydrogenase in their cytoplasm to favour the entry of 
pyruvate into the TCA cycle, as opposed to being reduced to lactate (Macdonald et 
al., 2005; Newsholme and Krause, 2012), highlighting the pivotal role of 
mitochondrial glucose oxidation in the production of ATP. The increase in the 
ATP/ADP ratio causes the closure of the ATP-dependent potassium channels (KATP), 
resulting in cell depolarization by reduction of K+ ion efflux. Subsequently, the 
voltage-dependent calcium channels (VDCC) open, increasing Ca2+ influx and 
triggering granule exocytosis (MacDonald and Rorsman, 2006). 
The pathway of insulin secretion involves secondary products of glucose 
metabolism. Incretins are known to exploit the cAMP pathway in perpetuating GSIS, 
both via protein kinase A (PKA) dependent and independent mechanisms (Fu et al., 
2013). 
Potassium and calcium play important roles in balancing electrical activity in 
beta cells. Following insulin release, the intracellular calcium ions also have a net 
action of repolarizing the cell membrane by both depleting ATP (Kanno et al., 2002) 
and directly favouring the opening of the potassium channels after a firing potential 
(Zhang et al., 2005). For these reasons, we focused on understanding how targeting 
the KATP and Ca2+ channels could modulate the insulinotropic activities of the novel 
hybrid peptides. 
4.1.2 The role of KATP channel in insulin secretion 
The ability to couple metabolic states to membrane excitability is a unique 
feature of KATP channels (Jonkers et al., 2011; Han et al., 2018; Silkimic et al., 
2019). In pancreatic beta-cells, KATP channels play an important role in regulating 
membrane potential, which is associated with insulin release. In the absence of 
glucose stimulation, the KATP channels only allow a slight inward rectifier current to 
maintain the resting membrane potential at -70 mV (Tarasov et al., 2004). In the 
presence of stimulatory glucose concentrations, ATP deriving from metabolism 
binds to the Kir6.2/SUR1 subunit of the channel causing displacement of ADP and 
leading to channel closure (Macdonald et al., 2005). The closure of KATP channels is 
associated with insulin secretion, even in the absence of a stimulatory glucose 
concentration (Han et al., 2018), indicating a glucose-independent effect of these 
channels on insulin release. To further understand the relevance of KATP channels in 
pancreatic beta-cells in vivo, studies involving animal models or naturally occurring 
polymorphisms have been performed. Inhibition of the Kir6.2/SUR1 subunit of the 
channel in mice generates hyperinsulinemia, which is associated with a diabetic 
phenotype later in life (Seino and Miki, 2003). Reports of gain-of-function or loss-
of-function mutations in KATP channels are correlated with severe metabolic diseases 
such as congenital hyperinsulinism and neonatal diabetes, respectively (Gloyn et al., 
2004; Sikimic et al., 2019). 
With regards to newly identified insulinotropic peptides, much attention has 
also been directed to understanding their mechanistic properties, by modulating the 
activity of KATP channels with different pharmacological agents (Ojo et al., 2015c). 
Secretagogues such KCl and sulphonylureas are known to induce a robust beta-cell 
depolarisation, representing an established model for first phase insulin secretion 
(Straub and Sharp 2004). On the other hand, allowing ion efflux with potassium 
channel openers dampens the electrical activity of pancreatic beta-cells, thus 
reducing insulin secretion (Seino and Miki, 2003). Two main agents have been 
reported to have clear actions in modulating the insulin secreting process. 
Diazoxide is a potassium channel opener responsible for inhibiting insulin 
secretion by preventing cell depolarisation induced by the closure of the KATP 
channels (Gembal et al., 1992). Conversely, tolbutamide determines a sustained cell 
depolarization responsible for the closure of the KATP channels and the activation of 
the voltage-dependent L-type calcium channels (VDCC), triggering insulin release 
(Gilon and Henquin,1992). Under these conditions, exposing cells to these KATP 
channel modulators allowed us to evaluate the contribution of KATP channels to the 
actions of the hybrid peptides. 
4.1.3 Calcium ions and insulin secretion 
The concentration of intracellular Ca2+ ions is critical to numerous biological 
functions, including maintenance of glucose homeostasis (Carvalho et al., 2018). 
Increasing concentrations of Ca2+ stimulate insulin secretion in a glucose-free 
medium, as reported in early studies pancreatic islets from fasted diabetic ob/ob mice 
(Andersson et al., 1981), highlighting the critical role of this ion in insulin release. 
As part of the triggering pathway, calcium enters pancreatic beta-cells via voltage-
dependent calcium channels (VDCC), to interact with pre-formed insulin granules.  
Beta-cells are also known to possess extracellular calcium-sensing receptors 
that identify fluctuations in local Ca2+ concentrations (Rcz et al., 2002; Jones et al., 
2007). By integrating these signals with neighbouring cells, beta cells within an islet 
coordinate and potentiate the secretory response to insulin secretagogues, exploiting 
cell-to-cell communication (Hodgkin et al., 2008). In the field of T2D, 
pharmacological inhibition of VDCCs using verapamil represents a tool for 
investigating dependency of the insulinotropic peptide actions on extracellular 
sources of Ca2+ (Srinivasan et al., 2014; Ojo et al., 2015a). 
In addition to Ca2+, cAMP plays an important role in insulin secretion. By 
directly promoting Ca2+ signalling, increasing the activity of VDCCs (Seino and 
Tadeo, 2005) or indirectly participating in exocytosis (Tengholm 2012; Carvalho et 
al., 2018), hormones such as incretins and neurotransmitters favour insulin secretion 
by increasing the levels of cAMP (Seino and Tadeo, 2005). This intracellular 
secondary messenger has been shown to be involved in intracellular movement of 
insulin granules towards a localisation that promotes insulin exocytosis (Hisatomi et 
al., 1996), supporting the role of cAMP in regulating insulin granule dynamics. 
Under sub-optimal concentrations of glucose, 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine (IBMX) 
inhibits phosphodiesterases, preventing degradation of cAMP and therefore 
favouring the activation of PKA involved in maintaining cytoplasmic Ca2+ levels 
(Tengholm, 2012).  
There is long standing evidence of this phosphodiesterase inhibitor triggering 
insulin release even in the absence of a stimulatory glucose concentration, with 
effects detected in the presence of 2.8 mM glucose (Siegel et al., 1980). Given the 
existence of these different pathways, modulating key targets of these processes in 
the presence of the hybrid peptides could shed light on their preferred mechanism of 
action in the acute phase of insulin release. 
4.2 AIM AND OBJECTIVES 
The aim is to understand the mechanism of insulinotropic actions of hybrid 
peptides E-TGN and E-MAM2, using BRIN-BD11 cells. As discussed in Chapter 3, 
these compounds were selected for further studies as they showed the most potent 
insulinotropic activities, when compared to the established GLP-1 receptor agonist 
exendin-4.  
Specific objectives include: 
1. Evaluating the effects of an increase in glucose concentrations on the 
insulinotropic activities of the hybrid peptides E-TGN and E-MAM2. 
2.  Assessing the involvement of the KATP channel in the actions of E-TGN 
and E-MAM2.  
3. Evaluation of the role of the voltage-dependent calcium channels (VDCC) 
and extracellular calcium in the actions of the aforementioned hybrid peptides. 
4.3 RESEARCH DESIGN  
4.3.1 Cell culture 
For mechanism of action studies, BRIN-BD11 cells were grown and 
maintained in sterile T75 flasks, and all solutions were prepared in KRB buffer as 
detailed in section 2.1.3. One day prior to treatment, cells were seeded into a 24-well 
plate, at a density of 1.5X105 cells/well and allowed to adhere overnight as 
previously described (see section 2.2). Prior to incubation with hybrid peptides 
and/or channel inhibitors, cells were washed for 40 mins with KRB buffer 
supplemented with 1.1 mM glucose.    
4.3.2 Determination of the action of glucose on the activity of the hybrid 
peptides 
An acute insulin test was performed as detailed in section 3.3.2. In this set of 
experiments, following 40 min pre-incubation in KRBB in the presence of 1.1 mM 
glucose, BRIN-BD11 cells were treated with 1.1, 5.6 or 11.1 mM glucose, in the 
presence or absence of the peptides (1M of E-TGN or E-MAM2). Following the 
acute test, supernatants were retrieved from each well and stored at -20C before 
insulin ELISA and LDH assays.  
4.3.3 Assessment of the involvement of KATP-channel in insulinotropic actions 
Cells were incubated with KRB buffer supplemented with glucose (5.6 mM) 
and modulators of th KATP-channel (300 M diazoxide or 200 M tolbutamide), in 
the absence or presence of the peptide (1 M). Test solutions with KCl (30 mM) 
were prepared in KRBB supplemented with 16.7 mM glucose. Following the 40 min 
pre-incubation with 1.1 mM glucose, cells were exposed to the test solutions, in a 
20-minute acute test, as described in section 3.3.2. Supernatants were collected from 
each well and stored at -20C for insulin measurements. 
4.3.4 Acute insulin test in the presence of calcium modulators 
In a separate set of experiment, BRIN-BD11 cells were incubated with 5.6 mM 
glucose in the presence of Verapamil (50 nM) or IBMX (200 M). Solutions were 
prepared in KRBB, as detailed previously in section 2.2. Cells were also incubated 
with or without peptides (1 M) in the absence of extracellular calcium using a 
modified KRB buffer, free from Ca2+ (115 mM NaCl, 4.7 mM KCl, 10 mM EGTA, 
1.2 mM MgSO47H2O, 1.2 mM KH2PO4, 25 mM HEPES, 8.4% (w/v) NaHCO3 and 
1% bovine serum albumin) (pH 7.4), supplemented with 5.6mM glucose and in the 
absence or presence of each peptide (1 M). Following the 40-minute pre-incubation 
in the presence of 1.1 mM glucose, a 20-minute acute test with the different 
treatments was performed. Supernatants were stored at -20C for insulin ELISA 
measurements. 
4.3.5 Insulin concentration measurement by ELISA 
An insulin specific ELISA was performed using the Ultrasensitive Insulin 
ELISA kit (Mercodia AB, Uppsala, Sweden) according to the manufacturers 
protocol (See Section 3.3.5). Briefly, 25 L of samples and standards, and 100 L of 
enzyme conjugate buffer were added to each well for a 2-hour incubation. At the end 
of the incubation wells were washed (x6), and 50 l of the substrate TMB was 
added. After 30 minutes H2SO4 (0.5 M) was added and the absorbance was measured 
by a spectrophotometer at a wavelength of 450 nm. 
4.4 RESULTS 
4.4.1 Effects of E-TGN and E-MAM2 on GSIS 
Insulin release in the presence of 1.1 and 5.6 mM glucose was 0.63  0.14 ng/L and 
0.69  0.06, respectively. At 11.1 mM glucose the concentration of insulin measured 
increased to 0.98  0.02 ng/L (P<0.01). The addition of E-TGN (1 M) generated a 
significant increase in insulin secretion (2.2-fold, P<0.05) reaching 1.52  0.32 ng/L 
in the presence of 1.1 mM glucose. At 5.6 mM glucose, E-TGN also increased 
insulin secretion by 2.8-fold (P<0.05), compared to control incubation in the absence 
of the peptide. At 11.1 mM glucose, E-TGN stimulated insulin release by 1.9-fold 
(P<0.01) compared to its respective control incubation in the absence of the peptide 
(Figure. 4.1A). 
Like E-TGN, the addition of E-MAM2 (1 M) to BRIN-BD11 cells in the presence of 
1.1 mM glucose generated a 2.2-fold increase (P<0.01) in insulin secretion, which 
increased slightly in the presence of 5.6 mM glucose (2.54-fold, P<0.01). In the 
presence of 11.1 mM glucose, E-MAM2 exhibited the highest stimulatory effects, 
increasing the amount of insulin secreted by 2.49-fold, compared to 11.1 mM 
glucose alone. and a 3.88-fold increase (P<0.05) compared to the actions of the 
peptide at a non-stimulatory glucose concentration (5.6 mM) (Figure. 4.1B).  
Glucose alone
Glucose + E-TGN (1 M)
 Glucose
(1.1 mM)
 Glucose
 (5.6 mM)
 Glucose
 (11.1 mM)
Glucose alone
Glucose + E-MAM2 (1 M)
 Glucose
(1.1 mM)
 Glucose
 (5.6 mM)
 Glucose
 (11.1 mM)

Figure 4.1. GSIS in the presence of (A) E-TGN or (B) E-MAM2.  
Values are mean  SEM (n=3). **P<0.01 compared to 5.6 mM glucose. P<0.001, 
P<0.01, P<0.05 compared to respective incubation without peptide. +P<0.05 compared to 
5.6 mM glucose + peptide (1 M). 
4.4.2  The role of KATP-channel in the insulinotropic actions of E-TGN and E-
To evaluate the contribution of the KATP-channel, a major component of the 
main pathway of insulin secretion as described in the background section of this 
chapter, cells were incubated with different modulators of KATP-channel activity. 
Basal insulin secretion at 5.6mM glucose (0.960.1 ng/L) was increased by 1.5- 
(P<0.01) and 1.7-fold (P<0.001) in the presence of E-TGN and E-MAM2 
respectively (1 M) (Figure 4.2). The addition of diazoxide (300 M) reduced basal 
insulin secretion from 0.960.1 ng/L to 0.550.1 ng/L (P<0.001). In the presence of 
this potassium channel opener, diazoxide, both E-TGN and E- MAM2 triggered a 
significant increase in insulin levels in the buffer (P<0.001), comparable to those in 
the absence of the modulator (1.290.4 ng/L and 1.290.3 ng/L).  
The depolarizing action of KCl (30 mM) in the presence of 16.7 mM glucose 
generated the highest increase in insulin secretion compared to control, by 4.8-fold 
(4.590.5 ng/L, P<0.001). The addition of E-MAM2 (1 M) further expanded the 
insulinotropic potential of the cell, by increasing the amount of insulin present in the 
buffer to 6.510.2 ng/L (1.4-fold, P<0.001) (Figure 4.2B), while in the presence of 
E-TGN insulin secretion remained in the same range compared to its respective 
control incubation (5.360.1 ng/L) (Figure 4.2A). Insulin output in the presence of 
tolbutamide was increased by 1.3-fold (P<0.05).  The actions of E-TGN and E- 
MAM2 were further enhanced in the presence of tolbutamide, with insulin secretion 
rising by a further 1.5- and 2-fold (P<0.01), respectively (Figure 4.2A and B). 
No peptide
With E-TGN (1 M)
Additions
Glu (5.6 mM) Glu (5.6 mM) +
Dia (300 M)
Glu (16.7 mM) +
KCl (30 mM)
Glu (5.6 mM) +
Tolb (200 M)
No peptide
With E-MAM2 (1 M)
Additions
Glu (5.6 mM) Glu (5.6 mM) +
Dia (300 M)
Glu (16.7 mM) +
KCl (30 mM)
Glu (5.6 mM) +
Tolb (200 M)
Figure 4.2. Effects of KATP channel modulators on the insulinotropic actions of (A) E-
TGN or (B) E-MAM2.  
Values are mean  SEM (n=3). **P<0.01, *P<0.05 compared to 5.6 mM glucose. P<0.01, 
P<0.05 compared to respective incubation without peptide. +++P<0.001, ++P<0.01, +P<0.05 
compared to 5.6 mM glucose + peptide (1 M). 
4.4.3 The role of calcium in the insulin-releasing effects of E-TGN and E-MAM2 
As expected, insulin secretion in control incubations (5.6 mM glucose only) 
was 0.36  0.04 ng/L which increased to 0.80  0.24 ng/L (P<0.01) and 0.91  0.26 
ng/L (P<0.01) with the addition of E-TGN and E-MAM2 (1 M), respectively 
(Figure 4.3). In the absence of extracellular calcium, basal insulin secretion 
decreased from 0.36  0.04 ng/L to 0.21  0.04 ng/L (P<0.01). Under Ca2+ free 
conditions, the insulin inducing properties of E-TGN were decreased to 0.29  0.07 
ng/L (P<0.01) (Figure 4.3A) and those of E-MAM2 to 0.45  0.12 ng/L (P<0.01) 
(Figure 4.3B) which represent a 2.8- and 2-fold reduction, compared to their 
activities in the presence of Ca2+. 
In this study, the presence of IBMX alone generated an increase in insulin 
secretion to 2.631.5 ng/L (P<0.01). The addition of E-TGN did not increase the 
amount of insulin secreted, which remained approximately the same (2.511.4 ng/L) 
(Figure. 4.3A). Conversely, the insulinotropic action of E-MAM2 in the presence of 
IBMX was increased by 1.6-fold (P<0.01) (Figure 4.3B) to levels comparable to 
those observed in the presence of 16.7 mM glucose and KCl.  
In order to assess the cells response to blockage of the VDCCs, the 
insulinotropic actions of the peptides were evaluated in the presence of verapamil 
(50 M). In this experiment, basal insulin secretion at 5.6 mM glucose was 
0.870.07 ng/L, which was reduced to 0.560.07 ng/L in the presence of verapamil 
(P<0.01). The addition of E-TGN resulted in an increase of basal insulin secretion to 
1.240.04 ng/L (P<0.01). In the presence of verapamil, these actions were reduced, 
and insulin secretion was recorded at 0.730.1 ng/L (P<0.001) (Figure 4.4A). This 
value was still significantly higher that the respective incubation in the absence of 
the peptide, suggesting the presence of an alternative pathway exploited by E-TGN 
to exert its actions. 
The actions of E-MAM2 were tested under the same conditions. At 5.6 mM 
glucose, the peptide increased insulin secretion to 1.70.11 ng/L (P<0.001). 
Compared to this condition, the addition of verapamil caused the actions of E-MAM2 
to reduce to 1.10.09 ng/L, which was still significantly higher than the respective 
incubation in the absence of the peptide (P<0.001). As opposed to E-TGN, insulin 
release in the presence of E-MAM2 and verapamil was 1.270.09-fold higher 
compared to basal levels at 5.6 mM glucose (Figure 4.4B). These results suggest that 
the importance of the VDCC in the mechanism of action of E-MAM2 are less 
pronounced that those of E-TGN, given the latter seems to be affected to a greater 
extent by inhibition of the channel. 
No peptide
With E-TGN (1 M)
Glu (5.6 mM)     Glu (5.6 mM)
 in Ca2+ free buffer
   Glu (5.6 mM)
+ IBMX (200 M)
No peptide
With E-MAM2 (1 M)
Glu (5.6 mM)     Glu (5.6 mM)
 in Ca2+ free buffer
   Glu (5.6 mM)
+ IBMX (200 M)
Figure 4.3. Effect of Ca2+ on the insulinotropic actions of (A) E-TGN or (B) E-MAM2. 
Values are mean  SEM (n=3). **P<0.01, *P<0.05 compared to 5.6 mM glucose. P<0.01, 
P<0.05 compared to respective incubation without peptide. +++P<0.001, ++P<0.01, +P<0.05 
compared to 5.6 mM glucose + peptide (1 M). 
Without peptide
With E-TGN (1M)
Glu (5.6mM) Glu (5.6mM) +
Verapamil (50 M)
Additions
Without peptide
With E-MAM2 (1M)
Glu (5.6mM) Glu (5.6mM) +
Verapamil (50nM)
Additions
Figure 4.4. Effect of VDCC inhibition on the insulinotropic actions of (A) E-TGN or 
(B) E-MAM2.  
Values are mean  SEM (n=3). ***P<0.001, **P<0.01, *P<0.05 compared to 5.6 mM 
glucose. P<0.001, P<0.05 compared to respective incubation without peptide. 
+++P<0.001 compared to 5.6 mM glucose + peptide (1 M). 
4.5 DISCUSSION 
The inability of cells to respond to glucose and endogenous incretins, and the 
contribution of hyperglycaemia to insulin secretion defects in T2D has been 
examined (Solomon et al., 2012; Meier and Nauck, 2010). A randomized clinical 
trial, comparing diabetic patients to healthy subjects under experimental 
hyperglycaemia, revealed that even though hyperglycaemia is not solely responsible 
for pancreatic endocrine dysfunction, it contributes to the reduction of beta cell 
responses to non-glucose stimuli such as GLP-1 (Solomon et al., 2012). This could 
partially explain failure of anti-diabetic treatment in subjects where beta-cell 
responsiveness is lost.  
To understand if beta-cells were responsive in experimental hyperglycaemia, 
this study tested the actions of the peptides on the clonal pancreatic beta-cell line at 
three different concentrations. At concentrations lower or equal to the physiological 
fasting glucose level (5.6 mM), insulin release in the absence of the peptide was not 
significantly different. By addition of E-TGN, the level of insulin release doubled, 
reaching similar levels at all glucose concentrations. The insulinotropic actions 
detected in the presence of the peptide at the glucose concentrations of 1.1 mM and 
5.6 mM suggest glucose-independent actions under these conditions. For the low 
glucose concentration, this mirrors the actions of exendin-4 in static incubations with 
rat islets in vitro, where at a non-stimulatory concentrations of 3 mM glucose, the 
peptide still retained its insulinotropic actions (Parkes et al., 2001). Nonetheless, the 
absence of further enhancement of the peptides actions at 11.1 mM glucose might 
suggest the activity of the peptide is already maximal at physiological glucose 
concentrations and the glucose-dependent feature of exendin-4 is not here retained.  
Similarly to E-TGN, E-MAM2 maintains its insulinotropic actions at non-
stimulatory glucose concentrations. With regards to the higher glucose 
concentration, mimicking fasting diabetic blood glucose levels, E-MAM2 further 
increased insulin secretion, compared to the incubation with non-stimulatory glucose 
concentration. This result corroborates previous reports in mouse islets challenged 
with MAM2 in the presence of high glucose concentrations (Ojo et al., 2015a), 
suggesting this property is maintained following the creation of the hybrid peptide E-
MAM2. 
For both peptides, insulinotropic activities are present at 1.1mM glucose, a 
concentration 5-fold lower than physiological levels. Notably, there is evidence of 
loss of glucose-dependent effects of incretins in the presence of other antidiabetic 
drugs such as sulfonylureas. Episodes of hypoglycaemia in patients on combination 
therapy with GLP-1 mimetics and sulfonylureas led to the assessment of insulin 
secretion in vitro under these conditions. At 3 mM glucose, the actions of GLP-1 on 
insulin release were absent, but the addition of tolbutamide to this condition caused 
insulinotropic actions 2-fold higher than those of tolbutamide alone, suggesting the 
glucose dependency of GLP-1 was lost under these conditions (De Heer and Holst, 
2007). E-TGN and E-MAM2 might have lost their glucose-dependent actions by a 
similar mechanism, and the amphibian peptides might contribute to the loss by 
generation of insulinotropic actions independent from glucose concentrations. To test 
this hypothesis, further mechanistic studies including those on receptor activity 
might shed light on the role of glucose in the action of the peptides. 
The process of insulin secretion is regulated by extracellular signals, that 
interact with cell membrane channels, and intracellular messengers responsible for 
perpetuating the response and couple the metabolic state of the cell with its electrical 
activity (Yang and Berggren, 2006; Sikimic et al., 2019).  
The potassium channel opener, diazoxide, allows intracellular potassium ions 
to exit beta-cells via the KATP channels, causing a reduction in depolarisation. As the 
insulinotropic activity of both peptides was not significantly affected by the presence 
of diazoxide this may reflect their ability to use another KATP-independent pathway 
to cause cell depolarisation. For example, for incretins such as GLP-1 receptor 
agonists, the mechanism for insulin secretion involves binding to GPCRs, leading to 
activation of adenylyl cyclase and an increase in cAMP production (Meloni et al., 
2013). 
KCl is known to stimulate insulin secretion by depolarising the cell and 
inducing Ca2+ entry in the beta-cell as reported in previous studies on this cell line 
(Hamid et al., 2002). Therefore it represents a valid tool used for studying the role of 
KATP channels in pancreatic cells (Ojo et al., 2015a). Insulinotropic actions of E-
MAM2 were further potentiated by KCl in the presence of 16.7 mM glucose, 
indicating that beta cells responses to E-MAM2 are not masked by KCl-induced 
depolarisation, as opposed to what was observed for E-TGN.  
Tolbutamide, a drug binding to the SUR1 subunit of the KATP channel, 
stimulates insulin secretion by closing these channels and depolarising the cell 
membrane (Seino and Miki, 2003). By inducing beta-cell clustering, it generates 
homogeneous Ca2+ oscillations for insulin release (Jonkers et al., 2011). The 
activities of both E-TGN and E-MAM2 in the presence of tolbutamide were 
enhanced, suggesting the closure of the KATP channel, associated with cell 
depolarization, facilitates the actions of the hybrid peptides. This has also been 
observed with TGN (Ojo et al., 2011), suggesting the hybrid inherited this property 
from the parent peptide and that the mechanism could be similar for E-MAM2 as 
well. 
With regards to this pathway of insulin secretion, IBMX (3-isobutyl-1-
methylxanthine) is well known to maintain levels of cAMP by inhibiting the 
degradation of intracellular secondary messengers which in turn results in an 
increase of intracellular calcium and insulin mobilisation (Siegel et al., 1980). 
Consistent with the possibility of utilizing this pathway, the insulinotropic actions of 
E-MAM2 were greatly enhanced in the presence of IBMX, indicating the reduced 
degradation of cAMP favours insulin secretion in the presence of this peptide. The 
significant increase observed in insulin secretion under this condition could also 
reflect the ability of cAMP to enhance cell sensitivity to Ca2+ permeabilization, 
which allows insulin secretion at a lower concentration of Ca2+ (Skelin et al., 2011). 
Conversely, E-TGN did not increase insulin output compared to its respective 
control incubation in the presence of IBMX. A possible explanation for this 
observation could be that if the actions of E-TGN cannot be further enhanced by this 
phosphodiesterase inhibitor and the actions of this peptides might be masked by 
those of IBMX. In support of this, there is evidence of phosphodiesterase inhibitors 
masking or causing oscillations in cAMP levels (Tian et al., 2012). Therefore, the 
result might reflect a time where cAMP production was increased but stable.  
Calcium plays a fundamental role in beta cells physiology and insulin 
secretion. It participates in cell growth and proliferation as well as contributing to the 
exocytotic process by interacting with pre-formed insulin granules (Yang and 
Berggren, 2006). In our experiments, we studied the effects of E-TGN and E-MAM2 
in the absence of extracellular calcium to evaluate the direct contribution of this 
pathway to the insulinotropic activities of the peptides. For both peptides, chelating 
extracellular calcium resulted in decreased insulin secretion, suggesting that 
extracellular calcium is required for the insulinotropic activities of the hybrid 
peptides. In support of this, the use of the VDCC blocker verapamil also provided 
further insight on the action of the peptides under these conditions. The presence of 
verapamil caused a decrease of E-TGNs insulinotropic activity, strongly suggesting 
the peptide stimulates insulin secretion relying on the activation of the VDCC. 
Previous reports using cationic forms of TGN ([S4R]tigerinin-1R and 
[H12K]tigerinin-1R) revealed that inhibition of the VDCC did not completely 
abolish the activity of the peptides, which we observed here. However, a study 
investigating the involvement of incretins in the ATP dynamics of beta-cells 
revealed that verapamil could reversibly inhibit the increase in the ATP/ADP ratio 
(Hodson et al., 2014), required for insulin release. Our study could reflect the action 
of the incretin component of the the E-TGN hybrid, suggesting it predominates in 
determining the overall mechanism of action of the peptide.  
The insulinotropic actions of E-MAM2 in the presence of verapamil were not 
completely abolished but only attenuated, similarly to what has been reported for 
MAM2 alone in the presence of this inhibitor (Ojo et al., 2015a), indicating this 
feature might be conserved in the hybrid, predominating on that of exendin-4. 
However, relying on potentiated intracellular resources of calcium has a great 
contribution to the actions of both E-TGN and E-MAM2. This concept aligns with 
the mechanism of action of incretins, coupled to G-proteins, where an increased 
influx of calcium in beta-cells for insulin exocytosis relies on the activation of the 
intracellular protein kinase A and Epac2 (Dzhura et al., 2010).  
As diazoxide did not inhibit the insulinotropic action of E-TGN and KCl failed 
to significantly increase the activities of the peptide on insulin secretion, we 
hypothesise that E-TGN might not rely KATP channels for cell depolarisation and 
there might be an additional stimulus causing activation of VDCC. E-MAM2 seems 
to rely on both the classical pathway on insulin secretion, involving the KATP 
channel, and on the increase of Ca2+ from intracellular stores, due to the amplifying 
pathway. 
Despite needing further studies to identify binding sites for the peptides, and 
further characterisation of VDCC activation under these conditions, the results 
obtained in this Chapter support the idea that the hybrid peptides might have 
inherited and maintained mechanistic properties of their native incretin counterpart. 
Furthermore, novelty associated with the presence of amphibian skin peptides 
motivated investigation into the contribution of these peptides in modulating gene 
expression in the clonal pancreatic cell line of choice, with a view of comparing any 
changes to the commercially available exendin-4. 
Before analysing the transcriptome, given the insulinotropic mechanism of action 
of exendin-4 has been previously described (Kang et al., 2005), we chose a different 
approach to investigate the molecular actions of this GLP-1 receptor agonist. We in fact 
considered how exendin-4 modulates glucose metabolism and its channelling through 
downstream pathways using metabolomics analysis. 
CHAPTER 5 
METABOLOMIC ANALYSIS 
5.1 BACKGROUND 
5.1.1 Further mechanistic aspects underlying T2D: the metabolomics field  
Part of the regulation of insulin secretion in beta-cells relies on channelling 
glucose metabolism towards the oxidative, aerobic pathway (Alcazar et al., 2000). 
As detailed in the previous chapter, the use of inhibitors and secretagogues suggests 
the preferred mechanism of insulin secretion for the different hybrid peptides. 
However, this study only partially explains insulin secretion regulation, as the 
pathways involved in the process still retain residual activities despite the presence 
of pharmacological inhibitors (Bain et al., 2009). 
We briefly mentioned in Section 1.4.3 that exendin-4 promotes insulin-
secretion by binding to the GLP-1 receptor and activating a signalling cascade 
leading to increased levels of cAMP. Mechanistically, exendin-4 (1 nM) sensitises 
intracellular Ca2+ channels by an increased influx of extracellular Ca2+, following 
glucose metabolism and thus inducing membrane depolarisation in the insulinoma 
cell line INS-1 (Kang et al., 2005). As shown in Figure 1.2, this further supports the 
importance of glucose metabolism in the action of GLP-1 receptor agonists such as 
exendin-4.  
Other recent studies explain how pre-treatment of BRIN-BD11 cells with 
exendin-4 (50 nM) modulates the metabolic response to glucose, with a 25% 
increase in glucose uptake which is also accompanied by increased ATP content and 
insulin secretion, compared to pre-treated sample with glucose only (Carlessi et al., 
2017). These results shed light on the anti-diabetic effect of chronic treatment with 
exendin-4 and highlight the role of a metabolic reprogramming of cells in the 
process. 
For the first time, Mora-Ortiz et al. (2019) reported a comprehensive, organ-
specific metabolomic analysis of the diabetic db/db mouse lacking the leptin 
receptor. What emerged from the studies are the differences between changes in 
metabolites across tissues, reflecting differential needs in the context of diabetes and 
obesity. Metabolomics has also recently been explored to study the effect of anti-
diabetic agents. Many of the currently available therapeutic agents for T2D fail in 
correcting the underlying metabolic impairment of the disease and, as such, this 
aspect has been taking into consideration in compounds with newly identified anti-
diabetic potential (Al-Zuaidy et al., 2017). 
Among these, the recently uncovered anti-diabetic actions of the Melicope 
lunu-ankenda (ML) leaf extract were further characterised using metabolomics 
analysis from animal samples. Following administration of 200 or 400 mg/kg of ML 
extract to T2D-induced rats, plasma and serum samples were analysed using proton 
NMR (1H-NMR) spectroscopy, in search of potential biomarkers or metabolic 
changes. Offering a comprehensive snap-shot of metabolic pathways at the time of 
the analysis, this study revealed the anti-diabetic actions in vivo observed in the 
diabetic rats resulted in a restored functionality of glucose oxidation via the TCA 
cycle, essential for homeostasis (Al-Zuaidy et al., 2017) (Figure 5.1). Even though at 
present it might not directly translate to a clinical outcome, metabolomics analysis 
could be exploited for further insight on the metabolic profile in T2D and eventually 
help characterisation of comprehensive and unequivocal biomarkers with predictive 
and prognostic power. 
The results generated so far prompted us to perform a flux analysis using 
uniformly labelled 13C-glucose ([U-13C glucose]) as a tracer to study how its 
metabolism is funnelled through its downstream pathways. The pre-treatment 
conditions we used reflect different cellular states, namely physiological 
concentration of glucose, where cells are expected to be responsive to a glucose load 
by performing glycolytic metabolism at a basal, control rate; a hyperglycaemic 
condition where the previous basal glucose metabolism may be altered and finally, 
both the conditions mentioned pre-treated with exendin-4 to test its effect on 
committing glucose and its metabolites towards different pathways and their 
significance in T2D. 
Figure 5.1. Schematic representation of the TCA cycle. 
5.2 AIM & OBJECTIVES 
The aim of this study is to qualitatively evaluate changes in metabolic fluxes 
following the treatment of pancreatic beta-cells with exendin-4. The specific 
objectives are: 
1. Pre-treatment of BRIN-BD11 cells with physiological or high glucose 
concentrations in the presence of exendin-4. 
2. Feeding pre-treated cells with 13C-labelled glucose and performing 
metabolite extraction.  
3. Analysing metabolites in the cell supernatant, using NMR, and in order to 
tracing glucose flux in the intracellular space, using GC-MS. 
5.3 RESEARCH DESIGN 
5.3.1 Sample preparation for metabolite analysis 
Metabolite analysis was performed in BRIN-BD11 cells. Cells were initially 
seeded at a density of 5x105 cells/well in a 6-well plate for overnight attachment as 
detailed in Section 2.3.1. The following day, they were treated with KRB buffer 
supplemented with either 5.6 or 25 mM glucose, in the presence or absence of 
exendin-4 (3 M) for 20 hrs. After the incubation, media was discarded and replaced 
with KRB buffer supplemented with 14 mM [U-13C] labelled glucose, for 1 hour. 
Following the labelled glucose treatment, the supernatant was collected and stored at 
-80C for nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) metabolite extraction. 25 L of 
supernatant were also assayed for insulin release, using insulin ELISA as described 
in section 2.1.4. The adherent BRIN-BD11 cells in the plate were further processed 
for GC-MS analysis. Experimental flow chart is presented in Figure 5.2. 
5.3.2 Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) 
For NMR metabolite extraction, as explained in Section 2.3.2, 120 l of 
deuterium oxide (D2O) containing 1 mM trimethylsilylpropanoic acid (TSP) and 25 
mM sodium azide (NaN3) were added to 60 l of phosphate buffer (500 mM) and 
420 l of supernatant. Samples were mixed and transferred to 5mm glass NMR 
tubes. 1H-NMR spectra were acquired over 5 minutes and measured at a frequency 
of 600 MHz, at a temperature of 300 K. TSP was used as in internal reference (0.0 ) 
for peak identification. 
5.3.3 Gas Chromatography  Mass Spectrometry (GC-MS) 
Treated BRIN-BD11 cells (section 5.3.1) were quenched using methanol and 
metabolite extraction was performed as per section 2.3.3. The aqueous and organic 
phases of each sample were methoximated and transmethylated, respectively, before 
derivatisation with MTBSTFA. Metabolites within the obtained extracts were 
separated using electron impact ionization as detailed in section 2.3.3.  
5.3.4 Statistical analysis 
The total ion chromatograms (TICs) were identified by the instrument, through 
the probability based match (PBM) library database.  
For the labelling experiment, the raw data was deconvoluted with the 
Automated Mass Spectral Deconvolution and Identification System (AMDIS) 
software and imported into the GC-MS Assignment Validator and Integrator 
(GAVIN) matrix for Matlab, as detailed in section 2.3.3 of the methodology.  
Mass isotopomer distributions (MIDs) resulting from the analysis were used to 
calculate the percentage of labelling of each compound, as described elsewhere 
(Buescher et al., 2015), using the following equation: 
Where i represents a given isotopologue (compound), n the number of its carbon 
atoms and l is the labelling abundance on each carbon. 
Differences between samples were analysed using one-way ANOVA, followed by 
Newman-Keuls post-hoc test. 
C labelling = 
  
x 100 
Figure 5.2. Experimental flow chart for metabolomics analysis. 
5.4 RESULTS 
5.4.1 Functional assay: insulin release 
To assess the insulinotropic activities of BRIN-BD11 cells under the different 
conditions, the cell supernatant was assayed for insulin release, following the 24-
hour glucose challenge (Figure 5.3). At 5.6 mM glucose, insulin release was 3.73  
0.6 ng/L. At 25 mM glucose, insulin release slightly decreased to 3.29  0.7 ng/L. 
The addition of exendin-4 to the pre-treatment increased insulin secretion to 9.44  
0.6 ng/L and 8.52  0.7 ng/L for low and high glucose, respectively (P<0.001). 
5.4.2 NMR spectroscopy on BRIN-BD11 cell supernatants 
In order to have a first overview on the differences in metabolites in the 
extracellular environment in cells pre-treated with either 5.6 or 25 mM glucose, we 
performed 1H-NMR on BRIN-BD11 cell supernatants. The Biological Magnetic 
Resonance Data Bank (BMRB), along with previous reports performing 1H-NMR in 
patient serum samples (Del Coco et al., 2019) allowed a putative identification of 
some of the peaks detected. Differences between cells treated with 5.6 and 25 mM 
glucose are presented in Figure 5.4.  
We assigned lactate at 1.253 ppm. The intricated pattern found between 2.9 
and 4.1 most likely corresponds to sugars in the sample (Del Coco et al., 2019). At 
25 mM glucose, we also putatively assigned alanine (1.279 ppm) and leucine (1.488 
ppm), which were found in higher abundance in the hyperglycaemic sample. Here, 
we also assigned beta-glucose, presented in the window between 3 and 3.9 ppm, and 
displaying a doublet at 4.4 ppm and alpha-glucose at 5.25 ppm. Even though these 
preliminary results are based on only 16 scans and putative assignments, we can still 
appreciate differences in the extracellular environment of the pancreatic cell line in 
the presence of different glucose concentrations and/or exendin-4 treatment (Figure 
5.5). 
In order to assess differences in metabolites following exendin-4 pre-treatment 
at physiological glucose concentration, we compared the 5.6 mM sample with the 
one pre-treated also with exendin-4. The peptide increased the amount of alanine and 
acetate (1.921 ppm) in the sample, whereas the untreated control maintained higher 
levels of lactate and acetone (2.235 ppm) (Figure 5.5A). 
By comparing exendin-4 treated samples, both at 5.6 and 25 mM we aimed to 
establish the role of the peptide in changing the levels of these metabolites under the 
different glucose concentrations. We observed that levels of lactate, alanine and 
acetone are higher in this sample, compared to the supernatant from cells treated 
with exendin-4 at 5.6 mM glucose (Figure 5.5B). 
We moved on to assess differences in the intracellular metabolites of the 
samples, using GC-MS and studying the total ion chromatograms (TICs) as well as 
the flux of U-13C glucose through its downstream pathways. 
Glucose alone
Glucose + Ex-4 (3 M)
*** 
5.6 mM glucose 25 mM glucose
Figure 5.3. Functional assay for insulin release in BRIN-BD11 cells.  
Cells were incubated with 5.6 or 25 mM glucose, in the absence or presence of exendin-4 (3 
M) for 24 hours before U-13C glucose challenge (14 mM). Supernatant was collected for 
insulin release assay. ***P<0.001, compared to 5.6 mM glucose alone. P<0.001, 
compared to 25 mM glucose alone. 
Figure 5.4. 1H-NMR spectra of BRIN-BD11 cell supernatants displaying differences in 
metabolites at low and high glucose concentrations. 
1H-NMR analysis was performed on BRIN-BD11 cell supernatants from samples pre-treated 
with 5.6 or 25 mM glucose, before 14 mM glucose challenge. Spectra at 25 mM were 
substracted from spectra at 5.6 mM using the Brucker Topspin software. Metabolites 
higher in 5.6 mM glucose are displayed at the top, those higher at 25 mM at the bottom. 
Figure 5.5.1H-NMR spectra of BRIN-BD11 cell supernatants comparing (A) untreated 
with exendin-4 treated samples, and treated (B) samples at 5.6 and 25 mM glucose. 
1H-NMR analysis from cell supernatants of samples pre-treated with (A) 5.6 mM glucose, in 
the absence or presence of exendin-4, or (B) 5.6 and 25 mM glucose in the presence of 
exendin-4, after the 14 mM glucose challenge. 
5.4.3 Analysis of BRIN-BD11 intracellular metabolites 
5.4.3.1 Total ion chromatograms (TICs)  
Total ion chromatograms (TICs) deriving from intracellular metabolites were 
identified using the PBM library of the instrument. Within the organic phase, this 
study found differences between samples derived from cells incubated at 5.6 and 25 
mM glucose (Figure 5.6A). The most striking differences are observed for saturated 
fatty acids such as palmitic (RT=16.569), stearic (RT=17.752) and arachidic acid 
(RT=18.908), which increased by approximately 4-fold, as well as cholesterol 
(RT=25.378) which increased by nearly 10-fold in the presence of 25 mM glucose. 
In the aqueous phase, the main difference observed between 5.6 mM and 25 mM 
glucose was decanoic acid (RT=24.584), which was reduced by about 2-fold at the 
high glucose concentration. Though the molecular entities eluting at 22.01, 22.07 
and 22.16 mins show differences between 5.6 snd 25 mM glucose, they were not 
detected by the software (Figure 5.6B). 
By comparing the TICs from the organic phase 5.6 mM glucose and its 
respective exendin-4 treatment, this study found a higher abundance of saturated 
fatty acids in the treated sample, contrary to our expectations, with a similar pattern 
observed in the 25 mM glucose sample (Figure 5.7A). 
In the aqueous phase, treatment with exendin-4 elicited a 3-fold reduction of 
the abundance of silane (RT=18.8) and a 1.5-fold reduction in docosanoic acid 
(RT=24.691), a saturated fatty acid (Figure 5.7B). 
Certain differences were also observed at 25 mM glucose. The addition of 
exendin-4 to the samples resulted in a decrease of fatty acid species with overall 
features resembling the chromatogram at 5.6 mM glucose. This suggests that 
exendin-4 might reduce the formation of saturated fatty acids to levels comparable to 
those observed at the physiological concentration of 5.6mM glucose (Figure 5.8A). 
Under these conditions, the presence of exendin-4 in the aqueous phase caused a 1.5-
fold reduction in abundance of silane (RT=18.8), and a slight reduction in d-
galactose abundance (1.2-fold, RT=22.572) (Figure 5.8B). 
For the labelling experiment, we were not able to determine labelled species 
originating from [U-13Cglucose] metabolism in the organic phase, therefore it was 
not possible to perform further analysis on this extract. 
Figure 5.6. TICs displaying intracellular (A) organic and (B) aqueous metabolites at 
physiological (top, in blue) and high glucose (bottom, in black) concentrations.  
Following pre-treatment in the presence of 5.6 or 25 mM glucose for 24 hrs, cells were 
challenged with a glucose load (14 mM) for 20 hrs. The reaction was quenched and 
metabolites extracted for GC-MS run. TICs were collected by the ChemStation software.   
Figure 5.7. TICs for intracellular metabolites in the (A) organic and (B) aqueous phase 
at physiological glucose in the absence (top) or presence (bottom) of exendin-4. 
Metabolites were extracted from BRIN-BD11 cells pre-treated with 5.6 mM glucose, in the 
absence or presence of exendin-4, for 24 hrs. Cells were treated with glucose (14 mM) and 
metabolites extracted after 20 hrs. Samples were run on the GC-MS and resulting TICs were 
collected by the instrument (ChemStation software) 
Figure 5.8. TICs displaying high glucose concentrations in the (A) organic and (B) 
aqueous phase, in the absence (top, in blue) or presence (bottom, in black) of exendin-4.  
BRIN-BD11 cells were pre-treated with 25 mM glucose in the presence or absence of 
exendin-4 for 24 hrs before 14 mM glucose challenge. Metabolites of the organic fraction 
were run on the GC-MS and TICs generated by the Chemstation software on the instrument. 
5.4.4.2 TCA cycle intermediates 
Enrichment of 13C in metabolites were evaluated after a 20 hr incubation under 
the differentially treated conditions. With regards to the glycolytic pathway, 
dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) (Figure 5.9A), 3-phosphoglycerate (Figure 
5.9B) and phosphenolpyruvate (PEP) (Figure 5.9C) were fully labelled under all 
conditions, before entry into the TCA cycle (represented schematically in Figure 
5.1). 
13C-labelled pyruvate originating from PEP at the basal concentration of 
glucose (5.6 mM) was 71  4.75% and did not significantly differ under the other 
experimental conditions (Figure 5.10). At 5.6 and 25 mM glucose, equilibrium 
between pyruvate, lactic acid and alanine labelling was maintained in the range from 
66.78  2.34% to 74.46  1.73%. Following treatment with exendin-4, 13C-
enrichment of lactate at 5.6 mM glucose was reduced by 20.1% (P<0.05), and by 
17.1% at 25 mM glucose (Figure 5.11).  
The opposite was observed for alanine labelling. After treatment with exendin-
4, 10.57% and 10.29% increase at low and high glucose concentrations respectively 
were observed (Figure 5.12). 13C enrichment for citrate was 36.67  2.2% at 5.6 mM 
glucose. This was the highest percentage of labelling observed across the different 
treatments, as the addition of exendin-4 lowered labelling to 26.02  3.3 % (P<0.05). 
At 25 mM glucose, enrichment of 13C was also lowered to 28.83  2.9 % (P<0.05) 
and 27.09  0.8 % (P<0.05), in the absence and presence of exendin-4, respectively 
(Figure 5.13). 
2-Ketoglutarate, generated from decarboxylation of isocitrate, was labelled by 
63.07  1.6 % at 5.6 mM glucose. The addition of exendin-4 did not significantly 
impact 13C-enrichment (63.7  0.8 %). Lower levels of 2-ketoglutarate labelling 
were detected at 25 mM glucose (58.93  0.5 %, P<0.05), which slightly increased to 
61.53  0.9 % in the presence of exendin-4 (Figure 5.14). Glutamate, another key 
component of the TCA cycle, can be generated from 2-Ketoglutarate transamination. 
Similar to what was observed for 2-Ketoglutarate, this study observed 61.57  0.6 % 
labelling in glutamate at 5.6 mM glucose,. The addition on exendin-4 did lowered 
13C enrichment to 59.20  1 % (P<0.05). A similar reduction was observed at 25 mM 
glucose, both in the absence (57.78  1.4 %, P<0.05) and the presence (58.17  0.7 
%) of exendin-4. (Figure 5.15) 
Succinate was labelled at 33.85  0.7 % at 5.6 mM glucose and, at 25mM 
glucose and in the presence of exendin-4, 13C enrichment was not significantly 
different among treatment groups (ranging from 32.27  1.4 % to 38.24  4.1 %) 
(Figure 5.16). Similarly, fumarate 13C enrichment did not vary between the different 
conditions, and was at 53.3  3.22 % for 5.6 mM glucose, with no increase or 
decrease with changes in glucose concentration and in the presence of exendin-4 
(Figure 5.17). The same applies to malate, with 13C labelling enrichment in the same 
range as that at 5.6 mM glucose (64.10  1.1 %) (Figure 5.18). 
Dihydroxyacetone phosphate
Glucose alone
Glucose + Ex-4 (3 M)
25 mM glucose5.6 mM glucose
Figure 5.9A. 13C Labelling percentage for dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP).  
Cells were pre-treated with 5.6 or 25 mM glucose, in the absence or presence of exendin-4 
(3 M). Following pre-treatment, cells were incubated with [U-13C]-glucose (14 mM) for 1 
hour and processed for metabolite extraction. Percentage of labelling was calculated from 
the mass isotopomer distributions (MIDs) resulting from the GC-MS run. Schematic 
representation of glycolytic intermediates is shown at the top, with DHAP highlighted. 
3-phosphoglycerate
Glucose alone
Glucose + Ex-4 (3 M)
25 mM glucose5.6 mM glucose
Figure 5.9B. 13C Labelling percentage for 3-phosphoglyceric acid.  
Cells were pre-treated with the above conditions were challenged with [U-13C]-glucose (14 
mM) for 1 hour. Cells were processed for metabolite extraction and percentage of labelling 
was calculated from the mass isotopomer distributions (MIDs) resulting from the GC-MS 
run. Schematic representation of glycolytic intermediates is shown at the top, with glycerol-
3-phosphate highlighted. Schematic representation of glycolytic intermediates is shown at 
the top, with 3-phosphoglycerate highlighted. 
Phosphenolpyruvic acid
Glucose alone
Glucose + Ex-4 (3 M)
25 mM glucose5.6 mM glucose
Figure 5.9C. 13C Labelling percentage for phosphenolpyruvate (PEP). 
Cells were pre-treated with the above conditions were challenged with [U-13C]-glucose (14 
mM) for 1 hour. Cells were processed for metabolite extraction and percentage of labelling 
was calculated from the mass isotopomer distributions (MIDs) resulting from the GC-MS 
run. Schematic representation of glycolytic intermediates is shown at the top, with glycerol-
3-phosphate highlighted. Schematic representation of glycolytic intermediates is shown at 
the top, with PEP highlighted. 
Pyruvate
Glucose alone
Glucose + Ex-4 (3 M)
25 mM glucose5.6 mM glucose
Figure 5.10. 13C Labelling percentage for pyruvate. [U-13C] glucose (14 mM) was 
fed to BRIN-BD11 cells following pre-treatment with 5.6 or 25 mM glucose, in the 
absence or presence of exendin-4. Labelling was calculated from the mass isotopomer 
distributions (MIDs) detected by the GC-MS. 
Lactate
Glucose alone
Glucose + Ex-4 (3 M)
25 mM glucose5.6 mM glucose
Figure 5.11. 13C labelling percentage for lactate. Labelling was calculated from the 
mass isotopomer distributions (MIDs) detected by the GC-MS. *P<0.05, compared to 
5.6 mM glucose alone. 
Alanine
Glucose alone
Glucose + Ex-4 (3 M)
25 mM glucose5.6 mM glucose
*** ***
 
Figure 5.12. 13C labelling percentage for alanine. Labelling was calculated from the 
mass isotopomer distributions (MIDs) detected by the GC-MS. ***P<0.001, 
compared to 5.6 mM glucose alone, P<0.001 compared to 25 mM glucose alone. 
Citrate
Glucose alone
Glucose + Ex-4 (3 M)
25 mM glucose5.6 mM glucose
Figure 5.13. 13C labelling percentage for citrate. [U-13C] glucose (14 mM) labelling 
percentage for the formation of lactate, following pre-treatment with 5.6 or 25 mM 
glucose, in the absence or presence of exendin-4. Labelling was calculated from the 
mass isotopomer distributions (MIDs) detected by the GC-MS. *P<0.05 compared to 
5.6 mM glucose alone. 
2-Ketoglutaric acid
Glucose alone
Glucose + Ex-4 (3 M)
25 mM glucose5.6 mM glucose
Figure 5.14. 13C labelling for 2-ketoglutarate. Labelling was calculated from the 
mass isotopomer distributions (MIDs) detected by the GC-MS. *P<0.05 compared to 
5.6 mM glucose alone, P<0.05 compared to 25 mM glucose alone. 
Glutamate
Glucose alone
Glucose + Ex-4 (3 M)
25 mM glucose5.6 mM glucose
Figure 5.15. 13C labelling for glutamate. [U-13C] glucose (14 mM) labelling 
percentage for the formation of lactate, following pre-treatment with 5.6 or 25 mM 
glucose, in the absence or presence of exendin-4. Labelling was calculated from the 
mass isotopomer distributions (MIDs) detected by the GC-MS. *P<0.05, compared to 
5.6 mM glucose alone. 
Succinate
Glucose alone
Glucose + Ex-4 (3 M)
25 mM glucose5.6 mM glucose
Figure 5.16. 13C labelling for succinate. Labelling was calculated from the mass 
isotopomer distributions (MIDs) detected by the GC-MS. 
Fumarate
Glucose alone
Glucose + Ex-4 (3 M)
25 mM glucose5.6 mM glucose
Figure 5.17. 13C labelling for fumarate. Labelling was calculated from the mass 
isotopomer distributions (MIDs) detected by the GC-MS. 
Malate
Glucose alone
Glucose + Ex-4 (3 M)
25 mM glucose5.6 mM glucose
Figure 5.18. 13C labelling for malate. Labelling was calculated from the mass 
isotopomer distributions (MIDs) detected by the GC-MS. *P<0.05, compared to 5.6 
mM glucose alone. 
5.5 DISCUSSION 
Though it does not provide quantitative information on the level of 
metabolites, the importance of this study lies in the possibility to monitor glucose 
channelling through different pathways and its relative contribution to the formation 
of key metabolic intermediates. We can consider the model here presented as a 
pseudo-steady state model, where the number of cells changes over time, whereas 
the isotopic label was only fed once (Buescher et al., 2015). 
What is known regarding metabolism in BRIN-BD11 cells is that an increase 
in glucose concentration decreases the oxidation of acetyl-derived intermediates in 
the TCA cycle, as evidenced by a study using the above cellular model to trace 
different glucose isotopes at low and high concentrations of the hexose sugar. In the 
study, the conversion D-[3, 4-14C]glucose to 14CO2 was used as a means of 
measuring pyruvate dehydrogenase activity, and conversion of [5-3H]glucose to 
3HOH as a means of overall D-glucose metabolism. The ratio between the two 
processes decreased when increasing glucose concentrations from 1.1 mM to 16.7 
mM, indicating a glucose-dependent decrease in its oxidation rate (Rasschaert et al., 
1996). 
From the insulin assay performed under the established conditions for the 
metabolite analysis, insulin response to the glucose load (14 mM) was slightly 
reduced in cells pre-treated with high glucose (25 mM), compared to those under 
physiological conditions (5.6 mM glucose). This reduction was not significant, in 
contrast to what was reported by others using this cell model (Wallace et al., 2013). 
It is possible that the absence of a wash step before glucose stimulation, which we 
could not perform given possible alteration to metabolite fraction labelling, might 
have masked the functional impairment previously reported at 25 mM glucose 
(Wallace et al., 2013). However, underlying metabolic changes might have started 
taking place, including differences in glucose channelling through its metabolic 
pathways. 
Notably, there is evidence pointing to a link between exendin-4 induced 
cellular metabolism, via the activation of the hypoxia induced factor  (HIF- ) and 
the activation of the mTOR pathway (Carlessi et al., 2017). There is pathway 
conversion between the mTOR pathway and the downstream activation of the insulin 
receptor signalling loop. However, the ability of exendin-4 to increase cellular 
respiratory capacity and glycolytic flux in BRIN-BD11 cells is independent of the 
presence of insulin growth-like factor receptor (IGFR) or the insulin receptor (IR) 
(Rowlands et al., 2018). Therefore, though the insulin assay could be informative of 
the functional state of the cells, it does not directly affect metabolic changes induced 
by exendin-4. 
With regards to other pathways for glucose metabolism, the pentose phosphate 
pathway does not affect glucose stimulated insulin secretion in the clonal pancreatic 
cell line INS-1 832/13. Specific inhibition of the enzymes involved in this pathway, 
namely siG6PDH-1 and 6-AN, both separately and in combination did not alter 
insulin secretion up to the concentration needed to downregulate the RNA of the 
enzymes (1000 and 200 M, respectively) (Huang and Joseph, 2012).  
Moreover, pyruvate labelling pattern in our study was either fully labelled or 
unlabelled under all the experimental conditions tested. This suggests the labelled 
pyruvate detected originates from glycolysis, given that when labelling occurs, all 3 
carbons of the molecule are involved, reinforcing the importance of oxidative 
metabolism in BRIN-BD11 cells. 
For these reasons and given the importance of oxidative glucose metabolism in 
regulating insulin secretion (Alcazar et al., 2000), we mainly focused our attention 
on intermediates on glycolysis and the TCA cycle, while considering metabolites we 
detected also in the organic phase extraction. 
5.5.1 Metabolites in the cell supernatants 
Our qualitative 1H-NMR revealed differences in metabolites following 
treatment with exendin-4, at physiological glucose concentrations. Acetate has been 
attributed a role in type 2 diabetes, in particular that of preventing hypoglycaemia 
when blood glucose levels are too low (Tang et al., 2015). Consistently, by 
comparing exendin-4 treatment at low and high glucose, the levels of acetate appear 
to be higher at 5.6 mM glucose, possibly suggesting a need to prevent 
hypoglycaemia and reflecting the glucose-dependent actions of the incretin. 
Conversely, the role of acetone in beta-cells has not yet established and further 
research in this aspect, starting with the characterisation of this putative metabolite 
could help establish the potential of this metabolite under these conditions. Alanine 
and lactate were also detected in the 13C experiment and their significance will be 
discussed further below. 
5.5.2 Organic phase metabolites 
Previous reports measure the total amount of fatty acids present in BRIN-
BD11 to be about 120 g/106 cells with palmitate, oleate, stearate and linoleate being 
the most abundant (Diakogiannaki et al., 2007). The role of fatty acids in T2D can 
vary according to the type of fatty acid and the length of the stimulation, as they are 
considered important fuels for beta-cells, but they can impair glucose-stimulated 
insulin secretion following chronic exposure (McClenaghan, 2007). The action of 
palmitate suggests association with beta-cell dysfunction, as increases in 
inflammatory IL-6 has been reported in healthy islets following stimulation with the 
fatty acid (Eguchi and Nagai, 2017).  
Compared to physiological concentrations of glucose, high glucose 
concentrations increased the abundance of palmitic and arachidic acids, which might 
impair insulin secretion (Keane et al., 2011). An increase in abundance was also 
observed for cholesterol, which has been previously associated with an increase in 
reactive oxygen species (ROS) production at concentrations of 160 M in BRIN-
BD11 cells (Asalla et al., 2016). All these metabolites were reduced by addition of 
exendin-4 at high glucose concentrations, consistent with the anti-diabetic effects 
related to such reduction.  
In contrast, at 5.6 mM glucose, exendin-4 increased the abundance of fatty 
acids. Studies have reported saturated fatty acids as mediators of lipotoxicity-
induced apoptosis of beta-cells, with concomitant increase in NO (Welters et al., 
2004), which we did not observe in the subsequent studies we performed on NO 
release (described in Chapter 6). In order to assess if the increase in fatty acid species 
lies within non-toxic levels, further quantification is needed to provide an 
explanation to the observed result. 
Using uniformly labelled glucose was a means of assessing fatty acid synthesis 
following exendin-4 treatment in physiological and hyperglycaemic conditions. 
However, the inability to detect labelling in our experiment could be mainly due to 
two reasons. It could be possible that very low levels of fatty acid concentration 
might have not allowed calculation of the mass isotopomer distributions (MIDs). 
Another reason could be that glucose was not significantly channelled towards fatty 
acids synthesis under our experimental conditions. Further studies taking into 
consideration the oxidation of fatty acids could shed light on the preferred 
mechanism of exendin-4 on this intracellular metabolic pathway and its role in 
stimulating insulin release. 
5.5.3 Aqueous phase metabolites 
The total ion chromatograms showing the abundance of aqueous metabolites 
revealed that increase of glucose concentrations from physiological levels to a 
hyperglycaemic state determined a reduction of docosanoic acid, a component of the 
extracellular membrane according to the Human Metabolome Data Base (HMDB). 
This suggests that chronic hyperglycaemia might direct metabolism towards a 
reduction of cell membrane synthesis which would be consistent with reduced 
proliferation under this condition preceding beta-cell failure (Chang-Chen et al., 
2008). This finding represents a good example of how, despite the maintenance of 
insulinotropic activities and responsiveness to exendin-4 under chronic 
hyperglycaemic state, beta-cells start undergoing changes in their metabolism 
predicting the features of beta-cell failure. Further studies quantifying these 
metabolites, as well as measuring them across different time points and alongside 
functional insulin release assays would help expand on their predictive potential in 
5.5.4 Significance of TCA intermediates 
The percentage of labelling for lactate detected in this study was consistent 
with previous reports considering the effects of metformin on the TCA cycle 
intermediates in primary rat astrocytes, given the drugs ability to cross the blood-
brain barrier (Hohnholt et al., 2017), suggesting the production of this intermediate is 
consistent across there two cellular models. The high turn-over observed in mice fed 
with 13C-lactate, which was about 2-fold higher than that of glucose itself, represents 
an index of increased consumption of this metabolite. This is supported by studies 
reported in both fed and fasting mice, where about 40-50% of TCA intermediates are 
generated from lactic acid (Hui et al., 2017). On a broader scale, non-oxidative 
metabolism, with increased accumulation of lactate has been reported in patients 
affected by T2D, compared to healthy controls (Adeva-Andany et al., 2014). An 
increase in consumption of lactate, for a higher ATP production for insulin release, 
could reflect the decrease in labelling of this intermediate in samples treated with 
exendin-4, possibly decreasing accumulation of the metabolite and consistent with 
an anti-diabetic environment.  
With regards to alanine, exendin-4 increased its labelling both under normo- 
and hyperglycaemic conditions. The suggested insulinotropic mechanism for the 
amino acid, co-transport with Na+, has been further characterised as an oxidative 
metabolism channelling mechanism (Brennan et al., 2002). In fact, by using a 13C-
tracer for glucose metabolism in NMR spectroscopy analysis, the same BRIN-BD11 
cell line displayed increased release of glutamate and lactate in the supernatant, 
suggesting the importance of aerobic metabolism for appropriate insulin secretion 
and glucose homeostasis.  
With regards to citrate, labelling of this intermediate was lowered under all 
experimental conditions, compared to the untreated sample. A decrease in metabolite 
labelling could be due to either a lower uptake in the labelled species, in our case 
glucose, or an increase in its consumption. It is possible that treatment with exendin-
4 increased the consumption rate of this intermediate, while high glucose alone 
might have been responsible for channelling towards other pathways. In fact, citrate 
has another important biological role, as it can be transported to the cytoplasm and 
broken down to oxaloacetate and acetyl-CoA for free fatty acid (FFA) synthesis. 
Interestingly, there is evidence supporting the role for FFA in beta-cell signalling for 
insulin secretion. As the KATP-channel dependent pathway is involved only in the 
acute phases of insulin secretion, a model integrating nutrient signalling on a 
separate yet connected pathway with glycolysis has been proposed. Long-chain 
acetyl-CoA (LC-acetylCoA) fatty acids deriving from citrate transport and 
metabolism in the cytoplasm have been shown to enhance glucose-stimulated insulin 
secretion only in the presence of glucose (Corkey et al., 2000). The reduction of 
labelling found for citrate for the exendin-4 treated conditions could have led to a 
FFA-mediated insulin secretion. The sample pre-treated with 25 mM glucose, 
however, could have simply responded by a decrease in glucose uptake, reflecting an 
impaired glucose-sensitivity under this condition. 
In the reaction from isocitrate to 2-Ketoglutarate, the CO2 released could be 
from the unlabelled portion, therefore not directly originating from the glucose we 
fed the cells with. The mass distribution vectors (MDVs) of 2-Ketoglutarate and 
glutamate should match, as the compounds are in complete exchange where 
correction for natural isotope abundance has been applied (Buescher et al., 2015). 
We observed a MDV of 63 and 61% for the 2KG and glutamate, respectively, 
indicating a degree of reliability in the isotope correction in data generated thus far. 
A slight, yet statistically significant reduction in the labelling pattern of 2-
Ketoglutarate was observed in the samples pre-treated with high glucose, both in the 
presence and absence of exendin-4. A consistent reduction was also observed in the 
MID for glutamate in these samples. Reports on the function of 2-KG in maintaining 
homeostasis in the gut, with an increase in the number of immune cells following an 
infection (Wu et al., 2016), point to an overall anti-inflammatory action related to 
this metabolite. At 5.6 mM glucose, both in the absence or the presence of exendin-
4, there is an increase in channelling glucose towards the formation of 2-
Ketoglutarate. Though we can observe a slight increase in labelling also at 25 mM 
glucose in the presence of exendin-4, this failed to reach statistical significance, 
suggesting this mechanism is more pronounced at lower glucose concentrations. 
Glutamate has been associated to anti-diabetic actions, allowing Goto-Kakizaki 
rats with insulin defects to respond to GLP-1 due to residual production of glutamate 
(Yokoi et al., 2016). Conversely, studies using the insulinoma RIN-m5F and MIN6 
cell lines showed that following a chronic stimulation (72 hrs) with 16.7mM glucose, 
there was an increase in glutamate in the cell supernatant. This was associated with 
impaired GSIS, which was restored by blocking glutamate with glutamate 
dehydrogenase (GDH) (Huang et al., 2017). Therefore, it seems like a balance 
between the stimulatory activity of glutamate with regards to insulin secretion needs 
to exist for cells to maintain a healthy metabolic state. The decrease operated by 
exendin-4 could work in this direction, whilst chronic stimulation with 25 mM 
glucose might have reduced production of glutamate from glucose reflecting a 
metabolic impairment. This hypothesis could be validated by a compartmental 
analysis of labelled glutamate to determine its localisation, either in the mitochondria 
to generate 2-Ketoglutarate or in the cytoplasm to contribute to insulin sensitivity. 
For succinate, fumarate and malate, we did not detect differences across 
samples, suggesting the main differences in metabolites under these conditions relate 
to the initial steps of the TCA cycle or that these metabolites reach a steady state 
quicker than the upstream intermediates. Given that our experiment is performed in 
whole intracellular metabolite extraction, it is not possible to discriminate between 
metabolite intermediate fractions that are shuttled out of the mitochondria for other 
roles in the cytoplasm.  
Nevertheless, the results observed in this study indicate an overall metabolic 
state which promotes channelling of glucose towards oxidative metabolism within 
the TCA cycle, consistent the efficient generation of ATP associated with insulin 
secretion reflected in the functional assay. We observed similar trends in the actions 
of exendin-4 between high and low glucose, with the latter being the setting where 
effects were more pronounced towards a more efficient turn-over in the cycle, 
suggesting more pronounced enzymatic activities at 5.6 mM glucose. In order to 
validate this hypothesis, studies measuring labelling abundance as well as enzymatic 
activity could take this possibility into account. Also using other labelled species for 
key metabolites such as lactate and pyruvate could isolate the channelling of these 
compounds and provide further information regarding their cycling in the pathway.  
By further understanding metabolic modulation operated by exendin-4, these 
studies could be extended to the hybrid peptides E-TGN and E-MAM2 for 
comparison of their actions on glucose metabolism. At present, we instead 
considered investigating the expression profile of key genes involved in insulin 
secretion, with a view of understanding how the different treatments, exendin-4, E-
TGN and E-MAM2 could also modulate the transcriptome.  
Chapter 6 
TRANSCRIPTIONAL MODULATION 
6.1 BACKGROUND 
6.1.1 Regulation of genes involved in insulin secretion 
Among the causative and contributing factors to the development of T2D, 
including glucotoxicity, oxidative and ER stress (Ottosson-Laakso et al., 2017), 
altered gene expression can potentially lead to altered metabolic homeostasis 
(Sithara et al., 2017). One of the main pathological traits of diabetes, glucotoxicity, 
has been referred to as a determinant for altered gene expression in T2D. In fact, 
glucose concentration has been found to modulate the PKA pathway, through 
variants associated with in vivo insulin secretion (Ottosson-Laakso et al., 2017). 
Success in the field of exploiting gene expression fingerprint as a predictive 
tool has been achieved in outcomes for treatment of breast cancer (van t Veer et al., 
2002), highlighting the power of this tool for complex and multifactorial diseases. In 
T2D, studies utilising gene expression signatures can harbour information on the 
state of the disease. By inducing experimental diabetes in adipocytes and comparing 
their gene expression profile after restoring insulin sensitivity, a characterisation of 
patients with different levels of insulin sensitivity was possible (Konstantopoulos et 
al., 2011). 
Interestingly, gene expression profile characterisation, performing genome-
wide association studies to identify SNPs and patterns which correlate with type 2 
diabetes have mainly focused adipocytes (Das and Rao, 2017) or pluripotent stem 
cells differentiated into islets (Perez-Alcantara et al., 2018). Though less is known 
regarding patterns in pancreatic beta-cells, some susceptibility genes for T2D have 
been examined. For example, the expression of KCNJ11, the gene encoding for a 
subunit of the potassium channel presented a negative association with body mass 
index levels when comparing healthy and diabetic islet donors, suggesting a link of 
this gene to obesity (Kirkpatrick et al, 2010). The pancreatic duodenal homeobox 
(PDX-1), which is responsible for beta-cell differentiation and growth, has also been 
linked to the upregulation of insulin gene transcription (Iype et al., 2005), suggesting 
that these genes work together in maintaining healthy and functional beta-cells.  
The ability of novel antidiabetic peptides, possessing a native GLP-1 
component to modulate gene expression has previously been shown. Skarbaliene and 
colleagues (2017) presented a novel dual GLP-1-gastrin agonist with antidiabetic 
action and compared its activity of modulating gene expression with that of exendin-
4. Results from this study showed the novel peptide upregulated genes involved in 
the activation of the MAPK pathway, consistent with the idea of an increased insulin 
signalling and beta-cell proliferation (Skarbaliene et al., 2017). This highlights how 
gene expression patterns can be clustered, providing an overview of the beta-cell 
transcriptome following treatment. 
In our experimental setting, we were guided by the rationale of having an 
overview of any changes in the expression of key genes involved in insulin secretion, 
using traditional real-time PCR. Though this does not provide a complete overview 
of the transcriptome, we were aiming to obtain indications on how the peptides could 
affect gene expression at a time where changes on a transcriptional level were 
detectable. 
6.1.1.1 Pancreatic duodenal homeobox (PDX-1) 
The insulin gene promoter, found about 340 bp upstream of the gene, is a 
known binding site for cis-and trans-acting transcription factors regulated by 
glucose, calcium and other nutrients (Andrali et al., 2008). Despite differences in 
regulation of transcription factors between rat and human species, one of the most 
conserved regulators is PDX-1, whose DNA binding activity is regulated by glucose 
(Andrali et al., 2008). 
The PDX-1 gene is known to regulate insulin production and beta-cell 
development and is downregulated in type 2 diabetes (Hao et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 
2017). An important role in regulating transcription of the insulin gene has also been 
attributed to PDX-1, as silencing this gene with small-interfering RNA caused a 40% 
downregulation of pre-insulin mRNA transcripts (Iype et al., 2005). PDX-1 also 
plays a fundamental part in beta-cell replacement therapy, where the idea of 
increasing and stimulating the production of insulin-secreting cells could represent a 
therapeutic option for both type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Pancreatic mesenchymal cells, 
following transfection with a synthetic form of PDX-1 mRNA, can differentiate in 
insulin-producing cells (Guo et al., 2015), highlighting the cellular reprogramming 
feature of the gene. 
Studies aimed at evaluating the contribution of exendin-4 and GLP-1 receptor 
agonists in carrying out anti-diabetic effects with regards to the growth and 
maturation of beta-cells have also shown promising results. In islet like cell clusters, 
exendin-4 stimulates the differentiation of beta-cells, which also corresponds to an in 
vivo increase of PDX-1 positive cells following transplantation of pancreatic 
precursors in the presence of exendin-4 (Movassat et al., 2002). Another GLP-1 
receptor agonist, liraglutide, was tested in insulin resistant mice to assess its 
relationship to GLP-1 in its anti-diabetic action. Together with preventing beta-cell 
loss, the GLP-1 receptor agonist increased mRNA levels of PDX-1 and this action 
was coupled with an improvement of pancreatic function (Hao et al., 2017). 
6.1.1.2 GLP-1 receptor (GLP-1R) 
The GLP-1 receptor mediates signalling of its agonists in the regulation of 
glucose concentrations. In T2D, the actions of both GIP and GLP-1 are impaired, 
with the latter preserving some residual activity (Nauck et al., 1993). In this context, 
the expression of the GLP-1 receptor has been measured in a diabetic in vivo model, 
the partially pancreatectomized rat. Results from that study show a reduction of 
GLP-1 receptor expression in the presence of high glucose levels both in vitro and in 
vivo over a 48-hour period (Xu et al., 2007). There is also evidence for a 3-fold 
decrease in the expression of this receptor in diabetic ob/ob mice islets compared to 
non-diabetic littermates (Kubo et al., 2016), strongly suggesting a correlation 
between the reduced expression of this receptor and impairment in glucose 
homeostasis. 
Another important link between the expression of GLP-1R and metabolic 
homeostasis lie in the ability of the receptor to function as a promoter for insulin 
gene expression, as the beta-cell line INS-1 overexpressing the receptor were able to 
generate an autocrine stimulation of insulin gene transcription (Chepurny and Holz, 
2002). This is in line with the anti-diabetic effects operated by GLP-1 receptor 
agonists and further supports the importance of this incretin in maintaining glucose 
homeostasis. 
Among the regulators of gene expression within the pancreatic beta-cell, also 
non-coding microRNAs have been studied for their possible effect on beta-cell 
specific transcripts in both murine and human islets. In particular, miR-204 
downregulates the transcription of both the insulin gene (Xu et al., 2013) and the 
GLP-1R, as evidenced by gene expression studies in the presence of that specific 
miRNA (Jo et al., 2018). Interestingly, in the absence of this transcriptional 
regulator, the beneficial effects on glucose tolerance were observed only following 
exendin-4 treatment, suggesting the importance of the peptide in mediating 
transcriptional effects on the GLP-1 receptor (Jo et al., 2018). 
For these reasons, we considered measuring mRNA levels of the crucial genes 
for beta-cell preservation, with a view to evaluating how the peptides modulate their 
expression. 
6.1.1.3 Plasma membrane channels (KCNJ11, ABCC8 and CACNA1C) 
KATP channels couple the electrical activity of beta-cells with the metabolic 
state of the cells (Ashcroft, 2005). The KCNJ11 gene encodes for the inner core 
subunit of the channel, Kir6.2. Activating mutations in the gene have been associated 
with neonatal diabetes, where by a gain of function causes a decrease in sensitivity to 
ATP, resulting in reduced insulin secretion (Gloyn et al., 2004). 
Another key subunit of the potassium channel, SUR1, is encoded by ABCC8. 
Sulphonylurea drugs bind to this subunit, allowing for an ATP-independent closure 
of the channel (Gloyn et al., 2004). Mutations in this gene are associated with cases 
of hyperinsulinism, related to the absence of the functional protein at the plasma 
membrane or failure of MgADP to activate the channel (Ashcroft, 2005). 
The L-type calcium channels located on the membrane of beta-cells are 
encoded by both CACNA1C and CACNA1D genes. Though the expression of 
CACNA1D is about 60-fold higher than CACNA1C in human beta-cells (Reinbothe 
et al., 2013), CACNA1C plays important roles in rodents. The isoform it encodes, 
Cav1.2, is vital as a global knockout of the gene is incompatible with life, whereas 
within the beta-cell the protein is necessary for first phase insulin release (Reinbothe 
et al., 2013). 
Given the results we observed for first phase insulin secretion suggest our 
novel hybrid peptides have anti-diabetic actions, we considered how that reflects on 
the expression of the gene encoding for this channel in pancreatic beta-cells 
following treatment. 
6.1.1.4 Nuclear factor kB (NFkB) 
As insulin resistance in T2D arises also as a consequence of chronic 
inflammation (Kolb and Mandrup-Poulsen, 2010; Pollack et al., 2016), we 
considered the expression of the NFkB gene in clonal pancreatic beta-cells. With a 
complex downstream signalling, by which both anti- and pro-inflammatory roles 
have been attributed to NFkB activation (Lawrence 2009), its function in beta-cells 
and diabetes has been investigated.  
The human beta-cell line 1.1B4, created by electrofusion, was assessed for 
gene expression following cytokine exposure, which is known to cause 
inflammation. Even though gene expression does not necessarily translate into an 
increased protein activity, results from this study indicated NFkB1 gene was 
upregulated following cytokine treatment and a 50% decrease in cell viability, as 
well as a decreased insulin content were observed (Vasu et al., 2014). This suggests 
that the inflammatory cytokines used in the study (IL-, TNF- and IFN-) acted as 
regulators of transcription after 18 h incubation within in a cellular model of beta-
cells, justifying the use of a similar protocol to understand the actions of our peptides 
in modulating gene expression.  
Information regarding gene expression profiles of beta-cells has also been 
acquired in vivo. Using a zebrafish model, it has been shown that NFkB can be 
considered a marker for beta-cell ageing. The decline in beta cell proliferation 
observed with ageing was associated with changes in gene expression, with different 
components of the NFkB pathway being upregulated (Janjuha et al., 2018), 
consistent with an increase of inflammatory markers. The activation of NFkB has 
been also linked to disruption of nitrates in the nitric oxide (NO) pathway 
(Grumbach et al., 2005), which plays a role in T2D. Beneficial/harmful effects of 
nitrates have been mostly linked to the source from its biosynthesis. While the 
endothelial nitrate-nitrite-NO pathway reduces oxidative stress and promotes insulin 
secretion via mitochondrial depolarization (Ghasemi and Jeddi, 2017), inducible NO 
contributes to insulin resistance of T2D. This form is enhanced in the presence of 
free fatty acids, which determine an increased circulation of pro-inflammatory 
cytokine IL-1 (Ghasemi and Zahediasl, 2013). Assessing the modulatory effects of 
the peptides on NFkB, we also considered any changes in nitrate release that could 
suggest the formation of a pro-inflammatory environment. 
With regards to peptide treatment modutating this pathway, there is evidence 
of exendin-4 improving insulin resistance by modulating NFkB, more specifically by 
polarising adipose tissue macrophages towards an anti-inflammatory phenotype, 
inhibiting release of inflammatory cytokines such as IL- and IL-6 (Guo et al., 
2016). For these reasons, NFkB represented a target of interest, as its actions in beta-
cells are known to propagate inflammation and exendin-4 can mitigate such effects 
also by modulating the expression of the gene. Our investigation was pointing to the 
possibility of the hybrid peptides to affect the number of NFkB transcripts, towards 
an anti-diabetic profile. 
6.2 AIM AND OBJECTIVES 
Following up on the mechanism of action studies, which show modulation of 
the peptides actions in relation to the activity of calcium and potassium channels, 
we studied the transcriptome relating to genes associated with T2D. The aim is to 
assess the expression profiles of key beta cell genes involved in insulin secretion and 
inflammation following treatment with exendin-4 and its related hybrids (E-TGN 
and E-MAM2). 
Specific objectives include: 
1. Treating BRIN-BD11 cells with insulin inducing concentrations of 
exendin-4, E-TGN and E-MAM2, according to the previous insulin release 
experiment. 
2. Extracting RNA and performing real-time quantitative PCR to 
compare the expression levels of genes involved in cell proliferation (GLP-1 
and PDX-1), insulin secretion (INS-1, ABCC8 and CACNA1C) and 
inflammation (NFkB), using -actin as the reference housekeeping gene. 
3. Assessment of the production of the nitric oxide metabolite NO2- 
as a measure of NO production relating to modulation of NFkB. 
6.3 RESEARCH DESIGN 
6.3.1 BRIN-BD11 cells treatment and RNA isolation 
BRIN-BD11 cells were used for gene expression studies. Cells were seeded 
and treated as detailed in section 2.4.1 and RNA extraction was performed using the 
Isolate II RNA Mini Kit (Bioline, London, UK), as per manufacturers 
recommended protocol. Following cell lysis with 350 L of lysis buffer and 3.5 L 
of -mercaptoethanol, lysate was filtered by centrifugation at 11,000 g for 1 minute. 
RNA precipitation was achieved by addition of 70% ethanol followed by a 30-
second centrifugation (11,000 g). The silica membrane was de-salted and 
residual DNA was digested with 95 l of DNAse I reaction mixture. The membrane 
was washed and dried by 3 successive 30-second centrifugation steps (at 
11,000 g).  RNA was eluted in 40 L RNAse-free water and quantified 
using Nanodrop 1000 (ThermoScientific). The instrument measured the 
concentration of each sample (ng/L), the 280/260 and 260/230nm absorbance 
ratios. For the 280/260 ratio, which indicates purity of the sample from proteins, the 
acceptable value of a good quality RNA extraction was selected as from 2.0 and 
above. For the 260/230 ratio, indicating purity from contaminants absorbing at 230 
nm such as carbohydrates, an acceptable value was chosen as from 2.0 above. 
6.3.2 cDNA synthesis and Real Time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR)  
cDNA strands were transcribed from RNA using Sensifast cDNA Synthesis 
kit (Bioline, London, UK), as detailed in section 2.4.2. The generated cDNA was 
stored at -20C until qPCR reaction. In summary, each reaction 
contained 1X Sensifast SYBR NO-ROX (Bioline, London, UK), 400-500 nM 
of forward and reverse primers for the given gene (Table 2 in Chapter 2), 100 ng of 
cDNA and deionized water to a final volume of 20L. The instrument used for the 
reaction (AriaMx Real-time PCR System (Agilent Technologies, Santa 
Clara, CA, USA)) was set up with the qPCR cycles detailed in section 2.4.3.  
6.3.3 NO2- measurements 
The NO metabolite NO2- was measured according to the protocol detailed in 
section 2.5. Briefly, BRIN-BD11 cells were seeded at a density of 2.5x104 cells/well 
in a 96-well plate and treated with exendin-4, E-TGN or E-MAM2 (3 M) for 24 
hours. The supernatant (50 l) was incubated in the presence of assay buffer, as well 
as nitrate reductase and enzymes co-factors for the detection of NO2-. Griess reagents 
A and B were added to all wells (50 l) for 5 and 10 minutes and absorbance was 
read at 540 nm. 
6.3.4 Statistical analysis 
Statistical analysis was carried out as detailed in section 2.7. The raw values of 
relative fluorescence obtained from the AriaMx instrument software were used to 
quantify gene expression levels. The relative gene expression (R) for each gene was 
calculated using the following equation:  
                                       R    = 
The efficiency of the target gene (E(target)) is normalised to the reference gene 
expression of -actin (E(ref)), according to the cycle threshold difference between the 
untreated and the sample (Ct(control-sample)) (Pflaffl, 2001). 
To compare gene expression levels between each differentially treated sample, 
an ANOVA followed by Newman-Keuls test were used. Values were normalised by 
setting the untreated control sample value to 1. 
E(target)Cttarget (control-sample) 
E(ref)Ctref (control-sample) 
6.4 RESULTS 
6.4.1 The peptides increased the expression of GLP-1R and PDX-1 
In order to assess the effects of the peptides on cell survival and proliferation, 
as these aspects are compromised in T2D, the first study was performed on GLP-1R 
and PDX-1. Consistently with the notion of an agonist increasing the number of 
receptors on the cell surface, exendin-4 increased the expression of GLP-1R by 7.1  
2.08-fold (p<0.05), compared to the untreated control (5.6. mM glucose). Treatment 
with E-TGN increased the expression of the receptor by 3.5  1.30-fold whilst E-
MAM2 increased the level of transcripts for the GLP-1 receptor by 13.3  1.41-fold 
compared to control (p<0.01) which represented a 1.9  1.41-fold, significantly 
higher expression (p<0.05) of this gene compared to exendin-4 (Figure 6.1A). 
With regards to the expression of the PDX-1 gene, compared to their native 
peptide exendin-4, both E-TGN and E-MAM2 decreased PDX-1 expression by 3.76 
and 10.13-fold, respectively (P<0.001), although treatments with exendin-4 and E-
TGN were still significantly higher than glucose alone (607-fold, P<0.001, and 161-
fold, P<0.05) (Figure 6.1B). 
Exendin-4
Treatment (3 M)
GLP-1R expression
E-MAM2E-TGNNone
Treatment (3 M)
None Exendin-4 E-MAM2 E-TGN
PDX-1 gene expression
30000
120000
210000
300000
500000
550000
600000
650000 ***
Figure 6.1. Gene expression levels for genes involved in proliferation: GLP-1R (A) and 
PDX-1 (B).  
Following 24-hour treatment with peptides (3 M), mRNA levels were measured for 
quantitative gene expression, relative to control. Values are mean  SEM (3 replicates from 
one experiment), *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001 compared to control (5.6 mM glucose 
treated). p<0.05, p<0.001, compared to exendin-4 treatment. 
6.4.2 The hybrid peptides modulated genes involved in insulin secretion (INS-1, 
ABCC8, KCNJ11 and CACNA1C)  
Treatment with exendin-4 increased INS-1 gene expression by 7.4-fold 
(P<0.05), compared to control. Similarly, E-TGN also increased INS-1 expression 
by 6.2-fold (P<0.05). E-MAM2 was the most potent modulator of the expression of 
this gene, generating a 4.5-fold increase compared to exendin-4 alone (P<0.001) 
(Figure 6.2A). 
With regards to the expression of the ATP-binding cassette on the potassium 
channel (ABCC8), exendin-4 downregulated the expression of the gene by 1.34-fold, 
compared to control. E-TGN and E-MAM2 both decreased this level by 2.1-fold 
(P<0.001) and 1.9-fold (P<0.01), respectively, compared to exendin-4 (Figure 6.2B).  
Exendin-4 upregulated the expression of KCNJ11, the gene encoding for the 
sulphonylurea receptor by 1.45-fold (P<0.05), compared to the untreated control. E-
TGN decreased the action of exendin-4 by 4.12-fold (P<0.001), and by 2.84-fold 
(P<0.01) compared to control. E-MAM2 downregulated KCNJ11 expression by 
1.83-fold (P<0.05) compared to control and by 2.65-fold (P<0.001) compared to 
exendin-4 alone (Figure 6.2C). 
The CACNA1C gene, encoding for the CaV1.2 gene was downregulated 
following treatment with each peptide. For exendin-4 treated cells, the expression of 
CACNA1C was reduced by 3.8-fold (P<0.001), compared to untreated control (5.6 
mM glucose). A further decrease in the transcription of this gene was observed 
following treatment with E-TGN and E-MAM2, where a reduction of 3.4- and a 
4.26-fold were observed, respectively, compared to exendin-4 (P<0.05) (Figure 
6.2D). 
Exendin-4
Treatment (3 M)
INS-1 expression
E-MAM2E-TGNNone
Exendin-4
Treatment (3 M)
ABCC8 expression
E-MAM2E-TGNNone
*** **
Exendin-4
Treatment (3 M)
KCNJ11 expression
E-MAM2E-TGNNone
Figure 6.2. Effects on exendin-4 and hybrid peptides on the mRNA expression of INS-
1(A), ABCC8 (B), KCNJ11 (C) and CACNA1C (D) in BRIN-BD11 cells  
Following 24-hour treatment with peptides (3 M), mRNA levels were measured for 
quantitative gene expression, relative to control. Values are mean  SEM (3 replicates from 
one experiment for INS-1, n=3 for the other genes), *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001 
compared to control (5.6 mM glucose treated). p<0.05, p<0.001, compared to 
exendin-4 treatment. 
CACNA1C gene expression
None Exendin-4 E-MAM2E-TGN
*** ***
Treatment (3 M)
A) B) 
       C)                                                                             D)    
6.4.3 Exendin-4 related peptides decrease NFkB expression, with no changes is 
NO2- release 
Compared to control, exendin-4 decreased the expression of NFkB by 4.18-
fold (P<0.001). E-TGN further decreased this by 7.78-fold (P<0.001), which 
represents an 11.5-fold reduction compared to control (P<0.001). In the presence of 
E-MAM2, gene expression of NFkB was 2.37-fold higher than that of exendin-4 
alone (P<0.01), but still 1.76-fold lower than control (P<0.001) (Figure 6.3). 
With regards to NO2- release, no changes were observed between the control 
(5.6 mM glucose) or the peptide treated samples (Figure 6.4). This result is relevant 
both to the inflammatory and metabolic features involved in T2D, as increased 
release of NO from NO2- can be an index of fatty acid-induced hypoxia (Welters et 
al., 2014). 
Exendin-4
Treatment (3 M)
NFkB expression
E-MAM2E-TGNNone
Figure 6.3. Effects of hybrid peptides on the expression of NFkB in BRIN-BD11 cells. 
Following 24-hour treatment with peptides (3 M), mRNA levels were measured for 
quantitative gene expression, relative to control. Values are mean  SEM (3 replicates frpm 
one experiment), ***p<0.001 compared to control (5.6 mM glucose treated). p<0.01, 
p<0.001, compared to exendin-4 treatment. 
Figure 6.4. Effects of native exendin-4 and hybrid peptides on nitrite (NO2-) release 
from BRIN-BD11 cells.  
NO2- release was measured after chronic treatment (24 hours) of cells with exendin-4. With 
this colorimetric assay, cells (2.5 X 104) were seeded in a 96-well plate for overnight 
attachment. The following day, BRIN-BD11 cells were treated with exendin-4, E-TGN, or 
E-MAM2 (3 M), for 24 hours. The supernatant was assayed for NO2- as described above 
Values are mean  SEM (N=2, with 3 replicates per experiment). No changes in NO2- 
release were observed following treatment with exendin-4 (3 M). 
Glucose (5.6 mM)
Glucose (5.6 mM) + peptide (3 M)
None Exendin-4 E-TGN E-MAM2
Additions
6.5 DISCUSSION 
For the purpose of this study, we focused on assessing changes in expression 
of genes involved in cell proliferation, insulin secretion and related to the 
inflammatory pathway of NFkB in order to further understand how exendin-4, E-
TGN and E-MAM2 modulate transcription of these genes.  
Given previous reports on the action of the FDA approved anti-diabetic drug 
exendin-4 on modulating gene expression with regards to the insulin-secreting 
pathway (Li et al., 2005; Fusco et al., 2017), we included the peptide in this study to 
evaluate how its action compares to those of the hybrid peptides. This allows a better 
understanding of how the novel peptides modulate insulin secretion compared to 
baseline. 
The expression of the insulin gene, occurring exclusively in pancreatic beta-
cells, is regulated both by transcriptional factors and external agents, including 
glucose, hormones and fatty acids (Melloul et al., 2002). Consistent with the ability 
of GLP-1 receptor agonists to increase the levels of insulin mRNA transcripts 
(Drucker et al., 1987; Chepurny et al., 2002; Fusco et al., 2017), exendin-4 increased 
insulin gene expression. Similarly, E-TGN also increased the expression of insulin. 
The same applied to E-MAM2, which also conferred increased levels of insulin 
transcripts to the BRIN-BD11 cell line by about 5-fold, compared to exendin-4. The 
amount of insulin in the cells can have an additive effect in stimulating gene 
expression (Le Lay and Stein 2006). Effects of MAM2 alone on gene expression 
have not yet been reported in the literature. However, peptide screening in Chapter 3 
indicated that the amount of insulin secreted by MAM2 was 1.16-fold higher than 
that of exendin-4. If this is consistent with gene expression levels, the frog peptide 
might contribute by additive effect to the result obtained here, even though it is 
understood that several factors may influence insulin gene expression and insulin 
secretion differentially.  
Beta-cell proliferation is impaired in diabetes, as beta-cell failure represents 
one of the main consequences of the hyperinsulinism defining the first stages of the 
disease (Shanik et al., 2008). To that end, promoting cell proliferation could be 
beneficial in reducing metabolic stress that precedes such failure. GLP-1R is the G-
protein coupled receptor to which the endogenous incretin, GLP-1, and exendin-4 
bind to. A decrease of the expression of this receptor was observed in diabetic 
murine islets, where by exogenous overexpression of GLP-1R insulin secretion was 
restored (Kubo et al., 2016), suggesting the anti-diabetic actions of exendin-4 could 
relate to this receptor. Consistently with that idea, in our experimental setting, the 
presence of exendin-4 increased the expression of GLP-1R by 10-fold. Likewise, the 
hybrid peptides generated a prominent increase in the expression of this receptor, 
with E-MAM2 having the highest effect. The increase in the expression of GLP-1R 
following peptide treatment suggests this receptor could contribute to the actions of 
all the peptides tested. Measurements of the final protein encoded by the gene would 
be needed to confirm this hypothesis. 
To further investigate aspects involved in proliferation, we looked at the 
expression of PDX-1. This gene is involved in pancreas development and beta-cell 
maturation and is also known to directly form a complex with insulin, favouring its 
transcription (Chakrabarti et al., 2002; Melloul et al., 2002). In this study and in 
corroboration of the reports by Wang et al. (2001), which used a GLP-1 receptor 
agonist (10 and 50 nM) in RIN cells, exendin-4 upregulated the expression of PDX-
1. The hybrids also had a significant effect although to a lower extent. This 
difference could be explained by understanding the individual contribution of 
amphibian peptides TGN and MAM2 to the mRNA levels of PDX-1, if any. 
By comparing the actions of E-TGN and E-MAM2 with regards to the 
expression of both GLP-1 receptor and PDX-1 gene, we noticed the effects on PDX-
1 transcription are greater in treatment with E-TGN compared to the hybrid E-
MAM2. Given the downstream pathway of GLP-1 receptor activation is responsible 
for transcription of PDX-1 by increasing its DNA binding activity in the insulinoma 
cell line INS-1 (Buteau et al., 1999), the results obtained for E-MAM2 could suggest 
that the action of its GLP-1 receptor signalling activation is less potent than that of 
E-TGN. However, further studies also taking into consideration protein levels of 
intermediates involved in the process would shed light on the importance of this 
pathway in the mechanism of action of the hybrids. 
For further insight on the involvement of the KATP-dependent pathway in the 
actions of exendin-4 and its related hybrids, gene expression studies were performed 
on genes encoding for the KATP channel. In our experiments, in vitro treatment of 
BRIN-BD11 cells with exendin-4 did not significantly alter the levels of KCJN11 
mRNA transcripts. Previous studies, comparing the effects of exendin-4, d-Ala2-GIP 
and DPP-4 inhibitors on expression of beta-cell genes following in vivo treatment in 
high-fat fed mice, also showed that exendin-4 did not change the expression levels of 
the KCNJ11 gene (Lamont and Drucker, 2008). Our data is consistent with this 
report that the actions of exendin-4 are not directly associated with changes in gene 
expression. 
On the other hand, treating BRIN-BD11 cells with the newly designed hybrid 
peptides resulted in KCNJ11 downregulation, with E-TGN leading to a reduction of 
over 50%. Loss of function in this gene, leading to hyperinsulinism is rare (Flanagan 
et al., 2009), however KCNJ11 downregulation in pancreatic mice islets can occur as 
a consequence of hypoxia following accelerated oxygen consumption in cells 
undergoing hyperglycaemic stress (Sato et al., 2014). In our experimental setting, we 
did not detect changes in nitrite (NO2-) levels that could point to cellular stress, 
making it unlikely cells are undergoing hypoxia. Moreover, hypoxia is also 
associated with NFkB activation (DIgnazio and Rocha), which we did not observe 
in our experiment. Therefore, the physiological relevance of this downregulation is 
unknown as consistencies with an increased cellular stress or transcriptional 
activation of inflammatory markers such as NFkB were absent. 
With regards to the ABCC8 gene, encoding the SUR1 subunit of the channel, a 
downregulation of transcripts was observed following peptide treatment. This pattern 
has also been observed in NZO mice islets, where a T2D phenotype of 
hyperglycaemia, hyperinsulinemia and glucose resistance was established in vivo 
(Andrikopoulos et al., 2016) and a downregulation of the ABCC8 gene was 
associated with this phenotype. However, the reduced levels of ABCC8 might not 
necessarily reflect impaired ability of the cells to respond to sulphonylureas 
following peptide treatment as transcriptional downregulation might not be 
associated with reduced protein levels. Also, given exendin-4 binds to a G-protein 
coupled receptor, an unchanged expression of the ATP-binding cassette is consistent 
with the possibility that the peptide might not utilise that portion of the receptor to 
exert its actions. It is to note that the binding site for the novel peptides E-TGN and 
E-MAM2 has not yet been studied or identified. 
However, the down-regulation of ABCC8 could indicate that the actions of 
these peptides may not directly involve the activation of the SUR1 subunit of the 
KATP channel. This is consistent with our hypothesis when designing the hybrid 
peptide that the new peptide may activate the GLP-1R to exert its actions. 
Immunoblotting studies would be able to corroborate this hypothesis. 
The expression of CACNA1C, the gene encoding for the L-type Ca2+ 
dependent channel CaV1.2, was also investigated. It is known to regulate insulin 
secretion in rodents, as knock-out mice for CaV1.2 lose first-phase (first 5 minutes) 
of insulin secretion, due to a 55% reduction in the inward Ca2+ current (Schulla et al., 
2003). We observed a downregulation in the expression of the CACNA1C gene in 
the presence of all peptides, following a 24-hour treatment. Schulla et al. (2003) had 
reported that the diminished insulin secretion observed in vivo for CaV1.2 knock-outs 
was restored to normal following the first 5 minutes of stimulation and basal insulin 
secretion was not affected. This result, along with ours, could indicate the disruption 
in insulin release might not be applicable to our experimental setting, given the 
peptides were insulinotropic in the 20-minute acute insulin tests described in Chapter 
3. The role and physiological relevance of this downregulation are unknown and 
whether the actions of the peptides are affected on the long term could be determined 
by further, long-term insulin studies. 
The effects of GLP-1 receptor agonists not only lie in their anti-diabetic 
actions, but the presence of the receptor on different tissues, including kidney, heart, 
muscle and nervous tissues reflects the pleiotropic actions of these compounds (Lee 
and Jun, 2016). An increasing body of evidence points to anti-inflammatory actions 
of GLP-1R agonists, which also mediate the anti-diabetic actions of these drugs. 
Within a chronic low-grade inflammation state, as that of obesity and type 2 
diabetes, the actions of GLP-1 receptor agonists have an overall effect in lowering 
chronic inflammation, and in isolated human islets exendin-4 (50 nM) mediated 
some of these actions by reducing the activation of the nuclear factor NFkB 
(Velmurugan et al., 2012). 
All peptides tested for effect on gene expression reduced the expression of the 
NFkB gene, compared to the untreated cells, but the differences between the peptides 
could represent differences in the mechanisms used to control this inflammatory 
pathway. The function attributed to NFkB as an inflammatory signal also relates to 
beta-cell ageing. By analysing the trascriptome of beta-cells from young and old 
zebrafish, it was found that the beta-cells with reduced proliferating activities, 
deriving from the older models, also had a higher activation of the NFkB pathway, 
according to GFP reporter studies (Janjuha et al., 2018), highlighting the role of this 
pathway in limiting proliferative capacities in beta-cells.  
In our study, we recorded a 75% downregulation of NFkB transcripts in the 
pancreatic cell line in the presence of exendin-4. This indicates the anti-
inflammatory action observed in other cell types such as adipocytes and breast 
cancer cells (Iwaya et al., 2017). A further, significant reduction of NFkB expression 
levels is observed in the presence of E-TGN, compared to exendin-4. We found this 
result of interest as drawing the cellular environment toward a milder inflammatory 
activation in T2D could have clinical relevance, considering inflammation is one of 
the causes of insulin resistance (Wu et al., 2014). Moreover, transgenic mice 
expressing an inactivated form of NFkB revealed a nearly complete protection from 
the diabetogenic agent streptozotocin (Eldor et al., 2006), indicating the involvement 
of the gene in the actions of diabetogenic agents. Even though the study focused on 
type 1 diabetes, streptozotocin is extensively used in the generation of T2D mouse 
models (Premilovac et al., 2017), justifying our interest in further characterising the 
inflammatory aspect related to T2D. 
Anti-inflammatory properties of TGN have been previously reported (Pantic et 
al., 2014). The aforementioned authors found that different synthetic forms of the 
peptide, including the one used for this study stimulated the production of the anti-
inflammatory IL-10 from peritoneal macrophages in both C57BL6 and BALB/c 
mice. This could explain the ability of E-TGN to downregulate the expression of 
NFkB to a higher degree compared to exendin-4 alone. With regards to E-MAM2, 
we reported a 50% decrease in the transcription of NFkB, compared to the untreated 
control, and this value was higher than that of exendin-4. We hypothesised that such 
a significant reduction in the expression of an inflammatory-related gene such as 
NFkB could have further implications. Beta-cells are not responsible for 
perpetuating inflammatory responses in T2D, therefore we carried on investigating 
this aspect in an antigen-presenting cell model, in the search for novel actions of the 
peptides in this context, beyond transcriptional regulation. Resident macrophages in 
insulin-sensitive tissues have been attributed an important role in the inflammatory 
process (Xia et al., 2017), however further studies have also presented T-cell 
responses mediated by dendritic cells (DCs) in the adipose tissue as an important 
component of inflammatory-mediated insulin resistance (Bertola et al., 2012). This 
study was based on a previous finding linking depletion of CD11c positive cells 
from the adipose tissue to a beneficial and improved insulin sensitivity (Patsouris et 
al., 2009). Given CD11c is one of the distinctive surface markers of DCs, we carried 
out further studies investigating the role of exendin-4 and its related hybrids in 
modulating the function of an in vitro model of DCs (Chapter 7). 
Chapter 7 
IMMUNOMODULATION STUDIES 
7.1 BACKGROUND 
From the previous chapters we found that exendin-4, E-TGN and E-MAM2 
lowered the expression of the NFkB gene. Inflammatory stimuli are known to 
facilitate dissociation of NFkB from its inhibitory subunit IkB, causing activation on 
the inflammatory pathway, and the downstream elements of this pathway are 
upregulated in T2D patients (Andreasen et al., 2011). Thus, obtaining a 
downregulation at the gene transcription level of NFkB in our previous experiment 
prompted further investigation on the actions of the peptides in the context of 
inflammation. 
7.1.1 The role of dendritic cells (DCs) in T2D 
Dendritic cells (DCs) are potent antigen-presenting cells produced by the 
haemopoietic bone marrow in an immature state (Rajan and Longhi, 2016). 
Activation or suppression of the immune response depends on the state of activation 
of DCs, as they are responsible for presenting self-antigens, allowing a tolerogenic 
environment when immature (Sundara and Longhi, 2016), as well as for activating 
T-cells and adaptive immune response when triggered by the appropriate stimuli 
(Collin and Bigley, 2018). 
Increasing interest in the role of these cells in the context of diabetes was 
initiated by the finding that the resident macrophages within the adipose tissue 
belonged to heterogeneous populations, but the ones expressing the CD11c surface 
marker were responsible for obesity-related insulin resistance. In fact, selectively 
ablating the subset of CD11c positive cells from the adipose and muscle tissues in 
vivo restored insulin sensitivity back to the control levels of lean, non-obese mice 
(Patsouris et al., 2008). This finding was further expanded by Bertola et al. (2012), 
who presented the possibility that within the CD11c population ablated in the 
previous study, DCs might have been present, given that this surface marker is one 
of their distinctive features. This hypothesis was confirmed by the characterization of 
a DC subset within the adipose tissue, expressing high levels of CD11c, capable of 
activating Th17 T-cell responses, further recruiting macrophages and promoting 
inflammation in both obese and T2D mouse models (Bertola et al., 2012). 
Within the pancreatic islet, DCs are found in non-diabetic mouse models in an 
immature state (Calderon et al., 2008). Treatment with the diabetogenic agent 
streptozotocin caused an increase in the number of intra-islet DCs, up to 2-fold 
increase after 8 days stimulation, due to migration of circulatory DCs from the blood 
(Calderon et al., 2008). In the context of T2D, the number and function of DCs has 
mostly been associated to an established risk factor for the disease, obesity, and one 
of its main complications, cardiovascular disease (Parenti et al, 2017). In mouse 
models of obesity, an increased activation of DCs with consequent T-cell activation 
has been linked to the inflammatory state causing metabolic disorders such as insulin 
resistance seen in these mice (Stefanovic-Racic et al., 2012).  
Other aspects relating T2D and DCs activation in a human setting have also 
been investigated. The cytokine responsible for DCs maturation, the granulocyte-
macrophage-colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF), is found at higher levels in T2D 
patients compared to normoglycaemic individuals (Surendar et al., 2012). Surface 
markers associated with the maturation of human DCs derived from peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells, such as CD83 and CD86 were upregulated in a glucose-
dependent fashion (Lu et al., 2013), suggesting a role for hyperglycaemia as an 
activating signal for perpetuating inflammation in diabetes. Human DCs were also 
found to secrete cytokines associated with the progression of atherosclerotic plaques 
in the presence of high glucose concentrations (30 mM), such as IL-6 and IL-12, 
whereas the anti-inflammatory chemokine IL-10 was decreased by nearly 40% (Lu 
et al., 2013). Taken together, these results highlight the role of DCs in contributing 
to T2D related inflammation and have sparked interest in investigating the anti-
inflammatory actions that could be found in anti-diabetic agents, and how they 
translate in the activation of adaptive cellular immunity. 
The residency of DCs within both the pancreas and the adipose tissue suggest 
an important role of these cells in mediating the inflammatory component associated 
to T2D, and given about 85% of patients affected by T2D are obese (Parenti et al., 
2017), we aimed to understand whether DCs could be modulated towards an anti-
inflammatory and anti-diabetic setting in the presence of our novel peptides. 
7.2 AIM & OBJECTIVES 
The aim of this chapter is to examine the effects of exendin-4, E-TGN and E-
MAM2 on maturation of DCs and to assess their cytokine profile following peptide 
treatment.  
Specific objectives include: 
1) The generation of bone marrow derived dendritic cells (BM-DCs) from 
mice using granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF), and their 
phenotypic characterisation (expression of surface markers MHC II, CD80 and 
CD86). 
2) Assessment of BM-DC phenotype following peptide treatment, in the 
absence or presence of an activation stimulus, lipopolysaccharide (LPS). 
3) Measurement of the pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-12 and anti-
inflammatory cytokine IL-10 released by DCs following exposure to exendin-4, E-
TGN or E-MAM2, in the absence or presence of LPS. 
7.3 RESEARCH DESIGN 
7.3.1 Generation of bone-marrow derived dendritic cells (BM-DCs) 
Bone marrow progenitor cells were isolated from the bones of C57BL6 mice 
as detailed in section 2.6.1. During the isolation procedure, the bone marrow was 
flushed and red blood cells were lysed with Ammonium-Potassium-Chloride 
solution (1X, 500 L/pair of legs). A negative bead selection was performed in the 
presence of M5-114 (anti-MHC II), RA3-3A1 (anti-B220), YTS 191 (anti-CD4) and 
YTS 169 (anti-CD8), where the antibodies were incubated with the cell suspension 
for 30 minutes before incubation with isolation beads coated with anti-goat 
antibodies. The mixture of cells and magnetic beads was placed on a DynaMag-15 
magnet (ThermoFisher) and non-bead associated cells were isolated. Following 
isolation using this negative bead selection protocol, progenitor cells were plated at a 
density of 106 cells/well of a 24 well plate in the presence of 4ng/ml granulocyte-
macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF). Cells were fed with fresh DC 
media (AIM V + AlbuMAX (BSA) 1X, 50 M -ME, 1 mM HEPES) on days 3 
and 5 of culture, as described in section 2.6.1 of Chapter 2. 
To study the effect of exendin-4, E-TGN and E-MAM2 peptides, DCs (day 6 
from culture) were incubated with 1M of each of these peptides or 1l of the 
vehicle control (0.001N HCL). In some experiments commercially sourced LPS was 
added to the cells (200 ng/mL) following peptide pre-treatment, for 18 hours. The 
supernatant (500 L) was then collected for cytokine analysis. Cells were harvested 
and stained for surface marker analysis by flow cytometry. 
7.3.2 Phenotypic analysis of BM-DCs by Flow cytometry  
Following treatment, BM-DCs were harvested and stained for surface markers 
expression as detailed in section 2.6.2. The antibodies used were against the surface 
markers involved in the antigen-presenting process (MHC II, CD80 and CD86) are 
shown in Table 2.3. Flow cytometry analysis was performed as detailed in section 
2.6.3 and data analysed using the CFlow Plus software. The mean fluorescence 
intensities (MFIs) of MHC II, CD80 and CD86 expression on CD11c+ cells were 
compared.  
7.3.3 Cytokine measurement using IL-12 and IL-10 specific sandwich ELISAs 
The culture supernatants collected from control DCs and DCs pre-treated with 
0.001N HCL, exendin-4, E-TGN or E-MAM2 peptides in the presence or absence of 
LPS were assayed for the presence of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines IL-12 
and IL-10, respectively, according to the manufacturers protocol and as detailed in 
section 2.6.4. The plates were read at a wavelength of 450 nm.  
7.3.4 Statistical analysis 
Data from the phenotype and cytokine ELISA measurements were compared 
using a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Newman-Keuls post-
hoc test (GraphPad Prism 3).  
7.4 RESULTS 
7.4.1 BM-DCs were generated and validated by surface marker expression 
Many challenges regarding the isolation, due to their low numbers, and 
characterization of ex vivo DCs has limited their in vitro use (Syme and Glck, 
2001). However, over the last decades, isolation and growth of monocyte derived 
DCs from murine bone marrow or human blood using GM-CSF, has become a 
particularly useful tool to study these cells and their ability to control immune 
responses (Syme and Glck, 2001). The bone marrow in particular contains 
numerous hematopoietic precursors that can be differentiated into DCs (Wang et al., 
2016), justifying our choice of this protocol to obtain these cells in vitro. Under the 
microscope, the progenitor cells undergo morphological changes during maturation 
in the presence of GM-CSF, starting off as single cells on day 1 (Figure 7.1A), 
developing the characteristic dendrites on day 3 and 5 (Figure 7.1B and C) and on 
day 7, BM-DCs formed multiple clusters of large cells, as displayed in Figure 7.1D, 
and as described by others (Inaba et al., 1992). 
On day 7, we performed a phenotypic characterisation of these clustered cells. 
Within our experiment, we used an unstained population to establish the gating 
strategy for our experiments. Out of the 59.3% of live cells, within the DC 
population size, we gated on the unstained population (Figure 7.1E, left) for the 
fluorescent marker associated to CD11c (APC) (Figure 7.1E, middle plot), in order 
to assess the presence of a CD11c+ population in the stained samples, by difference. 
Indeed, 95.1% of cells stained with the APC dye resulted to be positive, indicating 
this fraction of cells were CD11c+ (Figure 7.1E, middle plot). 
This single stained population was also used to gate for the expression of the 
other surface markers and the mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) for each fluorescent 
conjugated marker (FITC), namely MHC II, CD80 and CD86, was measured by 
difference. The presence of these markers (Figure 7.1F) confirmed the generation of 
mature DCs as reported in previous studies (Wang et al., 2016, Smyth et al., 2013). 
Figure 7.1. Morphological features of BM-DCs  
at (A) day 1 (x20), (B) day 3 (x20), (C) day 5 (x40) and (D) day 7 (x40). On day 7 DCs were 
assessed by flow cytometry, the live cell population (P1) was defined by plotting FSC vs 
SSC (E, left). 
Figure 7.2. BM-DCs express high levels of CD11c as well as MHC II and CD80. 
Following staining with anti-CD11c antibodies the CD11c+ cells were gated using unstained 
cells (E, middle dot blot), within the live population of cells (E, left dot blot). The 
precentage of the CD11c+ population is shown (E, right dot blot). BM-DCs were stained 
with one of the following: anti- MHC II, CD80 and CD86- FITC conjugated antibodies. 
Expression of these surface markers, on CD11c+ DCs were assessed by flow cytometry and 
are shown as histograms (F). 
Single stain (CD11c
Surface marker (MHC II, CD80, CD86) 
7.4.2 Exendin-4 and the hybrid peptides do not alter the expression of BM-DCs 
surface markers 
In order to test the effects of exendin-4, E-TGN and E-MAM2 on the generated 
BM-DCs, the phenotype of these cells was characterised by flow cytometry 
following peptide treatment. To ensure any changes in the phenotype of DCs were 
peptide-related, we included a vehicle control (0.001 NHCl) in our analysis. Cells 
were treated with the peptides or vehicle on day 6 from isolation, and were harvested 
between 18 and 24-hour following treatment and stained with antibodies to CD11c 
as well as one of the following antibodies, anti- MHC Class II, CD80 or CD86. We 
found that like the untreated controls, the CD11c surface marker was expressed on 
all viable cells regardless of pre-treatment (Figure 7.2A-D). 
In order to assess changes in the expression of the surface markers MHC II, 
CD80 and CD86, and to allow comparison across independent experiments, we set 
the MFI of the untreated control sample to 100, calculating increases/decreases as a 
relative percentage of this. For MHC II and CD80, the vehicle control did not 
significantly alter the expression levels of these markers in comparison to untreated 
cells (average % MFI 98.7  2.41 and 102.8  8, respectively). In the presence of 
exendin-4, E-TGN and E-MAM2 both the expression of MHC II (93.7  7.82, 97.9  
24.90 and 95.3  17.6 MFI, respectively) and CD80 (97.3  8.59, 98.8  4.79 and 
91.7  9.74 MFI, respectively) was not significantly changed as compared to either 
vehicle or untreated controls (Figure 7.3A and B). In comparison to untreated BM-
DCs, there was a slight but not significant increase in the expression of CD86 on 
DCs following treatment with the vehicle (108.8  6.8 MFI), E-TGN (MFI 107.4  
3.31), and E-MAM2 (107.5 5.74 MFI) (Figure 7.3C), which was not observed in the 
presence of exendin-4 (96.8  3.75 MFI). However no statistical difference in the 
expression of this marker between the treatment groups was observed.  
Taken together, these results show that pre-treatment of BM-DCs with 
exendin-4, E-TGN and E-MAM2 does not lead to either and increase or decrease of 
MHC II, CD80 or CD86 surface markers. Given these results were obtained in 
immature DCs, we proceeded to further consider the actions of exendin and the 
hybrid peptides on LPS-matured BM-DCs, aiming to answer questions regarding 
their ability to modulate the perpetuation of an inflammatory response associated 
with DC activation. 
Figure 7.3. BM-DCs pre-treated with vehicle (0.001 N HCl) or peptides retained 
expression of CD11c.  
The gating strategy for the untreated sample, used to determine the CD11c+ populations, was 
applied to cells pre-treated under the different conditions. This is represented by dot blots for 
BM-DCs treated with either the vehicle (A), exendin-4 (B), E-TGN (C) or E-MAM2 (D).  
Control Exendin-4 E-TGN E-MAM2V control
MHC class II
Control Exendin-4 E-TGN E-MAM2V control
Control Exendin-4 E-TGN E-MAM2V control
Figure 7.4. Pre-treatment of BM-DCs with the vehicle control, exendin-4, E-TGN or E-
MAM2 does not alter the expression of BM-DCs surface markers.  
The expression of surface markers (A) MHC II, (B) CD80 and (C) CD86 was assessed by 
flow cytometry using antibodies, following 24-hour treatment under the different conditions, 
as indicated in the x axis. Representative histograms from one experiment are shown. Bar 
charts showing the mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) of expression of these markers from 3 
independent experiments are shown. The untreated control was set to 100%. Values are 
mean  SEM.  
7.4.3 BM-DCs present an activated phenotype after LPS treatment 
In order to determine the activation of DCs following an appropriate 
inflammatory stimulus, we treated BM-DCs with lipopolysaccharide (LPS), known 
to induce DCs maturation by increasing the expression of MHC II, CD80 and CD86 
on the cell surface (Smyth et al., 2013).  
As expected, BM-DCs treated with LPS (1 g/ml) displayed increased 
expression of MHC II on their surface compared to untreated cells, with a 27  0.02 
MFI increase was observed (P<0.05), suggesting DCs respond to LPS as a 
maturating signal for the increase in expression of this marker. Following pre-
treatment with the vehicle control, this increase in expression of MHC II was 
observed but was not further affected (27.1  0.06 MFI). Similarly, the expression of 
MHC II increased in all the peptide pre-treated DCs to the same extent as the LPS 
treated controls (Figure 7.4A).  
With regards to CD80, following LPS treatment no increase in the expression 
of this co-stimulatory molecule was observed (Figure 7.4B). In contrast, CD86 
expression was increased by 1.85  0.21-fold in the presence of LPS (P<0.05). This 
increase was maintained in the peptide as well as vehicle treated DCs (1.72  0.18 
MFI for the vehicle to 1.82  0.22 MFI for exendin-4 (Figure 7.4C). No significant 
difference in CD86 expression was observed between any of the LPS activated DCs 
regardless of peptide treatment.  
Taken together, these results indicate that the maturation of BM-DCs in 
response to LPS as measured by increasing the expression of MHC II and CD86, is 
not altered by the action of the exendin-4 or its related peptides E-TGN and E-
MAM2. The absence of activation of CD80 in this setting was equally maintained 
across all treatment samples, suggesting the peptides did not have any additive effect 
on this marker. 
Control
No LPS
Control
    Vehicle
(0.001 NHCl)
   (1 M)
    E-TGN
    (1 M)
    E-MAM2
     (1 M)
LPS treated (200 ng/mL)
Figure 7.5. Pre-treatment of BM-DCs with vehicle control, exendin-4, E-TGN or E-
MAM2 did not alter the ability of cells to respond to LPS stimulation.  
Following pre-treatment with the vehicle control, exendin-4, E-TGN or E-MAM2 for 24 hrs, 
BM-DCs were pulsed with LPS (200 ng/mL) for 18 hrs. The bar charts on the left display 
the mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) for (A) MHC II, (B) CD80 and (C) CD86. On the 
right, histograms represent the shift between untreated control (black line) and LPS-treated 
(red line) cells. Untreated control was set to 100%. Values are mean  SEM (n=2, with 
values of each experiment pooled from an average of 3 technical replicates).  
MHC II
LPS treated (200 ng/mL)
Control
No LPS
Control
    Vehicle
(0.001 NHCl)
   (1 M)
    E-TGN
    (1 M)
    E-MAM2
     (1 M)
* * *
Control
No LPS
Control
    Vehicle
(0.001 NHCl)
   (1 M)
    E-TGN
    (1 M)
    E-MAM2
     (1 M)
LPS treated (200 ng/mL)
No LPS control 
Control + LPS (200 g/mL) 
7.4.4 LPS stimulates release of IL-10 and IL-12 in BM-DCs 
After characterising changes in the DCs phenotype, in order to determine 
whether the LPS activation of the cells was accompanied by cytokine release, we 
assayed the cell culture supernatant for IL-10 and IL-12, as the levels of these 
cytokines are known to be modified upon LPS stimulation (Corinti et al., 2001).  
In the presence of LPS, the amount of IL-10 released by BM-DCs increased 
from 272.63  28.9 pg/ml to 337.9  33.2 pg/ml (P<0.05). However, the vehicle 
decreased release of IL-10 (P<0.05), compared to the untreated control (204.9  34.2 
pg/ml vs 272.63  28.9 pg/ml). Despite this, the addition of LPS to vehicle treated 
BM-DCs, lead to an increase in IL-10 production, 377.6  50.7 pg/ml. Finally, no 
difference in IL-10 release was detected comparing the LPS treated samples, 
suggesting the vehicle does not contribute to changes in IL-10 release following LPS 
activation of the cells (Figure 7.5A). 
The levels of the pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-12 were also measured 
following LPS stimulation. In untreated cells, the levels of IL-12 averaged as 572.6  
38.2 pg/ml, which increased by 1.61-fold to 925.1  78.3 pg/ml (P<0.001) in the 
presence of LPS. Addition of the vehicle to the culture media did not significantly 
change the levels of IL-12 released compared to the untreated control (572.6  38.2 
pg/ml vs 602.3  32.6 pg/ml, respectively), but the addition of LPS to vehicle treated 
DCs caused a 1.88-fold increase (P<0.001) of IL-12, compared to the 
aforementioned. This was also 1.22-fold higher than the amount of IL-12 secreted in 
the presence of LPS only treated DC (P<0.01) (Figure 7.5B). 
These results indicate that the vehicle modifies DCs leading to cells with an 
increased ability to release IL-12 following LPs exposure. This effect on the DCs 
should be taken into consideration when assessing the effects of the peptides, which 
are dissolved in this solution, on cytokine production. 
Figure 7.6. LPS increases release of IL-10 (A) and IL-12 from untreated and vehicle-
treated BM-DCs.  
BM-DCs were pulsed with the vehicle control (0.001 NHCl) before being activated by LPS 
(200 ng/mL) for 18 hours.Cell supernatants were collected and assayed for cytokine release 
using ELISA. Values are mean  SEM (n=3 independent experiments, with each experiment 
having 3 technical replicates). *P<0.05, ***P<0.001 compared to untreated sample. 
P<0.001, P<0.01 compared to respective treatment in the absence of LPS. ##P<0.01, 
compared to untreated sample in the presence of LPS. 
Treatment
Untreated     Vehicle(0.001 NHCl)
Before LPS
After LPS
   Vehicle
(0.001 NHCl)Untreated
Treatment
After LPS
Before LPS
7.4.5 Peptide modulation of IL-10 and IL-12 release in BM-DCs in the presence 
of LPS 
As mentioned in the introduction to this chapter Lu et al., (2013) observed that 
secretion, by human DCs, of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 was decreased 
whilst pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-6 and IL-12, were increased in the 
presence of high glucose concentrations. In order to evaluate the effect of exendin-4, 
E-TGN and E-MAM2 on the release of IL-10 and IL-12 in the presence of a 
maturation stimulation, we pre-treated cells with the exendin-4 related peptides 
before pulsing them with LPS. 
As the vehicle alone (0.001 N HCl) had an effect on the expression of IL-10, 
we considered that sample as the baseline against which we compared the peptide 
treated samples in the cytokine release study. In the absence of LPS, we found no 
significant difference in the IL-10 production by BM-DCs following peptide-
treatment as compared to the vehicle control (vehicle=204.96  34.2 pg/ml; exendin-
4=202.19  49.3 pg/ml; E-TGN=183.55  43.8 pg/ml; E-MAM2=163.52  47.34 
pg/ml). Next, we assessed IL-10 production following LPS stimulation. The addition 
of LPS to DCs following exendin-4, E-TGN or E-MAM2 peptide treatment increased 
IL-10 release by 2.67-fold (P<0.01), 1.99-fold (P<0.001) and 3.01-fold (P<0.001) 
respectively, compared to cells treated with the aforementioned peptides in the 
absence of LPS. Excitingly, exendin-4 as well as E-MAM2 pre-treated BM-DCs 
generated significantly more IL-10, 1.62-fold (P<0.05) and a 1.48-fold (P<0.05) 
respectively, in the presence of LPS compared to LPS stimulated cells pre-treated 
with the vehicle (Figure 7.6A). For E-TGN, although an increase was seen this was 
not a significant compared to the vehicle only treatment, suggesting the Il-10 
measured was due to the vehicle effect. 
Next, the release of IL-12 under the same conditions, in both the absence and 
presence of LPS stimulation was measured. Treatment of immature DCs with the 
vehicle control only was recorded at 602.3  32.6 pg/ml. Addition of E-TGN and E-
MAM2 decreased this value to 547.5  8.83 (P<0.01) and 528.1  35.2 (P<0.01) 
pg/ml respectively, whereas exendin-4 showed no difference to the vehicle control 
(576  55.23 pg/ml). As mentioned above, the addition of LPS to the vehicle treated 
BM-DCs resulted in a significant increase in IL-12 production (1129.3  92.16 
(P<0.001)), compared to untreated cells. IL-12 production was decreased following 
pre-treatment with peptides in the presence of LPS. exendin-4 reduced the levels of 
IL-12 by 0.82-fold (P<0.05), E-TGN by 0.74-fold (P<0.01) and E-MAM2 by 0.87-
fold (P<0.05) (Figure 7.6B).  
Taken together the data suggests that peptide treatment modified the response 
of BM-DCs to LPS activation, with exendin-4 and E-MAM2 increasing release of 
IL-10 and all peptides decreasing IL-12 release, suggesting the promotion of an anti-
inflammatory environment in this model.  
650 
Treatment
    Vehicle
(0.001 NHCl)
(1 M)
 E-TGN
 (1 M)
 E-MAM2
  (1 M)
After LPS
Figure 7.7. (A) Exendin-4 and E-MAM2 treatment of BM-DCs increased the release of 
IL-10 in the presence of LPS.  
Bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (BM-DCs) were pulsed with exendin-4, E-TGN or E-
MAM2 for 24 hrs, before being activated by LPS for 18 hrs. IL-10 levels were assessed using 
an IL-10 specific ELISA. The concentration of IL-10 (pg/ml) are represented in the bar 
charts with values representing the mean  SEM of three independent experiments, with 
each experiment being tested in 3 technical replicates. P<0.001, P<0.01 compared to 
respective treatment in the absence of LPS; P<0.05 compared to vehicle (0.001 NHCl) in 
the presence of LPS. 
Figure 7.7. (B) Peptide treatment decreases the release of IL-12 following peptide and 
LPS treatment. 
Bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (BM-DCs) were pulsed with exendin-4, E-TGN 
and E-MAM2, before being activated by LPS for 24 hours. Values are mean  SEM 
(n=3). **P<0.01 compared to vehicle only (0.001 NHCl); P<0.001, P<0.01 
compared to respective treatment without LPS. 
   Vehicle
(0.001 NHCl)
(1 M)
E-TGN
(1 M)
E-MAM2
 (1 M)
Treatment
** **
After LPS
7.5 DISCUSSION 
Given the role of inflammation in T2D, as both a cause and a consequence of 
insulin resistance, we examined whether our hybrid peptides, alongside exendin-4, 
could modulate this feature by inhibiting the antigen presentation capacity and pro-
inflammatory cytokine production of DCs. Firstly, we addressed whether exendin 
and the hybrid peptides were recognised as a pathogen associated molecular patterns 
(PAMP) or damage associated molecular patterns (DAMP) by DCs. In BM-DCs pre-
treated with exendin-4, E-TGN or E-MAM2, no change in the expression of the cell 
surface markers examined was observed, suggesting that these peptides, if engaging 
with receptors expressed on DCs, do not lead to DC maturation. This finding aligns 
with the low immunogenicity associated with PEGylated compounds (Banerjee et 
al., 2012), such as our hybrid peptides. 
The acidic vehicle (0.001N HCL) slightly upregulated the expression of CD86. 
Though the increase was not significant, it supports the possibility of changes in pH 
affecting the activation of DCs, as described by others (Martnez et al., 2007). More 
specifically, the acidic environment created by inflammation in human DCs could 
also be responsible for their activation, as it has been reported that a slight decrease 
in pH to 6.5 could increase the expression of CD80 and CD86 following a short 
exposure as that of 30-minutes to slightly acidic conditions (Martnez et al., 2007). 
Similarly, given our vehicle was slightly acidified water (0.001N HCl), this 
extracellular environment could have favoured a slight increase in the CD86 surface 
marker, which was then maintained in range by the presence of the peptides. 
Notably, vehicle treated DCs produced more IL-12 following LPS activation, 
suggesting that acid environments trigger partial DC maturation also in our 
experimental setting. 
LPS plays a role in the development of T2D, as it has been shown to cause 
insulin resistance by migrating from bacteria in the gut, following high-fat diets, into 
systemic circulation leading to inflammation (Cani et al., 2007). LPS is a PAMP 
associated with the activation of DCs by interaction with Toll-like receptors (TLR 4) 
found on the cell surface. Other studies have identified the in vitro ability of this 
toxin to upregulate the expression of surface cell markers such as CD80, CD86 and 
MHC II in DCs (Alexis et al., 2005; Smyth et al., 2013), which is consistent with 
what we observed here. LPS also activates the release of the pro-inflammatory IL-12 
cytokine from DCs (Corinti et al., 2001). Consistently, BM-DCs matured in the 
presence of LPS in our study produced IL-12. Interestingly, pre-treatment of BM-
DCs with exendin-4, E-TGN and E-MAM2 significantly reduced IL-12 levels 
suggesting that these peptides might modulate TLR-4 activation and reduce the 
inflammatory response directed by DCs towards an anti-inflammatory setting.  
This hypothesis was further supported by the increased release of IL-10 
following exposure to exendin and the hybrid peptides. This cytokine, responsible 
for limiting the ability of DCs to trigger Th1 response (Corinti et al., 2001), was 
significantly increased in the presence of exendin-4 and E-MAM2. Previous reports 
detail the action of TGN in stimulating release of IL-10 from peritoneal macrophages 
(Pantic et al., 2014). Although we did not assess TGN alone in our assays, we did 
not observe an increase in IL-10 in its related hybrid E-TGN. This could indicate that 
by creation of the hybrid, the activity observed by the aforementioned study was not 
conserved or is not applicable to the cellular model of our choice. To corroborate this 
hypothesis, studies in BM-DCs and macrophages with both TGN and the E-TGN 
hybrid could provide further insight on how the actions of the peptides compare in 
these two cellular models. 
This study highlights the modulatory action of exendin-4 and E-MAM2 on 
BM-DCs, recalling the importance of the balance between inflammatory and anti-
inflammatory signals for homeostasis (Khondkaryan et al., 2018). An imbalance in 
these two components is known to play a role in the development of metabolic 
impairments, in particular with an increased number of CD11c+ cells producing pro-
inflammatory cytokines in the adipose tissue linked to obesity-induced insulin 
resistance (Chen et al., 2014). A proposed mechanism of the adipose-tissue mediated 
insulin resistance was published by Zhong et al. (2013) who reported an increased 
expression of the DPP-4 enzyme, responsible for GLP-1 degradation, in human 
adipose tissue DCs. Moreover, in T2D patients circulating levels of the growth-
factor for development of DCs from myeloid progenitors, GM-CSF, have been 
reported to increase as a consequence of hyperglycaemia (Surendar et al., 2012). 
These findings highlight the need to consider tipping the balance of the systemic 
environment in T2D towards an anti-inflammatory setting.  
As exendin-4 and the hybrid peptides did not alter the expression of both MHC 
and co-stimulation molecules it is feasible that antigen presentation by DCs has not 
been impaired. Given the increase in IL-10, T-cell polarisation may be affected 
following activation by these DCs as compared to untreated DCs (Mbongue et al., 
2017). As a subset of DCs in the adipose tissue has been characterised, as outlined in 
section 7.1.1, comparing the expression of surface markers in DCs originating from 
lean mice to those of their obese littermates following peptide treatment could be a 
tool for assessing changes in the resident population of DCs in this tissue. These 
changes could reflect different polarisation of T-cell responses, specifically Th1 and 
Th17 responses which have been previously characterised in the context of T2D and 
insulin resistance (Bertola et al., 2012). 
Further analysis, involving co-culture of antigen pulsed peptide treated BM-
DCs in the presence of T-cells could provide an even more comprehensive picture of 
the cell activation state and whether this translates to a perpetuation of the 
inflammatory state, or in the release of anti-inflammatory cellular mediators. Once 
these properties are assessed in BM-DCs, studies on how these results translate to a 
human subset of DCs could further elucidate the actions of exendin-4 related 
peptides in this model and replicate the inflammatory events that take places during 
Chapter 8 
GENERAL DISCUSSION 
As the foundation of our work, hybrid peptides were created by joining 
incretins, which have been extensively characterised, with selected amphibian skin 
peptides, previously reported to be anti-diabetic, both in vitro and in vivo. The 
approach of using hybrid peptides has been recently explored in the context of T2D 
and obesity, where the rationale was to create an agent efficiently stimulating insulin 
secretion while targeting multiple aspects of the disease (Finan et al., 2013). The 
goal of this approach is to merge the well characterised anti-diabetic effects of 
incretins, while increasing efficiency by having a single administration as opposed to 
using different agents simultaneously (Hasib et al., 2017). 
Our study showed that the actions of exendin-4 were potentiated within its 
related hybrids, indicating an additional anti-diabetic effect with the generation of 
these novel peptides. Non-toxic, insulinotropic actions superior to those of exendin-4 
have also been reported for other hybrid peptides yielding anti-diabetic actions in 
vivo. Dual agonists for both GLP-1 and GIP receptors, revealed potent, anti-diabetic 
outcomes in rodents (Finan et al., 2013). Also the actions of the d-Ala2-GIP-
oxyntomodulin hybrid described by Bhat et al., (2013) conferred improved 
glycaemic control in vivo, compared to its individual counterparts, suggesting the 
actions we observed could be extended further. Mechanistic investigations revealed 
glucose-independency in the insulinotropic actions. These actions partially relied on 
KATP-independent mechanisms, but ultimately depended on intracellular and 
extracellular sources of calcium. This mechanism recalls that of GLP-1R agonists, 
where the activation of adenylyl cyclase for release of Ca2+ from intracellular stores 
relies on the availability of ATP generated from glucose (Meloni et al., 2013). These 
properties also suggest the peptides could bind to the GLP-1 receptor or work 
through G-protein coupled receptors as exendin-4. Conserving this mechanism could 
be central to unravelling potential anti-diabetic actions in other cell types and tissue, 
given the extra-pancreatic localisation of those receptors (Lee and Jun, 2016). 
Relating to the diagnosis of diabetes, underlying metabolic changes within the 
pancreatic beta-cells, as well as other insulin target tissues, take place before 
hyperglycaemic and glucotoxic features clearly manifest (Zeng et al., 2009; Wang et 
al., 2011). Though previous studies had highlighted changes in metabolites following 
chronic glucotoxic conditions in BRIN-BD11 cells (Wallace et al., 2013), 
investigations regarding the metabolomic profile of these cells following treatment 
with exendin-4 was a novel, unexplored approach to understand the metabolic 
actions of this incretin in the BRIN-BD11 cell line. 
An overall promotion of oxidative metabolism, consistent with the appropriate 
maintenance of glucose homeostasis (Brennan et al., 2002), favours increased 
generation of ATP and might underlie the anti-diabetic actions of exendin-4. A study 
considering the oxidative capacity of exendin-4 (50 nM) in BRIN-BD11 cells 
reported enhanced glycolytic rates (Wallace et al., 2013), however metabolic flux 
analysis for the individual metabolites of the TCA cycle had not been previously 
reported. 
Future studies performing metabolomics analysis on the hybrids, as we did for 
exendin-4 here, could deepen understanding of the underlying mechanisms used by 
the peptides for their activity and contextualise the findings of the gene expression 
studies. We found results that suggested different molecular actions by the hybrids 
compared to exendin-4 alone. For example, the downregulation of the ATP-binding 
cassette on the potassium channel, as well as lowered expression of the voltage-
dependent calcium channel seem in apparent contrast with the importance of these 
channels in the mechanism of insulin release. These channels are crucial for insulin 
secretion, and though looking at individual genes can provide suggestions for further 
investigation, gene expression analysis of given pathways, using more advanced 
technologies such as microarray offer a more comprehensive overview of 
transcriptomics in the context of the disease (Taneera et al., 2014) and how 
therapeutic agents modulate these processes. 
As part of the assessment of the peptides effects on associated complications, 
we investigated the inflammatory component of T2D (Donath and Shoelson, 2011; 
Eguchi and Nagai, 2017; Gonzalez et al., 2018) in an ex vivo dendritic cell lineage. 
What we learned about the peptides is that neither exendin-4 or its related hybrids E-
TGN or E-MAM2 compromised or affected the phenotype of this model of antigen-
presenting cells, which suggests the peptides do not alter the cellular environment 
that could potentially activate these cells. Moreover, in the presence of an 
inflammatory stimulus, the peptides promote an anti-inflammatory environment 
which could prompt research interest in fields beyond diabetes, such as that of 
tolerogenic aspects of transplantation. 
What is known of exendin-4 (50 nM) in the context of the inflammation 
related to T2D is the downregulation of NFkB, which we also observed for its 
related hybrids, as well as its protective action on beta-cells from experimentally 
induced diabetes in the presence of streptozotocin in vivo (Lee and Jun, 2016). In the 
same diabetic model, bone marrow derived dendritic cells showed reduced response 
to a previously established bacterial activator of these cells (Williams et al., 2011). 
The aforementioned study reported differences after chronic high fat diet (70 days), 
and no difference was observed in acute diabetes (9 days of high fat diet). In our 
study, anti-inflammatory modulation of exendin-4 and its related hybrids was 
observed after only 24 hr of pre-treatment, which might suggest that the actions of 
the peptides precede the impairments generated by diabetes. This further expands on 
the novelty associated with these hybrid peptides and their initial in vitro 
characterisation here presented represents an original contribution to knowledge. 
Based on the results from this study, E-TGN and E-MAM2 have improved 
insulinotropic activity in vitro, compared to exendin-4, while promoting an anti-
inflammatory environment in the presence of an activating stimulus to a greater 
extent than that created by the incretin alone.  
The potential for exploration of these peptides for further studies exploring 
different aspects of the disease is broad, but data generated so far and representing an 
orginial contribution to knowledge includes: 
1) The characterization of insulinotropic actions of novel, exendin-4 
related hybrids, resulting in greater activity compared to that of exendin-4 alone. 
2) Insight into the mechanism of action of E-TGN and E-MAM2 
using insulin secretion modulators. This allowed determination of the importance 
of calcium in the actions of the peptides. 
3) The finding that exendin-4 channels glucose towards the formation 
of alanine, linked to increased insulinotropic actions, while preventing formation 
of lactic acid and increasing citrate consumptions. These actions are consistent 
with the anti-diabetic properties of oxidative glucose metabolism, obtained for 
the first time from metabolomics analysis performed in the clonal cell line BRIN-
BD11 in the presence of exendin-4. 
4) E-TGN and E-MAM2 upregulated the expression of the GLP-1 
receptor gene and downregulated the inflammatory-linked transcript for NFkB. 
As this action was more pronounced compared to that of exendin-4 alone, further 
investigations in possible modulation of inflammatory responses in the presence 
of E-TGN and E-MAM2 were carried out. 
5) E-TGN and E-MAM2 did not alter the phenotype of our antigen-
presenting cell model, while dampening the release of inflammatory mediators 
when these cells are activated. 
8.1 FUTURE STUDIES 
The studies presented here provide the foundation for further investigation into 
the properties of E-TGN and E-MAM2. With regards to insulin secretion, the logical 
next step to be taken in order to assess the suitability of these peptides for in vivo 
begins with in vitro plasma degradation studies. Through this experiment, possible 
degradation fragments could be assayed for insulinotropic actions and their stability 
over time could guide future structure optimization. This approach has already been 
proven successful for d-Ala2-GIP (Gault et al., 2008) and xenin-related peptides 
(Craig et al., 2018). Pharmacokinetics parameters could then be considered for the 
hybrid peptides E-TGN and E-MAM2, possibly followed by in vivo studies in pre-
clinical models, glucose and insulin sensitivity would help assess their potential as 
anti-diabetic agents. 
Another important aspect to consider is the binding site for these peptides. In 
fact, based on their localisation and density, future clinical implications can be 
considered in light of the multiple actions the peptides could have on organs and 
tissues. With regards to the target organs for diabetic complications, further in vitro 
studies monitoring the actions of E-TGN and E-MAM2 in the liver, adipose tissue 
and muscle, including the cardiac muscle, represents an extension of the actions we 
have only partially uncovered in the cellular models used in this study. 
In terms of metabolomics analysis, measuring the rate of glucose consumption 
could support the hypothesis of an increased generation of ATP as an anti-diabetic 
action following exendin-4 treatment. To take this study further, a principal 
component analysis (PCA), by which mathematical sample clustering can be used to 
discriminate differences across treatments could highlight further details we might 
have not been captured by comparing labelling percentages only. Further 
experiments using 13C-NMR to trace glucose could help complete the informative, 
yet limited overview we obtained on glucose fate in the extracellular space. Once 
this is established, extending this to the hybrid peptides E-TGN and E-MAM2 to 
assess how their modulation of glucose metabolism compares to that of exendin-4 
should be considered. 
Gene expression studies using advanced technologies such as microarray and 
performed on isolated islets would provide a more comprehensive picture of the 
transcriptome, and integration with measurement of protein levels could shed light 
on the translation of mRNAs into functional proteins under the established 
conditions.  
Expanding on the BM-DCs activation experiments, T-cell activation could be 
monitored by phenotypic characterisation, and their cytokine release profile could be 
investigated to assess their polarisation in the presence of the peptides for an 
eventual role in conferring tolerogenic properties to dendritic cells. This would allow 
for a broader application of the peptides for immunomodulatory studies that could 
contribute to successful beta-cell transplantation relevant to type 1 diabetes in 
particular. 
The findings presented in this study, together with the possibility to elaborate 
on such different aspects of the novel hybrid peptides E-TGN and E-MAM2 provide 
an original contribution to the field of peptide drug discovery as a tool for targeting 
complex diseases such as T2D. 
9. REFERENCES 
Aaboe, K., Knop, F.K., Vilsboll, T., Vlund, A., Simonsen, U., Deacon, C.F., 
Madsbad, S., Holst, J.J., Krarup, T. (2009) KATP channel closure ameliorates 
the impaired insulinotropic effect of glucose-dependent insulinotropic 
polypeptide in patients with type 2 diabetes. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 94, 
603608. https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2008-1731 
Abdel-Wahab, Y.H.A., Patterson, S., Flatt, P.R., Conlon, J.M. (2010) Brevinin-2-
related Peptide and its [D4K] analogue stimulate insulin release in vitro and 
improve glucose tolerance in mice fed a high fat diet. Horm. Metab. Res. 42, 
652656. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0030-1254126 
Abdel-Wahab, Y.H.A., Power, G.J., Flatt, P.R., Woodhams, D.C., Rollins-Smith, 
L.A., Conlon, J.M. (2008) A peptide of the phylloseptin family from the skin 
of the frog Hylomantis lemur (Phyllomedusinae) with potent in vitro and in 
vivo insulin-releasing activity. Peptides 29, 21362143. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.peptides.2008.09.006 
Abrantes, A.M., Tavares, L.C., Pires, S., Casalta-lopes, J., Mendes, C., Simes, M., 
Grazina, M.M., Carvalho, R.A., Botelho, M.F. (2014) Metabolic Effects of 
Hypoxia in Colorectal Cancer by 13C NMR Isotopomer Analysis. 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/759791. 
Adeva-Andany, M., Lpez-Ojn, M., Funcasta-Caldern, R., Ameneiros-Rodrguez, 
E., Donapetry-Garca, C., Vila-Altesor, M., Rodrguez-Seijas, J. (2014) 
Comprehensive review on lactate metabolism in human health. Mitochondrion 
17, 76100. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mito.2014.05.007 
Advani, A., Bugyei-Twum, A., Connelly, K.A. (2013) Cardiovascular Effects of 
Incretins in Diabetes. Can. J. Diabetes 37, 309314. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcjd.2013.06.010 
Ahrn, B. (2005) Exenatide: A novel treatment of Type 2 diabetes. Therapy 2, 207
222. https://doi.org/10.1586/14750708.2.2.207 
Alamshah, A., Spreckley, E., Norton, M., Kinsey-Jones, J.S., Amin, A., Ramgulam, 
A., Cao, Y., Johnson, R., Saleh, K., Akalestou, E., Malik, Z., Gonzalez-Abuin, 
N., Jomard, A., Amarsi, R., Moolla, A., Sargent, P.R., Gray, G.W., Bloom, 
S.R., Murphy, K.G. (2017) L-phenylalanine modulates gut hormone release 
and glucose tolerance, and suppresses food intake through the calcium-sensing 
receptor in rodents. Int. J. Obes. 41, 16931701. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/ijo.2017.164 
Alcazar, O., Tiedge, M., Lenzen, S. (2000) Importance of lactate dehydrogenase for 
the regulation of glycolytic flux and insulin secretion in insulin-producing 
cells. Biochem. J. 352, 373380. https://doi.org/10.1042/0264-6021:3520373 
Alexis, N.E., Lay, J.C., Almond, M., Bromberg, P.A., Patel, D.D., Peden, D.B., 
(2005) Acute LPS inhalation in healthy volunteers induces dendritic cell 
maturation in vivo. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol., 115, 345350. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2004.11.040 
AL-Zuaidy, M.H., Mumtaz, M.W., Hamid, A.A., Ismail, A., Mohamed, S., Razis, 
A.F.A., (2017) Biochemical characterization and 1H NMR based 
metabolomics revealed Melicope lunu-ankenda leaf extract a potent anti-
diabetic agent in rats. BMC Complement. Altern. Med. 17, 117. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12906-017-1849-2 
Andersson, T., Berggren, P.O., Gylfe, E. (1981) Effects of glucose on the calcium 
content of intact cells and cellular organelles. Ups. J. Med. Sci. 86, 165170. 
https://doi.org/10.3109/03009738109179224 
Andrali, S.S., Smapley, M.L., Vanderford, N.L., zcan, S. (2008) Glucose 
regulation of insulin gene expression in pancreatic -cells. Biochem. J., 415, 1
10. https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20081029 
Andreasen, A.S., Kelly, M., Berg, R.M.G., Mller, K., Pedersen, B.K. (2011) Type 2 
diabetes is associated with altered NF-B DNA binding activity, JNK 
phosphorylation, and AMPK phosphorylation in skeletal muscle after LPS. 
PLoS One, 6. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0023999 
Andrikopoulos, S., Fam, B.C., Holdsworth, A., Visinoni, S., Ruan, Z., Stathopoulos, 
M., Thorburn, A.W., Joannides, C.N., Cancilla, M., Balmer, L., Proietto, J., 
Morahan, G. (2016) Identification of ABCC8 as a contributory gene to 
impaired early-phase insulin secretion in NZO mice. J. Endocrinol., 228, 61
73. https://doi.org/10.1530/JOE-15-0290 
Asalla, S., Girada, S.B., Kuna, R.S., Chowdhury, D., Kandagatla, B., Oruganti, S., 
Bhadra, U., Bhadra, M.P., Kalivendi, S.V., Rao, S.P., Row, A., Ibrahim, A., 
Ghosh, P.P., Mitra, P. (2016) Restoring mitochondrial function: A small 
molecule-mediated approach to enhance glucose stimulated insulin secretion in 
cholesterol accumulated pancreatic beta cells. Sci. Rep. 6, 117. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/srep27513 
Ashcroft, F.M. (2005). ATP-sensitive potassium channelopathies: focus on insulin 
secretion. J Clin Invest., 115, 20472058. https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI25495.in 
Attoub, S., Mechkarska, M., Sonnevend, A., Radosavljevic, G., Jovanovic, I., Lukic, 
M.L., Conlon, J.M., (2013) Esculentin-2CHa: A host-defense peptide with 
differential cytotoxicity against bacteria, erythrocytes and tumor cells. Peptides 
39, 95102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.peptides.2012.11.004 
Babenko, A.Y., Savitskaya, D.A., Kononova, Y.A., Trofimova, A.Y., Simanenkova, 
A. V., Vasilyeva, E.Y., Shlyakhto, E. V. (2019) Predictors of effectiveness of 
glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist therapy in patients with type 2 
diabetes and obesity. J. Diabetes Res. 2019. 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/1365162 
Bain, J.R., Stevens, R.D., Wenner, B.R., Ilkayeva, O., Muoio, D.M., Newgard, C.B. 
(2009) Moving From Information to Knowledge 58. 
https://doi.org/10.2337/db09-0580 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1180549/
Banchereau, J., Steinman, R.M. (1998) Dendritic cells and the control of immunity. 
Nature 392, 245252. https://doi:10.1038/32588 
Banerjee, S.S., Aher, N., Patil, R., Khandare, J. (2012) Poly(ethylene glycol)-
Prodrug Conjugates: Concept, Design, and Applications. J. Drug Deliv. 2012, 
117. https://doi.org/10.1155/2012/103973 
Behrends, V., Giskedegrd, G.F., Bravo-Santano, N., Letek, M., Keun, H.C. (2019) 
Acetaminophen cytotoxicity in HepG2 cells is associated with a decoupling of 
glycolysis from the TCA cycle, loss of NADPH production, and suppression of 
anabolism. Arch. Toxicol. 93, 341353. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00204-018-
2371-0 
Behrends, V., Tredwell, G.D., Bundy, J.G. (2011) A software complement to 
AMDIS for processing GC-MS metabolomic data. Anal. Biochem. 415, 206
208. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ab.2011.04.009 
Bertola, A., Ciucci, T., Rousseau, D., Bourlier, V., Duffaut, C., Bonnafous, S., Blin-
wakkach, C., Anty, R., Iannelli, A., Gugenheim, J., Tran, A., Bouloumi, A., 
Gual, P., Wakkach, A (2012) Identification of Adipose Tissue Dendritic Cells 
Correlated With Obesity-Associated Insulin-Resistance and Inducing Th17 
Responses in Mice and Patients. Diabetes., 61, 2238-47. 
https://doi.org/10.2337/db11-1274 
Best, C.H., Scott D.A. (1923) The Preparation of Insulin. J. Biol. Chem. 57, 709-723. 
Bhat, V.K., Kerr, B.D., Flatt, P.R., Gault, V.A. (2013) A novel GIP-oxyntomodulin 
hybrid peptide acting through GIP , glucagon and GLP-1 receptors exhibits 
weight reducing and anti-diabetic properties. Biochem. Pharmacol., 85, 1655
1662. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bcp.2013.03.009 
Bloom, S.R., Edwards, A. V. (1975) The release of pancreatic glucagon and 
inhibition of insulin in response to stimulation of the sympathetic innervation. 
J. Physiol. 253, 157173. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.1975.sp011185 
Boland, B.B., Rhodes, C.J., Grimsby, J.S. (2017) The dynamic plasticity of insulin 
production in -cells. Mol. Metab. 6, 958973. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molmet.2017.04.010 
Boussageon R., Supper I., Bejan-Angoulvant T., Kellou N., Cucherat M.,  Boissel 
J., Kassai B., Moreau A., Gueyffier F., Cornu C. (2012) Reappraisal of 
Metformin Efficacy in the Treatment of Type 2 Diabetes: A Meta-Analysis of 
Randomised Controlled Trials. PLoS Med.,9:e1001204. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001204 
Brennan, Lorraine, Shine, A., Hewage, C., Malthouse, J.P.G., Brindle, K.M., 
Mcclenaghan, N., Flatt, P.R., Newsholme, P. (2002) A Nuclear Magnetic 
Resonance  Based Demonstration of Substantial Oxidative L -Alanine 
Metabolism and L -Alanine  Enhanced Glucose Metabolism in a Clonal 
Pancreatic beta-cell line. Diabetes 51, 17141721. 
Brownlee, M. (2001) Biology of Diabetic Complications. Nature 414, 813820. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/32588
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22596049
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=Kellou+N&cauthor_id=22509138
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=Cucherat+M&cauthor_id=22509138
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=Boissel+JP&cauthor_id=22509138
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=Kassai+B&cauthor_id=22509138
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=Moreau+A&cauthor_id=22509138
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=Gueyffier+F&cauthor_id=22509138
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=Cornu+C&cauthor_id=22509138
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001204
Buescher J.M., Antoniewicz M.R., Boros L.G., Burgess S.C., Brunengraber H., 
Clish C.B., DeBerardinis R.J., Feron O., Frezza C., Ghesquiere B., Gottlieb E., 
Hiller K., Jones R.G., Kamphorst J.J., Kibbey R.G., Kimmelman A.C., 
Locasale J.W., Lunt S.Y., Maddocks O.D., Malloy C., Metallo C.M., Meuillet 
E.J., Munger J., Nh K., Rabinowitz J.D., Ralser M., Sauer U., 
Stephanopoulos G., St-Pierre J., Tennant D.A., Wittmann C., Vander Heiden 
M.G., Vazquez A., Vousden K., Young J.D., Zamboni N., Fendt S.M. (2015) 
A roadmap for interpreting (13)C metabolite labeling patterns from cells. Curr 
Opin Biotechnol.,34, 189-201. https://doi:10.1016/j.copbio.2015.02.003.  
Buteau, J., Roduit, R., Susini, S., Prentki, M. (1999) Glucagon-like peptide-1 
promotes DNA synthesis, activates phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and increases 
transcription factor pancreatic and duodenal homeobox gene 1 (PDX-1) DNA 
binding activity in beta (INS-1)- cells. Diabetologia 42, 856864. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s001250051238 
Calderon, B., Carrero, J. A., Unanue, E. R. (2014). The central role of antigen 
presentation in islets of Langerhans in autoimmune diabetes. Curr Opin 
Immunol, 26, 3240. doi:10.1016/j.coi.2013.10.011 
Calderon, B., Suri, A., Miller, M.J., Unanue, E.R. (2008) Dendritic cells in islets of 
Langerhans constitutively present  cell-derived peptides bound to their class 
II MHC molecules. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 105, 61216126. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0801973105 
Cani P.D., Amar J., Iglesias M.A., Poggi M., Knauf C., Bastelica D., Neyrinck 
A.M., Fava F., Tuohy K.M., Chabo C., Waget A., Delme E., Cousin 
B., Sulpice T., Chamontin B., Ferrires J., Tanti J.F., Gibson G.R., Casteilla 
L., Delzenne N.M., Alessi M.C., Burcelin R. (2007) Metabolic endotoxemia 
initiates obesity and insulin resistance. Diabetes, 56, 1761-72. 
https://doi.org/10.2337/db06-1491 
Carlessi, R., Chen, Y., Rowlands, J., Cruzat, V.F., Keane, K.N., Egan, L., Mamotte, 
C., Stokes, R., Gunton, J.E., Bittencourt, P.I.H. De, Newsholme, P. (2017) 
GLP-1 receptor signalling promotes -cell glucose metabolism via mTOR-
dependent HIF-1 activation. Sci. Rep. 7, 113. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-02838-2 
Carlessi, R., Lemos, N.E., Dias, A.L., Oliveira, F.S., Brondani, L.A., Canani, L.H., 
Bauer, A.C., Leito, C.B., Crispim, D. (2015) Exendin-4 protects rat islets 
against loss of viability and function induced by brain death. Mol. Cell. 
Endocrinol. 412, 239250. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mce.2015.05.009 
Carvalho, D.S., de Almeida, A.A., Borges, A.F., Campos, V. (2018) Treatments for 
diabetes mellitus type II: New perspectives regarding the possible role of 
calcium and cAMP interaction. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 830, 916. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejphar.2018.04.002 
Cen, J., Sargsyan, E., Bergsten, P. (2016) Fatty acids stimulate insulin secretion from 
human pancreatic islets at fasting glucose concentrations via mitochondria-
dependent and -independent mechanisms. Nutr. Metab. 13, 19. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12986-016-0119-5 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Cani%20PD%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=17456850
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Amar%20J%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=17456850
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Iglesias%20MA%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=17456850
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Poggi%20M%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=17456850
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Knauf%20C%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=17456850
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Bastelica%20D%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=17456850
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Neyrinck%20AM%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=17456850
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Neyrinck%20AM%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=17456850
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Fava%20F%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=17456850
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Tuohy%20KM%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=17456850
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Chabo%20C%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=17456850
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Waget%20A%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=17456850
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Delm%C3%A9e%20E%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=17456850
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Cousin%20B%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=17456850
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Cousin%20B%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=17456850
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Sulpice%20T%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=17456850
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Chamontin%20B%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=17456850
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Ferri%C3%A8res%20J%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=17456850
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Tanti%20JF%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=17456850
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Gibson%20GR%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=17456850
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Casteilla%20L%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=17456850
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Casteilla%20L%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=17456850
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Delzenne%20NM%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=17456850
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Alessi%20MC%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=17456850
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Burcelin%20R%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=17456850
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17456850
Chakrabarti, S.K., James, J.C., Mirmira, R.G. (2002) Quantitative assessment of 
gene targeting in vitro and in vivo by the pancreatic transcription factor, Pdx1. 
Importance of chromatin structure in directing promoter binding. J. Biol. 
Chem. 277, 1328613293. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M111857200 
Chang Xia C., Rao X, and Jixin Zhong J. (2017) Role of T Lymphocytes in Type 2 
Diabetes and Diabetes-Associated Inflammation. J Diabetes Res, 2017:6. 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/6494795 
Chang-Chen, K.J., Mullur, R., Bernal-Mizrachi, E. (2008) -Cell Failure As a 
Complication of Diabetes. Rev. Endocr. Metab. Disord. 9, 329343. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11154-008-9101-5 
Chatterjee, S., Khunti, K., Davies, M.J. (2017) Type 2 diabetes. Lancet 389, 2239
2251. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(17)30058-2 
Chen, Y., Tian, J., Tian, X., Tang, X., Rui, K., Tong, J., Lu, L., Xu, H., Wang, S., 
(2014) Adipose tissue dendritic cells enhances inflammation by prompting the 
generation of Th17 cells. PLoS One 9, 18. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0092450 
Cheng, X., Ji, Z., Tsalkova, T., Mei, F. (2008) Epac and PKA: A tale of two 
intracellular cAMP receptors. Acta Biochim. Biophys. Sin. (Shanghai). 40, 
651662. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-7270.2008.00438. 
Chepurny O.G., Holz G.G. (2002) Over-expression of the glucagon-like peptide-1 
receptor on INS-1 cells confers autocrine stimulation of insulin gene promoter 
activity: a strategy for production of pancreatic beta-cell lines for use in 
transplantation. Cell Tissue Res., 307(2),191-201. https://doi: 10.1007/s00441-
001-0494-7.  
Collin, M., Bigley, V. (2018) Human dendritic cell subsets: an update. Immunology 
154, 320. https://doi.org/10.1111/imm.12888 
Conlon, J.M., Al-Ghaferi, N., Ahmed, E., Meetani, M.A., Leprince, J., Nielsen, P.F. 
(2010) Orthologs of magainin, PGLa, procaerulein-derived, and proxenopsin-
derived peptides from skin secretions of the octoploid frog Xenopus amieti 
(Pipidae). Peptides 31, 989994. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.peptides.2010.03.002 
Conlon, J.M., Mechkarska, M., Abdel-Wahab, Y.H., Flatt, P.R. (2018) Peptides from 
frog skin with potential for development into agents for Type 2 diabetes 
therapy. Peptides 100, 275281. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.peptides.2017.09.001 
Conlon, J.M., Musale, V., Attoub, S., Mangoni, L. (2017) Cytotoxic peptides with 
insulin-releasing activities from skin secretions of the Italian stream frog Rana 
italica (Ranidae). J Pept Sci, 23(10):769-776. https://doi.org/10.1002/psc.3025 
Corinti, S., Albanesi, C., la Sala, A., Pastore, S., Girolomoni, G. (2001) Regulatory 
Activity of Autocrine IL-10 on Dendritic Cell Functions. J. Immunol., 166, 
43124318. https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.166.7. 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/6494795
Corkey B.E., Deeney J.T., Yaney G.C., Tornheim K., Prentki M. (2000) The role of 
long-chain fatty acyl-CoA esters in -cell signal transduction. J 
Nutr, 130:299S304S. 
Craig, S.L., Gault, V.A., Irwin, N. (2018) Emerging therapeutic potential for xenin 
and related peptides in obesity and diabetes. Diabetes. Metab. Res. Rev. 34, 1
5. https://doi.org/10.1002/dmrr.3006 
Cunningham G.A., McClenaghan N.H., Flatt P.R., Newsholme P. (2005) L-Alanine 
induces changes in metabolic and signal transduction gene expression in a 
clonal rat pancreatic beta-cell line and protects from pro-inflammatory 
cytokine-induced apoptosis. Clin Sci (Lond), 109(5):447-55. 
https://doi.org/10.1042/CS20050149 
Das, U.N., Rao, A.A. (2007) Gene expression profile in obesity and type 2 diabetes 
mellitus. Lipids Health Dis. 6, 119. https://doi.org/10.1186/1476-511X-6-35 
De Heer, J., Holst, J.J. (2007) Sulfonylurea compounds uncouple the glucose 
dependence of the insulinotropic effect of glucagon-like peptide 1. Diabetes 
56, 438443. https://doi.org/10.2337/db06-0738 
Del Coco, L., Vergara, D., De Matteis, S., Mens, E., Sabbatinelli, J., Prattichizzo, 
F., Bonfigli, A.R., Storci, G., Bravaccini, S., Pirini, F., Ragusa, A., Casadei-
Gardini, A., Bonaf, M., Maffia, M., Fanizzi, F.P., Olivieri, F., Giudetti, A.M. 
(2019) NMR-Based Metabolomic Approach Tracks Potential Serum 
Biomarkers of Disease Progression in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus. 
J. Clin. Med. 8, 720. https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm8050720 
Diakogiannaki, E., Dhayal, S., Childs, C.E., Calder, P.C., Welters, H.J., Morgan, 
N.G. (2007) Mechanisms involved in the cytotoxic and cytoprotective actions 
of saturated versus monounsaturated long-chain fatty acids in pancreatic -
cells. J. Endocrinol. 194, 283291. https://doi.org/10.1677/JOE-07-0082 
D'Ignazio, L., Rocha, S. (2016). Hypoxia Induced NF-B. Cells, 5(1), 10. 
https://doi:10.3390/cells5010010 
Dixon, G., Nolan, J., Clenaghan, N.H.M.C., Flatt, P.R. (2004) Arachidonic acid , 
palmitic acid and glucose are important for the modulation of clonal pancreatic 
 -cell insulin secretion , growth and functional integrity. 
https://doi.org/10.1042/CS20030261 
Donath, M.Y., Meier, D.T., Bni-Schnetzler, M. (2019) Inflammation in the 
Pathophysiology and Therapy of Cardiometabolic Disease. Endocr. Rev. 40, 
10801091. https://doi.org/10.1210/er.2019-00002 
Donath, M.Y., Shoelson, S.E. (2011) Type 2 diabetes as an inflammatory disease. 
Nat. Rev. Immunol. 11, 98107. https://doi.org/10.1038/nri2925 
Doyle, I.R.E.E., Wang, X., Zhou, J.I.E., Egan, J.M. (2001) Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 
Causes Pancreatic Duodenal Homeobox-1 Protein Translocation from the 
Cytoplasm to the Nucleus of Pancreatic -Cells by a Cyclic Adenosine 
Monophosphate / Protein Kinase A-Dependent Mechanism 142, 18201827. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Cunningham%20GA%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=16045439
file:///C:/Users/Wendy/Downloads/McClenaghan%20N.H
file:///C:/Users/Wendy/Downloads/Flatt%20P.R
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Newsholme%20P%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=16045439
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16045439
https://doi.org/10.1042/CS20050149
Drucker D.J. (2006) The biology of incretin hormones. Cell Metab., 3(3):153-65. 
Drucker D.J. (2018) Mechanisms of Action and Therapeutic Application of 
Glucagon-like Peptide-1. Cell Metab., 27(4):740-756. https://doi: 
10.1016/j.cmet.2018.03.001. 
Drucker, D.J., Philippe, J., Mojsov, S., Chick, W.L., Habener, J.F. (1987) Glucagon-
like peptide I stimulates insulin gene expression and increases cyclic AMP 
levels in a rat islet cell line. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 84, 34343438. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.84.10.3434 
Dzhura, I., Chepurny, O.G., Kelley, G.G., Leech, C.A., Roe, M.W., Dzhura, E., 
Afshari, P., Malik, S., Rindler, M.J., Xu, X., Lu, Y., Smrcka, A. V., Holz, G.G. 
(2010) Epac2-dependent mobilization of intracellular Ca2+ by glucagon-like 
peptide-1 receptor agonist exendin-4 is disrupted in -cells of phospholipase 
C- knockout mice. J. Physiol. 588, 48714889. 
https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2010.198424 
Eguchi, K., Nagai, R. (2017) Islet inflammation in type 2 diabetes and physiology 
Find the latest version: Islet inflammation in type 2 diabetes and physiology. 
J. Clin. Invest. 127, 1423. https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI88877. 
Ehses, J.A., Perren, A., Eppler, E., Ribaux, P., Pospisilik, J.A., Maor-Cahn, R., 
Gueripel, X., Ellingsgaard, H., Schneider, M.K.J., Biollaz, G., Fontana, A., 
Reinecke, M., Homo-Delarche, F., Donath, M.Y. (2007) Increased number of 
islet-associated macrophages in type 2 diabetes. Diabetes 56, 23562370. 
https://doi.org/10.2337/db06-1650 
Eldor, R., Yeffet, A., Baum, K., Doviner, V., Amar, D., Ben-Neriah, Y., Christofori, 
G., Peled, A., Carel, J.C., Boitard, C., Klein, T., Serup, P., Eizirik, D.L., 
Melloul, D. (2006) Conditional and specific NF-B blockade protects 
pancreatic beta cells from diabetogenic agents. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
103, 50725077. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0508166103 
Eng, J., Kleinman, W.A., Singh, L., Singh, G., Raufman, J.P. (1992) Isolation and 
characterization of exendin-4, an exendin-3 analogue, from Heloderma 
suspectum venom. Further evidence for an exendin receptor on dispersed acini 
from guinea pig pancreas. J. Biol. Chem. 267, 74027405. 
Erspamer, V., Melchiorri, P. (1980) Active polypeptides: from amphibian skin to 
gastrointestinal tract and brain of mammals. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 1, 391
395. https://doi.org/10.1016/0165-6147(80)90060-7 
Feurle, G.E., Hamscher, G., Kusiek, R., Meyer, H.E., Metzger, J.W. (1992) 
Identification of xenin, a xenopsin-related peptide, in the human gastric 
mucosa and its effect on exocrine pancreatic secretion. J. Biol. Chem. 267, 
2230522309. 
Finan, B., Ma, T., Ottaway, N., Mller, T.D., Habegger, K.M., Heppner, K.M., 
Kirchner, H., Holland, J., Hembree, J., Raver, C., Lockie, S.H., Smiley, D.L., 
Gelfanov, V., Yang, B., Hofmann, S., Bruemmer, D., Drucker, D.J., Pfluger, 
P.T., Perez-Tilve, D., Gidda, J., Vignati, L., Zhang, L., Hauptman, J.B., Lau, 
M., Brecheisen, M., Uhles, S., Riboulet, W., Hainaut, E., Sebokova, E., Conde-
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Drucker%20DJ%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=16517403
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16517403
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Drucker%20DJ%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=29617641
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29617641
Knape, K., Konkar, A., DiMarchi, R.D., Tschp, M.H. (2013) Unimolecular 
dual incretins maximize metabolic benefits in rodents, monkeys, and humans. 
Sci. Transl. Med., 5. https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.3007218 
Flanagan, S.E., Clauin, S., Bellann-Chantelot, C., De Lonlay, P., Harries, L.W., 
Gloyn, A.L., Ellard, S. (2009) Update of mutations in the genes encoding the 
pancreatic beta-cell KATP channel subunits Kir6.2 (KCNJ11) and 
sulfonylurea receptor 1 (ABCC8) in diabetes mellitus and hyperinsulinism. 
Hum. Mutat. 30, 170180. https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.20838 
Fourmy, D. (2017) Hybrid peptides in the landscape of drug discovery. Peptides 90, 
A1A2. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.peptides.2017.01.010 
Fu, Z., Gilbert, E. R., & Liu, D. (2013) Regulation of insulin synthesis and secretion 
and pancreatic Beta-cell dysfunction in diabetes. Curr Diabetes Rev, 9(1), 25
Furman, B.L. (2012) The development of Byetta (exenatide) from the venom of the 
Gila monster as an anti-diabetic agent. Toxicon 59, 464471. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.toxicon.2010.12.016 
Fusco, J., Xiao, X., Prasadan, K., Sheng, Q., Chen, C., Ming, Y.C., Gittes, G. (2017) 
GLP-1/Exendin-4 induces -cell proliferation via the epidermal growth factor 
receptor. Sci. Rep. 7, 16. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-09898-4 
Gault, V.A., Kerr, B.D., Irwin, N., Flatt, P.R. (2008) C-terminal mini-PEGylation of 
glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide exhibits metabolic stability and 
improved glucose homeostasis in dietary-induced diabetes. Biochem. 
Pharmacol. 75, 23252333. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bcp.2008.03.011 
Gault, V.A., Martin, C.M.A., Flatt, P.R., Parthsarathy, V., Irwin, N. (2015) Xenin-
25[Lys13PAL]: a novel long-acting acylated analogue of xenin-25 with 
promising antidiabetic potential. Acta Diabetol. 52, 461471. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00592-014-0681-0 
Gault, V.A., Porter, D.W., Irwin, N., Flatt, P.R. (2011) Comparison of sub-chronic 
metabolic effects of stable forms of naturally occurring GIP(1-30) and GIP(1-
42) in high-fat fed mice. J. Endocrinol. 208, 265271. 
https://doi.org/10.1530/JOE-10-0419 
Gembal, M., Gilon, P., Henquin, J.C. (1992) Evidence that glucose can control 
insulin release independently from its action on ATP-sensitive K+ channels in 
mouse B cells. J. Clin. Invest. 89, 12881295. 
https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI115714 
Ghasemi, A., Jeddi, S. (2017) Anti-obesity and anti-diabetic effects of nitrate and 
nitrite. Nitric Oxide - Biol. Chem., 70, 924. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.niox.2017.08.003 
Ghasemi, A., Zahediasl, S. (2013) Potential therapeutic effects of nitrate/nitrite and 
type 2 diabetes mellitus. Int J Endocrinol Metab., 11, 6364. 
Gilon, P., Henquin, J.C. (1992) Influence of membrane potential changes on 
cytoplasmic Ca2+ concentration in an electrically excitable cell, the insulin-
secreting pancreatic B-cell. J. Biol. Chem. 267, 2071320720. 
Gloyn, A.L., Pearson, E.R., Antcliff, J.F., Proks, P., Bruining, G.J., Slingerland, 
A.S., Howard, N., Srinivasan, S., Silva, J.M.C.L., Molnes, J., Edghill, E.L., 
Frayling, T.M., Temple, I.K., Mackay, D., Shield, J.P.H., Sumnik, Z., van 
Rhijn, A., Wales, J.K.H., Clark, P., Gorman, S., Aisenberg, J., Ellard, S., 
Njlstad, P.R., Ashcroft, F.M., Hattersley, A.T. (2004) Activating Mutations in 
the Gene Encoding the ATP-Sensitive Potassium-Channel Subunit Kir6.2 and 
Permanent Neonatal Diabetes. N. Engl. J. Med. 350, 18381849. 
https://doi.org/10.1056/nejmoa032922 
Gonzalez, L.L., Garrie, K., Turner, M.D. (2018) Type 2 diabetes  An 
autoinflammatory disease driven by metabolic stress. Biochim. Biophys. Acta - 
Mol. Basis Dis., 1864, 38053823. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbadis.2018.08.034 
Gowda, G. A., Zhang, S., Gu, H., Asiago, V., Shanaiah, N., & Raftery, D. (2008) 
Metabolomics-based methods for early disease diagnostics. Exp Rev Mol 
Diagn, 8(5), 617633. doi:10.1586/14737159.8.5.617 
Gray, L.R., Tompkins, S.C., Taylor, E.B. (2014) Regulation of pyruvate metabolism 
and human disease. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 71, 25772604. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-013-1539-2 
Grumbach, I.M., Chen, W., Mertens, S.A., Harrison, D.G. (2005) A negative 
feedback mechanism involving nitric oxide and nuclear factor kappa-B 
modulates endothelial nitric oxide synthase transcription. J. Mol. Cell. 
Cardiol., 39, 595603. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yjmcc.2005.06.012 
Guo, X.R., Wang, X.L., Li, M.C., Yuan, Y.H., Chen, Y., Zou, D.D., Bian, L.J., Li, 
D.S. (2015) PDX-1 mRNA-induced reprogramming of mouse pancreas-
derived mesenchymal stem cells into insulin-producing cells in vitro. Clin. 
Exp. Med. 15, 501509. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10238-014-0319-0 
Hadadian, S., Shamassebi, D. N., Mirzahoseini, H., Shokrgozar, M. A., Bouzari, S., 
Sepahi, M. (2015) Stability and biological activity evaluations of PEGylated 
human basic fibroblast growth factor. Adv Biomed Res, 4, 176. 
doi:10.4103/2277-9175.164001 
Hagemann, D., Holst, J.J., Gethmann, A., Banasch, M., Schmidt, W.E., Meier, J.J. 
(2007) Glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) suppresses ghrelin levels in humans 
via increased insulin secretion. Regul. Pept. 143, 6468. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.regpep.2007.03.002 
Hamid, M., McCluskey, J.T., McClenaghan, N.H., Flatt, P.R. (2002) Comparison of 
the secretory properties of four insulin-secreting cell lines. Endocr. Res. 28, 
3547. https://doi.org/10.1081/ERC-120004536 
Han, Y.E., Chun, J.N., Kwon, M.J., Ji, Y.S., Jeong, M.H., Kim, H.H., Park, S.H., 
Rah, J.C., Kang, J.S., Lee, S.H., Ho, W.K. (2018) Endocytosis of K ATP 
Channels Drives Glucose-Stimulated Excitation of Pancreatic  Cells. Cell 
Rep. 22, 471481. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2017.12.049 
Hansen, K. B., Vilsbll, T., & Knop, F. K. (2010) Incretin mimetics: a novel 
therapeutic option for patients with type 2 diabetes  a review. Diabetes Metab 
Syndr Obes., 3: 155163.  
Hao, T., Hongtao, Z., Li, S., Tian, H. (2017) Glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor 
agonist ameliorates the insulin resistance function of islet  cells via the 
activation of PDX-1/JAK signaling transduction in C57/BL6 mice with high-
fat diet-induced diabetes. Int. J. Mol. Med. 39, 10291036. 
https://doi.org/10.3892/ijmm.2017.2910 
Harris, J.M., Chess, R.B. (2003) Effect of pegylation on pharmaceuticals 2, Nat Rev 
Drug Discov., 214221. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrd1033 
Hasib, A., Ng, M.T., Gault, V.A., Khan, D., Parthsarathy, V., Flatt, P.R., Irwin, N. 
(2017) An enzymatically stable GIP/xenin hybrid peptide restores GIP 
sensitivity, enhances beta cell function and improves glucose homeostasis in 
high-fat-fed mice. Diabetologia 60, 541552. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-
016-4186-y 
Henninot A., Collins J.C., Nuss J.M. (2018) The Current State of Peptide Drug 
Discovery: Back to the Future? J. Med. Chem., 61, 4, 1382-1414. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jmedchem.7b00318 
Hinke S.A., Gelling R.W., Pederson R.A., Manhart S., Nian C., Demuth 
H.U., McIntosh C.H. (2002) Dipeptidyl peptidase IV-resistant [D-
Ala(2)]glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) improves glucose 
tolerance in normal and obese diabetic rats. Diabetes, 51(3):652-61. 
https://doi.org/10.2337/diabetes.51.3.652 
Hisatomi M., Hidaka H., Niki I. (1996) Ca2+/calmodulin and cyclic 3,5' adenosine 
monophosphate control movement of secretory granules through protein 
phosphorylation/dephosphorylation in the pancreatic beta-cell. Endocrinology, 
137 (11), 46444649. https://doi.org/10.1210/endo.137.11.8895328 
Hodgkin, M.N., Hills, C.E., Squires, P.E. (2008) The calcium-sensing receptor and 
insulin secretion: a role outside systemic control 15 years on. J. Endocrinol. 
199, 14. https://doi.org/10.1677/joe-08-0261 
Hodson D.J., Tarasov A.I., Gimeno Brias S., Mitchell R.K., Johnston N.R., 
Haghollahi S., Cane M.C., Bugliani M., Marchetti P., Bosco D., Johnson P.R., 
Hughes S.J., Rutter G.A. (2014) Incretin-modulated beta cell energetics in 
intact islets of Langerhans. Mol Endocrinol., 28(6):860-71. 
https://doi:10.1210/me.2014-1038.  
Hohnholt, M.C., Blumrich, E.M., Waagepetersen, H.S., Dringen, R. (2017) The 
antidiabetic drug metformin decreases mitochondrial respiration and 
tricarboxylic acid cycle activity in cultured primary rat astrocytes. J. Neurosci. 
Res. 95, 23072320. https://doi.org/10.1002/jnr.24050 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Effect+of+pegylation+on+pharmaceuticals+harris+chess
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Effect+of+pegylation+on+pharmaceuticals+harris+chess
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Henninot%20A%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=28737935
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Collins%20JC%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=28737935
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Nuss%20JM%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=28737935
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jmedchem.7b00318
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Hinke%20SA%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=11872663
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Gelling%20RW%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=11872663
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Pederson%20RA%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=11872663
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Manhart%20S%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=11872663
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Nian%20C%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=11872663
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Demuth%20HU%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=11872663
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Demuth%20HU%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=11872663
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=McIntosh%20CH%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=11872663
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11872663
https://doi.org/10.2337/diabetes.51.3.652
javascript:;
javascript:;
javascript:;
https://doi.org/10.1210/endo.137.11.8895328
Hornigold, D.C., Roth, E., Howard, V., Will, S., Oldham, S., Coghlan, M.P., Blouet, 
C., Trevaskis, J.L. (2018) A GLP-1:CCK fusion peptide harnesses the 
synergistic effects on metabolism of CCK-1 and GLP-1 receptor agonism in 
mice. Appetite 127, 334340. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.appet.2018.05.131 
Hotamisligil, G.S., Shargill, N.S., Spiegelman, B.M. (1993) Adipose expression of 
tumor necrosis factor-: Direct role in obesity-linked insulin resistance. 
Science (80-. ). 259, 8791. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.7678183 
Hu, F.B. (2011) Globalization of diabetes: The role of diet, lifestyle, and genes. 
Diabetes Care 34, 12491257. https://doi.org/10.2337/dc11-0442 
Huang, M., Joseph, J.W. (2012)  Metabolomic analysis of pancreatic -cell insulin 
release in response to glucose Islets, 4(3):210-22. https://doi: 
10.4161/isl.20141. 
Huang, X.T., Li, C., Peng, X.P., Guo, J., Yue, S.J., Liu, W., Zhao, F.Y., Han, J.Z., 
Huang, Y.H., Yang-Li, Cheng, Q.M., Zhou, Z.G., Chen, C., Feng, D.D., Luo, 
Z.Q. (2017) An excessive increase in glutamate contributes to glucose-toxicity 
in -cells via activation of pancreatic NMDA receptors in rodent diabetes. Sci. 
Rep. 7, 114. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep44120 
Hui, S., Ghergurovich, J.M., Morscher, R.J., Jang, C., Teng, X., Lu, W., Esparza, 
L.A., Reya, T., Zhan, L., Yanxiang Guo, J., White, E., Rabinowitz, J.D. (2017) 
Glucose feeds the TCA cycle via circulating lactate. Nature 551, 115118. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature24057 
Ichinose, K., Maeshima, Y., Yamamoto, Y., Kinomura, M., Hirokoshi, K., 
Kitayama, H., Takazawa, Y., Sugiyama, H., Yamasaki, Y., Agata, N., Makino, 
H. (2006) 2-(8-Hydroxy-6-methoxy-1-oxo-1H-2-benzopyran-3-yl) propionic 
acid, an inhibitor of angiogenesis, ameliorates renal alterations in obese type 2 
diabetic mice. Diabetes 55, 12321242. https://doi.org/10.2337/db05-1367 
Inaba, K., Inaba, M., Romani, N., Aya, H., Deguchi, M., Ikehara, S., Muramatsu, S., 
Steinman, R.M. (1992) Generation of large numbers of dendritic cells from 
mouse bone marrow cultures supplemented with granulocyte/macrophage 
colony-stimulating factor. J. Exp. Med., 176, 16931702. 
https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.176.6.1693 
Irwin, N., Flatt, P.R. (2009) Evidence for beneficial effects of compromised gastric 
inhibitory polypeptide action in obesity-related diabetes and possible 
therapeutic implications. Diabetologia 52, 17241731. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-009-1422-8 
Irwin, N., Flatt, P.R. (2013) Enteroendocrine hormone mimetics for the treatment of 
obesity and diabetes. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 13, 989995. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coph.2013.09.009 
Irwin, N., Flatt, P.R. (2015) New perspectives on exploitation of incretin peptides for 
the treatment of diabetes and related disorders GLP-1. World J Diabetes, 6, 
12851295. https://doi.org/10.4239/wjd.v6.i15.1285 
https://doi.org/10.2337/dc11-0442
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Metabolomic+analysis+of+pancreatic+%CE%B2-cell+insulin+release+in+response+to+glucose+huang
Irwin, N., Frizelle, P., OHarte, F.P.M., Flatt, P.R. (2013) (pGlu-Gln)-CCK-
8[mPEG]: A novel, long-acting, mini-PEGylated cholecystokinin (CCK) 
agonist that improves metabolic status in dietary-induced diabetes. Biochim. 
Biophys. Acta - Gen. Subj. 1830, 40094016. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbagen.2013.04.004 
Irwin, N., Pathak, V., Flatt, P.R. (2015) A novel CCK-8/GLP-1 hybrid peptide 
exhibiting prominent insulinotropic, glucose-lowering, and satiety actions with 
significant therapeutic potential in high-fat-fed mice. Diabetes 64, 29963009. 
https://doi.org/10.2337/db15-0220 
Itoh, Y., Kawamata, Y., Harada, M., Kobayashi, M., Fujii, R., Fukusumi, S., Ogi, K., 
Hosoya, M., Tanaka, Y., Uejima, H., Tanaka, H., Maruyama, M., Satoh, R., 
Okubo, S., Kizawa, H., Komatsu, H., Matsumura, F., Noguchi, Y., Shinohara, 
T., Hinuma, S., Fujisawa, Y., Fujino, M. (2003) Free fatty acids regulate 
insulin secretion from pancreatic  cells through GPR40. Nature 422, 173
176. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature01478 
Iwaya, C., Nomiyama, T., Komatsu, S., Kawanami, T., Tsutsumi, Y., Hamaguchi, 
Y., Horikawa, T., Yoshinaga, Y., Yamashita, S., Tanaka, T., Terawaki, Y., 
Tanabe, M., Nabeshima, K., Iwasaki, A., Yanase, T. (2017) Exendin-4, a 
Glucagonlike Peptide-1 Receptor Agonist, Attenuates Breast Cancer Growth 
by Inhibiting NF- k B Activation. Endocrinology, 158, 42184232. 
https://doi.org/10.1210/en.2017-00461 
Iype, T., Francis, J., Garmey, J.C., Schisler, J.C., Nesher, R., Weir, G.C., Becker, 
T.C., Newgard, C.B., Griffen, S.C., Mirmira, R.G. (2005) Mechanism of 
insulin gene regulation by the pancreatic transcription factor Pdx-1: 
Application of pre-mRNA analysis and chromatin immunoprecipitation to 
assess formation of functional transcriptional complexes. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 
1679816807. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M414381200 
Janjuha, S., Singh, S.P., Tsakmaki, A., Neda Mousavy Gharavy, S., Murawala, P., 
Konantz, J., Birke, S., Hodson, D.J., Rutter, G.A., Bewick, G.A., Ninov, N. 
(2018) Age-related islet inflammation marks the proliferative decline of 
pancreatic beta-cells in zebrafish. Elife 7, 124. 
https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32965 
Jitrapakdee, S., Vidal-Puig, A., Wallace, J.C. (2006) Anaplerotic roles of pyruvate 
carboxylase in mammalian tissues. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 63, 843854. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-005-5410-y 
Jo, S.H., Chen, J., Xu, G., Grayson, T.B., Thielen, L.A., Shalev, A. (2018) miR-204 
controls glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor expression and agonist function. 
Diabetes 67, 256264. https://doi.org/10.2337/db17-0506 
Jones, B., Bloom, S.R., Buenaventura, T., Tomas, A., Rutter, G.A. (2018) Control of 
insulin secretion by GLP-1. Peptides 100, 7584. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.peptides.2017.12.013 
Jones, P.M., Kitsou-Mylona, I., Gray, E., Squires, P.E., Persaud, S.J. (2007) 
Expression and function of the extracellular calcium-sensing receptor in 
pancreatic -cells. Arch. Physiol. Biochem. 113, 98103. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/13813450701531185 
Jonkers, F.C., Guiot, Y., Rahier, J., Henquin, J.C. (2001) Tolbutamide stimulation of 
pancreatic -cells involves both cell recruitment and increase in the individual 
Ca2+ response. Br. J. Pharmacol. 133, 575585. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.bjp.0704108 
Kahn S.E., Cooper M.E., Del Prato S. (2014) Pathophysiology and treatment of Type 
2 Diabetes: Perspectives on the past, present and future. 
Lancet.,383(9922):1068-1083. https://doi.org/10.1201/9781420038798.sec2 
Kalwat, M.A., Cobb, M.H. (2017) Mechanisms of the amplifying pathway of insulin 
secretion in the  cell. Pharmacol. Ther. 179, 1730. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pharmthera.2017.05.003 
Kang, G., Chepurny, O.G., Rindler, M.J., Collis, L., Chepurny, Z., Li, W.H., 
Harbeck, M., Roe, M.W., Holz, G.G. (2005) A cAMP and Ca2+ coincidence 
detector in support of Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release in mouse pancreatic  cells. 
J. Physiol., 566, 173188. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2005.087510 
Kanno, T., Rorsman, P., Gpel, S.O. (2002) Glucose-dependent regulation of 
rhythmic action potential firing in pancreatic -cells by KATP-channel 
modulation. J. Physiol. 545, 501507. 
https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2002.031344 
Kastin, A.J., Akerstrom, V. (2003) Entry of exendin-4 into brain is rapid but may be 
limited at high doses. Int. J. Obes. 27, 313318. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.ijo.0802206 
Keane, D.C., Takahashi, H.K., Dhayal, S., Morgan, N.G., Curi, R., Newsholme, P. 
(2011) Arachidonic acid actions on functional integrity and attenuation of the 
negative effects of palmitic acid in a clonal pancreatic -cell line. Clin. Sci. 
120, 195206. https://doi.org/10.1042/CS20100282 
Khondkaryan, L., Margaryan, S., Poghosyan, D., Manukyan, G. (2018) Impaired 
Inflammatory Response to LPS in Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus. Int J Inflam., 14, 
2157434..https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/2157434 
Kiely, A., McClenaghan, N.H., Flatt, P.R., Newsholme, P. (2007) Pro-inflammatory 
cytokines increase glucose, alanine and triacylglycerol utilization but inhibit 
insulin secretion in a clonal pancreatic -cell line. J. Endocrinol. 195, 113
123. https://doi.org/10.1677/JOE-07-0306 
Kim, W., & Egan, J. M. (2008) The Role of Incretins in Glucose Homeostasis and 
Diabetes Treatment. Pharmaco Rev, 60(4), 470512. 
Kiss, A., Juhsz, L., Seprnyi, G., Kupai, K., Kaszaki, J., Vgh, . (2010) The role 
of nitric oxide, superoxide and peroxynitrite in the anti-arrhythmic effects of 
preconditioning and peroxynitrite infusion in anaesthetized dogs. Br. J. 
Pharmacol. 160, 12631272. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1476-
5381.2010.00774.x 
https://doi.org/10.1201/9781420038798.sec2
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29568481
Klein, M.S., Shearer, J. (2016) Metabolomics and Type 2 Diabetes: Translating 
Basic Research into Clinical Application. J. Diabetes Res. 2016. 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2016/3898502 
Kolb H., Mandrup-Poulsen T. (2010) The global diabetes epidemic as a consequence 
of lifestyle-induced low-grade inflammation. Diabetologia, 53(1):10-20. 
https://doi: 10.1007/s00125-009-1573-7. 
Kolterman, O.G., Buse, J.B., Fineman, M.S., Gaines, E., Heintz, S., Bicsak, T.A., 
Taylor, K., Kim, D., Aisporna, M., Wang, Y., Baron, A.D. (2003) Synthetic 
exendin-4 (exenatide) significantly reduces postprandial and fasting plasma 
glucose in subjects with type 2 diabetes. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 88, 3082
3089. https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2002-021545 
Konstantopoulos, N., Foletta, V.C., Segal, D.H., Shields, K.A., Sanigorski, A., 
Windmill, K., Swinton, C., Connor, T., Wanyonyi, S., Dyer, T.D., Fahey, R.P., 
Watt, R.A., Curran, J.E., Molero, J.C., Krippner, G., Collier, G.R., James, 
D.E., Blangero, J., Jowett, J.B., Walder, K.R. (2011) A gene expression 
signature for insulin resistance. Physiol. Genomics 43, 110120. 
https://doi.org/10.1152/physiolgenomics.00115.2010 
Korner, J., Cline, G.W., Slifstein, M., Barba, P., Rayat, G.R., Febres, G., Leibel, 
R.L., Maffei, A., Harris, P.E. (2019) A role for foregut tyrosine metabolism in 
glucose tolerance. Mol. Metab. 23, 3750. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molmet.2019.02.008 
Koska J., Saremi A., Bahn G., Yamashita S.,  Reaven P.D., Veterans Affairs 
Diabetes Trial Investigators (2013) The effect of intensive glucose lowering on 
lipoprotein particle profiles and inflammatory markers in the Veterans Affairs 
Diabetes Trial (VADT). Diabetes Care, 36:2408-2414. 
https://doi.org/10.2337/dc12-2082 
Koska, J., Ortega, E., Bunt, J.C., Gasser, A., Impson, J., Hanson, R.L., Forbes, J., De 
Courten, B., Krakoff, J. (2009) The effect of salsalate on insulin action and 
glucose tolerance in obese non-diabetic patients: Results of a randomised 
double-blind placebo-controlled study. Diabetologia 52, 385393. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-008-1239-x 
Koubaa, M., Mghaieth, S., Thomasset, B., Roscher, A. (2012) Gas chromatography-
mass spectrometry analysis of 13C labeling in sugars for metabolic flux 
analysis. Anal. Biochem. 425, 183188. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ab.2012.03.020 
Kubo, F., Miyatsuka, T., Sasaki, S., Takahara, M., Yamamoto, Y., Shimo, N., 
Watada, H., Kaneto, H., Gannon, M., Matsuoka, T.A., Shimomura, I. (2016) 
Sustained expression of GLP-1 receptor differentially modulates -cell 
functions in diabetic and nondiabetic mice. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 
471, 6874. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.01.177 
Lamanna C, Monami M., Marchionni N., Mannucci E. (2011) Effect of metformin 
on cardiovascular events and mortality: a meta-analysis of randomized clinical 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Kolb%20H%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=19890624
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Mandrup-Poulsen%20T%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=19890624
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19890624
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=Yamashita+S&cauthor_id=23536583
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=Reaven+PD&cauthor_id=23536583
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=Veterans+Affairs+Diabetes+Trial+Investigators%5BCorporate+Author%5D
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=Veterans+Affairs+Diabetes+Trial+Investigators%5BCorporate+Author%5D
https://doi.org/10.2337/dc12-2082
trials. Diabetes Obes Metab., 13:221-228. 
http://doi.wiley.com/10.1111/j.1463-1326.2010.01349.x 
Lamont, B.J., Drucker, D.J. (2008) Differential Antidiabetic Efficacy of Incretin 
Agonists 57. https://doi.org/10.2337/db07-1202.AUC 
Larsen, C. M., Faulenbach, M., Vaag, A., Ehses, J. A., Donath, M. Y., & Mandrup-
Poulsen, T. (2009) Sustained effects of interleukin-1 receptor antagonist 
treatment in type 2 diabetes. Diabetes care, 32(9), 16631668. 
doi:10.2337/dc09-0533 
Lawrence T. (2009) The nuclear factor NF-kappaB pathway in inflammation. Cold 
Spring Harbor perspectives in biology, 1(6), a001651. 
doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a001651. 
Le Lay, J., Stein, R. (2006) Involvement of PDX-1 in activation of human insulin 
gene transcription. J. Endocrinol., 188, 287294. 
https://doi.org/10.1677/joe.1.06510 
Lee, Y.S., Jun, H.S. (2016) Anti-Inflammatory Effects of GLP-1-Based Therapies 
beyond Glucose Control. Mediators Inflamm., 2016, 2632. 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2016/3094642 
Leibiger, B., Moede, T., Uhles, S., Berggren, P.O., Leibiger, I.B. (2002) Short-term 
regulation of insulin gene transcription. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 30, 312317. 
https://doi.org/10.1042/bst0300312 
Lernmark, . (1974) The preparation of, and studies on, free cell suspensions from 
mouse pancreatic islets. Diabetologia 10, 431438. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01221634 
Li, Y., Cao, X., Li, L.X., Brubaker, P.L., Edlund, H., Drucker, D.J. (2005) -Cell 
Pdx1 expression is essential for the glucoregulatory, proliferative, and 
cytoprotective actions of glucagon-like peptide-1. Diabetes 54, 482491. 
https://doi.org/10.2337/diabetes.54.2.482 
Lu, H., Yao, K., Huang, D., Sun, A., Zou, Y., Qian, J., Ge, J. (2013) High glucose 
induces upregulation of scavenger receptors and promotes maturation of 
dendritic cells. Cardiovasc. Diabetol., 12, 1. https://doi.org/10.1186/1475-
2840-12-80 
Lynch, H., Sempowski, G.D. (2013) LDH assay. Methods Mol Biol 979, 112. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-62703-290-2 
MacDonald, P.E., Joseph, J.W., Rorsman, P. (2005) Glucose-sensing mechanisms in 
pancreatic -cells. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 360, 22112225. 
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2005.1762 
MacDonald, P.E., Rorsman, P. (2006) Oscillations, intercellular coupling, and 
insulin secretion in pancreatic  cells. PLoS Biol. 4, 167171. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.0040049 
Maedler, K., Halban, P.A., Donath, M.Y., Maedler, K., Sergeev, P., Ris, F., 
Oberholzer, J., Joller-jemelka, H.I., Spinas, G.A., Kaiser, N., Halban, P.A., 
http://doi.wiley.com/10.1111/j.1463-1326.2010.01349.x
Donath, M.Y. (2002) Glucose-induced beta cell production of IL-1beta 
contributes to glucotoxicity in human pancreatic islets.  J Clin Invest, 110(6), 
851860. https://doi:10.1172/JCI15318 
Malone, J.I., Cuthbertson, D.D., Malone, M.A., Schocken, D.D. (2006) Diabetic 
Rats. Cardiovasc. Diabetol. 6, 27. https://doi.org/10.1186/1475-2840-5-2 
Malozowski, S., Sahlroot, J.T. (2007) Interleukin-1-receptor antagonist in type 2 
diabetes mellitus. N. Engl. J. Med. 357, 302303. 
https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMc071324 
Mangoni, M.L. (2011) Host-defense peptides: From biology to therapeutic strategies. 
Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 68, 21572159. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-011-0709-3 
Marenah, L., Flatt, P.R., Orr, D.F., McClean, S., Shaw, C., Abdel-Wahab, Y.H.A. 
(2004) Skin secretion of the toad Bombina variegata contains multiple insulin-
releasing peptides including bombesin and entirely novel insulinotropic 
structures. Biol. Chem. 385, 315321. https://doi.org/10.1515/BC.2004.027 
Marenah, L., Flatt, P.R., Orr, D.F., Shaw, C., Abdel-Wahab, Y.H.A. (2006) Skin 
secretions of Rana saharica frogs reveal antimicrobial peptides esculentins-1 
and -1B and brevinins-1E and -2EC with novel insulin releasing activity. J. 
Endocrinol. 188, 19. https://doi.org/10.1677/joe.1.06293 
Marso S.P., Bain S.C., Consoli A., Eliaschewitz F.G., Jdar E., Leiter L.A., Lingvay 
I., Rosenstock J., Seufert J., Warren M.L., Woo V., Hansen O., Holst 
A.G., Pettersson J., Vilsbll T. (2016) Semaglutide and Cardiovascular 
Outcomes in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes. New Engl J Med., 375:1834-1144. 
https://doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1607141. 
Martin, C.M.A., Gault, V.A., McClean, S., Flatt, P.R., Irwin, N. (2012) Degradation, 
insulin secretion, glucose-lowering and GIP additive actions of a palmitate-
derivatised analogue of xenin-25. Biochem. Pharmacol. 84, 312319. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bcp.2012.04.015 
Martin, C.M.A., Irwin, N., Flatt, P.R., Gault, V.A. (2013) A novel acylated form of 
(d-Ala2)GIP with improved antidiabetic potential, lacking effect on body fat 
stores. Biochim. Biophys. Acta - Gen. Subj. 1830, 34073413. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbagen.2013.03.011 
Martnez, D., Vermeulen, M., Euw, E. Von, Maggni, J., Ceballos, A., Trevani, A., 
Nahmod, K., Salamone, G., Barrio, M., Amigorena, S., Geffner, J., Euw, E. 
Von, Sabatte, J., Magg, J., Ceballos, A., Nahmod, K., Salamone, G., Barrio, 
M., Giordano, M., Amigorena, S., Geffner, J. (2007) Extracellular Acidosis 
Triggers the Maturation of Human Dendritic Cells and the Production of IL-
12. J Immunol., 179, 1950-9. https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.179.3.1950 
Matsuzaki, K. (1998) Magainins as paradigm for the mode of action of pore forming 
polypeptides. Biochim. Biophys. Acta - Rev. Biomembr. 1376, 391400. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0304-4157(98)00014-8 
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=Eliaschewitz+FG&cauthor_id=27633186
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=J%C3%B3dar+E&cauthor_id=27633186
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=Leiter+LA&cauthor_id=27633186
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=Lingvay+I&cauthor_id=27633186
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=Rosenstock+J&cauthor_id=27633186
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=Seufert+J&cauthor_id=27633186
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=Warren+ML&cauthor_id=27633186
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=Woo+V&cauthor_id=27633186
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=Hansen+O&cauthor_id=27633186
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=Holst+AG&cauthor_id=27633186
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=Pettersson+J&cauthor_id=27633186
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=Vilsb%C3%B8ll+T&cauthor_id=27633186
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17641062
Mbongue, J.C., Nieves, H.A., Torrez, T.W., Langridge, W.H.R. (2017) The role of 
dendritic cell maturation in the induction of insulin-dependent diabetes 
mellitus. Front. Immunol. 8, 19. https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2017.00327 
McClenaghan N.H., Barnett C.R., Ah-Sing E., Abdel-Wahab Y.H., O'Harte 
F.P., Yoon T.W., Swanston-Flatt S.K., Flatt P.R. (1996a) Characterization of a 
novel glucose-responsive insulin-secreting cell line, BRIN-BD11, produced by 
electrofusion. Diabetes., 45(8):1132-40. 
McClenaghan, N.H. (2007) Physiological regulation of the pancreatic -cell: 
Functional insights for understanding and therapy of diabetes. Exp. Physiol. 
92, 481496. https://doi.org/10.1113/expphysiol.2006.034835 
McClenaghan, N.H., Barnett, C.R., Flatt, P.R. (1998) Na+ cotransport by 
metabolizable and nonmetabolizable amino acids stimulates a glucose-
regulated insulin-secretory response. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 249, 
299303. https://doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.1998.9136 
McClenaghan, N.H., Barnett, C.R., OHarte, F.P.M., Flatt, P.R. (1996b) Mechanisms 
of amino acid-induced insulin secretion from the glucose-responsive BRIN-
BD11 pancreatic B-cell line. J. Endocrinol. 151, 349357. 
https://doi.org/10.1677/joe.0.1510349 
McClenaghan, N.H., Flatt, P.R. (1999) Engineering cultured insulin-secreting 
pancreatic B-cell lines. J. Mol. Med. 77, 235243. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s001090050344 
Mechkarska, M., Kolodziejek, J., Musale, V., Coquet, L., Leprince, J., Jouenne, T., 
Nowotny, N., Conlon, J.M. (2019) Peptidomic analysis of the host-defense 
peptides in skin secretions of Rana graeca provides insight into phylogenetic 
relationships among Eurasian Rana species. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. - Part D 
Genomics Proteomics 29, 228234. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cbd.2018.12.006 
Meier, J.J., Nauck, M.A. (2010) Is the diminished incretin effect in type 2 diabetes 
just an epi-phenomenon of impaired -cell function? Diabetes 59, 11171125. 
https://doi.org/10.2337/db09-1899 
Melloul D., Marshak S., Cerasi E. (2002) Regulation of insulin gene transcription. 
Diabetologia, 45(3):309-26. 
Meloni, A.R., Deyoung, M.B., Lowe, C., Parkes, D.G. (2013) GLP-1 receptor 
activated insulin secretion from pancreatic -cells: Mechanism and glucose 
dependence. Diabetes, Obes. Metab. 15, 1527. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1463-
1326.2012.01663.x 
Moore, S.W.M., Bhat, V.K., Flatt, P.R., Gault, V.A., McClean, S. (2015) Isolation 
and characterisation of insulin-releasing compounds from Crotalus 
adamanteus, Crotalus vegrandis and Bitis nasicornis venom. Toxicon 101, 48
54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.toxicon.2015.05.002 
Mora-Ortiz, M., Nuez Ramos, P., Oregioni, A., Claus, S.P. (2019) NMR 
metabolomics identifies over 60 biomarkers associated with Type II Diabetes 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=McClenaghan%20NH%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=8690162
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Barnett%20CR%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=8690162
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Ah-Sing%20E%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=8690162
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Abdel-Wahab%20YH%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=8690162
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=O%27Harte%20FP%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=8690162
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=O%27Harte%20FP%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=8690162
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Yoon%20TW%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=8690162
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Swanston-Flatt%20SK%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=8690162
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Flatt%20PR%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=8690162
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8690162
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Melloul%20D%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=11914736
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Marshak%20S%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=11914736
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Cerasi%20E%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=11914736
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11914736
impairment in db/db mice. Metabolomics 15, 116. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11306-019-1548-8 
Morey, M., OGaora, P., Pandit, A., Hlary, C. (2019) Hyperglycemia acts in 
synergy with hypoxia to maintain the pro-inflammatory phenotype of 
macrophages. PLoS One 14, 117. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0220577 
Movassat J., Beattie G.M., Lopez A.D., Hayek A. (2002) Exendin 4 up-regulates 
expression of PDX 1 and hastens differentiation and maturation of human fetal 
pancreatic cells. J Clin Endocrinol Metab., 87(10):4775-81. 
Nanjan, M.J., Mohammed, M., Prashantha Kumar, B.R., Chandrasekar, M.J.N. 
(2018) Thiazolidinediones as antidiabetic agents: A critical review. Bioorg. 
Chem. 77, 548567. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bioorg.2018.02.009 
Nauck, M.A., Heimesaat, M.M., Orskov, C., Holst, J.J., Ebert, R., Creutzfeldt, W. 
(1993) Preserved incretin activity of glucagon-like peptide 1 [7-36 amide] but 
not of synthetic human gastric inhibitory polypeptide in patients with type- 2 
diabetes mellitus. J. Clin. Invest. 91, 301307. 
https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI116186 
Neels, J.G. (2009) Obese Insulin Resistant Animals 8, 301309. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2008.08.015.Ablation 
Newsholme, P., Krause, M. (2012) Nutritional Regulation of Insulin Secretion: 
Implications for Diabetes. Clin. Biochem. Rev. 33, 3547. 
Nikolajczyk, B., Jagannathan-Bogdan, M., Shin, H., Gyurko R. (2011) State of the 
union between metabolism and the immune system in type 2 diabetes. Genes 
Immun 12, 239250. https://doi.org/10.1038/gene.2011.14 
Nolan, C.J., Leahy, J.L., Delghingaro-Augusto, V., Moibi, J., Soni, K., Peyot, M.L., 
Fortier, M., Guay, C., Lamontagne, J., Barbeau, A., Przybytkowski, E., Joly, 
E., Masiello, P., Wang, S., Mitchell, G.A., Prentki, M. (2006) Beta cell 
compensation for insulin resistance in Zucker fatty rats: Increased lipolysis and 
fatty acid signalling. Diabetologia 49, 21202130. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-006-0305-5 
Nunemaker C.S. (2016) Considerations for Defining Cytokine Dose, Duration, and 
Milieu That Are Appropriate for Modeling Chronic Low-Grade Inflammation 
in Type 2 Diabetes. J Diabetes Res., 2016:2846570. 
Nyenwe, E. A., Jerkins, T. W., Umpierrez, G. E., & Kitabchi, A. E. (2011) 
Management of type 2 diabetes: evolving strategies for the treatment of 
patients with type 2 diabetes. Metabolism, 60(1): 123. 
OHarte, F., Gault, V., Parker, J., Harriott, P., Mooney, M., Bailey, C., Flatt, P. 
(2002) Improved stability, insulin-releasing activity and antidiabetic potential 
of two novel N-terminal analogues of gastric inhibitory polypeptide: N-acetyl-
GIP and pGlu-GIP. Diabetologia 45, 12811291. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-002-0894-6 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Movassat%20J%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=12364473
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Beattie%20GM%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=12364473
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Lopez%20AD%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=12364473
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Hayek%20A%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=12364473
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12364473
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Nunemaker%20CS%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=27843953
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27843953
Ojo, O., Srinivasan, D., Owolabi, B., Flatt, P., Abdel-Wahab, Y. (2015a). Magainin-
Related Peptides Stimulate Insulin-Release and Improve Glucose Tolerance in 
High Fat Fed Mice. Protein Pept. Lett. 22, 256263. 
https://doi.org/10.2174/0929866521666141229105757 
Ojo, O.O., Abdel-Wahab, Y.H.A., Flatt, P.R., Mechkarska, M., Conlon, J.M. (2011) 
Tigerinin-1R: A potent, non-toxic insulin-releasing peptide isolated from the 
skin of the Asian frog, Hoplobatrachus rugulosus. Diabetes, Obes. Metab. 13, 
11141122. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1463-1326.2011.01470.x 
Ojo, O.O., Conlon, J.M., Flatt, P.R., Abdel-Wahab, Y.H.A. (2013) Frog skin 
peptides (tigerinin-1R, magainin-AM1, -AM2, CPF-AM1, and PGla-AM1) 
stimulate secretion of glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) by GLUTag cells. 
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 431, 1418. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.12.116 
Ojo, O.O., Srinivasan, D.K., Owolabi, B.O., Conlon, J.M., Flatt, P.R., Abdel-Wahab, 
Y.H.A., (2015b). Magainin-AM2 improves glucose homeostasis and beta cell 
function in high-fat fed mice. Biochim. Biophys. Acta - Gen. Subj. 1850, 80
87. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbagen.2014.10.011 
Ojo, O.O., Srinivasan, D.K., Owolabi, B.O., Flatt, P.R., Abdel-Wahab, Y.H.A., 
(2015c) Beneficial effects of tigerinin-1R on glucose homeostasis and beta cell 
function in mice with diet-induced obesity-diabetes. Biochimie 109, 1826. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biochi.2014.11.018 
Ojo, O.O., Srinivasan, D.K., Owolabi, B.O., Vasu, S., Conlon, J.M., Flatt, P.R., 
Abdel-Wahab, Y.H.A. (2015d) Esculentin-2cha-related peptides modulate islet 
cell function and improve glucose tolerance in mice with diet-induced obesity 
and insulin resistance. PLoS One 10, 117. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0141549 
Okamoto, M., Ohara-Imaizumi, M., Kubota, N., Hashimoto, S., Eto, K., Kanno, T., 
Kubota, T., Wakui, M., Nagai, R., Noda, M., Nagamatsu, S., Kadowaki, T. 
(2008) Adiponectin induces insulin secretion in vitro and in vivo at a low 
glucose concentration. Diabetologia 51, 827835. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-008-0944-9 
O'Neill C.M., Lu C., Corbin K.L., Sharma P.R., Dula S.B, Carter J.D, Ramadan 
J.W., Xin W., Lee J.K., Nunemaker C.S (2013) Circulating Levels of IL-
1B+IL-6 Cause ER Stress and Dysfunction in Islets From Prediabetic Male 
Mice. Endocrinology, 154(9): 30773088. https://doi: 10.1210/en.2012-2138. 
Ottosson-Laakso, E., Krus, U., Storm, P., Prasad, R.B., Oskolkov, N., Ahlqvist, E., 
Fadista, J., Hansson, O., Groop, L., Vikman, P. (2017) Glucose-induced 
changes in gene expression in human pancreatic islets: Causes or consequences 
of chronic hyperglycemia. Diabetes 66, 30133028. 
https://doi.org/10.2337/db17-0311 
Owolabi, B.O., Musale, V., Ojo, O.O., Moffett, R.C., McGahon, M.K., Curtis, T.M., 
Conlon, J.M., Flatt, P.R., Abdel-Wahab, Y.H.A. (2017) Actions of PGLa-AM1 
and its [A14K] and [A20K] analogues and their therapeutic potential as anti-
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=O%27Neill%20CM%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=23836031
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Lu%20C%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=23836031
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Corbin%20KL%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=23836031
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Sharma%20PR%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=23836031
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Dula%20SB%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=23836031
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Carter%20JD%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=23836031
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Ramadan%20JW%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=23836031
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Xin%20W%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=23836031
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Lee%20JK%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=23836031
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Nunemaker%20CS%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=23836031
diabetic agents. Biochimie 138, 112. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biochi.2017.04.004 
Pan, C.Q., Buxton, J.M., Yung, S.L., Tom, I., Yang, L., Chen, H., MacDougall, M., 
Bell, A., Claus, T.H., Clairmont, K.B., Whelan, J.P. (2006) Design of a long 
acting peptide functioning as both a glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist 
and a glucagon receptor antagonist. J. Biol. Chem. 281, 1250612515. 
https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M600127200 
Pantic, J.M., Jovanovic, I.P., Radosavljevic, G.D., Arsenijevic, N.N., Conlon, J.M., 
Lukic, M.L. (2017) The potential of frog skin-derived peptides for 
development into therapeutically-valuable immunomodulatory agents. 
Molecules 22. https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules22122071 
Pantic, J.M., Mechkarska, M., Lukic, M.L., Conlon, J.M. (2014) Effects of tigerinin 
peptides on cytokine production by mouse peritoneal macrophages and spleen 
cells and by human peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Biochimie 101, 8392. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biochi.2013.12.022 
Parenti, A., Pala, L., Paccosi, S., Rotella, C.M. (2017) Potential Role for Dendritic 
Cells in Endothelial Dysfunction, Diabetes and Cardiovascular Disease. Curr. 
Pharm. Des,. 23, 14351444. 
https://doi.org/10.2174/1381612823666170124125826 
Parkes, D.G., Pittner, R., Jodka, C., Smith, P., Young, A. (2001) Insulinotropic 
actions of exendin-4 and glucagon-like peptide-1 in vivo and in vitro. 
Metabolism. 50, 583589. https://doi.org/10.1053/meta.2001.22519 
Patsouris D., Li P.P., Thapar D., Chapman J., Olefsky J.M., Neels J.G. (2008) 
Ablation of CD11c-positive cells normalizes insulin sensitivity in obese insulin 
resistant animals. Cell Metab. 2008 Oct;8(4):301-9. 
https://doi:10.1016/j.cmet.2008.08.015. 
Pennington, M.W., Czerwinski, A., Norton, R.S. (2018) Peptide therapeutics from 
venom: Current status and potential. Bioorganic Med. Chem. 26, 27382758. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bmc.2017.09.029 
Perez-Alcantara, M., Honor, C., Wesolowska-Andersen, A., Gloyn, A.L., 
McCarthy, M.I., Hansson, M., Beer, N.L., van de Bunt, M. (2018) Patterns of 
differential gene expression in a cellular model of human islet development, 
and relationship to type 2 diabetes predisposition. Diabetologia 61, 1614
1622. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-018-4612-4 
Pollack, R.M., Donath, M.Y., LeRoith, D., Leibowitz, G. (2016) Anti-inflammatory 
agents in the treatment of diabetes and its vascular complications. Diabetes 
Care 39, S244S252. https://doi.org/10.2337/dcS15-3015 
Premilovac, Di., Gasperini, R.J., Sawyer, S., West, A., Keske, M.A., Taylor, B. V., 
Foa, L. (2017) A New Method for Targeted and Sustained Induction of Type 2 
Diabetes in Rodents. Sci. Rep. 7, 110. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-
14114-4 
Pukala, T. L., Bertozzi, T., Donnellan, S. C., Bowie, J. H., Surinya-Johnson, K. H., 
Liu, Y., Jackway, R. J., Doyle, J. R., Llewellyn, L. E. and Tyler, M. J. (2006) 
Host-defence peptide profiles of the skin secretions of interspecific hybrid tree 
frogs and their parents, female Litoria splendida and male Litoria caerulea. 
FEBS Journal, 273: 35113519. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1742-
4658.2006.05358.x 
Rcz, G.Z., Kittel, ., Riccardi, D., Case, R.M., Elliott, A.C., Varga, G. (2002) 
Extracellular calcium sensing receptor in human pancreatic cells. Gut 51, 705
711. https://doi.org/10.1136/gut.51.5.705 
Rasschaert J., Flatt P.R., Barnett C.R., McClenaghan N.H., Malaisse W.J. (1996) D-
glucose metabolism in BRIN-BD11 islet cells. Biochem Mol Med., 57(2):97-
Reinbothe, T.M., Alkayyali, S., Ahlqvist, E., Tuomi, T., Isomaa, B., Lyssenko, V., 
Renstrm, E. (2013) The human L-type calcium channel Cav1.3 regulates 
insulin release and polymorphisms in CACNA1D associate with type 2 
diabetes. Diabetologia 56, 340349. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-012-2758-
Robinson, E., Cassidy, R.S., Tate, M., Zhao, Y., Lockhart, S., Calderwood, D., 
Church, R., McGahon, M.K., Brazil, D.P., McDermott, B.J., Green, B.D., 
Grieve, D.J. (2015) Exendin-4 protects against post-myocardial infarction 
remodelling via specific actions on inflammation and the extracellular matrix. 
Basic Res. Cardiol. 110. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00395-015-0476-7 
Roney K. (2013) Bone marrow-derived dendritic cells. Methods Mol Biol., 1031:71-
6. https://doi: 10.1007/978-1-62703-481-4_9. 
Rosario, W., Singh, I., Wautlet, A., Patterson, C., Flak, J., Becker, T.C., Ali, A., 
Tamarina, N., Philipson, L.H., Enquist, L.W., Myers, M.G., Rhodes, C.J. 
(2016) The brain-to-pancreatic islet neuronal map reveals differential glucose 
regulation from distinct hypothalamic regions. Diabetes 65, 27112723. 
https://doi.org/10.2337/db15-0629 
Rowlands, J., Cruzat, V., Carlessi, R., Newsholme, P. (2018) Peptides Insulin and 
IGF-1 receptor autocrine loops are not required for Exendin-4 induced changes 
to pancreatic  -cell bioenergetic parameters and metabolism in BRIN-BD11 
cells. Peptides, 100, 140149. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.peptides.2017.11.015 
Sai, K.P., Jagannadham, M.V., Vairamani, M., Raju, N.P., Devi, A.S., Nagaraj, R., 
Sitaram, N. (2001) Tigerinins: Novel Antimicrobial Peptides from the Indian 
Frog Rana tigerina. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 27012707. 
https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M006615200 
Sas, K.M., Karnovsky, A., Michailidis, G., Pennathur, S. (2015) Metabolomics and 
diabetes: Analytical and computational approaches. Diabetes 64, 718732. 
https://doi.org/10.2337/db14-0509 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Rasschaert%20J%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=8733887
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Flatt%20PR%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=8733887
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Barnett%20CR%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=8733887
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=McClenaghan%20NH%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=8733887
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Malaisse%20WJ%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=8733887
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8733887
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Roney%20K%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=23824889
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23824889
Sato, Y., Inoue, M., Yoshizawa, T., Yamagata, K. (2014) Moderate hypoxia induces 
-cell dysfunction with HIF-1-independent gene expression changes. PLoS 
One 9, 120. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0114868 
Schulla, V., Renstro, E., Feil, R., Feil, S., Franklin, I., Gjinovci, A., Jing, X., Laux, 
D., Lundquist, I., Magnuson, M.A., Obermu, S., Olofsson, C.S., Salehi, A., 
Wendt, A., Klugbauer, N., Wollheim, C.B., Rorsman, P., Hofmann, F. (2003) 
Impaired insulin secretion and glucose tolerance in b cell-selective Ca V 1 . 2 
Ca 2 + channel null mice. EMBO J., 22,15. 38443854. 
https://doi: 10.1093/emboj/cdg389. 
Seino, S., Miki, T. (2003) Physiological and pathophysiological roles of ATP-
sensitive K+ channels. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 81, 133176. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0079-6107(02)00053-6 
Seino, S., Shibasaki, T. (2005) PKA-Dependent and PKA-Independent Pathways for 
cAMP-Regulated Exocytosis. Physiol. Rev. 85, 13031342. 
https://doi.org/10.1152/physrev.00001.2005 
Seino, Y., Fukushima, M., Yabe, D. (2010) GIP and GLP-1, the two incretin 
hormones: Similarities and differences. J. Diabetes Investig. 1, 823. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2040-1124.2010.00022.x 
Shanik, M.H., Xu, Y., Skrha, J., Dankner, R., Zick, Y., Roth, J. (2008) Insulin 
resistance and hyperinsulinemia: is hyperinsulinemia the cart or the horse? 
Diabetes Care 31 Suppl 2. https://doi.org/10.2337/dc08-s264 
Shibasaki, T., Takahashi, H., Miki, T., Sunaga, Y., Matsumura, K., Yamanaka, M., 
Zhang, C., Tamamoto, A., Satoh, T., Miyazaki, J.I., Seino, S. (2007) Essential 
role of Epac2/Rap1 signaling in regulation of insulin granule dynamics by 
cAMP. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 104, 1933319338. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0707054104 
Sicree, B.R., Shaw, J., Zimmet, P. (2011) The Global Burden: Diabetes and Impaired 
Glucose Tolerance. Diabetes Atlas 1105. 
https://doi.org/10.1097/01.hjr.0000368191.86614.5a 
Siegel, E.G., Wollheim, C.B., Kikuchi, M., Renold, A.E., Sharp, G.W. (1980) 
Dependency of cyclic AMP-induced insulin release on intra- and extracellular 
calcium in rat islets of Langerhans. J. Clin. Invest. 65, 233241. 
https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI109665 
Sikimic, J., McMillen, T.S., Bleile, C., Dastvan, F., Quast, U., Krippeit-Drews, P., 
Drews, G., Bryan, J. (2019) ATP binding without hydrolysis switches 
sulfonylurea receptor 1 (SUR1) to outward-facing conformations that activate 
K ATP channels. J. Biol. Chem. 294, 37073719. 
https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.RA118.005236 
Simonsen, L., Holst, J.J., Deacon, C.F. (2006) Exendin-4, but not glucagon-like 
peptide-1, is cleared exclusively by glomerular filtration in anaesthetised pigs. 
Diabetologia 49, 706712. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-005-0128-9 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC169062/
https://dx.doi.org/10.1093%2Femboj%2Fcdg389
Sithara, S., Crowley, T.M., Walder, K., Aston-Mourney, K. (2017) Gene expression 
signature: A powerful approach for drug discovery in diabetes. J. Endocrinol. 
232, R131R139. https://doi.org/10.1530/JOE-16-0515 
Skarbaliene, J., Rigbolt, K.T., Fosgerau, K., Billestrup, N. (2017) In-vitro and in-
vivo studies supporting the therapeutic potential of ZP3022 in diabetes. Eur. J. 
Pharmacol. 815, 181189. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejphar.2017.09.026 
Skelin, M., Rupnik, M. (2011) cAMP increases the sensitivity of exocytosis to Ca2+ 
primarily through protein kinase A in mouse pancreatic beta cells. Cell 
Calcium 49, 8999. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceca.2010.12.005 
Smyth, L.A., Ratnasothy, K., Moreau, A., Alcock, S., Sagoo, P. (2013) Tolerogenic 
donor-derived dendritic cells risk sensitisation in vivo due to processing and 
presentation by recipient antigen- presenting cells. J Immunol, 190, 4848
4860. https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.1200870. 
Solomon, T.P.J., Knudsen, S.H., Karstoft, K., Winding, K., Holst, J.J., Pedersen, 
B.K. (2012) Examining the effects of hyperglycemia on pancreatic endocrine 
function in humans: Evidence for in vivo glucotoxicity. J. Clin. Endocrinol. 
Metab. 97, 46824691. https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2012-2097 
Spranger J., Kroke A., Mhlig M., Hoffmann K., Bergmann M.M., Ristow 
M., Boeing H., Pfeiffer A.F. (2003) Inflammatory cytokines and the risk to 
develop type 2 diabetes: results of the prospective population-based European 
Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC)-Potsdam Study. 
Diabetes, 52(3):812-7. https://doi.org/10.2337/diabetes.52.3.812. 
Srinivasan, D., Ojo, O.O., Abdel-Wahab, Y.H.A., Flatt, P.R., Guilhaudis, L., 
Conlon, J.M., (2014) Insulin-releasing and cytotoxic properties of the frog skin 
peptide, tigerinin-1R: A structure-activity study. Peptides 55, 2331. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.peptides.2014.02.002 
Srinivasan, D.K., Ojo, O.O., Owolabi, B.O., Conlon, J.M., Flatt, P.R., Abdel-Wahab, 
Y.H.A. (2016) [I10W]tigerinin-1R enhances both insulin sensitivity and 
pancreatic beta cell function and decreases adiposity and plasma triglycerides 
in high-fat mice. Acta Diabetol. 53, 303315. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00592-
015-0783-3 
Stefanovic-Racic, M., Yang, X., Turner, M.S., Mantell, B.S., Stolz, D.B., Sumpter, 
T.L., Sipula, I.J., Dedousis, N., Scott, D.K., Morel, P.A., Thomson, A.W., 
ODoherty, R.M. (2012) Dendritic cells promote macrophage infiltration and 
comprise a substantial proportion of obesity-associated increases in CD11c + 
cells in adipose tissue and liver. Diabetes 61, 23302339. 
https://doi.org/10.2337/db11-1523 
Straub, S.G., Sharp, G.W.G. (2004) Hypothesis: One rate-limiting step controls the 
magnitude of both phases of glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. Am. J. 
Physiol. - Cell Physiol. 287, 565571. 
https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.00079.2004 
Stumvoll M., Goldstein B.J., Van Haeften T.W. (2005) Type 2 diabetes: principles 
of pathogenesis and therapy. Lancet, 365: 133346. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Spranger%20J%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=12606524
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Kroke%20A%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=12606524
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=M%C3%B6hlig%20M%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=12606524
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Hoffmann%20K%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=12606524
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Bergmann%20MM%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=12606524
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Ristow%20M%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=12606524
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Ristow%20M%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=12606524
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Boeing%20H%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=12606524
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Pfeiffer%20AF%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=12606524
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12606524
https://doi.org/10.2337/diabetes.52.3.812
Sul, H.S., Latasa, M.-J., Moon, Y., Kim, K.-H. (2000) Symposium: The Role of 
Long Chain Fatty Acyl-CoAs as Signaling Molecules in Cellular Metabolism 
Regulation of the Fatty Acid Synthase Promoter by Insulin 1,2. J. Nutr 130, 
315320. 
Sundara RS., Longhi, M.P. (2016) Dendritic cells and adipose tissue. Immunology, 
149, 353361. https://doi.org/10.1111/imm.12653 
Surendar, J., Mohan, V., Pavankumar, N., Babu, S., Aravindhan, V. (2012) Increased 
Levels of Serum Granulocyte-Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factor Is 
Associated with Activated Peripheral Dendritic Cells in Type 2 Diabetes 
Subjects. Diabetes Technol Ther., 14, 344-9. 
https://doi.org/10.1089/dia.2011.0182 
Syme R., Glck S. (2001) Generation of dendritic cells: role of cytokines and 
potential clinical applications. Transfus Apher Sci., 24:117-24. 
Taneera, J., Storm, P., Groop, L. (2014) Downregulation of type II diabetes mellitus 
and maturity onset diabetes of young pathways in human pancreatic islets from 
hyperglycemic donors. J. Diabetes Res., 2014. 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/237535 
Tang, C., Ahmed, K., Gille, A., Lu, S., Grne, H.J., Tunaru, S., Offermanns, S. 
(2015) Loss of FFA2 and FFA3 increases insulin secretion and improves 
glucose tolerance in type 2 diabetes. Nat. Med. 21, 173177. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.3779 
Tapadia, M., Carlessi, R., Johnson, S., Utikar, R., Newsholme, P. (2019) Lupin seed 
hydrolysate promotes G-protein-coupled receptor, intracellular Ca2+ and 
enhanced glycolytic metabolism-mediated insulin secretion from BRIN-BD11 
pancreatic beta cells. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 480, 8396. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mce.2018.10.015 
Tarasov A., Dusonchet J., Ashcroft F. (2004) Metabolic regulation of the pancreatic 
beta-cell ATP-sensitive K+ channel: a pas de deux. Diabetes, 53 (Suppl 3): 
S113-22. https://doi.org/10.2337/diabetes.53.suppl_3.S113 
Tengholm, A. (2012) Cyclic AMP dynamics in the pancreatic -cell. Ups. J. Med. 
Sci. 117, 355369. https://doi.org/10.3109/03009734.2012.724732 
Teramoto, S., Miyamoto, N., Yatomi, K., Tanaka, Y., Oishi, H., Arai, H., Hattori, 
N., Urabe, T. (2011) Exendin-4, a glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist, 
provides neuroprotection in mice transient focal cerebral ischemia. J. Cereb. 
Blood Flow Metab. 31, 16961705. https://doi.org/10.1038/jcbfm.2011.51 
Tian, G., Sagetorp, J., Xu, Y., Shuai, H., Degerman, E., Tengholm, A. (2012) Role 
of phosphodiesterases in the shaping of sub-plasma-membrane cAMP 
oscillations and pulsatile insulin secretion. J. Cell Sci. 125, 50845095. 
https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.107201 
Torimoto, K., Okada, Y., Mori, H., Otsuka, T., Kawaguchi, M., Matsuda, M., Kuno 
F., Sugai K.,  Sonoda S., Hajime M., Tanaka K., Arao T., Tanaka, Y. (2015). 
Effects of exenatide on postprandial vascular endothelial dysfunction in type 2 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22149626
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Syme%20R%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=11501570
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Gl%C3%BCck%20S%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=11501570
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11501570
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Tarasov%20A%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=15561898
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Dusonchet%20J%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=15561898
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Ashcroft%20F%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=15561898
https://doi.org/10.2337/diabetes.53.suppl_3.S113
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Kuno%20F%5Bauth%5D
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Sugai%20K%5Bauth%5D
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Sonoda%20S%5Bauth%5D
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Hajime%20M%5Bauth%5D
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Tanaka%20K%5Bauth%5D
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Arao%20T%5Bauth%5D
diabetes mellitus. Cardiovasc Diabetol, 14: 25. https://doi: 10.1186/s12933-
015-0188-1. 
Tzoulaki, I., Ebbels, T.M.D., Valdes, A., Elliott, P., Ioannidis, J.P.A. (2014) Design 
and analysis of metabolomics studies in epidemiologic research: A primer on-
omic technologies. Am. J. Epidemiol. 180, 129139. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwu143 
Van t Veer, L.J. Van, Dai, H., Vijver, M.J. Van De, Kooy, K. Van Der, Marton, 
M.J., Witteveen, A.T., Schreiber, G.J., Kerkhoven, R.M., Roberts, C., 
Bernards, A., Friend, S.H., Linsley, P.S. (2002) Gene expression profiling 
predicts clinical outcome of breast cancer. Nature, 415(6871):530-6. 
https://doi:10.1038/415530a 
Vasu, S., McClenaghan, N.H., McCluskey, J.T., Flatt, P.R. (2014) Mechanisms of 
toxicity by proinflammatory cytokines in a novel human pancreatic beta cell 
line, 1.1B4. Biochim. Biophys. Acta - Gen. Subj. 1840, 136145. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbagen.2013.08.022 
Vasu, S., McGahon, M.K., Charlotte Moffett, R., Curtis, T.M., Michael Conlon, J., 
Abdel-Wahab, Y.H.A., Flatt, P.R. (2017) Esculentin-2CHa(1-30) and its 
analogues: Stability and mechanisms of insulinotropic action. J. Endocrinol. 
232, 423435. https://doi.org/10.1530/JOE-16-0453 
Velmurugan, K., Balamurugan, A.N., Loganathan, G., Ahmad, A., Hering, B.J., 
Pugazhenthi, S. (2012) Antiapoptotic actions of exendin-4 against hypoxia and 
cytokines are augmented by CREB. Endocrinology 153, 11161128. 
https://doi.org/10.1210/en.2011-1895 
Vetere, A., Choudhary, A., Burns, S.M., Wagner, B.K. (2014) Targeting the 
pancreatic -cell to treat diabetes. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 13, 278289. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nrd4231 
Wallace, M., Whelan, H., Brennan, L. (2013) Metabolomic analysis of pancreatic 
beta cells following exposure to high glucose. Biochim. Biophys. Acta - Gen. 
Subj. 1830, 25832590. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbagen.2012.10.025 
Wang T.J., Martin G. Larson, Ramachandran S. Vasan, Susan Cheng, Eugene P. 
Rhee, Elizabeth McCabe, Gregory D. Lewis, Caroline S. Fox, Paul F. Jacques, 
Cline Fernandez, Christopher J. ODonnell, Stephen A. Carr, Vamsi K. 
Mootha, Jose C. Florez, Amand, C.B., Clish, and R.E.G. (2011) Metabolite 
profiles and diabetes. Nat. Med. 17, 448453. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.2307.Metabolite 
Wang, C., Yang, C., Chen, Y. chen, Ma, L., Huang, K. (2019). Rational Design of 
Hybrid Peptides: A Novel Drug Design Approach. Curr. Med. Sci. 39, 349
355. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11596-019-2042-2 
Wang, W., Li, J., Wu, K., Azhati, B., Rexiati, M. (2016) Culture and identification 
of mouse bone marrow-derived dendritic cells and their capability to induce T 
lymphocyte proliferation. Med. Sci. Monit. 22, 244250. 
https://doi.org/10.12659/MSM.896951 
https://doi.org/10.1038/415530a
Wellen, K. E., Hotamisligil, G. S. (2005) Inflammation, stress, and diabetes.  J Clin 
Invest, 115(5), 11111119. https://doi:10.1172/JCI25102 
Welters, H.J., Tadayyon, M., Scarpello, J.H.B., Smith, S.A., Morgan, N.G. (2004) 
Mono-unsaturated fatty acids protect against -cell apoptosis induced by 
saturated fatty acids, serum withdrawal or cytokine exposure. FEBS Lett. 560, 
103108. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0014-5793(04)00079-1 
Widenmaier, S.B., Kim, S.J., Yang, G.K., De Los Reyes, T., Nian, C., Asadi, A., 
Seino, Y., Kieffer, T.J., Kwok, Y.N., McIntosh, C.H.S. (2010) A GIP receptor 
agonist exhibits -cell anti-apoptotic actions in rat models of diabetes resulting 
in improved -cell function and glycemic control. PLoS One 5. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0009590 
Williams, N.L., Morris, J.L., Rush, C., Govan, B.L., Ketheesan, N. (2011) Impact of 
streptozotocin-induced diabetes on functional responses of dendritic cells and 
macrophages towards Burkholderia pseudomallei. FEMS Immunol. Med. 
Microbiol., 61, 218227. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1574-695X.2010.00767.x 
Wolak, M., Staszewska, T., Juszczak, M., Gadyszyska, M., Bojanowska, E. (2019) 
Anti-inflammatory and pro-healing impacts of exendin-4 treatment in Zucker 
diabetic rats: Effects on skin wound fibroblasts. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 842, 262
269. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejphar.2018.10.053 
Wu, N., Yang, M., Gaur, U., Xu, H., Yao, Y., Li, D. (2016) Alpha-ketoglutarate: 
Physiological functions and applications. Biomol. Ther. 24, 18. 
https://doi.org/10.4062/biomolther.2015.078 
Wu, Y., Ding, Y., Tanaka, Y., Zhang, W. (2014) Risk factors contributing to type 2 
diabetes and recent advances in the treatment and prevention. Int. J. Med. Sci. 
11, 11851200. https://doi.org/10.7150/ijms.10001 
Xu, G., Chen, J., Jing, G., Shalev, A. (2013) Thioredoxin-interacting protein 
regulates insulin transcription through microRNA-204. Nat. Med. 19, 1141
1146. https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.3287 
Xu, G., Kaneto, H., Laybutt, D.R., Duvivier-kali, V.F., Trivedi, N., Suzuma, K., 
King, G.L., Weir, G.C., Bonner-weir, S. (2007) Downregulation of GLP-1 and 
GIP Receptor Expression by Hyperglycemia. Diabetes 56, 15511558. 
https://doi.org/10.2337/db06-1033.Ad-GFP 
Yajima, H., Komatsu, M., Sato, Y., Yamada, S., Yamauchi, K., Sharp, G.W.G., 
Aizawa, T., Hashizume, K. (2001) Norepinephrine inhibits glucose-stimulated, 
Ca2+-independent insulin release independently from its action on adenylyl 
cyclase. Endocr. J. 48, 647654. https://doi.org/10.1507/endocrj.48.647 
Yang, S.N., Berggren, P.O. (2006) The role of voltage-gated calcium channels in 
pancreatic -cell physiology and pathophysiology. Endocr. Rev. 27, 621676. 
https://doi.org/10.1210/er.2005-0888 
Yao, K., Lu, H., Huang, R., Zhang, S., Hong, X., Shi, H., Sun, A., Qian, J., Zou, Y., 
Ge, J., (2011) Changes of dendritic cells and fractalkine in type 2 diabetic 
patients with unstable angina pectoris: A preliminary report. Cardiovasc. 
Diabetol. 10, 50. https://doi.org/10.1186/1475-2840-10-50 
Ying, W., Fu, W., Lee, Y.S., Olefsky, J.M. (2019) The role of macrophages in 
obesity-associated islet inflammation and -cell abnormalities. Nat. Rev. 
Endocrinol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41574-019-0286-3 
Yokoi, N., Gheni, G., Takahashi, H., Seino, S. (2016) -Cell glutamate signaling: Its 
role in incretin-induced insulin secretion. J. Diabetes Investig. 7, 3843. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/jdi.12468 
Yusta, B., Baggio, L.L., Estall, J.L., Koehler, J.A., Holland, D.P., Li, H., Pipeleers, 
D., Ling, Z., Drucker, D.J. (2006) GLP-1 receptor activation improves  cell 
function and survival following induction of endoplasmic reticulum stress. Cell 
Metab. 4, 391406. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2006.10.001 
Zeng, M., Che, Z., Liang, Y., Wang, B., Chen, X., Li, H., Deng, J., Zhou, Z. (2009) 
GC-MS based plasma metabolic profiling of type 2 diabetes mellitus. 
Chromatographia 69, 941948. https://doi.org/10.1365/s10337-009-1040-0 
Zhang, H., Sturchler, E., Zhu, J., Nieto, A., Cistrone, P.A., Xie, J., He, L., Yea, K., 
Jones, T., Turn, R., Di Stefano, P.S., Griffin, P.R., Dawson, P.E., McDonald, 
P.H., Lerner, R.A. (2015) Autocrine selection of a GLP-1R G-protein biased 
agonist with potent antidiabetic effects. Nat. Commun. 6, 113. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms9918 
Zhang, M., Houamed, K., Kupershmidt, S., Roden, D., Satin, L.S. (2005) 
Pharmacological Properties and Functional Role of K slow Current in Mouse 
Pancreatic -Cells . J. Gen. Physiol. 126, 353363. 
https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.200509312 
Zhong, J., Rao, X., Deiuliis, J., Braunstein, Z., Narula, V., Hazey, J., Mikami, D., 
Needleman, B., Satoskar, A.R., Rajagopalan, S. (2013) A potential role for 
dendritic cell/macrophage-expressing DPP4 in obesity-induced visceral 
inflammation. Diabetes 62, 149157. https://doi.org/10.2337/db12-0230 
Zhu Y., Liu Q., Zhou Z., Ikeda Y. (2017) PDX1, Neurogenin-3, and MAFA: critical 
transcription regulators for beta cell development and regeneration. Stem Cell 
Res Ther., 8(1):240. https://doi:10.1186/s13287-017-0694-z.  
