Time-of-flight spectrometry of the 
spontaneous fission neutron 
emission from 244Cm and 252Cf using 
EJ-309 liquid scintillators 
Submitted in accordance with the requirements of Lancaster University 
 for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy 
Alexander James Grievson 
January 2020 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: 
 No thesis is a solo effort, and this one is certainly no exception, there 
are many people that I need to thank, not only for direct contributions made to 
the thesis itself, but also those who have accompanied me on the journey, and 
this has certainly been a long and varied one 
To the many friends I have made along the way also on the PhD journey, 
Chris Tighe, Dom Lavantine, Liz Howett, Craig Smith, Helen ODonnell, 
Ashley Jones, Jonny Beaumont, Vyas, both the Iaonnises and many more, 
sharing the road with you all was a privilege and a joy. 
Joe Fennell, whos distractions and adventures have made Lancaster home 
as well as a place of study. 
The many people who have provided invaluable help with the experimental 
work, and also with developing me as a PhD student, Lee Packer, Neil 
Roberts, Mike Bunce, Stephanie McElhaney, Michael Aspinall, your efforts are 
truly appreciated. I wish also to thank AWE plc for their financial support for 
this research. 
To Malcolm Joyce, your supervision, insight and knowledge has been truly 
and deeply appreciated. Few PhD students have ran as far away from a thesis 
as I have, and special thanks must go to you for keeping me going. It has 
been a privilege to be your student. 
Finally and by no means least I wish to thank my family. I am very blessed in 
life to have so many loved ones, but without the support and distraction of my 
Brother, Cousins, Aunties Uncles and Grandparents I would not be who I am 
today or have achieved what I have, but most of all I must thank my Parents, 
Brian and Catharine Grievson to whom I wish to dedicate this thesis in thanks 
for their support, encouragement and love. 
Ministry of Defence British Crown Copyright 2020/AWE 
ABSTRACT 
The identification and characterisation of nuclear material is important for 
a number of security, safeguards and verification purposes. Nuclides 
susceptible to nuclear fission produce a characteristic energy distribution of 
fission neutrons, known as the Prompt Fission Neutron Spectrum (PFNS). The 
energy distribution of the PFNS can be indicative of the material under 
observation; the measurement of the energy spectrum of neutrons however is 
notoriously difficult, due to the stochastic manner in which they interact with 
radiation instrumentation. Time of flight (TOF) spectrometry however is one 
way of deterministically measuring the neutron energy.  
This research has used a variety of the associated particle TOF 
technique, to perform real time TOF spectrometry of fission nuclides with a 
small-scale portable set up,  triggering on the  prompt fission gamma 
emission. In order to conduct this, the low energy threshold of EJ-309 has 
been determined experimentally via monoenergetic neutron irradiations to be 
0.75 MeV, and efficiency curves have been fitted to these data to ensure self-
consistency. 
The TOF spectrometry system has been developed and used  to measure 
the prompt neutron energy spectrum of 252Cf and 244Cm, the latter of which 
has never been explored in this way. The Maxwellian fission spectrum has 
been fitted to the PFNS of 244Cm with a parameter T= 1.33 MeV (0.7) and the 
Watt spectrum has been fitted with parameters of a=0.918 and b=1.151.  On 
the basis of these measurements it is thought that this small scale, real time 
TOF spectrometer is able to discriminate between certain nuclides. 
Declaration 
I, Alexander Grievson, hereby certify that this thesis and the research 
described within, is all my own work, unless otherwise indicated and has not 
been submitted in any previous application for a higher degree.  
Date:.   Signature of candidate:.. 
I Professor Malcolm John Joyce, hereby certify that the candidate has fulfilled 
the conditions of the resolution and regulations appropriate for the degree of 
Doctor of Philosophy at Lancaster University and that the candidate is 
qualified to submit this thesis in application for that degree. 
Date:.   Signature of supervisor:.. 
Professor Malcolm John Joyce 
CONTENTS 
3.3.3 Detector efficiency characterisation at low incident neutron energy
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
ADC Analogue to digital converter 
ANN Artificial neural network 
BNC Bayonet Neill Concelman 
CBRN Chemical biological radiological 
nuclear 
COM Centre of mass 
FPGA Field programmable gate array 
GUI Graphical user interface 
MCNP Monte Carlo neutron photon 
(simulation package) 
MFA Mixed field analyser 
NPL National Physical Laboratory 
PE Polyethylene 
PFNS Prompt fission neutron spectrum 
PHD Pulse height distribution 
PHS Pulse height spectrum 
PSC Parajito Scientific Corporation 
PSD Pulse shape discrimination 
SHV Shielded high voltage 
SiPM Silicon photomultiplier 
TIC Twin (back to back) ionisation 
chamber 
TID Time interval distribution 
TOF Time of flight 
TTL Transistor-transistor logic 
1 INTRODUCTION 
The discovery of the neutron in 1932 by James Chadwick [1]  precipitated 
a number of important discoveries in the early 20th century. Not least of these 
was nuclear fission, some six years later, a discovery which in turn would 
bring about the beginning of the atomic age. Few people in history have seen 
their discoveries have as great an impact on humanity as James Chadwick, 
who within a career saw his observations proving the existence of a hitherto 
unknown subatomic particle, culminate in the detonation of the first atomic 
weapon in the New Mexico desert. 
Civil and military uses of nuclear science have proliferated around the 
world, carrying with them the many benefits and risks which have rendered it a 
controversial technology. The general public is all too aware of the hazards 
posed by radiation, making the control of radioactive materials a high priority 
for governments and those they task with protecting the public from the more 
harmful aspects of human progress.  
The end of the Cold War saw the dissolution of the Soviet Union and 
increased international concern about the security of the sprawling civil and 
nuclear infrastructure left behind. These worries were further compounded by 
the 9/11 terrorist attacks in New York which inspired significant worldwide 
policy implementation on counter terrorism and CBRN security themes. [2] 
Other than via energetic reactions induced via particle accelerators, 
free neutrons are produced by unstable heavy isotopes, either as a product of 
fission, or via the interaction of alpha particles and low Z materials. [3] 
Accordingly, the presence of significant quantities of free neutrons can be a 
strong indicator of the presence of nuclear material. [4]  It is this relationship 
between free neutrons and nuclear material that makes their detection and 
measurement valuable in the fields of nuclear security, safeguards and 
nuclear materials verification. Additionally, the shielding requirements of 
neutrons are very different to those of other penetrating radiations such as x-
rays or gamma rays, a fact which can be exploited when it is believed that a 
hazardous substance may be being hidden deliberately. [5] 
Radioactive materials which produce neutrons include those which are 
capable of decay via spontaneous fission, including 252Cf, 240Pu and 244Cm. 
Plutonium in particular bears a strong association with fissile materials, whilst 
curium is indicative of spent nuclear fuel and high-level radioactive waste, A 
further grouping of materials are those susceptible to induced fission, either 
via neutron-induced fission or gamma-induced photofission. Isotopes of 
interest in this regard include 235U and 239Pu, which, being fissile materials can 
constitute a security and safeguards concern but can be detected via the 
neutron and gamma rays emitted following interrogative stimulation from an 
external source.  
244Cm is of further interest from a materials identification standpoint as 
its spontaneous fission rate is higher than that of other materials of interest, 
for example 240Pu. This can lead to its neutron flux obscuring Pu signatures in 
spent nuclear fuel, which are used to determine 240Pu levels in such materials. 
[6] Uncertainties associated with the production cross sections of 244Cm lead 
to high uncertainties in the amounts in fuel after irradiation and thus can 
complicate burn up assessment. 
In addition to special nuclear materials and those associated with the 
nuclear fuel cycle, neutron sources are used in universities and research 
institutes around the world and are also used in a number of industrial 
applications [7]. Research and industrial neutron sources most commonly 
consist of  (,n) sources and 252Cf fission sources, and are used in universities 
and research facilities for the characterisation and development of nuclear 
instrumentation. Industrial uses of neutrons include oil well logging, moisture 
gauging, industrial tomography, and especially recently, the detection of 
explosive materials. From a security standpoint, the ability to differentiate 
between neutron sources and identify their origins is of great value.  
1.1 RESEARCH AIMS 
The advent of digital electronics has revolutionised many areas of  
radiation measurement and instrumentation. This research will investigate the 
potential to further harness these advances in the area of fast neutron 
detection, with a particular focus on source characterisation and spectrum 
measurement. The research group at Lancaster has considerable experience 
in the use of liquid organic scintillators for mixed gamma- neutron detection, 
work which has been commercially developed by the spin off company, Hybrid 
Instruments. [8] [9] [10] This research is carried out using a specially modified 
mixed field analyser, capable of performing coincidence analysis between 
separate EJ309 liquid scintillator detectors and processing this data to perform 
time of flight (TOF) spectroscopy. 
Neutron TOF spectroscopy has been used in a number of applications 
previously, most notably for the production of nuclear reference data and the 
response characterisation of neutron detectors. [11] [12] [13]  Interest around 
the technique is primarily due to it being the only way of deterministically 
measuring the energy of neutrons.  TOF spectroscopy has traditionally 
required substantial and/ or specialised laboratory infrastructure, a fact which 
has until recently restricted its use in a more general sense. The ability to 
store and post-process data  provided by digital systems has led to recent 
developments in associated particle TOF methods, where coincidences 
between particle detections are used to infer the time of flight of neutrons. This 
research advances this approach, using correlated gamma  neutron 
detections to measure the fast neutron energy spectrum. 
Obtaining access to 239Pu and 235U for the purposes of simulated fission 
research measurements comes with difficulty due to the safeguards 
constraints of these materials. In any case, they are both already well studied 
and characterised. [14]   The spontaneous fission rate of 240Pu is low 
compared to those of 244Cm and 252Cf, meaning even if it were readily 
available, acquiring TOF spectra would still be relatively difficult. 
Therefore, in this research, 252Cf and 244Cm were selected as isotopes  
that could be used to assess the ability of the TOF system to discriminate 
between nuclides via the measurement of their fast neutron spectra. Each of 
these isotopes has a reasonably high rate of spontaneous fission and they are 
far more accessible for research purposes than 235U or 239Pu samples, which 
would also require stimulation to induce fission. Furthermore, measuring these 
two isotopes would provide an interesting complementarity in that the 
spectrum of 252Cf has been studied extensively by virtue of its use as a 
reference spectrum, [15] [16] whereas the fast neutron spectrum of 244Cm is 
less well understood, and has not been examined in any detail for quite some 
time. The prompt fission spectrum of both nuclides is believed to be very 
similar, and so performing these measurements will give a challenging basis 
on which to test the TOF approach to nuclide identification, and provide insight 
into the extrapolation of these findings to the ability to identify other nuclides, 
such as 235U and 239Pu. 
This work undertakes to: 
 Miniaturise the hardware associated with performing associated 
particle TOF spectroscopy and enable the conduction of TOF 
measurements using a single, FPGA-based data processing unit. 
 Perform TOF spectroscopy in real time, i.e. discriminate relevant 
events and provide the timing information to the user in real time, 
without the requirement for the storage and postprocessing of 
superfluous pulse and timing data. 
 Use the developed instrument to measure prompt fission neutron 
energy spectra, particularly those of 252Cf and 244Cm. 
 Evaluate the ability of the system to discriminate or identify the 
nuclide under observation from its fast neutron energy spectrum. 
2 BACKGROUND 
The work of characterising radiation sources, probing the structure and 
mechanics of the atomic nucleus, and monitoring and controlling nuclear 
reactions, has long required a means of observing the behaviour of the 
neutron. From a block of paraffin wax in front of a Geiger counter, to modern 
ultra-high-speed electronics and data processing techniques, neutron 
detection and measurement have developed alongside the fields of nuclear 
physics and engineering, and indeed have been an essential tool to these 
ends. 
It is an unfortunate fact that, alongside the great potential benefits and 
uses of the nuclear discoveries of the 20th century, arose the need to prevent 
their abuse. Treaties intended to reduce the potential for mistakes of 
eschatological proportions are only as effective as the willingness of state 
actors to abide by them and, accordingly, new fields of safeguards and 
materials verification developed to ensure compliance and to foster trust. The 
potential for the abuse of nuclear materials has necessitated the deployment 
of technologies to provide nuclear security, and to control the movement and 
availability of potentially hazardous substances.  
It is against this background of security and safeguards that this research 
is primarily motivated, although the physics and techniques are largely shared 
across various applications of neutron metrology. The following sections will 
briefly explore the physics and detection equipment which provide the 
background for this research. 
2.1 NEUTRONS AND THEIR ORIGINS 
Although stable whilst bound within the nucleus, free neutrons are unstable, 
decaying to protons with a half-life of  just under 15 minutes (depending on 
how it is measured [17] [18] ).  As a result, neutrons exist transiently outside 
the nucleus and, where they are observed, it is as a product of reactions 
involving atomic nuclei. The predominant sources of terrestrial neutrons are 
fission reactions, spallation reactions involving cosmic rays, and interactions 
between atomic nuclei and alpha particles (the latter known as (,n) reactions 
[19]). Naturally occurring neutron background is primarily made up of neutrons 
produced by cosmic-ray interactions and is of a low intensity when compared 
with that of other background radiations. [20] A significant neutron flux is also 
produced by nuclear fusion, [21] and so neutron measurement is also an 
important requirement in fusion research.   
2.1.1 Nuclear Fission 
Nuclear fission was discovered by Meitner, Fritsch and Hahn in 1939 to 
explain the behaviour of uranium bombarded with neutrons. [22] Soon 
afterwards, Bohr and Wheeler described the process conceptually in terms of 
an analogy to surface tension maintaining the shape of a drop of liquid. 
Opposing forces of the attractive strong nuclear force between all nucleons, 
and the repulsive coulomb forces produced between protons constantly distort 
and misshape the nucleus into a dumbbell shape as depicted schematically in 
Figure 1. 
In some cases, the distortion becomes so strong that the attractive 
force is no longer powerful enough to maintain the single volume, and the 
nucleus splits, or fissions, into two overly massive and unstable bodies. The 
two fragments promptly emit neutrons and gamma photons to shed energy 
Figure 1: An illustration of the fission process.  In (A) the nucleus sits in 
equillibrium. The interplay of coloumb and strong nuclear forces cause 
deformation in (B). The nucleus scissions in (C), and emits prompt neutrons 
after the fragments have fully accelerated. Prompt gamma emission begins 
alongside neutron emission and lasts slightly longer into (D). 
and achieve greater stability. Even after the emission of prompt radiation at 
the time of fission, fission products are still not stable, and will decay via 
delayed radiations until they are stable. [23] 
Some isotopes with mass numbers greater than 230 can fission 
spontaneously although this often competes with -decay. At mass numbers 
of 230 and just above -decay dominates, spontaneous fission half-life 
decreases however with isotopic mass until it begins to approach the rate of -
decay above mass number 252. 
The striking of the nucleus by a free neutron can also cause induced 
fission; the incident nucleus is absorbed, forming an unstable compound 
nucleus which then fissions in a manner similar to the spontaneous fission 
described above. Whether a nucleus can be caused to fission via the capture 
of a neutron depends on the incident neutron energy, and the size and A/Z 
composition of the nucleus.  
The number of neutrons emitted in a particular fission event depends 
on the size and A/Z composition of the fission fragments. From the point of 
view of the observer and averaged over many events, they can be assumed to 
be random, sampled from an approximately Gaussian distribution, with a 
mean and standard deviation that depends on the parent nuclide. Figure 2 
shows the multiplicity distributions for 244Cm and 252Cf. [24] 
The energy spectrum of prompt fission neutrons (the prompt fission 
neutron spectrum, or PFNS) is related to the energy left with the fission 
fragments after scission. Early in the study of fission, an analogy to 
thermodynamic evaporation in liquids has been successful in describing the 
mechanics behind neutron emission [25]. The fission fragments are left with a 
certain nuclear temperature, which causes neutrons to evaporate off, 
providing a mechanism for de-excitation (along with prompt gamma emission). 
The neutrons are evaporated isotropically in the centre of mass frame of the 
fragment from which they are emitted, with an energy spectrum approximated 
by a Maxwellian distribution.  
This approach describes the energy of the evaporation neutrons in the 
centre of mass frame with respect to the neutron/ fission fragment system. 
Perhaps the most frequently used function used to describe the PNFS in the 
laboratory frame of reference is the Watt spectrum [26]. This treats the 
neutrons as evaporating off the fission fragments, but transforms to the 
laboratory frame, reflecting the fact that the majority of neutrons are emitted 
after the fission fragment is fully accelerated. The Watt spectrum describes 
Figure 2: The neutron multiplicity distributions of 252Cf 
and 244Cm. [24] 
the spectrum using two empirically-derived parameters a and b to describe it. 
The inclusion of c gives a normalisation parameter. [24] 
Equation 1 
() = 
sinh  
The Watt spectrum has been applied to experimental data for a range of 
nuclides and historically has been the basis for the description and modelling 
of the PFNS [24]. Both average prompt neutron energy and neutron 
multiplicity vary with the fission fragment mass and energy, and therefore 
between different fissioning nuclides. References [27] and [28] give 
descriptions of comprehensive modelling of the various parameters of fission 
of different nuclides. Figure 3 shows the Watt spectrum of 252Cf, using 
parameters of a= 0.84 and b=1.03. The curve is normalised to unity. [24]. 
Figure 3: The Watt prompt fission neutron spectrum normalised to 
unity, shape parameters taken from [24]. 
The Maxwellian spectrum is also frequently fitted to fission spectra, often with 
good agreement and uses a single parameter T. 
Equation 2 
 =
exp(
The Watt and Maxwellian spectra differ primarily in the low- and high-energy 
regions, as shown in Figure 4. 
 With regards to the Watt and Maxwellian distributions, it is important to 
note that, whilst they show good and verified agreement with measured data, 
they are essentially empirical fits. This means that nuclear data based on Watt 
or Maxwellian parameters are only as good as the measurements to which 
they are fitted. There is no predictive ability in the Watt and Maxwellian 
distributions when it comes to fission spectra that have not been 
characterised. This can limit the usefulness of the approach, particularly when 
it comes to modelling induced fission. [29] 
There have been efforts to model the PFNS in more detail, particularly 
with respect to the dependence on fission fragment distributions. The Los 
Alamos (Madland-Nix) model, for example [30], taking additional aspects of 
Figure 4:Plot showing the deviation between Watt and 
Maxwellian spectra of the PFNS of 252Cf. 
the fission process into account. These more complex models are usually 
reserved for modelling use due to their added complexity; where a spectrum is 
required for comparison with experimental results, either the Watt or 
Maxwellian spectrum are used in the majority of cases. 
2.1.2 (,n) Reactions as a source of neutrons 
The (,n) reaction was the first type of reaction to be discovered which 
produced neutrons; this was an important discovery as it was neutrons 
produced by the bombardment of a beryllium target with alpha particles from a 
polonium source which lead to the discovery of the neutron in 1932 [1]. The 
(,n) reaction takes place when an alpha particle is captured by the nucleus of 
certain low-Z materials, and a neutron is subsequently ejected. [23] 
Electrostatic repulsion between the alpha particle and the target 
nucleus constitutes the coulomb barrier that must be overcome in order for an 
interaction to occur. As the Z-value of the nucleus increases, the coulomb 
barrier also increases and so accordingly nuclei above 37Cl are not susceptible 
to these reactions. The Q-value of the reaction is another important 
consideration; if the binding energy of the products of the reaction is greater 
than that of the initial nucleus and alpha particle, then an energy threshold will 
exist that the alpha particle must overcome in order for the reaction to 
proceed. The Q-value of a specific Z(,n) reaction also has implications on the 
energy spectrum of neutrons produced in this manner. 
The (,n) reaction is a major contributor to the neutron flux produced by 
spent nuclear fuels due to the abundance of alpha-emitting heavy nuclides 
alongside oxygen in the form of oxides and other low-Z impurities that build up 
in the fuel. [23] The (,n) reaction is also a useful mechanism for the 
production of neutrons and is utilised in sealed sources which combine a close 
mixture of an actinide alpha source and a low-Z target material such as 
beryllium. This constitutes a convenient, passive and portable source of 
neutrons. [23] 
2.2 INTERACTION OF NEUTRONS WITH MATTER 
Free neutrons react relatively infrequently with the matter around them. 
Being uncharged, they do not interact via the Coulomb force with the 
electronic structure of matter and need to come in direct contact via a collision 
with an atomic nucleus in order to have an effect on their surroundings. [31] 
Upon collision, two scenarios can arise: either the neutron will be captured by 
the nucleus or be scattered by it. After neutron capture, the mass number of 
the target nucleus will increase by one and the energy of the neutron will be 
absorbed by the nucleus. This can result in an unstable isotope or a nucleus 
being left in an excited state, both cases being capable of producing a range 
of secondary radiations in the form of charged particles (via beta decay, (n,p), 
(n,) and other similar reactions), or gamma rays. [32] 
 The cross section for neutron absorption is generally higher at thermal 
neutron energies. Fast neutrons are generally more likely to scatter off a 
target nucleus, either exciting it during the collision (inelastic scattering) or 
leaving it in its ground state (elastic scattering). These mechanisms of reaction 
mean that if a neutron does interact then it is in one or more discrete events, 
such as several scatterings or a capture event. These properties contrast with 
the behaviour of alpha and beta particles which will continuously lose energy 
whilst they pass through matter, forming ionisation trails around their path, 
whereas it is possible for neutrons to pass through metres of matter before 
interacting by colliding with a [33] [34] 
The relative infrequency of neutron interactions complicates the study 
of their behaviour, as the neutron itself has no means of inducing an electronic 
signal in a detector. Instead, the effects of secondary reaction products within 
a detector must be used to infer the presence and properties of neutrons. 
Neutron detectors operate by facilitating a reaction that will produce a charged 
secondary particle that can be easily detected such as a proton, beta particle, 
alpha particle or light ion. Neutron capture is the predominant mechanism for 
thermal neutron detection as the cross section for this reaction compared with 
that of scattering is high at lower energies. Neutron scattering off atomic nuclei 
dominates for fast neutrons and it is this reaction that is utilised in liquid 
scintillators. [32] [35] 
2.2.1.1 Neutron scattering kinematics 
Neutrons colliding with a nucleus will be scattered across a certain angle, the 
neutron will transfer a proportion of its energy to the nucleus which will recoil. 
The energy transferred to the recoil nucleus is a function of the scattering 
angle and the mass of the recoil nucleus. Figure 7 shows a neutron scatter 
diagram showing the same event in the laboratory (LAB) frame of reference 
and the centre of mass (COM) frame of reference1. [34] 
1 In the LAB frame of reference particle velocities are taken from the point of view of the 
observer in the laboratory. As the neutron is moving at far higher velocities than the recoil 
nucleus (which will be travelling at thermal velocities) the nucleus can be considered static 
until after the collision. Conversely in the centre of mass (COM) frame of reference the centre 
of mass of the two particles is used as the stationary point. Both the neutron and nucleus will 
be moving toward this point with velocities with the same proportion as the proportion of 
masses of the two bodies. Using this frame of reference can make the kinematics of the 
reaction easier to treat mathematically. 
Figure 5: Kinematic diagram of (n,p) elastic scattering, in the 
LAB frame of reference (top) and COM frame of reference 
(bottom) 
By considering the conservation of energy and momentum, the energy 
transferred to the recoil nucleus during the scatter is: 
Equation 3    =
(1  ) 
where Er is the energy transferred to the recoil nucleus, A is the ratio of the 
nucleus to neutron mass,  is the COM scatter angle and En is the energy of 
the incident neutron. 
The following transformation can be used to calculate the energy transfer in 
terms of the angle through which the neutron is scattered in the LAB frame of 
reference: 
Equation 4:     = 
1
which gives: 
Equation 5:          2 =
(1+)2
(2)1 
In the LAB frame of reference  is used to denote the scatter angle of 
the recoil nucleus.  From this result it can be seen that the neutron will impart 
a portion of its energy according to the scatter angle. To transfer a maximum 
amount of energy the neutron hits the recoil nucleus head on, and the nucleus 
recoils in the direction of neutron travel and a scatter angle of 0. A glancing 
collision of the neutron will only impart a vanishingly small amount of the 
neutrons kinetic energy, scattering the recoil nucleus at an angle close to 90 
off the neutrons direction of travel.  
The actual proportion of energy transferred in a scatter event with a 
specific angle  is dependent on the mass ratio of nucleus to neutron. The 
larger the mass of the recoil nucleus the less energy is transferred to it, as 
dictated by Equation 5 
 The 1H nucleus consists of one proton and is approximately the same 
mass as a neutron, therefore the neutron is able to transfer almost the entirety 
of its energy to a proton in a single event, whereas a neutron will scatter off a 
heavy nucleus without transferring much energy at all. Table 1 shows the 
maximum amount of energy transferable to different light nuclei in a single 
scattering event according to Equation 5. 
Table 1: Potential energy transfer to different nuclei in elastic scattering 
events. From [36] 
Target Nucleus A Proportional energy 
transfer 
1H 1 1 
2H 2 8/9=0.889 
3He 3 2/4=0.750 
4He 4 16/25=0.640 
12C 12 48/169=0.284 
16O 16 64/289=0.221 
As stated above, neutrons will react in matter over several discrete 
events as opposed to charged radiation, which transfer energy more 
continuously via the ionisation tracks formed as they pass through matter. 
This has consequences when attempting to shield neutrons. Instead of being 
slowed in electron-rich, high-mass material, neutrons must be slowed via 
several recoil events in a moderating material.  This means that the steps 
taken to shield a neutron field are starkly different to other forms of ionising 
radiation. Low-Z materials rich in light nuclei such as hydrogen, nitrogen, 
oxygen and carbon make the best neutron moderators, as high proportions of 
the neutron energy can be transferred in each recoil event.  
Conversely, recoils in shielding designed for electromagnetic radiation 
(gamma rays, X-rays etc.), such as lead, will not remove much energy from a 
neutron and therefore it will not act as an efficient neutron attenuator. Indeed, 
neutrons can travel through large amounts of concrete and lead shielding. [34] 
Polythene and water are commonly used to shield against neutrons. The 
addition of materials comprising elements with isotopes having a high thermal 
neutron capture cross section, such as boron or cadmium, improves neutron 
shielding by absorbing neutrons via neutron capture reactions once the 
neutron has been slowed to thermal energies via scattering interactions.   
The relationship between recoil nucleus mass and energy transfer also 
has important implications for detectors which utilize neutron scattering 
reactions as a detection mechanism for neutrons.  
2.3 NEUTRON DETECTION AND MEASUREMENT 
As mentioned in the previous section, the only clue to the observer of 
the presence of neutrons is the effects produced by secondary radiations 
produced by the neutron as it passes through matter. In the following section, 
some methods of detecting neutrons and then measuring their energy will be 
explored.  The first instance examined will be the proton recoil scintillator, 
being the device used in this research. There are a range of other methods 
which will be described afterwards.  
Scintillation mechanisms have been used in radiation detection since 
the dawn of the field. [37] Scintillators exploit the fluorescent effect of 
secondary particles produced in a detector volume to indicate the presence of 
neutrons (and gamma rays) and infer some of the properties of these 
radiations. The secondary particle observed most often in liquid organic 
scintillators, such as EJ-309, is the recoil proton. 
2.3.1 Proton recoil detectors 
A neutron which scatters off a proton - a hydrogen nucleus - imparts 
some energy to the proton. If the incident neutron is fast, then the energy 
imparted will often be very much greater than the energy necessary to break 
the chemical bond holding the hydrogen atom in its molecular structure, thus 
freeing the molecular hydrogen nucleus and producing an energetic free 
proton. This energetic proton will now move through the scintillant, depositing 
energy via ionisation in the form of tracks of charge carriers. It is possible for 
the neutron to scatter off a subsequent nucleus, producing another recoil 
product as shown in Figure 6. Such multiple scatterings happen very rapidly, 
each contributing light to the total scintillation magnitude. Scatter events will 
happen until the neutron is thermalised, captured or leaves the detector 
volume.  
Of course, the neutron can scatter off any nucleus in the scintillant (or 
none at all and pass through undetected.) From Equation 5 it is clear that the 
energy transferred in a scatter is inversely proportional to the recoil nucleus 
mass. In order to improve signal strength and preserve spectroscopic 
information, it is desirable that energy transfer is maximised in each scatter. 
Effective detection media are therefore rich in low mass nuclides, such as 
hydrogen, oxygen and carbon: hence the effectiveness of organic liquid and 
plastic scintillators in this regard.  
Figure 6: Illustration of Neutron scattering off protons in the detector 
volume from N1 to N2. Blue arrows show track of the neutron and red 
dashed lines show the path of the recoil proton. 
Scintillators are also sensitive to gamma rays. Whilst neutrons interact 
with the atomic nucleus, gamma rays are electromagnetic phenomena and 
can interact with the electron structure of the scintillant. Gamma rays primarily 
react via Compton scattering in organic scintillators, a discrete scatter event 
similar to the proton recoil experienced by neutrons. The primary difference is 
the resultant secondary particle, where neutrons produce energetic free 
protons, an incident gamma ray will produce a fast electron. Protons and 
electrons are both charged particles which may deposit energy in the 
scintillant via electromagnetic reaction as they pass through. For further 
information on gamma ray interaction in the scintillant, see Appendix A: 
Gamma interactions in the scintillator. 
Scintillation light is produced via a process of excitement in the 
electronic structure of the scintillator substance. [38] As the secondary 
charged radiation loses energy to an ionisation track in the scintillator material, 
it produces a volume of high ionisation and excitation density. Delta rays 
produced by the initial secondary particle can exit the track producing extra 
blobs of ionisation and excitation off the ionisation track. Scintillation 
mechanisms rely on the excitation of the -electron bond structure, found in 
Figure 7:Excitation and de-excitation diagram of electrons in the scintillant figure 
reproduced from [38]. Passing energetic charged particles excite the electron 
structure to one of the singlet states as shown at 1. The singlet state excitations 
higher than level 1 will quickly de-excite via radiation less processes in 2, to the 
1st singlet state. De-excitation to ground happens in 3 and produces scintillation 
light. Intersystem crossing (4) causes excitation in the triplet states, which de-
excite, producing light with a longer delay.(5) 
certain molecular arrangements. The benzene ring is an example of a 
molecule possessing such a feature, in that only a small number of the 
valance electrons are tightly associated with stronger -bonds and the rest are 
not bound to a particular atom and are available for excitation between -
electronic states.  The -electronic states are shown in Figure 7. Electrons 
can be excited in the singlet states (electron paired with spin=0) or triplet 
states (spin of one paired electron charges). These levels also have a finer set 
of excitation levels associated with vibrational states of the molecule. An 
electron can be raised into one of several singlet states via a passing charged 
particle, as shown by upward arrows marked 1 in Figure 7. Excitations higher 
than the first singlet state quickly (10-11s) de-excite via radiation less 
processes (2 in Figure 7) within the molecule to the first singlet state. They 
can also use a mechanism (intersystem crossing) to convert to the triplet 
states (4 in Figure 7). De-excitation between the first singlet state and the 
ground S-states results in the emission of a photon, at a wavelength 
dependent on the energy gap between S1 and the vibrational level it de-
excites too. Most de-excitations occur between smaller energy gaps than that 
of the S0-S1 transition, meaning the photon cannot be absorbed via the 
excitation of another electron system in the scintillator. For this reason, the 
scintillator is highly transparent to its own scintillation light. S1-S0 transitions 
happen very promptly, within nanoseconds, whereas triplet states decay much 
more slowly, over up to hundreds of nanoseconds. This two-component 
scintillation process produces asymmetric light pulses, as illustrated in Figure 
EJ-301 and EJ-309 are liquid scintillators which use p-xylene as a 
solvent, providing a ready source of hydrogen and carbon nuclei. The 
molecule contains a -electron structure in its central benzene ring, giving the 
scintillator mechanism, as shown in Figure 8. Some of the properties of EJ-
301 and EJ-309 are provided in Appendix B: Properties of EJ301 and EJ309. 
EJ-301 and EJ-309 are popular due to their fast response, good 
sensitivity and their ability to discriminate between gamma rays and neutrons. 
Being liquids, they are also more resistant to the crystal 
structure damage that solid crystal scintillators can 
experience when subjected to high radiation fields. [39] [40] 
The response of EJ-301 and EJ-309 has been 
studied extensively and much work has been performed 
characterising the light output properties and efficiencies of 
these scintillators. The physics behind the response function 
is elucidated upon in the following section. 
2.3.2 Scintillator response 
Every radiation detector will have a certain response 
to incident radiation that must be understood in order to 
interpret the measurements made with the device. The 
response of liquid scintillators is largely dependent on the 
kinematics of the neutron scatter process and the 
relationship between secondary particle energy and light production. [41] 
As described previously, neutrons and gamma-ray photons traversing 
the scintillator chamber will not produce light due to their lack of charge but 
instead rely on recoil particles to produce their scintillation. The relationship 
between the energy deposited in the scintillator by the recoil particle and the 
number of light photons produced varies with the recoil particle.  
The amplitudes of photon pulses generated by hydrogen nuclei are not 
linearly proportional to their recoil energy. Their light output has been 
characterised using a variety of empirical functions. A well-studied and 
commonly-used example is the Kornilov function [42]: 
Equation 6:   () = 0 (
+1
Figure 8: The 
chemical 
structure of 
xylene. The 
central benzene 
ring provides a 
scintillation 
mechanism. 
Where L is the light output in MeVee, Ep is the proton recoil energy and L0 
and L1 are empirically-obtained constants that vary with the detector scintillant 
and geometry. The curve of this light production function is shown in Figure 9. 
Gamma radiation primarily generates scintillations as a result of a recoil 
electron, produced as a result of a Compton scatter event. The light output 
from an electron is proportional over the range of energies relevant in this 
work (>0.4 MeV). This relationship is useful as a basis for using the units of 
eVee (electron volt electron equivalent, equivalent to the pulse height 
produced by an electron with an energy of 1 eV) as a value for relating pulse 
height to particle.  
2.3.2.1 Detector response to mono-energetic neutrons 
As the light output from the scintillator is proportional to the energy of 
the recoil particle and not the neutron itself, the detector does not simply 
respond with a peak representing the incident neutron energy.  Instead, the 
pulse height spectrum (PHS) produced in the detector by a mono-energetic 
source of neutrons will reflect a range of possible scatter scenarios in the 
scintillant. At the simplest level, the PHS will be a flat continuum of values, up 
to an edge at a maximum value. This continuum represents the range of 
scatter angles that can occur in a neutronproton scatter event and is shown 
Figure 9: Light output curve for EJ309 scintillator based on the Kornilov 
function [42]. The curve was produced by fitting the curve to experimental 
data collected by the author via detector calibration measurements 
performed using a Van de Graaf accelerator at the National Physical 
Laboratory, Teddington. Monoenergetic neutrons produced via the 7Li(p,n) 
and T(p,n) reactions provided known energy responses with which to 
determine the relative light output per MeV deposited in the detector. Plot for 
informative purposes only and is not referred to henceforth. 
in Figure 10.  As a neutron can impart the entirety of its energy in one scatter 
event with a proton, the upper edge of the continuum represents the full 
energy of the neutron. The rest of the continuum represents the ability of the 
neutron to deposit any amount of its energy to a recoil proton, depending on 
the scatter angle. In practice, a number of other factors affect the PHS [35] 
[43]: 
 Non-linear light output: As the scintillator light produced by the recoil 
proton follows the relationship shown in Figure 9, the PHS shows a 
skew toward low pulse heights as shown in Figure 11 (a). 
 Wall effect: A recoil proton produced adjacent to the wall of the 
scintillator volume may escape the scintillator before depositing the 
entirety of the energy it has picked up from the neutron. Again, this will 
skew the PHD toward low pulse heights as shown in Figure 11 (a). 
 Finite resolution: The inherent uncertainty of the light production and 
gathering process smears out some of the detail of the PHS, in a 
mono-energetic source this would manifest in rounding of the edges of 
the high energy cut-off as seen in Figure 11 (b). 
Figure 10: Illustration of the idealised rectangular pulse height 
distribution indicative of that which would be produced by varying 
scatter angles of the n(scatter,p) reaction. Angle of scatter indicated 
by the arrows across the top. Figure reproduced from [36] 
Figure 11: Diagram showing the effect of different contributions to the 
shape of the PHS. (a) shows the effect of non-linear light production in 
the scintillator, (b) illustrates the effect of detector resolution, (c) shows 
the effect of carbon scatters and (d) shows the contribution of multiple 
scattering events. 
 Carbon scatters: As neutrons impart a far lower proportion of their 
energy to the heavier carbon nuclei, the scintillation light produced 
directly by carbon has a relatively limited effect on the PHS. 
Subsequent proton scatters however will still contribute, but with a 
lowered available energy after the carbon scatter. This results in a 
missing section of the PHS representing those neutrons which have 
lost energy in carbon scatters previously to the proton scatter. The 
maximum energy a neutron can lose to a carbon nucleus in a scatter is 
0.28 En (from  
 Equation 5) and so carbon scatters are apparent above 0.72 En. Figure 
11 (c) shows this effect on the PHS.  
 Multiple scatters: In the flat rectangular perfect response, all of the 
pulses are produced in single neutron scatters off protons. After the first 
scatter has happened, it is still possible for the neutron to scatter again, 
producing another recoil proton. As the scatter and excitation process 
happens much faster than de-excitation and scintillation, the light 
produced by the second proton adds to the pulse height of the first 
event, rather than appearing as a separate event. The effect on the 
PHS is additional larger pulses, forming a hump behind the high energy 
edge of the distribution as shown in Figure 11 (d). 
The combination of the above components produces a PHS for a mono-
energetic neutron source like the one shown in Figure 12. 
Figure 12: Illustration of the PHS produced in an organic liquid 
scintillator by a mono-energetic neutron source of energy En. The 
dotted line shows the distribution of energies deposited in the 
original simple treatment of single scatters off protons, the solid line 
shows the effect on the PHS of the other factors described above. 
2.3.2.2 Pulse shape n/ discrimination 
Neutrons and gamma-ray photons elicit a similar response in the 
detector2. As all sources of neutrons also produce gamma rays, a method of 
distinguishing between photon and neutron detections must be used to give 
meaning to any readings of either radiation. The pulses produced by neutrons 
and gamma rays are very similar, stemming from the de-excitation of singlet 
and triplet states in the scintillant. Energetic protons produced by neutrons 
typically deposit their energy in a shorter physical space in the scintillant than 
the electrons produced by gamma rays and will produce a higher proportion of 
longer-lived triplet state excitations. [44]  This means that the pulses produced 
by neutrons take longer to decay for a given pulse height, as shown in Figure 
This subtle difference in pulse shape gives rise to a number of methods of 
discriminating between neutron and gamma-ray events, most commonly by 
integrating sections of the pulse providing comparison between the overall 
pulse magnitude to the tail magnitude. [8] [45] 
2 For a discussion of the mechanics of gamma ray interaction in the scintillator volume, see 
Appendix A: Gamma interactions in the scintillator. 
Figure 13: Illustration of pulse shapes for neutron and gamma induced 
detection events. The proton- mediated scintillations of the neutron give a 
longer decay tail than the electron produced pulses of gamma rays. 
2.3.3 Neutron spectroscopy with proton recoil scintillators 
The relatively flat nature of the scintillator response to neutrons 
complicates the process of obtaining a source neutron spectrum. As there is 
no well-defined peak in the pulse height distribution produced by even mono-
energetic neutrons, a simple relationship between the neutron energy 
spectrum and the pulse height spectrum in the detector cannot be assumed. 
This facet of detector behaviour necessitates the using of some process to 
separate the desired energy information from the detector response.  
A comprehensive review of the mathematics behind spectrum unfolding 
is given by Matzke [46] . For our purposes, a brief overview of the concepts 
and approaches behind spectrum unfolding is sufficient to understand the 
process and some of its nuances. 
 The pulse height spectrum produced in the scintillator is a convolution 
of the source energy spectrum E(E) and the detector response function R(E), 
a relationship that is described by the following equation:  
Equation 7    +  =  ()() 
where Nk is the number of counts in channel k, Rk(E) is the detector response 
in channel k to incident neutrons of energy E, ek is a term accounting for the 
various uncertainties, i.e., counting statistics, poorly defined responses etc. As 
can be seen from the expression, the response in any particular channel is an 
integration of contributions from across the whole energy spectrum E(E), and 
the process of obtaining E(E) from a set of measurements involves unfolding 
the measurements and the response. From this observation alone the 
difficulty in performing fast neutron spectroscopy can appreciated: we know 
from the kinematics of the scattering process that the energy deposited by a 
given neutron is stochastic across a range of values, and so a particular initial 
energy cannot be assigned to a specific neutron from the signal it produces in 
the detector. The neutron spectrum must therefore be determined 
stochastically from the observed response and with a certain amount of a 
priori information. 
 The task of unfolding neutron measurements is usually begun by 
describing the relationship between Ni   and E in terms of a discrete matrix 
equation [46]: 
Equation 8      =  
   As before, Nk   is the counts in channel k of the pulse height spectrum 
although now expressed in a column vector with each entry representing a 
channel. The terms R and   now represent a matrix and a vector, 
respectively,   being a vector containing each channel of the solution 
spectrum and R being a k x j matrix containing a characterisation of the 
detector response in different channels across the full energy spectrum. At 
first glance what is given is a matrix inversion problem, yet herein lies the 
primary difficulty of neutron spectrum unfolding, as the solution for Nk is highly 
ill-conditioned, since the true spectrum is just one of a great many possible 
solutions. 
2.3.3.1 Detector characterisation and response measurement 
In order to unfold the neutron spectrum using Equation 8, the detector 
response matrix must be obtained. This is a relatively involved process which 
must be performed to a high level of accuracy to obtain reliable results. 
Detector calibration typically involves a combination of modelling work and 
characterisation with neutrons of known energy; the kinematics of neutron 
scattering within the detector can be accurately modelled using cross section 
data within Monte-Carlo calculations, the finer points of light production and 
detection on the other hand cannot. Modelling can be performed using either 
general purpose Monte-Carlo modelling software such as MCNP, or via 
purpose made detector modelling packages [47] [48] [49] [50] [51]. Detector 
characterisation involves quantifying the effect that the various aspects of the 
detection mechanism have on the response of the detector.  
Traditionally, the light output per unit energy deposited in the detector 
and the detector resolution are measured by irradiating it with neutrons of 
known energy and observing its response. [47] [48] [49] This information is 
then fed back into a model to calculate the response function of the detector 
across the desired energy range. Although there are no radionuclide sources 
of mono-energetic neutrons, in the sense of the dependence describing a 
Dirac delta function, the closest to this ideal is achieved by producing neutrons 
with reactions in an accelerator. The method of using measurements to 
produce and verify a model of the detector response is powerful in that it 
allows the response at any energy across a range, and even the response to 
a particular poly-energetic source. Modelling the response over a particular 
energy structure can also make the unfolding process simpler, as the size of 
the response matrix can be tailored to match the energy bin structure of 
measured or solution spectra. 
Knowledge of neutron energy on an event-by-event basis can only be 
obtained via time-of-flight methods, typically via the use of a pulsed or 
chopped accelerator source. Either is usually a time consuming and 
expensive process and unsuited to portable measurements of workplace 
fields.  
Figure 14: A liquid scintillator set up in front of the 
reaction target of a Van de Graaf generator for 
mono-energetic neutron irradiation. Photograph 
authors own. 
An alternative to the use of an accelerator is time-of-flight detector 
characterisation using fission sources. Using this approach, a separate 
detector is used to obtain a timing (trigger) signal for a fission event, and the 
energy of the neutron can be calculated from the time of flight [52] that 
elapses prior to it being detected, relative to that of the trigger signal. 
Accumulating pulses produced by neutrons with the same time of flight gives 
the pulse height distribution for a given energy. 
TOF detector characterisation set-ups vary according to the choice of 
radiation mechanism exploited for the start signal and also the type of detector 
used in the start and stop positions. Ionisation chambers used to detect fission 
fragments have been used successfully, as have scintillators triggered by 
correlated fission particles, and scatter of a single neutron between detectors 
[53] [54] [11]. As well as not requiring accelerator facilities, an advantage to 
this approach is that, as neutron sources produce neutrons across the 
detector response, the whole response function can be determined in a single 
measurement. The resolution of the response function obtained only limited by 
the precision with which the particle flight can be timed and the time available 
to make the measurement. 
2.3.3.2 Spectrum unfolding 
Without a very well characterised and detailed understanding of the 
detector response, a probabilistic approach must be used to estimate the most 
likely solutions. To get the best results, the estimation process must not only 
take into account a mathematical treatment of the measured data, but also as 
much a priori information as the measurer can account for. A wide variety of 
unfolding codes and procedures exist, but in general an effective unfolding 
process should [55]:  
1. Produce a stable solution 
2. Provide only one valid solution 
3. Reject unphysical solutions 
4. Provide estimation of errors propagated through from the various 
inputs. 
  The matter of incorporating a priori information into the unfolding 
process is one that requires an amount of judgement on the part of the 
researcher. At the simplest level, a priori information can be the steps taken 
within the unfolding process to satisfy condition 3, ensuring that the solution 
spectrum remains physical. Often this entails preventing the inclusion of 
negative values or supressing the tendency of many unfolding codes to 
produce strong oscillations in the solution spectra. Many codes require a priori 
information in the form of a starting spectrum. This can simply be a flat 
distribution, or if the approximate shape of the source spectrum is known then 
this can be included as an initial guess spectrum. The ISO standard spectra 
for 252Cf or AmBe are other possible seed spectra to begin unfolding if the 
identity of the source is known. The scientist performing the measurements is 
not restricted to a single choice of a priori information, and comparison 
between results unfolded from different initial guess spectra can aid in 
evaluating the convergence process. [56] 
In addition to a priori information being used to generate the solution, it 
can also be used to determine the nature of the solution itself. In Bayesian 
analysis, a parameterisation of the solution spectrum is used, for example a 
particular dose produced by a workplace field or the FWHM of the energy 
peak of neutrons produced in a fusion plasma. [57]. Applying Bayes theorem 
allows a probability to be calculated that the neutron spectrum measured 
would produce a given set of parameters using a likelihood function 
incorporating known behaviour of the detector. [58] 
  A large body of work has been built up by authors over many years on 
the subject of spectrum unfolding, devising a multiplicity of different unfolding 
codes and procedures. [59] [60] [61] Despite the large number of codes and 
programs, they utilise the same core mathematical mechanisms attempting 
the same mathematical aim: finding the spectrum that when multiplied by the 
response matrix gives best agreement with the measured data. [62] 
Amongst the approaches to solving the ill-posed problem of spectrum 
unfolding are iterative least squares fitting and maximum entropy methods as 
some of the oldest and most commonly used approaches. Least squares and 
maximum entropy unfolding algorithms are variations of regularisation 
unfolding methods. [61]  This approach takes a starting spectrum and 
attempts to adjust it to best match the observations made with the 
spectrometer, according to the relationship with the response function. [63] 
This is often an iterative process using a metric such as a form of a chi 
squared statistic based on a priori  information, and the relationship between 
the response and the source spectrum, to evaluate the best solution.  
  Maximum entropy algorithms are a regularisation approach which use 
the principle of maximum entropy to evaluate the solution spectrum, again 
using a priori information in the form of an initial guess spectrum. [59] [58] 
Informational Entropy is a measure of uncertainty, by choosing a solution 
spectrum that maximises the entropy between the solution and the a priori 
spectrum, the algorithm is introducing the least amount of information which 
does not come directly from the measurements and input spectrum. The 
maximum entropy method was developed as a way of including a priori 
information in a consistent and general fashion.  
Various machine learning algorithms have been used to unfold neutron 
energy spectrum measurements including, in particular, artificial neural 
networks (ANNs) and genetic algorithms. ANNs have been used successfully 
to discriminate between different sources but are still outperformed by least 
squares methods. [64] [65] Additionally, it is difficult to account for the 
uncertainties in the solution spectrum, consistently. Genetic algorithms have 
also been used to unfold a variety of spectra successfully. An advantage of 
this technique is that it does not need an initial guess spectrum to begin 
unfolding, but when good knowledge of the measured spectrum is known, 
better results can be obtained with maximum entropy methods. [66] 
One of the major limitations of many unfolding algorithms is the inability 
to consistently evaluate the uncertainty associated with the unfolded solution 
spectrum. [46]  Whilst this does not preclude their use in many applications, it 
does attach the requirement of experience and interpretation when it comes to 
using their results. [67]  
The unfolding of neutron spectra from pulse height distributions in 
proton recoil detectors is a useful and varied field of research. There are 
several limitations associated with the technique however: 
 A not inconsiderable amount of skill and effort is required when it 
comes to preparing the response function of the detector, input 
data, and any initial guess spectrum used in the calculation. 
 The solution spectrum can be highly dependent on the amount 
of a priori information available and the judgement of the user 
when incorporating this into calculations. 
 The propagation of uncertainties can be inconsistent. 
Liquid scintillators are not the only instrument whose measurement 
results require unfolding. Observations made with many other instruments 
with non-trivial responses to neutron fields can and have been unfolded to 
perform neutron spectroscopy. Other instruments which can be used to 
measure neutron energy spectra will be explored in the next section. 
2.3.4 Nuclear reaction detectors 
There are several alternative detection mechanisms available for 
converting the energy of a neutron into a form that which can be detected and 
measured. Several nuclear reactions are used in neutron spectrometry 
utilising a variety of detector constructions. These reactions produce energetic 
charged particles as secondary radiations which can be detected much like 
the recoil proton in an organic scintillant. In addition to nuclear reactions, 
neutron activation of elements has also been used to perform spectroscopy in 
a process which will be described in the following sections. 
2.3.4.1 Nuclear reactions in neutron detection 
There are three reactions which are particularly relevant to the field of 
neutron detection [68] [69]: 
10B(n, )7Li  Q-value = 2.792 MeV  
3He(n,p)T  Q-value=0.764 MeV 
6Li(n,)T  Q-value = 4.78 MeV 
The 10B(n,) reaction is often exploited for measurements at thermal 
and can be used to detect fast neutrons after they have been moderated by 
an appropriate material. [70] The 3He(n,p) and 6Li(n,) are also used to 
detectboth fast and thermal neutrons and are used in various spectroscopy 
applications.  
The two fundamental differences between neutron capture reactions 
and scatter reactions are the positive Q-value and the fact that the reaction 
will produce two reaction products, with the entirety of the energy of the 
incident neutron. The positive Q-value indicates that the reaction is 
exothermic, and the secondary products receive energy from the reaction as 
well as the energy of the neutron. Most basically, this indicates that even 
thermal neutrons with negligibly low energies will produce reaction products of 
at least the Q-value. This has advantages as it raises the energy of the 
products of low-energy neutron events well above noise and the signal level of 
Figure 15: Illustration of the 3He(n,p)T reaction at thermal (left) and fast (right) 
incident neutron energies. In the case of the thermal neutron the energy of the 
reaction products is Q, and they are emitted in opposite directions. When a 
fast neutron is involved, its momentum is retained with the reaction products 
along with the energy associated with the Q-value, resulting in the scenario on 
the right. Reproduced from [68]. 
gamma-ray interactions, offering some reaction detectors an element of in-
built n/ discrimination, via their immunity to gamma-rays. 
The response of reaction detectors to fast neutrons contrasts with that 
of the proton recoil detector in several ways. Figure 16 shows an idealised 
energy distribution in dN/dE, or counts per unit energy, of charged particles 
produced in a 3He detector. Like proton recoil detectors, the recoil edge 
associated with neutron scatter is present, although in this case it is scatter off 
a 3He nucleus rather than a proton, and therefore is only 0.75En. The major 
difference from the spectrum produced in a purely recoil detector is the 
presence of the full energy peak, representing the energy possessed by the 
reaction products of the capture reaction, plus the energy En of the incident 
neutron. Finally, the thermal peak contains events corresponding to reactions 
involving neutrons that have been captured after thermalisation, producing 
reaction products with energy equivalent to the Q-value of the reaction. 
Not shown in Figure 16 is the wall effect. In the same manner as a 
recoil proton hitting the wall of a scintillator before it has had the chance to 
deposit its energy, the reaction products in a reaction detector can be lost at 
the wall of the detector.  Like the case of the scintillator, this produces a 
continuum of events where deceasing amounts of energy are deposited in the 
detector. When thermal neutrons are captured, there are two reaction 
products and thus two possibilities to lose one to the detector wall. This 
Figure 16: Illustration of the energy distribution of charged particles 
produced in a 3He detector irradiated with mono-energetic fast 
neutrons of energy En, reproduced from [68] 
Thermal peak 
produces a two-step wall effect around the reaction peaks, as shown for the 
10B(n,) reaction in Figure 17. 
The wall effect can act as a limit on the energy ranges of detectors, 
particularly those which absorb reaction energy within a gas. The wall effect 
can be minimised with bigger detector volumes, minimising the probability a 
reaction product will reach the wall, or by adding a heavy gas such as argon to 
shorten the path of the charged reaction products. 
2.3.5 Fast neutron spectroscopy using reaction detectors 
The design of a nuclear reaction detector involves two main 
considerations: a vessel containing the reaction nuclide of interest in a 
convenient form and a means of absorbing the energy of the reaction products 
and converting this into a measurable signal. There are many ways of 
achieving these ends and many subtle design features that can improve the 
efficiency or utility of a neutron spectrometer. The following sections discusses 
some of the devices that have been used, both in the past and more recently, 
to detect and measure fast neutrons. 
2.3.5.1 Ionisation chambers 
Ionisation chambers have long been used for neutron spectroscopy, along 
with many other radiation measurements. Whilst their use in many fields has 
Figure 17: Illustration of the wall effect seen in the 
detector response of 10B(n,) detectors.(not showing 
the effects of different energy states of the 10B 
nucleus) Reproduced from [68] 
declined in preference of solid-state detector technology, they remain useful 
for high-resolution neutron energy measurements. 3He gas is utilised to exploit 
the3He(n,p)T reaction to produce ion trails which yield a signal across a 
cathode and anode held at a potential difference. Ionisation chambers can 
also include a grid assembly to increase the energy resolution; another 
advantageous property when performing neutron spectroscopy. 
The use of 3He gas gives a neutron response as shown in Figure 16, with the 
possibility of the full energy of the neutron to be transferred to the reaction 
products. The inclusion of the full energy peak is advantageous when 
unfolding neutron spectra, although scattering events must still be accounted 
for, either by inclusion in an unfolding calculation or, more recently, by event-
by-event filtering using pulse rise time analysis [71] [72]. Pulse shape analysis 
can be used to discriminate neutron events from background counts from 
other radiations. 
Figure 18: Schematic representation of the operation of a gridded ionisation 
chamber. In its simplest form an ionisation chamber simply requires the anode 
and cathode with an appropriate potential difference between the two. Ion pairs 
produced between them will drift to the electrodes producing a signal in the 
detector. The inclusion of the grid removes the component of the signal produced 
by positive ions and the first part of the electrons drift. Subsequently the signal 
only varies with ion track length, removing variance of the signal with the point of 
ionisation and improving resolution. 
 As well as use as a direct 
neutron spectrometer, ionisation 
chambers can be constructed with thin 
layers of fissile material deposited onto 
foil cathodes in the instrument itself. 
The twin, back-to-back ionisation 
chamber (TIC) is an example of an 
instrument which, when used in 
laboratory settings, has enabled 
observations of fission fragment 
distributions.  The measurements can 
be extended to cover the prompt 
fission neutron energy spectrum by 
using the ionisation chamber signal in 
coincidence with a separate neutron 
detector, thus allowing neutron energy 
measurement via time-of-flight 
measurements [73]. More recently, a 
specialised multiple independent 
anode construction in conjunction with 
analysis of fission fragment position 
and energy distribution has provided neutron energy and multiplicity 
measurements in a single detector. [74] 
2.3.5.2 Proportional counters 
Proportional counters of various fill gasses and geometric 
arrangements are another commonly-used instrument for performing neutron 
counting and spectroscopy [75] [76]. The  3He(n,p)T  and 10B(n,)7Li reactions 
are both utilised in neutron detectors and are particularly well suited to the 
detection of thermal neutrons due to their high absorption cross section in that 
energy and positive Q-values. [77] B(n,) detectors use boron trifluoride (BF3) 
gas and 3He gas is usually used with a buffer gas such as CO2, CH4 or Kr to 
decrease charged particle range in the gas and reduce the wall effect. [78] 
[79] A boron-lined proportional tube, with a different fill gas, is another way of 
Figure 19: Schematic representation 
of a Twin back to back ionisation 
chamber (TIC). Two separate 
anodes share a common cathode 
deposited with a thin layer of fissile 
material. Fission fragments are 
emitted into the ionisation chamber 
where their respective energies can 
be measured. Unless a suitable fill 
gas is used then neutrons will 
escape the detector. 
using the 10B(n,)7Li reaction without BF3 due to its toxicity.  Although 3He-
filled proportional tubes have been used as fast neutron spectrometers, the 
use is uncommon outside the laboratory as the thermal peak can dominate 
the response, since the detection efficiency at thermal energies is 
considerably higher than for fast neutrons. [80] Figure 20 shows the cross 
sections for 3He scatter and capture. To measure fast neutron fields, 3He or 
10B proportional counters are more commonly used as the thermal detector at 
the centre of moderated detectors described below. Utilising the lower cross 
section at thermal energies, nitrogen gas has been used in a proportional 
counter to perform fast neutron spectroscopy of radionuclide sources, using 
the 14N(n,p)14C and 14N(n,)11B reactions, albeit with a strong contribution 
from the wall effect. [81] 
Used as fast neutron spectrometers, proportional counters have also 
been used to measure the energy deposited by neutrons via scatter reactions 
in 1H, 4He gas in elastic scatter reactions, requiring a similar characterisation 
process and unfolding of the recoil edges as a recoil scintillator. [77]. Recoil-
based, He-gas proportional counters are limited to use below around 5 MeV 
Figure 20: Cross sections for neutron capture in 3He, along with 
scatter on 3He and 1H. Data taken from ENDF/B-VIII.0 
incident neutron energy as the poor stopping power of He gas means that the 
wall effect becomes a hinderance at higher recoil particle energy. [82] 
2.3.5.3 Bonner spheres 
Bonner spheres are a common 
component of a specific design of 
neutron spectrometer. [83] 
Together with a detector, they 
provide an instrument with a wide 
useful energy range and isotropic 
response, a particularly useful 
attribute when measuring 
workplace neutron fields. [84] [69] 
They are also used in studies of 
the cosmic neutron background. 
[20]  Bonner spheres consist of a 
set of spheres made from 
hydrogen-rich materials (high-
density polyethylene), with a small 
thermal neutron counter in the 
centre. Neutrons hitting the sphere 
will scatter in the moderator until they are thermalised or escape the sphere. 
Thermalised neutrons at the centre have a reasonable chance of being 
detected and producing a count. A set of spheres of different thicknesses 
provides the user with a number of different detectors with a set of response 
curves that vary with moderator thickness.  Measurements with Bonner 
spheres consist of a single count number from each sphere, and an unfolding 
process not unlike that performed for proton recoil detectors is used to 
construct the source energy spectrum from the set of counts, the response 
functions of the spheres, and a priori  knowledge of the neutron field. [85] 
 The instrument was originally developed by Bramblett et al., (the team 
including Bonner himself, for whom the spheres are named) using small 
LiI(Eu) scintillators. [86] Since then a variety of central detectors have been 
used: 3He proportional counters are common and BF3 proportional counters 
Figure 21: Schematic representation of a 
Bonner sphere. The hydrogen rich 
neutron moderator thermalises fast 
neutrons via scattering events. 
Thermalised neutrons then have a higher 
chance of detection in the central 
detector volume. Different thicknesses of 
moderator provide different efficiency 
distributions with respect to energy. 
have been used as well. Recent research has also used solid state thermal 
neutron rate detectors successfully within Bonner spheres. [87] 
Measurements have also successfully been performed using different 
activation foils as the neutron counter. Foils, whilst somewhat inconvenient for 
general use, offer several advantages in certain situations, including immunity 
to pulse pile-up and oversaturation limitations when measuring intense 
neutron irradiations, and lack of sensitivity to high photon fields. [88] [89] 
 Novel, single-instrument, Bonner-style instruments have been 
developed, placing a number of detectors at different points within a single 
moderating sphere, enabling single instrument measurements to be made. 
[90] [91] 
2.3.5.4 Inorganic and gaseous scintillators 
Organic liquids are not the only substances that can be used as 
scintillators for the detection of neutrons. Various other scintillator materials 
and mixtures of materials have been used successfully as neutron 
spectrometers. All scintillators use a similar general construction, featuring a 
material that scintillates upon irradiation within a light-tight chamber. This is 
coupled to a sensitive light detector, traditionally a photomultiplier tube but 
some modern scintillators have used solid state alternatives, such as silicon 
photomultipliers (SiPMs). [92] [93] 
Both recoil and capture reactions can be used to produce energetic, 
charged, secondary radiations which will induce scintillations. In the same 
realm as proton recoil scintillators, the use of 4He as a recoil detector has 
been reported, developed in response to the shortage of 3He, as a neutron 
spectrometer sensitive to and preserving the energy information of fast 
neutrons. [94]  As in all gas-based detectors, raising the pressure of the fill 
gas increases the number of reaction targets available to neutrons and 
therefore increases detection efficiency. The 4He scintillator uses 4He gas as 
both a source of recoil nuclei and scintillator material, producing a similar 
response to proton recoil scintillators but with recoil edges on the PHS 
reflecting the lower maximum energy that can be transferred in an 4He (n, 
elastic) scatter event. An unfolding process identical to that performed with 
proton recoil scintillators is required to obtain the source neutron distribution 
[95]. One advantage of using the gas is the relatively low electron density, 
giving a relatively low gamma-ray sensitivity. 
3He has also been used in scintillators although its relative expense and 
recent shortage of supply have precluded its extensive use in recent years. 
6Li does not have a gaseous form and is instead used as a component 
in solid scintillator crystals. Lithium iodide crystals doped with thallium or 
europium are commonly used scintillators, containing a significant quantity of 
lithium and a structure in which the reaction products (an alpha particle and a 
triton) deposit their energy, producing scintillations. [97] These scintillators are 
particularly sensitive to thermal neutrons, and are often used with moderation 
in integral spectroscopy arrangements to perform fast neutron spectroscopy, 
as described in the previous section on Bonner spheres. 
Scintillators are also often doped with various combinations of additives 
to increase light yield or tailor the response to different energies of neutron or 
photons [98] [99] [100]. Scintillators are also built into different shapes and 
arrangements for different applications, for example, large sheets or into 
fibres. [101]  
2.3.5.5 Sandwich spectrometers 
Sandwich spectrometers are another 
means of measuring the neutron field 
using nuclear reactions. As the name 
suggests, the sandwich spectrometer 
consists of a reaction product filling 
sandwiched between two charged-particle 
detectors, as illustrated schematically in 
Figure 22. In a similar mode of operation 
as the twin back-to-back ionisation 
chamber, the two reaction products are 
emitted in opposite directions into the two 
detector areas. Running the two charged-
particle detectors in coincidence mode 
affords a degree of immunity to noise, as 
uncorrelated, background counts will 
typically only register in one side. 
Additionally, summation of the two 
coincident pulses allows the full energy of 
the incident neutron to be measured. 
Choosing the thickness of the central 
reaction material is largely a trade-off 
between providing sufficient thickness to 
provide reasonable efficiency, without too 
much of the energy of the reaction product being absorbed before they reach 
the detector areas. At high neutron energy, enough momentum from the 
incident neutron is transferred to the products to cause them both to end up in 
one detector, leading to lowered efficiency as energy increases.  
Both 6Li and 3He have been used as reaction targets in the centre of sandwich 
spectrometers. Lithium, being a solid at room temperature, is deposited on 
thin substrates between detectors, as shown in Figure 22. There are a range 
of charged particle detectors which can be used in sandwich detector 
construction. Recent research has made progress using diamond detectors 
Figure 22: Schematic illustration 
(not to scale) of a sandwich 
spectrometer. The central area 
contains reaction nuclei such as 
3He or 6Li. The secondary 
charged particles produced 
during capture reactions are 
detected in the detection regions 
on either side. Using coincidence 
counting, background counts can 
be greatly reduced and the full 
energy acertained. 
around a deposited 6Li neutron converter layer, to constitute a neutron 
spectrometer that is both environmentally robust and radiation-hard. The 
thinness of the sensitive layer however means their effectiveness is optimised 
in high-flux applications, such as reactor dosimetry and fusion diagnostics. 
[102] [103]   
Being gaseous, 3He must be contained in a volume and is particularly 
effective when this volume is run as a proportional counter alongside the 
charged particle detectors on each side. This setup, first reported by Kluge 
and Wiese, [104] is particularly effective as a spectrometer as it gives the best 
chance converting the full energy deposited by a neutron into a signal as 
energy deposited in the reaction gas still adds to the signal. Observing 
coincident pulses in the proportional counter and the two semiconductor 
layers allows differentiation between true events and background detections. 
The 3He sandwich spectrometer has been used for characterising reference 
neutron sources. [105]  Like many detectors utilising the 3He(n,p)T reaction, 
the high cross section at thermal energies can pose a problem when making 
measurements, as the thermal neutron contribution can swamp the detector 
response. 
2.3.5.6 Activation foils 
Activation foils can be used in integral spectroscopy methods to construct the 
neutron energy spectrum in a similar methodology as is used with Bonner 
spheres. As mentioned in section 2.3.5.3, activation foils with a high cross 
section for activation by thermal neutrons can also be used as the detector in 
the centre of Bonner sphere sets. [88] [89] Foils made from materials which 
have an energy threshold to neutron activation can also be used directly as an 
integration spectroscopy system; the relative activations of a set of foils with 
different thresholds can be unfolded to calculate the neutron energy spectrum. 
Many of the unfolding codes used for Bonner spheres or scintillators are also 
used when unfolding foil activation measurements. [106] [107] As mentioned 
previously, foils provide spectroscopic capabilities where neutron fluence rates 
would overpower other detectors. Similarly, they are useful when neutrons are 
produced alongside very high gamma-ray fluxes resulting in them being a 
popular choice when measuring reactor or medical accelerator fluxes. [108] 
[109] [110]  Another advantage is that they are unpowered, minimising time 
spent setting up and arranging power supplies. This can be a desirable quality 
when taking measurements in high dose areas.  
 Activation foils share disadvantages with most integral spectroscopy 
systems, in that they have poor resolution and there is an amount of 
uncertainty in the unfolding process. In addition, there is the counting process 
involved in measuring the activation which, depending on the decay constant 
of the induced activity, must be performed within a certain time after 
irradiation, adding complexity to the measurement process. 
2.3.6 Time-of-flight neutron spectroscopy  
In the previous section 2.3.3.1, the use of time-of-flight measurement to 
establish neutron energy for purposes of detector calibration was described. 
When characterising a detector, the time of flight of a detected neutron can be 
used to measure the full energy of the neutron independently of the amount of 
energy it deposits in the detector. The logical extension of this technique is to 
take the neutron energy as the value being measured and construct the 
neutron energy spectrum from this information. Figure 23 illustrates the 
principle of TOF spectroscopy.  
Figure 23: The principle of TOF spectroscopy. A detector placed 
some distance, d, from a neutron source measures the time taken 
for a neutron to fly from point A to point B. Application of simple 
kinematic formula reveal the energy of the neutron. At the neutron 
energies encountered from fission reactions and as a result of  
(,n) reactions, the effect of relativity can be acceptably ignored. 
 One of the chief difficulties of using the neutron time of flight as a basis 
for spectroscopy is the acquisition of a start signal; until recently this aspect of 
making these measurements has limited its use. The detection of the neutron 
at the end of its journey is relatively simple and has been measured with a 
variety of detectors (primarily scintillators due to their fast response and 
relatively high efficiency across a range of neutron energies). Gauging the 
moment of the beginning of the neutrons journey however is more difficult but 
this has been achieved by a number of methods: 
 Fission fragment detection 
 Pulse mode accelerator use 
 Associated particle methods 
Fission fragment methods use the detection of fission fragments to 
determine the time of fission allowing TOF measurement of the PFNS. Being 
heavy charged ions, fission fragments can produce a strong signal within a 
detector but are also stopped very quickly by matter and will not escape from 
a physically-thick source. To combat this, the source nuclide is deposited 
thinly onto a foil and located within the detector itself, usually an ionisation 
chamber (as mentioned previously in section 2.3.5.1). This provides a 
prominent signal associated with the fission event, with a high degree of 
Figure 24: Illustration of ionisation chamber triggered TOF spectroscopy. 
Fission fragments detected in the ionisation chamber (left) trigger the start 
of the timing process. The detection of a prompt fission neutron in the 
second detector (illustrated here as a scintillator) stops the timing process. 
efficiency (up to 99%). [15] By only triggering on the detection of both fission 
fragments, background counts can be greatly reduced.  
A similar approach places the source within a 4He gaseous scintillator 
rather than an ionisation chamber, although this has been reported in the 
context of detector characterisation as opposed to direct spectroscopy. [12] 
 Accelerator-triggered measurements can be used to measure the 
neutron energy spectrum of any prompt neutron radiation produced in induced 
reactions, such as induced fission or neutrons produced through 
bombardment reactions on targets. An accelerator-based neutron source 
which can operated in pulsed mode irradiates a sample of the reaction 
material, producing both the reaction and the start signal of the TOF 
measurement. 
 Associated particle TOF measurements use paired detections of 
various particles produced either at the same time or very closely to a neutron. 
For fission reactions, this can mean either co-produced neutrons, or prompt 
gamma rays. (,n) sources can also be measured using this technique via the 
detection of gamma rays produced during the reaction. For this method to 
work, there must be some means of correlating the two events. This can be 
done using a coincidence gate; neutrons detected within a certain time 
window after a gamma ray, for example, can be assumed to be correlated. 
Figure 25: Accelerator triggered time of flight spectroscopy, in this case 
measuring the induced fission neutron spectrum of an actinide sampleThe 
start time of the time of flight measurement is provided by the accelerator 
which also produces the stream of neutrons inducing the reaction. 
The time of the detection of the gamma ray is taken as the moment of fission, 
whilst the delay between the two events is taken to be the time of flight of the 
neutron. Additionally a single neutron can be used as both the trigger pulse 
and the particle being measured. A neutron scattered in the first detector can 
produce a pulse, triggering the ToF measurement. When the neutron is 
detected in the second detector the timing is completed, it will however have 
lost energy in the scatter event which must be accounted for. 
The time-of-flight method of neutron spectroscopy has a relatively long 
history. Due to the tendency of the alternative methods of neutron 
spectroscopy described above to provide a stochastic measure of the neutron 
spectrum, time of flight has been used as an alternative providing a 
deterministic measure of the neutron energy. The deterministic nature of the 
results has meant that it has been frequently used to evaluate neutron spectra 
for reference values and nuclear data purposes. 
The Mannhart evaluation [15] is still a benchmark treatment of the 
important 252Cf fission spectrum used as a standard in nuclear measurements. 
It is based on an evaluation of different experimental measurements of the 
252Cf spontaneous fission neutron spectrum available at the time. All of the 
experimental data in that evaluation were produced by ionisation chamber 
Figure 26:Associated particle TOF spectroscopy. Co-produced particles can be 
detected in the two detectors, and the time interval between the two detections 
can be used to infer the TOF. For example, a fission event can produce prompt 
gamma rays and neutrons. The travel time of a gamma ray to detector #1 is 
negligible, and so the time taken to detect a correlated neutron in #2 can be 
treated as its time of flight. Some method must be used to determine 
correlation, such as looking for events within a certain coincidence time window. 
triggered TOF setups, using a variety of neutron detectors including lithium 
glass scintillators, plastic scintillators and organic liquid scintillators. All of the 
measurements used in the Mannhart evaluation were taken in 1983 (or closely 
prior to 1983), but the technique predates this. Ionisation chamber TOF 
methods are still used to generate nuclear data as they are a well understood 
means of obtaining neutron spectra. 
Accelerator-initiated TOF measurements are commonly used to 
characterise accelerator-based neutron sources. [111] [112] This method is 
also particularly useful for measuring the PFNS in induced fission reactions 
such as the 235U(n,fission) reaction and 237Np(n,fission) and is used to 
produce nuclear data for modelling and reference purposes. [113] [114] An 
additional advantage of this technique, as opposed to inducing the reaction via 
a radionuclide neutron source, is that the energy of the inducing neutron can 
be finely controlled. This allows the dependence of the spectrum on the 
energy of the incoming neutron to also be investigated.  
A common theme across the previous two techniques is that they have 
primarily been used in laboratory-based settings. They are excellent 
techniques for producing nuclear data and reference spectra, but less well 
suited to general use source identification or characterisation. The 
requirement of accelerators or the preparation of the source within an 
ionisation chamber makes them impractical for more general source 
characterisation use. Associated particle triggered time-of-flight methods do 
not have the same requirements and can be performed with two detectors and 
the necessary electronics. 
The data processing aspect of the measurements have been the 
limiting factor in exploiting this technique.  Whilst this type of measurement 
has been performed in the past, the advent of digital electronics has enabled 
the use of associated particle triggering more widely. However, the vast 
majority of recent work on the subject has been focused detector 
characterisation rather than using it for direct spectroscopy [53]. The primary 
motivation is cost and convenience, as it allows a detector to be fully 
characterised using a single radionuclide source rather than requiring 
repeated and expensive measurements using accelerators. 
Some spectroscopy has been performed using the technique, however. 
A particular theme appears to be the measurement of the neutron spectrum 
produced by 241AmBe (,n) neutron sources [115] [116], potentially because 
they are less well suited to ionisation chamber measurements as they do not 
produce fission fragments. A characteristic, 4.44MeV gamma ray is produced 
by the 9Be(,n)12C* reaction which can serve as a trigger for TOF 
measurements and can be detected outside the source volume. Additionally, 
the neutron spectrum of fusion experiments has been measured using neutron 
scatter TOF in high flux environments. [117] 
The often-measured 252Cf reference spectrum has also been measured 
using  -tagging TOF methods, Becchetti et al. [118] and Blain et al. [119] both 
report the use of associated particle TOF spectroscopy in research contexts, 
in the first case however this is deployed as a laboratory demonstration tool, 
and in the second case the technique is pressed into service with the intention 
of gathering nuclear data. Both cases use specialised electronics and in the 
second case, dedicated gamma detectors to increase gamma sensitivity and 
n/ discrimination.  
The present state-of-the-art in associated particle time-of-flight 
spectroscopy still leaves unexplored areas. The potential to provide 
deterministic neutron energy measurements in a wider range of applications 
and with portable equipment is worth exploring, especially if the ability to 
discriminate between very similar spectra, such as those of fission nuclides of 
relevance to security applications, can be achieved. This research has 
attempted to examine some of these possibilities as the use of digital 
electronic data processing methods has become widespread. In particular, the 
aim is to demonstrate TOF spectroscopy capabilities using general-purpose 
FPGA hardware and EJ-309 liquid scintillators. 
A further aim of this research is to investigate the ability of such a set-
up to discriminate between sources. Of particular interest are fission nuclides; 
knowledge of the nuclide producing a neutron field can offer valuable insight 
into the origin of that particular radioactive source.
3 EXPERIMENTAL METHODS AND APPARATUS 
The following chapter outlines the experimental methods deployed during 
the course of this work. Firstly, an overview of the EJ-309 detectors and 
Hybrid digitiser system used in all measurement campaigns is given. 
Afterwards, a description of the set-up of the system for taking Time of Flight 
(TOF) measurements and converting these to energy spectra is given. Finally, 
the calibration of the detectors with mono-energetic neutron irradiations at the 
sparsely explored low end of the neutron energy range is described. 
3.1 APPARATUS AND EXPERIMENTAL TECHNIQUES 
As discussed previously, in this research a liquid organic scintillator 
detector has been used to investigate various neutron spectra based on TOF. 
The scintillator is not a standalone device and is used in conjunction with 
ancillary electronics and a data-logging PC. In this research, a single-unit 
Mixed Field Analyser from Hybrid Instruments has been used to process the 
signals from the scintillators. A PC is used to log the data.  Figure 27 shows a 
schematic diagram of the detector set-up. 
Figure 27: Schematic diagram of a single detector system using the Hybrid 
Instruments mixed field analyser. 
3.1.1 The detector 
The scintillators used in this research consist of a container of EJ-309 
scintillant coupled to a photomultiplier tube. The mechanics of the scintillation 
mechanism and the detector response has been discussed in section 2.3.1  
and will not be elaborated on further here.  
The photomultiplier tube has been an essential component of the 
scintillator detector for many years. Indeed, until its introduction, scintillation 
experiments utilised the sensitivity of the human eye in a dark room, and good 
eyesight and stamina were preconditions to study these branches of science.  
The use of a device to detect scintillations with a high level of sensitivity allows 
for electronic data acquisition, and the ability to quantify the magnitude and 
pulse shape of very fast scintillations opens the possibility of spectroscopic 
and particle discrimination techniques. 
The photomultiplier tube is an evacuated tube containing a cathode, 
several dynodes and an anode. [120] The device is fed by a negative, high-
voltage supply holding the cathode at a very low potential, and the dynodes at 
gradually increasing in potential toward ground in a stepwise manner. Light 
photons are guided from the scintillator volume along a light guide, made of 
optical acrylic or glass. At one end of the tube they encounter the 
photocathode where the photo-electric effect is exploited to convert them into 
electrons. The photocathode is designed to have a high quantum efficiency in 
Figure 28:Schematic of a photomultiplier tube. An incident photon 
liberates a photo-electron from the photocathode on the left. The 
electron is accelerated through a potential difference to the first dynode, 
where it liberates further electrons via secondary emission. By using 
stepped dynodes, large gains can be achieved. 
the blue to near ultraviolet section of the electromagnetic spectrum which is 
where most scintillators emit their light. An electron freed at the photocathode 
is then accelerated across an electric potential to the first dynode where it 
liberates several additional electrons via the secondary emission process. 
This process is repeated at each dynode resulting in considerable gain across 
the whole tube. Typical gains for photomultiplier tubes are between 103 and 
107 depending on the number of dynodes and the operating voltage.  
Figure 29:Circuit diagram of a photomultiplier tube showing the arrangement 
of the resistor network, anode, cathode and dynodes. 
Figure 29 shows a circuit diagram for a standard photomultiplier tube. 
On the left is the photocathode as described above. Several dynode stages 
are then seen separating the negative high voltage from ground. The resistor 
network provides a potential divider giving a gradual decrease in voltage in 
several discrete steps. The resistors are specified to limit the current that will 
flow with each pulse: too low a current will affect sensitivity, but linearity is lost 
as current rises above a threshold value. Resistors of around 100 k are 
typically used in the potential divider.  
The detectors have a signal output on the photomultiplier tube anode 
connection, using a BNC connector to allow a length of RG-58 co-axial cable 
to carry the detection pulse to the mixed field analyser. The use of co-axial 
cable gives good signal transmission for fast pulses, particularly important in 
the case of scintillators with typical pulse rise times of nanoseconds. The 
detectors are supplied with a high-voltage supply fed via another co-axial 
cable, connected via a SHV connector to prevent incorrect coupling. 
Operating voltages of photomultiplier tubes can vary depending on their 
design and purpose. [121] Generally speaking, photomultipliers are run at 
between -500 V and -2000 V. Photomultiplier gain varies logarithmically with 
the operating voltage and insufficient voltage will affect sensitivity.  Overly high 
magnitude pulses can exceed the range of pulse processing hardware or be 
outside the range in which the hardware behaves in a linear fashion.   
3.1.1.1 The detector used in this research 
This research has used two EJ-309 detectors, both produced by Scionix, 
Holland, of type V94A94. The detector consists of a square scintillator 
chamber coupled to a photomultiplier tube with an integrated resistor network.  
The scintillator chamber is 100 mm  100 
mm  100 mm in dimension, with an 
aluminium casing and light guide to ensure 
optical coupling to the photomultiplier tube. 
Connection to the negative high voltage 
supply and data logging electronics are 
provided by BNC sockets on the top of the 
detector. The scintillator is pictured in 
Figure 30. 
3.1.2 The mixed field analyser 
The mixed field analyser (MFA) is a field 
programmable gate array (FPGA) based 
signal acquisition and processing system 
manufactured by Hybrid Instruments ltd. It 
comes in single channel or 4-channel 
versions, the latter allowing it to operate 4 
detectors independently but on a single 
processing board and clock for timing 
purposes. Figure 31 shows the MFA and 
some of its specifications. 
Figure 30: Photograph of the 
Scionix V94A94, EJ-309 liquid 
organic scintillator used in this 
research.  
Hybrid instruments Mixed Field analyser 
 500 MSa/s sampling rate 
 12-bit resolution  
 3 Mpps discriminated particle throughput 
 Integrated HV supply up to 2 kV 
 Time correlated TTL neutron and gamma outputs 
 Network based PC connectivity 
Central to the operation of the MFA is an FPGA signal acquisition board. 
FPGA hardware provides ultra-quick processing of the detector signals, 
allowing real time pulse processing and throughput. Pulses from the detector 
are digitised by the MFA which then offers several processing options. As its 
name suggests, it is primarily a device for working in mixed neutron/gamma-
ray fields: neutron and gamma events are separated using a pulse-shape 
discrimination algorithm described below. Following discrimination, events are 
output either in the form of TTL signals on the front of the unit, allowing it to be 
used with a pulse-counting device, or via TCP/UDP network packets over a 
network card to a connected PC. In PC-mode, the pulse height or the time of 
flight between two events can be logged in an event list mode.  The PC is also 
used to set the pulse shape discrimination parameters, trigger settings and 
thresholds using a graphical user interface on the PC. 
In time-of-flight mode, a coincidence window can be set between two 
detector channels on a 4-channel MFA. When two events are detected within 
this time window, both are assumed to be scatter events between the 
detectors. More information on TOF mode is given below.  
The MFA also has an integrated high-voltage supply, providing 
independent supplies to each connected detector. This allows different models 
of detector to be used or independent calibration of similar detectors to be 
performed.  
Figure 31: Hybrid Instruments Ltd 
Mixed Field Analyser 
3.1.3 Pulse triggering and digitisation 
Pulse digitisation is performed via a 12-bit bipolar analogue to digital 
converter (ADC) feeding into the FPGA. Prior to digitisation, the signal is 
passed through a variable gain amplifier. The ADC provides a total of 2048 
separate values across the positive voltage range and appropriate variable 
gain amplifier settings are chosen to enable the use of the full range of the 
ADC without producing signal clipping due to over-amplification of the largest 
pulses.  
The MFA offers a choice of two triggers used to recognise pulses: a 
differential and a greater-than trigger. When set to greater-than, the MFA will 
trigger as the signal rises above a user-defined threshold. The differential 
trigger operates by comparing adjacent samples; a trigger is initiated when a 
samples value increase is greater than the user-specified value and a pulse is 
registered. The trigger level is set in arbitrary ADC units as the effect of the 
variable gain amplifier precludes relating the trigger level setting to a specific 
voltage range. Figure 32 shows the two trigger schemes. 
3.1.4 Pulse-shape discrimination 
Discrimination between neutron and gamma-ray events is performed by the 
FPGA onboard the MFA in real time as pulses are detected and digitised. 
Differentiation between particle detections is achieved by measuring the 
difference in pulse shape produced by each particle. As described in section 
Figure 32:Trigger options available on the Hybrid systems MFA. On the left the 
greater than threshold, where the first datapoint above a threshold triggers pulse 
processing. On the right, Differential triggering, where a difference of a certain 
value between points triggers pulse processing. 
2.3.2.2, Pulse shape n/ discrimination, there is a subtle difference in neutron 
and gamma-ray pulses, with both rising quickly to their full pulse height, and 
then dropping off with pulses produced by neutrons decaying more slowly 
than pulses produced by gamma-ray events.  
The beginning of the pulse is detected using one of the two methods 
described above as chosen by the user. Once the MFA has been triggered at 
the start of a pulse, a set time window is taken to contain the pulse, and the 
digitised pulse is passed to the PSD algorithm.  
The MFA distinguishes between the events using a two-point discrimination 
algorithm. Firstly, the pulse is smoothed using a moving average filter to 
reduce measurement noise. Following this two amplitude samples are taken, 
one a short amount of time after the pulse peak, and the second a user 
specified number of nanoseconds afterwards. The comparison of these two 
points  allows neutron events to be distinguished from gamma events in 56ns, 
faster than the timescale of the pulse. Figure 33 shows the pulse shape and 
the timings of the various PSD parameters. 
Figure 33: Illustration of the PSD process. The pulse is smoothed using a 
rolling average filter, once the peak is detected, two parameters are sampled, 
one near the peak, and one a set amount of time (typically 16ns) later. The 
difference between these two samples are used to identify the particle that 
produced the event. 
When connected to a PC, the MFA can transfer the two pulse shape 
parameters over the network interface to the software running on the PC. This 
will plot the two values on a scatter plot, where the user can then specify PSD 
parameters as shown in Figure 34. In this research, the PSD capabilities of 
the MFA have been used to filter coincidence events in terms of the 
combination of particles they consist of. As this process requires either real-
time knowledge of particle identity, or the storage and post processing of list 
mode pulse data, the real time PSD capability of the digitiser is valuable. 
Figure 34: PSD scatter plot showing neutron and gamma "plumes" produced 
by the PSD parameters taken by the MFA. PSD allows the neutron 
component to be extracted in the presence of a strong, undesired gamma 
field. Events are sorted depending on the side of the black line they fall, which 
is set by the user by placing the three points during the instrument set-up. 
Data collected from a 252Cf neutron source for illustrative purposes 
3.1.5 Pulse height spectra 
Producing histograms of pulse heights detected by the MFA is very useful for 
spectroscopy and troubleshooting purposes. The MFA can display a pulse 
height spectrum in real time directly on the GUI, or the long integral values 
can be taken from the log file in post processing. In this research, the python 
programming language has been used to produce scripts that post process 
the log files, extracting the long integrals and binning them by size to produce 
a pulse height spectrum. Python post processing of long and short integrals 
has also been used to judge the operation of the PSD process. 
3.1.6 Coincidence mode 
In response to a specific requirement for this research, the MFA firmware was 
modified by Hybrid Instruments Ltd. to operate in a bespoke coincidence 
mode. This function provides time measurement between pulses in separate 
detectors for spectroscopy purposes. Processing the signals from both 
detectors in the same unit and using the same clock cycle for processing 
allows for timing of pulses between channels.  The FPGA gives a timing 
resolution of 4 ns, limited by the clock cycle of the unit. 
The coincidence mode gives the option to set a variable length time window. 
Whenever a pulse is detected in one channel, the window is initiated and if a 
pulse is detected in the other channel during this time period, a coincidence 
event is logged. Figure 35 shows the timing schedule for time of flight mode. 
Along with fast timing the MFA retains its real time particle discrimination 
function, allowing particle-based logic to be applied to coincident events, only 
Figure 35: Schematic illustration of coincidence mode. Every pulse detected 
opens a coincidence window (time set by the user, up to 240 ns). An event 
second detector within the time window is registered as coincident and the 
time between the two events, as well as the particle identity is recorded. 
processing those for example which involve two neutrons, or a gamma-ray 
and a neutron. This function firstly acts as a filter to reduce the data-
processing requirement both during operation and post-measurement, and 
also allows the contributions to the time distribution made by different 
mechanisms to be identified.  
Upon flagging a coincident event, the MFA logs an event via the network 
interface, recording the pulse heights in each detector, the time of flight 
between the detectors, and a direction indication parameter showing the 
direction in which the scatter occurred. 
The four detection pairings contain manifestations of three coincidence 
scenarios: 
1. Detection of correlated particles: two prompt gamma rays, neutrons or 
combinations of the two are detected within the coincidence window in 
the two detectors. Particles detected after correlated production like this 
will take direct paths to the two detectors as seen in Figure 49. 
2. Detection of scattering between detectors: a single neutron or gamma 
ray is detected in both detectors as it scatters between the two. Events 
of this type result from a single particle taking the path between the 
detectors also shown in Figure 49. 
3. Accidental counts are recorded as a result of two uncorrelated particles 
being detected in the two detectors within the coincidence window by 
virtue of the Poisson statistics governing the temporal distribution of 
radioactive decays of the source. 
Figure 36 shows an example of the time distribution of correlated events 
(example data taken at the Lancaster University 252Cf source). This plot shows 
the time interval distribution (TID) recorded between two detections, provided 
the second event is in the second detector and is detected within the 
coincidence window of 240 ns. This plot contains all events independent of 
particle identification. The features produced by the four correlation scenarios 
can be clearly observed and are demarked in Figure 36. 
The first feature in the time distribution is the gamma-ray peak. Gamma rays 
travelling at the speed of light arrive first after the corresponding fission event 
from which they originated, irrespective of the detector they arrive at. This 
initial peak in the time separation spectrum represents double gamma-ray 
events, either containing a single gamma-ray photon scattered between 
detectors or two correlated prompt gamma-ray photons.   The following 
hump spanning 3 to 20 clock cycles (12 to 80ns) contains events involving 
neutrons. The contents of the n-hump are listed in Table 2. 
Figure 36: Time interval distribution of correlated events independent of 
particle type. This distribution contains a histogram of the times logged for 
correlated events detected within a time window of 100 ns. The Gamma 
peak seen on the left contains coincident gamma detections. Events 
involving neutrons form a hump produced by the range of arrival times 
for neutrons of different energies.  Data collected for illustrative purposes 
from a 252Cf fission source.  
Table 2:  Coincident detection mechanisms in the two detectors found in the 
neutron hump. 
Particle 
detector 
Particle 
detector 
Correlation mechanism Time of Flight 
corresponding to 
presumed coincidence 
mechanism 
n n Correlated neutrons from the 
same fission event 
(TOF of neutron to D2)- 
(TOF of second neutron to 
n n Single neutron scattered 
between detectors 
TOF of neutron between 
D1 and D2 
 n Prompt gamma detected in 
detector 1, prompt neutron 
detected in detector 2 
(TOF of neutron to D2)- 
(TOF of gamma to D1) 
Either Either Accidently coincident events Flat interval distribution 
according to Poisson 
statistics 
Theoretically, the spectrum of Time Of Flight (TOF) values stated for the 
second two scenarios listed in the table are related directly to the PFNS 
emitted from the source. In the case of the n-n scatter events, the time of flight 
corresponds to the time of flight between the detectors, where the neutron will 
Figure 37: Schematic of a n-n scatter event. The source neutron with 
energy En scatters in the first detector, depositing some energy and 
producing a start signal. Timing the neutrons flight to the second 
detector gives a measurement of its energy after the scatter, En* 
have the energy it received from the fission event, minus the energy lost in the 
scatter. As all of the neutrons which undergo scatter reactions will be 
scattered through approximately the same angle between the detectors, and 
therefore the TOF spectrum is a function of the PFNS, the scatter angle 
between the detectors and the distance separating the detectors. 
 The time recorded in the case of gamma-neutron events also 
corresponds to PFNS. The time of flight of the gamma ray to the first detector 
is practically negligible compared to that of the neutron to the second detector, 
and so if the two are correlated then the gamma ray can be treated as an 
indicator of the time of  the fission event itself (or a correction can be made 
assuming the source location is known). Correspondingly, the time delay to 
the neutron detection can be considered to be a measurement of the time of 
flight of the neutron from point of fission to second detector. The TOF from 
source to detector is a function of the PFNS and the detector-source 
separation, and so this TOF spectrum can be directly converted to the PFNS. 
3.1.6.1 Uncertainties in the TID to TOF conversion  
If the source and detectors were set up in a large area of free space, 
with perfect detection timing, particle discrimination and infinitely small and 
infinitely efficient detectors were available, then the TOF measurements 
above could be used to determine the PFNS directly, as described above. 
Figure 38: illustration of gamma triggered TOF measurements, the 
detection of a gamma event in detector 1 starts the timing process, 
stopped by detector 2. 
However, there are several factors which affect the response of the system 
and add a level of uncertainty to the measurements. 
 Firstly, there is the matter of neutron scattering; in addition to travelling 
directly to or between the two detectors and producing the scenarios listed in 
Table 2, the particles involved can travel via one or more scatters off the 
surroundings. Neutrons detected after a scatter will have traversed a 
considerably further flight distance than that inferred from the detector 
arrangement. In addition, the neutron will lose a portion of its energy as it 
scatters, travelling more slowly and adding extra time to its time of flight. The 
geometry involved with these scattering events is shown in Figure 39. 
Scattered neutrons are shown in the figure as coming directly from the fission 
source but scatter off a mass after scattering in the first detector is also 
possible. 
Figure 39:The effect of scatter neutrons on the perceived TOF spectrum. The 
dotted lines show different possible paths taken to the detector by a neutron. 
In all cases the detection will have been assumed to have followed the direct 
path shown by the dashed line. 
The physical size of the detectors also adds an amount of uncertainty 
to the measure of the distance the neutron has travelled. Since the neutron 
interaction with the detector can either happen at the front of the scintillator 
volume, at the rear or any other point, uncertainties of up to 9 cm (in the 
detectors used in this study) are introduced. As a 1 MeV neutron travels 
approximately 1.4 cm in a nanosecond, this can mean a difference of around 
6.5 ns in travel time depending on where it interacts in the detector. Figure 40 
shows the potential longest and shortest flight path of neutrons in both the n-n 
and -n correlation scenarios.  Geometric uncertainties will be more 
pronounced in the case of single particle n-n scatter detections, as there is 
uncertainty in the detection/scatter position in both the first and second 
scintillator volume. In this case, the different scatter paths will also contain a 
range of potential scatter angles, leading to uncertainties in how much energy 
the neutron will have deposited in the first detector. If the fission source is 
physically small, then -n detections only have spatial uncertainty in the 
second detector as the differences in TOF as a result of detection point for the 
gamma ray being negligibly small3. 
For n-n correlated events there is a component of the detection 
separation spectrum added by correlated prompt neutrons. As fission events 
3 A gamma ray takes 0.03 ns to travel an extra centimetre in the detector in contrast to the 
neutrons 0.7 ns. 
Figure 40: Uncertainty produced by detector setup in n-n scatter 
events (top) and -n events (bottom). The effect of position of 
scatter in the detector on flight length and scatter angle is 
illustrated. 
produce neutrons with an average multiplicity greater than one, there is a 
possibility of detecting two of the prompt neutrons in two separate detectors. If 
the assumption is being made that all n-n designated events are a result of 
detection of a single neutron scattered in the first detector, then this 
component will contaminate the TOF spectrum garnered from the 
measurements. The time separation of two detected prompt neutrons cannot 
be directly related to the PFNS as it is a function of two neutron energies, and 
two detector distances from the source, rendering the problem ill-posed.     
Finally, there is a certain level of background counts. Radioactive 
decay obeying Poisson statistics produces randomly-spaced events with a 
time interval distribution described by the function [122] : 
Equation 9                           () =
()1
(1)
Where In(t) is the distribution of time intervals t between a pulse and its Nth 
neighbouring pulse, and  being the average rate . Summed over all possible 
values of N renders: 
Equation 10 
() =  
indicating that single, randomly produced counts will produce a flat distribution 
proportional to 2, highly-active sources giving higher background counts. A 
background correction can be performed by taking the average count of the 
bins representing coincidences that arrive after any real correlated particles 
could arrive. In practice, this is where the time separation distribution flattens 
to a constant value of counts. 
3.1.6.2 Conversion to neutron energy spectrum 
The TID spectrum can be converted to the neutron energy spectrum via a 
number of steps. Firstly, an assumption must be made so that the detection 
time separation spectrum may be treated as a Time-of-Flight spectrum. To 
enable this, coincidences must be able to be treated as correlations.  
All contributions to the time seperation spectrum are correlated in some 
manner except accidental coincidences which must be removed.  As stated 
above, truly random, uncorrelated events can be expected to produce a flat 
response in the detection time seperation spectrum. This effect is seen in the 
example dataset shown in Figure 41.  The contribution made by this random 
background can be inferred by observing the count in a time bin a substantial 
distance from the initial detection, after any genuinely-correlated counts can 
be expected to have arrived in the detector. Taking the average of several 
bins in a window at great time separation from the initial event accounts for 
statistical variation in background counts, and this value can be subtracted 
from all bins. Without randomly coincident events, the remaining counts in the 
time separation spectrum can be reasonably assumed to be correlated in 
some manner.  
Using the correlation mechanisms discribed in Table 2, the researcher 
can begin to make sense of the physical events being measured. Using all 
Figure 41:Time interval spectrum example data showing discarded 
components of the data. A constant section at the bottom of each bin 
can be removed representing coincident events. The gamma flash at 
the beginning of the distribution can also be discarded. 
recorded events in one analysis is sub-optimal, as a number of different 
mechanisms contribute to the spectrum, and therefore a single time bin 
cannot be reasonably assumed to represent a single time of flight. Using the 
additional information provided by the particle discrimination abilities of the 
MFA, however, allows the different mechanisms to be separated out to a 
certain degree. With a reasonable level of confidence that the correlations are 
due to a particular coincidence mechanism, the spectrum can be treated as a 
TOF spectrum and then converted to an energy spectrum. 
As the PSD process is not perfect, some events can be miss-identified, 
allowing some corruption of the TOF spectrum. Some mis-identifications can 
be filtered out from the TOF spectrum itself. Any gamma rays detected in the 
second detector will arrive in the first two clock cycles, well before any of even 
the fastest neutrons can arrive in the detector. This gamma-ray peak can 
therefore be removed, as shown in Figure 41, and the effect of mis-identifying 
gamma photons as neutrons in the second detector is null. 
 Incorrect particle discrimination in the first detector however is more 
problematic. If the assumption, for example, is that an n-n event is a scattered 
neutron, when in fact it was a prompt gamma ray that arrived in the first 
detector and a prompt neutron in the second detector, then the distance that it 
has travelled is further than anticipated, and additionally it will have been 
assumed to have lost energy in a scatter event that never happened. This will 
give an erroneous measure of the neutrons energy, although the exact 
magnitude of the error will depend on the initial energy of the neutron. 
 More simple is the case of a neutron masquerading as a gamma ray in 
the first detector. In this case, the assumption is that the event in the first 
detector corresponds to the time of the fission event producing the neutron 
detected in the second  scintillator.  In actual fact, the TOF value measured 
will be the genuine TOF of a neutron to the second detector, minus the non-
negligible time of flight of the first neutron to the first detector. This will 
therefore produce a value indicative of a faster neutron than was actually 
present. 
Once the TOF spectrum has been obtained, it can be converted to 
neutron energy using the standard formula expressing  kinetic energy in terms 
of distance and time:  
Equation 11 
where  is the neutron energy, is the mass of the neutron,  is the 
distance the neutron has travelled and  is the TOF. 
If n-n coincidences are being used to generate the PFNS spectrum then an 
additional correction must be made for the neutron scatter. This correction can 
be performed using Equation 5, the formula for neutron energy after a scatter 
event discussed in the section on Neutron scattering on page 14, reproduced 
here: 
2 =
(1 + )2
(2)1 
(with 1 and 2 being neutron incident and resultant energy, respectively,  
is the atomic mass of the recoil nucleus and  is the neutron scatter angle.) As 
can be seen, the energy possessed by the neutron after its scatter depends 
on the initial neutron energy, the angle through which it is scattered by, and 
the mass of the nucleus off which it scatters. Scatter angle can be measured 
from the angle between detector 2 and the centroid of the souce and detector 
one. This angle is subject to uncertainty associated with the non-negligable 
dimensions of the detectors. The mass of the scatter nucleus cannot be 
known without prior knowledge of the initial conditions. An assumption can be 
made that the predominant scatter nucleus is hydrogen (A=1), although the 
spectrum will be contaminated with events which have scattered off other 
nuclei in the scintillator, primarily carbon (A=12). 
Further to converting the TOF bins in the above plots, a correction for bin 
width must also be applied. Neutron energy is inversely-proportional to the 
square of the TOF, and so the bin widths, although a constant width of 4 ns (1 
clock cycle) in the time domain, are wider in the energy domain at shorter 
times of flight. To make the energy bins comparable with each other, the 
counts are corrected by dividing through by the bin width to give units of 
dN/dE.  
 A final correction must be made for the effects of relativity. The effect 
on the spectrum at fission neutron energies is small ( 3%) but can be 
accounted for by replacing the rest mass of the neutron with its relativistic 
mass according to its velocity using the following relationship: 
Equation 12 
 =

Where mrelativistic is the relativistic neutron mass, mrest is the neutron rest mass, 
v is the neutron velocity and c is the speed of light. 
3.2 NEUTRON SOURCES 
Several different neutron sources at separate facilities were used for 
measurements in this study. The first was Lancaster university, where a 
water-stored 252Cf source was used for initial research with the TOF system 
and an investigation into the effect of several variables on the TOF spectrum. 
An experimental campaign at the National Physical Laboratory, Teddington, 
UK, involved the use of accelerator-based mono-energetic neutrons along 
with the use of a bare 252Cf source. 
244Cm measurements were taken at Pajarito Scientific Corporation, in 
Santa Fe, New Mexico, also available there was a 252Cf source for 
comparison. 
3.2.1 The Lancaster 252Cf source  
The Lancaster University californium neutron source is a water-stored 252Cf 
neuron source. It is housed in a 1 m3 water tank providing containment of the 
neutron field when not in use. Gamma shielding is provided by 20 mm of steel 
cladding on the outside of the tank. The source is a small, doubly-
encapsulated 252Cf fission source mounted on a pneumatic handling 
mechanism. For day-to-day storage, the source is kept in the centre of the 
tank, and when the source is required a compressed air mechanism moves 
the source from the middle to the edge of the tank, allowing neutrons to 
escape out of the side. When in the exposed position the source still has a 
thin layer of 2.5 cm of water between it and the side of the tank. The source 
was used in this research to perform initial validation measurements to test 
the ability of the MFA running two detectors in coincidence mode for the first 
time. 
(33mm) 
Figure 42:  Plan view of the neutron source facility at Lancaster 
university. In the figure the source is shown in the exposed position in 
which neutrons can escape from the side. In the stored position the 
source is moved to the centre of the tank. (not to scale) 
3.2.2 Bare sealed sources 
In addition to the water-stored 252Cf source, a number of sealed neutron 
sources have been used in measurements. Sealed sources contain an 
amount of active material produced in a reactor. The source is typically 
doubly-sealed inside stainless steel capsules, welded closed to provide 
protection against leaks. Neutrons 
are produced either via 
spontaneous fission or secondary 
reactions produced by the radiation 
of the primary radioactive nuclide, 
for example (,n) reactions.  
Sealed sources come 
in a range of sizes, 
measured in either 
decay rate (usually in 
Becquerels but also 
Curies) or neutron 
production rate (ns-1). 
Neutron rate is more 
common with (, n) 
sources as the 
neutron production 
rate depends on many 
factors arising in the manufacture of the source. For spontaneous 
fission sources the neutron production rate will depend on the 
source activity, the branching ratio of the decay chain of the 
active nuclide, and the spontaneous fission neutron multiplicity of 
the isotope. The half-life of the active isotope must also be 
considered when calculating source strength. 252Cf for example 
has a half-life of 2.645 years; sources are frequently deemed 
usable for several half-lives and so the actual amount of active material will 
potentially have diminished since the source was commissioned.  
Figure 43: A variety of sealed sources 
used for various detector calibration and 
other measurement tasks. Photograph 
taken by the author at Bradbury Science 
Museum, Los Alamos, NM. 
Figure 44: 244Cm 
source used at PSC. 
The active material is 
contained on a foil 
disk at one end of the 
source assembly. 
Ruler markings in 
Inches. 
  Sealed sources are convenient to use as the material is completely 
sealed away from the outside world. They are particularly useful in the TOF 
measuring context as they are physically small, giving a precise location from 
which, the neutrons originate, and have little in the way of moderating material 
to significantly affect the neutron energy spectrum. Figure 44 shows the 
source assembly used in the curium measurements at Pajarito Scientific 
Corporation (PSC), the active material is contained in a circular foil disk 22 
mm in diameter at one end of the source (top end in image.) The additional 
bulk of the source assembly distances the hand from the source foil to 
minimise the dose received. In practice, the source is carried by the string 
visible in the bottom of the image in order to minimise the received dose 
further.  
 The two other sources used in this research were both sealed 252Cf 
spontaneous fission sources. A small californium source was used at PSC to 
compare with the curium measurements. A sealed californium source was 
also used at NPL to compare a bare source with the Lancaster water-stored 
source.  
3.2.3 The NPL Van de Graaf accelerator 
Whilst radionuclide sources are useful in many applications, their 
continuous neutron spectrum can limit their use in calibration applications. In 
order to determine the absolute detector efficiency at low energies, a detector 
characterisation was performed at the low-scatter facility at the National 
Physical Laboratory in Teddington, London (NPL). The low-scatter facility 
consists of a Van de Graaf generator housed alongside a large accelerator 
hall. The accelerator hall contains a large pit with a tower in the centre which 
gives a mounting point for the detector, providing a large spatial separation 
between the detector and the hall structure. This allows measurements to be 
taken with a minimal scattered neutron component. When used in conjunction 
with a mono-energetic neutron source, the detector response to an accurately 
known neutron spectrum and fluence rate can be measured. 
The mono energetic neutron source is produced by the Van de Graaf 
generator. By accelerating protons or deuterons toward a suitable target, (p,n) 
and (d,n) reactions can be used to obtain neutrons.  As the potential 
difference is finely controllable, the energy transferred to the ions introduced 
into this cylinder is also finely tuneable. [123]  Acceleration is achieved using a 
high potential difference generated on a steel shell by an electrically charged 
belt.  
The energy provided to the neutron during the reaction depends on that 
of the incident proton. This gives the Van de Graaf generator its ability to 
provide an essentially mono-energetic source of neutrons. As the target is 
physically thin, the protons will only lose a very small amount of energy 
traversing the target, meaning the reaction kinematics are essentially the 
same for each produced neutron, leading to a mono-energetic neutron 
spectrum. There is a small deviation from a purely mono-energetic neutron 
energy spectrum caused by neutron scatter within the target; this contribution 
is calculated via Monte Carlo calculations for the specific neutron energy and 
target material and is folded into the uncertainties.  
Figure 45: Schematic of a Van de Graaff accelerator. Positive charge is 
transferred to a steel cylinder from a charged belt via the skin effect. This positive 
charge produces a potential difference used to accelerate ions to a finely 
tuneable energy. 
Steel cylinder 
accumulates 
charge 
The energy of neutrons produced in this way is not isotropic and varies 
with the angle from the reaction target and the magnitude of this variance is 
dependent on the neutron energy. The low-scatter facility has the equipment 
to mount the subject of an irradiation at any angle around the pit and provide 
several irradiations at different energies at once, in these measurements 
however the 0 position was used exclusively. Figure 46 shows the layout of 
the low-scatter facility and the position of the mounted detector.  
To perform calibrated runs, the neutron fluence rate is determined 
using the NPL standard long counter prior to the irradiation of the instrument. 
This process ensures the fluence rate at the particular neutron energy 
provided to the detector to be calibrated is accurately known. The long counter 
consists of a BF3 proportional counter tube surrounded by a cylinder of 
moderating wax, open at one end. This gives a directional, neutron detector, 
insensitive to gamma rays and with a reasonably flat response across a wide 
range of neutron energies [124]. The response of the long counter is well 
characterised through the use of well-defined radionuclide sources and Monte 
Carlo calculations. 
As the long counter and scintillator cannot be run in the same position 
and at the same time, an additional measurement during both the calibration 
run and the detector irradiation must be made. To provide this information a 
Figure 46: Plan view of the layout of the low scatter facility at NPL. The 
detector is mounted on a pedestal near the centre of the pit, 
approximately 2m away from the reaction target of the Van de Graaf 
generator.(not to scale) 
current integrator measures, the proton current impingent on the reaction 
target and a slab counter on the laboratory wall measures the neutron field 
produced during each measurement. Counting software measures these two 
parameters so that the total integrated fluence provided during the detector 
irradiation may be determined.  
3.2.4 Scatter cone measurements 
As discussed in section 2.2.1.1, neutrons scatter off matter in the environment 
and so neutrons that would not have hit the scintillator can potentially scatter 
back into the detector from the surroundings and register a signal. This scatter 
component of the neutron field will be indistinguishable from neutrons direct 
from the source. This presents several potential issues for the neutron 
metrologist. Complications arising from scatter neutrons include: 
1. Distortion of the measured pulse height spectrum. Neutrons will have 
lost energy as they scatter, this will affect the PHS measured from a 
particular source and interfere with spectroscopy measurements using 
the energy deposited in the scintillator. 
2. Scatter neutrons will take longer to reach the detector, corrupting time 
of flight measurements. 
3. Greater numbers of neutrons will be detected than would have been 
otherwise. If the counts made in a detector are being used to infer the 
absolute decay rate of a source, or calculate detector efficiency, then 
the extra counts from scattered neutrons will add erroneous counts. 
4. Scatter neutrons can mask the location of a source. If directionally 
sensitive detector systems are being used, then scatter neutrons may 
appear as if they are arriving from another location. 
The number of scatter counts made by a detector is dependent on the 
particular surroundings at time of measurement. Any matter in the proximity of 
the detector can scatter neutrons back to be counted and form a potentially 
large scatter component of the measurement. Scatter can be off solid, dense 
objects in the vicinity of the source or detector, or it can be from the air around 
the detector, producing air in-scatter. 
In many cases the best way to combat the incursion of scatter neutrons on the 
measurement is to minimise their existence in the first place. Siting the 
detector and source as far away from unnecessary objects can reduce the 
total number of scatter neutrons. The low-scatter facility at NPL used for some 
of the measurements in this research uses a large room (7 m separation from 
the closest wall) and places the detector on a tower in a pit (6 m deep) to 
reduce the scatter contribution to measurements. A similar strategy is used 
when making measurements with a radioisotope source whereby large 
masses of matter are avoided in the source area. 
Sometimes the nature of the measurements being performed make scatter 
neutrons particularly undesirable. For example, in this study measurements 
have been made to determine the absolute efficiency of the detector and the 
additional counts contributed by scatter neutrons can artificially increase the 
measured efficiency. In order to correct for the scatter effect a shadow cone 
measurement is performed. The shadow cone measurement is run in identical 
conditions to the main measurement, but a cone to isolate the contribution 
from scattered neutrons is placed between the source and the detector. 
 The shadow cone is made up of two sections, an iron forward section 
and a boron-doped paraffin or polyethene section behind. [125] This 
arrangement prevents the detector from seeing the source directly, it will 
however still count neutrons that have scattered in the environment, allowing 
the scatter component of the initial measurement to be determined. Figure 47 
shows the effect of the shadow cone on the ability of the detector to count 
neutrons directly from the source. 
Figure 47: Schematic of the shadow cone measurement technique. The 
cone blocks neutrons from reaching detector unless they have been 
scattered in indirectly. 
The counts from the shadow cone measurement can then be used to 
determine the scatter fraction. This in turn can be used to produce a scatter 
corrected measurement. 
If spectroscopy data are being measured, then a pulse height spectrum can 
be populated from the shadow measurement to determine the scatter 
contribution as a function of deposited energy. Figure 48 shows the 
contribution of scatter neutrons to a PHS measured from a 16.5MeV mono-
energetic neutron flux.  
As can be seen in the figure, the bulk of the scatter contribution to the pulse 
height spectrum is at the low energy end of the spectrum as would be 
expected from neutrons which have undergone at least one scatter. 
Figure 48: Scatter contribution of a 16.5 MeV irradiation of the detector. 
Data collected by the author using the NPL Van de Graaf accelerator. 
Monoenergetic neutrons are produced by the T(d,n) reaction. The green line 
shows the measurements gathered with the scatter cone in place. The black 
line shows the corrected pulse height spectrum. Data for illustrative 
purposes only and not referred to subsequently. 
3.3 EXPERIMENTAL SET-UPS AND PROCEDURE 
Four sets of measurements were performed as part of this study. The 
following sections explain the experimental procedures carried out in each 
case. The experimental research began with a series of measurements of the 
Lancaster source after the MFA modifications had been made. These 
measurements were performed primarily to verify the operation of the 
coincidence mode and the ability of the system to measure the PFNS. In the 
first set of measurements, the detectors were set up in a configuration 
encouraging n-n coincidences. The second round of Lancaster measurements 
built on this work testing the system when the detectors were arranged to 
favour -n coincidences. After these measurements were a success a low-
energy detector efficiency characterisation was performed at NPL in London 
to better understand the behaviour of the system at low incident neutron 
energy. At the same time, a bare source 252Cf measurement was taken, and 
this was finally compared with the measurement of a bare 244Cm source in an 
identical set up. Addition data collected using the Lancaster source are 
presented also, giving a characterisation of the system. 
3.3.1 First round of Lancaster measurements 
The initial set of time-of-flight (TOF) measurements were taken at 
Lancaster University using the Engineering Departments 252Cf source. The 
aim of the first round of measurements was to test the ability of the system to 
measure the prompt fission neutron spectrum (PFNS) via a number of 
coincidence mechanisms between two detectors. The MFA was used in 
coincidence mode to measure the time separation between coincident events.  
Space was limited by the size of the room to a detector separation of 95 cm. 
This measurement was geometrically optimised to record neutrons scattering 
in the first detector into the second.  The detectors were offset slightly from the 
central line of sight to the source as, by definition, any neutrons scattering 
between the detectors would be scattered off the line. The detectors were 
arranged as in Figure 49. 
Figure 49: Detector set up for the first round of coincidence measurements 
made using the Lancaster 252Cf source. View from above. 
The two detectors were connected to the MFA with the tank-side detector 
connected to channel 1 and the further detector into channel 2. Initially, the 
MFA was run in PSD mode to set up the detectors with appropriate PSD 
parameters, allowing particle type sorting of the different coincidence events 
to be performed.  
The MFA was switched to coincidence mode to collect the TOF data. A 
coincidence window of 240 ns was used for these initial measurements. At the 
time of measurement, the Lancaster source contained an encapsulated 40 
MBq 252Cf source. The system was allowed to collect data for 46 hrs. 
3.3.2 Second round of Lancaster measurements 
A second round of measurements were made using the Lancaster 252Cf 
source. This set of measurements used a modified detector arrangement to 
optimise energy resolution calculated from the time separation of coincidently-
detected gamma-ray and neutron events.  In this set-up the detectors were 
arranged in a linear geometry, with one detector given a clear view of the 
source with a large separation to improve the anticipated time resolution, and 
the other close to the tank to maximise the probability of gamma-ray 
detections. The detector arrangement is shown in Figure 50. In this 
arrangement there was 97 cm separation between the 252Cf source and 
detector 2. Detector 1 was placed close up against the tank wall. 
These measurements were taken some time after the initial 
measurements with a time gap of just under one half-life of the source. The 
source strength was now therefore 20MBq.  
 As in the initial measurements, the PSD parameters and negative high 
voltages were set before the measurements using the PHD scatterplot mode 
on the MFA GUI.  
Figure 50:Detector arrangement by the Lancaster water 
stored 252Cf source for the second round of Lancaster 
measurements. View from above. 
3.3.3 Detector efficiency characterisation at low incident neutron 
energy 
Although the application of the coincidence measurements using the 
Lancaster source showed promise, uncertainty around the response of the 
detector provided the motivation to characterise the efficiency of the detector 
at low neutron energies. Whilst a great deal of progress has been made 
characterising scintillators at a range of energies, such as recent studies by 
Pino [54], in order to verify the applicability of the EJ-301 scintillators used in 
this research at the particularly important low-energy end of the neutron 
spectrum, mono-energetic neutrons produced by the Van de Graaf generator 
at NPL in Teddington, London, were used to probe their efficiency response at 
low energy. 
  Neutrons for this research were produced using the T(p,n)3He reaction. 
The target consists of a gold body with the target mate impregnated on the 
surface. Compressed air cools the target to prevent the heating effect of the 
proton beam from warping the target and liberating the target material. Figure 
51 shows the target mounted on the accelerator tube. 
Figure 51: The tritium target mounted at the end of the accelerator 
tube.Compressed air is supplied to cool the target via the copper tube at 
the bottom of the image. 
  This research involved a sweep of different neutron energy values 
aimed at improving the understanding of the thresholding function of the MFA, 
along with the scintillant response. Following this calibrated fluence runs were 
made at three energies, (0.7, 0.85, 1 MeV) along with scatter correction 
measurements. This provides the means of calculating the detector efficiency 
at these energies. The detector was set up in the centre position of the NPL 
low-scatter facility. The front face of the detector was aligned to be coincident 
with the path of the beam as shown in the photograph in Figure 52. 
The detector was mounted a distance of 2 metres from the reaction 
target of the accelerator apparatus and was aligned so that the neutron flux 
was aimed co-axially to the centreline of the scintillator. The MFA was set up 
close to the detector, connected to the anode and negative HV sockets by 3 m 
lengths of RG58 coaxial cable, the MFA was then connected to the data 
logging laptop located outside the accelerator hall in the control room, allowing 
control of the MFA whilst the accelerator was running.  The MFA was set to 
record the two pulse parameters, giving the pulse height, for spectroscopy, 
Figure 52: EJ309 detector mounted in the beamline of the Van de Graaf 
generator in the accelerator hall of the NPL low scatter facility. The 
detector can be seen in the middle-background, with the evacuated 
accelerator tube moving back through the centre of the photograph. 
and a short integral value to provide n- discrimination. The short integral 
value was set to begin 43 ns after the pulse peak. 
The PSD thresholds were set as for the Lancaster californium 
measurements and checked with a californium source provided by NPL. The 
threshold settings were also set the same as for the Lancaster measurements 
(100), as lowering the threshold lead to the presence of an overwhelming 
artefact on the scatter plot, shown in Figure 53. 
In order to locate the approximate level of the low-energy cut-off of the 
detector and make best use of the available time with the accelerator, a 
sweep of energies was performed. Initially, the accelerator was set to produce 
400 keV neutrons with the intention of sweeping up until a neutron plume 
became evident on the scatterplot displaying the events being recorded by the 
MFA.  It was expected that the low-energy cut-off would be between 450 keV 
and 1 MeV.  In practice, the neutron plume did not become apparent until 
approximately 2 MeV; far higher than anticipated, indicating that using this 
system, neutrons were indistinguishable from gamma rays below 2 MeV. 
Whilst this would not necessarily affect the TOF system, as gamma rays can 
be separated from the neutron by virtue of where they land in the TOF 
Figure 53: Scatter plot produced by the GUI controlling and 
receiving data from the MFA during a 1MeV  mono-energetic 
irradiation. The linear artefact displaying unphysical events can be 
seen from the bottom left to mid right of the plot, identified within 
the ellipse, obscuring any neutron counts. 
spectrum, it would impede the ability to measure the neutron detection 
efficiency of the detector.  
In subsequent, higher energy irradiations of the detector, an additional 
difficulty emerged: as the display software from the MFA displays point data 
with no change for multiple events with the same pair of first and second 
integrals, it proves difficult to distinguish the amount of overlap between the 
plumes in the scatter plot containing gamma-ray and neutron events. In order 
to distinguish between the areas of the scatter plot containing high numbers of 
counts and the areas which were outliers, a heat map analysis was 
performed, plotting the same scatter data but with colour to demark areas of 
high counts. Figure 54 shows the standard scatterplot alongside the heat-map 
display of the data for a 2MeV monoenergetic irradiation. The heat map colour 
Second parameter 
Figure 54: Scatter plots showing the same data from a 2.5MeV neutron 
irradiation. In the right hand plot, a logarithmic heat map reveals the 
neutron counts present in the data 
2MeV neutron irradiation 
scheme has been plotted logarithmically to show the presence of the linear 
artefact and the extended gamma-ray plume. 
As can be seen in Figure 54, the neutron component contains numbers 
of counts that are orders of magnitude higher than gamma rays, and bins 
associated with the linear artefact contain tens of counts. Figure 55 shows 
measurements of four more descending energies (2, 1.8, 1.6 and 1.5 MeV) 
where the neutron plume can be seen retreating into the area of the graph 
previously swamped out between the gamma-ray counts and the linear 
artefact.  This finding suggested that the response at lower neutron energies 
could be distinguished amongst the other scatter plot contributions, and that 
the lower threshold values were acceptable for use.  
Figure 55: Neutron plumes produced by 2 MeV, 1.8 MeV, 1.6 MeV and 
1.5 MeV monoenergetic neutrons from the NPL Van der Graaf 
accelerator. Heatmap colours are assigned linearly. 
Second parameter Second parameter 
Figure 56: Plots showing the effect of threshold on the 
low energy cut-off. Each subplot shows a 
measurement of the same monoenergetic neutron 
energy of 1 MeV but with different thresholds. 
Figure 56 shows the effect of the threshold on the measurements. The three 
subplots presented are three separate measurements of 1 MeV mono-
energetics. The first subplot shows the data collected whilst the MFA is set 
with a threshold value of 100, this is the default value of the MFA. In subplots 
two and three the threshold is lowered to 70 and 40 respectively. At a lower 
threshold than 40 the spurious counts became non-negligible and began to 
dominate the neutron signal. As can be seen, the thresholds of 70 and 100 cut 
off the detector response at well above the level where 1 MeV neutrons 
produce a signal.  
As there was now confidence that the low-energy cut-off would fall 
between 1 MeV and 500 keV, the Van de Graaf generator was set to produce 
1 MeV neutrons, with the intention of moving incrementally down in energy, 
performing fully calibrated irradiations.  
Three irradiations were performed: 1 MeV, 850 keV and 700 keV. Each 
irradiation was performed at three different threshold settings (100, 70 and 40) 
and identical runs were performed with the scatter cone in place to allow a 
scatter/ background correction. Each irradiation was run For as long as 
possible, but time was ultimately constrained by facility availability. 
Two measurements were made per energy with the long counter: firstly 
a measurement of the total neutron field hitting the detector both directly from 
the source and from scatter off the equipment and the room, and secondly a 
shadow cone measurement was performed to determine the scatter 
component of the first measurement. Both of these measurements were made 
with the long counter in the 0 position with respect to the proton beam. 
Following the long counter calibration measurements, the long counter was 
replaced with the scintillator.  
Analysis swiftly showed that the threshold settings above 40 yielded a 
low-energy cut-off above 1 MeV (see Figure 56) and data presented 
henceforth were measured with the threshold settings at 40. 
The source parameters for the three calibrated irradiations are shown 
in  Table 3.  The uncertainties applicable to the calibrated neutron fluence 
provided are shown in Table 4; these values have been provided by NPL staff 
and are standard counting uncertainties. The final table entry shows the total 
uncertainty multiplied by a reflective of a two standard deviation confidence 
interval (i.e. 95%).
Table 3: Parameters for the mono-energetic neutron runs using the Van de 
Graaf accelerator. 
Reaction T(p,n) T(p,n) T(p,n) 
Incident particle 
energy Ep / keV 
1573.53.0 1712.83.0 1854.43.0 
Target thickness / 
11517 10916 10315 
Mean neutron 
energy En() / keV 
700.13.4 850.13.2 999.93.2 
Full width of 
Neutron energy 
distribution 
12218 11317 10617 
En(+5) / keV 697.03.4 8463.2 996.13.2 
En(+10) / keV 687.83.4 836.23.2 984.63.2 
Table 4: Uncertainties associated with the calibrated fluence irradiations. 
Calculations performed by NPL staff and provided in Instrument certificate of 
calibration. 
Uncertainty 
component 
Neutron Energy  
0.7MeV 0.85MeV 1MeV 
Statistical uncertainty 
associated with the 
neutron fluence rate 
determination 
0.6% 0.4% 0.6% 
Long counter dead-
time correction 
0.1% 0.1% 0.1% 
In-scatter correction 
factor when measuring 
fluence rate 
0.3% 0.3% 0.3% 
Positioning of long 
counter 
0.2% 0.2% 0.2% 
Air out-scatter when 
measuring fluence rate  
0.1% 0.1% 0.1% 
Efficiency and effective 
centre of long counter 
2.0% 2.0% 2.0% 
Long counter long term 
stability 
0.8% 0.8% 0.8% 
Variation of neutron 
fluence rate with 
incident beam current 
during irradiations 
3.7% 0.9% 1.0% 
Instrument to target 
distance 
0.3% 0.3% 0.3% 
Standard uncertainty 
in the fluence rate at 
the instrument 
reference position 
4.3% 2.4% 2.5% 
Expanded 
uncertainty in fluence 
8.7% 4.8% 5.0% 
3.3.4 Bare fission source measurements 
3.3.4.1 NPL bare 252Cf source 
The first opportunity to test the system on a bare fission source was upon a 
source located at NPL. Accordingly, measurement using the source was made 
in the low scatter facility adjacent to the accelerator. 
 The detectors were set up on clamp stands in a similar arrangement to 
that behind the Lancaster source. The same distance between the neutron 
detector and the source was used of 97 cm, with the gamma trigger detector 
placed close by but not obscuring the neutron detector at a distance limited by 
the stand arrangement available in the low scatter facility. The detector 
arrangement can be seen in Figure 57. 
As with previous measurements, the negative high voltage and PSD 
parameters were set up prior to the measurement being taken. The threshold 
settings for this measurement were set at 100 au (arbitrary units).  An 
overnight exposure to the 252Cf source was taken collecting a total of 14.5 hrs 
worth of data. 
Figure 57:Plan view of the detector- source 
arrangement for the NPL 252Cf measurement 
(not to scale). 
3.3.4.2 244Cm bare source 
Following the measurements at NPL, the TOF system was used to 
measure the spectrum of a bare 244Cm fission source. The aim of this 
measurement was to have to use the system to measure the under-reported 
244Cm spectrum and also to investigate the potential for the TOF setup to 
differentiate between the neutron spectra of fission nuclides. These 
measurements were done at Pajarito Scientific Corporation (PSC), in Santa 
Fe, New Mexico.  
As for the previous TOF measurements, two EJ-309 detectors were 
used, coupled to the Hybrid Instruments MFA running in coincidence mode. 
The detectors were arranged as in Figure 58, optimised for -n coincidences 
with the second detector in a position 
so that it was not in any part eclipsed 
by the first detector. The first detector 
was placed in close proximity to the 
source in order to maximise the 
number of gamma-ray detections. 
The second detector was placed 
approximately 1 m away to avoid 
sacrificing energy resolution and to 
mirror previous geometry 
arrangements. 
The 244Cm source was set up 
alongside the detectors on a table-
top in a large workshop area. The 
MFA and power supply were situated 
Figure 58: Plan view of the detector 
setup for 244Cm measurement in 
PSC, Santa Fe, NM arranged to be 
the same as previous NPL 
measurements. (not to scale)  
on a shelf, approximately 2 m away. Figure 59 shows the test area set up for 
the 244Cm measurements. 
The detectors were operated for some time to stabilise before the 
measurements started. The negative high voltage and PSD parameters were 
set up before each set of measurements were taken to match those used in 
the previous measurements at NPL. As the efficiency measurements at NPL 
had found that the previous threshold settings of 100 au did not utilise the full 
intrinsic efficiency of the EJ-309 scintillant, the threshold was set to 40 au to 
enable the full sensitivity of the system and reflect the lessons learned during 
detector characterisation. 
The relatively low activity of the 244Cm source necessitated a long 
irradiation time relative to earlier measurements. To gain the best possible 
statistics in the time available, the irradiation was left for 83 hrs which was 
limited by source facility availability.  
3.3.4.3 244Cm and 252Cf small scale TOF comparison  
Also available for use at PSC was a small 252Cf source. It was originally 
envisioned that this would provide the means to test the set-up at PSC with 
both nuclides. The source was fairly old however and the short half-life of 252Cf 
Figure 59: Photograph of the detector setup at PSC. The encapsulated 
244Cm source can be seen in the bottom centre of the photograph. 
meant that it had decayed down to a fairly weak output. Whilst still usable as a 
measurable source of fission neutrons, the low geometric efficiency of the full 
1 m detector setup rendered the measurement impractical in the time 
available. Instead, a smaller-scale TOF arrangement was set up, with the 
detectors considerably closer. Both 252Cf and 244Cm were measured in this 
way. As the detectors were now considerably closer there was concern that 
detector scatter would produce an appreciable component of the 
measurement. To evaluate this scatter contribution a second set of 
measurements with a slab of polythene between the detectors was made. 
This was an attempt to cut down detector cross scatter and isolate -n events. 
Figure 60 shows the arrangement of the detectors, source and polythene slab. 
Figure 60: Photograph of detectors arranged in close in TOF 
configuration. The polythene slab is visible between the 
detectors. Identical measurements were taken with each 
source and both with and without the slab. Photograph taken 
without source in place 
3.3.5 Study of sensitivity of TOF set-up to variables 
A series of measurements were made to investigate the dependence of 
the system on various parameters using the Lancaster 252Cf source. The 
effects of three variables were to be investigated:  
 The PSD settings applied to the detectors 
 Voltage applied to the detectors 
 Shielding on the detectors. 
Motivation for this set of measurements was two-fold: Firstly, the effect of 
detector voltage on the TOF spectrum had not been investigated. Secondly, 
an ongoing concern when interpreting the results has been the operation of 
the PSD algorithm. As there is considerable overlap between neutrons and 
gamma rays at low energy, the PSD settings had been set up to provide 
maximum efficiency, at the expense of accuracy. The rationale behind this has 
been that the incorrectly classified events would be removed by nature of their 
TOF signature.  
Whilst misidentified gamma rays in detector 2 are easily filtered by their 
arrival time, misidentified neutrons in the first detector would have a more 
subtle effect. It was thought that if a neutron was identified in detector 1 as a 
gamma ray, the time it had taken to arrive would be non-negligible, resulting in 
an apparently faster flight time for the second neutron detected in detector 2.  
In order to investigate this, polyethylene shielding was used in front of the 
gamma detector to decrease the number of neutron triggers, and lead was 
also placed in front of detector 2. 
The 252Cf source to be used was the same water-stored source used 
earlier in this research based at Lancaster. The detector arrangement was 
near identical to that of previous measurements, although this time space was 
left for the inclusion of PE shielding in front of detector 1. As detector 2 
remained in the same place, the movement of detector 1 by 5 cm should have 
no effect on the spectral shape but would however reduce the efficiency by a 
marginal amount. This is due to the reduction of gamma trigger detections as 
a result of the reduced geometric efficiency.  
   Irradiations were carried out with a range of voltage, PSD and shielding 
combinations. The voltage of both detectors was varied together by the same 
amount and measurements were made at a high-, mid- and low-voltage 
combinations. In previous measurements, the PSD thresholds had been set to 
exclude as few of the desired particles from each detector, i.e., gamma rays in 
detector 1 and neutrons in detector 2 and relying on the arrival time of miss-
identified particles to exclude themselves. This approach had appeared to 
work well for miss-identified gamma rays in detector 2, as they would arrive in 
the first two bins and be excluded. Neutrons being mistaken for gamma rays 
in detector 1, however, have a more subtle effect, and to gain insight into their 
effect a shielded measurement was made, using 5 cm of PE to reduce the 
number of neutrons arriving at the trigger detector. A lead shield was also 
placed in front of detector 2 to reduce gamma counts, but as described above, 
this was not expected to have much effect on the TOF distribution as gamma 
rays can be excluded by nature of their arrival time. Figure 62 shows the 
Figure 61: Detectors sited in the irradiation area to the rear 
of the 252Cf tank in preparation for parameter study 
measurements. 
detectors in a shielded configuration in the irradiation zone of the Lancaster 
252Cf neutron source. 
Figure 62: Detectors arranged for measurement of 
Lancaster source with PE and lead shielding 
4 RESULTS 
Chapter 3 described the equipment and experimental research carried out 
in the course of this research. The chapter following presents the results of 
these experiments, starting with early preliminary measurements exploring the 
operation of the spectroscopy system, and moving on through the various 
measurements made to characterise and apply the system. 
4.1 LANCASTER UNIVERSITY 252CF TIME-OF-FLIGHT MEASUREMENTS  
The first set of measurements were carried out with the Lancaster 252Cf 
source, as described in 3.3.1. Counts were recorded in list mode on the data 
logging PC networked via Ethernet to the MFA. Analysis of the data shows the 
following numbers of the various combinations of coincident events that 
happened within the 240 ns coincidence window. 
As can be seen, the predominant registered event type are gamma-gamma 
coincidences. Neutron-neutron, gamma-neutron and neutron-gamma events 
are all also registered.  
Figure 64 shows the results of applying particle discrimination logic to 
the individual events of the time separation distribution. Top left in the figure 
Figure 63:Bar chart showing numbers of counts of each 
coincidence pair. 
shows the total events irrespective of particle classification as shown above. 
Top right is filtered to only contain n-n events. The bottom left and right plots 
show -n and - respectively. 
Figure 64: Time of flight spectra for the different particle criteria in the first set of 
Lancaster measurements. Top left shows all detected events, top right shows 
neutron-neutron events, bottom left shows gamma-neutron and bottom right 
shows gamma-gamma events. 
Figure 65 shows the neutron energy spectra derived from the TOF data 
collected in the first round of Lancaster measurements. Shown in the figure is 
the spectrum populated from -n events (top) and n-n events (bottom.) The 
Watt spectrum for 252Cf is included for reference on each sub-pot. Standard 
counting uncertainties are shown on the plot, 
The general spectrum shape can be obtained with somewhat larger 
uncertainties in considerably less time than the above measurements. Figure 
66 shows the results of a 2 hour measurement taken of the same californium 
source. 
The low energy peaks visible in the low count spectrum represent background 
counts are produced by statistical fluctuations in the background counts as the 
bin width correction exaggerates the magnitude of the low energy bins.  
Figure 66: The 252Cf neutron energy spectrum produced from 
a 2hr long measurement. 
Figure 65:The TOF data converted to neutron energy spectra. The top plot shows the 
spectrum plotted from just -n events; bottom plot consists of n-n events. The black smooth 
curve in both plots depicts the 252Cf Watt spectrum from [24]. 
4.2 NPL LOW-ENERGY RESPONSE MEASUREMENT 
The following section presents the results of the low-energy detector efficiency 
measurements performed at NPL. The experimental procedure used to 
produce the data is described in section 3.3.3. 
As explained previously, calibrated fluence runs were performed at 
three neutron energies at the presumed lower end of the sensitive region of 
the detector: 700, 850 and 1000 keV. Counts were recorded at three different 
threshold settings (100, 75, 40 arbitrary units) but examination of the data 
indicated that the two higher settings (100 and 75Au) resulted in a low-energy 
cut-off higher than 1 MeV. The following results therefore all represent the 
lower threshold of 40.   
The counts collected during the irradiations are shown in Table 5. 
Uncertainties on the count data represent standard  uncertainties. The 
percentage uncertainty of the integrated fluence values is the sum of various 
uncertainties in the calibration process and is expanded on in Table 4 (page 
93). The uncertainties in the fluence data are multiplied by a coverage factor 
of k=2 to represent two standard deviations, or a confidence interval of 95%. 
Figure 67 shows heat-plots of the mixed /n field produced in the irradiations. 
The neutron counts were extracted from these scatter data.  
Table 5: Count data collected during the calibrated fluence runs alongside the 
integrated fluence provided to the detector. Uncertainties on count data are 
standard one standard deviation uncertainties. 
Incident 
neutron 
energy 
MeV-1 
Counts Integrated 
Fluence 
Counts with 
shadow 
Integrated 
fluence 
with cone 
Percentage 
uncertainty 
integrated 
fluences 
0.7 382662 5.0x105 16713 1.09x105 8.7 
0.85 794589 1.8x105 53523 1.68x105 4.8 
1 28224168 1.16x105 79228 7.94x104 5 
Figure 67:Heatplots of the mono-energetic 
irradiations showing the diminishing neutron 
signal. 
Figure 68 shows a comparison of the counts with and without the shadow 
cone. The data in this case are in units of counts per incident neutron (on the 
detector volume) allowing the two values to be compared directly. The scatter 
contribution was found to be relatively small. This is consistent with the low 
energy of the accelerator-produced neutrons: after losing a proportion of their 
energy via a scattering interaction, it is likely that the leftover energy of the 
neutron is insufficient to be detected. The error bars in the plot show 
expanded uncertainties representing an enhanced confidence interval of 95%. 
The scatter fraction can be removed from the standard run to give a scatter- 
corrected value for the number of counts per unit neutron fluence, or the 
efficiency of the detector. Figure 69 shows the scatter corrected efficiency 
values. As in the previously presented data, the uncertainties are expanded to 
cover a 95% confidence interval. 
Figure 68: Plot showing the counts per unit neutron fluence both with and 
without the shadow cone. Error bars show expanded uncertainties 
representing a confidence interval of 95%. 
Figure 70 shows the efficiency measurements alongside data reported 
by Pino et al. [13] for low-energy threshold values of 0.1 and 0.2 MeVee. The 
Pino data  give measured EJ-309 efficiency values at energy values between 
0 and 8.5 MeV, verified by Monte Carlo calculations. The NPL measurements 
suggest that the MFA threshold value of 40 is equivalent to a point between 
0.1 and 0.2 MeVee. To relate the NPL efficiency measurements to the full 
range of energies encountered from a fission source, a fitting and interpolation 
process has been used. 
Figure 69: Plot showing the scatter- corrected efficiency values for the EJ309 
detector irradiated at NPL. 
Figure 70:Plot of the lognormal curve fitted to NPL efficiency measurements alongside 
similar lognormal curves fitted to the Pino measurements [54] 
 The curves shown in Figure 70 are generated using a lognormal 
function, as per Equation 13.  
Equation 13 
 =
  (
  
 Wherein E is the energy of the incident neutron fluence, and both  and 
 are fitting constants. This distribution is modified with an  offset to account 
for the null response at energies below 500 keV and a scaling factor.  The 
curves are fitted to the Pino data using a least square fitting algorithm to find 
the four coefficients to best describe the data. A linear interpolation calculation 
is then used to find the fitting coefficients that best fit the NPL gathered data. 
This provides an efficiency function to use across the full energy range of the 
scintillator. Figure 71 shows the effect of the detector efficiency on the Watt 
fission spectrum. In this figure, the Watt spectrum has been folded with the 
efficiency curve to show the spectrum that the scintillator should recreate, 
should neutron detection efficiency be the only factor shaping the response of 
the system.  
Figure 71: Effect of the detector response on the Watt spectrum. The 
solid curve shows the Watt distribution of neutron energies from a 
252Cf fission source. The dashed line shows the same  spectrum 
folded with the efficiency of the detector as derived in this work. Both 
curves have been normalised to a value of 1 at 3.5MeV. Watt 
parameters from [24] 
4.3 LANCASTER MEASUREMENTS: ROUND TWO 
Figure 72 shows the time distribution of coincident -n events during the 
second spectrum measurement. The neutron energy spectrum measured in 
this arrangement, was calculated from the detection time interval distribution 
as in the previous measurements and is shown in Figure 73. 
Figure 72: Time distribution of coincident -n events from the 
Lancaster 252Cf fission source measured in the second detector 
arrangement.  
Figure 73: Energy spectrum calculated from the -n coincidence time 
distribution shown in Figure 72. 
4.4 MEASUREMENT OF 252CF AND 244CM BARE FISSION SOURCES 
The TOF detector system was used to measure the neutron spectra of several 
bare sources. The following section shows the results of the comparison of the 
PFNS of two different nuclides measured with the TOF system. The 
experimental setup of these experiments is described in section 3.3.4, 
4.4.1 NPL 252Cf measurement 
The first opportunity to test the system on a bare fission source was upon a 
source located at NPL. Accordingly, measurement using the source was made 
in the low-scatter facility adjacent to the accelerator. 
 The detectors were set up on clamp stands in a similar arrangement to 
that behind the Lancaster 252Cf source. The same distance between the 
neutron detector and the source was used of 97 cm, with the gamma trigger 
detector placed close by but without covering up the neutron detector.  The 
detector arrangement can be seen in Figure 55. 
As with previous measurements the negative high voltage and PSD 
parameters were set up prior to the measurement being taken. An overnight 
exposure to the 252Cf source was taken collecting a total of 14.5 hrs worth of 
data. For the initial run, the system was set up with the high threshold of 100 
(arbitrary units). Figure 75 shows the TOF-derived PFNS at the high threshold 
setting.   
Figure 74: Comparison of energy spectrum measurements from NPL and 
Lancaster 252Cf sources. The reference Watt spectrum is shown for 
comparison. All are normalised to 1 at the same energy bin of 4.89MeV 
Figure 75:PFNS measured with the high trigger threshold on 
the NPL bare 252Cf source. 
The effect of the threshold is apparent in the spectrum as the response 
at energies below 2 MeV is very low. The high threshold was also used on the 
Lancaster measurements. Comparing the two spectra in Figure 74 shows a 
similar effect.  The Lancaster data however exhibit significantly higher 
numbers of the low-energy neutrons.  
As the source neutron spectrum should be identical for both 
measurements and the settings on the data acquisition system were the 
same, it stands to reason that the different spectrum shape must be due to the 
environment in which the measurements were taken. The softening of the 
measured neutron system can be explained by the scatter of neutrons in the 
environment around the source, particularly due to the water tank in which the 
source is stored.  
 As described in section 3.2.1, the Lancaster 252Cf neutron source is 
moved to one side of a water tank in order to expose the instrument to the 
neutron flux. Despite being at one side, there is still 20 mm of water between it 
and the instrument, providing a source of hydrogen nuclei to scatter neutrons, 
both reducing the neutron energy and providing a longer flight path. In 
addition, oxygen nuclei can scatter neutrons back from the main bulk of the 
tank producing the same effect.  
 Figure 76 shows the NPL 252Cf measurements alongside a modified 
efficiency curve. In this plot the reference spectrum has been folded with 
modified efficiency data, which has been fitted to the low energy cut off of the 
measurements with this threshold setting. As can be seen, there is little 
alteration to the fit at high energies, but the overall shape of the curve is much 
better predicted. 
Figure 76: NPL 252Cf  data plotted alongside the reference 252Cf Maxwellian 
spectrum, folded with detector efficiency curve fitted to low energy threshold of 
these measurements. 
4.4.2 244Cm source measurements 
The first true application of the system was the measurement of the 
244Cm bare fission source. Figure 77 shows the results of the measurements 
taken, with the same detector layout as at NPL.  Also plotted are reference 
Watt and Maxwellian spectra for 244Cm, folded with the detector efficiency 
curve as measured in the previous calibration measurements. This curve shall 
be referred to as the WattEFF spectrum.  The measured data are in good 
agreement with the reported reference curves above 2 MeV.  
In addition to plotting the data alongside reference curves, a least 
square fitting algorithm was used to fit the Watt and Maxwellian spectrum to 
the measured data. For the Maxwellian spectrum, the single parameter T is 
adjusted to fit the curve, in the Watt spectrum, two parameters, a and b are 
adjusted. In both processes, the curves and data were normalised to 2.9 MeV 
Figure 77: PFNS of the PSC bare 244Cm source as measured with the TOF 
system. All plots normalised to 1 at 2.9MeV. Reference spectra in black 
plotted from parameters obtained from [24] 
as in the previous figure. Figure 78 shows the curves fitted to the measured 
data. 
The fitting process gave results of T=1.336 (0.07) MeV, for the 
Maxwellian spectrum, and a=0.918 and b=1.151 for the Watt parameters. The 
fit was made using the high energy edge of the distribution, as this approach 
gave the best fit. As the detector threshold is higher than the energy of the 
neutrons being measured, the low energy edge of the spectrum is dictated by 
the threshold rather than the source spectrum. 
The uncertainties on the fit were determined via a Monte Carlo 
procedure. Pseudo datasets sampled normally around the measured data 
were used to determine a large number of fits. The results of these fits were 
binned allowing the distribution of possible fits given the uncertainties to be 
Figure 78:Watt and Maxwellian spectra fitted to the measured data. Watt fit 
obscured by that of the Maxwellian. Points used in the fit marked with circles. 
determined. A gaussian distribution fitted to this data gave the standard 
deviation of the Maxwellian fits, which is quoted here as the uncertainty. 
4.4.3 Comparison of 252Cf and 244Cm in a small-scale TOF setup 
In addition to the recreation of the NPL setup, a small-scale TOF 
measurement layout was constructed at PSC. The improved geometric 
efficiency of the smaller setup allowed a small 252Cf source to be measured as 
well as the curium source. The TOF distributions measured for the two 
sources are shown in Figure 79. 
In both TOF distributions the gamma peak in the first bin can be 
observed. This feature is present despite the fact that PSD is used to filter 
events and reflects the fact that the PSD process is imperfect, particularly at 
low energies. As the PSD parameters were set to over-classify neutrons in the 
second detector in order to maximise counts, this peak is particularly 
prominent. 
 Figure 80 shows the energy spectra derived from the TOF data. The 
plot shows both nuclides measured, both with and without a PE scatter-guard 
between the detectors. The energy conversion calculations were conducted 
using the separation between the source and the centre of the second 
Figure 79: TOF distributions for the small separation TOF measurements. The left-hand plot 
shows the data collected from the 252Cf source; the right-hand plot shows 244Cm data. Note the 
logarithmic count axis. 
detector. As in previous treatments of the data, the first two bins of the TOF 
spectrum were discarded to remove the gamma spike. 
Uncertainties on the counts around the peak preclude a confident 
assessment of the relative differences between the spectra, particularly in 
terms of discriminating between sources on the basis of locating the peak. 
Differences in the efficiency-corrected Watt spectra in that area do suggest 
however that, with better counting statistics, the two sources may be 
discerned from one another on the basis of peak position.  
 The presence of the PE-scatter guard appears to have a small 
influence on the observed spectrum, suggesting that misidentified neutrons 
Figure 80: Energy spectrum for 252Cf and 244Cm derived from TOF data All datasets 
normalised to 1 at the peak. 
from detector 1 scattering into detector 2 have little effect on the 
measurements.  However, poorer statistics in the californium measurements 
around the peak make identifying a trend difficult. At higher neutron energies, 
the distribution of events with the PE scatter-guard does show separation from 
the measurement taken without PE. 
The largest deviation from the standard 252Cf watt spectrum is in the 
final two bins, with considerable overestimation of the high-energy end of the 
spectrum. Most notable, however, is the separation between the two nuclides, 
with the 252Cf generating a considerably greater discrepancy. One potential 
explanation for this effect is the greater multiplicity of 252Cf relative to 244Cm 
[24]. Greater numbers of higher-order groups of neutrons would increase the 
probability of double-neutron detections being misidentified as single, higher-
energy neutrons. 
 To investigate this effect further, the same setup was recreated in 
Lancaster using the 252Cf. This arrangement was measured with PE and lead 
shielding in front of detector 1 and detector 2, respectively. The effect of the 
PE was first investigated via the scatter-data gathered by the PSD algorithm 
on the MFA shown in Figure 82 and Figure 81. The pulse height data for these 
plots were collected over two 10-minute runs. 
Figure 82:Heat map showing areas of difference between measurements with 
and without PE shielding. Areas in blue show where counts have been 
subtracted by the PE shielding.  
Figure 81: Heatmap showing the ratio of counts made with and without 
PE shielding in front of the detector. 
Second Parameter 
Second Parameter 
As can be seen in Figure 82, the area on which the PE shielding has 
the greatest absolute effect is with the low-energy neutrons. Computing the 
ratio of counts with shielding to those made without, however, shows the 
change is approximately even across the neutron area of the scatterplot. 
Some gamma rays are also removed at low energy. The average ratio of 
shielded to non-shielded measurements is 0.35, suggesting the neutron 
fluence on the detector is reduced by two thirds. Figure 83 shows the TOF 
data gathered with and without the shielding. As can be seen, the high-energy 
bins are reduced by a marginal amount, potentially reflecting the reduction in 
multiplet neutron detections as described previously. The effect is not however 
strong enough to completely explain the overcounting in higher bins. 
Figure 83: Small separation TOF measurements made at the Lancaster 
source with various shielding materials on the detectors. 
4.5 PARAMETER STUDY ON TOF SYSTEM 
Several experiments were performed in order to investigate the response 
of the TOF system to the Lancaster water-stored 252Cf source. The 
experimental setup is described in section 3.3.5. 
The first set of measurements were taken with varying detector negative 
high voltage. The effect on the spectrum is shown in Figure 84.  
As can be seen, varying the voltage applied to the photomultiplier elicits 
a similar response to changing the threshold values, moving the low-energy 
cut-off lower as voltage increases. The high-energy response appears to be 
consistent between voltages within statistical variance.  
Figure 84: The effect of varying detector negative high voltage on the measured 
TOF spectrum. 
 The results for the measurements made with shielding and PSD 
alterations are shown in Figure 85 and Figure 86. As can be seen in the first 
figure, the primary effect is a lowering of the high-energy response.  
The results of measurements with different PSD settings are shown in Figure 
86. In this dataset, the high-energy responses are consistent within statistical 
variation. There is a noticeably lower response at the low-energy edge of the 
spectrum. 
Figure 85:Comparison of results of measurements with shielding over the detectors 
and without. Plot of the ratio of the two measurements are shown in the smaller 
plot below. Both plots normalised to unity at 3.84. 
Figure 86: Comparison of results of measurement with varying PSD settings, ratio of 
the two plotted on subplot underneath. 
5 DISCUSSION 
As explained in the introduction to this thesis, this research was instigated 
with the goal of investigating the use of neutron time of flight measurement in 
a security context. Specifically, the aims of the research were to:  
 Miniaturise the hardware associated with performing associated 
particle TOF spectroscopy. 
 Perform TOF spectroscopy in real time. 
 Measure the prompt fission neutron energy spectrum of 244Cm 
and 252Cf.  
 Evaluate the ability of the system to discriminate or identify the 
nuclide under observation. 
In the following section the findings of this research and the extent to which 
these aims have been accomplished will be discussed. 
5.1 INITIAL FINDINGS AND VERIFICATION OF THE TOF SPECTROMETER  
In section 4.1 (page 101) the first measurements of the Lancaster source 
using the modified Hybrid systems MFA were presented. These initial 
measurements verify the operation of the system and the functioning of the 
coincidence pairing.   
The system functions as expected, with a flat rate of background count, 
a sharp gamma peak, and a distribution of correlated neutron events. As can 
be seen in these first measurements, the shape of the measured spectrum 
agrees with the shape of the known Watt spectrum for 252Cf at high energies, 
once the adjustments for energy bin width and background counts have been 
made. The discrepancies between the measured results and the watt 
spectrum at this stage are generally attributed to the effect of detector 
efficiency on  the operation of the system. 
Of particular interest with these measurements is the ability to record 
coincident events of multiple particle scenarios. As was observed by summing 
the different event combinations, the predominant event type was - 
coincidences reflecting the higher gamma multiplicity value in fission, relative 
to the neutron multiplicity. The counts of n-n, -n and n- coincidences are 
similar, but with a slight preference for n-n events. It is not known definitively 
why there is an equal or greater number of n-n events to either n- or -n , 
since  multiplicities should increase the probability of the latter two scenarios, 
but it is possibly because the n-n category primarily contains neutron scatter 
events rather than multiplets of coincident particles.  
When comparing the energy spectra computed from the TOF 
distributions of n-n and -n coincidences, shown in Figure 65 (page 104), it 
can be seen that the shape of each spectrum is in agreement with the Watt 
spectrum above 2.5 MeV. The data collected from n-n coincidences show a 
noticeably higher number of counts in the upper bins, representing neutrons 
above 5 MeV, than would be expected from the Watt distribution when it is 
normalised across the spectrum. Again, it is not known definitively why this is, 
but it is speculated that the mechanism of detection (neutron scatter between 
the detectors) favours high energy neutrons. This can be explained via the 
kinematics of the scatter reaction; the detectors are placed with an associated 
scatter angle of 45, which equates to an energy loss of half the neutrons 
initial energy within a scatter event (assuming scatter off a proton in the 
scintillant.)  The requirement for a scatter before the final detection lowers the 
neutrons energy, making it more likely that it will not reach the low energy cut 
off in the second detector, giving a lower detection efficiency for low energy 
neutrons. 
The primary reason for focusing on -n coincidences in subsequent 
measurements is the reduced uncertainty associated with the coincidence 
mechanism. As shown in Figure 40, (page 67) the uncertainty in the energy 
domain regarding where the neutron is detected within the scintillator volume 
must be accounted for twice in a neutron scatter event, along with the 
uncertainty on the angle that the neutron will have scattered through. 
Furthermore, fission-correlated neutrons detected in coincidence cannot be 
removed from those consisting of neutron scatter using the PSD function of 
the MFA which will further complicate the spectrum. These geometric 
uncertainties are reduced when using -n events, as there is only one neutron 
detection, and the use of PSD filtering of particles greatly reduces the number 
of fission-correlated neutrons included in the spectrum. Reduced uncertainty 
is an advantage when attempting to compare very similar spectra, such as 
those produced by fissioning nuclides. 
The ability to measure n-n events is not however completely redundant. 
The use of associated particle TOF methods have been reported using start 
signalling based on gamma rays produced at the moment of (,n) reactions in 
AmBe sources. [116] [126] The energetics of the 9Be(,n) reaction mean that 
40% of the neutrons produced are not produced with a correlated gamma ray. 
This leads to an incomplete fast neutron spectrum, with neutrons above 
approximately 7 MeV missing. Having the option to measure n-n scatter 
events and accounting for the energy lost in the scatter event would potentially 
allow the full spectrum to be measured, giving the technique utility in 
measuring (,n) spectra, or those without  associated gamma rays. Indeed, 
examining the capabilities of n-n mode would make for valuable further work. 
5.2 NPL BARE 252CF SOURCE MEASUREMENTS 
Section 4.4.1 (page 113) presented the results of the measurement of a bare 
252Cf source, taken at NPL. The differences between the spectra taken from 
bare and water stored sources shall be discussed in the following section 
(5.6.1.1). 
 The bare 252Cf source measurement was made with the threshold 
settings on the MFA still at 100, and so exhibits a much higher low energy cut 
off than that would be expected from the efficiency of the scintillator. As in the 
Lancaster measurements however, this appears to primarily affect the low 
energy end of the spectrum. As the efficiency curve of EJ-309 peaks close to 
the low energy cut off, and then drops very linearly and slowly, the shape 
above the low energy cut off is preserved relatively well, with little 
improvement to the agreement between the curve and the data. 
 Adjusting the fit of the interpolation of the efficiency curve to match the 
low energy threshold of the measured californium data however renders a 
good fit to the data across the full energy range of measurements, as shown 
in Figure 76 (page 116). Whilst there is good agreement across most of the 
measured data, it appears that the high energy bins of the spectrum are 
somewhat higher than expected. This finding is similar to the findings of 
Becchetti [118]  and Blain [119], who have also measured the 252Cf spectrum 
via gamma tagged, and both exhibit counts greater than predicted in the 
energy bins above 5 MeV. 
 An attempt was made to fit Watt and Maxwellian spectra using a least 
squares fitting procedure, but as the primary shaping factor of these fits is the 
average neutron energy, and this part of the spectrum falls below the low 
energy cut off of the detector system, the fitting procedure would not fit to any 
parameters that were reasonable considering the a priori knowledge of the 
source. Additionally, the high energy bins, which are believed to be 
overestimated, form a large enough proportion of the data that they can affect 
the fit considerably. As stated above however, the measurements show good 
agreement with the reference spectrum for 252Cf when plotted and normalised 
together.  
5.3 CURIUM MEASUREMENTS 
There are few examples of curium fission spectra in the literature. This 
stands in stark contrast with that of 252Cf, which, as a commonly used neutron 
source, has been studied in depth, mainly due to its abundance as a neutron 
source and its use as a reference spectrum. 
  In this research the PFNS of  244Cm was deterministically measured 
using a pair of EJ-309 liquid scintillators in a prompt gamma triggered TOF 
mode. A far greater proportion of the high energy edge of the spectrum, was 
measured for 244Cm compared to 252Cf, allowing a Maxwellian fit to be made.   
The measured data were fitted to a Maxwellian spectrum with a parameter T, 
of 1.33 (0.07) MeV and the Watt spectrum with parameters of a=0.918 and 
b=1.151.  This is in agreement with previous measurements, taken using 
various experimental setups. 
The 244Cm spectra that can be found in the literature are fairly dated. 
Three references to curium measurements made in the late 60s-early 70s 
were made in the work of Aleksandrova et al [127], and a review of nuclear 
data undertaken in 1996 again references these works and made the case for 
these values to be remeasured with modern techniques. Also decried in the 
1996 review was the lack of detail in earlier work on the exact nature of the 
measurements, and how and to what extent uncertainties in the data were 
quantified. [128] 
The most recent measurements of the 244Cm spectrum appear to be 
those of Batenkov et al. [129] made in 1997. These measurements were 
made with a foil deposited source housed in an ionisation chamber fission 
detector. Several neutron detectors were used which allowed a greater energy 
range to be studied than in this research. Further to measured values, 
unreferenced and somewhat contradictory mentions of Maxwellian and Watt 
parameters have been found, primarily in manuals to modelling applications. It 
is believed that these values are obtained by modelling the spectrum as a 
function of fission fragment distributions, and the measured neutron 
multiplicity. [24] [130] [6] 
An additional aspect of the older 244Cm data is that it is generally 
expressed in terms of the single parameter of the  Maxwellian distribution. 
Table 6 shows the results of various legacy measurements of the 244Cm 
spectrum, along with that made in this research. 
Table 6: Maxwellian and Watt distributions from various sources. 
Energy 
range 
MeV-1 
Maxwell parameter T 
Method of 
measurement 
Reference Date 
15MeV 
1.33  0.07  triggered 
This work 2019 
0.3-7 1.37  0.03 TOF   [127] 
(Belov) 
0.5-6 1.455 0.062 
(extrapolated from average 
energy) 
spectrometer 
[127] Herold 1972 
0.5-6 1.38  0.03 TOF [131] 
Zamyatnin 
2-14 1.33  0.03 Stilbene 
scintillator  
[127] 
Aleksandrov 
- 1.5 - [6] 1981 
0.1 -15 1.37  0.02 Fission 
chamber TOF 
[129] 1997 
 Watt Parameters  
Number 
graph 
- 1 0.906 
3.720 - [24] 2007 
- 2 1.108 3.848 - [130] 2003 
15MeV 
1.33  
triggered 
Figure 87 shows Watt and Maxwellian spectra plotted using the parameters 
listed in Table 6. This research supports a Maxwellian parameter of 1.33, 
which corroborates that measured by Aleksandrov [127], but within 
uncertainties the result is consistent with the findings of Batenkov [129] in the 
most recent (1996) measurements. 
 A limitation of the measurements made in this research is the low 
counting statistics and subsequent uncertainty associated with the parameter 
found by the Maxwellian fit. A Monte-Carlo uncertainty analysis procedure 
suggests uncertainties of 0.07 , which are higher than those reported in the 
older measurements listed in Table 6, although it should be noted that the 
nature of the reported uncertainties and their reliability has been questioned in 
several review sources. The source of the increased uncertainties in these 
measurements is mainly due to counting statistics, as counting time was 
limited by source availability rather than data requirements. An additional 
factor is the resolution of the measurements, 4ns timing resolution in this 
research in comparison with around 1ns reported in the literature. The 
operation of the FPGA is the limiting factor on the timing resolution, governed 
by the clock cycle (4ns). This resolution limit reduces the number of data 
Figure 87: Watt and Maxwellian spectra for 244Cm plotted using parameters 
listed in Table 6 
available, particularly at the high energy end of the spectrum. Subsequent 
measurements with a stronger source or for longer period would reduce these 
uncertainties. Additionally, there is the geometric uncertainties associated with 
the detector size, the detectors used in this research had dimensions of 10cm, 
those used by Batenkov to obtain TOF measurements report a geometric 
uncertainty of 5mm. 
Despite these limitations, the  uncertainties are small enough that the 
Maxwellian parameter can be measured with a resolution comparable to the 
differences between nuclides. Most importantly in a source discrimination 
context, this result suggests that the fission spectrum can be measured to a 
precision that allows discrimination between 244Cm and 252Cf. The generally 
accepted Maxwellian parameter for 252Cf , 1.42, renders a harder spectrum 
than that of 244Cm. This is reflected in the measurements of 252Cf sources 
made during this research; whilst the small range of energies that the spectra 
are a measured over precludes the fitting of fission curves, the californium 
measurements in all cases suggest a measurably harder spectrum than that 
of curium. Figure 88 shows the measurements of 252Cf and 244Cm taken at 
NPL (section 4.4.1, page 113) and  PSC (section 4.4.2, page 117) on the 
same axis, alongside Maxwellian spectra plotted using the parameters 
reported by Aleksandrov, folded with the detector efficiency for the 
measurements made in this work. All data is normalised to 1 in the first bin. 
 This compares well with the measurements made by Aleksandrov, who 
made measurements of 252Cf, 244Cm, and 240Pu under identical conditions, 
using pulse height data from a variety of detectors. This is a particularly 
encouraging result, as being able to discriminate 240Pu from 244Cm or 252Cf is a 
useful asset from a security context. The Maxwellian spectra determined by 
the measurements  of Aleksandrova are plotted on Figure 89. 
Figure 88: Comparison of 252Cf and 244Cm data. Normalised to area under the 
curve. 
5.4 SIMULTANEOUS 244CM AND 252CF MEASUREMENTS 
Section 4.4.3 (page 119) shows the results of the small separation TOF 
measurements of  252Cf and 244Cm taken under identical conditions. As can be 
seen in the measurements there is significant separation between the two 
nuclides in the high energy region of the spectrum. At the peak of the spectra 
the two datasets are indistinguishable within uncertainties, unfortunately the 
low activity of the two sources prevented the collection of enough counts to 
adequately  show any separation around the peak. 
The counts at the high energy end of the spectrum were higher than 
expected. As explained in the results section, it was thought that this could 
have been a manifestation of the multiplicity of the two nuclides. Subsequent 
measurements with polyethylene however have suggested that this is not the 
sole reason for this result.  
Figure 89:Maxwellian spectra using parameters measured by Aleksandrova et 
al [127]. Plotted are spectra for 252Cf (1.42), 244Cm (1.33), 240Pu (1.26).  
It is not entirely clear why there is such a strong signal from the high 
energy end of the spectrum. It does however appear to affect both of the 
nuclides under investigation. It is possible there is an unforeseen component 
of the efficiency of the overall system which favours the detection of high 
energy neutrons, such as a correlation between the gamma energy and that of 
high energy prompt neutrons. Alternatively, this could be a systematic error 
born of the assumption that prompt neutrons and prompt gamma rays are 
produced at exactly the same moment. The majority of investigations into 
prompt gamma rays have focused on those emitted within 10ns of fission, 
although there is evidence that some take longer to materialise. [132] At short 
flight times, even small delays in the gamma emission times would lead to an 
overestimation of the neutron energy, resulting in overpopulation of the high 
energy bins.  This speculation however cannot be confirmed by the 
measurements made here and would need to be developed via further 
research.  
There remains however a separation in the spectra measured from the 
two nuclides, supporting the hypothesis that the 252Cf spectrum is measurably 
harder than that of 244Cm, when measured via a TOF approach [127]. 
5.5 NPL EFFICIENCY MEASUREMENTS 
Section 4.2 (page  105) shows the results of the efficiency 
measurements on the detector system. The primary motivation for this work 
was the need to understand the system response to low energy neutrons. 
 Few detector characterisations reported in the literature are 
accompanied by efficiency data. Response measurements are typically used 
to determine the light output curve and detector resolution functions of a 
detector, with the efficiency of the detector accounted for during subsequent 
modelling. This focus on the light output is driven by the requirement of pulse 
height spectrum unfolding applications, as described in the background 
section on page 29. Standalone efficiency data are seldom reported, this is 
partially due to the fact that both the low energy cut off and absolute efficiency 
of a detector have a strong dependence on the threshold settings of the data 
acquisition hardware, and partially because the effect of efficiency is 
accounted for during detector modelling, without specific input from the user. 
Where efficiency values are reported, it is usually as part of a detector 
characterisation utilising TOF methods, most recently reflected in the work of 
Pino [13] and Kornilov [52].   
 Knowledge of the detector efficiency and the low energy cut off is vital 
when interpreting the data provided by TOF systems, as can be seen in the 
early results presented in this thesis, where the efficiency curves must be 
accounted for before the measurements will fit the reference spectra, 
particularly at the lower energy regions. The Pino data mentioned above 
incorporates measured data, measured using a TOF setup similar to that used 
in this research, compared with modelled results produced by MCNPX and 
GEANT4 and was found to be adequate for use in this work. Fitting the Pino 
efficiency curves to the low energy threshold measurements gives an 
efficiency curve which can be used with this TOF setup. Performing the low 
energy measurements was also valuable in verifying the low energy cut off 
associated with the EJ-309 scintillant, as the Pino data reports uncertainties of 
around 5%, and at low threshold settings measurements do not cover the 
whole energy range over which the scintillator is sensitive, with the point of the 
response cut off interpolated via modelling.  
The results of the low energy cut off measurements were somewhat 
surprising, as it was expected that the efficiency response would drop linearly 
with decreasing energy. If this were the case, then based on the 
measurements at 1 and 0.85 MeV, the final 0.7 MeV measurement should 
have been below the cut off.  The presence of neutrons in this measurement 
was somewhat unexpected. Examination of the modelled efficiency curves at 
higher thresholds however indicated the presence of this effect. Furthermore, 
comparing with other modelled data (from the TOF experiments described by 
Becchetti [118] ,albeit EJ-200, a plastic scintillator, but still based on proton 
recoil) exhibits the same feature, suggesting that it is physical component of 
the efficiency spectrum.  
The fitting of the efficiency data to the lognormal curve as shown in 
Figure 70, provided a convenient method of using the Pino data in this 
research. The use of a curve as shown here was also an effective way of 
applying the data to a continuous curve such as the Watt spectrum, allowing it 
to maintain its shape without distortion produced by interpolation of modelled 
or measured point data. 
Folding the efficiency into the reference data for comparison with the 
measured data has proved a good way of comparing the measurements with 
the expected Watt spectrum. The technique is inspired by the work of 
Becchetti et al [118] . It is preferable to directly correcting the measurements 
for efficiency as it avoids producing unphysically high counts where the 
efficiency gets close to zero and simplifies the error propagation process. 
5.5.1 Absolute system efficiency 
Until now, only the detection efficiency of a single detector has been 
considered. By the nature of the detection mechanism, i.e. a gamma ray must 
be detected in coincidence with a neutron, the absolute detection efficiency of 
the system will be a convolution of the detector efficiencies with respect to 
energy for both gamma rays and neutrons. Pino has also reported values for 
the gamma efficiency alongside the measurements for neutron detection 
efficiency. Compared to the response for neutrons, the gamma efficiency is 
relatively flat at the energies encountered from fission [54]. 
This research has not attempted to establish the overall efficiency of the 
system, rather it has relied on the fact that as the energy spectrum of prompt 
fission gamma rays is stochastic with respect to neutron energy [133], The 
shape of the measured spectrum remains dependent only on the neutron 
efficiency curves, and is not dependent on the gamma ray efficiency. As future 
work however, establishing the gamma ray efficiency and the geometric 
efficiency of the system could prove a means of measuring the rate of fission, 
independently of the overall radioactivity of the source. 
5.6 PARAMETER STUDY 
Both the effect of the surroundings of the source and the parameters 
used to setup the equipment has a direct bearing on the measurements 
obtained.  This aspect of performing TOF measurements has not been 
reported in the literature but has been briefly investigated during this research 
using the Lancaster californium source. 
5.6.1.1 Effect of the water tank and scatter 
The experiments performed using the Lancaster source suggest that 
surroundings of the source and the water-tank has a strong influence on the 
measured spectrum. As can be seen in direct comparison with the NPL bare 
californium, source shown in Figure 74 (page 114), the low energy end of the 
spectrum is extended to below the threshold of the detector, and the high 
energy bins of the spectrum also increase in size relative to the normalisation 
point.  
 This effect can be explained in terms of the scatter around the source; 
neutrons scattered off the surroundings will have a longer flight path and 
therefore a longer time of flight, as shown in Figure 90 hence they will be 
mistaken for lower energy neutrons. This also explains the apparent lowering 
of the low energy threshold of the detector; whilst the TOF may suggest that a 
neutron has low energy, in reality it will merely have had a longer flight path, 
Figure 90: Illustration of scatter off the water tank and 
source surroundings.The longer path of neutrons scattered 
into the detector are illustrated. 
but still be energetic enough to produce a scintillation pulse greater than the 
threshold of the detector.   
5.6.2 The effect of photomultiplier voltage on efficiency 
Figure 84 (page 124), shows energy spectra produced using a 252Cf 
source, and the TOF system with three different negative high voltage levels 
supplying the detectors. The effect of varying the high voltage can be seen 
clearly, the energy threshold lowering as voltage is increased. This can be 
understood as a manifestation of the increasing photomultiplier tube gain with 
the supply voltage. As the gain is made larger, decreasingly small scintillation 
pulses are able to trigger the pulse acquisition process, and therefore the 
overall detection efficiency is increased. The effect is largely the same as that 
of changing the threshold on the MFA. 
Whilst this is a fairly intuitive finding , it highlights the need to keep 
equipment consistent between measurements, as the effect of the changing 
efficiency can easily match or exceed that of the small differences in different 
fission neutron spectra.    
5.6.3 The effect of PSD settings on the measurement 
Altering the PSD settings of the system seems to have a small effect on the 
measured data, mostly altering the low energy end of the spectrum. As can be 
seen, the application of a stricter PSD setting raises the low energy threshold 
and heightens the peak at the most probable energy. The high energy 
response is largely unchanged. These effects can be understood in terms of 
the system artificially removing true events; strict PSD not only removes a 
number of false counts but will also increase the number of true counts 
rejected. As the area of greatest ambiguity in particle identification is around 
low amplitude pulses, the application of strict PSD disproportionately effects 
low energy events. 
 From this finding it can be seen that, in the neutron detector at least, it 
is better to leave the PSD at a less strict setting, relying on the timing 
information to remove erroneous gamma coincidences. A reasonable amount 
of particle discrimination fidelity  must be maintained in the gamma trigger 
however, as falsely classified neutrons cannot be sifted out of the 
measurements in such a simple manner. 
5.7 IMPLICATIONS FOR ISOTOPIC DISCRIMINATION IN A SECURITY 
CONTEXT 
The results of this research demonstrate the ability to measure the fission 
spectrum and fit it to a Maxwellian distribution, using just a pair of organic 
scintillators, without an external trigger.  Whilst evidence for the discrimination 
of 252Cf and 244Cm has been examined, there are many other nuclides that are 
of interest from a security standpoint. 
As explained earlier in this thesis, there is great value in the ability to 
discriminate the neutron spectra of fissile materials such as 235U and 239Pu 
from those indicating spent nuclear fuel such as 244Cm, or 240Pu, and from 
Figure 91:Induced and spontaneous fission spectra for 235U(nthermal,fission), 
239Pu(nthermal,fission) and 240Pu, 244Cm and 252Cf spontaneous fission . Spectra for 
235U and 239P are taken from ENDF/B V library. 252Cf and 240Pu are Maxwellian 
distributions from [127], and 244Cm is from this research. The grey area shows 
the one sigma uncertainty on the 244Cm measurements. 
those that may have come from a university or industrial source such as 
AmBe or 252Cf . 
On the most basic level this research has demonstrated the ability to 
measure the fission spectrum simply and easily, suggesting that TOF 
measurements would be able to discriminate between fission sources and 
(,n) sources. As mentioned earlier, some interesting further work would be to 
take measurements of an AmBe source, as the literature suggests that the 
spectrum measured would be significantly different in shape to that of a fission 
source [12]. 
The discrimination of neutron spectra of fission sources is difficult due to the 
similarity of their distributions. Figure 91 shows reference spectra for the 
thermally induced fission of 235U and 239Pu, such as may be produced by SNM 
under interrogation by the neutron spectrum of a thermalised AmLi source. 
Alongside those spectra are those of the spontaneous fission of 240Pu,  244Cm 
and 252Cf . Also shown on the plot is the uncertainty associated with the 
Maxwellian fit to the data taken in this  work (dotted lines).  
As can be seen from the plot, due to the closeness of the curves, 
combined with the uncertainty associated with the measurements, it would be 
difficult to confidently discriminate between the different spectra on the basis 
of the measurements presented in this thesis. As previously discussed, as the 
uncertainties are mainly due to lower counting statistics, it is reasonable to 
expect that they could be reduced with further counts. Similar TOF setups 
[127] in the literature have reported data fitted with Maxwellian spectra with 
uncertainties on the T value as low as0.03, at which point discrimination is 
more feasible. Performing the uncertainty analysis on the basis of an identical 
dataset, but with more counts, running the measurements for 4 times the 
amount of time would reduce the uncertainties to 0.03. The same end can be  
also be achieved via a source 4 times as active, or by moving the detectors 
closer to improve geometric efficiency. 
A final matter, complicating efforts to identify nuclides based on their 
prompt neutron energy spectrum, is the uncertainty surrounding reference 
spectra available in the literature. [134]  There is a constant effort to update 
nuclear data, and whilst some spectra, such as that of 252Cf, are well 
characterised, for many nuclides measurements of the fission spectrum are 
still subject to inconsistency.  
6 CONCLUSIONS OF THIS RESEARCH 
Time of flight spectroscopy has long been used to measure the neutron 
energy spectrum as it is the only way of obtaining a deterministic 
measurement of neutron energy. There have been several ways this has been 
achieved in the past, often requiring specialised instrumentation, source 
preparation and equipment and only recently has it been a technique that can 
be used in a more general sense. 
This research has outlined the development of TOF neutron 
spectroscopy system, allowing this technique to be performed in a real time, 
and using small scale, portable hardware, using two EJ-309 scintillators, 
without any external trigger. Furthermore, it has investigated the ability of the 
TOF system to discriminate between nuclides. This ability to identify and 
characterise neutron spectra is desirable in a range of security and 
safeguards contexts and is particularly difficult given the similarity of the 
neutron spectra produced by different sources, and the challenge typically 
associated with measuring them. On the basis of the data collected, it can be 
established that there is scope to discriminate between 244Cm and 252Cf, and 
the spectra can be fitted Maxwellian spectrum, giving insight to its identity 
when compared with known fission spectra. Extrapolating out, this finding 
suggests that the discrimination of other fission sources, particularly those of 
235U and 239Pu, is feasible. 
The 244Cm spectrum itself is of interest in a number of applications, 
particularly in the characterisation of spent nuclear fuel but has been subject 
to uncertainty. It has been some time since it has been measured and this 
work adds to and advances knowledge of this spectrum. The lack of 
information characterising fission spectra has not only affected 244Cm, and this 
simple method for deterministically measuring fission spectra is a 
demonstration of a potential method of increasing the body of knowledge on 
fission spectra in general. 
This technique is not completely immune to some of the subtleties 
associated with all methods of measuring the neutron energy spectrum; 
understanding the detector efficiency is an important aspect of making any 
measurements and is particularly relevant here. It was found that efficiency 
data in the literature can be used in this case as long as it is adjusted to 
represent the detector and settings in use, and for this purpose efficiency 
measurements have been made to establish the low energy cut off of the 
detector. 
An investigation into the effect of the source environment and the set-up 
of the system has found that the measured spectrum is sensitive to small 
changes in the surroundings and measurement parameters. Those measuring 
spectra with a TOF system based on liquid scintillators must take great care 
that the system efficiency is not affected by small changes in the detector 
thresholds, the detector voltages, and the geometry of the time of flight 
arrangement. The shape of the measured spectrum is highly dependent on 
these factors and small changes can easily overshadow the subtle differences 
in spectrum that are under investigation. 
6.1 FUTURE WORK 
There are several areas of interesting further work that could follow on 
from this research, particularly now that the operation and response of the 
system is better understood given the findings of this work. 
 An obvious next step is to use the system to measure more examples 
of fission spectra. As stated above, 244Cm and 252Cf can be discriminated on 
the basis of their spectra, and there are other fission sources with similar or 
greater separation in their fission sources. It would be valuable work to 
measure more fission nuclides, to further demonstrate the discriminative 
ability of the system. In addition to demonstrating the power to discriminate 
nuclides, this would add to the body of knowledge of fission sources in 
general. 
 As part of this effort to characterise fission spectra, a logical 
development from measuring spontaneous fission sources would be to extend 
the application of the system to stimulated fission spectra. Whilst nuclides 
which can be induced to fission, such as 235U and 239Pu are harder to access, 
evaluating the response of the TOF system to their spectra would enhance its 
utility in a security context. Whilst the known spectra taken from the ENDF 
library (Figure 91, page 142) suggested that the spectra have a greater 
separation from the nuclides measured in this work, and may be more easily 
identified, there would be the additional challenge of the obscuration factor of 
the stimulation spectrum. Additional research could examine strategies for 
minimising this signature, whilst obtaining the maximum amount of information 
about the source under interrogation.  
 This research has focused on -n events. It would extend the utility of 
the system to further examine n-n scatter events, as this would open up 
opportunities to measure the spectrum of neutron sources without associated 
particles, the full energy range of the commonly used AmBe source for 
example cannot be measure using only -n coincidences. Accounting for 
scatter and the effect of the efficiency of two detectors on the system 
response would allow these spectra to be measured. 
 Finally, there is a large amount of work that could be done to further 
develop the hardware of the system. Finer timing resolution, the inclusion of 
more detectors and the accounting for pulse height as well as pulse timing 
would either improve the measurements which can already be made with this 
setup or open up more capabilities of the system. 
6.2 FINAL WORDS 
In conclusion, there are several achievements and findings that this research 
has accomplished: 
 It has been demonstrated that the fast neutron energy spectrum of a 
fission source can be measured in real time using two EJ-309 
scintillator detectors and a single, FPGA-based data acquisition 
system.  A choice of n-n or -n events can be used. 
 The time interval distribution is distinct between different fission 
radionuclides when measured under identical conditions. Fitting to the 
known spectrum parameters is possible with enough precision to 
suggest differentiation between fission sources is feasible.  
 The response of the system is highly dependent on the settings of the 
data acquisition process, and the voltage applied to the photomultiplier 
tubes of the detector. This is a reflection of the probability behind event 
detection and the effect the aforementioned parameters have on the 
efficiency of the detectors across the energy range. 
 Measurements of the 244Cm spectrum are in broad agreement with the 
relatively sparse amount of prior data and add to the body of 
knowledge of this spectrum. 
The novelty of this system lies in the simple, portable and real time nature of 
the TOF system and its ability to measure fission spectra to a degree where 
discrimination is possible. In addition, the measurements made with the new 
system advance the knowledge available on the long unexplored 244Cm 
prompt fission spectrum. 
7 REFERENCES 
[1]  J. Chadwick, The Existence of a Neutron, Proc. R. Soc. London. Ser. 
A, vol. 136, no. 830, pp. 692-708, 1932.  
[2]  W. Bowen, M. Cottee, C. Hobbs, L. Lentini, M. Moran and S. Tzinieris, 
9/11 and Beyond, in Nuclear Security Briefing Book, London, Kings 
college London, 2019, p. 35. 
[3]  H. R. Vega-Carrillo and S. A. Martinez-Ovalle, Neutron spectra and 
dosimetric features of Isotopic neutron sources: A review, in Int. Symp. 
Solid State Dosimetry, Leon, Mexico, 2015.  
[4]  R. T. Kouzes, J. H. Ely, L. E. Erikson, W. J. Kernan, A. T. Lintereur, E. 
R. Siciliano, D. L. Stephens, D. C. Stromswold, R. M. V. Ginhoven and 
M. L. Woodring, Neutron detection alternatives to 3He for national 
security applications,, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 623, 
no. 3, pp. 1035-1045, 2010.  
[5]  R. T. Kouzes, E. R. Siciliano, J. H. Ely, P. E. Keller and R. J. McConn, 
Passive neutron detection for interdiction of nuclear material at 
borders, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 584, no. 2-3, pp. 
383-400, 2008.  
[6]  P. M. Rinard, G. E. Bosler and J. R. Phillips, Calculated neutron source 
spectra from selected irradiated PWR fuel assemblies, Los Alamos 
National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM Tech. Rep. LA-9125-LS, 1981. 
[7]  J. L. Szabo and L. J. Boutaine, Some Examples of Industrial Uses of 
Neutron Sources, Radiat. Prot. Dosim., vol. 70, no. 1-4, pp. 193-196, 
1997.  
[8]  M. J. Joyce, M. Aspinall, B. D'Mellow and R. O. Mackin, Digital 
discrimination of neutrons and -rays in liquid scintillators using pulse 
gradient analysis., Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 578, no. 
1, pp. 191-197, 2007.  
[9]  J. S. Beaumont, B. A. Shippen, M. P. Mellor and M. J. Joyce, Imaging 
of fast neutrons and gamma rays from 252Cf in a heavily shielded 
environment, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 847, pp. 77-85, 
2017.  
[10]  M. J. Joyce, S. Agar, M. D. Aspinall, J. S. Beaumont, E. Colley, M. 
Colling, J. Dykes, P. Kardasopoulos and K. Mitton, Fast neutron 
tomography with real-time pulse-shape discrimination in organic 
scintillation detectors, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 834, 
pp. 36-45, 2016.  
[11]  J. Iwanowska, L. Swiderski, T. Krakowski, M. Moszynski, T. Szczesniak 
and G. Pausch, The time-of-flight method for characterizing the 
neutron response of liquid organic scintillators, Nucl. Instrum. Methods 
Phys. Res. A, vol. 781, pp. 44-49, 2015.  
[12]  J. Scherzinger, R. A. Jebali, J. Annand, A. Bala, K. Fissum, R. Hall-
Wilton, D. Hamilton, N. Mauritzson, F. Messi, H. Perrey and E. Rofors, 
Tagging fast neutrons from a 252Cf fission-fragment source, Appl. 
Radiat. Isot, vol. 128, pp. 270-274, 2017.  
[13]  F. Pino, L. Stevanto, D. Cester, G. Nebbia, L. Sajo-Bohus and G. Viesti, 
The Light output and the detection efficiency of the liquid scintillator EJ-
309, Applied Radiation and Isotopes, vol. 89, pp. 79-94, 2014.  
[14]  L. Berge, O. Litaize, O. Serot, C. D. S. Jean, P. Archier and Y. 
Peneliau, Study on Prompt Fission Neutron Spectra and Associated 
Covariances for 235U(nth,f) and 239Pu(nth,f), in Physics Procedia, 
2015.  
[15]  W. Mannhart, Evaluation of the 252Cf Fission Neutron Spectrum 
between 0MeV and 20MeV, IAEA, Braunschweig (Germany, F.R.) 
Tech. Rep. IAEA-TECDOC--410, 1986. 
[16]  M. Schulc, M. Kol, E. Novk, R. Kubn and J. imon, Application of 
252Cf neutron source for precise nuclear data experiments, Appl. 
Radiat. Isot., vol. 151, pp. 187-195, 2019.  
[17]  A. T. Yue, M. S. Dewey, D. M. Gilliam, G. L. Greene, A. B. Laptev, J. S. 
Nico, W. M. Snow and F. E. Wietfeldt, Improved Determination of the 
Neutron Lifetime, Phys. Rev. Lett, vol. 111, no. 22, 2013.  
[18]  A. P. Serebrov, V. E. Varlamov, A. G. Kharitonov, A. K. Fomin, Y. N. 
Pokotilovski, P. Geltenbort, I. A. Krasnoschekova, M. S. Lasakov, R. R. 
Taldaev and A. V. Vassiljev, Neutron lifetime measurements using 
gravitationally trapped ultracold neutrons, Phys. Lett. B, vol. 78, no. 1-
2, pp. 72-78, 2005.  
[19]  G. F. Knoll, Sources of Background Radiation, in Radiation detection 
and measurement, Hoboken, NJ, USA, Wiley, 2000, p. 757. 
[20]  Z. Hu, L. Ge, J. Sun, Y. Zhang, Z. Cui, G. Gorini, H. Zhang, J. Chen, J. 
Chen, X. Li and T. Fan, Measurements of cosmic ray induced 
background neutrons near the ground using a Bonner sphere 
spectrometer, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 940, pp. 78-
82, 2019.  
[21]  T. Vasilopoulou, I. Stamatelatos, P. Batistoni, A. Colangeli, D. Flammini, 
N. Fonnesu, S. Loreti, B. Obryk, M. Pillon and R. Villari, Improved 
neutron activation dosimetry for fusion, Fusion Engineering and 
Design, vol. 139, pp. 109-114, 2019.  
[22]  L. Meitner and O. R. Frisch, Disintegration of Uranium by Neutrons: A 
New Type of Nuclear Reaction, Nature, vol. 143, no. 3615, pp. 239 - 
240, 1939.  
[23]  E. N, The Origin of Neutron Radiation, Los Alamos National 
Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM Tech. Rep. LA-UR-90-732, 1991. 
[24]  J. Verbeke, C. Hagmann and D. M. Wright, Simulation of Neutron and 
Gamma Ray emission from fission, Laurence Livermore National 
Laboratory, Livermore CA Tech. Rep. UCRL-AR-228518, 2007. 
[25]  V. Weisskopf, Statistics and Nuclear Reactions, Phys. Rev, vol. 52, 
no. 4, pp. 295-303, 1937.  
[26]  E. B. Watt, Energy Spectrum of Neutrons from Thermal Fission of 
235U, Phys. Rev., vol. 87, no. 6, pp. 1037-1041, 1952.  
[27]  O. Litaize and O. Serot, Investigation of phenomenological models for 
the Monte Carlo simulation of the prompt fission neutron and Y 
emission, Phys. Rev. C, vol. 82, no. 5, 2011.  
[28]  N. Kornilov, F.-J. Hambsch and V. A. S, Neutron emission in fission, 
Nucl. Phys. A, vol. 789, no. 1-4, pp. 55-72, 2007.  
[29]  T. Ethvignot, M. Devlin, R. Drosg, T. Granier, R. C. Haight, B. Morillon, 
R. O. Nelson, J. M. O'Donnell and D. Rochman, Prompt-fission-neutron 
average energy for 238U(n,f) from threshold to 200 MeV, Phys. Lett. B, 
vol. 575, no. 3-4, pp. 221-228, 2003.  
[30]  D. Madland and A.C. Kahler, Refinements in the Los Alamos model of 
the prompt fission neutron spectrum, Nucl. Phys. A, vol. 957, pp. 289-
311, 2017.  
[31]  G. Choppin, O. L. J and J. Rydberg, Radiochemistry and Nuclear 
Chemistry: 4th Edition, in Radiation Effects on Matter, Amsterdam, 
Elsevier Inc., 2002, p. 166. 
[32]  G. F. Knoll, Interaction of Neutrons, in Radiation Detection and 
Measurement, 3rd Edition, Wiley, 2000, pp. 55-57. 
[33]  D. Hei, H. Zhuang, W. Jia, C. Cheng, Z. Jiang, H. Wang and D. Chen, 
Design of a setup for 252Cf neutron source for storage and analysis 
purpose, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. B, vol. 386, pp. 1-3, 2016.  
[34]  B. J. Marion and C. F. Young, Nuclear Reaction Analysis: Graphs and 
Tables, Amsterdam, 1968.  
[35]  A. Enqvist and I. Pazsit, Calculation of the light pulse distributions 
induced by fast neutrons in organic scintillation detectors, Nucl. 
Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 618, no. 1-3, pp. 266-274, 2010.  
[36]  G. F. Knoll, Fast Neutron Detectors, in Radiation Detection and 
Measurement, 3rd Edition, Hoboken, NJ, USA, Wiley, 2000, pp. 553-
[37]  E. Rutherford, The scattering of alpha and beta particles by matter and 
the structure of the atom, Philos. Mag, vol. 21, no. 6, 1911.  
[38]  B. J. Birks, The Theory and Practice of Scintillation Counting, New 
York, NY,USA: Permagon, 1964.  
[39]  R.-Y. Zhu, Radiation Damage Effects, in Handbook of Particle 
Detection and Imaging, Heidelberg, Springer-Verlag, 2012, pp. 537-
[40]  S. Golovkin, A. Konstantinchenko, V. Kozlov, A. Kushnirenko, A. 
Pyshchev, V. Shershukov, V. Vasil'chenko and K. Zimyn, Radiation 
damage studies on new liquid scintillators and liquid-core scintillating 
fibers,, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 362, no. 2-3, pp. 
283-291, 1995.  
[41]  M. Cecconello, Liquid Scintillators Neutron Response Function: A 
Tutorial, J Fusion Energy, vol. 38, no. 3-4, pp. 356-375, 2019.  
[42]  N. Kornilov, I. Fabry, S. Oberstedt and F. Hambsch, Total 
characterization of neutron detectors with a 252Cf source and a new 
light output determination, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 
599, no. 2-3, pp. 226-233, 2009.  
[43]  A. Enqvist, C. C. Lawrence, B. M. Wieger, S. A. Pozzi and T. N. 
Massey, Neutron light output response and resolution functions in EJ-
309 liquid scintillation detectors, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, 
vol. 715, pp. 79-86, 2013.  
[44]  N. Zaitseva, A. Glenn, L. Carman, R. Hatarik, S. Hamel, M. Faust, B. 
Schabes, N. Cherepy and S. Payne, Pulse Shape Discrimination in 
Impure and Mixed Single-Crystal Organic Scintillators, IEEE Trans. 
Nucl. Sci., vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 3411 - 3420, 2011.  
[45]  I. Paweczak, S. Ouedraogo, A. Glenn, R. Wurtz and L. Nakae, Studies 
of neutron pulse shape discrimination in EJ-309 liquid scintillator 
using charge integration method, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, 
vol. 711, pp. 21-26, 2013.  
[46]  M. Matzke, Unfolding Procedures, Rad. Proct. Dosim., vol. 107, no. 1-
3, pp. 155-174, 2003.  
[47]  A. Tomanin, J. Paepen, P. Schillebeeckx, R. Wynants, R. Nolte and A. 
Lavietes, Characterization of a cubic EJ-309 liquid scintillator detector, 
Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 756, pp. 45-54, 2014.  
[48]  M. Gohil, K. Banerjee, S. Bhattacharya, K. K. T, G. Rana, K. M. J, R. 
Meena, H. Pandey, K. P. T, A. Ghosh, S. Dey, D. Mukhopadhyay, S. 
Pandit, R. P. S, T. Banerjee and Bandhopadhyay, Measurement and 
simulation of neutron response function of organic liquid scintillator 
detector, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res. A, vol. 664, no. 1, pp. 304-
309, 2012.  
[49]  A. Enqvist, C. C. Lawrence, B. M. Wieger, S. A. Pozzi and T. N. 
Massey, Neutron light output response and resolution functions in 
EJ309 liquid scintillation detectors, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. 
A, vol. 715, pp. 79 - 86, 2013.  
[50]  G. Dietze and H. Klein, NRESP4 and NEFF4 - Monte Carlo codes for 
the calculation of neutron response functions and detection efficiencies 
for NE 213 scintillation detectors, Physikalisch-Technische 
Bundesanstalt, Braunschweig (Germany, F.R.) Tech. Rep. 
RN:14769159, 1982. 
[51]  M. Frgeau, M. Delarue, A.-M. Frelin-Labalme, B. Laurent, X. Ledoux 
and C. Varignon, Light response and efficiency calibration of EJ309 
liquid scintillator between 3 and 45 MeV, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. 
Res. A, vol. 941, 2019.  
[52]  N. Kornilov, I. Fabry, S. Oberstedt and F.-J. Hambsch, Total 
characterization of neutron detectors with a 252Cf source and a new 
light output determination, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 
599, no. 2-3, pp. 226-233, 2009.  
[53]  H. Bai, Z. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. Lu, H. Jiang, J. Chen and G. Zhang, 
Calibration of an EJ309 liquid scintillator using an AmBe neutron 
source, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 863, pp. 47-54, 
2017.  
[54]  F. Pino, L. Stevanato, D. Cester, G. Nebbia, L. Sajo-Bohus and G. 
Viesti, The light output and the detection efficiency of the liquid 
scintillator EJ-309, Appl. Radiat. Isot., vol. 89, pp. 79 - 84, 2014.  
[55]  S. Meada, H. Tomita, J. Kawarabayashi and T. Iguchi, Fundamental 
Study on Neutron Spectrum Unfolding using Maximum Entropy and 
Maximum Likelihood Method, Prog. Nucl. Sci. Tech, vol. 1, pp. 233-
236, 2011.  
[56]  L. Lebreton, A. Zimbal and D. Thomas, Experimental Comparison of 
241Am-Be Neutron Fluence Energy Distributions, Radiat. Prot. 
Dosimetry, vol. 126, no. 1-4, pp. 3-7, 2007.  
[57]  G. M. Ishak-Boushaki and M. Allab, Comparison between standard 
unfolding and Bayesian methods in Bonner spheres neutron 
spectrometry, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 689, pp. 35-
39, 2012.  
[58]  M. Regginato and A. Zimbal, Bayesian and maximum entropy methods 
for fusion diagnostic measurements with compact neutron 
spectrometers, Rev. Sci. Instrum., vol. 79, no. 2, p. 023505, 2008.  
[59]  M. Reginatto, P. Goldhagen and S. Neumann, Spectrum unfolding, 
sensitivity analysis and propagation of uncertainties with the maximum 
entropy deconvolution code MAXED, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. 
Res. A, vol. 476, no. 1-2, pp. 242-246, 2002.  
[60]  G. F. Perey, Spectrum Unfolding by the least squares method, Oak 
Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee, 1977. 
[61]  M. Reginatto, Overview of spectral unfolding techniques and 
uncertainty estimation, Radiat. Meas., vol. 45, no. 10, pp. 1323-1329, 
2010.  
[62]  N. J. Roberts, Investigation of combined unfolding of neutron spectra 
using the UMG unfolding codes, Radiat. Proct. Dosim., vol. 126, no. 1-
4, pp. 398-403, 2007.  
[63]  C. C. Lawrence, A. Enqvist, M. Flaska, S. A. Pozzi and F. Becchetti, 
Comparison of spectrum-unfolding performance of (EJ315) and 
(EJ309) liquid scintillators on measured 252Cf pulse-height spectra, 
Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 729, pp. 924-929, 2013.  
[64]  S. Avdic, S. A. Pozzi and V. Protopopescu, Detector response 
unfolding using artificial neural networks, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. 
Res. A, vol. 565, pp. 924-929, 2006.  
[65]  S. A. Hossein, Neutron spectrum unfolding using artificial neural 
network and modified least square method, Radiat. Phys. Chem., vol. 
126, pp. 75-84, 2016.  
[66]  S. Vitisha and K. P. Sarkar, Neutron spectrum unfolding using genetic 
algorithm in a Monte Carlo simulation, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. 
Res. A, vol. 737, pp. 76-86, 2014.  
[67]  M. Matzke, Propagation of uncertainties in unfolding procedures, Nucl. 
Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 476, no. 1-2, pp. 230-241, 2002.  
[68]  G. F. Knoll, Chapter 14, Slow Neutron Detection Methods, in 
Radiation Detection and Measurement, 3rd Edition, Hoboken, NJ, USA, 
Wiley, 2000, pp. 505-513. 
[69]  D. J. Thomas, Neutron Spectrometry for radiation protection, Radiat. 
Prot. Dosimetry, vol. 110, no. 1-4, pp. 141-149, 2004.  
[70]  H. Tatsuta, K. Katoh and Y. Yoshida, Energy Response of BF3 
Counter Using Paraffin Moderators, Jap. J. Appl. Phys., vol. 4, no. 5, 
pp. 321-325, 1965.  
[71]  T. Nishitani and J. D. Strachan, Neutron Spectroscopy with a 3He 
Ionization Chamber on TFTR, Jpn. J Appl. Phys., vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 
591-596, 1990.  
[72]  D. Chichester, J. Johnson and E.H. Seabury, Fast-neutron 
spectrometry using a 3He ionization chamber and digital pulse shape 
analysis,, Appl. Radiat. Isot., vol. 70, no. 8, pp. 1457-1463, 2012.  
[73]  A. Gook, F. J. Hambsch and M. Vidali, Prompt neutron multiplicity in 
correlation with fragments from spontaneous fission of 252Cf, Phys. 
Rev. C, vol. 90, no. 6, p. 064611, 2014.  
[74]  S. Zeynalov, O. Zeynalova, F.-J. Hambsch, P. Sedyshev and V. 
Shvetsov, Ionization chamber for prompt fission neutron investigation, 
Phys. Proc., vol. 59, pp. 160-166, 2014.  
[75]  D. Mazed, S. Mameri and R. Ciolini, Design parameters and 
technology optimization of 3He-filled proportionalcounters for thermal 
neutron detection and spectrometry applications, Rad. Meas., vol. 47, 
no. 8, pp. 577-587, 2012.  
[76]  M. Manolopoulou, M. Fragopoulou, S. Stoulos, C. Koukorava, A. 
Spyrou, G. Perdikakis, S. Hashemi-Nezhad and M. Zamani, Studies on 
the response of 3He and 4He proportional counters to monoenergetic 
fast neutrons,, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 562, no. 1, 
pp. 371-379, 2006.  
[77]  M. Weyrauch, A. Casnati, P. Schillebeeckx and M. Clapham, Use of 
4He-filled proportional counters as neutron spectrometers, Nucl. 
Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 403, no. 2-3, pp. 442-454, 1998.  
[78]  T. R. Kouzes, H. J. Ely, T. A. Lintereur, R. E. Siciliano and L. M. 
Woodring, BF3 Neutron Detector tests, Pacific Northwest National 
Laboratory, Washington Tech. Rep. PNNL-19050, 2009. 
[79]  T. Langford, C. Bass, E. Beise, H. Breuer, D. Erwin, C. Heimbach and 
J. Nico, Event identification in 3He proportional counters using risetime 
discrimination, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 717, pp. 51-
57, 2013.  
[80]  G. W. R. Endres, J. M. Aldrich, L. W. Brackenbush, L. G. Faust, R. V. 
Griffith and D. E. Hankins, Neutron Dosimetry at Commertial Nuclear 
plants, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, WA Tech. Rep. PNL-
3585, 1981. 
[81]  E. Bougamont, A. Dastgheibi, J. Derre, J. Galan, G. Gerbier, I. 
Giomataris, M. Gros, I. Katsioulas, D. Jourde, P. Magnier, X. Navick, T. 
Papaevangelou, I. Savvidis and G. Tsiledakis, Neutron spectroscopy 
with the Spherical Proportional Counter based on nitrogen gas, Nucl. 
Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 847, pp. 10-14, 2017.  
[82]  F. D. Brooks and H. Klein, Neutron Spectroscopy- historical review and 
present status, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 476, no. 1-2, 
pp. 1-11, 2002.  
[83]  D. J. Thomas and A. V. Alevra, Bonner sphere spectrometersa 
critical review, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 476, no. 1-2, 
pp. 12-20, 2002.  
[84]  R. Bedogni, A. Esposito and M. Chiti, Determination of workplace 
neutron spectra at a high energy hadron accelerator using active and 
passive Bonner sphere spectrometers, Radiat. Meas., vol. 43, no. 2-6, 
pp. 1113-1117, 2008.  
[85]  G. M. Ishak-Boushaki and M. Allab, Comparison between standard 
unfolding and Bayesian methods in Bonner spheres neutron 
spectrometry,, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 689, pp. 35-
39, 2012.  
[86]  R. L. Bramblett, R. I. Ewing and T. W. Bonner, A new type of neutron 
spectrometer, Nucl. Inst. Meth., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1-12, 1960.  
[87]  R. Bedogni, J. M. Gomez-Ros, M. Costa, V. Monti, E. Durisi, O. S. 
Planell, L. Menzio, D. Flammini, F. Moro, M. Pillon and A. Pietropaolo, 
An active Bonner sphere spectrometer for intense neutron fields, Nucl. 
Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 940, pp. 302-306, 2019.  
[88]  D. J. Thomas, A. G. Bardell and E. M. Macaulay, Characterisation of a 
gold foil-based Bonner sphere set and measurements of neutron 
spectra at a medical accelerator, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, 
vol. 476, no. 1-2, pp. 31-35, 2002.  
[89]  R. Bedogni, P. Ferrari, G. Gualdrini and A. Esposito, Design and 
experimental validation of a Bonner Sphere Spectrometer based on 
Dysprosium activation foils, Radiat. Meas., vol. 45, no. 10, pp. 1201-
1204, 2010.  
[90]  R. Bedogni, R. Bedogni, J. M. Gmez-Ros, D. Bortot, A. Pola, M. V. 
Introini, A. Esposito, A. Gentile, G. Mazzitelli and B. Buonomo, 
Development of single-exposure, multidetector neutron spectrometers: 
The NESCOFI@BTF project, Radiat. Prot Dosimetry, vol. 161, no. 1-4, 
pp. 37-40, 2014.  
[91]  R. Bedogni, J. M. Gmez-Ros, A. Pola, M. V. Introini, D. Bortot, A. 
Gentile, A. Esposito, G. Mazzitelli, B. Buonomo, L. Quintieri and L. 
Foggetta, Testing a newly developed single-sphere neutron 
spectrometer in reference monochromatic fields from 147keV to 
14.8MeV,, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 714, pp. 110-114, 
2013.  
[92]  M. A. Wonders, D. L. Chichester and M. Flaska, Characterization of 
New-Generation Silicon Photomultipliers for Nuclear Security 
Applications, EPJ Web of Conferences, vol. 170, p. 07015, 2018.  
[93]  R. A. Akbarov, G. S. Ahmadov, F. I. Ahmadov, D. Berikov, M. Holik, R. 
Mammadov, S. M. Nuruyev, A. Z. Sadigov, Z. Y. Sadygov and S. I. 
Tyutyunnikov, Fast neutron detectors with silicon photomultiplier 
readouts, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 936, pp. 549-551, 
2019.  
[94]  Y. Liang, T. Zhu, C. E. Parker, A. L. Richard, T. N. Massey, R. Chandra, 
H. Ray, K. A. Jordan, J. Baciak and A. Enqvist, Neutron spectroscopy 
and spectral unfolding with  4He fast neutron scintillators,, Nucl. 
Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 922, pp. 1-7, 2019.  
[95]  R. P. Kelley, L. M. Rolison, J. M. Lewis, D. Murer, T. N. Massey, A. 
Enqvist and K. A. Jordan, Neutron response function characterization 
of 4He scintillation detectors, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 
793, pp. 101-107, 2015.  
[96]  G. F. Knoll, T. M. Henderson and W. J. Felmlee, A Novel 3He 
Scintillation Detector, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 470-
474, 1987.  
[97]  L. A. Boatner, E. P. Comer, G. W. Wright, J. O. Ramey, R. A. Riedel, G. 
E. Jellison and J. A. Kolopus, Improved lithium iodide neutron 
scintillator with Eu2+ activation: The elimination of Suzuki-Phase 
precipitates, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 854, pp. 82-88, 
2017.  
[98]  X. Wen, T. Harvey, R. Weinmann-Smith, J. Walker, Y. Noh, R. Farley 
and A. Enqvist, Characterization of a tin-loaded liquid scintillator for 
gamma spectroscopy and neutron detection, Nucl. Instrum. Methods 
Phys. Res. A, vol. 897, pp. 47-53, 2018.  
[99]  C. Frangville, A. Grabowski, J. Dumazert, E. Montbarbon, C. Lynde, R. 
Coulon, A. Venerosy, G. H. V. Bertrand and M. Hamel, 6Li210B4O7 
NPs-loaded plastic scintillators for fast/thermal neutron and gamma ray 
detection, Mat. Chem. Frontiers, vol. 3, no. 8, pp. 1574-1579, 2019.  
[100]  T. Brown, P. Chowdhury, E. Doucet, E. Jackson, C. Lister, A. Mitchell, 
C. Morse, A. Rogers, G. Wilson, N. DOlympia, M. Devlin, N. Fotiades, 
J. Gomez, S. Mosby and R. Nelson, Applications of C7LYC scintillators 
in fast neutron spectroscopy,, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, 
vol. 954, p. 161123, 2020.  
[101]  C. Cowles, S. Behling, P. Baldez, M. Folsom, R. Kouzes, V. Kukharev, 
A. Lintereur, S. Robinson, E. Siciliano, S. Stave and P. Valdez, 
Development of a lithium fluoride zinc sulfide based neutron multiplicity 
counter, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 887, pp. 59-63, 
2018.  
[102]  M. Osipenko, V. Ceriale, G. Gariano, M. Girolami, S. Cerchi, R. Nolte, 
E. Pirovano, M. Ripani and D. Trucchi, Calibration of a 6Li diamond-
sandwich spectrometer with quasi-monoenergetic neutrons,, Nucl. 
Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 931, pp. 135-141, 2019.  
[103]  M. Osipenko, M. Ripani, G. Ricco, B. Caiffi, F. Pompili, M. Pillon, M. 
Angelone, G. Verona-Rinati, R. Cardarelli, G. Mila and S. Argiro, 
Neutron spectrometer for fast nuclear reactors, Nucl. Instrum. 
Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 799, pp. 207-213, 2015.  
[104]  H. Kluge and K. Weise, The Neutron Energy Spectrum of a 241Am-
Be(Alpha,n) Source and Resulting Mean Fluence to Dose Equivalent 
Conversion Factors, Radiat. Prot. Dosim., vol. 2, pp. 85-93, 1982.  
[105]  J. W. Marsh, D. J. Thomas and M. Burke, High resolution 
measurements of neutron energy spectra from Am-Be and Am-B 
neutron sources, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 366, no. 2-
3, pp. 340-348, 1995.  
[106]  A. Seghour and F. Seghour, Unfolding neutron energy spectra from foil 
activation detector measurements with the Gold algorithm, Nucl. 
Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 457, no. 3, pp. 617-626, 2001.  
[107]  E. Vagena, K. Theodorou and S. Stoulos, Thick-foils activation 
technique for neutron spectrum unfolding with the MINUIT routine
Comparison with GEANT4 simulations,, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. 
Res. A, vol. 887, pp. 64-69, 2018.  
[108]  F. Molina, P. Aguilera, J. Romero-Barrientos, H. Arellano, J. Agramunt, 
J. Mede, J. M. and M. Zambra, Energy distribution of the neutron flux 
measurements at the Chilean Reactor RECH-1 using multi-foil neutron 
activation and the Expectation Maximization unfolding algorithm,, Appl. 
Radiat. Isot., vol. 129, pp. 28-34, 2017.  
[109]  U. d. Bitelli, F. P. G. Martins and R. Jerez, Measurements of the 
neutron spectrum energy in the IPEN/MB-01 reactor core, Braz. J 
Phys., vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 39-43, 2009.  
[110]  D. Thomas, A. Bardell and E. Macaulay, Characterisation of a gold foil-
based Bonner sphere set and measurements of neutron spectra at a 
medical accelerator,, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 476, 
no. 1-2, pp. 31-35, 2002.  
[111]  D. Bleuel, M. McMahan, L. Ahle, B. Barquest, J. Cerny, L. Heilbronn 
and C.C. Jewett, Characterization of a tunable quasi-monoenergetic 
neutron beam from deuteron breakup, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. 
Res. B, vol. 261, no. 1-2, pp. 974-979, 2007.  
[112]  J. I. W. Watterson, Review of Accellerator based neutron sources and 
their applications, Schonland research Centre, Wits, South Africa Tech. 
Rep. XA0054945, 2000. 
[113]  M. Devlin, J. Gomez, K. Kelly, R. Haight, J. O'Donnell, T. Taddeucci, H. 
Lee, S. Mosby, B. Perdue, N. Fotiades, J. Ullmann, C. Wu, B. Bucher, 
M. Buckner, R. Henderson, D. Neudecker, M. White, P. Talou, M. 
Rising and C. Solomon, The Prompt Fission Neutron Spectrum of 
235U(n,f) below 2.5 MeV for Incident Neutrons from 0.7 to 20 MeV,, 
Nucl. Data Sheets, vol. 148, pp. 322-337, 2018.  
[114]  N. Kornilov, A. Kagalenko, V. Baryba, V. Demenkov, S. Pupko and P. 
Androsenko, Inelastic neutron scattering and prompt fission neutron 
spectra for 237Np, Anns Nucl. Energy, vol. 27, pp. 1643-1667, 2000.  
[115]  J. Pal, S. Saha, C. C. Dey, B. K. Sinha and M. B. Chatterjee, Neutron 
energy spectrum of an Am-Be source by gamma gated NTOF 
technique, Radiat. Phys. and Chem., vol. 51, no. 4-6, pp. 475-477, 
1998.  
[116]  J. Scherzinger, R. A. Jebali, J. Annand, K. Fissum, R. Hall-Wilton, S. 
Koufigar, N. Mauritzson, F. Messi, H. Perrey and E. Rofors, A 
comparison of untagged gamma-ray and tagged-neutron yields from 
241AmBe and 238PuBe sources,, Appl. Radiat. Isot., vol. 127, pp. 98-
102, 2017.  
[117]  M. Skiba, G. Ericsson, A. Hjalmarsson, C. Hellesen, S. Conroy, E. 
Andersson-Sundn, J. Eriksson and J. Contributors, Kinematic 
background discrimination methods using a fully digital data acquisition 
system for TOFOR, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 838, pp. 
82-88, 2016.  
[118]  F. D. Becchetti, M. Febbraro, R. Torres-Isea, M. Ojaruega and L. Baum, 
252Cf fission-neutron spectrum using a simplified time-of-flight setup: 
An advanced teaching laboratory experiment, Am. J. Phys., vol. 81, no. 
2, pp. 112-119, 2013.  
[119]  E. Blain, A. Daskalakis, R. C. Block and Y. Danon, Measurement of 
prompt fission neutron spectrum for spontaneous fission of 252Cf using 
y multiplicity tagging, Phys. Rev. C, vol. 95, p. 064615, 2017.  
[120]  Hamamatsu, Basic Principles of Photomultiplier Tubes, in 
Photomultiplier tubes, Third edition, Hamamatsu Photonics K K, 2007, 
pp. 13-19. 
[121]  Burle Industries Ltd, Photomultiplier Applications, in Photomultiplier 
Handbook, Burle Industries Ltd, 1980, pp. 80-119. 
[122]  M. Bruggeman, P. Baeten, W. De Boeck and R. Carchon, Neutron 
Coincidence Counting based on Time Interval Analysis with Dead Time 
Corrected One and Two Dimensional Rossi-alpha Distributions. An 
application for Passive Neutron Waste Assay, Nucl. Instrum. Methods 
Phys. Res. A, vol. 382, pp. 511-518, 1996.  
[123]  G. R. Chopin, J. Liljenzin and J. Rydberg, Chapter 13, Particle 
Accellerators, in Radio Chemistry and Nuclear Chemistry, Elsevier, 
2002, pp. 352-354. 
[124]  N. J. Roberts, H. Tagziria and D. J. Thomas, Determination of the 
effective centres of the NPL long counters, NPL, London Tech. Rep. 
NPL REPORT DQL RN004, 2004. 
[125]  G. C. Taylor and D. J. Thomas, Neutron scatter characteristics of the 
low scatter facility of the Chadwick building, National Physical 
Laboratory, London Tech. Rep. CIRM 17, 1998. 
[126]  J. Scherzinger, J. R. M. Annand, G. Davatz, K. G. Fissum, U. Gendotti, 
R. R. Hall-Wilton, A. Rosborg, E. Hakansson, R. Jebali, K. Kanaki, M. 
Lundin, B. Nilsson and H. Svensson, Tagging fast neutrons from an 
AmBe source, Appl. Radiat. Isot., vol. 98, pp. 74-79, 2015.  
[127]  Z. A. Aleksandrova, V. I. Bolshov, V. F. Kuznetsov, G. N. Smirenkin and 
M. N. Tarasko, Spectra of the prompt neutrons arising from the 
spontaneous fission of 252Cf, 244Cm and 240Pu, Sov. Atom. Ener., 
vol. 36, pp. 355-358, 1974.  
[128]  D. L and S. B, Status of measurements of fission neutron spectra of 
minor actinides, in Selected Papers of ISTC Workshop on Nuclear 
Data of Minor Actinides, Tokai, 1997.  
[129]  O. I. Batenkov, G. S. Boykov, L. V. Drapchinski, M. Marajov and V. A. 
Trenkin, The measurement of prompt neutron spectrum in 
spontaneous fission of 244Cm, in Selected Papers of ISTC Worlshop 
on Nuclear Data of Minor Acinides, Tokai, Japan, 1997.  
[130]  X-5 Monte Carlo Team, MCNP - A general monte carlo N-Particle 
transport code, Version 5, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los 
Alamos, NM Tech. Rep. LA-13709-M, 2003. 
[131]  Y. Zamyatiny, N. Kroshkin, A. Mel'nikov and V. Nefedov, Measurement 
of the energy spectra and the average number of prompt neutrons 
produced in the fission of actinide elements, in Nuclear data for 
Reactors (Proc. of the 2nd Int. Conf. on Nucl. Data for Reactors), 
Helsinki, 1970.  
[132]  H. Maier-Leibnitz, P. Armbruster and H. J. Specht, Prompt and 
Delayed Gamma rays from fission, IAEA, Vienna Tech. Rep. Jul-405-
NP, 1965. 
[133]  A. Chyzh, C. Y. Wu, E. Kwan, R. A. Henderson, J. M. Gostic, T. A. 
Bredeweg, R. C. Haight and A. C. Hayes-Sterbenz, Evidence for the 
stochastic aspect of prompt  emission in spontaneous fission, Phys. 
Rev. C, vol. 85, no. 2, 2012.  
[134]  D. Neudecker, T. Taddeucci, R. Haight, H. Lee, M. White and M. Rising, 
The Need for Precise and Well-documented Experimental Data on 
Prompt Fission Neutron Spectra from Neutron-induced Fission of 
239Pu,, Nucl. Data Sheets, vol. 131, pp. 289-318, 2016.  
[135]  Eljen Technology, NEUTRON/GAMMA PSD LIQUID SCINTILLATOR 
EJ301, EJ309 DATASHEET, 2018. [Online]. Available: 
https://eljentechnology.com/images/products/data_sheets/EJ-301_EJ-
309.pdf. [Accessed 15 01 2020]. 
APPENDIX A: GAMMA INTERACTIONS IN THE DETECTOR 
  A gamma photon incident with the detector volume also have the ability 
to interact with the scintillant and produce a signal. Upon interaction a pulse of 
optical photons is produced that is very similar to those produced by neutrons, 
but the mechanism whereby they are formed is different. Similarly, to 
neutrons, gamma rays are uncharged and therefore do not directly form 
ionisation tracks in the scintillant. However, gamma rays are an 
electromagnetic phenomenon, and therefore in contrast with neutrons, will 
interact with atomic electrons, allowing a number of different excitement 
mechanisms. The nature of the interaction between gamma photons and 
atomic electrons means that gamma interactions happen in discrete events, 
and therefore behave more like a neutron recoiling off nuclei than an alpha 
particle slowing as it travels through matter. 
At the energy range studied in this work (0.5-20MeV) Compton scattering is 
the predominant mechanism by which gamma photons deposit their energy 
into the scintillant [19]. In this process an incident gamma photon interacts 
with an electron in the orbital shell of an atom in the scintillator, imparts some 
of its energy to the electron and is then scattered by an angle . The energy 
gained by the electron is enough to liberate it from the atom of origin 
producing a free electron. This free electron now travels through the scintillant 
as an energetic charged particle, exciting atomic electrons into higher atomic 
singlet and triplet quantum states, producing de-excitation photons in the 
same manner as neutrons. The proportion of the gamma rays energy gained 
by the electron depends on the scatter angle of the initial gamma photon. 
The electron recoil energy is given by: 
 =   1 
Where E is the gamma energy, and E1 is the gamma energy after the recoil, 
given by: 
1 =
2 (1  )
This gives a theoretical maximum amount of energy that can be transferred to 
the electron, in the case where =180.  
As the electron can scatter at any angle between 0 and 180 a mono-
energetic source of gamma photons will produce a continuum of electron 
energies, with a high energy cut-off at the theoretical maximum. As the photon 
will never transfer the entirety of its energy to the recoil photon, the Compton 
edge is lower in energy than the full energy of a monoenergetic gamma 
source. 
Some commonly used gamma sensitive detectors, for example sodium iodide 
detectors, exhibit a full energy peak in their responses. This is produced by 
pair production effects and does not feature in the organic scintillator pulse 
height spectrum. Therefore, any energy scale axis calibrations using gamma 
sources rely on finding the Compton edge and correctly associating it with a 
known peak in the gamma spectrum. 
Figure 92: Compton edge and spectrum continuum produced by a mono-energetic gamma 
source. (Resolution effects not included) 
APPENDIX B: PROPERTIES OF EJ301 AND EJ309 
Data provided by the manufacturer Eljen [135]. 
Properties EJ301 EJ309 
Light output (% 
Anthracene) 
78 80 
Scintillation efficiency 
(photons/MeV e-) 
12000 12300 
Wavelength of 
maximum emission 
425 424 
Decay time, short 
Component (ns) 
3.2 3.5 
Mean decay times of 
first 3 components (ns) 
Bulk light Attenuation 
length (m) 
2.5-3 >1 
Specific Gravity 0.874 0.959 
Refractive index 1.505 1.57 
Flash point (C) 26 144 
Boiling point (C at 
1atm) 
141 290-300 
Vapour pressure (mm 
Hg at 20C) 
6 0.002 
No of H Atoms per cm3 
(x1022) 
4.82 5.43 
No of C Atoms per cm3 
(x1022) 
3.98 4.35 
No of electrons per cm3 
(x1022) 
2.27 3.16 
