Transforming earth and fire: new narratives of identity and place in the Northern Ireland peace process
Transforming Earth and Fire: New Narratives
of Identity and Place in the Northern Ireland
Peace Process
Lia Dong Shimada
Department of Geography
University College London
Submitted in accordance with the requirements for the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy, University College London, 2010
Declaration of Original Work
I, Lia Dong Shimada, confirm that the work presented in this thesis is my own. Where
information has been derived from other sources, I confirm that this has been indicated in
the thesis.
Lia Dong Shimada
9 July 2010
Abstract
This thesis explores the cultural geographies of peacebuilding through a study of
Belfast, Northern Ireland. I investigate the connections between transformations of
contested landscapes, shifting meanings of place, and new narratives of identity and
belonging emerging through the Northern Ireland peace process. The aims of my
research serve two theoretical objectives: first, to examine how transformations of
contested cultural landscapes provoke new perceptions of place and geographic scale;
and second, to examine how these transformations shape the expression, creation and
negotiation of identity in societies emerging from violent conflict. For this project, I
have developed a collaborative, qualitative methodological approach that combines
semi-structured interviews and participant observation. I ground my research in case
studies of two contested landscapes, both of which bear symbolic and material weight
from Northern Irelands thirty-year civil war. The first case study explores republican
cultural identities in relation to Divis Mountain, the highest point in Belfast, as it
transitions from a British military base to a public recreational resource. The second
case study focuses on peacetime transformations of the contentious 11th Night bonfire
tradition and their implications for shifting expressions of loyalist cultural identity.
Crucially, I cross-cut these case studies with a third strand of inquiry that explores
transformations of contested landscapes in relation to identities and ideas of
belonging among Northern Irelands growing minority ethnic populations. I position
this project as a challenge to existing models of analysis for Northern Ireland. By
opening the dominant Protestant-Catholic binary to explore the less-studied
perspectives of ethnic minorities, I highlight the diversity of cultural identities
emerging in post-ceasefire Belfast. I argue that practice in and scholarship on
Northern Ireland must expand beyond traditional, binary conceptualizations of
sectarian conflict to acknowledge how diverse relationships, identities and
communities are vital to the process of building peace.
Table of Contents
Statement of Original Work 2
Abstract 3
Table of Contents 4
List of Figures 7
List of Tables 8
List of Acronyms 9
Acknowledgements 10
Chapter One Introduction: The Place of Peacebuilding
Overview 11
1. Research Objectives and Approach 12
2. Structure of the Thesis 13
Conclusion 17
Chapter Two Literature Review and Theoretical Framework
Introduction 19
1. Theorizing Peace 21
2. Conflict Transformation and Cultural Geography 26
3. Contested Landscapes 29
4. The Challenge of Shared Heritage 35
5. New Places, New Identities, New Possibilities 38
Conclusion 42
Chapter Three Northern Ireland: A Case Study for
Conflict Transformation
Introduction 45
1. Historical Overview 47
2. Post-Conflict Belfast 51
3. Placing Identity 55
4. Dilemmas of Heritage and History 59
5. Ethnic Minorities: A New Social Landscape 64
6. Rhetoric versus Reality: Putting Peace into Practice 68
Conclusion 71
Chapter Four Research Strategy and Design
Introduction 75
1. Feminist and Participatory Research Debates 77
2. Research Methods, or Ways of Asking 79
3. Research Strategy 82
4. Case Study: 11
Night Bonfires 86
Strand 1: Loyalist Perspectives 87
Strand 2: Minority Ethnic Perspectives 89
5. Case Study: Divis Mountain 90
Strand 1: Republican Perspectives 91
Strand 2: Minority Ethnic Perspectives 93
6. Positionality 93
Conclusion 97
Chapter Five Transforming Earth: Divis Mountain and
Republican Identities
Introduction 104
1. Imperial Legacies 108
The Ordnance Survey 108
Military Geographies 110
2. Republican Landscapes 112
The Romance of Resistance 112
The Fort and the Herald 119
3. Inscribing Identity 124
(Re)naming Places 124
An Activist Alphabet 130
Conclusion 135
Chapter Six Transforming Fire: 11
Night Bonfires and
Loyalist Identities
Introduction 146
1. Loyalism in Transition: Fire, History and Heritage 150
A Brief History 150
Building and Burning 152
Contested Landscape; Divisive Tradition 155
2. Transformations: Negotiating Change 160
Belfast: Piloting Progress 162
Antrim: The Changing Place of Paramilitarism 171
Woodvale: From Bonfire to Beacon 182
Conclusion 194
Chapter Seven Diversity in a Divided City: Ethnic Minorities and
New Narratives of Belonging
Introduction 202
1. Divis Mountain 206
Divergent Perspectives: Breaking Down Barriers 206
Scales of Belonging 209
2. 11
Night Bonfires 213
(In)visible Identities 215
Flying the Flags of Fear 220
Bonfires and Belonging 223
Conclusion 230
Chapter Eight Conclusion: New Narratives of Identity and Place
Introduction 234
1. Summary of Key Findings 236
2. Contributions to Academic Scholarship 241
3. Contributions to Policy and Practice 244
4. Reflections on the Roles of the Researcher 246
Coda 249
References 251
Appendix 1: Sample interview questions (Divis  Ethnic Minorities) 271
Appendix 2: Sample interview questions (Bonfires  Ethnic Minorities) 272
List of Figures
3.1 Peaceline at Springmartin, West Belfast 73
3.2 Entrance to loyalist enclave, North Belfast 73
3.3 Republican mural, Falls, West Belfast 74
3.4 Loyalist mural, Mount Vernon estate, North Belfast 74
4.1 Panels from Bonfire Management Programme exhibit 101
5.1 West Belfast with Divis Mountain in the background 139
5.2 Ordnance Survey theodolite base on Black Mountain 139
5.3 Ministry of Defense compound on Divis 140
5.4 Eco-grid trail leading to Black Mountain 140
5.5 Derelict 18
century stone barn, eventual site of visitors centre 141
5.6 Concrete imprint of Ministry of Defense compound 141
5.7 Herald of Jericho sculpture 142
5.8 Fort Whiterock, known locally as Fort Jericho 142
5.9 National Trust entrance sign 143
5.10 Christoff Gillen with a white sheet 143
5.11 Question mark on Black Mountain 144
5.12 The letter H on Black Mountain 144
5.13 NO BUSH on Black Mountain 145
6.1 11
Night bonfire 198
6.2 Bonfire under construction 198
6.3 Bonfire with Irish Tricolour and posters of republican politicians 199
6.4 Burning bonfire 199
6.5 Aftermath of a bonfire 200
6.6 Anti-gentrification graffiti on the Shankill Road, West Belfast 200
6.7 Bonfire designed as a castle 201
6.8 Trial burning of the beacon 201
7.1 Members of the Afro-Caribbean Society on Divis Mountain 232
7.2 View of Belfast from Divis 232
7.3 Racist sign posted on the Shankill Road, West Belfast 233
List of Tables
4.1 Bonfire discussions in loyalist communities 100
4.2 Individual bonfire interviews 100
4.3 Bonfire interviews with minority ethnic community groups 102
4.4 Interviews and discussions for Divis Mountain case study, Strand 1 103
4.5 Walking tours of Divis and discussions with minority ethnic
community groups
List of Acronyms
ACSONI Afro-Caribbean Society of Northern Ireland
IRA Irish Republican Army
MOD Ministry of Defense
UDA Ulster Defense Association
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
UVF Ulster Volunteer Force
Acknowledgements
To my remarkable advisor, Dr Claire Dwyer, I give wholehearted thanks for her
guidance, encouragement and support. I feel fortunate to have worked with a mentor who
has challenged and sustained me in equal measures, and who gave me wide latitude to
develop this piece of scholarship in creative, collaborative ways.
My doctoral studies were made possible through grants from the US National
Science Foundation (Graduate Research Fellowship Program), the Overseas Research
Students Award Scheme, and Wellesley College (Horton-Hallowell Fellowship). I have
benefited enormously from the stimulating intellectual community of the Department of
Geography at University College London. During my time in Northern Ireland, Queens
University Belfast kindly gave me an academic base; I am grateful to Nuala Johnson and
Brendan Murtagh for arranging formal affiliations with their departments.
As my research took shape in Belfast, I was assisted by more people than I can
count. Particular thanks to Sylvia Gordon and the staff at Groundwork Northern Ireland;
Dermot McCann and Heather Smith from The National Trust; the Minority Ethnic and
Faith Network; Jim Bradley, Belfast Hills Partnership; Christoff Gillen; Terry and
Feargal Enright; the West Belfast Taxi Association; Deirdre Mackel, Upper Springfield
Development Trust; Bill McComb, Upper Springfield Integrated Youth Services; Jim
McKinley, Donegall Pass Community Forum; and Norman Watson and David Robinson,
Belfast City Council. Above all, I thank my research participants, who gave generously of
their time and stories.
I have been fortunate to cultivate a rich life on both sides of the Irish Sea. In
Belfast, I am grateful for the friendships of Mark and Anne Johnston, Henri Mohammed,
John Eltham, Eva McDermott, my fellow Quire singers, and No Alibis bookstore. In
London, I owe my sanity to the London Orpheus Choir, the community of St Jamess
Piccadilly, and the harpsichords at Fenton House. Special thanks to Diane Horn for
providing a second home filled with food, books and music.
From the shores of the Pacific, the members of my family  and especially my
parents, Fay and Jay Shimada  have borne my wanderlust with patience and grace.
Their love is immeasurable.
Finally, I give thanks to my godmother, Mary Yamashita Doi, and my dear friend
Charles Nelson, who launched me to London in 2005 with great enthusiasm. Neither
lived to see the finished product, but they are nonetheless present in these pages. Amidst
the rubble of the Second World War, they chose compassion, courage and integrity as the
stars by which to navigate an uncertain future. Their legacy to me is the proof that
conflict need not define the arc of a life, and the knowledge that peacebuilding can take
surprising forms. I dedicate this dissertation to Mary and Charles, in loving memory.
Chapter 1. Introduction 11
Chapter One
Introduction: The Place of Peacebuilding
For everything is contingent and provisional; and
the subjunctive mood of these images is tensed to the
ifs and buts, the yeas and nays of Belfasts history.
 Ciaran Carson (1989: 67)
from Revised Version, Belfast Confetti
Overview
This thesis explores the cultural geographies of peacebuilding through a study of
Belfast, Northern Ireland. For societies emerging from civil war, peace accords merely
punctuate a complex process of transformation that continues long after agreement has,
ostensibly, been reached. My fascination lies with the aftermath, with its juxtaposition of
simmering conflict and waking peace. For wars waged over contested land, a peace
process may be particularly ambiguous. At stake is not just ownership of territory, but
control over the very meaning and identity of the place in question. To this end, I explore
peacebuilding as a process that reworks relationships to place and, in doing so, provokes
new expressions and negotiations of identity. These are themes that speak powerfully to
cultural geography and its potential to illuminate new dimensions  both theoretical and
practical  to our understanding of peace processes. I situate my study in the nexus of
several distinct academic literatures, with particular emphasis on peace and conflict
studies and cultural geography. Within the latter, I draw heavily on interlinking dialogues
around contested cultural landscapes, heritage, and multiple, poststructuralist identities,
and I have developed innovative qualitative methodologies to address these debates. My
research also develops scholarship on public geographies and, in the context of Northern
Ireland, contributes to debates around community relations, diversity and environmental
policy.
Northern Ireland offers an intriguing case study for investigating the dynamics
between place, identity and peacebuilding in a delicate post-conflict society. My initial
entry point was an interest in environmental issues that I explored during a fellowship
funded by the Thomas J. Watson Foundation. For fifteen months, from August 2000
through November 2001, I studied reforestation movements in Ireland, Nepal and
Madagascar. I had conceptualized this project as a way to think about the cultural
Chapter 1. Introduction 12
dimensions of forested landscapes, and to understand how people and places shape each
other through their tangled environmental histories. Of the many places I dwelled during
this fellowship, Belfast resonated the most powerfully with my queries. In the autumn of
2000, I came to Northern Ireland to think about the role of trees in a place recovering
from conflict. More broadly, I wanted to learn about environmentalism in a place where
political stability cannot be taken for granted and perceptions of common good are
anything but universal. Although my work at that time focused on reforestation, I became
fascinated by the larger scope of urban environmental regeneration, its spatial expressions,
and the possibilities for an environmental ethos to create common identities across
partisan lines.
For my doctoral research, I have developed from these initial queries a broader,
more complex interrogation of the relationships between place-associated identities and
peacebuilding. In this chapter, I outline the scope and structure of my dissertation. I begin
by discussing my research objectives, the approach I adopted, and my reasons for
selecting the case studies on which I based my empirical research in Northern Ireland.
The second section describes the structure of the thesis, comprising a brief overview of
subsequent chapters and their key arguments. I conclude by highlighting the contributions
of this thesis, which I will discuss in greater depth in the final chapter.
1. Research Objectives and Approach
My research traces two interlinking theoretical aims. The first examines how
peacetime transformations of contested landscapes provoke new perceptions of place and
geographic scale. How, I ask, do such transformations alter the meanings of places
associated with violent conflict? How do they shape the ways in which people relate these
places to wider scales of belonging? The second aim examines how these transformations
shape the expression, creation and negotiation of identity. How do people negotiate their
identities in a place of recovering conflict? How do interactions between shifting
identities and transformations of contested landscapes address the legacy of conflict and
contribute to the process of building peace?
I explore these aims through three striking transformations at work in Northern
Ireland: the demilitarization of Divis Mountain, the redefinition of 11
Night bonfires,
and the regions increasingly visible ethnic diversity. Divis Mountain and the 11
Night
bonfires are, respectively, powerful republican and loyalist icons. In Belfast, their ability
to inspire allegiance in one cultural population, while eliciting a sense of exclusion in
another, renders them among the citys most contested spaces. Their complex peacetime
Chapter 1. Introduction 13
transformations invite reflection on how narratives of place and identity might be
reworked and reconceptualized for a shared society. In Chapter Five, I explore this
process through republican engagement with Divis Mountain, the highest point in Belfast,
as it transitions from a British military base to a public recreational resource. Chapter Six,
in contrast, focuses on loyalist engagement with the 11
Night bonfires, which are built
and burned every July to commemorate the 1690 Protestant victory at the Battle of the
Boyne. Loyalist communities are now responding to the need to redefine this sectarian
tradition, spurred in part by municipal concerns about environmental pollution and risks
to public health.
I chose these two landscapes  Divis Mountain and 11
Night bonfires  for their
contrapuntal dialogue and the different dimensions they illuminate to the process of
peacebuilding. Both inspire devotion amongst their respective communities, and their
deep cultural resonance amplifies the conflict over place and identity in Northern
Irelands divided society. Both landscapes address current environmental debates taking
shape through the peace process. For example, the transformation of Divis Mountain
highlights issues around conservation for public recreation, while the 11
Night bonfires
engage a different set of issues around pollution and urban regeneration. Moreover, these
contested landscapes reframe cultural identity in a variety of scales, from local and civic
to national and global.
The third transformation cross-cuts both landscapes. Northern Irelands
increasingly diverse society is one of the most visible changes of the past decade. The
peace accords may go some way toward explaining the trend, but they are only part of a
larger story of diaspora and migration. In Northern Ireland, the entwined discourses of
conflict and peacebuilding frequently sideline minority ethnic residents. Through this
research project, I attempt to address the imbalance, inspired in part by my own
complicated identity as a Japanese-Chinese-American woman living in Belfast. By
exploring minority ethnic perspectives and identities in relation to Divis Mountain and
Night bonfires, I deepen my analysis of how transformations of contested landscapes
might complicate and contribute to the process of peacebuilding in a society emerging
from violent conflict.
2. Structure of the Thesis
In the next two chapters, I develop my theoretical questions in the context of
post-conflict Northern Ireland, followed by a short chapter that describes my
methodological approach. I then analyze my empirical research, devoting one chapter to
Chapter 1. Introduction 14
each of the three major transformations described above. I conclude with some reflections
about this project and its wider contributions. Below, I offer a brief overview of the scope
and key arguments of each chapter.
Chapter Two sets forth the theoretical framework for this dissertation, drawn
from a range of academic literatures in cultural geography and peace and conflict studies.
I begin with an overview of scholarship in peace research that illuminates the challenges
involved with the post-conflict phase of peacebuilding. I focus in particular on debates
related to conflict transformation theory, to which I voice my own concerns about its
insufficient spatial theorization. I argue that in addition to nurturing the transformation of
inter-personal relationships, conflict transformation must also attend to the relationships
between identity and place. To this end, I argue that cultural geography offers valuable
theoretical contributions to the transformation of violent conflict. I explore cultural
landscape as a conceptual framework that mediates debates about contested meanings of
heritage, memory, identity and place in a post-conflict society. Ultimately, I argue that
the challenge of peacebuilding is the challenge of reworking contested notions of place
and identity.
In Chapter Three, I develop my theoretical framework in the context of my
research site. Northern Ireland offers an intriguing case study for probing the theoretical
contributions of cultural geography to the transformation of conflict. I begin with a brief
historical overview of the region, tracing the creation of Northern Ireland in the first part
of the 20
century, the political tensions that gave rise to violent civil unrest, the
controversial 1998 peace settlement, and the subsequent challenges of post-conflict
peacebuilding. I focus in particular on Belfast, where ongoing and highly visual sectarian
tensions offer rich scope for exploring how cultural geographers might theorize conflict
over culture, identity, heritage, memory and belonging. Following Graham (1994, 2004)
and Reid (2004), I argue that the absence of shared identity (re)produces Northern
Irelands divisive conceptualizations of physical and imaginative place, and I ask how
new expressions of identity might emerge through contemporary transformations of
Belfasts contested landscapes. Crucially, I highlight the absence of minority ethnic
perspectives in scholarship on Northern Ireland, which focuses overwhelmingly on the
conflict between Protestants/unionists/loyalists and Catholics/nationalists/republicans. In
this dissertation, I seek to expand the scholarship beyond the traditional, binary model of
Northern Irelands sectarian conflict. To this end, I argue that the inclusion of diverse
perspectives is vital to both building and studying peace. I end this chapter by discussing
some of the challenges of putting peace into practice, and in doing so I gesture toward the
practical contributions of my research process.
Chapter 1. Introduction 15
Chapter Four outlines my research strategy and methodologies. In particular, I
draw from methodological literatures in feminist geography and participatory research
that emphasize reflexive, qualitative approaches. For this project, I adopted a suite of
mixed methodologies  participant observation, semi-structured interviews, semi-
structured group discussions, and maintenance of a research diary  that were designed to
yield complex understandings about the Northern Ireland peace process. Moreover, I
initiated collaborations with two non-profit organizations involved with the practical
work of engaging people with contested spaces: Groundwork Northern Ireland with the
Night bonfires; and the National Trust with Divis Mountain. For both organizations, I
offered to develop their outreach programmes to minority ethnic communities in
exchange for logistical support for my research. In this chapter, I discuss in greater detail
these collaborations, their ethical implications, and how they have shaped my
methodological processes. I end by meditating on issues that arose around positionality
and reflexivity with regard to my own negotiations of identity in Northern Ireland. This
chapter articulates my sustained engagement with the shifting terrain between praxis and
theory. I argue that my strategy represents an innovative approach for conceptualizing
how geographic research can contribute  through its process as well as its products  to
the scholarship and practice of peacebuilding.
In Chapter Five, the first of three empirical chapters, I explore the transformation
of Divis Mountain from major military base to public recreational resource. Specifically,
I examine the ways in which ideas of the mountain circulate in narratives of republican
identity that are emerging from the history of conflict, and are now evolving through the
peace process. I situate my analysis of Divis in theoretical debates about postcolonialism
and its relevance for a shared, peacetime society. This case study excavates tensions
between British imperial history, republican memories of resistance, and the need for
wider ways of imagining the mountain as a shared identity resource. I begin by
establishing Divis as a contested landscape, implicated in the British imperial project
through its role in the 19
century Ordnance Survey mapping and its 20
century military
occupation. Through interviews and participant observation with a wide array of residents,
activists and artists in West Belfast, I develop my analysis of Divis as a shifting focus for
republican consciousness and cultural identity. I examine debates around inscription of
landscape and its role in articulating cultural ownership of place  first through efforts to
reinstate Gaelic placenames, and then through a contemporary art project that draws the
city of Belfast into dialogue with Divis. In conclusion, I gesture toward new
developments that reframe the mountain in wider scales of belonging. More broadly, I
argue that for republicans residing in its shadow, the transformations of Divis provokes
Chapter 1. Introduction 16
new conceptualizations of place and identity that both complicate and contribute to the
process of peacebuilding.
Chapter Six shifts from republican to loyalist perspectives, focusing on the post-
conflict transformations of 11
Night bonfires. For this case study, I bring together
several strands of work from my overlapping academic and practical projects. My
professional engagement with Belfast City Councils Bonfire Management Programme
offered invaluable access to the loyalist communities in which I conducted participant
observation and semi-structured interviews. In this chapter, I ask how shifting
conceptualizations of heritage and tradition are shaping negotiations of identity and ideas
of place in a society emerging from conflict. I begin by establishing 11
Night bonfires as
a contested cultural landscape, tracing their evolution from historic origins to their current
sectarian manifestations. I ask how peacetime transformations of the bonfire tradition are
provoking loyalists to engage in new ways with culture, place, tradition and identity. I
then respond to this question through three contemporary examples of bonfire
management: Belfast City Councils Bonfire Management Programme; its counterpart in
Antrim Borough Council; and the innovative bonfire alternative known as the beacon.
Throughout this chapter, I explore the relationships between 11
Night bonfires and
shifting dynamics of gender, paramilitarism, cultural heritage and peacebuilding. I argue
that transformations of the contested bonfire landscape can be read as both a product and
an agent of the peace process, which in turn reflect and provoke new expressions of
identity in loyalist culture.
In Chapter Seven, I draw together the landscapes of Divis Mountain and 11
Night bonfires by exploring their contestation through minority ethnic perspectives. In
this chapter, I locate the voices of ethnic minorities in the fraught dialogues around shared
space and identity in post-conflict Belfast. In doing so, I address implicit assumptions
about the lack of impact of Northern Irelands long-standing conflict on ethnic minorities.
My research challenges these assumptions by firmly engaging minority ethnic
participants with the same contested cultural landscapes through which I explored
Northern Irelands far larger republican and loyalist populations. The first part of this
chapter focuses on Divis Mountain, where I led walking tours for minority ethnic
community groups. I ground my research in academic debates about the racialization of
ethnic minorities in representations of the countryside. In semi-structured group
interviews that followed the walks, I queried how minority ethnic engagement with the
mountain provokes insights into shifting scales of diasporic identity and the challenge of
negotiating belonging in a territorial, sectarian city. The second part of this chapter
focuses on 11
Night bonfires. I facilitated discussions about loyalist bonfires with a
range of minority ethnic community groups in Belfast, drawing on the visual aids created
Chapter 1. Introduction 17
for the Bonfire Management Programmes travelling exhibit. My findings from these
discussions address experiences of racism, politics of (in)visibility, meditations on
identity and global conflict, and negotiations of belonging in peacetime Northern Ireland.
In this chapter, I argue that scholarship on Northern Ireland must acknowledge how
diverse relationships and communities are vital to the process of peacebuilding.
Each of these empirical chapters responds to the meta-argument that I set forth in
Chapter Two for increasing engagement between conflict transformation theory and
cultural geography. My empirical research draws from cultural geographys major themes
of landscape, place, culture, heritage and identity, and illuminates how the discipline can
frame relationships between people, place and belonging in a society emerging from
conflict. Below, I highlight the key contributions of this thesis, which I will discuss in
greater detail in the Chapter Eight, the final chapter.
Conclusion
This thesis contributes to a wide range of academic and practical debates. The
largest contribution correlates to the argument I will set forth in Chapter Two for
increasing engagement between cultural geography and theories of conflict
transformation. Within cultural geography, my research on contested cultural landscapes
contributes to debates on the politics of memory and concepts of public landscape,
transition, and transformation. This thesis also holds relevance for interdisciplinary
debates on multiple identities and new ethnicities, and I develop the ways in which these
debates contribute to scholarship on peacebuilding. With regard to methodological
contributions, this thesis introduces some innovative approaches in the form of guided
walking tours and formal collaborations with non-profit organizations.
My research also makes a number of contributions to scholarship about Northern
Ireland. This thesis amplifies the presence of cultural geography in published research
about the conflict in Northern Ireland, thus bolstering the profile of geography in a field
dominated by political scientists and legal scholars. Specifically, my work on
transformations of contested landscapes and identities in republican and loyalist cultures
contributes to collective knowledge about communities sympathetic to paramilitarism.
Moreover, this thesis contributes to growing scholarly interest in Northern Irelands
ethnic minorities, but crucially it does so by drawing them into larger dialogues about the
legacy of the Troubles and the transformation of violent conflict. In addition to its
academic contributions, this thesis also contributes to the practical work of peacebuilding.
For example, my collaborations with local non-profit organizations have increased their
Chapter 1. Introduction 18
capacity to deliver programmes, particularly in relation to minority ethnic residents in
Belfast.
Arching over this project are debates about public geographies, to which my
theoretical, methodological, empirical and practical approaches all contribute. Although
geographers have long grappled with the challenge of producing research that is relevant
beyond the academy, recent debates are bringing into sharper focus the concept of
relevance. Some authors advocate an expanded presence of the discipline in highly
visible arenas such as public policy (Johnston and Plummer 2005) and in wider debates
on political and social matters (Murphy 2006). Others, however, offer more nuanced
conceptualizations. Fuller and Kitchin (2004: 5) criticize forms of applied geography
that call for the discipline to become more relevant by serving the interests of the state
and business through consultancy. They maintain that ideological intent distinguishes
radical and critical praxis from other forms of applied geography. Ward (2006: 496,
original emphasis) cautions that recent emphasis on public policy has taken place at the
expense of proper consideration of what is meant, or might be meant, by the publics. He
argues that dialogue about relevance should allow room for other ways of naming,
defining and putting to work understandings of relevance (ibid: 501). According to
Staeheli and Mitchell (2005), determination of relevance is a social and political process
that is not easily measured and may not be directly observable. They argue that recent
debates over relevance in geography have adopted a narrow view of where relevance is
located or enacted.
The emerging debates around public geographies respond to the challenge for
new conceptualizations of relevance. The Birmingham Public Geographies Working
Group (2010) defines public geographies, at least provisionally, as the production of
accessible academic work for broader non-academic audiences; the co-construction of
knowledge with non-academics; and the legitimation of non-academic or public
geographical knowledges. Fuller and Askins (2007) assert that public geographies require
recognition that publics, while multiple and in flux, are also created. They argue that
academic geographers need to think about the different publics we inhabit (ibid: 587).
Davies and Dwyer (2008) identify a series of gaps  between research context and policy
application, between different enactments of public geographies, between articulation and
silence  opened by methodological questions and the different ways of articulating
publics (ibid: 399). This dissertation can be read as a response to their call.
Chapter 2. Literature Review and Theoretical Framework 19
Chapter Two
Literature Review and Theoretical Framework
Introduction
At its heart, my doctoral project explores the potential for cultural geography to
theorize the process of peacebuilding in societies emerging from violent conflict. With its
thematic attention to space, place, scale and identity, cultural geography provides a
dynamic frame for probing the transformation of conflicts based on competing territorial
claims. Over the course of this chapter, I will outline the theoretical framework for my
dissertation. In doing so, I will build an argument for the study of contested cultural
landscapes to illuminate the complex interplay between place, identity and peacebuilding.
The chapter begins with an overview of academic scholarship in peace research.
Throughout, I ground theoretical ideas with examples from around the globe. In the first
section, I acknowledge the challenges involved with the volatile, delicate phase known as
post-conflict, as societies recovering from violent conflict attempt to establish normal
relations. I describe the three main schools of thought that have developed from the body
of academic literature on handling conflict. These are known as conflict resolution,
conflict management and conflict transformation. I focus in particular on the theoretical
debates related to conflict transformation, drawn primarily from the scholarship of John
Paul Lederach. I end this section by affirming the value of the conflict transformation
approach, even while observing its lack of attention to spatial dynamics.
In the second section, I develop this observation to argue for the importance of
cultural geography to conflict transformation theory. In its current manifestation, the
theory emphasizes the transformation of relationships, interests and discourses that
underlie and fuel violent conflict. I argue that in addition to nurturing the transformation
of inter-personal relationships, conflict transformation theory must also focus on
transforming the relationships between identity and place. As I discuss in greater detail in
Chapter Three with regard to my work in Northern Ireland, these relationships  and
hence their transformations  are crucial for building peace in conflicts over competing
territorial claims. I draw upon existing scholarship to emphasize the ways in which
cultural identity and sense of place are entwined, and I position my argument in this
nexus. I then turn to a discussion of contemporary cultural geography, exploring the ways
in which the discipline seeks to understand people and places. I argue that cultural
Chapter 2. Literature Review and Theoretical Framework 20
geography offers a useful framework for interrogating the relationships between place
and identity that lie at the heart of conflict over contested territory.
To this end, I invoke cultural landscape as a conceptual framework for studying
places recovering from conflict. In this third section, I briefly describe trends in academic
scholarship with regard to the concept of landscape before focusing on more recent
theorizations of people, place, culture and identity in contemporary cultural geography. I
describe how tensions over competing territorial claims might be explored through the
prism of contested cultural landscapes, drawing on recent feminist and poststructuralist
interpretations of the co-constitutive relationships between landscapes, social practices
and identities. I end this section by exploring the connections between landscape and
memory, and I argue that the contestation of cultural landscapes for places of recovering
conflict is based, in part, on contested narratives of heritage and identity.
I explore the concept of heritage in more depth in the fourth section, tracing
connections between the study of heritage and its dialogue with community, history,
identity and place. I argue that the process of building peace involves the search for
shared forms of heritage from which to build a shared future. To illuminate this challenge,
I draw on existing scholarship on heritage, primarily drawn from the academic literature
of cultural geography. I discuss the relationships between heritage and memory,
community, identity and conflict, describing in particular the fraught role that heritage
performs in the creation and maintenance of collective cultural identities. I invoke
Ashworth and Grahams (2005) claim that the concept of heritage is inevitably
contested, and I point toward ways in which conflicting forms of heritage challenge the
process of peacebuilding.
In the fifth section, I return to my argument that the challenge of peacebuilding is
a challenge of reworking contested notions of place and identity. In this section, I outline
my framework for theorizing identity, with particular emphasis on feminist and
postcolonial approaches that destabilizes fixities and opens the concept of identity to
multiple interpretations. I begin by discussing Masseys (1994: 12) reconceptualization of
place as open and porous networks of social relations to provide context for other
feminist critiques of identity, with particular focus on Valentines (2007) recent
discussion of intersectionality. I then discuss how Halls (1992) concept of new
ethnicities might be invoked to articulate new expressions of identity and belonging in
places recovering from violent conflict. Halls acknowledgement of identity as a
transformation always in process resonates with my own experience of post-conflict
transitions.
I conclude this chapter by synthesizing and framing the strands of my arguments
as two overarching objectives for my doctoral project: To examine how transformations
Chapter 2. Literature Review and Theoretical Framework 21
of contested landscapes provoke new perceptions of place and scale; and how these
transformations shape the expression, creation and negotiation of identity in places
recovering from violent conflict. This sets the scene for my empirical work in Northern
Ireland, which develops my contribution to cultural geographies of peacebuilding and
conflict transformation. In Chapter Three, I explore these concepts in relation to Northern
Ireland.
1. Theorizing Peace
Peace research and conflict studies emerged as academic disciplines in the first
half of the 20
century. According to Lederach (1997: 3), their emergence was fuelled in
part by the two world wars. Theoretical perspectives filtered through pre-existing
academic lenses, most notably from the political sciences and, to a lesser degree, from
sociology and psychology. As research on peace and conflict resolution coalesced into
full-fledged academic study, predominantly European structuralists struggled against
predominantly North American pragmatists to define the agendas (Miall et al 1999: 44).
In contemporary times, this gap between theory and practice has narrowed, with
increasing dialogue as both practitioners and scholars contribute to the burgeoning
academic field. As I will elaborate in Chapter Four, my own research grounds theoretical
insights in the practical work of peacebuilding in Northern Ireland.
The breadth of scholarship on peacebuilding reflects the complicated dynamics at
work in divided societies attempting to move beyond violent conflict. Not surprisingly,
much of the literature focuses on the overarching structures of governance that form the
basis of most peace accords. Some form of power-sharing government often emerges as a
compromise between warring factions, as recent examples from Afghanistan and
Zimbabwe attest. In his study of ethno-linguistic conflict in South Tyrol, Italy, Wolff
(2004) credits its successful resolution to a 1972 statute that combined autonomy with the
sharing of power. For many other conflicts, however, power-sharing governments are far
from panacea for peace, as the examples of Cyprus (Baier-Allen 2004) and Sri Lanka
(Chadda 2004) attest. Rothchild and Roeder (2005b: 49) criticize the way in which
power-sharing in ethnically divided societies emerging from conflict unites former
opponents in an unsteady coalition of convenience. The fragility of these new, hybrid
governments is exacerbated further by the dilemma of power-sharing which Rothchild
and Roder (2005a: 13) define as the inconsistency between short-term benefits and longer
term costs, and the broader strategy to achieve enduring peace. Rothchild and Roeder
describe two inter-related phases in the transition from civil war. The first phase,
Chapter 2. Literature Review and Theoretical Framework 22
initiation of peace, begins with the cessation of hostilities. The second phase,
consolidation, fosters belief in the legitimacy of the new government. However, a gap
usually arises between the promises needed to initiate transition and the performance
necessary to consolidate peace and democracy. In the real world, this gap represents a
vacuum of continuing  often intensified  conflict.
Although agreement creates the expectation that conflict has ended, (Lederach
2005: 44) the assumption is frequently, and at times dangerously, misleading. Recent
findings by the Human Security Report Project (2008, cited in Dayton and Kriesberg
2009) suggest that since the end of the 1980s, violent conflicts end more frequently
through negotiations or by petering out, rather than through the defeat of one side or the
other. However, nearly 40 percent of peace agreements fail within five years (Harbom et
al 2006), illustrating the impermanence of conflict termination. Simpson (1997: 476)
observes: The sources of social conflict shift over time, taking on new forms and
manifestations. In this sense, there is no such thing as post-conflict. As Muggah (2005:
240-242) elaborates, the term post-conflict is a particularly unhelpful designation, as it
disguises a vast array of real and perceived threats that face most societies emerging from
war. In the aftermath of its peace accords, a society frequently finds itself wracked not
only with political strife but also with enormous economic, social and cultural instability.
Steenkamp (2005) argues that periods of protracted violent conflict give rise to a culture
of violence. She highlights a number of reasons to explain this phenomenon, including
official state use of violence that influences citizen attitudes toward its use, and the
impact of war leading to greater social tolerance of violent behaviour.
In attempts to secure peace, the most visible efforts focus on elite-level actions,
such as government-led peace accords. Although these high profile agreements may be
vital for establishing structures for peace, they can become meaningless if the rhetoric
fails to materialize into reality at all levels of society. As Lederach (2005: 53) observes,
when viewed from the ground by the people most affected by peace decisions and
logistics, there exists a profound gap of authenticity in how peace and post-accord change
processes operate and shape their future. Atashi (2009) argues that current practices and
analyses of peacebuilding tend to focus on changes at the leadership level, rather than on
the ordinary people who live with the realities of violent conflict. Although a peace
agreement may lead to transformation at the national level, local problems (such as
inequality, mistrust, economic deprivation, fear and violence) may still persist. She
observes that uneven peace agreements reduce the likelihood of achieving sustainable
peace, as marginalized groups disregard negotiated settlement and continue their
struggles.
Chapter 2. Literature Review and Theoretical Framework 23
The gap between local- and elite-level action and experience points to complex
interplays of scale. With regard to Northern Ireland, Boal (2000) emphasizes the
complementary relationship between the different but inter-related scales of the local and
the national/international. He points out that macro-political solutions provide the
foundations for managing conflict at the local level, which in turn provide the day-to-day
underpinning for higher-level constitutional framework. Ben-Porat (2005) extrapolates
further in his comparative study of peace processes in Northern Ireland and Israel. He
argues that by rethinking seemingly intractable ethno-national conflicts in a transnational
context, changes toward de-territorializing sovereignty and the corresponding emergence
of global institutions can offer new incentives and possibilities for resolution. Golan and
Gal (2009), however, sound a cautionary note with their study of globalization and the
ways it both contributes to and obstructs the transformation of conflict.
Scholarship on peace research has given rise to a large body of literature on
handling conflict. In recent years, three main schools of thought have developed, which
are generally known as conflict resolution, conflict management, and conflict
transformation. As Miall (2004: 3) notes, these three schools not only articulate varying
approaches to conflict intervention, but also reflect different conceptualizations of
conflict itself.
Conflict resolution is the traditional, and perhaps most familiar, response to
conflicts unable to resolve themselves through violence or by other means. This theory
is based in the belief that in communal and identity conflicts, people cannot compromise
on their fundamental needs (Miall 2004: 3-4). Advocates of conflict resolution argue that
it is possible to transcend conflicts if parties can be helped to explore, analyze, question
and reframe their positions and interests. This approach emphasizes intervention by third
parties to foster new thinking and to forge new relationships. The ultimate goal of conflict
resolution is to move conflicting parties from zero-sum, destructive patterns to positive,
constructive outcomes. Dayton (2009) points to the United Nations peacekeeping force as
perhaps the best known example of third-party intermediaries in peacebuilding efforts.
These peacekeepers respond to a diverse range of conflicts, from Haiti and Somalia to
Sierra Leone and East Timor. Other well-known mediation efforts include those by
United States Senator George Mitchell in the 1998 Northern Ireland peace accords, and
the Norwegian Institute for Applied Social Science in the 1993 Oslo accords between the
Palestinian Authority and the State of Israel.
In contrast to conflict resolution, conflict management theory acknowledges that
some conflicts may not have a readily available solution. Shirlow et al (2005: 70) suggest
that advocates of this approach tend to view violent conflict as the result of differences of
values, interests and power within and between communities. According to the conflict
Chapter 2. Literature Review and Theoretical Framework 24
management paradigm, resolution is an unrealistic goal for these conflicts. Thus, the best
approach is to manage and contain them, generally through interventions to achieve
political settlements. Miall (2004: 3) observes that these settlements usually reflect and
form the basis of compromise between the warring parties. In her study of Corsica and
the land Islands, Daftary (2004) explores the grey area (McGarry and OLeary 1993:
32, cited by Daftary 2004: 115) of autonomy as a conflict regulation method aimed at
managing rather than eliminating differences. From a different angle, Joiremans (2004)
study of Eritrea presents secession as an alternative conflict management outcome.
The approaches of conflict resolution and conflict management have both been
criticized for their oversimplification of, respectively, the conflicts and the actors
involved. With conflict resolution, the underlying philosophy suggests that conflict is
destructive and that it can be resolved permanently through mediation or other forms of
intervention. Such a belief ignores the reality that many conflicts emerge from legitimate
injustices or inequalities. The resolution of such conflicts often requires structural
changes in society that may not be possible, at least in the short term (Shirlow et al 2005:
69-70). Miall (2004: 3) criticizes the simplistic core theories of conflict resolution,
especially those that advocate win-win outcomes in two-party conflicts. For example,
Parsonss (2009: 245) reflections on the unstable transformation of Palestine expose the
navete of the Oslo peace accords. He cites Israels incorporation of the Palestine
Liberation Organization into restructured governance without accommodating the key
issues from the Palestinian nationalist agenda. Moreover, as Miall et al (1999: 21) point
out, conflict resolution can be ambiguous, as the term refers to both the intention and the
completion of the process.
While conflict management operates under more realistic assumptions than
conflict resolution, its critics cite its power political view of conflict (Miall 2004: 3-4).
By treating violence as the problem, the conflict management approach draws attention
from the real issues at the root of violent conflict, even as it suggests, problematically,
that people can be directed and controlled. Moreover, the conflict management approach
treats violence as the problem, and thus draws attention from the real issues at the root of
conflict. Serbin (2009), for example, highlights in his study of Brazils transition to
democracy the individual and collective efforts of former revolutionaries struggling
against vast social inequalities and authoritarian legacies of violence. More recently,
theories of conflict have acknowledged that conflict situations are far from static; in short,
that issues, actors and interests change over time (Vayrynen 1991, cited in Miall 2004: 5).
By way of example, Buckley-Zistel (2008) draws on her work on social change in
Uganda to expose the limiting tendency of traditional conflict management to maintain
the status quo.
Chapter 2. Literature Review and Theoretical Framework 25
The third main theoretical school has emerged from this recognition of the
inherent dynamism of conflict situations. The conflict transformation approach goes
beyond the resolution and the containment of issues that fuel violent conflict. As an
alternative to the other two approaches, conflict transformation may reflect a better
understanding of the nature of conflict itself. In 1997, Lederach published a book titled
Building Peace: Sustainable Reconciliation in Divided Societies, which peace scholars
and practitioners widely recognize as a major milestone in the development of conflict
transformation theory. Lederach argues that social conflict is by nature lodged in long-
standing relationships (ibid: 14) that are cyclical and episodic in nature, and that it holds
the power to transform the people entrenched in these relationships. If left unchecked,
these transformations can spiral the conflict into social destruction. Lederachs conflict
transformation approach aims to reduce this potential by helping to transform the
relationships, interests and discourses that support the continuation of violent conflict. He
proposes a model for understanding the dynamic process of peacebuilding as based on
two central concepts. The first concept views conflict as a progression that moves through
different stages. The second concept views peacebuilding as a process made up of
multiple interdependent roles, functions and activities. Significantly, this approach
operates at a number of different levels. It recognizes that enduring peace depends on
structural changes that address inequalities and injustices, as well as on individual- and
community-level changes to beliefs and perceptions (Lederach 1995, cited in Shirlow et
al 2005: 69-70).
The conflict transformation approach has been developed subsequently by both
theorists and practitioners. In practice, conflict transformation is a comprehensive and
wide-ranging approach that emphasizes the need to provide support for groups within the
society in conflict, rather than relying on the mediation of outsiders. As Kriesberg and
Miller (2009: 25) point out: Many analyses of peacebuilding focus on external
intervention, but the partisans themselves bear the greatest burden in building a stable and
just peace. Constructive conflict is seen as a vital agent of and catalyst for change that
challenge(s) norms and valuesand address(es) the distribution of power at the heart of
political processes (Dayton and Kriesberg 2009: 1-2). Crucially, it recognises that
conflicts change gradually through a series of smaller or larger changes, thus affecting
different system levels at different times. Like many theories pressed into practice, it must
be continually adjusted in response to the changing nature of the conflicts it addresses.
According to Miall (2004: 3), conflict transformation is best viewed not as a wholly new
approach, but rather as a re-conceptualisation of the field in order to make it more
relevant to contemporary conflicts.
Chapter 2. Literature Review and Theoretical Framework 26
Conflict transformation may currently be the most widely embraced approach,
but it is not without weakness. As Miall (2004: 17) notes, (m)ost theories concentrate
either on the causes and development of conflict or on the creation and sustenance of a
peacebuilding capacity, and fail to sufficiently integrate an understanding of how the
preventors and causes of conflict interact. He argues that the conflict transformation
approach still lacks precise theories to capture the emergent properties of conflict. For
Ryan (2007), the concept of transformation is as ambiguous as the concept of resolution.
He argues that although transformation is considered an attractive word (ibid: 1)
associated with appealing traits like optimism, not all transformations are positive. Ryan
points out that dictators like Stalin, Pol Pot, Mao and Hitler were all social transformers
who approached social problems with an ideologically-driven, messianic commitment to
radical change (ibid: 26). Moreover, fear, loss and destruction in war could also be seen
as an unintended experience of transformation (Frykman 1997, cited by Ryan 2007: 59).
For Ryan, transformation is an underdeveloped concept that can be criticized for its
vagueness and ambiguities. As with the concept of conflict resolution, conflict
transformation likewise lacks clarity. In addressing mediation, it potentially confuses the
process with the outcome. However, Ryan also argues that negative transformations may
have a powerful role to play, providing clues and guidance with regard to the potential for
positive transformation in the post-violence stage of conflict (ibid: 59).
Curiously, the scholarship on conflict transformation pays only cursory attention
to the transformation of spatial relationships. In conflicts entrenched in competing claims
to territory, people may form relationships across a broad spectrum, from physical to
imaginary, with these contested places. In many settings, such as Israel-Palestine and
Northern Ireland, the conflict may be rooted in competing struggles to define contested
terrain. Following Graham (2004), I argue that the challenge of peacebuilding involves
the creation of shared place-based identities among the conflicting parties. To this end,
the spatial dimensions of cultural conflict cannot be underestimated. In the next section, I
explore the scope for cultural geography in conflict transformation theory.
2. Conflict Transformation and Cultural Geography
In 2005, Lederach published a book titled The Moral Imagination. The type of
imagination under discussion is no less than that which he believes to hold the capacity to
transcend violence. The moral imagination, according to Lederach, must be explored in
two broad directions. In one direction lies the creative process itself, the wellspring that
Chapter 2. Literature Review and Theoretical Framework 27
feeds the building of peace (ibid: 5). In the other direction, however, Lederach issues this
call:
(W)e must understand and feel the landscape of protracted violence
and why it poses such deep-rooted challenges to constructive change.
In other words, we must set our feet deeply into the geographies and
realities of what destructive relationships produce, what legacies
they leave, and what breaking their violent patterns will require. (ibid:
Lederachs language captures the geographic dimensions to conflict transformation
theory, but few (if any) theorists in peace studies have interrogated their scope. This is
surprising, given the importance of place-derived identities and relationships in conflicts
that involve contested territorial claims. In these types of conflicts, the land itself
becomes as important an actor as the conflicting parties. As Miall (2004: 8) notes, the
meaning of a conflict depends largely on the context out of which it arises, with
assumptions and attitudes shaped by previous relationships, and driving behaviours based
on memories of the past. In this way, place  as both physical entity and symbolic
concept  and the context for peacebuilding are closely entwined.
The conflict transformation approach emphasizes the transformation of
relationships, interests and discourses that underlie and fuel the conflict. In general, these
tend to focus on interpersonal dynamics, firmly couched in social relationships between
the conflicting parties. But the relational space that Lederach (2005: 7) describes could
also apply to that between people and place. People in conflict, especially those conflicts
involving competing territorial claims, may cultivate deep relationships with these
contested places. The importance of place to the development of a conflict, and its
delicate aftermath, cannot be ignored.
Conflicts in divided societies are often created by  and, in turn, re-create 
situations of entrenched, antagonistic ethnic identity. Ethnic identity can be particularly
fierce when linked to a collective memory of past or present traumas (Polkingham and
Byrne 2001). Ross (2001) describes these polarizing events as psychocultural traumas,
or non-negotiable cultural claims in which chosen traumas are incorporated into a
narrative of identity and passed on. In a landmark treatise, Smith (1986: 21-31) developed
six components of ethnicity around which an ethnic group tends to cohere: 1) an
identifying name; 2) a common myth of descent, involving either temporal or spatial
origins; 3) a shared history, based on shared memories that serve to unite successive
generations; 4) a distinctive and shared culture, such as common language, religion or
Chapter 2. Literature Review and Theoretical Framework 28
customs, that are reflected in the lifestyles and values of the group; 5) a link to place, for
instance a homeland or territory; and 6) a sense of solidarity, derived from a meaningful
sense of self-identity and self-worth. Smith synthesized these six criteria to define ethnic
groups as named human populations with shared ancestry myths, histories and cultures,
having an association with a specific territory and a sense of solidarity (ibid: 32,
emphasis mine).
Following Smiths definition, a sense of belonging to a place is fundamental to
the formation of ethnic identity. Ashworth and Graham (2005: 3) describe the active
process of ascribing identities to places: In defining the discourses of inclusion and
exclusion that constitute identity, people call upon an affinity with places or, at least, with
representations of places, which, in turn, are used to legitimate their claim to those
places. Community and place, both of which can be read as products of the imagination,
thus form a reciprocal relationship:
The group is seen as being formed by the place (we are what we
are because we come from here) while the place becomes special
through its association with the group (here is where we were
formed and thus belong.)Space is transformed into place
through traditions, memories, myths and narratives and its
uniqueness confirmed and legitimated in terms of their
relationship to particular representations of the past. (Ashworth et
al 2007: 54)
If community and place are social constructs, then (a)ll constructs of space and place,
even those that pretend to neutrality, carry an ideological intent (Ashworth et al 2007:
63). Not surprisingly, the assertion of ethnic identities on and over contested territory can
create new sources of conflict, or provoke existing ones. Crang (1998: 162) describes the
circular logic whereby ones right to belong to a space is seen as dependent on
possessing the culture that is also used to identify the territory, potentially forming a
potent combination of blood and soil. Given that identity and sense of place are deeply
entwined, the process of peacebuilding must address the ways in which their
entanglement contributes to conflict.
Despite its relative nuance, the conflict transformation approach tends to sideline
the importance of identity in building peace. Although conflict transformation recognizes
the complex dynamics of relationships, the approach lacks an understanding of the ways
in which identity profoundly shapes these relationships, alongside the discourses,
perceptions and beliefs that also must be challenged and transformed. Peacebuilding in
Chapter 2. Literature Review and Theoretical Framework 29
contested territories involves not only the transformation of relationships between people
but also, and crucially, transformation of the relationships between identity and place. For
conflicts entrenched in competing claims over territory, geography could bring vital
perspectives and dimensions to their theorization. I argue that conflict transformation
theory could benefit from a deeper engagement with geography in general, and with
cultural geography in particular. Cultural geography concerns itself with understanding
people and the places they occupy, through analyzing cultural identities and cultural
landscapes. Norton (2006: 21-22, original emphasis) succinctly summarizes the
importance of place to cultural geography: Identity is not simply a matter of who we are,
but also where we are.
In recent times, cultural geography itself has experienced a transformation from
an essentially descriptive, empiricist enterprise to a more conceptually varied search for
understanding and meaning of both peoples and places (Norton 2006: 2). Although
cultural geography is a contested arena, with an abundance of vying approaches and
research interests, at its heart is a fundamental concern with how cultural groups create
landscapes that, in turn, shape their cultural identities. To this end, I argue that cultural
landscapes can provide a conceptual framework for interrogating the relationships
between place and identity that lie at the heart of conflict over contested territory. In the
next section, I draw on scholarship from contemporary cultural geography to explore the
potential for contested landscapes to serve as a theoretical framework for studies of
conflict and peacebuilding.
3. Contested Landscapes
Although landscape is a basic organizing concept for the discipline of geography,
landscape itself is a fiercely contested term. The word is an English rendering of the
German composite landschaft. The first part, land, refers to the area used to support a
group of people; the second, schaft, refers to the molding of a social unity. Together, they
refer to group activities and experiences that occur in a particular place. As Norton (2006)
describes, early 20
century geographers inherited this conceptual framework, along with
a pictorial meaning of landscape that emerged through the European tradition of scenic
painting. In recent times, however, geographers have turned away from longstanding
material and empirical traditions of enquiry (Wylie 2007: 15) and their attendant
interpretations of landscape, towards more complex and multi-faceted interpretations.
Within cultural geography, landscapes hold a pivotal and shifting focus of inquiry
between people, place, culture and identity. Over the past century, geographers have
Chapter 2. Literature Review and Theoretical Framework 30
complicated the concept of landscape enormously, from a transparent window through
which reality may be unproblematically viewed (Moore and Whelan 2007: x) to an
interpretation of landscapes as material and metaphorical sites of representation. In many
ways, the evolution of contemporary cultural geography can be traced through the
evolving concept of landscape itself (Wylie 2007; Norton 2006). More recently, the
development of new cultural geography has focused analysis of landscape on matters of
cultural identity  the formation of identities with reference both to other groups of
people and to places, as these places are themselves contested. In his historiography of
landscape and memory, OKeeffe (2007: 4) argues that scholars who embrace a
contemporary, constructivist understanding of landscape see humans as situated inside
landscapes, forming and re-forming them. As Norton (2006: 2) notes, new cultural
geography, like its conceptual predecessors, is engrossed with a fundamental concern
with how cultural groups create landscapes that, in turn, reinforce their cultural
identities.
There is a question as to what constitutes landscape, and particularly a cultural
landscape. On the one hand, and outside of academia, the latter has been pressed into
service by organizations as diverse as the American Society of Landscapes Architects, the
United States National Park Service, and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization (UNESCO). As Alanen and Melnick (2000: 7-8) point out, each of
these organizations adopts its own definition of the term. UNESCO offers a particularly
intriguing and high-profile example. The sites on its World Heritage List are perhaps the
best known examples of cultural landscapes. UNESCO (2009) defines the cultural
landscapes on the World Heritage List as those sites that testify to the creative genius,
social development and the imaginative and spiritual viability of humanity. To UNESCO,
cultural landscapes are distinct physical entities  cultivated mountain terraces, for
example, or sacred temples  whose preservation the organization claims for the
collective identity of humanity.
In stark contrast are interpretations of the cultural landscape as more symbolic,
and less moored to physical space. For instance, Ashworth et al (2007: 60-62) see
landscapes as largely symbolic entities that function as significant sources for
unravelling present geographies of political and cultural identities. Matless (1998, 2000)
removes the focus from the specificity of place; he describes cultures of landscape that
place the focus upon more multifaceted cultural movements, debates and practices, in
which landscape circulates both materially and symbolically, such as in debates over
citizenship, identity and planning. In yet another contrast, Alanen and Melnick (2000: 16)
describe landscape as both artefact and system, as product and process. Wylie (2007),
however, may best capture the ambiguity by exploring landscape as a series of tensions
Chapter 2. Literature Review and Theoretical Framework 31
between proximity and distance; observation and inhabitation; eye and land; and culture
and nature. He argues for an interpretation of landscape as both material entity and
symbolic meaning, as both persistent in form and changeable in meaning (page 193,
original emphasis).
With respect to my own work, I have been influenced greatly by Matless, and to a
far lesser extent by Wylie. Although both scholars represent a later phase of new
cultural geographies, their approaches to landscape differ significantly. Wylie works
largely within the rubric of phenomenology, a branch of European continental
philosophy that emerged in the late-19
and early-20
centuries. In his overview of its
recent applications to landscape, Wylie (2007) emphasizes that like most major
philosophical traditions, phenomenology has been practiced and defined in diverse ways.
Within cultural geography, phenomenological understandings of landscape have been
harnessed to address issues of culture-nature relations, embodiment and performance (for
example, Tuan 1974, 1977; Seamon 1979; Seamon and Mugerauer 1989; Relph 1976). In
recent times, its primary advocates have grappled with these ideas through the rich
theoretical movement of non-representational theory, which emphasizes and
foregrounds the body  with its attendant practices, performances and lived experiences 
in the world (for example, Thrift 1996, 1997, 1999; Lorimer 2006). Lorimer (2005: 83)
describes non-representational theory as an umbrella term for diverse work that seeks
better to cope with our self-evidently more-than-human, more-than-textual multisensual
worlds. Although embodiment is not my primary focus, in its emphasis on tactility (see
Hetherington 2003; Lewis 2000) and particularly Wylies (2002, 2005) accounts of
walking, phenomenological understandings of landscape resonate to a small degree with
my own work in Northern Ireland.
However, for the most part I share the scepticism that other geographers have
articulated with regard to non-representational theory and landscape phenomenology (for
example, Castree and MacMillan 2004; Nelson 1999; Jacobs and Nash 2003). In an early
review of the emerging oeuvre, Nash (2000: 661-662) observes:
Turning away from representation and texts would mean
abandoning the tradition within cultural geographyof
exploring the intersections between representations, discourses,
materials things, spaces and practices  the intertwined and
interacting material and social worldMy wariness about
abstract accounts of body-practices and the return to
phenomenological notions of being-in-the-world arises also
from the dangerthat they constitute a retreat from feminism
Chapter 2. Literature Review and Theoretical Framework 32
and the politics of the body in favour of the individualistic and
universalizing sovereign subject.
Her critique emphasizes the tendency of these approaches to foreground a romanticized
individual subject, but also points more broadly to their contextual limitations. As Wylie
(2007: 181, original emphasis) himself admits, the broader politics of identity
construction have had difficulties with a phenomenological approach, because such an
approach appears to neglect the constraining and determining effects of forms of power.
To this end, my conceptualization of cultural landscape draws more forcefully
from what Matless (1998) describes as cultures of landscape, which conceive landscape
as one part of a constructed, circulating system of cultural meaning, in which everyday
landscape practices are contextualized in relation to the broader cultural discourses that
create them. He acknowledges that while what he calls doubleness  for example,
representation and materiality, financial and emotional value  may create difficulties for
defining landscape, such complexity may also be at the heart of contests over it (Matless
2003: 231). Fruitfully, he draws on Latours (1993) metaphor of the shuttle to describe
how landscape weav(es) through matters often held apart (Matless 2003: 231). To
Matless (1998: 12),
the question of what landscape is or means can always be
subsumed in the question of how it works; as a vehicle of social
and self identity, as a vehicle of social and self identity; as a site
for the claiming of a cultural authorityas a space for different
kinds of living.
His emphasis on how, rather than what, emphasizes landscape not as inert backdrop to
action but as culturally charged (Matless 2000: 142). This understanding resonates
powerfully with my own work, centred at the dynamic, ever-shifting intersection of
culture, landscape and identity. Like OKeeffe (2007: 4), I invoke landscapes that exist
reflexively in our cognitive as well as our corporeal experiences of the material world,
shaping and being shaped by our simultaneously multiple identities as humans.
An understanding of landscape and identity as socially constructed resonates with
an understanding that multiple values exist in the cultural landscape, thus giving rise to
multiple interpretations. For example, Dubrow (2000: 152) illustrates how landscapes
may be transformed into a battleground of contested meanings through the example of
late-19
century Asian-American immigrants to the United States. He draws his example
from Washington State, in the northwestern corner of the country, in a time of rising anti-
Chapter 2. Literature Review and Theoretical Framework 33
Chinese sentiment. As Chinese labourers came to feel more settled, they developed a
practice of storing potatoes and other food sources in underground pits; these could later
be planted as part of the new seasons crops. To the Chinese labourers, these storage pits
represented wealth upon which they could draw in the coming year. To local white
exclusionists, however, they represented a threatening transition from Chinese seasonal
labour to year-round settlement. Dubrows example highlights how different
interpretations of a landscape might fuel conflicts involving competing territorial claims,
in which different groups ascribe different meanings and narratives of identity to the same
contested space.
Contested meanings and values in landscapes can have profound effects on
identity, particularly with regard to territorial claims. As Hardesty (2000) explains, people
invoke their own cultural and social images in the creation of cultural landscapes. These
landscapes reflect and form the continuous process of world-making (ibid: 171),
changing as people themselves and their cultures change. Along similar lines, Crang
(1998: 162) argues that the cultural landscape can be seen as an agent in the process of
imbuing territory with the ideas of a specific cultural identity. Hence, the collision of
different landscapes may create social and political controversies that involve the
maintenance of cultural identities. Powerful, paradigmatic examples of the relationship
between identity and cultural landscape can be found in scholarship on the Middle East.
Selwyn (1995), for instance, illuminates how the Israeli landscape is used to provide a
metaphorical setting to define us versus other, and to construct myths of defence.
Symbols of activity on and attitudes toward Israeli land then find their way into the
construction of cultural identity. Likewise, in his analysis of the contested symbolic
landscape of the Rashidieh refugee camp in Lebanon, Ramadan (2009) explores
landscape as a medium of competition between groups. He argues that through the visual
display of posters, murals and flags, landscape becomes a medium through which
different Palestinian factions attempt to articulate and reproduce their power, influence
and ideologies.
Indeed, the co-constitutive relationship between landscapes and social practices
has been widely explored in contemporary cultural geography, particularly within
feminist and postcolonial critique (for example, Einhorn 2000). As Morin (2003: 319)
points out: Debates about landscape do not simply rest on what landscape is but also on
what landscape does  how it is produced and how it works in social practice (original
emphasis). She interprets landscape as an ideological and symbolic process that holds the
active power to (re)produce relationships among people, and between people and the
material world:
Chapter 2. Literature Review and Theoretical Framework 34
Landscape always carries with it a set of representational practices
[that] refer to how people see, interpret and represent the world
around them as landscape, and how that represented landscape
reflects and actually helps produce a set of lived relationships taking
place on the ground. (ibid: 320, original emphasis)
Her observation is particularly salient to places recovering from violent conflict, where
messages conveyed within and through the landscape enforce the lived relationships
that underpin the processes of conflict and peacebuilding, as well as the spectrum
between the two. Thus, I argue that the transformation of contested landscapes holds
powerful implications for the people who live there.
Transformation, however, is no easy task, as conflicts involving contested
landscapes and identity are frequently bound up in the politics of memory. As Schama
(1996: 7; cited in Einhorn 2000: 710) observes: Landscape is the work of the mind. Its
scenery is built up as much from strata of memory as from layers of work. In his
overview of landscape research within cultural geography, Wylie (2007) identifies
memory as perhaps the strongest focus of academic inquiry in recent times. Mitchell
(2003: 790) describes landscape as a concretization and maker of memory, echoing the
emphasis that others have placed on the mutually constitutive properties of landscape and
social practice. Morin (2003) illustrates this process in a discussion of monumental
landscapes that carry laudatory messages about war heroes and military conquest. The
messages that the monuments deploy (for instance, a particular version of the past that
celebrates masculine values) actively reproduce these values in the present, thereby
shaping current social practices and collective memories. In debates over the material use
and symbolic meaning of landscapes, memorial and heritage sites, in particular,
(l)andscape is conceived in terms of struggle and conflict (Wylie 2007: 15).
In places recovering from violent conflict, the fraught politics of heritage  like
those of memory  are embedded in contested landscapes. Indeed, Moore and Whelan
(2007) point out that as loci of both power and resistance, cultural landscapes should be
considered a key element in the heritage process. OKeeffe (2007: 9-10) echoes their
argument in the connections he draws between identity, culture, heritage and place:
communities invest in landscape formation, andlocate their identities within
landscapes or have their identities metamorphized as landscapes. Thus all
landscapesqualify as somebodys heritage. I argue that the contestation of cultural
landscapes for places recovering from conflict is based, in part, on contested narratives of
heritage and identity. Thus, the process of peacebuilding calls for the reworking of these
contested, place-based narratives. In Chapter Three, I will develop this argument through
Chapter 2. Literature Review and Theoretical Framework 35
my case study of Northern Ireland. In the next section, however, I discuss heritage in
greater depth and its role in creating and mediating social conflict.
4. The Challenge of Shared Heritage
The transformation of contested landscapes inevitably creates encounters
between conflicting narratives of cultural heritage. As the study of heritage creates a
dialogue between community, history, identity and place, the process of peacebuilding,
therefore, involves the search for shared forms of heritage on which to build a shared
future. Ashworth and Graham (2005: 4) are emphatic that heritage is not merely the study
of the past. Instead, they define heritage as:
concerned with the ways in which very selective material artefacts,
mythologies, memories and traditions become resources for the
present. The contents, interpretations and representations of the
resource are selected according to the demands of the present; an
imagined past provides resources for a heritage that is to be
bequeathed to an imagined future.
Heritage, in this context, is concerned primarily with meanings, which then give value to
material resources. These values may shift over time, when pasts have to be reinvented
to reflect new presents. Thus, heritage is as much about forgetting as remembering the
past (ibid). Ashworth and Graham (ibid: 7) then define heritage as also a knowledge, a
cultural product and a political resource, all of which serve crucial socio-political
functions.
Heritage plays a powerful role in shaping identity, particularly at the scale of the
community. Collective identity is a powerful concept, which has been interpreted with
varying degrees of suspicion by heritage practitioners and scholars. On one hand, and to
return to an example from the previous section, UNESCO suggests that the sites on its
World Heritage List form part of the collective identity of humanity. According to this
logic, these physical sites  regardless of position, location, or context  connect people
globally in what Anderson (1991) describes as an imagined community. In contrast,
geographic scholarship on the concept of collective identity is careful to address its
relationship to scale. For example, Robertson and Hall (2007) draw on their study of
memorialization in the Scottish Highlands to argue that attention should be paid to local
Chapter 2. Literature Review and Theoretical Framework 36
identity and to the ways in which it is mediated through contested narratives of the past.
Likewise, Ashworth and Graham (2005: 3) point out that:
(T)he concept of collective identity, like the notions of collective
memory or collective heritage, with which it is strongly related
does not supersede or replace individual identity. It does, however,
allow generalization and location of ideas of belonging within
political and social contexts.
Their interpretation, while acknowledging the usefulness of invoking the notion, also
suggests that collective forms of identity must work in tandem with those at other scales.
This is particularly important in places recovering from conflict. As I discussed in the
first section of this chapter, the process of peacebuilding requires the reworking of
relationships at all levels of society.
The creation of collective identity is an active process, in which memory plays a
critical role. As OKeeffe (2007: 5) argues, at whatever scale a collective is constituted,
we have no collective capacity to share memories that are not in some way externally
programmed for us. To Robertson and Hall (2007), these external programmes have
distinctly geographic dimensions. In an evocation of the contested cultural landscapes I
discussed in the previous section, they describe a psychic terrain of symbolic spaces that
attempt to fix collective memory, and act as prompts for a shared identity. Likewise,
Busteed (2007) draws on the contested and controversial commemoration ritual of the
Manchester Martyrs  three Irish nationalists convicted and executed for the 1867 murder
of a policeman in Manchester, England  to emphasize the process of selection in seeking
historical justification for current political attitudes and practices. He argues that group
memory is a fluid, flexible construct subject to constant renewal (ibid: 70) that draws
the past, present and future into complex dialogue.
In societies recovering from violent conflict, these connections are particularly
fraught. Winter (2007) excavates this dialogue in his study of post-conflict Cambodia
and domestic tourism related to the annual Khmer New Year festival. He explores the
cultural landscape of Angkor, itself a UNESCO-designated World Heritage Site, as not
merely a relic of an ancient past, but as a form of living heritage, pivotal in the
articulation of cultural, ethnic and national identities. Within the present-day site of
Angkor lies the presence of imagined pasts and futures; the idea of memory focuses
attention to the ways places and times are actively constituted and reconstituted. Winter
draws upon memory to illuminate how his Cambodian research participants
simultaneously reappropriated, remembered and forgot recent traumatic events through
Chapter 2. Literature Review and Theoretical Framework 37
the personal experience of being a tourist at the heritage site of Angkor. He argues that
the twin processes of forgetting and remembering recent histories [is] vital to the
(re)formation of collective identities (ibid: 134).
Given the complexities that surround heritage and its role in the creation of
collective identities, the potential for contestation is rife, and nowhere more so than in
societies recovering from violent conflict. Heritage may refer to past and future, but it is
centred in the present and, hence, is created, shaped and managed by, and in response to
the demands of the present. As such it is open to constant revision and change and is also
both a source and a repercussion of social conflict (Ashworth et al 2007: 3). Ashworth
and Graham (2005: 5-7) declare that the concept of heritage is inevitably contested,
particularly when places and objects are involved in issues related to the legitimization of
power structures. Tensions arise from the continuous interplay of the official/unofficial
and insider/outsider dichotomies that characterize every single manifestation of heritage
(ibid: 11). Ashworth et al (2007: 5) attribute these dichotomies to the zero-sum
characteristics of heritage: The creation of any heritage actively or potentially disinherits
or excludes those who do not subscribe to, or are embraced within, the terms of meaning
attending that heritage. Graham and McDowell (2007: 345) describe this bluntly: All
heritage is someones heritage, and therefore logically not someone elsesany creation
of heritage from the past disinherits someone elses. As Robertson and Hall (2007: 22)
argue, inevitable contestation and conflict emerge in any form of identity- and heritage-
making, especially with regard to the question, Whose heritage? They point out that
both heritage and identity are susceptible to contestation from within as much as they are
from without (ibid: 34). Along similar lines, Busteed (2007) argues that while collective
memory is central to the formulation of national identity, within any group there are
alternative readings of events and how they should be commemorated.
The processes by which heritage creates and manages collective identities are
ripe for rupture. As Ashworth and Graham (2005: 9) argue, (t)he past validates the
present by conveying an idea of timeless values and unbroken narratives. However,
different people at different times create different narratives of belonging, suggesting that
place images are unstable through time, and thus complicating the assumption of a
common linear narrative of belonging. These narratives of belonging are forged through a
connection to place that is fundamental to identity. The relationships between heritage,
identity and place are mediated through a complex series of overlapping imaginings (or
non-imaginings) of a place that, quite inevitably, create conflicts of allegiance (Ashworth
et al 2007: 54). As contemporary societies become increasingly diverse and fragmented,
many pasts become transformed through many heritages into many identitieswhich
may support, coexist with or conflict with each other (ibid: 45). Moreover, an
Chapter 2. Literature Review and Theoretical Framework 38
individuals experiences of heritage are often plural, consumed for diverse purposes and
often in combination, through an individuals capability to identify with different spatial,
jurisdictional and imaginative scales.
For societies recovering from violent conflict, political settlements relating to
competing territorial claims are only the beginning of the long process of building peace.
Underpinning these claims to territory are deeply entrenched narratives of heritage that
anchor people to place in the past, present and future. Northern Ireland, as I will discuss
in subsequent chapters, provides a fascinating example of the tangled web of conflict and
heritage in its multiple, contested variations. I argue that the process of peacebuilding
must address how competing versions of heritage might be reworked and reimagined, in
order to create opportunities for new, shared narratives of identity and belonging to
emerge.
5. New Places, New Identities, New Possibilities
Conflicts arising from contested spaces may at their heart be rooted in contested
ideas about the identities of place. As the process of peacebuilding transforms contested
landscapes, new possibilities emerge for how people imagine these places and their
relationships to them. The challenge of building peace is, therefore, also the challenge of
reworking identities. In this section, I outline my framework for theorizing identity, with
particular emphasis on feminist and postcolonial scholarship. Postcolonial and feminist
theorizations offer a rich set of conceptual resources (Young 2001: 64) for probing the
complicated questions emerging from spatialized and ideological conflict; they attempt to
destabilize fixities and to open the concept of identity to multiple interpretations. In doing
so, these theoretical explorations suggest ways in which conflict might be transformed.
In societies recovering from violent conflict, the transformation of contested
landscapes opens possibilities for new ways of thinking about place. Unlike the rigid
interpretations of place and belonging that are invoked during the conflict, the post-
conflict aftermath calls for reinterpretations that can be shared by all. Masseys (1993,
1994) work offers a useful theoretical framework. In her influential book Space, Place
and Gender, she argues forcefully for a new idea of place:
Thinking of places in this way implies that they are not so much
bounded areas as open and porous networks of social relations. It
implies that their identities are constructed through the
specificity of their interaction with other places rather than by
Chapter 2. Literature Review and Theoretical Framework 39
counterposition to them. It reinforces the idea, moreover, that
those identities will be multipleand that what is to be the
dominant image of any place will be a matter of contestation and
will change over time. (Massey 1994: 12)
Massey (1993: 66) advocates a progressive concept of place that resists reactionary
notions of place as a single, essential identity constructed out of introverted history. She
argues instead for a concept of place that is neither static nor bounded, and whose
multiple identities are full of internal conflicts (Massey 1994). Although criticized within
postcolonial literature for its assumption of white community as stable background
(McGuinness 2002: 111), Masseys essay has also been lauded as nothing less than a
reimagination of space. As Nash (2005b: 64) emphasizes, Massey reimagines the local
via interconnection with wider geographies, thus refiguring identities as multiply scaled.
Her work is particularly relevant in theorizing the transformations of place  both
physical and imaginary  that occur in the process of building peace.
Masseys re-orientation of place away from static essentialism and toward
multiplicity illuminates similar possibilities for re-orientating the human identities and
relationships that flow through and create her progressive concept of space. A sizeable
body of scholarship challenges more traditional conceptualizations of essentialized
identity categories. Feminist scholars  especially those who foreground issues of
race/ethnicity/imperialism (Beasley 2005)  are particularly engaged with this task.
Critiques of the exclusivity of the mainstream, predominantly white womens movement
led to the development of multiple feminist identities and the recognition that identity is
always both internally fractured and externally multiple (Bondi 1993: 97). As Brewer
(2001) points out, many social identity theories now recognize that individuals derive
identity from more than one social group, and that they develop strategies for managing
these multiple identities. I argue that for societies engaged in the process of peacebuilding,
an acknowledgment of identity as nuanced and multiple offers scope for reworking more
rigid interpretations that previously had contributed to and sustained the conflict.
Alongside its other transformations, I argue that the process of peacebuilding
creates opportunities for reframing senses of belonging by encouraging the derivation of
identity from diverse and multiple categories. The concept of intersectionality offers a
useful theoretical framework. Minow (1997: 38, cited in Valentine 2007: 12) defines
intersectionality as the way in which any particular individual stands at the crossroads of
multiple groups. Valentine (2007: 18) argues that the concept offers a framework in
which to develop geographical thinking about the relationship between multiple
categories of belonging. By emphasizing the fluidity and instability of intersections
Chapter 2. Literature Review and Theoretical Framework 40
between categories, the concept of intersectionality emphasizes the complex ways in
which identities are unmade as well as made, and undone as well as done. Valentines
interpretation of intersectionality contains a welcome note of caution, acknowledging
both the challenge of negotiating the crossroads of multiple categories of belonging and
also the inherent messiness involved in such transformations of identity.
The reworking of identity also finds scope in Halls theorization of new
ethnicities. To Hall (1992: 257), ethnicity acknowledges the place of history, language
and culture in the construction of subjectivity and identity, as well as the fact that all
discourse is placed, positioned, situated, and all knowledge is contextual. Hall goes
beyond Smiths (1986) six-point definition of ethnicity, which I outlined in the second
section of this chapter. He calls instead for the decoupling of ethnicity as it currently
functions in the dominant discourse. For example, and with regard to British identity
politics, Hall describes the equivalence of ethnicity with nationalism, imperialism, racism
and the state as the points of attachment around which a distinctive and reactionary
English ethnicity has been constructed (ibid: 254). Instead, he presents an alternative
conceptualization of ethnicity as a new cultural politics which engages rather than
suppresses difference, and which depends, in part, on the cultural construction of new
ethnic identities (ibid: 257, original emphasis). In a resonance with Masseys (1994)
concept of unbounded place, Hall describes how a more flexible interpretation of
ethnicity, predicated on difference and diversity, might shape the construction of
identity:
[There is a] recognition that we all speak from a particular place,
out of a particular history, a particular culture, without being
contained by that position...We are all, in that sense, ethnically
located and our ethnic identities are crucial to our subjective sense
of who we are. (Hall 1992: 258, original emphasis)
In this way, Hall acknowledges the specificity of place, history and culture, and their
importance to oursense of who we are, even as he frees us from their constraints.
Such an interpretation holds powerful ramifications for societies emerging from conflict,
as they engage with the task of opening previously rigid narratives of cultural heritage to
new, flexible ways of locating ethnic identity.
Indeed, the reworking of ethnic identities that underlie conflict holds powerful
possibilities for developing new forms of belonging in a transforming social landscape.
For example, Dwyer (2002: 185), in her study of young British Muslim women, argues
that the negotiation of new ethnicities and hybrid identities can reveal how alternative
Chapter 2. Literature Review and Theoretical Framework 41
forms of national belonging in postcolonial Britain might be imagined. She draws on the
concept of diasporic identities, which cut across and displace national boundaries and,
in doing so, challenge the fixity of place-bound identities (Brah 1996, cited in Dwyer
2000: 475). Dwyer argues that identities must be seen as discursive formations,
constituted within particular social, cultural and economic relations. As with Valentines
(2007) theorizing of intersectionality, Dwyer (2000: 484) describes ways in which her
respondents articulated alternative identities that draw on an alternative Islamic
diaspora, and argues that such identities are shaped by wider globalised discourses as
well as local experiences. More broadly, Dwyers argument illuminates the powerful,
shifting relationships between new forms of identity and new meanings of place. These
are the relationships that lie at the heart of my research on Northern Ireland.
For societies recovering from violent conflict, the advent of peace creates and
coincides with new forms of engagement with the wider world, which may lead to new
relationships between place, heritage and identity. The process of redefinition, alongside
its attendant transformations, holds both opportunity and challenge in equal measures. As
Ashworth and Graham (2005: 4-5) observe, however, dissonance is not necessarily
destructive. Paradoxically, it is also a condition of the construction of pluralist, multi-
cultural societies that strive for inclusive conceptualizations of the past. The very lack of
consistency embodied in dissonance offers scope for constructive imaginings of identity,
drawn from shifting conceptualizations of transforming places.
The process of peacebuilding calls upon identities that are malleable and can
develop in pace with the other transformations at work in societies recovering from
conflict. To this end, Halls (1996: 2) discursive approach, which sees identification as a
construction, a process never completed, may best encapsulate the nuance necessary for
this work. His concept of identity
accepts that identities are never unified andincreasingly
fragmented and fracturing; never singular but multiple constructed
across different, often intersecting and antagonistic discourses,
practices and positions. They are subject to a radical
historicization, and are constantly in the process of change and
transformationThough they seem to invoke an origin in a
historical past with which they continue to correspond, actually
identities are about questions of using the resources of history,
language and culture in the process of becoming rather than being:
not who we are or where we came from, so much as what we
might become. (ibid: 4)
Chapter 2. Literature Review and Theoretical Framework 42
In this way, Halls conceptualization of identity points toward new ways of negotiating
senses of belonging, and new possibilities for defining relationships. Yet lurking behind
such optimism is the possibility that identities and ideas of place might become more  not
less  entrenched and less inclined toward positive, creative change. These amgibuities,
which I will explore in relation to Northern Irelands peace process, speak to both the
challenges and the possibilities in places of tentative, waking peace.
Conclusion
In this chapter, I have argued for the importance of cultural geography to
developing a more nuanced and comprehensive theoretical framework for the conflict
transformation approach. I understand conflicts involving competing territorial claims to
be rooted in contested ideas about the identities of place, and I have argued that the
transformation of relationships between cultural identities and senses of place is crucial to
the process of peacebuilding. I developed this argument by drawing on existing
scholarship on contested cultural landscapes, exploring their potential for serving as a
conceptual framework for investigating the transformations at work in places of
recovering conflict. Finally, I have positioned the transformations of contested cultural
landscapes  their challenges and their possibilities  within broader discussions of
cultural heritage and new forms of identity and belonging.
Given the spotlight in which the politics of heritage, memory, identity and
belonging unfold in places recovering from conflict, the idea of public may offer a clue
to their post-conflict possibilities. In this regard, the work of Mitchell (1995; 1996) is
particularly helpful. Mitchell (1995: 121) argues: Definitions ofthe public are not
universal and enduring; they are produced rather through constant struggle in the past and
in the present. His conceptualization carries a critical spatial element, in which public
space is the product of competing ideas about what constitutes space (order/control
versus free; dangerous, interaction) and who constitutes the public (ibid: 111). Such
ambiguities are apt for societies emerging from civil war, as their long histories of
struggle shape the dynamics of a peacetime present. To this end, and although beyond the
scope of this dissertation, I suggest that the work of defining a shared, inclusive public
may represent a new discourse of peacebuilding, in which contested landscapes evolve
and contested resources such as heritage and identity move into a shared public domain.
Chapter 2. Literature Review and Theoretical Framework 43
Curiously, there is very little scholarship on the concept of public landscape
within cultural geography. A recent on-line search of the geography database Geobase
revealed only eight papers that had listed the term as a keyword; of these papers, only two
engage with the concept with any depth. In their study of Cyprus, Kliot and Mansfield
(1997: 499) designate public landscape as a set of elements such as public meeting-
places, parks and squares that comprise a wider political landscape of material systems,
behaviours and ideologies. Bell (1999) adopts a slightly different tack in his study of
national identity in Uzbekistan, focusing on the ways in which political elites have
redesigned Tashkents official public landscape (ibid: 184) to rally citizens around
symbols of national autonomy. For both of these studies, public landscape is linked to
material manifestations of governance. Although I acknowledge these dimensions as
important, I am drawn to a broader conceptualization of public as diverse and multiple,
and I seek to understand how public landscape might be invoked for a study of
peacebuilding. Could public landscape be read as a viable transformation of a contested
cultural landscape? As a peace process provokes such transformations, drawing the
resources of heritage and identity into shared public domain, might the concept of public
landscape offer a useful theoretical framework for exploring subsequent phases of
peacebuilding? These issues hover over my empirical research, and I will return to them in
the final chapter.
My research traces two interlinking theoretical aims, which in turn provoke
related research questions:
Aim 1. To examine how transformations of contested landscapes provoke new
perceptions of place and geographic scale.
Research Questions:
 How do these transformations alter long-held meanings of places associated with
violent conflict?
 How do they shape the ways in which people relate contested landscapes to
broader regional, national and international scales?
Aim 2. To examine how transformations of contested landscapes shape the
expression, creation and negotiation of identity.
Search conducted on 9 March 2010.
Chapter 2. Literature Review and Theoretical Framework 44
Research Questions:
 How do these transformations help to create new dimensions of identity?
 How do people negotiate their shifting identities in a place of recovering conflict?
 How do interactions between shifting identities and transformations of contested
landscapes address the legacy of violence and contribute to the process of
building peace?
In the next chapter, I discuss these questions as they relate to my research site, Belfast,
Northern Ireland.
Chapter 3. Northern Ireland 45
Chapter Three
Northern Ireland: A Case Study for Conflict Transformation
Introduction
In the preceding chapter, I outlined some key theoretical ideas and concepts that
shape my research questions. In this chapter, I ground my theoretical framework more
concretely in my research site, Belfast, Northern Ireland. This is a place where fraught
politics of culture, identity, heritage and belonging collide in the complex transformations of
long-standing social conflict. To this end, Northern Ireland provides a fascinating case study
for exploring the nexus of cultural geography and conflict transformation.
I begin with an overview of predominantly 20
century history, tracing the formation
of Northern Ireland and its subsequent, contested evolution. I briefly describe the political
tensions that erupted in the 30-year civil war known euphemistically as The Troubles,
highlighting the roles played by paramilitary forces on both sides and their enduring legacy
of violence and distrust. The latter part of this section focuses on the peace process that
culminated in and flows from the landmark 1998 peace accords. I describe the settlements
ambivalent reception, drawing on arguments by its critics to amplify the unresolved questions
of identity and belonging that still simmer in Northern Ireland.
The second section explores post-conflict Belfast, where I conducted the bulk of
my research. I describe how sectarianism shapes the urban landscape, with its striking
patterns of housing segregation and the interface areas that form frequent flashpoints of
violence between warring communities. I discuss the effects of Belfasts iconic peace lines,
which are designed and implemented to contain such urban violence, but which tend instead
to deepen antagonisms. Equally iconic are the ways in which residents of Belfast mark
territory with the patriotic colours of their respective mother countries  green, white and
orange for Ireland; red, white and blue for Britain  and with murals that reflect and deploy
narratives of cultural identity. I then turn to other societal challenges that haunt contemporary
Belfast: patterns of educational segregation, drug use and ongoing paramilitary presence. By
developing a detailed description of the citys entrenched sectarian legacy, I contextualize the
contested cultural landscapes that I will explore through my empirical research.
The third section meditates on the complexities of place and identity that underpin
Northern Irelands conflict, and that lie at the heart of my research. I discuss how the absence
Chapter 3. Northern Ireland 46
of a shared identity (re)produces Northern Irelands divisive, sectarian conceptualizations of
physical and imaginative place. I draw on existing scholarship to explore how these unagreed
and contested representations are rooted in the regions fraught historical narratives, and how
Protestant-loyalists, in particular, struggle to anchor a valid sense of belonging against the
more confident cultural narratives of Catholic-nationalists. I then gesture toward new
conceptualizations of place and identity that resist their fossilized territorialization, focusing
in particular on work by Reid (2004, 2005, 2008) that calls for the development of multiple
and shared senses of place and belonging. I end this section by querying how new types of
identity might emerge through the transformations of Belfasts ever-shifting and contested
landscapes.
I turn to a related challenge of peacebuilding in the fourth section, as I examine how
people negotiate contested senses of place and identity through the prism of history and
heritage. I begin with a discussion of Northern Irelands ambivalent postcolonial status,
drawing on work by Nash (1999, 2002) and Howe (2000) that complicates simplistic clichs
and repositions Northern Irelands relationship to colonialism with greater ambiguity. I then
turn to the complex questions surrounding the role of heritage, exploring how contested
processes of memorialization and commemoration, through the inscription of victimhood on
public space, perpetuate the conflict. I explore the contested landscapes of identity through
the burgeoning popularity of conflict tourism and through controversial plans to develop
two of the most iconic landmarks of the Troubles: the Maze prison and the Crumlin Road
courthouse. In the final paragraphs, I discuss the potential for developing a shared sense of
heritage, and the role that this might play in connecting Northern Ireland to wider dimensions
of identity, geography and belonging.
The fifth section focuses on Northern Irelands rapidly shifting social landscape, as
people who belong to neither of the dominant ethno-religious designations become
increasingly visible. I begin with a brief overview of the political framework for Northern
Irelands race relations dialogue, outlining how major legislative acts have emphasized new
directions in social policy. I then describe some recent trends in migration  by workers,
refugees and asylum seekers  that are leading to greater ethnic diversity. Next, I discuss the
rising patterns of violence and antagonism directed at Northern Irelands so-called ethnic
minorities. I contextualize this phenomenon through a discussion of sectarianism, racism and
the complex relationships between the two. Finally, I explore the challenges that Northern
Irelands sectarian conflict poses for minority ethnic residents, as they negotiate their
identities and senses of belonging in a deeply divided society. I argue that the inclusion of
Chapter 3. Northern Ireland 47
their diverse voices is crucial for contemporary scholarship on Northern Irelands peace
process.
The sixth and final section discusses the challenges of putting peace into practice. I
begin by describing high-profile strategies that place good relations at the centre of work in
the community/voluntary sector, and then by describing the gap between rhetoric and reality.
Next, I discuss the attempted application of conflict transformation theory to Northern
Ireland, outlining the challenges of moving beyond superficial cross-community engagement.
I explore the controversial practice of single identity strategies that focus exclusively on one
community, with the intent of building a confident base from which to engage with other
cultures. The section ends with a discussion of diversity and pluralism as enshrined within
Northern Irelands community relations policy. I draw on the work of Nash (2005a), who
argues for an expansive concept of diversity that recognizes multiple types and scales of
difference, from which to create the basis for strong, confident, inclusive identities in
Northern Irelands rapidly shifting society. As I will explore in later chapters, my research is
both based on and emerges from the practical complexities of the peace process.
The Troubles and their aftermath invite analysis from a wide range of social science
disciplines. For my own purposes, however, I emphasize the themes most relevant to cultural
geography: place, identity, culture, heritage. Although this chapter takes deceptively linear
chronological form, these themes circulate fluidly throughout my study. They illuminate the
spectre of contested history in contemporary attempts to build peace, and emphasize the
fraught spatial dimensions of the Northern Ireland conflict. Through this chapter, my major
theoretical themes take material form. Here, I contextualize the contested landscapes that I
will explore in my empirical research, and I frame their transformations as both possibility
and challenge for a divided society emerging from violent conflict.
1. Historical Overview
In 1921, following years of insurgence and mounting public anger, politicians from
both sides of the Irish Sea negotiated the fate of Ireland. They drew an invisible line around
six of the nine counties of Ulster, the islands northernmost province. In doing so, they
created two distinct entities: the small statelet of Northern Ireland, which promptly chose to
remain a part of the United Kingdom; and, from the remaining twenty-six counties, the
autonomous state that would eventually become the Republic of Ireland. Their decision
Chapter 3. Northern Ireland 48
created two divergent countries rooted in the same island. Today, the repercussions resonate
powerfully.
Northern Ireland occupies fewer than 5,500 square miles, but the six counties that
comprise it are among the most disputed in the world. Northern Irelands predominantly
Protestant unionists claim this territory for Britain, while the predominantly Catholic
nationalists claim it for the Republic of Ireland.
The contention has its origins in the 17
century, when the British government implemented a policy of plantation settlement in an
attempt to bring the colony more tightly under control. Over the next centuries, waves of
English and Scottish settlers moved to Ireland. The majority settled in Ulster, which until
then had been the most culturally Gaelic of the four Irish provinces, and thus the most
resistant to British rule (Bardon 1982). In what has become known as the Protestant
Ascendency, the settlers assumed a position of social, economic and political superiority
over the native Catholic population they displaced. When political pressures necessitated the
partition of Ireland in 1921, unionist negotiators selected only the six northeastern counties of
Ulster that would ensure a Protestant majority; the predominantly Catholic counties of Cavan,
Donegal, and Monaghan became part of the newly created Irish Free State.
The partition of Ireland created a pressure-cooker effect that concentrated the
conflict within a smaller territory (Anderson and Hamilton 1999: 107). From its inception,
sectarianism has featured prominently in Northern Ireland. The British government at
Westminster adopted a hands-off strategy, delegating virtually all aspects of domestic
governance to the Protestant-dominated assembly based to the east of Belfast in Stormont.
These unionist officials made no secret of their pro-Protestant biases and agendas. Not
surprisingly, their attempt to maintain the status quo came at the expense of Northern
Irelands Catholic population. In the decades following partition, Catholics faced institutional
discrimination at all levels, of which job and housing discrimination were the most fractious.
State-run schools in Catholic neighbourhoods were woefully underfunded, leading to an
exodus toward church-run schools, and resulting in a pattern of educational segregation that
continues today (Sales 1997; Kilpatrick and Leitch 2004). Long-simmering resentment and
rising anger created a situation ripe for violent conflict.
In reality, these designations are far more complex than the popular, conflated renderings of religious
and political identification might suggest. For the sake of simplicity, however, I will refer to Catholics
and Protestants as interchangeable with nationalists and unionists, respectively. Republicans and
loyalists refer to those nationalists and unionists who embrace more fervent ideological orientations.
Chapter 3. Northern Ireland 49
The era known euphemistically as The Troubles erupted in the western city of
Derry/Londonderry
in 1969. As Catholics marched to protest their disenfranchisement and
lack of political rights, British military forces responded by opening fire, killing thirteen
unarmed protestors and injuring many more. Bloody Sunday, as it came to be known,
unleashed waves of violence across Northern Ireland. The Troubles ushered in an era of
violent conflict that claimed over 3,000 lives, most of them civilian. During this time, the
Royal Ulster Constabulary became the worlds most dangerous police force in which to serve
(Mulgahy 2000), as republican dissidents routinely targeted those they perceived as aiding
the British state. The Troubles entrenched Northern Irelands patterns of segregation and left
as their legacy a culture of violence, suspicion and mutual antagonism.
One of the most striking characteristics of the Troubles was the prevalence of
paramilitary violence on both sides of the conflict. On one side, the Irish Republic Army
(IRA) renewed the long-standing republican struggle for a united, 32-county Ireland.
bombing expertise of the IRA became a hallmark of their violent campaign. They claimed
1,300 bombings in 1972 alone, including 22 that exploded in the space of 75 minutes, within
a one-mile radius of Belfasts city centre (Oppenheimer 2009). On the opposite side, the
Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF) and the Ulster Defence Association (UDA) campaigned to
defend the six counties of Northern Ireland for Britain. The UVF was a smaller, more
professional organization than the UDA; its capacity to produce and carry out bomb attacks
was due to a steady stream of gelignite and detonators from loyalist sympathizers working in
the Scottish mining industry (Cusack and McDonald 2008). The UDA, the largest loyalist
paramilitary organization, emerged from the rioting that engulfed Belfast in the early days of
the Troubles, when local residents formed defence militias to block access to their areas. At
its peak, the UDA had 40,000 members and a large reservoir of support within loyalist
communities (McDonald and Cusack 2004).
When it became clear that officials based at Stormont could no longer contain the
escalating conflict, the British government prorogued Northern Irelands parliament and
Derry is the preferred name used by nationalists, and Londonderry, by unionists. As Shirlow and
Murtagh (2006: 33) point out: Divisive naming is symptomatic of the perpetual reality that Northern
Ireland, despite significant and meaningful political change, remains as a disagreed place within
which politics remain disagreeable.
The original IRA formed in the early 20
century and was pivotal to the 1916 Easter Rising. The
Provisional IRA emerged from the turbulence generated by the 1960s civil rights movement in the
North. During the Troubles, this organization became known simply as the IRA, and its members as
Provisionals or Provos. (English 2003)
Chapter 3. Northern Ireland 50
instituted direct rule from London. Over the years, politicians attempted a handful of
interventions, from the failed Sunningdale Agreement of 1973 to the 1985 Anglo-Irish
Agreement that acknowledged the Republic of Irelands stake in the Northern Irish situation.
Not until the 1990s did sufficient momentum gather for a lasting solution to the conflict. The
peace process began with the declaration of the first ceasefire in 1994, and proceeded in fits
and starts to the signing of the peace accords
in April 1998. The watershed agreement
intertwined the pursuit of an equitable and shared society within the framework for political
settlement (Hughes and Donnelly 2004). Nationalists overwhelmingly supported the
Agreement, indicating a new priority of internal political change over the nationalist goal of a
united Ireland (Tonge 2004). Largely viewed by Catholics (including Sinn Fin, the IRAs
political arm) as a transitional constitutional framework (McGovern 2004: 640), the
Agreement called for a devolved, power-sharing government; the release of political
prisoners; and, significantly, parity of esteem for Northern Irelands two predominant
political, social, and cultural traditions.
The Agreement, however, is far from a perfect solution. Many view it with
ambivalence, arguing that it can be seen as either half full or half empty (Gallagher 2004:
639). It has been roundly criticized for the contradiction at its heart  an agreement based on
two political bodies and mutual respect for both traditions, thus reinforcing two sets of
exclusive nationalisms (Brown and MacGinty 2003; Anderson and Shuttleworth 1998).
Shirlow and Murtagh (2006: 32) refer to it witheringly as The Belfast Disagreement,
arguing that its construction provided for and legitimised the capacity of each ethno-
sectarian bloc to quixotically raise the demands they make of each other (ibid: 177).
Complicating the dynamic of these demands is the inability of unionism and loyalism to
match republicanisms ideological certainties, thereby undermining the concept of equality
between the two traditions (Graham and Nash 2006: 259). Moreover, as Graham and Nash
(ibid: 276) observe, critics argue that by privileging universal group rights, the Agreement
has led to attributes of individual identity such as culture, nationality and religion, that are
understood to be matters of choice in pluralist societies, being reinforced as determining
public identifiers in Northern Ireland.
The peace process today remains fragile. In many ways, Northern Ireland resides in a
twilight zone, caught in its spiral of history and hatred. Its nationalistic fervour for its parent
The terminology of this agreement is fraught with political connotation. Although the Good Friday
Agreement is the common name invoked in the international media, some unionists view it as a term
that is biased toward nationalism. Following Shirlow and Murtagh (2006), I will refer to this political
settlement as the Agreement.
Chapter 3. Northern Ireland 51
countries is hugely out of step with the more cosmopolitan cultures evolving in both the
Republic of Ireland and mainland Britain (Brown and MacGinty 2003: 87; Shirlow and
Murtagh 2006: 175). One major problem of the peace process may be its reliance on
consociationalism  an assumption that decision-making and consensus-building among
elites will regulate conflict in a divided society (Byrne 2001). In reality, the Agreements
overarching political solutions have yet to translate fully into change of consciousness at the
local level of communities, neighbourhoods, and individuals.
The local level is where I chose to base my research. Although the peace process
invites analysis of a broad timeframe and a diverse range of actors, my interests lie not with
media-savvy political ingnues, but with ordinary people who ultimately underpin sustainable
peace. For the purposes of my project, the 1998 peace accords can be read as the point from
which my research begins. The date, however, is highly permeable, as questions of heritage
and identity draw the regions contested history firmly into the present, and its present into
the past. Long after the ceasefires, the Troubles continue to shape Northern Ireland, and
nowhere more so than its principal city, Belfast.
2. Post-conflict Belfast
Northern Irelands largest city rests in a glacier-carved valley at the mouth of Belfast
Lough, at the lowest fordable point of the River Lagan. A small provincial settlement for
hundreds of years, Belfast came of age in the 18
and 19
centuries. The citys proximity to
Scotland ensured a constant exchange of goods in and out of the province, thus ensuring its
position as a vital port. The rivers that feed the lough flow from the hills that ring the city,
generating power for the linen factories that, along with shipbuilding, propelled Victorian
Belfast to its status as a prominent industrial centre (Gillespie and Royle 2007). Belfasts
booming industries relied on labourers from the poor, rural Catholic populations. They settled
in slums outside the boundaries of the Protestant-dominated city, and in doing so established
the basis for Belfasts characteristic patchwork of segregated identities (Maguire 1993).
Sectarianism profoundly shapes the urban landscape and serves as one of Northern
Irelands strongest spatial determinants (Shirlow and Murtagh 2006: 18). In Belfast, the
outbreak of the Troubles created a desperate spatial sorting process that left jagged and
uncomfortable edges to ethnic territory (Murtagh 2000: 190). In what is known as the
ratchet effect, segregation rises dramatically in the wake of violent episodes, which then
Chapter 3. Northern Ireland 52
forms the base from which the next segregation increase builds (Doherty and Poole 2000;
Boal 1996). In Belfast, the legacy of housing segregation continues today. Although modern
urban policy strives to create ethnically neutral space in the city centre (Cebulla 1996), it can
do nothing to mitigate the segregation found in the citys numerous housing estates.
Segregation is particularly marked in working-class areas of Belfast, particularly in the public
housing sector (Keane 1990, cited in Doherty and Poole 2000: 189; Morrissey and Gaffikin
2008: 27). The crescent street form and terraced houses that became staples of turn-of-the-
-century English urban architecture feature prominently in Belfast. Sennet (1990: 193)
describes these as unifying elements, reaching finger-like into new territory to connect it to
the city. In Belfast, however, they have the opposite effect. Crescents and terraces curve in on
themselves  often with a single entry and exit point  to create enclosures of dominant
ethnicity. Within these boundaries, community identity is fiercely maintained and savagely
protected. These are the neighbourhoods in which I ground my empirical research.
Interface areas, where one neighbourhood meets another, are frequent flashpoints
of violence, leading to the erection of several peace lines throughout the city (Figure 3.1).
Some take physical form in high fences of concrete and iron; others are less obviously
demarcated, taking shape in derelict homes, industrial buffer zones, or are simply understood
as local knowledge. These barriers are striking features of the urban landscape, and their
immediate impact is to create social, political and cultural distance between communities. In
their attempt to contain the violence, they also have the regrettable effect of deepening
antagonism. As Selwyn (2001: 234) observes of the bypass roads in contested Palestine, the
effect of fences is to stir the imagination toward elaborate notions of an aggressive other,
thus reinforcing the desire for permanent separation. Shirlow and Murtagh (2006: 57-58),
writing specifically about Belfast, echo his observation: Interfaces are also a constant
reminder of harm done and of threat implied. Their existence compacts the performance of
violence into space [and] compress space into sites that become the most notable places of
violence and resistance.
Contrary to popular assumption, antagonism in interface areas has increased in the
years since the peace accords, leading to the erection of several new peace lines and
provoking Shirlow and Murtagh (2006: 170) to lament that (t)he issue of segregation is
falling between the cracks. As exit becomes a coping strategy for upwardly mobile
residents, those that remain discover that their community is decreasingly able to support
local facilities and services. Shirlow and Murtagh (2006: 64) describe this process as
residualisation, whereby communities occupying marginal, dangerous or contested territory
Chapter 3. Northern Ireland 53
are increasingly characterised by high rates of social deprivation and poverty. For residents of
these communities, social deprivation is amplified by deeply entrenched sectarian
antagonism. For example, Shirlow and Murtagh (ibid: 85) cite a 2004 survey that revealed
high levels of people travelling twice as far to locate private sector services, even if the
nearest was across the peace line in the other communitys territory. They argue that the
(l)egacy of violence is not merely that it created competing discourses of harm but also that
it embedded the logic and need for intercommunity separation (ibid: 79).
Territory in Belfast, which replicates nationalist ideologies at the local scale
(Graham and Nash 2006: 262), is emphatically marked through a variety of media. Both
loyalists and republicans establish visual dominance in their neighbourhoods by flying their
respective national flags and by painting kerbstones and signposts  red, white, and blue for
Britain versus Irelands green, white, and orange (Figure 3.2). More overt signs of allegiance
can be found in politicized graffiti and in the commemorative murals that adorn gable walls
in predominantly working class estates (Figure 3.3 and 3.4). Cresswell (1996) argues
cogently that street graffiti acts to transgress a normative landscape. In Belfast, however, I
argue that politicized street graffiti and its related practices simultaneously transgresses and
strives to create a normative landscape, whether unionist-loyalist or nationalist-republican.
For example, nationalist neighbourhoods may subvert government hegemonic power
(Winchester et al 2003: 74) by re-naming streets and by installing signposts written in Gaelic.
For unionists and loyalists, the 12
of July parade tradition serves to mark territory in a
spatial performance of identity and allegiance (Jarman 1997; Cohen 2007). These examples
represent only a fraction of the ways in which local residents serve to assert identity on and
ownership of Belfasts contested terrain.
This is the landscape in which peace now struggles to take root, and in which I
ground my empirical research. The process of peacebuilding is far from easy; as Simpson
(2000) observes: There is no such thing as a post-conflict society. In Northern Ireland, the
situation remains tenuous as new societal challenges move into the vacuum once occupied by
the Troubles. Even as Northern Ireland experiences a general decline in religious practice
Doherty and Poole 2002),
it records higher levels of segregation than at any other period
(Boal 2002). The vast majority of children  over 96%  still attend segregated schools
(Kilpatrick and Leitch 2004). In addition, an explosion in general crime, particularly drug-
Shirlow and Murtagh (2006: 15) describe religion as a boundary marker for competing aspirations
of Britishness and Irishness. In Northern Ireland, Protestant and Catholic act as cultural as well as
religious designations. Even religiously non-observant individuals will self-identify as Protestant or
Catholic, according to cultural affiliation.
Chapter 3. Northern Ireland 54
related offences, has accompanied the peace process. Adolescent drug use, which was very
low during the Troubles, has increased dramatically since the ceasefires: Northern Ireland
now reports higher levels of inhalant drug use per capita than those reported elsewhere in
either Europe or the US (Higgins et al 2004). During the Troubles, paramilitaries such as the
IRA, which held a well-known anti-drug stance, enforced codes of conduct within their
communities. In contrast, many of the post-ceasefire paramilitaries in existence today have
discovered a lucrative trade in drug trafficking, and are assumed largely responsible for the
rise of use in Belfast (Muldoon 2004).
Despite the ceasefires, paramilitary-associated activity continues to be a concern. In
the years the followed the 1998 peace accords, paramilitary activity declined less steeply in
urban than in rural areas, with Belfast continuing to experience the brunt of the violence
(Poole 2004). Writing over five years after the signing of the peace accords, Monaghan
(2004) reported that internal punishment shootings, which are not considered breaches of
ceasefire, were on the rise. Unlike the IRA, loyalist paramilitaries have been slow to declare
their intention to decommission their arms (Smyth 2004). Edwards and Bloomer (2008: 2)
observe that while the IRAs move to dismantle its war machine had been widely anticipated,
the failure of loyalist paramilitaries to enter into a symmetrical decommissioning process
was surprising. It was not until May 2007  nine years after the signing of the peace accords
 that the Ulster Volunteer Force and the Red Hand Commandos announced an end to their
campaign, but (e)ven then their statement fell dramatically short of decommissioning
(Bloomer and Edwards 2009: 6). Within the republican movement, splinter factions continue
to cause unrest. The IRA is historically prone to splits in times of perceived betrayal by its
leaders; the Real IRA and the Continuity IRA have now assumed the militarized mantle of
the now-defunct main IRA (Tonge 2004). According to Bloomer and Edwards (2009) the
current threat from dissident republicans is at its most pronounced since 1998, although the
recent declarations of disarmament by the Irish National Liberation Army and the Official
IRA (BBC, 8 February 2010) offer a cautious note of hope. More broadly, within all
paramilitary organizations at the turn of the 21
century, the leaders represent the second
generation that grew up in Northern Irelands culture of violence. Bruce (2004) argues that
these young members are a destabilizing influence on the peace process, as they are not
inhibited by memories of the worst of the Troubles.
Northern Irelands culture of violence profoundly affects its residents, regardless of
affiliation. The legacy of conflict reflects the tangled history of bitter grievances and
powerful attachment to a deeply contested land. These fiercely held, place-centred identities
Chapter 3. Northern Ireland 55
are themselves a legacy of Northern Irelands complicated colonial history and its aftermath.
They form the heart of my dissertation, and my exploration of how the post-conflict
transformations at work in Northern Ireland provoke new forms of engagement.
3. Placing Identity
At its heart, the struggle over Northern Ireland is a struggle over the contested
identities ascribed to and drawn from the land. As Bowman (1993: 81) observes, For land
to serve as ground on which to build nationhood, it must be more than a geographical
setting. Instead, it must be a domain of the imagination where people can locate others with
whom they see themselves sharing a present situation as well as a future nation. In Northern
Ireland, Protestants and Catholics only tenuously share their present, and the shape of a future
nation is, for many, too difficult to imagine together. Northern Irelands inhabitants have
developed strategies for coping with their landscape and the different ideas it holds for those
living within it. Nationalists, for instance, may define the province Ulster historically as its
nine-county, pre-partition version, thereby deriving a distinct identity from that which
unionists derive from their own idea of Ulster as an unambiguous component of the United
Kingdom.
At ground level, though, the simplest coping strategy involves carving separate
spheres and moving exclusively within them. Ten years after the peace agreement, the
Northern Ireland conflict remains inherently territorial and the ground a key political
resource (Graham and Nash (2006: 262), with crucial implications for identity and power.
The act of social and spatial distancing then ensures the maintenance and re-creation of
specific identity in new generations (Douglas 1997). As Graham and Nash (2006: 254)
observe: Identity remains vested in traditional principles of ethno-nationalism that locate
cultural belonging and citizenship in a living space defined by clearly demarcated
boundaries and zero-sum models of space and place.
While the physical demarcation of territory may be more visually striking in
working-class neighbourhoods, sectarian division is not bound by class alone. In 1998,
writing in the prevailing mood of optimism that accompanied the signing of the peace
I draw here from Bowmans observation of Palestinian strategy: For Palestinians, territory is
qualified historically (using the pre-1948 boundaries as the locus) and semantically (i.e., distinguishing
between Israel and Palestine). Thus the identity that Palestinians derive from their land is kept distinct
from that which the Israelis derive from the land they occupy. (Bowman 1993: 76)
Chapter 3. Northern Ireland 56
accords, Graham and Shirlow (1998: 253) pointed toward the development of a political
middle ground. This comprised people who can reconcile inner tensions between cultural
identity and citizenship aspirations, in whom political attitudes were no longer necessarily
congruent with cultural identity. Along similar lines, Anderson and Shuttleworth (1998: 193)
revealed wide and overlapping continuums of political affiliation, as they argued that
Northern Irelands sectarianism, like ethnicity, needs to be (re)produced continually in order
to survive. Several years into the peace process, however, these early celebrations of a post-
sectarian middle-class have proven premature. Shirlow and Murtagh (2006: 123) believe that
it is wrong to assume that this new socio-spatial class has forged an alternative cultural
political identity. Although they acknowledge that the middle classes have managed to
negotiate their way through conflict, tolerating the other in their pursuit of material
advantage, Shirlow and Murtagh (ibid: 101) maintain that [the middle classes] have not
constructed a shared identity that is capable of challenging the binary politics of Northern
Ireland.
In Northern Ireland, the absence of a shared identity is derived from and reproduces
divisive, sectarian conceptualizations of place, both physical and imaginative. Northern
Ireland is a political entity that is yet to be imagined by the majority of its inhabitants
(Foster 1991: 281; cited in Graham and Shirlow 1998: 245). Reid (2005) argues that the lack
of an overarching narrative of place for Northern Ireland, and its territorial conflict, has
resulted in fragmented, highly localized and strictly bounded senses of place. She points to
the way in which Northern Ireland was founded in overt opposition to the professed
characteristics of the Irish Free State. Reid (2004: 103) traces the central, powerful role that
place has played in Irish nationalism since the late-19
century, crystallising in a vision of
essentially Irish place which explicitly rejects the urban, the industrial, and the non-global
and non-Catholic (see also Gaffey 2004). Northern Ireland, she argues, was brought into
existence in self-conscious refusal of Irish nationalisms cultural and political identity,
forged in the imaginative crucible of the islands western landscape. The power of the
nationalist romanticized sense of place, along with the statelets existence on the island of
Ireland, has made difficult any separate or distinctive place-based imaginings of Northern
Ireland (ibid: 106).
For Protestants, in particular, the lack of a place narrative is an ongoing challenge.
Their insecurity is highlighted by a general feeling that Catholics have gained more through
the 1998 Agreement and subsequent peace process (Hughes and Donnelly 2004; Boal 2000).
Compounding this suspicion is Britains increasing disengagement from Northern Ireland
Chapter 3. Northern Ireland 57
(Smith 1996: 181), leaving many Protestants struggling to re-negotiate the British dimension
of their unionist identity. Graham (2004) argues that uncertain, unagreed unionist identity 
not conflict, per se  lies at the heart of Northern Irelands current problem. He points to the
past political failure to develop a unitary geographical representation, a myth of place to
legitimate and substantiate [Northern Irelands] domicile in the island of Ireland (ibid: 3).
According to Graham, Protestants in Ulster lack a representative landscape  a metaphorical
encapsulation of a peoples image of itself, based upon particular territory and a shared past,
which helps to define communal identity. Ulster Protestantism has been defined by what it is
not (Gaelic, Catholic) rather than by what it is, and the absence of an agreed representative
landscape underpins the uncertainty of their identity. Their challenge now is to create a
contemporary identity that opens their past to hold relevance in the present and validates their
presence in this place. This is a challenge to which the reinvigorated Ulster-Scots cultural
movement now attempts to respond, drawing identity from a cultural province of the
Dalriadan Sea that incorporates Ulster as historically Scottish, and thus interpreting the 17
century Scottish Plantation as a reunification and reconquest by an Ulster-Scots people once
expelled from their rightful territory by invading Gaels (Mac Pilin 1999, cited in Graham
2004: 496. See also McCall 2002; Stapleton and Wilson 2004).
Northern Irelands malleability, of which the Ulster-Scots movements westward
extrapolation of the Scottish boundary to include Ulster is but one example, has been pressed
into service time and again for a variety of cultural and political projects. Among the best
known is the Field Day collective, formed in the 1980s by a group of prominent writers
including the playwright Brian Friel and the poet Seamus Heaney. They envisioned an
imaginary cultural space, a fifth province, that would transcend the political morass and
foster new dialogue through the arts. The collective has shown itself open to change.
Eventually, their dialogue addressed gendered disparities, after Field Days first three
published volumes alerted readers to the lack of adequate representation of women in
editorial practice; subsequent volumes addressed the absence (Bourke et al 2002).
Yet Reid (2004: 196) cautions against uncritical celebration: Northern Ireland may
be described as a hybrid, borderline area, but this context has resulted more often in
fossilisation of identity and difference than any kind of acceptance and celebration of
ambiguity. She draws hope, however, in imagery that constructs place as ambiguous in
meaning, and resistant to attempts to fix its meaning and to political or cultural
terrorialisation (Reid 2008: 521), suggesting that in order to fracture the monolith of spatial
sectarianism, attention must be paid to imaginings and uses of place which move beyond the
Chapter 3. Northern Ireland 58
tendency to exclude. These are ideas with which I grapple in my research on transformations
of contested cultural landscapes.
The peace process has shaped Northern Ireland undeniably, and nowhere more so
than in Belfast, where the sectarianism and rigid territoriality of republican and loyalist
estates is juxtaposed with the increasingly global orientation of civic culture. Now is a time
of massive change for Belfast, as the city connects economically, politically and culturally in
new ways to the Six Counties, the province of Ulster, Northern Ireland, the Republic of
Ireland and the United Kingdom, the European Union, and beyond. Reid (2005: 486) points
to the gradual breakdown of the former unionist state, as Belfast demonstrates its tendency
to elude total control, threatening unionist and nationalist definitions of place and belonging
based on territorial ownership, and exposing the need for new definition. For both
republicans and loyalists, she predicts a cultural displacement, no longer able to exclusively
control and manipulate the image of the landscape in its relation to identity (Reid 2004:
104). The people of Northern Ireland, and particularly Belfast, need new ways to engage with
both the changing physical reality and the idea of Northern Ireland. Stainer (2005: 373) calls
for disruptive reconceptualisations of social space and the city that can interject and
subvert the sterile antagonisms of (sectarian) politics. Along similar lines, Neill (1999) calls
for a new place vision for Belfast  one that probes cultural identity by focusing on the
issue of representational space and peoples identification with the city.
As I will argue in this dissertation, Northern Ireland is proof that one space can give
rise to multiple, diverse identities among the people who inhabit it. This same space can also
give rise (f)or each setting and for each person [to] a multiplicity of place identities
reflecting different experiences and attitudes (Relph 1976: 62). Through the peace process,
these place-centred identities (Graham 1994) are opening to new interpretations and
variations that emerge from its transforming political, economic, cultural and social
landscapes. Reid (2008: 531) calls for complex, nuanced, provisional readings
ofpolitically burdened places, suggesting that they offer grounds for hope for multiple and
shared senses of place and belonging. My research is an attempt to answer her call: In
Belfast, what connections can be mapped between physical space and global imagination? In
the wake of the peace accords, what kinds of identities  and how  are the people of Belfast
drawing from shifting, contested landscapes that are both shaped by and attempting to
emerge from violent conflict? And how might they respond to what Graham (2004: 483) calls
the unresolved questions surrounding identity and allegiance [that] contain the keys to
conflict and its resolution?
Chapter 3. Northern Ireland 59
4. Dilemmas of Heritage and History
In Northern Ireland, identity both creates and is created by fierce devotion to
nationhood. A nation, as Benedict Anderson (1991) famously defined, is an imagined
political community distinguished by the style in which it is imagined. These imagined
communities need narratives that anchor the present to the past, and from which identity can
be drawn. In Northern Ireland, the narratives of identity for the two dominant ethnic groups
connect members to a common past and a shared future within their respective communities.
Although their narratives differ markedly, each is drawn from chosen traumas incorporated
over the years, which solidify and are re-articulated as the polarizing events and non-
negotiable cultural claims that Ross (2001) describes as psychological dramas. To imply
continuity with the past, narratives of ethnic identity create practices governed by rules (the
loyalist 12
of July parades, for instance) that Hobsbawm (1983) calls invented traditions.
Their repetition not only provides reference to the past but establishes and symbolizes social
cohesion. The symbols and representations that develop through identity narratives reflect the
imagined contours of a group, thus marking their difference from others (Woodward 2000:
2). Identity theorists Woodward and Jenkins both argue that identities marked by difference
rely for their existence on the presence of others (Woodward 1997: 2), for without this
validation, the issue of identity claims would not exist (Jenkins 2003). In Northern Ireland,
Protestant and Catholic identities have been heavily forged by mutual resistance to and
negotiation of the other. Not surprisingly, the ways in which their narratives are imagined
speak to radically divergent and unagreed historical perspectives.
Nowhere is the issue of contested history more apparent than in the debate over
Northern Irelands status as a postcolonial entity. In the story of the dismantling of the British
Empire, Northern Ireland remains an ambiguous footnote. Unlike the twenty-six Irish
counties to its south, Northern Ireland to this day remains under British political governance,
thus complicating assertions of Irelands postcolonial present. Scholars remain divided about
Irelands colonial-settler history and about interpretations of its present-day condition, with
more nuanced readings emerging in recent times. Howe (2000: 70), for example, urges
caution in advancing the simplistic clich of Britains imperialist stake; he points out that
the common invocation of Northern Ireland as Britains last colony became popular only in
the 1970s. Likewise, Nash (1999: 460) criticizes the simple binary of colonized-colonizer as
deeply problematic, particularly in the Northern Irish context. She calls for a differentiated
Chapter 3. Northern Ireland 60
sense of the post-colonial to challenge the dualism and the polarized versions of history and
identity in Northern Ireland. Crucially, she asks whether a reinvigorated notion of cultural
location for all traditions in Ireland can avoid the ways those traditions have been based on
opposition to each other (ibid: 468).
Nashs challenge is a daunting one for a societal culture in which the past is
considered a hard-edged political resource (Graham and Whelan 2007: 477). In Northern
Ireland, ancient grievances and the more recent spectre of civil war haunt a fragile society
attempting to emerge from its shadow. The Troubles bequeathed both a tangible and
intangible heritage of division and hurt (McDowell 2008a: 405), and the challenge of
addressing the past in the present continues to dog the peace process. Graham and Whelan
(2007) argue that the 1998 peace accords were fashioned in a way to avoid creating
mechanisms for addressing the legacy of the past. From this vacuum, the commemoration of
fatalities has emerged as a major impediment to the transformation of conflict:
There is little sense of reconciliation through shared loss, but,
instead, the commemorative landscape seems largely to form part of
competing claims for hegemonic victimhood by trenchantly opposed
identities and spatialities proclaiming their irreconcilable differences.
(ibid: 480)
The armed warfare of the Troubles may have ended, but in Northern Ireland the conflict over
space and identity continues by other means. As Shirlow and Murtagh (2006: 49) observe,
for political actors capacity to win political support has been based upon delivering a
singular narrative of victimhood and exclusion. They identify the issue of loss and harm as
a tool of political manipulation (ibid: 180), as victimhood and memory continue to
reproduce the past within the present.
Like the past, political actors have also discovered a new political resource in
memorialization, which they deploy as a tool to alter the present-day parameters of the
Troubles. McDowell (2007: 729) argues that memorialization contributes to the
establishment of social control in post-conflict Northern Ireland, as memorial landscapes
which document one communitys suffering and resistance often serve to invoke continuing
fear of the other. She cites, for example, the ways in which memorialization serves the
political purposes of the republican movement, as it must define the parameters of their
struggle to undermine British control in a rapidly changing peacetime landscape. By way of
Chapter 3. Northern Ireland 61
example, she draws on republican politician and ex-militant Gerry Adams, who in 2001
proclaimed the 20
anniversary of the infamous hunger strikes to be a year of
commemorations. In recalling the sacrifices made by republican prisoners, particularly those
who lost their lives in their attempt to gain status as political prisoners, Adams not only
tapped into the sense of victimization but also established his political party, Sinn Fin, as the
rightful heir to the history of militant Irish republicanism (ibid: 731). In this way,
McDowell (ibid: 726) observes, the process of remembering the past is inexorably fused
with the politics of the present and plays a crucial role in the post-conflict negotiation of
identity, power and place.
Ten years after the peace accords, both ethno-sectarian camps now strive to inscribe
their respective claims of victimhood on the tangible public space (Graham and McDowell
2007: 359) of the cultural landscape. As Johnson (2002: 294) observes: Memory is not
simply a recollection of times past, it is also anchored in places past and visualized in
masonry and bronze. These inscriptions of memory contribute to a communitys
representative landscape, which Graham (1994: 258) defines as an encapsulation of a
peoples image of itself, a collage, based upon the particularity of territory and a shared past
which helps define communal identity. These landscapes, with their representations of
memory, act as identity resources:
They assist in marking and bounding territory, shaping place
identities, supporting political ideologies, and contributing to a group
identity, which is often defined in contradisctinction to the ethnic
other and which is both sustained and legitimated by reference to
shared memories. (Graham and Whelan 2007: 482)
In this way, as Graham and McDowell (2007: 345) argue, the politics of identity appropriate
both tangible material and intangible forms of heritage. These landscapes not only define
identity in opposition to the other, but also serve to reinforce particular messages of identity
within one community. According to Johnson (2002: 294), (t)he ordering of memory around
sites of collective remembrance provides a focus for the performance of ritual of communal
remembrance and sometimes forgetfulness. McDowells (2008b) own study of recent
practices of commemoration in both republican and loyalist traditions, which serve to elide
and erase the contributions of women, illustrates this point cogently.
Chapter 3. Northern Ireland 62
Northern Irelands heady promise of economic regeneration is raising uncomfortable
questions about the contested materiality of the Troubles, as officials try to navigate the
deeply divisive experiences of the past. In North Belfast, militant activists from both sides of
the conflict were tried and sentenced at the Victorian-era Crumlin Road courthouse and
imprisoned in its adjacent gaol. The gaol closed in 1996, and the courthouse in 1998; officials
have subsequently attempted to address the question of how to develop the site (Building
Design Partnership 2007). Today, the gaol is experiencing a limited revival as a tourist and
educational site, with eventual plans to transform the building as part of a broader economic
regeneration strategy. However, the fate of the courthouse remains in limbo; the deteriorating
building, recently the object of an arson attack by local youths, is testimony to the unsettling
consequences of official indecision. Even more problematic is the infamous Maze prison,
located to the south of Belfast, which housed paramilitary prisoners from 1971 to its closure
in 2000. Although the prison is a symbolic touchstone for people on both sides of the
sectarian divide, it has achieved iconic status in republican mythology through the political
protests that took place within its walls. Contemporary efforts to regenerate the now-defunct
prison have stalled in stalemate. Graham and McDowell (2007: 363) describe the Maze as a
zero-sum heritage site that form(s) part of the struggle to achieve the hegemony of one
particular discourse at the expense of others. Consequently, they conclude that the site has
limited potential to facilitate societal healing and reconciliation.
Yet despite these high-profile and highly contentious regeneration projects, there are
other signs that Northern Ireland is engaging with its past in the present. Among the more
visible transformations in Belfast is the explosion of so-called conflict tourism, which now
forms an important component of the growing post-conflict economy. The advent of peace
sparked a rise in tourism to the region, with over 6.8 million visitors recorded for Belfast
alone in 2006.
Open-top bus tours now ply once-unthinkable routes, offering tourists a
glimpse into the physical landscape of a divided society. The content, itinerary and, above all,
messages deployed depend heavily on the person delivering the tour and the community 
whether republican or loyalist  that designed it. McDowell (2008a: 406-7) argues that the
visitors, in turn, reinforce both the legitimacy of the landscape in question and the narratives
being evoked, and in doing so, contribute to a spatial practice whichredefines and
reinforces territorial politics and ultimately prolongs the war:
Belfast Tourism Monitor, Belfast City Council.
www.belfastcity.gov.uk/tourism/docs/tourismfactsandfigures06.pdf. Accessed 16 February 2010.
Chapter 3. Northern Ireland 63
The imagined conflict needs sustenance in the construction of
symbols, which remind the public that the conflict is not far away.
These conflict signifiers represent continuing power struggles which
symbolise contested identities and heritages and help keep the
conflict ongoing. (ibid: 418-9)
These exclusive narratives are marketed to an external audience, while simultaneously
reinforcing polarized interpretations of history within the communities on display. Rather
than improving inter-community relations, McDowell (ibid: 407) argues that Belfasts
community-based tourism instead has reified and formalised divisions through single-
identity work, as communities market their own spaces and narratives through heritage that is
deliberately exclusive.
Nonetheless, signs of hope persist for the possibility of developing a shared sense of
heritage. Even in a place with a deeply entrenched tradition of using history for sectarian
purposes, there are new ways of addressing the contested issue of heritage. Nash (2005b)
illuminates one such route in her exploration of local histories in Northern Ireland, pointing
to research that refigures Northern Ireland as regionally (rather than merely politically)
divided. She points toward recent accounts, undertaken by lay practitioners, that illuminate a
sense of the landscape as a shared inheritance, as well as a sense of Northern Ireland as
composed of a complex geography of distinctive local places (ibid: 55). As Nash (ibid: 53)
explains: The common ground here is not, or not only, the land and landscape but a shared
tradition of identification with the local. In other words, the people who inhabit Northern
Ireland, although divided by politics, share a sense of the significance of attachments to
specific localities (ibid: 64).
This shared passion for the land points to new opportunities for reimagining how the
local connects with what Nash (2005b: 64) describes as wider geographies. In doing so,
identity is also refigured as multiply scaled: local, regional, translocal or transnational
(ibid). I draw on Nashs refiguring of identity as multiply scaled in my empirical
explorations of contested cultural landscapes in Chapters Five and Six. In the decade since
the peace accords, the region has undergone tremendous changes that have provoked new
interpretations. No change is, perhaps, more dramatic than Northern Irelands rapidly shifting
demographic  and, by extension, cultural  landscape.
Chapter 3. Northern Ireland 64
5. Ethnic Minorities: A New Social Landscape
Although commonly defined by its high-profile conflict between (white) Protestants
and (white) Catholics, Northern Ireland is also home to residents who belong to neither of the
regions dominant ethno-national traditions. As demographic patterns shift dramatically,
issues of cultural diversity have emerged to the forefront of Northern Irelands post-conflict
social discourses. Their current framework began to take shape in the late 1990s, alongside
the peace negotiations. The introduction of the Northern Ireland Race Relations Order in
1997, albeit twenty years after the introduction of similar legislation in the rest of the United
Kingdom,8 outlawed discrimination on the basis of colour, nationality, race, or ethnic or
national origin. Meanwhile, legislation in the 1998 Northern Ireland Act obligated the public
services to ensure equal access for all. The 1998 peace accords themselves also contributed to
the debate on cultural inclusion. For example, one clause in the Agreement stipulates that all
political parties would:
recognise the importance of respect and tolerance in relation to
linguistic diversity, including in Northern Ireland, the Irish language,
Ulster Scots and the languages of the various ethnic minority
communities, all of which are part of the cultural wealth of the island
of Ireland. (Governments of the United Kingdom and Ireland 1998)
For Northern Ireland, the cessation of violence has therefore created new opportunities to
incorporate the presence of others in rebuilding a healthy post-conflict society.
Among the most striking changes of the past decade is the increasing visibility of
Northern Irelands so-called ethnic minorities. Accurate statistics, however, are notoriously
difficult to quantify. The Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency conducted its last
census in 2001, at which time minority ethnic groups accounted for less than one per cent of
Northern Irelands population. In the intervening years, the region has experienced significant
in-migration, generated by a growing economy and demands for workers which cannot be
When the UK government introduced the Race Relations Act in 1965, the Protestant-dominated
government at Stormont requested that Northern Ireland be excluded, on the grounds that religion
rather than race represented the most serious locus of discrimination. (Dickey 1972, cited in
Geoghegan 2008).
Chapter 3. Northern Ireland 65
met from the local population. The 2004 expansion of the European Union, in particular, led
to the arrival of thousands of migrants from central and Eastern Europe.
Although industrial centres located throughout Northern Ireland attract large numbers
of newcomers, Belfast has been a particular site of inward migration. Jarman (2007)
triangulates census figures with more recent data from a variety of sources
to identify
realistic, if conservative, demographic figures. By including dependants and those outside the
formal recording system, Jarman yields a conservative estimate of 7,500 migrants arriving in
Belfast during the two-year period from April 2004 to March 2006. Employment varies
considerably by sector, with the construction sector employing migrants from Eastern
Europe, particularly Poland, and the health sector employing people predominantly of
Filipino, Indian and Malay nationalities. In his report, Jarman notes that the term migrant
worker covers a diverse range of nationalities, ethnicities and skills, and he cautions against
generalizing about their experiences and needs.
Alongside the influx of migrant workers, Northern Ireland has also witnessed rising
numbers of refugees and asylum seekers. The exact figures for Northern Ireland are difficult
to establish, as figures are only available for the United Kingdom as a whole. However, the
Belfast-based Refugee Action Group (2007) estimates that approximately 2,000 refugee and
asylum seekers currently reside in Northern Ireland, of which a large majority hail from 19
different countries including Algeria, Iraq, Sierra Leone, Kosovo, China, Iran, Sudan,
Somalia and Azerbaijian. Asylum seekers and refugees reach Northern Ireland through a
variety of routes. The border between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland is one of
the most common points of access. As this border is difficult to discern along large rural
stretches, some people may not even realize that they have crossed from the Republic into a
different country. Until recently, asylum seekers could be held in prison in Northern Ireland,
but following a campaign by Refugee Action Group, detainees are no longer held alongside
convicted prisoners. The practice of removing them to secure immigration centres in Scotland
and England, however, has created new concerns, particularly for those who wish to maintain
contact with family and legal representation in Northern Ireland. Further complicating the
lengthy review process are the negative attitudes and behaviours of the local population,
many of whom conflate the definitions of refugee and asylum seeker, and who justify
their hostility on the assumption that the presence of these individuals in Northern Ireland
constitutes a drain on the public purse.
For example, new registrations for health services and National Insurance numbers; work permits
issued; and school census figures.
Chapter 3. Northern Ireland 66
Expressions of hostility are hardly confined to refugees and asylum seekers. Since
the signing of the peace accords, Northern Ireland has garnered the dubious distinction in
some media reports as the race hate capital of Europe (BBC 17 June 2009), and Belfast the
most racist city in the world (McVeigh 2006: 33). The Police Service of Northern Ireland
has reported an exponential increase in the number of racially-motivated crimes in the years
since the ceasefires (Jarman and Monaghan 2003). Based on the size of its minority ethnic
population, Northern Ireland now has one of the highest reported levels of racially-motivated
crime within the UK (Jarman 2004). Crimes range from verbal and physical assault to
property damage and, in areas with strong paramilitary presence, extortion. Although most
reported attacks have occurred in loyalist areas, it is clear that racist violence is widespread
across other areas as well. Particularly chilling is evidence of paramilitary involvement in a
number of cases, such as those involving the Ulster Volunteer Force and the Ulster Young
Militants (ibid: 37). More recently, a sustained intimidation campaign by local youths led to
the forced evacuation of more than 100 Roma individuals, including small children, from
their homes in South Belfast (BBC 17 June 2009). McVeigh (2006: 64) cautions: The
current reality is that many minority ethnic people live in well-grounded fear of
becomingthe next Stephen Lawrence.
Not surprisingly, sectarianism has shaped racism in Northern Ireland in complicated
ways, which commentators are only beginning to untangle. In 1998, in the introduction to a
landmark publication on ethnic minorities and racism in Northern Ireland, Hainsworth (1998:
3) observed that the countrys preoccupation with the Troubles left scant room for other
agendas, in terms of addressing both violence and widespread institutional discrimination.
McVeigh (1998: 12), contributing to the same book, linked the specificity of Northern Irish
racism to widespread denial of its presence in a society preoccupied with the Troubles: It is
not the absence of racism but rather the relative absence of discussion of racism which makes
[Northern Ireland] different from most European countries (ibid: 14). In the intervening
years, visible demographic shifts, political agendas and media commentary have succeeded in
raising the public profile of Northern Irelands minority ethnic populations and the challenges
they face. Although the dual issues of sectarianism and racism interact with each other in
complex ways, they are frequently elided or treated as entirely separate problems. Geoghegan
Stephen Lawrence, a black British teenager living in London, was murdered in April 1993 at the age
of 18 by a gang of white racists. The failure of the police and the criminal justice system to respond
appropriately to this racist murder led to a campaign for justice. Ultimately, the British government
instituted a public inquiry, which encouraged a wider re-evaluation of the place of racism in the
criminal justice system.
Chapter 3. Northern Ireland 67
(2008: 134) cautions against such simplistic treatment, arguing that Northern Irelands
policymakers and politicians must acknowledge the resilience of engrained sectarian
waysto attend to thespecific challenges of Race Relations and the precarious situation
facing many racialised groups living in a violent, divided society that is slowly moving out of
conflict.
Over the past decade, researchers have begun to illuminate the ways in which
Northern Irelands minority ethnic residents coped with the Troubles by compromising to fit
in with existing power structures (Fawcett 1998) and by emphasizing their political neutrality
(Donnan and OBrien 1998). Donnan and OBrien (ibid: 206) argue that Northern Irelands
divided society held some beneficial effects for local ethnic minorities, by diverting
antagonisms along more deeply entrenched and historically sedimented channels. For the
most part, however, academic scholarship on the peace process has paid scant attention to the
experiences of ethnic minorities in Northern Ireland. These trends reflect McVeighs (1998:
17) description of racism in Northern Ireland as a dual majority problem, in which minority
ethnic people struggle for equality against a backdrop of conflict. Moreover, he argues that
the widespread sectarian division has created further difficulties for ethnic minorities to
negotiate a place for their identities.
Among their challenges is the prevalence of the competing narratives of history, all
of which strive for dominance in Northern Ireland. Nash, for example, (2005b: 62) points to
contemporary efforts that attempt to re-imagine and justify the presence of Protestants,
figuring their history as one of waves of settlement that predate and include the arrival of
English and Scottish planters in the seventeenth century. While this revised history may
provide a model of belonging that includes Protestants, Nash cautions that it may be a less
inclusive model of belonging for those who have more recently arrived on these shores. In
addition, standard narratives of migration may not accommodate the multiple journeys that
shape the intensely diasporic identities of some of Northern Irelands new inhabitants. The
regions Portuguese-speaking population illustrates the nuance of diversity. While those who
have settled in Northern Ireland may hold Portuguese citizenship and share a common
language, their cultural origins reside in far-flung former colonies, such as East Timor,
Mozambique, Guinea Bissau and Cape Verde (Saores 2002; cited in McDermott and
Odhiambo, forthcoming). Moreover, longer-standing Chinese and Indian populations now
include a robust second generation, thus further complicating notions of belonging.
Northern Ireland now struggles to accommodate other dimensions of diversity. As
the power of religious identity declines, the former binary model becomes increasingly
Chapter 3. Northern Ireland 68
outdated (Doherty and Poole 2002). To complicate the problem, residents now attempt to re-
define Northern Irelands relationships with parent countries that are increasingly
heterogeneous, multiracial and multicultural. For example, Britain, which has an extensive
history of inward migration, has long been engaged in a dialogue to incorporate both anglo-
centric and multicultural Britishness into its heritage (Chambers 1993). In Northern Ireland,
local community and civic organizations have begun to address this necessary dialogue. The
current discourse in Northern Ireland revolves more around cultural diversity than
multiculturalism, although ideas of both have been criticized for reproducing simplistic
ideas of cultural difference and racialized notions of minority communities (Nash 2005a:
285). As I will explore in Chapter 7, the region now faces a crisis of identity as it learns to
accommodate a broader spectrum of diversity within the space of its six counties, and within
the larger idea of Northern Ireland itself.
6. Rhetoric versus Reality: Putting Peace Into Practice
Northern Irelands policy landscape (Shirlow and Murtagh 2006: 143) has changed
dramatically in the decade since the signing of the peace accords. The post-conflict era
emphasizes the building of positive relationships, which a range of governmental and non-
governmental organizations now incorporate into their work. Belfast City Council, for
example, sends a clear signal of intention through its Good Relations Unit, based at City Hall.
The Councils strategy, titled Building our Future Together, advocates four main themes:
promoting community relations; celebrating cultural diversity; and promoting equality
through service delivery and a representative workforce (Belfast City Council 2003). These
themes are now embraced, with varying degrees of enthusiasm, by the organizations in the
community and voluntary sector that engage with the practical aspects of promoting peace on
the ground. They face sizeable challenges as they seek to enshrine an ethos of good
relations in a society recovering from the trauma of its civil war. Although high-profile
policies may signal important shifts and new directions, the reality often struggles to match
the rhetoric. Shirlow and Murtagh (ibid: 143) cite the scatter of unconnected initiatives,
small-scale projects and funding streams aimed at a range of diverse problems. More
pointedly, Graham and Nash (2006: 263) criticize both the idea that a shared society stands
as an alternative to a divided society and, crucially, government-led strategies that neglect
Chapter 3. Northern Ireland 69
the very issues at the heart of the conflict: the deep relationships between historical memory,
territorialized space and community identity.
Although contemporary conventional wisdom, both academic and practical, tends to
embrace conflict transformation theory as the best approach for Northern Ireland, its
application proves to be problematic. As I described in Chapter 1, the conflict transformation
approach aims to reduce the potential for violence by helping to transform the underlying
relationships, interests and discourses. Ten years after the peace accords, Northern Irelands
Protestant and Catholic populations still struggle to bridge the divide. Like other critics (see
Brown and MacGinty 2003; Anderson and Shuttleworth 1998), Shirlow and Murtagh (2006:
48) blame the peace agreement itself: The Agreement may well have established contact
between oppositional groups, but that contact is based upon managing disorder as opposed to
removing the meaning of communal mistrust and division. This is evident in the good
relations practices of post-conflict Belfast. While Gaffikin and Rafferty (2008: 58)
acknowledge the many genuine examples of cross-community work in the city, they also
criticize Belfasts myriad community organizations for their increasing practice of doing
deals across the divide mainly to comply with funding requirements. Such arrangements,
they argue, do not constitute a real move forward toward healing and renewal (ibid); in
managing the conflict without transforming it, the problem will remain largely intact.
Gaffikin and Rafferty, like Graham and Nash (2006), call for explicit engagement with
Northern Irelands fundamental challenges, such as how to resolve land use and territory.
Facilitators of the peace process recognize the impasse between managing and
transforming the conflict. Although cross-community activities may generate a rosy view of
progress, there is danger of outreach becoming an empty gesture. In reality, many individuals
 particularly those living in working-class neighbourhoods where segregation is most
entrenched  are simply not ready to interact across sectarian lines. As a result, single
identity work has emerged as a precursor to more ambitious schemes of cross-community
engagement. The phrase refers to efforts that focus on exploring identity solely within one
community, in order to create a strong and confident foundation that can lead to more critical
explorations of identity (Nash 2005b: 51) and from which to reach across the sectarian divide
(Kilpatrick and Leitch 2004). As Nash (2005a: 295) observes: The single identity
strategyreflects an understanding of the challenges of effective cross-community contact
and encourages groups to face the discomforting work of critical self-reflection. Critics such
as Shirlow and Murtagh (2006: 50), however, argue that this strategy bolsters notions of
cultural separation and competition for scant resources. Nonetheless, as Nash (2005b: 64-65)
Chapter 3. Northern Ireland 70
observes, a sense of affirmation and security in ones own sense of place and belonging,
which serves as a platform for recognizing the validity of anothers, is a key dimension of
Northern Irelands contemporary community relations policy.
Specifically enshrined within community relations policy are issues of diversity and
pluralism. These issues now heavily influence localized strategies, particularly those adopted
by community and voluntary organizations that rely on government grants for operational
funding. Not surprisingly, tensions frequently arise, with gaps widening between government
rhetoric and practical reality. An extended government consultation process initiated in
January 2003,
titled A Shared Future: Improving Relations in Northern Ireland, illustrates
these tensions nicely. Graham and Nash (2006: 276) argue that A Shared Future is a state-
led and elitist initiative that strives towards a pluralist society without acknowledging that
such a society stems from a political process that, inadvertently, has concretized Northern
Irelands ethno-national allegiances. They criticize this consultation as a policy that
necessarily foregrounds ideas of cultural diversity and pluralismat the expense of a
sustained engagement with the temporal and spatial dimensions of identities in Northern
Ireland (ibid: 256).
Government directives such as these, however well intentioned, pose challenges to
the practical work of cultural relations. Nash (2005a: 289) suggests that the concept of
diversity must also recognize differences in local contexts, such as different levels of
violence, segregation and deprivation. She argues that these differences shape the degree to
which groups feel willing and confident enough to engage with the demanding questions of
community relations that are pivotal to true change in Northern Ireland. Nash applauds new
developments and efforts by those working in the community relations sector to seek
progressive ways of addressing the fraught issues of heritage, culture and identity:
(T)he approach to culture is not simply deconstructive. Traditions are
not simply reduced to invention; identities are not simply
destabilised. Instead, culture and heritage are presented as important
sources of personal and collective identities and as more dynamic
and more diverse than can be contained within the familiar model of
two polarised communities. (ibid: 294, emphasis in original)
Initiated by the Community Relations Unit of the Office of the First Minister and the Deputy First
Minister.
Chapter 3. Northern Ireland 71
This strategy is crucial, as confidence and security are vital for maintaining support for the
ongoing resolution and transformation of the Troubles. In my empirical research, I will
explore this strategy in greater depth.
Given Northern Irelands extensive history of conflict, it is not surprising that the
current discourse of culture revolves largely around cultural diversity, which has itself been
replaced, to some extent, by the dialogue around community cohesion in other parts of the
UK (Dwyer and Uberoi 2009). As Nash (2005b: 295) observes, within community relations
and cultural policy in Northern Ireland, the term diversity refers to an approach to culture
which recognises differences rather than imposing unwanted assimilation. In this context,
diversity links anti-sectarianism to anti-racism: Itdefies sectarian division, precedes new
patterns of immigration, and extends diversity to include other ethnic groups (ibid). These
are ambitious projects for a society that has long operated within a binary model of ethnicity,
and which now, understandably, struggles to expand that model. Northern Irelands newly
imagined social relationships and political structures face the additional challenge of
accommodat(ing) divergent political perspectives, including those that reject pluralism
(ibid: 65). For Northern Ireland, perhaps, the challenge is now to progress an increasingly
diverse society in which agreement may always be elusive.
Conclusion
The aftermath of Northern Irelands conflict can be read in many different ways, and
through a variety of disciplinary lenses. In the preceding chapter, I made the case for greater
synergy between cultural geography and conflict transformation theory. In this chapter, I
have outlined how the contested dimensions of peacebuilding must actively engage with
contested cultural landscapes. The issues that underlie the conflict  the struggle over
contested identities and ideas of place that are ascribed to and drawn from the land  are as
prevalent today as at any previous point in the history of this troubled region. Graham (2004)
argues that the key to resolving the conflict lies in creating a positively defined loyalist
identity. I expand his argument beyond loyalism: I argue that the key to a sustainable post-
conflict future in Northern Ireland relies on a larger process of redefining and renegotiating
place-derived cultural identities. To this end, I have chosen carefully the contested landscapes
that will serve as case studies for my empirical research. In Chapter Five, I will explore post-
conflict republican cultural identities through the transformation of Divis Mountain, and
Chapter 3. Northern Ireland 72
loyalist identities through the transformation of the 11th Night bonfire tradition in Chapter
Six. Each landscape is part of specific, targeted policy iniatives designed to re-make
contested spaces in peacetime Belfast. In their different ways, these iconic touchstones of
loyalist and republican culture speak eloquently to themes of place, heritage, culture, and
landscape, and they offer rich scope for exploring the interplay between conflict
transformation and cultural geography.
In this chapter, I have also gestured toward under-explored aspects of the Northern
Ireland conflict and its ambiguous aftermath. As Edwards and Bloomer (2008: 1) observe:
That communities traditionally sympathetic to paramilitarism are now making moves
towards abandoning the option of armed struggle in the new Northern Ireland is a
phenomenon hitherto under-explored by academics. Although recent work has focused on
the political operations at work in these communities, particularly in their transition from
terrorism to democratic politics (for example, ODonnell 2008; Tonge 2008), I have chosen
to bring my geographers imagination to bear on the questions of place and identity that
underpin these transformations.
Moreover, I have conceptualized this project to address gaps in the scholarship about
Northern Irelands ethnic minorities. Despite saturated scholarship on the Troubles and their
aftermath, little academic attention has been dedicated to the experiences of minority ethnic
residents. Although recent years have witnessed increasing numbers of research studies about
ethnic minorities living in Northern Ireland, these projects tend to be executed in isolation
from the much larger body of work around conflict and peace. In contrast, I have positioned
ethnic minorities firmly within my study of post-conflict transformations. As I will discuss
in the following chapter, I conceptualized this project as a direct engagement with the
communities I seek to highlight in both the academic and practical work of the peace process.
I argue that scholarship on Northern Ireland must expand beyond its traditional binary model
of sectarian conflict to acknowledge how diverse relationships and communities are also vital
to the process of building peace.
Chapter 3. Northern Ireland 73
Figure 3.1. Peace line at Springmartin, West Belfast. Photo by Mark Johnston.
Figure 3.2. Entrance to Tigers Bay, a loyalist enclave in North Belfast. Photo by the author.
Chapter 3. Northern Ireland 74
Figure 3.3. Republican mural, Falls, West Belfast. Photo by the author.
Figure 3.4. Loyalist mural, Mount Vernon estate, North Belfast. Photo by the author.
Chapter 4: Research Strategy and Design 75
Chapter Four
Research Strategy and Design
Introduction
In this chapter, I discuss the methodological framework for my research. This thesis
takes engagement with landscape as a means for understanding identity and culture in post-
conflict Northern Ireland. I begin by positioning my work within larger academic debates,
drawing in particular on the rich seam of methodological literatures within feminist
geography and participatory research. Although my work in Northern Ireland sits outside the
parameters of mainstream feminist and participatory traditions, both sets of literature have
shaped my research strategy and my engagement with the ethical implications that arose from
this project.
The second section outlines my research methods, or ways of asking (Nairn 2002).
For this project, I adopted a set of mixed, qualitative methodologies that were designed to
achieve a balance of breadth and depth in my research materials. In this section, I elaborate
on the various methods (participant observation, semi-structured interviews, semi-structured
group discussions, and maintenance of a research diary) that I employed. I discuss the ways
in which these methods intersect with and amplify each other to produce empirical material.
The third section focuses more broadly on my research strategy. I begin by
discussing the 18-month timeframe of my fieldwork period, which allowed me to delve into
three distinct cultural populations in Northern Ireland: loyalists, republicans and ethnic
minorities. I pay particular attention to the formal collaborations that I developed with the
Belfast-based chapters of two national non-profit organizations: Groundwork Northern
Ireland and the National Trust. I elaborate on the reasons for selecting these two
organizations, relating their remits to my research questions about cultural identity and the
transformation of contested landscapes. I then discuss the practical outreach work that I
spearheaded on behalf of both organizations in Belfasts burgeoning minority ethnic
community sector, and I relate these networking possibilities to my own research.
The fourth section focuses on the first of two case studies that I selected for this
project. I briefly describe the 11
Night bonfire tradition as it relates to my research interests
in contested cultural landscapes. Next, I describe how my collaboration with Groundwork
Chapter 4: Research Strategy and Design 76
Northern Ireland created opportunities for practical engagement with this transforming
tradition, which in turn shaped the evolution of this case study. For the remainder of this
section, I discuss my strategy and the ways in which I drew upon various methodological
components to explore how the transforming bonfire tradition provokes new relationships
between place, culture and identity. The first strand of this case study relates to loyalist
perspectives and experiences (Chapter Six); the second strand, to those of ethnic minorities
(Chapter Seven). I discuss my methodological processes for each strand separately.
The fifth section focuses on the second of my two case studies, which explores the
demilitarizing landscape of Divis Mountain. I begin with a brief rationale for selecting this
site, contrasting its landscape to that of the loyalist bonfire tradition and describing the
mountains significance in the psyche of Belfasts republican communities. Like the bonfire
case study, my research on Divis Mountain encompasses two strands. The first strand relates
to republican perspectives (Chapter Five); the second, to those of ethnic minorities (Chapter
Seven). I first discuss my research strategy with relation to local republicans. Next, I discuss
my collaboration with the National Trust, my outreach work on behalf of their behalf in the
minority ethnic community sector, and my research into minority ethnic perceptions of place,
culture and identity in Northern Ireland.
The sixth section of this chapter addresses issues of positionality and reflexivity. I
reflect upon negotiations of my own identity as a raced/classed/gendered individual in
Northern Irelands delicate political environment. I also discuss the advantages and
disadvantages of my collaborative relationships with Groundwork Northern Ireland and the
National Trust, and I describe some of the tensions that arose through the research
opportunities they created. Throughout this section, I explore my experiences in dialogue
with the feminist and participatory literatures that infuse my methodological approach.
I conclude this chapter with a reflection on my research strategy. I summarize the key
features of my approach, contextualizing my methods with regard to the breadth of
participants I sought to include. I discuss how this thesis contributes to rich academic debates
on methodologies that engage landscape to understand identity and culture, and I push these
concepts further to study peacebuilding in societies recovering from conflict. I end by
highlighting some innovative dimensions of my methodological approach and the
contributions that my research makes to scholarship and practice.
Chapter 4: Research Strategy and Design 77
1. Feminist and Participatory Research Debates
As a cultural geographer, I explore the shifting meanings and identities that people in
a post-ceasefire society derive from contested landscapes. This work requires great sensitivity
to the contexts in which transformations of place, culture and identity occur. From the outset,
I felt drawn to methodological approaches that could acknowledge the delicate dynamics
involved with conducting research in such places. As Moss (2002: 3) reflects: Thinking
about feminist research tends to sharpen an approach to a project in that understanding power
and knowledge brings into focus the varied contexts in which the research takes place. I
found her observation to be particularly apt for Northern Ireland, where competing territorial
and cultural claims overlay a general atmosphere of unease.
In an early retrospective article, McDowell (1997: 382) describes feminist geography
as looking at the actions and meanings of gendered peopleat the different ways in which
spaces are gendered and how this affects peoples understandings of themselves as women or
men. In the intervening years, the scope of feminist geography has widened. Moss (2002)
argues that a feminist politics, broadly defined, influences all aspects of the research process.
Along similar lines, Hall (2002) questions the possibility of feminist geography without
gender. She comes to the conclusion that for herself and her postgraduate contemporaries,
feminism is more intuitive than explicit and that it is inflected with postcolonialism and
postmodernism (ibid: 24). She points out that feminist critique often serves as initial
exposure to the idea that places are permeated with power relations. Indeed, my own growing
awareness of this idea, and its implications for my research site, was profoundly influenced
by my engagement with feminist geographical scholarship.
Feminist geography also steered me toward the burgeoning literature in participatory
research, with a number of feminist scholars conceptualizing participatory dimensions to
their work (see Cahill 2007; Sultana 2007). The ideals that drive participatory research mirror
the values of feminist research, for example, its emphasis on participation and collaboration,
peoples experience and knowledge, and knowledge for the purpose of political action
(Gatenby and Humphries 2000: 90). The value that participatory research places on local and
indigenous knowledge echoes feminist poststructuralist suspicion of overarching theories,
and also the value it ascribes to multiple types of knowledge (Reason and Bradbury 2001,
cited by Cameron and Gibson 2005: 317).
Chapter 4: Research Strategy and Design 78
My project sits somewhat ambiguously within the parameters of participatory
debates. Participatory approaches are frequently conflated with action research. Reason and
Bradbury (2001: 1) offer a working definition of action research as a participatory,
democratic process concerned with developing practical knowing in the pursuit of
worthwhile human purposes, grounded in a participatory worldview [that] is emerging at this
historical moment. My own research deviates from their definition; at no point did I open
this project to a democratic process of revision. Nonetheless, I listened carefully to my
participants and to my collaborators, through whom I embedded my research. At various
points, I reconsidered my approach and reshaped my questions in order to respond to
perceived needs  both theirs and mine. Like many participatory projects, at its heart my
doctoral research was a form of praxis aimed at social change (Gatenby and Humphries
2000: 89) that engaged in dialogue with transformations at work on a number of different
scales in Northern Ireland. As Cameron and Gibson (2005: 320) observe, a micro-politics of
self-transformation is an important part of a larger social change and macropolitical agenda.
Like Parr (2007), they suggest that a participatory approach can contribute to social and
economic change by focusing on forms of identity and subjectivity.
Alongside their advocacy of qualitative methodologies, feminist and participatory
research traditions increasingly emphasize the importance of reflexivity in the research
process. Sultana (2007: 376) describes reflexivity as a reflection on how one is inserted in
grids of power relations and how that influences methods, interpretations and knowledge
production. She argues that practices of reflexivity are critical for the production of ethical
research, by opening it to more complex and nuanced understandings of issues. Nairn (2002:
149), however, stresses the importance of ongoing vigilence to the research process,
emphasizing that reflexivity must be continuously invoked. Rose (1997) adopts an even more
cautious approach, concentrating on the anxieties and ambivalences that surround reflexive
methodologies and illuminating their limits.
As scholars in both participatory and feminist research traditions have turned their
reflexive gaze on their own practices, the methodological traditions themselves undergo a
process of revision. Kesby (2007: 2819) cautions that participation, like feminism, must now
be seen as a partial, situated, and contestable work in progress subject to future challenges
and transformations. His warning is apt for my own project, with its focus on contested
cultural landscapes that are at once transforming and transformative. The next section details
the qualitative methodologies that I employed to explore and to interrogate these landscapes.
Chapter 4: Research Strategy and Design 79
2. Research Methods, or Ways of Asking
In this section, I outline my research methods, or what Nairn (2002: 148) describes as
ways of asking. For my doctoral project, I designed a complementary, integrated field
programme that strove to create dialogue and interaction between its various components. To
maintain a balance of breadth and depth, I deliberately chose a set of mixed methodologies.
Reinharz (1992: 197) notes:
Multiple methods enable feminist researchers to link past and
present, data-gathering and action, and individual behaviour
with social frameworksBy combining methods, feminist
researchers are particularly able to illuminate previously
unexamined or misunderstood experience.
The diversity of methods at my disposal allowed me to choose the most appropriate method
for each respective phase of the research process, with an eye for the level of empathy that
could realistically be expected at key points (Nairn: 148). As Kong (1998: 80) observes:
Some methods may be more likely to yield certain insights into
particular experiences, while others may yield other types of
insight. In other words, different methods yield different truths,
all of which are valid.
Crucially, I emphasized qualitative methodologies to understand lived experience and to
reflect on and interpret the understandings and shared meanings of peoples everyday social
worlds and realities (Limb and Dwyer 2001: 6).
Participant observation was a vital element of my research strategy. Bennett (2002:
139) describes participant observation as the attempt to understand the everyday lives of
other people from their perspective [by requiring] researchers to situate themselves in the
lives of others. Critics of the method cite its small sample size, its tendency to privilege
depth at the expense of breadth, and its loss of detachment. However, participant observation
is unparalleled in its ability to study behaviour in its natural setting, and thus offers great
Chapter 4: Research Strategy and Design 80
depth of understanding (Dowler 2001: 158). Similarly, Nairn (2002: 149) argues that (b)y
participating in social phenomena we observe, we are more likely to learn the underlying
meanings that produce that phenomena. For my purposes, the strengths of participant
observation outweighed its potential weaknesses. By working alongside the other
methodological components, participant observation illuminated the human dimension of my
research questions and helped me to examine the vying discourses (Dowler 2001: 159) at
work in Northern Ireland. With regard to my research objectives, this method allowed me to
observe the transformations at work in my chosen contested landscapes, and to observe
peoples shifting experiences of and engagements with them. As I discuss in the next section,
the formal collaborations that I developed within Belfasts voluntary sector led to numerous
opportunities for participant observation. However, as I will discuss in the final section of
this chapter, on the reverse side of these opportunities were challenges related to positionality
and, at times, my dual professional and academic relationships with my research participants.
To balance the breadth of participant observation, and to engage with the voiced
experiences of my research participants, I also pursued semi-structured interviews and group
discussions. Through these methods, I explored in more depth my research questions of how
transformations of contested landscapes provoke people to think in new ways about place,
culture and identity. Initially, I found myself drawn to the dialogic character (Bedford and
Burgess 2001: 123-124) of group discussions, and to their potential to empower participants
through exploration of social agency and collective knowledge production (Hyams 2004:
106). As Pratt (2002: 215) argues, groups hold the potential to offer a safe space  literally
safety in numbers  in which to discuss issues and experiences. She argues that this type of
group methodology is premised on the notion that we develop knowledge in context and in
relation to others (ibid) However, as Kong (1998: 81) observes, for issues that are sensitive
and deeply personal, individual interviews may be more appropriate than the social context
generated by group interviews.
In the end, I adopted both approaches. I organized 28 group discussions and 15
individual interviews. Of these, I recorded and transcribed 15 group discussions and one
individual interview, with the permission of the participants. Over many months, I developed
the facilitation skills necessary for these varied discussions. Likewise, I learned to gauge the
level of delicacy required for any given interview participant. For republican ex-prisoners, for
instance, whose personal histories were intensely political and deeply sensitive, one-to-one
interviews were usually the wiser option. To the best of my abilities, I exercised discretion in
Chapter 4: Research Strategy and Design 81
choosing one format over the other, always bearing in mind the delicate atmosphere in which
I conducted this research project. At all times, I tried to follow the leads and signals
communicated by my interview participants and other research contacts.
As with participation observation, the semi-structured conversations  whether group
discussions or one-to-one interviews  harboured their own liabilities and disadvantages.
Hyams (2004) argues that the attention given to voices in group discussion reinforces the
simplistic equation of silence with absence and voice with presence, thereby making it
difficult to hear meaningful silences. With regard to one-to-one interviews, Valentine (2002:
122) observes that the interviewer and interviewee engage in a constant process of
(re)production. She argues: As a consequence of these complex ways that positionings are
(re)negotiated throughout interviews it is impossible to fully know or understand how these
shape the knowledge produced from the encounter. In my own work, I have tried to take
their warnings to heart. Like Sultana (2007: 378), I acknowledge that I was only able to
partially access the lives of the people I was interested in and tried to be faithful to the
relations in that space and timeand the knowledge that was produced through the research,
however partial.
The use of multiple methods enabled me to amplify the strengths, and to compensate
for the weaknesses, of my various methodological strands. I discovered that participant
observation and semi-structured conversations interacted with each other in unexpected ways.
For example, participant observation frequently gave rise to both the content of and
participants for the group discussions and interviews. In return, the material generated by the
discussions and interviews tended to sharpen my subsequent observations.
Throughout the fieldwork process, I faithfully maintained a research diary to show
the unfolding of a story as it develops (Bennett 2001: 146-147). Following Bennett (ibid:
147), this diary contains three parts: 1) field observations; 2) attempts to make sense of these;
and 3) my reflections in relation to the research. The research diary serves as my primary
record for participant observation, but it also contextualizes each group discussion or
interview that I conducted, and it details the lengthy process for recruiting research
participants. In total, the research diary amounts to 185,437 words. The discipline required to
maintain this diary, together with the monthly reports that I sent to my advisor, provoked me
to grapple with my data as it emerged. The continuous process of reflection proved to be a
valuable tool, helping me to identify new opportunities and directions for my work that I
might otherwise have missed. The research diary forms an evolving narrative through which
Chapter 4: Research Strategy and Design 82
I can trace significant shifts, both in the progress of my research studies and in myself as a
researcher.
3. Research Strategy
Fieldwork began in February 2007 and ended in August 2008. Although I had
originally planned to finish the previous summer, I realized that a six-month timeframe
would be insufficient for my research objectives. Belfast is a complicated city; to negotiate it
requires sensitivity and deep awareness. Moreover, the transformations that I sought to study
inevitably unfolded at their own pace: The 11th Night bonfires changed enormously from one
year to the next, and the demilitarization of Divis Mountain occurred fitfully, over months
and years. With 18 months, I was able to immerse myself in my research setting and to
develop strong networks for participant observation and interview/discussion recruitment.
The longer I lived in Belfast, the deeper and more nuanced was my understanding of this
place and its people. The eighteen-month period was a transformative one, as Northern
Ireland approached and moved through the tenth anniversary of the peace accords. Watershed
events in the political arena reverberated powerfully with people at the grassroots level; I
wanted to study their perspectives as they lived through these transitions. As OReilly
(2005:93) points out, a longer timeframe shifts the focus on the static elements of peoples
lives to a focus on processes and how questions. Indeed, as I illustrated in Chapter Two,
how questions are crucial to the over-arching research aims of this project.
Before the ceasefires, Northern Irelands political situation and culture of conflict
imposed considerable limitations on research designs; cross-community investigations were
viewed with great suspicion.1 Times are different now. The peace process has created
research opportunities unimagined during the Troubles, not least of which is a wider range of
research participants. Dowler (2001: 158), who conducted research in Northern Ireland in the
early 1990s, argues that (w)hen working with a community, it is important to obtain a range
of backgrounds in the selection of respondents, especially if the community has undergone
years of civil strife. From the outset, I knew that I sought extreme perspectives on both sides
For instance, Dowler conducted research (on which she later based this observation) in Belfast during
a particularly tense time in the run-up to the first declared ceasefire. Concerned that her research
participants might perceive her as a spy, Dowler chose to focus her study solely on Catholics living in
one West Belfast neighbourhood (Dowler 2001: 153-154).
Chapter 4: Research Strategy and Design 83
of the conflict, and that I would need to network separately in different areas. The contested
landscapes that I chose to study are powerful cultural icons for their respective communities:
bonfires for loyalists and Divis Mountain for republicans. By gathering in-depth information
from these extremes, I felt that I could illuminate a more honest picture of present-day
Belfast, ten years after the signing of the peace accords. Moreover, to probe a different
dimension to the challenge of creating shared space in a conflicted society, I wanted to
understand how ethnic minorities engage with these culturally charged (Matless 2000: 142)
landscapes.
Given the precarious political situation in Belfast, I decided to collaborate with
established non-profit organizations that could vouch for me in a city long-accustomed to
treating outsiders with suspicion. Benson and Nagar (2006: 584) define collaboaration as the
combined insights of different persons, places and research contexts, and recognize its
importance in generating new dialogues and knowledges across socioeconomic,
geographical and institutional areas. I sought collaborators that would provide logistical
support for my research, expose me to new perspectives, and both challenge and enhance my
existing knowledge of the peace process. Moreover, as I sought organizations for whom my
work  both academic and practical  would be useful and important.
I chose an organization called Groundwork Northern Ireland as my initial
collaborator. Like its counterparts in the UK-wide Groundwork Trust, Groundwork Northern
Ireland works in partnership with local communities, statutory agencies and key funding
bodies to facilitate community and environmental regeneration. Established in Northern
Ireland in 1991, the organization has developed strong relationships with economically
disadvantaged neighbourhoods  both Protestant and Catholic  which in Belfast were among
the most severely affected by the Troubles, and which continue to experience the aftershocks
today. Unlike similar environmental organizations, Groundwork Northern Ireland places
equal emphasis on the social regeneration of these post-conflict neighbourhoods. In
addition to more traditional services in landscape architecture and project implementation,
the organization also works closely with communities on building relationships, both internal
and external, that can facilitate wider processes of regeneration and conflict transformation.
Groundwork Northern Ireland summarizes its mission with the following motto: Changing
Places, Changing Lives, Changing Minds. As a geographer, I felt drawn to this triad of
place, people and peacebuilding. I perceived Groundwork Northern Ireland as an
organization that engaged on a practical level with the questions that previously I had
Chapter 4: Research Strategy and Design 84
entertained only as abstract theory. At the beginning of my fieldwork period, I had yet to
specify my particular case studies. I suspected that collaboration with Groundwork would
open opportunities for engaging with appropriate participants and landscapes for my research
project.
In February 2007, I contacted the director of Groundwork Northern Ireland. Sylvia
Gordon, then the Assistant Director and the head of the Policy & Development Team,
with me to explore the potential for collaboration. I proposed to join Groundwork Northern
Ireland as a long-term volunteer, assisting the organization on projects that would feed my
research questions. We agreed that I would join the Bonfire Management Programme, which
would allow me to look closely at physical and cultural transformations in working-class
loyalist neighbourhoods. Over time, my engagement with this programme solidified into a
case study for my doctoral research. In exchange for Groundworks institutional support and,
eventually, introductions to interview participants, I offered to spearhead the organizations
minority ethnic outreach efforts. In Belfast, the voluntary sector (of which Groundwork
Northern Ireland is a part) is now realizing that its work must expand from a focus on two
communities to a model that is sensitive to and inclusive of Northern Irelands growing
diversity. Sylvia Gordon accepted my proposal immediately. I want you to help us be on the
edge, she said (Research Diary, 20 February 2007).
On behalf of Groundwork Northern Ireland, I joined the most prominent bodies in
the emerging minority ethnic community sector: the Northern Ireland Council on Ethnic
Minorities; the Black, Minority Ethnic and Faith Network; and the South Belfast Roundtable
(formerly the South Belfast Roundtable on Racism.) Through these organizations, I cultivated
relationships with numerous community groups. I later drew upon these relationships to
organize discussion groups and to identify interview participants for my doctoral research.
Throughout my fieldwork period, I included my interactions with the minority ethnic
community sector as research material, with participant observation notes recorded regularly
in my research diary.
My other case study, on Divis Mountain, developed in a less formal manner. On the
advice of a local acquaintance in Belfast, who suggested that I might be interested in
gathering oral histories of republican residents in West Belfast who live at the base of the
Belfast Hills, I began to develop a separate line of inquiry with regard to the transformation
of Divis Mountain. Its appeal was due in part to its striking parallels and contrasts with my
Sylvia Gordon became Director of Groundwork Northern Ireland in April 2008.
Chapter 4: Research Strategy and Design 85
first case study. Like the landscape of the loyalist bonfires, Divis Mountain resonates
powerfully with members of one dominant ethnic population and is viewed with unease by
those of the other. Yet unlike the loyalist bonfires, whose cultural landscape extends across
Belfast and the rest of Northern Ireland, Divis Mountain is anchored in one specific
geographic site.
I selected my second collaborating organization, the National Trust, on the basis of
its role in the mountains demilitarization and subsequent public management. In contrast to
Groundwork Northern Ireland, the remit of the National Trust extends throughout England
and Wales as well as Northern Ireland.
The organization acquires and protects threatened
coastline, countryside and buildings, which they maintain for public access. In 2004, the
National Trust spearheaded the purchase and acquisition of Divis Mountain. As a new public
resource, the majority of the initial budget went toward clean-up and maintenance of the site,
with little left over for community outreach. In August 2007, I contacted the National Trusts
warden for Divis, and I offered myself as a volunteer. My familiarity and extensive contacts
with the minority ethnic sector were an attractive resource to the National Trust. Like
Groundwork Northern Ireland, the Trusts warden at Divis and other Belfast-based managers
were eager to expand and diversify their outreach remit. The warden and I agreed that I
would raise awareness of the mountain within the minority ethnic sector, and that I would
coordinate and lead walking tours of Divis for any interested community groups. When
possible, and following Burgess (1996), after each of these walks I would facilitate a group
discussion to gather research material on their perceptions and experiences of the mountain.
For the discussion venue, the site warden and his staff would make available to me the
Second World War Nissan hut located near the entrance to the public footpath. Finally, I was
given the option of volunteering in a more general capacity whenever I wished to do so. This
primarily involved assisting the staff with large-scale public walks and with property
maintenance. The latter proved to be particularly helpful for my research, as it allowed me to
develop an intimate physical knowledge of the landscape. For research purposes, my
interactions with the National Trust operatives at Divis, and with the mountain itself, were
recorded as participant observation.
My collaborative relationships with Groundwork Northern Ireland and the National
Trust required me to develop research practices that were necessarily fluid and flexible
(OReilly 2005: 27). With Groundwork, in particular, our relationship took some time to
The National Trust of Scotland is a separate, although related, organization.
Chapter 4: Research Strategy and Design 86
settle, as we explored how our collaboration would work. I had to learn how to balance
allegiance to my collaborators with the critical distance necessary for my research. Later in
this chapter, I explore in greater depth these collaborations in relation to my own positionality
as a researcher, volunteer and ordinary resident of Belfast.
4. Case Study: 11
Night Bonfires
The bonfire case study emerged directly through my collaboration with Groundwork
Northern Ireland. The 11
Night bonfires form a vital part of the loyalist cultural landscape,
but their continued presence and sectarian intent remain deeply controversial in a divided
city. Although I had long been fascinated by the tradition, it rose to the forefront of my
research on contested cultural landscapes when I was invited to join the Bonfire Management
Programme.
Following two successful pilot programmes, Belfast City Council voted in September
2006 to introduce grant-aid framework for communities involved with the bonfire tradition.
The purpose of this programme was three-fold:
1) To support communities in the celebration of their cultural tradition through positive
engagement, whilst engaging with the perceived negative aspects that have become
associated with bonfires.
2) To support local communities in improving the management of these bonfires,
particularly with regard to cultural sensitivity, inclusion and safety.
3) To reduce the adverse health and environmental impacts of bonfires.
Groundwork Northern Ireland won the tender to administer this programme. Over the course
of three years, the number of participating communities increased from 13 to 34. My research
on 11
Night bonfires encompasses two strands: perceptions among residents living in
loyalist neighbourhoods with an active bonfire tradition, and perceptions among ethnic
minorities living in greater Belfast. Both strands drew upon participant observation and group
discussions.
Chapter 4: Research Strategy and Design 87
Strand 1: Loyalist Perspectives
Participant observation forms an extensive part of my research into loyalist identities
and experiences of the transforming bonfire tradition. In the months leading up to July 2007,
I shadowed staff members from Groundwork Northern Ireland on their site visits and
meetings with local community leaders. During this time, I listened carefully to dialogue,
both within these communities and amongst my colleagues. I witnessed the creation of local
bonfire committees; followed their development over many months; and came to understand
the challenges to and possibilities for change. Slowly, I began to frame these localized efforts
in relation to the larger transformations at work across the city. As my research diary reflects,
this period provided excellent opportunities, not only for participant observation but also for
continuous reflection.
In the spring of 2008, at the beginning of the programmes second year, Sylvia
Gordon asked me to take a more active role. She assigned me as the liaison to the bonfire
committee in Donegall Pass, a loyalist neighbourhood located at the southern edge of City
Centre. For nearly five months, beginning in March 2008, I met regularly with the members
of the local bonfire committee. In this capacity, I supported their efforts to improve the
neighbourhoods designated bonfire site. This work included facilitating discussions with
children, teenagers and young adults on safety and environmental guidelines. I also worked
with the committee members to design a programme to explore their cultural heritage. As
part of this programme, I co-facilitated a discussion with a group of 24 young people, and I
was also present at a discussion on increased consumption of alcohol during bonfire season.
A colleague facilitated this second session, which allowed me to observe intently. Out of
respect for the delicate dynamics involved in organizing these sessions, combined with
pervasive suspicion amongst the participants  and in loyalist communities, more broadly 
about their misrepresentation by outsiders, I chose not to make electronic recordings of either
of these discussions. Nonetheless, they offered plenty of research material for participant
observation, which I later recorded in my research diary. More broadly, my work in Donegall
Pass provided excellent insights into one communitys engagement with the transformation
of the 11
Night bonfires.
The months that I dedicated to participant observation allowed me to identify more
specific questions with regard to the relationship between bonfire transformation and shifting
forms of loyalist cultural identity. Groundwork provided me with an excellent opportunity for
Chapter 4: Research Strategy and Design 88
eliciting responses. In June 2008, I was asked to facilitate a series of discussions with nine
communities that had recently joined the Bonfire Management Programme. These
neighbourhoods received smaller grants to defray the costs of their community festivals. In
return, each neighbourhood was required to identify and convene a small group of residents
for a 45-minute discussion on cultural heritage and bonfires. From early-June through mid-
July, I facilitated these discussions in eight loyalist neighbourhoods, with numbers of
participants ranging from one to 15. These discussions covered a wide demographic range
(see Table 4.1). For the purposes of my doctoral project, I am counting my notes from these
nine group discussions as research material. In deference to the suspicion with which loyalist
neighbourhoods tend to view outsiders, coupled with the delicate political environment in
which the Bonfire Management Programme operated, I chose not to ask permission to record
these discussions electronically.
I did, however, record two group discussions that were organized with the help of
colleagues at Groundwork and in the voluntary sector. The first of these discussions took
place with the womens group in the North Belfast neighbourhood of Woodvale. Unlike the
other communities participating in the Bonfire Management Programme, Woodvales bonfire
committee was composed almost entirely of women. Like the other discussions that I
facilitated on behalf of the Bonfire Management Programme, this discussion focused on their
perceptions of the transforming bonfire tradition and its relationship with transformations in
their own loyalist identities. I also drew forth their opinions on the role of gender in loyalism,
probing their thoughts on why and how they formed a predominantly female committee in
the highly masculinized world of loyalist bonfires. As we arranged the logistics for the
discussion, and as the discussion itself progressed, I chose to emphasize my role as a
researcher, rather than my role with the Bonfire Management Programme.
With the help of a colleague in the voluntary sector, I conducted another formal,
recorded discussion with senior loyalist leaders in the neighbouring town of Antrim.
Although the Bonfire Management Programme brought me into regular contact with
paramilitary members in Belfast, I felt that potentially sensitive research about paramilitarism
should be kept separate from my professional responsibilities. These men, both of whom
represent their respective paramilitary organizations to Antrim Borough Council, are heavily
involved with efforts to transform their local bonfires. As they had no connection to Belfasts
Later in this chapter, I discuss issues of positionality that arose from my collaborative relationships
with Groundwork Northern Ireland (and by extension, the Bonfire Management Programme) and the
National Trust.
Chapter 4: Research Strategy and Design 89
Bonfire Management Programme, I felt comfortable asking for their permission to record the
discussion. Our conversation focused not only on the relationships between the bonfires and
their shifting cultural identities, but also on their perspectives about transformations in
loyalist paramilitary vision and culture. The material from this discussion, as well as from the
interview in Woodvale, provided me with detailed transcripts, which I analyzed in
conjunction with the notes from my extensive opportunities in participant observation. Out of
respect for the privacy of my research participants, I use pseudonyms when writing about
these interviews in subsequent chapters.
Finally, I conducted six interviews with individuals from a range of professional
backgrounds who deepened my contextual understanding of 11
Night bonfires (Table 4.2).
With one exception, I have withheld their names in this dissertation.
Strand 2. Minority Ethnic Perspectives
For the second strand of this case study, I explored perceptions of 11
Night bonfires
among minority ethnic residents living in greater Belfast.
This represents a new area of
research in Northern Ireland, and the Bonfire Management Programme offered a solid base
from which to conduct this project.
Unlike the loyalist strand, with the ample opportunities it provided for participant
observation, this second strand of research focused primarily on group discussions (Table
4.3). To recruit participants, I networked through the Black, Minority Ethnic and Faith
Network  an umbrella organization for people working in the minority ethnic community
sector. With the help of colleagues in the Network, I organized discussions with community
groups from the following populations: Afro-Caribbean, Bangladeshi, Chinese, Indian,
Muslim and Turkish. These populations represent a spectrum of Northern Irelands growing
ethnic diversity, ranging from the relatively longer-established Chinese and Indian
populations to the more recent Turkish newcomers. Each discussion took place at the office
or headquarters of the respective community organization. I also sought to arrange
discussions with Polish, Portuguese and Lithuanian residents; with the expansion of the
European Union in 2005, these groups are among Northern Irelands fastest-growing
I chose not to include local nationalist/republicans in this project. In early 2007, the Belfast-based
Institute of Conflict Research applied for funding to conduct a study of nationalist perceptions of
loyalist bonfires. Although their application was unsuccessful, the Institute may re-apply in the future.
If their future application bears fruit, my project on ethnic minority perceptions will dovetail nicely
with their research.
Chapter 4: Research Strategy and Design 90
minority ethnic populations. However, due to lack of interest on the part of their respective
community representatives, group discussions for my research did not materialize. Later, in
contrast to the other single-ethnic groups that I studied in this research strand, the Black,
Minority Ethnic and Faith Network itself agreed to participate in a group discussion at one of
its quarterly meetings, which I hosted on the premises of Groundwork Northern Ireland.
Finally, I also recruited through a snowball technique a group of American students, all based
at Queens University. In doing so, I sought to create an opportunity to probe my own
complicated perspectives of the 11
Night bonfires, becoming in this way a research
participant in my own project.
I facilitated each of these discussions with the aid of posters created in early 2007 by
a consultant for the Bonfire Management Programme. Paul Hutchinson designed a traveling
exhibit comprising five pop-up stands, which were designed to provoke discussion within
loyalist communities participating in the programme. Through simple text and striking
photos, each poster addressed a different dimension of the 11
Night bonfire tradition:
Framework, Fun, Flags, Fire and Future questions (Figure 4.1). Together, they provided a
general sense of the bonfire process within loyalist communities. At my request, Groundwork
made a smaller, portable set that I took to my interviews with minority ethnic community
groups. I began each discussion session by inviting participants to view the exhibit.
Frequently, these posters provided the participants with their first images of the bonfires. I
then facilitated a discussion about their experience of the 11th Night tradition, drawing forth
their thoughts on the relationships and disconnections between the bonfires and their larger
senses of belonging and identity in Northern Ireland. The photographic exhibit remained in
place throughout the entire session, at times entering into dialogue with the groups
discussion. By serving as a visual focal point, the images helped participants to articulate
their questions about and opinions and experiences of this tradition.
5. Case Study: Divis Mountain
To balance the intensely loyalist 11
Night bonfires, I focused my other case study
on perspectives from the opposite side of Northern Irelands conflict. Divis Mountain, the
highest of the Belfast hills, has long been considered iconic to republicans living in its
shadow. In the aftermath of its occupation by the British military, Divis remains a deeply
Chapter 4: Research Strategy and Design 91
contested landscape, posing sizeable challenges to efforts to develop the mountain as a shared
cultural resource. As with my bonfire research, this case study encompasses two strands:
Perceptions among residents living in staunchly republican neighbourhoods in West Belfast,
and perceptions among ethnic minorities living in greater Belfast.
Strand 1. Republican Perspectives
Participant observation formed an important baseline for my research on Divis
Mountain. Elsewhere in this chapter, I detail how my collaboration with the National Trust
revolved primarily around the minority ethnic outreach that I conducted on the organizations
behalf. However, this collaboration also proved beneficial to my research in less targeted
ways. The National Trust propelled the public acquisition of Divis Mountain, and was
subsequently awarded the remit to maintain the mountain for public use. Its wardens were an
invaluable resource for my research on the mountains extraordinary transformation from a
British military base to a place of public access. The research insights that I acquired through
participant observation, via the National Trust, helped me to contextualize and to frame the
discussions that I posed to republicans and to ethnic minorities about their relationships with
this contested landscape.
In republican West Belfast, I sought participants for a series of semi-structured
interviews and group discussions; I hoped that these encounters would yield insights into the
relationship between the transformation of Divis Mountain and expressions of republican
cultural identity. In July 2007, I contacted Filte Feirste Thiar, West Belfasts local tourism
board. I emerged from this initial meeting with names and contact information for three
individuals; recruitment for this case study snowballed from there. Networking proved to be
fairly straightforward in the tight-knit communities of republican West Belfast.
Initially, I had hoped to facilitate a series of group discussions across the age
spectrum, with one group comprising elderly residents; a second group comprising middle-
aged residents who came of age during the Troubles; and a third group comprising younger
residents born during the Troubles. I anticipated that these discussions, when analyzed in
relation with each other, would yield insights into the different experiences of the mountain
and its shifting history of militarism. Due to a combination of logistical difficulties with
organizing a group of younger residents, and the preference of middle-aged residents to speak
to me individually, I conducted only two group discussions along the lines of my original
Chapter 4: Research Strategy and Design 92
plan. The first group discussion took place with a group of elderly residents at Bleach Green
Court, a care home located at the very edge of the city, on the lower slopes of Divis Mountain
itself. The second discussion focused on two members of a prominent republican family:
Terry Enright, an environmental campaigner, and his son Feargal Enright, an Irish language
specialist. In each of these discussions, I sought to understand their experiences of Divis
Mountain, through its fraught history of militarism and its subsequent demilitarization, and
the mountains shifting implications for their cultural identity and sense of belonging.
The individual interviews were facilitated along similar lines. Although I had initially
intended to prioritize discussion groups over one-to-one interviews for this case study, it
quickly became clear that individual conversations were the preferred option of many
participants, particularly those who had fought for the IRA. Today, Northern Ireland remains
a sensitive political milieu, and I realized that the tight-knit atmosphere that facilitated my
networking could also pose a risk to my research participants, were they to share their
narratives in a group discussion. For the convenience of my participants, I conducted the
interviews in venues that they chose. As a result, the research materials for this case study
were gathered in a variety of settings, for example, in the homes or offices of my participants.
Less conventional venues included an artists workshop in a renovated mill and the front
passenger seat while interviewing on-duty taxi drivers.
Table 4.4 details the range of semi-structured group discussions and one-to-one
interviews conducted as part of Strand 1 for my case study on Divis Mountain. For additional
context, I interviewed three people who are not residents of republican West Belfast: the
National Trust employee who spearheaded the public acquisition of Divis Mountain, and who
subsequently presided over the British militarys withdrawal from the site; the director of the
Belfast Hills Partnership,
an independent charity that seeks to improve the management of
the hills; and a middle-aged Protestant man, from a neighbourhood in South Belfast, whom I
met while assisting with a public walking tour organized by the National Trust in March
2008. Due to his ethnic background, he had long regarded Divis Mountain with fear, based
on its terratorial associations as a republican stronghold. The National Trust event marked his
first time on the mountain. I sought to include his voice as research material, in order to
complicate and to contextualize Divis Mountains strong associations with republican
The organizations partners include local councils, government departments, community groups,
conservation organizations, and businesses committed to caring for the Belfast hills.
Chapter 4: Research Strategy and Design 93
cultural identities. With the exception of Terry and Feargal Enright, and the artists Christoff
Gillen, Deirdre Mackel and Frank Quigley, I have changed the names of people interviewed.
Strand 2. Minority Ethnic Perspectives
For the second strand of this case study, I explored perceptions of Divis Mountain
among minority ethnic residents in greater Belfast. On behalf of the National Trust, I
publicized the mountain within Belfasts minority ethnic community sector. By August 2007,
when I joined the National Trust as a volunteer, I had built strong networks with the same
minority ethnic groups to which I also represented Groundwork Northern Ireland. It was a
mutually beneficial collaboration; the National Trust was eager to diversify its outreach
efforts, and I was well-positioned to help them do so. Over twelve months, I worked with a
variety of minority ethnic community groups to organize day-trips to Divis. In an evocation
of Burgesss (1996) methodologies on walking, I led guided tours of the mountain. In this
way, participants could experience the terrain of the mountain itself and, from the vantage
point of the summit, position the mountain within the wider regional landscapes. I drew upon
participant observation to reflect on these walking tours, and I entered my observations into
my research diary. When possible, I brought the groups back to the National Trusts Nissan
hut for tea, lunch and discussion. The research material that I sought to gather from these
discussions included their thoughts on the mountain, and how it provoked them to think more
broadly about cultural identity and their sense of belonging in Northern Ireland.
These group discussions required a high degree of flexibility on my part. With one
exception, the walking tours were designed as family-orientated events. The presence of
small children posed some challenges to the group discussions, although I quickly learned to
prioritize my interview questions. To entertain the children, I provided art supplies and
environment-themed activity sheets donated by the Belfast Hills Partnership. Table 4.5
outlines the groups that participated in walking tours of Divis Mountain.
Section 6. Positionality
As a geographer working in a delicate post-conflict environment, my own personal
narrative entered unavoidably into this project. Smyth and Robinson (2001: 207) argue that
Chapter 4: Research Strategy and Design 94
researchers working in violently divided societies struggle to connect with the mainstream
research community because concepts like neutrality do not export easily to these contexts.
Although I maintained a presentation of political neutrality while in Belfast, I nonetheless
became what Hermann (2001: 89) calls an involved outsider. She defines this figure as one
who is personally connected to the conflictbecause of an identification with a general
political stance such as anti-racism, anti-colonialism or non-violence that is relevant to the
analysis of the specific conflict (ibid: 89-90). With regard to Northern Ireland, I divided my
attention equally between loyalists and republicans, between the 11
Night bonfires and
Divis Mountain. My neutrality, however, ended there. I devoted the rest of my energy and
collaborative resources to my research in the minority ethnic community sector. In doing so, I
advanced my own political agenda, that of bringing alternative voices into the larger dialogue
of the peace process.
My collaborations with Groundwork Northern Ireland and the National Trust allowed
me to immerse myself in the practical aspects of peacebuilding. These collaborations,
although rewarding, were not without challenge. Like most organizations, charitable or not,
Groundwork and the National Trust are rife with political intrigue, the specifics of which I
had to discover and negotiate. For example, the valuable contacts in the minority ethnic
sector that I brought to my work on Divis Mountain provoked resentment among other
properties owned by the National Trust. One senior employee asked if I would be willing to
conduct outreach to minority ethnic communities on behalf of other National Trust sites. In
the interest of time and my research objectives, I had to decline. With regard to Groundwork,
the organization underwent a series of managerial shake-ups in the first year of our
collaboration, which resulted in Sylvia Gordon, my primary contact, eventually taking the
directorship. During this time, particularly in the early months, I struggled to understand how
my interests could, in practice, dovetail with the broader work of the organization. Even after
three years of collaboration, and although grateful for what I have accomplished by forging
contacts in the minority ethnic community sector, Groundworks employees still seem
uncertain as to how they might incorporate these new dimensions into their work in
environmental and community regeneration.
Occasionally, other challenges arose in relation to external perceptions of my
collaborating organizations. The National Trust, for example, is frequently viewed as a
predominantly English charity that panders to its middle- and upper-class membership base.
While conducting interviews about Divis Mountain with residents of working-class
Chapter 4: Research Strategy and Design 95
republican neighbourhoods, I would often be guarded about my affiliation with the National
Trust. Concern, however, flowed in both directions. For example, I wondered whether my
research engagement with former IRA members might damage my relationship with the
National Trust, which was keen to position itself outside the Northern Ireland conflict. For
these interviews, I was careful not to identify myself as a volunteer of the National Trust.
My collaboration with Groundwork and, subsequently, the Bonfire Management
Programme, offered a different set of challenges. From the spring of 2008, I held a semi-
professional role in the organization as a liaison to loyalist bonfire sites. This change in
status, from volunteer to Project Development Officer, had an inevitable impact on my
research. Although grateful for the rich opportunities for participant observation that
stemmed from the Bonfire Management Programme, I was careful not to take advantage of
my position. In part, I was afraid that conducting research interviews would not only confuse
the people in loyalist communities with whom I worked, but might also lead them to voice
negative opinions about situations, with the expectation that I, in my professional role, would
be able to fix. As a result, I chose to use only participant observation for research encounters
with communities with which I worked in a professional capacity. However, to gather the
deeper insights of a semi-structured conversation, I organized discussions with two groups
with whom I had virtually no professional connection: the bonfire committee in Woodvale,
and loyalist paramilitary leaders in Antrim. The womens group from Woodvale, although
part of the Bonfire Management Programme, had no contact with me prior to my request for
a research discussion, which I arranged with the help of their liaison, who was also my
colleague at Groundwork. The discussion in Antrim was arranged with the help of colleague
in the voluntary sector, and the men who took part had no formal ties to the Bonfire
Management Programme. For both group discussions, I highlighted my identity as an
independent researcher and mentioned only in passing my affiliation with the Bonfire
Management Programme.
In addition to the challenges discussed above, these collaborations required me to
devote considerable time and energy for administrative purposes to the organizations, which I
might otherwise have directed elsewhere. However, the disadvantages were outweighed by
the rich opportunities created through these collaborations. The relationship with
Groundwork was particularly helpful, in that it allowed me to see how I, in my multiple
academic and professional roles, might apply my research questions on the ground. Before I
began fieldwork, I articulated this challenge to myself:
Chapter 4: Research Strategy and Design 96
One challenge that I foresee is to let the peace process be what it
will be, without pinning my own hopes and visions on it. How, I
wonder, can I maintain a rigorous honesty while investing
myself in peacebuilding work that may be predisposed toward a
rose-tinted outlook on progress?
As Bennett (2002: 140) notes: Participant observation can be a bit of a contradiction because
it is about both taking part and observing. I certainly found this to be true, yet I also
discovered great benefits within this contradiction. In doing so, I believe that my research
became more honest and, perhaps, more attuned to Northern Irelands complex realities than
if it had been a purely theoretical exercise.
Collaborations aside, the other perplexing challenge of positionality came from my
own complicated, multiple identities. Feminist methodological philosophies have deeply
inspired my approach, not least of all this observation by Jenkins et al (2003: 58, original
emphasis):
Thinking and doing the F word implies a sensitivity to power
relations in the field, an awareness of the ethical role of the
researcher and a commitment to the progressive role of the
research as well as an understanding of how the researcher and
the researched have been gendered, sexualised, raced and
classed.
I found this to be particularly apt in the rapidly shifting society of post-ceasefire Northern
Ireland, where I learned to make complex identifications and disidentificationswith many
different notions of sameness and differences operating at the same time (Valentine 2002:
120).
As a female, middle-class, educated American of mixed Japanese and Chinese
ancestry, I experienced Belfast through the lens of my own shifting identities. Depending on
circumstance, each of these dimensions could be an asset, a liability, or (more frequently)
both at once. My educated, middle-class upbringing, for instance, provoked uncertainty in
This extract was taken from my upgrade report, submitted in December 2006.
Chapter 4: Research Strategy and Design 97
working-class loyalist and republican neighbourhoods, but it also marked me as a safe
outsider through whom sensitive personal stories would not trickle back into the community.
As a woman studying the highly masculine loyalist bonfire culture, my presence provoked a
sense of camaraderie among other women, and both consternation and amusement among
male bonfire builders, at once opening and closing windows into their world.
Most interesting, however, were reactions to my ethnic heritage. Like many of my
research participants, I experienced my share of racist behaviour in Northern Ireland. At 5
foot 7 inches, with unambiguously Asian features, I was a visual anomaly in Belfast. My own
experience of racist aggression, whether implicitly or explicitly acknowledged, helped me to
develop strong rapport with other ethnic minorities whom I interviewed. To Belfasts local
Protestant and Catholic residents, my mixed ancestry and American citizenship frequently
challenged their concepts of national identity. I learned to negotiate my multiple identities,
drawing forth or muting aspects as a situation required. In republican West Belfast, for
example, I met families still angered by the British governments practice in the early 1970s
of interning suspected paramilitary members. With these people, I shared stories about the
internment of my Japanese grandparents by the American government in the Second World
War. When I met community activists planning a Gaeltacht quarter for Irish language and
culture, I drew parallels to Seattles Chinatown, where my maternal grandmother has lived
for over forty years. In loyalist communities, I connected with devout Protestants by
introducing myself as the granddaughter of a Methodist minister. More broadly, I came to
feel that my mixed Japanese and Chinese heritage traced its own role in Northern Ireland.
The tension between the two halves of my own heritage  so similar in appearance, yet
strikingly different in culture  helped me to empathize with the fraught work of negotiating
Northern Irelands two dominant ethnic traditions. Through my own story, I feel that I have
brought to Belfast an appreciation for the subtle dynamics at work in both the conflict and the
process of peacebuilding.
Conclusion
In this chapter, I have outlined an innovative strategy that enabled me to gather high-
quality empirical material for this research project. By adopting a suite of qualitative methods
(participant observation, group discussions, one-to-one interviews), a flexible approach, and
Chapter 4: Research Strategy and Design 98
an 18-month timeframe, my research yielded complex understandings about politically
sensitive, post-conflict Northern Ireland. Moreover, I have conceptualized a project that
encompasses extraordinary breadth in its participants and addresses known gaps in the
academic literature on Northern Ireland. Edwards and Bloomer (2009: 1) lament the lack of
academic interest in communities traditionally sympathetic to paramilitarism [that] are now
making moves towards abandoning the option of armed struggle in the new Northern
Ireland. These are the communities  both loyalist and republican  that form the basis of my
research. From the outset, I deliberately sought contested cultural landscapes that would draw
me into the communities where memories of paramilitarism, whether past or present,
complicate the peace process. Furthermore, as I will discuss in greater detail below, I devoted
an equal portion of my energy, attention, and analysis to the little-explored perspectives of
Northern Irelands ethnic minorities.
My thesis engages with landscape to understand identity and culture in a rapidly-
changing, post-conflict society. In doing so, I follow a long tradition of cultural geographers
who embrace similar projects in a variety of ways. Bondi (1992, 1998) and Domosh (1996),
for example, explore the gendering of the urban landscape through its symbolic coding,
consumption patterns, and processes of gentrification, while Lorimer (2005), Hetherington
(2003) and Crouch (2003) emphasize embodied acts of landscape (Lorimer 2005: 85, cited
in Wylie 2007: 166). In an interesting resonance to my own work, Wylie (2002, 2005)
explores these embodied acts through the practice of walking through landscape. Like not
only Wylie but Burgess (1996), on whom I modeled parts of my methodology, I sought to
develop a research practice that emphasizes walking alongside talking. My strategy diverges
from other research practices in its emphasis on practical, participatory engagement as a
means of understanding, and contributing to, the transformation of conflict as it relates to
shifting conceptualizations of place and cultural identity.
To this end, my collaborations with local non-profit organizations highlight some of
the more innovative dimensions of my research. Groundwork Northern Ireland, in particular,
was pivotal to the development of my research strategy. As I discussed previously, their
motto  Changing Places, Changing Lives, Changing Minds  encapsulates my argument
for the intersection of conflict transformation theory and cultural geography. Amplifying the
theoretical scope is Groundworks practical emphasis on people, place and peacebuilding.
Over the course of my fieldwork period, I engaged with this triad conceptually and
practically. In this way, theory and praxis became intimately entwined.
Chapter 4: Research Strategy and Design 99
The most apparent outcome of this approach is my work with minority ethnic
communities. At the outset, I conceptualized this research project as a way to address their
silence in scholarship on Northern Ireland. Although a handful of studies focus on ethnic
minorities, with several more published in recent years, they tend to do so in isolation of the
larger spectre of the Troubles. I wanted to produce a piece of work that explored minority
ethnic perspectives of post-conflict Northern Ireland, invoking the same contested cultural
landscapes on which I centred my research on republican and loyalist identities. In doing so, I
simultaneously drew on my collaborations with Groundwork Northern Ireland and the
National Trust to reposition ethnic minorities within the practical, public work of conflict
transformation in the community relations sector. I argue that both scholarship on and praxis
in Northern Ireland must expand beyond its traditional, binary model of sectarian conflict to
acknowledge how diverse relationships and communities are also vital to the process of
building peace.
Chapter 4: Research Strategy and Design 100
Table 4.1. Bonfire discussions in loyalist communities
Name of
Community
Number of
Participants
Gender
Composition
Composition
Date of Discussion
Antrim* 2 male adults 8 April 2008
Ballysillan 12 mixed youth 10 July 2008
Donegall Pass 24 mixed youth 11 June 2008
Donegall Pass 14** mixed youth 17 June 2008
Fairhill 1 male adult 9 July 2008
Glencairn 9 mixed youth and
adults
24 June 2008
Graymount 8 male youth 2 July 2008
Knocknagoney 9 mixed adults 3 July 2008
Lisburn Road 8 male youth and
adults
23 June 2008
Walkway 7 female adults 26 June 2008
Westland 15 mixed youth 25 June 2008
White City 8 mixed youth and
adults
18 June 2008
Woodvale* 8 female adults 3 April 2008
* Discussion recorded electronically
** Approximate number
Table 4.2. Individual bonfire interviews
Organization Title Date of Interview
Belfast City Council
Cleansing Services
Enforcement Officer 16 August 2007
Belfast City Council,
Good Relations Unit
Good Relations Officer 26 November 2009
Belfast City Council
Waste Management Service
Waste Manager 23 February 2006
Chartered Institute of Environmental Health Director 14 February 2006
Harvard University School of Public Health
Department of Environmental Health
Dr David Christiani,
Professor of Medicine
1 May 2007
Orange Order Chief Archivist 23 January 2009
Chapter 4: Research Strategy and Design 101
Figure 4.1. Selected panels from the Bonfire Management Programmes traveling exhibit
Chapter 4: Research Strategy and Design 102
Table 4.3. Bonfire interviews with minority ethnic community groups
Community Group Number of
Participants
Gender Date of Interview
Afro-Caribbean Support of
8 mixed 8 February 2008
American students** 4 mixed 12 October 2007
Bangladeshi Association 5 mixed 7 July 2008
Chinese Welfare Association 7 mixed 21 August 2008
Indian Community Centre 7* mixed 20 August 2007
Belfast Islamic Centre 8* men 30 November 2007
Belfast Islamic Centre 3 women 17 June 2008
Turkish Community 13 men 25 March 2008
BMEF Network *** 12 mixed 8 April 2008
* Approximate number
** Not a formal organisation
*** Greek, Bangladeshi, Chinese, Indian, Muslim, American, Malaysian, Northern Ireland
Protestant and Catholic
Chapter 4: Research Strategy and Design 103
Table 4.4. Interviews and discussions for Divis Mountain case study, Strand 1
Group
Discussions
Participant(s) Context Gender Date of Interview
Terry and
Feargal Enright
Environmental
campaigner and Irish
language specialist
male 25 February 2008
Residents (7) of
Bleach Green
Court
mixed 12 February 2008
Individual
Interviews
Seamus Taxi driver and
former IRA prisoner
male 5 June 2008
Padraig Former IRA prisoner male 27 June 2008
Cormac Former IRA prisoner male 19 October 2007
Christoff Gillen Artist male 24 June 2008
Deirdre Mackel Artist and
community worker
female 13 August 2008
Frank Quigley Artist / Former IRA
prisoner
male 4 July 2008
Jim Bradley Director, Belfast
Hills Partnership
male 24 September 2007
(Name withheld) Divis warden,
National Trust
male 2 June 2008
(Name withheld) Protestant participant
of public walk
male 19 March 2008
Table 4.5. Walking tours of Divis and discussions with minority ethnic community groups
Community Group Number Age
Composition
Gender
Composition
Date of Tour and
Discussion
Afro-Caribbean Support
of Northern Ireland
5 5 adults mixed 22 September 2007
Belfast Islamic Centre 12 4 adults, 8
children
mixed 29 June 2008
Latino America Unida 14 9 adults, 5
children
mixed 11 November 2007
Turkish Community 10 10 adults male 1 April 2008
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 104
Chapter Five
Transforming Earth: Divis Mountain and Republican Identities
Introduction
At 1562 feet above sea level, rising from the western edge of the city, Divis
Mountain is the highest point in greater Belfast. On a clear day, its summit offers
sweeping views of Northern Ireland and glimpses of Scotland and northwestern England.
In its time, Divis has served as the burial ground for ancient Irish kings; the source of
rivers that fueled the linen industry, propelling Belfast from modest provincial town to
linchpin of the British Empire; and, perhaps most controversial in recent memory, a
major operational base for the British army. Over the past decade, as peace has settled in
Northern Ireland, the mountain has undergone dramatic transformations. In the late-
1990s, the Ministry of Defense (MOD) deemed its holdings on Divis to be no longer
necessary, thus paving the way for the mountains acquisition for the public.
Underpinning the demilitarization of Divis, however, are multiple, contested readings that
complicate the mountains transformation into a shared identity resource for post-
conflict Northern Ireland.
In Chapter Two, I argued for a deeper engagement between conflict
transformation theory and cultural geography, to interrogate the relationships between
place and identity that lie at the heart of conflict over contested territory. In this chapter, I
draw on Divis Mountain to explore the challenge of reworking notions of culture,
heritage, identity and place for a post-conflict society. The mountains transformation
from militarized terrain to public open space provokes important questions about the
diverse, shifting expressions of cultural identity in the republican heartland that resides in
its shadow. This case study addresses the tensions between anti-imperial narratives of
Divis in contemporary republican culture, and the need for new and wider ways of
imagining this identity resource. I situate my analysis of Divis within Matlesss (1998)
framework of cultures of landscape, in which landscape circulates materially and
symbolically in the multifaceted cultural movements of identity, authority and belonging
(Wylie 2007: 95). Throughout this chapter, I invoke the concept of a culturally charged
(Matless 2000: 142) landscape to engage with the tensions that emanate from the
mountains  and, by extensions, Northern Irelands  colonial past and ambiguous
postcolonial present.
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 105
Postcolonialism and geography are intimately linked, with geography lying at the
heart of postcolonial critique (Blunt and McEwan 2002: 1) and its challenge to
conceptualizations of space, power and imperial imagination (Mitchell 1994). Nash
(1999: 458) defines the concept of postcolonialism as a set of perspectives formulated in
theory and cultural practice, which...share a critical focus on colonialism and its legacies.
Among the many contributions of postcolonial theory are new frameworks for theorizing
identity, most notably Bhabhas (1992, 1994) concept of hybridity. As Carroll (2003: 7)
acknowledges, hybridity has the advantage of restoring a more complex sense of the
often conflicted subject positions of the colonized both through resistance and
collaboration. She cautions, however, against invocations of hybridity that rewrite
history as a matter of mutual and neutral interactions [and thus] denies the power
relationships under imperialism then and now (ibid).
As a postcolonial entity, Ireland is a particularly ambiguous case, viewed as both
a transgressive and a founding site for postcolonial theory (Carroll 2003: 3). From one
perspective, Ireland can be considered Englands first colony (Cleary 2003) and thus the
training ground for colonists to other locations, as well as the context of the first English
discourse  which racialized Irelands inhabitants as non-European and pagan (see
Gibbons 2001)  on the rationalization and the process of colonization. From a different
perspective, however, Irelands cultural and political membership of the West makes it an
uneasy site for theories that have been generated in the more obviously postcolonial,
subaltern (Spivak 1988) contexts of Africa, the Caribbean, Latin America and Asia.
Further complications to Irelands postcolonial status include the participation of Irish
people in processes of colonization around the globe, its fuller incorporation (compared
to other former British colonies) into the United Kingdom and, of course, the spectre of
Northern Ireland.
The 1920 Government of Ireland Act released from Britain the 26 counties that
would eventually become the Republic of Ireland, creating a clear break in political
colonial status. For the six counties that remained within the United Kingdom, however,
the interpenetrating effects of colonial and postcolonial conditions (Carroll 2003: 2) are
particularly acute. In a landmark publication in the development of postcolonial theory,
McClintock (1992: 88) stridently referred to Britains colonial grip on Northern Ireland:
Ireland may, at a pinch, be post-colonial, but for the inhabitants of British-occupied
Northern Ireland...there may be nothing post about colonialism at all (ibid: 87). Yet
developments of the past decade, such as Northern Irelands delicate power-sharing
legislative assembly, complicate McClintocks forceful interpretation of Northern Ireland
as a colonial entity, and signal a need for a more differentiated sense of the post-
colonial (Nash 1999: 460).
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 106
In Ireland, colonialism and its complicated aftermath have profoundly shaped a
nationalist republican ideology that advocates a united, independent, 32-county Ireland.
Although adherents from both sides of the border agitate for political change,
republicanism as a cultural movement is particularly pronounced in Northern Ireland. In
Belfast, Divis Mountain serves as a lens that refracts the concept of postcolonialism and
its tensions around memory, authority, identity and change. In this chapter, I explore the
ways in which an idea of the mountain circulates in narratives of republican identity that
are emerging from the history of conflict, and are now evolving through the peace
process. For this case study, I focus on the republican heartland of West Belfast, where
neighbourhoods that nestle at the base of Divis (Figure 5.1) are intimately bound to the
ongoing narrative of the Troubles. As I discussed in Chapter Four, I conducted participant
observation and semi-structured interviews with local residents, including former
volunteers of the Irish Republican Army (IRA), ex-prisoners, activists, National Trust
employees, Irish language specialists and artists. I drew my interview participants from a
broad age spectrum, ranging from young men in their mid-20s to a group of elderly
residents in a care home. Through this research, I intended to glean diverse experiences,
memories and ways of relating to the cultural landscape of Divis.
I begin this chapter by establishing the mountains contested colonial history. I
ground my analysis in two separate but related dimensions of the British imperial project
in Ireland: the 19
century Ordnance Survey mapping process and, in the latter half of the
century, the controversial military presence during the Troubles. I draw on
Woodwards (2004) work on military geographies to connect the mountains central
role in the mapping process to its overt militarization in the 20
century. Running through
this first section are themes of vision and power, in which the imperial gaze (Jacobs
1996: 159; Blunt and Wills 2000) of the Ordnance Surveys cartographic programme
finds new material and political form in the surveillance of local republican residents by
century British soldiers. Finally, I describe the effects of the peace process in the
transformation of Divis Mountain from militarized terrain to a place of public access.
Trailing in the wake of this transformation are the tensions and shadows of imperialism
that continue to resonate in the contested landscape of Divis.
In the second section, I enlarge this imperial reading to explore the relationship of
Divis to republican resistance in the cultural heartland of West Belfast. The juxtaposition
of these two sections emphasizes the mountains discordant, contested narratives. I begin
with a contextual overview of republicanism, tracing its evolution from a movement that
became synonymous with the IRAs violent campaign for national liberation, to one that
today supports non-violent constitutional politics in Northern Irelands power-sharing
government. On the ground, however, republican ideology remains entrenched in both the
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 107
idea and the material fact of community. I explore its continued, widespread valorization
in West Belfast through interviews with three former IRA volunteers, all of whom served
time in prison for militant activities during the Troubles. Their narratives illuminate
connections between the iconic presence of Divis Mountain and republican
consciousness, resistance and cultural identity. I end my reflections on resistance by
discussing a public art sculpture that speaks to the expression of Divis in contemporary
republican cultural identity. Herald of Jericho was created in 2002 from the demolished
ruins of a controversial British army base located at the edge of the mountain. The
sculptures story of emergence  its provenance, conceptualization, production, reception
 illuminates strong links between republican culture, identity, heritage and the
(de)militarization of Divis Mountain.
In the third section, however, I complicate republican claims to the mountain by
exploring tensions around language, location and identity. I draw on two different aspects
of landscape inscription on Divis. The first focuses on etymologic inscription, which I
trace through the 19
century Ordnance Survey and the mapmakers alteration of the Irish
linguistic landscape. Following Nash (1999), I argue that contemporary efforts to
reinscribe Gaelic placenames may perpetuate simplistic, anti-colonial narratives that
counteract other efforts to create shared cultural space in peacetime Northern Ireland. To
explore these possibilities, I then turn to a very different material inscription of Divis. For
Christoff Gillen, an artist and activist who grew up in republican West Belfast, the
mountain serves as a space for provoking a city-wide dialogue on questions of identity
and belonging. His installations evoke the bleaching greens of the industrializing city,
thus reworking the historic landscape on a contemporary canvas. Gillens creations ask
provocative questions about home, belonging and equality. I argue that his inscriptions
gesture toward ways of opening the republican icon of Divis as an identity resource for a
broader, peacetime public.
I conclude this chapter by reflecting on new possibilities for conceptualizing
Divis in wider scales of belonging. As well as its role in public art, to which the work of
Christoff Gillen alludes, the mountains increasing popularity as a recreation site invites
dialogue with debates in cultural geography about walking, landscape and cultural
politics.
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 108
1. Imperial Legacies
The Ordnance Survey
In an early article that pre-figured the explosion of interest in mapping among
geographers and other scholars of postcolonialism, Harley (1988) described maps as
socially constructed forms of geographical knowledge that reveal intimate connections to
power. These value-laden images (ibid: 278) distort the world through the modes,
content and hierarchies of representation that a mapmaker chooses to employ. In this
way, maps contribute to wider cultural stereotypes [that] enshrine self-fulfilling
prophecies about the geography of power (ibid: 292). Similarly, Blunt and Wills (2000:
194, original emphasis) argue that the mapping of places, particularly those previously
unknown to Europeans, came to create such places in an imperial imagination that was
also quite clearly a geographical imagination. The connections between mapping and
power provide fertile ground for a number of geographic, postcolonial studies (for
example, Carter 1987; Huggan 1989).
The Ordnance Survey was one of the most extensive aspects of the British
imperial project, with military surveyors dispatched to the far corners of the empire (see
also Clayton 2008; Edney 1997; Seymour 1980). According to Seymour (1980), the
Board of Ordnance, to which the national survey owes its name, is one of Englands
oldest institutions, with roots in the Middle Ages. The Ordnance Survey extended a long
tradition of military cartography for the rapidly expanding empire. The etymologic roots
reflect imperial intent: ordnance derives from the Latin ordinre, meaning to order,
regulate or rule; while survey, from the French sur (over) and voir (to see) implies a
view from a commanding position ( Cadhla 2007: 1). At one level, maps served
administrative purposes for the British state, fostering better economic and political
control of and access through local-level landscapes. They amounted, however, to acts of
colonial domination (Smith 2003: 71), accession and a significant step towards
political social and cultural hierarchization ( Cadhla 2007: 7). Smith (2003: 74) looks
beyond the maps themselves to their process as a means of internal control...which
required an army of soldier-surveyors to plot the landscape. Their prolonged presence in
these landscapes served as a constant reminder of British colonial rule.
The mapping of Ireland began in July 1825 (Andrews 2002). Three years
previously, the surveyors had observed Divis Mountain from a vantage point in Scotland.
Its summit became the first point for the interior triangulation of the island; the second
point (Figure 5.2) was the slightly lower elevation on the eastern flank that was
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 109
subsequently named Black Mountain. In total, the surveyors observed no fewer than 200
points from Divis, which they combined with observations made from Scotland to frame
the trigonometric skeleton for the map of Ireland. Andrews (1997:1-2) describes this
cross-channel intervisibility between the two islands as a kind of geodetic
imperialism. By linking Irish coordinates into the existing British triangulation system,
the survey method sent a message that Ireland was part of Britain (Smith 2003: 84).
Moreover, the presence of soldier-surveyors required for this project further emphasized
the mapping process as a reminder of colonial rule (ibid 74).
Parallel to the material process of the Ordnance Survey, Britain continued to flex
its imperial authority through the naming of places (Withers 2000). According to
Andrews (1997: 300), the Ordnance Survey had its own policy for the spelling of
placenames. Surveyors would collect existing versions of each name and then select
whichever of these spellings came closest to the presumed original Irish form. Kiberd
(1995: 619) describes the result as an English grid...remorselessly imposed on all Irish
complexities, reflecting an imperial desire not so much to translate Irish values into
English words as to translate English values into Irish terms. To  Cadhla (2007: 223),
the anglicization of Irish placenames left a physical trace of a wider translative energy
that fuelled the survey and rendered the place, the name and the language...as mute
anachronisms, vestiges of barbarous inarticulacy, of the world before English civilization
(ibid: 80).
At the edge of Belfast, itself an anglicization of Beal Feirste for mouth of the
sandbars, the highest summit became known through the paper landscape (Andrews
2002) as Divis.
The name is an anglicized version of Dubh, the Irish word for black, by
which the mountain had been known to the local Gaelic-speaking population. In the
process of mapping the mountain, the surveyors formally partitioned it, assigning Divis
to the summit and Black Mountain to the slightly lower elevation on the eastern flank.
The role of Divis in the mapping of Ireland pre-figured its military occupation
during the Troubles. As I described above, the mapping process emerged from a history
of militarism, but it also shaped future military activities on the mountain. Woodward
(2004:107-108) argues that the history of cartography is bound up with the history of
military-led imperial expansion. The process of mapping consolidates military readings
of landscape, representing physical three-dimensional space in order to serve tactical
Translations, the best known of Brian Friels (1981) plays, explores these issues. Set in a hedge
school in County Donegal in August 1833, it describes the attempt by British soldiers of the Royal
Engineers and their Irish collaborators to transliterate the local Gaelic placenames and anglicize
them, in the process of mapping the area for the Ordnance Survey. The play was first staged in
1980 to launch the Field Day Company, which I discussed in Chapter 3.
Later in this chapter, I explore complications that arose from this name, as well as contemporary
efforts to retrieve the mountains original Gaelic appellations.
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 110
and strategic military purposes (ibid). Below, I describe how these military purposes
drew the mountain firmly into republican narratives of the Troubles.
Military Geographies
The British military asserted itself unambiguously on Divis Mountain in the 20
century. For several decades, beginning around the Second World War, the army
maintained an active and controversial presence in the Belfast hills. The MOD first
formally leased a large swath of the Belfast hills from local landowners in 1953. Later,
during the height of the Troubles, it purchased this property outright (Interview, National
Trust, 2 June 2008). On Divis, the highest summit, the MOD erected communications
infrastructure, including a series of aerial towers that could be seen from virtually
anywhere in the city below (Figure 5.3). In nearby fields, soldiers honed their skills on
the rifle training ground. And on the lower slopes, which once served as bleaching greens
for the linen industry, a large army fort loomed over West Belfast. For local residents, the
occupation of Divis by the British military became one of the most iconic injustices of the
Troubles.
Woodward (2004) defines militarisms geographies as the control of space.
Divis Mountain was only one focal point in the larger conflict in Northern Ireland, but it
provided the British army with a superb base for exerting control over West Belfast. I
spoke to one young man, born in the early 1980s, who compared West Belfast during the
Troubles to an open prison. He described helicopters flying overhead, regular army
patrols on the streets and, intriguingly, the all-seeing eye of Divis Mountain (Research
Diary, 6 November 2007). Dandeker (1990: 38) describes surveillance as the basis of a
relationship of domination between ruler and ruled. Along similar lines, Feldman (1997,
cited in Zurawski 2005) argues: Visual appropriation [becomes] a metonym for
dominance over others.
In the late 1990s, as the Troubles were winding to a close, the MOD quietly
began to examine its vast holdings. Divis Mountain became classified as surplus to
requirements (Green Balance 2006: 52). This was a startling reversal for what, in recent
memory, was heavily militarized terrain. Not long after the re-classification, the MOD
announced its intention to sell the property. In Belfast, an employee of the National Trust
became captivated by the idea of purchasing Divis for the public (Interview, National
Trust, 2 June 2008). Although perhaps best known for the preservation of stately homes,
the National Trust also acquires and protects threatened coastline and countryside in
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 111
England, Wales and Northern Ireland.
The public acquisition of Divis required extensive
community consultations and intricate negotiations between the MOD and three separate
funding bodies. The National Trust, the Environment and Heritage Service, and the
Heritage Lottery Fund raised 2.9 million for the acquisition of the mountain and a three-
year project that would transform Divis from abandoned military property into a place fit
for public use. From these funds, the three organizations purchased the bulk of Divis in
November 2004.
The National Trust assumed primary responsibility for managing the property.
They retained as sole tenants the family from which the MOD had purchased Divis;
throughout the Troubles, the army had granted this family permission to graze their cattle
on the mountain, and a delicate, symbiotic relationship had developed between the
animals and the land (Interview, Belfast Hills Partnership, 24 September 2007). A
skeleton staff, led by the newly-instated warden for Divis, worked tirelessly to make the
site fit for public use. According to the National Trust employees who coordinated the
effort, this was no easy task (Research Diary, 5 November 2007; Interview, 2 June 2008).
Toward the end of the 1990s, as peace promised to settle in Northern Ireland, the soldiers
left their posts on Divis, and fly-tipping began in earnest. For several months after the
2004 acquisition, the warden, his staff, and a handful of volunteers cleared rubbish and
installed miles of fencing around the perimeter of the property. They constructed an eco-
grid made from recycled silage bins (Figure 5.4), and laid it across the boggy ground
from the MODs paved road to the viewpoint on Black Mountain where the base for the
Ordnance Survey theodolite still stands. They sifted through the wreckage of airplanes,
some dating from the Second World War, and they worked with archaeologists to map
ancient ruins. They began to dream about turning a derelict 18
century stone barn into a
visitors centre (Figure 5.5). On 24
June 2005, Divis Mountain opened to the public.
Tensions, however, continue to resonate in the complicated legacy of the MOD
and its military occupation. The British military could easily have placed Divis for sale
on the open market, where the property would have sold for far more money. Instead, the
MODs willingness to forgo a larger profit allowed the National Trust, the Heritage
Lottery Fund, and Environment and Heritage Service to acquire the mountain for the
public. Moreover, the long military occupation protected the mountain from development
and the worst effects of pollution. According to the site warden, Divis is one of the most
pristine places in Europe, thanks to the MOD (Research Diary, 14 November 2007).
Although this perspective is voiced by a civilian who was born and bred in republican
West Belfast, it resonates with what Woodward (2004: 89) calls discourses of military
The National Trust of Scotland is a similar but separate organization.
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 112
environmentalism  a key strategy for marketing military establishments as places of
environmental protection.
Woodward (2004: 53) cautions that conversion  in which military resources
are transferred to the civilian sector  is best conceptualized as a process rather than a
once-and-for-all change. The example of Divis Mountain illustrates her theory. Even
after the transfer of Divis to public ownership, the mountains ongoing military
occupation could be interpreted in the MODs decision to retain nine acres of land on the
summit. This compound, comprising aerial towers and buildings encircled by barbed
wire, remained visible from virtually any point in the city below, and served as a stark
reminder of the continuing military presence on the mountain. The MOD eventually
relinquished its holdings on the summit to the National Trust in 2009, nearly five years
after the original sale, but its footprint remains. Despite the removal of the barbed wire
fence and appropriation of the existing infrastructure for civilian use, the imprint of its
concrete base is a visible reminder of the mountains military history (Figure 5.6).
Lurking behind these visible manifestations are the invisible ways in which the
military continues to control the space. Woodward (2004: 54) observes: There is a basic
lack of information available on the conversion of military holdings partly as a result of
its invisibility in public policy. With regard to Divis, the MOD has been less than
forthcoming about its activities on the mountain during its long period of ownership and
occupation. (Interview, National Trust, 2 June 2008; private e-mail correspondence with
local journalist). As Woodward (2004: 35) observes, military control over space is
reliant in part on controlling data or information about military occupancy. Divis may
now belong to the public, but British military control persists in the secrecy that shrouds
its former activities on the mountain. These tensions amplify readings of Divis Mountain
as a landscape of imperial control, through which and on which the British state exerted
colonial rule in Ireland. In the next section, I heighten the tensions in this contested
landscape by exploring how the mountain circulates in discourses of republican cultural
identity.
2. Republican Landscapes
The Romance of Resistance
The origins of the Irish republican movement are grounded in anti-colonial
resistance. In the 20
century narrative of independence, 1916 resonates as the year that
proclaimed the Irish Republic as a sovereign, independent state. The Easter Rising of that
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 113
same year marked the beginning of the end for British rule in the 26 counties that
eventually became the Republic of Ireland. However, the partition of the island in 1921
left under British control the six northeastern counties, and necessitated new articulations
of republican ideology. As McGovern (2004) observes, Irish republicanism in the latter
half of the century drew its support base overwhelmingly from the northern Catholic
working class. Their lived experiences, framed by the sectarian division of the state in
which they lived, have largely defined the trajectory of a movement that became
synonymous with the IRA and its violent campaign for national liberation.
The peace process has marked a significant movement away from the historical
position of classic Irish republicanism as it was articulated in the 1916 proclamation.
Notably, the 1998 peace accords fell substantially short of the republican goal of a united,
independent Ireland. McGovern (2004) argues that although rhetoric of nationalist
aspirations remains, the concept of equality has become the meta-discourse of
contemporary republicanism. He describes Irish republicanism as an historically rooted
ideological resource [that] fuses the values of civil rights and national liberation (ibid:
637). According to Tonge (2008: 59), the need for national reconciliation has replaced
the vernacular of smashing Northern Ireland. He argues that the romanticized republican
narrative of the 1916 Easter Rising is now largely ghettoised within the discourse
of...republican ultras (ibid: 72). Dissident republican groups continue to emphasize the
colonial nature of British rule by (re)creating the need for repressive, visible security
measures in Northern Ireland, giving the impression that the British Army and the police
service are forces of occupation (Tonge 2004: 690). On the whole, however, non-
violent constitutional politics has replaced armed resistance within Irish republicanism,
provoking Bean (2007: 250) to quip that the IRA is quickly passing into history and is
thought sufficiently harmless to be re-packaged as heritage for Troubles tourism and
theme bars.
On the ground, republican ideology remains entrenched in both the idea and the
material fact of community, and republican identity continues to find tangible expression
in West Belfast and other staunchly republican areas. Bean (2007: 57) describes these
areas as resistance communities that were characterized by a strong sense of place, and
that became battlefields between the British state and the emerging counter-hegemony of
the anti-state insurgency. He argues that the development of the IRA was shaped by the
civil society of the nationalist community, which provided the resources (material,
symbolic, human) that facilitated an activist, militant nationalism, and proved decisive in
mobilizing large sections of the nationalist population to support republicanism (ibid: 13).
In West Belfast today, support for contemporary non-violent republican values
sits alongside devotion to the IRA. Its legacy is a potent source of pride and identity for
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 114
republican communities that endured the long civil war. The prevalence of former IRA
volunteers, many of whom served prison sentences during the Troubles, serve as a living
link to a glorified past.
In the following extract from my research diary, I recount a
conversation with a young community worker in the West Belfast estate of Ballymurphy:
Is there much of a paramilitary presence? I ask. Almost
immediately, I realize that I have overstepped the line.
There are no paramilitaries here, Liam answers sternly.
Not since the British military left. He emphasizes the
importance of terminology  a rebuke that I accept.
Ballymurphy, in Liams eyes, is neither terrorist nor sectarian.
He frames the struggle in terms of people willing to fight for
their ideals. Is this neighbourhood proud to be republican? he
asks rhetorically. Yes, it is. (Research Diary, 9 November
2007)
By equating paramilitarism with the British military, Liam de-legitimizes Britains
claim to and presence in Northern Ireland. In contrast, he presents the IRA as a legitimate
expression of idealized hope for a united Ireland. Although this excerpt refers specifically
to the well-known republican stronghold of Ballymurphy, the estate is by no means
unique in its continued celebration of armed republicanism (see de Baroid 2000). Liams
defiant resistance to my line of questioning illuminates the widespread, continued
valorization of republicanism in West Belfast.
For the generation of republicans in West Belfast who came of age during the
Troubles, Divis Mountain provokes a complicated constellation of memories. Although
the British military dates its presence on Divis to the Second World War, it managed to
co-exist peacefully for several years with the local republican neighbourhoods clustered
at the base of the mountain. As Padraig, a middle-aged interview participant, commented:
For people my age, the mountain pre-dates the conflict (Interview, 27 June 2008). Like
many others whom I encountered through casual conversation, he possesses vivid
childhood memories of Divis as an idyllic outdoor playground. But as Northern Ireland
edged toward civil war, and the military presence intensified in response, the nationalist
neighbourhoods of West Belfast became a nexus for republican resistance. Many of the
Estimates for the number imprisoned are difficult to calculate, but some sources suggest
approximate totals of 15,000 republicans and somewhere between 5,000 to 10,000 loyalists
(McEvoy 2001, cited in Shirlow and McEvoy 2008: 2). Under the 1998 peace agreement, 447
prisoners were released back into their communities, of which 241 came from republican areas
(McEvoy et al 2004: 646).
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 115
children who had played on the mountain in calmer times now took up arms, while others
resisted in subtler ways (see Dowler 1998). For example, an environmental campaigner
named Terry Enright told me that he routinely defied the army by entering its off-limits
property for recreational walks on the mountain. He remembers stumbling across soldiers
participating in surveillance exercises, as they lay half-hidden in the bracken (Interview, 2
November 2007).
Today, the young men and women who came of age in the Troubles are now
middle-aged leaders of their communities. Their defiance continues to energize West
Belfast, and their memories shape the cultural landscape  a heritage of resistance
expressed through murals, memorials and, for many, the iconic presence of Divis
Mountain. Below, I explore how the mountain circulates in narratives of identity for three
former IRA volunteers from West Belfast, all of whom served time in prison for their
activities during the Troubles.
Padraig grew up in the Turf Lodge estate, located at the edge of the mountain.
Lying alongside his fond childhood memories of Divis are unpleasant associations with
military violence. Padraig recalls that British soldiers would take local residents into the
hills and give them a good hiding. Moreover, memories of military surveillance are
particularly potent. Padraig recalls cameras dug into the face of the mountain, and the
chilling knowledge that from their vantage point at Fort Jericho, the army looked directly
into his neighbourhood. In the following excerpt from my research diary, I recount a
conversation with Padraig, in which memories of military surveillance entwine with
memories of his growing republican activism:
What was it like, I ask, Living at the foot of the
mountain and knowing you were watched?
When I was young, I didnt know that I was being
watched. Padraig's awareness increased as he...became more
actively Republican, in a military senseAs an active
republican in Turf Lodge,you had to learn how to move across
the estate in a particular way. (Research Diary, 27 June 2008)
Padraig can trace his growing awareness of military surveillance alongside his emergence
as an active Republican  a euphemism for his participation in the IRA. He describes an
intricate relationship between the mountain, with its British military observers, and his
changing experience with the local landscape. Like many other republican activists,
Padraig developed skills for hiding from the network of cameras that criss-crossed his
estate. The mountain, as the vantage point of the enemy, became dangerous to Padraig.
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 116
That the mountain is both a source of danger and a site of great affection speaks
to a complex juxtaposition. In our interview, when I ask him to describe the relationship
between Divis and his sense of identity, Padraig links the mountain to the development of
his republican political consciousness: At the same time that I became an active
Republican, the mountain became an escape. He feels the same way toward it today:
There are parts of the mountain that are as beautiful as
Donegal. And theres nowhere as beautiful as Donegal.
Although local republican residents could access, with varying degrees of ease, some of
the lower reaches of the mountain during the Troubles, it seems likely that the escape to
which Padraig refers is metaphorical in meaning. The word takes on greater significance
considering that Padraig, like many of his compatriots in the IRA, spent several years in
prison during the Troubles. He further heightens the mountains symbolic value by
comparing it to Donegal, the westernmost county in the province of Ulster. The 1921
partition of Ireland is the result of political gerrymandering, based on unionist fears that
the large Catholic populations in three of the nine northern counties (Donegal, Cavan and
Monaghan) would complicate their attempt to create a Protestant-dominated Northern
Ireland (see Bardon 1992). The resulting political border effectively separated Donegal
from the rest of the Irish Republic, bounded to the east and south by three counties of
Northern Ireland, and by the sea to the north and west. Donegals isolation from the rest
of the Republic, and the status of its Irish-speaking Gaeltacht,
evokes great affinity
amongst republicans living in Northern Ireland. Indeed, Donegal looms large in Padraig's
imagination as a place of great beauty to which no other can compare.
For Padraig, the mountain offers transformative personal properties. In our
interview, he describes conversations on the mountain that you wouldnt have anywhere
else. As an example, he recounts a walk he once took with a friend. On the mountain, he
recalls that they spoke freely about poetry and about their lives with a depth that, once
they had descended from Divis, they never experienced again. Intriguingly, Padraig then
attempts to describe in another way these dimensions of himself that he discovered on the
mountain: During the conflict, you would become a different person when you crossed
the border to the 26 counties. He equates crossing the political border with the ability to
express himself as a different person. As a committed republican, Padraig fervently
advocates a united, 32-county Ireland. His comment suggests that the strain of living in
British-ruled Northern Ireland dissipated in the homeland, whether real or imagined, of
Gaeltacht refers to an Irish-speaking region. In Ireland, the Gaeltacht is refers to the districts,
located primarily in the west of the island, where Irish is the predominant language.
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 117
the Irish Republic  the 26 counties, as he describes it. The new identity that Padraig
identifies in the physical crossing of borders is replicated through his presence on the
mountain, as though the mountain allows him to tap into dimensions of his identity only
found outside of Northern Ireland. In this way, the mountain appears to connect him to
wider possibilities of identity, linked to his desired republican vision of a united,
independent Ireland.
The imagined homeland that Divis evokes for Padraig resonates in a different
way for Seamus, for whom the mountain is linked inextricably with his prison
experience. During the Troubles, Seamus spent 11 years, two months and two weeks
inside the notorious Maze prison; his original sentence of 18 years was reduced to nine on
remission, but the prison authorities added time back on to his sentence for each day in
which he participated in the IRAs organized protests. Within the walls of the Maze,
republican prisoners launched a raft of actions, aided by a sophisticated paramilitary
command structure capable of reorganizing itself behind bars. As McEvoy et al (2004:
650) observe: A central feature to the Republican resistance project was their
determination that the prison experience be a collective one. The blanket protest began
in 1976, in which prisoners chose to wear their prison-issued blankets rather than the
uniforms issued to criminal  rather than political  prisoners (Coogan 1980, 1987, cited
in Shirlow and McEvoy 2008). It escalated into the dirty protest, in which republican
prisoners refused to bathe and smeared the walls of their cells with their own excrement.
Along with hundreds of his fellow prisoners, Seamus went on the blanket, participated
in the dirty protest, and was present at the Maze during the high-profile hunger strikes
that led to the deaths of ten colleagues. Although the long-running blanket and dirty
protests ultimately came to be regarded as self-defeating (McKeown 2001, cited in
Shirlow and McEvoy 2008: 37) and were suspended by the IRA leadership, they
intensified the oppression of the prison experience for incarcerated republican activists
like Seamus.
In 1986, one year before his release, Seamus was taken by prison authorities to
Musgrave Park Hospital in Belfast to see a doctor. The hospitals military wing was
located on the westernmost edge of the grounds. From the car park, Seamus saw the
mountain for the first time in a decade:
Childhood memories came flooding back  memories of
bluebells and gullies, of sheep and aerials...[Seamus] said, I
have to go back there...I want to go home. (Research Diary, 5
June 2008)
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 118
These vivid memories of wildlife, and even the military aerials, contrast sharply with
the bleak interior world of the Maze prison. Particularly striking is the sense of home
that the mountain evokes. In this way, Divis can be read as a synecdoche for the
unreachable lost home (Morley 2000: 44) that focuses Seamuss memories of his past
life. Heller (1995, cited in Morley 2000: 24) defines home as awareness of a fixed
point in space, a firm position from which we proceedwhere we feel safe and where
our emotional relationships are at their most intense. For Seamus, Divis Mountain serves
as this fixed point: You knew where it waswhere you lived (Interview, 5 June
2008). This unexpected encounter with Divis, which Seamus vividly recounted for me
over 20 years later, speaks to the power of emotional memory. As Jones (2005: 215)
observes: The emotions of childhood are imprinted onto whatever landscape they are
acted out in.
The enshrined resonance of love and landscape is mobilized in a variety of ways.
Padraig, for example, recently participated in a sponsored walk on Divis designed to raise
funds for the controversial defense of former IRA colleagues. The Colombia Three
were arrested in Bogot in August 2001 and accused by the Colombian government of
training rebels from the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia. In conceptualizing the
event, Padraig and his fellow organizers recognized the mountains power to garner
attention: We came to the conclusion that people would remember a walk across the
mountain much longer than a function (Interview, 27 June 2008). And in 1998, as the
peace agreements put to rest the need for armed conflict, a group of former IRA members
and ex-political prisoners founded a social walking club called the Irish Ramblers
Association. Today, membership hovers between 30 to 50 people, and the Ramblers
meet several times a year for walks on Divis. The founding of the club can be read in
many ways: as a transformation of the Irish Republican Army; as continued, symbolic
resistance through its deliberate acronym; as reclamation of a mountain long controlled
by the British army; as all of these at once. For Cormac, one member of the club, the
British military occupation was a brief anomaly:
The British were only here for a blink of an eye...Weve held the
mountain for thousands of years...Weve had the mountain for
longer than they had it. (Interview, 19 October 2007).
He sketches a long history, covering thousands of years, of the mountains deep
significance to local republicans. Although the Troubles have ended, republican resistance
to British imperial control is still articulated through the landscape of Divis.
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 119
As former IRA volunteers and ex-prisoners, Padraig, Seamus and Cormac are
obvious figures for examining republican resistance. The IRA, which emerged in direct
response to British colonial rule, is an excellent example of what Jacobs (1993: 217) calls
a tectonic form of resistance. In the next section, however, I excavate subtler
expressions in which resistance is articulated through a range of more fragmented
formations in which stark oppositions give way to more complex subversions (ibid). As
Pile (1993: 3) observes, identities of resistance are
taken up not only in relation to authority...but also through
experiences which are not so quickly labelled power, such as
desire and anger, capacity and ability, happiness and fear,
dreaming and forgetting.
These emotional capacities allow for more nuanced readings of resistance that complicate
what Cresswell (2000) describes as the tendency toward romanticism, and offer scope to
engage with acts and attitudes of resistance that are not defined by the Troubles alone.
The Fort and the Herald
This section explores the expression of Divis in republican cultural identity
through a public art sculpture created in 2002. Herald of Jericho (Figure 5.7) hangs in the
foyer of the Upper Springfield Development Trust, a community regeneration and
economic development charity based at the westernmost edge of Belfast. The
organizations remit encompasses the densely populated neighbourhoods that once
stretched across the vast, rural bleaching greens of the linen industry. Deirdre Mackel,
Arts Officer for the Upper Springfield Development Trust, coordinates public art projects
for West Belfast, whose residents tend to face barriers, both real and perceived, to visiting
art galleries located in the city's wealthier areas. The mountain is of particular interest to
Deirdre. She frequently incorporates its image and story into her projects, of which
Herald of Jericho is a dramatic example. In the summer of 2008, I conducted interviews
with Deirdre and Frank Quigley, the artist commissioned to lead the project. For Frank,
the process of conceptualizing and producing the sculpture is intimately entwined with
his activist republican identity; during the Troubles, he too served time in the Maze
prison for his association with the IRA. The sculpture's story of emergence  its
provenance, conceptualization, production, reception  illuminates the links between
culture, identity, heritage and the (de)militarization of Divis Mountain.
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 120
The Heralds origins lie in the military forts of the Troubles. By the 1970s, the
British army occupied three military bases in West Belfast, known as Forts Monagh,
Pegasus and Henry Taggart. According to Padraig, whom I introduced in the previous
section, the three bases were all within eyesight of each other (Interview, 27 June 2008).
To the republican population of West Belfast, these military bases were sources of
resentment that proclaimed British military power in both symbolic and material form.
For example, the army built Fort Pegasus on the grounds of the Gaelic Atheletic
Association, a site of deep cultural significance to local republican communities. Fort
Henry Taggart, in contrast, was created from a former Presbyterian church; during
sectarian riots at the beginning of the Troubles, its Protestant parishioners fled to safer
ground (de Baroid 2000). In my interviews, two republican ex-prisoners identified the
forts as sites of torture, and Fort Henry Taggart as the base from which British soldiers
shot dead eleven people in August 1971 (Interviews, 27 July 2008, 4 July 2008).
Despite the proximity of their three existing bases in this corner of Belfast, the
British military decided to spearhead yet another. Fort Whiterock, located at the eastern
edge of Divis Mountain, was the last and largest operational base built in a nationalist
area of Belfast (Figure 5.8). To amplify the controversy, the land identified for the project
was an industrial cooperative of workshops owned collectively by local residents. In the
face of soaring unemployment, the Whiterock Industrial Estate had embodied the
economic hopes of residents in this corner of West Belfast. Consequently, the army's
decision to claim this site provoked further outrage amongst local republicans. From this
position, high in the hills and backed by the mountain, the fort offered superior
surveillance opportunities for observing republican activists in the neighbourhoods
below. In November 1979, the British military moved on to the site. During construction,
the MOD erected temporary metal walls to hide from view the forts layout and building
progress. The wind, however, kept blowing down these walls, evoking the ancient city of
Jericho and the biblical story of its fall. To West Belfasts residents, Fort Whiterock
became widely known known as Fort Jericho (see de Baroid 2000). Once built, Fort
Jericho blocked the view of the mountain for decades. In our interview, Frank described
the effect: It was a huge, grey lumpJust a blot on the landscape, to use a clich. The
mountain just disappeared. You wouldnt have seen the mountain after that (Interview, 4
July 2008).
In our interview, Padraig described his development as a republican activist
alongside the erection of Fort Jericho. When construction began in the late 1970s, Padraig
was a fifteen-year-old student living in the nearby republican stronghold of Turf Lodge.
He took an active role in protesting the forts presence, attacking it every day on his way
to school (Interview, 27 June 2008). For todays younger generation, however, the
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 121
military bases formed their known landscape and created a more complicated dynamic of
resistance than that embraced by their elders, who came of age in the Troubles. Twenty-
six-year-old Feargal Enright, an Irish language specialist, grew up in the Dermott Hill
neighbourhood, wedged against the mountain and beneath the looming shadow of Fort
Jericho. In spite of the British military presence, some children continued to play on the
mountains more accessible slopes, including the popular Hatchet Field. In an act of
defiance, Terry Enright, Feargals father, encouraged his son from a young age to roam
the mountain, when and where he could. Like his father, Feargal also remembers
stumbling across soldiers hiding unsuccessfully in the bracken.
In an interview that I conducted with both Enrights, Feargal described a nuanced
relationship between local republican youth and the soldiers stationed at Fort Jericho.
According to Feargal, the fort became a popular gathering spot for local teenagers, who
would congregate directly beneath the watchful eyes of the soldiers:
And we wouldve sat there, right below them. There was a patch
where we wouldve played footballBut I can remember when
we were there, there was a couple of British soldiers who were
friendlyNow, a lot of us had a policy of not talking to them.
We just ignored them. If you seen them in the street, you
ignored themSome of the kids that I can remember that we
played with, they werent in any way political. They just took
things as they were and they did speak to themThere were
young soldiers who supported Celtic,
and they wouldve thrown
fags [to us], and some of the kids wouldve ended up giving
them a cigarette back and so on. And that went on for years,
until the fort was dismantled.
In this excerpt, Feargal illustrates that amongst his contemporaries there was a diverse
range of opinions about and ways of engaging (or consciously disengaging) with the
British military presence. Feargal acknowledges that this diversity may be due to a
generational shift: [Talking to the soldiers] would have been the 90s as wellI imagine
in the 80s it wouldnt have happened. There wouldve been less civil relationships. Yet
beneath these friendly interactions there simmered a far different dynamic, which erupted
in the tense period leading to the 1994 ceasefire declaration.
6 A football team in Glasgow, popular with republican communities in Northern Ireland.
Celtics primary rivals, the Rangers, are popular with loyalist communities.
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 122
So we wouldve been throwing petrol bombs at [the fort] rather
than throwing cigarettes at them. So it was through the changing
times as well. Although I can remember when the IRA ceasefire
was called, the 31
of August 94...There was a statement put
out [that] from midnight, there would be a cessation of all the
military operations. But about 10 oclock, we were all going
down to the fort, and the IRA came and attacked the fort. With
coffee jar bombs and stuff like thatThe next day, kids
gathered around to see the damage...That was great, come in the
next day and see what damage there is.
As the friendly exchange of cigarettes gave way to destruction by petrol bombs, Feargal
and his friends were drawn into the militant political struggle of their elders. Although
Feargal is too young to remember a time before Fort Jericho, the enthusiasm that he
recalls when recounting the damage speaks to the power of inherited memories of
injustice in republican culture.
On 18 May 1999  after nearly twenty years of military occupation  the British
army drove the last of its vehicles through the gates of Fort Jericho, returning what
remained of the Whiterock Industrial Estate to the local republican community (de Baroid
2000: 386). Demolition began shortly thereafter, and over several months, local residents
observed the process with delight. The demolition of Fort Jericho transformed the
landscape, offering residents of West Belfast their first unobstructed view of the hills
since the forts inception. Frank Quigley noted in our interview: It just went from grey
steel to green mountain when they were finished (Interview, 4 July 2008). His
observation found echoes in the participatory workshops that Deirdre Mackel organized
for local residents, in which she asked them to conceptualize the sculpture that would
eventually emerge as Herald of Jericho. According to Deirdre, people that we were
talking to said: Well, [weve] got the view of Black Mountain back (Interview, 13
August 2008).
The demolition of Fort Jericho represented a huge and long-delayed triumph for
republican West Belfast. Frank recalls: It was a certain victory. The British army hadnt
won. They left before the IRA did (Interview, 4 July 2008). Nearby, from her office at
the newly-built premises of the Upper Springfield Development Trust, Deirdre conceived
an idea for creating a public art sculpture from materials sourced from the forts ruins.
With difficulty, she arranged for clearance to enter the demolition site and to gather
materials. Deirdre recalls the control that the MOD continued to exert, even as it
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 123
dismantled its stronghold: We had to go in and just tell them which bits we wanted
(Interview, 13 August 2008).
To design the sculpture, Frank and an Irish-Canadian artist named Farhad ONeill
consulted with groups of ex-prisoners and young people. Through talking with one
another and through sharing their memories, the idea for Herald of Jericho began to take
shape. In our interview, Deirdre describes the concept as one of transformation and
reclamation:
The notion was...taking something from a bad period in history
and doing something positive with it. Because it was also a time
of political change as well...and it was significant for people of
the area that this fort was being dismantled. And it was a way to
say, This is a new time now. Good-bye...And this provided a
symbolic way of doing that...Heralding the new dawn.
Frank and Farhad, a metal-working specialist, proceeded to collaborate with local
residents to produce the sculpture. From the materials gathered from the demolished
army base  palisades, corrugated metal, rocket wire  the artists and residents cut,
welded and fashioned a large metal angel with outstretched wings, holding a bugle in her
hand. They inscribed the angel with republican identity, through decorative Celtic
designs and, less visibly, inscriptions of their own names. Twelve ex-prisoners, many of
whom Frank knew from his own time at the Maze, lifted the sculpture into place, where
it now hangs from the high-ceilinged atrium of the Upper Springfield Development
Trust.
In February 2002, Herald of Jericho took flight. Those present at its launch
included local residents, ex-prisoners, former members of the cooperative at the
Whiterock Industrial Estate, the chief executive of the Arts Council of Northern Ireland,
and Gerry Adams, a former IRA commander who now serves as a member of Northern
Irelands power-sharing government. Also present was Father Des Wilson, a priest whose
active presence in West Belfast during the Troubles, against the wishes of the Irish
Catholic Church, is now legendary (see de Baroid 1999). At the launch, Father Wilsons
speech encapsulated the narrative of transformation embodied in the sculpture:
There is a great saying in our tradition, that swords will be
melted down and made into ploughs, that the weapons of war
will be made into instruments of prosperity, and here we have a
piece of an army barracks reworked into a symbol of hope and
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 124
work and prosperity for the futureNothing could be more
suitable to our situation and more expressive of its meaning than
that. (The Irish News, 26 February 2002)
Yet this symbol of hope and work and prosperity is a bittersweet and incomplete
memorial to recent history. When sunlight filters through the foyer, the angels skirt of
palisades casts shadows shaped like prison bars, evoking the memories and embodied
experiences of the prisoners who helped to design and position the sculpture.
I interpret the demolition of Fort Jericho as a microcosm of the larger
demilitarization of Divis. These transformations, although widely celebrated by local
republican residents, nonetheless trail darker memories in their wake. Deirdre reads these
shadows as a narrative for the larger republican community:
Well, the fort, when it was there, it was so imposing. It actually
cast physical shadows...It obliterated the view of the Black
Mountain, but also cast shadows that aren't seen on the people.
Like a negative impact on peoples lives. So whatever way [the
sculpture] is lit, it casts shadows. (Interview, 13 August 2008)
Herald of Jericho captures some of these complex, emotional resonances. Its creation
from the fallen walls of Fort Jericho, reworked by and for the community, underscores
continued resistance to the idea of British military presence, and reclaims the mountain
for republican culture. In the next section, however, I consider how republican cultural
reclamation of Divis challenges efforts to cultivate the mountain as a shared landscape for
a wider peacetime society.
3. Inscribing Identity
(Re)naming Places
Language is an emotive force in the transformation of Divis, and in republican
culture more broadly. Connections between the Irish language and Irish national identity
have been well established. Nash (1999: 461) argues that these connections emerged from
cultural projects of romantic nationalism, particularly in the late-19
century, in which
land and language were twinned in an imaginative, political and economic geography of
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 125
rural land and native land ownership that invested the Gaelic language and the soil of
Ireland as deep repositories of the native spirit. According to OReilly (1999: 26), for
Irish language enthusiasts known as gaeilgeoiri, Ireland can be fully and completely
imagined only through the medium of Irish. Across the island of Ireland, both north and
south of the border, the Irish language and the places it describes forms a linguistic
heritage that links the cultural and physical landscapes:
Placenames are an integral part of our everyday language and
are an indispensable component in defining our relationship with
our physical environmentPlacenames also carry within them
an important cultural resonance in that they are constant
reminders of the dominance of the Irish language in the
countryside over the last two millennia. (Mac Giolla Easpaig
2008: 164).
Yet the empowered inscription ( Cadhla 2007: 7) of the Ordnance Survey map altered
and erased Irelands linguistic landscape. Indeed, on the first edition of Ordnance Survey
(1833) map for Belfast, English Town appears just south of Black Mountain, imposing
not only a new name but a new national identity on the place it occupied on paper.
In 1946, the Irish Free State (which in 1949 would become the Republic of
Ireland), established An Coimisin Logainmneacha, otherwise known as the Placenames
Commission (Nash 1999). The commissions remit was to examine the placenames of
Ireland and, where possible, to search for their correct original Irish versions. From this
work, the commission prepared lists of these names for publication and official use. The
project was incorporated eventually into later editions of the Ordnance Survey, and the
1970 edition of a general map of Ireland reinstated several Irish placenames. North of the
border, however, six counties still remain under British jurisdiction. With no official
equivalent of An Coimisin Logainmneacha, the placenames of Northern Irelands
contemporary Ordnance Survey maps continue to reflect the efforts of the 19
century
mapmakers.
In West Belfast, contemporary names in the local landscape evoke the historical
geography of Divis. For example, the Springfield Road, which arcs from the infamous
Falls-Shankill interface and serves as one of Belfasts westernmost arterials, recalls both
the springs that rose from Divis to power the mills and the bleaching fields pressed into
the service of the linen industry. The Whiterock Road connects the heartland of the Falls
Road to the neighbourhoods that perch at the edge of the city, in the mountains shadow.
Whiterock refers to the exposed escarpments that gleam against the dark earth, while
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 126
the etymological origins of Divis itself reside in dubh, the Irish word for black, so called
for the mountains dark peat soil.
Today, considerable confusion abounds over the mountains name. Divis, an
anglicized version of dubh, was formalized by Britains 19
century mapping endeavor.
At the time of the first Ordnance Survey map for Ireland, surveyed in 1832 and engraved
in 1833, the mapmakers split the mountain into two parts. The lower hump became
known as Black Mountain, from whose plateau of 1275 feet rises the summit now known
as Divis. Further heightening the confusion are their overlapping definitions: the
anglicized Divis and its English translation. The National Trust labels the property as
Divis and the Black Mountain on the signpost for the entrance (Figure 5.9). The
singular form of mountain, enshrined formally not only on in this sign but also in the
National Trusts maps and brochures, provokes and reflects lingering semantic confusion
among local residents who have known the mountain by different names. The following
excerpt is taken from a group interview that I conducted at Bleach Green Court, a
residential home for the elderly located near the top of the Whiterock Road. I begin this
extract by attempting to clarify the location of an event that one participant had described:
Lia This was on Divis Mountain or Black Mountain?
Ciaran Divis. The foot of the Divis. And then 
Danny No, at the foot of Black Mountain. At the top of 
Ciaran Thats Divis up there. The Black Mountains further on
up...
Danny No, the Black Mountains the first one you get [to]...
Ciaran Well, the two of them mirror each other, dont they?
Danny Yeah.
Ciaran They do mirror each other. Like, you know. (Interview,
12 February 2008)
As this exchange illuminates, the multiple names by which the mountain(s) is known
generate confusion even among lifelong residents of West Belfast. Their differing
perceptions may deviate from the official versions published by the Ordnance Survey or
in the National Trusts promotional literature. In this interview excerpt, the argument
resolves itself when Ciaran states that the two parts of the mountain mirror each other,
to which Danny agrees. The concept of the mirror, which Ciaran reiterates moments later,
is particularly striking. Although the elevations of their summits differ by 287 feet, he
seems to suggest that the two are nonetheless equal, or perhaps two parts of the same.
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 127
According to Irish language enthusiasts Terry and Feargal Enright, the confusion
dates to Britain's 19
century mapping project, which split an entity formerly considered
one mountain into two:
Terry (A)t one stage, we believe they all might have been
called Dubh, from the Irish which is black hill. And
then for your Ordnance Survey, or private ownership,
they split the two and called one Divis and one Black
Mountain
Lia Do you know why they did that?
Terry I havent a clue. On the old Ordnance Survey
mapsup to 1832 youll see references to them, so it
must have been around that period. So it could have
been for private ownerships, you know. This is Black
Mountain. This is Divis. (Interview, 25 February
2008)
Although not mentioned explicitly in this exchange, private ownership in the historical
context of Northern Ireland connotes colonial bias to Terry and many other republicans.
Historically, the people with the financial resources to own land in the Belfast hills
tended to be Protestant, and were therefore implicit beneficiaries of British colonial
policies. Terrys conflation of private ownership with the Ordnance Survey exemplifies
the linked processes of the British colonial project. Where previously the mountain was
perceived as an integral element of the Irish cultural landscape, now it was named,
mapped and distributed for ownership by and among the British colonizers.
While the 19
century Ordnance Survey map may represent the metaphorical
colonization of Divis, the 20
century witnessed its incontrovertible physical occupation.
For 26-year-old Feargal, the mountain crystallized into two distinct  and distinctly
named  zones:
See, there was a British army base at the top of DivisPeople just
wouldve usually went on Black Mountain, and they dont even call
it Black Mountain, though. Its called the mountain, or the hill.
And then you wouldve went exploring there, and then Divis was
kind of a place that you wouldnt have went. Uh-huh. You wouldnt
have went. Becausethere was an army base on top, so kids just
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 128
used to do their own thing, stay away from it. (Interview, 25
February 2008)
In this extract, Feargal makes clear distinctions between Divis and Black Mountain, as
remembered and filtered through his childhood experience. The mountain and the hill
suggest intimacy and familiarity. Intriguingly, he refers to these in singular form, as
though mountain condensed into the terrain that was accessible and thus known to him.
In contrast, the forbidding summit of Divis, with its army patrol, lay beyond the reach of
familiarity. His discomfort echoes the ambivalent relationship that other residents of West
Belfast express with Divis. According to Deirdre Mackel of the Upper Springfield
Development Trust, Divis is a name invented by the British military (Interview, 24
October 2007). Her own practice of calling it Black Mountain can be read as contempt
for this British linguistic legacy.
For Irish language enthusiasts, the demilitarization of Divis represents a long-
delayed opportunity to reinstate Gaelic placenames. Nash (1999: 462) argues that the
process of renaming can be read as a post-imperial countermapping project that rectifies
the Ordnance Survey map of the British imperial project. In our interview, Terry Enright
recounted how he had urged the National Trust to restore the original Irish names of
several geographic features in their publications and on signposts on the site itself. In the
following extract, Terry describes his frustration with the process:
Terry Theres a couple of issues which are still ongoing in
terms of the National Trust and myself. One has been
the whole thing with the language, and the fact that
there is so many of the sites who already have Irish
place names. You know. And the fact that [the National
Trust] not necessarily have ignored it  They keep
saying, you know, Were going to do it later.
Lia Mmm-hmm. You mean, in terms of giving places
names?
Terry Give places their names in Irish, their proper names.
(Interview, 25 February 2008)
Terrys attempts to restore the Irish language on Divis is part of a larger movement for
Gaelic cultural revival in West Belfast. In May 2008, politician Gerry Adams put forward
a proposal to create a Gaeltacht Quarter as part of an urban regeneration drive. The
proposed Irish language district would encompass four city wards, including two of the
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 129
most deprived in Northern Ireland. Adamss proposal builds on existing enthusiasm.
West Belfast is already home to a number of Irish-language primary and secondary
schools, as well as an Irish language radio station (The Andersonstown News, 9 October
2006). The diverse array of Irish language institutions in this part of the city highlights a
fierce sense of cultural pride and reclamation.
Yet projects to reinstate Gaelic placenames in contemporary Ireland, both north
and south, raise complicated questions about cultural identity, authenticity and diversity 
issues that Nash (1999) identifies as central to postcolonial cultural politics, and which
may also explain the reticence of the National Trust that Terry describes above. Nash
(ibid: 458) argues that interpretations of the story of topographic naming and renaming
often return to the drama of anti-colonial models of Irish history, which set the purity of
pre-colonial culture against the corruption of colonial influence. The simplistic narrative
of colonial erasure and post-colonial retrieval, or of sectarian and cultural antagonism
(ibid: 457) does a disservice to the nuanced history of the Irish language revival. Despite
its early non-political stance in the late-19
century, and the active and influential
participation of several Protestant enthusiasts, the Gaelic language revival movement
ultimately became linked to Catholic nationalism and an exclusive Catholic, Gaelic and
rural ideology of Irish republicanism (Nash 1999: 463, citing Mac Pilin 1997). As
Watson (2008: 166) argues, the idea of revival incorporated more than language: The
revival of the Irish language went hand-in-hand with the construction of an Irish
identity...In fact, to a large extent, Irishness was constructed in contrast with notions of
Englishness.
In Northern Ireland, the contested politicization (Nash 1999: 469) of the Irish
language may be exacerbated by an interpretation of Gaelic placenames and projects for
their recovery as a sectarian version of cultural belonging, location and purity (ibid:
463). During the Troubles, the Irish language became a focal point of pride and resistance
when imprisoned IRA volunteers studied the language and sparked its larger 20
century
revival in republican areas across the North (Mac Ionnrachtaigh 2008, McEvoy 2001).
Today, the Irish language takes its place alongside other politicized symbols of
republican culture  St Patricks Day and Gaelic sporting events, for example  that
continue to polarize a divided society. Like Graham (1994), Nash argues that Northern
Ireland needs new models of belonging, new senses of place and cultural location.
Although placenames have frequently been harnessed in ways that emphasize rootedness
and exacerbate cultural conflict, Nash (ibid: 476) also points to their potential as located
identities expressed through attachments to place [to] help shape a plural sense of
culture.
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 130
The countermapping (Nash 1999: 462) of Divis by Irish language enthusiasts
may be read as an exercise in postcolonial retrieval of a republican cultural landscape, but
it also raises uncomfortable parallels to British imperial mapping and power. Through the
strength of their claims, drawn from a long and almost mythic history, the republicans
whom I interviewed seek to establish Divis as an incontrovertible resource for their
heritage and identity. In Chapter Two, I discussed how heritage resources in post-
conflict societies are particularly complex. As Graham and McDowell (2007: 345) point
out: All heritage is someones heritage, and therefore logically not someone elses. I
had argued that the process of building peace involves the search for shared forms of
heritage on which to build a shared identity and future. The demilitarization of Divis
offers rich scope for reworking a contested landscape caught between the competing
cultural claims of Irish republicanism and British imperialism, both of which inscribe
identity  and therefore ownership  through (re)naming the landscape. To address this
challenge, I turn to a very different act of inscription.
An Activist Alphabet
As one of Belfasts most visible features, the eastern flank of the mountain offers
a tempting surface on which activists and artists can convey messages to the wider public.
For Christoff Gillen, an artist and activist who grew up in republican West Belfast, the
mountain provides a canvas for provoking a city-wide dialogue about place, identity and
belonging. Although in our interview (24 June 2008) he did not choose to define himself
in these terms, Christoffs intentions contribute to a movement loosely known as Land
Art or Earth Art, in which landscape and the work of art are inextricably linked. As
Andrews (1999) observes, the emphasis is on the relationship between the object(s)
deployed and the otherwise untouched site. Given the great diversity of works associated
with this movement, ranging from minimal, ephemeral interventions in a site (for
example, works by Richard Long, Andy Goldsworthy and Michael Singer) to large-scale
sculptural works (eg, Michael Heizer, Robert Smithson), Brady (2007: 257) advises
adopting an approach that emphasizes family resemblance rather than firm definition.
Although the emergence of the Land Art movement is commonly attributed to the 1960s,
in its active modelling of the land (Andrews 1999: 204) the movement evokes human
intervention in a variety of forms, from gardening to ancient ritualistic earthworks.
In Belfast, Christoffs projects reflect these diverse ideas. As he notes in his arts
degree proposal:
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 131
[I] propose to use the Black Mountain overlooking the capital city of
Belfast. Upon this I will place text or symbols of significance and
forward thinking for the peoples of Belfast and beyondOne of the key
issues behind my thinking for this project is how can we approach and
deal with the legacy of the Troubles and how to address this, by making
a Public Art work on theface of the mountain that is all inclusive for
the people of Belfast. (Gillen, unpublished)
More recently, the practice of writing on the mountain has its precedent in the
Troubles. According to former IRA volunteer Padraig, in 1980 people became very
imaginative about how to publicize the hunger strike (Interview, 27 June 2008). Giant
Hs, symbolizing both hunger and the infamous H-shaped blocks of the Maze prison,
appeared on the mountain. Padraig remembers people digging the letter into the surface
of the mountain, and then filling the depression with lime to make the letter more
permanent and visible. The H, designed to raise awareness of the prisoners plight,
quickly became contentious. At the time, there was considerable controversy over the
absence of the letter A to symbolize the womens jail in County Armagh, where female
republican activists were imprisoned.
Christoff himself was born in County Armagh, to a Polish father and a Catholic
mother. At the age of ten, he moved to West Belfast. Now 40, Christoff calls himself a
nomad (Interview, 24 June 2008) and grapples with vexed questions of questions of
belonging and identity. The mountain provides the space to explore them. In our
interview, he showed me photos of large-scale landscape etchings that inspired his own.
Of these, the most influential are the chalk horses of Wiltshire, England and, in Ireland,
the recent protests against the proposed motorway through the valley below the Hill of
Tara. In large white letters, startling against the emerald turf, protesters wrote Save the
Valley; below the text they drew the chalk outline of a Celtic harp.
Christoff began his project in the spring of 2008. His aim was to build up a
dialogue and a language on the Mountain by using a letter from the alphabet every week
with the view of forming a word (Gillen, unpublished). Every Saturday, beginning the 5
of April, Christoff and a handful of volunteers traveled to the mountain to create their
contribution to the dialogue. According to Christoff, the journey itself was a vital part of
the process. He and his volunteers would congregate in front of the gates of City Hall and
proceed by black taxi  the iconic community transport system  through West Belfast to
The absence in the gendered landscape continues today. A public art campaign led to the creation
of several large H-shaped monuments throughout West Belfast. However, no monuments exist to
the letter A.
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 132
the top of the Whiterock Road. From there, they walked to the site along the ancient
pathway known as the mountain loney. As he explained to me in an interview, this
journey contributes to a sense of community that he seeks to invoke and promote through
his art.
In a contemporary reworking of the historic landscape, Christoff creates his
letters and images from pieces of white cloth that evoke the bleaching greens of Belfasts
industrial linen industry (Figure 5.10). For the first installation, Christoff and his
volunteers created a large, slender question mark (Figure 5.11). The following week, they
created the letter U, which could be read as shorthand for the word you, directed to the
people of Belfast. These early attempts comprised the steepest part of the learning curve.
By the end of the second week, Christoff knew that he would need to enlarge the letters to
make them legible from the city below.
Over the course of four consecutive weeks, Christoff created the following large-
scale letters: H, O, M and E (Figure 5.12). One letter appeared each week, replacing that
which had preceded it the previous week. In this way, the word unfolded not across space
but across time. For Christoff, the interrogation of home is central to his art and to the
questions he poses to his wider audience:
What does home mean in the context of now? muses
Christoff. Although its tempting to think of the mountain as a
blank canvas, Christoff resists the assumption: Its not blank in
many ways. Theres a lot of history. (Interview, 24 June 2008)
One particular challenge to this project was the intrusion of external forces, for example
the weather or, more commonly, local youth who re-appropriated the letters to their own
purposes. Christoff described a series of photographs that he took from below, shortly
after completing the letter E. In place of his installation were the wobbly outlines of the
letters K and A. Loyalist youth were presumably behind these changes: KAT is a
popular acronym for Kill All Taigs, itself a derogatory term for Catholics. Christoff
assumed that the T lay just beyond the cameras frame. Scattered on the slope were tiny
figures, suggesting that local youth must have moved in shortly after Christoff and his
team departed. These are acts of transgression that amplify Christoff's own; the site on
which he writes his letters is private property. By trespassing, he emphasizes his
advocacy for the mountain as a public resource, which he underscores with the inscription
HOME.
In June 2008, Christoff harnessed the mountain to make a statement against US
President George W Bush, who was visiting Belfast as part of a larger tour of Europe.
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 133
Alongside other protest activities taking place across the city, Christoff planned to write
NO TO BUSH in 50-foot white letters on the mountain. Seventeen volunteers from
diverse backgrounds, including myself, joined Christoff at City Hall for the journey to the
mountain. He had recruited the others primarily through word-of-mouth in local anarchist
activist networks. The following excerpt from my research diary describes the process of
creating the artwork:
At five minutes to nine, we reach the site. Christoff surveys the
slope, dismayed. A short string of expletives follows. Apparently, theres
far more vegetation than he had expected. We stand knee-deep in a
carpet of ferns
We set to work. Christoff produces a spool of white ribbonHe
busies himself with a retractable tape measure, with the help of a couple
of minions. Laboriously, they unspool the ribbon, draping it over the
ferns to mark the outline of the shape that will, eventually, be filled by
white fabric. While the select few toil with the tape measure, the rest of
us stand around, chatting.Every now and then, in an effort to look like
Im pulling my weight, I half-heartedly tromp a few ferns to the ground...
From their rucksacks, the organizers pull out swaths of old, white
fabric. We lay these inside the ribbon outline, affixing them to the
ground by way of nails, tent poles and even chopsticks. Due to the
abundance of ferns, this process is far more difficult than it sounds...
By 9:20pm, weve completed only the two legs of the N.
Has this gone a bit wonky? wonders Dick.
Ten minutes later, the guerilla artistes start to notice the fading
light...This is only one of many problems to plague Operation No To
Bush. I now understand the allure for the MOD to harness the hills for
surveillance training. I remember Terry Enrights story about stumbling
over horizontal soldiers. Drop a hammer, or a pair a scissors, and youll
never find it again. The most distressing problem, however, is the
dwindling supply of fabric
First, we scupper the outline process. Its an uprising of the
masses  a miniature revolution against our fearless (and increasingly
testy) leader. Then the second word  the ineffectual TO  falls by the
wayside. The final N looks perfectly respectable, but its siblings suffer
by comparison. As we work against fading light and diminishing
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 134
materials, the letters become smaller and smaller. Christoff is close to
explosion.
Im working on the S, nailing linen napkins into the gaps
between frayed lace curtains. To my right, the H team contemplates a
lone gorse bush that occupies the space where the horizontal band needs
to lie. When I look again a few minutes later, the gorse is no more. One
bush sacrificed for another.
The sun sinks ever lower in the sky...Christoff looks ready, if he
could, to fire us all on the spot...Someone suggests that we should have
spelled NOB. I agree. Its a fine message  straight to the point, and
requiring three letters instead of six.
Christoff stomps through the ferns, muttering to himself.
Theyre not going to be able to see it. Not going to be able to SEE
IT
At 10 oclock, everyone except Christoff is ready to call it a
day...Well have to live with it. Christoffs most ardent minions continue
to putter, while the rest of us stand back and admire our handiwork.
(Research Diary, 16 June 2008)
Due to the lack of white fabric and the fading daylight, the final product spelled NO
BUSH, with each subsequent letter growing progressively smaller and more difficult to
discern. The installation stayed in place through Bushs visit to Belfast, although the
message proved difficult to read from City Centre. The following week, Christoff
removed all letters except the adjacent U and S. Through this ambiguous result, which
could refer either to the word us or to the United States, Christoff drew the mountain
into a multiply-scaled dialogue, at once local and global.
The No to Bush installation could be read simply as a form of protest graffiti,
similar to other examples that cropped up around the city in the days before Bushs visit
to Northern Ireland. However, Christoffs decision to locate this project on Divis
Mountain complicates an iconic landscape intimately associated with republican cultural
identity, opening it to a larger global dialogue. The No to Bush installation involved the
participation of a diverse, multinational group of volunteers whose presence requires new
interpretations of the mountain that go beyond anti-colonial Irish resistance and
reclamation.
Christoffs work on Divis offers a ripe study to probe the relationship between
landscape, identity and meaning(s) of place within cultural geography. As Foster and
Lorimer (2007: 426) observe, artists employ a spatialized vocabulary to label, describe
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 135
and explain their work that geographers recognize as their own. Like Halls (1997) study
of Raymond Masons fiberglass sculptures in Birmingham, or Revills (1994) work on
the Forest of Deans Forest Sculpture Trail, my own analysis of Christoff plots the
shifting place of landscape art within a wider art of landscape (Daniels 2008: 431,
original emphasis). Specifically, I seek to understand how landscape art can shape new
discourses of place and heritage in a post-conflict society. Through the arc of his work,
Christoff draws out new dimensions of Divis Mountain. Running throughout is the
pervasive theme of his first installation. The slender question mark conveys the
ambiguities and uncertainties of the peace process, which Christoff distills into and
projects from the contested, shifting landscape of Divis.
Conclusion
The demilitarization of Divis Mountain is a dramatic transformation of post-
ceasefire Belfast, and its evolution is ongoing. In 2007, the National Trust acquired
another large swath of land to the south and east, effectively increasing its holdings on the
mountain by almost one-third. More recently, the transfer of ownership of the summit
opens new possibilities. Under the stewardship of the National Trust, the mountain now
has official museum status, which will expedite the transfer of the first Ordnance Survey
theodolite base from its current storage site at the Natural History Museum in London. Its
reinstatement on the summit will recall the mountains multiple layers of imperial,
military history, even as efforts by Irish language advocates to restore Gaelic placenames
recall a different narrative. Other ongoing projects include the site of Fort Jericho,
earmarked for return to the local community as an industrial estate, although efforts to
develop it prove to be complex and protracted.
Community regeneration organizations and cultural heritage bodies increasingly
seek new ways of engaging with Divis. In our interview, Deirdre Mackel of the Upper
Springfield Development Trust predicted: Tourism is going to bring a lot of
opportunities for local people...especially in and around the Black Mountain, theres
going to be a lot of things in the future happening there (Interview, 13 August 2008).
Filte Feirste, the republican-centred tourism board for West Belfast, seeks to promote
the mountain locally. Their efforts dovetail with those of the West Belfast Taxi
Association. The fleet of black taxis, the ex-prisoners who drive them, and Divis
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 136
Mountain form a constellation of iconic images in the culture of republican West Belfast.
As the manager of the Association explained to me, an interest in tourism is a natural
progression from the recognition that the mountain forms the background to all their
services. Tentative plans are in progress for the creation of a taxi tour of West Belfast,
which would develop an environmental focus alongside the more traditional political,
economic, cultural and social foci of current tours. This new tour will feature Divis
Mountain as integral to West Belfasts cultural landscape (Research Diary, 20 May
2008).
Yet this cultural landscape continues to shift, as does the place of Divis Mountain
within it. Earlier in this chapter, I introduced a former IRA combatant and prisoner named
Padraig. His ardent political ideals, and his repeated invocations of the Irish Republic
through references to County Donegal and the 26 Counties, suggest that he might
harbour antipathy toward the English-based National Trust and its role in managing the
mountain. However, in our interview Padraig expressed a surprising level of ease:
How do you feel about the National Trust purchasing Divis
and Black Mountain? I ask.
Brilliant, Padraig replies promptly. For two reasons.
Reason One is obvious: It starts to remove the army
presence from the mountain. The fact that this is an English
organization is insignificant to Padraig. Why would you cut off
your nose to spite your face?
Reason Two: The change in people using that mountain is
fabulous. (Research Diary, 27 June 2008)
The National Trust, which is widely perceived as a middle-class, English organization,
could easily be read as an arbiter of British colonial history. Many of the stately homes
managed by the Trust are relics of British imperialism. For instance, Florence Court in
the western county of Fermanagh is a mansion built by wealth from the slave trade.
Moreover, most of the manor houses on the island of Ireland are vestiges of British
colonial plantation history. Yet despite these associations, Padraig expresses satisfaction
with the presence of the National Trust on Divis. His rhetorical question to me  Why
During the Troubles, bus services in West Belfast were frequently disrupted in a cycle that
involved both the unionist civic government and local republican residents. Out of this vacuum
emerged the black taxi cooperative to serve local residents in this part of the city. Today, the West
Belfast Taxi Association is a cooperative enterprise that co-exists alongside the municipal bus
service. The Association employs a large number of ex-prisoners as drivers. In doing so, it invokes
the suspicion of people outside of the area, many of whom view the black taxi service as a funding
mechanism for republican paramilitary efforts.
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 137
would you cut off your nose to spite your face?  suggests an element of strategic
internal negotiation: On balance, the National Trust is a far preferable alternative to the
British army. Moreover, the second reason that he cites, The change in people using the
mountain, suggests that his hopes align with those of the National Trust  to encourage
public ownership and use of the mountain. The softening of this former IRA volunteer
toward a major British heritage organization indicates new possibilities for reframing an
iconic republican cultural landscape as a shared resource for a wider public.
In the years since the acquisition, the National Trust and other environmental
organizations have worked actively to promote Divis as a recreational landscape open to
all. For Seamus, the former IRA volunteer imprisoned for eleven years, the National
Trust was pivotal to fulfilling the promise he made to himself at the height of the
Troubles, while standing in the car park of the military hospital in Belfast. In our
interview, he recounted his thoughts as he glimpsed the mountain for the first time in a
decade: I said, I have to go back there. It took eighteen years to fulfill that promise
(Interview, 5 June 2008). Seamus finally returned Divis when he took part in one of the
National Trusts sponsored walks.
More broadly, the re-casting of Divis as a public recreational resource engages
with debates in cultural geography around walking, landscape and cultural politics (for
example, Burgess 1996; Brennan 2005; Wylie 2002). As Wylie (2005: 235) argues,
notions of the walking selfadvance ineluctably into cultural politics, into complex
histories of protest and access and discursive entanglements of walking, gender,
neutrality, health, fitness, happiness, patriotism. Phillips (2005: 509), in a meditation on
the artist Tim Brennans Mercator manoeuvre,
observes that walking is enchanting
because it offers a way of writing the landscape, and in doing so inscribing new
meanings.
In this chapter, I excavated the competing, overlapping layers of inscription and
meaning on Divis Mountain to examine their role in the transformation of conflict. As a
historic site for British military imperialism, the mountain serves as a rallying point
around which a defiant, postcolonial republican culture can cohere. Yet the roles and
meanings of Divis during the Troubles are now shifting in a time of waking peace.
Expressions of cultural reclamation  embodied above in Herald of Jericho and attempts
to restore Gaelic placenames  emphasize republican claims to the mountain. In doing so,
they potentially threaten attempts to develop shared space in Northern Irelands fragile,
In Mercator manoeuvre, Brennan leads a group of participants on a guided walking tour. He
takes his route from the line of sight offered by a statue of Ernest Shackleton outside the
headquarters of the Royal Geographical Society, and then proceeds to lead the participants on a
tour of certain monuments in Hyde Park, linked thematically to concepts of historical and
contemporary colonialism. (Phillips 2005)
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 138
post-conflict society. My research, however, suggests that the demilitarization of Divis
provokes wider possibilities for republican cultural identity. Padraig provides a poignant
example: a staunch republican and former combatant who now welcomes the presence of
the contentiously-named National Trust. The contradictions that he embodies find wider
resonance in West Belfast, where contemporary support for non-violent constitutional
politics sits alongside valorized memories of republican struggle. These contradictions
point toward ways in which the peace process complicates existing narratives of conflict,
rendering simplistic, anti-colonial justifications in more nuanced variations. Trailing in
their wake are transformations, both physical and metaphorical, of contested cultural
landscapes. In this case study, I have drawn on the demilitarization of Divis Mountain to
explore how its attendant transformations provoke individuals and communities to
negotiate multiple, overlapping and, perhaps, conflicting identities in a society recovering
from conflict.
I will return to Divis Mountain in Chapter Seven, to explore in greater depth the
challenge of opening such a culturally charged landscape to a wider public. In the next
chapter, however, I develop the theme of post-conflict negotiations of cultural heritage
and identity through an exploration of the loyalist bonfire tradition.
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 139
Figure 5.1. West Belfast with Divis in the background. Photo by Christoff Gillen.
Figure 5.2. Ordnance
Survey theodolite base on
Black Mountain. Photo by
the author.
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 140
Figure 5.3. Ministry of Defense compound on Divis. Photo by Dermot McCann,
National Trust.
Figure 5.4. Eco-grid trail leading to Black Mountain. Photo courtesy of Belfast Hills
Partnership.
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 141
Figure 5.5. Derelict 18
century stone barn, eventual site of visitors centre. Photo
courtesy of Belfast Hills Partnership.
Figure 5.5. Concrete imprint of Ministry of Defense compound, now designated for
civilian use. Photo by the author.
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 142
Figure 5.7. Herald of
Jericho. Photo by the
author.
Figure 5.8. Fort Whiterock, known locally as Fort Jericho. Photo courtesy of
www.ballymurphy.org.
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 143
Figure 5.9. National Trust entrance sign. Photo courtesy of Belfast Hills Partnership.
Figure 5.10. Christoff Gillen with a white sheet. Photo courtesy of Christoff Gillen.
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 144
Figure 5.11. Question mark on Black Mountain. Photo by Christoff Gillen.
Figure 5.12. The letter H on Black Mountain, from Christoff Gillens HOME
installation. Photo by Christoff Gillen.
Chapter 5: Transforming Earth 145
Figure 5.13. NO BUSH on Black Mountain. Photo by Christoff Gillen.
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 146
Chapter Six
Transforming Fire: 11
Night Bonfires and Loyalist Identities
Introduction
At the zenith of the loyalist cultural calendar, the 11
Night bonfires provide an
intriguing counterpoint to the cultural landscape of Divis. Unlike the mountains solid mass
and fixed geographical coordinates, loyalist bonfires are ephemeral and widely dispersed in
space and time. While the peacetime transformation of Divis highlights issues around
conservation, the bonfires engage a different set of environmental concerns around pollution
and regeneration. Yet like Divis, their current transformations implicate cultural identity in
conflicts over contested territory, and their redefinition is crucial to the peacebuilding
process. As I discussed in Chapter Two, the transformation of conflict provokes encounters
between conflicting narratives of cultural heritage, which in turn play powerful roles in
shaping community identity. Thus, the transformation of conflict calls for new ways of
engaging with culturally charged (Matless 2000: 142) landscapes and their attendant
contentions of heritage and memory. In this chapter, I draw on the contested landscape of
loyalist bonfires to explore the (re)negotiation of cultural heritage and identity in a divided,
rapidly changing post-conflict society.
The 11
Night bonfires celebrate the victory of the Protestant King William III over
the Catholic King James II at the Battle of the Boyne in 1690. Like the 12th of July parades
that they herald, the bonfires inscribe loyalist cultural ownership over the space they define
(Jarman 1997; see also Cohen 2007). In recent times, the peace process has provoked
massive changes to these traditions. For example, parades are now closely monitored and
frequently re-routed to avoid sectarian conflict as they pass through predominantly Catholic
neighbourhoods (Bell 2007). With regard to bonfires, the changes are particularly poignant.
In the decade since the peace accords, urban regeneration in Belfast has claimed many of the
sites on which loyalist communities build their bonfires. Moreover, people both within and
outside of these areas are gaining confidence to complain about a divisive sectarian tradition
that poses widespread risks to the environment and to public health. Today, as the discourse
of peace champions the ideal of shared space, loyalists struggle to redefine their tradition and,
by extension, the connections they draw between place and identity.
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 147
These transformations are unfolding in a very different context than that which I
explored in the preceding chapter. Unlike Irish republicanism, which emerged from and
defined itself in opposition to British imperialism, loyalism has evolved from allegiance to
the crown and to the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. While
republican cultural identities can be situated within wider postcolonial discourses, their
loyalist counterparts call for different analytical frameworks. As I discussed in Chapter
Three, loyalist desire to maintain an unsustainable political status quo stems from deep-
seated insecurities about the peace process and the place of loyalism in it. In response,
community practitioners in loyalist areas frequently invoke single identity work to develop
group confidence to face the discomforting work of critical self-reflection (Nash 2005a:
295). At first glance, engagement around bonfires appears to fall under the rubric of single
identity. In this chapter, however, I aim to destabilize and complicate this assumption by
exploring diverse, multiple expressions emerging in post-conflict loyalist identities.
Gender is one theme that cross-cuts assumptions of monolithic loyalist identity.
Throughout this chapter, I will analyze the gendering of bonfires to complicate the ways in
which loyalist cultural heritage is (re)defined. This is rich yet surprisingly under-explored
thematic territory. As Meyer (2000: 114) observes: The politics of Northern Ireland are
unambiguously gendered, yet gender has remained a largely ignored variable in explaining
the ongoing conflict. McDowells (2008b) analyses of gender nuances in the peacetime
commemoration of the Troubles reveal similar findings: In a conflict orchestrated largely by
men against men, the experiences of women and their varied interpretations have often been
elided from localized narratives of the past. (ibid: 335). These patterns are particularly
striking within loyalism. Ward (2002: 167) points to the predominantly male public face of
unionism and gendered national symbolism that lacks positive female imagery. Like Ward
(2004), Meyer (2000: 120) locates the lack of available political space for women in the
gender constructions used in sectarian symbols and identities. She argues that the Protestant-
unionist-loyalist identity draws heavily from masculine warrior imagery that reflects staunch
patriarchal values and excludes women from political leadership. According to Meyer, these
values are taken up and re-emphasized through the prevalence of political murals in working-
class loyalist estates:
The most frequent and menacing figures in these murals are the
armed and faceless male bodies representing the loyalist
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 148
paramilitaries themselves. Always wearing balaclavas to hide
their faces, typically dressed in black, their rifles aimed and
cocked in phallic readiness. (Meyer 2000: 132)
The striking absence of female imagery in loyalist visual culture leads McDowell (2008b:
350) to question: So what roles can women play in the present if they have been written out
of the past?
In many ways, the 11
Night bonfires seem to reinforce traditional gender roles and
symbolic values in loyalist culture. Yet as I argue in this chapter, recent transformations are
challenging people in these communities to re-think assumed cultural norms. In doing so,
they rework the identity resource (Graham and Shirlow 2002: 882) of the bonfire tradition
for a new phase of peacebuilding. When positioned against larger transformations in loyalist
culture, the bonfires offer insight into connections between contested cultural identities, new
meanings of place, and the redefinition of contemporary loyalism. More broadly, I argue that
transformations in the contested bonfire landscape can be read as both a product and an agent
of the peace process, which in turn reflect and provoke new expressions of identity in loyalist
culture.
For this case study, I bring together several strands of work from my overlapping
academic and practical projects. My data is based primarily on participant observation, which
I arranged through my collaboration with Groundwork Northern Ireland and Belfast City
Councils Bonfire Management Programme. I also draw on transcripts of semi-structured
interviews that I conducted with a wide array of participants, most notably paramilitary
members, civil servants, community activists and bonfire builders residing in loyalist
communities throughout greater Belfast. As I discussed in Chapter Four, my collaborative
relationship with Groundwork Northern Ireland offered both opportunity and challenge. On
the one hand, our collaboration gave me an excellent vantage point from which to conduct
participant observation and to network with potential interview participants. On the other
hand, this collaboration required me to balance my academic pursuits with sensitive
professional responsibilities. Tensions occasionally and inevitably arose between these
different roles, but they also heightened my awareness and deepened my understanding of the
complex dynamics at work in the transformation of contested traditions.
I have organized this chapter into two overarching parts. In the shorter first section, I
contextualize the 11
Night bonfires against the shifting backdrop of loyalism, tracing their
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 149
evolution from historic origins to contemporary practices. As I build layers of complexity to
these descriptions, I develop my interpreration of loyalist bonfires as a contested cultural
landscape. I end the first section by pointing toward complex dynamics surrounding post-
conflict transformations, and I ask how these changes provoke loyalists to engage in new
ways with culture, place, tradition and identity. I devote the remainder of the chapter to
responding to these questions.
The chapters second overarching section explores how loyalist communities
negotiate change through three interlinking case studies on bonfire management and
transformation. The first of these focuses on a municipal programme based in Belfast. The
Bonfire Management Programme was a three-year grant framework structure, funded by
Belfast City Council and administered by Groundwork Northern Ireland, that aimed to
address key issues around the environment, good relations, community development and
cultural tradition. Through this case study, I explore some of the complex dynamics around
bonfires, gendering and cultural identity in a time of transition.
In the second case study, I trace connections between contemporary bonfires and
loyalist paramilitary culture through a separate bonfire management programme in the nearby
borough of Antrim. Drawing on a semi-structured interview with two senior paramilitary
members, I explore how transformations in the bonfire tradition challenge these former
combatants to engage with wider social trends emerging through the peace process, thus
provoking them to re-examine their political loyalties and cultural identities.
The third case study explores the gendering of bonfire transformation through the
beacon  an alternative structure designed through the Bonfire Management Programme in
collaboration with the neighbourhood of Woodvale in North Belfast. I describe the beacons
controversial history of development; the tensions it provoked within the larger loyalist
population in Belfast; its successful public launch in July 2008; and the pivotal role played by
Woodvales female bonfire committee. I argue that the beacon can be read as one of the most
powerful and controversial symbols of bonfire transformation and, by extension, of
transformations within loyalism itself.
Finally, I conclude this chapter by outlining future directions for 11th Night bonfires.
A new municipal programme in Belfast aims to support loyalist communities in the positive
celebration of the cultural heritage and identity. I contextualize bonfire transformation as part
of a larger process of re-imagining the place of loyalist culture and identity in a time of
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 150
growing peace, and I gesture toward ways in which this example can illuminate the roles and
challenges of shared heritage for divided post-conflict societies.
1. Loyalism in Transition: Fire, History and Heritage
A Brief History
Unlike the 12
of July parades, 11
Night bonfires have garnered little formal
research attention. The Orange Order
(2008) traces the history of the tradition to ancient and
early Christian rituals involving fire, as well as to practices of signaling and communicating
through fire. In early modern Britain, for example, fire played an important role in signaling
the sighting of the stricken Spanish Armada of 1588, and again in the 1605 Gunpowder Plot.
However, the crux of the loyalist bonfire tradition lies in the so-called Glorious Revolution.
In 1688, as religious and political tensions mounted across Europe, the Glorious
Revolution began when a group of English parliamentarians overthrew Catholic James II.
The parliamentarians replaced the deposed king with his daughter, Mary II, and her Dutch
husband, William Henry of Orange, who would become King William III. Crucially, both
Mary and William were Protestant  a cause for celebration in Ireland amongst the plantation
settlers and their descendents. According to legend, news of the coronation sparked a
celebration of bonfires across the hilltops of Ulster. Elsewhere in Ireland, though, the
predominantly Catholic supporters of James greeted the news with antagonism. The
Glorious Revolution was secured by a series of major battles, not in Britain but on the
island of Ireland. The most famous of these took place on the 1st of July 1690, on the banks of
the River Boyne. The Battle of the Boyne marked Williams decisive victory and the end of
Jamess attempts to regain the British crown. More broadly, Williams victory secured
Protestantism for the British throne. The Battle of the Boyne etched itself deeply in the
cultural psyche of Irelands pro-British Protestants, and King William III, or King Billy as
he is fondly remembered today, became one of loyalisms most revered icons.
The Loyal Orange Institution, more commonly known as the Orange Order, is a Protestant fraternity
founded in 1795. Despite its origins among the labouring classes, the Order today is perceived as
largely professional; throughout the 20
century, Northern Irelands most prominent political, civic
and economic leaders all claimed membership. Today, the Orange Order is most strongly associated
with the 12
of July parade tradition.
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 151
When the Julian calendar gave way to the Gregorian in the 18th century, the 1st of
July became the revered 12
Although the 12
of July holds sway as loyalisms most
important date, celebrated by the marching tradition and flute band parades, the eve of the
is nearly as significant. On 11
Night, the bonfire tradition re-enacts the campfires lit by
soldiers on the banks of the River Boyne, on the eve of their victorious battle in 1690. The
following year, when the western city of Derry/Londonderry fell under siege, Governor
Colonel Lundy advocated surrendering the city to King James IIs army. The loyalist
defenders refused, and Lundy fled the city under the cover of darkness. Lundy entered
loyalist folklore as a notorious traitor, giving rise to the tradition of burning effigies atop
bonfires.
The bonfires of today bear little resemblance to the rural campfires by which 17
century soldiers kept watch. Although bonfires are built in loyalist areas throughout Northern
Ireland, the majority are constructed in urban, working-class areas. Belfasts sheer density
intensifies the spectacle, to which Northern Irelands successive unionist governments have
tended to turn a blind eye. As the ethos of peace takes hold, however, activities once assumed
as given are increasingly challenged by the larger public. This is a time of great change for
loyalist communities, particularly for estates where paramilitarism holds sway. Loyalism in
Transition, a recent initiative of the political arm of the Ulster Defense Association, attempts
to steer the transformation of a militarized, indoctrinated population into peaceful participants
of post-ceasefire Northern Ireland, which will ultimately enable Loyalism to emerge out
ofconflict to play a full and meaningful role in a process of reconciliation (Hall 2006: 19).
Bloomer and Edwards (2009), however, sound a note of caution. They observe that while
paramilitaries may have dismantled their active service units, non-militarised, civilianised
power structures remain in place, with former paramilitary participants now unashamedly
engaged in colonising jobs in the community and voluntary sector, thus repositioning
themselves as gatekeepers of public service provision (ibid: 7).
This is the complicated local context in which 11
Night bonfires are grounded, yet
they also provoke broader questions about national belonging and allegiance to Britain. Their
peacetime transformation reworks these multiple scales of engagement, emphasizing
loyalisms unresolved questions around place and identity in Northern Ireland. In the
The irony is not lost to some contemporary loyalists. As the Orange Orders chief archivist
commented to me: We only commemorate the Battle on the 12
because the Pope told us to
(Interview, 23 January 2009).
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 152
following two sub-sections, I describe contemporary practices and problems related to 11th
Night bonfires, in order to develop my interpretation of this contested cultural landscape.
Building and Burning
Bonfire season begins in the early days of spring. Across loyalist neighbourhoods in
Belfast, young people begin to collect their building materials: wooden pallets, rubber tyres,
odds and ends of refuse. As the materials amass, other residents (and, at times, complete
outsiders) contribute to the growing pile. For those wishing for cost-free disposal of old
furniture, carpets, and household appliances, bonfire season is a golden opportunity. In
neighbourhoods where the bonfire site is well-known and highly visible, people may come
from miles away with their contributions.
As the days pass and materials accumulate, the risk of theft increases from rival
bonfire sites. Communities with ample participants will post guards  a task that frequently
falls to younger children. More ambitious communities may build small huts, from which to
guard the boney, as bonfires are often called.
Those with smaller numbers are less
fortunate, as this extract from my research diary illustrates:
Unlike other neighbourhoods, the builders at Dunluce
Avenue dont have the manpower to guard their site from raiding
parties. The builders from nearby Donegall Road are frequent
culprits. They can cut easily across the grounds of the hospital to
lift the wood from poor, unguarded Dunluce.
The other day, the boys discovered that 200 of their pallets
had been taken. They seem put out  hurt, even  by the raiding
of their site. We dont steal from other people, Tommy points
out, perplexed
I ask if they would ever steal the wood back from the
bonfires in Donegall Road. Not likely. And from nearby Sandy
Row? People know better than to steal from Sandy Row, says
According to Gailey (1977), the English language is unique for having a term to apply to seasonal
fires. Bonfire is derived from Bone-fire  a curious etymology, given that bones are not particularly
combustible.
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 153
one young man, as a collective shudder ripples through the
group. (Research Diary, 23 June 2008)
As this example illuminates, the tradition of raiding and stealing reveals hierarchies between
loyalist communities, often tied to paramilitary prowess. Of the two neighbourhoods
mentioned above, Donegall Road is a known stronghold of the UVF; Sandy Row, the UDA.
The young men whom I interviewed knew the limitations of their own neighbourhoods
social and political standing within loyalist Belfast. Although angered by the theft of their
bonfire wood, they had no intention of retrieving it.
The construction process itself is highly strategic. Build too early and you risk
someone setting fire to your structure in the days before the 11
. Build too late and you risk
ridicule for not finishing your bonfire in time for its burning. In most loyalist communities,
bonfire construction begins in the week leading up to the 11
July. Designs vary according to
location, local tradition and available materials. The advent of wooden pallets, from which
most contemporary bonfires are constructed, allow for greater stability in building designs.
Today, most bonfires are beehive-shaped, wide at the base and narrow toward the top,
although variations abound. In my notes, I described one bonfire in North Belfast as bulging
out of the hillside like an enormous, tyre-filled tumor (Research Diary, 11 July 2007). The
largest reach heights of fifty feet or more (Figure 6.1). In contrast, teenagers in one small
loyalist enclave in North Belfast build their bonfire with the materials at hand on the 11
regardless of how paltry the supply; their trademark bonfire design is tall and skinny. Others
opt for airy towers more akin to skyscrapers. This passage from my research diary describes
the structure and the building experience of a prominent inner-city bonfire:
Sandy Row builds its bonfire in the middle of a car park. The
base is enormous, from which rises a skinnier chimney. I notice
a Dublin vehicle registration plate tacked about two-thirds up the
structure. A couple of young men are still hard at work. With the
help of a rope, theyre pulling yet another wooden pallet to the
top. I hold my breath; its a long way to fall. (Research Diary, 11
July 2007) (Figure 6.2)
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 154
Injuries are, not surprisingly, all too common. In June 2008, while facilitating a discussion
with a group of teenage boys in North Belfast, I questioned them about the safety risks
involved with bonfire building:
When I ask them if they can remember any accidents, they
divulge a litany. Nail punctures are common, as are falling tyres.
The boy sitting to my right tips his head toward me, so that I can
see the scar, hidden amidst whorls of brown hair, where a door
once landed on him. (Research Diary, 2 July 2008)
Despite the risks, teenagers in another North Belfast neighbourhood (Research Diary, 18 June
2008) implied in our discussion that great honor is bestowed on the person brave enough to
climb the finished structure to tack on the last piece of wood.
The bonfire may be the focal point of the festivities, but it forms only part of the
visual landscape. In the days and weeks leading up to the 11th, loyalist communities deck
their streets with patriotic bunting, strung from one lamppost to the next. Wealthy benefactors
may donate funds for the purchase of flags and decorative bunting. In other communities,
neighbourhood leaders, often with paramilitary connections, may coordinate door-to-door
collections to cover the cost of the decorations. Against this backdrop of red, white and blue,
the bonfire may also be draped with flags of a different sort. In some communities, the flags
of the Union Jack, Northern Ireland, and loyalist paramilitary organizations may wave briefly
from the structure. Out of respect, these are removed before the midnight burning. Universal
to nearly all loyalist bonfires, however, is the Tricolour flag of the Irish Republic (Figure
6.3). Other cultural symbols of the enemy include effigies of the Pope, campaign posters of
politicians (usually from Sinn Fin, the political party most closely associated with Irish
republicanism) and, as with Sandy Row in the example above, vehicle registration plates
from south of the border.
On 11
July, many communities host parties  whether impromptu or planned  for
local residents. Alcohol and, in some places, drugs may feature prominently. Overnight,
smaller bonfires appear throughout the city. These may represent a tradition for families who
shun their communitys primary bonfire, or they may indicate more serious factions within an
estate. In some neighbourhoods, the builders may create smaller structures, which can be
burned earlier in the evening for the benefit of local children. As midnight nears, residents
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 155
gather around the bonfire. To facilitate ignition, the bonfire is doused liberally with petrol (or,
as some are rumoured, explosives like semtex) and then set alight (Figure 6.4). This
description of the South Belfast neighbourhood of Donegall Pass describes the spectacle:
At ten minutes to midnight, I suggest that we move
outdoors. We join the stream of peopleIn the empty lot behind
us, a few men are setting up a fireworks display; they instruct us
to move further down the streetJudging by the numbers of
both prams and grannies, this is definitely a family affair.
A man prepares a torch from a small fire that has been
burning in the car park. Circling the bonfire, he lights the base at
a few different points. Before long, flames are leaping up the
sides. The speed with which the structure burns is due, no doubt,
to a generous dousing of petrol. When the first Tricolour catches
fire, the crowd erupts in an audible cheer. Behind us, fireworks
whistle overhead, exploding in bright showers as the bonfire
flames crackle loudly. (Research Diary, 11 July 2007)
In some places, masked men may fire live rounds of ammunition into the sky, in a display
known colloquially as a paramilitary show of strength. The party runs full throttle as local
residents celebrate through the night. Many will still be awake come morning, when the
members of the flute bands will don their uniforms, assemble for the 12
of July parade, and
celebrate, once more, the triumph of King Billy.
Contested Landscape; Divisive Tradition
Bonfires may represent a cornerstone of loyalist tradition, but their negative effects
reverberate throughout the region. In the months leading up to July, bonfire sites become de
facto rubbish dumps, in which rat infestations are common. The wooden pallets that comprise
the bulk of most contemporary bonfires are taken, without compensation, from local
businesses. At a cost of 6-12 per pallet, the loss of income to local businesses can run into
thousands of pounds (Interview, Good Relations Unit, Belfast City Council, 26 November
2009). Furthermore, and for a variety of reasons (intimidation by paramilitaries, for instance,
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 156
or loss of clientele) many small businesses feel compelled to close during the days leading up
to the 12
of July.
Despite the recent pledges of the UVF and UDA to place their weapons beyond
reach, paramilitarism maintains its stranglehold over some loyalist communities. The hard
men wield their power from the local pubs or social clubs that serve as unofficial
headquarters. As bonfire season approaches, they may solicit monetary donations (often
mandatory) from local residents for the purchase of decorations. In the minds of many, both
within and outside of loyalist areas, 11
Night bonfires and paramilitarism are closely
entwined. The rounds of live gunfire that mark the midnight burning may be the most
obvious example, but paramilitaries may also show their strength in other ways. The
following extract, drawn from a discussion that I facilitated in the Westland estate, illustrates
how a bonfire can serve as fertile ground for recruiting new members:
This is UDA heartland. Westland was home to the dreaded and
infamous Shoukri, who tyrannized the estate. From 2000 to
2004, he and his cronies would order people to participate in the
bonfire. The older lads in tonights discussion group harbor
uncomfortable memories from this time. As at most bonfires,
people would drink to excess on 11
Night. In their inebriated
state, some might agree to join the UDA. (They would sign a
form? I ask for clarification. No, answers Phil. You just had
to say Yes.) One could retract the promise without physical
harm, but only if willing to pay 2000 pounds. (Research Diary,
25 June 2008)
Whether through intimidation or, some would say, collusion, authorities have traditionally
turned a blind eye to 11
Night bonfires and the illegal activities that trail in their wake.
Although authorities have sought, albeit half-heartedly, to regulate bonfires since at least the
1950s, unionist politicians at the height of the old Stormont government would suspend laws
on burning fires during the month of July (Graham 2008).
Also ignored until recently are the enormous environmental implications of the
bonfires. On 11
Night, petrol is poured over the bonfire to help it ignite. When lit, its
contents  wood, foam furniture, rubber tyres, and plastics of all types  go up in flame. On
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 157
11th Night, thick plumes of smoke are visible throughout Belfast. The citys topography  a
glacial valley edged by ranges of steep hills to the west and east  tends to concentrate the
pollutants. According to the director of the Chartered Institute of Environmental Health for
Northern Ireland, Belfasts air quality is one of the citys major environmental health issues
(Interview, 14 February 2006). Along with their associated environmental concerns, bonfires
also pose a threat to public health. Smoke comprises gaseous components, carbon monoxide
and tiny particles of matter that, when inhaled, can cause neural disorders and inflammation,
affect heart rhythms, and increase the risk of stroke. The particles present in Belfasts
bonfires are particularly toxic. Epidemiologic studies conducted at the Harvard University
School of Public Health (Interview, Dr David Christiani, 1 May 2007) suggest that particles
from painted wood can contribute to lead poisoning, while those from rubber tyres are known
carcinogens. Although the people living closest to the burning bonfires would be at greatest
risk, air pollution knows no geographic boundaries.
In Belfast, the bonfires place significant strain on the statutory services. On 11
Night, the Fire and Rescue Service responds repeatedly to calls, struggling to contain bonfires
that burgeon out of control and threaten nearby homes and buildings. Firefighters tend to
have a wary and uncertain relationship with these communities. Revelers  some in an
alcohol-induced haze  may interpret the firefighters actions as an attack on their bonfire,
leading to reciprocal attacks on the service itself. This account by a long-serving firefighter
illustrates a common scenario:
He tells me about a bonfire to which he once responded. It
sounds like a classic disaster: foam furniture, alcohol, and a fire
that quickly grew out of control and spread to nearby houses.
The crew managed to contain the blaze before it resulted in too
much property damage, but in the process, some of the water
they sprayed on the houses ended up in the bonfire itself. The
locals took offense; they demonstrated their displeasure with the
firefighters by slitting the hoses. (Research Diary, 30 September
2007)
Even in neighbourhoods where the Fire and Rescue Service can contain the bonfire, adjacent
houses may suffer collateral damage from smoke and heat. Repairs frequently fall to the
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 158
Northern Ireland Housing Executive, which owns most of the social housing stock in loyalist
estates. Due to their size, the ruins of the bonfires may continue to smolder for days. When
they finally die out, the tarmac on which they rested must be re-paved at the taxpayers
expense, disturbing both vehicular and pedestrian traffic during the process (Figure 6.5).
Moreover, patriotic flags and bunting are frequently left to moulder on public lampposts,
sometimes well into the autumn. As these trends suggest, the environmental imprint of the
bonfires lingers long after the 12
of July.
Arching over these myriad problems is the spectre of symbolic aggression. A loyalist
bonfire is considered incomplete until draped with the flag of the Republic of Ireland.
Although the Union Jack and a communitys associated paramilitary flags may adorn the
bonfire briefly, these are taken down before the midnight burning. Alongside the Irish
Tricolour, bonfire builders may also drape the structure with photos of Republican
politicians, effigies of the Pope, and other symbols of the enemy. Outside of, and
sometimes within, loyalist communities, the public image of bonfires is understandably
negative. Among Catholic nationalists, in particular, they strike a deeply disturbing chord.
In spite of  or, perhaps, because of  their detractions, bonfires serve a vital role in
loyalist culture. In a time of uncertain identity, 11
Night represents the one time of year that
draws a loyalist community together. In several discussions that I facilitated in the spring of
2008, young people from loyalist estates emphasized that bonfire season gives them a sense
of purpose. With few youth programmes or useable greenspaces in these areas, young people
spend most of the year loitering on street corners, playing football in the road and engaging in
anti-social behaviour. Come spring, they turn their energy to the multitude of tasks required
to provide a bonfire for their community.
The importance of place to the bonfire tradition cannot be understated; depth of
feeling for bonfires and bonfire sites runs strong. For example, I visited a fiercely loyalist
estate at the southern edge of Belfast in April 2007. Community leaders described a long
waiting list of people wanting to move into the neighbourhood. They informed me that
although they could sell the land for profit, they would never do so because of its importance
as the communitys bonfire site. The extract below is drawn from my first visit to this
community:
At the far end of the field, the local residents have begun
the transformation from field to fly-tip to bonfire site. Flotsam
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 159
and jetsam lie scattered on the grass; I can see wood for
shelving, interior doors, a couple of mattresses. You could outfit
an entire kitchen, [my colleague] says in disgust.
Its a lovely spot, despite the stockpile of household
detritus and the paramilitary mural looming nearby. Grass a
vibrant shade of emerald, a healthy grove of young tree saplings
stretching to the right, a cheerful peppering of white-petaled
daisies  and an abrupt line where they end. The daisy line
delineates the parameters of last years bonfire. (Research Diary,
24 April 2007)
I read this swath of recovering grass as a landscape both inscribed by conflict and
contributing to it. Like the 12
of July parades, the 11
Night bonfires connect people to
place through a revered tradition that reaffirms loyalist claims to Northern Ireland, and
reinforces the triad of identity, culture and territory. Moreover, the bonfires connect
participants beyond their local sites to celebrations of the wider loyalist community, across
both space and time. In this way, bonfires are an important feature in the cultural landscape
of loyalism, firmly anchored in physical space but refracting cultural and social values from
the past to the present and into the future. To borrow from Wylie (2007: 193, emphasis in
original), bonfires form a cultural landscape that is both material entity and symbolic
meaning, both persistent in form and changeable in meaning.
Increasingly, the discourse of post-ceasefire Belfast revolves around the creation of
shared space for a shared city. In an essay titled Archetypes of an uncertain future, Graham
(2008: no page number) describes 11th Night bonfires as a double throwback:
They carry an aura of a pre-Partitioned, urbanizing Ulster, in
which the remnants of a rural tradition have survived
disingenuously in the life of a city. In our current moment, they
are an out-of-sorts relic of the Troubles mentality, giving them a
future which may be as out of joint with the times as the Twelfth
they prologueEleventh night bonfires are potentially an
embarrassing sign of recalcitrance in a Northern Ireland which is
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 160
unsure of whether its future is one based on shared spaces or the
accommodation of ongoing and perpetual differences.
As the peace process moves into its second decade, people across Northern Ireland
increasingly challenge the environmental, political and cultural sustainability of loyalist
bonfires. These forces of change hold tremendous implications for loyalist communities in
general, and for their bonfires in particular. In the remainder of this chapter, I draw on my
empirical work to explore how transformations in the contested landscape of 11
Night
bonfires illuminate new debates around culture and identity in loyalist communities.
2. Transformations: Negotiating Change
Although bonfires long predate Northern Irelands 20
century conflict, the Troubles
cemented their symbolic importance to loyalist enthusiasts and, inevitably, their notoriety to
everyone else. The limited archive of bonfire history captures the delicacy with which the
public and voluntary sectors have approached the practice. A pamphlet published in 1992 by
Bryson House, a local environmental and human services charity, marked an early attempt to
establish a formal bonfire code for Belfast. In a sign of the precarious political environment,
the pamphlet blandly encouraged the preservation of a good environment to live in:
Lots of people are now working to make Belfast a better place to
live in and visitThey are planting trees and flowers and
improving landscapes. Some people are putting out window
boxes and hanging baskets. A bad bonfire may interfere with
some or all of these activities.
The authors of the pamphlet euphemistically appeal to everyone to look after the
environment. They suggest to bonfire builders that they collect other suitable material for
burning, leaving young trees to grow. Strikingly, the pamphlet makes no reference to the
reasons behind the bonfires; in focusing solely on ways to develop good environmental
practices, the authors tiptoed around the real issues. Even as recently as 2004, the Inter-
Agency Working Group published a guidance pamphlet on good practice around bonfires,
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 161
but made no mention of sectarianism. The authors  all drawn from statutory bodies with
civic responsibilities and, theoretically, enforcement powers  described bonfires
euphemistically and apolitically as one of the ways in which Northern Ireland people
celebrate their history.
The political sea-change of the peace process has had profound effects on the bonfire
tradition, most notably in public attitudes toward it. In the mid-1990s, as the ceasefires
calmed the Troubles, environmental roles began to emerge in local government, reflecting the
visibility of broader public support for and awareness of the environment (Interview, Waste
Management Service, Belfast City Council, 23 February 2006). Alongside the emergence of
environmental awareness is increased confidence to criticize the 11
Night bonfires. A long-
serving employee of Belfast City Councils Cleansing Services division told me that if a
complaint about bonfires had come through to his office five years previously, no one would
have taken the call (Interview, 16 August 2007). Of primary concern was the safety of the
City Council staff. Today, local residents both within and outside of loyalist communities feel
increasingly emboldened to voice their concerns.
The peace process has profoundly transformed the physical and imaginative spaces
for bonfires. One of the most visible manifestations of the peace process is the influx of
economic investment in Northern Ireland. The regeneration of Belfast now transforms the
urban landscape, as property developers purchase swaths of derelict land and place it beyond
the reach of local residents. As a result, vacant lots where bonfires are built are rapidly
diminishing in number. The displacement of bonfires from their traditional sites has
disconcerting effects on these communities. The following extract is drawn from a discussion
with members of a bonfire group in South Belfast. For many years, this group built a
notoriously large bonfire, before their displacement to a smaller and, in their opinion,
markedly inferior site.
Before, the Tates Avenue bonfire drew huge crowds on 11
Night.
Andrew tells me that people used to pack the bridge to see it. 2004
was their last year at Tates Avenue. Then, seemingly overnight, the
developers moved in. The bonfire moved to its current site on
Dunluce Avenue, surrounded by fences and hemmed in by the
railway line. These days, no one from outside the community comes
to see it. (Research Diary, 23 June 2008)
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 162
This is a common phenomenon throughout Belfast; even the potential for loss casts shadows.
At a public forum for loyalist bonfire communities, hosted by Groundwork Northern Ireland
in June 2007, the following comment by a resident from an inner-city neighbourhood
reflected a common anxiety: Every year we ask, Is this our last year? There just isnt any
more space (Research Diary, 31 May 2007). In the West Belfast neighbourhood of Shankill,
property developers cordoned off the neighbourhoods traditional bonfire site with high
fencing. Local residents articulated their anger; graffiti on the fence reads: Meet local needs,
not developers greed (Figure 6.6). To date, amidst rumours of paramilitary intimidation,
construction at the site has yet to begin. Curiously, the urban planning sector in Northern
Ireland has dedicated little formal dialogue, either academic or practical, to the subject of
bonfires. The omission is remarkable, given the obvious intersection between planning
concerns and 11
Night bonfires, particularly in the densely built inner-city areas of Belfast.
The transformations that I have described above illustrate how external factors affect
the bonfires, yet even more remarkable transformations are taking place within loyalist
communities themselves. As the cessation of conflict increasingly emboldens public criticism
of the bonfires, those who build them must redefine their tradition for a time of peace. To this
end, loyalist bonfires offer a way to examine larger questions about the shifting roles of
divisive traditions in post-conflict societies. I argue that transformations of contested
traditions take shape as much internally  in the ways in which their adherents must rework
their own relationships to place, culture and identity  as externally. Below, I explore these
transformations through three case studies drawn from empirical research in and around
Belfast.
Belfast: Piloting Progress
In 2006, following two successful pilot attempts, Belfast City Council voted to fund
the Bonfire Management Programme as a three-year grant framework for loyalist
communities.4 The programme operated under three overarching aims:
In the second year, the Bonfire Management Programme added an auxiliary site in the
nationalist/republican Falls neighbourhood to address a more recent bonfire tradition that
commemorates the widespread internment  without due process  of alleged republican activists in
1971. Loyalist bonfires, however, were the original reason for the programme, and thus its primary
focus. As my research on bonfires focuses exclusively on transformations in loyalist communities, I
will not address the republican site in this chapter.
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 163
1) To support a number of communities in Belfast in the celebration of their
cultural tradition through positive engagement, whilst engaging with the
perceived negative aspects that have become associated with bonfires.
2) To work with and support local communities to bring about improvements in
bonfire management, particularly in terms of inclusivity, safety and increased
family atmosphere.
3) To further reduce the adverse health and environmental impacts of bonfires
on the city, including the illegal disposal of waste.
Each participating community signed an agreement to abide by a series of guidelines. The
following are a selection from the 2008 programme:
 A local bonfire committee should be formed and in place by the 1st of March
 Collection of material should not commence before 16
May, although
communities that refrain from collecting before 1
June would receive an
additional financial incentive.
 Local communities, in conjunction with Groundwork Northern Ireland,
should develop locally based community engagement programmes
 Tyres should not be collected or burned on the bonfire; building materials
should be restricted to wood.
 Communities should refrain from displaying racist, sectarian or paramilitary
trappings such as flags, emblems, or effigies either on or in the vicinity of the
bonfire site.
 The safety and well-being of City Council employees, its partners and
contractors should be respected at all times.
 Members from the local bonfire committees should attend the Participants
Forum held in the neutral space of Groundwork Northern Ireland.
If communities met these targets, they were eligible to receive an award of up to 1,500 to
fund a family-oriented bonfire festival  for many neighbourhoods, the first of its kind. In this
way, Belfast City Council sought to encourage wider community engagement around bonfire
management.
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 164
Groundwork Northern Ireland won the tender to administer the scheme, building on
its extensive experience with developing environmental regeneration projects in loyalist
areas. Project Development Officers from Groundwork, including myself, were assigned to
participating neighbourhoods to liaise with the local bonfire committees. We maintained lines
of communication to ensure that the bonfire builders in these communities understood and
complied with the guidelines, particularly around the collection start-date and acceptable
building materials. When illegal dumping or fly-tipping occurred, we arranged for a
designated, external cleansing contractor to clear the site of debris. Crucially, we hosted
regular Participants Forums at Groundwork, which brought together community
representatives from participating loyalist communities across the city.
Over the course of three years, the number of participating communities increased
from 14 to 34, with some of the more recent additions involved in more limited capacities.
The program was overseen by an inter-agency forum comprising City Council
representatives, the Police Service of Northern Ireland, the Northern Ireland Fire and Rescue
Service, the Department of Regional Development, the Roads Service, the Environment and
Heritage Service, the Community Relations Council, the Northern Ireland Community Safety
Unit, the Northern Ireland Housing Executive, and Groundwork Northern Ireland. In this
way, the Bonfire Management Programme drew loyalist bonfire communities into dialogue
not only with each other, but also with a range of relevant statutory agencies.
Although many people cautiously welcomed the Bonfire Management Programme,
critics also abound. As a City Council initiative, the programme was ultimately funded by the
public, thus inviting criticism about financing loyalist paramilitaries with taxpayer money.
Moreover, although the Bonfire Management Programme worked with the most prominent
loyalist communities in Belfast, its remit covered only a fraction of the bonfires built for 11th
Night. Even within participating neighbourhoods, local factions and fractures sometimes led
to the construction of multiple alternative bonfires. For example, in East Belfast in 2008,
young people cooperated outwardly with regard to their official site with the Bonfire
Management Programme, whilst channeling the bulk of their energy and materials into an
enormous, non-participating bonfire. The resulting structure was one of the largest in the city,
built with materials, such as rubber tyres, considered contraband for sites that were
participating in the programme. This example encapsulates the tensions between the
aspirations and the realities of the Bonfire Management Programme. Frequently, members of
the local bonfire committees were caught in the middle.
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 165
Alongside wider public disapproval, criticism also emanated from the communities
participating in the programme. Individual members of the bonfire committees frequently
found themselves in the difficult position of communicating unpopular guidelines,
particularly around acceptable building materials or the collection start date. Confusion and
resentment were exacerbated by communities that chose not to participate; young bonfire
builders looked to those sites and saw rubber tyres and other building materials now
forbidden for their own bonfire. Most important, many participants in the Bonfire
Management Programme articulated in various meetings and public forums that they felt
under-consulted about the guidelines of the programme, which many interpreted as top-down
and bureaucrat-driven. Some participating neighbourhoods perceived Belfast City Councils
primary agenda as enforcing change, thus heightening anxiety and a sense of vulnerability
within loyalist communities who feared the loss of their bonfires. In a discussion that I
facilitated in a North Belfast neighbourhood, one local community volunteer leveled angry
accusations at City Council: Theyre trying to take [the bonfire] away Theyre killing our
culture (Research Diary, 18 June 2008). His comment encapsulates the quandary at the
heart of bonfire transformation, and the broader crisis of loyalist identity.
The 12
of July may be the most important date in the loyalist cultural calendar, but
its adherents increasingly struggle to articulate its contemporary relevance. In many
communities, bonfires have become an exercise in structural engineering, unmoored from
history and relevant only in the spectacle of their construction. Alcohol has become firmly
entrenched in bonfire culture, frequently replacing the Battle of the Boyne as the primary
reason for celebration. As the peace process encourages changes in the physical manifestation
of the bonfires, their transformation also represents an opportunity for loyalists to rework and
redefine the meaning of their tradition.
To this end, in 2008 the Bonfire Management Programme developed a separate but
related strand to address issues of cultural heritage and identity. The Programme of
Reflection and Capacity-Building allocated resources for each bonfire committee to select a
series of facilitated discussions (for example, on alcohol consumption, cultural heritage or
media portrayals) for participants within their community. In addition, members of the
bonfire committees were invited to attend workshops on practical skills related to funding
applications, event management, and community audits. The Programme of Reflection and
Capacity-Building engaged loyalist communities with less tangible dimensions of change,
thus positioning the physical transformations of the bonfires within a larger dialogue about
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 166
cultural heritage and identity. Groundworks Project Development Officers assisted the
bonfire committees in delivering this programme. Our assistance frequently involved
facilitating discussions with constituent groups (usually young people) from within these
communities. In addition to my responsibilities as a liaison to designated sites, I was also
assigned to facilitate discussions on cultural heritage in nine other loyalist neighbourhoods.
As I discussed in Chapter Four, my dual roles as practitioner and researcher offered unique
opportunities. My supervisors at Groundwork gave me wide latitude in choosing the content
of these discussions, which I facilitated in ways that addressed my own interests around
gender, identity and (as I will discuss in Chapter Seven) minority ethnic engagement.
Nowhere is the crisis of cultural identity within loyalism more apparent than in the
widespread practice of burning the flag of the Irish Republic. In a neighbourhood in North
Belfast, I facilitated a discussion with a group of children on the afternoon of 10
July 2008.
They had completed construction of their bonfire, one day ahead of schedule. At the top of
the structure, the Union Jack waved from the position usually reserved for the Irish Tricolour.
One young girl assured me: We dont burn that. Well put the other flag up later (Research
Diary, 10 July 2008). I did not press her to elaborate, but her vague reference to the other
flag strongly suggests that the widespread practice of burning the Tricolour stems from habit
rather than conviction, particularly among young children. In a different neighbourhood, I
asked a group of slightly older children what they thought the bonfire is about. You burn the
Tricolour, one replied (Research Diary, 24 June 2008). These responses underscore the
tendency within loyalism to define itself negatively, in opposition to Irish republicanism,
rather than framing a positively defined identity of its own (Graham 1994, 2004).
As I engaged with loyalist communities across Belfast, I discerned widespread
ignorance not just about the historical basis for the bonfires but about the larger meaning of
the 12
of July itself. At a discussion that I facilitated with a mixed-age group in West
Belfast, I asked the teenagers present if they knew the history behind the celebrations. Their
answers were startlingly inaccurate:
Guy Fawkes Day, hazards one girl. St Patricks Day, ventures
the spiky-haired boy. The other lad looks down and mumbles
something I cant hear. Only one guesses correctly: Something
about King Billy? (Research Diary, 24 June 2008)
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 167
The response of St Patricks Day is particularly surprising. In Belfast, it is widely
interpreted as a holiday claimed solely by Irish republican culture, in which loyalists have no
place. The five adult women who were present at this discussion seemed embarrassed by
these responses, yet when pressed they fared no better. As I observed later in my notes: Even
for the women, the sense of history seems hazy at best (Research Diary, 24 June 2008).
However, their lack of understanding is by no means unique to this community. At a meeting
that I attended in South Belfast, an experienced community worker identified the problem as
cyclical in nature: Parents pass their ignorance along to their children, who will themselves
become parents one day (Research Diary, 24 April 2007).
The uncertainties of meaning that arose in my visits to and discussions with loyalist
communities highlight the importance of the Bonfire Management Programmes emphasis on
reflection and capacity-building. I discovered a similar lack of reflection through my
queries about the gendered dimensions of bonfire practice. These emerged forcefully around
the division of and ideas about labor. With few exceptions, these ideas emphasize bonfire
construction as a masculine activity. Below, I draw the following extract from a discussion
that I facilitated with eight participants, aged 15 to early-30s, of the all-male bonfire group in
a loyalist neighbourhood in South Belfast. Although I gathered from our conversation that
building the bonfire was an exclusively male activity, I wondered whether females in this
community participated in related practices such as sourcing wood.
The absence of females at this discussion is striking. Do they collect
wood? I ask. An explosion of laughter greets my question, which
gives me a gauge of how ridiculous they find it. No, girls dont
collect, although they may come to hang out on the day of the
bonfire. (Research Diary, 23 June 2008)
The explosion of laughter that forms their initial response offers a clear insight into the
mindset of these men, in which females are positioned conditionally and peripherally: they
may come to hang out, (emphasis mine) but only on the day of the bonfire itself.
Through discussions in other loyalist communities, I explored the depth of these
gendered dimensions and the extent to which females themselves participated in their
exclusion. The following example relates to a discussion that I facilitated with a group of
teenagers and young adults in North Belfast. When I arrived at the estate, a large crowd was
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 168
in the process of building their bonfire. As the community worker shepherded them to the
room where I would facilitate the discussion, I realized that the individuals building this
bonfire were exclusively male. The following extract begins with the community workers
attempt, of his own initiative, to rectify the gender imbalance:
Several minutes into the discussion, the doors open and [the
community worker]shoves three girls into the room. When I ask if
theyre involved with building the bonfire, everyone laughs 
including the girls. Aye, they make the sandwiches. (Research
Diary, 25 June 2008)
As in the previous excerpt, the initial reaction of laughter underscores a shared perception of
female involvement as ridiculous. Moreover, the laughter of the girls themselves illuminates
the extent to which they participate in their exclusion from the building process. At the end of
this excerpt, a young man replies, Aye, they make the sandwiches. His response grants the
girls a role in a parallel process of construction, but through sandwiches rather than the
bonfire itself. A similar division of labour repeats itself throughout Belfast in the lead-up to
mid-July, with males in loyalist communities involved with bonfire-building and females
supporting their work from the periphery.
The gendered symbolism of the bonfire tradition is, perhaps, most apparent in the
widespread and overwhelming emphasis on size. On loyalist estates across Belfast, prevailing
wisdom holds that a bigger structure equals a better bonfire. I heard this belief repeated at
several different bonfire sites on the afternoon of 11
July 2007, as my Groundwork
colleagues and I visited each community participating in the Bonfire Management
Programme to wish them luck with their festivities. The following exchange took place at an
estate in South Belfast, where we encountered a small group of bonfire builders:
We tell a group of teenagers (all male) that we have just come from
Finaghy [a nearby loyalist estate]. Ours is bigger, a skinny,
bespectacled boy announces. Then, worriedly: Isnt it? (Research
Diary, 11 July 2007)
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 169
In this extract, the boy responds initially with confidence, but he follows this with a worried
plea for reassurance. This juxtaposition of bravado and anxiety suggests that his engagement
with the bonfire reinforces masculine identity while simultaneously exposing it to
vulnerability.
A sense of masculinized competition was rife not only amongst loyalist communities,
but also amongst my Groundwork colleagues, for whom bonfires formed a familiar element
of their cultural heritage. The following extract, drawn from our site visit on 11 July 2007 to
a neighbourhood in North Belfast, illuminates the complex gendered dynamics between the
bonfire builders; Eddie, their Groundwork liaison; and I.
This is Eddies site. He struts around the bonfire site, clearly
pleased to be on his own turf. To the builder: Prettiest bonfire,
mate. Then he calls me over: Show him the other bonfires.
I set my camera to the first photo of Finaghy. The images offer
no sense of relative scale, but the builder is nonetheless intrigued. I
assure him that his is the biggest. (Its not, but what harm is a little
lie?)
We report that we have just driven past Lower Shankill, and that
theyre still hard at work.
Not a chance. Not a chance, says one builder smugly. They
dont know how to build a bonfire.
As we return to the car, Eddie thumps his chest with pride. I
have to laugh; its so funny, these tough men and their crazy
competition for the biggest bonfire in Belfast. I wonder if this is how
they talk about their penises. (Research Diary, 11 July 2007)
Although it would be tempting to draw a clear line between a bonfires size and perceptions
of success, this extract illuminates a more complex interplay. As Eddies proclamation
(prettiest bonfire) and the builders disdain (They dont know how to build a bonfire)
suggest, the desire for the biggest bonfire is tempered by aesthetic design and building
knowledge. Moreover, I argue that the role of the audience is also central to this dynamic. In
this extract, aspects of my own gendered identity entered unavoidably into my engagement
with this bonfire. My inclination to soothe the builder  I assure him that his is the biggest 
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 170
reinforces uncomfortable stereotypes of women placating men. Moments later, however, I
deride these tough men and their crazy competition, likening it to how they talk about their
penises. This juxtaposition of my responses illuminates the cautious negotiations that take
place around gender, identity and bonfires.
These negotiations are increasingly important, if loyalist bonfires are to adapt to a
rapidly changing society. For example, conceptions of masculinity must now be re-negotiated
alongside the transformation of bonfires. As property development increasingly consumes
traditional sites, loyalist communities who have long competed to build the biggest bonfire
now struggle to re-align their sense of worth with the options available. Amplifying this
transition is the Bonfire Management Programmes emphasis on gender inclusion, and its
active encouragement of local bonfire committees to include women as representatives. In
this way, the Bonfire Management Programme itself is driving new aspirations and
expectations for participating loyalist communities, thus expanding the scope for these
communities to engage with different aspects of bonfire transformation.
I have highlighted the Bonfire Management Programme not only because it is the
largest of its kind in Northern Ireland, but because it illuminates the co-constitutative
dynamics at work in the transformation of a contested landscape. On the one hand, the
Bonfire Management Programme is a clear outcome of the peace process  a public service
unimaginable even ten years ago  that seeks to instill an ethos of good practice for the
benefit of a wider peacetime public. At the same time, the programme also drives many of
the transformations it seeks to implement  for example, reduction in size; regulation of
building materials; and clear lines of communication between bonfire builders and relevant
statutory agencies. Yet there are intangible transformations at work as well within loyalist
culture. Through its emphasis on reflection and capacity-building, the programme
encourages participating communities to explore new roles and places for the celebration of
loyalist heritage in a transforming post-conflict city.
The Bonfire Management Programme may be the largest, but other initiatives are
starting to emerge across Northern Ireland. Some, like Belfasts are publicly funded and
implemented by civic officials; others are developed locally within a single neighbourhood.
Despite their differences, however, these efforts all emerge from a shared recognition that the
divisive, sectarian bonfire tradition must adapt to a rapidly changing post-conflict society.
Next, I pursue these ideas further through a case study drawn from the local bonfire program
in the nearby town of Antrim.
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 171
Antrim: The Changing Place of Paramilitarism
Like its counterpart in Belfast, the programme administered through Antrim Borough
Council encourages loyalist communities to develop good practices around the 11
Night
bonfire tradition. Antrims programme, however, differs from Belfasts in the overt
paramilitary presence of its community leaders. Unlike Belfast, where the machinations of
behind-the-scenes paramilitarism are acknowledged quietly, the conduit between the Lord
Mayor of Antrim and participating local communities is maintained by two middle-aged men
who represent the leading loyalist paramilitary organizations. Although my work as a Project
Development Officer for Groundwork brought me into regular contact with paramilitary
members in Belfast, I felt that potentially sensitive research about paramilitarism should be
kept separate from my professional responsibilities to the Bonfire Management Programme.
With the help of a colleague in the community relations sector, I arranged to interview the
two liaisons to Antrim Borough Council in the lead-up to the 2008 bonfires. I wanted to
explore how transformations to their bonfire tradition are yielding new insights into identity,
place and paramilitary culture.
During the Troubles, two prominent paramilitary bodies emerged for the loyalist
cause: the Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF) and the Ulster Defense Association (UDA). These
organizations, in turn, gave rise to a number of splinter groups, such as the Red Hand
Defenders, the Red Hand Commandos and the Loyalist Volunteer Force, and the youth wings
known as the Ulster Young Militants and Young Citizens Volunteers. Members of the UVF,
the smaller of the two main organizations, trace their lineage to a predecessor of the same
name. The original UVF, inaugurated in 1913, formed the 36th (Ulster) Division of the British
Army and served on the Western Front for the duration of the First World War (Cusack and
McDonald 2008). Half a century later, in 1966, loyalists revived the UVF for the conflict
closer to home. In contrast, its main rival, the UDA, emerged in the early days of the
Troubles and quickly became the largest loyalist paramilitary organization. At its peak, the
UDA had 40,000 members and a large reservoir of support within loyalist communities
(McDonald and Cusack 2004). Although united in their political aims and their opposition to
Irish republicanism, loyalist paramilitarism imploded into feuds between and within the main
organizations only two years after the signing of the 1998 peace accords. The prominent
presence of both Davey and Rob, representatives of the UDA and UVF, respectively, in
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 172
Antrim Borough Councils bonfire management program speaks to the Councils
acknowledgement of tensions that persist within loyalist paramilitarism.
In the minds of many, particularly among non-loyalists, 11
Night bonfires are
intimately associated with paramilitarism. The bonfires themselves form part of a cultural
landscape in which murals, patriotic colors and other visual markers serve as striking
affirmations of territorial identity and ownership. According to Davey, local paramilitary
structures may also contribute to this visual dialogue:
Even through the peace process people were still very territorial
and defensive of their territories. Youd have come in and found
Ulster Volunteer Force and Ulster Freedom Fighters
and Ulster
Defense Association flags adorning every lamppost. You know,
and for anybody, even people within the Protestant communities,
driving into that sort of went: WhoaIt was very territorial.
(Interview, 8 April 2008)
As a high-ranking paramilitary member, Davey is aware of how symbols can be manipulated
to invoke awe and fear, which he captures in his imagined response of a person entering the
territory. The flags adorning every lamppost broadcast the presence of paramilitary
organizations within the defined physical space of the estate.
In this context, bonfires play their own role of intimidation, both material and
symbolic, in the heightened atmosphere of 11
Night. Davey describes how, previously, local
paramilitaries would emphasize their menacing presence through what is known colloquially
as a show of strength:
And on [bonfire night] both fields suddenly went quietThe
tempo of the music changed, and then you had the masked men
coming out with the balaclavas and the firearms, shooting up
into the air. And there was a lot of paramilitary trappings.
There is a performative quality to the spectacle that Davey describes, from the sudden
descent of silence to the quickened music that accompanies the masked men and their
When it served their purpose, members of the UDA would carry out sectarian attacks under its nom
de guerre, the Ulster Freedom Fighters. (McDonald and Cusack 2004)
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 173
volleys of gunfire. The firearms evoke not only the armed warfare of the 20th century
Troubles but also the 1690 battle that gave rise to the bonfire tradition. I read the
juxtaposition of these two conflicts as an attempt to legitimate the armed struggle of the
Troubles by framing it as an extension of the historic Battle of the Boyne. Moreover, as
bonfires are frequently built by and celebrated within communities with a strong tradition of
sectarian murals, the show of strength reworks in three dimensions some of militant
loyalisms most threatening and iconic images, such as armed men with balaclavas. Thus, the
performance of the bonfire brings to life the static images that adorn the estates built
environment, further emphasizing the connections between paramilitarism and place. In this
way, bonfires and loyalist paramilitary culture co-constitute each other: one emphasizes the
power of the other, and in doing so, defines and reinforces a particular type of place-
associated loyalist identity.
Yet despite the tendency to think of loyalist communities (or indeed, any community)
as monolithic, these places may actually fracture into warring factions. In the Antrim estate
that Davey and Rob describe, the flags of different paramilitary organizations divide the area
into more nuanced spheres of loyalist identity and influence. As Davey acknowledges in the
excerpt above, the Ulster Volunteer Force, the Ulster Defense Association and the Ulster
Freedom Fighters each laid claim to a distinct spatial zone and then communicated their
ownership through the visual medium of flags. In a similar way, bonfires are used to stake
territory and to proclaim the power of various paramilitary organizations within the
microgeography of one estate. Davey and Rob describe how bonfires were previously placed
literally a hundred yards from each other, built by warring loyalist factions. In the following
excerpt, they discuss how these bonfires, acting as territorial demarcations, shape how people
move through and engage with the estate:
Lia A few years ago, would you have people from
thedifferent bonfires visiting each others bonfires?
Rob Only couldve had violence
Davey [Uses hands to sketch an imaginary map]If you
imagine one great estate, youd a bonfire here, youd a
bonfire there, and a bonfire here. Well, this upper and
this far bonfire wouldve been practically followers of
the same organization. Whereas this one in the middle
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 174
was a completely different loyalist organization. And
everybody, rather than going this way from this
bonfire to that one, wouldve went [motions with
hands to describe a longer route]. Because chances are
if youd even been caught in the wrong field, you
couldve ended up in the bloody bonfire.
Daveys interpretation of the consequence  you couldve ended up in the bloody bonfire 
recalls the practice of effigy-burning. Although the contemporary burning of effigies is
predominantly anti-Catholic in intent, with the Pope the most common figure burned on
bonfires, the historic origins of this practice involve the treachery of a fellow loyalist. Robert
Lundy, the governor of Derry/Londonderry, fled the city as the forces of King James II
approached in 1689 (Bardon 1992). Lundy is reviled in loyalist lore, and his historic
treachery continues to underscore multiple tensions within loyalism. In the excerpt above,
Rob and Daveys portrayal of warring bonfires highlights the extent to which different
paramilitaries of the same loyalist persuasion can shape and control a single estate. In this
context, place-knowledge is crucial; those with inadequate knowledge of the area, or of the
nuances within loyalist paramilitary politics, expose themselves to grave danger vis--vis the
bonfires.
In recent years, as the peace process spurs broad shifts in public opinion, some
loyalists have recognized that the public image of the bonfire tradition must change. In
Antrim, the bonfire programme has given more visionary leaders an opportunity to move
away from the stark paramilitarism that characterized their bonfires previously. In our
interview, Davey reports that when yet another paramilitary bonfire began on their estate, it
gave us an avenue to jump ship. He and Rob shifted their focus to young people, seeking to
engage them with the process and the cultural history of bonfire-building. Rob took the
radical step of redesigning the structure entirely. Rather than following the tower- or beehive-
shaped design typically employed in contemporary bonfires, Rob and the young people in his
area constructed their bonfire in the shape of a castle (Figures 6.7). They built a square-
shaped frame using large sheets of plywood and carved crenellation on top. The young
people then painted the castle, piled wood inside its four walls and, as usual, decorated the
structure with the Irish Tricolour. Despite the sectarianism connoted by the Irish flag, the new
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 175
design represents a significant symbolic break from the more typical paramilitary-controlled
bonfires in the estate.
New designs aside, where these new bonfires differed most dramatically is in their
movement away from the culture of violence that characterized their predecessors. In the
following extract, Davey, who also supervised the building of another new bonfire on the
estate, describes the difference between old and new:
Initially when you first came down to our bonfireyou hit this
wall that had two camouflaged men with machine guns. As bold
as you want, red, white and blue letters: UDA, UFF, UYM, Kill
All Taigs. The bonfire was absolutely demonic. It was swamped
every night of the week by hooded facesIt was like something
out of the Wild West. And see now where we are now, were
probably the most timid fire in Antrim. Although we still have
our fire.
Davey describes a constellation of militant loyalisms iconic imagery: sectarian graffiti,
patriotic colors, and camouflaged men with machine guns. The graffiti refers not only to
prominent paramilitary branches within the community  the Ulster Defense Association,
Ulster Freedom Fighters and Ulster Young Militants  but also contains a direct call to
violence: Kill All Taigs is a derogatory anti-Catholic slur frequently employed through
visual media in loyalist areas. Although Davey most likely describes a local mural in this
excerpt, his description elides with that of the demonic bonfire built in its shadow, with
sinister hooded faces tracing the bonfires progress in the days leading up to 11th Night.
Through this conflation, the bonfire that Davey describes feeds into and from the dense
tapestry of identity and place in this loyalist estate. In stark contrast, Davey interprets the
bonfire that he now oversees as probably the most timid fire in Antrim. This shift away
from a highly masculinized and glorified culture of violence applies not only to the bonfire,
but may also describe larger shifts within paramilitary culture itself, as the peace process and
public opinion encourage demilitarization. Daveys final comment in this extract  Although
we still have our fire  is striking. It emphasizes the centrality of the bonfire itself, in a far
simpler form, to a loyalist cultural identity that seeks to move away from paramilitarism.
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 176
The peace process may signal a shift away from paramilitarism, but real
transformation struggles to take root in a pervasively sectarian environment. As Davey
describes below, the bonfires as practiced previously offered a narrow interpretation of
cultural identity:
Because up until three years ago, especially over our end of the
estate, you had two fires which were Protestant culture, generally
as you understand. But they wererepresentative of two
different loyalist organizations. One of them wouldve been the
Ulster Defense Association, and the other being the Ulster
Volunteer Force.
He describes the two fires as both Protestant culture and representative of two different
loyalist [paramilitary] organizations. In doing so, he conflates Protestant culture with
paramilitarism, thus suggesting the extent to which loyalist communities themselves actively
limit the horizons of their own identities. Davey and Rob comment on this process in the
following extract, illuminating how a narrow definition of Protestant identity perpetuates
itself in future generations:
Davey Our kids grew up in an environmentofinbred
sectarianism.
Rob Well, you know yourselfYou hear the word UVF
and [the kids] think: Well, thats them boysUVF
to them kids is presence.
Davey Its presence.
Rob Its not a history. Its not a history.
As this dialogue suggests, the absence of genuine historical understanding creates a cultural
vacuum, which is then filled by the charismatic Ulster Volunteer Force. The word presence,
which takes on additional weight with Daveys echo in the following line, may also point to
the limitations they perceive with a loyalist culture moored in the present. As Rob twice
points out, its not a history, suggesting that  despite his own membership in the
organization  he considers the Ulster Volunteer Force to be an inadequate substitute for
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 177
knowledge of a deeper historical narrative. Their challenge now is to define loyalist culture in
positive terms, beyond the sectarian and paramilitary framework by which it has come to be
known. Davey articulates this task: We want to be seen as people that are remembering who
we were, and where we came from, to the present daymaking it more culturally
acceptable. In doing so, he identifies the importance of locating Protestant culture within the
context of its history, from which to re-frame more nuanced forms of loyalist cultural identity
that can be sustained in time of peace.
There is a growing awareness within loyalist communities that the transformation of
the bonfire tradition creates valuable opportunities for cultural education. While the cultural
heritage aim is less formally articulated in Antrim Borough Councils programme than in
Belfast City Councils, its loyalist leaders are committed to educating young people about the
historic relevance of the tradition:
Lia I mean, how would you say that bonfires are important
to your sense of cultural identity?
Rob Our kids arent ever taught their own culture or their
own identity. And we see the bonfires as an
opportunityWe bring lambeg drums onto the field,
flute bands, different things. And the kids become
inquisitive then: Whats that for? So it gives us an
opportunity to bring our communities together. And
through lifting a few pallets or whatever, give them a
wee bit of education and, you know, help them
understand that its notabout burning the Tricolour.
Its about the kids understanding who they are,
because, you know, if these kids are gonna be a part of
our future, they have to understand their past.
Alongside the bonfire itself, Rob draws on the material artifacts of the 12th of July  lambeg
drums, flute bands, different things  to pique the childrens interest in their cultural
heritage. The bonfire site becomes a tangible space for learning, where the embodied
experience of lifting a few pallets connects the young people powerfully to their history. In
this way, Rob traces direct connections between the bonfire tradition and the development of
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 178
a positively defined cultural identity that is not about burning the (Irish) Tricolour. He
suggests that a successful future for loyalist culture depends on the capacity for young people
to develop a robust and positively defined cultural identity enriched by collective
understanding of loyalist history.
Bonfires are only part of the larger process of re-imaging the place of loyalist culture.
Other expressions of paramilitarism, such as flags and murals, still serve as vivid declarations
of territorial identity. The peace process may encourage loyalists to reconsider these
contested place images, but memories of the Troubles slow the progress. In the sensitive
atmosphere of post-ceasefire Northern Ireland, former figures of terror  both loyalist and
republican  now work side by side in new political structures, inevitably exacerbating
existing tensions. Not surprisingly, Antrim Borough Councils controversial relationship with
Rob and Davey invites public criticism. From Daveys perspective, these working
relationships, however fraught, are a necessary reality:
Unless you work with the people that we have to work with, you
dont have any success. But there are still councilors in these
chambers who say: Were not working with terrorists, full
stopThey shout about these offensive murals, and weve
always had the policy: Lets try and get the gunmen off the
streets before we worry about cardboard figures and wallsA
lot of them dont give us the opportunity, because unless youre
prepared to work with paramilitaries and engage with them and
try and help them come out of conflict  through bonfires,
through flags, through murals, through whatever process 
youre never gonna be successful. You have to speak to them.
This excerpt highlights Daveys understanding of the connections between the process of
peacebuilding and the process of re-imagining the meanings attached to place. He identifies
the markers of loyalist identity  bonfires, flags, murals  as symbolic and physical material
with which loyalist paramilitaries must now engage in order to come out of conflict. As I
argued in Chapter 2, a more holistic approach toward conflict transformation should consider
the transformation of relationships not only between people in conflict, but between people
and the ideas of place that underpin the conflict. As Davey points out in the excerpt above,
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 179
this is a multi-pronged process whose success depends on developing relationships with the
very people perceived to be entrenched in and fueling the conflict.
Even beyond the transformation of physical space, Antrims bonfire management
programme is provoking the bonfire builders to think critically about their tradition in
relation to wider scales of impact and, possibly, belonging. Although outsiders to loyalism
may view bonfire builders as parochial, provincial in outlook, and selfishly blas toward the
environment, Davey and Rob demonstrate a sophisticated grasp of environmental processes
and an awareness of their own impact. In our interview, Rob makes a solid and unambiguous
connection between bonfires and the growing threat of climate change: Bonfires have a
direct effect. Theres no doubt about it. Over the course of the interview, and unprompted by
me, he twice refers to their carbon footprint. This concept refers not only to the defined
physical space of the site on which a bonfire is built, but also connects loyalist builders and
bonfire celebrants to a wider global dialogue about justice and responsibility:
And I mean, if you think the amount of bonfires that are lit in
Northern Ireland on the 11
NightThe bonfires would be the
equivalent of taking millions of cars off the road. Lets not kid
yourself about that.
Robs estimation of millions of cars sits oddly with Northern Irelands relatively small
population size of 1.7 million, suggesting that he considers the bonfires scale of impact to
extend far beyond the region. To Rob, the future for bonfires is inevitable: Theyre going to
change dramatically over the next five to ten years. They have to.
These changes, already in progress, are revealing tensions in the increasingly
ambivalent relationship between working-class loyalists and the broader unionist political
leadership (see Graham and Shirlow 2002). In the following excerpt, Rob enacts an imagined
dialogue with a government official:
I feel that through time theyre going to enforce law, rightAll
the bonfires are all constituted, to a community-based group
festival or whatever. So therell come a stage where theyll
comeSay they come to me and say: Right, youre involved.
Youre the chairman of that group that runs that bonfire. Aye.
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 180
Heres a summons. Whats that for? Pollution. And make
no doubt, thats whats gonna happen.
Rob predicts the eventual demise of bonfires, when the force of law will override the
voluntary transformations taking place at present. This will be a dramatic change from the
relationship that held sway previously, when predominantly unionist government officials
routinely turned a blind eye to the tradition. (Indeed, despite recent efforts such as Belfasts
and Antrims bonfire management programmes, statutory agencies across Northern Ireland
continue to remain largely powerless at present to stop 11
Night bonfires.) Rob posits the
faceless and nameless they, to which he refers in the excerpt above, as a force that holds
power over working-class community leaders like himself. The governments current
inaction may be the legacy of previous unionist-dominated governments and their overt
sympathy to the bonfire tradition, but the following excerpt illustrates Robs resignation to an
eventual sea-change:
Theres no way is the British government gonna let [the
bonfires] happen. They cant go on about China and America
and the carbon footprint, and let this continue to happen. They
cantYoull see that happens.
As a loyalist, Robs political sympathies lie with the sovereignty of the British government.
However, in this extract he acknowledges that the very government whose historic victory his
bonfires commemorate is the force that will spell their end. He points to the complex political
dialogue in which the British government is engaged, and the necessity of assessing the
carbon footprint of Northern Irelands bonfire tradition alongside those of China and
America. In doing so, Rob acknowledges the hypocrisy inherent in the governments current
practice of ignoring 11
Night bonfires. His musings illustrate a growing rift between
political unionism and cultural loyalism, and gesture toward the need for loyalist
paramilitaries to re-examine their relationship with the two.
Former fighters like Rob and Davey are now negotiating new identities that extend
beyond the paramilitary framework of their former relationship to loyalism. In the following
extract, Davey describes the shift from militant to political expression of his ideals:
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 181
Like, I make no beefI am a political representative of the
Ulster Defense Association, Ulster Freedom FightersI wear
who I am and what I am on my sleeve. I was prepared to go to
jail, and worse, for the struggles of this country. Were now in an
environment where we want to end that. I dont want to be in jail
and visit my kids through a glass visor. I dont want my kids
burying me because Ive been murdered at the hands of whoever
else. We have to take the struggle on...Itsmore than bonfires
now, you know.
As Davey points out, bonfires are just the starting point for re-defining loyalism in a
changing political environment. The transformation of the bonfire tradition is only a part of
the larger transformation of loyalist paramilitarism, and of loyalism itself. The place of
paramilitarism in Northern Ireland, in terms of both physical manifestation and symbolic
value, must now be re-negotiated through the peace process. In communities like Daveys
and Robs, the transformation of the 11
Night bonfire tradition offers scope for redefining
loyalist identities in a post-ceasefire  and one day, perhaps, post-paramilitary  Northern
Ireland.
In many ways, my study of Antrim can be read as a response, in microcosm, to the
research aims that I set forth in Chapter Two: To explore how transformations of contested
landscapes provoke new perceptions of place and scale, and how these new perceptions, in
turn, shape the expression and negotiation of identity. Drawing on the voices of Davey and
Rob, I began by sketching the bonfire tradition in Antrim in its former heyday, when
paramilitary culture entwined with local bonfires in a co-constitutive creation of fear,
territory and power. Against this backdrop, I explored contemporary transformations in this
tradition: the introduction of new designs; the reduction of violence; and the harnessing of
bonfires as a resource for cultural education. I then broadened my exploration to wider scales,
exploring how Rob and Davey now (re)position their bonfires in relation to larger dialogues
that connect local activity to global environmental and geopolitical ramifications. The case
study ends by considering how Rob and Davey now negotiate paramilitary culture  and their
relationships to it  for a time of peace, in which positively defined identities might
reinvigorate new forms of loyalist culture in a post-conflict society.
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 182
My decision to emphasize paramilitarism in this case study highlights an intriguing
dimension to the bonfire culture that Rob and Davey portray. Running throughout are hyper-
masculine descriptions and images of loyalist paramilitary cultural identity, for example
Daveys recollection of masked men shooting volleys of gunfire over a lit bonfire. My
analysis of their interview, however, suggests that bonfire transformation appears to involve,
in part, a process of de-masculinization, as Rob and Davey come to terms with new
parameters of size and style. I read this process as a more complex negotiation of multiple
scripts that construct and constrain the performance of acceptable and respected
masculinities (McDowell 2003: 221-222). I carry this gendered theme into the next case
study, which explores the work of a local womens group in a paramilitary-controlled
neighbourhood that gave rise to an innovative bonfire alternative.
Woodvale: From Bonfire to Beacon
In contrast to the vast fields and open spaces of Rob and Daveys estate in Antrim,
the North Belfast neighbourhood of Woodvale struggles for even a small site on which to
build a bonfire. According to the Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency, this
loyalist enclave comprises one of Northern Irelands most impoverished wards.
Its location
at the top of the infamous Shankill Road  heartland of loyalist paramilitarism during the
Troubles  marked Woodvale for its fair share of violence. The estates narrow streets,
crumbling terraced housing and, despite its name, utter lack of greenery all contribute to the
general air of decay. On paper, Woodvale appears an unlikely frontrunner in the process of
change. Yet from this neighbourhood emerged one of the most innovative transformations of
Belfast City Councils Bonfire Management Programme, due in no small part to the efforts of
its female bonfire committee.
The beacon is the brainchild of Lee Mouncey, a landscape architect employed by
Groundwork Northern Ireland.
As a former resident of Woodvale, Mouncey was acutely
aware of the neighbourhods predicament. Two years previously, Woodvale had lost its last
suitable bonfire site. Due to a shortage of open space in the estate, bonfires in Woodvale were
Multiple Deprivation Measure (2005). Data available from Northern Ireland Neighbourhood
Information Service, Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency. www.ninis.nisra.gov.uk. Last
accessed 16 February 2010.
Shortly after designing the prototype and participating in its trial burning, Mouncey left the
community/voluntary sector for private practice. His bonfire designs and architectural plans remain
with Groundwork Northern Ireland.
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 183
typically built in the middle of roads, often in dangerously close proximity to nearby houses.
Mouncey, in consultation with local residents, conceived a design for an alternative bonfire
structure, which eventually became known as the beacon. He conceptualized a metal
framework that could be filled with wood and draped with hessian cloth. In a nod to the
contemporary practice of building bonfires from standardized industrial pallets, Mouncey
designed a square base which could hold 50 pallets, topped by a large pyramid filled with
carbon-neutral willow chips. The beacon would be set atop a sand pit to protect the surface
underneath. When Mouncey had completed his design, Belfast City Council took on the task
of building a prototype beacon. In the meantime, Mouncey facilitated a workshop with local
children in Woodvale to design the artwork that would be painted on the beacons hessian
cover. In September 2007, roughly a year after Mouncey began to design the structure, the
beacon prototype underwent a controlled trial burning at the premises of the Fire Service
Training Ground (Figure 6.8). In attendance were a large contingent from Woodvale,
including bonfire committee members, paramilitary representatives and the children who had
designed the artwork; Groundwork staff; and several officials from Belfast City Council and
various statutory agencies.
The idea for the beacon may have originated with Mouncey, but Woodvales bonfire
committee shepherded it to reality. Unlike the other loyalist areas participating in the Bonfire
Management Programme, Woodvales was the only committee managed exclusively by
women. Although Woodvale, like other loyalist areas across Belfast, continues to suffer from
the legacy of the Troubles, the neighbourhood benefits enormously from the strong capacity
of its local womens group. For several years, the members of this group have worked on
behalf of their community; their activity long predates the Bonfire Management Programme.
Over the years, the womens group has coordinated local youth programmes, organized
projects to improve the area, and pressured the Housing Executive to install PVC windows in
the neighbourhoods crumbling social housing stock. In many ways, Woodvales
participation in the Bonfire Management Programme can be read as an extension of its long-
standing neighbourhood improvement advocacy.
The women of Woodvale were pivotal in the development of the beacon. Although
the controlled trial burning of the prototype demonstrated its structural viability, the beacon
might easily have slipped into obscurity, ignored by civic officials loath to confront
complicated logistical details. Through the Bonfire Management Programme, however,
Woodvales committee applied sustained pressure on Belfast City Council to fund the
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 184
development of the beacon. Nervous about potential insurance liabilities, Belfast City
Council commissioned further testing of the beacon at one of the University of Ulsters
structural engineering laboratories. As the beacon entered this new phase in the bureaucratic
system, Woodvales bonfire committee ramped up its campaign. Due in part to the
committees determination, the engineers finally approved the design and declared the
beacon fit for purpose. Groundwork Northern Ireland then oversaw the building process, and
the beacon was ready in time for the 2008 bonfire season. Fittingly, the honor of launching it
went to Woodvale.
In July 2008, Northern Irelands first official beacon was erected in Woodvale Park,
and the local community hosted a large festival to showcase it as part of a larger, positive
interpretation of loyalist culture. With the help of their Groundwork liaison to the Bonfire
Management Programme, Woodvales bonfire committee secured a sizeable amount of
funding and, in the months leading up to July, worked closely with officials from a variety of
City Council departments and statutory agencies to prepare for 11
Night. The festival on
11th July was free to the public; it began at mid-day and attracted over 6,000 people.
Politicians from across the unionist political spectrum and members of the Linfield Football
Club made high-profile appearances. Journalists flocked to the park, providing substantial
news coverage to local, regional and national media networks (for example, BBC, 8 July
2008). Children clambered on inflatable bouncy castles that had been hired for the day, while
a long list of cultural acts  Scottish dancers, folk musicians, and loyalist rock bands  took
their turn on the stage. The festival provided business opportunities to several small food
vendors, and over 100 volunteer marshals patrolled the festival in the name of community
safety. So successful was the attempt to portray a positive interpretation of loyalist culture
that, later, one Groundwork colleague observed to me, In a couple years, you could picture a
Catholic family coming here during the day (Research Diary, 11 July 2008).
The festivals focal point was the beacon. In a nod to its uncertain reception as an
alternative to a bonfire, the festival organizers scheduled its burning for 11pm, thus giving
on-lookers time to travel to other sites by midnight. In doing so, they removed any element of
competition between the beacon and the more conventional bonfires built in other parts of the
city. This excerpt from my research diary describes the burning:
In the darkness, the beacon appears larger than it did in the
harsh light of day. Two lads light the base. For a couple of
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 185
minutes, nothing exciting happens. Then, the flames begin to
burgeon from the frame, leaping up the sides. The canvas
covering, decorated earlier by the kids, catches fire.
Ooh, the crowd murmurs. Cheers erupt as a large
expanse of canvas floats free and drifts to the ground. Is this the
same reaction that the incineration of the (Irish) Tricolour would
invoke? Its hard to tell.
Several yards away, firecrackers begin to whistle their
ascent. They explode in huge blooms against the night sky.
(Research diary, 11 July 2008)
Throughout the day, community safety marshals had carefully guarded the beacon, lest
someone (whether from inside or outside the Woodvale community) attempted to decorate it
with flags. Their vigilance paid off; based on my observations of other loyalist bonfires,
Woodvale was probably the only site in Belfast devoid of sectarian symbolism on 11th Night.
The beacon shouldered a heavy burden of responsibility in Woodvale Park. In an
earlier operational meeting of Groundwork staff involved in the Bonfire Management
Programme, a Chief Executive of Belfast City Councils Good Relations Unit explained how
the beacons viability would be based on its reception in Woodvale Park:
Its a test for public reaction. If the reaction is thats crap,
obviously the design goes out the window. (Research Diary, 3
June 2008)
Not surprisingly, praise has been far from universal, and the beacon has emerged as one of
the most contentious symbols of bonfire transformation. In the months leading up to July
2008, I was assigned to facilitate a series of discussions about cultural heritage with nine
loyalist communities across Belfast that had recently joined the Bonfire Management
Programme. Through these discussions, enforced by observations that my colleagues at
Groundwork shared in our regular operational meetings, I noticed a widespread belief
amongst loyalist communities that the beacon comprised a plot by Belfast City Council to
eliminate bonfires entirely. In contrast to the largely positive consensus of those who had
attended the trial burning at the Fire Service Training Ground, a community worker from a
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 186
loyalist estate in South Belfast commented to me: We heard that the beacon was a disaster
(Research Diary, 22 February 2008). Others expressed reservations about the prospect of
burning the young peoples artwork; the designs painted on the beacons hessian covering at
the controlled trial burning had included pictures of symbolic importance to loyalist culture,
such as the lambeg drum.
A common point of concern related to securing the cooperation of local young
people. In early June 2008, representatives from communities participating in the Bonfire
Management Programme gathered at Groundwork Northern Ireland for the annual
Participants Forum to discuss progress and concerns about their specific sites, and about the
programme as a whole. Given that plans were well underway for the festival at Woodvale
Park, the beacon featured heavily as a collective concern amongst those attending the forum.
The following extract conveys a sentiment affirmed by many who attended the Participants
Forum held at Groundwork in June 2008:
Travislooks at the photos [of the beacon], shakes his head, and
snorts. He says that hes trying to imagine telling the kids, Thats
what youve got. Id have to leave the area. (Research Diary, 3
June 2008)
The prediction he draws from this hypothetical scenario  that he would have to leave the
area  may be melodramatic, but it illuminates the difficulties that community workers face
as they attempt to implement the Bonfire Management Programmes unpopular guidelines in
their own communities. As I learned through facilitating a wide range of discussions on
cultural heritage in loyalist neighbourhoods across the city, the hostile reaction that Travis
imagines is not limited to his community alone. For example, in one neighbourhood in North
Belfast I facilitated a discussion with a group of teenagers. Unavoidably, the subject of the
beacon arose, their curiosity piqued by the rumours they had heard of the festival planned for
Woodvale Park. I described the design of the beacon and the trial burning I had witnessed the
previous September. The young people were deeply unimpressed with my reports of the
beacons size and height. Of greater concern, though, was the loss of the building process
itself, and how they would occupy themselves in the weeks and months when, normally, they
would be collecting wood (Research Diary, 18 June 2008)
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 187
At the outset, Woodvales bonfire committee may not have wished to deviate from
the norm, but as they confronted their predicament and how their lack of a suitable bonfire
site affected their community, they began to pursue their new course with determination.
Their actions provoked a range of responses from other loyalist communities in the Bonfire
Management Programme and beyond. Although some expressed cautious support, more often
their reactions took the form of skepticism, anger and jibes about selling out. At the
Participants Forum in June 2008, the controversial plans for the beacons launch at Woodvale
Park led to a heated exchange, compelling the representatives from Woodvales bonfire
committee to hotly defend their actions:
Its better than nothing.
Its the only option we have.
Its either that or nothing. And if theres no fire, thats your
culture gone. (Research Diary, 3 June 2008)
Their responses frame the beacon as a final effort and the sole alternative to losing the
tradition entirely. The last comment, with its straightforward equation of fire to culture,
emphasizes the speakers belief in the bonfire tradition as crucial to loyalist cultural identity.
At a time when the peace process is sparking massive urban regeneration and threatening
bonfire sites across the city, loyalists must confront the frightening prospect of change. In this
context, the beacon can be read as one of the most powerful and contentious symbols of
bonfire transformation and, by extension, of transformations within loyalist culture itself.
In April 2008, I conducted an interview with eight residents from Woodvale, all of
whom belong to the neighbourhoods long-standing womens group and now bonfire
committee. At the time of this interview, as the engineers at the University of Ulster
continued to test the structure, the members of Woodvales bonfire committee were waiting
anxiously for confirmation that the beacon would be ready in time for their festival on 11
July. Through this interview, I wanted to understand how their engagement with the beacon
reworks their notions of cultural heritage and provokes new perceptions about the
relationship between peace, place and identity.
The installation of the beacon marks a dramatic shift from Woodvales traditional
bonfire practice. In our interview, when I ask how 11
Night bonfires affect the estate, their
responses could apply to virtually any loyalist neighbourhood across the city. The
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 188
participants describe wood lying haphazardly about the streets, alcohol-fueled anti-social
behaviour, young people running wild, and no proper organization for the process. For one
participant, in particular, the dangers strike close to heart, crystallized in an act of violence
directed at her young son. Five years previously, the 11-year-old boy was attacked in the days
leading up to the 11
by a group of young adults who were drinking and smoking marijuana
around the growing bonfire. They threw the child into the hot ashes of a small fire that had
been burning on the site and then, according to his mother, they went on about their
business.
To Woodvales bonfire committee, the beacon represents an opportunity not only to
address the loss of space to housing development, but also to tackle bonfire seasons
entrenched negative elements. Nonetheless, local residents reacted with skepticism and anger
toward Woodvales participation in the Bonfire Management Programme. In the following
extract, one participant describes the challenge of garnering support within the community:
It was really hard. You know, peoplein the area thought that
we were selling our souls, take the [beacon] for a few pounds.
But its not like that at allThe money has really, really helped
us. Not us personally. For the likes of children, the old people 
Its helped the community come together, young and old.
This excerpt illuminates the reverence for bonfires within loyalist culture, to the point where
the committees acceptance of the beacon could be compared to a treacherous act of biblical
proportions: selling our souls in exchange for a few pounds. As this speaker points out,
however, the funding that Woodvale receives from the Bonfire Management Programme
facilitates community-wide engagement that would have been impossible previously, when
every street sported its own separate bonfire.
In addition to reducing the sheer number of bonfires built on the estate, the beacons
implementation required substantial spatial changes to local bonfire practice. Previously,
Woodvale built its bonfires in the heart of the estate, along the dense network of narrow
residential streets. As plans for a large festival developed around the beacon, however,
nearby Woodvale Park began to emerge as the logical venue. Despite the parks name and
proximity, the proposed shift in venue disturbed local residents, many of whom perceive the
park as located beyond the neighbourhoods invisible boundaries. As one interview
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 189
participant explains, the local youth view Woodvale as their own wee comfort zone  a
sentiment that could apply equally to adults. Despite the bonfire committees advocacy of
Woodvale Park, the following interview extract nonetheless conveys tensions and
ambivalence around their decision:
Lia Do you use the park for [other] activities as well?
[Multiple voices  No, we use the streets]
Sally Get the streets. Seal it off. So its safe.
Joan Och, everybody moves their cars and that there.
Lia Oh, thats nice too. Just kind of reclaiming the
streets as well.
Patsy Yeah.
Joan I think if you take it to the park, youre taking it out
of your area.
Sally Its not that. If you take it to the park, you sort of 
Joan Everybody can come and go.
Patsy Theres so much of the park but you cant
reallybe in so many places at once. Aye.
Despite the dangers they acknowledged previously about bonfires built in the streets, in this
excerpt the participants appear almost nostalgic. They describe the streets as an intimate
venue that can be seal(ed) off and made safe. In contrast, they articulate a fear of moving
the bonfire to the park, of taking it out of your area. Unlike the sealed streets, the park is a
space in which everybody can come and go. Hence, the streets offer a familiar space for
familiar people; conversely, the park rests outside the perceived sphere of influence and
control. For the bonfire committee, securing widespread local support for the beacon requires
a community-wide transformation in how residents perceive not only the place of the bonfire
tradition in Woodvale, but the psychological borders of Woodvale itself.
Furthermore, the beacon provoked concern within Woodvale about how local youth
would respond to massive changes to their bonfire tradition. At our interview, the bonfire
committee members tell me that they went to great lengths to involve the young people in the
process of the beacon, particularly around the structures decorative artwork. Also reassuring
was the knowledge gained from the prototypes controlled trial burning in September 2007,
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 190
when the beacon burned far longer than anticipated. One of the biggest challenges, however,
relates to the tradition of wood collection. In the extract below, one participant describes this
transformation through the eyes of local children:
I mean, it was hard for them. They were told they werent
allowed to collect wood. You know? Since theyre home from
school, their old trainers on fromabout April, May. And they
were away, seeing what wood they could get. You know? And
then they were angry that they had to wait until the last day,
really.
As this speaker elaborates, bonfires follow a seasonal rhythm that engages children for
several months leading up to mid-July. In contrast, the beacon would be filled with willow
chips during its construction, thereby offering minimal opportunities for local children to
participate in the eagerly-anticipated process of wood collection.
Yet the beacon presents other opportunities for youth engagement, particularly
around environmental education. At the beacons controlled trial burning in September 2007,
its designer gave a short demonstration about the environmental effects of bonfires, which he
geared toward the younger members of Woodvales delegation:
Lee [Mouncey] sets up a small table, on which he places a
number of small items. He begins with a brief introduction. We
learn that carbon-neutral willow is good, and that chemically-
treated pallets are bad. Lee shows us a box full of nails, collected
from the pallets burned in last years bonfires in Woodvale. He
tells us that a single nail takes fifty years to decomposeNext,
Lee lays a large, white sheet of paper on the table, on to which
he pours debris from various soup cartons. These small piles of
ash, sand and hessian strips represent the end-products of a
clean beacon fire. As proof, Lee mixes these into a mesh-lined
coffee press, pours in some water, plunges, and then  for
dramatic effect  takes a sip of the murky liquid. Ewww we all
screech. (Research Diary, 30 September 2007)
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 191
In our interview, the members of Woodvales bonfire committee refer enthusiastically to
Mounceys demonstration, citing its educational benefits to local children. One participant
comments: (T)heyre learning about the different woods and whats good to burn, and where
toxic fumes and all come from. So this is good for them. Woodvales bonfire committee
intends to develop the beacons educational potential. In our interview, they describe their
desire to take the young people on a field trip to a wood plant sort of a thing, in order to
learn about different types of wood. Although Woodvale may be an ill-fitting description
for the neighbourhood, the name suggests a rich local woodland heritage. Perhaps the beacon
will spur local residents to excavate the cultural connections between wood, history and
tradition in Woodvale.
The beacon raises fascinating questions about the nature of change. In the following
extract, I query how this specific transformation might affect Woodvales bonfire culture:
Lia As the bonfires change  You know, as you move
from having an old-style bonfire to doing the
beacon, how do you think thats going toaffect the
sense of tradition for the younger generations?
Sally They grew up with it, just as we grew up with the,
what we would call the traditional bonfire.
Joan When theyre older, theyll look back on their time,
and thats all theyll probably know.
Patsy That will be their tradition. So it will.
In response to my question, these three participants identify how the collective memory of
Woodvales young people will eventually incorporate the beacon into their concept of 11
Night. As Joan acknowledges, the beacon will be all theyll probably know. As a
generational shift reshapes the cultural knowledge held within the community, the concept of
tradition likewise will shift. Sallys hesitation  we grew up with the, what we would call
the traditional bonfire  suggests her active revision of her definition of traditional. Patsy
emphasizes the definitions transience by proclaiming that for Woodvales children, the
beacon will be their tradition. Indeed, the beacon already highlights generational shifts in
the cultural tradition of wood collection. Contemporary bonfires bear little resemblance to the
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 192
traditional bonfire to which Sally refers, which were built before the advent of the
standardized industrial pallets widely used today. Belfast City Council agreed to supply the
carbon-neutral willow chips for Woodvales beacon in 2008, but in future years local
residents may need to source their own wood for the structure, marking yet another shift in
cultural practices of wood collection. To this end, the beacon is provoking Woodvale to
rework its notions of tradition.
Although the bonfire committee could not predict success at the time of our
interview, Woodvales festival would be lauded widely as a triumph in Belfast and beyond.
The following year, three additional loyalist communities followed Woodvales lead and
opted for a beacon instead of building a large-scale bonfire. However, the months leading up
to the festival were full of uncertainties and heightened tensions around the prospect of the
beacon. Over the course of my research fieldwork, I heard concerns articulated  often as
gendered, sexualized ridicule  about the beacons comparatively shorter height and the fixed
dimensions of its structure. Given the logistical obstacles and the lack of support from the
wider loyalist population in Belfast, the role of Woodvales womens group in the beacons
development is particularly poignant. In the following interview extract, I query the dynamics
that facilitate Woodvales unique female bonfire committee:
Lia In other neighbourhoodspeople are really
struggling to get women on to the committees there.
But it seems like Woodvale is the exception.
[Laughter]
Sally Were in charge. Women are in charge of the
Woodvale, definitely, like. We just bring the men on
board that day.
Joan We dont even ask.
Sandy Yeah, I dont know what we need them for. Weve
been doing everything else ourselves. I think the
men in this area are glad that the women are 
LeeAnn They are. They are.
Sally They dont know what to do.
Sandy We intimidate the men. [Laughs]
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 193
Joan They wouldsupport us all the way. The men in the
area.
This exchange portrays a confident and gendered leadership identity amongst those present at
the interview; as Sally claims, Women are in charge of the Woodvale. Their dialogue
illuminates attitudes toward and relationships with local men that are collaborative and
complex. In a reversal of the patterns in other loyalist bonfire communities, which involve
women peripherally and for limited timespans, in Woodvale the women of the bonfire
committee just bring the men on board that day. In this way, Woodvale inverts the gender
dynamics prevalent in other loyalist areas. Likewise, this community also inverts
stereotypical ideas of gender, power and fear. According to the interview participants, local
men dont know what to do and are glad that these women advocate within and on behalf
of the community. Despite Sandys rueful acknowledgement that local women intimidate the
men, these appear to be relationships rooted in respect. Joan emphasizes this sentiment by
affirming that Woodvales men support us all the way.
Yet although it may be tempting to frame the beacons success in terms of female
empowerment, Woodvales gendered dynamics complicate this seemingly simple story.
Woodvales controversial pursuit of the beacon illuminates how these dynamics entered into
the process of negotiation:
Lia I mean, was it a challenge getting the men on board
with the beacon?
Joan No, not really.
Patsy No, because it was a mans [Lee Mounceys] idea at
the beginning, and he got us involved with the
bonfire committee. So he came along with us too,
but hes other commitmentsSo Joan and myself,
weve gone to most of the meetings, and then the
last few meetings Sandy and Sally were able to go.
Because theres strength in numbers.
In this extract, Joan and Patsy acknowledge how the beacons male architect paved the way
for its advocacy by the local women. As Patsy suggests, the local men were more receptive to
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 194
the idea because it was a mans idea at the beginning. Woodvales gender dynamics also
surface in perceptions of strength. When other commitments drew Mouncey away from the
beacon, the local womens group took on the responsibility as a collaborative effort. But in
the predominantly male environment of Belfasts Bonfire Management Programme, the
women of Woodvale sought strength in numbers.
Furthermore, despite the tireless efforts of Woodvales bonfire committee, the
support of the local, exclusively male paramilitary unit was ultimately crucial to the
communitys acceptance of the beacon. In an operational meeting for the Bonfire
Management Programme, Groundworks Project Development Officer for Woodvale
informed us that the local members of the UVF had met in December 2007  shortly after the
controlled trial burning of the prototype  and agreed to support the beacon: [The
paramilitaries] see beacons as the way forward (Research Diary, 10 January 2008). Without
their backing, it is unclear how far the bonfire committee would have progressed. Channels
of communication with the UVF helped the bonfire committee to present a united front for
Woodvale, thus ensuring wider community support for a transformation as major as the
beacon. These dynamics illustrate nuanced relationships between men and women in
Woodvale, and the complex negotiations that sustained the support for the beacon.
Despite the odds against it, the beacon has emerged as one of the most innovative
transformations of the Bonfire Management Programme. Its successful development, from
architectural idea to built reality, was due in large part to the efforts of Woodvales female
bonfire committee, and I have drawn from their story the nuanced, gendered complexities
that shape the transformation of this local tradition. Woodvale, as presented here, contrasts
sharply with the hyper-masculine paramilitary culture of Antrim, yet both case studies
suggest that the transformation of the bonfire tradition provokes loyalist communities to
negotiate, at some level, new ideas and practices of gender. In the story of its emergence, the
beacon illuminates gendered dynamics in the process of redefining tradition. In doing so, it
points toward possibilities for developing inclusive forms of cultural heritage in a shared city.
Conclusion
The future for bonfires has never looked more uncertain. Across Belfast, loyalist
communities wonder how long their tradition will last. Where do you see the bonfires in ten
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 195
years time? I asked in every discussion that I facilitated. Some groups voiced anxiety about
disappearing sites, as developers purchase land for commercial and residential property. Such
fears may not apply to sites with ample greenspace, for instance the estate in Antrim or areas
near public parks, but even those communities are questioning how long the statutory
services will turn a blind eye to the bonfire practice. Some participants suspect that bonfires
will be made illegal soon. (In reality, they already are illegal, although not enforced.) The
biggest changes, however, seem to emanate from the communities themselves. Demographics
are now arrayed against Northern Irelands Protestant population, leading to a dearth of
children in loyalist areas. One neighbourhood in East Belfast foresees that their community
will have no bonfire in ten years time, because no one will be left to build it. How, they
wonder, will they raise a new generation of bonfire builders to keep the tradition alive?
The long-term survival of the tradition will most likely depend on the ability of
loyalist communities to adapt their bonfires to Belfasts rapidly changing post-conflict
realities. An extensive, independent consultation with communities participating in the
Bonfire Management Programme underscored a need for bonfires to be addressed within the
larger context of culture and tradition (Byrne and ORiordan 2009). As the three-year Bonfire
Management Programme draws to a close, Belfast City Council now seeks to support loyalist
communities in framing longer-term objectives. In May 2009, the Council approved a new
programme to succeed the Bonfire Management Programme. Unlike the previous emphasis
on individual bonfire committees, the new programme creates six Cultural Networks
located throughout Belfast. These networks will run throughout the year, thus re-positioning
the 12
of July as only one date in the larger cultural calendar and the bonfires as only one
event. Crucially, guidelines around bonfires will be agreed in collaboration with Belfast City
Council, but developed and delivered by the people in the communities themselves. Each
cultural network will develop a locally appropriate vision, mission and plan to address
issues such as bonfires, murals, flags, sectarian graffiti and physical barriers. In doing so,
they will take responsibility for addressing controversial bonfire practices such as the flying
of paramilitary flags and the burning of the Irish Tricolour. Above all, this new programme
seeks to support loyalist communities in the positive celebration of their cultural heritage and
identity.
In Chapter Two, I argued that the process of peacebuilding must address how
divisive, contested versions of heritage can be reworked and reimagined for a shared future.
Although genuine enthusiasm for 11
Night bonfires may never extend beyond loyalist
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 196
communities, the changes taking shape at present indicate potential for a divisive tradition to
evolve into a more inclusive, less antagonistic celebration. As Ashworth and Graham (2005:
4) observe: The contents, interpretations and representations of the [heritage] resource are
selected according to the demands of the present. My observations of loyalist bonfires
suggest that Belfast has entered a time in which the demands of the present necessitate new
ways of thinking about and engaging with cultural tradition. In the interview in Woodvale,
three participants described how young people in the area will eventually incorporate the
beacon into their concept of 11
Night. Their faith in this eventual transformation speaks also
to a faith in group memory as fluid, flexible [and] subject to constant renewal (Busteed
2007: 70).
In this chapter, I have drawn on the contested landscape of 11
Night to explore the
(re)negotiation of cultural heritage and identity in a new phase of peacebuilding. The three
distinct but interlinking case studies on bonfire management illuminate different aspects of
transformation. I have queried how various forms of loyalist identity are reworked through
the shifting tradition. My explorations of the gendering of bonfires, in particular, support
McDowells (2003: 221) argument that gender, class and ethnicity are mutually constituted
to construct identities that are fluid and variable. My research findings subvert conventional
assumptions of monolithic practices of gendered identity in loyalist culture. Although some
communities emphasized traditional labour roles  for example, bonfire-building as an
exclusively masculine activity, and sandwich-making as exclusively feminine  others
illuminated more complex gendered dynamics to the bonfire tradition. In Antrim, the loyalist
leaders with whom I spoke are actively redefining the militarized and hyper-masculine
culture around 11
Night. In Woodvale, the female bonfire committee successfully
introduced the innovative alternative of the beacon, albeit with the explicit approval and
support of the communitys all-male paramilitary command structure. Ultimately, I argue that
transformations of the contested bonfire landscape can be read as both a product and an agent
of the peace process, both complicating and contributing to practices of peacebuilding.
My findings also indicate that as loyalists negotiate the changing material parameters
of their tradition, they are re-framing territorial identities within wider, multiple scales of
engagement. By way of example, I invoke the paramilitary leader named Rob from Antrim.
His observation of the bonfires carbon footprint, and the response they will elicit
eventually from the British government, suggests a sophisticated awareness of global
environmental politics that re-scales both the bonfire tradition and himself as participants in
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 197
larger dialogues. On a more localized scale, the Bonfire Management Programmes
Participants Forum represents a space in which Belfasts territorial, and sometimes warring,
loyalist communities come together to strategize around the shifting tradition. In doing so,
they evoke not only the historic purpose of communication that bonfires once served, but also
gesture toward new possibilities for community cultural identities.
Loyalist bonfires illuminate larger debates around the politics of belonging in a post-
conflict society. In Chapter Two, I suggested the possibility for the concept of public
landscape to represent the transformed, peacetime continuum of a contested cultural
landscape. The transformations at work in loyalist estates indicate potential for deeper public
engagement with the 11
Night bonfire tradition, for example through the Bonfire
Management Programmes emphasis on, and support for, family-oriented festivals. In the
case study on Woodvale, I recounted my Groundwork colleagues prediction: In a couple
years, you could picture a Catholic family coming here during the day (Research Diary, 11
July 2008). His observation captures the ambiguities of the transformations at work in the
peace process. On the one hand, the presence of a Catholic family at a loyalist bonfire
represents, against sizeable odds, a triumph of inclusive change. On the other hand, my
colleague simultaneously hedges his optimism: The family that he imagines would not be
welcome for a couple years, and even then only during the day. I raise this example to
illustrate the challenges of defining and engaging diverse publics in a divided society
attempting to emerge from conflict. In the next chapter, I probe these challenges further
through an analysis of ethnic minorities and their complex negotiations of belonging in
Northern Ireland.
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 198
Figure 6.1. 11
Night bonfire. Photo courtesy of Antrim Borough Council.
Figure 4.2. Bonfire
under construction.
Photo by the author.
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 199
Figure 6.3. Bonfire with
Irish Tricolour and
posters of republican
politicians. Photo by the
author.
Figure 6.4. Burning bonfire. Photo by Paul Hutchinson.
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 200
Figure 6.5. Aftermath of a bonfire. Photo by Norman Watson, Belfast City Council.
Figure 6.6. Anti-development graffiti on the Shankill Road. Photo by Mark Johnston.
Chapter 6: Transforming Fire 201
Figure 6.7. Bonfire designed as a castle. Photo courtesy of Antrim Borough Council.
Figure 6.8. Trial burning of the beacon. Photo by the author.
Chapter 7: Diversity in a Divided City 202
Chapter Seven
Diversity in a Divided City: Ethnic Minorities and
New Narratives of Belonging
Introduction
In Chapter Two, I argued that conflict transformation theory must address relationships
not only between people, but between people and place. In doing so, the conflict transformation
approach offers potential to re-frame contested cultural landscapes, opening them to new
expressions of cultural identity. In the two previous empirical chapters, I explored how peacetime
transformations of iconic, contested landscapes are provoking new forms of loyalist and
republican cultural identities. I now turn to a discussion of Northern Irelands minority ethnic
residents, to locate their voices in the shifting matrix of identity in post-conflict Belfast.
Ultimately, this chapter explores the challenge of locating multicultural diversity in a divided and
territorial city.
The peace process is opening new social fractures, further complicating Northern
Irelands traditional sectarian politics and drawing ethnic minorities into larger, fraught dialogues
around shared space and post-conflict identity. Although far more nuanced than simplified
trends allow, the rise in racially-motivated crime and harassment in Northern Ireland charts a
parallel course to the advent of peace, begging the question of how the two are related. One
theory, popular in the public imagination, traces a linear trajectory from the ceasefires to the rise
of racism, and thus frames racism as a legacy of sectarianism. In reality, the relationship between
racism and sectarianism is complex and long pre-dates the peace accords. As McVeigh (1998:
20) argues, Northern Irelands pervasive sectarian culture structures the way in which racism is
reproduced and experienced. He points to a common local joke, one variation of which I heard in
an interview I conducted with a civil servant in Belfast City Councils Waste Management
Services. He described the challenge of assigning staff to rubbish collection routes in this highly
territorial city:
I want to send in thousands of Muslims to collect their bins, but theyll
probably just be asked, Are you a Catholic Muslim or a Protestant
Muslim? (Interview, 23 February 2006)
Chapter 7: Diversity in a Divided City 203
A simplistic trajectory, from sectarianism to racism, masks long-standing forms of discrimination
against groups such as the Travellers (Noonan 1998) and eclipses the history of ethnic and faith
diversity, however limited, in Northern Ireland (see Warm 1998). Furthermore, I argue that
reliance on sectarianism to explain racism denies ethnic minorities their own agency and
experience with regard to the Troubles. To this end, I seek to highlight the voices of Northern
Irelands minority ethnic communities in an exploration of how they, too, struggle to reconcile
their diverse and multiple identities with the rapidly shifting cultural landscapes of post-conflict
Belfast.
In Northern Ireland, the presence of ethnic minorities opens into larger questions about
postcolonial politics of belonging (Nash 2002). The province perches on the periphery of the
Mother Country, at once part of the imperial power yet also itself a colonial site and a product
of Britains imperial past. The tensions around its unfinished (post)colonial history, made
manifest in the Troubles, shape the ways in which new migrants and existing minority ethnic
populations engage with Northern Ireland. Minority ethnic residents refract Northern Ireland
through their own lived landscapes (Tolia-Kelly 2006: 341) of migration and diaspora.
Although sidelined from the general discourse of sectarian conflict, their presence offers insight
into the ways in which diverse identities and varied place relationships might enrich the
peacetime transformations of contested cultural landscapes. In her study of British Asian cultures
of English landscape(s), Tolia-Kelly (2006: 355) situates identity between a set of landscapes
comprising geographical coordinates of the present, past, and utopian landscapes of belonging
(ibid: 351). She points to the ways in which identity embeds itself in remembered landscapes
(Tolia-Kelly 2004: 280), particularly for diasporic people who have migrated through varied
landscapes, but who have also varied political connections with territory and national identity
(ibid: 285).
To illuminate the complicated dynamics between landscape, territory, identity and
belonging for minority ethnic residents of Belfast, I offer the following quotation by Ugur, a
Turkish man who moved to Northern Ireland at the time of the 1998 peace accords. He describes
his reaction to the strange scenes of conflict that unfolded before him:
But everywhere [were] army and tank. I said...Probably the
Palestinians and Israelis have a fight hereI say, Where are we?
Because, uh, Northern Ireland, you know, its a European country,
but I wassurprised at that time when I see armies and tanks in the
Chapter 7: Diversity in a Divided City 204
road...I says, God, you know, what country [is] here?I thought,
you know, Arab Middle East? (Interview, 25 March 2008)
Coming from Turkey, itself located at the crossroads between Europe and the Middle East, Ugur
attempts to understand the contested landscape of Belfast through his imagined geographies of
Europe as a site of peace and security, and the Arab Middle East, as a site of conflict. The scene
he describes of urban conflict, replete with armies and tanks, would cause no surprise to people
from Northern Ireland who have lived through the Troubles. But Ugurs evocation of another
conflict zone and his bewildered sense of dislocation  Where are we?  highlights the
challenges for minority ethnic residents to locate a sense of belonging in the contested and
territorial landscapes of urban Belfast. As Hirsch and OHanlon (1995: 23, cited in Tolia-Kelly
2006: 356) argue: There is not one absolute landscape here, but a series of related, contradictory
moments  perspectives  which cohere in what can be recognised as landscape as a cultural
process. In Northern Ireland, this process encompasses the complex negotiations of cultural
identity amongst minority ethnic individuals and communities.
In this chapter, I draw on insights from the contested landscapes  Divis Mountain and
the 11
Night bonfires  that I explored in Chapters Five and Six, but my analysis now turns to
Northern Irelands minority ethnic residents and their own engagement with those same
landscapes. Early in my research, I became intrigued by the silences surrounding ethnic
minorities in Northern Ireland and their experiences of the conflict. Recent efforts by various
statutory and local community organizations to include ethnic minorities in their work struck me
as an exercise in token diversity and essentialism; the superficial nature of these efforts only
highlights a lack of deeper engagement. In addition to my research on shifting loyalist and
republican identities, I developed a parallel line of inquiry around the expression of minority
identities. As I discussed in Chapter Four, my curiosity emerged, in part, from my own minority
ethnic identity and the complex negotiations I perform while living in Belfast. The following
excerpt describes my reaction to an early operational meeting for the Bonfire Management
Programme, when Paul Hutchinson, the programmes external arts consultant, unveiled the
travelling exhibit he had designed to provoke discussion in loyalist communities (Figure 4.1):
Paul has created five separate panels: Framework, Fun, Fire,
Flag, and Future Questions. He has also prepared a facilitation
guide, which he runs through with us. To illustrate this guide, he
Chapter 7: Diversity in a Divided City 205
frequently morphs the meeting into a practice discussion session,
with the rest of us as participants.
The other [Groundwork staff members] are, of course,
extremely familiar with bonfires and the surrounding culture. Its all
new to me. At first, I feel that I dont have anything to offer. Then,
slowly, it dawns on me that I am precisely the type of person I want
to include in this discussion. (Research Diary, 15 March 2007)
In the absence of the dynamics that I sought to explore, I initiated formal relationships between
minority ethnic communities and the contested cultural landscapes of my research project. In
effect, I staged the encounters that I wanted to study. I sought, and received, permission from the
director of Groundwork Northern Ireland to use the visual display about bonfires, described
above, in my interviews and discussions with community groups. I also contacted the National
Trust and offered to develop their minority ethnic outreach programme for Divis Mountain. For
both organizations, my offers came at a time when the community/voluntary sector was
awakening to the need to diversify its traditional remit.
As I discussed in Chapter Four, my
collaborations drew Groundwork Northern Ireland and the National Trust into dialogue with the
Minority Ethnic and Faith Network, and gave both organizations a presence in Northern Irelands
emerging minority ethnic community sector. Through my research encounters, I query how
transformations of contested landscapes provoke ethnic minorities to negotiate the complex
dynamics of alienation, belonging and identity in post-conflict Belfast.
I have divided this chapter into two overarching sections, each focusing on the contested
landscapes on which I drew my earlier analyses of republican and loyalist identities. The first
section explores minority ethnic engagement with the transforming landscape of Divis Mountain.
I begin with an overview of literature on ethnic minorities in the English countryside, drawing on
the black British photographer Ingrid Pollards landmark exhibit, Pastoral Interludes, to frame
academic discussion on racialized bodies in a symbolically white landscape. I then expand this
discussion to Northern Ireland, tracing the different ways in which rural discourses have shaped
conflicting nationalist and unionist identities, and their implications for the current transformation
of Divis Mountain from off-limits military property to a place of public access. I situate my
analysis of ethnic minority engagement within the framework of this contested space, based on
Indeed, the latest round of European Union Peace III funding, which drives much of the community
relations discourse in Northern Ireland, now stipulates that funded projects must emphasize a cross-
community dimension.
Chapter 7: Diversity in a Divided City 206
participant observation drawn from guided walks and interviews with two different minority
ethnic community groups. I explore how engagement with the mountain provokes insights into
shifting scales of diasporic identity, and the challenge of negotiating belonging in a territorial,
sectarian city.
In the second section, I return to the 11
Night bonfires. I begin by contextualizing the
scope for minority ethnic engagement within loyalist communities. Against this backdrop,
transformations of the 11
Night bonfires offer rich scope for exploring how ethnic minorities
negotiate a sense of belonging in post-conflict Belfast. I then introduce the experiences and
perspectives of ethnic minorities themselves, looking first at the intersection between peace and
racism, and the politics of visibility and invisibility. Next, I look at the contested practice of flag-
burning, examining how the practice provokes articulations of identity and how other global
conflicts and peace processes intersect and cross-cut Northern Irelands. Finally, I probe the
relationship between bonfires and belonging, and the negotiations that develop in response to this
transforming, contested landscape.
1. Divis Mountain
Divergent Perspectives: Breaking Down Barriers
My research about ethnic minorities and Divis Mountain contributes to an established
academic dialogue on the challenge of negotiating diversity in the white landscape of the
English countryside (Agyeman and Spooner 1997: 197; see also Agyeman 1990). It draws
inspiration, in part, from the photographer Ingrid Pollards Pastoral Interludes, first exhibited in
1984. In this visual critique of the countryside, Pollard explored her own discomfort as a black
British woman in these traditionally white landscapes. Through images that disturbed pastoral
myths, Pollard drew attention to material, cultural and ideological barriers that shape perceptions
of black identity in relation to the countryside. By exploring the construction of these identities,
Pollards photography can be read as an effort to reshap(e) the imaginative geography of the
English landscape (Kinsman 1995: 308).
The countryside, as Neal and Agyeman (2006a: 4) argue, is not neutral but a politically
charged space...that has been adept at signifying nation. Furthermore, the idea of the English
countryside occupies a particular and racially coded place in Britains national story (Neal and
Agyeman 2006b: 99). Agyeman (1990: 232) cites the role of the British environmental movement
Chapter 7: Diversity in a Divided City 207
and the media in propagating a myth of the countryside as a repository of the true keeper of
Anglo-Saxon culture, thus excluding the presence of black people from this pastoral vision.
Other scholars, however, warn against racialized readings of the countryside that theorize visible
communities (Askins 2006: 150) as outsiders to rural space and national identity, thus denying
their claims to both. As Askins (ibid, original emphasis) cautions: (T)here is a danger that if we
only focus on visible communities as rural others, we reconstruct people from non-white
backgrounds as always already marginalised in the countryside.
In Northern Ireland, a dialogue about diversity in the countryside is only beginning to
emerge. Recently, the Environment & Heritage Service attempted to address the silence by
commissioning a study titled Barriers to Participation (Countryside Access & Activities
Network for Northern Ireland 2008). However, due to its small sample of ethnic minorities and
its limited methodological scope, the report offers little illumination. The challenge of engaging
ethnic minorities with the countryside is complicated further by the very different roles that rural
discourse plays in Northern Irelands competing political projects. Irish nationalism has forged its
sense of identity, in part, on romantic images of an essentially rural Ireland (Gaffey 2004, Duffy
1997). Furthermore, Connolly (2006: 23) argues that (T)he timeless depiction of Irishness and
the continued evocation of an ancient and mystical past have ensured that such an identity
remains essentially White. In stark contrast to the Irish nationalist project, and despite its own
emphasis on the land of Ulster, unionism is far less influenced by rural discourses. Connolly
(ibid: 24) reads this ambivalence toward the rural within unionist identity as a rejection of its
strong associations with Irish nationalism.
These divergent roles of rural discourse become evident with regard to Divis Mountain.
As I discussed in Chapter Five, the mountain is an important touchstone in republican cultural
identity in Belfast  a narrative landscape of struggle, resistance and victory. In contrast, loyalist
perceptions of the mountain are decidedly ambivalent. As one middle-aged Protestant man
commented to me: Its a cold mountain...I suppose it sounds cruel, but do you find that people
just dont care about it? (Research Diary, 19 March 2008). His perception of a remote mountain
contrasts sharply with those of his republican contemporaries, many of whom participated in the
armed struggle of the Troubles, and for whom Divis represents a rich cipher of cultural heritage
and identity.
Not surprisingly, sectarian politics of territory play a large role in the divergent
perceptions of Divis Mountain amongst republicans and loyalists. In an interview, the National
Trust employee who spearheaded the mountains public acquisition described the process of
garnering support. To his surprise, nationalists in West Belfast were dead easy and raised no
Chapter 7: Diversity in a Divided City 208
objection to the idea of the National Trust, a perceived English organization, managing the
mountain for the public. His observations resonate with the remarks of Padraig, the former IRA
prisoner, in Chapter 5. Loyalists, in contrast, expressed anxiety during these consultations:
Here be dragons, [the National Trust employee] remembers. It
takes a moment for me to catch up with his train of thought. He is
referring to old maps, on whose edges lurk fantastical monsters.
Perhaps the local loyalists perceive Divis as the edge of the known
world: You just dont go there. (Research Diary, 2 June 2008)
Despite the acquisition of Divis for public use, territorial politics continue to wield substantial
power. The mountains points of access adjoin territory that is perceived to lie within republican
boundaries, thus heightening anxiety amongst loyalists reluctant to travel through hostile areas.
The transformation of the contested landscape of Divis, located at the edge of and
overlooking the city, offers intriguing potential for engaging minority ethnic residents with
Belfast and the rural hinterland of the Belfast hills. In a society long-entrenched in sectarian
conflict, however, new dimensions of diversity have proven difficult to incorporate:
When I asked [the director] about the Partnerships plans for
incorporating ethnic minority participation, the question stumped
him. He sat for a long moment, looking thoughtful and a bit rueful.
Finally, he told me that it was a good question, and one to which he
would give more thought. (Research Diary, 20 February 2007)
In this exchange, I question the director of the Belfast Hills Partnership  a non-profit network of
various interest groups related to the Belfast hills, including the National Trust. His response
reflects, at that time, a wider lack of awareness across the citys community/voluntary sector with
regard to ethnic minority inclusion. This was the niche that I identified and sought to address
through my doctoral research. With the support of both the National Trust and the Belfast Hills
Partnership, I began to publicize Divis Mountain within the minority ethnic community sector
and organized guided walks for community groups that expressed interest (Figure 7.1). I took
inspiration for this research strategy from Burgesss (1996) pioneering qualitative methodology
based on leading group walks in a forest.
Chapter 7: Diversity in a Divided City 209
These walks also drew inspiration from Ingrid Pollard, whose 1984 exhibit highlighted
ironic tensions of the word pastoral. According to Snape (2004: 143) the concept refers to a pre-
industrial primitive communal lifestyle that came to be romanticized in Victorian times, when
century cultural critics advocated this interpretation of the countryside as a cultural and
spiritual alternative to the industrial city. The pastoral countryside came to symbolize an idealized
 and implicitly white  English nationalism (see also Snape 2009; Woods 2005; Daniels 1993).
In the deliberate introduction of minority bodies to the countryside, the walks that I led on Divis
echo Pollards resistance to the idealization of a white, pastoral landscape. Like Pollard, I attempt
to disrupt the construction of visible communities as others (Askins 2006: 168). In my
research, I push this exploration further, contextualizing the relationship between diversity and
rural space in the larger legacy of the Troubles.
Scales of Belonging
Divis Mountain inhabits multiple worlds. Located at the periphery of Belfast, it holds
obvious urban links yet simultaneously comprises the rural countryside of the Belfast hills. Its
contested history as both a republican cultural touchstone and a former British military base
provokes questions about the shifting scales of national belonging. The mountain mediates
distinct and overlapping scales of relationship between places and people, and between places
and identities. In part, I staged encounters between ethnic minorities and the complex landscape
of Divis to explore not only the ways but the scales in which they construct and negotiate their
identities in post-conflict Belfast.
I draw on interview transcripts from two community groups that I accompanied to Divis
for a guided walk of the mountain,2 both of which raise intriguing questions about scales of
individual and communal identity. The Afro-Caribbean Society of Northern Ireland (ACSONI),
based in Belfast, claims an ethnically, culturally and geographically diverse membership; many
are migrants from former British colonies in Africa and the Caribbean. Despite their disparate
origins, however, in Northern Ireland they unite around the shared experience of their racialized
presence in a predominantly white society. Along similar lines, Latina America Unida is a
smaller, pan-national community body whose members hail from diverse regions of Spanish-
speaking Central and South America. Through these community groups, members of both
The group from ACSONI comprised five participants; Latino America Unida, fifteen, including three
children.
Chapter 7: Diversity in a Divided City 210
ACSONI and Latina America Unida juggle distinct and overlapping scales of identity related to
geography, culture and their shared, lived experience of visible difference in Northern Ireland.
Conventional wisdom suggests that ethnic minorities have only limited engagement with
the Troubles (Hainsworth 1998). Unlike the republicans whom I interviewed in West Belfast, the
minority ethnic participants whom I interviewed knew little about the contested history of Divis
Mountain or its transition from military ownership to public open space. As one participant
commented: I just think it belongs to the telephone company...because you can see masts
(Interview, 22 September 2007). However, the interview I conducted with ACSONI members
reveals the extent to which sectarian conflict shapes not only their perceptions of Belfast but their
embodied experience of the city as well:
Lia So what [makes you feel unsafe] on Divis?
Arthur Well, the past history of this area, because there is
conflict, and where it is located. It is right up beside
where there is two interface areas.
Cal Yeah.
Arthur Soyou never know, I mean, becauseyou have not
been there. We are not aware of whats actually
happened there. Was that place used for some sort of,
you know, some sort of activity before? So, we cannot 
I mean, it would be brave of someone to just take off and
go there at night or something. (Interview, 22 September
2007)
In this extract, Arthur describes how the mountains location  right up beside...two interface
areas renders it unsafe. In a continuous mapping process, the geographical knowledge that he
gathers about the city informs his sense of where he can and cannot go. His delicate allusion to an
imagined atrocity  Was that place used for some sort of, you know, some sort of activity
before?  suggests his reluctance to engage with a place about which he holds little knowledge.
In effect, Arthurs mental map of Belfast positions Divis in vague but threatening territory.
Unlike the citys republican and loyalist residents, for whom an interface would signify a
territory of affinity on one side or the other, for Arthur the sectarian structure is a threatening
feature best to be avoided.
Chapter 7: Diversity in a Divided City 211
For many of my interview participants, West Belfast holds a particularly lawless and
dangerous reputation, concretized in the high-profile peace line between the republican area of
Falls and the loyalist area of Shankill. The guided walking tour of Divis, however, signifies an
opportunity to move, en masse and accompanied, through the area. In a discussion after Latina
America Unidas guided walk, one man acknowledged: It helps to de-demonize West Belfast.
Furthermore, from the height of Divis, Belfasts disjointed territorial fragments assemble into a
cohesive, visual whole (Figure 7.2). For one participant from Peru, the new perspective shifts her
geographic understanding of the city:
Its really interesting because we always talk about West Belfast,
East Belfast, North Belfast and South Belfast. But then as you
see...its so small. But you hardly [ever] see it together. (Interview,
11 November 2007)
This participant divides Belfast into rough quadrants of well-known sectarian territory:
republican West Belfast, loyalist East Belfast, the mosaic of interface walls in North Belfast. Like
most residents of Belfast, regardless of national affinity, minority ethnic residents navigate the
city based on their knowledge of sectarian geography. The view from Divis, however, condenses
Belfasts territorial intricacies, eliding  if only temporarily  the sectarian patchwork of
neighbourhoods that ethnic minorities must navigate. Moreover, Divis Mountain further disrupts
Belfasts territorial microcosm by reframing the city in relation to the rest of Northern Ireland,
parts of the Republic of Ireland and, on a clear day, to Scotland. In doing so, it (re)engages the
city with other scales and landscapes of nation and identity.
Likewise, the local landscape of Divis Mountain may evoke broader landscapes of home
and diaspora. Askins (2006: 165) stresses the importance of rurality within nationality as cross-
national and cross-cultural. She points to the ways in which individuals can develop attachment
to the countryside through connections between one rural landscape and another, for example, the
English Peak District and the Himalayas. The following interview extract, spoken by a participant
named Chudi from Nigeria, illustrates this concept:
Oh, we have fantastic views in Africa. Breathtaking ones... I mean,
you wouldnt want to actually go up [to Divis] as somebody who
comes from, say, close to Kilimanjaro. He wouldnt want to go to
Chapter 7: Diversity in a Divided City 212
Divis Mountain...But without Kilimanjaro, in Belfast, suddenly it
will do. (Interview, 22 September 2007)
For Chudi, Divis Mountain evokes a very different and distant mountainous landscape, which he
summons rhetorically for comparison. Although Nigeria frames a powerful identity for Chudi,
which surfaces repeatedly in other conversations, he conjures Africa as his point of origin and
belonging. Kilimanjaro may rise on the far side of the continent from his Nigerian birthplace, but
Chudi nonetheless claims it as totemic of home. He compares Divis unfavorably to the
breathtaking view of Kilimanjaro, yet in its absence, suddenly it will do. In this way, Divis
Mountain connects him to another, preferred landscape of his narrated past while simultaneously
serving as a substitute in that of his present.
For the participants from ACSONI, Divis Mountain invites speculation on a strange point
of connection, or disconnection, between land, culture and identity:
As we walk, I point out the Mourne Mountains, the military towers,
and the bulk of earth to our right that comprises Black Mountain.
Cal and Chudi pretend to take offense at the name. I suggest that
maybe they should claim it as their own. Yeah cries Cal. Well
use it for ACSONI meetings. (Research Diary, 22 September 2007)
As I discussed in Chapter Five, the summit of Divis and the lower elevation of Black Mountain
comprise one mountain, and Divis derives from the Irish word for black, in reference to the
dark peat soil. In the absence of this etymological knowledge, however, Chudi and Cal bring their
own embodied experience of black to the landscape. They seize, perhaps jokingly, its negative
implications. Black becomes a trope that, momentarily, links land to identity for these new
migrants to Belfast. At my suggestion, Cal and Chudi invert its potential negative connotations
and claim it as their own. By embracing the dual meanings of black, they inscribe their own
identities  reinforced imaginatively, if provisionally, through Cals enthusiastic vision of a
meeting venue  in the landscape of Divis.
In its transformation from off-limits military property to a place of public ownership,
Divis Mountain represents the type of shared space envisioned through the peace process and
enshrined in government policy (for example, Lownsbrough and Beunderman 2007). Tolia-Kelly
(2006: 348, citing Anderson et al 2000), drawing on her research of British Asians in the English
landscape, argues that their experiences create a space for imagining inclusive, utopian visions
Chapter 7: Diversity in a Divided City 213
of territory, which enable a sense of enfranchisement and ownership. On Divis Mountain,
however, these utopian visions prove to be elusive:
Lia I mean, do you feel that you would be able to go up to the
mountains and feel like they belonged to you, as well?
Cal No, I never think that nothing in this country belongs to
me. You know? I always feel like  I never think that
anything in this country belongs to meIll always be
Jamaican. You know? (Interview, 22 September 2007)
This exchange with Cal exposes the fragility of his earlier, playful inscription of belonging on
Black Mountain. When I raise the prospect of Divis Mountain and the Belfast hills as sites of
public belonging, Cal counters with a forceful assertion: I never think that nothing in this country
belongs to me. He highlights an interesting interplay between the concepts of belonging in a
place versus a place belonging to him. For Cal, the limitations of the latter shape his experience of
the former; his proclamation of Jamaican identity can be read, in part, as a reaction to his sense of
exclusion. Although the only Jamaican present at this interview, his repeated invocation  You
know  suggests a desire for validation, directed toward the other participants or even toward
myself. By implicating his audience in a shared experience of exclusion, he positions his singular
Jamaican identity in a broader, shared, communal context of difference.
The encounters that I describe between ethnic minorities and Divis Mountain offer a
glimpse into the multiple place identities that the participants carry to Belfast, and up the
mountain, contributing to the disruption of what Askins (2006: 161) describes as the white rural
myth of the countryside. Yet what distinguishes Divis from other landscapes perceived as white
and rural are the long shadows of sectarian conflict to which my interview participants allude.
Their negotiations of multiple identities encompass not only the racialized dynamics of a
predominantly white society, but its sectarian fractures as well.
2. 11
Night Bonfires
Unlike Divis Mountain, with its fixed coordinates and singular physical presence, the 11
Night bonfires form a varied landscape across loyalist Belfast, differing dramatically in size,
circumstance and location. In this way, the bonfires provide an excellent counterpoint to Divis,
Chapter 7: Diversity in a Divided City 214
and offer a distinctly urban dimension for exploring the expression of minority ethnic identities in
a city recovering from violent conflict. In Chapter Six, I discussed the transformation of the
bonfire landscape with regard to loyalist cultural identity, heritage and tradition. From this
thematic intersection, I now situate and develop my analysis of minority ethnic identities in the
peace process.
As I discussed in Chapter Four, my role as a community practitioner gave me
unparalleled access to the process and players of the loyalist bonfires, while my research interests
around ethnic minorities contributed, in a small way, to the discourse around their transformation.
In the spring of 2008, roughly the half-way point for the three-year Bonfire Management
Programme, I was assigned to facilitate discussions about cultural heritage with nine loyalist
neighbourhoods new to the Bonfire Management Programme. In these discussions, I inquired
gently about the participants relations with their ethnic minority neighbours. My queries at times
provoked hostile reactions, as this exchange with a local youth worker in North Belfast
illustrates:
I explain my affiliation with Groundwork, with the [Bonfire
Management] programme, and I mention a little bit of the work I do
around ethnic minority engagement.
Excuse me, interrupts Trevor, but what do ethnic minorities
have to do with this? His tone is belligerent rather than curious.
(Research Diary, 18 June 2008)
Trevors reaction can be read as an expression of the so-called siege mentality prevalent in
loyalist areas. To this man, and to others like him, enquiries around minority ethnic engagement
heighten anxieties about a tradition that they perceive as under threat already from gentrification
and increasingly vocal public disapproval.
In other loyalist areas, however, participants were more open to exploring issues around
diversity, inclusion and the bonfires. The following excerpt, from a discussion I facilitated with a
group of teenaged boys in North Belfast, illustrates the informal dialogues that are taking shape in
these communities:
Graymount is now home to a noticeable number of Polish
residents, among others. The boys communicate a wariness toward
the newcomers that is neither hostile nor welcoming. From the back
Chapter 7: Diversity in a Divided City 215
of the room, [a community worker] points out that if the foreigners
dont engage with the local community, its because they arent
treated terribly well. Later, she will tell me that the problem lies
mostly with the attitude of the local adults. For now, though, she
tells us that her next-door neighbours are Polish, and that theyre
dead on. This elicits a storm of echoes from the boys, several of
whom also know non-local neighbours who are also dead on.
My favorite comment of the evening gestures toward potential
ethnic minority inclusion in Graymounts bonfire. One lad observes
that among the Polish residents are big, strong men. They should be
helping us build it. The others agree. (Research Diary, 2 July 2008)
This extract illuminates complex negotiations around tradition, culture and identity amongst the
loyalist bonfire builders. For one participant, quickly echoed by the others, their big, strong
Polish neighbours have a role, perhaps even a responsibility, to contribute to the construction of
the communitys bonfire. Their provisional incorporation of Polish men, who are predominantly
Catholic, illustrates the negotiations  perhaps once unimaginable  at work in the transforming
bonfire tradition.
As I discussed in Chapter Three, loyalist areas are rife with tensions, frequently
expressed negatively toward Belfasts increasingly visible minority ethnic residents. Although
racist violence is widespread across the city, it is particularly prevalent in loyalist
neighbourhoods, illustrating a synergy between Loyalism and racism (McVeigh 2006). These
tensions are expressed in extortion, politics of fear and, perhaps most chillingly, the paramilitary-
directed messages of hate toward minority ethnic residents and their businesses (see Chan 2006).
Against this backdrop, the transformation of 11
Night bonfires offers rich scope for exploring
how ethnic minorities negotiate their senses of belonging in post-conflict Belfast.
(In)visible Identities
In Northern Ireland, ethnic minorities have long negotiated their visual distinction 
made all the more striking for the backdrop of a predominantly, although not homogenous, white
society  with the dynamics of (in)visibility. The peace process has disrupted the political
dynamics that held sway during the Troubles, ushering in a new era to which all parties must now
adapt. For Belfasts ethnic minorities, and particularly for those who are long-term residents with
Chapter 7: Diversity in a Divided City 216
a basis for comparison, the past decade has wrought uncomfortable changes in the wake of peace.
The following quotation, by a male interview participant at the Belfast Islamic Centre, illustrates
his perception of these changes:
We had a good time. We had a good time. Before, they are fighting
together, they dont see us. Now, theyre no more fighting together.
They can see, Oh, thats a Chinese. Thats Indian. Thats West
African. (Interview, 30 November 2007)
His nostalgic recollection  We had a good time  harkens an era of welcome invisibility, when
preoccupation with the Troubles limited the peripheral vision of the combatants and allowed
minority ethnic residents to live quietly and unnoticed. He now traces a clear link between the
ceasefires and the sudden exposure of ethnic minorities living locally. Likewise, another
participant at the Islamic Centre expands on this link:
Look, we dont want to sound negative, but this isthe fact of life.
When there is a struggle between two types of communities, they are
too busy to even see whats surrounding them...Peace is good. But, we
dont want to pay a negative price for this peace. Where [before] you
used to fight with your Catholic neighbour, now you are in peace, or
seeming peace, now you are going to look over and sayWho are
these people living here? Oh, I never noticed them before. Now I
notice them. Oh, hes taking my job. Oh, hes taking the housing.
(Interview, 30 November 2007)
In this empathetic account, the speaker attempts to understand the dynamics between the
ceasefires and the negative price that ethnic minorities have paid for peace. He inhabits the
perspective of a loyalist who once fought with a Catholic neighbour, turning his gaze on ethnic
minorities, like himself, who become suddenly visible through the peacetime threats  to housing,
to jobs  that they now imply. Through adopting, briefly, the identity of a generic loyalist, this
interview participant attempts to understand the factors that now render ethnic minorities both
visible and vulnerable in a society hostile to their presence.
Although prejudice and racism persist throughout the year, there is a sense amongst the
interview participants that bonfire season exacerbates the potential for negative attention. In the
Chapter 7: Diversity in a Divided City 217
following excerpt, drawn from a discussion with members of the Bangladeshi community, Quazi
clearly links rising levels of racial abuse to the 12
of July:
Quazi And being coloured. You know, you get abuse
Lia Do you think its worse on the 12
than at other times of
year?
Quazi Definitely. (Interview, 7 July 2008)
He bluntly identifies his physical difference, being coloured, as the motivation for his abuse.
Later in the same interview, Quazis nephew Mihir observes that these bonfires make people
more motivate(d) to do bad things. Between them, Quazi and Mihir describe a cycle of racism,
bonfires, visibility and abuse, in which one element amplifies the others in mid-Julys
increasingly fevered pitch.
For this reason, newcomers to Belfast are frequently warned, often by their compatriots,
to avoid the bonfires. As one participant from ACSONI cautions: I wouldnt encourage being,
uh, visible...at something like that. I would never go. I have no business being there (Interview, 8
February 2008). Yet for others, the spectacle of the bonfires holds an allure. In an interview at the
Indian Community Centre, one couple spoke of their cautious, occasional forays to their nearest
bonfire:
Priya But we stay very out, you know, out of the environment 
Rav Behind, behind, behind it.
Priya Because we are very easily noticed, you know, we are
noticed far quicker than anybody else in the whole room.
So we stay pretty well behind. And we go there and have a
look and then come back. (Interview, 20 August 2007)
Priya and Rav are long-term residents of Belfasts. They attended their first bonfire in 1959,
before the Troubles began. At that time, their visible difference intrigued the local loyalist
community, who welcomed their presence at the bonfire. Several decades later, however, this
couple has a far different relationship with the tradition, with the positive memories of that first
bonfire now resting uneasily alongside the contemporary experience of danger and fear. Despite
their misgivings, this couple continues to attend the bonfire, although they negotiate their
visibility carefully by sticking to the periphery, behind the action and the crowds.
Chapter 7: Diversity in a Divided City 218
For the participants at the Indian Community Centre, this discussion about visibility at
loyalist bonfires opens into a broader discussion of prejudice in Belfast:
Priya The thing [is] Indians are very easily spotted, as well, that
Lia So you are very visible.
Rav Yeah. Especially now. Remarks, actually. It hurts how you
take the remarks.
Priya No, but you cant take all remarks.
Rav Well, if you take it, you know, lightly, you know, if they
call me a funny man, you know, I wouldnt mind.
Priya But if they call you a Paki, you dont take it lightly.
[This elicits a reaction from the entire group, with multiple people
commenting on this common experience.]
Priya They cant tell the difference anyway. (Interview, 20
August 2007)
Their visibility heightens on the 12
 a day that celebrates a culture that is loyalist and,
implicitly, white, and on which Indians are very easily spotted. Ravs transition, from the
concept of heightened visibility to hurtful remarks, may be abrupt, but it also describes a
correlation between the two. The exchange that follows describes varied ways for negotiating
these remarks, but Priyas reference to Paki serves as a lightning rod of shared experience. In
Northern Ireland, Paki serves as a catch-all derogatory term for any individual of South Asian
descent, and one which the taunters show little discernment in applying. As Priya bitterly
observes, They cant tell the difference anyway. In a curious twist, the remarks themselves
can render the participants invisible, even as their physical visibility garners the unwanted
attention.
This theme surfaced, with even greater nuance, in a later interview with members of the
Bangladeshi community. The following extract is a dialogue with two men: Quazi, a restaurant
owner who has lived in Northern Ireland for nearly three decades, and his nephew, Mihir.
Lia Do you get a lot of people, um, assuming thatyoure
Indian?
Mihir Were terrorists. Thats what they think.
Chapter 7: Diversity in a Divided City 219
Quazi No, to them, you know, any coloured, you know, Asian,
we are Pakis.
Mihir Yeah.
Quazi Thats what it isIt doesnt matter if you are from
Pakistan, India, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh...(Interview, 7 July
2008)
In this extract, the participants describe two inaccurate and racially coded (or coloured)
identities that have been ascribed to them: terrorist and Paki. The former is particularly ironic,
considering that both republican and loyalist combatants engaged in terrorist activities during the
Troubles. The latter, however, holds particular poignancy for these men, with regard to
Bangladeshs own brutal 20
century war with Pakistan. Like Priya at the Indian Community
Centre, Quazi observes that in Northern Ireland it doesn't matter if you are from Pakistan, India,
Sri Lanka, Bangladesh. The amorphous slur of Paki elides national and cultural identities,
subsuming their nuance and, in doing so, renders invisible the distinctions of these identities.
The examples that I have presented in this section illustrate some of the ways in which
Northern Irelands society renders ethnic minorities visible or invisible. However, it is also
crucial to consider the ways in which ethnic minorities, themselves, actively negotiate their own
(in)visibility. Hainsworth (1998: 3) notes that during the Troubles, politicians praised individuals
from ethnic minority communities for keeping their heads down and not bothering anyone.
Such praise, he laments, suggests an unfortunate view of a would-be passive citizenry
expectation for ethnic minority persons. Hainsworths indignation is understandable, but his
reading of passivity fails to recognize how a low profile can also be read as an active strategy for
survival. I encountered this in my own research, as I sought to arrange discussions about bonfires
with various minority ethnic community groups across Belfast. As part of the process of
approaching Belfast Jewish Community, I arranged a preliminary meeting with the organizations
representative to the Minority Ethnic and Faith Network. She warned me that Jewish residents in
Belfast choose to keep their heads down and avoid engaging in politically-sensitive dialogue
(Research Diary, 26 November 2007). As predicted, the official gatekeeper for Belfast Jewish
Community responded to my request with a polite but terse email, wishing me luck with my
project but effectively shutting down the possibility for further communication. I read their
silence not as passive, but as an active, political negotiation of cultural identity in a delicate and
volatile society.
Chapter 7: Diversity in a Divided City 220
My exploration of the political potential of visibility and invisibility speaks to the work
of feminist geographer Hyams (2004), who argues that disproportionate attention given to
voices in group discussion (dis)misses meaningful silences and the ways they give shape to and
are shaped by experience. She observes: Silence is most often equated with absence and voice
with presence  literally and figuratively (ibid: 109). A parallel logic could apply to the absence
of invisibility and presence of visibility. In contrast to a straightforward assignment of value, a
multidimensional and situational interpretation of (in)visibility reveals more nuanced
understanding of how ethnic minorities can resist and rework simplistic and ignorant readings of
their identities.
Flying the Flags of Fear
In Belfast, where territorial aspirations are emphatically marked through visual displays,
the 11
Night bonfires represent a high-profile opportunity, literally and figuratively, for loyalists
to assert their claims of identity. As a bonfire grows toward the sky, its builders will drape it with
the flags of their culture: the Union Jack, the Ulster flag, the Northern Ireland flag and, on some
sites, the flags of various paramilitary organizations. As midnight on 11
Night approaches, these
flags are removed for safekeeping, and symbols of Irish republicanism are hoisted in their stead.
In recent years, effigies of the Pope have given way to campaign posters of republican and
nationalist politicians. Common to all, however, is the Irish Tricolour, which adorns the top of the
bonfire and, significantly, is burned at midnight. In this way, the loyalist bonfires physically
consume nationalist-republican aspirations; the version of Northern Ireland that is affirmed on
Night is one that is culturally and politically British in identity.
While the flags signify and affirm the patriotism of loyalist bonfire celebrants, they draw
Belfasts minority ethnic residents into a very different conversation about place and identity. For
the minority ethnic participants whom I interviewed, the presence of flags on the bonfire, and the
burning of the Irish Tricolour, in particular, elicited a visceral emotional response that draws forth
their own expressions of national and cultural identity. In the following excerpt, drawn from an
interview with the Bangladeshi community, two men articulate their condemnation of the loyalist
tradition:
Hamber 2006
Chapter 7: Diversity in a Divided City 221
Mihir I mean, once youve seen a flag being burnt, that, to me,
thats significant enoughTo me, thats like hating
another side
Quazi Well, you won the war, so, you know  They won the war,
uh, by  Whats that called? Battle of Boyne, or
something. [Laughs]
Lia In 1690. Three centuries ago.
Mihir Theres a difference between celebrating your
independence and celebrating hate. Conquering another
community, or another raceIt actually reminds people of
that hateI think the message to young people is: Look,
were better, were superiorand we hate them.
(Interview, 7 July 2008)
Mihir begins this exchange by voicing his disapproval of the flag-burning  a practice that he
interprets as a loathsome symbol of hatred. His uncle, who moved to Northern Ireland nearly 30
years ago, responds by playing the devils advocate: Quazi laughingly offers the Battle of the
Boyne as justification of the practice. Mihir responds by pressing his point, articulating an
important distinction between celebrating your independence and celebrating hate. In doing so,
he echoes the larger dialogue taking place in contemporary loyalism: How can loyalists define
themselves positively, in terms of what they are (British, unionist, Protestant), rather than
negatively, in terms of what they are not (Irish, nationalist, Catholic) (Graham 2004). Mihir links
the conquerors reenactment of victory to the perpetuation of hatred. Moreover, and as I
discussed in the previous section, unspoken in this exchange between the two Bangladeshi men is
the haunting spectre of their own national and cultural history, and the brutal civil war that
created Bangladesh from East Pakistan. This parallel illuminates the ways in which Northern
Irelands ethnic minoritiy residents bring their own cultural and historical perspectives to bear on
what is to them a bizarre loyalist tradition.
In recent years, the controversy around flags and bonfires has widened in geographic
scope. At some bonfire sites, Israeli flags now fly alongside the Union Jack and other traditional
symbols of loyalist patriotism; on occasion, the Palestinian flag burns alongside the Irish
Tricolour. Paradoxically, these symbols have become more significant in Northern Irelands
relatively peaceful post-ceasefire period. According to Hill and White (2008), the republican
movement has supported Palestine since the late-1970s, as they sought to position themselves in
Chapter 7: Diversity in a Divided City 222
the vanguard of global anti-imperialist struggles. In West Belfast, the heartland of republicanism,
symbols of support and sympathy for the Palestinian cause have increased since 2002.
Although the links between Palestine and Irish republicanism are well developed in the
academic literature (Bell 2004; Coogan 1995; Hanley and Millar 2009), the connection between
Israel and loyalism is more difficult to decipher. Hill and White (2008) trace the flying of Israeli
flags in loyalist areas to April 2002, which they read as a direct response to the increased
prevalence of Palestinian flags in republican areas. One way to read the connection between
Israel and loyalism relates to the theory of the lost tribe of Israel. Its proponents belong to a
hardline Christian sect that believes Ulster Protestants to be the true lost tribe, and therefore
Ulster the true last bastion of Christianity in Europe (Cusack and McDonald 2008: 378). The
Israeli flag therefore emphasizes their self-image as a chosen people with a spiritually sanctioned
claim to the land (Hill and White 2008: 38). Another reading relates to the refusal of some
loyalist areas to fly flags that hold links with the right-wing British National Party and the anti-
semitic hate organization Combat 18 (Figure 7.3). According to this theory, the flying of the
Israeli flag may be read as symbolic opposition to anti-white supremacy.
Regardless of the loyalists reasoning, the presence of Israeli flags sparks dialogue
among Belfasts Muslim community, whose members would sympathize predominantly with the
Palestinian cause. The director of the Belfast Islamic Centre believes that loyalists fly the Israeli
flag because they interpret it as anti-Catholic. His contempt for their ignorance is echoed in the
discussion with a group of Muslim men at the Islamic Centre:
Hassan Thats the culture of flags, you know, thats what, eh,
Catholic area flying the, the Palestinian flag. Then 
Tariq Protestant, they burn the Palestinian flag. With the, with
the Irish flag. Okay? And then, same as Catholic, you
know, they burn the British flag along with the Israeli flag.
They just taking each others.
Lia Do you feel that the Protestants and Catholics understand
the symbolism of these flags?
Hassan Symbolism offighting against the hatreds against one
another. (Interview, 30 November 2007)
The controversy surrounding the flying of the Palestinian and Israeli flags draws Belfasts
Muslim population into a larger dialogue with 11
Night bonfires, and with Northern Ireland
Chapter 7: Diversity in a Divided City 223
itself. For these men, many of whom expressed with great eloquence their unease and fear with
the loyalist bonfire tradition, the visual battle being played out between Palestine and Israel
complicates their own relationship with the Northern Ireland conflict. Below, I explore the
complexities of these relationships.
Bonfires and Belonging
Residents who hail from neither of Northern Irelands dominant ethnic blocs can find
themselves sidelined by the 12
of July and the contentious debate prompted every year by the
11th Night bonfires. The virulent anti-nationalist rhetoric around the bonfires inevitably engages
Catholics in dialogue, through which republicanism can reaffirm its own strong claims to land,
culture and identity. Between the two extremes of the conflict, however, is the uncertain space in
which ethnic minorities attempt to anchor their own sense of participation and belonging in
Northern Ireland.
Among the other challenges discussed previously, loyalist bonfires also stage
confrontations for ethnic minority individuals who hold powerful cultural beliefs about fire. The
following extract is drawn from an interview with the Minority, Ethnic and Faith Network,
which Pritam describes the role of fire in his Hindu religious practice:
Earth, water, air, sky and earth. These are the five elements. And we
are made with those five elements. And once we dissolve we just
turn up into those five again. So in Indian religion, the fire is
significance. We dont burn anything bad into it. (Interview, 8 April
2008)
As I discussed in Chapter Six, loyalist bonfires frequently comprise rubber tyres, electrical
appliances and discarded furniture, alongside chemically-treated wooden pallets; the sites
become, in essence, seasonal rubbish tips that go up in flame on 11
Night. According to the
belief system that Pritam describes above, loyalist bonfires therefore represent pollution that is
spiritual as well as physical. Along similar lines, the participants whom I interviewed at the
Belfast Islamic Centre describe another way in which 11
Night bonfires transgress boundaries of
faith and culture:
As I discussed in Chapter Four, the Minority, Ethnic and Faith Network is the umbrella for the
emerging minority ethnic community sector in Northern Ireland.
Chapter 7: Diversity in a Divided City 224
Karim As a Muslim, as soon as you see fire, you show your fear
from God...Fire is really well-hated in Islam.
Hassan You go to hell.
Karim Fire is well-hated in our religion. ReallyI mean, in our
holy book, from page one to the last page of it, its all God
is warning us from hellfire, hellfire, hellfire, hellfire.
Tariq In Islam, it says, If you are not believe in God, you will
be thrown into the 
[Multiple voices] Hellfire (Interview, 30 November 2007)
Unlike the reverence that Pritam depicts, these participants describe an interpretation of fire that
emerges from and inspires fear. On 11
Night, the loyalist cultural landscape evokes hellfire in
tangible, three-dimensional form. Although these two extracts differ markedly in their
interpretation of fire, together they illustrate the tensions between cultural identity, belief and
bonfires. The challenge for ethnic minorities from these communities, among others, is to
reconcile aspects of their own cultural identities with the highly public performance of the
loyalist bonfire tradition.
In his influential study on landscapes of fear, Tuan (1979: 6) links these landscapes to
psychological states and...tangible environments. The phrase aptly describes the bonfires on 11
Night for ethnic minority residents, who adopt various strategies for negotiating this landscape.
Not surprisingly, avoidance is a popular tactic. As one man from the Belfast Islamic Centre
proclaims bluntly:
I wouldnt go to a bonfire in case I would be thrown into it. You
know what Im saying? You know, like the way they throw cats in
it. (Interview, 30 November 2007)
Another interview participant, however, provides a more nuanced explanation. Harold, an
African-American man who came to Northern Ireland in the early 1990s, observes that a bonfire
is not really the best environment to find yourself in because, as they say here, nobody knows
what foot you kick with (Interview, 8 February 2008). He refers to a vernacular expression,
popularized during the Troubles, which avers that Protestants and Catholics can be distinguished
Chapter 7: Diversity in a Divided City 225
by what foot you kick with  whether left or right.5 With this comment, Harold provides a
practical illustration of how Northern Irelands pervasive sectarianism structures the way in
which racism is...experienced (McVeigh 1998: 20). Moreover, his comment also illuminates
how ethnic minorities negotiate anxieties about racism and xenophobia in a sectarian society.
Underlying such tactics of avoidance are the ways in which ethnic minorities frame their
relationship to the bonfires and, more broadly, to Northern Irelands pervasive sectarian culture.
The following quotation comes from Quazi, a Bangladeshi restaurant owner who moved here
nearly 30 years ago:
But to us, uh, its nothing. Its just a bonfire for us. But as for them,
you know, its more like a political thing. They celebrate their, uh,
achievement or something like thatI dont understand all that, you
know. Politics, Irish politics, or all thatI stay out of it. (Interview,
7 July 2008)
He stages a stark contrast between us, for whom bonfires mean nothing, and them. His
hesitation when trying to explain the history behind bonfires  They celebrate their, uh,
achievement or something like that  signals a vague understanding and, thus, positions him as
neutrally as possible. Furthermore, he lumps the bonfire into the amorphous category of Irish
politics, which he purposefully avoids. Quazis arrival in Northern Ireland long pre-dates that of
many minority ethnic residents, but the sentiments that underpin his survival strategies find
echoes in the experiences of others. In the following extract, Matama, a young professional from
Kenya, describes his own methods for maintaining distance from the bonfires:
Doesnt really affect me. I mean, this is a tradition by people who
live here. And Im a visitor hereThis is their business. And, uh, I
respect that, andit doesnt bother me.I mean, you just keep
away, do your bit. (Interview, 8 February 2008)
Despite his plans to remain in Belfast indefinitely, Matama identifies himself as a visitor. In
doing so, he positions himself as separate from the people who live here; the distinction allows
Another similar vernacular expression distinguishes Protestants from Catholics by the pronunciation
of the letter H.
Chapter 7: Diversity in a Divided City 226
him to frame his attitude toward the bonfires as one of respect. Like the gatekeepers from the
Jewish community, Matama chooses to keep away.
The political potential (Hyams 2004: 105) of Matamas choice, however, is
compromised by the very people he seeks to avoid. In keeping with common practice, the local
loyalist leadership in Matamas neighbourhood approached him for a monetary donation.
One of the guys on my streetcame around to the door one day, and
was asking for donationWe made our little donation to put things
[flags] on the street, on the roads...Its a small street and, you know,
you dont see a lot of people on it. So there was no chance of any of
the big, bad boys coming on the street as well, you know? And the
marchers tended to behave themselves. I mean, the guys, they tend
to behave themselves. So it was safe, and, uh, I dont think I made a
big mistake, donating to, to, to that decorations, uh, effect, you
know?
Collections such as that which Matama describes are frequently organized and implemented by
individuals with paramilitary connections, thus turning the appeal for donations into an exercise
in intimidation and coercion. Matamas account illuminates the challenge of reconciling his
desire to keep away with the demands of his loyalist neighbours, who engage him  however
unwillingly  with the bonfires. Matama reports making a small donation for the decorations.
He then attempts to justify this act through a variety of reasons: the size of his street precludes the
arrival of big, bad boys; the marchers tended to behave themselves; it was safe. Toward the
end of the extract, however, he seems to seek reassurance: I dont think I made a big mistake.
Despite the justifications he has provided, the uncertainty in this statement suggests that he
harbours doubts about his collusion, however small, with the local loyalist paramilitary presence.
In contrast to Matamas experience of unwilling complicity, Jacquie, a black woman
from England, reveals during the same interview that she has never been approached for a
donation. She explains that when she moved into a loyalist estate, her confidence and strength of
character communicated to her neighbours what I stood for. According to Jacquie,
paramilitaries were told, Dont go to this house. She acknowledges, however, a more complex
relationship between power, fear and exclusion that permeates the lead-up to mid-July:
Chapter 7: Diversity in a Divided City 227
So theres that whole intimidation thing there going on in the
estate...before the bonfire, they are knocking on peoples doors and
they are trying to collect money. But...you couldnt feel a part of it
because its not  its not something you ever  celebratory of black
people. Soif theres a black person in a particular houseyoud
be passed by. (Interview, 8 February 2008)
In this passage, Jacquie describes how the dynamics of intimidation enter into the practice of
money collection, to fund activities that you couldn't feel a part of. Not surprisingly, she is
unable to see a celebration of her black identity reflected in the tradition. Her active voice,
however, shifts suddenly at the end of this extract: if theres a black person in a particular
house...youd be passed by. Running through and intermingled with her relief is, perhaps, an
awareness of her exclusion.
The domination of sectarian politics and problems sidelines ethnic minorities in Northern
Ireland throughout the year, but bonfires serve to intensify the sense of exclusion. As an
interview participant from Nigeria, who has lived in Belfast for ten years, explains:
I think around that time of the year, thats when you actually feel
you dont belong here...as a foreigner, when you know those things
are coming, you actually book your holiday. You want to get out.
(Interview, 8 February 2008).
His response to his sense of exclusion as a foreigner is to embody it through his physical
absence. The desire to leave also runs through this passage by a long-term resident from the
Belfast Islamic Centre:
You dont feel you belong to it. If you feel the belonging sense, yes,
you would stayI been here more than twenty yearsAnd I still
dont feel I belong to this kind of, you know, um, culture, if you
want to call it, you know. Which, you know, a bonfire, you know,
you just dont  you dont  because you are not welcome to it.
(Interview, 30 November 2007)
Chapter 7: Diversity in a Divided City 228
Although the two extracts differ, perhaps, in the degree of exclusion  the speaker in the first
extract feels that he does not belong, whereas the speaker of the second believes that he is not
welcome to it  both acknowledge clearly the negative impact of 11
Night bonfires on
cultivating a sense of belonging to Northern Ireland.
Hope, perhaps, might be drawn from the example of another bonfire tradition. In several
interview discussions with minority ethnic groups, the 5
of November emerged as a successful
contrast to the 11
of July. The frequency with which Guy Fawkes was mentioned speaks to the
dynamics of diaspora, with many of Northern Irelands minority ethnic residents having migrated
more recently from mainland Britain. Although based in historic events as sectarian as those
that inform 11th Night, Guy Fawkes evokes far more muted meanings for the interview
participants. In the following extract, a man whom I interviewed through the Chinese Welfare
Association enthusiastically compares Englands 5
of November to Northern Irelands 11
Night:
Guy Fawkes Nightit was a family outing. Theres no, no
sectarianism in thatSo thats the difference. But if you look at the
way that in England, Guy Fawkes night is really a day out for the
family. Its nothing else. (Interview, 21 August 2008)
Although this speaker emphatically declares that Guy Fawkes holds no sectarianism, its historic
ironies are not lost on other participants. The following extract is drawn from an interview with a
member of the Bangladeshi community:
If you think about it, the Guy Fawkes Day, thats not a good history
anyway. And, uh, the history behind it, thats not really something
that you celebrate. [Laughs] But now they forget about it...they just
enjoy themselves. (Interview, 7 July 2008)
Similar sentiments were expressed by a participant from the Belfast Islamic Centre:
Nobody thinks about why its taking place. Its all about: 'Oh, this is
good fun, lets go.' But its not like that here yet. (Interview, 30
November 2007)
Chapter 7: Diversity in a Divided City 229
These speakers seem to suggest that a level of historical amnesia applies to the Guy Fawkes
tradition, which renders its festivities less fraught with danger, and therefor inclusive for all. One
participant from the Bangladeshi community offers his interpretation of its ethos succinctly: Yes,
it has a different message...[I]t becomes a celebration for the British people. (Interview, 7 July
2008)
Is similar potential within reach for Northern Ireland? In a discussion at the Belfast
Islamic Centre, one participant articulated his vision for 11
Night bonfires:
I would like the bonfire to be a nice night out. Go and enjoy it, and
sit with the extreme ones. Go to the carnival, the Shankill, you are a
foreigner, you are a black. Sit there, enjoy the fire. And enjoy the
, enjoy St Patrick Day. What is it to do? You know what I mean?
I only live here Let me enjoy both.
In this extract, the participant reworks an imaginary bonfire for an inclusive society. In doing
so, he nonetheless affirms its place in loyalist culture by acknowledging the presence of the
extreme ones (perhaps a paramilitary reference) and the location of this imaginary bonfire
in the loyalist heartland of the Shankill. Crucially, however, this speaker imagines himself in
a society that can tolerate  and perhaps even welcome  his presence at both the loyalist 12
of July and the republican St Patricks Day celebrations. In recent years, festivities for St
Patricks Day, while still largely perceived as culturally republican, have begun to encompass
other forms of ethnic diversity, for example in the composition of the annual parade through
Belfast City Centre. Although loyalists lag behind their republican counterparts, there are
signs that a similar shift may be possible. In Chapter Six, I discussed the successful launch of
the beacon at Woodvale Park in July 2008 and my colleagues observation: In a couple
years, you could picture a Catholic family coming here during the day (Research Diary, 11
July 2008). As loyalists come to terms with the transformations at work in their tradition,
perhaps one day, too, for Northern Irelands ethnic minorities the bonfire will be nothing
more threatening than a nice night out.
Chapter 7: Diversity in a Divided City 230
Conclusion
In this chapter, I explored the transformations at work in the Northern Ireland peace
process through the perspectives of minority ethnic residents. Surprisingly, academics and
practitioners have tended to overlook their presence in both analyses of and practical
engagement with peacebuilding. Although my case studies of Divis Mountain and 11
Night
bonfires yielded fascinating insights into republican and loyalist cultural identities, the
inclusion of minority ethnic voices (and silences) renders a fuller, more dynamic
understanding of the multiple dimensions to conflict transformation.
My findings suggest that Belfasts contested landscapes provoke ethnic minorities to
negotiate complex dynamics of alienation, belonging and identity. For example, the
participants who accompanied me on guided walking tours of Divis described the challenges
of moving through a city that is infamous for its territoriality. For new migrants, in particular,
these intricacies can exacerbate the bewildering process of learning the local landscapes. Also
bewildering are the 11
Night bonfires that position and implicate ethnic minorities in
unpredictable ways. For instance, the recent practice in some loyalist neighbourhoods of
burning the Palestinian flag draws some members of the Belfast Islamic Centre into a
dialogue, however one-sided, in which they did not want to participate. The discussions that I
facilitated with minority ethnic community groups yielded diverse experiences. For example,
the interview with the Afro-Caribbean Society featured both Matama, who felt compelled to
donate to the neighbourhoods monetary collection for patriotic decorations, and Jacquie,
who credits the force of her personality for keeping would-be collectors at bay. These are just
some of the practices that ethnic minorities employ to navigate the complex politics of racism
and sectarianism in Northern Ireland.
By re-framing the contested landscapes that I examined in the two preceding
chapters, I emphasize the role of ethnic minorities in re-making Northern Irelands post-
conflict cultural landscapes. I argue that their diverse memories and narratives contribute to
the transformations at work through the peace process. Tolia-Kelly (2004: 278, original
emphasis) illuminates these dynamics in her study of British Asian women: For the women
in the study, marginalized from the national landscape of Britain, other landscapes and
ecologies become sites of affirming individual and collective identities, and these shift British
identity. In similar ways, Northern Irelands ethnic minorities bring a vast range of other
landscapes to bear on the divided, sectarian landscape of their current location. Tolia-Kellys
insights into the continual process of re-making Englishness illuminate similar possibilities
Chapter 7: Diversity in a Divided City 231
for Northern Ireland. The re-making of Northern Ireland involves, in part, its re-scaling in
wider geographies of engagement and belonging. To this end, Northern Irelands ethnic
minorities play an invaluable role.
Throughout this thesis, I have sought to uncover ways in which transformations of
contested cultural landscapes might yield new forms of identity that can sustain  and be
sustained by  a peacetime society. In her study of young British Muslim women, Dwyer
(2002) argues that it is possible to see, through negotiations of new ethnicities and hybrid
identities, how new forms of national belonging within a postcolonial Britain might be
imagined. Her argument resonates powerfully for Northern Ireland, where new forms of
belonging are desperately needed for a divided and increasingly diverse post-conflict
society. Even as they recall experiences of hardship, racism and exclusion, the minority
ethnic participants whom I interviewed embody possibilities for a non-sectarian future.
I end this chapter with the words of an older man from the Belfast Islamic Centre:
We are here now. We are here with the children, and the children [are]
born here, they grow here, they love the soil of this place. They want to
make a living here, they want to stay here for rest of their timeThats
why we are hoping to get good peace in the future, you see. (Interview,
30 November 2007)
This eloquent statement disproves any assumptions that in Northern Ireland, passion for the
land is the remit of republicans and loyalists alone. Good peace belongs to all, regardless of
political affiliation. I argue that scholarship on Northern Ireland must expand beyond its
traditional, binary model of sectarian conflict to acknowledge how diverse relationships and
communities are equally vital to a society emerging from violent conflict.
Chapter 7: Diversity in a Divided City 232
Figure 7.1. Members of the Afro-Caribbean Society on Divis Mountain. Photo by the author.
Figure 7.2. View of Belfast from Divis. The Springmartin peace line is visible
behind the cow on the left. Photo courtesy of Belfast Hills Partnership.
Chapter 7: Diversity in a Divided City 233
Figure 7.3. Racist sign posted on the Shankill Road, West Belfast. Photo by Henri
Mohammed.
Chapter 8: Conclusion 234
Chapter 8
Conclusion: New Narratives of Identity and Place
Introduction
In its broadest sense, this thesis explores cultural geographies of peacebuilding.
By positioning my project at the crossroads of cultural geography and conflict
transformation theory, I have developed a theoretical approach that emphasizes how
relationships between identity and place underpin conflict over contested territory.
Through my empirical research in Northern Ireland, I have demonstrated that these
relationships  and hence their transformations  are crucial for building peace in
conflicts based on competing territorial claims.
From Afghanistan to Zimbabwe, the literature on conflict and peace is plentiful.
My own project contributes to this body of scholarship, while pushing further into new
theoretical terrain where cultural geography and conflict transformation theory intersect.
Although I bring to my work a healthy respect for the harder, high-profile politics of
peace  for discourses of governance and democracy, legislation and policy  my
fascination lies with ordinary people and the extraordinary lives they lead in the fraught
transition out of conflict. For conflicts based on competing territorial claims, in particular,
cultural geography can frame vital questions about the meanings that people invest in,
and the identities they draw from, the contested places over which they struggle. For my
doctoral project, I conceptualized these queries through the framework of contested
cultural landscapes. These landscapes became a space within which I interrogated
complex connections to culture, identity, history and heritage  dimensions to conflict
that remain integral to the peace process long after the spotlight of the international media
has shifted elsewhere.
In Chapter Two, I outlined my interlinking research aims and the questions they
provoked. I reiterate them below:
Aim 1. To examine how transformations of contested landscapes provoke new
perceptions of place and geographic scale.
Research Questions:
 How do these transformations alter long-held meanings of places associated with
violent conflict?
 How do they shape the ways in which people relate contested landscapes to
broader regional, national and international scales?
Chapter 8: Conclusion 235
Aim 2. To examine how transformations of contested landscapes shape the
expression, creation and negotiation of identity.
Research Questions:
 How do these transformations help to create new dimensions of identity?
 How do people negotiate their shifting identities in a place of recovering conflict?
 How do interactions between shifting identities and transformations of contested
landscapes address the legacy of violence and complicate and contribute to the
process of building peace?
Whereas other studies of the transformation of violent conflict tend to ask why, I chose to
emphasize how. Much of the published academic literature on conflict transformation
probes the reasons that underlie change: Why did the actors decide to pursue or not to
pursue peace? Why did changes occur when they occurred? In contrast, my emphasis on
how can be read, at some level, as my attempt to discern a blueprint for peacebuilding. I
wanted to investigate the multi-layered processes by which societies emerging from
conflict come to new understandings about the places over which they struggle, and their
relationships to those places. I chose to examine a window of time  the end of the first
post-conflict decade  that is sufficiently distant from the drama of the peace accords to
invite reflection, but not so distant that they have faded into mythic memory. In other
words, I sought a timeframe that is both reflective and raw.
With its divisive territorial struggles, imprinted visibly in peace lines and
political murals, and its spatially sectarian society, Northern Ireland is a geographers
dream. As Smyth and Darby (2001: 36) wryly comment, It is difficult to imagine an
ethnic conflict anywhere in the world that has been more thoroughly researched. In a site
as saturated as Northern Ireland, what did I hope to illuminate? My obvious starting point
was the small band of cultural geographers  namely Catherine Nash, Brian Graham, Sara
McDowell and Bryonie Reid  whose queries around identity, place and heritage resonate
with my own. I build on their work by pushing cultural geography further into dialogue
with theories of conflict transformation and peacebuilding. Where I diverge, as well, is in
the diversity of my research participants. In addition to studying the republican and
loyalist populations for which Northern Ireland is known, I actively sought the
perspectives of minority ethnic residents. I wanted to produce a piece of scholarship on
Northern Ireland that not only reflects the regions growing ethnic diversity, but that also
acknowledges the ways in which people marginalized by the general discourse of
Northern Ireland have experienced the long civil war and its uncertain aftermath. By
Chapter 8: Conclusion 236
eliciting their perspectives, I developed a richer, more complex understanding of the
Northern Ireland peace process.
In this final chapter, I bring together some concluding thoughts on my thesis as a
whole. The first section reiterates the key findings from my empirical research. In the
second section, I reflect further on the major themes that recur throughout this
dissertation, including transformation, cultural landscapes, scales of identity, and the role
and process of research. I emphasize the contributions of my study to academic
scholarship and to Northern Ireland. Finally, I end by gesturing toward broader impacts,
particularly in relation to peacebuilding and reconciliation politics in Northern Ireland,
and I suggest directions for future work.
1. Summary of Key Findings
For this project, my conceptual launching point was the two-part hypothesis
framed in my research aims. First, transformations of contested landscapes provoke
people to think in new ways about places implicated in violent conflict, altering the ways
in which they relate these places to wider scales of engagement and belonging. Second, in
doing so, these transformations create new expressions, dimensions and negotiations of
identity that complicate and contribute to the process of peacebuilding. I based my
research around three entry points: Divis Mountain, 11
Night bonfires, and Northern
Irelands growing ethnic diversity. In taking this approach, I wanted to explore the
dynamics of identity and place within distinct cultural populations, while simultaneously
drawing connections and comparisons between them. As I discussed in Chapter One, the
contested landscapes of Divis Mountain and the 11
Night bonfires resonate powerfully
within republican and loyalist cultures, respectively. Moreover, they address current
environmental and political debates that are taking shape through the peace process.
These landscapes offer intriguing case studies for exploring how their transformations
provoke shifting conceptualizations of place, identity, and scale in a society emerging
from conflict. Cross-cutting and connecting these landscapes is my third entry point 
Northern Irelands growing ethnic diversity. By exploring minority ethnic perspectives
through their engagement with transformations of Divis Mountain and 11
Night
bonfires, I wanted to deepen and diversify my understanding of how conflict shapes
senses of belonging. In Chapter Three, I discussed Reids (2008: 531) call for complex,
nuanced, provisional readings ofpolitically burdened places and her suggestion that
they offer grounds for hope for multiple and shared senses of place and belonging. My
Chapter 8: Conclusion 237
research attempts to answer her call, while bearing in mind the ways that such readings
can complicate as well as contribute to peacebuilding.
In Chapter Five, I focused on the demilitarization of Divis Mountain and its
implications for republican cultural identities. The mountains militarization allowed me
to tap the rich vein of imperial history that has shaped contemporary ideas around
resistance, victimhood and memory in republican communities, while its demilitarization
helped me to understand how history can be mobilized to serve a particular cultural
narrative. My research on the transformations of this contested landscape exposes a range
of possibilities for peacebuilding, as well as complex undercurrents. For the residents
whom I interviewed, Divis has long held an iconic place in their conceptualizations not
only of West Belfast but of a larger, romanticized narrative of republican resistance to
British authority. The mountains return to the public domain now requires people to re-
engage with the landscape in a variety of ways. In Chapter Five, I explore some strikingly
different engagements. For example, the wistful meditations of the taxi driver Seamus,
recalling his first glimpse of the mountain after a decade of imprisonment, articulate an
idea of Divis that is suffused with emotional memories of homecoming. The mountain
resonates in complex ways for Seamus, who only returned to visit it several years after
his release from prison. In contrast, the Irish Ramblers Association, founded by former
members of the Irish Republican Army in 1998, coordinates regular walks on Divis that
can be read as continued resistance to British authority as well as reclamation of the
mountain. The Herald of Jericho sculpture illuminates yet another avenue for
engagement, reworking materially the army fort that had for two decades obliterated the
mountain from view. These diverse engagements illuminate various routes by which
memories and identities of republican resistance are being reworked in a time of peace.
The transformations of Divis speak powerfully to debates around the process of
defining heritage for a shared society. In Chapter Two, I discussed the complexities that
surround heritage, its role in the creation of collective identities, and its potential for
contestation in societies recovering from violent conflict. As Ashworth et al (2007: 5)
argue: The creation of any heritage actively or potentially disinherits or excludes those
who do not subscribe to, or are embraced within, the terms of meaning attending that
heritage. My research on Divis gestures toward this potential. For several interview
participants, the mountains demilitarization represents republican victory and an
opportunity to reinscribe republican belonging in the landscape. In sectarian Belfast, the
zeal with which republicans embrace Divis as a cultural resource holds potential to
exclude others. This dichotomy captures what Ashworth et al (ibid) describe as the zero-
sum characteristics of heritage that can destabilize a peace process and undermine the
search for shared forms of heritage.
Chapter 8: Conclusion 238
Yet my findings on Divis also indicate that transformations of contested
landscapes can provoke wider possibilities for post-conflict cultural identities. The
example of the ideologically-driven former combatant named Padraig, whose opinions of
the National Trust suggest a softened stance toward a symbol of British imperialism,
suggests that peacetime transformations may reposition a fiercely held identity resource
like Divis within new scales of engagement. The artist Christoff Gillen illuminates such
possibilities through installations that rework the historic landscape of the linen industry
for a contemporary, city-wide audience, and in doing so provokes the public to engage in
new ways with the mountain. More broadly, my research responds to Nashs (1999: 460)
call for a more differentiated sense of the post-colonial. The findings described above
point to the potential for peacebuilding to complicate existing narratives of conflict,
rendering simplistic anti-colonial justifications in more nuanced variations that offer
scope for new forms of shared heritage.
In Chapter Six, I focused on loyalist identities through an analysis of the
transformations of 11
Night bonfires. In many ways, these transformations  spurred by
municipal concerns about environmental pollution and symbols of sectarian aggression 
can be read as a microcosm of the larger changes wrought by the peace process. Unlike
the demilitarization of Divis, which was warmly received by republicans in West Belfast,
the changes at work in the 11
Night bonfire tradition present more ambiguous
opportunities for their loyalist adherents. Through the bonfires, I query the roles of
tradition in a post-conflict society, and how they attempt to bind culture, community
and identity to place, both physical and ideological. Within the rubric of 11
Night
bonfires, I chose to study three case studies: Belfasts Bonfire Management Programme;
its counterpart in Antrim; and the beacon of Woodvale. Each of these case studies refracts
different dimensions of change, although the emergence of common themes around
environmental stewardship and cultural education speaks to the broader possibilities of
reconceptualizing this divisive tradition.
Particularly striking, in all three case studies, are the ways in which external
transformations of the bonfire tradition provoke people in loyalist communities to re-
scale their tradition, and hence themselves, as participants in larger dialogues. For
example, the Bonfire Management Programmes Participants Forum became a space in
which initially reluctant loyalist communities came together to share and to strategize
around their bonfires, evoking the system of communication that historic bonfires once
served. In Antrim, new practices of, and municipal support for, bonfire engagement is
changing in pace with the paramilitary culture that until recently defined the tradition. As
rigid systems of territorial control begin to relax, new practices around 11
Night bonfires
Chapter 8: Conclusion 239
are provoking paramilitary combatants to link their effects to larger scales of geopolitics
and environmental justice.
Earlier in this thesis, I argued that the process of peacebuilding must address how
divisive, contested versions of heritage can be reimagined for a shared future. My
findings from Chapter Six illuminate how the co-constitutive dynamics between
landscape and identity can effect such change. For example, the Bonfire Management
Programmes Programme of Reflection and Capacity-Building is provoking new
expressions of a positively defined loyalist identity, which in turn help to soften the
sectarian edges of the bonfire landscape. In doing so, these new expressions of identity
point toward ways in which transformations of the contested 11
Night bonfires can
facilitate the reworking of a sectarian tradition for a shared society. However, other
findings from my empirical research suggest that this trajectory is far from
straightforward. My research on the gendering of bonfires, for example, reveals complex
negotiations of identity and expectation, particularly with respect to the division of
labour. Even Woodvales strong female bonfire committee, in their pursuit of the beacon,
relied on the support of the local, masculine paramilitary presence. Ultimately, I argue
that transformations of the contested bonfire landscape can be read as both a product and
an agent of the peace process, both complicating and contributing to practices of
peacebuilding.
In Chapter Seven, I broadened the scope of the Northern Ireland conflict by
focusing on Belfasts frequently-overlooked minority ethnic residents and their
perspectives of the transformations at work with Divis Mountain and 11
Night bonfires.
By re-framing the same cultural icons that I explored in relation to republican and loyalist
identities, I sought to highlight the role of ethnic minorities in re-making Northern
Irelands contested cultural landscapes. Through a series of semi-structured interviews, I
examined how transformations of these contested landscapes provoke ethnic minorities to
negotiate complex dynamics of alienation, belonging and identity in post-conflict
Belfast.
With regard to Divis Mountain, my findings reveal the extent to which sectarian
conflict shapes not only perceptions but embodied experiences of Belfast. My interviews
suggest that ethnic minorities navigate the city based on their knowledge of sectarian
geography. For example, the participant named Arthur describes a continuous mapping
process by which he gathers geographical, territorial knowledge that informs his sense of
where he can and cannot go. In this way, Arthur and his fellow ethnic minorities are like
any resident of sectarian Belfast, regardless of national affinity. Ethnic minorities,
however, and particularly those new to Northern Ireland, face the additional challenge of
Chapter 8: Conclusion 240
building their spatial knowledge of sectarianism without the benefit of the received
wisdom (however inaccurate) that circulates in republican and loyalist communities.
From the summit of Divis, the participants experienced new perspectives of scale
that (re)engaged their experience of the city with other scales and landscapes of diasporic
identity. The citys territorial intricacies elided into larger views, repositioning Belfast in
relation to the rest of Northern Ireland, to the Irish Republic, and to Britain. Moreover,
engagement with Divis evoked other landscapes of home, such as one participants
reflections on Mount Kilimanjaro. My findings suggest that Divis Mountain provokes
new insights into the shifting scales of diasporic identity and, by extension, multiple
identities that must be negotiated in a highly territorial city. These negotiations of identity
encompass not only the racialized dynamics of living in a predominantly white society,
but its sectarian fractures as well.
Through the landscape of the 11
Night bonfires, I dealt more explicitly with the
politics of minority ethnic belonging in a sectarian society. My research reveals
ambivalent perceptions about the peace process amongst the ethnic minorities I
interviewed, most notably in the ways it renders them visible in negative ways. However,
my findings also suggest that ethnic minorities actively negotiate their own (in)visibility,
and exercise political choices around when, and how, to voice or silence themselves. I
also uncovered ways in which these participants position themselves as neutral, for
example by relegating bonfires as an amorphous extension of Irish politics that is best to
be avoided.
Nonetheless, my research suggests that Northern Irelands sectarian struggle
implicates Belfasts minority ethnic residents in unwelcome ways, for example, through
pressure to contribute financially to a neighbourhoods decorations for July festivities.
Another unwelcome engagement emerges through the practice of draping bonfires with
national flags, drawing ethnic minorities into difficult reflections about place, nationalism
and identity. For example, the flying of Palestinian and Israeli flags in loyalist areas
elicited visceral emotional responses from members of the Belfast Islamic Centre, and
complicates their own positions with regard to the conflict and their senses of belonging
within Northern Ireland itself.
Yet my research also reveals how ethnic minorities, with their multiply
positioned, diasporic identities and experiences, can contribute to larger dialogues about
transformation and tradition in Northern Ireland. Many of my interview participants had
lived previously in England, where their exposure to the more welcoming Guy Fawkes
tradition allowed them to trace parallels and contrasts to the 11
Night bonfires.
Furthermore, the ways in which ethnic minorities embody their multiple identities offers
Chapter 8: Conclusion 241
an example for ways in which new ethnicities and hybrid identities might emerge from
and contribute to the process of building peace.
Having outlined the key findings of the three empirical chapters, I now want to
reflect more broadly on the wider themes of this thesis and my contributions to academic
debates.
2. Contributions to Academic Scholarship
For this project, I have drawn from wide-ranging sources across a number of
different academic fields. In doing so, I positioned my thesis to contribute to diverse
dialogues. The most obvious contribution is the argument I set forth in Chapter Two for
greater engagement between cultural geography and conflict transformation theory.
Although others have emphasized the importance of place identities to processes of
peacebuilding (for example, Graham 2004; Reid 2004, 2005), I believe that this thesis
articulates the first clear theoretical argument for linking the two fields. In doing so, I
bring to the amorphous, interdisciplinary field of peace studies a disciplinary approach
that frames processes of social transformation through theorization of place, landscape,
culture and identity.
Within cultural geography, this thesis contributes to a number of established and
emerging debates. Just as my work in geography frames new theorizations within peace
and conflict studies, so do insights from peace studies help me to chart new terrain in
cultural geography. My analyses of contested cultural landscapes contribute to what
Wylie (2007: 191) describes as a recent suite of writings on landscape and the politics of
memory, with specific contributions to discussions about politics of heritage in divided
societies. As I discussed in Chapter Two, cultural geographers have published
surprisingly little scholarship on the concept of public landscape. I suggest that this
concept may hold important scope for studies that conceptualize landscape as a
continuum from contested to public. My research holds potential to develop ideas of
public landscape in relation to peacebuilding, as contested resources of heritage and
identity move into a broader, shared public domain. I suggest that public landscape may
offer a useful theoretical framework for exploring the ambiguous transformation of
contested cultural landscapes in their new post-conflict manifestations.
Furthermore, my research on conflict transformation and processes of
peacebuilding contributes to an emerging debate about geographic dimensions of
transition. For example, geographers have explored transition in contexts including the
legacies of post-socialist transitions (Bradshaw and Stenning 2004); young peoples
Chapter 8: Conclusion 242
transitions to adulthood (Valentine 2003); and gender identity transitions among trans
people (Lim and Browne 2009). This debate recognizes that transitions take many forms,
and challenges their normative assumptions. In September 2010, I will participate in a
two-part session on diverse geographies of transition at the annual conference of the
Royal Geographical Society. My presentation will explore transition through the more
ambiguous transformations of the Northern Ireland peace process.
Indeed, my research develops scholarship not only on transition, but on the
concept of transformation itself. I introduced the concept in Chapter Two as the
theoretical approach of conflict transformation, which aims to transform the
relationships, interests and discourses that support the continuation of violent conflict. I
then invoked transformation in multiple variations as it relates to landscape, identity,
culture, tradition and peacebuilding. To rephrase the hypothesis framed in my research
aims: A peace process provokes tangible transformations of contested landscapes, which
in turn provoke intangible changes in how people engage with these landscapes. Lurking
behind this hypothesis is an expectation of transformation as an agent of positive change.
Projected outcomes, for example, might include new forms of inclusive, positively-
defined cultural identities, or shifts from local to global worldviews that can facilitate and
sustain a non-violent society. These desires, however, mask the more ambiguous
dimensions of transformation. They also perpetuate problematic assumptions, for
example, the equation of local as parochial and global as progressive. By resisting the
temptation to read the narrative of peace as an optimistic, one-way trajectory, I
conceptualize transformation as a multi-dimensional framework that more accurately
engages with reality. To draw an example from my own research, the connections
between paramilitarism and racism in post-ceasefire Northern Ireland suggest that the
transformation of conflict is partial and complex.
This thesis also contributes to vibrant, interdisciplinary debates about multiple
identities. In Chapter Two, I discussed how Valentine (2007) emphasizes the fluidity and
instability of intersections between categories, thus developing geographical thinking
about the relationship between multiple categories of belonging. I also discussed how the
reworking of identity is central to Halls (1992) theorization of new ethnicities. To these
debates I offer the novel approach of contextualizing their expression, creation and
negotiation in post-conflict situations. The insights gleaned from my research suggest
rich scope for theorizing multiple identities in relation to conflict transformation and
peacebuilding. I argue that conceptualizations of identity and ethnicity as fluid and
constructed offer hope for societies emerging from conflict, as they engage with the task
of opening previously rigid narratives of cultural heritage to new, flexible ways of
locating ethnic identity. In a related vein, my findings in Northern Ireland may also
Chapter 8: Conclusion 243
contribute to debates around political belonging in a world of multiple identities (Hall
2002). These debates relate to migration (see Yuval-Davis et al 2005, Kastoryano 2004),
heritage (see Czaplicka 2004) and multiculturalism (see van den Abbeele 2004, Hansen
2004)  all of which are pertinent issues in contemporary Northern Ireland.
Although I will reflect in greater depth on my research process toward the end of
this chapter, I describe here the contributions of this thesis to scholarship on
methodology. As I discussed in Chapter Four, I designed for this project a
complementary, integrated field programme that drew on a set of mixed qualitative
methodologies. In addition to the more commonly used methods of participant
observation, semi-structured interviews and maintenance of a research diary, I developed
some novel methodological approaches. For example, the guided walks that I led on
Divis Mountain for minority ethnic groups echo earlier techniques used by Burgess
(1996), Brennan (2005) and even Wylie (2002). My own practice, however, differs in its
response to the sensitive political environment of my research site. These walks may have
introduced participants to Divis, but I argue that the act of travelling to the mountain is
equally important. By bringing the participants through territory initially perceived as
unknown and potentially dangerous, my walking technique facilitated their embodied
experience of sectarian Belfast. Other novel research approaches, which I developed in
response to the challenge of working in a volatile, sectarian society, include my
collaboration with Groundwork and the semi-structured bonfire discussions with minority
ethnic groups that I conducted with the aid of the Bonfire Management Programmes
travelling exhibit. In short, I believe that this thesis contributes to scholarship on the
methodological challenges of conducting research in sensitive, post-conflict
environments.
Finally, my research offers a number of contributions to scholarship on my
research site, Belfast, Northern Ireland. As I discussed previously, this thesis amplifies
the scholarship of the handful of cultural geographers who also write about the Northern
Ireland conflict, thus bolstering the profile of geography in a field dominated by political
scientists and legal scholars. Cultural geography offers unique theoretical resources for
framing and conceptualizing questions of place, scale, community and identity. These are
crucial issues for the process of peacebuilding. Through conducting this research, I also
affirm the importance of Northern Ireland as a site worthy of cultural geographic inquiry.
My work on transformations of contested landscapes and identities in republican and
loyalist cultures responds to Edwards and Bloomers (2009) call for research on
communities sympathetic to paramilitarism and their emergence from armed struggle.
However, I feel that my emphasis on ethnic minorities represents my most important and
meaningful contribution to academic literature on Northern Ireland. Elsewhere in this
Chapter 8: Conclusion 244
thesis, I have argued that scholarship on Northern Ireland must expand beyond the
established binary model of sectarian conflict to acknowledge how diverse relationships
and communities also contribute to the process of peacebuilding. My research contributes
to growing scholarly interest in Northern Irelands ethnic minorities but, crucially, it does
so by drawing them into Northern Irelands larger, complex dialogues about the legacy of
the Troubles and the transformation of violent conflict.
3. Contributions to Policy and Practice
In addition to its contributions to academic scholarship, this project contributes in
a number of ways to the practical work of peacebuilding in Northern Ireland. I have taken
seriously my argument for reconceptualizing the participants of the peace process by
responding to my own call for meaningful minority ethnic engagement. As I intended, my
research process made tangible contributions, in real time, to participants from minority
ethnic backgrounds. The guided walks of Divis introduced them to a little-known public
resource, and the bonfire discussions gave newcomers, in particular, a chance to learn
more about a bewildering local practice.
As I discussed in Chapter Four, my collaborations with Groundwork and the
National Trust gave each organization a presence in the emerging minority ethnic sector.
Moreover, my involvement has served to increase awareness within these organizations
about the importance and the benefits of diversifying their work. Groundwork, for
example, increasingly draws on the connections I have forged with minority ethnic
community groups to develop new projects around regenerating shared space. At the time
of writing, I continue to lead guided walks of Divis Mountain for groups that express
interest. These walks now contribute to a larger dialogue within the National Trust,
emanating from its headquarters in England, around diversity, accessibility and the
organizations relevance for a multicultural public (Mayo 2009; Hawthorne 2007). In
December 2009, I spoke on behalf of the organization at a conference on recreational
diversity, organized by the Countryside Access & Activities Network. This summer, the
National Trust intends to incorporate my work on Divis in one of its regular reports to its
membership base.
My research also contributes to debates around practices of peacebuilding in
Northern Ireland. In Chapter Three, I discussed the controversy over single identity
work, which refers to efforts that focus on exploring identity solely within one
community in order to create a strong and confident foundation from which to reach
across the sectarian divide (Nash 2005b; Kilpatrick and Leitch 2004). Critics, however,
Chapter 8: Conclusion 245
argue that this strategy bolsters notions of cultural separation and competition for scant
resources (Shirlow and Murtagh 2006). To some extent, my own activities in Belfast can
be interpreted as single identity work, particularly in relation to my roles and
responsibilities with the Bonfire Management Programme. Although my professional
participation was circumscribed by the formal structure of the programme, I adopted a
similar approach for my empirical research. By focusing on republican perspectives in
relation to Divis Mountain, and on loyalist perspectives in relation to 11
Night bonfires,
I transferred the concept of single identity work to my research practices with the
republican and loyalist populations for which Northern Ireland is known. The concept of
single identity breaks down, however, with regard to my emphasis on minority ethnic
perspectives. The groups that participated in walks on Divis and in bonfire discussions
(for example, the Minority Ethnic and Faith Network, the Afro-Caribbean Society and
Latina America Unida) comprise a diverse range of ethnicities and nationalities. This
diversity  between the various minority ethnic groups that participated in my research, as
well as internally within each group itself  reworks notions of community and
belonging. Moreover, the diverse membership of these groups draws on wider scales of
identity, thus pointing toward ways in which community practitioners in Northern Ireland
might reconceptualize ideas of what constitutes single identity.
As I discussed in Chapter Three, the challenge of putting peace into practice is
bound up in Northern Irelands intricate and contested policy landscape (Shirlow and
Murtagh 2006: 143). To this end, this thesis also holds implications for public policy and
related debates around community relations. To reiterate my discussion in Chapter Three,
I invoke the example of Belfast City Councils influential good relations strategy, which
advocates the promotion of community relations, the celebration of cultural diversity, and
the promotion of equality through service delivery and a representative workforce
(Belfast City Council 2003). The strands of my research feed into these debates in various
ways. For example, my research on republican and loyalist cultural identities contributes
to knowledge about the processes by which communities long entrenched in the conflict
are approaching, perceiving and negotiating the peace process. In doing so, my research
also contextualizes and points to practical possibilities for peacebuilding in these
communities. Simultaneously, my research on minority ethnic perspectives contributes to
emerging dialogues about cultural diversity, particularly in relation to 11
Night bonfires.
Through my involvement with the Bonfire Management Programme, I worked closely
with a range of statutory stakeholders. Although our interactions revolved primarily
around my professional responsibilities in various loyalist communities, I discovered that
my research on minority ethnic perspectives and experiences frequently piqued interest
among civic officials. As my doctoral project draws to a close, I will seek new avenues
Chapter 8: Conclusion 246
(for example, through lectures, meetings and professional reports) for disseminating the
results of my work to the public sector.
4. Reflections on the Roles of the Researcher
Perhaps the most innovative contributions emerging from this thesis relate to my
methodological approach. From the outset, I conceptualized this project as qualitative in
design, and myself as open to an array of theoretical frameworks. In Chapter Four, I
discussed the importance of feminist and participatory geographies in shaping my work.
With regard to feminist geography, I was drawn to the ways in which its methodological
approaches could acknowledge the delicate dynamics involved with conducting research
in sensitive political environments. As Moss (2002: 3) observes: Thinking about feminist
research tends to sharpen an approach to a project in that understanding power and
knowledge brings into focus the varied contexts in which the research takes place. Along
similar lines, participatory geographers inspired me with their emphasis on collaboration,
peoples experience and knowledge, and knowledge for the purpose of political action
(Gatenby and Humphries 2000: 90). Yet although these methodological literatures
influenced me greatly, I struggled to understand how my work could contribute to
scholarship in participatory geography, and to a lesser extent in feminist geography. If
gender formed only one aspect of my analysis, could I call myself a feminist geographer?
If my research participants did not actively co-design my project, could I honestly wear
the mantle of participatory geographer? Steered by instinct, over the course of my
research I navigated an invisible course between the two.
The experience was liberating. Although I could not categorize it, I honoured my
conviction that the process of research is as important as its products. I wanted this
project to be relevant in real time, and to real people. To this end, the collaborations that I
pursued were ideological as well as logistical. Even as I sought support for entering
paramilitary-controlled territory, I also craved opportunities to contribute tangibly to the
peace process. And in the end, I did, although in ways I could not have anticipated.
Through my collaboration with Groundwork, which in the second year became a formal
staff position, I worked intimately with loyalist neighbourhoods to advance the aims of
the Bonfire Management Programme. On Divis Mountain, as I helped the warden repair
barbed wire fencing through which neighbouring cattle had rampaged, I contributed in
my own small way to cultivating this newly-acquired resource for a peacetime public.
My engagement with ethnic minorities, however, may represent my most
influential contribution to scholarship and practice in Northern Ireland. On a strategic
Chapter 8: Conclusion 247
level, I bridged the work of my collaborating organizations with the emerging minority
ethnic sector, which in many ways was in its infancy when I began fieldwork in February
2007. In this capacity, I expanded the routes by which minority ethnic communities
engage with Northern Ireland, through walks on Divis Mountain and discussions about
loyalist bonfires that, more than once, offered newcomers a chance to question and to
learn about this bewildering local tradition. In devoting my energy and collaborative
resources to my research in the minority ethnic community sector, I advanced my own
political agenda, that of bringing their voices into the larger dialogue of the peace
process.
In a marriage of theory and praxis, my doctoral research evolved alongside and
through my practical work. In Chapter Four, I bemoaned the absence of Northern
Irelands ethnic minorities in scholarship on the peace process. Over the course of my
fieldwork period, I came to understand the practical dynamics that underpin the silence.
Although ethnic minorities are garnering greater attention in both practical and academic
circles, I have been dismayed by their disconnection from existing discourses of the peace
process, and by a widespread tendency to treat racism and exclusion as problems
unrelated to larger dialogues of post-conflict community relations. Underpinning these
patterns are well-meaning workers in the community/voluntary sector who assume that
minority ethnic issues represent a softer, easier option than the difficult task of grappling
with the legacy of the Troubles in loyalist and republican communities. As I deepened my
responsibilities to and engagement with the minority ethnic community sector, I came to
recognize the importance of my research to enlarging and diversifying the public
discourse of the peace process. At one level, my actions were purely incidental  an
unintended effect of my Japanese-Chinese-American presence in, say, the white,
working-class loyalist neighbourhoods participating in the Bonfire Management
Programme. But in other ways, my research offers a deliberate course of action. By
presenting Northern Irelands ethnic minorities as complex, multiply positioned
individuals, with the capacity to negotiate their multiple identities, my research holds
potential to shape the ways in which they are conceptualized by the wider society as well.
In some ways, my research experience can be read as a process by which I staged
the encounters I wanted to study. In doing so, I left a physical, cultural and ideological
imprint on my field site and, more importantly, I facilitated the social changes I wanted to
see. My advisor once asked me why I reject the terms activist and participatory. Until
then, I had not considered activist in relation to my research, and participatory only to
dismiss it. In exploring the basis for my resistance, however, I realize that the definitions
I adopted initially were narrow and rigid. In my research approach, I placed great value
on listening, observing and absorbing. These are seemingly passive processes that
Chapter 8: Conclusion 248
contrast sharply with the images I held of a (brash, outgoing, politically impassioned)
participatory activist. Yet as I reflect on these differences, I recognize that I have done a
great disservice to terms like activist and participatory by limiting their scope. I am
coming to understand that my research collaborations were indeed participatory in nature,
and that seemingly passive aspects of my own approach were, in fact, quietly active in
their own right.
I return, at last, to the theme of public geographies, which I introduced in
Chapter One as an overarching dialogue for this dissertation. To reiterate, public
geographies can be considered, at least provisionally, as the production of accessible
academic work for broader non-academic audiences; the co-construction of knowledge
with non-academics; and the legitimation of non-academic or public geographical
knowledges (Birmingham Public Geographies Working Group 2010). My meditations on
activism, which developed over the course of this project, resonate with lively debates
emerging within public geography. Mitchell (2004), for example, calls for academics to
contribute to social change through what we are employed to do  that is, to produce
solid, important work within the academy. Dempsey and Rowe (2004: 32), however,
challenge his argument, advocating instead a concept of theory-as-toolkit that facilitates
activist knowledge production. Meanwhile, Maxey (2004: 159) argues that a broad,
inclusive understanding of activism can offer a number of ways for us to develop critical
geography conceptually and practically. He observes overlaps between reflexive
processes and inclusive understandings of activism. The value that he invests in reflexive
activism (ibid) mirrors my own.
Running through these debates is the challenge of balancing academic research
with activism  a challenge with which I have grappled over the course of this project.
Maxey (2004: 159) points to the boundaries between theory/practice, academia/activism
and the very notion of engagement within/beyond the academy. These are distinctions
that public geographies, with their emphasis on accessible, relevant scholarship for
multiple publics, attempt to dismantle. My own research, and the approaches I adopted,
also probe the distinction between these categories, pushing further into terrain where
they dissolve. As Cloke (2004: 96) wisely observes: The academic and the personal
perform such complex interactive manoeuvres that it is well nigh impossible to
disentangle them.
Chapter 8: Conclusion 249
As this project draws to a close, my own narrative of identity and place is now
poised to take flight. Running alongside my thesis is its antithesis  a vastly different
account of my years in Belfast. Or so I assumed at the outset.
In February 2007, I moved to Belfast with the intention of writing an explicitly
non-academic book from my doctoral research. Weary of scholarly tomes that barely
disguised their postgraduate origins, I adopted the opposite approach: a dissertation
fashioned from the real book at its heart. I pressed my research diary into service as a
double agent, and launched what I assumed would be a double life.
For several years, I had skirted around the idea of a career in community
relations. In Belfast, one of my research collaborations turned the idea into distinct
possibility. With Groundworks support, I pursued training in a suite of professional skills
that had long intrigued me: mediation, principled negotiation, facilitative leadership,
community capacity-building. I gained valuable on-the-ground experience, facilitating
discussions at first about 11
Night bonfires, and eventually about the grittier topics of
racism, homophobia and hate crime prevention. This is no easy task for an introvert, but
fascination pushed me onward, and I have slowly come to understand the strengths and
challenges that I bring to my work in post-conflict community development.
Initially, I intended to keep separate my postgraduate and professional
trajectories, my thesis and its antithesis. I envisioned one as the respite from the other,
and in the beginning this was so. Inevitably, the distinctions collapsed  initially to my
alarm, but ultimately to my delight. Three years later, I find it difficult to decipher where
one process begins and the other ends. My research interviews, for instance, inhabit the
same learning curve as my community discussions. I developed vital facilitation skills
through both and, I argue, at a quicker pace than otherwise possible on their own.
I may have wished to compartmentalize the double strands of my work, but
geography has willed it otherwise. September will find me at the Royal Geographical
Society, not only delivering an academic paper on ambiguous transitions of
peacebuilding, but taking part in a panel titled geographers helping. While the other
panelists discuss how their work in the helping professions led them to geographical
critique, I will trace an alternate course. In my case, it was geography that led.
The so-called antithesis lies in wait, roughly assembled between the covers of my
research diary. Like its academic counterpart, this book will take shape as earth and fire,
and water as well. In East Belfast, transformations of derelict shipyards, which in grander
days gave rise to the Titanic, now ripple into regenerating the communities along the
Chapter 8: Conclusion 250
waterways. Over eighteen months of fieldwork, and nearly eighteen more of dissertation-
writing, I have nurtured this book as my gift to the everyday reader  a departure from
academic, theoretical debate. Yet at the moment of departure, geographys gravitational
pull draws me back into its orbit. Here, I find myself face to face with public
geographies and their commitment to creating popular, accessible work that is as
relevant for people outside academia as it is for those within. In the end  or perhaps,
more accurately, in the beginning  I discover that my thesis and its alternative are two
parts of the same process.
References 251
References
Agyeman J (1990) Black people in a white landscape: Social and environmental justice.
Built Environment 16(3): 232-236.
Agyeman J and Spooner R (1997) Ethnicity and the rural environment. In: Cloke P and
Little J (eds) Contested countryside cultures: Otherness, marginalisation and
rurality. London: Routledge, p 197-217.
Alanen AR and Melnick RZ (2000) Introduction: Why cultural landscape preservation?
In: AR Alanen and RZ Melnick (eds) Preserving cultural landscapes in America.
Baltimore and London: Johns Hopkins University Press, p 1-21.
Anderson B (1991) Imagined communities: Reflections on the origin and spread of
nationalism. London: Verso.
Anderson J and Hamilton D (1999) Territoriality, democracy and national conflict
resolution in Ireland. Geography Research Forum 19: 98-121.
Anderson J and Shuttleworth I (1998) Sectarian demography, territoriality, and political
development in Northern Ireland. Political Geography 17(2): 187-208.
Anderson P, Carvalho M, Tolia-Kelly DP (2000) Intimate distance: Fantasy islands and
English lakes. Ecumene 8: 112-119.
Andersonstown News. 9 October 2006. Century of Irish Language Growth, p 4.
Andrews, JH. (1997) Shapes of Ireland: Maps and their makers (1564-1839). Dublin:
Geography Publications.
Andrews JH. (2002) A paper landscape: The Ordnance Survey in 19
century Ireland.
Dublin: Four Courts Press.
Andrews M (1999) Landscape and Western art. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Askins K (2006) New countryside? New country: Visible communities in the English
national parks. In: Neal S and Agyeman J (eds) The new countryside? Ethnicity,
nation and exclusion in contemporary rural Britain. Bristol: Policy Press, p 149-
Ashworth GJ and Graham B (2005) Senses of place: Senses of time. Hants: Ashgate.
Ashworth GJ, Graham B and Tunbridge JE (2007) Pluralising pasts: Heritage, identity
and place in multicultural societies. London: Pluto.
Atashi E (2009) Challenges to conflict transformation from the streets. In: BW Dayton
and L Kriesberg (eds) Conflict transformation and peacebuilding: Moving from
violence to sustainable peace. London: Routledge, p 45-60.
Baier-Allen S (2004) The failure of power-sharing in Cyprus: Causes and consequences.
In: U Schneckener and S Wolff (eds) Managing and settling ethnic conflicts:
Perspectives on successes and failures in Europe, Africa and Asia. London: Hurst
& Company, p 77-93..
Bardon J (1982) Belfast. Dundonald, Northern Ireland: Blackstaff.
Bardon J (1992) A history of Ulster. Dundonald, Northern Ireland: Blackstaff.
References 252
BBC. 17 June 2009. Racism in Northern Ireland. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/northern_
ireland/8104978.stm. Accessed 24 March 2010.
BBC. 8 February 2010. INLA arms disposal statements due. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/
northern_ireland/8503079.stm. Accessed 24 March 2010.
BBC. 8 July 2008. Creating a 21
century bonfire. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/northern_
ireland/foyle_and_west/7493672. Accessed 24 March 2010.
Bean, K. (2007) The new politics of Sinn Fin. Liverpool: Liverpool University Press.
Beasley C (2005) Gender and sexuality: Critical theories, critical thinkers. London:
Sage.
Bedford T and Burgess J (2001) The focus-group experience. In: M Limb and C Dwyer
(eds) Qualitative methodologies for geographers: Issues and debates. London:
Arnold, p 121-135.
Belfast City Council. (2003) Good relations strategy: Building our future together.
Bell J (1999) Redefining national identity in Uzbekistan: Symbolic tensions in Tashkents
official public landscape. Cultural Geographies 6(2): 183-213.
Bell J (2007) Parades and protests. Belfast: Institute for Conflict Research.
Bell JB (2004) The secret army: The IRA (revised 3
edition). London: Transaction.
Bennett K (2002) Participant observation. In: P Shurmer-Smith (ed) Doing cultural
geography. London: Sage, p 139-149.
Ben-Porat G (2005) Grounds for peace: Territoriality and conflict resolution. Geopolitics
10: 147-166.
Benson K and Nagar R (2006) Collaboration as resistance? Reconsidering the processes,
products, and possibilities of feminist oral history and ethnography. Gender,
Place and Culture 13(5): 581-592.
Bhabha H (1992) The world and the home. Social Text 31(2): 141-153.
Bhabha H (1994) The location of culture. London: Routledge.
Birmingham Public Geographies Working Group (2010)
www.gees.bham.ac.uk/research/clus
ters/cpp.pgwg. Accessed 23 March 2010.
Bloomer S and Edwards A (2009) UVF decommissioning  a pyrrhic victory. Fortnight
466: 6-7.
Blunt A and McEwan C (2002) Introduction. In: A Blunt and C McEwan (eds)
Postcolonial geographies. London: Continuum, p 1-6.
Blunt A and Wills J (2000) Dissident geographies: An introduction to radial ideas and
practice. London: Prentice Hall.
Blunt A and Rose G (1994) Writing women and space: Colonial and postcolonial
geographies. New York: Guilford Press.
Boal FW (1996) Integration and division: Sharing and segregation in Belfast. Planning
practice and research 11(2):121-158.
Boal FW (2000) Seeking the common ground. In: N Kliot and D Newman (eds)
Geopolitics at the end of the twentieth century: The changing world political
map. London: Frank Cass, p 239-261.
References 253
Boal FW (2002) Belfast: Walls within. Political Geography 21: 687-694.
Bondi L (1992) Gender symbols and urban landscapes. Progress in Human Geography
16(2): 157-170.
Bondi L (1993) Locating identity politics. In: M Keith and S Pile (eds) Place and the
politics of identity. London: Routledge.
Bondi L (1998) Gender, class and urban space: Public and private space in contemporary
urban landscape. Urban Geography 19(2): 160-185.
Bowman G (1993) Tales of the lost land: Palestinian identity and the formation of
nationalist consciousness. In: E Carter, J Donald and J Squires (eds) Space and
place: Theories of identity and location. London: Lawrence & Wishart, p 73-99.
Bourke A, Kilfeather S, Luddy M, Mac Curtain M, Meaney G, NDhonnchadha M,
ODowd M, Wills C (2002) Preface to volumes iv and v. In: A Bourke et al (eds)
The Field Day anthology of Irish writing, volume v: Irish womens writing and
traditions. Cork: Cork University Press, in association with Field Day, p xxxii-
xxxvi.
Bradshaw M and Stenning AC (2004) East Central Europe and the former Soviet Union:
Post-socialist states. Harlow, Essex: Pearson.
Brady E (2007) Introduction to environmental and land art. Ethics, Place and
Environment: 10(3): 257-261.
Brah A (1996) Cartographies of diaspora. London: Routledge.
Brennan T (2005) Mercator manoeuvre. Cultural Geographies 12(4): 514-520.
Brewer MB (2001) The many faces of social identity: Implications for political
psychology. Political Psychology 22(1): 115-125.
Brown K and MacGinty R (2003) Public attitudes toward partisan and neutral symbols in
post-agreement Northern Ireland. Identities  Global Studies in Culture and
Power 10: 83-108.
Bruce S (2004) Turf war and peace: Loyalist paramilitaries since 1994. Terrorism and
Political Violence 16(3): 501-521.
Bryson House (1992) Belfast Community Bonfire Code [pamphlet]. Belfast: Bryson
House.
Buckley-Zistel S (2008) Conflict transformation and social change in Uganda:
Remembering after violence. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Building Design Partnership (2007) Crumlin Road Gaol & Girdwood Barracks: Draft
masterplan and consultation process. London: Building Design Partnership
(London) Ltd.
Burgess J (1996) Focusing on fear: The use of focus groups in a project for the
Community Forest Unit, Countryside Commission. Area 28(2): 13-135.
Busteed M (2007) Fostered to trouble the next generation: Contesting the ownership of
the Martyrs commemoration ritual in Manchester 1888-1921. In: N Moore and Y
Whelan (eds) Heritage, memory and the politics of identity: New perspectives on
the cultural landscape. Aldershot: Ashgate, p 69-82.
References 254
Byrne S (2001) Consociational and civic society approaches to peacebuilding in Northern
Ireland. Journal of Peace Research 38(3): 327-352.
Byrne J and ORiordan O (2009) Review of the Belfast City Councils Bonfire
Management Programme 2007-2009. Belfast: Institute for Conflict Research.
Cahill C (2007) The personal is political: Developing new subjectivities through
participatory action research. Gender, Place and Culture 14(3): 267-292.
Cameron J and Gibson K (2005) Participatory action research in a poststructuralist vein.
Geoforum 36(3): 315-331.
Carroll C (2003) Introduction: The nation and postcolonial theory. In: C Carroll and P
King (eds) Ireland and postcolonial theory. Notre Dame: University of Notre
Dame Press, p 1-15
Carson C (1989) Belfast Confetti. Oldcastle, County Meath, Ireland: Gallery Press.
Carter P (1987) The road to Botany Bay. London: Faber and Faber.
Castree N and MacMillan T (2004) Old news: Representation and academic novelty.
Environment and Planning A 36: 469-480
Cebulla A (1996) Urban policy and local economic interests in Northern Ireland: A city
comparison. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 20(3): 466-
Chadda M (2004) Between consociationalism and control: Sri Lanka. In: U Schneckener
and S Wolff (eds) Managing and settling ethnic conflicts: Perspectives on
successes and failures in Europe, Africa and Asia. London: Hurst & Company, p
94-114.
Chambers I (1993) Narratives of nationalism: Being British. In: E Carter, J Donald and
J Squires (eds) Space and place: Theories of identity and location. London:
Lawrence & Wishart, p 145-164.
Chan S (2006) Gods little acre and Belfast Chinatown: Diversity and ethnic place
identity in Northern Ireland. The Fondazione Eni Enrico Mattei Series Index.
(Milan, Italy).
Clayton D (2008) Imperial geographies. In: JS Duncan, NC Johnson, RH Schein (eds) A
companion to cultural geography. Oxford: Blackwell, p 449-468.
Cleary J (2003) Misplaced ideas? Colonialism, location and dislocation in Irish studies.
In: C Carroll and P King (eds) Ireland and postcolonial theory. Notre Dame:
University of Notre Dame Press, p 16-45.
Cloke P (2004) Exploring boundaries of professional/personal practice and action: Being
and becoming in Khayelitsha Township, Cape Town. In: D Fuller and R Kitchin
(eds) Radical theory/critical praxis: Making a difference beyond the academy?
Vernon and Victoria, BC, Canada: Praxis (e)press, p 92-102. www.praxis-
epress.org/rtcp/contents.html. Accessed 23 March 2010.
Cohen S (2007) Winning while losing: The Apprentice Boys of Derry walk their beat.
Political Geography 26(8): 951-967.
Connolly P (2006) It goes without saying (well, sometimes): Racism, whiteness and
identity in Northern Ireland. In: Neal S and Agyeman J (eds) The new
References 255
countryside? Ethnicity, nation and exclusion in contemporary rural Britain.
Bristol: Policy Press, p 21-45.
Coogan TP (1980) On the blanket: The H Block story. Dublin: Ward River Press.
Coogan TP (1987) Disillusioned decades. Dublin: Ward River Press.
Coogan TP (1995) The I.R.A. (new edition). London: HarperCollins.
Countryside Area & Activities Network for Northern Ireland (2008) Barriers to
participation: A review of why specific communities in Northern Ireland do not
use the countryside for recreation. Belfast: Countryside Area & Activities
Network for Northern Ireland.
Crang M (1998) Cultural geography. London and New York: Routledge.
Cresswell T (1996) In place / out of place: Geography, ideology and transgression.
Minneapolis and London: University of Minnesota Press.
Cresswell (2000) Falling down: Resistance as diagnostic. In: JP Sharp, P Routledge, C
Philo and R Paddison (eds) Entanglements of power: Geographies of domination/
resistance. London: Routledge, p 256-268.
Crouch D (2003) Spacing, performing and becoming: Tangles in the mundane.
Environment and Planning A 35: 1945-1960.
Cusack J and McDonald H (2008) UVF: The endgame (revised edition). Dublin: Poolbeg.
Czaplicka J (2004) Putting heritage and identity into place after communism: Gdask,
Riga, and Vilnius. In: U Hedetoft and G Delanty (eds) The politics of multiple
belonging. Aldershot: Ashgate, p 147-166.
Daftary F (2004) Insular autonomy: A framework for conflict resolution? Corsica and the
land Islands. In: U Schneckener and S Wolff (eds) Managing and settling
ethnic conflicts: Perspectives on successes and failures in Europe, Africa and
Asia. London: Hurst & Company, p 115-138.
Dandeker C (1990) Surveillance, power and modernity: Bureaucracy and discipline from
1700 to the present day. Cambridge: Polity.
Daniels S (1993) Fields of vision: Landscape, imagery and national identity in England
and the United States. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Daniels S (2008) Landscape and art. In: JS Duncan, NC Johnson and RH Schein (eds) A
companion to cultural geography. Oxford: Blackwell, p 430-446.
Davies G and Dwyer C (2008) Qualitative methods II: Minding the gap. Progress in
Human Geography 32(3): 399-406.
Dayton BW (2009) Useful but insufficient: Intermediaries in peacebuilding. In: BW
Dayton and L Kriesberg (eds) Conflict transformation and peacebuilding:
Moving from violence to sustainable peace. London: Routledge, p 61-73.
Dayton BW and L Kriesberg (2009) Introduction. In: BW Dayton and L Kriesberg (eds)
Conflict transformation and peacebuilding: Moving from violence to sustainable
peace. London: Routledge, p 1-12.
de Baroid, C. (1999) Ballymurphy and the Irish war. London: Pluto Press.
Dempsey J and Rowe JK (2004) Why poststructuralism is a live wire for the left. In: D
Fuller and R Kitchin (eds) Radical theory/critical praxis: Making a difference
References 256
beyond the academy? Vernon and Victoria, BC, Canada: Praxis (e)press, p 31-51.
www.praxis-epress.org/rtcp/contents.html. Accessed 23 March 2010.
Dickey A (1972) Anti-incitement legislation in Britain and Northern Ireland. New
Community 1(2): 133-138.
Doherty P and Poole M (2000) Living apart in Belfast: Residential segregation in a
context of ethnic conflict. In: FW Boal (ed) Ethnicity and housing:
Accommodating differences. Aldershot: Ashgate, p 179-189.
Doherty P and Poole MA (2002) Religion as an indicator of ethnicity in Northern Ireland
 an alternative perspective. Irish Geography 35(2): 75-89.
Domosh M (1996) Invented cities: The creation of landscape in nineteenth-century New
York and Boston. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press.
Donnan H and OBrien (1998) Because you stick out, you stand out: Perceptions of
prejudice among Northern Irelands Pakistanis. In: P Hainsworth (ed) Divided
society: Ethnic minorities and racism in Northern Ireland. London: Pluto Press, p
197-221.
Douglas N (1997) Political structures: Social interaction and identity change in Northern
Ireland. In: BJ Graham (ed) In search of Ireland: A cultural geography. London:
Routledge, p 151-173.
Dowler L (1998) And they think Im just a nice old lady: Women and war in Belfast,
Northern Ireland. Gender, Place and Culture 5(2): 159-176.
Dowler L (2001) Fieldwork in the trenches: Participant observation in a conflict area. In:
M Limb and C Dwyer (eds) Qualitative methodologies for geographers: Issues
and debates. London: Arnold, p 153-164.
Dubrow GL (2000) Asian American imprints in the Western landscape. In: AR Alanen
and RZ Melnick (eds) Preserving cultural landscapes in America. Baltimore and
London: Johns Hopkins University Press, p 143-168.
Duffy P (1997) Writing Ireland: Literature and art in the representation of Irish place. In:
B Graham (ed) In search of Ireland: A cultural geography. London: Routledge, p
64-83.
Dwyer C (2000) Negotiating diasporic identities: Young British South Asian Muslim
women. Womens Studies International Forum 23(4): 475-486.
Dwyer C (2002) Where are you from?: Young British Muslim women and the making
of home. In: A Blunt and C McEwan (eds) Postcolonial geographies. London:
Continuum, p 184-199.
Dwyer C and Limb M (2001) Introduction: Doing qualitative research in geography. In:
M Limb and C Dwyer (eds) Qualitative methodologies for geographers: Issues
and debates. London: Arnold, p 1-20.
Dwyer C and Uberoi V (2009) British Muslims and community cohesion debates In: R
Phillips (ed) Muslim spaces of hope: Geographies of possibility in Britain and the
West. London: Zed Books, p 201-221.
Edney M (1997) Mapping an empire: The geographical construction of British India,
1765-1843. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
References 257
Edwards A and Bloomer S (2008) Introduction: Transforming the peace process: From
terrorism to democratic politics? In: A Edwards and S Bloomer (eds)
Transforming the peace process in Northern Ireland: From terrorism to
democratic politics. Dublin: Irish Academic Press, p 1-12.
Einhorn B (2000) Gender, nation, landscape and identity in narratives of exile and return.
Womens Studies International Forum 23(6): 701-713.
English R (2003) Armed struggle: The history of the IRA. London: Macmillan.
Fawcett L (1998) Fitting in: Ethnic minorities and the news media. In: P Hainsworth (ed).
Divided society: Ethnic minorities and racism in Northern Ireland. London: Pluto
Press, p 104-124.
Feldman A (1997) Violence and vision: The prosthetics and aesthetics of terror. Public
Culture 10: 125-160.
Foster JW (1991) Colonial consequences: Essays in Irish literature and culture. Dublin:
Lilliput Press.
Foster K and Lorimer M (2007) Some reflections on art-geography as collaboration.
Cultural Geographies 14(3): 425-432.
Friel B (1981) Translations. London: Faber & Faber.
Frykman MP (1997) Identities in war: Embodiments of violence and places of belonging.
Ethnologia Europaea 27: 153-162.
Fuller D and Askins K (2007) The discomfiting rise of public geographies  a public
conversation. Antipode 39(4): 579-601.
Fuller D and Kitchin R (2004) Radical theory/critical praxis: Academic geography
beyond the academy? In: D Fuller and R Kitchin (eds) Radical theory/critical
praxis: Making a difference beyond the academy? Vernon and Victoria, BC,
Canada: Praxis (e)press, p 1-20. www.praxis-epress.org/rtcp/contents.html.
Accessed 23 March 2010.
Gaffey S (2004) Signifying place: The semiotic realization of place in Irish product
marketing. Aldershot and Burlington: Ashgate.
Gaffikin and Rafferty (2008) Belfast: A city of partners? Experience & lessons from the
last decade. Belfast: Queens University Belfast.
Gailey A (1977) The bonfire in North Irish tradition. Folklore 88: 3-38.
Gallagher T (2004) After the war comes peace?: An examination of the impact of the
Northern Ireland conflict on young people. Journal of Social Issues 60(3): 629-
Gatenby B and Humphries M (2000) Feminist participatory action research:
Methodological and ethical issues. Womens Studies International Forum 23(1):
89-105.
Geoghegan P (2008) Managing race in a divided society: A study of race relations
policy in Northern Ireland. In: C Dwyer and C Bressey (eds) New geographies of
race and racism. Aldershot: Ashgate, p 125-139.
Gibbons L (2001) Race against time: Racial discourse and Irish history. In: G Castle (ed)
Postcolonial discourses: An anthology. Oxford: Blackwell.
References 258
Gillen, C. Unpublished Masters degree proposal. University of Ulster.
Gillespie R and Royle SA (2007) Belfast c. 1600 to c. 1900: The making of the modern
city. Dublin: Royal Irish Academy.
Golan G and Gal A (2009) Globalization and the transformation of conflict. In: BW
Dayton and L Kriesberg (eds) Conflict transformation and peacebuilding:
Moving from violence to sustainable peace. London: Routledge, p 123-139.
Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
Government of Ireland (1998) The Agreement: The agreement reached in multi-
party negotiations. www.nio.gov.uk. Accessed 24 March 2010.
Graham BJ (1994) No place of the mind: Contested Protestant representations of Ulster.
Ecumene 1(3): 257-281.
Graham BJ (2002) Heritage as knowledge: Capital or culture? Urban Studies 39(5-6):
1003-1117.
Graham B (2004) The past in the present: The shaping of identity in Loyalist Ulster.
Terrorism and Political Violence 16(3): 483-500.
Graham B and McDowell S (2007) Meaning in the Maze: The heritage of Long Kesh.
Cultural Geographies 14(3): 343-368.
Graham B and Nash C (2006) A shared future: Territoriality, pluralism and public policy
in Northern Ireland. Political Geography 25: 253-278.
Graham B and Shirlow P (1998) An elusive agenda: The development of a middle ground
in Northern Ireland. Area 30(3): 245-254.
Graham B and Shirlow P (2002) The Battle of the Somme in Ulster memory and identity.
Political Geography 21: 881-904.
Graham B and Whelan Y (2007) The legacies of the dead: Commemorating the Troubles
in Northern Ireland. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 25: 476-
Graham C (2008) Archetypes of an uncertain future. In: Duncan J (ed) Bonfires. Belfast:
Photoworks, Belfast Exposed Photography.
Green Balance (2006) The disposal of heritage assets by public bodies: A report by
Green Balance for The National Trust. London: The National Trust.
Hainsworth P (1998) Introduction: Ethnic minorities and racism in a divided society. In:
P Hainsworth (ed) Divided society: Ethnic minorities and racism in Northern
Ireland. London: Pluto, p 1-8.
Hall J (2002) The next generation: Can there be a feminist geography without gender?
Great Lakes Geographer 9(1): 19-27.
Hall M (2006) A new reality? Loyalism in Transition I. Island Pamphlets, volume 79.
Newtownabbey: Island Publications.
Hall S (1992) New ethnicities. In: J Donald and A Rattansi (eds) Race, culture and
difference. London: Sage, p 252-259.
Hall S (1996) Introduction: Who needs identity? In: S Hall and P du Gay (eds) Questions
of cultural identity. London: Sage, p 1-17.
References 259
Hall S (2002) Political belonging in a world of multiple identities. In: S Vertovec and R
Cohen (eds) Conceiving cosmopolitanism: Theory, context, practice. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, p 25-31.
Hall T (1997) Images of industry in the postindustrial city: Raymond Mason and
Birmingham. Ecumene 4(1): 46-68.
Hamber B (2006) Flying the flags of fear: The role of fear in the process of political
transition. Journal of Human Rights 5: 127-142.
Hanley B and Millar S (2009) The lost revolution: The story of the official IRA and the
Workers Party. Dublin: Penguin.
Hansen AS (2004) Writing indigenous belonging: Ownership in the construction of
identity in Japan. In: U Hedetoft and G Delanty (eds) The politics of multiple
belonging. Aldershot: Ashgate, p 221-237.
Harbom L, Hgbladh S and Wallensteen P (2006) Armed conflict and peace agreements.
Journal of Peace Research 43(5): 617-631.
Hardesty DL (2000) Ethnographic landscapes: Transforming nature into culture. In: AR
Alanen and RZ Melnick (eds) Preserving cultural landscapes in America.
Baltimore and London: Johns Hopkins University Press, p 169-185.
Harley JB (1988) Maps, knowledge, and power. In: D Cosgrove and S Daniels (eds) The
iconography of landscape. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, p 277-312.
Hawthorne E (ed) (2007) Whose story? 2005-2007: A record of the National Trusts
work with diverse communities in the West Midlands. London: The National
Trust.
Heller A (1995) Where we are at home. Thesis Eleven 41.
Hermann T (2001) The impermeable identity wall: The study of violent conflicts by
insiders and outsiders. In: M Smyth and G Robinson (eds) Researching
violently divided societies. London: Pluto, p 77-91.
Hetherington K (2003) Spatial textures: Place, touch and praesentia. Environment and
Planning A 35: 1933-1944.
Higgins K, Percy A, and McCrystal P (2004) Secular trends in substance abuse: The
conflict and young people in Northern Ireland. Journal of Social Issues 60(3):
485-506.
Hill A and White A. (2008) The flying of Israeli flags in Northern Ireland. Identities:
Global Studies in Culture and Power 15(1): 31-50.
Hirsch E and OHanlon M (eds) (1995) The anthropology of landscape: Perspectives on
space and place. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hobsbawm E (1983) Introduction: Inventing tradition. In: E Hobsbawm and T Ranger
(eds) The invention of tradition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, p 1-14.
Howe S (2000) Ireland and empire: Colonial legacies in Irish history and culture.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Huggan G (1989) Decolonizing the map: Post-colonialism, post-structuralism and the
cartographic connection. Ariel 20: 115-131.
References 260
Hughes J and Donnelly C (2004) Attitudes to community relations in Northern Ireland:
Signs of optimism in the post cease-fire period? Terrorism and Political Violence
16(3): 567-592.
Human Security Report Project (2008) Human security brief 2007. Vancouver, Canada:
Simon Fraser University.
Hyams M (2004) Hearing girls silences: Thoughts on the politics and practices of a
feminist method of group discussion. Gender, Place and Culture 11(1): 105-119.
Inter-Agency Working Group (2004) Bonfires [pamphlet]. Belfast.
Irish News, 26 February 2002, page 3. Flying Angel heralds the end to Jerichos walls.
Jacobs JM (1993) Resisting reconciliation: The secret geographies of (post)colonial
Australia. In: S Pile and M Keith (eds) Geographies of resistance. London:
Routledge, p 203-218.
Jacobs JM (1996) Edge of empire: Postcolonialism and the city. London: Routledge.
Jacobs JM and Nash C (2003) Too little, too much: Cultural feminist geographies.
Gender, Place and Culture 10(3): 265-279.
Jarman N (1997) Material conflicts: Parades and visual displays in Northern Ireland.
Oxford: Berg.
Jarman N (2004) From war to peace?: Changing patterns of violence in Northern Ireland,
1990-2003. Terrorism and Political Violence 16(3): 420-438.
Jarman N (2007) New migrant communities and Belfast. Belfast: Belfast City Council.
Jarman N and Monaghan R (2003) Analysis of incidents of racial harassment recorded by
the police in Northern Ireland. Belfast: Institute for Conflict Research.
Jenkins R (2003). Rethinking ethnicity: Identity, categorization, and power. In: J Stone
and R Dennis (eds) Race and ethnicity: Comparative and theoretical approaches.
Oxford: Blackwell, p 57-71.
Jenkins S, Jones V and Dixon D (2003) Thinking / doing the F word: On power in
feminist methodologies. ACME: An International E-Journal for Critical
Geographies 2(1): 58-63.
Johnson NC (2002) Mapping monuments: The shaping of public space and cultural
identities. Visual Communication 1: 293-298.
Johnston R and Plummer P (2005) What is policy-oriented research? Environment and
Planning A 37(9): 1521-1526.
Joireman SF (2004) Secession and its aftermath: Eritrea. In: U Schneckener and S Wolff
(eds) Managing and settling ethnic conflicts: Perspectives on successes and
failures in Europe, Africa and Asia. London: Hurst & Company, p 176-188.
Jones O (2005) An ecology of emotion, memory, self and landscape. In: J Urry, L Bondi
and M Smith (eds) Emotional geographies. Aldershot: Ashgate, p 205-218.
Kastoryano R (2004) Turkish transnational nationalism: How the Turks abroad redefine
nationalism. In: U Hedetoft and G Delanty (eds) The politics of multiple
belonging. Aldershot: Ashgate, p 77-91.
References 261
Keane MC (1990) Segregation processes in public sector housing. In: P Doherty (ed)
Geographical perspectives on the Belfast region. Newtownabbey: The
Geographical Society of Ireland, p 88-108.
Kesby M (2007) Spatialising participatory approaches: The contribution of geography to
a mature debate. Environment and Planning A 39: 2813-2831.
Kiberd D (1995) Inventing Ireland: The literature of the modern nation. London:
Vintage.
Kilpatrick R and Leitch R (2004) Teachers and pupils educational experiences and
school-based responses to the conflict in Northern Ireland. Journal of Social
Issues 60(3): 563-586.
Kinsman P (1995) Landscape, race and national identity: The photography of Ingrid
Pollard. Area 27(4): 300-310.
Kliot N and Mansfield Y (1997) The political landscape of partition: The case of Cyprus.
Political Geography 16(6): 495-521.
Kong L (1998) Refocusing on qualitative methods: Problems and prospects for research
in a specific Asian context. Area 30(1): 79-82.
Kriesberg L and Miller G (2009) Protagonist strategies that help end violence. In: BW
Dayton and L Kriesberg (eds) Conflict transformation and peacebuilding:
Moving from violence to sustainable peace. London: Routledge, p 13-29.
Latour B (1993) We have never been modern. London: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Lederach JP (1995) Preparing for peace: Conflict transformation across cultures. New
York: Syracuse University Press.
Lederach JP (1997) Building peace: Sustainable reconciliation in divided societies.
Washington: United States Institute of Peace Press.
Lederach JP (2005) The moral imagination: The art and soul of building peace. Oxford
and New York: Oxford University Press.
Lewis N (2000) The climbing body: Nature and the experience of modernity. Body and
Society 6(3/4): 58-80.
Lewis R and Mills S (eds) (2003) Feminist postcolonial theory: A reader. Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press.
Lim J and Browne K (2009) Senses of gender. Sociological Research Online I 14(1),
accessed 19 February 2010.
Lorimer H (2005) Cultural geography: The busyness of being more-than-
representational. Progress in Human Geography 29(1): 83-94.
Lorimer H (2006) Herding memories of humans and animals. Environment and Planning
D: Society and Space 24(4): 497-518.
Lownsbrough H and Beunderman J (2007) Equally spaced?: Public space and
interaction between diverse communities. Commission for Racial Equality.
Mac Giolla Easpaig, D. (2008) Placenames policy and its implementation. In: C Nic
Phidn and S  Cearnaigh (eds) A new view of the Irish language. Dublin: Cois
Life, p 164-177.
References 262
Mac Ionnrachtaigh (Enright) FE (2008) An ghaeilge faoi ghlas: Republican prisoners
and the Irish language in the North of Ireland  power, resistance and revival.
Unpublished PhD dissertation, Queen's University Belfast.
Mac Pilin A (1997) Plus a change: The Irish language and politics. In: A Mac Pilin
(ed) The Irish language in Northern Ireland. Belfast: Ultach Trust, p 31-48.
Mac Pilin A (1999) Language, identity and politics in Northern Ireland. Ulster Folklife
45: 106-132.
Maguire WA (1993) Belfast. Keele: Ryburn.
Massey D (1993) Power-geometry and a progressive sense of place. In: J Bird, B Curtis,
T Putnam, G Robertson and L Tickner (eds) Mapping the futures: Local cultures,
global change. London: Routledge.
Massey D (1994) Space, place and gender. Cambridge: Polity, p 59-69.
Matless D (1996) New material? Work in social and cultural geography, 1995. Progress
in Human Geography 20(3): 379-392.
Matless D (1998) Landscape and Englishness. London: Reaktion.
Matless D (2000) Action and noise of a hundred years: The making of a nature region.
Body and Society 6(3-4): 141-165.
Maxey LJ (2004) Moving beyond from within: Reflexive activism and critical
geographies. In: D Fuller and R Kitchin (eds) Radical theory/critical praxis:
Making a difference beyond the academy? Vernon and Victoria, BC, Canada:
Praxis (e)press, p 159-171. www.praxis-epress.org/rtcp/contents.html. Accessed
23 March 2010.
Mayo S (2009) London Voices evaluation project: Developing family learning practices
at The National Trust in London. London: The National Trust.
McCall C (2002) Political transformation and the reinvention of Ulster Scots identity and
culture. Identities  Global Studies in Culture and Power 9: 197-218.
McClintock A (1992) The angel of progress: Pitfalls of the term Post-colonialism.
Social Text 31/32: 84-98.
McDermott P and Odhiambo EO (forthcoming) Voices from the Global South. Belfast:
Centre for Global Education.
McDonald H and Cusack J (2004) UDA: Inside the heart of loyalist terror. London and
Dublin: Penguin.
McDowell L (1997) Women/gender/feminisms: Doing feminist geography. Journal of
Geography in Higher Education 21(3): 381-400.
McDowell L (2003) Redundant masculinities?: Employment change and white working
class youth. Oxford: Blackwell.
McDowell S (2007) Armalite, the ballot box and memorialization: Sinn Fin and the state
in post-conflict Northern Ireland. The Round Table 96(393): 725-738.
McDowell S (2008a) Selling conflict heritage through tourism in peacetime Northern
Ireland: Transforming conflict or exacerbating difference? International Journal
of Heritage Studies 14(5): 405-421.
References 263
McDowell S (2008b) Commemorating dead men: Gendering the past and present in
post-conflict Northern Ireland. Gender, Place and Culture 15(4): 335-354.
McEvoy K (2001) Paramilitary imprisonment in Northern Ireland: Resistance,
management and release. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
McEvoy K, Shirlow P and McElrath K (2004) Resistance, transition and exclusion:
Politically motivated ex-prisoners and conflict transformation in Northern
Ireland. Terrorism and Political Violence 16(3): 646-670.
McGarry J and OLeary B (eds) (1993) The politics of ethnic conflict regulation. London:
Routledge.
McGovern M (2004) The old days are over: Irish Republicanism, the peace process, and
the discourse of equality. Terrorism and Political Violence 16(3): 622-645.
McGuinness M (2002) Geographies with a difference? Citizenship and difference in
postcolonial urban spaces. In: A Blunt and C McEwan (eds) Postcolonial
geographies. London: Continuum, p 99-114.
McKeown L (2001) Out of time: Republican prisoners 1970-2000. Belfast: Beyond the
Pale Press.
McSweeney B (1996) Security, identity and the peace process in Northern Ireland.
Security Dialogue 27(2): 167-178.
McVeigh R (1998) Theres no racism because theres no black people here: Racism and
anti-racism in Northern Ireland. In: P Hainsworth (ed) Divided society: Ethnic
minorities and racism in Northern Ireland. London: Pluto, p 11-32.
McVeigh R (2006) The next Stephen Lawrence?: Racist violence and criminal justice in
Northern Ireland. Belfast: Northern Ireland Council for Ethnic Minorities.
Meyer MK (2000) Ulsters Red Hand: Gender, identity, and sectarian conflict in Northern
Ireland. In: S Ranchor-Nilsson and MA Ttreault (eds) Women, states, and
nationalism: At home in the nation? London: Routledge, p 119-142.
Miall H (2004) Conflict transformation: A multi-dimensional task. Berghof Handbook for
Conflict Transformation. Berghof Research Centre for Constructive Conflict
Management.
Miall H, Ramsbotham O, Woodhouse T (1999) Contemporary Conflict Resolution: The
prevention, management and transformation of deadly conflicts. Malden: Polity.
Minow M (1997) Not only for myself: Identity, politics and the law. New York: New
Press.
Mitchell D (1995) The end of public space? Peoples park, definitions of the public, and
democracy. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 85(1): 108-133.
Mitchell D (1996) Introduction: Public space and the city. Urban Geography 17(2): 127-
Mitchell D (2003) Cultural landscapes: Just landscapes or landscapes of justice? Progress
in Human Geography 27(6): 787-296.
Mitchell D (2004) Radical scholarship: A polemic on making a difference outside the
academy. In: D Fuller and R Kitchin (eds) Radical theory/critical praxis: Making
a difference beyond the academy? Vernon and Victoria, BC, Canada: Praxis
References 264
(e)press, p 21-31. www.praxis-epress.org/rtcp/contents.html. Accessed 23 March
2010.
Mitchell WJT (1994) Imperial landscape. In: WJT Mitchell (ed) Landscape and power.
London: Routledge, p 6-34.
Monaghan R (2004) An imperfect peace: Paramilitary punishments in Northern Ireland.
Terrorism and Political Violence 16(3): 439-461.
Moore N and Whelan Y (2007) Preface. In: N Moore and Y Whelan (eds) Heritage,
memory and the politics of identity: New perspectives on the cultural landscape.
Aldershot: Ashgate, p x-xii.
Morin KM (2005) Landscape and environment: Representing and interpreting the world.
In: SL Holloway, SP Rice and G Valentine (eds) Key concepts in geography.
London: Sage, p 319-334.
Morley D (2000) Home territories: Media, mobility and identity. London: Routledge.
Morrissey M and Gaffikin F. Planning for peace in contested space: Inclusion through
engagement and sanction. In: Brand R, Gaffikin F, Morrissey M and Perry D
(eds) Changing the contested city. Belfast: Queens University Belfast, Contested
Cities-Urban Universities research project, p 17-46.
Moss P (2002) Taking on, thinking about, and doing feminist research in geography. In: P
Moss (ed) Feminist geography in practice: Research and methods. Oxford:
Blackwell, p 1-17.
Muggah R (2005) No magic bullet: A critical perspective on disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) and weapons reduction in post-conflict
contexts. Round Table 94(379): 238-252.
Muldoon OT (2004) Children of the Troubles: The impact of political violence in
Northern Ireland. Journal of Social Issues 60(3): 453-468.
Mulgahy A (2000) Policing history: The official discourse and organization memory of
the Royal Ulster Constabulary. British Journal of Criminology 40: 68-87.
Murphy AB (2006) Enhancing geographys role in public debate. Annals of the
Association of American Geographers 96(1): 1-13.
Murtagh B (2000) Belfasts peace lines and potential directions for local planning. In: F
Boal (ed) Ethnicity and housing: Accommodating differences. Aldershot:
Ashgate, p 190-197.
Nairn K (2002) Doing feminist fieldwork about geography fieldwork. In: P Moss (ed)
Feminist geography in practice: Research and methods. Oxford: Blackwell, p
146-159.
Nash C (1999) Irish placenames: Post-colonial locations. Transactions of the Institute of
British Geographers 24(4): 457-480.
Nash C (2002) Cultural geography: Postcolonial cultural geographies. Progress in
Human Geography 26(2): 219-230.
Nash C (2005a) Equity, diversity and interdependence. Antipode 37(2): 272-300.
Nash C (2005b) Local histories in Northern Ireland. History Workshop Journal 60(1): 45-
References 265
Neal S and Agyeman J (2006a) Introduction. In: Neal S and Agyeman J (eds) The new
countryside? Ethnicity, nation and exclusion in contemporary rural Britain.
Bristol: Policy Press, p 1-17.
Neal S and Agyeman J (2006b) Remaking English ruralities: Processes of belonging and
becoming, continuity and change in racialised spaces. In: Neal S and Agyeman J
(eds) The new countryside? Ethnicity, nation and exclusion in contemporary
rural Britain. Bristol: Policy Press, p 99-125.
Neill WJV (1999) Whose city? Can a place vision for Belfast avoid the issue of identity?
European Planning Studies 7(3): 269-281.
Nelson L (1999) Bodies (and spaces) do matter: The limits of performativity. Gender,
Place and Culture 6(4): 331-353.
Noonan P (1998) Pathologisation and resistance: Travellers, nomadism and the state. In:
Hainsworth P (ed) Divided society: Ethnic minorities and racism in Northern
Ireland. London: Pluto, p 152-183.
Norton W (2006) Cultural geography: Environments, landscapes, identities, inequalities
edition). Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
 Cadhla, S. (2007) Civilizing Ireland: Ordnance Survey 1824-1842: Ethnography,
Cartography, Translation. Dublin: Irish American Press.
ODonnell C (2008) The evolution of Irish republicanism and the peace process in
Northern Ireland. In: A Edwards and S Bloomer (eds) Transforming the peace
process in Northern Ireland: From terrorism to democratic politics. Dublin: Irish
Academic Press, p 44-58.
OKeeffe T (2007) Landscape and memory: Historiography, theory, methodology. In: N
Moore and Y Whelan (eds) Heritage, memory and the politics of identity: New
perspectives on the cultural landscape. Aldershot: Ashgate, p 3-18.
OReilly CO (1999) The Irish language in Northern Ireland: The politics of culture and
identity. London: Macmillan.
OReilly K (2005) Ethonographic Methods. Abingdon: Routledge.
Oppenheimer AR (2009) IRA: The bombs and the bullets: A history of deadly ingenuity.
Dublin: Irish Academic Press.
Orange Order (2008) Burning passion: The historic tradition of bonfires [pamphlet].
Belfast: The Orange Order.
Ordnance Survey, 1
edition (1833) Map of County Antrim, sheet 60. Surveyed 1832,
engraved 1833.
Parr H (2007) Mental health, nature work and social inclusion. Environment and
Planning D: Society and Space 25(3): 537-561.
Parsons N (2009) The Palestine Liberation Organization and the Oslo process:
Incorporation without accommodation. In: BW Dayton and L Kriesberg (eds)
Conflict transformation and peacebuilding: Moving from violence to sustainable
peace. London: Routledge, p 235-251.
Phillips A (2005) Walking and looking. Cultural Geographies 12(4): 507-513.
References 266
Pile S (1993) Introduction: Opposition, political identities and spaces of resistance. In: S
Pile and M Keith (eds) Geographies of resistance. London: Routledge, p 1-32.
Polkinghorn B and Byrne S (2001) Between war and peace: An examination of conflict
management styles in four conflict zones. International Journal of Conflict
Management 12(1): 23-46.
Poole MA (2004) Has it made any difference?: The geographical impact of the 1994
cease-fire in Northern Ireland. Terrorism and Political Violence 16(3): 401-419.
Pratt G (2002) Studying immigrants in focus groups. In: P Moss (ed) Feminist geography
in practice: Research and methods. Oxford: Blackwell, p 214-229.
Ramadan A (2009) A refugee landscape: Writing Palestinian nationalisms in Lebanon.
ACME: An International E-Journal of Critical Geographies 8(1): 69-99.
Reason P and Bradbury H (2002) Introduction: Inquiry and participation in search of a
world worthy of human aspiration. In: P Reason and H Bradbury (eds) Handbook
of Action Research. London: Sage, p 1-14.
Refugee Action Group (2007) Forced to flee (3
edition). Belfast: Refugee Action
Group.
Reid B (2004) Labouring towards the space to belong: Place and identity in Northern
Ireland. Irish Geography 37(1): 103-113.
Reid B (2005) A profound edge: Performative negotiations of Belfast. Cultural
Geographies 12(4): 485-506.
Reid B (2008) Trellising the girders: Poetry and the imagining of place in Northern
Ireland. Social and Cultural Geography 9(5): 519-933.
Reinharz S (1992) Feminist methods in social research. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Relph E (1976) Place and placelessness. London: Pion.
Revill G (1994) Promoting the Forest of Dean: Art, ecology and the industrial landscape.
In: JR Gold and SV Ward (eds) Place promotion: The use of publicity and
marketing to sell towns and regions. Chichester: John Wiley, p 233-245.
Robertson I and Hall T (2007) Memory, identity and the memorialization of conflict in
the Scottish Highlands. In: N Moore and Y Whelan (eds) Heritage, memory and
the politics of identity: New perspectives on the cultural landscape. Aldershot:
Ashgate, p 19-36.
Rose G (1997) Situating knowledges: Positionality, reflexivities and other tactics.
Progress in Human Geography 21(3): 305-320.
Ross MH (2001) Psychocultural interpretations and dreams: Identity dynamics in ethnic
conflict. Political Psychology 22(1): 157-178.
Rothchild D and Roeder PG (2005a) Dilemmas of state-building in divided societies. In:
PG Roeder and D Rothchild (eds) Sustainable peace: Power and democracy after
civil war. London: Cornell University Press, p 1-25.
Rothchild D and Roeder PG (2005b) Power sharing as an impediment to peace and
democracy. In: PG Roeder and D Rothchild (eds) Sustainable peace: Power and
democracy after civil war. London: Cornell University Press, p 29-50.
References 267
Ryan S (2007) The transformation of violent intercommunal conflict. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Sales R (1997) Women divided: Gender, religion and politics in Northern Ireland.
London: Routledge.
Saores A (2002) Relatrio Sobre Trabalhadores: Experiences of Portuguese migrant
workers in Northern Ireland. Belfast: Multicultural Resource Centre.
Schama S (1996) Landscape and memory. New York: Vintage.
Seamon D (1979) A geography of the lifeworld: Movement, rest and encounter. London:
Croom Helm.
Seamon D and Mugurauer R (eds) (1989) Dwelling, place and environment: Towards a
phenomenology of person and world. New York: Columbia University Press.
Selwyn T (2001) Landscapes of separation: Reflections on the symbolism of by-pass
roads in Palestine. In: B Bender and M Winer (eds) Contested landscapes:
Movement, exile, and place. Oxford: Berg, p 225-240.
Sennet R (1990) The conscience of the eye: The design and social life of cities. New
York: Knopf.
Serbin KP (2009) Mainstreaming the revolutionaries: National Liberating Action and the
shift from resistance to democracy in Brazil, 1964-present. In: BW Dayton and L
Kriesberg (eds) Conflict transformation and peacebuilding: Moving from
violence to sustainable peace. London: Routledge, p 204-219.
Seymour WA (1980) A history of the Ordnance Survey. Folkestone, Kent: Dawson.
Shirlow P, Graham B, McEvoy K,  hAdhmail F, Purvis D (2005) Politically motivated
former prisoner groups: Community activism and conflict transformation.
Belfast: Community Relations Council.
Shirlow P and McEvoy K (2008) Beyond the wire: Former prisoners and conflict
transformation in Northern Ireland. London: Pluto.
Shirlow P and Murtagh B (2006) Belfast: Segregation, violence and the city. London:
Pluto.
Simpson G (1997) Reconstruction and reconciliation: Emerging from transition.
Development in Practice 7(4): 475-478.
Simpson G (2000) Rebuilding fractured societies: Reconstruction, reconciliation and the
changing nature of violence in South Africa. Unpublished conference paper.
Smith A (2003) Landscape representation: Place and identity in nineteenth-century
Ordnance Survey maps of Ireland. In: PJ Stewart and A Strathern (eds)
Landscape, memory and history: Anthropological perspectives. London: Pluto, p
71-88.
Smith AD (1986) The Ethnic Origins of Nations. Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA:
Blackwell.
Smith D (1996) Security, identity, and the peace process in Northern Ireland. Security
Dialogue 27(2): 179-184.
Smyth M (2004) The process of demilitarization and the reversibility of the peace process
in Northern Ireland. Terrorism and Political Violence 16(3): 544-566.
References 268
Smyth M and Darby J (2001) Does research make any difference?: The case of Northern
Ireland. In: M Smyth and G Robinson (eds) Researching violently divided
societies. London: Pluto, p 34-54.
Smyth M and Robinson G (2001) Conclusions. In: M Smyth and G Robinson (eds)
Researching violently divided societies. London: Pluto, p 207-209.
Snape R (2004) The Co-operative Holidays Association and the cultural formation of
countryside leisure practice. Leisure Studies 23(2): 143-158.
Snape R (2009) Continuity, change and performativity in leisure: English folk dancing
and modernity, 1900-1939. Leisure Studies 28(3): 297-311.
Spivak GC (1998) Can the subaltern speak? In: C Nelson and L Grossberg (eds) Marxism
and the interpretation of culture. London: Macmillian, p 271-313.
Staeheli LA and Mitchell D (2005) The complex politics of relevance in geography.
Annals of the Association of American Geographers 95(2): 357-372.
Stainer J (2005) The possibility of non-sectarian futures: Emerging disruptive identities
of place in the Belfast of Ciaran Carsons The Star Factory. Environment and
Planning D: Society and Space 23(3): 373-394.
Stapleton K and Wilson J (2004) Ulster Scots identity and culture: The missing voices.
Identities  Global Studies in Culture and Power 11: 563-591.
Steenkamp C (2005) The legacy of war: Conceptualizing a culture of violence to
explain violence after peace accords. Round Table 94(379): 253-267.
Sultana F (2007) Reflexivity, positionality and participatory ethics: Negotiating fieldwork
dilemmas in international research. ACME: An International E-Journal of
Critical Geographies 6(3): 374-385.
Thrift N (1996) Spatial Formations. London: Sage.
Thrift N (1997) The still point: Resistance, expressive embodiment and dance. In: S Pile
and M Keith (eds) Geographies of resistance. London: Routledge.
Thrift N (2000) Afterwards. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space. 18(2):
213-255.
Tolia-Kelly DP (2006) Mobility/stability: British Asian cultures of landscape and
Englishness. Environment and Planning A 38: 341-358.
Tolia-Kelly DP (2004) Landscape, race and memory: Biographical mapping of the routes
of British Asian landscape values. Landscape Research 29(3): 277-292.
Tonge J (2004) They havent gone away, you know: Irish Republican dissidents and
armed struggle. Terrorism and Political Violence 16(3): 671-693.
Tonge J (2008) Nationalist Convergence? The evolution of Sinn Fin and SDLP politics.
In: A Edwards and S Bloomer (eds) Transforming the peace process in Northern
Ireland: From terrorism to democratic politics. Dublin: Irish Academic Press, p
59-76.
Tuan YF (1974) Topophilia: A study of environmental perception, attitudes and values.
Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.
Tuan YF (1977) Space and place: The perspective of experience. Minneapolis: University
of Minnesota Press.
References 269
Tuan YF (1979) Landscapes of fear. New York: Pantheon.
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organizations (2009)
http://whc.unesco.org./en/culturallandscape, accessed 15 February 2009
Valentine G (2002) People like us: Negotiating sameness and difference in the research
process. In: P Moss (ed) Feminist geography in practice: Research and methods.
Oxford: Blackwell, p 116-126.
Valentine G (2003) Boundary crossings: Transitions from childhood to adulthood.
Childrens Geographies 1(1): 37-52.
Valentine G (2007) Theorizing and researching intersectionality: A challenge for feminist
geography. The Professional Geographer 59 (1): 10-21.
Van den Abbele G (2004) No joking matter: The multiple identities of Belgium. In: U
Hedetoft and G Delanty (eds) The politics of multiple belonging. Aldershot:
Ashgate, p 207-220.
Vayrynen R (1991) To settle or to transform? Perceptives on the resolution of national
and international conflicts. In: R Vayrynen (ed) New directions in conflict theory:
Conflict resolution and conflict transformation. London: Sage, p 1-25.
Ward K (2006) Geography and public policy: Towards public geographies. Progress in
Human Geography 30(4): 495-503.
Ward RJ (2004) Its not just tea and buns: Women and pro-union politics in Northern
Ireland. British Journal of Politics and International Relations 6(4): 494-506.
Ward R (2002) Invisible women: The political roles of unionist and loyalist women in
contemporary Northern Ireland. Parliamentary Affairs 55(1): 167-178.
Warm D (1998) The Jews in Northern Ireland. In: Hainsworth P (ed) Divided society:
Ethnic minorities and racism in Northern Ireland. London: Pluto, p 222-239.
Watson, I. (2008) The Irish language and identity. In: C Nic Phidn and S  Cearnaigh
(eds) A new view of the Irish language. Dublin: Cois Life, p 66-75.
Winchester H, Kong L, and Dunn K (2003) Landscapes: Ways of imagining the world.
London: Pearson.
Winter T (2007) Landscapes in the living memory: New Year festivities at Angkor,
Cambodia. In: N Moore and Y Whelan (eds) Heritage, memory and the politics
of identity: New perspectives on the cultural landscape. Aldershot: Ashgate, p
133-147.
Withers CWJ (2000) Authorizing landscape: Authority, naming and the Ordnance
Surveys mapping of the Scottish Highlands in the nineteenth century. Journal of
Historical Geography 26(4): 532-554.
Wolff S (2004) Settling an ethnic conflict through power-sharing: South Tyrol. In: U
Schneckener and S Wolff (eds) Managing and settling ethnic conflicts:
Perspectives on successes and failures in Europe, Africa and Asia. London: Hurst
& Company, p 57-76.
Woods M (2005) Rural geography: Processes, responses and experiences in rural
restructuring. London: Sage.
Woodward K (1997) Identity and difference. London: Sage.
References 270
Woodward K (2000) Questions of identity. In: K Woodward (ed) Questioning identity:
Gender, class, nation. London: Routledge, p 5-41.
Woodward R (2004) Military geographies. Oxford: Blackwell.
Wylie J (2002) An essay on ascending Glastonbury Tor. Geoforum 33: 441-454.
Wylie J (2005) A single days walking: Narrating self and landscape on the South West
Coastal Path. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 30(2): 234-
Wylie J (2007) Landscape. London: Routledge.
Young R (2001) Postcolonialism: An historical introduction. Oxford: Blackwell.
Yuval-Davis N, Anthias S and Kofman E (2005) Secure borders and safe haven and the
gendered politics of belonging: Beyond social cohesion. Ethnic and Racial
Studies 28(3): 513-535.
Zurawski N (2005) I know where you live: Aspects of watching, surveillance and
social control in a conflict zone (Northern Ireland). Surveillance and Society 2(4):
498-572.
Appendix 1. Sample Interview Questions  Divis (Ethnic Minorities) 271
Sample Question Rationale
1. Introductions: Name, where you came from,
and how long you have lived in Belfast.
Establish ethnic identity, other
identities
2. Before today, what did you know about the
Belfast hills?
Previous knowledge of and
relationship with landscape
Did you know that you are allowed to go there?
What were your impressions of the hills?
3. How would you describe your experience of
todays hike?
Current thoughts on the hills
How has the hike changed your previous ideas
about the hills?
4. What did you think of the view of the city? Thoughts on view of the city
Has it changed your sense of Belfast? Of
Northern Ireland? How?
Perceptions of scale
Has the hike helped you feel more of a
connection to Belfast?
5. More generally, how would you describe your
experience of living in Belfast?
Thoughts on belonging
How would you describe your experience of
living here during the peace process?
What are ways in which you feel as though you
belong? What are ways in which you feel as
though you dont belong?
In general, does Belfast/Northern Ireland enter
into your sense of identity? How?
Articulation of identity and
place
6. Going back to our hike today, do you think that
you would go to the hills on your own?
Continuing engagement with
Belfast hills
Would you feel safe there?
What would be your ideal walk, either in the
city or outside of it? How long? What would
you want to see or experience?
Appendix 1. Sample Interview Questions  Divis (Ethnic Minorities) 271
Appendix 2. Sample Interview Questions  Bonfires (Ethnic Minorities) 272
Sample Question Rationale
1. Where in Belfast do you live? For how long
have you lived here?
Establish ethnic identity, other
identities
What kinds of identities do you draw from this
place? How is [this place  i.e., neighbourhood,
Belfast, Northern Ireland] important to your
sense of identity?
Articulation of identity and
place
What other aspects of identity do you consider
important?
2. How would you describe your experience of
the bonfire tradition?
Establish relationship to bonfire
tradition and core community
In your opinion, why do you think this tradition
is celebrated?
What aspects of the bonfire tradition do you
find frustrating?
What aspects of the tradition do you find
positive or enjoyable?
How do the bonfires affect your sense of
belonging to/identity in [this place]?
Articulation of how bonfires
affect sense of identity and
place
3. Recently, some loyalist communities have been
trying to open their bonfire tradition to people
from other cultural backgrounds. How would
you describe your reaction to their efforts?
Establish extent of interest in
participating in the
transformation of bonfires.
How would you feel about being included in
the bonfire tradition?
What would need to happen for you to feel
included and valued in [this place]?
What kind of place might you see for yourself
in this evolving tradition?
Articulation of identity and
belonging in changing Northern
Ireland.
What kind of place do you see for yourself in
your neighbourhood / in Belfast, more
generally?
Appendix 2. Sample Interview Questions  Bonfires (Ethnic Minorities) 273
4. What is different today? Thoughts on relationship
between environment and peace
process
How is [this place  i.e., neighbourhood,
Belfast, Northern Ireland] different today? How
has it changed?
Have the bonfires changed the way you think
about [this place]? Has it changed your
relationship to [this place]? If so, how and in
what ways?
How does [this activity] tie into other aspectrs
of your identity?
What are your hopes for [this place]? Does [this
activity] tie into these hopes? If so, how?
