The Relationship Between 
Children's Cultural 
Literacies and their 
Readings of Literary Texts 
A thesis submitted in partial fulfilment of 
the requirements of the University of 
Brighton for the degree of Doctor of 
Philosophy 
Heather Mines 
December 2000 
Abstract 
The thesis asks what the reading processes are through which children and 
adults both use and transfonn their culture and how these processes relate to 
our understanding of what reading is and how it is defmed. In order to address 
the question, a polysemic picture-book, The Tunnel (Anthony Browne, 1989), 
was selected as a dual-address, pluralist text, to be read with groups of 
Bangladeshi children from the London borough of Tower Hamlets and children 
from rural Sussex. The researcher's own reading fIrst looked at the levels of 
meaning created by the relationship between the words and pictures and how 
these are revealed by the graphic codes. The text was read as an account of the 
relationship between inner and outer reality, dealing with unconscious fears 
and desires of growing up and using archetypal and kenotypal imagery to 
develop the theme. Literary theories are then discussed which may have 
explanatory power for such a reading and the processes by which meanings are 
constructed, including psychoanalytic theory and those perspectives in which 
the reading process is seen as a partnership which privileges the reader. 
Children's literature is discussed in the light of these theories, and the need is 
seen for texts that will themselves provide reading lessons for readers who are 
still developing. 
Literary theory sees reading as a partnership in which both text and 
reader are culturally constituted, but both have the power to transfonn each 
other. Having discussed reading, the study then considers readers and the social 
context for their reading, discussing the tenn 'culture' with reference to 
Vygotskian theories of the intemalisation of social processes, and cultural and 
multicultural studies which may illuminate differences in the children's 
reading. 
8arthes's semiotic codes are seen as an appropriate coding system for 
the analysis of layers of meaning in both the text and the children's readings of 
it. Analysis indicates differences in their interpretation of cultural detail and 
intertext and in understanding of the polysemic nature of the text: there was 
also resistance to the theme of gender in all groups of children. Nevertheless 
there were also marked similarities in approach and the text enabled all Groups 
actively to construct meanings in the context of their own literary, cultural and 
personal experiences. The thesis concludes, therefore, that such polysemic texts 
have power for all children and should be an integral part of their literary 
experience. 
IMAGES ON PAGES 1, iv, 131, 
135 AND 137, HAVE BEEN 
OMITTED AT THE REQUEST OF 
THE AWARDING UNIVERSITY. 
Contents 
Acknowledgements iii 
Abstract iv 
Introduction 
Chapter I Reading Processes: the Reader and the Text II 
Part I A Reading of The Tunnel 11 
Part 2 Literary Perspectives 32 
Chapter 2 Cultural Contexts 66 
Chapter 3 Methodology 99 
Chapter 4 Data analysis 125 
Part I The context of the fieldwork 125 
Part 2 Semiotic analysis of selected pages 130 
Part 3 Response to the proairetic and hermeneutic codes 140 
Part 4 Response to the semic, symbolic and cultural codes 155 
Conclusion 188 
Bibliography 216 
Appendices 234 
Appendix 1: School A reading 1 235 
Appendix 2: School A reading 2 249 
Appendix 3: School Breading 1 270 
Appendix 4: School Breading 2 279 
Appendix 5: School Breading 3 287 
Appendix 6: School C reading 1 304 
Appendix 7: School C reading 2 312 
Illustrations on title and acknowledgements pages 
Giorgione La Tempesta (c. 1505) 
Acknowledgements 
I would like to thank my friend and supervisor, 
Carol Fox, for her unstinting help, encouragement 
and inspiration, in writing this. 
Thanks are also due to my colleagues Carole 
King, Henrietta Dombey and all the 'English 
Team' for their generous support. Special thanks 
also to Pam Blackman. 
Particular thanks to Ken Mines for his 
continuing help and also to Andrew and Richard 
Mines for their technical assistance. 
Thanks also to the schools concerned, 
especially the children. 
A special acknowledgement to Margaret 
Meek Spencer, who not only encouraged and 
advised me but, through her writing and lectures, 
taught me about the power of texts for young 
children and inspired me to write this thesis. 
Introduction 
Introduction 
My interest in how children read texts from other cultures began with a ten-year-old 
Sylhetti girl, Haleema, who was learning to read and make sense of English books. 
She had been in England for about six months and attended a school recently built in 
the centre of Tower Hamlets to accommodate the growing number of Bangladeshi 
children. The building was attractive and the keen young staff were committed to 
valuing the children's home culture and language and to building up a stock of 
appropriate books, including picture-books and dual-text books. 
Haleema's teacher asked me to read and talk to her because he was concerned 
that she was not making the expected progress in reading. So, armed with the first 
suitable book I could find, I Hate My Teddy Bear (1982), despite the raised eyebrows 
of the teacher who thought she would not understand it, Haleema and I departed to a 
quiet room together. 
I asked her first if she could read in Bengali and her face lit up as she told me 
that she was so good that she had been awarded a gold medal. For two hours most 
evenings she attended Bengali school, where the children sat in rows and learned to 
read, using a systematic phonic approach together with extensive rote-learning and 
class chanting. Haleema was also learning to recite the Qu'ran in classical Arabic and 
her evident enthusiasm reminded me of other Bangladeshi children I had worked with 
- the boys who chanted long passages to me and loved to learn them because 'It's the 
word of God, Miss' (Mines 1986: 14). Haleema enjoyed reading with me, 
competently managing the simple written text and discussing the complex pictures 
with interest, noticing details and making connections. The next time I saw her was 
six months later when she was in another class. She asked if she could read to me and, 
to my surprise, produced Pippi Longstocking. which she read with painstaking care. 
Many words and concepts were unfamiliar to her and she showed me her notebook in 
Introduction 
which she wrote them down to check with her teacher later. I was impressed by her 
perseverance and progress, but I was also puzzled: what sort of sense was an orthodox 
Muslim girl making of Pip pi Longstocking, an independent, rebellious Swedish girl? 
Haleema stayed in my mind as I read and shared books with children from a 
variety of cultures and classes and raised a number of recurring questions. What sort 
of books should we be providing for pupils like her? Should our priority be to select 
books that reflect a multicultural society and contain positive images of ethnic 
minorities? If so, why were Haleema and other children like her motivated to work 
hard to read texts that presented bigger challenges? 
My own early literacy experiences as a child possibly gave me some insight 
into Haleema's. Like her I grew up in a religion that centred on interpretation of a 
religious text - in my case the Bible - and strict adherence to it. I was brought up as a 
member of the Exclusive Plymouth Brethren, who believed that every aspect of our 
lives should be controlled by a literal interpretation of the Scriptures. We therefore 
lived within a close-knit community in which the Brethren cared for each other but 
whose beliefs exerted a strong control over every aspect of our lives. 
Brian Street (1984) has described how, in Maktab literacy, the Mullahs were 
able to make multiple interpretations of passages of the Qu'ran and apply these to 
details of daily life. For us, too, multiple interpretations of the Scriptures were 
encouraged and the Bible was studied in depth for layers of allegorical meaning. 
Although all the men participated in the interpretative process, there were 
acknowledged to be those who had the gift of prophecy and exposition, becoming 
unofficial leaders: strong boundaries of interpretation were fixed by consensus, and 
meaning was mediated through the hierarchy of authority. In Father and Son (Gosse 
1907, 1997 edn), Edmund Gosse's account of his own childhood within the Brethren, 
he writes of his father's turmoil because of the conflict between the evidence of his 
own scientific discoveries, which were influential in the development of 19th century 
evolutionary theory, and his belief in the literal interpretation of the Bible. 
I learned to read partly by following my mother's finger pointing at the Bible 
and at hymns with which I was already familiar. Reading was my major form of 
entertainment and I read voraciously, despite some Brethren disapproval of novels. 
When eventually I moved away from my early evangelical faith, novelists such as 
George Eliot and Thomas Hardy who had trodden a similar path were to provide 
Introduction 
comfort and hope, but it was a long time before I felt at ease with contemporary 
novels, written within a quite different moral framework. My pleasure at close reading 
of texts for their connotations or levels of meaning may well have its source in the 
interpretative procedures I regularly listened to. 
My sheltered upbringing left me ill-prepared for my first teaching post in 
Hoxton in the early sixties. This was an area situated near the site of the notorious 
Jago described by Arthur Morrison (1896) and one that was referred to in one of the 
newspapers as the 'black mile' of London's crime. The teachers worked hard, 
although there was a tacit acceptance that most children would not succeed 
academically and that we would do well if we instilled into them a functional literacy 
and a willingness to engage in routine, mainly workbook-centred, activities. My own 
salvation lay in my love of stories. I found that the only way I could control my class 
was to tell stories, and I began with the Wooden Horse of Troy and the stories of 
Odysseus. The toughest boys were the most attentive listeners: gradually they 
accepted me and we were able to share a variety of literature, including The Hobbit 
and parts of Oliver Twist, and to read and write poetry. Thus stories came to be at the 
heart of my teaching, almost by accident. Looking back I wonder now what it all 
meant to them: for many, reading would be no more than a series of drills, but there is 
no doubt that the heroic qualities of the stories touched their lives in some way and, 
for a time, turned us into a community of readers. 
Increasingly involved with children who had difficulties learning to read, I 
was responsible for setting up a remedial department in a school where the majority of 
the pupils were Afro-Caribbean, and felt that the approach to teaching reading through 
individualised reading schemes and phonic work books only touched the surface, 
giving most of the children a functional literacy at best. Literature and picture-books 
did not feature highly, although there was always a queue of children to read my small 
stock of story books at playtime. The English system was failing the children, both 
black and white working class, and in some areas of London the West Indian 
community set up its own Saturday schools. They concentrated on fonnal teaching of 
basic skills, but with the same high expectation of behaviour and academic 
achievement as I was to encounter later in Bengali and Mosque schools. I moved on 
to teach in a Special School for Delicate Children (now known as MLD) where I 
Introduction 
became even more frustrated by the limitations of a rigidly structured phonic 
approach. 
In 1976 I attended a course called 'Reading for Understanding' at the Centre 
for Educational Studies (CUES), which marked a turning point for me and for 
attitudes to multicultural education in the primary classroom. It was a training course 
in the use of reading materials designed to meet the needs of black children and was 
the result of a research programme into underachievement amongst black pupils. The 
research team had started with the hypothesis that West Indians' dialect led to a lack 
of understanding and poor academic achievement. They found, however, as did 
Swann later (1985), that the problem was not linguistic but largely a result of inherent 
racism in the school system, including the content of text books and fiction which 
lacked positive images of minority groups - indeed, of working-class children 
generally. 
The reading materials produced at CUES consisted of packs with story books 
featuring the sort of children to be found in London schools, with accompanying tapes 
read in appropriate accents. One vivid memory of this time was of the intense surprise 
and pleasure on the face of a hitherto very withdrawn Chinese girl as she listened to a 
story and heard the dragon speak Cantonese. The children enjoyed the stories, partly 
because they were a welcome change from the reading schemes. However, 
innovative though they were, the stories were limited and there was still little 
recognition of the importance of the quality of books offered to children, of the 
connections between literature and literacy. 
I went on to teach bilingual pupils, first on the Hackney Language Bus and 
then in Tower Hamlets, where I was based near Brick Lane, the heart of the Bengali 
community. Books and stories played an important role in my teaching since there 
was a growing realisation of the power of story for language development and as a 
means of cultural understanding: the value of picture-books and literature in acquiring 
literacy was beginning to be recognised in some schools. At the same time, attention 
was becoming focused on racist content, later to include sexist and classist images in 
children's books, so that an increasing need was felt for books that would reflect the 
multicultural nature of society. Guidelines were published giving criteria for the 
selection of books (Dixon 1977; Klein 1985), but these have been criticised for 
putting insufficient emphasis on the quality of the text (Pinsent 1988). Teachers were 
Introduction 
discarding books that contained what were felt to be racist images and, in some 
schools, parents were invited to help in this process. 
Unfortunately many of the judgements made were simplistic and showed a 
lack of understanding of how texts work. Subversive, polysemic texts, such as those 
by Anthony Browne and David McKee, were often particular targets of censorship 
because people often did not know how to read them and interpret their ambiguous 
meanings. During the eighties, however, some teachers began to realise that the 
development of critical literacy was preferable to censorship, and a growing number 
of children's authors were producing books that normalised the position of children 
from minority groups by introducing them into their books in a casual way so that 
their books presented a microcosm of society (Pinsent ibid.). Such authors included 
the Ahlbergs, Shirley Hughes and Geraldine Kaye. There was a growing awareness -
influenced by the writing and teaching of Margaret Meek - of the role that texts play 
in teaching children how to read them, and a recognition of the complexities of home 
literacies. 
I myself was reading picture-books with children and finding out that, through 
the meanings created by the interaction of words and pictures, such books had power 
to teach children to take on the role of active readers, including - and perhaps 
especially - children who were struggling to learn. Research for an MA (1988) taught 
me about the richness of young children's readings and the complexities of seemingly 
simple books written for them, such as those by Pat Hutchins, Shirley Hughes, John 
Burningham and many others. I was interested in the different meanings that children 
found in the texts and their ways of interacting with them, and I wanted to explore 
these further. At the same time I was learning about the rich home literacies of the 
children that I taught, in particular the Bangladeshi children with their Mosque and 
Bengali classes. As I talked to Bangladeshi children, teachers and helpers, I 
wondered increasingly about the meanings they were making of texts: I was interested 
in the different ways that Bengali teachers read books, so that a text like Alfie Gets In 
First (Hughes 1981) could be interpreted as a moral story about the need to obey 
one's parents. It reminded me of Brice Heath's Roadville community and their way of 
reading, a similarity noted by Brian Street: 
Introduction 
Like the children in Roadville, young Maktab students learnt from their literacy 
training to think of stories as 'true events' and to look for moral truths in them. 
(Street 1984: 156) 
This brings me back to Haleema and her books and my questions about the books we 
should be providing for children like her - texts that would allow her to affirm and 
use her own cultural experiences and subjectivities, but which also open up new ways 
of reading and enable her to transcend these. I had previously read Anthony Browne's 
earlier book Hansel and Gretel with a mixed group of children, and had been struck 
by the way in which two Bangladeshi boys responded to the forest scenes. They told 
the English children about possible dangers there and recounted anecdotes of their 
own experiences which gave them a certain status within the group. This made me 
aware of the wide appeal of this author and the potential of his work to illuminate my 
questions. Further reasons for the selection of The Tunnel are given in subsequent 
chapters, but there is also a sense in which the children themselves chose it, through 
their desire to read it again and to go on talking about it, thereby making me more 
aware of its possibilities as an open text that invites close reading and speculation, and 
which would therefore provide insights into ways of reading and making meaning. 
Before giving a detailed account of my own reading of the book in the next chapter, 
there follows now a brief consideration of Anthony Browne's work as a whole. 
On looking through a pile of his books, one is immediately struck by their 
surrealist style, by their wit and inventiveness, and also by recurring motifs such as 
gorillas, cages and bananas. It is clear from the covers alone that to read Anthony 
Browne is to enter a world of visual puzzles and incongruities. Within this surrealist 
style he shows a versatility, having illustrated stories such as Hansel and Gretel 
(1981) and Alice's Adventures in Wonderland (1988); and written books for a variety 
of ages, including My Dad (2000) for young children and King Kong (1994) which is 
suitable for older readers. A few of his earlier books - such as The Tunnel, Hansel and 
Gretel and Gorilla (1992) - are richly detailed with sombre colours, whereas many 
others like Changes (1993) use bold images in clear colours. Caricatured characters 
are used in Piggybook (1989) and Zoo (1992), and even chimpanzees instead of 
people in Willy the Wimp (1998) and Voices in the Park (1998). 
Although Browne's early work as a medical illustrator was very different from 
illustrating children's books, a certain influence can be seen in the realisation of his 
Introduction 
aim to' show what was hidden behind other things, show what people would expect it 
to look like' (1994: 194). This comment refers to Alice in Wonderland (1988), the 
picture of the hand painting the Rose being painted in its turn (71), and could also 
apply to such details as the upside-down map of Australia as Alice falls down the 
tunnel. Where it has particular relevance, however, is in his ability to paint what is 
hidden in people's heads and what reflects their unconscious feelings. This is clear in 
Voices in the Park (1998), where each character's view of the park is a reflection of 
their personality and what they are feeling. Whereas the repressed nervous boy sees a 
wintry scene, in which the trees reflect the shape of his mother's hat, the warm-
natured and happy girl sees brightly coloured fruit on the trees and an enormous 
strawberry. In showing what is hidden he has also shown what is unexpected and 
sometimes shocking. 
In doing this, he takes a position within the Surrealist tradition, juxtaposing 
images in unexpected ways that make us look again at the familiar. He follows 
Magritte's prescriptions that 'the eye must be made to "think" in a different way' 
(Whitfield 1992: 31) and that art 'should act as an irritant or a source of disquiet' (41). 
One of Browne's books that clearly uses Surrealist images to reflect unconscious 
anxieties is Changes (1993), in which a boy's inner worries about a new baby are 
reflected in a world that loses its constancy: furniture changes into a crocodile and a 
snake as well as a gorilla, and a bovine skull hangs from the washing line in a manner 
reminiscent of images to be found in paintings by Salvador Dali. 
Browne's strongest influence is the artist Magritte, to whom he refers as 'my 
old friend Magritte' (178), borrowing such images as the crowd of bowler-hatted men 
in Golconda (Magritte 1953) which appears in his first book, Mirror (1987). Voices in 
the Park provides other examples of his use of intertextual references to Magritte. The 
stark wintry trees are similar to those in The Lost Jockey (Magritte 1948): in both 
pictures the branches appear as nerve tracts. The statues in the park recall the stage 
like quality of The Secret Player (1927) and Magritte's characteristic blue sky - as in 
Beautiful World (1962) or The Large Family (1963) - appears within the lamps in the 
park (and incidentally in the small glimpse of blue sky in The Tunnel as the children 
are sent out by their mother). 
Magritte rejected the ideas of Freud and psychoanalysis. His interest is in the 
relationship between what is visible and what is concealed but revealed in art: 'I make 
Introduction 
use of painting to make thought visible' (paquet 1994: 79). In this way aesthetic and 
intellectual pleasure are closely linked. His interest in these two aspects of art is 
shown in such pictures as La Condition Humaine (1933) which shows a painting in 
front of a window concealing the part of the window that is in the painting and of 
which he says: 
It existed for the spectator, as it were, simultaneously in his mind, as both inside 
the room in the painting and outside in the real landscape, which is how we see 
the world: we see it as being outside ourselves even though it is only a mental 
representation of it that we experience inside ourselves. 
(Whitfield 1992: 62) 
This kind of visual 'trick' recalls the easel with the painting of a painting to be seen in 
Through the Magic Mi"or or Browne's use of books within books in The Tunnel. 
Both Magritte and Browne, therefore, are interested in making visible what is 
concealed, and in so doing they require readers or viewers who will accept the 
challenge of the unexpected and who will be prepared to think. Browne is writing for 
children, however, who must be enticed or initiated into reading and looking in this 
way: his visual shocks and surprises must also have an element of playfulness and 
fun. His books also differ from the art of Magritte in that many of them are about 
childhood and relationships, so that they deal with subjectivity and unconscious 
feelings, and the surrealist images are a means of expressing these themes rather than 
an end in themselves. The visual surprises in Voices in the Park are aesthetically 
pleasing but this is largely because, in reflecting the mental states of the characters, 
they are an integral part of the story, for his books are stories which are also about 
stories and the stories we tell ourselves and they invite children to read them through 
the stories with which they are familiar. 
The Tunnel was published in 1989 and was described by my local librarian as 
Browne's 'weirdest book so far'. It can be compared to Hansel and Gretel (1981) in 
its style of illustration and the Freudian treatment of family relationships. One book 
features the children's relationship with the stepmother, who is also the witch, and the 
other shows it is the girl's brother who is like a predatory wolf in the relationship. In 
both books it is the girl who rescues her brother. Hansel and Gretel, however, is a 
darker book, with the plight of the children echoed in the shapes of dead birds at the 
base of the tree. The connection between the books is strengthened by intertextual 
Introduction 
links between the pattern on the wallpaper and the woodcutter's fire in the forest, as 
well as the shape of the witch's hat in the cottage window. Browne (1994) says that 
there are three themes or motifs running through Hansel and Gretel: birds, bars and 
transformations. These are also evident in The Tunnel, where the bars are replaced by 
constraining walls and Jack is not imprisoned in a cage but turned to stone. The birds 
are present, concealed in the trees, and there is the transformation of bedroom into 
forest. 
Comparisons can also be made with Gorilla (1983), winner of both the Kate 
Greenaway prize and the Kurt Maschler award. This too, is a book about love and 
reconciliation within a relationship, in this case between a girl and her father, in which 
intimacy and warmth are made difficult by the demands of modem life and the 
father's work. Both books have an ambiguous meaning: it is never clear who or what 
the gorilla is, and the banana sticking out of her father's pocket in the last picture adds 
to the mystery. Gorilla is a book that is playful in its use of detailed visual jokes and 
intertext that can be seen even on the front cover, but there is also sadness in the 
depiction of the imprisoned chimpanzees, echoing Hannah's own situation. It is one 
of the first books in which Browne sets out to make the pictures tell more than the 
written narrative, and this he does through the visual codes. Thus the picture of 
Hannah and her father at the breakfast table uses cold colours, size and perspective to 
emphasise the distance between them; whereas when Hannah and the gorilla share a 
meal the colours are warm, the perspectives are shortened and the massive bulk of the 
gorilla seems to draw in Hannah and the viewer rather than emphasise Hannah's 
vulnerability. 
Hansel and Gretel, Gorilla and The Tunnel have much in common, therefore, 
in their themes and their use of puzzles and ambiguities. The last two books make use 
of an alternative world which in Gorilla represents Hannah's dearest wish, but in The 
Tunnel reflects Rose's worst nightmare. It is perhaps no coincidence that Browne 
illustrated Alice in Wonderland (1988) - for which he also won the Kurt Maschler 
award - one year before publication of The Tunnel: both books are about entry into a 
fantasy world through a tunnel and both feature metamorphosis. The surreal and 
inconstant world of Alice has allowed Browne to exercise fully his visual wit and 
inventiveness. All his books offer their readers the pleasures of exploration but, in so 
doing, they present challenges to both adult and child, so that what has been said of 
Introduction 
Magritte is also true of Browne: 'he calls on us to show what we are capable or 
(Whitfield 1992: 39). 
The thesis analyses in detail the readings of The Tunnel by three different 
groups of children: Bangladeshi children who are newcomers to this country, those 
who are second generation immigrants, and a group of children (including no 
immigrants) from rural Sussex. I begin Chapter I with my own reading, and in the 
second part of the Chapter I look at those literary theories that may illuminate both my 
responses as an experienced reader who has studied the book closely and those of the 
children who are at an early stage of encountering such texts. In Chapter 2 I look at 
reading both as culturally constituted and as being subversive in nature. In doing this, 
I use Nikolajeva' s literary semiosphere (1996) as a model for the dynamic 
relationship between culture and text. The methodology explains the way in which I 
use Barthes's semiotic narrative codes and Moebius's graphic codes as analytic tools 
to make line by line analysis of the transcripts. Chapter 4 gives my own reading of 
selected pages, using the semiotic codes, and then analyses those of the children, first 
in response to the proairetic and hermeneutic and then to the semic, symbolic and 
cultural codes. The conclusion reflects on the children's readings in the light of the 
analysis and literary theory discussed earlier in the thesis, and offers 
recommendations for practice in school. 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 1: A Reading of 'The Tunnel' 
Reading Processes: The Reader and 
the Text 
Fogou. Carn Euny Ancient Settlement, 
West Penwith, Cornwall. 
Tentative date 5th Century Be. 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 1: A Reading of 'The Tunnel' 
1: A Reading of The Tunnel 
The aim of the thesis is to analyse children's responses to picture-books, with a 
particular focus on how far they are culturally detennined. I have focused on one book 
in particular, The Tunnel (Browne 1992), in order to look in depth both at the 
children's readings and at the qualities of the book that enabled such readings to be 
made. This chapter, exploring the nature of reading and what happens between the 
reader and the text, discusses those literary theories that may help to offer 
explanations of children's responses to and interpretations of the book. In this first 
section of the chapter I give my own reading of The Tunnel in order to provide a 
context and a framework within which to discuss theories that account for both the 
children's readings and mine. My interest here is in reading as a literary activity, a 
making of meaning, rather than in the processes of learning to read and decode text. 
There will necessarily be differences between the children's reading and my 
own, since I, having made many readings of this text, come to it as an experienced 
reader with a particular interest and knowledge of picture-books. Because of its 
polysemic nature the book is an example of what Barbara Wall (1991) calls a dual 
address text, that is one that appeals to readers of different ages and stages of 
development and which adults and children alike will enjoy at their own level. Dual 
address is achieved through dual intertext (Meek 1996) and, like Sendak, Browne uses 
a range of references, including ones that will be understood only by a very limited 
number of readers. However children are developing readers and their responses, 
though different, may not be lesser than those of the adult (Crago 1983). 
I selected The Tunnel as being an open-ended, pluralist book - one that makes 
possible a number of interpretations. There is a particular kind of dialogue between 
words and pictures that compels readers to make links between them (Lewis 1990), 
and the pictures are detailed and full of ambiguities which generate discussion. The 
book abounds in half- hidden pictures, which Nodelman claims, make us 'use our 
eyes and take delight in what they discover' (Nodelman 1996: 247). 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 1: A Reading of 'The Tunnel' 
Even a cursory reading of The Tunnel shows that much of the story is told 
through the pictures and suggests that their detailed and enigmatic quality carries 
layers of meaning. Lorraine (1978) points out that the pictures in picture-books are 
there to tell a story and that the art techniques employed must have the story as their 
focus. They must be viewed as integral to the text, and he refers to the relationship 
between words and pictures as 'a wedding' where neither tells the full story by itself. 
In reading a picture-book, however, we are reading two symbol systems, 
which are read in different ways. Using the image of musical counterpoint to describe 
the relationship, Sendak compares this to reading poetry and thinking music (Lanes 
1980). Schwartz (1982) looks more closely at the differences. The written text is 
linear; we scan it rapidly (although it reveals its meaning gradually as we read on 
through the book) and it can deal with both space and time. A picture, on the other 
hand, is viewed as an entity, and the passing of time can only be shown through a 
series: 'Good pictures concentrate our attention on a series of carefully perceived 
moments of time' (Nodelman 1996: 246). He analyses Where the Wild Things Are to 
show how, through the book as a whole, Sendak has achieved a balance of pictures 
that depict the moment before, during or after an action (Nodelman 1988). Moebius 
(1986) indicates how the focused perception of the visual image on each page is an 
opening onto a new perspective that involves a shutting of what came before and a 
withholding of what is to come. In following a visual narrative we tend to use what 
Schwartz refers to as focal and subsidiary awareness, looking fIrst at recurring fIgures 
within each picture and then at the picture as a whole, relating the focal fIgures to this 
context. These differences in the way that we read verbal and pictorial text mean that 
there is a tension in reading picture-books which Node1man (1996) compares to a 
forwards and backwards movement: the words propel us forward, but the pictures 
force us to linger, having the same effect as descriptive passages in a novel. 
In my own reading of The Tunnel, I fIrst studied the book as a whole, 
following the techniques suggested by Doonan (1993) to understand the 
interrelationship between the text and the pictures. However, in this chapter - while 
bearing in mind the integral relationship between the written text and the illustrations 
- I discuss the words and pictures separately, this being the clearest way of organising 
and communicating a detailed reading of a complex book of this nature. I look fIrst at 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 1: A Reading of 'The Tunnel' 
the cover, the endpapers and the title-page, all of which all act as a frame for the book, 
and then I comment on the written text before discussing the pictures. 
The front cover, endpapers and title-page 
The cover shows a girl crawling away from us into a dark tunnel made of stone 
blocks. She has her back to us and, as she crawls away from us, she draws us in with 
her, just as Max in Where the Wild Things Are takes us with him when he sets out to 
explore his new world (Nodelman 1988). She wears red, often a symbol of danger, 
and this colour is echoed in the book The Sleeping Beauty which lies open at the 
entrance to the tunnel. In this open book, the witch is about to send Sleeping Beauty 
into her long sleep, an indication that there may be magic and danger at the other end 
of the tunnel. The witch's hat and the ray of sunshine that falls across the witch point 
the way into the tunnel, adding to the sense of possible danger. They also hint that the 
text features a book within a book, and that the girl may actually be entering the story 
world. 
The cover of The Tunnel also suggests that the book may be about worlds 
within worlds, or a journey into interiority, and involve a conflict between inner and 
outer reality (Stewart 1993). The tunnel itself is what Nikolajeva (1996) refers to as an 
archetypal symbol. Tunnels have connotations of birth and death: thus the tunnelled 
fogous and holed stones in West Cornwall are thought to have a ritual fertility 
purpose, while Jung suggested that tunnels, corridors and labyrinths may be symbols 
of the unconscious. A photograph of the entrance to the tomb of Rameses III, a dark 
tunnel leading into blackness, acts both as the frontispiece to Jung's book Man and his 
Symbols (1974) and as the beginning of its first chapter, entitled Approaching the 
Unconscious. Tunnels and holes also feature in many children's picture-books - such 
as Peepo, Are You Asleep Little Bear? and The Hungry Caterpillar - and may be 
atavistic symbols in books for young readers: beginnings and endings, sex and death 
are common themes. The thick ivy around the tunnel, like the vines in Max's 
bedroom, suggests the possibility of growth and life. 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 1: A Reading of 'The Tunnel J 
The cover, the endpapers and the title-page are all part of the text as a whole. 
Sendak exemplifies how integral they may be to the book (Lanes 1980), and 
Nodelman (1988) points out that they frame the text, which gives 'a psychological 
value to perceived images' (Doonan 1997: 184). Here, the endpapers depict two 
contrasting walls. One is the wall of a room, with William Morris style wallpaper of 
curving leaf and flower shapes in green and olive. The other is an external red-brick 
wall, unbroken by any object and composed of uniform, rectangular bricks. The two 
walls are joined by a white band or skirting-board and set up connotations of certain 
dualities within the book, or what Barthes refers to as antitheses of the symbolic code: 
between inner and outer reality, imagination and logic, growth and sterility, natural 
and artificial, male and female. The contrast between the two walls is accentuated by 
the book in front of the indoor wall, also with a leaf-patterned cover, possibly 
representing the world of the imagination and, like the book - also leaf-patterned - on 
the cover, indicating the metafictive nature of The Tunnel. The endpaper at the back 
of the book is identical to that at the front, except that now the book is on the right-
hand page, in front of the brick wall, indicating the closer relationship between the 
children, and Rose's greater confidence about leaving home. The fact that it is on the 
right anticipates a new way of life, since in Western books and paintings, what is 
given or established generally appears on the left and what is new on the right 
(Moebius 1986). 
The title-page shows two broken columns on a graffiti-covered brick base 
pointing up to the curved title of the book, which is balanced by the author's name 
and the publisher's mark under the column. The theme of male/female duality 
suggested by the endpapers is continued by the phallic symbolism of the columns and 
the contrasting curve of the title. Nodelman (1988) points out that picture-book artists 
may quote styles of painting to add narrative value to their books. The broken 
columns hint at Browne's interest in surrealism, in particular Magritte's work. This is 
evident in his other books such as Changes, and surrealism suggests the mysterious 
and imaginative: 'impossible things have a distressingly possible actuality' 
(Nodelman: 88). The columns are, however, also an intertextual device which Browne 
has taken from Giorgione's painting La Tempesta. On the right-hand side of this 
picture, a half-naked woman suckles a baby while on the left, a debonair soldier 
strolls along a path. In the space between them are broken columns, while a town in 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 1: A Reading of 'The Tunnel' 
the background is illuminated by lightning from an approaching storm. The picture 
has always been an enigma and is open to many interpretations, but Browne is 
perhaps drawing on the contrast between the quiet acceptance of the downtrodden 
woman and the swagger of the man in La Tempesta, in defming the gap between the 
brother and the sister in The Tunnel. 
The text 
In its structure, the text is similar to a traditional folk-tale. This is indicated by the 
opening formula 'Once upon a time'. It continues the theme suggested by the cover 
and title-page by immediately stating the difference between the brother and sister, 
and the text of the next four pages uses iterative time (Genette 1980) to show how the 
boy bullied his sister in their relationship. The turning-point comes when their mother 
sends them out for the morning: as in many a folk-tale, such as The Goose Girl, the 
children are banished with an admonition, in this case to be back in time for lunch. 
Jack fmds the tunnel and, disregarding his mother's command, sets out to explore it 
and does not return. Overcoming her fears, his sister follows on a quest to fmd her 
brother and has to go through a forest, another archetypal symbol in many folk-tales, 
before she fmds him turned to stone. She rescues him by her embrace and, reunited, 
they return home in time for lunch. Like the mother in Where the Wild Things Are, 
their unseen mother provides forgiveness and security through love expressed as the 
provision of food. The reference to lunchtime also indicates that they have been in an 
alternative world with another time scheme. Thus the written story has the elements of 
folk-tale as set out by Propp (1958), including a supernatural element, disobedience to 
a command, a quest, a rescue involving courage, and a happy ending with male and 
female characters united. The differences are that this story features siblings rather 
than lovers, the 'hero' or rescuer is the female character, and there are no explanations 
for what happens on the other side of the tunnel: it remains, like Giorgione's picture, 
an enigma, open to interpretation. 
Written within a contemporary ideology, the story has a strong moral message 
about the need for respect between the sexes, which requires that both children 
develop and mature. Rose achieves this by overcoming her fears and rescuing her 
brother so that she is no longer a passive victim, whereas Jack is forced to change by 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 1: A Reading of 'The Tunnel' 
an agency beyond his control. The story presents us with traditional male/female 
stereotypes which are then broken when the girl rescues her brother. Browne has, 
therefore, used a familiar story structure to present a certain message: he has drawn 
upon a folk-tale genre as a pre-text, which he uses as a 'metanarrative' (Stephens 
1998). The familiarity of the genre provides criteria for understanding the structure 
and for interpretation, and thus allows him to make explicit the ideological issues of 
his retelling, or to develop what Stephens calls a 'metaethic' (7). 
The intertextual references throughout the book emphasise its metanarrative 
quality and, although these are most evident in the pictures, the story owes much to 
Hans Christian Andersen's The Snow Queen and C. S. Lewis's The Lion, the Witch 
and the Wardrobe. Even the bricks behind Jack are similar to the blocks of ice with 
which Kay has to fmd out the nature of truth through logic and, like Jack, it is 
Edmund's own nature that causes him to be turned to stone. The children's names are 
also intertextua1: Jack is the Giant-killer, while the name 'Rose' has connotations of 
medieval romance, while also being suggestive of developing sexuality. Their names, 
however, are not revealed until after the rescue, as though it is only in unity that they 
can realise their own identities. Rose herself is in a tradition of silent heroines, 
discussed by Marina Warner (1995), which goes back to Chaucer's Patient Griselda. 
The themes of the book, such as sibling rivalry and maturation through quest, 
appear to owe much to psychoanalytical theories, in particular those of Freud and 
Jung, and to Joseph Campbell's Jungian analyses (1988) ofmytbological themes; but 
this influence is more evident in the illustrations and I will therefore return to them in 
the following section. 
The language itself is simple and might be called undistinguished. The 
dialogue makes use of rather dated slang, such as 'don't be wet,' with verbs like 
'yelled' and 'moaned'. These terms recall adventure stories in which boys generally 
play a dominant role. In picture-books, it is important to stress that the words need to 
be simple so that there is a balance between words and pictures, and neither 
overpowers the other but each is seen in relation to the other (Alderson 1986). The 
pictures, moreover, 'can create rhythm and turn undistinguished prose into good 
prose' (Nodelman 1996: 248). Nodelman also writes of the excitement of reading a 
picture-book, generated by the tension between the carefully selected single moments 
of the pictures and the flow of words that link them. 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 1: A Reading of 'The Tunnel' 
On reading the pictures 
As suggested earlier, the pictures through which much of the story is told are richly 
detailed, with visual puzzles and half-suggested shapes, so that readers continually 
discover more on each rereading. It is the inter-relationship between words and 
pictures that create tensions and ambiguities and the possibilities of layers of meaning. 
Sendak has described this relationship: 'like a bouncing ball, it goes back and forth. 
And this to me is the invention of the picture-book' (Cott 1984: ix). Lewis refers to 
the way in which words and pictures 'speak to each other across the gap between 
them' (1996: 109). The picture of the stone figure of Jack, heavily framed in black, is 
a particular example of this dialogue, or tension between words and picture, as it 
contrasts with the opposing white page, with the verbal text set almost in its centre. 
The two pages create a feeling of horror as we look at the screaming figure turned to 
stone while running away from some nameless enemy, and this is accentuated by the 
words which tell of Rose's apparent awareness of the danger. Her anticipation of the 
disaster adds to the mystery of this scene. 
Although pictures are easily accessible, the ability to read them is largely a 
learned one within a cultural context: meaning is conveyed through what Kress and 
Leeuwen (1998) refer to as a 'grammar' of visual design. Children learn to read the 
semiotics of visual text as everybody has to learn to read art from another culture: 
being unfamiliar with a particular kind of art means a lack of grammar to comprehend 
it. This grammar is comprised of semiotic codes which 'enhance the reader's feeling 
comprehension of events and emotions' (Moebius 1986: 148). Moebius gives five 
codes through which 'design-as-communication'(143) is achieved. His codes parallel 
the semiotic codes of Barthes (which are also employed in this study's analysis and 
are discussed later in this chapter) and, like Barthes' s codes they are not fIXed entities. 
Moebius refers to them in terms of 'dominances' and 'probabilities' so that, as in 
Barthes's analysis of SIZ (1975), when taken together, they are capable of producing a 
coherent interpretation of each specific text: 
It would be misleading or destructive of the possibility of an 'open text' to say 
that within the graphic codes, this particular gesture means one thing or another, 
regardless of the specific text. (148) 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 1: A Reading of 'The Tunnel' 
My reading of The Tunnel must, therefore, be regarded, not as defmitive, but as one of 
a set of possible readings that I might make; and I would echo Moebius's own words 
on his reading of Waber's Ira Sleeps Over: 'Such a reading as this is never complete. 
Our hope is always that we will never read the same book twice in quite the same 
way' (158). Nevertheless my reading of The Tunnel is one that is maximally infonned 
by the study and experience of reading pictures and picture-books. 
The codes were, therefore, a useful tool in bringing to consciousness the way 
meanings work in pictures. They are as follows: 
Position: 
Perspective: 
Frame: 
Line and capillarity: 
Colour 
What is on the left is secure but confmed: the 
right-hand page is that of risk or adventure. 
A character in a two-dimensional fa~ade is likely 
to be less open-minded. A sudden absence of 
horizon indicates trouble. 
The reader identifies with the world inside and 
outside the story, but an unframed illustration 
provides a total experience or a view from 
'within'. What is enclosed in circular shapes is 
secure and controlled, but rectangular shapes 
indicate a problem or the disadvantages of 
discipline or civilised life. The covers and 
endpapers are part of this code. 
The quality of line indicates the intensity of 
experience: 'squiggles' show a surfeit of energy. 
Bright colours are associated with exhilaration 
and discovery, but dark colours with 
disappointment and confusion. 
If we return to the composition of the verbal and visual text on the pages of Jack's 
flight, it can be seen how the graphic codes communicate the 'feeling comprehension' 
referred to above. Jack is imprisoned within the heavy black frames, which also 
reinforce his movement away both from the reader, and his pursuer, an effect that is 
accentuated by the text, which stands out against the white background. 
Moebius also points out that picture-books are crafted in such a way that the 
contents of the pictures have connotations and belong to the symbolic code, and the 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 1: A Reading of 'The Tunnel' 
pictures are therefore open to interpretation. He lists water, doorways, windows and 
bridges as just a few of the symbols that operate in picture-books, but reminds us that 
the symbolic codes work differently in different stories and, like the graphic codes 
outlined above, must be interpreted in the context of each text. This unfIxed nature of 
symbolism in picture-books can be traced back to William Blake, who prepared the 
way for the picture-book as we know it, with its interdependence of picture and print 
(Alderson 1986). In Songs of Innocence, for instance, the symbolism of the pictorial 
must be understood within the context of each poem as a whole (Leader 1981). 
Browne has framed most of the pictures with a narrow black line: the smaller 
pictures have a wide white margin, and a light blue line frames the whole page. The 
use of a white margin suggests that the characters feel constrained, while the framing 
puts the reader outside the world of the story, as in other picture-books such as Peepo 
(Ahlberg A. and Ahlberg, J. 1981). Like Sendak in Where the Wild Things Are, 
Browne loses the frame or changes the pattern at certain points in the story - for 
example, in the full page spread of Rose running through the forest, where her fear 
takes over and our view of the scene is from within. The words, too, are placed within 
the blue frame, on white, either under the picture or on the left-hand page opposite the 
picture. A visual balance that allows words and pictures to interact is therefore 
achieved, and the frame provides a contrast or foil for the detailed pictures. The code 
of frame is thus part of the meaning of the book. 
Pages 3-4 
On the fIrst double-page, the children are depicted in four small pictures which 
contextualise the iterative time established by the words. They are separated from one 
another, each in their own picture, and in the fIrst pair are set against the two walls 
that we saw on the front cover: the leaves appear to grow from Rose's head, linking 
her to what is natural and intuitive, whereas Jack stands out against the stark brick 
wall. Both children immediately engage our attention as they look directly at us, the 
closeness of the faces involving the viewer in a personal way (Kress and Leeuwen 
1998). Rose shrinks away with her hands behind her back, while Jack boldly folds his 
arms with a bit of a swagger. They look as though they are posing for a photograph, 
suggesting a parent, whom we never see, behind the camera. The words state that the 
children are not alike, although the picture shows that there are facial similarities 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 1: A Reading of 'The Tunnel' 
between them. By this slippage in meaning between words and pictures, a gap is 
already set up for the active reader to fill, in the same way as on the title-page and 
cover of Where the Wild Things Are. Their clothes confonn to gender stereotypes: 
Rose is dressed in feminine pink and Jack in saturated primary colours. Stars and 
stripes decorate his sweater, linking him to Supennan and a macho American culture. 
Across the two pages, the contrasts in colour cause the pictures of Rose to recede 
while those of Jack advance, an impression heightened by the way he comes towards 
us as he plays football. 
The companion picture shows Rose sitting reading on a windowsill behind a 
curtain, echoing for me Jane Eyre reading behind the curtain to escape the bullying of 
her cousin John Reed. Characters who are framed within a rectangle are often 
frustrated and constrained by their circumstances in some way, and Rose is framed 
both by the window and by the houses opposite. The window, however, acts as a 
threshold onto the world outside (Barthes 1993), and the open book suggests that 
reading provides her with an escape into the world of the imagination. The open book 
shows a cottage - possibly the Gingerbread House - within a dark forest, and there are 
thus layers of interiority. Susan Stewart in On Longing (1993) discusses the doll's 
house or the house within a house, comparing it to 'the locket or the secret recesses of 
the heart: center within center, within within within' (61). This is another indication 
that the book is about the tensions between inner and outer reality. 
As readers, we look over Rose's shoulder at the book she is reading and then 
to the houses opposite, where what she is reading is reflected in the shapes of the 
witch's hat made by two of the curtains, the chimney cap, and in the witch' scat, 
rendering the houses as rather threatening. Although there are sources of fear within 
the picture, the symbolic use of green in the curtains, the house and the wallpaper 
suggests that the tension may be fruitful. 
Jack and his friends playing football fonn a complete contrast. The boys 
appear to be enclosed in a confmed area and stand out against the harsh lines of the 
brick wall. Like Rose, they are framed in a rectangular shape. the painted 'goal posts'. 
There is also a small, dark, barred and broken window in their wall too, but this is not 
a symbolic opening onto the world outside, however, but hints at their frustration, 
while the darkness suggests a void beyond the wall. It reminds me of the crack in the 
wall that expresses Max's feelings of anger in Where the Wild Things Are. Unlike the 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 1: A Reading of 'The Tunnel J 
stability of Rose's pose, the figures of the boys form an inverted triangle which 
suggests instability; the movement of Jack's leg adds to this sense of restlessness, so 
that the picture conveys a feeling of frustrated and therefore potentially destructive 
energy. 
Pages 5-6 
Jack is peacefully sleeping, a smile on his face, in the small picture on the left-hand 
page; the right-hand picture presents a contrast as Jack creeps in to frighten his sister 
who, unlike him, is unable to sleep. The code of position shows Jack as he should be, 
on the left, and as he wants to be, on the right. His bedroom has a modem pine bed 
and there are stars on the walls, whereas Rose's room has rather old-fashioned 
furniture which looms in a frightening way. The pastel shades and floral patterns build 
up the feminine stereotype. In both pictures, the reader looks down on the children, 
whose childish vulnerability is thus revealed. 
Jack is the focal point of the second picture: the lines of the furniture combine 
with the hallway - framing him and throwing him into relief - to direct our attention 
towards him. The picture captures a moment at the beginning of his action, and Rose 
will see only his shadow going before him. Amheim shows how shadows are 
associated with the self and with virtual power (1974), and in this and the following 
picture the shadow implies Jack's domination. Like Max in Where the Wild Things 
Are, Jack is dressed in a wolf costume, signifying his inner frustration and anger. This 
is further emphasised by the fact that, again like Max, he is crawling from right to left, 
striking a discordant note since culturally we expect left to right movements. The 
bright hallway should be a place of safety but the red carpet suggests possible danger: 
'Red is the color symbolizing violent emotions, very much including sexual ones' 
(Bette1heim 1991: 173). 
As we look down on Rose in bed, her hands nervously pulling up the covers, 
we are aware of the dangers that she senses or imagines. Who has not been afraid of a 
wardrobe, its handles seeming to give it a face, or a ghostly sleeve protruding? Things 
under the bed are commonly frightening, and here the shoes and the cord suggest the 
possible fears in Rose's mind. Marina Warner points out the universality of the fear of 
what comes in the night, showing that traditional figures like The Sandman and The 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 1: A Reading of 'The Tunnel' 
Bogeyman are metaphors for 'internal states and private knowledge' (1998:1). Thus 
we see Rose's private fears extemalised in the room around her. Beside Rose's bed is 
a light in the form of a Gingerbread House - hardly a soothing motif for a nervous 
child, and over the bed the wolf leers at Red Riding Hood in the picture by Walter 
Crane (1870). These are images of interiority indicating the theme of The Tunnel. The 
Crane picture forms a contrast with Rose and her brother. Zipes (1993) has shown that 
this is one of the earliest illustrations in which Red Riding Hood is not afraid of the 
wolf but looks him boldly in the eye, part of a male fantasy about women conniving in 
their own seduction. Rose, however is simply a victim of male aggression. The 
intertextual reference is further strengthened by the red coat hanging on the wardrobe: 
as Stephens (1992) observes, the story becomes an inverse version of Red Riding 
Hood, beginning with the wolf creeping in on his victim. The use of what Moebius 
calls capillarity, or squiggles of lines, gives the picture its psychic energy. 
Pages 7-8 
The two pictures are linked by the two pointing arms and the direction of the shadow, 
so that in the left- hand picture Rose appears to be forced back inwards, whereas in 
the right-hand picture both children are sent away from the home. On page 7, the 
horizontal and vertical lines are particularly significant: the vertical lines of the 
window frames and Jack's fork pointing upwards in a hostile way, echoed by the salt 
and pepper pots, and the horizontal lines of the window sill, the table and the cutlery. 
These all emphasise Jack's threatening arm and his looming shadow, while the shade 
outside falls diagonally onto Rose, making her the focal point of the aggression. 
Rose's stereotypical femininity is shown by the pink rose that matches her jersey, 
whereas Jack has a table mat that corresponds to the primary colours of his clothes. 
Page 8 marks the point where the text moves into singulative time (Genette 
1980) when, on a particular day, their mother loses patience with them and sends 
them out together. The code of position shows this as they walk towards the right, the 
side of the new and the start of adventure. As though prepared for a more active role, 
Rose now wears her red coat, but she still carries her book and Jack has his football: 
both children walk with downcast heads. The mother is not to be seen but remains an 
invisible admonitory figure. The children are sharply dermed against the brick wall, 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 1: A Reading of 'The Tunnel' 
and such defmition makes them appear more than real, as in surrealist paintings 
(Kress and Leewuen 1998). This effect is heightened by the glimpse of a Magritte-like 
sky while the broken glass on top of the wall is a reminder of the constraints on their 
lives. 
Pages 9-10 
There is no picture on the left-hand page, and the words on the white background 
contrast with the detail in the full-page picture opposite. The location is the waste 
ground: a derelict, rundown area with graffiti on the peeling walls, and piles of junk 
such as broken machinery, car wheels, springs, and bits of television. There is also a 
bird's wing, - another surrealist image - used in Browne's Changes (1993) and a shoe, 
very like the one beneath Rose's bed, protruding from under a car seat. Possibly the 
wing is a Jungian image of liberation and the shoe may hint at the story theme of 
journey and quest. Rose has turned her back on her brother and the rubbish as she 
reads her book, already entering the world of the imagination which she is to 
encounter through the tunnel. She is on the left of the picture, still unwilling to 
relinquish the security of the book; Jack is on the right, ready for adventure. The 
length of pipe acts as a vector to emphasise the distance between them. Stephens's 
comments on The Tunnel show how the affection between the children is 'pitted 
against the waste land of the modern world in which human beings fear emotional 
commitment' (1992: 176). He sees the pipe on the waste ground as delineating the 
emotional space which the children must cross to reach each other. 
The broken machinery could be seen as an example of what Nikolajeva (1996) 
refers to as 'kenotypal' images that is, images drawn from recognisable structures and 
artefacts of contemporary life. She is drawing on Bakhtin to show how a unity of time 
and space is expressed within a literary work, which he defmes as the chronotype, 'the 
intrinsic connectedness of temporal and spatial relationships that are artistically 
expressed in literature' (Bakhtin 1981: 84). 
This relationship takes different characteristic forms within different genres: a 
fairy story, for example, is about a time and land beyond our experience, and fantasy 
has two parallel worlds, usually connected by some sort of doorway. Within picture-
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 1: A Reading of 'The Tunnel' 
books, as we have already seen, the temporal element is mainly limited to the words 
and the spatial aspect is predominant in the pictures. The concepts of time and space 
are historically determined and are given concrete expression through recurrent 
images. Thus fairy tales have their own images, such as magic amulets and swords. 
Archetypal images are those that go back to prehistoric times and they are engraved in 
our consciousness largely through our experience of narrative in its different forms. 
These include such images as water and forests. Kenotypes contrast with archetypal 
imagery and are often images of communication. Thus the abandoned television and 
the bits of car could be seen as kenotypal, but in this book they are broken and 
dysfunctional. The tunnel itself is kenotypal as well as archetypal in its connotations, 
in that it is faced with regular, machine-made stones and probably has some modem 
function. 
The contrast between archetypal and kenotypal imagery can be seen in other 
picture-books such as Granpa (Burningham 1984) which is looking at past and 
present time. The floodwater, the whale, the arches, the church and the clouds of glory 
are archetypal. The predominant kenotypal image is the girl's bicycle, which is 
increasingly evident as she becomes less dependent on her grandfather. The sea is not 
only archetypal but also kenotypal because it is at a modem resort. What Browne does 
is to take images from modem life, such as dressing gown cords, and give them 
archetypal significance. The waste ground itself is both kenotypal and archetypal -
kenotypal in that it has a modem function and archetypal because the waste area has a 
particular meaning as a place of trial before resolution or rebirth. The wilderness 
appears in both the Old and New Testaments, in folk stories such as Rapunzel and in 
literature such as T.S. Eliot's The Waste Land or the moorland across which Jane Eyre 
travels after leaving Mr Rochester. Campbell (1988) shows how the mythological 
hero on his spiritual passage has to pass over a threshold, which is usually an area of 
danger lying outside the village settlement and may be a desert or an alien land. Here 
the waste ground is the area where the children fmd the entrance to the tunnel. 
Pages 11-12 
This page is another spread that has no illustration on the left-hand page. The tunnel is 
on the right-hand page and Jack is crawling into it, the picture thus showing a moment 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part J: A Reading of 'The Tunnel' 
just after the exchange in the text. Jack leaves his ball behind as he explores and Rose 
watches him, standing on the left of the picture, the side of the familiar. The picture is 
striking as a complete contrast to the waste area, although the stony ground shows the 
tunnel's proximity to it. The thick green ivy around the tunnel arch dominates the 
picture, and the freshness of the greenery is accentuated by the colour of Rose's coat; 
this is very different from the urban landscape of the first part of the book and recalls 
the forest that grew in Max's bedroom in Where the Wild Things Are. The greenery 
suggests life and new birth as Jack crawls through what is a passage to an alternative 
world. The tunnel is in the centre of the picture and we can see that it stretches into 
darkness. 
Pages 13-14 
These pages have a different layout from the others in the book, reflecting the 
importance of Rose's decision to come to terms with her fears and follow Jack into 
the tunnel. On the left-hand page, the side of the given and familiar, she gazes at the 
reader with a miserable face, her direct gaze engaging our attention. She is framed in a 
black arch, as though she is standing at the threshold of the tunnel, and the black 
against the stark white background emphasises the depth of her fear. Joseph Campbell 
gives a quotation from a patient's dream that seems appropriate: 'I stood before a dark 
cave, wanting to go in and 1 shuddered at the thought that I might not be able to fmd 
my way back' (1988: 101). The right-hand page, however, the side of the new, shows 
Rose crawling into the tunnel. This picture is the same as that on the cover, only here 
the viewpoint is closer, giving the reader the feeling of being on the threshold of the 
tunnel with Rose. 
Pages 15-16 
Four small pictures across the spread show Rose crawling through the dark tunnel, 
presenting the passing of time and emphasising the passage between the primary 
world of reality and the secondary world of the imagination. The tunnel is dark, but lit 
from the left as she enters and leaves the familiar world, and then from the right when 
she is approaching an unknown place: only her hair band shines in the dark. As she 
progresses forward, each frame shows the next movement of her body. 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 1: A Reading of 'The Tunnel' 
Pages 17-20 
The next three pictures are a selection from her journey which can be viewed as a 
sequence: Rose emerges into a pleasant wood with dappled sunshine which then 
becomes dark and threatening, with a wolf peering out from behind a tree. On the full 
page spread, the wood is a terrifying forest where the wolf looms over Rose and other 
fearsome creatures appear. This is reflected in how she moves through the pleasant 
wood. She walks with her hands in her pockets, looking down and appearing rather 
uncertain. On the next page her hands are by her sides and she looks ahead as she 
walks resolutely and quickly. But on the third page she runs in terror, her hair 
streaming behind her, the neat headband lost and her clothes streaked to show her 
speed. 
On page 17 the trees are straight and regular, their branches make patterns on 
the grass, and the leaves overhead form a green canopy. On the horizon, thick green 
woodland can be seen. The predominance of the colour green, together with the 
sunlight make this a tranquil, pastoral scene, quite unlike the urban landscape Rose 
has left behind. Birds - symbols of liberation (Iung 1974) - peck around her feet, 
recalling the birds in Hansel and Gretel. 
The trees soon change into gnarled and forbidding shapes, full of hidden 
dangers. The club and beanstalk from the book she has been reading are visible. There 
is the woodcutter's axe, Red Riding Hood's basket and a fife - symbol of new life in 
Jungian psychology and an intertextual reference to Browne's own version of Hansel 
and Gretel (1981). A great thumb grips the tree trunk, suggesting an unseen presence, 
while the rope hanging from it recalls the cord under the bed in Rose's bedroom. 
Owls, often associated with witches, cluster around her, and gargoyle-like heads can 
be seen in the trees. There is a friendly duck's head, however, at the base of the tree. 
On the left is a boarded-up hole at the base of a tree-trunk, perhaps a reminder of the 
tunnel she cannot now enter. 
As Rose goes deeper into the forest, her fears become even more intense. The 
third picture spreads over the two pages and is unframed, showing how Rose's inner 
reality has taken over. The absence of horizon increases the feeling of danger 
(Moebius 1990). The trees have taken on the shapes of animals and monsters: a wild 
boar can be seen in the roots of a tree, and a bear which seems to have no hands is 
running as though it is chasing Rose; it appears to notice the reader. The wolf that ftrSt 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 1: A Reading of 'The Tunnel' 
appeared in Crane's picture on the bedroom wall now leans over Rose in a menacing 
way. As in the preceding picture, there are suggested shapes of owls and the wood 
seems full of eyes. A smaller thumb supports a branch, making a dent as though into 
flesh, but there is also a more homely bird's head among the branches, and the gentle 
head of a gorilla can be seen in the tree roots between Rose and the wolf. A path goes 
up the centre of the picture, leading to a cottage with a witch's hat in the window, like 
the Gingerbread House in Rose's room and in the same position. The cottage's red 
roof glows in the distance and the trees leading towards it make it seem at the heart of 
the picture. On the way to the cottage is a gravestone with another evil little gargoyle 
head nearby. 
Earlier in the book, Rose externalised her inner fears, imagining witches in the 
houses opposite and dangers under the bed and in the wardrobe. Now that she is in the 
forest and confronting her own worst fears she sees dangers everywhere and, as 
readers, we share her experiences. We too 'read' the landscape and fmd menacing 
shapes and as we look at the forest scenes in different lights and in different ways, so 
we see more shapes. Wollheim refers to this as 'seeing in' (Wollheim 1987: 52), 
which he believes to be an innate capacity that is culturally universal and the origin of 
representational art. He points out that it is the spectator within the picture (the 
implied spectator) that allows the spectator of the picture a particular access and 
viewpoint. Van Eyck's painting The Arnolfini Wedding is an example of this. In 
children's picture-books, an animal often provides this viewpoint (Moebius 1990) -
for example the cat in Pat Hutchins' You'll Soon Grow into them Titch (1983). In The 
Tunnel, however, we see the scene in the forest as through Rose's eyes. 
It is as though she is on a journey into the world of her imagination, inhabited by 
images from the books she has read. She goes through layer after layer into the dark 
regions of her own interiority although, even in the forest the house - the innennost 
recess of the unconscious - remains unentered. Drawing on Freudian theory, the 
psychologist Bettelheim might have said that Rose needs to confront her worst fears if 
she is to mature and achieve independence, hut that the fairy stories she reads will 
provide her with images and imaginary experiences to help her in this process: 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 1: A Reading of 'The Tunnel' 
Stories like Hansel and Gretel encourage the child to explore on his own even 
the figments of his anxious imagination, because such fairy tales give him 
confidence to master, not only the real dangers which his parents told him about 
but even those vastly exaggerated ones which he fears exists. 
(Bettelheim 1991: 166) 
The intertextual images in the wood are certainly from stories about young people 
who achieve maturity through overcoming adversity, such as Hansel and Gretel, Jack 
and the Beanstalk and Red Riding Hood. 
In Jungian terms, Rose's journey represents her individuation process where 
'the heroic quest has the general shape of a descent into darkness and peril followed 
by a renewal of life' (Frye 1978: 122). The waste ground is the threshold, and the 
tunnel the passageway, into this inner world, and the forest becomes the place of peril 
and rebirth. Campbell's words on the mythological journey of the hero seem 
particularly appropriate: 
Having crossed the threshold, the hero (or heroine, e.g. Psyche) moves in a 
dream landscape of curiously fluid, ambiguous forms, where he must survive a 
succession of trials. 
(1993: 97) 
He also says: 
And so it happens that if anyone - in whatever society - undertakes for himself 
the perilous journey into the darkness by descending, either intentionally or 
unintentionally, into the crooked lanes of his own spiritual labyrinth, he soon 
fmds himself in a landscape of symbolical figures (anyone of which may 
swallow him). 
(101) 
This seems to describe Rose's experiences in the forest and the shapes she sees 
around her. 
Pages 21-22 
This page presents a horrifying contrast. Jack is on a black page, with white lines 
doubly framing the small picture. He is turned to stone and appears to be running 
away from us, the readers, his head turned back towards us and his mouth open in a 
scream. The use of black and white diminishes him in size, rather like looking down 
the wrong end of a telescope. Behind him can be seen a shadow, which may be Rose 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 1: A Reading of 'The Tunnel' 
but adds to the sense of an unknown presence and raises questions about what Jack 
was running from. One of his feet is on the ground in a ring of stones, like a magic 
ring, the other is upturned in the posture of running, the sole of the shoe - apparent in 
so many pictures - upraised. The trees around him are cut down to mere stumps and 
the clouds are dark and threatening. 
We are not told what turned him into stone: it remains the central enigma of 
the book. Jack willingly passed through the tunnel, and so he too undertook the 
journey into interiority, encountering the dangers of the journey. But unlike Rose his 
imagination did not provide him with metaphors to give form to his fears and thus 
come to terms with them. He was therefore turned to stone. Jack's clothes earlier in 
the book may link him to a conventional male stereotype, and the sterility of the urban 
landscape, the broken machinery on the waste ground and the cut-down trees may 
show the destructive force of this male domination expressed in a capitalist society. In 
a way Jack is as much a victim of socio-cultural conventions as Rose. 
Pages 23-24 
These pages are a sequence of four small pictures showing Jack's gradual return to 
life through the embrace of his sister. Unlike the preceding pictures, there is a change 
from darkness into light and colour as Rose steps into the stone circle and puts her 
arms around him. When Jack turns and the children embrace, the stones become 
daisies. By overcoming her fears and showing her love, Rose has rescued her brother 
and, through undertaking the journey right into the magic circle with Jack, she has 
also rescued herself. The double-page sequence is not framed with a blue line, perhaps 
indicating the freedom of the children. 
Pages 25-26 
These two pages are unframed and on the left-hand page the print. is at the bottom of 
an otherwise unbroken white page. On the right, Jack has his back to us and we look 
over his shoulder at Rose as she smiles at him, her happy expression probably 
reflecting his own. It is the fIrst time we have seen Rose through Jack's eyes, and 
there is no longer separation and polarity between them. In Freudian and Jungian 
terms, there has to be a unity of the male and female elements within the individual to 
complete the process of self-knowledge and individuation; and according to 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 1: A Reading of 'The Tunnel' 
Bettelheim (ibid.), this is the reason for the wedding at the end of the traditional folk-
tale. The united children are on the left-hand page, as though they are ready for new 
adventures together - as anticipated by the ball and the book placed together on the 
right of the endpaper under the brick wall. 
As I read the book I do so on two levels: as a moral story about the 
relationship between a boy and his sister, and the need to break down sexual 
stereotypes; and as a story about the tension between inner and outer reality, about the 
process of coming to terms with one's self, and the nature of the unconscious. My 
responses have developed through much rereading of the text. They have been 
informed by previous reading and research into picture-books, and they have drawn 
on areas of interest or sometimes half-forgotten knowledge that have come to mind 
through reading the text. I have come to writing about the text with my responses 
rooted in all my other reading; I have had the feeling in some ways that I have been 
writing my own text as I proceeded - that may not correspond to Browne's own 
conception. 
Anthony Browne likewise has necessarily drawn on his own knowledge and -
possibly - half-forgotten sources of information in creating the book. For that reason 
his creation of the book may be compared to my reading of it as both being processes 
of discovery. As author, however, he has worked within conventions and used 
semiotic codes to produce images with certain connotations, to convey certain 
meanings; and these have guided my reading. The second part of the chapter will 
explore literary theories concerned with the nature of reading and the relationship 
between reader and writer as a partnership. I will be looking to such theories for help 
in explaining both my own processes in reading this book and the children's. 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 2: Literary Perspectives 
%: Literary Perspeetives 
In the following part of the chapter, I discuss those literary theories that may account 
for the complexities of my own and the children's readings of The Tunnel, 
considering the dual nature of reading which enabled both the children and myself to 
interpret the book at our own levels. My own reading drew on an earlier interest in the 
theories of Freud, Jung and Campbell. I was aware of Browne's apparent use of 
Freudian and archetypal imagery to express such themes as the duality between inner 
and outer reality and the painful process of personal maturation. I fIrSt discuss 
psychoanalytical theories and their influence upon or within literary texts and their 
readers. I include Winnicott's insights into the origins of play, fantasy and reading 
which develop from the 'third area' between the child's understanding of self and the 
external world. I also discuss Lacan's view of the discursive nature of the 
unconscious. 
I then look more closely at a view of reading as a partnership that favours the 
reader. I start with lser's theory of the construct of the implied reader, through which 
the text is actualised, and Iser's interest in an interaction between text and reader in 
which the latter synthesizes perspectives to supply the meaning. He believes that gaps 
in the text stimulate the imagination into formulating meaning  a helpful concept in 
understanding how children read picture.books in which the relationship between 
words and pictures create such gaps. Iser's awareness of the creative nature of the 
tension between text and culture is relevant to my own questions about children's 
reading. 
The fluid and arbitrary nature of Barthes' s codes may offer a more appropriate 
framework for an understanding of the complexities of The Tunnel and the children's 
readings of it. Text and reader are constructed by a network of intertextual codes in 
which the pluralities of both bring about certain kinds of meanings, and the structures 
of the text are perceived as discourses realised in the act of reading them, rather than 
as some fIxed 'core' of the text. Although such a view of reading has much to offer, 
the destabilisation of the subject raises the question of its effect on children who are 
stillieaming what reading is all about. 
Culler's exposition of the intertextual network through which we read has 
much in common with Barthes' s codes. He sees literature as a particular form of 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 2: Literary Perspectives 
literary discourse which we learn to read through developing literary competencies. 
This is particularly relevant for a discussion of children's readings of literary texts, 
and the interpretative conventions they use as they learn 'what can be done with 
literary works' (Culler 1975: 128). It also raises the question of which competencies 
we wish to develop in children, and whether these should be the same for all. 
This leads to a consideration of perspectives that include teaching implications 
- Scholes's emphasis on textuaIity and Rosenblatt's distinction between aesthetic and 
efferent reading - before a discussion of the value of text-centred criticism for 
children's literature. Although such an approach may be inappropriate for reading The 
Tunnel, it has implications for the need of texts that will guide children in how to read 
them. 
The chapter concludes by looking at two extracts of children's readings in the 
light of each of these reading perspectives, preparing the way for a consideration of 
culture in the following chapter. 
My research question focused on the use and transformation of culture in 
reading literary texts, thus the nature of reading itself. I was interested in those literary 
theories that, in emphasising interaction between texts and readers, share a view of 
both as being culturally constituted, so that there is a continual tension between 
cultural reading and the power of the text to change and transform: 'Both texts and 
readers are already written when they meet, but both may emerge from the encounter 
altered in some crucial respect' (Scholes 1989: 92). I look fU'St at psychoanalytical 
explanations to explore this tension, in the light of archetypal and Freudian imagery in 
The Tunnel. 
Psychoanalytical penpectives 
Freud remains one of the most influential and controversial thinkers of our century. 
The way in which he has opened up the unconscious for discussion has led to an 
awareness of the way in which processes of conflict and resolution are a prerequisite 
for social adjustments. His ideas have had a profound influence on literary theory: the 
relationship between language and desire, the nature of the self in relationship to the 
external world, the interpretation of dreams as texts built on metaphor and metonymy, 
and an understanding of literary works in which both authors and readers are subject 
to laws of the unconscious. Such ideas have spilled into children's literature -
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 2: Literary Perspectives 
especially picture-books written for young children who are at an early stage in the 
process of adjustment. 
Freudian theory explores the tension between primordial desires and the goals 
and constraints of society - a conflict that is given form in The Tunnel in the Walter 
Crane picture in Rose's bedroom, where Red Riding Hood and her would-be seducer 
are constrained by the presence of the villagers in the background. Desires are 
controlled by language, or other symbolic representation, which is unable fully to 
define them so that they fmd form in particular images which corne to represent 
unconscious wishes. Language and the unconscious are, therefore, closely related, 
language giving form to sexuality and those needs of the body on which the 
unconscious is based. Writing should be understood in the light of this aspect of 
language, and has implications for literary theory. In Freudian terms, literature can be 
seen as a form of persuasion in which bodies are speaking to bodies, or as a collusion 
or secret around a core fantasy between author and reader, providing reassurance for 
the reader (Wright 1984:5). 
Freud sees the unconscious as a dynamic interplay between instinctual images 
and regulatory primary processes. Eagleton (1983) provides a succinct summary of 
Freud's thesis in which the unconscious is formed through the repression of the 
'pleasure principle' by the 'reality principle.' This results in a continual tension 
between the repressed 'id', the conscious, socialized 'ego'. The influence of parents 
and society - the 'super ego' - providing further tension. In The Tunnel such tension is 
given graphic form in the rectangular framing behind Jack which suggests frustration 
at social constraints with which he still has to corne to terms. 
Childhood is a time of assimilation and adjustment to social demands in which 
the process of maturation is often painful. The tensions between ego and id open the 
way for fantasy and dreams, which Freud sees as symbolic fulfilment of unconscious 
wishes. Dreams are themselves symbolic texts to be interpreted in the light of their 
ambiguity, and understood through both metaphoric and metonymic images which 
may be given linguistic expression. These are the two primary features of language 
(Jakobson 1962), occurring in many picture-books, particularly those about the 
difficulties of growing up and coming to terms with the instincts of the unconscious. 
Max learns to control his feelings of anger and frustration in Where the Wild Things 
Are (Sendak 1963), through a dream fantasy in which his unconscious feelings find 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 2: Literary Perspectives 
expression in the figures of the monsters on the island. Sendak believes in the 
cathartic effect of children encountering such images within the safety of a book 
(Lanes 1980). The monsters are frightening because Max fmds his own anger 
frightening. Max's bedroom becomes a forest, and objects such as Max's picture, the 
rope with the toy hanging from it, and the tent, later reappear on the dream island 
transformed into monsters and the pavilion. Thus Max's dream is metaphoric in that it 
is constructed around the symbolism of the sea and the island, but in the contiguous 
way in which one image is displaced by another, it is also metonymic. These two 
aspects of dreams can also be seen in The Tunnel, in the way in which objects in 
Rose's bedroom become transformed in the scenes of the forest. 
Maturity and awareness of selthood involve a secure sexual identity -
primarily a psychical construct - which develops during childhood when unacceptable 
desires are driven into the unconscious but fmd expression in images and symbols. 
Such Freudian symbols are widely referred to in a very simplistic way, although he 
himself emphasised that they are typical rather than universal in nature, and should be 
read and interpreted within their context. Many children's books and stories are open 
to this kind of interpretation, especially those about maturation. 
The Tunnel is about two children still fmding their sexual identity, sibling 
rivalry being part of the process. Much of the imagery of the book may be read in 
Freudian terms, such as the tunnel itself which is an atavistic symbol in many 
children's books - Peepo, The Hungry Caterpillar, and Can't You Sleep Little Bear? 
Freud's theory of instinctual drives was dualistic. This is reflected in the book: for 
example in the contrast between the phallic columns on the title-page and the curving 
line of print above, and also in the contrasting motifs on the walls behind the two 
children. Other connotations of developing sexuality include the use of the colour red 
in the bedroom, suggestive of danger and sexuality; the shapes in the wallpaper 
behind Rose, and the holes in the tree-trunks in the forest which suggest female sexual 
orifices. Although he points out that one cannot fmd anything which is not there, 
Freud himself writes of the process of interpretation: 
It may be that we have produced a complete caricature of an interpretation by 
introducing into an innocent work of art purposes of which its creator had no 
notion, and by so doing have shown once more how easy it is to fmd what one 
is looking for and what is occupying one's mind. (Freud 1953 ix: 91-92) 
Reading Proce&&e&: The Reader and the Text 
Part 2: Literary Per&pective& 
His theory that 'readers not only work on texts but texts work on readers' (Wright 
1984: 17), and his conviction that a text cannot be defmed apart from readings of it 
are of particular relevance to literary theory. Jung, the other pioneer of psychoanalytic 
theory, and initially Freud's disciple, has also influenced literary theories. A major 
difference between them was that whereas Freud's symbols were to be interpreted 
within their cultural context, lung believed that the unconscious fmds expression in 
archetypal images, universal in character and drawn from the deepest level of the 
unconscious. He refers to this as the collective unconscious, through which certain 
motifs from mythology are universal - 'the inherited possibilities of human 
imagination as it was from time immemorial' (Wright 1984: 65). Appleyard refers to 
Jung's collective unconscious as being 'a kind of well we need to draw on from time 
to time to nourish our psyches' (Appleyard 1990: 44). Like Freud, lung believed that 
the mind is subject to conflicting forces, which start in childhood and follow a 
developmental course. At the heart of the human psyche is the self, which 'comprises 
the totality of all psychic processes, conscious as well as unconscious' (Jacobi 1968: 
5). Throughout life, but especially in middle age, the self struggles to reconcile the 
conflicting claims of the unconscious and the social world. lung refers to this process 
of integration as the individuation process, and believed that 'we fmd our way back to 
the deepest springs of life' (lung 1992: 82) through translating the archetypal into 
language. As in the theories of Freud, there is an inherent dualism, for individuation 
can be achieved only through reconciliation of opposing forces, including 
male/female characteristics. Frye describes the process as one where 'the heroic quest 
has the general shape of a descent into darkness and peril followed by a renewal of 
life' (Frye 1978: 122). 
Jung's emphasis was on interpretation of meaning through symbol rather than 
language, and these symbols are linked to the psychic experience of the whole race 
and to the way we thought as children (Appleyard 1990). It is not surprising then that 
archetypal symbols appear widely in children's literature, particularly in picture-
books. Nikolajeva has drawn attention to the primeval nature of archetypal imagery in 
children's books (1996), and Moebius (1986) points out that nothing appears by 
accident in picture-book illustration, so that motifs such as water, forests and bridges 
all have symbolic force. The Tunnel is constructed around such images - indeed the 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 2: Literary Perspectives 
tunnel itself can be interpreted through both Freudian and Jungian symbols, and as an 
archetypal image of entry into the unconscious. Other picture-books with such 
imagery include You '1/ Soon Grow into them, Titch (Hutchins 1983), in which the 
window and door have a symbolic role in the development of Titch's independence, 
and Granpa (Burningham 1984) which uses arches, doors and water to symbolize 
death and rebirth. 
The focus of later psychoanalytical theory was the psychic process through 
which the child develops an understanding of self in relation to the external world, 
and the role of symbolic representation in this process, including fantasy, play and 
literature. Klein (1977) sees the relationship in terms of a dualism in which good and 
bad, and life and death instincts can coexist within a single concept. The developing 
ego splits when it is exposed to destructive instinctual urges, but its defence 
mechanism is the ability to expel the bad (projection) and absorb the good 
(introjection). The mother's breast is experienced as a 'good object' and a 'bad 
object', according to whether it is a source of satisfaction or frustration. This position 
is accompanied by destructive feelings of rage towards the mother but later, as the 
child develops an awareness of her as an individual, it feels guilt for its rage and 
wants to make reparation. The child may move between these two positions 
throughout its development, and it does so through symbol formation. One of Klein's 
most important contributions is thus the importance of fantasy in coming to terms 
with reality (the child's feelings for the mother), and the need to structure these 
fantasies through play to gain access to the unconscious and develop an awareness of 
self in relation to the external world. 
The psychoanalyst Winnicott had a different approach to the relationship 
between inner experience and outer reality. He saw a third area of 'potential space' 
between the individual and the environment from which the child learns to 
differentiate between self and the external world. Initially this space is bridged by the 
transitional object (the 'comfort blanket'), but comes to be the area of inter-subjective 
play which leads to the creative use of cultural objects: 'cultural experience begins 
with creative living fIrSt manifested in play' (Winnicott 1980: 100). Britton develops 
the concept of the third space to show the relationship between fantasy play and 
children's stories, and their role in assimilating children's inner fears and desires 
within the constraints of the social world (Britton 1977). He shows how it is culture, 
Reading Proce&ses: The Reader and the Text 
Part 2: Literary Perspectives 
'the common pool of humanity' (47), that can offer children such symbolic fantasy 
figures as witches and fairy godmothers to help them come to terms with inner fears. 
This has implications for my study into how children with a different cultural 
repertoire of stories are able to respond to these fantasy figures in The Tunnel. 
The children's picture-book Peepo (Ahlberg, A. and Ahlberg, J. 1981) shows 
the young child coming to terms with the external social world. We see a baby who 
initially perceives his social world in a fragmented way from within the constraints of 
cot-bars and safety straps. As the book progresses, the baby is loosed from his 
constraints, and the book closes with a mirror image in which he sees reflected 
himself and all his family. The mirror image marks an important stage in the 
development of the child. The young baby has no centre of identity; it is not a unified 
subject desiring a stable object but 'a complex, shifting field of force' (Eagleton 1983: 
154). Klein and Winnicott recognised the indeterminate nature of the boundaries 
between the baby and the external world, but the psychologist Lacan (1977) further 
developed our understanding of this relationship through the theory of the mirror 
stage. In so doing, he moved away from the concept of self to that of subject, 
constituted in language and discourse and therefore unstable and fragmented (Lacan 
1989). The mirror stage occurs when the child first recognises its reflection in the 
mirror, becoming aware of itself as an integrated yet alienated self - itself and yet not 
itself. This is the beginning of the realm of images, when such constant factors in our 
lives as our mother or familiar stories provide us with self-images in which we make 
identifications but in so doing, misperceive and misrecognise ourselves. The ego is 
therefore built up through a 'fictive sense of unitary selfhood' (164). 
Lacan claims that the unconscious, demonstrated through dreams, is structured 
like language. This is based on Jakobson's (1962) distinction between metaphor and 
metonymy and also on Saussure's thesis of the signifier/signified - that dream images 
signify or stand for a certain meaning. Unlike the relatively stable semiotic 
relationship between the signifier and signified, the relationship between them in the 
dream is shifting and conative. The unconscious as language arises from that time 
when social reality breaks in upon the infant's early desire for the mother's body. 
Lacan refers to this as the "'Non" du pere': the law in the figure of the father 
interposes itself between the child and its desires, which are driven into the 
unconscious. The unconscious develops, therefore, as the child learns to control 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 2: Literary Perspectives 
gratification through language so that 'language imposes a chain of words along 
which the ego must move, while the unconscious remains in search of the object it has 
lost' (Wright 1984: 111). Lacan's unconscious is not so much within us as around us 
and between us: 
a kind of vast, tangled network which surrounds us and weaves itself through us 
and yet the very stuff of which we are made 'is language indeed.' 
(Eagleton 1983: 173) 
Lacan thought of language as the symbolic order through which we come to know our 
own subjectivity - it existed before us and we are part of it, but we can never control 
it. We can only realise our own subjectivity in relation to that which is different or 
"'the Other," that which brought us into being as subjects in the first place, but which 
always outruns our grasp' (Eagleton: 1983: 174). During the mirror stage, therefore, 
the child begins to learn about itself in relation to the external world, but only 
develops a full awareness of itself as subject through the acquisition of language and 
entry into the symbolic order. This makes Lacan's ideas powerful for discussing 
children's encounters with written texts. His theories of the fragmented subject, 
structured through language so that the psyche is textual in nature, had considerable 
influence among post-structuralists, including writers such as Barthes whose ideas I 
consider later in the chapter. 
The ego psychologist Holland is worth considering here for his interest - close 
to classical Freudian theory - in the psychological nature of the interaction between 
text and reader. He originally believed that literary works are created through the 
unconscious desires of the author, who puts up a 'defense' between himself and the 
desire through creating literary form. Later, however, he located this role of literature 
within the reader rather than the writer; readers project their own fantasies and desires 
onto the work of literature, thus identifying theme and meaning. Holland believes that 
the form of the novel exists not in the text but in the readers themselves who impose 
their own sense of form and meaning, and thus bring formal devices to work on the 
novel. In 5 Readers Reading (1975) he analyses the response oftive people's reading 
of Faulkner's novel The Rose, to show how each one interprets the story differently 
according to their own fantasies and unconscious desires. In Gothic Possibilities 
(1986), he outlines the literary reading experience as comprising four shapes: defence, 
expectation, fantasy and transfonnation, so that in reading 'each of us resymbolizes 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 2: Literary Perspectives 
reality in our own terms' (218). This is similar to Freud's theory of interpretation but 
is weighted towards the reader's activity. In Prolegomena to a Theory of Reading 
(1980), Culler points out that Holland has transferred the concept of unity from text to 
person and that, in so doing, he neglects the notion of the individual as a 'highly 
complex cultural construct' (56). 
Psychoanalytical theories have provided insights into the nature of reading, 
including a focus on the text as written from the author's unconscious fantasies. 
Eagleton (1983) discusses D.H. Lawrence's Sons and Lovers in this way, but also 
points out the limitations of a psychological view of reading that neglects the social 
and political issues that complicate the working-out of relationships within the text. 
Psychoanalysis may, however, concur with Holland in seeing the meaning of texts as 
coming from readers who project their unconscious fantasies on to it. Both approaches 
offer insights into the reading of a text that is as rich in symbolism as The Tunnel - a 
text which leaves spaces into which readers can project their own fantasies. On the 
other hand, psychoanalysis offers a view of the reader as the unstable subject who 
reads the text through plural codes (Barthes 1973) - a view that has much in common 
with the post-structuralists considered later in the chapter. Although psychoanalysis 
may have limitations as a therapeutic tool, as a theory which has been able to throw 
light upon the ways in which the arts become meaningful, as in literature and painting, 
the developments in psychoanalytical criticism throughout the twentieth century have 
been powerful and illuminating. 
Children's books, particularly picture-books, are by their nature dealing - often 
in symbolic form - with the theme of childhood and the pleasures and pains of 
growing up. Rose defmes the unconscious as our constant reworking of childhood 'in 
our attempt to build an image of our own history' (Rose 1984: 12). The themes of 
unconscious fears, sibling rivalry, relationship with parents, dependence and 
independence constantly reappear within the pages of children's books. The Freudian 
psychoanalyst Bettelheim sees folk-tales, the origins of children's stories, as being an 
essential part of children coming to terms with their own deep inner turmoil. Through 
them, the child is enabled to fit 'unconscious content into conscious fantasies which 
enable him to deal with that content' (Bettelheim 1991: 7). His interpretations of such 
stories may seem simplistic and rigid, and he neglects social and cultural factors 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 2: Literary Perspectives 
(Zipes, 1983), but these stories are dealing with the themes of childhood listed above. 
Portrayed as a hard struggle, evil is everywhere but in the end good triumphs. 
Childhood fears, rivalries and relationships and developing sexuality are 
central themes in The Tunnel, made manifest largely by the archetypal images of the 
forest, the waste land and the tunnel itself. The psychic energy conveyed in Rose's 
bedroom is metonymically transformed into the forest scene, where the threatening 
figures and suggestions of half-hidden horrors are such as one encounters in a dream. 
In order to understand further how we read and interpret such a text, I now consider 
some of the theories of reading that may offer explanations for my own and the 
children's readings. Starting with Iser and response theory, I discuss first those 
accounts that privilege the reader in the interaction between text and reader. 
Reader~eDtred penpectives 
The following section looks at Iser's theories of how texts are actualised in their 
readers, first discussing the role of the 'implied reader' in this process, and then how 
the gaps in the text stimulate readers into making meaning. Iser bases his view of 
reading on the nature of the interaction between reader and text, or what he terms 
'Aesthetic Response', in which the reader formulates the meaning, but the text is 
constructed in such a way as to bring about what he refers to as 'performances of 
meaning' (Iser 1978: 27). The construct of the implied reader is central to this process 
as it 'designates a network of response-inviting structures which impel the reader to 
grasp the text' (34). 
This model of the reading process is not so much a search for hidden meaning 
but, to use a metaphor which Iser borrows from Frye, 'a picnic to which the author 
brings the words and the reader the meaning' (27). The focus is on the reader and the 
process of reading, rather than on the text or the author. Iser's primary concern is with 
the means by which the reader is able to construct meaning, in contrast with a view of 
reading which objectively analyses the text for meaning, seeing conflict and 
resolution unfolding before the gaze of the reader. Iser, on the other hand, situates this 
structure within the reader: 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 2: Literary Perspectives 
This is not in the form of a spectacle unfolding before the reader's eyes; on the 
contrary, the truly literary text will set off reactions in the reader, and the 
rhythm will be both constituted and performed within him. (47) 
This process takes place through what he calls the 'wandering viewpoint'. The text is 
constructed through a system of perspectives - usually those of the narrator, the 
characters, the plot and the fictitious reader - and readers are stimulated through the 
structure of the text to make connections between these perspectives. Textual devices, 
such as sudden breaks in the narrative or the juxtaposition of different narrative 
viewpoints, open up new vantage points on the world of the text. The implied reader 
is situated at the meeting point of these perspectives which s/he must fuse together, so 
that the images thus formed continually open up new possibilities of what is to come 
while illuminating what has gone before. Such a reader, therefore, is continually 
looking forwards and backwards (protensions and retentions). 
This process is not linguistic but ideational, and can only be realised in the 
mind of the reader. lser describes the relationship between the structure of the text, 
and the reader in whose mind the structure takes place, as 'related in the same way as 
intention and fulfilment' (1978: 36). The images through which the reader creates the 
world of the text are read through the reader's own referential background so that they 
are shaped by previous reading and social experiences. Therefore there is no. one true 
reading of the text, but every reading presupposes a network of alternative readings 
past and present. 
The reader is stimulated into making connections within the text through areas 
of uncertainty - what Iser refers to as the blanks or gaps in the text - which stimulate 
the imagination to provide what is not there: 'What is concealed spurs the reader into 
action, but this action is also controlled by what is revealed' (1980: 111). Such gap 
filling is an integral part of all verbal communication as well as the reading process, 
since what is said always raises questions about what is not or cannot be said. Some 
authors, however, are particularly skilful at raising questions in their readers' minds 
and are able to use these gaps as conscious literary devices. Iser quotes Virginia 
Woolfs reference to Jane Austen as an example of a writer who is thus able to 
stimulate the reader to supply meanings: she 'is thus a mistress of much deeper 
emotion than appears upon the surface. She stimulates us to supply what is not there' 
(1957: 174 in Iser 1978: 168). Such picture-books as Where the Wild Things Are or 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 2: Literary Perspectives 
Rosie's Walk are particular examples of texts in which the ambiguities create such 
gaps. 
The shifting perspectives within the text are closely connected to the gaps or 
blanks in the text, since the fusion of two perspectives may well open up a new gap to 
be filled by the reader's imagination. Two narrative viewpoints upon a certain event 
may raise questions in the reader's mind. This is seen in a novel like Last Orders 
(Swift 1996), where the juxtaposition of each character's memories and viewpoints as 
they transport Jack Dodds's ashes to the sea produces gaps in the text through which 
readers construct their own image of each character and what really happened in the 
past. Granpa (Burningham 1984) is a picture-book constructed around the 
perspectives of each character, where the reader has to imagine or supply a narrative 
based on brief moments of interaction between them. Iser describes this as 'a mutually 
restrictive and magnifying interaction between the explicit and the implicit, between 
revelation and concealment' (1980: 111). He may have meant by this that meaning is 
not located solely within the text, but in the interpretative processes which the text 
sets in motion in the reader through such gaps, so that there is a tension between the 
reader's role and the guidance provided by the text. The relevance for my research 
question is that the gaps may be filled from different cultural perspectives and 
traditions, even though the text may originate in an apparently Western tradition. 
Iser is open to criticism for apparent inconsistency in his view of an active 
reader whose interpretative procedures are thus fundy constrained by the text. Such 
an emphasis would seem to place Iser in a traditional objectivist school of criticism, 
but his interest in the nature of the interaction between reader and text marks a real 
shift from text-centred criticism. Nevertheless, it is the text itself which stimulates the 
reading process, and, as Scholes (1985) points out, the reader's choices in 'making' 
meaning are severely limited by the writer's choice of what to write. Iser himself 
compares the author to the artist. The artist paints a picture in such a way as to take 
account of the onlooker's perceptions, but provides guidance on the way that the 
picture is to be seen through the use of devices such as perspective, line and colour. In 
the same way, the author presents viewpoints through a narrative structure that will be 
actualised in the implied reader, and thus forces the real reader to adopt an active role. 
This view of reading is one of constantly synthesising perspectives or constructing 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 2: Literary Perspectives 
consistencies through fonning and revising Gestalten. as the spectator does before the 
visual arts (lser 1978: 125). 
lser compares his own theories to those of Gombrich discussing the visual arts. 
When we look at a picture we can 'never really separate theories of perception of 
what we see from what we know' (Gombrich 1962: 331). The artist will also tend to 
see what he paints rather than paint what he sees, relying on a public that shares a way 
oflooking at the world and 'knows how to take a hint' (196). Iser likewise shows that 
literature draws on the prevailing social nonns and referential fields but goes beyond 
them, so that 'it begins to activate that which the system has left inactive' (1980: 76): 
or in Barthes's words 'It represents history and at the same time resists it' (lser 1978: 
73). It has a transfonning power to reorganise cultural nonns and literary traditions 
and force readers 'to see what they cannot nonnally see in the ordinary process of 
day-to-day living' (Iser 1980: 70). lser refers to Harding's claim that literature brings 
about wish fonnulation rather than wish fulfilment, claiming that in the act of reading 
we fonnulate ourselves and thus discover an inner world of which we had hitherto not 
been conscious (Harding 1977: 158). 
In summary, lser sees the act of reading to be through shifting perspectives on 
the text sited in the implied reader, who actively synthesizes these into images or 
Gestalten, bringing his/her own reading history and cultural norms to this process and, 
in so doing, transcending them. Bruner puts it thus: 
a great story must be written with sufficient subjectivity to allow it to be 
rewritten by the reader, rewritten to allow play for the reader's 
imagination. 
(1986: 35) 
In my reading of The Tunnel, I was aware of the puzzles that stimulate meaning-
making. The most striking enigma, or gap, is the stone figure of Jack and the fact that 
we are not told what it was that turned him to stone. Another major gap is the nature 
of the world beyond the tunnel and the sense of unseen presence there, indicated by 
the axe and the fire, as well as the house and the gravestone. The unseen Mother 
provides a gap, like the Mother in Where the Wild Things, and on every page there are 
puzzles leading to a particular kind of active reading and to an awareness of levels of 
meaning within the book. It may be such gaps that allow readers from non-Western 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 2: Literary Perspectives 
cultures to draw on their own experiences and subjectivities to find their own way into 
the world of the text. 
The reader has to fuse the perspectives of the text, one of which is the contrast 
between the two children made apparent from the front endpaper. On the fIrst page 
there is a discrepancy or 'slippage' between the words of the text, which proclaim the 
difference between the children, and the picture, which shows a strong family 
resemblance. We anticipate that they will have contrasting experiences and this is 
confirmed within the ftrst four double-pages: in the pictures of each of them in their 
bed, and in the waste ground where the pipe between them denotes their separation. 
Contrast is also drawn between the real world and the world within the book which 
Rose carries in nearly every picture, but leaves behind at the entrance of the tunnel. 
Once in the forest, we are in a scene haunted by fairy tale characters, in which another 
contrast is established between the two ends of the tunnel - the forest at one end and 
the waste ground and bedroom at the other. 
Anthony Browne thus constructs an implied reader, able to make connections 
and enter the world of the book. The text offers guidance in this process by the use of 
such repeating motifs as the witch's hat, and by the references to certain fairy tales, 
but readers will also have their own understanding of such images fonned by previous 
reading experiences. Browne makes the reader aware that more layers of 
interpretation are possible by withholding information such as the significance of La 
Tempesta on the title-page, or the meaning of the mysterious shoes that reappear 
through the book. A tension between the active role of the reader and the guidance of 
the text is also shown in the composition of the pictures. In the forest, we are invited 
to find all sorts of creatures and engage in the pleasures of 'seeing in,' using our 
expectations and knowledge to create Gestalten that enable us to recognise what is 
there. In this process, however, Browne uses perspective and colour to guide our 
observations. 
Iser's theories thus provide insights into how we read this text. Nevertheless, 
he cannot quite account for the teasing quality of the book, which sets up connotations 
and possibilities of meanings that are continually elusive; nor do his theories account 
for its metafIctive quality. A post-structuralist approach is more open than Iser's, no 
longer searching for text structures already there, but realising them in the act of 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 2: Literary Perspectives 
reading. In the next section, therefore, I discuss the explanatory power of the theories 
of Barthes and Culler who belong to this tradition. 
Post .. structuralist penpeetives 
Iser's approach locates the implied reader within the text, but in SlZ, Barthes analyses 
it line by line to reveal the underlying semiotic codes. His is a process of 
interpretation and reinterpretation through which the reader can become aware of 
several meanings at once (Fox 1993). He has moved on from his earlier Structuralism, 
which was influenced by Saussure' s model of linguistic analysis that sees meaning 
arising from differential relations within a system. Structuralism attempted to describe 
and understand the conventions and modes of signification which make it possible to 
'mean' - that is, it seeks to discover the conditions of meaning (Lodge 1980 in Rice 
and Waugh 1992: 23). 
In Mythologies (1973), for instance, Barthes worked from a premise that an 
utterance (verbal, visual, fashion, etc.) presupposes a system which generates the 
possibility of meaning for such an utterance; it is the task of Structuralism to describe 
and analyse that system. In the essay 'Introduction to the structural analysis of 
narratives' (1966, in Image - Music - Text 1977), he uses a Structuralist approach to 
give three levels of analysis of narrative structures: functions, perceiVed through 
narrative units; actions, by which he refers to those characters who can be defmed 
according to their participation in action, and narration itself. In this discussion he 
draws on and develops the narrative theories of structuralists such as Propp and 
Todorov. 
As a post-structuralist, however, Barthes has an approach in which the 
semiotic codes have become arbitrary and more fluid, relying on the reader to 
approach the text with a willingness to read the mUltiple signals set Up by the text. 
SlZ, first published in 1973, works through Balzac's Sarrasine in a step-by-step 
commentary to demonstrate this way of reading the text. In it Barthes makes a 
distinction between the classic 'readerly' text: 'what can be read but not written' 
(1993: 4), and the 'writerly' text by which he means the text as rewritten by and 
through the reader: 'the writerly text is ourselves writing' (5). The text becomes 
writerIy in setting connotations in the reader through which it obtains meaning or 
polysemy, thus becoming a plural text: 'connotation makes possible a (limited) 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 2: Literary Perspectives 
dissemination of meanings, spread like gold dust on the apparent surface of the text' 
(8-9). However, some texts are more plural and therefore less 'written' than others. 
His analysis of Sarrasine shows the semiotic codes through which the reader 
'rewrites' a classic readerly text at the point of receiving it, analysing the text by 
means of five codes. He divides the text into very short starred sections labelled 
lexias, pointing out that this division is purely empirical and arbitrary. His starring 
system is used to demonstrate the infmite number of simultaneous meanings there can 
be, and he refers to the lexia as 'the fmest possible sieves, thanks to which we shall ' 
"cream off' meanings, connotations' (Lodge 1988: 174). If we overlook or forget 
meanings, this too is part of the reading process and the plurality of the text, since it 
makes each successive reading of a text a different experience. The five codes are as 
follows, although he gives readers the licence to devise others when appropriate. 
proairetic 
hermeneutic 
semic 
symbolic 
cultural 
The code of narrative actions: it can be thought of as the 
referential aspects that represent the story structure. It 
refers to the 'already done' (1993: 19) and, since it 
derives its meaning from the closure of the text, its drive 
is backward looking. 
This builds on the desire to know the truth: it is the code 
of secrets, problems and enigma which raise questions. 
As the proairetic looks back, so this looks forward and 
impels the reader to turn the pages and continue 
reading. 
Barthes refers to these as the 'flickers of meaning' or 
the small details that gradually build up our knowledge 
of a character or a place. 
Through this code the larger themes over the whole 
narrative are organized. In Sarrasine they operate 
through antitheses. 
All the codes are in fact cultural, but this is the code that 
links the text to the real world and builds on the reader's 
social and intertextual knowledge. 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 2: Literary Perspectives 
The reader, who thus rewrites the text, is also 'a plurality of other texts, of codes 
which are infmite, or more precisely, "lost'" (1993: 10). Barthes's position is similar 
to that of Lac an or Derrida in this view of an unstable subject, constructed in language 
and discourse, and therefore split and fragmented. Underlying structures of both text 
and subject are perceived, not as some fixed 'core' of the text, but as fluid sets of 
codes or discourses, thus extending 'the domain and the play of signification 
infmitely' (1993: 152). The author loses any claim to originality, since every text is a 
weaving together a myriad of other texts, none of them original: 'the text is a tissue, a 
woven fabric' (1971: 159). They are woven together, however, not in the writer but in 
the reader: 'the space on which all the quotations that make up a writing are inscribed' 
(1993: 118). 
Browne's refusal to give closure to The Tunnel makes it a plural or writerly 
text, with visual puzzles and enigmas that give rise to an infinite number of readings 
so that Barthes's accounts of the reader/writer relationship would seem to offer a 
rationale for a reading of it. It is also a children's book, however, and the question 
must be asked as to whether such a view of reading that destabilizes the subject is 
appropriate for children who are still fmding an identity as subjects and as readers. 
Culler's concept of literary competencies may be helpful in considering this 
question. He makes a comparison between literary and linguistic competence, 
pointing out that we all implicitly learn the rules and structures of our own language, 
which some of us may then make explicit in the study of language. In the same way, 
we implicitly learn the forms and conventions of literary discourse, but 'to make the 
implicit explicit is the task of both linguistics and poetics' (Culler 1975: 122). 
In order to read text as a particular social discourse which is designated as 
literature, we employ certain conventions: for example, although Blake's poem 
London has been interpreted in many different ways, all critics share a reading in 
which meanings are developed in a unified way through form and imagery. A 
programme that develops literary competencies, therefore, is one that encourages the 
reader to reflect on their own processes of reading literature so that, in Culler's words: 
'we can read a text as literature and then enquire what operations that involves' (128). 
He shares Barthes' s view of the elusive nature of the literary text as being 
layered like an onion, which contains 'nothing except the infmity of its own surfaces' 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 2: Literary Perspectives 
(Barthes 1971:10). David Lodge makes use of this metaphor of reading when Maurice 
Zapp delivers his lecture on reading as striptease, in his novel Small World. 
The text unveils itself before us, but never allows itself to be possessed; and 
instead of striving to possess it we should take pleasure in its teasing'. 
(Lodge: 1984:27) 
Culler points out that we have to discover the latent properties of the text itself in 
order to enjoy its teasing. He believes that if we think of reading in terms of the 
qualities of the actual reading (interpretative operations), rather than in terms of fixed 
meanings, then we open ourselves up to 'challenging and innovative texts which 
challenge the limits we set to the self as a device or order and allow us, painfully or 
joyfully, to accede to an expansion of self (1975: 130). 
The process is a dynamic relationship between texts and ways of reading them 
that have a transforming effect upon the reader. In order to develop as readers we 
have to read with an awareness of the literary conventions of our culture, which 
enable us to read 'against the conventions of the discourse'(l30). In his discussion of 
what he terms 'anti-narrative', Scholes (1981) makes a similar point. He refers to texts 
that break the conventions or rules of narrative - in particular those relating to the 
proairetic and hermeneutic codes - thus making the reader aware of them as codes. 
Culler's exposition of intertext has much in common with Barthes's view of 
the text which is woven from other texts. Culler's metaphor is that of a grid: 'A work 
can only be read in connection with or against other texts, which provide a grid 
through which it is read' (Culler 1975: 139). His defmition of intertext includes 
knowledge of the world and how it works, as well as awareness of genres and literary 
texts. It is through the continual interplay of these features of intertext that texts are 
sited within the institution or discourse of literature, but it is through asserting their 
otherness to these codes that they become interesting and challenging. 
Scholes's (1985) more stable, culturally constituted self, the centre around 
which a new text is continually rewritten, contrasts with the post-structuralist, 
fragmented subject. For Scholes, the term 'text' includes lived and shared experience 
- the text of our lives. Reading can then be defmed as 'rewriting the text of the work 
within the text of our lives' (10). a continual intertextual process of bringing texts 
together. 
Reading Proce~~e~: The Reader and the Text 
Part 2: Literary Per~pectives 
All readers will perceive different features of literary works because they have 
different cultural and personal experiences. Scholes refers to the lesson from 
feminism that the reading experience can never be the same for all. His view of the 
cultural nature of reading is particularly relevant for my research question. It is not 
one of cultural determinism, for the texts we read have a transforming power: 'both 
texts and readers are already written when they meet but both may emerge from the 
encounter altered in some crucial respect' (92). 
Scholes further develops the concept of intertext within a view of reading as a 
partnership between text and reader, but one in which the literary text has more 
stability than in post-structuralist models. The writer is unable to entirely express 
emotions and must rely on the reader to do the rest, producing 'a textual interpretation 
that is the result of two consciousnesses' (54). Unlike Barthes's writerly text, 
constituted within the reader, Scholes' s writer has intentions which must be respected 
by the reader. The latter may take on the role of writer by constructing the literary 
forms of the text, but continues to read on, precisely because of the otherness of the 
text: 'an attempt to grasp meanings that are not ours, meanings that are interesting 
because they come from outside us' (SO). 
In Textual Power (1985), Scholes questioned Fish's notion of interpretative 
communities, with a fIrm statement that the choices readers make are constrained by 
what writers have chosen to write. Fish argued that a literary work becomes so, not 
because of its intrinsic qualities, but because of the interpretative strategies that 
readers bring to them: 'Objects are made and not found' (Fish 1980: 331). The reader 
who brings these strategies is a socially constituted being, 'the product of social and 
cultural patterns of thought' (332), who comes to the text as a member of an 
interpretative community. Scholes answers, however, that 'it is the differences within 
the reader, who is never a unifIed member of a single unifIed group, which create the 
space in which the reader exercises a measure of interpretative freedom' (1985: 154). 
He sees a more dynamic relationship between verbal and cultural text, in which the 
former is written within the matrix of the latter which 'it both depends on and 
modifIes' (33). This has similarities with Hollindale's model of 'childness,' discussed 
in the following chapter as relevant to the way in which the children in my study were 
able to relate the themes of The Tunnel to their own cultural backgrounds and 
expectations. 
Reading Processe$: The Reader and the Text 
Part 2: Literary Perspectives 
The relationship between writer and reader is asymmetrical, and to read 
successfully, readers need frameworks or protocols within which to negotiate 
differences between texts. Teachers can develop students' awareness of such 
protocols by an approach that focuses on textuality and so help students understand 
that 'every poem, play and story is a text related to others, both verbal pre texts; and 
social sub-texts and all manner of sub-texts' (Scholes 1985: 20). There are three 
aspects of reading through which readers can develop an awareness of textuality. The 
first is reading, which is largely unconscious and depends on the reader's knowledge; 
the second is interpretation, activated when there is a hitch - what he calls a failure of 
reading - that calls attention to the meaning of the text. Scholes points out that some 
texts are so constructed to produce this sense of incompleteness, thus stimulating an 
interpretative mode of reading - The Tunnel surely being an example of this. The third 
aspect is criticism in which we look at its social values from a position outside the 
written text. Scholes summarizes the textuality of each of these activities thus: 
In reading we produce text within text; in interpretation we produce text upon 
text; and in criticizing we produce text against text. 
Pedagogic implications are implicit in his theories of reading, therefore, as in the 
reading theories developed by Rosenblatt. As she somewhat ruefully admits (1993: 6), 
she is often credited with initiating the term 'reader-response theory', which has been 
so influential in the teaching of English, especially in secondary schools. Watson, for 
instance, shows how The Reader, The Text, The Poem (Rosenblatt 1978), influenced 
him to make reader-response theory explicit to secondary schools students through 
reading John Brown, Rose and the Midnight Cat (Watson 1992). 
Rosenblatt now prefers to use Dewey's term 'transaction' in referring to the 
relationship between text and reader, because it emphasizes the contribution of both, 
in what she calls a reciprocal interplay between text and reader (Rosenblatt 1993). For 
successful transactions with the text, readers must adopt either an aesthetic or an 
efferent reading stance. 
The aesthetic stance is one in which the reading is an end in itself. We read 
for the sake of the text created during the reading, attending to the form or imagery of 
Reading Proc:e&su: The Reader and the Text 
Part 2: Literary Perspectives 
the text, listening to the rhythms and sounds or experiencing the events within the 
story: 
The aesthetic stance in shaping what is understood, produces a meaning in 
which cognitive and affective, referential and emotive, denotational and 
connotational are intermingled. 
We draw on our own experiences and culture to read like this and interpret the text, 
producing a partnership or transaction between a text and reader. 
An efferent reading does not focus on the text for its own sake, but is one in 
which we read to fmd out information on something beyond the text. 'Attention 
focuses on accumulating what is to be carried away at the end of the reading' (7). 
Rosenblatt believes that teachers of literature must flrst encourage an aesthetic stance, 
allowing students to experience the text: 'form is something felt on the pulses ftrst of 
all' (20). They should be able to draw on their own cultural knowledge in this 
experience, using nonverbal responses and the use of open questions to build up trust 
between the teacher and the students. Aesthetic reading is particularly important for 
young inexperienced readers, who are still learning what it means to be a reader. A 
narrow view of reader-response theory, however, may focus attention too soon on 
cognitive understanding of literary forms, resulting in an efferent reading. Rosenblatt 
emphasises that aesthetic reading is not efferent reading with affective responses 
added later, calling this the 'jam on bread' theory of literature. 
A summary of this section, indicates that the perspectives of each school of 
thought may illuminate a reading of The Tunnel, offering insights into different facets 
of the relationship between reader and text. Psychoanalysis sees the text as a 
projection of the writer's unconscious desires, the means by which readers recognise 
and come to terms with the unconscious, developing an awareness of subjectivity in 
relation to the external world. In reader-response theory, the active reader synthesizes 
perspectives and fllls the gaps in the text, while the text of the post-structuralist is 
rewritten by the unstable subject in the act of receiving it, both text and reader being 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 2: Literary Perspectives 
composed of pluralist semiotic codes. Culler discusses the nature of intertextuality 
and the need for reading competencies that make explicit the processes of reading 
literature as a particular discourse, while Scholes extends these ideas through the 
concept of textuality as lived experience as well as literary reading, so that the aim of 
teaching literature should be the development of awareness of this textuality. The 
section concludes with Rosenblatt's plea for teaching literature as aesthetic stance. 
These theorists share a view of reading as a partnership or transaction that has 
the power to transform both text and reader. They have much to offer for an. 
understanding of The Tunnel with its use of archetypal imagel)' and Freudian themes; 
its gaps and enigmas that encourage readers to become interpreters; its intertextual 
nature that makes it a metafictional text, and the fluidity of its plural codes that makes 
its meanings elusive, continually suggesting other readings. 
The view of reading as a partnership has been influential in approaches to 
teaching literature to children. Benton and Fox, for instance (1985), have promoted an 
approach to teaching literature based on reading as an active meaning-making 
activity, and Judith Langer's 'envisionment' as a way of constructing 'text worlds in 
the mind' (Meek 1996b: 100) is based on reader-response theol)'. These approaches 
have been valuable in promoting ways of encouraging children to respond to texts and 
make aesthetic readings. 
However, there are dangers in understanding children's reading only in terms 
of theories of adults' reading. Meek (1996) points out the difficulty of directly 
transferring adult literary theol)', in which 'texts depend for their meaning on their 
relationship with readers', to books written for children who are still becoming 
readers. One difference is in the relationship between the writer and the reader: 
Adult writers are discovered by their readers. Writers who include the young in 
their scheme of things seek out both children and adults. 
(180) 
In this view of reading, texts for children woo their readers and provide guidance on 
how they are to be read, Browne's books being examples of such guidance. The next 
section, therefore, discusses whether text-centred criticism can provide insights into 
the guidance or 'nourishment' that young readers need. 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 2: Literary Perspectives 
Textlauthor..centred penpectives 
There are two schools of thought within this tradition of literary theory: one focuses 
on the actual authors and their intentions, and the other on the text itself. The 
dominant perspective of the last century and a half was what Belsey calls 'expressive 
realism' (1980) - an approach to literature in which the text is seen to give form to the 
sensibilities of a particular author: 
The novelist is giving form to a story, giving form to his moral and 
metaphysical view and giving form to his particular experience of sensations, 
people, places and society. 
(Hardy 1964: 1) 
The purpose of such criticism was to uncover the meaning that was in the author's 
mind, using historical and biographical evidence to help clarify this: 
the text could be seen to possess a single, determinate meaning, however 
complex, and the authority for this meaning was the author. Meaning was what 
the author put in the text. 
(BeIsey 1980: 17) 
David Lodge gives a rueful account of this process as he describes the questions that 
critics ask, even today, in their attempts to get at the 'real truth' behind his novels 
(Lodge 1990). 
In the fifties, sixties and seventies, largely influenced by I.A. Richards, New 
Criticism moved away from an emphasis on the author to a closer focus on the text 
itself, though still maintaining a stable, unchanging meaning that can be revealed 
through close textual analysis. In Practical Criticism (1929), Richards had analysed 
interpretations of a number of poems. He observed students' difficulties in 
understanding poetry, and commented severely that readers draw upon preconceptions 
and stock responses so that 'what happens appears be more of the reader's doing than 
the poet's' (IS). He views this as something against which 'we require to be 
especially on our guard' (16). His recommendation against 'wild interpretations' was 
the systematic study of a theory of interpretations, which would enable the reader to 
develop the skills to arrive at a correct reading of the text. F .R. Leavis was one 
influential critic within this tradition, who firmly believed in a clear focus on the text 
itself, but was sometimes drawn into discussion of a text in relation to its author - for 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 2: Literary Perspectives 
example, his comments on the novelists of The Great Tradition (1962) or on D.H. 
Lawrence (1973). 
One of the foremost proponents of the author-centred approach was E.N. 
Hirsch, who gave Wordsworth's Lucy part Vas an example of the need to read a 
poem in the light of the poet's philosophy at the time of writing the poem. He 
believed that a text has one meaning, not inherent in the words, but construed by the 
knowledgeable reader: 'Meaning is an affair of consciousness, and not of physical 
signs or things' (Hirsch 1967:3). Although he realised the limitation of New 
Criticism's concentration on the text alone, he also deplored the notion of a plurality 
of meanings which he considered anarchic. What he appears to advocate, in fact, is a 
hierarchical community of knowledgeable readers who research, identify and 
disseminate the true meaning of texts. 
Graham Greene gives a writer's perspective on this when he comments on a 
theory of informed readers who claim to know what the text means and what was in 
the mind of the author. He is 'more afraid to read his favourable critics than his 
unfavourable, for with tenible patience they unroll before his eyes the unchanging 
pattern of the carpet' (Greene 1980:134). 
He pinpoints the paradox of literary criticism. Although he recognises the 
need for the writer to distance himself from his work, he is initated by those critics 
who seem to undervalue the role of the author and, in his case, the carefully 
researched accuracies of his novels, when they promote the reader as partner in the 
construction of meanings. 
'This is Indo-China,' I want to proclaim, 'this is Mexico, this is Sierra Leone 
carefully and accurately described.' 
It would be hard to read The Tunnel in the light of a text/author-centred tradition of 
literary criticism, since Browne teasingly withholds meanings from his readers. There 
are also questions about what such an approach can contribute to our understanding of 
children's readings. Hirsch's model of reading implies that those who do not belong 
to an elite of informed readers, or those who are still developing as readers, are 
condemned to fall short in some way so that the power of the text is beyond their 
grasp. This fails to take account of the dual nature of many children's books -
Reading Proces~es: The Reader and the Text 
Part 2: Literary Per~pective~ 
particularly picture-books - by which such books can be read on different levels by 
adult and child alike (Wall 1991}. Such a view of literature allows for the validity of 
young readers' meanings, rather than seeing them only as immature. It is worth noting 
here that, even themes within The Tunnel, such as the need to break down gender 
rivalry and stereotyping, were read in different ways by two groups of children in this 
study. Both groups would appear to be resisting the notion of an apparently 
incontrovertible reading. 
The American critic, Wayne Booth, explores the relationship between the 
ideology of the author and that of the reader. He uses the concept of the implied 
reader, through whom 'The author makes his reader as he makes his second self, and 
the most successful reading is one in which the created selves, author and reader, can 
fmd complete agreement' (1961: 138). The thesis of his book, The Rhetoric of 
Fiction, is to analyse the means by which authors persuade or create readers who 
share their views. This is a view of reading in which the writer is still ftrmly in 
control, but the reader has a degree of freedom reflected in his own resistance to 
'manipulation' by various authors. Iser disputes Booth's notion of the implied reader, 
pointing out that he neglects the tensions of reading between the text and the cultural 
norms which the reader brings to the text (Iser 1978). 
In his later book, The Company we Keep (1988), Booth develops the concept 
of the implied author/reader using the metaphor of friendship: 'we choose our friends 
and their gifts and therefore who we will be' (177). Our very selves are formed by the 
encounters with these friends so that it becomes impossible to distinguish the 
'unstoried self.' There is a choice. Just as we can choose friends who reflect the sort 
of people we wish to be and who then have a formative role in the sort of people we 
become, so, in the world of books, we can choose the company we keep and the 
selves we wish to become, and the books become part of our becoming. This is of 
particular importance for children who are 'still becoming' (Meek 1996: 180), and the 
next section considers the question of how much guidance the text itself might offer 
young readers on how it should be read. 
Implications for children's literature 
Chambers develops Booth's concept of the implied reader in The Reader in the Text 
(1985), as a means by which the author can provide this guidance for young readers. 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 2: Literary Perspectives 
He believes that 'we need a critical method that will take account of the child-as-
reader' (34). Since children have not yet fully learned how to give themselves up to 
the book or 'shift the gears of their personality' they need 'books that will take a child 
as he is and then draw him into the text' (37). Chambers explains the ways in which 
the book can do this, including style, narrative point of view and those gaps in the text 
that stimulate children into becoming partners in the reading process (lser 1980). His 
is a firm view of the teaching role of the children's writer. 'It is one of the 
responsibilities of children's writers ... so to write that children are led to understand 
how to read' (48). 
Stephens comments that Chambers presupposes the idea of a fixed or a true 
meaning towards which the author guides young readers (Stephens 1992: 66). 
However, Margaret Meek has demonstrated the role of the text in providing untaught 
lessons in reading. In How Texts Teach what Readers Learn (1988), she shows the 
lessons that very young children can learn from authors and illustrators who know 
how to engage and direct their attention. She gives Rosie's Walk as an example: that 
there is no written mention of the fox but there would be no story without him, and 
that such a lesson can only be learned in interaction with a text. Later she writes that: 
children's authors know that they can provoke reading as well as promote it. 
They also know how to change it. Postmodemism in children's texts, as 
elsewhere, is about all kinds of change. 
(Meek 2000: 199) 
Anthony Browne's books are about this kind of change: one book, in fact, is called 
Changes (1990), constructed around a series of metonymic images arising from a 
child's efforts to come to terms with an expected new baby. Browne's books resist a 
text-centred approach by withholding infonnation. The relationship between the 
stepmother and the witch in Hansel and Gretel (1981) is an example of this, and 
another is the nature of the gorilla in the book Gorilla (1983): 
She meets this gorilla of the night, which may be her Father, may be a dream, or 
may be it's how she would like her Father to be. 
(Browne 1994: 186) 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 2: Literary Perspectives 
The Tunnel itself is constructed around mysteries. The puzzles cannot be solved 
through attention to the text alone, but require a certain kind of reading - active 
partnership in meaning making. They fulfil Chambers's strictures that books for 
children should allow for emergent readings, but show children how to read in certain 
ways, thus giving lessons that will enable children to make the sort of readings 
described earlier in this chapter. Although the visual puzzles provide possible clues, 
their ambiguous nature invites the kind of meaning-making that is exemplified in 
Barthes's writeriy text. 
It may be that children also require canonical texts which will affIrm their own 
experiences, and provide a clear structure through which they can begin to understand 
their own emotions. Folk-tales are a clear example of what Adams refers to as 
'experienced'texts: 
the clash of structure between the growing reader and the 'experienced' text 
must result in the production of meaning in the child. 
(Adams 1986: 5). 
However, children also require those texts which will allow reading through multiple 
perspectives, so that they are enabled to 'construct childhood as they go along, and 
that they do so from fictions of various kinds, not merely from social experience' 
(Hollindale 1997: 69). 
David Lewis (1990) shows how the relationship between words and pictures 
gives picture-books a particular capacity to develop this kind of reading. He refers to 
'metafictive' texts that 'prise open' the gaps between words and pictures, forcing 
readers to make new links between them. He shows the value of such reading 
experiences for children who are still developing literary competencies or learning 
'what can be done with literary works' (Culler 1975: 12). Lewis refers to John 
Burningham's books as examples of such metafiction. The book that Rose continually 
reads in The Tunnel forms a book within the book, while the very stories she reads are 
played out in the scenes around her. It is a text that problematises narrative codes and 
thus makes them explicit. The written narrative follows the structure of a folk-tale, 
where proairetic and hermeneutic codes usually predominate, but the illustrations 
force readers to question the validity of these codes and open up possibilities of plural 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 2: Literary Perspectives 
meaning. Thus an innovatory text challenges its readers, yet lays down clues which 
invite them to certain kinds of understanding. 
The reader's attention is drawn to the reading process itself through the 
'process of interaction between texts' (Stephens 1992: 88), which he sees as giving 
each new work its particular meaning. Intertext has a particular significance for 
children's literature, which lacks a specific discourse of its own and therefore exists 
'at the intersection of a number of discourses' (86). Nikolajeva refers to Bakhtin's 
theory of intertext, or 'dialogics' in which literature and art are created in a continuous 
conversation between creators, in which each new piece of art or literature is a new 
line in the conversation (Nikolajeva 1996: 153). 
Intertextuality is at the heart of adult literature, but there is a radical difference 
in intertext in children's books, in that it is not so easy to make assumptions about the 
knowledge and preconceptions that children bring to a text. Meek has pointed out that 
dual address books will also have a dual system of intertext (1996), and picture-books, 
intended to be shared by adult and child together, are particular examples of this 
duality. Author/ illustrators such as the Ahlbergs construct their books from familiar 
rhymes and stories (Each Peach Pear Plum 1978) and bring together, with varying 
degrees of sophistication, a variety of cultural and literary discourses that include 
familiar sayings, legal letters and oral history (The Jolly Postman 1986; Peepo 1981; 
The Clothes Horse 1987). Another classic picture-book, Rosie's Walk (Hutchins 
1968), draws on a long tradition of stories about a fox and a hen, which an 
experienced reader can trace back to Chaucer. In The Tunnel only a few readers 'in 
the know' will recognise the picture by Walter Crane in Rose's bedroom. These levels 
of intertext give such books their polysemic nature. They are engaging children in the 
sharing of secrets and providing the excitement of surprise (Meek 1988), while 
making the process of reading explicit. The texts themselves are therefore teaching 
the literary competencies extolled by Scholes and Culler. 
3: The children's readings 
In the following section I look briefly at extracts from transcripts of two groups of six 
year olds, in the light of each of the perspectives on reading, as outlined in this 
chapter. Both extracts are from the children's second reading of the forest scene. The 
children in School A were recent arrivals from Bangladesh, new to school in England 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 2: Literary Perspectives 
and still non-fluent speakers of English, whereas School C was a small rural school in 
the Wealden area of East Sussex. Both extracts are analysed further in Chapter 4. 
School A reading % - Appendix A ... % lines 119 .. %11 
The children's reading of the book as a whole was a very affective one but these 
pages of the forest aroused the strongest emotions. Their voices were hushed and 
intent as they looked at the pictures. They looked fIrst at the great thumb on page 18 
and then at the bright fIre. On turning to the double-page spread, they fIrst referred to 
the Gingerbread House and excitedly compared it to Rose's bedside-lamp (141-158). 
They then noticed the creatures in the forest, frequently repeating the word 
'dangerous' (159-188). A boy pointed to the gravestone, which he called a window, 
using his fmger to show me a tunnel from there to the house, and sketching an 
imaginary assault course across the branch and down the supporting pole (196-211). 
Psychoanalytical 
The tunnel and the forest can be seen as archetypal images and the strong emotions of 
this group suggest that their response may have been at an unconscious, preverbal 
level. The suggested fIgures and sense of unseen presences contribute to a nightmare 
quality and their utterances suggest a sense of evil: 
ghost a ghost mans and then a ghost eye 
is a ghost a real ghost (163-164). 
They were shocked by the references to hands, both the thumbs and the missing hands 
of the bear: 
And look at hands Witch's hands  hands I know look hands 
Yeah and look at hands look 
very very very dangerous (120-124). 
They also showed a particular interest in the house - a possible image of interiority: 
I know she's house she's house Yes is the same the window 
Door the door the same (141 .. 144). 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 2: Literary Perspectives 
The forest seemed to be a very real place to them and they appeared to share Rose's 
fears in her encounter with her own unconscious fears. 
Reader-;,respoDse 
In reader-response theory, the reader reconstructs the world of the book through 
synthesizing perspectives, and the children began to do this as they made comparisons 
between the house in the forest and Rose's bedside lamp: 
The same that nor same that nor same Look one window (lS2-1S4). 
The gravestone is one of the mysteries - or textual gaps - which they referred to as a 
window. The narrative about the route from the gravestone to the house showed a 
willingness to respond to such puzzles by actively reconstructing their own story: 
that one in come there and and he' s floor that one in there and 
1'Un 1'Un run and he go to the there and that one there and 
one little coming and he there (198-203). 
The form of the narrative is internalised in the reader for Iser. The situation of conflict 
and resolution of this text is possibly internalised in the Bangladeshi children's 
intense reactions to the forest and their pleasure at the subsequent reconciliation 
between Rose and her brother, as though they themselves had experienced the 
separation, ordeal and reunion through their reading. 
Post.structuralism 
The children were particularly aware of the semic code, noticing the small details that 
indicate the nature of the forest such as the ftre, the house and its similarity to the 
bedside light in Rose's bedroom, and the hands and the eyes in the trees. Their 
affective response to the danger of the forest may be an awareness of the symbolic 
code and they responded to the hermeneutic code as they asked questions about the 
missing hands and speculated on a possible tunnel to the house. The cultural code may 
operate here, explaining their sense of danger. 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 2: Literary Perspectives 
Text...eentred criticism 
The nature of the picture makes a text-centred approach difficult as it suggests figures 
in the trees that readers must find and interpret for themselves. Nevertheless. Browne 
offers some guidance and the graphic codes provide a framework for where and how 
to look. The children explore the picture, using lines of direction to let their gaze 
travel round it. They look back towards the house, their attention directed by the line 
of the trees and by the bright colour of the roof. Their eyes then move across the 
bottom of the page from left to right, following the line of movement of the bear and 
the boar until they see the wolf and the running figure of Rose. 
School C reading 1 - Appendix 6: C-llines 70-113 
They were excited by the book and enjoyed the game of fmding hidden pictures. The 
first thing they noticed was the fire and a boy proclaimed: Hey there's a fire (70) with 
a note of discovery and excitement in his voice. They then saw what they assumed to 
be a little lunch-box, concluding that it was Little Red Riding Hood's basket, which 
led one boy to speculate that Rose has gone into the land of storybooks. The 
excitement continued as they looked at the double-page spread. They were intrigued 
by the technical detail of her coat as it streams out behind her: Boy you can see her 
clothes running behind (81). They associated the house in the distance with Red 
Riding Hood, although they recognised its similarity to the Hansel and Gretel house in 
the bedroom. Their gaze then returned to the stone in the foreground, which they 
decided was a gravestone. Finally they noticed the wolf, chanting his name. 
Psychoanalytical theories 
Although they enjoyed these pictures, their emotional involvement appeared to be less 
than that of School A's and the terrors of the scene were not so real to them. The 
comment on it being the land of stories may suggest a greater awareness of it as a 
narrative construct, as well as their interest in the technique of streaking Rose's coat. 
Their reading was more dispassionate and they were interested in the house. Later 
comments show their relief to be out of the forest and possibly they found the picture 
more disturbing than they cared to admit. 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 2: Literary Perspectives 
Reader..,respoose theory 
They looked at the details that interested them and constructed their own meanings, 
reading the picture in the light of the story of Red Riding Hood and disregarding the 
similarity of the house to the Gingerbread House. They did not comment on the 
thumb, the rope, or other shapes in the trees, but they synthesised what appeared to 
support their own reading. The comment that it is 'the land of stories' shows an ability 
to relate the picture to what they had previously observed, and they were able to 
reconstruct the fantasy nature of the scene with some possible awareness of its 
polysemic nature. 
Post structuralist theories 
In response to the semic code they noticed the house and the animals. There was 
awareness of the symbolic code in their recognition that Rose had gone into the world 
of books, and they began to make a symbolic antithesis between the real world and 
the world of the imagination. There was greater response to the cultural code, 
particularly in their recognition of intertextual features, and they were aware of the 
textuality of the scene and, possibly, its metafictional quality. This is shown in their 
playful chanting of the name of the wolf (108-113), suggesting that he is a 'stock 
character' in their imagination (Applebee 1978). 
Text-ceotred theories 
These pictures are full of suggested shapes that they did not comment on, perhaps 
because they wanted to read on to see what happened next, although they also failed 
to mention many details on the second reading. Their attention was drawn first to the 
bright red of the fire, and their gaze moved around the focal points of the picture on 
the double-page spread. They looked first at Rose's red coat, then across to the boar. 
Their line of regard then moved up the line of trees towards the house and then down 
to the gravestone and the wolf. They surveyed the scene in a circular clockwise 
movement guided by the graphic codes and the focal points. 
The discussions from both groups have much in common. They shared a sense 
of excitement, exploring the pictures, beginning to make connections, speculating and 
fantasising. There were marked differences in their readings, however. The 
Bangladeshi children seemed to have a deeper emotional involvement in the story and 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 2: Literary Perspectives 
to share Rose's fear with her as they gazed silently and whispered to themselves. The 
forest seemed like a real place of danger and potential menace, with frightening eyes 
and hands and creatures looming over them. Their sense of this forest as a real place 
was echoed by a Bangladeshi girl in another school who suggested that the picture 
beside Rose's bed was in fact a photo of the wolf in the forest. Possibly they were 
responding to the archetypal nature of the forest. However, they were also able to 
speculate and make connections between the shapes in the forest, as in their account 
of the secret tunnel to the little house. 
The Sussex children were also aware of Rose's fear but their reaction was 
noisier and more excited as they noticed intertextual details. They explored the idea of 
whether the monsters in the forest were real or in Rose's imagination, linking them to 
the book she was reading and the fact that she had gone into the world of stories. They 
were aware of the polysemy of the text but possibly lacked experience of close 
readings of such texts that would have enabled them to look more closely. 
Some differences in their reading can be accounted for by cultural differences. 
Those theories of reading that see it as a partnership or transaction between reader and 
writer develop the concept of a reader who approaches the text as a cultural being. 
Rosenblatt sees the need for literature teachers who are able to build bridges between 
the pupils' own worlds and those of the text (1993), while Scholes includes life 
experiences as part oftextuality. 
The Bangladeshi children approached the text from a different life experience. 
They all had memories of Bangladesh and delighted in telling me about the dangers of 
the forests and the dogs they kept for protection. Their talk of 'ghost eyes' reminds 
me of a Bengali poet who told us about the fIreflies that fly at night around the 
swamps in Bangladesh, often thought of as ghosts and then woven into oral poems 
and stories. In the act of encountering another culture, the children are able to use 
their own experiences to make the new culture less strange. Such a process of reading 
is transformative: it enables them to reconstruct both the text and themselves as 
readers. Coming from a thickly-wooded part of Sussex and familiar with the knotted 
shapes in the beech trees, the English children perhaps accepted these as natural, and 
peer group pressure would not have allowed them to express fear. 
The two groups read the book through a different intertext. The Bangladeshi 
children were unfamiliar with most of the stories referred to but saw a dragon and 
Reading Processes: The Reader and the Text 
Part 2: Literary Perspectives 
snake in the fIrst reading, familiar to them from their own folk stories and 
experiences. The English children, however, had the pleasure of recognising familiar 
stories, and their recognition of the textuality made them aware of the polysemic and 
metaftctive possibilities of the book. 
The approach to the text was also markedly different. The fIrst group looked 
with more 'innocent' eyes and theirs was a very affective reading. The second group's 
reading was more conjectural and they enjoyed working out what was happening. 
This may, in part, be due to a different cultural approach to the teaching of reading. 
Bangladeshi children are not encouraged to discuss the text until they have acquired 
the reading skills (Gregory 1997), but English children are usually encouraged to 
comment on what they read, relating it to their own lives. However the English 
children in this group had a limited experience of polysemic texts or group discussion 
of this nature, and this perhaps limited their observations. 
Despite these differences, both groups were able to reconstruct the world of 
the book through their own experiences and expectations. The book itself guided their 
reading, allowing them to make their own meaning and thus, to echo both Iser and 
Scholes, both text and readers were transformed in some way. 
This chapter has explored the literary nature of this transaction in the light of 
readings of The Tunnel. The theories discussed were all able in some way to 
illuminate the readings and thus to further our understanding of the nature of reading. 
The next chapter considers more closely the nature of the reader in this transaction, 
and the nature and meaning of the culture which is an integral part of the reading 
partnership. 
Cultural Contexts 
Cultural Contexts 
The previous chapter opened with an adult's reading of The Tunnel before a 
discussion of theories that would account for the nature of that experienced reading 
and for the ways in which groups of children read the same text. This discussion 
considered psychoanalytic, reader-response and post-structuralist theories and also the 
relevance of a text-centred approach to children's literature. The cultural nature of 
both text and reader and the capacity for both to be transfonned in the reading 
transaction was a common theme in reader-centred theory. This had relevance for my 
research question on how children can both use and transfonn their culture in reading, 
since I wanted to explore the ways in which children may be influenced by their 
cultural backgrounds and culturally constructed views of reading. I also wished to 
show how a polysemic text might enable children to construct their own meanings, or, 
in the words of Meek, 'to fmd his interior fiction as part of a writer's intention' 
{l980: 36). 
In this chapter I discuss definitions of culture and psychological theories that 
account for consciousness as the internalisation of social behaviour. I make particular 
reference to Vygotsky and Bruner, and to Geertz's semiotic defmition of culture 
through his ethnographic explorations of the cultural nature of seeing and doing. The 
implications of these theories for an understanding of literature and literacy is then 
discussed and related to a view of children's literature as situated within inter-relating 
social semiospheres. The chapter concludes with pedagogic and educational views of 
culture and multiculturalism. 
Cultural Contexts 
I begin with a brief discussion of how these ideas are relevant to an 
understanding of what children's literature is - something that is difficult to defme. 
childhood recognisable today' (Hunt 1991: 61-62). Seemingly contrary to this is 
Arthur Ransome's famous claim: 'you write not for children but for yourself' (Hunt 
1990: 34) and C.S. Lewis's rationale for writing children's books: 'a children's story 
is the best art-fonn for something you have to say' (Lewis 1980: 208). 
The inherent difficulty of such defmitions is in deciding the meaning of the 
tenns 'children' and 'literature' and in then putting them together (Hollindale 1997). 
Hollindale suggests that the term 'childness' is central to an understanding of 
children's literature. By this term he simply means 'the quality of being a child' (47). 
For the child, a sense of childness involves an awareness of the developing self in 
relation to cultural images of childhood - for the adult it is based on memories and 
social attitudes. Children's literature is the meeting point of these two concepts of 
childness: 'the compound of cultural and personal attitudes is articulated in a text of 
children's literature' (49). The term thus has strong cultural overtones, as children 
develop their sense of childness through both personal experiences and socially 
constructed meanings. These may be influenced by local cultures or social 
organisations to which the child belongs, and may include attitudes related to religion, 
ethnicity, family and school, as well as images of childness encountered through the 
media. It suggests that the three different groups of children in my study will have 
different concepts of childness based on their religion, their Mosques and English 
schools and their aspirations. For instance, the desire of the second-generation 
Bangladeshi children in School B to be more Western than their parents wished, 
influenced the concept of childness which they brought to the text. The English group 
demonstrated their view of what it means to be a child by their attitudes to the theme 
of gender within the book, and in their interest in the two children's toys. In addition, 
each child would also have an individual sense of childness formed by personal 
experiences. 
Viewed within this context, children's literature is no longer an absolute term, 
but takes its meaning from the 'reading event' - the encounter of the text with a reader 
who relates their sense of childness to the text. As in reader-centred literary theories, 
the difference between adult and children's literature lies 'not in the text but in the 
Cultural Contexts 
reader, and in the reader's ability and readiness to locate the readings that the text 
makes available' (84). 
Definitions of culture 
It may now be useful to examine what is meant by the term 'culture', bearing in mind 
the opening sentence of Eagleton's book The Idea of Culture: 
Culture is said to be one of the two or three most complex words in the English 
language, and the term which is sometimes considered to be its opposite -
nature - is commonly awarded the accolade of being the most complex of all. 
(2000: 1) 
The discussion of literary theory in the previous chapter began with psychoanalytical 
theories, now relevant to a consideration of culture, for psychoanalysis sees a conflict 
between nature and culture - id and ego - resulting in the suppression of culturally 
unacceptable desires into the unconscious, which then fmd expression in images and 
dreams: 
Freud is a 'culturalist' in so far as the body for him is always a fictional 
meanings from within and which threaten in the end to sink them without trace' . 
(109) 
For this reason, a discussion of culture needs to include the relationship between 
culture and its antithesis, nature; for a tension between what is natural and what is 
man-made is inherent to this relationship, and between organic growth and the 
cultivation of it: 
Within this single term, questions of freedom and determination, agency and 
endurance, change and identity, the given and the created, come dimly into 
focus. If culture means the active tending of natural growth, then it suggests 
dialectic between the artificial and the natural, what we do to the world and 
what the world does to us. (2) 
To think of culture in this way, rather than in terms of a narrow determinism, is to see 
the interdependence between the two views and recognise that as symbol-making 
beings, we are bound to strive to transcend ourselves. The dynamic relationship 
Cultural Contexts 
suggests another level to an interpretation of The Tunnel in which Rose is associated 
with what is organic but Jack is out of touch with what is natural, but where two 
elements are reconciled in the end. In looking at the cultural nature of the children's 
responses to The Tunnel, the research question addresses the balance between nature 
and culture. 
Some defmitions of the tenn may now be considered. Raymond Williams is an 
appropriate starting point since his extensive writing on the theme has been influential 
in an understanding of culture as a signifying system, constitutive of other social 
systems. In The Long Revolution (1961) he considers three meanings: the ideal, the 
documentary and the social. Culture as the ideal is what may be considered as the best 
in terms of universal values. This is a defmition shared by the Oxford Dictionary in 
which culture is linked to refmement - 'the intellectual side of civilisation' (Shorter 
Oxford Dictionary 1991). The second meaning is that of the documentary or the 
corpus of intellectual work representing human thought and experience. In the third 
meaning, that of social definition, culture is understood as a way of life expressing 
certain meanings and values in institutions and ordinary behaviour as well as in art 
and learning. 
Williams's own interest is in the social defmition of culture. He sees 'the 
theory of culture as the study of relationships between elements in a whole way of 
life' (1973: 63). He explores the nature of the relationship between the individual and 
society in terms of the patterns learned and created in the mind and those 
communicated and made active in relationships, conventions and cultures. He sees a 
tension between culture as a 'learned system of feeling and acting in a particular 
society' and the place of the individual within this learned system (1961). Williams 
concludes that individuals retain autonomy through their unique social histories and 
potential, so that they can help change those social processes of which they are 
products. 
Williams also points out that individuals may belong to different organisations 
during their lives, so that culture is not a static, uniform concept, but can be seen to be 
made up of interrelating and evolving groups. In Culture and Society (1963) he 
discusses the diversity of culture, describing it as: 
Cultural Contexts 
A very complex system of specialised developments - the whole of which 
will form the whole culture, but will not be available or conscious as a 
whole to any individual or group living within it. 
(238) 
Hall develops Williams' view of culture in tenns of patterns both within the 
individual consciousness and within society as a whole, to show how culture is a 
means of making meaning of our world. He defines culture as the 'lived practices' or 
'practical ideologies which enable a society, group or class to experience, defme, 
interpret and make sense of its conditions of existence' (Hall 1982: 7). He later gives 
a structuralist definition of culture as a set of practices around the 'giving and taking 
of meaning' (Hall 1997: 2). Symbolism is at the heart of social life, constructed within 
a dialogue between members of the same culture who share cultural codes, including 
ways of thinking and feeling. Such symbolism is semiotic, as the vehicle of meaning 
in culture. 
Bourdieu's defmition of culture summarised by Scafe (1989) is a system of 
codes established through convention, providing a framework or master pattern 
through which new ideas can be formulated and expressed, which can generate an 
infinite number of products. A culture is defined by the forms of its expression, such 
as religion or education, rather than by its content. Scafe applies this concept to the 
teaching of literature, in which personal response to texts is generally valued and 
encouraged and it is often forgotten that this response is itself framed by the cultural 
system which regulates it (20-21). In contrast to this somewhat determinist view, 
Luke and Kale emphasise the evolving nature of culture where modem culture mixes 
with long-standing cultural practices and 'people everywhere are inventing and 
reinventing their identities' (Luke and Kale 1997: 12). This view of culture as 
continually evolving is supported by James (1981). In his criticism of multicultural 
education, which advocates the need to develop each child's positive self image, he 
points out that culture is not something fixed and immutable, but that children in each 
generation continually create for themselves a living culture from elements of the 
existing cultures to which they have access - in Eagleton's words: 'to belong to a 
culture is to be part of a context which is inherently open ended' (2000: 96). 
Experience of books and stories will be part of this ongoing process of recreation, so 
Cultural Contexts 
that a book like The Tunnel may empower children to question and reformulate their 
own cultural values. 
Identities and positions are constructed and defmed by language in use, so that 
discourse has a constitutive role and, according to Foucault, constructs the topic (Hall 
1997). An example of this is given by Kapitzke (1995), who looks at the way in which 
one religion in particular, Seventh Day Adventism, can maintain a system of beliefs 
and rules by its discursive practices, although these involve self denial and discipline. 
She supports her argwnent by reference to Geertz and his view of religious activities 
as 'material and discursive practices that provide frameworks of interpretation for the 
representation of reality by spiritually-oriented social groups' (Kapitzke 1995: 3). 
Psychological/anthropological approaches 
In considering how children's reading is culturally constructed, it is worth looking 
more closely at the constitutive nature of culture. The anthropologist Geertz has 
developed our understanding of the semiotic nature of culture. Like Williams, he 
understands it as a signifying system, quoting Weber's metaphor: 
Man is 'an animal suspended in webs of significance he himself has spun'. I 
take culture to be those webs and the analysis of it to be '" an interpretive one in 
search of meaning. 
(Geertz 1973: 5) 
The cultural webs of significance are semiotic. They are socially constructed signs or 
symbols, such as language, music, art, which carry meaning and have both an 
external, public aspect and an internal aspect. They are institutionalised within, for 
example, law and religion, not so much as a motivating power, but as a context within 
which institutions can be described. This aspect of culture is public and can be 
analysed within the complexities of social discourse. 
Culture is also located in human consciousness - in the way we think and feel 
as well as the implicit knowledge we have to have in order to operate as part of a 
culture. The relationship between external semiotic systems and internal 
consciousness will be discussed later in relation to Vygotsky but, as in Bourdieu's 
cultural framework, these internal psychological structures may be seen as the 
Cultural Contexts 
templates, based on social interaction, which give meaning and context for making 
sense of our lives. 
Britton (1970) has shown how we construct an inner model or representation of 
the world, through symbols which include language, and that our understanding of the 
world is dependent on our capacity to symbolise. He quotes Cassirer to show the 
significance of symbolic thought and behaviour so that they: 
are among the most characteristic features of human life, and that the whole 
progress of human culture is based on these conditions is undeniable. 
(Cassirer 1944: 27) 
Britton uses Kelly's concept of learning through templates, which we create from 
experience and then attempt to fit over the realities of the world so that the template is 
continually modified. Britton himself expresses the individual nature of these inner 
models of representation, as well as their cultural nature, so that there is a continual 
interrelationship of the personal and the social. This view of learning can be seen to 
have much in common with Hollindale's concept of childness as a kind of template 
which the child fits over the book so that both text and concept are continually 
revised. 
Geertz also looks at the role of public symbolic structures in how we make 
sense, or internal representations, of our world within the ongoing course of life. In 
the continual struggle between the natural and the social, these structures may act as 
control systems to the biological aspects of man's nature. Incest and fasting are both 
examples of cultural taboos that override biology and provide safeguards for society 
because they have meanings or symbolic power that give sense to life and enable us to 
overcome physical constraints (Bruner 1990). 
Geertz sees the evolutionary process itself as taking place through interaction 
between both biological and cultural forces, rather than through innate learning 
abilities alone, with culture being a later addition at a certain stage of development. 
He claims that 'there is no such thing as human nature independent of culture' (Geertz 
1973: 49). Unlike other animals, humans have developed a generalised and therefore 
more adaptable control of their actions so that they have become more dependent on 
cultural systems of control. The human nervous system therefore relies on public 
symbolic structures to build an 'autonomous ongoing pattern of activity' (38). As an 
Cultural Contexts 
example, he describes the evolutionary process by which early tool use led to the 
development of the thumb which later became a symbolic representation in the cortex, 
so that cultural pattern, the body and the brain all worked together. There is a sense in 
which we can claim that man was an agent in his own creation. This view of mental 
processes developing from social and cultural activity has much in common with 
Vygotsky's view of the use of tools as the foundation of mental activity. 
As culture provides a template for action and understanding, so it enables us to 
develop norms for behaviour which become embodied in canonical texts, stories, 
proverbs and common-sense knowledge. Geertz has analysed this commonsense to 
show that such beliefs are not so self-evident as we assume, but are in fact cultural 
constructs, understood as normal ways of interpreting the world through our own 
cultural predispositions. 
There is a sense, however, in which we each have to fmd our own individual 
way even within such a constitutive view of culture. Geertz comments that culture 
should be seen as a context rather than a power, and our relationship with our world 
may often seem tenuous. Within Western society, we feel a need to develop a sense of 
who we are within our social world. Bruner expresses this uncertainty when he refers 
to culture as 'implicit and only semi-connected knowledge of the world, from which, 
through negotiation, people arrive at satisfactory ways of acting in given contexts' 
(1986: 65). Negotiation implies choice and exploration and this is reflected in the 
stories we tell. Through stories, 'life could be said to imitate art' (69), for stories 
provide maps 'of possible roles and worlds' that develop our sense of who we are, by 
allowing us to relate ourselves to others. Stories play a particularly important part in 
the development of the young child who is able 'to defme his own intentions and even 
his own history in the light of the characteristic cultural dramas in which he plays a 
part' (67). 
We appear to have an innate predisposition to shape our experience through 
story. Barbara Hardy has made a claim for narrative as a 'primary act of mind' (Hardy 
1964) and Bruner points out that we construct our own autobiographies through story, 
so that 'the self is a telling' (Schafer 1981: 31). Much of our folk psychology is 
handed on through stories which may include folk-tales and modem retellings in the 
form of novels, film and television drama. Such stories are canonical in nature and 
they become part of the cultural template through which we know what is expected 
Cultural Contexts 
and usual. Many children's books are canonical in nature and can be seen to be 
reworking common themes (Nikolajeva 1996). Adams (1986) refers to these as 
'experienced texts' (see Chapter 1). They act as metaphors of reality, referring to 
reality 'not in order to copy it but in order to give it a new reading' (Ricoeur 1981: 
288). 
Narrative also deals with the unexpected. It has the power to present us with 
the norm but also the exception to the norm. Stories have a dual aspect, therefore. 
They can allow us to see ourselves within a cultural context and they are able to show 
exceptions to that culture, becoming 'explorations in the limits of legitimacy' (Bruner 
1990: 50). They may have a subversive quality, and non-canonical stories, such as 
those in post-modem fiction, can subvert both the rules and the conventions by which 
these rules are presented. Many children's picture-books such as those by 
Burningham, Browne and Sendak are examples of such subversion, and it is 
interesting to note that Bruner (1990) found that anti-canonical stories stimulated 
more narrative invention in kindergarten than did canonical. The way in which the 
children responded to the narrative gaps in The Tunnel by constructing their own 
narratives clearly is of relevance to this study. Later in the chapter, I discuss 
Nikolajeva's explanation of semiospheres, or culturally constructed areas of 
understanding outside which comprehension is difficult. Semiospheres overlap with 
one another, generating creative misunderstandings in the areas of intersection, and it 
is likely that these are areas which create pluralist meanings, are most open to 
interpretation, and are thus non-canonical in nature. The Tunnel is such an example 
where what was just beyond the children's comprehension caused the most narrative 
explanation, so that the intersection of the world of the book and the world of the 
children created a 'zone of proximal development' as discussed below. 
Stories, then, are a means by which we develop both self-awareness and 
subjectivity, but they are also a means by which we may learn about and adjust to our 
social world. Bruner uses the metaphor of the barometer to clarify the relationship 
between culture and autonomy: 
The self then, like any other aspect of human nature, stands both as guardian of 
permanence and as a barometer responding to the local cultural weather. 
(1990: 110) 
Cultural Contexts 
He believes that one of the most important aspects of stories is that they enable us to 
reflect on and order our experiences into patterns. We are able to imagine alternatives 
so that we get a sense not only of who we are, but also who we might be, and it is this 
that helps us to create our autonomous selves. 
So far the chapter has discussed the nature of culture, seeing it in terms of a 
dynamic relationship between individual and culture, in which individuals pattern 
their world through the semiotic symbols provided by culture. A template or inner 
representation of the world is thus formed, symbolic in nature and continually 
modified by the interactions between individual and culture. This template is 
expressed in Hollindale's notion of childness, through which literature is actualised as 
children's literature within the reader. It also fmds expression in the concept of the 
semiosphere, to which I shall return later in the chapter. Such a dynamic relationship 
therefore provides an appropriate context for discussion of the children's interactions 
with a text and the way in which each has the power to change the other. Vygotsky 
brought together these psychological and cultural aspects. I now look more closely at 
his understanding of the social nature of mental processes and the transforming power 
of the zones of proximal development, play and those creative and imaginative 
activities which develop from play. 
Vygotsky and the internalution of social activity 
Bruner, in particular, owes much to the influence of Vygotsky and to two related 
aspects of his work: the intrapersonal psychological and the interpersonal 
psychological processes. The first shows the socia-historical origins of higher mental 
functions and traces the move inwards from social sign to consciousness. The other 
develops a theory of learning through social interaction. Bruner brings these two 
aspects together as he shows how we learn about the symbolic nature of the world 
with and through others, 'for in fact that world is others' (1985: 32). 
The focus of this study is on how far children's reading of a text is culturally 
constituted, and it is Vygotsky who has most fully developed the idea of the effect of 
social factors on understanding and who has constructed a theory of 'how external 
processes are fonned to create internal processes' (Wertsch 1985: 163). With other 
Russian intellectuals of the period such as Bakhtin and Voloshinov, Vygotsky's 
Cultural Contexts 
purpose was to develop a psychological theory of development within a Marxist 
framework. Marx believed that consciousness is formed through changes in man's 
reality and that, as man acts upon and recreates his external world, so he modifies the 
nature of consciousness. At a time when there was a division between subjective 
realism and behaviourism - a split that still continues - Vygotsky set out to explore the 
relationship between the natural and the social, and between culture and psychology. 
He believed that the higher mental functions have their origins in culture. All 
tools specifically designed for manual labour have cultural elements. There are also 
psychological tools, such as language, that have their roots in social interaction and 
then become internalised to create mental functions. Such psychological tools are 
signs or symbols that have evolved in the history of a culture and are, therefore, 
semiotic and carry culturally developed meaning. Meaning becomes the unit of 
mental activity, and in the inward movement of such mental activity there is a 
complete cycle from cultural historical development to the development of mental 
functions in the individual. 
Vygotsky fmnly links mental development to historical development: 'the 
process of man's mental development is part of the general historical development of 
mankind' (Vygotsky 1981: 95). He also believed that human nature itself is 
continually changing as socially organised activities change historically. Those 
cultural forms which most profoundly affect mental life (symbolic and 
communicative spheres of activity) appear slowly in historic development, and there 
is a parallel process within ontogenetic development. Cultural development and 
biological development of the child have different origins until culture is 
superimposed on the processes of growth, maturation and organic development. 'The 
two lines of changes interpenetrate and in essence form a single line of socio-
biological formation of the child's personality' (1960: 47). At this point, individual 
psychological development obeys sociohistorical principles of evolution and it is 
through language as a semiotic system that 'society converts the principle of cognitive 
development from biological to social dialectic' (Lee 1985: 75). 
The move from social to psychological can be seen in the development of 
word meanings and this is also an example of a function that fIrst 'appears between 
people as an interpsychological category, and then within the child as an 
intrapsychological category' (Vygotsky 1981: 163). 
Cultural Contexts 
Word meanings develop through social interaction and, as this interaction 
becomes more complex, so the level of generalisation or abstraction develops. 
Initially children understand words through relationships with other words, whereas 
adults understand them in terms of a complex semiotic system. Vygotsky 
distinguishes between meaning and reference because, in conversation, children use 
words that are mutually comprehensible as points of reference and as entry into the 
conversation. New words can be seen as a beginning, not an end, so that meaning is 
acquired in the course of verbal social interaction with adults. 'In general a child does 
not create hislher own speech, he/she masters the existing speech of surrounding 
adults' (1956: 181). Thus the move from concrete to semiotic in the mastery of word 
meanings is 'an instance of formation of an internal plane of functioning' and 'the 
concepts used in mental concepts are provided by the speech community in which one 
has developed' (Wertsch 1985: 171). 
Through the development of word meaning and the ability to generalise, 
children learn to categorise and develop cognitively. It is through coming to 
understand what is meant by what is said that their cognitive skills develop (167). 
Thus the process of intemalisation is seen most clearly in speech as language moves 
from an early phase where speech and action are undifferentiated aspects of the same 
psychological function to the adult system where speech is internalised as a kind of 
action. Initially speech and thought follow separate lines of development: 
In the phylogeny of thought and speech, a pre linguistic phase in the 
development of thought and a preintellectual phase in the development of 
speech are clearly discernible. 
(Vygotsky 1962: 43) 
The pre linguistic phase of thought is comparable to tool-making activity in animals, 
and the pre-intellectual roots of language are manifested in early babbling and crying, 
although even these early sounds are social in nature. These two functions intertwine 
at about the age of two when the child discovers the symbolic function of words - the 
greatest discovery of his life, 'that each thing has its name' (43). The child has now 
reached the intellectual stage where thought and language can generate each other, 
thus allowing the child 'to bootstrap himself up through various levels of abstraction' 
(Lee 1985: 79). 
Cultural Contexts 
The internalisation process now starts. Egocentric speech is the first sign of the 
child transferring social forms of behaviour to inner processes. The child starts to talk 
to himself as he has done to others. This is particularly apparent when a problem 
occurs, as in Vygotsky's example ofa broken pencil. The child is likely to think aloud 
- talking to himself as a guide to action - in the same way as he had previously talked 
to others in communicative speech. It is the planning function of egocentric speech 
that links it to thought, so that through such speech we can claim that inner speech 
develops psychologically before it is internalised physically. 
Experiments by both Piaget and Vygotsky showed that egocentric speech 
always occurs in a social context; indeed the child is unaware of the difference 
between egocentric and social speech. However they both reached very different 
conclusions about the function of egocentric speech. For Piaget it was a stage in the 
process of socialisation, dying away with the child's maturity, no longer needed. For 
Vygotsky it was a stage in the process of individuation occurring in a social context 
because of the 'insufficient isolation of the child's individual consciousness from the 
social whole' (1962: 136). 
As egocentric speech dies away, so inner speech emerges as a new plane of 
thought. Features of inner speech can be deduced from the nature of egocentric speech 
which becomes increasingly predicated as it turns inwards. As the child expresses 
increasingly complex ideas, words are combined in a process of agglutination - that is, 
'a single word is so saturated with sense that many words would be required to 
explain it in external speech' (148). In inner speech 'words die as they bring forth 
thought' (149). In tracing the development of inner speech and verbal thought from 
egocentric and social speech, Vygotsky shows how thinking is based on the speech 
structures mastered by the child so that the thought is detennined by language (the 
linguistic tools of thought) and by sociocultural experiences. In this move to verbal 
thought, development itself changes from biological to socio-historical. 
Inner speech is largely thinking in pure meaning (149), but beyond that lies 
what Vygotsky calls 'pure thought,' which is non-verbal and has its own structures. It 
is engendered by motivation, comprised of desires, needs, interests and emotions. In 
the move from thought to speech, thought must pass flrst through meanings and then 
through words, a process that 'may be compared to a cloud shedding a shower of 
words' (150). 
Cultural Contexts 
Vygotsky, therefore, develops the Marxist philosophy of consciousness itself 
as constructed through social interaction and having its roots in practical activity. For 
Marx, consciousness is an integral part of the way in which man shapes and creates 
reality. It is a dialectical process, and as new levels of the organisation of productive 
forces emerge, so the nature of consciousness itself changes. For Vygotsky, 
ontogenetic development takes place through gradual reorganisation of the 
consciousness As the child crosses from the natural line of development to the 
sociohistorical, cultural development is superimposed on the biological. Human 
consciousness is formed through mastering semiotic processes, of which the foremost 
is language in social interaction. Language is the only sign system that is meta-
linguistic, and through it we are able to reflect and control our own behaviour so that 
'consciousness is the experiencing of experiences (Vygotsky 1979: 52). 
Bakhtin, writing in 1929, also has a view of the social nature of consciousness. 
'The individual consciousness is a social-ideological fact' (Morriss 1994: 52). He sees 
consciousness as formed through ideological content, which is itself semiotic in 
nature and formed through signs which arise between individuals. Thus 'a psychic 
phenomenon becomes explainable only in terms of the social factors that shape the 
concrete life of the individual in the conditions of his social environment' (56). 
Verbal thought not only derives from social interaction but also takes on the 
character of this interaction so that it is dialogic in nature. The units of inner speech 
'resemble the alternating lines of a dialogue' (57). This inner dialogue, however, takes 
place within a social context that forms a 'stabilized social audience.' Bakhtin uses 
the metaphor of an island to show the relationship between inner and outer speech and 
the concrete situation which generates speech: 
The process of speech, broadly understood as the process of inner and outer 
verbal life, goes on continuously. It knows neither beginning nor end. The 
outwardly actualised utterance is an island rising from the boundless sea of 
inner speech; the dimensions and forms of this island are determined by the 
particular situation of the utterance and its audience. 
For Vygotsky, play has an important role in the development of inner speech and 
higher mental functions. In play, action is determined by meaning, so that in 
substituting a stick for a horse the child is replacing the object with a sign and acting 
Cultural Contexts 
according to the meaning. When play is converted to internal processes, it becomes 
the foundation for the imagination, logical memory and abstract thought, while its 
external forms develop into games with rules. Play is therefore linked to the 
development of inner speech and higher mental functions, which are mediated by 
meaning. Vygotsky claims that play becomes the 'leading edge' of psychological 
development because it allows the child a zone of proximal development through 
which new motivations and attitudes to reality are created (Lee 1985: 90). Vygotsky's 
view of intemalisation becomes not deterministic but transformative through his 
understanding of the central r6le of play that develops into imaginative activity, 
including literature, music and the arts. This process takes place through the zone of 
proximal development, our understanding of which offers insights into the nature of 
concepts such as the semiosphere. The next section, therefore, moves from the 
intrapersonal to the interpersonal nature of leaming. 
Learning through interpersonal processes 
Children acquire language and develop word meanings through entering a community 
of speakers and using a language system that is already there. In this process, as in all 
other aspects of acculturation, children are initiated through interaction with other 
more experienced members of the community through what Vygotsky called the 
'zone of proximal development'. He defmes this as: 
the distance between the actual developmentaIlevel as determined by 
independent problem solving and the level of potential development as 
determined through problem solving under adult guidance or in collaboration 
with more capable peers. 
(1978: 86) 
In his discussion of the relationship between leaming and development, Vygotsky 
claimed that the best leaming is always in advance of development, or is addressing 
the zone of proximal development. This presupposes 'a specific social nature and a 
process by which children grow into the intellectual life of those around them' (88). 
Thus learning is a transactional process linking both the cultural and cognitive, so that 
'individual efforts, social interaction, and the cultural context are inherently bound 
together in the development of the children' (Rogoff 1990: 18). In showing the 
interaction between the individual and society, Rogoff uses the metaphor of the forest 
Cultural Contexts 
as the cultural context, an entity in itself, which nourishes and shelters the individual 
trees, without which there would be no forest and which grow and change the nature 
of the forest itself. In the same way, children appropriate the cultural tools of their 
community, but succeeding generations transform institutions and practices in 
response to changing conditions and current practices. In discussing language 
acquisition as an example of learning through the zone of proximal development, 
Rogoff refers to the cultural differences in this process. In those societies in which 
children are not segregated from adults but become part of the community from 
infancy, they are not inducted into language through face-to-face, interactive 
exchanges between carers and children. The Trackton community in Heath (1983) is 
an example of children leaming to establish reciprocity by forcing their way into 
conversation, in contrast with the Maintown community where meanings were 
negotiated between carers and children. 
Bruner also gives language acquisition as an example of leaming through the 
zone of proximal development in which, to use his term, the carer 'scaffolds' the 
child. This is particularly evident in early exchanges between mother and child 
described by Snow and referred to as 'motherese'. Bruner describes scaffolding as a 
process in which the 'tutor' serves the leamer as a form of vicarious consciousness 
until the learner is able to master his own action through his own consciousness and 
control (1985: 25). The discourse into which children are inducted has the 
topic/comment structure or, in Vygotskian terms, the subject/predicate, and Bruner 
tentatively suggests that this may correlate with the given and the new structure. As 
external forms of speech move inwards to verbal thought, the discourse structure also 
passes inwards and this may be what Vygotsky meant by the predicated nature of 
inner speech. In inner speech, therefore, it is the 'new' that is foregrounded and it is 
through this that children and learners can ask questions, so that inner speech becomes 
an instrument for the zone of proximal development and ,thus an instrument for 
continual transformation of mental processes. 
Other research on language acquisition conftrms Vygotsky's views on the 
social nature oflangwlge. Halliday (1975) has shown that early language is rooted in 
the child's culture. He looks at the functional nature of early language, or proto-
language, which develops before the child has a recognisable vocabulary and can be 
understood only by his parents. Halliday shows that this proto-language, as yet 
Cultural Contexts 
consisting only of content/expression, has what he refers to as meaning potential or, as 
Wells (1981) puts it, a 'cultural resource'. It is interpersonal in nature, centred on the 
initiation and maintenance of social interaction. 
Early language is rooted in recurrent social episodes and routines that fonn an 
'interpretive background' and a context for meaningful experience (Hundeide 1985: 
306). Nelson (1981) shows how schemata develop from such regular routines as 
feeding, changing and play. These usually take place in social situations directed and 
structured by the adult, thus extending the child's development within the zone of 
proximal development. Shields also shows how language learning depends upon the 
development of schema about the relationships between people and objects within an 
intersubjective field of attention (Shields 1978). What Trevarthen refers to as 'proto-
conversations' start as early as a few weeks with the child initiating interaction by 
look or gesture and the mother following this up (Trevarthen 1974). Secondary 
intersubjectivity occurs at the end of the first year when the child is able to give 
attention simultaneously to another person and to an object of shared regard. As 
language becomes an integral part of such inter subjective routines the child learns 
'which aspects of experience are culturally salient' (Wells 1981: 98) as well as the 
way in which these are given linguistic fonn so that language and culture are 
inextricably linked. 
Bruner has analysed such exchanges or 'transactions' showing how they 
become ritualised games or what he calls 'standard action frames' in which words 
gradually become an integral part of the activity and the child learns the rules of 
dialogue through the give and take of the game. In Actual Minds Possible Worlds 
(1986) he points out that our transactions with others are based on intersubjectivity or 
a shared understanding and knowledge of how the world works and this cultural 
knowledge is based on such early routines. 
Wells's Bristol research develops such ideas to show that the most beneficial 
interaction for the child's language development is that which gives due weight to the 
contributions of both parties, and emphasises mutuality and reciprocity in the 
meanings that are constructed and negotiated through talk (1981). 
In Such a view, language acquisition appears as a means of learning both 
through culture and also about it. If such a view has a detenninistic note, Meek 
Cultural Contexts 
reminds us of the affective nature of language that has a subversive role and runs 
alongside these interactions: 
there develops the language of an alternative universe, a repertoire for 
disorganizing and reorganizing what counts as common sense and refmed 
reasoning. 
(Meek 1985: 42) 
She uses Cbukowsky's term, 'intellectual effrontery' (1963) to refer to the playful 
aspects of language through which, in learning the rules of language, children also 
learn to break them in language play, riddles and jokes. She compares the child using 
and experimenting with words for the fIrst time, to the poet using words as though for 
the fIrst time, and shows how this language play is the basis for a later pleasure in the 
structured language play that is literature. The importance of the imaginative and 
playful in learning language is also shown by Fox's study of young children's 
storytelling and the relationship of language play and hearing stories read aloud (Fox 
1993). Thus, as in Vygotsky's view of play, the social aspects of language and 
learning are subverted by language play and story. 
The zone of proximal development makes a claim for the social nature of 
learning. It is the means by which children learn through and within their culture and 
it therefore brings together the intrapersonal and the interpersonal aspects of learning 
and can be seen as the mechanism 'for transforming culture into cognition' (Cole 
1985: 147). Cole gives several examples of such learning, including an account of 
learning to weave among Zinacantecan weavers of South-Central Mexico (Child and 
GreenfIeld 1982). The girls observe the entire process but initially the women as 
teachers spend about 93% of the time weaving alongside the child, quickly reducing 
this task as the girl becomes competent. The language initially used in the task 
consists of short simple commands, but becomes increasingly complex in discussion 
about the nature of the weaving. As in language acquisition, the learners acquire the 
small steps in the context of the process as a whole, so that, as Vygotsky stressed, 
learning is always ahead of development. 
The chapter so far has discussed how consciousness, ways of thinking and 
mental processes have developed through the internalisation of cultural tools or 
semiotic symbols and how the way we interpret our world must be understood within 
a cultural context. It has also shown that the individual has subversive power that 
Cultural Contexts 
fmds expression in play, fantasy and literature. Although children draw on culturally 
constituted knowledge in engaging in imaginative activities, these can also act as 
zones of proximal development that enable children to transfonn that knowledge. The 
next section, therefore, relates these ideas to the concept of the semiosphere, 
mentioned earlier in the chapter. in particular comparing it to the zone of proximal 
development and seeing it as constantly changing through interaction with other 
semiospheres. 
Cultural ditTerenees in interpretation 
In her exposition of Lotman's concept of the literary semiosphere, Nikolajeva's 
(1996) particular interest is in the inherent problems of translating children's books, 
in which she identifies the difficulty as cultural difference rather than language. She 
refers particularly to the difficulties Americans have in understanding a book like 
Pippi Longstocking. in which the heroine is a rebel and breaker of rules, a question 
that I had already posed in relation to a ten-year-old Muslim girl reading the same text 
(see Introduction). Nikolajeva shows how a work of literature has its own 
semiosphere, so that the semiotic signs through which it is written are most fully 
understood when writers and readers have a shared cultural understanding. When the 
book is translated there is an area of untranslatability, as cultural nonns may not be 
understood by another social group. As an example, Nikolajeva refers to the fact that 
Russian children would fmd it hard to understand that in Where the Wild Things Are. 
Max has his own bedroom. In my study, the Bangladeshi children were resistant to the 
idea of Jack bullying his sister because their culture encourages siblings to look after 
one another. Nikolajeva quotes Lotman, however, who believes that there is an active 
boundary zone where cultures intersect, resulting in 'creative misunderstandings' . 
The following section now considers examples of the creative arts and the 
ways in which culture shapes our understanding of art and literature. I start with some 
examples given by the anthropologist, Geertz, whose view of culture as a constitutive 
signifying practice was discussed in the earlier part of this chapter. A quotation from 
Matisse shows the relationship between art and culture and the way in which this 
artist experienced painting as an expression of life rooted in a particular culture: 'I am 
unable to distinguish between the feeling I have for life and my way of expressing it' 
(Geertz 1983: 95). To further discuss this relationship, Geertz draws on the writing of 
Cultural Contexts 
Baxandall and his work on Renaissance art and Quattrocento painting (1912). Here 
Baxandall shows how a number of social institutions, ranging from the religious to the 
commercial, could contribute to an understanding of paintings by such artists as Piero 
Della Francesca or Bellini. Both these painters could rely on what Baxandall calls the 
'period eye', by which their public would bring certain interpretative skills to make 
sense of the picture, drawn from general experience of a Quattrocento view of life: 
Fifteenth century experience of the Transfiguration was an interaction between 
the painting, the configuration on the wall and the visualising activity of the 
public - a public mind with different furniture and dispositions from ours. 
(Baxandall1912: 48) 
Baxandall gives dance and drama as two aspects of Renaissance culture that 
contributed to the way pictures were understood. Dance was closely allied to spectacle 
in pageantry and masques. The Renaissance public particularly valued the stylised 
poses framed between the dance movements and were able to read refmed innuendo 
into such poses. The dance forms and the groupings of figures and arrangements of 
body could be used by painters such as Botticelli in his Primavera or his Birth of 
Venus and his public would have a visual understanding of the paintings. 
Piero Della Francesca - who wrote a mathematical handbook on gauging - was 
also able to call on his public's ability to see in a certain way. Many of those who 
bought the paintings were merchants. Until the nineteenth century, measuring 
containers were apparently unknown and merchants had to be able to judge volume 
and capacity quickly and accurately. They did this by mentally breaking down 
complex masses and planes into simpler regular shapes and were therefore able to see 
the structure of complex forms in paintings in the same way. They were able to 
'interpret - gauge, if you will. his paintings and grasp at their meaning' (Geertz 1983: 
101). 
The artist's ability to take for granted a certain way of looking and seeing is 
the theme of Gombrich's book, Art and Illusion (1962). Gombrich claims that style 
creates a mental set which makes the artist look for certain aspects in the scene around 
him, and that the artist tends to 'see what he paints rather than paint what he sees' 
(73). To illustrate this point, he refers to the differences between a painting by Chiang 
Yee, Cows in Derwentwater (1936) and a painting by an anonymous artist, 
Cultural Contexts 
Derwentwater, looking toward Borrowdale (1826), in which the trees are grouped in 
another position. Gombrich reiterates 'how much of what we call seeing is 
conditioned by habits and expectations' (77). The relationship between artist and 
public is a dynamic one -'the artist creates his own elite and the elite likes its own 
artist' (196). When we look at a picture we project our knowledge of how we see. In 
order to bring to life the brush strokes of, for example, an Impressionist painting, we 
see it in the light of our knowledge of landscape. Gombrich also believes that pictures 
train us how to see them, so that the relationship between the semiosphere of the 
picture and the semiosphere of the viewer is one of transformation. He gives comics 
as an example to show how the limits of our understanding can be extended (196). 
Of particular interest to this thesis is Geertz's commentary on Islamic poetry. 
This must be read in the context of its relationship to the Qu'ran. For Muslims, the 
Qu'ran is unique in that it contains God's direct speech, and the Qu'ran reciter 'chants 
God Himself'. For this reason, the children I encountered in London went through 
certain rituals before reading even the 'Kaider' or children's version of the Qu'ran. 
Because the Qu'ran is a holy object, something of this reverence transfers to the 
language in which it was written. Seventh century Meccan Arabic was revered as 
holy; poetry became the cardinal fme art in Islamic civilisations and the poet trod a 
narrow path between respect for his art on one hand and the danger of the gravest 
form of blasphemy on the other. 
Reciting the poetry is a social act: the words come in the act of recitation, 
partly through mnemonic phrases and established formulae. Geertz describes the 
scene of a recitation with tambourines as assistants and lines of dancing men. The 
men in the audience squat before the poet and the women peer out from the houses. In 
the centre of all this stands the poet reciting his work in a wailed falsetto. Thus the 
recitation becomes an act - constantly new, constantly renewable. Geertz says the 
Moroccan oral poet 'inhabits a region between speech types which is at the same time 
a region between worlds, between the discourse of God and the wrangle of men' 
(119). He concludes by stating that we need to seek for the roots of form in 'the social 
history of the imagination so that semiotics is able to locate in the tenor of their 
setting the sources of their spells' (1983: 119). Like Vygotsky, therefore, Geertz sees 
the imaginative and creative as having its foundation in the social, so that there is a 
dynamic interaction between Culture and culture. Eagleton points out, however, that 
Cultural Contexts 
High Culture can be understood as that which surpasses culture so that there may be a 
polarity between the two: 
Culture, by contrast, has an ironic relationship to its historical milieu: if it needs 
that setting to realize itself, it is Culture only because it surpasses it toward the 
universal. 
(Eagleton 2000: 53) 
Each of the examples of art outlined above developed within a semiosphere and may 
be understood in a particular way within that semiosphere. Semiospheres overlap, 
however (Nikolajeva 1996), and it is within that area of intersection that creative 
misunderstandings can occur. It would be hard for an uninformed Western audience to 
appreciate the Moroccan recitations because the area of common understanding is 
small, but the same Western audience can enjoy and bring meaning to a painting by 
Piero Della Francesca, although they may not see it in the same way as his 
contemporaries. The need for some mutual understanding, or overlapping 
semiospheres, is shown by two examples of sharing Shakespeare with groups to 
whom he is unfamiliar. Laura Bohannan gives an amusing account of her attempt to 
retell Hamlet to the Tiv in West Africa (Bohannan 1966) and the confusions that arose 
because there was no area of common understanding. BBC2, however, filmed Romeo 
and Juliet in production on an estate in Birmingham (Shakespeare on the Estate, 
BBC2, 1994) and for the first time the participants discovered Shakespeare's 
relevance to their lives. He had the power to speak to them, as he still speaks to a 
modem audience, although the meanings we bring to his plays and poetry differ from 
those of his Elizabethan audience. Every age has made its own interpretation of 
Shakespeare's work, as their semiospheres intersect with his. Kermode claims that 
later generations may be able to interpret more freely as they are liberated from 
contemporary cultural preconceptions and can make what he calls a 'spiritual 
reading': 
Such a text is an oracle that comes true in circumstances quite unforeseeable, to 
be heard by later years and divined by later magic. And every text may be 
treated thus. It may have some sense that can be sought only at some long 
temporal distance. 
(Kermode 1979: 20) 
Cultural Contexts 
The concept of a creative area of overlapping understanding between cultures has 
much in common with Vygotsky's zone of proximal development. The focus of this 
research is the area of potential understanding between different cultural groups of 
children and a particular text, but I look fIrst at an example of differences in cultural 
ways of reading reported by the French literary critic Leenhardt. His interest was in 
whether the text itself had meaning, or whether, as modern critics would claim, 
reading is a set of mental structures in which meaning is realised in the act of reading 
through the codes the reader brings to the text. He also wished to fmd out whether 
meaning is obtained only when there is a social consensus between reader and writer, 
and his study therefore has particular relevance for my own research question. 
A group of French readers and one of Hungarian readers were both asked to 
read a French novel, Les Choses (0. Perec) and a Hungarian novel Rozsdatemeto (E. 
Fejes). The French readers took an analytical approach, looking for logical 
determinism. They were disconcerted by the seemingly fragmentary nature of the 
Hungarian novel, and reorganised it into thematic patterns around a central hero, so 
that they were able to relate the parts to the novel as a whole. In contrast to this way 
of reading, the Hungarians' interest was in formulating a judgemental code and 
moralising from the particular, rather than establishing a dialectic between part and 
whole. They were concerned to individualise good and evil, and they preferred 
dramatic scenes where they were able to apply these kinds of judgements. 
Leenhardt's research showed that there were defmite cultural reading 
differences between French and Hungarian readers, as each group appeared to read 
novels according to preconceptions of how text is understood. It led him to believe 
that 'cultural objects are produced and received according to schema elaborated by 
collective rather than by individual entities' (Leenhardt 1980: 224) and that literary 
effects will vary according to place and time. He concludes that attention to the 
meaning of a traditional novel will not repress the meaning-making activity of readers 
and that differences in the readings of texts can lead to a creative process of renewing 
and re-elaborating the perceptions through which we read. I take this to mean that the 
differences between the two groups would have been the starting point for a further 
development of their reading competencies by making them aware of their own 
reading processes. Leenhardt states that such a renewal of reflective awareness will be 
more successful with a polysemic text which will offer readers more ways of relating 
Cultural Contexts 
their own ways of making meaning. This is particularly relevant to my study of the 
way in which a polysemic text enabled children from different cultural backgrounds 
to relate their own meanings to it and of how we can build on the creative nature of 
the intersection between semiospheres further to develop children's reading. The next 
section, therefore, looks at two extracts from children's reading in the light of these 
theories and asks how children from one semiosphere interpret literature created 
within another. 
The semiospheres of the text and its readers 
I first briefly consider the semiospheres within The Tunnel. Such an account can be no 
more than an indication since both the verbal and visual text are composed of cultural 
codes which Barthes has taught us to see underlie all other codes. On one level, the 
book is about the relationship between a boy and his younger sister and the tension 
between them due to his bullying - a familiar situation to many English children. 
Browne sets up gender stereotypes at the beginning of the book which are later 
broken, so that Rose wears pastel pink and has a rather old-fashioned bedroom, and 
Jack wears stars and stripes in primary colours and sleeps in a modem bed. As is 
common in our society, the girl enjoys reading stories whereas the boy likes playing 
football. Other details, such as the motifs on the place mats, reflect the way of life of a 
certain Western culture. The terraced houses, the waste ground and graffiti also 
suggest a rather run down inner-city area. The book has its own sense of childness 
which is not one of sentimental approval but reflects an awareness that within our 
culture there are unpleasant aspects to being a child and there is suffering in the 
process of growing up. 
The text itself is intertextual, based on folk-tales from a Northern European 
culture such as Red Riding Hood, Jack and the Beanstalk and Hansel and Gretel. 
References to these stories reappear throughout the book and the reader's awareness 
of possible readings is enhanced through a knowledge of them. The semiosphere of 
the book is not only in the codes but also requires a certain way of looking in order to 
fmd ambiguous shapes half-hidden in the pictures and relate them to the meaning of 
the text as a whole. As a polysemic text, it requires readers who will be able to see 
different ways of reading it and will accept it as having many levels of meaning. 
Cultural Contexts 
The groups with whom I read had contrasting semiospheres with very different 
concepts of childness. I analyse closely their responses in Chapter 4, but here I look at 
brief extracts in the light of the preceding discussion, and look for signs of the 
interaction of their semiosphere and that of the text. 
The English children: Group C 
The children in the English group attended a rural church school. They were from 
small families. One boy's parents had recently divorced, and two children were from 
affluent families and mentioned their toys and books. The school had a traditional 
approach to teaching reading, based on reading schemes and phonics. The girls 
mentioned having anthologies of folk-tales and pop-up books at home. One boy really 
liked information books but the other claimed to dislike books and anything to do 
with reading. The children all reacted strongly to the theme of gender within the book, 
although not all their comments are on tape. The boys scoffed at Rose, comparing her 
to their own whining sisters, and they ignored Jack's bullying although one boy said it 
gave him ideas for bullying his sister. The girls commented on the fact that the boy 
and girl hated each other. Thus they have much in common with Jack and Rose and a 
sense of childness that includes bullying and attitudes about gender. 
This was reflected in their observations on the page where Rose is in bed. 
They fllSt commented on Jack in the wolf suit with some enjoyment but no 
condemnation. In line 42 they laughed at Jack telling his sister off and on their second 
reading they tried to retell the story so that Jack was not turned to stone. They 
immediately recognised the intertext and this was their main focus of interest, as they 
even pretended to eat the Gingerbread Cottage. This playfulness within the text was 
apparent elsewhere and possibly reflects a feeling of familiarity with the book and the 
intertext. They were interested in the book that Rose is reading, one boy comparing it 
to what he liked to read himself and they imagined that on the page they saw Father 
Christmas - in whom they all have an interest. As already mentioned in Chapter 1, 
they did not notice all the visual puzzles but they did have an understanding that the 
text has different levels of meaning. This was indicated by their earlier prediction that 
there will be a book on every page (CI: 3-4). Although their semiosphere had 
similarities to that of the text, the book's assumption that male dominance is 
Cultural Contexts 
undesirable challenged their view of life and their sense of childness, so that they 
were resistant to its message. 
23 Hey I think they've got the 
24 Big Bad wolf in there 
25 Yeah they've got the Big Bad wolf picture 
I think so yes 
26 Little Red Riding Hood 
Yes yes 
27 Look that's the Hansel and Gretel's house there 
It is isn't it with the roof all made of 
sweeties 
28 (several) Yeah urn yeah (loud eating noises) 
29 It's a night light isn't it? 
30 I would eat it 
31 Yes she's left a book on her bed 
32 So amI 
33 I love reading space books 
34 Yes there's a fairy 
35 Yeah 
36 yes it's a fairy story book fairies 
37 Yeah 
38 Defmitelyabout fairies 
She's very fond of reading isn't 
So are you yes 
Yes well she likes stories doesn't 
she she looks as though she likes 
fairy stories 
39 Hey I think I see Father Christmas in there 
Where? Where's Father Christmas? 
The Bangladeshi children: Group B 
The Bangladeshi children in this extract were all born in England but had been on 
visits to Bangladesh and had vivid memories of it. Living in Whitechapel, they were 
familiar with the urban landscape of the book, but the forest scenes had connotations 
for them of forests in Bangladesh. They came from large families where children were 
expected to look after one another. Rashid and Gregory have shown, for instance, the 
role of siblings in helping younger children learn to read (Gregory 1997). Although 
part ofa strict Muslim community, the children had a strong desire to be Western and 
were familiar with common English folk-tales from books and videos at home and in 
school. 
Cultural Contexts 
They all attended their local Mosque school, where they learned the Qu'ran by 
rote (Street 1984) They also went to Bengali classes. Rashid and Gregory (ibid.) show 
the importance of rote learning and reciting in these classes, where children are 
expected to concentrate for long periods of time. This was in contrast to their English 
school, where much teaching was done through literature and book-making. 
Their reading was less lighthearted than that of the English children: they 
focused more closely on the text, noticing more details in the picture and relating 
these to one another in the context of the narrative. This is shown in lines 259-270 
where they realised the wolf in the forest was the same as the wolf in the picture on 
the bedroom wall, and they compared Rose to Red Riding Hood and Jack to the wolf. 
There was a striking difference in their approach to the text and the meanings that 
they made. Whereas the English children recognised that the creatures were in Rose's 
imagination, the Bangladeshi children interpreted the scene in a more literal way, 
wondering if Rose had been to the forest before and taken a photograph. 
They understood much of the intertext, even recognising Sleeping Beauty in 
Rose's book at the entrance to the tunnel. They recognised the bear in the forest, but 
also saw a snake and ants, creatures that they were familiar with from their own 
experiences in Bangladesh (247-248). There was some difference in their semiosphere 
and that of the book, in that the book requires the understanding of a fantasy world 
and theirs was a more literal understanding but they were able to draw on intertext 
from their own culture to interpret the picture. 
247 No that looks like a snake and this one 
248 looks like ant coming inside and they 
249 made a * * * 
250 Look two eyes look like two eyes 
Yes they do 
252 No } 
253 There's a bear 
254 There's a bear 
255 That's the monster's hand 
256 Look that's the bear (excited) 
257 There's scary things 
Yes what about that one then 
258 Second bear 
259 That's a wolf 
260 Yeab I thought that wolf come in here 
Cultural Contexts 
261 come here there's that wolf 
262 Look he there and he there there and 
263 that and that 
264 Everything is same here 
265 I know there's the she's the Red 
266 Riding Hood he's the wolf  like that 
267 I know that wolfwas here she photocopied 
268 she photo the tunnel with the other time 
269 because it same 
270 And he's seen (been?) the wolf too 
271 And that's the and that's the same in 
the jungle 
The Bangladeshi children: Group A 
These children were newly arrived from Bangladesh and had siblings still there. Their 
experiences at community, Mosque and English schools were similar to those of the 
other Bangladeshi group, but their memories of the home country were particularly 
strong and their attitudes and aspirations were not yet Westemised. They referred to 
English books and films, however, as well as their own electronic games and 
equipment. They also enjoyed Indian videos. 
The children had little awareness of the intertextual references and, although 
some of them claimed to have the video of Red Riding Hood at home, they still had 
not made the story sufficiently their own to relate it to this book. Their understanding 
of scenes like Rose's bedroom and the forest was therefore limited, and may be the 
reason that they referred to fewer details in the trees. The pictures offer opportunities 
for 'seeing in' and they were able to do this, drawing on their own life and 
experiences, so they saw snakes and dragons rather than bears and wolves. They 
fmnly condemned Jack for his behaviour to Rose and they were the only group to say 
that Rose rescued her brother because she loved him. In their own written version of 
the story, the two children hold hands and go into the tunnel together, suggesting that 
a depiction of quarrelling seems to be culturally unacceptable to them. There was also 
a marked difference in their approach to reading the text, particularly evident in the 
responses to the forest scenes. They looked at the scene with more innocent eyes -
theirs was an affective reading as the dangers seemed very real to them, in marked 
contrast to the more conjectural reading of the other groups. Their semiosphere 
differed from that of the book, but its open, pluralist nature enabled them to relate 
their own meanings to it. 
Cultural Contexts 
119 And look at hands 
120 Witches hands  hands 
121 I know look hands 
122 Yeah 
123 And look at my hands look 
124 Very very very dangerous 
125 and look at the fire 
126 I dunno 
127 The witch's 
128 He look at the tree 
Where's the hands? 
Oh yes look can you see the big 
thumb? 
Yes it's big isn't yes 
Yes I think it is 
I wonder whose fire that is? 
Do you know whose fire it could 
Could be the witch's fire couldn't 
it? Yes 
Both groups of Bangladeshi children approached the text differently from the English 
children, with their sense of childness more strongly influenced by religion, different 
literacy practices, and the experiences and duties of being part of a large family and a 
community that extends to the home country. These differences raise the question of 
appropriate approaches to literacy teaching in multicultural classrooms and the choice 
of texts that will be of most benefit to them. 
Multicultural approacbes 
An approach to developing literary competencies needs to be built on an awareness of 
the semiosphere of the children and the kinds of knowledge they bring to reading. In 
recent years there has been a greater awareness of the diversity of literacy practices 
associated with different social contexts, and the fact that children enter school with 
distinct reading histories. This has been highlighted by classroom research such as 
Hilary Minns' study of the ways in which 'the children's learning is enmeshed in the 
social and cultural traditions of each child's family' (Minns 1990: xiii), and by Barton 
and Hamilton's (1998) extensive study of intermeshing literacy practices within one 
community. My own awareness began in the early eighties, when I studied two 
Cultural Contexts 
children's reading at home and at school and realised the power of the religious 
literacy of the Mosque schools (Mines 1986). 
During the 1980s, literacy came to be redefined as a set of social practices 
around the written word - 'a complex amalgam of psychological, linguistic and social 
processes, layered one on top of another like a rich and indigestible gateau' (Levine 
1986: 22). This school of thought marked a move away from a model of literacy 
independent of social context but fixed in the meaning of the text and with the power 
to change the nature of cognition by its intrinsic character. Goody and Watt (1968) 
referred to writing as 'an autonomous mode of communication'. They developed the 
thesis that it was the nature of the Greek alphabet that led to a certain form of literacy, 
within which philosophy and intellectual thought was able to develop in Ancient 
Greece. Their theory, however, neglects those complex social factors that combined to 
produce the Classical Greek civilisation. 
More recently ethnographers have come to recognise and research Street's 
'ideological' model ofliteracy (Street 1984), in which literacy is not an 'absolute', but 
'a set of social practices associated with particular social systems and their related 
technologies' {Barton 1994: 32). 
In Ways With Words (1983), Heath gives an ethnographic account of the ways 
in which literacy practices were based on religious traditions and cultural attitudes in 
two literate working-class communities in the Southern States of America. The 
written word reflected the authority of the Bible in the white community of Roadville, 
and multiple interpretation was discouraged. In the black community of Trackton, 
however, the collaborative and oral nature of the church service was reflected in their 
ways of understanding the written word through negotiation and manipulation, 
including storytelling: 
For Roadville, the written word limits alternatives of expression; in Trackton, it 
opens alternatives. Neither community's ways with the written word prepares it 
for the school's ways. 
(Heath 1983: 235) 
Heath shows how the discontinuity between notions of literacy in school and home 
resulted in educational underachievement. The children from Trackton were 
disadvantaged in an educational system which was unable to acknowledge their 
storytelling tradition and their view of reading as a group activity. The children from 
Cultural Contexts 
the white community were also disadvantaged because of their inability to fantasise 
and conjecture. 
Nearer to home, Barton and Hamilton's research (1998) found that literacy is 
not only embedded within a social context but also shapes the sense of personal 
identity of people within that community. They give an account of the different 
literacies engaged in by a wife and mother within an Islamic Gujarati family who was 
able to read in English, Gujarati and Arabic. Her diverse reading included the Qu'ran 
and other Islamic texts: magazines and romantic novels, letters home and Indian 
newspapers. As in Streefs observations, learning the Qu'ran was largely through 
memorisation: 'it's just our religion to learn things. When you pray you have to learn 
by heart to pray' (1998: 185). 
Street's research in Iran (1984) also demonstrates the nature of literacy 
practices as embedded in social institutions. He describes those practices associated 
with reading the Qu'ran: the ritual of hand washing before reading the Holy Book and 
reading it by rote. Rashid and Gregory describe the 'harmonious recitation in unison 
with the gentle rocking to and fro which accompanies the reading' (Rashid and 
Gregory 1997: 109). Learning to read the Qu'ran has great importance for Muslims as 
an initiation into their religion, as I found from the children's pride when they recited 
long sections to me, declaring 'It's the Word of God, Miss' (Mines 1986). Like 
Bettelheim and Zelan's (1982) account of Jews learning to read the Torah in Hebrew, 
it is a process that continues through life as children learn more about the meaning of 
the Holy Word in the company of older, more experienced, learners. As the Word of 
God, the Qu'ran influences every aspect of daily life and Street tells of the 
relationship between text and life and between life and text: 
Like the children in Roadville, young 'Maktab' students learn from their 
literacy training to think of stories as 'true' events and to look for moral truths 
in them and, conversely, they learn to frame their moral sense in terms of such 
stories. 
(Street 1984: 156) 
A relationship with the text of this nature is based on certain interpretative procedures, 
in which it is regarded as representing literal truth, but within this immutable 
framework there is constant reinterpretation, each one seeking authority from the 
Holy Word: 
Cultural Contexts 
literacy can both serve to justify the claim that there is only one interpretation 
and at the same time facilitate the range of interpretation that anthropologists 
fmd in practice. (151) 
Such an approach is likely to have implications for the way in which the children read 
The Tunnel and may account for the Bangladeshi children's close attention and 
approach to making meaning. They were concerned to make connections and 
reconstruct a coherent story, but within a framework of literal interpretation. Despite 
their perceptive observations, they did not recognise its polysemic qualities. 
This chapter has discussed the cultural nature of the reader and further 
considered Scholes's insights into the cultural nature of both reader and text in a 
relationship in which each has the power to change the other. It has considered the 
constitutive nature of culture, which may, however, be subverted by play and story, 
and it has looked at the relationship of children to literature in which the childness of 
each interact in a creative intersection between literary semiospheres. This raises 
questions about the texts we need to offer to children and whether we should 
introduce them to books that will confirm their sense of childness, or that will enlarge 
their semiosphere by teaching them more about the new culture in which they live, 
thus challenging their ways of reading. 
In the seventies and eighties the aim of multicultural education was to reflect 
and value diversity of lifestyles, beliefs and cultural traditions (James 1981). It 
identified a particular need for children, particularly those from minority ethnic 
groups, to develop positive self images, and for all children to have favourable 
attitudes towards those different from themselves. The importance of the images 
presented to children in books was a central belief, resulting in the selection of books 
according to criteria based on race and gender. This sometimes led to simplistic 
readings that judged such polysemic texts as Anthony Browne's and David McKee's 
to be unacceptable. 
Such an approach fails to take account of the nature of the individual within 
culture, and the shifting nature of culture as it is constantly reinterpreted. Children 
create a living culture for themselves (James 1981). For second generation immigrants 
this is created out of the contrasts between home, school and the mass media. James 
concludes that schools should not present fossilised elements of what they imagine to 
be the children's cultures. but should teach a literacy that enables children to analyse 
Cultural Contexts 
and criticise the assumptions of the social worlds in which they are growing up. This 
is supported by Zec (1981), who sees the need to select material according to 
educational criteria rather than because it relates to a minority culture, and by May, 
who concludes that: 
critical multiculturalism must foster students who can engage critically with all 
ethnic and cultural backgrounds including their own. 
(May 1999: 33) 
The National Curriculum now prescribes what is to be taught, but May's words apply 
with equal force to our choice of books. All children need canonical texts that will 
reflect their sense of who they are, but they also need books that will introduce new 
ways of seeing their world and challenge their ways of reading. They need pluralist 
texts that will become 'sites of transfonnations and transitions in children's reading' 
and will open up ways in which they can be read for all children (Meek 2000: 199). 
Methodology 
Methodology 
1: The choice of research approacb 
The study so far has explored readings of The Tunnel and theoretical perceptions of 
reading and cultural processes that may account both for my own reading and those of 
the children in the study. In the process of this exploration, research questions have 
been identified, related to how children use and draw upon their culture in their 
literary understanding, and in what ways they are able to transfonn that culture. The 
study explores, therefore, the nature of reading itself. Before turning to a 
consideration of the fmdings of the fieldwork, this chapter sets out the methods used 
and the reasons behind the choices made in carrying out the research. 
The focus of this chapter is methodological issues. I begin with broader 
questions relating to qualitative, ethnographic or case-study research and the 
decisions I had to make, stemming from such questions. I then give the context of my 
research and how this context was chosen, together with an account of the way in 
which the research groups and the text used were selected. This is followed by a 
description of the fieldwork carried out, the reasons for the research design, and the 
methods chosen to record the data. My own role within the fieldwork is addressed, 
and the approach to analysing the material is explained and justified. 
la Methodological stance 
The first decision I had to make was about my methodological stance and whether a 
qualitative or quantitative approach would be appropriate for my questions. These 
Methodology 
related to the processes of reading; not, however, the processes by which children 
learn to read, such as cueing systems, phonological awareness and classroom 
pedagogies, but rather the development of literary competencies and how children 
read and understand literature. I needed to look closely at children's interactions with 
text; the meanings they made and the interplay of culture and text within such 
readings. A qualitative approach appeared to be appropriate, therefore, providing the 
tools for analysing rich, contextual and detailed data. 
The distinction between quantitative and qualitative research needs to be 
considered, although it is not entirely clear cut and both methods can produce data 
which 'is useful for verification and generation of theory' (Glaser and Strauss 1967: 
18). Quantitive research is linked to an objective, positivist research tradition in 
which natural science is accepted as the 'paradigm of human knowledge' (Cohen and 
Manion 1994: 12). It is based on four fundamental assumptions. 
The first is that of determinism, so that causal links between events can be 
uncovered in order to understand them, thus providing a basis for prediction and 
control of regular phenomena. The second assumption is that the tenability of the 
theory or the hypothesis depends on the nature of empirical evidence; 'empirical' here 
means verifiable by observation and 'evidence' means data that provide strong 
confmnation of the theory or hypothesis in a research setting (Cohen and Manion 
1994). 
The decision for empiricism as an act of scientific faith signifies that the best 
way to acquire reliable knowledge is the way of evidence obtained by direct 
experience. 
(Barratt 1971; Cohen and Manion: 13) 
The third assumption is that of economy in the presentation of research fmdings, so 
that they are comprehensive but not unwieldy. The fourth is that of generality, so that 
relationships are established between what is concrete and particular and what is 
abstract and general. 
Quantitative research has, therefore, been a useful tool for fmding regularities 
across large data samples and recent education policy has been based on a belief in its 
necessity and value to provide quantitive indicators of the quality of educational 
outputs, inputs and processes (Hammersley 1993). Such an approach, for example, 
Methodology 
may have been appropriate had I wished my research to demonstrate that children's 
reading improves through systematic use of synthetic phonics, although it would have 
left important questions unanswered. Its strength is: 
its ability to simplify data, thus revealing pattern, but this is also its weakness as 
simplification may obscure relevant features of the data. 
(Henwood and Pidgeon 1993: 23) 
It has been criticised, however, on the grounds that it neglects complexity of 
experience and our ability to interpret experiences and construct theories about 
ourselves and our world (Shipman 1972; Giddens 1976). 
Qualitative research in education developed in Britain in the late 1960s and 
early 1970s as a reaction against such positivist approaches, setting out 'to explore 
what happens in school from the point of view of the participants' (Atkinson, 
Delamont and Hammersley 1993: 16). One of its strengths is that it cannot be pigeon-
holed but embraces a wide range of intellectual traditions, particularly those which 
fall within an interpretivist sociological tradition. It is based on flexible methods of 
data generalisation leading to understanding of complexity, detail and context with an 
emphasis on holistic fonns of analysis and explanation. It makes use of interviewing 
or fieldwork based on participant observation and the data may be transcripts of 
subjects' talk. Although it may use some form of quantification, statistical forms of 
analysis are not seen as central. Its strength is that it does not lose sight of complexity 
where this may be significant. 
An example of a productive approach to research within the qualitative 
tradition is 'Grounded Theory,' developed by Corbin and Strauss (1967). It is a 
method in which concepts develop from the data rather than from an a priori theory 
and there is what Henwood and Pidgeon (ibid.) call a 'flip-flop' between ideas and 
research. The researcher allows a number of concepts and categories to emerge from 
systematic inspection of data, and uses open-ended indexing systems and data 
generating labels to work through low-level concepts to more abstract features. In 
reality both quantitative and qualitative research are engaged in the process of 
arranging and rearranging the complexities of raw data and each may make use of the 
techniques of the other. 
Methodology 
My own research was fmnly rooted in a qualitative tradition; it was less about 
the size of my sample and more about the complexities of children's interactions with 
literary text. It was carried out by a single researcher, which precluded the collection 
of large samples of data, and it focused on a specific text which was read by small 
groups of children in only three schools. A qualitative approach which looked at 
levels of meaning was, therefore, appropriate. 
Having made this decision, I needed an initial consideration of what my own 
role was to be. In order to fmd answers to my questions I realised that I would need to 
be a participant observer. (See below, section 4). My role would not be to develop the 
children's understanding, as in an action research project, where the aim is to 
diagnose a problem in a specific context and to improve practice (Cohen and Manion 
1994). My involvement was rather to discover understanding and those meanings that 
the children were able to make. 
1 b Refining the model 
Having decided that a qualitative approach would be appropriate, I needed to choose 
from within this tradition a particular methodology which would be most appropriate 
for my own questions. I first considered an ethnographic approach, bearing in mind 
that my interest was in the relationship between culture and reading. The central 
method of ethnography is observational. The researcher immerses herself in the 
observed culture, and spends time with families and communities to provide a full 
account, or Geertz's (1973) 'thick description' of practices at home and in school 
within a detailed social context. The researcher is able to be a 'knower' because of 
shared experience with the researched that enables her to understand what the social 
setting feels like, although not necessarily from the perspective of all participants 
(Mason 1996: 62). It entails a commitment to a search for meaning and an 
engagement of the self - 'self-conscious engagement with the world is what dermes 
the process of ethnography' (Ball 1993: 33). For this reason, reflexivity, or an 
awareness of the value of interaction and the researcher's own effect upon these 
interactions, is a key element of ethnographic research. 
The previous chapter discussed some of the insights into the cultural nature of 
literacy provided by ethnographers who have researched using this approach (Heath 
Methodology 
1983, Street 1984). Their methods involved living among the communities they were 
studying. Heath, for example, lived within the black community of Trackton for ten 
years in order to study deeply ingrained language habits, and Street spent long periods 
of time in villages in Iran, sharing the daily lives of those whom he researched. 
These ethnographic studies investigate the purposes, skills and processes of 
reading and learning to read within a cultural context, but there is little attention given 
to literary or interpretative aspects of reading, to how children are able to draw on 
their cultural knowledge to read and make meaning from literature. Such research 
would require closer analysis of reading episodes than would be possible within an 
ethnographic approach and I decided, therefore, that, while I could learn much from 
ethnography, it would not be a suitable research method for what I wanted to explore. 
Complementary to ethnographic research is the use of case studies. The term 
is rather imprecise and refers to studies which analyse in depth the characteristics of a 
chosen unit, such as an individual, group or school, with a view to relating this to 
more generalised insights. Its main strength lies in 'its attention to the complexity of 
the case in its own right' (Cohen and Manion: 123). Concepts of generalisability have 
changed since the demand for external validity demanded by quantitive research, 
'generalizations that are intended to be context-free will have little that is useful to 
say about human behaviour' (Guba and Lincoln 1981: 62). It is through their attention 
to subtlety and complexity that case studies can provide rich material as a source for 
subsequent comparisons and alternative interpretations (Adelman et 0/1980), and are 
thus a natural basis for generalisation. 
There is a history of case studies of individual child readers, including White 
(1954), Crago (1975), Butler (1979), Wolf and Heath (1992), Fox (1993), and we 
have learned much about the nature of reading and literary understanding from such 
studies. Many of them were carried out by parents who closely observed their own 
children over a number of years, as participant observers in literacy events. Inherent 
in this is the difficulty of both observing and recording one's own children while 
simultaneously 'standing back' to see the data from the perspective of others (Crago 
1995). Crago also refers to the difficulty that adults may have in understanding - or 
even tolerating - what children say in response to books, so that there is a temptation 
to 'retreat into intellectualisation or into aesthetics, focusing on the literary texts not 
Methodology 
on the children' (Crago: 189). He sees a continuing need for detailed data on what 
children make of literature, which must 'rise above our emotional investments - in our 
own children as well as in our preferred ideologies of literature and of childhood' 
(190). 
The children in these case studies were children of academic parents with a 
specialised interest in books, used to articulating responses to books. They represent a 
particular tradition of literary development in middle class Western families, which 
cannot be generalised to other class and cultural contexts (Wolf and Heath 1992). 
Other case studies, however, have been carried out in schools and homes to explore 
different traditions of becoming literate, and these are closer to the ethnographic 
approach. One such study is Minns' investigation into the reading histories of five 
children from various cultural backgrounds and their progress in learning to read in 
primary school (1990). Gregory has also collected a number of case studies of 
children's literacy experiences within different cultures, from which I was able to 
learn much about the literacy practices of the Bangladeshi children in my study. 
Although influenced by both these case-study approaches, the nature of my 
enquiry required close analysis both of the published text used to read with the 
children and the texts produced during the course of the research - i.e. the transcripts 
of the children's readings. My research would, therefore, be text-based and it would 
be multi-layered, in that I would be uncovering levels of meaning and interpretation 
in a manner akin to textual criticism. The texts which formed my data were obtained 
in the course of working with small groups of children on a regular basis as a 
participant observer, and my research is, therefore, in the case study tradition for all 
groups of children. 
I shall now explain the main practical questions of method which arose to 
provide an organising structure for a consideration of the allied methodological 
lssues. 
Ie Home or school 
I initially considered the use of home visits, since many case studies have been 
carried out in the familiar surroundings of the home where the child is interacting 
with a parent or someone familiar. This security will affect the nature of the child's 
Methodology 
response to the text and, as I myself found out in an earlier study (Mines 1988), the 
quality of response from children whom I knew well in their own homes was 
markedly different from those of individual children in school. My choice of a school 
context, however, was based on both practical and theoretical considerations. Since I 
no longer taught in London and did not know the children and their families well, 
they could regard my visits as an intrusion. My access to school was also likely to be 
facilitated by my background of working with teachers in Tower Hamlets. Closely 
allied to this consideration was my intention to be a participant observer, in that I 
would keep the children focused on the text, support their English and also ask open 
questions to encourage them to look more closely. This kind of role would be more 
successfully carried out in a school setting. 
Another reason for restricting my research to school was the fact that visits to 
families would draw me into an ethnographic approach to research, observing literacy 
events in the home and possibly in the community or Mosque schools. Although this 
would have afforded valuable insights and may have informed my interpretations of 
the children's readings, such procedures would have been beyond the scope of a 
single researcher project. In addition, lack of time could have led me into making 
simplistic and misleading judgements and contrasts. With a larger scale project it 
would have been valuable to follow up this school-based work with visits to homes, 
community and Mosque schools, but within the constraints of this study such 
activities could have been a distraction from the focus of my research. 
These practical and theoretical considerations were reinforced by the fact that 
I was exploring the topic with a view to being able to make recommendations about 
teaching approaches and materials. The research is therefore educational rather than 
sociological and such research is most appropriately carried out within an educational 
context. The decision to carry out my research in school was also affected by the fact 
that I would be working with groups of children rather than individuals and I now 
consider the reasons for that choice. 
Id Individual or group 
Since reading is an activity which is usually done silently and individually, it might 
be expected that my research would focus on the individual's interpretations. Such an 
Methodology 
approach, however, is not always the most productive way to find out the nature of 
children's readings, as indicated above. Crago (1990) has pointed out that it is 
impossible to know exactly how individuals experience a story or picture-book; we 
can only know what they show us and, in so doing, they change the nature of that 
experience. I made the decision, therefore, that I would learn more about the nature of 
children's reading if they were able to feel relaxed within a familiar group, although I 
remained cognisant of Crago's warning that I would only be aware of what the 
children chose to reveal. 
A factor that influenced my decision was that reading is often experienced as a 
shared, communal activity in educational settings and children are acculturated to 
school texts together. This was particularly true of the children in the schools in 
London who were accustomed to read and discuss texts in a group. In addition, I had 
decided to work with children aged six to seven (see below for discussion), who are 
still at an inexperienced stage of reading development but who may have more 
difficulty in articulating their responses as individuals because, by this age, they are 
beginning to fmd silent reading a more natural activity. This is a factor that I 
encountered in earlier research, when some children of this age found it difficult to 
talk coherently about a book on an individual basis but were able to take part in group 
discussion. 
All these factors led me to conclude that group work was more appropriate, 
despite its inherent problems, such as possible domination by certain individuals or 
the influence of peer group pressure. The fact that group work was a natural and 
regular part of activity in school added weight to my decision to work in school rather 
than in children's homes. This decision to work with groups rather than individuals 
was strengthened by my view that children's spoken language was relevant to an 
investigation of their interactions with text, a view discussed in the ensuing section. 
Ie Why talk? 
This was one of the more straightforward decisions. Given that I wanted to explore 
the children's readings of a text, I needed to have access to the processes of their 
interactions with the text and how they made sense of it. It is impossible to know 
exactly what is going on in the mind of a reader, but Vygotsky has made us aware 
Methodology 
that talk is the means of giving fonn to thought, and it is often through talk that we 
become aware of what we are thinking (Vygotsky 1962). Talk therefore appeared to 
offer the most immediate access to the children's reading experiences. 
An alternative would have been written responses and initially I made use of 
written accounts and artwork to support my understanding of the children's oral 
responses. Given their young age, however, the children's writing ability was less 
well-developed than their speech and would have posed particular problems for the 
fIrst Bangladeshi group, who had only recently entered an English school. In addition, 
I was looking for immediate and spontaneous responses, unmediated by myself, and 
the physical act of writing or drawing may have impeded this. In a more extended 
project with a greater number of children, patterns and trends in their drawings might 
have been more discernible and would therefore have greater validity, but in this 
study I made the decision to focus on transcripts of oral language, using writing and 
art for further backup when appropriate. 
1 f Summary of research approach 
Although the above factors have been considered separately they are, to a greater or 
lesser degree, interrelated. Having decided to use a qualitative approach and then to 
use the tools of textual criticism to discover levels of meaning, other decisions were 
made in line with this. The next stage was to select suitable schools and books and 
design the fIeldwork and I tum now to a description of the chosen context. 
2: The context of the fieldwork 
2a The choice of schools 
In order to select appropriate settings for research, I needed to consider what 
infonnation I was seeking and where it was likely to be located; the choice of schools 
therefore must be related to the questions I wanted to ask. In order to obtain samples 
that would enable me to make valid generalisations and useful comparisons I also 
needed to consider how many schools I needed to visit, as well as the composition of 
the groups within those schools. I needed schools in which I could work with children 
who had different cultural backgrounds but where I would have ease of access and be 
able to visit regularly in the limited time available. 
Methodology 
Since I bad previously taught in Tower Hamlets for a number of years and it 
was my experiences of the children there that had stimulated my interest in the 
research topic, I decided to carry out the research in this area. I started with a pilot 
study in Stepney, and the richness and complexity of the children's readings 
influenced my decision to restrict my research to a small number of schools so that I 
could analyse material in depth. I then selected two schools in Whitechapel, referred 
to in this study as schools A and B, and two local schools in East Sussex, schools C 
and D. These would give me opportunities for interpretative comparisons of their 
readings, while remaining aware of the dangers of simplistic comparisons between 
schools, as though each was representative of all such schools (Mason 1996). 
The pupils in both inner city schools were almost all Bangladeshi. School A 
was recently opened in order to provide education for the growing number of 
Bangladeshi children in the area, most of whom were first generation immigrants and 
at an early stage of acquiring English. School a, however, was an established school: 
the majority of the pupils were second-generation immigrants and some of their 
parents had themselves attended the same school. I had previously worked with the 
headteachers of both schools and knew they would be supportive, since they both had 
a particular interest in literacy. The two local schools were both in rural areas of 
Sussex: School C was a small church school and the other school was larger, with a 
tradition of teaching literacy through literature and picture-books. 
lb Selection of the groups 
My next decisions related to the age of the children and the size of the groups. The 
children in the study were in Year One and were thus all six years old. I initially 
worked with a group of ten-year-olds in the pilot school, who, as already mentioned, 
gave rich and detailed readings of the text. However, although the focus of my 
research was on children's use of their own culture in reading, I wanted to relate this 
to children who were at an early stage of developing literary competencies, and the 
confidence of these children in the pilot study confirmed my decision to work with 
younger, less experienced, readers. I also felt that they would be particularly receptive 
to the lessons about reading that are offered in good picture-books at this age, before 
independent reading is firmly established (Benson 1986). 
Methodology 
I decided that groups of four were the most suitable size for my purpose, 
providing a sufficiently intimate atmosphere yet with the possibility of a range of 
ideas and attitudes. Four voices also seemed to be the best number for clarity of 
transcription of the audiotapes made during the readings. 
I had to rely on the class teachers' judgements in the selection of the group 
members, particularly in the London schools where fluency in English was a deciding 
factor for inclusion. Each group comprised two boys and two girls so that the gender 
balance was constant. Children were selected who were sufficiently confident to 
engage in a discussion but who would not dominate a group. The groups were kept 
constant but in School C one boy was ill and was replaced by another for the second 
reading. The exception to this way of working was School B, which included two 
readings (B-1 and B-2) by the same group and a reading by another group, (B-3), 
which included one boy from the original group. In summary, I used the transcripts 
from four groups of children: one group from School A, two groups from School B 
and one from School C. I did not include the transcripts from School D for the 
reasons given below. 
lc Selection of the text 
As with choices relating to the sample groups, my choice of text had to relate to the 
research question. My initial intention had been to use a number of texts including 
canonical, multicultural and polysemic texts and I did, in fact, read a number of such 
books with all the groups, using The Tunnel as the core text, with other picture-books 
to support my analysis. During the course of the research, however, it became clear 
that - in order to address the research questions - I would need to analyse closely the 
children's readings as well as the text itself. To do this in depth I needed to focus on 
only one text. I have, therefore, not made direct use of the readings of other books, 
although they have informed my interpretations. My decision to focus on The Tunnel 
unfortunately meant that the extremely rich discussion of School D's reading of 
Where the Wild Things Are is not included in my analysis. 
The Tunnel was initially one text among several that I read with the groups, 
but it emerged as the text which elicited the most detailed and interesting responses. 
There are a number of reasons for this: my own reading of it (as given in Chapter 1) 
Methodology 
shows it to be a plural text with visual puzzles and ambiguities that require its readers 
to make active readings and to draw on previous reading and cultural experience to 
make sense of it. Since my research question related to the use of culture in reading, it 
was important that the book had overt cultural references to the relationship of the 
characters and to their life style. The use of intertext as a device was another aspect of 
the cultural code, as well as the metafictive nature of the book. The use of archetypal 
imagery, however, seemed to transcend the cultural code, and have a deeper appeal, 
allowing readers to make their own meanings. For all these reasons I found that the 
book was one that stimulated the discussion essential for my analysis, and would 
allow me to address my question relating to the nature of reading itself. 
3: The nature of the fieldwork activities 
3a The pilot study 
I fIrSt conducted a pilot study with a group of four ten-year-olds in a school in 
Stepney. The group selected represented an ethnic mix: a white boy from a local 
family, an Afro-Caribbean boy bom in England, a Bangladeshi girl, an English 
daughter of a doctor, and a boy recently arrived from French-speaking Martinique, 
traumatised by violent events and at an early stage of leaming English. 
I made five visits to the school between October and December 1993, during 
which time I shared a variety of picture-books with the group. The sessions were 
designed to explore the children's responses to a range of texts and to clarify my 
research question. I found that The Tunnel elicited the most interesting discussion. 
The children responded to its polysemic quality, the English boy referring to it as 
being 'Like a myth, everything's got meaning' and the Afro-Caribbean boy 
recognising that Rose had gone into 'a world of her worst nightmares.' The 
Bangladeshi girl's reading was more literal, with a belief that it was a witch who 
turned Jack to stone, while the boy from Martinique was absorbed by the book. 
mumbling to himself as he turned the pages and looking particularly closely at the 
pictures of Rose passing through the tunnel. The English boy's reaction to the 
relationship between the children was marked: he suddenly became very angry as he 
told me that he hated his sister and that Jack was quite right not to want his 'whining 
sister' with him. These different readings helped me to formulate the research 
Methodology 
question and confirmed my decision to use The Tunnel as my core text. The 
children's confident reading encouraged me to work with younger children who were 
at an earlier stage of development. 
3b Design of the main fieldwork 
On the basis of the pilot study, the main fieldwork was carried out in four groups, as 
described above. I visited each school on a weekly basis for several weeks, working 
with the same group for a period of about one hour. I wanted the children to feel 
relaxed and confident so that they would discuss the book freely and I tried, therefore, 
to achieve an atmosphere that was informal but similar to that of their familiar 
classroom. I was able to work with them in a quiet room where they sat around a table 
with me, as they were accustomed to do, a comfortable and convenient way to look at 
books. The hourly sessions followed a flexible pattern in which I first read a familiar 
or contrasting book, holding it up and encouraging discussion as I would when 
reading aloud to a class of this age. The children were then provided with their own 
copies of The Tunnel, which I read aloud, although the fact that they each had a copy 
of the text enabled them to have more control over the reading. Each session 
concluded with a reading ofa folk-tale or other story of their choice. 
I made the decision to read the book to them because my interest was in how 
they read and understood the text as a whole, interrelating the words and the pictures. 
Because they were still learning to read, had I encouraged them to read aloud, it was 
likely that their attempts to decode the words would have distracted them from close 
attention to the pictures, 
On the first reading of The Tunnel, my procedure was to allow a pause after 
each page. This gave them time to look closely at the pictures, since 'the look and the 
gaze are essentially non-verbal, although they are often accompanied and directed by 
inner speech' (Benson 1986: 134). If they remained silent, I waited a few seconds and 
then turned to read the next page. Examples of this are where children in 8-1 say 
nothing in response to pages 3-4 and those in C-l are silent in response to pages 11-
14. Although I initially questioned children in A-I to encourage discussion, the 
transcripts show that the children in all groups usually initiate discussion 
Methodology 
spontaneously after listening to a page. Sometimes they intemJpt the reading, 
especially A-I, who do this four times in response to page 17 (A-I: 125-136). 
On the second reading, again the children usually initiate discussion, but I 
sometimes comment or question in order to stimulate conversation, as with C-2 on 
pages 11-14 (C-2: 211-223). As with the first reading, however, I did not approach 
these sessions with prepared questions but responded to the children's comments. 
This was because I wanted spontaneous responses and to obtain these I needed to 
participate as a fellow explorer, interested in what they had to say, whilst withholding 
my own reading. My role in the discussions is more fully discussed below. 
The Tunnel was read in this way on three or four successive occasions and all 
sessions were tape-recorded. From these tapes I later selected their first two readings 
for analysis. The reason for this decision was that the first reading revealed their 
initial reactions to the text and their second reading proved to offer the most 
interesting insights. Subsequent readings tended to reinforce these insights but did not 
provide transcripts that were of interest throughout. The exception was School B, in 
which I include two readings from one group (8-1 and B-2) and one reading from 
another group (8-3), which was chosen because of the richness of the children's 
reading. 
4: My role within the fieldwork 
48 The children's perceptions of my role 
My role was not and could not have been neutral. By going into the school and 
withdrawing the children, I changed the situation and created new contexts in which 
the children were encountering new experiences. The children did not previously 
know me and I did not become involved in classroom activities. It is important, 
therefore, to consider what the children considered my role to be and what they 
thought they were doing in reading with me. 
In both schools A and B, the children were used to additional adults working 
with groups to support the learning of English or to develop literacy skills. In 
addition, School B was used to frequent discussion of books, although not with such a 
focus on meaning and pictures. These schools had a less formal relationship between 
adults and children and I was able to allow the children to call me by my first name. 
Methodology 
Participation in my group was seen as a privilege, envied by other children and they 
therefore tried to please me. 
School C had few additional teachers and helpers and group discussion of a 
text was a new experience for them. I explained my interest in how children read 
certain books and they appeared to accept this, although it must have been quite 
puzzling for them. They became absorbed in the discussion and, at one point, where 
they were unsure of what had happened to Jack, they asked if I could return the 
following day to continue. It seems, therefore, that they came to regard the sessions as 
worthwhile in themselves. On another occasion, they referred to the fact that they had 
done a lot of work on The Tunnel, which implies some acceptance of the discussions 
as a part of the school routine. 
All the schools, therefore, regarded my visits as something different, and I had 
to remember Crago's warning on the effect of interpersonal contexts on children's 
readings and the fact that my interest and the use of the tape- recorder would set up a 
certain pattern in which their responses would be maximised (Crago 1990). However, 
since I was looking at possible readings, rather than regular reading habits, this was to 
my advantage. 
4b The impact of the intervention 
Since I was a participant in the group reading, with the same potential to influence the 
discussion as every other participant, my comments will have had some impact on at 
least some of the directions which these conversations took. In my interactions with 
the children I was aware of Wells's (1981) fmdings on the nature of the adult/child 
language interaction that is most productive, and I therefore aimed to allow the 
children to initiate conversation, being aware of the dangers of asking questions that 
did not relate to what they were thinking. The influence of my participation is seen 
most clearly in the transcripts of School A. This is largely because it was the fIrSt 
school in which I carried out my research and initially I was concerned to be 
supportive, flexible and exploratory. 
My role here was: 
Methodology 
a) to facilitate discussion and help overcome shyness. Sometimes I invited the group 
to relate their own experiences, which had the effect of moving them away from the 
text itself. At times, however, this involved them more fully and gave them the 
confidence to discuss the text. In Appendix 1, for example, the children say little until 
I ask them about their own families (A-I: 17ft). 
b) To support the children's English usage. My contributions to School A's 
discussions were influenced by the fact that they were at an early stage of learning 
English and it was necessary to support and encourage their spoken language. This 
can be seen in A-I: 91-93, where I put into words what I think one of the children is 
trying to say. 
c) To help clarify parts of the discussion for the transcript. I sometimes repeated their 
words in order to make them audible for the purpose of transcription. This is shown in 
A-2: (198-211) where I interpret the gestures with which one boy accompanies his 
narrative explanation. 
My role with all the groups: 
a) to listen and occasionally direct the conversation back to the text. This was 
necessary with young children in order to maintain interest and concentration. Group 
C, for instance, were less accustomed to close reading ofa text (C-2:67); 
b) to fmd out what they were thinking, and also what they were capable of thinking, 
in response to a text, or the zone of proximal development within which they 
understood the text. They themselves provided this zone for one another and it can be 
seen how meanings developed through discussion (B-3: 259-270). At other times I 
Question in order to fmd out what someone may have noticed or thought (C-2:132). It 
is interesting that where my suggestions or Questions do not relate to what the 
children are thinking, they often ignore or answer with a negative (B-2:127). 
Although I was a participant in the conversation I was aware of two particular 
dangers to the validity of the research. 
a) Firstly, putting words into their mouths, a possibility particularly with Group A 
where a balance had to be achieved between supporting and interpreting their English 
and presupposing their meanings. 
Methodology 
b) Secondly, of leading the discussion. It is worth noting that, where they are most 
involved, the children clearly lead the discussion (A-2: 152-206), (C-I: 23-40), (B-3: 
55-73). 
Having transcribed the discussions from Schools A and C and critically evaluated my 
own participation, I was able to take a less pedagogic role with School B, especially 
since they were a voluble group who needed less prompting or support. 
4c Ethical considerations 
In both the initial research design and in my interactions with the children, I was 
aware of the importance of ethical principles. This is a complex issue, of particular 
relevance to qualitative research where the material obtained is not entirely reducible 
to numbers and charts but based on holistic analyses. A balance has to be established 
between the researcher's quest for truth on the one hand and the rights of the subjects 
on the other hand. 
A fundamental ethical principle is that of obtaining informed consent from 
research subjects. Such issues are not always straightforward, however, as in 
Milgram's (1974) 'obedience to authority experiments' where informed consent 
would, by its nature, negate the results. A defmition of informed consent (Diener and 
Crandall 1978) includes four elements: competence, voluntarism, full information and 
comprehension, but these can be problematical when the research involves children. 
There is a necessity to obtain the consent of those adults responsible for the children. 
I therefore gained permission from the education authorities, the headteachers and the 
class teachers involved, giving full information on the purpose and intended 
procedures of my research. 
At a time of increasing sensitivity to children's welfare and rights it IS 
important also to obtain their approval: 
Our feeling is that children should be told as much as possible, even if some of 
them cannot understand the full explanation. Their age should not diminish 
their rights although their level of understanding must be taken into account in 
the explanations that are shared with them. 
(Fine and Sandstrom, 1988) 
Methodology 
In full agreement with the above statement, I obtained the consent of the children in 
my study, explaining in simple terms the nature of my research and the use of the tape 
recorder and ensuring that their participation was voluntary. 
Another ethical dimension of research is that of the subjects' welfare. It is important 
to set the right tone and not alienate or intimidate subjects, and research requires 
interpersonal skills of a high order. Hammersley and Atkinson (1983) point out that 
this involves drawing on the interpersonal strategies we use in everyday life as a basis 
for ethical practice in research; this is particularly relevant when working with young 
children who are in an asymmetrical relationship with the researcher. At all times, 
therefore, my concern was to ensure the children's well-being through a relaxed, 
conversational style of interaction, as outlined above. Researchers need to be aware, 
however, that their subjects are more likely unwittingly to reveal confidential 
information in a relaxed and friendly atmosphere. Overt observation can then become 
as potentially deceptive as covert observation. In the case of my research, in a more 
formal environment, Group C may have been more guarded about their feelings 
towards the gender issues within the book. 
It can be seen that ethical principles are not absolute and the welfare of individuals 
must be at the heart of ethical practice. Homan (1991) points out the potential dangers 
of an ethical code of practice in establishing what are considered to be the acceptable 
limits of professional behaviour, regarding this as likely to invite observation in the 
letter rather than the spirit. By ostensibly protecting the rights of the subject, a formal 
code may leave researchers free to pursue their own interests and thus 'close down 
rather than sustain the moral responsibilities of the individual researcher' (330) and 
he advocates, therefore, 'moral precepts in place of procedures' (331). It is this spirit 
that I have tried to emulate in the course of my research. 
5: Collection and analysis of the data 
Sa Data collection 
My research involved analysis of two kinds of data: the text selected for study with 
the children, and the text generated in the course of the research - the transcripts. All 
sessions were tape-recorded, although I was aware that this would have some 
influence on the interactions within the group and initially I allowed the children to 
Methodology 
listen to sections of the tape so that they would become used to it. A video recorder 
was not used as it would have served as a further distraction, although at times it 
would have been useful to indicate what the children were looking at. 
Additional material was collected in the fonn of notes of my observations and 
children's collaborative writing and pictures. These provided an extra dimension of 
infonnation to support what I had observed in the transcripts but cannot be regarded 
as triangulation since, as Mason (1996) points out, different methods of data 
collection will produce different versions or 'levels' of answer. Triangulation implies 
an objective reality which can be measured and my interest was in multi-layered 
interpretation. 
It was because of this that I decided not to interview parents, smce my 
understandings of the children's ways of making meaning of the text could not have 
been verified by such an approach. 
5b Transcription prineiples 
Transcription Symbols 
In transcribing the tapes, I had to make a series of decisions about the way in which I 
was going to represent what was on the tapes. Some questions were relatively minor, 
such as my choice of symbols to represent pauses or simultaneous speech and a key at 
the beginning of Appendix 1 explains the various symbols used in the transcripts. 
Since spoken language does not have the same punctuation and sentence structure as 
written language, I omitted punctuation other than question marks, but occasionally 
indicated noticeable emphasis of tone or voice by brief notes in parentheses or the use 
of exclamation marks. In this I made use of transcription principles used by Wells 
(1981 ). 
The differentiation of individual speakers 
I had to decide whether to indicate which child was speaking, since a difficulty I 
encountered at an early stage was that I was often unable to distinguish between the 
Methodology 
speech of the different children, particularly that of the Bangladeshi children. My aim 
was not to study and compare the readings of individuals, however, but to look at the 
responses of the group as a whole, and I decided not to initialise or number the 
contributions of individual children according to who was speaking, but to number 
the lines according to their position on the page. A new speaker's utterance always 
starts at the beginning of a new line and begins with a capital letter. 
Other questions arose during the research, such as gender differences. Where the 
contributor's gender is particularly relevant, such as when a girl admires Rose's pink 
slipper (C-2: 48-50), I comment on it in the analysis. A video recorder would need to 
be used in research specifically designed to analyse gender differences or where the 
identification of the child was important. 
Pauses and intonation 
The amount of detail to be included was another key decision. For the purpose of 
linguistic analysis, all pauses and exact intonational details are significant. Since my 
concern was not to analyse the children's language through a detailed discourse 
analysis approach, I judged that such detailed transcription would be inappropriate. 
However I did try to be as accurate as possible, since seemingly insignificant details 
could indicate what the children might be thinking or feeling. In addition, the speech 
of the Bangladeshi children was difficult to follow, especially in School A, as they 
spoke quietly and excitedly and their English pronunciation was still poor. Schools A 
and B also used their first language at moments of excitement, although this in itself 
had interpretative value. Absolute accuracy was therefore impossible. 
Speech patterns 
Closely related to this was the question of how I represented the speech patterns of 
the children. The children all had more or less strong accents. The English children 
used glottal stops, did not always pronounce fmal consonants and sometimes 
pronounced 'th' as 'f. They also used non-standard grammatical expressions (for 
example, 'we was', 'they done'). The Bangladeshi children habitually pronounced 
'th' as 'd' and their syntax was typical of children learning English as an additional 
language. There was confusion over the use of the personal pronoun 'he' and 'she,' 
Methodology 
for example, as well as incorrect forms of verb and tense. At times, the children's use 
of non-standard English indicated their level of involvement. School C's language, 
for example, became almost incoherent in their narrative explanation of the stone 
figure of Jack (C-2: 397-411). Since I did not wish to change what the children had 
said, I maintained any non-standard grammar in the transcripts but attempted to 
indicate intended pronunciation of particular sounds. This preserves the children's 
language patterns without compromising the legibility of the transcripts. 
Non-verbal responses 
Non-verbal information such as laughter, evident in the audiotapes or recorded in my 
notes, is indicated in 'stage direction'-style brackets, as are significant changes of 
tone such as whispering. 
Completeness of the transcripts 
I had to make another decision concerning completeness: whether to transcribe every 
word uttered by the children or to be selective. Strauss and Corbin (1990) suggest that 
early interviews should be transcribed in full while patterns are being established, but 
as theory develops, only those sections that relate to the evolving theory should be 
transcribed. I began by making rough synopses of each tape, including conversation 
and readings of other books and I then transcribed in detail the sections where the 
children were talking about this text. In practice this meant that the discussions of The 
Tunnel were transcribed in full with a few brief indicated omissions where the 
children moved completely away from the text. Only sessions which have been used 
in the final analysis in Chapter 4 have been included in the appendices. My notes on 
other readings have been used to inform my analyses of their readings of The Tunnel. 
Setting out the speKh and written text for analysis 
The arrangement of speech on the page has significance, since transcription is not 
neutral but 'a selective process selecting theoretical goals and defmitions' (Ocbs 
1979: 44). A method of verbal transcription that arranges speech like the script of a 
play may impose links between the conversational turns that may not be there. The 
transcript is, therefore, arranged in columns, with the children's utterances on the left 
Methodology 
- the side of the initiator - and mine on the right. This arrangement is also used by 
Wells (1981) and goes some way towards equalizing the role of the child and the 
adult and clarifies the links between the children's comments. I originally included 
the text of The Tunnel as it was read aloud within the transcripts, but then decided that 
there was unnecessary repetition and that this distracted from the clarity of the page. 
The text is therefore included on the back cover of the thesis with the pages numbered 
as in my analysis of the book. The reading of the text is indicated by reference to the 
appropriate page in italics. 
6: Data analysis 
Having transcribed the fieldwork sessions, I had to consider how best to analyse the 
data, comprising the picture-book - The Tunnel - and the transcripts of the children's 
readings of it. I needed a framework, therefore, that would enable me to analyse four 
elements: the verbal and the visual text of The Tunnel and the children's readings of 
both of these. I also needed a procedure that would enable me to integrate my reading 
of the published text and the readings generated by the text in the course of the 
research. My reading of the data would be interpretative in the sense that I was 
engaged in 'looking through and beyond the data' (Mason 1996: 109) to produce a 
multi-layered analysis. I was also engaged in interpretation of the children's 
interpretation so that my procedures had to be appropriate for looking at detail and 
complexity . 
Data analysis may be thought of as comprising three interrelated processes. 
Huberman and Miles (1994) refer to these as data reduction, data display and drawing 
conclusions, whereas Dey (1993) refers to them as describing, classifying and 
connecting. Wolcott's model (1994) was useful for my purpose. He refers frrst to 
description in which the researcher tells the story of the data; then to analysis in 
which the researcher carefully searches for themes and patterns: and fmally to 
interpretation, which he refers to as 'the threshold' at which the researcher transcends 
factual data and cautious analysis and begins to explain and interpret in a 'creative 
and freewheeling' manner (Wolcott 36). His model was useful to me as it has more 
flexibility than the other two, in that the three processes are not so clearly defmed and 
mutually exclusive but form 'the primary ingredients of qualitative research from 
Methodology 
which different balances can be struck' (Coffey and Atkinson 1996: 9). My research 
was predominantly textual criticism, in which the coding would be important but the 
processes of coding and interpretation would closely interlink, as explained below. 
It was of paramount importance to find or devise an appropriate coding 
system which would allow me to fmd patterns within the children's talk and which 
would relate these to the text of The Tunnel. It should have elements of what Strauss 
and Corbin (1990) refer to as 'open coding' in that it should allow me to use the 
patterns that emerge as a tool to think with, to expand on the data, to develop 
hypotheses and to speculate about the nature of reading itself. 
The researcher has a choice between devising a code or using an existing one, 
according to which will be the more appropriate tool to address the research question. 
I initially considered devising a coding system such as that used by Langer (1995), in 
which she sees four stages through which readers reconstruct, or envision, the world 
of the text. This, however, takes for granted a view of reading as response, an 
assumption that I needed to question. The categories were also too broad to allow for 
detailed line-by-line analysis and, unlike the ideas behind Strauss's open, speculative 
coding, such categories would limit speculation and possibly lead to simplistic 
conclusions. 
The semiotic, connotative codes devised by Barthes seemed more appropriate. 
I have already discussed in Chapter 1 why his theories of reading were helpful in 
considering how we read an open, plural text such as The Tunnel. In SIZ, his analysis 
of Balzac's Sarrasine (1993), Barthes has given five major narrative codes (outlined 
in Chapter 1). Through these codes, texts are actualised in readers who rewrite the 
text, drawing on their individual and cultural subjectivities in the process. It was thus 
an appropriate framework through which to address the research question on the use 
and transformation of culture in the reading process. 
Barthes emphasises the non-arbitrary nature of the codes: 'not to manifest a 
structure but to produce a structuration' (1993: 20). His is not a paradigmatic system 
of coding, but 'a perspective of quotations, a mirage of structures' (ibid.). Barthes's 
codes can be applied to the narratives in both written and visual texts, although it is 
important to consider the differences between them: 'Pictorial signs differ from verbal 
signs because each belongs to a different symbol system, and signifies m ways 
Methodology 
characteristic of the system' (Benson 1986: 136). Visual images are presented 
through graphic codes, such as those outlined by Moebius (1986), which constitute 
the visual grammar referred to in Chapter 1. Moebius acknowledges that he has used 
Barthes's notion of the code as 'a perspective of quotations' and therefore his codes 
offer an appropriate tool for analysis of the pictures. In the analysis of the written text 
of The Tunnel, I use the same system as in Barthes's SlZ, where each unit of meaning, 
or lexia, is starred and labelled according to its codes, since lexias may be multi-
coded. I then analyse the pictures, fIrst using Barthes's codes, and then Moebius's 
graphic codes. The two forms of semiotic coding of the pictures - narrative and 
graphic - are set out in a table, thus demonstrating the presentational process through 
which the former fmds shape in the latter. This provides a framework, or template, 
against which the children's readings can be compared. In imposing such a 
framework, however, I am aware of the danger of reducing both verbal and visual 
texts to a rigid system, which may conceal the fluid and tentative nature of Barthes' s 
and Moebius's presentational codes. 
I read and reread the transcripts of the children's readings, marking where 
they appeared to comment on each code and, where possible, noting where they have 
been guided by the graphic codes. The codes' flexibility was an advantage in that the 
process had to be interpretative, as it was not always possible to be certain what the 
children were referring to, and it allowed me to make a line-by-line analysis, relating 
their readings closely to the text. I felt that this coding system was one that would 
allow me to break the data apart in a way that would lead to a rearrangement of the 
material and to further questions about the data (Strauss 1987). 
Data display is an important part of this process. It should be in a form that 
will make the data accessible for further reading and explanation, and that will also 
reveal any negative fmdings that may have signifIcance for the research question. 
According to Tesch (1990), the process of arranging material is one of 
decontextualisation and recontextualisation. Accordingly, data are fIrst sorted or 
coded according to concepts or 'pools of meaning' generated in the course of the 
research, and then re-sorted or put together again in meaningful categories. An 
effective indexing system for this re-sorting must relate to those kinds of phenomena 
represented by the initial categories and to the kind of explanatory logic I would need 
Methodology 
to apply in my analysis (Mason 1996). Since my categories are primarily based on 
interpretative readings, I needed a system that would allow me to understand detailed 
and intricate material and relate this to the complex processes of reading. 
My choice was between a cross-sectional or non cross-sectional indexing 
system. The initial decision was to use the latter because of its usefulness for 
understanding complex and interwoven sections of data, through analysis and 
comparison of holistic units. The system is often used for case studies, and seemed to 
be appropriate for my close analysis. Accordingly I selected sections of each 
transcript relating to certain pages of the text, for example, all the schools' readings of 
the picture of Rose in bed. These were divided into short chunks in which I looked at 
the interplay of all the codes and then compared them across schools. This was a 
useful exercise since it helped me to look closely at the interrelationship of all 
Barthes's codes in the children's readings, and also raised other relevant questions 
such as the differences between the first and second readings of a text. 
The data in the units selected, however, were too dense to reveal patterns 
which could lead to useful analysis or comparison, and to use this system for all the 
transcript material would have been a time-consuming task, leading to an unwieldy 
display. The data needed to be further broken down or decontextualised in order to 
become a useful tool and I decided to use a cross-sectional system, arranging my 
material as categorically indexed slices. This is particularly useful for text-based data, 
where it can provide a systematic overview and help the researcher in 'conceptual, 
analytic and theoretical thinking' (Mason 1996: 118). I grouped Barthes's codes into 
proairetic/henneneutic and semic/symbolic/cultural. I worked systematically through 
the transcripts, noting each school's responses to these codes page by page, with a 
summary comparison at the end of an appropriate section of text. 
My coding system involved close reading and re-reading of the transcripts 
and, as already mentioned, the process of using Barthes' s codes was itself 
interpretative. Coding and analysis was thus cyclical, each infonning the other. 
Certain patterns began to emerge in the course of first transcribing and then coding 
the material: these intuitive interpretations were important but the systematic indexing 
was necessary to prevent over-reliance on intuition. 
Methodology 
CODclusioD 
In this chapter I have shown how the fieldwork was carried out and why this approach 
was deemed to be appropriate. The following four chapters present the fmdings of 
this fieldwork and the codes are more fully discussed in the context of this analysis 
and that of the school. 
Data Analysis: The context of the fieldwork 
Data Analysis 
Before analysing the transcripts, the chapter gives a more detailed account of the 
literacy practices of the children in the three schools. This provides a context for the 
analysis and also illuminates the children's readings of The Tunnel. I then use 
Barthes's semiotic narrative codes and Moebius's graphic codes to analyse selected 
pages of The Tunnel. This provides a possible reading for comparison with those of 
the children. Finally I analyse the transcripts of children's reading, grouping together 
responses to the proairetic and henneneutic codes; then to the semic, symbolic and 
cultural codes. 
1: The context of the fieldwork 
School A 
The school was in its second tenn of opening. Its pupils were drawn almost entirely 
from the Bangladeshi community; many of them had no previous experience of 
school in England and were at an early stage of learning English. The school was 
situated near the Mile End Road and the busy Whitechapel market. Most of the 
children came from nearby blocks of flats, but the streets around the school were 
early Victorian terraced houses similar to those opposite the illustration of Rose in 
The Tunnel as she reads in the window. 
The children were all born in Bangladesh and had relatives or older siblings 
still there. They were able to talk about their journey to England and the new clothes 
bought for the occasion. They came from Sylhet, a thickly wooded region in the 
North East of the country, where most of the families are farmers. They spoke with 
Data Analysis: The context of the fieldwork 
reading each line aloud and the children repeating it. Gregory shows that there is a 
basic pattern to Bengali classes of 'Demonstration, Repetition, Practice, Text' (43). 
The demonstration followed by repetition extends to children reading aloud as 
individuals. She gives the example of a Bangladeshi girl helping her younger sister 
read her English book. She hears her read and provides the correct word when 
necessary, which is repeated by the younger sister who then reads on. Questions are 
asked at the end to ascertain learning and comprehension: there is no reference to the 
pictures or attempt to relate the text to the child's own experience. This is in contrast 
to the English school attended by the girl, in which enjoyment in reading is very 
important. 
The classroom in these children's English school is attractively arranged with 
a well-stocked book area and other opportunities to read and write. The success of 
this approach is evident in the children's enthusiasm for books as they take me into 
their classroom and show me the books. Their teacher is from New Zealand; she uses 
Big Books for whole-class reading, and teaches writing through modelling it and 
making their own Big Books. Letter sounds and phonic patterns are taught, usually 
based on the text they have been reading together. In addition the school uses the 
Oxford Reading Tree for individual reading practice and children are encouraged to 
take home both 'scheme' and picture-books. There is an emphasis on reading stories 
aloud to the children and there are Bangladeshi teachers and helpers who are able to 
tell stories in the children's home language. 
School B 
This is a well-established school near Brick Lane, the heart of the Bangladeshi 
community in Tower Hamlets. The children with whom I worked were all born in 
England and the school reports that many parents also attended the same school. 
There is a happy atmosphere. The school has always cultivated strong links with the 
community and teachers are accustomed to visit the children at home informally for 
birthday parties or to see a new baby, while parents visit school to learn English in the 
attached community centre or to talk to one another in the parents' room. 
Although this is a long established Muslim community it is also strictly 
orthodox. As I walked towards the school I noticed how many women are now fully 
Data Analysis: The context of the fieldwork 
veiled and the school is concerned at the number of older girls who are being 
prepared for an ananged marriage in Bangladesh. During one of my sessions a young 
woman who was a voluntary helper at the school brought her prayer mat into the 
room and quietly prayed in one corner: apart from informing me what she was doing, 
the children paid no attention to her. 
Despite their strict religious upbringing, these particular children are causing 
concern to their families by their interest in Western culture, their reluctance to do 
their Bengali or English homework, and their liveliness at home and at school. They 
enjoy English books and videos but screwed up their faces at books with 'Indian' 
characters, claiming to only enjoy books about white people. They referred to English 
folk stories they had at home, as well as Walt Disney films and accompanying books. 
Their favourite was AI-Addin. As I read to them they always wanted more books, 
asking me to 'bring hundreds'. 
Their school has a long tradition of interest in literacy teaching, and for many 
years worked closely with the Centre for Language in Primary Education (CLPE), 
being a pioneer school for teaching reading through literature and encouraging a 
'developmental' approach to writing. In addition they had a 'parents as authors' 
project in which parents were encouraged to write about their own experiences for 
their children and use the school's reprographic facilities to publish these. The project 
became so successful that the books were later professionally published as 'parallel' 
texts in English and Bengali. Although it is no longer possible to continue the project, 
a legacy of interest in book-making remains, and attractive home-made children's 
books can be seen in classrooms and libraries. 
In this class, much of the literacy and cross-curricular work is carried out 
through particular picture-books: they were working with The Very Hungry 
Caterpillar during the term in which I visited the school and paintings and writing 
from the books were on the walls. Although the school regards literature and picture-
books as central to literacy development, a greater emphasis was now given to 
structured teaching of phonics and the use of selected reading schemes such as the 
Cambridge Reading Scheme. 
The school presents a lively environment with displays of children's art and 
English and Bengali writing on the walls. Bangladeshi teachers, helpers and friends 
Data Analysis: The context of the fieldwork 
support and enhance classroom teaching and drama and music projects are in 
evidence. 
School C 
This is a church school in a rural area of the Weald, a thickly-wooded area of East 
Sussex. The woods nearby where the children play remind me of the forest in The 
Tunnel with ancient beech trees and areas of coppiced chestnuts. It is a small school 
with only three classes and a number of children come from outside the village, 
attracted by the school's informality and family atmosphere. There are also local 
children, some of whose families have lived in the village for generations. Unlike the 
Bangladeshi families, who were united by a common religion which influenced every 
aspect of their lives, these children were a more disparate group, from families of 
different social classes and with diverse experiences and family structures. 
The class teacher had been in the school for many years. A teacher of great 
warmth and charm, she was loved by the children and their parents and the children in 
her class were very happy and confident. There were noticeably fewer books than in 
the London schools, both in the classroom and in the small school library. In these 
days before the introduction of the Literacy Strategy, reading was taught through 
individualised reading schemes, including Oxford Reading Tree and Ginn 360. 
Children were expected to practise their reading at home and both parents and teacher 
filled in a form on their progress. Most comments related to phonics and word 
recognition. 
The children talked about books at home. They had anthologies of familiar 
folk stories and pop-up books and one girl particularly liked Peter Rabbit which her 
father read to her each night. The boys liked information texts but one boy strongly 
disliked books and reading. 
Data Analysis: Semiotic analysis of selected pages 
2: Semiotic analysis of selected pages from 'The Tunnel' 
This section analyses three double-pages: Jack and Rose's bedrooms; Rose entering 
the forest and the double-page spread of the forest. I selected these pages as 
comparisons can be made between Rose's bedroom and the forest and the three 
pictures of the forest form a sequence. 
On each page I first analyse the written text, dividing it into lexias. According 
to Barthes, a lexia may be one word or a paragraph. He gives no guiding principles 
for deciding on the boundaries of the units, describing the process as 'arbitrary in the 
extreme' and 'a matter of convenience' (Barthes 1974: 13). They are what readers 
judge to be significant moments in the narrative where the hidden voices of the five 
connotative codes may be observed. I have followed Barthes' s system of starring each 
lexia to show which codes seem to be operating, using the following abbreviations: 
* ACT - Proairetic 
* HER-
*SYM-
*SEM-
*REF -
Hermeneutic 
Symbolic 
Semic 
Cu Ita ral 
I then use the semiotic codes to analyse the pictures as a table in two columns. In the 
left-hand column I list the elements which relate to each of Barthes' s narrative codes; 
in the right-hand column I do so in terms of Moebius's five graphic codes through 
which the narrative codes are presented. The lists do not claim to be exhaustive since 
the process of such coding is non-arbitrary. The table is, however, a framework that 
provides an indication of possibilities for analysis of the children's responses. I follow 
the coding with a commentary that gives my own reading based on the codes, bearing 
in mind that this is a possible reading, tentative in nature: 'such a reading as this is 
never complete' (Moebius 1986: 158). 
Page 5 - The Verbal Text - Semiotic Narrative Codes At night he slept soundly in 
his room, undisturbed by dreams. But she would lie awake, listening to the noises of 
the night. * SYM. There is an antithesis between the two children: she is aware of 
potential dangers, her imagination stimulated by her books; he has a limited inner 
imaginative world and is untroubled, therefore, by dreams.  REF. The children 
Data Analysis: Semiotic analysis of selected pages 
have separate rooms. Sometimes he crept into her room to frighten her, for he knew 
she was afraid of the dark.  SYM. His habitual actions. *Overcoming her fears is a 
theme of the book and the relationship between them is later reversed. *  HERM. 
We anticipate what he may do to her later. 
Page 6 
Narrative codes Graphic codes 
Proairetic Position and size: Jack is in bed in the 
Hermeneutic: the fact that it is mid small left-hand picture. In the right-hand 
action raises questions, as do the shoes picture, Rose is small and vulnerable and 
and cord under the bed. dwarfed by the shapes around her. Jack 
Semic: the details of the bedrooms: e.g. creeps in from right to left. Beyond him 
Jack's pine bed and the stars, her old on the left is the passage. The Crane 
Data Analysis: Semiotic analysis of selected pages 
fashioned bedroom furniture, the floral picture is high - but Jack is low on the 
wallpaper and pastel colours of her page. 
bedclothes, the fairy tale motifs and her Frame: in the left-hand picture Jack is 
open book and the toy rabbit, the soles of double- framed. In the right-hand picture 
the shoes there are frames within frame of the 
picture and book. Jack is framed by the 
open door. 
Perspective: converging lines of door, 
Svmbolic: the references to Red Riding rug and bed make Jack the focal point. 
Hood, the red cloak, the picture on the Parallel lines of walls, wardrobe, bed and 
wall, Jack's animal mask, the rug direct attention back to the 
Gingerbread House, the outside passage, Gingerbread House and the picture. Jack 
the open book. and Rose follow this perspective so that 
Cultural: the bedroom furnishing, the they are at an oblique angle and detached 
intertextual references to fairy stories from the viewer. We look down on the 
and Walter Crane. children. 
Commentary 
Colour: her room is in soft colours. 
There is the red of the cloak, the passage 
and on Jack's clothes. Jack is positioned 
against the red carpet and is illuminated 
by the light in the passage. 
Line: straight lines of furniture contrast 
with capillarity on wardrobe and patterns 
on duvet and wallpaper 
Although the written text gives few details, an element of suspense is developed 
through iterative time in which Jack habitually frightens his sister, so that we expect 
worse to follow. The verbal text anticipates Rose's adventure on the other side of the 
tunnel where she must encounter those fears that now keep her awake. The ftrst 
sentence refers to Jack and the second to Rose, starting with the conjunction 'but' 
Data Analysis: Semiotic analysis of selected pages 
which emphasises the contrast between the two children. The third sentence is 
balanced between them. This contrast or antithesis between the genders is a theme of 
the book and a major symbolic code. The written text is simple, leaving gaps for the 
pictures to fill, such as the ways in which Jack teased his sister and those things which 
frightened her in the dark. 
The contrast between the children is shown clearly in the two pictures, where 
on one page Jack can be seen smiling contentedly in his sleep, while on the opposite 
page Rose lies fearfully in bed. Jack is shown in mid-action so that we anticipate what 
will happen next. The semic codes supply information of the details of the bedrooms, 
Rose's old-fashioned wardrobe, bed and overhead light contrasting with Jack's 
modem pine bed and fluorescent stars on the wall. The soft colours of the bedroom 
reveal Rose's femininity and establish a rather stereotyped gender role which Rose 
will break later in the book. Her tastes and interest in fairy tales are revealed by the 
picture on the wall, the Gingerbread House and the open book. These are also part of 
the symbolic code. They are all examples of interiority or what Stewart calls 'centre 
within centre' (1993: 61) and they indicate the journey into interiority that Rose must 
make. As such, they contrast with the stars in Jack's bedroom, which may indicate his 
restlessness and desire to explore and look outwards rather than inwards. The 
intertextual references to Hansel and Gretel and Red Riding Hood are also symbolic 
in that they refer to stories about growing up and becoming independent. Like Max's 
wolf suit in Where the Wild Things Are, Jack's wolf mask may reveal his inner anger 
and frustration as well as the predatory form this anger takes. The shoes under the bed 
are interesting. It is likely that they indicate Rose's fear of someone under the bed and 
as such are semic, but they also recur throughout the book which is about a journey 
and as such may be symbolic. 
The narrative codes are presented through the graphic codes. Jack is smiling in 
his sleep in the left-hand picture in contrast to Rose on the right. He is, therefore, in 
the position of a character, who 'is likely to be in a more secure, albeit potentially 
confmed space' (Moebius 149). The focal point of the right-hand picture is Jack 
crawling in through the open door. Like Max in Where the Wild Things Are, Jack's 
movement here is from right to left which visually reflects a discord in his emotions, 
since we are culturally accustomed to seeing movement from left to right. The reader 
Data Analysis: Semiotic analysis of selected pages 
sees him in his mask before Rose does; she can only see his shadow and one hand. 
The lines of the rug, the bed and the open door all converge on this point of menace, 
but also lead the viewer's gaze back to the picture on the wall and the Gingerbread 
House which are at the centre of the picture. 
We look down on the children, thus reducing their status, and Rose's 
vulnerability is emphasised by her small size so that she is dwarfed by the large bed 
and wardrobe. These are both sources of hidden fear, indicated by the shoes and cord 
under the bed and the ghostly shirtsleeve protruding from the wardrobe door. Rose 
looks very lonely in her large bed, even with her toy rabbit beside her. The Walter 
Crane picture is above the bed, and there is a contrast between the suave wolf and 
bold Red Riding Hood of popular conception and the bullying boy and frightened girl 
of reality. The soft colours of her room contrast with the bright red carpet outside in 
the brightly lit hall which may indicate both security and a source of potential danger. 
As in Waber's Ira Sleeps Over pages 6-7 (Moebius 1986: 154), there are two 
kinds of capillarity within the bedroom - the dense lines of the grain of the wood on 
the wardrobe and the door - both sources of fear - and the rounded, organic squiggles 
on the duvet cover and the wallpaper, appropriate for Rose's personality and outlook 
on life. The use of capillarity contributes to the sense of nervous energy within the 
room. 
Data Analysis: Semiotic analysis of selected pages 
Page 17 - The Verbal Text Semiotic - Narrative Codes 
At the other end she found herself in a quiet wood  S YM. The contrast with the 
urban environment at the other end of the tunnel. There was no sign of her brother. 
HERM. The mystery as to his whereabouts. But the wood soon turned into a dark 
forest. * SYM. Her journey into her own interiority. She thought about wolves and 
giants and Witches,  SYM. What is in her imagination . REF. References to folk-
tale dangers. and wanted to turn back, but she could not - for what would become of 
her brother if she did? SEM. Her natural timidity. ** HERM. What has happened to 
her brother? By now she was very frightened and she began to run, faster and 
faster ... *HERM. Unfinished sentence produces suspense . ACT. She runs into the 
forest. 
Data Analysis: Semiotic analysis of selected pages 
Narrative codes 
Proairetic: -
Graphic codes 
Position and size: she is in the front 
Hermeneutic: the fIre, axe, rope etc. raise centre of the picture, seen from closer 
questions; the shapes in the trees suggest range so that she appears to be larger. 
danger. Frame: single framed. 
Semic: her hands are by her side and she Perspective: a side view so that reader 
walks more purposefully. watches her; no horizon. 
Symbolic: the shapes in the trees suggest Colour: sombre green and brown 
the books she reads; other monsters contrast with red fIre and light green 
reflect her inner tunnoil; the fIre. 
Cultural: intertextual references to 
Hansel and Gretel; Jack and the 
Beanstalk and Red Riding Hood. 
Commentary 
beanstalk and white mist in the 
background. 
Line: grotesque curving shapes of trees; 
squiggly lines of bark and grass. 
Rose is now walking more quickly and purposefully; one hand is swinging at her side 
and her head is no longer down. She is now seen from closer up in the centre of the 
picture, and therefore appears larger. The woods have become a forest of old trees, 
gnarled and knotted, in which Rose's fears are beginning to take external form. A tree 
that looks like a beanstalk can be seen in the background, as well as the giant's club 
that featured on the page that Rose was reading in the waste ground. Behind a tree is 
the wolrs snout, mouth open, while Red Riding Hood's basket and the woodcutter's 
axe are on the ground. The fire in the background comes from Browne's version of 
Hansel and Gretel and, in Jungian terms, may signify death and rebirth. A piece of 
rope, recalling the rope under the bed, hangs from what looks like a giant thumb. The 
grotesque shapes of the trees are such that different readers will see different things, 
but owls can be seen and gargoyle-like heads and, at the base of the nearest tree, a 
friendly duck's head. The picture raises questions such as who the axe belongs to, 
who lit the fIre, and what is the boarded-up hole at the base of one of the trees. 
Data Analysis: Semiotic analysis of selected pages 
No horizon can be seen, which adds to the sense of danger. The colours are 
now sombre, although dark green predominates. 
Pages 19-20 
Data Analysis: Semiotic analysis of selected pages 
Narrative codes 
Proairetic: she is running. 
Hermeneutic: artefacts such as the 
gravestone, the house and the tree-prop 
Graphic codes 
Position and size: she is on the right of 
the picture, looking back. She is small in 
comparison with the trees and the 
raise questions; the shapes in the trees monsters - the wolf looms over her. 
(the bear, the boar, the wolf) menace her. Frame: none. 
Other suggested shapes - eyes, owls etc. Perspective: the creatures' direction of 
Semic: her hair is loose and her face 
frightened. 
Symbolic: as above: the shapes in the 
trees suggest the books she reads and 
other nameless fears; the house and the 
wolf refer to her bedroom. The house 
and the forest are archetypal images. 
Cultural: intertextual references to 
Hansel and Gretel, Jack and the 
Beanstalk and Red Riding Hood. 
Commentary 
gaze directs us across the page to Rose 
and emphasises her flight; the branches 
of the trees form an arch across the 
picture directing attention to the house; 
the bear is at an oblique angle so that he 
appears to lunge towards the reader; no 
horizon. 
Colour: sombre green and brown, lighter 
on the left; darker in the distance and 
around the house. 
Line: contorted, writhing shapes of 
branches; squiggly lines of bark and 
grass; streaked lines to denote flight. 
Rose is now on the right-hand side of the picture, running from the terrors of the 
forest. Her hair has now come loose from its neat bobble and streaks of colour 
indicate her speed and her panic. Her head is up and she looks back towards the 
creatures that pursue her. What was a lurking threat in the previous picture now 
becomes actuality as the wolf from the Crane picture looms menacingly over her, and 
the bear and the boar appear to pursue her, the sawn-off arms of the bear making him 
look even more threatening. The branches of the trees form a vector across the 
picture, emphasising flight and pursuit. Rose has now taken the place of Red Riding 
Hood in the Crane picture but she is running away. In the distance can be seen a 
Data AnDlysis: Semiotic Q1IQlysis of selected pages 
cottage like Rose's bedside lamp and in a similar position in the picture. The curtains 
make the shape ofa witch's hat in the window. The branches fonn an arch that directs 
our attention towards the cottage and the red roof causes it to shine through the trees. 
The picture is full of menacing suggestions such as the stone like a gravestone 
and the thumb on the tree prop that slightly dents the branch. As in the previous 
picture there are creatures to be found - owls, devilish heads, a gentle gorilla and a 
blackbird. The reader is involved in the scene by the open arch of branches facing us, 
the movement of the bear towards us and the fact that there is no frame. This is the 
only unframed picture in the book and shows how Rose's inner world has taken over; 
she has entered the world of the book and the picture but the house remains as another 
'within.' The colours are dark and gloomy and the house is in darkness but some light 
falls on the trees from the left. No leaves can be seen, only the gnarled trunks and 
branches of ancient trees. 
Data Analysis: Response to the proairetic and hermeneutic codes 
3: Response to the proairetic and hermeneutic codes 
I now analyse the transcripts, looking at how the children have responded to Barthes' s 
codes, also noting, where possible, in what ways they may have been guided by the 
graphic codes. In looking at Barthes's codes separately, it is necessary to remember 
that they are closely interrelated and that one feature of the text may be multi-coded. 
The cord under Rose's bed, for instance, may be seen as semic in that it is part of her 
clothing, as symbolic in that it reflects her inner fears, and as hermeneutic in that it is 
ambiguous and builds up suspense. It is also cultural as it is probably a dressing gown 
cord. Although there is no hierarchy of codes I begin with the hermeneutic, the first 
on Barthes' s list. I consider it in conjunction with the proairetic since these codes 
form an appropriate pair, one looking forward and the other backward. The proairetic 
is the code of the sequence of actions from beginning to end that take their 
significance from the story's closure. The hermeneutic however, is the code which 
raises questions and makes us want to read on, based on our need to search for 
resolution. Barthes defmes it as the structuring device through which enigmas are 
'distinguished, suggested, formulated held in response, and fmally disclosed' (Barthes 
1974: 19). Since The Tunnel is a book of unresolved enigmas, the code is very strong 
in this text, indeed the title-page itself, with the detail from La Tempesta, is an 
example of such an enigma. The feeling of mystery and unresolved puzzles pervades 
the book, from the witch's hat and cat in the windows opposite Rose, to the figures in 
the forest and the stone figure of Jack. The hermeneutic code builds up to some sort 
of resolution, as the pictures become increasingly frightening and mysterious, but an 
explanation is never given, although the reconciliation between the children and the 
meal ready for them provides a traditional ending and sense of closure. There is a 
sense, therefore, in which the hermeneutic permeates the text but the proairetic is 
teasingly withheld. 
Looking at how the children respond to the hermeneutic code, I include their 
questions and predictions as well as their sense of danger and suspense. For the 
proairetic code I note where they comment on the narrative action but also where they 
supply their own narratives. Where an entry is left blank the children made no verbal 
response. 
Data Analysis: Response to the proairetic and hermeneutic codes 
Cover; endpaper; title-page 
A-I Their whispers when they look at the cover suggest anticipation of possible 
danger. 
A-2 -
8-2 They predict that it will be nice. 
8-2 -
C-I One boy predicts that there will be books on every page: Yeah there's going to 
be books on every page I think (3-4). He is prepared to be tentative in his prediction. 
Pages 3-4 
Pages 5-6 
A-I Their awareness of the tensions within the scene are shown by the repetition 
of the comment it's very dangerous (71-72). 
A-2 Before they read the book again, they turn to this page and ask why Jack is 
coming into the bedroom (1) and repeat that it is dangerous (2). They also exclaim at 
the figure of Jack Look at the monster (14-15), asking where are its eyes and also 
where Jack is (16-17). This suggests that they are trying to make sense of the scene as 
a story and are looking for the proairetic. 
8-2 They ask questions about the figure in a mask: Who is he? (13) Is he a boy? Is 
he a boy? (15) and they want to know what is under the bed (24-28). 
B-3 They question which one is Jack (47). 
Data Analysis: Response to the proairetic and hermeneutic codes 
Pages 7-8 
A-I They want to know why the children quarrel (98) and appear to question 
where they are going (99 -100). They are making sense of the story and what is 
happening. 
A-2 They ask about Jack's threatening gesture to his sister: Look at him Why? 
What is doing? (63-65). They are still working out what is happening. As I read the 
next page, they continue to comment that she has walked with her brother (76). 
8-2 They wonder where the mother is: Heather is the boy and girl alone with us 
(sic) Mum? (36-37). 
Summary Comment 
It is perhaps not surprising that there is little response to these codes, since the written 
text refers to iterative time rather than completed actions. My own coding of these 
pages indicates that the semic and symbolic codes predominate in the early 
illustrations, which give infonnation before the action begins. The henneneutic is 
present, however, on the title-page and in the witch's hat and cat in the windows 
opposite and I would have expected some of the children to comment on these. Since 
there are ambiguities in the picture on page 6, such as what is under the bed, and there 
is also a sense of something about to happen as Jack creeps into the bedroom, it is 
also surprising that none of the children wonder what will happen next. Group A 
express most sense of danger here in their reaction to Jack and the 'snake' under the 
bed. They try to work out what is happening and also show some curiosity as to 
where the children are going when their mother sends them out together. Group 8 
also want to work out what is happening when Jack creeps in. 
Data Analysis: Response to the proairetic and hermeneutic codes 
Pages 9-10 
A-I They question where Jack is going to explore: What is going? His home He's 
going to park? (101- 102), thus responding to the hermeneutic code in the written 
text. 
B-1 They look at the shoe sticking out from the car seat and together they 
construct a narrative explanation, amending it as they go. First they think they see a 
man: One man is there look the feet (43). They look at the marks on the wall and 
attribute them to a fire (47-48) and they then conjecture that the shoe belongs to a boy 
who died in the fire (49-52): That must be a short burn and a boy was in here and he 
died in the fire because of his shoes (49-51). They then change their minds with a 
clear No (53) and tell a story about a boy who was in a shop when a car went into the 
shop: ran him over and burst into flame: and the boy was at the shop and the tyre 
went over him and then he then the fire came (55-57). They refer to the pink 
discolouration on the wall to support their theory: Look at the fire the fire wall (58). 
They do not comment on the written text. 
B-2 They return to this picture when they look at page 18 and again construct an 
explanation which links both ends of the tunnel (see commentary 17-18). 
B-3 The boy who has previously read the book continues to link the two ends of 
the tunnel in seeking an explanation for who is dead (149-162). Shall I show you 
who's dead? (turns to page 18) who made thisfire? He's dead here he made thatfire? 
(153-154). The mask makes them think that somebody else is also there, presumably 
dead (159-160). 
Summary Comment 
The only group to respond to these codes in the written text is Group A as they 
question where Jack is going to explore. The sole of the shoe seen under the car seat 
is a puzzle, and the broken objects, including a mask and a dummy leg, give a feeling 
of something having happened here and this has stimulated Group B to supply their 
Data Analysis: Response to the proairetic and hermeneutic codes 
own narrative explanation. Thus it is the withholding of an explanation to the puzzle 
that stimulates their own narratives. 
Pages 11-12 
A-I There is an unfmished comment on where Jack is going (l08). 
A-2 They add Or snake or dragon (85, 86) and they affmn that Jack is going down 
the tunnel: He's going there (93). 
B-1 They comment You're reading the scary part (62). 
C-2 This page makes them remember and reconsider the stone figure of Jack later 
in the book and they produce a brief narrative explanation in which Jack is not that 
figure. Their meaning is unclear but they may be saying that someone took an axe and 
chopped down the trees and got turned to stone (214-220) and there was just one 
person they got turned to stone far for away from the brother and um just stayed like 
that Ever since (216-220). There is a fmnness about the last two words that 
disassociates the stone figure from Jack. 
Pages 13-14 
A-I In response to my question they believe that there may be goblins or dragons 
down the tunnel. They have thus used Rose's words on the previous page to anticipate 
danger. There is a brief reference to a cat (117) which may refer to the witch in the 
open book or may be a memory of the previous cat-like shape in the window of the 
house opposite Rose (page 4). 
B-3 They comment on the fact that she goes into the tunnel, despite her fears: 
She's scared and she's going in there (184). 
Data Analysis: Response to the proairetic and hermeneutic codes 
Pages 15-16 
B-3 They have to take torch light (185). 
Summary Comment 
Rose and Jack leave the constraints of their own environment in these pages, and 
Rose ceases to be a passive victim but overcomes her fears to follow her brother. 
80th codes work through the combination of verbal and visual text. On page 11, for 
example, suspense is developed through the dialogue as Rose voices her fears, but it 
is the picture that shows lack's action in going into the tunnel. The sight of the dark 
tunnel and the way in which both children in tum crawl away from the reader further 
builds up suspense as does the voicing of Rose's fears on page 13 and her passage 
through the tunnel on page 16. Nevertheless the children say surprisingly little that 
relates to these codes even on the fIrst reading, and although the text builds on fears 
and expectations about what may be at the other end of the tunnel, this is not reflected 
in what they say. The clearest response to the hermeneutic is 8-1 's reference to this as 
'scary' but B-3 also recognise the fact that Rose is overcoming her fears to go down 
the tunnel and Group A are aware of possible dangers. It is possible that they do not 
want to stop and talk about these pages because they are responding to the 
hermeneutic, and want to read on and fmd out what is at the other end of the tunnel. 
It is not clear what calls forth C-2's story but it is an example of the backward 
movement of the proairetic: they are giving his action new signifIcance in the light of 
what they know happens later. Their explanation is interesting because it differs from 
their earlier summary of the book (C-2: 1-12) in which they show an understanding of 
the narrative sequence and the fact that it was Jack who was turned to stone and came 
back to life when Rose hugged him. 
Data Analysis: Response to the proairetic and hermeneutic codes 
Pages 17-19 
A-I Their sense of the story is shown by the comments on Rose's journey: He's 
coming to the - (124) and their observation that her brother is not there: He not 
coming (128). This observation relates to the written text and later they ask where he 
is (157). A sense of danger is shown by their hushed voices: Ssh (126) and the 
repetition of the word monsters (130, 132, 145). 
A-2 The reading is noticeable for the intensity with which they look at the pictures 
with a real sense of danger, thus responding to the hermeneutic. They are particularly 
horrified by the enormous thumb, which they associate with the witch: And look at 
hands Witch's hands and hands (119-120): Very very dangerous (124). 
B-1 They continue the narrative explanation started in regard to pages 9-10 and 
make links between the woodcutter, the fire and the axe, and the waste ground at the 
other end of the tunnel (66-73). They surmise that a man 'stick' (stabbed?) the 
woodcutter, or perhaps Rose's brother, and then took him through the tunnel to the 
waste ground and burned him: Maybe this one a man was in here and then he stick 
the woodcutter and no his brother And then he put the fire and then he put it in here 
(points to the waste ground) and then he burned here (66-70). This explanation would 
account for what they see as signs of fire on the waste ground. 
B-2 The fire again produces a narrative explanation (44-54), in which the person 
who lives in the forest is able to open the tunnel with the fire or with a magic thing: 
who live here open the tunnel with the fire he can er he's got a magic thing (51-54). 
This narrative addresses the sense of unseen presence in the forest as well as the 
boarded hole under the tree and the mask on the waste ground. 
B-3 The first thing they look at is the thumb and the length of string and their 
immediate reaction is that someone has put it there to kill Rose (193-195). They 
develop this idea to show that they would know she would be going that way and they 
would use the rope to tie up her feet and then hoist her up into the trees: if they put it 
round her feet and she would know she's going this way And they'll tie it and get it up 
(205-208). They believe that Jack needed to escape from the dangers of that place so 
he went through the barred hole at the foot of the tree, leaving the basket behind: 
Data Analysis: Response to the proairetic and hermeneutic codes 
Yeah because he had to get out of this (199). He wanted to go under there and he put 
this The basket the basket (202-203). 
Summary Comment 
Each group has responded differently to the codes. Group A have a general sense of 
great danger and they also wonder where Jack is. Group B-1 and 2 respond to the 
visual enigma by continuing a narrative that links this scene to the waste ground. the 
other end of the tunnel. and addresses the sense of an unseen presence that has killed 
the woodcutter and possibly Jack. The second reading involves magic. possibly 
because they have seen what happens to Jack. B-3 respond to the thumb and the rope. 
also sensing an unseen presence which threatens Rose and from which Jack escaped. 
These groups have again responded to the henneneutic and the withholding of the 
proairetic by producing their own narratives. Group C, however, are more interested 
in the intertext and do not respond in this way. 
Pages 19-20 
A-I On the full-page spread they identify one of these monsters as a dragon (137-
140). The repetition of dangerous and the use of the words coming along suggest 
their sense of suspense: It's a dragon there he is he's dangerous and he's coming 
along and that is dangerous (137-139). They then observe that Rose is running, 
possibly from this monster, and screaming: And he's going running and going aaah 
(140). 
A-2 They look more closely at some of the dangers, still speaking in lowered 
voices. Their questions and comments on the bear show a sense of fear: Where is his 
hands? (159-160). Look is coming (164). And what is hands like that? What is hands 
(whispers) (170-171). They refer to a ghost and also mention the eyes which may be 
the bear's blank eyes or the eyes within the pictures: Ghost a ghostman's And then 
ghost eye (175-176). 
As they look at the hand and then the wolf they reiterate that it is very 
dangerous (184. 187-188, 193-194. 197): Look look look look look  It's very 
Data Analysis: Response to the proairetic and hermeneutic codes 
dangerous look (181-183). Their absorbed interest and sense of menace make this a 
very affective reading, in which they are responding to the henneneutic code. 
One of the puzzles of this page is the gravestone. A boy refers to this as a window and 
excitedly shows me where he believes there is a tunnel from the stone to the cottage, 
using his fmgers to show me how Jack has gone down this tunnel, back across the 
trees and down the rope (204-221): That is coming there in the that window (206-207) 
floor (213-216). 
B-3 They continue their theory of a malevolent presence in the forest by referring 
to the house: Somebody deadjrom this house *. Witch house (222-224). They then 
go back to the waste ground and point to the shoes which they believe belonged to the 
dead person: He he died you see that shoes? He died (228). They are intrigued by the 
fact that the wolf is the same as in the Crane picture and they build this too into their 
narrative. One girl believes that Rose has been in this forest before and photographed 
the wolf: I know that wolf was here she photocopied she photo the tunnel with the 
other time because it same And he's seen (been?) the wolf too (267-270). It is not 
clear who the pronoun in 270 refers to; Jack, the wolf or Rose herself. 
Summary comment 
Group A continue to respond to the dangers in hushed voices and, on the second 
reading, one of the children also offers an explanation of the gravestone. Having 
developed a story about the previous page, B-1 and B-2 now explore the dOUble-page 
spread for what they can fmd in the trees, but B-3 see the witch's house as the source 
of danger, and continue storytelling to link the other end of the tunnel and Rose's 
bedroom. Although this is the group who most clearly see the connection between the 
wolf in the forest and in the Crane picture, also commenting that Rose is Red Riding 
Hood, they continue a narrative in which Rose has visited the forest before and 
photographed the wolf. Thus they continue to build the puzzles into a story. 
Data Analysis: Response to the proairetic and hermeneutic codes 
Perhaps because Group C have a greater sense of the imaginary nature of the 
forest, they are less concerned to develop a coherent narrative that links this scene 
with the other side of the tunnel. 
Pages 21-22 
A-I He going to park (167). 
A-2 They believe that Jack is running towards his home and that Rose will help 
him (224-226). When asked, they answer that it was a witch or a dragon that turned 
him to stone (233-236). 
B-1 They react to the picture by moaning and crying. 
B-2 The children develop what is the longest narrative explanation of the study, in 
answer to the central enigma of the text, which is why Jack turned to stone. One boy 
is the principal storyteller although the other children excitedly join in. Their 
excitement causes them to talk so quickly, and at times incoherently, that it is 
impossible to decipher exactly what they mean. They suggest that he goes into a 
crack, possibly meaning a crevice in one of the trees, and something turns him into 
stone: wait here this is because he's going in a crack this is a crack so he can turn 
into a stone (68-70). He then ran very fast till the cold turned him to stone: he runned 
he runned so fast that he quickly" then the cold turned him to real stone (71-73). 
The wolf then becomes involved in the account (77-81). He appears to creep into the 
forest and he has a magic stone so that he can turn himself into stone: this may be an 
attempt to account for the wolf appearing to be carved in the tree. They then talk 
about stone circles and cracks in stones (83-88): one of the cracks has a magic eye 
that emits rays: The crack eye got eyes that go shhh it done magic eyes (87-88). Their 
explanation refers back to the forest, where the eyes in the trees and shapes give a 
sense of a menacing presence and they may be referring to Rose when they say that 
'he' ran fast: the cracks is because he ran he ran so quickly (84). It is probably the 
wolf who is able to become invisible and tum things to stone: When he was this one 
he can be invisible things so he can he can zap all the   can turn him to stone (93-
Possibly influenced by the posture of the wolf on page 20, they suggest that he 
goes slowly and turns Jack to stone. They may mean that he creeps up on Jack 
Data Analysis: Response to the proairetic and hermeneutic codes 
stealthily: He can only move slowly he's invisible and then he can go as slowly slowly 
slowly slowly slowly slowly slowly slowly slowly then he can go to the boy then he 
can tum him into stone (96-100). Their own voices become slow at this point for 
dramatic effect. 
This dramatic involvement is evident when they account for the stone figure 
of the screaming boy: Like this first he was a boy then he go wala wala wala wala 
wala (101 102). Their voices are slow at the beginning of the utterance but then 
become louder and faster as they give Jack's screams. 
B-3 This group have already spent a long time exploring and explaining the 
previous picture and they explain briefly that he has turned to stone because he 
stepped into the 'magic things' (280-283). 
C-2 When urged to consider how Jack was turned to stone, they wonder if it was 
the person who lived in the house: Because the person who lives in the house was a 
goblin or something he made him into stone or a witch or something (317-320). In 
this interpretation they have remembered the written text that there may be goblins or 
witches down the tunnel. One child wonders if it was the tunnel itself, perhaps 
thinking of entry into a magic world, but this idea is immediately rejected: It might be 
it was the tunnel No the tunnel couldn't have done it (333-334). They then identify 
little holes, possibly the ring of stones or the tree stumps and believe that they may be 
the cause of the change: those little holes going up and somebody went like that to 
them their power and it turned it into stone (336-339). In answer to my question 
about the tree stumps, they conjecture that 'he' cut them down in order to see anyone 
who came to fight him. The pronoun may refer to Jack or to the person who turned 
Jack to stone: Just in case any people coming to fight him and he can see 'em because 
if there was some trees in the way he can't see through the trees he can see over them 
now (341-344). A few lines later they link this picture with the scenes in the forest. 
They become excited and talk in short disconnected utterances with many inaudible 
phrases, but they refer to the axe and appear to think that it cut down the animals in 
the trees: That axe didn't - The animals in the picture that can be cut away  (360-
362). They again look at the hole under the tree and the other holes in the forest: 
Data Analysis: Response to the proairetic and hermeneutic codes 
That's little caves there  In a tree (366-367). They also mention the fire that 
possibly burned what was cut down (369). 
Pages 23-24 
A-I They see the returning colour. 
A-2 Their realisation of what has happened is shown by the repeated reference to 
the returning colour and the fact that he stops running (244-250): Look at the don't do 
running the colour coming (245-246). 
B-1 They realise he is returning to life (133-135). 
B-2 Their narrative explanations continue as they look at this page and imagine 
that they see bands and eyes in the trees behind Jack. It continues to be difficult to 
understand their meaning, but their excitement is still evident (113) as they appear to 
believe that there is a power on the other side who turns Jack to stone. Their 
discussion of 'the other side' may refer to the fact that the animals in the forest look 
as though they have been turned into statues, although it is not clear whether they 
mean on the other side of the tunnel or the forest: maybe really he was turned into a 
stone that's may be turned into a stone then maybe he can turn him into stone here 
Who? Him on the other side (114-118).The repetition of maybe shows the tentative 
nature of their explanations and they use Bengali to explain their ideas more easily at 
this point. In this part of the forest, the hands in the trees are seen as good, for it is a 
hand that causes him to be brought back to life (125). The hand and the stone have a 
dialogue in which much of what they say is omitted: The he    make me a stone 
~~~.~~~.~.~~~~.~~~~ 
the little boy in normal then he turn into normal (121-125). 
Although the proairetic code functions in this series of pictures in showing 
how Rose brought her brother back to life, the children do not refer to her, but prefer 
their own explanations and, when I ask whether it was Rose who brought Jack back to 
life, they answer no (127). They fmish their commentary on these pages by one more 
explanation of the stone figure, that he had to keep running and when he stopped he 
turned to stone (128-139): he only have to run not stop then he turn into a stone (138-
139). 
Data Analysis: Response to the proairetic and hermeneutic codes 
B-3 They believe that Rose has also turned to stone (285-287): Look she's a statue 
now with his brother (287). As I read the page, they interrupt me to point to the ring 
of stones which tum into flowers, believing that they are magic seeds which turn the 
stone children back into people (288-292): look those are magic seeds (288); those 
are not   stone this stone here This now happy (291-292). They also question the 
written text by asking where the tunnel was through which they ran back home (293). 
Later they look back at this page and explain that the magic seeds came from the 
clouds and grew into sunflowers (308-319). 
C-2 They look at the circle of stones and of daisies and wonder whether the 
children moved to another circle (400-406). They are puzzled by the trees, which 
seem to grow again and appear to relate their growth to Jack being brought to life. 
Pages 25-28 
A-I There is a recognition of a satisfactory ending with dinner ready for them: He 
going to home and he want to go to the ready dinner (171-172). 
A-2 They comment: Finished (275). 
B-2 They recognise that they are now friends: No more cross (142). 
B-3 They recognise their friendship: they al/ together now (296). 
C-2 They supply the ending by commenting that they are Just in time for tea (527) 
but change it to lunch, in the light of the earlier part of the story (528). They recognise 
that the children now like each other (532-533). 
Discussion of responses to hermeneutic and proairetic codes 
The henneneutic code is very strong throughout the book but the picture of the stone 
figure of Jack is the central enigma. Although the suspense is built up as the children 
go through the tunnel and the forest, the expected explanation or closure is withheld 
when we reach Jack, and this stimulates the children to provide their own narratives. 
Their stories are often long, involved and delivered with an excitement that 
sometimes makes them almost indecipherable. The exception to this is Group A who 
DatQ Analysis: Response to the proairetic and hermeneutic codes 
do not question why Jack is turned to stone and are the only group to clearly state that 
it was Rose who rescued her brother. 
Even Group C show this kind of excitement on the second reading an~ like school B, 
try to link this scene to the forest and to the house and the axe. They have already 
given a summary of the book (C-2: 1-12) which demonstrates an understanding of the 
narrative sequence of the book but does not account for the stone figure of Jack. It is 
this puzzle that again engages them, and appears to make them reconstruct the 
narrative in a different way. This is also shown in their alternative suggestion of the 
stone figure being someone else (C-2: 213-219), an explanation they do not follow up 
later. 
B-2 are the most prolific story tellers and the details of what they comment on 
in the forest are largely influenced by the stories that they tell. What they see, 
therefore, appears to be determined by what they are looking for. In the way in which 
they try to link the different parts of the story they can be seen, in Iserian terms, to be 
synthesising perspectives, filling gaps and reconstructing their own stories that are 
often not plausible within the given information and are influenced by film and 
television. An example of this is the story about the shoe on the waste ground being 
the result of a car crashing into a shop and bursting into flames. They show an ability 
continually to modify their stories as they reread the text. Group A, who are the least 
conjectural and voluble, also produce a story to account for the mysterious tombstone 
in the forest. B-3 are the most observant of detail but it is this ability to notice and 
compare that leads them into an explanation of the forest as being an actual place that 
Rose had previously visited and photographed. 
Their response to the text through narrative explanation, supports research 
reported by Bruner (1990: 81-82) in which non-canonical stories - stories that 
violated expectations in some way - produced the most elaborated narrative 
explanations amongst young children. In fact such stories produced ten times more 
narratives than did canonical stories. Scholes (1981) on  anti-narrative' is also 
relevant. He gives three aspects of story; events, text and interpretation and shows 
that anti-narrative problematises the last two, so that our attempts to apply the 
proairetic and hermeneutic are frustrated and we are able to see them as codes. The 
Tunnel did this by withholding the proairetic, thus frustrating the reader's desire to 
Data Analysis: Response to the proairetic and hermeneutic codes 
provide closure to the hermeneutic. The children's response was, therefore, to provide 
their own proairetic codes. One way in which Browne develops the hermeneutic code, 
however, is through de-stabilising the semic code and the next section looks at how 
the children respond to this code together with the symbolic and cultural. 
Data Analysis: Response to the semic. symbolic and cultural codes 
4: Response to the semic, symbolic and cultural codes 
In this section I systematically analyse the transcripts in terms of the children's 
responses to the semic, symbolic and cultural codes in both verbal and visual texts, 
relating these to any evidence of the role of the graphic codes in guiding their 
observations. As shown in Chapter I, Barthes defines these codes as follows. The 
semic code relates to the details through which we glean information about characters 
or places, so that we construct our own knowledge of them. In SIZ he avoids grouping 
them thematically, preferring to give them the instability characteristic of 'motes of 
dust, flickers of meaning' (1993: 19). The symbolic code refers to those themes which 
are grouped together to produce a wider significance. In SIZ this code is developed 
through antitheses. The cultural code takes for granted a common knowledge of that 
world between reader and writer: 'The cultural code reaches out from the text to the 
social world' (Fox 1993: 172). It is the code that refers to areas of knowledge such as 
science, history, etc. as well as cultural artefacts and consumable possessions. It is 
similar to Culler's intertext, which forms a grid through which we read, relating the 
text to our knowledge of our world. Barthes saw this code as underlying all the others 
and it is included with the semic and the symbolic because the cultural code is 
expressed through them and the children draw on their cultural knowledge to interpret 
them. 
Barthes emphasises the arbitrary and fluid nature of the codes and many of his 
units of meaning, or lexias, are multi-coded, as is also apparent in the text of The 
Tunnel where many semes are also symbolic. Rose's books, for example, are semic 
for what they reveal about her as a character, but they are also symbolic of the 
relationship or the antithesis between inner and outer reality, as well as cultural in 
their reference to other stories. The children's ability to demonstrate an awareness of 
the symbolic code as well as the semic will be a significant factor in understanding 
how they read and make meaning. 
Children's utterances are again outlined page by page with summary 
comments comparing their responses at appropriate points of the text. 
Data Analysis: Response to the semic, symbolic and cultural codes 
Front cover; endpaper; tide-page 
B-1 Before we start to read, they predict that it will be about Red Riding Hood 
(tape recorder not on). Their initial reaction to the endpaper is enthusiastic as they 
exclaim at the patterned wallpaper wow flowers * * pattern (1) and at its smell: I hate 
that smell (3). Their reactions are strong as they discuss which wall and which smell 
they love or hate (1-7). 
B-2 They compare the patterned wallpaper to the coffee plant: Look this one looks 
like coffee (1), later claiming to have seen coffee growing in Bangladesh. They again 
comment on its smell: smelly (3). 
B-3 They recognise the book on the front cover as Sleeping Beauty (1). 
C-l They comment briefly on the wall (1) and notice that there is a book on the 
cover and on the endpaper (2), predicting that there will be a book on every page: 
Yeah there's going to be books on every page I think (3-4). 
C-2 They compare the position of the book on the front and back endpapers: The 
book again the book down there (16-17) and they believe that the wallpaper and brick 
wall denote indoors and outside (18-21): That's at home and that's outside (21). In 
response to my question about the title-page, they conjecture that the tunnel is behind 
what we then referred to as the chimney (26-30). 
Summary Comparison 
School A make no comment on either reading, possibly because they are not sure 
what they should be looking for, or what these sections of the book denote. School B 
react strongly to the contrast between the two walls in terms of their smell and pattern 
and on the second reading they compare the patterned wallpaper to the coffee plant as 
something they are familiar with. They have thus responded to the symbolic code and 
the antithesis between the male and female backgrounds. B-1 and B-2 do not refer to 
the book on the ground but B-3 identify Rose's book. It is Group C, however, who are 
immediately able to relate the book on the cover and front endpaper to the theme of 
The Tunnel and who, in their second reading, comment on the change of position of 
Data Analysis: Response to the semic, symbolic and cultural codes 
the book. They also realise that the contrast between the walls connotes inside and 
outside, thus already showing an explicit awareness of the symbolic code and taking 
on an active reading role. Theirs is a confident reading as they interpret the symbolic 
code and predict what the book will be about. 
Pages 3-4 
A-I They look at Jack playing, saying that he is shouting (48); the words state this 
although the picture does not show it. 
A-2 They notice the different colour of their clothes (32) probably in response to 
the written text that they are 'different.' They also add to what the text says on page4 
commenting that the brother played ball (35) and again that he is shouting: Yes look at 
shouting shouting like that shouting (36-38). Possibly this reflects their experience 
of children playing in London streets. 
B-1 No comment. 
B-2 They notice the broken window (7) and are reproving: That's not nice (6). 
They use appropriate terminology to say that he is tackling in football. 
B-3 They recognise the girl reading a book in the window as the girl on the cover 
who leaves her book behind as she crawls into the tunnel (2-5): Look because I know 
it because the girl is reading (4-5). They question the statement that the two children 
were different: not true Miss the mouth's the same (6-8). They ask why Rose stayed 
indoors (9) and then realise that the patterns on the endpapers show the difference 
between the boy and the girl (11-14): Because he the brother goes outside and the 
girl stay inside that's why they are a wall. They also comment on the broken window 
and the exclamation: oh no (15) shows their involvement as they realise it is broken 
because the boys play football there (17-18). 
As we tum to the next page, they look back at Rose's book and wonder if she 
made this story in this book (19). It is not clear what they mean but may reflect the 
book-making culture of this school. They associate the house in Rose's book with the 
Gingerbread House bedside lamp: She made a story with this little house Like a little 
witch house (21-23). 
C-I They are very interested in the details on this page, focusing first on Browne's 
Data Analysis: Response to the semic, symbolic and cultural codes 
technique for showing the kicking movement: I think it's clever how he does that 
shoe thing (5-7). The boys look closely at the picture of Jack: a little tear there on his 
nose One coming down his nostril there and there (8-9). They conjecture that Jack 
and his friends may have broken the window (11-12). The position of Rose's book in 
the centre of the picture, open towards the reader, invites us to share it with her and it 
arouses their curiosity as they examine the details on the open page (14-17): In the 
book in this book there's a house tree chimney there's a wood (15-1 7). They seem to 
enjoy the idea of a book within a book and pretend to read the title of 'Hansel and 
Gretel' (18 -19). One girl compares it to her book of Hansel and Gretel (20-21). 
C-2 The boys again look first at how Jack's kicking movement is shown: There's 
good effects there It looks like he's kicking the ball (36-38). They notice the 
difference in the children's height and then the background of wallpaper and bricks 
(41--45) and relate these to the picture of Rose inside and Jack outside (45), looking 
closely at the wallpaper under the window. One of the girls notices her pink slippers 
(48-50): yeah she loves pink and there is a comparison with someone's sister (51). 
After questioning, they conjecture where the children are playing and look at the 
houses opposite, searching for broken windows (66-67), but they do not see the 
witch-like shapes in the houses. They comment on the position of the goal posts on 
the wall (57-58). 
Summary Comment pages 3-4 
School A refer only to Jack's shouting and then, on the second reading, to the 
different clothes the children are wearing. They appear to have made use of those 
parts of the written text that they understand to interpret the pictures, responding to 
the short simple second sentence on page 3. School B say nothing on the first reading 
and the second time they comment only on the football and the broken window: 
possibly they are unsure of how to read the series of small pictures but are interested 
in the urban environment. The children in B-3, however, seem to know immediately 
the processes of reading this text. They link the book that appeared on the cover to the 
one that Rose is reading here and then to the book and the lamp on the following 
page. They have the confidence to read against the text, noticing that the children in 
Data Analysis: Response to the semic, symbolic and cultural codes 
the picture are, in fact, quite similar, although the text states their difference. They are 
also able to link the two walls to the two children and to the fact that Rose stays 
inside and Jack plays outside. Thus they are reading the semic code and becoming 
aware of the symbolic. 
School C also relate the patterns on the walls to the pictures of the children 
inside and outside. They have a particular interest in the book as a construct, shown 
by their attention to the effect of Jack's kicking movement and to the composition of 
his face. They are also interested in the intertext as they examine and identify Rose's 
book and pretend to read it with her. They have responded to the graphic code here, in 
which the position of the book invites us to read it over Rose's shoulder. They 
transcend their slight contempt for story books in so doing, and identify themselves as 
fellow readers. They comment on the semic details of the difference in their heights 
and refer to the use of pink in Rose's clothes and slippers, a culturally specific 
convention through which a gender stereotype is developed. 
It is interesting that none of the children mentions the shapes of a witch's hat 
and cat in the houses opposite, although these are ambiguous shapes that subvert what 
is to be expected in an otherwise normal row of houses so that they cause the semic 
code to lose its consistency. It is a sign that nothing can be relied on and that things 
are not what they seem to be. Possibly the children are uncertain what to make of 
them and thus ignore them, but A-I later refer to the possibility of a cat being in the 
tunnel, which may be a reference to the cat on page 4. 
Pages 5-6 
A-I The first thing they mention is the figure of Jack (58-61) and they use the 
words of the text in their comment: he's frightening her (61) as they try to work out 
what he is doing: Why is standing there? (68). They refer to Jack's mask as a 
dragon's head, possibly intertext from a story from their own culture, and thus more 
familiar to them than a Wolf (66) but, after I have supplied the word 'wolf, they call 
him a monster (67, 70). Guided by the lines of direction, they then look back to the 
Gingerbread Cottage: I can see a house I like that house (73-74). One boy points to 
Data Analysis: Response to the semic, symbolic and cultural codes 
Rose's coat (91) and, in view of my response, appears to compare it with Red Riding 
Hood's cloak in the Crane picture (93). Although they do not remember the name of 
the story they claim to have the book and the video at home (78-90): I've got Red 
Riding Hood on film (90). They then point to the light, the bed and the carpet, all part 
of the semic code but also cultural artefacts in which they are interested, possibly 
because their own flats are newly furnished. 
A-2 Before reading the book, they browse through it and again they look first at 
the figure of Jack coming into the bedroom: Why is coming? (1). They then look back 
to the bedside lamp (5) and realise it is the same as the house in the forest (8). As we 
read the book, they point to Rose's red coat and to the light, then notice the cord 
under the bed. They refer to this as a tail (45) and then as a snake: is like a snake (47). 
Having read through the book, they return to this page, first pointing to the 
shoes (305) and then looking at Rose and asking why she is awake: Why is not 
sleepy? (306). They may be comparing her to the picture of Jack in bed or referring to 
the words of the written text, which states that she would lie awake. They point to the 
wolf in the Crane picture (308) and make wolf noises although they do not appear to 
associate him with the wolf in the forest. They refer to the cord like a snake (311) and 
look both at the light by the bed and the light outside the door (313-316). They then 
proceed to tell me about their carpets and what they have in their bedrooms at home 
(319ff.). Their attitude to Jack is one of condemnation for being naughty (2-3). 
B-1 Initially they are confused by the number of children on the pages and think 
that there are two boys but then realize that Jack is in bed as well as in the main 
picture: Two people two boys No it's the same boy that's him he's in his bed He's 
asleep (8-11). They look at Rose in bed and at the Crane picture above her, where 
they identify Red Riding Hood and the wolf (14-20), but appear bemused by the 
wolfs hat, referring to him as an old wolf and then a cowboy: Yeah an old wolf He's 
not a old wolf he's a cowboy (19-20). They then look around the room for other 
intertextual clues and assume that the shoes under the bed as well as the red coat are 
Red Riding Hood's and that the bedside lamp is Grandma's cottage (20-24). They 
quickly amend this, however, to the house in Hansel and Gretel, showing familiarity 
with the story: Witch's house that's sweets on (27). 
Data Analysis: Response to the semic, symbolic and cultural codes 
8-2 Their attention is caught by the red cloak which they identify as Red Riding 
Hood's (12). Like School A, the children look first at Jack, and identify him as a 
wolf; (14) then, possibly influenced by the text, realise that he is a boy scaring his 
sister (15-17) and condemn his action: He's too bad 'cos he's bad to his sister (18-
19). The repetition of is it a boy? (15) indicates their interest. They see that Rose is 
scared (22) because her eyes are peeping open (23). They have thus quickly worked 
out what Jack is doing and the effect upon his sister. 
Having looked at Rose they look at the shoes under the bed and at first they 
think her brother is under the bed (24-30), showing that they are still trying to 
understand what is happening: Yeah maybe somebody's shoes No his brother 
climbing out (29-30). They then wonder about a crocodile (34) perhaps referring to 
the tail. In this reading, they do not comment on the Crane picture or the lamp, but 
appear to focus on the boy and the girl. Their final comment on Rose's feelings about 
Jack coming into her room shows their clear views on what is socially acceptable: 
because she's a girl she's not a boy she don't want a boy in a girl's bed (34-36). 
8-3 They look first at the Gingerbread House by the bed and relate it to Rose's 
book on the preceding page, summarising the story of Hansel and Gretel: Its like little 
witch take the boy and put him in a cage (19-27). They then look at the Crane picture 
above the light and identify that story, linking it to Rose's coat (32) and to Jack in the 
wolf-mask: And fox is wolf is there and He put a mask on (34-35). They have thus 
made a connection between Red Riding Hood and the wolf, and Rose and her brother. 
At this point one child refers to the smaller picture on the opposite page and contrasts 
the two pictures, saying that in the left-hand picture Jack is dreaming about what he 
will do in the right-hand picture: he's dreaming about he's went creeping on his sister 
(37-38). This may also be a reference to the written text. 
Having worked out the main focus of the picture, the relationship between 
brother and sister, they look at other semic details in the room (39-48). They construct 
explanations about the cord and shoes under the bed, based on the idea that someone 
is dead or that they are hiding (41-42). They see that Rose is afraid of her brother: 
Then she's scared Big baby He chasing (56-58). They again contrast the two pages, 
as they look at Jack in his bed and see the stars on the wall above his head, and then 
Data Analysis: Response to the semic, symbolic and cultural codes 
point to Rose's light. And there's the little star And this is the world and this is a  
light (59-61). When they look at the red coat, the sleeve sticking out of the wardrobe 
(62-63) and then the picture on the wall, they again show the ability to compare and 
contrast as one girl notices the resemblance between Red Riding Hood and Rose, and 
between the wolf and Jack: Look ... this girl face match and that boy match look look 
Heather (65-66). She is then able to see the contrast between Red Riding Hood and 
Rose: The Red Riding Hood no scared of the wolf(67-68). She looks closely at the 
Crane picture to notice that Red Riding Hood's face is shaped like an egg and they 
repeat that the wolfis like her brother (71) and looks like a cowboy (73). 
C-I This group enthusiastically comment first on the wolf: Hey I think they've go/the 
Big Bad wolf in there Yeah they've got the Big Bad wolf picture (23-25) Line 23 may 
refer to the figure of Jack or may be an initial response to the Crane picture and they 
then notice Red Riding Hood in the picture. They recognise the Hansel and Gretel 
cottage under the picture, which they identify as a lamp (27-29). Their initial attention 
has, therefore, been given to identifying the intertext. In view of Bettelheim's 
Freudian interpretation of this story it is interesting that the boys make loud eating 
noises and express a wish to eat the Gingerbread Cottage: I would eat it (30). They 
comment on Rose's book, conjecturing that it is a fairy story and imagining that they 
can see Father Christmas: Definitely about fairies Hey I think I can see Father 
Christmas in there (38-39). One boy compares Rose's love of reading to his own 
interest in space books (32-33). The children's interest appears to be in identifying 
the stories and the intertext and there is no comment on the characters and what Jack 
is doing. In their interest in the Crane picture, the Gingerbread lamp and the book 
they are responding primarily to the texts within the text and therefore to the symbolic 
code. 
C-2 One of the boys looks first at the left-hand picture of Jack in bed and the blue 
speckled effect on his face, another example of their interest in the technique of the 
book (68-69). A girl then looks at Rose's eyes and decides that she is peeping through 
them: I can see her eyes open they're just going (mimes) (71-72). She compares this 
to what her dad does in the evening when he pretends to be asleep because he doesn't 
want to get up out of his chair: when my dad watch lelly he closes his eyes and says 
Data Analysis: Response to the semic, symbolic and cultural codes 
he's asleep so he can't get us anything (73-75). Although this appears to be a 
digression, she is using her own experience to interpret what Rose is doing. 
They notice the shoes under the bed (84), and, unlike the other groups, they 
accept the shoes as belonging to Rose. lover-prompt them to see the ambiguities of 
the shoes and their comments on the rope are made with a laugh as though to please 
me, with a sense of mischief rather than danger: A man's under the bed holding the 
rope (laughs) It might be - trip somebody up (91-93). They also wonder if it is her 
teddy bear that is under the bed (96). After some questioning they think that the red 
coat is like Red Riding Hood's (105-106) but are aware of the difference between a 
coat and a cape (108). They enjoy the picture of the wolf; a girl points him out with a 
laugh and the boys chants his name: The Big Bad wolf The Big Bad wolf the Big Bad 
poo poo poo poo (111-113). This suggests an awareness of the wolf as a stock 
character (Applebee 1978). They finish this by mocking Rose: Sister blister sister 
blister (114-115). 
Summary comment page 5-6 
All the groups quickly respond to the figure of Jack in the mask, the focal point of 
this picture. School A initially react to him as a dangerous monster and later question 
what he is doing. School 8 also look first at Jack to work out what is happening and 
what the relationship is between this figure and the peacefully sleeping Jack on the 
opposite page. In their second reading they articulate the fact that Jack is deliberately 
frightening his sister and that her fear is shown by her eyes. 8-3 understand what is 
happening and relate the figure of Jack to the wolf in the picture. It is noticeable, 
however, that despite their initial exclamation, School C make no explicit reference to 
what Jack is doing, as though they do not wish to acknowledge that he is a bully. 
From Jack's wolf figure, the reader's gaze is then led back to the Crane 
picture and the Gingerbread Cottage under it, and 8-3 and C-l quickly look at the 
picture. The fact that Group 8-3 then link the wolf in the picture and the figure of 
Jack shows some awareness of the symbolic code which they later develop when they 
compare the frightened Rose with the bold Red Riding Hood. It is this picture which 
instantly attracts Group C: their immediate interest is in the figure of the wolf 
although it is unclear whether their enthusiastic reference to the 'Big Bad Wolf also 
Data Analysis: Response to the semic, symbolic and cultural codes 
includes the creeping figure of Jack. 
A-I are perhaps not sufficiently familiar with the intertext to make 
comparisons, but they appear to link Rose's red coat and Red Riding Hood's cloak, 
and their second reading shows they are interested in the wolf although they may not 
recognise him as the wolf in the forest. Group 8-1 identify the picture, but are 
bemused by the wolf s hat; on their second reading they refer to Rose's coat as Red 
Riding Hood's. 
The Gingerbread Cottage is under the picture: Group A first comment on it as 
something they like, but on the second reading they excitedly realise that it is the 
same house as in the forest, thus showing some perception of its symbolic nature 
rather than seeing it only as part of the semic code. Group 8 correctly identify the 
cottage on the first reading but do not mention it the second time. 8-3 are the only 
group to link it to the house in the book that Rose was reading earlier. Group C, 
however, are particularly interested in identifying the intertextual references in the 
picture; they recognise the cottage, as well as its function as a lamp, and express a 
wish to eat it, making loud eating noises. 
All the groups have, therefore, responded in some way to these aspects of the 
symbolic code, although they appear to see them as semic, and Group C avoid 
reference to Jack in the mask. 8-3, however are able to make connections that move 
them towards an understanding of the symbolic themes of the book. 
The cord and the shoes under the bed belong to the semic code but, like the 
shapes in the window on the previous page, they are ambiguous and therefore 
destabilising. In their reference to Rose's inner fears they may also be seen as part of 
the symbolic code. Group A comment on them in their second reading, comparing the 
cord to a tail and then a snake, thus relating their own cultural fears. Group B first 
identify the shoes as Red Riding Hood's, possibly confusing Rose and Red Riding 
Hood. B-3, however, interpret the shoes as belonging to someone under the bed and 
spend some time working out whether someone is dead or whether there is another 
brother hiding there. Group C conjecture rather playfully that there may be a man 
under the bed, holding a rope to trip someone up. None of the children has, therefore, 
recognised these as externalising Rose's fears but they see them as potential sources 
of danger. 
Data Analysis: Response to the semic, symbolic and cultural codes 
A small detail that interests them all is whether Rose's eyes are open. Group A 
look at her and ask why she is not sleepy: possibly it is the words of the text 'But she 
would lie awake' that evoke this question. B-2 comment that she is scared because 
she is 'peeping' through her eyes and a girl in C-2 compares Rose's eyes to her 
father's when he is pretending to be asleep, probably meaning that they are screwed 
up and flickering. The children in B-3 look at her face and compare it to Red Riding 
Hood's. 
There is little comment on the left-hand picture, but Group A's question on 
Rose not being sleepy may be contrasting her to Jack's peaceful sleep. B-1 are 
initially perplexed by the fact that there appear to be two boys and then realise that 
Jack is both the boy in the mask and the boy asleep in bed. B-3, however, explicitly 
contrast the two pictures when they state that Jack is dreaming about scaring his 
sister, thus accounting for his smile. B-3 also compare the stars above Jack's head to 
the light in Rose's bedroom, and, in an untaped conversation, the boys in Group C 
were very interested in what they identified as fluorescent stars above Jack's head and 
the speckled surface of this picture. 
Group A are particularly interested in the details of the bedroom: they point to 
the light above the bed, and they are the only group to refer to the light in the passage 
outside and to the carpet which they compare to their carpets at home. Later, off tape, 
they tell me about the toys and computers in their own bedrooms. Possibly they are 
curious about the bedroom because they are living in homes that are new to them. The 
differences in responses to the cultural code can be seen first in the attitudes to the 
relationship between the children. Group A and the children in B-1I2 condemn Jack 
for frightening his sister and B-112 also think that he should not be in a girl's 
bedroom. The children in B-3, however, are mildly scornful of Rose, while Group C 
ignore his action and taunt Rose. Off the tape-recorder the boys say that it has given 
them ideas for teasing their sisters. 
Pages 7-8 
A-I They interrupt me to point to the flower on Rose's mat (96-97). They question 
why Jack does not want his sister with him (98) and they believe that the children are 
going to school (100). 
Data Analysis: Response to the semic, symbolic and cultural codes 
A-2 There is an exclamation of some disapproval at the pointing arm: Look at him 
(63). As we turn to the next page they refer back to the fact that Rose went with her 
brother: She's walk with him (77). 
B-1 They immediately match the children's clothes with their place mats: she's 
clothes that's why she's got flower in there he got this that's why he's got this (32-
34). They also notice the mother who is never seen: Heather is the boy and girl alone 
with us Mum? (36-37) and question her pointing arm (38). 
B-2 They compare the two pointing arms: Look mummy's hand and his hand (37). 
B-3 They are pleased to be able to match Jack's sleeve with his place mat: Look 
match match match match This is like Superman (75-76). Later in the conversation 
(94-100) they return to these mats and again compare Jack's to the Superman motif: 
Cool cool cool There's a good picture that (97-98), also pointing out the star (100). 
They see that Jack's action is the same as his mother's: the boy is doing that the mum 
is doing the same (81-82). They comment that Rose is crying on page 7 (85) and then 
one of them sees that she is frightened (101). They look at the dejected attitudes of the 
children's bodies when they are sent out and guess what they are feeling and what 
they might be saying: and he said no you can't go (83-84). They realise they are both 
sad because he doesn't want her with him and she wants to stay inside: 'Cos he 
doesn't want his sister to come sister want to come No she doesn't want she want to 
stay inside (89-91) and they also think that they are being sent to school (87). 
C-l One of them sees that Jack is telling Rose off and imitates his action (41-43) 
repeating what he might have said in a gruff voice: Aha you're very naughty (45). 
They notice the effect on Rose: Yeah and she looks sad (44). 
C-2 They notice the pointing hand (122) and a girl surmises that he's telling her 
off because she's been naughty. They notice the similarity between the pointing arms 
(124-127). They are also interested in the different mats but see Jack's mat as a 
football mat (140-143) and they comment on his football on page 8, making bouncing 
noises boing boing boing (147). 
Summary comment pages 7-8 
The two place mats match the children's clothes and are therefore part of both the 
Data Analysis: Response to the semic, symbolic and cultural codes 
semic and the symbolic code as well as confirming the cultural stereotypes. All the 
groups comment on these mats. Group A point only to the flower on Rose's mat on 
the first reading, whereas Group B-1 notice that the mats match the children's clothes 
and B-3 detect the Superman star on Jack's mat and admire it. The repetition of 'cool' 
suggests an interest in this hero from the media. School C also comment on the 
difference between the two mats but they see Jack's mat as having a football motif 
and then they point to his football. 
The two pointing arms dominate the pictures and all the groups notice them, 
although only Group A express some disapproval of Jack's threatening gesture, 
whereas Group C rather enjoy this picture, first imitating Jack's action and what he 
might have said, and then conjecturing that Rose has been naughty, thus putting the 
blame on her rather than her brother. Group B-1 appear to question the fact that the 
mother is not seen: on the second reading they contrast the two anns. B-3 however 
develop the contrast by noting that the boy and the mother are doing the same gesture 
but that Jack's action frightens his sister. They conjecture that Jack is telling his sister 
that she can't come with him. They are the only group to look at the children's 
dejected attitudes as they are sent out and to imagine what they are both feeling. Thus 
they show an ability to understand motive and to empathise with the characters. 
Pages 9-10 
A-I Their interest is in what the children are wearing and they notice Jack's 
jumper: Why is she wearing that red and blue? (107). The personal pronoun 'she' 
probably refers to Jack. They then comment on Rose's nice coat (l09-11 1). They 
have, therefore, focused on the children as the two focal points, particularly noticing 
the brightly coloured clothes which stand out against the sombre background. They 
also wonder whether Jack is going to explore in the park (102). 
A-2 They notice that she is reading a book like one in the classroom(78-80). Their 
other comments are inaudible. 
B-1 It is not clear what 39-40 refers to, but they look at the rubbish dump and in 
some excitement find the shoe and imagine that a man is there (41-46): One man is 
there look the feet (43). Their narrative conjecture appears to be influenced by 
television as it involves a car driving into a shop, running over a boy and bursting into 
flames (54-58) so that they appear to regard the pile of rubbish as the scene of a large 
fire. 
Data Analysis: Response to the semic, symbolic and cultural codes 
B-2 They find the little mask with a gasp of horror (38) and then the feet. There is 
some Bengali speech and inaudible speech and then they again produce a narrative 
that links the head and the feet with the other side of the tunnel. 
B-3 This group reacts with a confused noise of everyone talking excitedly. They 
seem to feel it is a place of menace because they comment that the girl is frightened 
but her brother isn't (10 I, 103). They look first at the graffiti on the wall which they 
compare to a spider web and the moon and sun (102-106). There is a reference to 
flowers (109) - possibly they are referring to the sprayed graffiti - and there is a 
poignant note: And this one made a garden and everything's break (110). They then 
look closely at the pile of rubbish, finding a ladder, a broom, a little door, a comb, a 
keyhole, a freezer, a Coca Cola bottle, a carpet, a sofa, a TV, a bicycle. They return to 
the shoe and again have a narrative explanation that links this scene to the other side 
of the tunnel. They conclude by finding what is a CD or a cooker (165-167). 
C-I They notice the shoe first, calling it an old boot (47) and one boy is very 
interested in what he takes to be a periscope from a submarine because he has one that 
he found on the beach with a bullet still in it. They do not list what they see but they 
are very interested and would like to use the objects to make a robot: I'd like to go 
there and make a robot then 1 wouldn't have to do all the cleaning up J would get a 
robot to fight my sister so when my sister goes like that and then whack (60--63). They 
identify a giant 'bommy-knocker' in Rose's book, a reference to a Story Chest book 
by that name (64-66). 
C-2 Again their first reaction is to think of what they could make like a robot or a 
walkie-talkie radio (152-159). They then spend a long time 'picking over' the rubbish, 
finding the smashed TV, the mask, a fridge, a coffin, the top of an aerial from a 
walkie-talkie (162-205). They enjoy making discoveries and discuss together what 
things might be, sometimes semi-audibly: What's that thing there? that little thing * 
(199-200). That might be the top of an aerial from a walkie-talkie or that wonky thing 
on our television (mumbling) Yeah that wonky thing (202-205). 
Data Analysis: Response to the semic, symbolic and cultural codes 
Summary comment pages 9-10 
Group C are particularly interested in this scene and the opportunities there for 
making things and they spend some time looking at and discovering the objects. B-3 
also spend a long time listing what they can see and they notice the graffiti sprayed on 
the wall and that everything is broken. B-1/2 are the only children to see the feet 
under the seat and they build them into a narrative, which they continue on their 
second reading, linking it with the other side of the tunnel. Their story shows the 
influence of television or film with the car bursting into a shop window. School A say 
nothing about what is on the waste ground and it is possible that they are unfamiliar 
with the concept of a rubbish tip like this: they do comment on the children's clothes, 
thus looking at the two bright figures, which stand out against the waste ground. On 
the second reading they comment on Rose's book. 
Pages 11-12 
A-I They believe there may be a dragon in the tunnel (115). 
A-2 They comment on the ball although their meaning is unclear: Where is her 
ball? (90). They may be questioning why Jack has left the ball behind. They repeat 
that there may be snakes or dragons in the tunnel (85-89) and think that Jack is 
naughty to go into the tunnel (89). 
B-3 They look at page 13 and then return to this page to comment on the written 
text that there may be monsters down the tunnel and Rose is therefore crying because 
she doesn't want to go into the tunnel (179-180). 
Pages 13-14 
A-2 They comment on her book: I like that book (109). 
Data Analysis: Response to the semic, symbolic and cultural codes 
B-3 Their immediate reaction is laughter at Rose's face which they first attribute to 
the book she is reading: Sad sad story look a sad story she's sad (168). They then 
look closely at the open book on page 14 and compare it with the story she was 
reading on the waste ground: Look it's different look it's the lion here and that it is 
Sleeping Beauty (169-172). A girl compares it to her own anthology of fairy stories. 
Oh lots of lots of lots of there's Sleeping Beauty and there's  There's Cinderella 
I've got one like that My book's Sleeping Beauty one like Cinderella All together 
gether gether (173-179). 
They realise that she is going into the tunnel despite her fears: She's scared and she's 
going in there (184). 
Pages 15-16 
A-I They notice how the colours change as Rose crawls through the tunnel: Why 
are you changing them? (123). 
A-2 There is discussion but it is inaudible. 
B-3 They realise that it is dark enough for her to need a torch: They have to take 
torch light (185). They are interested in her hair slide that shines like a little light 
(186-192): Look it's like a light this one's like a light little light (188-189). 
C-2 They join in with the words and one girl giggles apprehensively and starts to 
say: she doesn't like it (235-237). 
Summary comment 
There are few comments on these pages although Group A-2 notice the ball and the 
book left behind. B-3 are amused by Rose's sad face but aware of her fears and the 
Data Analysis: Response to the semic, symbolic and cultural codes 
fact that she is overcoming these to go into the tunnel. They refer to the written text to 
guess what might be down the tunnel. They also notice that the open book on page 14 
is different from that on the waste ground and make comparisons with their own 
books. They are also the only children to say anything about Rose crawling through 
the tunnel, as they comment on her hair band that shines in the dark and the need for a 
torch. A-I comment on the change in colour as the tunnel becomes darker but C3 
only join in the words with some apprehensive giggles. 
Pages 17 -18 
A-I There is no reference to page 17. As the forest changes, they interrupt my 
reading to point to monsters: Monsters monsters It's the monsters Monsters (130-
132). They are aware of dangers but possibly lack the English vocabulary to name 
what they see. In response to some prompting from me they find the fire (133, 136) 
but do not refer to the thumb or the axe or any other half-hidden shapes. 
A-2 This time they interrupt my reading and look at the enormous thumb, calling it 
a witch's hand (119-120). They are, therefore, relating the words about witches to the 
pictures and they go on to look at fire and wonder if that too is a witch's fire. They 
have a strong awareness of the dangers of the forest: very very very dangerous. Their 
comment: He look at the tree perhaps shows an awareness of Rose's greater attention 
to what is in the forest. 
8-1 The first thing they look at is what they refer to as a house, which may be the 
barred hole at the base of the tree. They then see the fire and the axe which they 
identify as the woodcutter's axe: Somebody house and look one woodcutter one man 
cut wood look afire (63-65). This response shows their sense of a presence within the 
forest, and they develop a narrative explanation about an unseen person linking this 
scene to the waste ground (66-73). They look at the rope which indicates danger: A 
rope danger In there in a stick (76-77). The meaning of line 82 is unclear and could 
refer to either of the children: Yeah there's his brother. They have, therefore 
commented on the four focal items within the picture but have not mentioned the 
half-hidden shapes within the trees. 
8-2 Their first interest is in creating a narrative explanation which links both sides 
Data Analysis: Response to the semic, symbolic and cultural codes 
of the tunnel. They excitedly indicate what they see as magic fire (55) but do not 
comment on anything else on this page. 
B-3 Unlike the other groups, they comment on Rose in the quiet wood on page 17: 
This part is so nice isn't it? (192) They are aware of the dangers of the forest on page 
18, and they look around the picture, seeing the details and creating a story from them 
(see proairetic). They look at the thumb first and the string and, unlike the hushed 
voices of horror from School A, they wonder if the thumb and the string have been 
put there to kill her: This is a hand somebody put it here like when she goes there they 
will kill her And there's the string (193-195). They wonder if the brother escaped 
down the boarded-up hole under the tree: a rabbit or mouse's house (196) and they 
think it was he who left the basket behind when he went: He wanted to go under there 
and he put this The basket the basket (202-203). Somebody also notices a bird -
perhaps an owl or the duck's head (204) and they also identify the beanstalk (210-11). 
C-l They do not comment on the left-hand picture or the written text. There is a 
note of discovery in their voices when they first find the fire: hey there's a fire (70). 
One child then finds what they refer to as a lunchbox (71) and there is some interest 
as the other children look for it (71-74). When they recognise it as a basket they 
believe it belongs to Red Riding Hood and one boy reveals his understanding of the 
fantasy nature of the forest: Yeah and probably she's gone into the land of stories 
(80). 
C-2 Again they notice the fire first of all. When asked, they wonder if it has been 
lit by the goblins mentioned earlier in the written text, or Indians. Their declaration 
that they are not scared of them (245 -246) indicates an awareness of the frightening 
nature of the picture. They also think that it may have been lit by her brother (243). 
After some prompting they notice the axe (255). 
Summary comment pages 17-18 
The only group to comment on page 17 is B-3 when they admire the 'nice' part. 
There is a difference in the kind of response the children make to what they see in the 
forest. School A are initially aware of the dangers, but do not refer to them 
specifically. On their second reading they see the scene in terms of the witch 
mentioned in the text and point to the thumb and the fire as belonging to the witch. 
Data Analysis: Response to the semic, symbolic and cultural codes 
Their sense of danger is evident in their hushed tones (they appear to look at what 
Rose is doing). 
School B, however, are intent on constructing a story and they look first at those 
objects which indicate an unseen presence and a possible story, so they look at the 
barred-up hole at the base of the tree, the axe, the rope and the fire but ignore the 
suggested shapes in the trees. B-3 continue to construct a narrative, involving the 
barred tunnel, the rope and the basket. They have a sense of danger but are more 
conjectural and they are the only group to comment on the beanstalk and a bird. 
School C's reading is very different. As they identify Red Riding Hood's 
basket, one boy recognises the forest as a land of stories and they look at the scene in 
tenns of this story whereas B-1 and B-3 look at it in tenns of their own stories. It is 
C-l, therefore, that recognise the intertextual nature of the book but the children in 
the group ignore the large thumb that is such a disturbing image. They are interested 
in the fire and there is an awareness of the forest as a frightening place. 
Pages 19-20 
A-I They look at one of the monsters, possibly the wild boar, 'referring to it as a 
dragon, as they had earlier labelled Jack in his wolf-mask (65-66): See the dragon it's 
the dragon there he is he's dangerous and he's coming along and that is dangerous 
(137-139). 
Their eyes pass across the foreground of the picture, moving from the pursuer 
to the pursued as they notice that Rose is running and screaming: And he's going 
running and going aaah (140). Like their earlier comments on Jack shouting in the 
yard (48), they imagine the sound that she makes. They then look back at the house, 
following the visual line of direction, just as they had looked back at the Gingerbread 
House in Rose's bedroom. Although it is I who point out the resemblance between the 
two houses, they indicate their interest: And that's a house Let's see Yes (142-144). 
They then look at the wolf, which they refer to as a dog and then a fox, asking the 
name of his stick and his legs: Or the dog it's like aJox look What's that? What's the 
that and the that? (159-161). Thus they have looked at the three focal points in the 
triangular construction of the picture but have not commented on other shapes in the 
trees. 
Data Analysis: Response to the semic, symbolic and cultural codes 
A-2 They look first at the house and spend some time comparing it to the house in 
Rose's bedroom (138 - 163): Yes is the same the window door the door the same (144 
-146). Although they had already discussed the link between the two houses, they 
now want to look more closely to prove that they are the same and there is an 
excitement at the discovery. They do not comment on the shape of a witch's hat in the 
cottage window; possibly it is this that they refer to in line 158 although my response 
suggests they are talking about the gravestone. 
They then become conscious of the dangers of the forest and they look at the 
bear on the left and wonder where his hands are (159-160). They are aware of his 
running movement as he appears to lunge out towards the reader: Look is coming 
(164) and they compare his glazed but glaring eyes to a ghost's: Ghost is a ghostman 
and then ghost eye (166). The horror of this monster seems to grow as they look again 
at the missing hands and speak in whispers: And what is hands like that What is 
hands? 
They continue to talk in hushed voices as they look at the other monsters, the 
boar and then the wolf, often repeating that it is very dangerous (177, 180, 183, 184). 
Their engagement is shown by repetition: look look look look look (181). Their 
reference to a tree: That is tree * dangerous (184) suggests that they may realise that 
the wolf is part of the tree but this is supposition. They again mention eyes - this time 
the wolfs eyes: And look at his look at his eyes look where are the black * is very 
very very dangerous (185-187) but it is possible that they are aware of the other eyes 
in the picture, such as the owls', which give a feeling of an unseen presence. 
As in the first reading they comment on the fact that Rose is running and they 
say she is sad because her brother is hurt: She's sad because her brother" hurt 
(191-195). They do not say that she is frightened, however. One boy then returns to 
the tombstone, which he calls a window: That's his window coming the floor (193). 
B-1 They see the house and the tombstone: Somebody's died (87). They look at the 
animals and there is some discussion as to whether they are real or not: is it real 
this/He's a teddy bear It looks like a teddy bear It's a real teddy bear It's only a tree 
(90-94). They seem to compare the bear with Jack in the wolf-mask: It's a tree it's a 
like her brother how it was (95-96). They look at the boar and then realise that there 
are a lot of things to find (102-123): In the tree ... iots of things in the tree (102). They 
are very observant and find a crocodile, a frog, a pig, the wolf, a vampire, something 
Data Analysis: Response to the semic, symbolic and cultural codes 
like a leopard and somebody sees the well-concealed gorilla's head (103-123). Thus 
they have drawn on the referential or cultural code to see what they recognise in the 
trees. 
They then look at the house again and there is a gasp as they recognise it as 
Hansel and Gretel's house but a real one not a night light (124-129). They do not refer 
to Rose at all, or ask where Jack is. 
B-2 They just point to the house and then the wolf (57-58). Something which they 
think looks like a pillow arouses the most interest (60- 61 ). 
B-3 On lines 212-216 they look at the house and, possibly, the witch's hat, and 
continue the idea of a malevolent presence who wants to kill Rose: and somebody kill 
from this house and somebody see her A witch maybe (214-216). Later they refer to 
it as the witch house (224). They point to the gravestone and wonder whether 
somebody from the house is dead: somebody dead/rom this house (222), associating 
it with the shoe on the waste ground (228-232). They then look very closely at the 
picture, noticing the gargoyle-like head above the gravestone (233-234) and an owl 
(236). They find big and little pigs, an ant and a snake: Snake snake snake you see 
him (243). There is a suggestion that somebody is dead but it is not quite clear 
whether this is a monster or whether this is due to a monster: It looks like some body's 
dead a monster (246). A few lines later they refer to the monster's hand (255). They 
are aware of the eyes: Look two eyes look like two eyes (250), which may be the 
bear's two eyes but the picture is also full of eyes. They are excited by the bear (251-
256) although they do not refer to the appearance of his chopped-off arms. 
They then see the wolf and immediately one girl identifies him as the wolf in 
Rose's picture: Yeah I thought that wolf came in here (260) and they notice what is 
the same in both pictures: Look he there and he there there and that and that 
Everything is same here (262-264). The girl who had previously compared Rose to 
Red Riding Hood then makes another comparison between Rose and Red Riding 
Hood: I knew there's the she she's the Red Riding Hood she's the wolf (265-266). She 
does not, however, see that the wolf is in Rose's imagination but believes that Rose 
has been here before and taken a photograph: I knew that wolf was here she 
photocopied she photo the tunnel with the other time because it same and he's been 
(seen?) the wolf too (267-270). The rest ofthe Group Confirm this (271-273) and one 
of them points to the thumb (272). 
Data Analysis: Response to the semic, symbolic and cultural codes 
C-I They first point to the streaked effect of Rose's coat Boy you can see her 
clothes running behind (81) and then to what they call a 'secret door', which is 
probably the gravestone. They look at the wild boar on the left and one of them 
claims to have seen a boar's head (85-86) and they then look back at the house which 
they believe to be Little Red Riding Hood's granny's (89) and then realise that it is 
the same as Rose's bedside lamp: 00 the house was her lamp that was Hansel and 
Gretel's house (91 92) but there is some disagreement on who lives there: It might be 
her house or it might be Red Riding Hood's house (96-99). They do not, however, 
comment on the shape of the witch's hat in the window. 
They identify the gravestone, which they first think is a door (100-105), and then 
look at the wolf (108-113). They do not appear to link it to the wolf in the Crane 
picture but refer to it in a playful way: There see a monster a monstery, a wolf the 
wolf look (108-109). This playfulness may indicate an understanding that this is a 
fantasy world in which they enjoy finding familiar, or 'stock' characters (Applebee 
1978). 
C-2 They first comment on what they call a little road going down (251). Their 
interest in what they can find is indicated by the fact that they all talk at once: some 
voices are talking about the house which is at the end of the 'road' and others are 
talking about a wart-hog (260, 263) and the wolf (264) with his walking stick (266). 
The child who refers to the house is again using a sing-song voice and her comment: 
monsters there's a real house (265) shows that she is comparing it to the one in 
Rose's bedroom. Then they look at how fast Rose is running (273-275): Vroom She's 
going vooah (275). There is no comment on why she is running so fast. 
Previously there was a comment that she had gone into the world of stories, 
but on this reading they wonder whether the shapes in the trees have been carved by 
the axe and Rose imagines that they are real (277-283): Yeah they've carved it and 
she's imagining it's real (282-283). One boy relates it to his own experience of seeing 
shapes in things (284-292): I see pictures on the trees there's a picture in everything 
'cos 1 was making a chip butly last night and 1 was just putting the chips and fish 
fingers and tomato ketchup and everything and it made a face upside down (284-
290). There is some discussion on whether they can see a pig or a warthog (300-302), 
by which they probably mean the bear which appears to be running: and the warthog 
is moving (300). Continuing in their belief that the monsters are not real they believe 
Data Analysis: Response to the semic, symbolic and cultural codes 
that it has been grown in this way and the anns have been cut off: They've just grown 
it and chopped them off (303-304). Some of their final words on this page are an 
affirmation that much of what they can see is imaginary: Yeah but not real'" (307). 
Summary comment pages 19-20 
School A continue to be aware of the dangers of the forest, first responding to the 
bear on the left and the effect on Rose, and then looking at the house and the wolf, so 
that they have again commented on the focal points of the picture but not all the 
details. In seeing Rose's fear and the wolfs stick they have shown awareness of the 
semic code. On their second reading they become very aware of the dangers of the 
forest, having first looked at the house and compared it to the bedside lamp,. Theirs is 
a very affective reading as they look at the handless bear and are aware of the eyes in 
the pictures, talking about ghosts and repeating the word 'dangerous'. 
B-1 also look first at the house and, although they do not refer to the witch's 
hat, they appear to view it as a malevolent presence, linking it to the gravestone. Later 
they realise with a gasp of excitement that it is the same as Rose's night-light. Unlike 
School A, they are aware that the lunging bear is not real but part of the tree, just as 
Jack was not a real monster in the earlier picture. This helps them to realise that there 
are other shapes in the trees and they are the most exploratory group. 
B-3 look very closely at the picture. They have an awareness of danger and 
death which they again associate with the house. They also refer to the eyes within 
the picture. Just as they had earlier compared the Crane picture with the two children, 
now they see the wolf in the forest and realise he is the same as in the Crane picture, 
and the same girl sees that Rose in her red coat is like Red Riding Hood. Having 
made this important comparison, however, they conclude that Rose has been to the 
forest before and taken a photograph, thus giving a very literal interpretation. 
In both readings, School C's interest in the book as a construct is shown by 
their immediate comment on the effects by which Rose is shown to be running. Like 
the other groups they identify the house and the wolf, but their comments on the wolf 
are playful rather than fearful. On their second reading they see the path between the 
trees which leads our eyes back to the house. Just as their earlier comment on the 
forest was that it was a land of stories, they now discuss whether the animals have 
been carved by the axe or whether they are in her imagination. One boy realises that 
Data Analysis: Response to the semic, symbolic and cultural codes 
we can see shapes in everything and compares the shapes in the trees to the patterns 
he sees in everyday objects, like chip butties. Perhaps because they have rationalised 
the scene and made it a safe place, they do not relate the pictures to earlier pages to 
explore other possible meanings ofthe book. 
Thus all the groups have responded to the three codes. The intertext and the 
use of suggested and ambiguous shapes have allowed them to draw on cultural 
knowledge in their reference to stories, film and personal experience. They have 
responded to the semic code in noticing details in the trees but it is how the semic 
details are organised within the symbolic code that is significant here and they have 
all shown some awareness of the meaning of the forest in relation to the book as a 
whole. The children in Group A show this in their sense of the dangers of the forest 
and their pleasure in linking the house there to the lamp in the bedroom, and the other 
children in an awareness of the imaginary nature of the creatures in the trees and a 
recognition that the wolf is the same as in the Crane picture with Rose herself as Red 
Riding Hood. Group C most clearly recognise the imaginary nature of the forest but 
ignore many of the details through which the symbolic code is developed. 
Pages 21-22 
A-I They appear to be perplexed by what has happened to Jack but they recognise 
that he is turned to stone: he's got stone (164). They wonder whether he was going 
home (163) or to the park (167), and address him directly: Are you going in the 
home? (165) 
A-2 They notice Jack's cry: He's crying (213), that he is running and that Rose 
will help him: is going the home an he run She's going to help him (214-216). When 
asked, they wonder if the witch or the dragon turned him to stone (233-236) or 
acknowledge that they don't know (237). 
8-1 As I read the children join in with crying sounds and comments on his scream: 
Look his mouth screamed (131). They then make screaming sounds themselves. 
8-2 They explain this picture through narratives that take account of the fact that 
he is running fast (71-72); that he is in a circle of stones (83-84) and he is screaming: 
Like this first he was a boy then he go wala wala wala wala wala wala (101-102). 
Although they had previously only mentioned the wolf briefly, their narrative shows 
their awareness of his menace and it appears to be he that turned Jack to stone. 
Data Analysis: Response to the semic, symbolic and cultural codes 
Although their meaning is unclear (77-100) the wolf appears to have magic powers 
that enable him to become invisible and tum Jack to stone: He can only move slowly 
he's invisible (96).Their long story has elements from films and stories, such as magic 
stones (79) and eyes that emit rays that turn people to stone (87-88). They use words 
like 'zap.' 
B-3 They respond to page 22 as a frightening picture: Every time the scary picture 
(275) and refer to Jack as the statue boy (275). They notice the circle of stones which 
have turned him to stone: there's magic things here if you step here then you're a 
statue (282-283). They also comment on the trees that have been cut down (278). 
e-l -
e-2 They comment excitedly that he is turned to stone (313). Initially I have to ask 
questions to encourage them to consider why he is turned to stone and they respond 
that it is the person who lived in the house (313-316), probably a goblin or a witch 
(317-320). They notice the cut down trees (328) and the ring of stones (351), and they 
build these into a long narrative explanation that includes the axe, the animals in the 
trees (360-362), the boarded-up tunnel (366-367) and the fire (369). 
Summary comment pages 21-22 
The stone figure of Jack stands as the central symbolic enigma of the story, and all the 
groups recognise that he has been turned to stone and that he is screaming. Most of 
their explanations are through their own narrative, which I discuss in the section on 
the proairetic code. It is interesting, however, that none of the children understands 
the symbolic nature of his transformation but believe it was caused by a goblin or a 
witch (A, e); the wolf (B); the person who lived in the house (e), and Groups B and 
e notice the ring of stones that may have magic properties. The response by Group e 
is interesting. They had constructed a view of the forest as a fantasy place with 
imaginary creatures in the trees. That reading is disturbed, however, when they tum 
the page to see the stone figure of Jack, and they have to reconsider their 
interpretation of the nature of the forest. They now begin to see it as a place of 
danger, in which the animals that are in the trees or carved in wood are somehow 
linked to the statue. On the first reading they are silent, perhaps because they do not 
understand what has happened and just want to look at the picture. On the second 
reading they are more excited and they look at the tree stumps, suddenly 
Data Analysis: Response to the semic. symbolic and cultural codes 
remembering the axe and the fire in the forest and wondering if they have now 
destroyed the monsters in the trees. The symbolic code of the barren landscape and 
the figure of Jack have thus caused them to revise their reading. 
Pages 23-24 
A-I They notice Jack's colour returning (169). 
A-2 Their immediate comment is on Rose's love for her brother, although they 
may lack the vocabulary to express this: Brother love him (242). They then look at 
Jack's change of colour (245-251) with some awareness of colour symbolism as they 
associate the dark side of the picture on the left with danger (250-253). 
8-1 They see his returning colour and realise that he coming back to life: Can you 
see it changing? Why? It's coming real (133-135). 
8-2 They start to talk about the changes in Jack and then see shapes that look like 
hands in the trees: Look look there's hands hands (l05). They then look at Jack's 
blank eyes: Where? Where the eyes? Eyes eyes eyes. Is just the stick got into his  
(111-112). When I ask if they think it was Rose who brought him back to life they 
answer with a firm No (127) and although there are long explanations on why he was 
turned to stone, there is no reason given for his return to life. 
8-3 They echo the words of the text that this is her brother (284) and believe that 
she has become a statue boy like her brother because she has stepped inside 'the 
magic things': Look she's a statue now /ike her brother (287). They see that the 
children are now happy and wonder where the tunnel is now (292-295). 
C-2 They notice the difference between the ring of stones and of daisies and 
consider the meaning of the daisies: And stepped into a ring of daisies Where? There 
Ring ring of daisies must mean (375-378) and see how Jack comes alive (381-382). 
They also see the change in light and colour as Jack comes back to life: Probably 
because he's in stone Lighter and lighter (394--395). They spend some time 
discussing why there are now trees behind Jack and Rose and the tree stumps are in 
the background, trying to relate them to the tree stumps in the previous page. They are 
also puzzled by the ring of stones which turns to daisies, but appear to realise that the 
trees and the daisies relate to Jack's transformation: and he he gets bring back to life 
Data Analysis: Response to the semic, symbolic and cultural codes 
the trees grow again and that might just be another place for them trees chopped 
down with another ring in it (520-523). 
Summary comment pages 23 - 24 
The only group who articulate Rose's love for her brother is school A. Groups A and 
B comment on Jack's returning colour and B-2 imagine that they see hands in the 
coppiced trees and comment on Jack's blank eyes. Because they have their own 
explanation for Jack's transformation, they reject the idea of Rose rescuing her 
brother. B-3 notice the ring of 'magic things'. It is C-2 who, as in the previous 
picture, are engaged by the unaccountable changes in the semic code: they are in a 
land where there is no consistency so that the tree stumps are replaced by dark trees 
and the ring of stones changes to daisies. Their interest is shown by their request that I 
come back tomorrow to continue the discussion (377). They come to an 
understanding that the trees grow and the colours change as Jack returns to life, thus 
showing understanding of the symbolic code. They do not, however, acknowledge 
that it is Rose who has saved her brother. B-3 is the only group who wonder where 
the tunnel is. 
Page 25-26 and end-paper 
A-I They recognise that the children are now home and there is dinner ready for 
them: He going to home she want to go to the ready dinner (171-172). 
A-2 Their comment: That's his brother (274) may indicate a recognition of the 
relationship between the children or may simply be a recognition of which one is 
Jack. 
B-2 They recognise that they are friends now: Because they're friends No more 
cross (141-142). 
B-3 They see the ball and book together (294-301) and recognise the reunion of 
the brother and sister: they all together again (296). They notice the book is now on 
the brother's side: Give the book back (301). 
C-2 A girl says that they are back in time for tea but they correct this to lunch 
(527-528). There is then a discussion of why there is only a book on the front 
Data Analysis: Response to the semic, symbolic and cultural codes 
endpaper, a book and a ball together on the right-hand side at the end of the book. 
They conclude that it is because they like each other and now the girl wants to go 
outside to read (529-536). 
Discussion of responses to semic, symbolic and cultural codes 
Group A 
Of necessity, their observations were limited by their limited fluency in English and 
knowledge of stories. This was apparent when they looked at the forest and were 
aware of dangers but were not able to point to so many specific hidden shapes as 
School B. Perhaps for this reason they appeared to be guided by both verbal and 
visual text to a greater degree than the other schools. They echo the word 'different' 
to comment on the difference in their clothes; they do the same with the word 
'frighten' where they state that Jack is frightening Rose on page 6, and they repeat 
that Rose is running when they see her in the forest. Not only do they use words from 
The Tunnel, they also appear to be guided by the graphic codes. In Rose's bedroom, 
for instance, they are the only group to comment first on the figure of Jack, the focal 
point of the picture. On the waste ground they say nothing about the pile of rubbish 
but refer to the bright clothes of the two children which stand out against the subdued 
colours of the background. On the double-page spread view of the forest, on the first 
reading. they mention only the focal points: the bear ('dragon'), the figure of Rose; 
then the house, finally looking at the wolf ('dog'). 
An interesting feature of their reading is an understanding of the feelings of the two 
characters. They judge Jack to be naughty from the pictures of him shouting and then 
creeping into the bedroom. They look carefully at Rose, noticing her place-mat, 
appearing to notice the change in her posture on page 18 as she looks around her 
more alertly, and commenting on her scream on pages 19-20. On their second reading 
they also understand that her concern for her brother causes her to run. They are the 
only group to state that she helped her brother and that she loved him. 
Considering the symbolic code, it is clear that the semes they have responded to have 
led them to the central antithesis between the two children - the contrast between the 
children and the fact that Rose was able to rescue her brother through her love. 
Although their interpretation of the forest is of a real place, they have a strong sense 
of the dangers Rose has passed through. 
Data Analysis: Response to the semic, symbolic and cultural codes 
School B Groups 1 and 2 
Because the children in Groups 1 and 2 were different from Group 3 (apart from one 
boy), I shall discuss Group B-3 separately. On looking through the utterances of B-1 
and 2, it seems that they were more aware of the semic/symbolic code on their first 
reading, when they were very observant, but more engaged with the proairetic on a 
second reading. 
Their observation of the patterns on the wall are sensory, commenting on the 
smell of the walls and then comparing Rose's wallpaper to the coffee plant. They do 
not, however, link the two wallpapers to the children. 
In their first reading they have to work out the relationship of the left and 
right-hand pictures to make sense of pages 5-6. Their interest is in the Crane picture 
on the wall, and in the wolf s cowboy hat. They see other semic details of the 
bedroom in the light of the story of Red Riding Hood, until they identify the bedside 
lamp as the 'witch's cottage'. On the second reading, however, they focus more 
closely on the two children, looking at Rose's 'peeping' eyes as evidence that she is 
scared. They say little more about their relationship until their recognition at the end 
that they are now friends. They are, however, the only group to express awareness of 
the unseen mother. 
Their observations of the forest are interesting. On the first reading they look 
at the four main features of the picture: the axe, the barred hole, the rope and the fire 
and they begin to link these with the other end of the tunnel. When they look at the 
double-page spread, they first look back to the tombstone and the house. They then 
look at the bear on the left and quickly realise that it is not real but part of the tree. 
Their comparison with Jack in the wolf mask probably refers to the wolf, although 
they do not mention him by name, but it also shows an awareness that the animals in 
the wood are not what they seem. They enjoy finding shapes in the forest on the first 
reading and on a second reading their subsequent explanation of how Jack was turned 
to stone shows their awareness of the cracks and shapes in the trees. 
They notice Jack's mouth open in a scream and his horrifying blank eyes, 
comparing his stone head to a rock. The children in this group have been particularly 
observant of small details, such as Rose's peeping eyes. They are aware of Jack's 
behaviour but not to the same degree as Group A and there is little observation of 
Data Analysis: Response to the semic, symbolic and cultural codes 
Rose's feelings or her role in rescuing her brother. They have a greater interest in 
making sense of the scenes through their own narratives and they tend to see the 
scenes in terms of these narratives but they do show an awareness that the shapes in 
the tree are not literally true. 
Group 8-3 
From the beginning, their reading shows an expectation that they are required to look 
carefully at the pictures, relating the details within and between pictures. On looking 
at pages 3-4, therefore, they immediately identify Rose as the girl on the cover; relate 
the two wallpapers to the two children and read against the written text to point out 
the similarity rather than the difference between the children. 
Throughout the book they are able to interpret the semic code to develop an 
understanding of the relationship between the two children, leading them to an 
awareness of the symbolic nature of the text. This is shown by the way in which they 
link the two Wallpapers to Rose and Jack - indoors and outdoors - and in their 
understanding of the position of the book and ball together on the back endpaper. 
There is a humorous remonstrance here to Jack to give the book back, recognising 
that it is now on his side of the wall. 
On pages 5-6, they are able to compare the pictures on both pages, interpreting 
the smile on Jack's face to mean that he is dreaming about scaring his sister and also 
realising that she is frightened. Their willingness to interpret what they see is shown 
by their comparison of the Crane picture with the figures of Jack and Rose, including 
the observation that Red Riding Hood is not scared. This comparison is continued 
later in the forest scene when they see that the wolf in the forest is the same as in the 
Crane picture and that Rose is in the role of Red Riding Hood. 
Their awareness of the children's feelings is shown in their recognition that 
Rose is frightened of her brother on page 7 and their understanding of the children's 
dejection on page 8 - Jack doesn't want Rose with him and she doesn't want to go 
either. Although they are amused by her gloomy face on page 13 they realise that she 
has to overcome her fears to enter the tunnel. 
This group is observant of small semic details, such as Rose's hair bobble that 
shines in the dark and her book - not the same on the waste ground as the open book 
Data Analysis: Response to the semic, symbolic and cultural codes 
she leaves by the tunnel. They also notice many shapes on the waste ground and in 
the forest. 
Overall, this group gives the fullest reading. In their understanding of the 
relationship between the children and the way they are able to make comparisons 
between the children and Red Riding Hood and the wolf they show that they are able 
to synthesize observations into an understanding ofthe symbolic code. 
Groupe 
They have some sense of the polysemy of the book from the very beginning, when 
they see the book on the front endpaper and remember the book on the cover to 
predict that there will be a book on every page. By the end of the second reading they 
know the reason for the book and the ball being together. Their awareness of the 
importance of books and stories continues when they look at Rose reading in the 
window and pretend to read over her shoulder as, in fact, the picture invites the reader 
to do. In Rose's bedroom it is again 'the worlds within worlds' that interest them: the 
Crane picture, the Gingerbread lamp and the book on the bed. Their interest in the 
intertext and the metafictive nature of the text leads one of them to realise that she has 
gone into the world of stories. This interpretation is shaken, however, not only by 
Jack's stone figure, but also by the changes in the scenery around him that force them 
to re-examine the nature of the text. 
On the first reading they comment on comparatively few semes but on only 
those details that relate to their own interpretation. The boys enjoy the picture of Jack 
telling Rose off, imitating his voice, and they become engrossed by the rubbish on 
the waste ground, identifying things they have themselves. They are the only group to 
comment on the book's techniques, pointing to the streaked effect of the kicking 
movement of Jack's foot and Rose running through the forest. Like B-3 they also see 
that the two patterns on the wallpaper are associated with Rose and Jack and with 
indoors and outdoors. 
Their attention is drawn to the focal points in the forest, but they do not see 
many of the hidden shapes in the trees. On the second reading, however, they enjoy 
'picking over' the rubbish on the waste ground and are very observant. They have a 
greater interest than the other groups in the appearance of the two children, noticing 
the difference in their heights and Rose's slippers. Like 8-3 they also comment on her 
Data Analysis: Response to the semic, symbolic and cultural codes 
peeping eyes. It is noticeable that they say nothing about Jack in the mask, although 
this is the focal point of this picture and the one to which the graphic codes direct our 
gaze. 
Each group of children has read the text in a different way. The children in 
Group A have shown awareness of Rose's emotions and have themselves responded 
in a more affective way. Groups B-1 and B-2 have looked in detail but their main 
interest is in narrative explanations and they have tended to read the pictures in the 
light of these narratives. The children in Group B-3 have looked particularly closely. 
They have made meanings by relating the semic details to one another and they have 
also shown awareness of the children's feelings and of the symbolism of the 
Wallpapers. The children in Group C have read the book in a more lighthearted way, 
interested in the intertext and the technical effects. They have also shown awareness 
of the symbolic, polysemic nature of the book but not as it relates to Jack's treatment 
of his sister. 
It is interesting to look at elements in common in their readings of these codes. 
Only A-2 and B-3 say anything about the journey into the tunnel between pages 11-
17. This may be because the hermeneutic code involves them in what will happen 
next and makes them unwilling to discuss the pictures. None of the children sees the 
witch's hat in the houses opposite Rose as she reads, or comments on the witch's hat 
in the window in the forest. B-3 is the only group that make a comparison with the 
smaller pictures on the left so that the children pay greater attention to the right-hand 
pictures, the side of the 'new' according to the graphic codes. 
There are details they nearly all notice, however. They all comment on the 
bedside lamp and compare it to the house in the forest. With the exception of Group 
A, they show an interest in the Crane picture, although B-3, and possibly B-2, are the 
only ones to see that the wolf is the same as in the forest. They have been guided by 
the graphic codes to look closely at what is an important part of the symbolic code. 
They all comment and contrast the pointing arms on pages 7-8 which are such a 
striking visual image, but B-2 are the only group to mention the mother whom we 
never see. 
On the double-page spread of the forest, all the children, except A-I and C-I, 
look first at the house and then their gaze travels down to the creatures on the left and 
across to Rose and the wolf on the right. Thus, as in the bedroom, the graphic codes 
Data Analysis: Response to the semic. symbolic and cultural codes 
have directed their attention back to an important detail of the picture. Most children 
seemed to see the house as a malevolent influence in the story. 
When they look at the stone figure of Jack, B-1 and B-2 are the ones who 
really articulate the horror, referring to his screaming mouth and blank eyes and his 
head like a rock, and they also refer to the shapes of the trees in the background. B-3 
and Group C notice the circle of stones that turns to flowers but do not relate it to the 
symbolism of the text. All the groups show an awareness of the ending of the book, 
commenting on the fact that they are friends and that dinner, or tea, is ready. 
The analysis has shown that their readings have much in common, especially 
the enthusiasm with which they explored the text. What surprised me was the extent 
of the absorption and inventiveness with which they responded to The Tunnel. This 
creativity, stimulated by the book, enabled them to draw on their own cultural 
resources in their reading of the semic code as well as in their own extended and 
sometimes dramatic storytelling. They began to transform these resources through 
their playful interactions with the text as they organised the semes into larger 
symbolic meanings and moved towards an understanding of the spiritual meaning of 
the story. There were unexpected differences in their readings of these codes, 
however, many of which were due to their cultural backgrounds or literary 
semiospheres. In the conclusion, therefore, I discuss what the semiotic coding of their 
readings has revealed about the ways in which they were able to use and transform 
their own cultures and what they learned about the nature of reading itself. 
Conclusion 
Conclusion 
The research set out to explore children's readings: the ways in which they were able to draw 
upon their cultural experiences and subjectivities to read a particular text, and how the text 
enabled them to transcend these influences. In Hollindale's terminology, I wanted to look at 
the interaction of their differing concepts of childness with those of The Tunnel in a process 
of transformation. 
In order to do this, I needed an analytical framework that would allow me to look 
closely at the children's readings of both words and pictures and I selected Barthes' s semiotic 
codes as a tool that would allow me to analyse both and which was particularly appropriate 
for a post-modem picture-book. I also made use of Moebius's graphic codes to provide 
further insights into the children's responses to the pictures. 
Reflection on Barthes's connotative codes as a means of analysing different readings 
of texts (rather than the texts themselves) helped me to see how the intriguing, surreal, 
detailed semes in the text invited the children's curiosity and led them towards the larger 
symbolic connections and antitheses of the story, the meaning of the semes being often 
ambiguous enough to admit the children's own meanings. When the semic code became 
inconsistent or surprising, the children were able to revise their reading to accommodate the 
inconsistencies, which also moved them towards an understanding of the symbolic code. This 
can be seen in the way in which Group B responded to the objects in the forest, attempting to 
relate them to the waste ground (B-1: 66-70), and in Group C's reaction to the pictures of the 
stone figure of Jack and his subsequent rescue, which led them to discuss the meaning of the 
changes in the pictures (C-2: 370-523). 
The hermeneutic and proairetic codes were also important to the children, and the 
puzzles and enigma of the text stimulated them into storytelling and narrative explanations, 
particularly when a sense of mystery was developed through the hermeneutic code while the 
proairetic was withheld. This was particularly evident in the response of Group B-2 to the 
stone figure of Jack (B-2: 67-139). I was able to trace the children's response to the cultural 
code through the meanings they brought to interpret the other codes, particularly the semic 
code and this led me towards conclusions on the cultural nature of their reading which I 
Conclusion 
discuss later in this chapter. This polysemy is precisely what for Barthes, in S/Z, characterises 
the writerly text. In all the children's readings, but especially in B-3, the Barthes's coding 
allows us to witness children as producers of the text. While not wanting to underestimate the 
importance of 'multicultural' content for all pupils in children's literature, the use of a 
connotative analysis of this kind implies that a more fruitful and productive approach to book 
selection is possible, and it changes our focus from content to higher-order interpretative 
competencies. 
In the conclusion, then, I recall my intention to consider The Tunnel as an appropriate 
choice of book for children, in the light of the responses of the children referred to in Chapter 
4 as they reconstruct its secondary world. I go on to show how the evidence presented brings 
about enhanced understanding of their reading, and consider the nature of literary 
competencies more generally, recommendations for choosing texts, and classroom practices 
that will promote literary competencies, particularly in multicultural classrooms. 
The book and its possibilities 
At the heart of the thesis is the children's picture-book around which the readings of the 
children and myself have been explored. As discussed in Chapter I, in The Tunnel Anthony 
Browne has made it possible for me, as an infonned reader, to draw on a tradition of 
psychoanalysis and surrealism in my reading. The story invites the exploration of levels of 
consciousness, of inner and outer reality. It is constructed around metonymic images that 
merge into one another as in a dream. The forest scenes are full of shapes and creatures that 
are all the more frightening because they are suggested rather than clearly delineated: the 
reader must read them through their own fears and dreams. As adults we can usually 
rationalise such images, but to children they are close to their own nightmares. Who has not 
dreamt of being unable to move while being chased by some monster? 
The book is a cultural representation in which the author uses semiotic codes to give 
fonn to such inner fears. Readers learn to recognise such codes as the means used to create 
layered significances. This recognition develops through cultural experience and culturally 
mediated ways of reading, as well as their own inner repertoire of stories. It is through its 
problematising of such codes, however - by building up suspense and then teasingly 
withholding the satisfaction of the movement of the story, or by shifting the semes, the 
markers of a consistent world - that The Tunnel invites its readers to become writers. It is, 
Conclusion 
therefore, in Barthes's tenns, a writerly text. The text teaches its readers the processes they 
must engage in to read it and the kind of reading they must make. The book plays with 
children's very inexperience as readers when it invites them to experience the pleasures of 
the game of 'finding in' as they look at the waste ground or the forest. The book encourages 
them to find connections and offers them the satisfaction of recognising characters from 
familiar stories. 
In the way that it uses intertext, The Tunnel is also metafictive. It is a text about texts, 
full of allusions and references that become integral to it. Browne takes the fonn of a 
traditional folk-tale, but then subverts it, inverting the fonn and content of Red Riding Hood 
and also the ideology of the folk-tale. This is a post-modem picture-book that draws attention 
to its own codes. 
The Tunnel is thus a book that both delights and challenges. To read it is to find an 
infinite number of possibilities, and few readers can resist the pleasures of discovery and 
rediscovery that it offers. The children with whom I read it were engrossed: they wanted to 
talk about it and they wanted me to return the next day to talk about it more. Adult students 
approach it in a similar absorbed way. It both challenges adult readers with its elusive 
meanings, and demands the maximum from the most inexperienced of readers as they make 
connections, discover what is only hinted at, experience the fear and the shock of what is 
through the tunnel, and feel relief at the satisfyingly happy ending. In requiring such a way 
of reading, using readers' subjectivities as well as their own cultures, and in its subversion of 
what is canonical, my contention is that the book enables readers to transcend the cultural and 
to broaden their literary semiospheres. The selected text was seen to have its own 
semiosphere based on the daily life and relationships within a family and constructed around 
an intertext drawn from Western folk-tales and culture. It is not a canonical story that 
confirms such a way of life, however, but a book that breaks nonns and creates instability in 
the reader, thus challenging the childness in all its readers. In the following section I 
reconsider the children's readings in a cultural context, to show how each group read the 
book through a different template or view of the world. 
Cultural differences in each group's readings 
The children's responses to intertext and the representation of common objects 
I discuss cultural differences in the children's readings in three ways. I look first at their 
Conclusion 
response to the everyday objects in the book, and to the intertextual references. I then show 
how the children in each group respond to the ideology of the text. Finally, I consider their 
approach to interpreting the secondary world within the text. 
The everyday objects are transmitted through the semic and symbolic codes and my 
conclusions are, therefore, based on the evidence in Chapter 4 of how the children in each 
group were able to use these codes in their construction of a reading, and of how they are able 
to reconstruct the world of the book through these objects which can create multi-level 
systems in the reader's mind (Nikolajeva 1996). 
The children who had the narrowest overlap of understanding with the text were those 
in Group A, the least familiar with the English language and culture and the least experienced 
readers of English picture-books. Their unfamiliarity with the book's intertextual references 
was apparent. Although Group A claimed to know Red Riding Hood, they were not 
sufficiently familiar with it to have made it their own. They found it hard to remember the 
name of the wolf, and did not have the same response to him - as a stock character of wicked 
cunning - as the English children. Perhaps for this reason Group A did not make comparisons 
between Rose and Red Riding Hood and Jack and the wolf. They saw in the pictures 
creatures from their own tradition, dragons and snakes rather than wolves and bears, although 
they did recognise the witch (A-2: 221-223). In the forest they failed to notice many of the 
monsters and shapes in the trees, possibly because they were unfamiliar with them and saw 
only what they expected to see. Perhaps, too, they lacked the English vocabulary to express 
what they could see. They were, however, conscious of the thumb and the eyes (A-2: 164-
169). 
As I expected, Group A's comments on where Jack was going, both to explore and 
when he was turned to stone, were limited by their own cultural experiences of going to the 
park or going to school (A-I: 100-102). I was surprised, however, by their interest in the 
children's clothes and the bedroom furniture (A-I: 93-95; A-I: 105-110; A-2: 302ft). This 
may reflect some curiosity about an English way of life, as well as a desire to compare their 
own possessions to those shown in the book. I treated these as important evidence of their 
ability to use their own culture to make sense of the book. Another surprise was the way in 
which Group A were guided by the graphic codes in many of their observations. They were 
the group that often commented first on the focal points of the pictures. This can be seen in 
the way in which they looked first at Jack crawling into Rose's bedroom (A-I: 58-61; A-2: 
Conclusion 
They also looked at the bright figures of the two children dressed in clothes of primary 
colours on the waste ground (A-I: 107-111), but ignored the pile of rubbish that the other 
groups found so interesting. Coming from a country in which such 'junk' is reused, however, 
it is possible that they were not familiar with the concept of a rubbish tip. Their use of the 
graphic codes is significant of the way that the text itself enabled them to make sense of the 
story. 
The children were also, to some extent, guided by the words of the story, sometimes 
using the words in their own responses (A-I: 113; A-2: 30-31,306). Repetition is one 
element of learning a story in another language (Krashen 1982), and it is also possible that 
their greater attention to the words may reflect the cultural approach to reading in their 
communities (Gregory 1997). The other groups seldom used the words of the text, although 
B-3 had the confidence to question them in the light of the picture (B-3: 6-8). 
The children in Group B-1, B-2 and B-3 were more familiar with life in England; they 
enjoyed English books and stories, especially fairy stories, and they watched English films 
and television. Although the culture of their homes was firmly based on an orthodox Muslim 
way of life, these particular children were also interested in Western culture. It is not 
surprising, therefore, that they were able to recognise and enjoy the intertext, remembering 
what happened in Hansel and Gretel (B-1: 25-27), finding the beanstalk in the forest (B-3: 
211), and recognising the allusions to Red Riding Hood (B-1: 16-24). B-3, in particular, were 
interested in Rose's books and wanted to compare them to their own (B-3: 176-179). I had 
not expected B-3's reading to be so closely observant of detail: they used their knowledge of 
life, stories and film to interpret what they saw so that they were able to find, not only 
crocodiles, snakes and frogs in the trees, but also Dracula (B-1: 97-124). They also noticed 
many cultural artefacts on the waste ground, such as Coca-Cola tins and a CD (B-3: 102-
167). The stories they created in response to the gaps in the text showed the influence of film 
and television, with car chases and laser guns, and they greatly admired what they saw as 
Jack's Superman mat (B-3: 96-100). The children in this school can be seen, therefore, to be 
embedded in two cultural spheres, nearer the mainstream Western culture than those in 
School A, but less embedded in it than those in School C. 
The Sussex children in Group C were less interested in listing what they saw (see 
Chapter 4), and they ignored those details that were misplaced, such as the witch's hat in the 
window and the foot on the waste ground. They noticed what appealed to them, commenting 
on details such as Rose's pink slippers (C-2: 48-51), Jack's football and the place mats (C-2: 
Conclusion 
140-147}. They became engrossed by the picture of the waste ground, partly in identifying 
what they themselves possessed, but also with regard to things they would like to make. 
These were themselves part of the children's culture, being robots and 'walkie-talkies'{C-l: 
48-63; C-2: 152-159}, but it is interesting that the seme of the broken glass caught the girls' 
attention, since they were echoing Rose's fear of the waste ground (C-2: 154). 
Group C read the book in terms of the intertext. They wanted to identify the book, the 
picture and the lamp in Rose's bedroom {C-l: 18-40}. They also looked at the forest in 
relation to Little Red Riding Hood {C-I: 79-98}. But, surprisingly, they missed or ignored 
some of the other details, such as the semes of the thumb, the owls, the gorilla and the other 
creatures in the forest. The fact that the children were making sense of the story with 
reference to the intertext suggests that they felt that they were 'in the know' in recognising it, 
and also felt some surprise at encountering familiar friends in a new context. They were 
constructing a reading based on a mental template of familiar stories, and their expectations 
of story genres were too firmly established for them to know that there may be surprises. 
They 'tidied it up' and made it safe, but they became more observant when they looked at the 
stone figure of Jack and the changes in the forest and they had to revise what they had 
previously seen (C-2: 360-362). Group C can be seen comparing their own sense of childness 
with that of the book and the children within the book - comparing what they liked to read 
and have in their rooms and showing what they would like to do and make in the waste 
ground. 
Although I analysed the groups' readings with the presupposition that there would be 
differences in the semes that they recognised and responded to, I was surprised by the extent 
to which their perceptions were influenced by cultural expectations, and by the way in which 
they were all able to draw upon their own intertextual resources and the exuberance with 
which they did so. 
Their response to the ideology of the text 
The relationship between the two child characters is central to the childness of the book, 
which is written within a semiosphere where sibling rivalry is nonnal and boys often bully 
their younger sisters. The way Jack's stereotypical bullying is presented carries an explicit 
message that this is an undesirable way to behave. Initially Rose's demeanour and behaviour 
complement his, but it is she who takes the initiative and rescues her brother. It is the fact that 
Conclusion 
Rose overcomes her fears to do this, thus breaking the gender stereotype, that produces 
narrative tension and also the spiritual meaning of the book. 
The extent to which the groups of children differed in their response to the relationship 
between Jack and Rose was unexpected. The Bangladeshi children came from larger families, 
often separated from siblings still in Bangladesh where there is a stronger cultural expectation 
of duty and care between siblings. This was particularly evident in the reading of Group A, 
who were shocked by Jack's behaviour and were the most condemnatory of him (A-I: 71; A-
2: 3). They were also the only group to mention that Rose loved her brother (A-2: 230) and 
that it was she who rescued him (A-2: 214). In the group's stories, Jack and Rose went 
through the tunnel hand in hand to take care of each other. There is an irony in the fact that, 
although their semiosphere is different from a Western one, it is closer to the 'message' of the 
story, while at the same time preventing them from accepting the extent of the division in 
Jack and Rose's relationship. 
The children from the second school also disapproved of Jack's bullying, but with a 
note of ambiguity in their attitude since they were, at one point, mildly contemptuous of 
Rose's fear (B-3: 57). Their awareness of the children's emotions, especially Rose's (B-3: 
101,103,179), and their realisation that she has to overcome her fears to go into the tunnel (B-
3: 184) reflects their apparent position between the two cultures of School A and School C. 
They have much in common with School A but they have moved closer to Western culture. 
They did not acknowledge that Rose rescues her brother - an idea that was met with a firm 
rejection by B-2 because it did not fit in with their own narrative explanations (B-2: 127). 
The attitude of the Sussex children was very different. Unlike those from other 
schools, they were so deeply embedded in the values that Browne's book makes explicit, 
involving a kind of sibling hatred and gender divide, that they were not easily able to accept 
the redemptive power of Rose's love. They didn't want to regard it as a good thing or 
acknowledge it, and their resistance to the ideology of the book caused them to miss the 
larger spiritual meaning. 
The reading of these children is marked by an identification with Jack and by 
disapproval or taunting of Rose (C-2: 114-115). There is no acknowledgement of her courage 
in going into the tunnel or her rescue of Jack, although their brief retelling of the story at the 
beginning of their second reading does indicate an awareness of the power of Rose's embrace 
(C-2: 1-14). They related what they saw and read in the text to their own relationships with 
their siblings (C-l: 62), and one of the girls went so far as to tell me ( off tape) that girls and 
Conclusion 
boys hate each other. It seems that reading the book acted as a kind of conduit for such 
negative emotions to be made explicit, which may be the first stage towards recognising them 
for what they are. Although their attitude was strengthened by the group situation, it is similar 
to that of the ten-year-old boy in the pilot study who suddenly became angry at the book and 
began to talk about his whining sister. The children recognised that Jack and Rose are friends 
at the end of the book (A-2: 274; B-2: 141; B-3: 294-301; C-2: 527), but they represented this 
as being on Jack's terms in that Rose now goes outside to read (B-3: 296-301; C-2: 529-536). 
There is a universality about the brother/sister theme of the story. Each group is 
culturally situated to recognise part, but not all, of Browne's 'message,' which is difficult and 
complex. Adult readers can only speculate about what happened to Jack. The book allowed 
space for each group to move towards a deeper meaning within the tenns of their own 
semiosphere. In this sense, their responses to it exemplify reading as a journey rather than an 
arrival. 
Response to the secondary world of the text 
The Tunnel presents a secondary world, entered through the tunnel, which serves as the 
passage between the everyday world and the fantasy world beyond. However the boundary 
between the two worlds is not as defined as this suggests, since the secondary world creeps 
into the real world, as hinted at by the witch's hat and the mysterious shoe soles. Influenced 
by Heath's account (1983) of the two communities, Roadville and Trackton, I had expected 
that there would be some differences between the children's understanding of the secondary 
world and mine, with its reading of the cultural nature of concepts of fantasy. Working with 
these groups of children, however, enhanced my understanding of the effect of cultural 
influences on how the children construct meaning and interpret the book. As discussed in 
Chapter 2, the children in schools A and B were taught in their Mosque schools to regard the 
Holy Book as a true book and a guide for everyday life, its meaning being mediated through 
the Mullahs. In their Bengali classes, the teaching of decoding skills came before discussion 
of meaning, and children were not encouraged to relate their everyday experiences to the text. 
It is noticeable, in fact, how much more the English children did this than the Bangladeshis, 
other than when I encourage them to do so (C-l: 33,48; C-2: 284-290). The Bangladeshi 
children may have encountered fantasy and parallel worlds in English books such as the 
Shirley books by John Burningham or Where the Wild Things Are or in films like Back to the 
Future or even Superman, which Group B mention with approval (B-3: 96-98), but fantasy is 
Conclusion 
not an integral part of their literature. School C children are more familiar with the English 
tradition of alternative worlds (Meek 2001) from books such as Alice in Wonderland. the 
Narnia books. and even Enid Blyton's The Faraway Tree. 
This may account for some differences in how each group understood the world 
beyond the tunnel. All the Bangladeshi children appeared to regard it as an actual place 
which the brother and sister visited. The children in school A regarded it with horror as a 
place of real danger from witches and ghosts and other nameless monsters (A-2: 161-187). 
They accepted the stone figure of Jack and his rescue by Rose without question and it is only 
the gravestone that elicited explanation. 
The children in school B were more experienced readers who were accustomed to 
talking about books in their English school and enjoyed fairy stories like Sleeping Beauty and 
Aladdin. It is possible that the importance of the text in their culture and the attention they are 
expected to pay to accuracy, generated attention to what is on each page: they did not treat 
the task lightly. The fact that they regarded the forest as an actual place is shown by their 
theory that the picture on Rose's wall was a photograph from an earlier visit (B-3: 267-270), 
although at times they showed an awareness that the animals in the trees were not real (B-1: 
90-94. Because they saw the world beyond the tunnel as an actual place, they expected it to 
make sense: they were the groups to make the strongest links between the two ends of the 
tunnel (B-1: 63-70; B-3: 222-232). When the author presents puzzles and breaks the 
conventions of realism, they responded by inventing ever more involved stories which 
synthesised the semes they had observed in earlier parts of the book. Thus their long narrative 
explanation for what has turned Jack to stone referred back to the shapes they had seen in the 
forest (B-2: 68-88). 
The English children were more lighthearted and playful in their approach to the 
book: they chanted names, taunted Rose and pretended to eat the Gingerbread House. They 
were also more interested in the book's graphic techniques (C-l: 81; C-2: 68-69; C-2: 275), 
and they took account of the intertext, although they did not make the connections between 
texts as B-3 do. More than the others they appeared to see the story as a textual construct, and 
had some awareness of its metafictive quality: unlike them they saw the other side of the 
tunnel as an alternative place - 'the land of story books' (Cl: 80). This may indicate some 
understanding of the polysemic nature of the book and the symbolism of the forest. They 
were certainly aware of the significance of the change of light and the growth of trees when 
Jack returns to life (C-2: 394), and of the ball and the book on the endpapers (C-2: 529-536). 
Conclusion 
Their awareness of the secondary world may also indicate a cultural acceptance of parallel 
worlds. Their interest in the fact that Rose had gone 'into the world of stories' (C-l: 80) 
appears to be consistent with their approach to reading The Tunnel as a whole. This group's 
rationalisation was, however, shaken by what happens to Jack and this led to a 
reconsideration of their interpretation, involving a closer look at the pictures and the 
symbolic code. 
In summary, all the groups read The Tunnel differently, drawing on their cultural 
ways of perception and comprehension, the wealth of the resources of their cultural 
expectations. Their interactions of this nature with the book reveal much about the dynamics 
of the reading process, in which the literary semiosphere of the reader develops through 
encountering that of the text. Exploration of an unfamiliar cultural semiosphere not only 
challenges readers but also helps them to discover more about themselves. The children in 
this study were able to define their own childness against that of the text, and their readings 
thus became processes of affirmation and transformation in which they learned something 
about themselves and about the nature of reading. 
The Tunnel repeatedly confounds expectations that it has set up. In drawing on stories 
familiar to most of its readers and by breaking conventions of realism in writing, Browne 
gave the children a series of challenges, causing them to reconsider their interpretations and 
way of reading, and thus provided a zone of proximal development within which there is the 
potential for personal and cultural transformation and enrichment for each of the groups. I 
now proceed to discuss their readings in the light of psychoanalytical literary theories 
discussed in Chapter 2 and then look at other interpretative strategies through which they 
read and reconstructed this writerly text. 
Meaningful reading experiences for the teacher 
Psychoanalytical theories were compared for their insights into how readers might interpret 
the text and for the ways in which the book might use images that build on unconscious fears 
or desires. Aidan Chambers has suggested that an awareness of the power of the unconscious 
and the relationship between inner and outer reality has become part of the 'grammar of our 
thought' (1985: 66), influencing the way we think about ourselves and the way we read and 
write, particularly in the case of children. My own adult reading interpreted the text as a 
Jungian journey into the unconscious, seeing the tunnel, the forest and the waste ground as 
archetypal images. I also read it with an awareness of Freudian views of infantile sexuality, 
Conclusion 
and of childhood as a time of learning to come to tenns with the terrors of everyday life and 
the nature of sibling rivalry. 
Children do not think in this way, however, and the 'grammar of thought' referred to 
above is also a culturally specific way of thinking. In looking at their reading, therefore, I am 
interested to see whether they had an awareness that the book is about the inner world of 
Rose, but also whether they themselves responded in a way that suggested that their own 
inner fears were involved. 
Meaningful reading experiences for the English children 
The English children reacted to the theme of sibling rivalry by articulating their own 
grievances against their siblings. The boys thought of ways to tease their sisters. There was a 
marked resistance to the theme of Jack's bullying, with the boys unwilling to judge Jack or 
comment on his actions. They did not acknowledge Rose's courage. Even the girls remained 
silent about this and, unlike Group A, they did not use the word 'love.' Their reaction 
suggests that Browne's treatment of the relationship between the children may have affected 
them at a deeper level, as well as reflecting a cultural attitude and a desire to be seen in a 
certain light by their peers. I am persuaded that they identified too closely with the children to 
want to comment on their relationship: the semiosphere of the book depicting the relationship 
in the bleak scenes of the waste ground and the stone figure of Jack in the cut-down forest, 
was too close to their own for comfort. 
They were able to relate the other side of the forest to the world of stories, but there 
was no recognition that this reflects Rose's own fears or that they thought of these scenes as 
being like a dream - unlike an older boy in the pilot study, who said that the children had 
gone into their worst nightmare. The seeming reluctance of children in Group C to explore 
the hidden shapes within the trees is surprising, and perhaps suggests that they found this 
scene more disturbing than they cared to admit, or that they lacked experience in looking 
closely at picture-books in this way. They were able to explain the forest, but it is clear that 
the rationality of their reading was shaken by the irrationality of Jack's stone figure and this 
produced their most extended discussion (C-2: 328-523). They also showed a particular 
interest in the miniature worlds of Rose's books, the picture on her wall and the Gingerbread 
Cottage lamp - images that can be seen as metaphors for interiority (Stewart; see Chapter I). 
Conclusion 
Meaningful reading experiences for the Bangladeshi children 
They were able to talk about their own fears in bed at night and about the fact that some of 
them sleep with the door open and a light on just as Rose did. They were aware of the 
frightening images that were in the forest, Group A in particular responding to them as 
though they reflected their own fears. The children from School B were eager to play the 
Freudian game of free association, and they identified the largest number of creatures in the 
forest as well as shapes on the waste ground (B-1: 83-129; B-3: 102-167). They were able to 
link the images in the forest with what was in Rose's bedroom, but with no apparent 
realisation that these monsters may have been in her imagination. Emotionally they 
experienced Rose's fear with her but with no indication that this reflects her inner conflict 
and resolution - indeed, they rejected the fractured relationship between the children. The 
Bangladeshi children were more able than the English children to talk about Rose's feelings 
(B-3: 91) and her love for her brother (A-2: 230), thus showing some understanding of 
multi consciousness within the text. Because their semiosphere situates them at a distance 
from the conflict between Jack and Rose, they were able to comment on that relationship, 
unlike the English children for whom, as already mentioned, the relationship was too close to 
their own experience for them to be able to acknowledge it. 
Similarities and differences 
Although there were differences between the groups' readings of the relationship between the 
two children, it is clear that all of them found the forest and Jack's figure disturbing to some 
extent. This is shown in the transcripts (A-2: 185-187, 213; 8-1: 131, 8-3: 212-216,275), 
and also in their own drawings: the children in Group A replaced the forest with apple trees 
and the children in Group C included their own monsters, but they expressed some relief 
when they turned to the page with the tree-stumps (C-2: 345-346). In Margaret Meek's 
words, the book enabled them to 'name the unnameable in their lives' (Meek 1991: 122). In 
addition, they all responded to the resolution of the ending, where the children are united in 
the safety of home with a meal ready (see above). The meal recalls the supper in Where the 
Wild Things Are - that other book about inner turmoil; and in his own reference to this book, 
Sendak states the need for images in children's literature that will enable children to face 
their inner fears: 
Conclusion 
That from their earliest years children live on familiar terms with disrupting emotions, 
that fear and anxiety are an integral part of their lives and it is through fantasy that 
children achieve catharsis. 
(Lanes 1980: 107) 
Britton, too, sees the value of fantasy as a means of giving fonn to unconscious feelings that 
are part of the process of growing up, and expresses how the cultural and the psychological 
work together: 
Culture, the common pool of humanity, offers the young child witches and fairy 
godmothers, symbols which may embody and work upon the hate and love that are part 
of a close, dependent relationship. 
(1977: 47) 
The Tunnel does not have a fairy godmother, but it does have a both angry and forgiving 
mother, as well as a witch who lurks in the background, and the children's satisfaction at the 
ending suggests that it provided a cathartic experience for them. 
The reading of the groups of children differed from that of the teacher in one crucial 
respect. She interpreted the pictures . as reflecting what was happening within the two 
children, so that the tunnel and the forest are metaphors for inner conflicts, whereas the 
children experienced fear with Rose and, indeed, read the scenes in the forest in the same 
way as Rose did. Through their experience of reading this book, they were beginning to use 
the power of affective response to texts as a way of knowing, and they were acquiring literary 
competencies which, with further reading experience, could develop into the adult's ability to 
both experience and reflect critically on the text. 
Interpretative strategies 
The first chapter looked at those literary theories that might have explanatory power both for 
an adult reading of the text and for that of the children. Those theories that favoured the 
reader offered the most compelling explanations, but the role of the text in providing 
guidance in how it should be read was also seen to be particularly important in books for 
children One of the interesting features of the children's reading is the fact that all the groups 
interpreted the book differently. In their readings they constantly looked backwards and 
forwards, revising them and seeing things in a new light. This active manner of reading is 
accompanied by some excitement. Even Group A, who backtracked least, often gave a gasp 
Conclusion 
of excitement as the children recognised that the house in the forest is the same as the one by 
Rose's bed. The involvement of the groups in School B was apparent in the nature of their 
stories, which included dramatic effects and repetitions, and Group C's voices dropped and 
became quite intense as they looked back at the axe, suddenly considering what it might have 
done to the creatures in the forest, and whether there was some relationship between the 
creatures in the trees and the statue of Jack. The transcripts show how hard the children 
worked to fill the gaps, and the fact that how they looked at the pictures and what they saw 
were detennined by the mental template that they applied to their reading, this being a largely 
cultural construction. 
This study makes plain that adult interpretations of children's readings are partial, 
incomplete and gain from evidence the children provide. In many ways, the groups' 
engagement, and their ability to relate and revise, has much in common with my own reading 
processes, although their interpretations and responses to the symbolic code are sometimes 
different. There is a danger, however, in applying adult literary theories to children's reading. 
Meek (1996) has stressed that children's readings are not the same as adult readers' and that a 
theory of children's literary reading is still required. Children are inexperienced: their 
knowledge of life and books is limited and their subjectivities are unformed. To recapitulate 
from Chapter 1, studies have been made of children's reading in the light of reader-response 
theory, such as Judith Langer's model of how readers 'envision' a text or create a 'text world 
in the mind' (1995: 9). She sees this envisionment developing through four stages, which she 
describes in terms of 'stepping out' and 'moving through'. 
In many ways Langer's is a useful model, capable of describing how the children read 
and the continuum of competencies they still need to acquire. However, in the light of this 
study, it does not accurately reflect the children's absorption on their first reading, when 
many of their utterances are interpretative and show them working hard to make sense of the 
story through reconstructing the text and tolerating uncertainty. In addition, Langer's model 
does not account for the affective nature of the children's readings, such as their shock at the 
sight of the stone figure of Jack, School A's fear of the forest, and School C's playfulness 
with the text. Moreover, it does not stress the possible power of a text itself to direct its 
readers in certain ways and to guide them through the stages she mentions above. 
The children all drew on culturally constructed ways of reading and making meaning, 
yet in some sense they were all able to transcend these: the first group, who approached the 
text with the most 'innocent' eyes, were affected by Rose's journey and also began to make 
Conclusion 
intra-textual connections; the second group were stimulated into reconstructing their own 
text; and the third group were forced to reconsider their reading. Thus, the semiosphere of 
each is expanded through that of the text, which requires readers to be active. By means of a 
trail of clues in the pictures, the book guided its young readers as to how to read it: the ball 
and the book on the endpapers, for instance, and the wallpaper with which each child was 
associated, are examples of explicit symbolism which most of the children recognised and 
responded to. Faced with the clues, enigma and puzzles inserted into the telling by the author, 
the children had to draw on new interpretative skills, a process of transformation for them. 
Any theory of children's reading, therefore, must take account of the importance of the kinds 
of texts that they are offered and the kind of reading competencies those texts can teach 
(Meek 1986). 
Summary 
The following section summarises the first part of the chapter before considering the specific 
literary lessons, or competencies, that emerged from the children's experience of reading The 
Tunnel. At the beginning of this chapter, I affirmed the value of 8arthes's connotative codes 
as a tool for close analysis of the children's readings; it illuminated the ways in which this 
writerly text allowed them to bring their own readings to it. This was followed by a brief 
reconsideration of the text in the light of the children's responses to it, and I then discussed 
the insights I had gained into the cultural nature of the children's readings. I found that, 
although I had expected some of the variations in their responses, there were also surprising 
differences in their interpretations, particularly in the extent to which their responses to the 
secondary world of the text was influenced by cultural ways of understanding fantasy. I was 
also surprised by how much The Tunnel had enabled them to draw upon their own cultural 
resources to make new meanings. 
Having discussed their cultural readings, I reconsidered the children's responses in 
the light of psychoanalytical literary theory. Although there was little explicit recognition of 
the theme of inner and outer reality, all the groups of children responded in varying degrees 
to the frightening images within the forest, and to the final reconciliation, so that reading The 
Tunnel was a cathartic experience for them. I then recapitulated the difference between the 
ways in which children and adults read, and stressed the importance of providing texts that 
will give guidance to inexperienced readers on how they are to be read. 
Conclusion 
VVhatthechildrenlearned 
The following section now explores what the children learned about the nature of reading 
from their experiences of reading The Tunnel in this way. In considering this, I found 
Scholes's three aspects of English teaching - reading, interpretation and criticism - helpful 
(see Chapterl), although I was mindful of the fact that his model was derived from teaching 
older, albeit inexperienced undergraduates, whereas the children in my study did not yet have 
enough experience of textual varieties to know about reading as distinct from understanding a 
story they were exploring. Scholes's third aspect, criticism, was not applicable to children as 
young as those in this study. 
To see themselves as readers 
This reading lesson is fundamental to all others. Meek refers to it as the 'most important 
untaught, early lesson. Children see themselves as readers before they can explain the nature 
of textual engagement' (2000: 200). It is a lesson taught through early interactions with 
books, even before children start school, and this develops as children's concepts of what it 
means to be a reader continually change. Children need to see themselves as active makers of 
meaning, whereby they become both the teller and the told (Scollon and Scollon 1981). This 
was an important lesson for all the groups, but particularly groups A and C. Group A were, 
for the first time, encountering texts that challenged their cultural approach to reading and 
learning to read. Their delight in the new treasures spread before them was evident as they 
showed me the array of books in their classroom. They regarded books with the innocent 
eyes of younger children looking at them for the first time and, like such young children, they 
will have formed concepts, from these early encounters, of what reading in the new culture is 
all about. During their readings of The Tunnel, they began to understand their role as partners 
in the reading transaction. 
The children in Group C, who were not used to talking about and re-reading texts in 
this intensive way, also saw themselves as readers in a new way, as the nature of the text and 
the focus of discussion led to the construction of possible meanings. 
To tolerate uncertainty 
This was an important lesson for all the children who, whatever their previous reading 
experiences, were unaccustomed to explore a pluralist, open text of this nature. Furthermore, 
the text required them to develop an understanding of the situations of Jack and Rose through 
Conclusion 
the use of iterative time in the series of pictures from pages 3-7, before singulative time starts 
on page 8. Some uncertainty was shown, particularly by the children in School B, who said 
nothing in response to pages 3-4 on the first reading and who had to work out the 
relationship of the pictures on pages 5-6 (BI: 8-11; B2: 13-17; B-3: 43-53). 
The open nature of the book and the use of visual puzzles heightened their 
uncertainty, but also stimulated them into becoming active readers, prepared to conjecture but 
able to modify their reading and accept that some things may not have an explanation (such 
as the witch's hat in the window opposite Rose, or what happened to Jack). They learned, 
therefore, that reading is, in Rosenblatt's words, a transaction in which they must play their 
part, and that in the act of reading things may not always be what they appear to be. 
Affective and cognitive engagement 
In order to solve the problems, the children had to engage closely with the text. School C, in 
particular, may have been unfamiliar with this way of reading, which could account for the 
brevity of some of their discussion. As they encountered the challenges of the book, however, 
they became more involved in discussion and conjecture, even asking me to return the 
following day to continue their speculations. Their reading became more tentative and 
exploratory and, as it did so, their language became less certain (C2: 379-395). The verb 
'think' is repeated (397, 404, 405, 412, 413, 415, 417) as well as modals like 'might' (401, 
519, 521), 'because' (391, 394, 398), and 'probably' (394). It is interesting that their 
discussion became more collaborative as they questioned and sometimes disagreed with one 
another, using evidence to support their ideas (390, 404-407). 
The engagement of the children in B I and B2 is particularly evident in their long 
narrative explanations and in the unselfconscious way these narratives are dramatised. A 
good example of this is in B-2: 96-102, where a boy describes how the wolf crept up on Jack 
and turned him to stone. His voice is deep and slow as he quietly repeats the word 'slowly' 
nine times to suggest the movement of the wolf, and then suddenly becomes high-pitched and 
fast as he makes the sound of Jack when he is caught. B-3's engagement is shown by their 
close attention to details and the way in which they are able to synthesize them. 
The book called, then, for an intellectual engagement, but the children also learned to 
be emotionally involved. This is particularly evident in A2's response to the forest, when 
their voices become hushed and intent as they exclaim in horror at the witch's thumb, the 
bear without arms and the 'ghosts' eyes (A2: 119, 124, 161, 185). This affective response is 
Conclusion 
also apparent in the excitement of the other groups, but to a lesser degree. It is a significant 
reading lesson, for, as Nelson Goodman (1968) points out, affective response is an important 
element of learning to understand works of art, and the emotions are themselves a way of 
knowing: 'In aesthetic experience the emotions function cognitively. The work of art is 
apprehended through the feelings as well as the senses' (1968: 248). Closely linked to this is 
Jane Doonan's emphasis (1988) on the importance of 'aesthetic looking' and the need to give 
children time to experience this. An important lesson for all the children, therefore, was in the 
need to spend time looking, in how to be involved in looking, and in the need to look 
repeatedly at books of this nature. 
Understanding of symbol and metaphor 
The literary competencies discussed so far relate to ways of approaching the book within 
Rosenblatt's 'aesthetic stance' (see Chapter 1). The children's ways of reading were extended 
so that, in addition to their affective reading, School A was also learning what details to look 
at and how to relate these to one another, while School C was beginning to learn an 
emotional involvement that enabled them to see such close looking as worthwhile, thereby 
also extending their cognitive understanding. School B was fully engaged both affectively 
and intellectually, but the text was developing their understanding of its metaphorical and 
symbolic nature, a literary competence included in Scholes's category of 'interpretation'. He 
sees interpretation as activated by what he refers to as the 'failures of reading' (1985: 23). In 
other words, the reader encounters puzzles or uncertainties in the text which draw attention to 
the need to solve them. This can be related to Iser's gaps in the text which stimulate the 
making of meaning, and to Scholes's emphasis on making the process explicit. As a text 
constructed around puzzles, The Tunnel is one that guides its readers into problem-solving 
and interpretation. 
As discussed earlier, The Tunnel opens up countless possibilities and meanings, but 
also provides clear guidance as to how it is to be read. Groups 8 and C, therefore, were able 
to recognise the symbolism of the two walls and the contrast between indoors and outside, 
reflecting the antithesis between the two children (8-3: 11-14; C-2: 18-21). They also 
understood the significance of the position of the book and the ball on the endpapers (8-2: 
294-301; B-3: 296; C-2: 529-535). These groups became aware that the creatures in the forest 
are not real and Group C realised that they may be in Rose's imagination (C-3: 280-286). 
These all exemplify a symbolic code that invites interpretation. 
Conclusion 
The book also abounds with details, or semes, to be synthesized into larger symbolic 
meanings and all the groups showed a developing ability to do this. Group A recognised the 
connection between the house in the forest and Rose's lamp, and their excitement indicates 
that this discovery was significant to them (A-2: 141-157). The connections and meanings 
made are, at times, bizarre, especially those of B2, but again their involved and incoherent 
explanations show how important this interpretative process was to them. The children were 
beginning to develop this competence: while they were not yet able to see the symbolic force 
of the stone figure of Jack, the mystery stimulated intense interpretative speCUlation. On their 
second reading, Group C discussed the significance of the stone circle and the ring of daisies, 
but they did not see them as metaphors for the children's state of mind; they are not yet at the 
stage of the ten-year-old boy in the pilot study who compared the book to a myth where 
everything has meaning. 
Culler (1975) sees the ability to recognise metaphorical coherence as one of the basic 
conventions informing literary competence, and this includes recognition of the ways in 
which figurative language contributes to overall meaning. The children are moving towards 
this kind of understanding and awareness of the patterns and rhythms of the book; they are 
also learning that it has a great number of possibilities of meaning and that they are required 
to draw upon their own cultural and reading histories to make sense of it. 
The constructedness of texts 
Another lesson that the children learned was the way in which texts gain their meaning from 
their relationship to other texts. Groups B and C, in particular, were intrigued by the intertext 
- eager to show their knowledge and establish themselves as fellow readers; they are also able 
to use the intertextual references as a framework for understanding the story. It is crucial, 
therefore, that children whose semiosphere is 'other' than mainstream are offered a range of 
reading experiences which can admit them to such reading competencies, and which can help 
them to see how literary traditions and intertext work. 
Reading as a social activity 
Exploring a text and making meaning collaboratively was an important learning experience 
for all groups. It is worth referring here to the fact that - as mentioned in Chapter 3, section 
3b - the book empowered them to initiate discussion in response to nearly every page. 
Although the London children were accustomed to group reading, close attention to text was 
Conclusion 
a new experience for them, while the Sussex children were not used to group discussion of 
picture-books. They implicitly learned about two aspects of reading and language: they 
experienced talk as a powerful means of developing meanings, and they extended their ability 
to use a range of appropriate language. 
It is noticeable that, despite the inevitable interruptions and overlapping utterances 
that are a feature of informal conversation, the children were able to listen to one another and 
extend one another's ideas, so that meanings emerged and were given form as a group 
interpretation, not merely as a number of individual responses. This can be seen in A-2 when 
they exclaimed at the dangers of the forest (A-2: 141-187), repeating phrases and building up 
a picture together so that, for example, one child referred to a ghost and another pointed to his 
eyes (162-164). In line 157, a boy starts to talk about the gravestone, but the rest of the group 
are not yet ready and he waits until line 192. 
The children in School B were more fluent users of English and there are many 
examples of how they arrived at an understanding of the text through their conversational 
turn-taking. In B-2, for example, lines 89-96 show how a number of brief utterances about 
the handless bear enabled the children to consider the reality of the monsters and then to 
make a comparison with the earlier figure of Jack in his mask. Another noteworthy example 
of the collaborative making of meaning is when B-3 first noticed the similarities between the 
forest and Rose's bedroom, then compare Rose to Red Riding Hood, and concluded that the 
Crane picture is a photograph of a previous visit (B-3: 258-271). Each child's utterance built 
on the preceding one, gradually leading the group to a joint conclusion. 
As already mentioned, School C's language became speCUlative and tentative as they 
puzzled over the scenes of Jack's transformation, and were able to question one another (C-2: 
373, 390) and discuss together (C-2: 404-410).Thus the children have experienced the 
interpersonal nature of learning through discussion of a text with the power to engage and 
challenge them. 
Using English as an additional language 
It is worth noting here the sheer amount of language practice generated by the social nature 
of the readings in the two Bangladeshi groups. On the way to mastering an additional 
language, children are able to respond verbally to a complex mixed text, thereby improving 
their linguistic skills. Verbal responses such as are found in these children's reading are 
closely related to their strong emotional involvement in the text, especially in the case of the 
Conclusion 
least experienced readers. This suggests that, in contrast to the affective sparseness of many 
readers for beginners, texts that are polysemic and complex are more suitable because they 
are able to stimulate more explanatory and speculative uses of language, of the kind required 
for problem-solving and intellectual activity of many kinds. 
Reading as play 
The nature of the text, together with the children's infonnal collaboration, encouraged them 
to be playful as they explored the forest for hidden shapes, dramatised their own long 
narratives, or chanted and engaged in language play. They were thus experiencing the 
subversive power of literature as a kind of play in the ways discussed in Chapter 2. Hence 
literature can be seen here as Winnicott's third space through which children develop a sense 
of their own subjectivity in relation to the external world - the space described by Britton as 
'the place where we are most ourselves' (Meek et al. 1977: 102). Their absorption and, at 
times, intense pleasure in making connections within the book indicates the profoundly 
satisfying nature of this engagement in deep play. 
Summary 
The study shows the complexities of the reading experience for these children, what they 
learned about the nature of reading, and what it feels like to be a reader. They learned about 
the affective and intellectual nature of engagement with text, experiencing both disturbance 
and catharsis. They came to know what it feels like to become active readers, partners in the 
reading transaction while drawing on their own subjectivities and experiences. They learned 
to construct meanings and began to understand the nature of metaphor whereby semic details 
can be organised into larger symbolic meanings. They became aware that texts offer various 
possibilities of meaning, and they increased their tolerance of uncertainty. They learned the 
power of talk as a prime medium for making meaning while at the same time extending their 
own language repertoire. They also discovered the playful nature of reading as a means of 
self-realisation and, in their encounter with the semiosphere of the book, they learned about 
themselves and developed their sense of childness. 
These young children - especially those from School A - are at an early stage of 
reading development, and will need to progress in order to develop higher order 
competencies. The next section, therefore, considers the implications of the study for 
classroom practices, first discussing the kinds of the texts that will promote such 
Conclusion 
development, and then looking at classroom interactions and practices that will enhance 
literary understanding. 
Classroom implications: the nature of texts for the multicultural classroom 
The study raises important questions about the nature of the texts we offer to all children in 
our multicultural classrooms. Although there is an interest in picture-books amongst many 
teachers, there is also a concern that the non-canonical texts - the polysemic picture-books -
may not be appropriate for children from 'other' ethnic backgrounds. This is partly accounted 
for by a feeling that the complex ideas and language of authors like Sendak and McKee will 
be inaccessible to children from another culture, and I have encountered many teachers who 
have voiced scepticism over introducing their books to children who are not yet fluent in 
English. Among many teachers, there is a tendency to offer these children only stories with 
plain, literal and simplified language, and preferably books in which readers will see positive 
self-images and some reflection of their culture. By contrast, this study shows how a 
complex, multi-layered book evoked complex responses from a great variety of children. 
It is true that children do need many kinds of books, including ones that confirm their 
sense of identity in recognisable norms and conventions. It was noticeable that, after reading 
The Tunnel, which made so many demands upon them, the children in the study particularly 
enjoyed a familiar story, often a folk-tale, to which they would listen in contented silence, 
sometimes offering to bring their own version of the story from home. Such stories may well 
be selected from a variety of cultures, and traditional folk-tales provide a rich source for all 
children to become aware of other cultures, alongside enjoyment of their own. School B's 
enthusiasm for Aladdin shows how they valued a story made popular by Walt Disney and 
featuring a Muslim hero. There has to be wariness in the selection of books, however. It is 
possible to offer children certain books in the belief that these will be culturally appropriate, 
but where there is a disjunction between the teacher's sense of what is a cultural match and 
the children's sense of their own developing childness. This is particularly true with children 
who are trying to construct their own new cultural identity in the way that School B were. 
Scafe (1989) refers to the undesirability of introducing 'black' texts into the curriculum, so 
that students 'feel better,' without an understanding of children's complex feelings about 
their own culture and that in which they find themselves in the wider society. 
Children develop reading competencies by reading as widely as possible from a diet 
of books that includes the known and familiar, those that are currently at their level, and 
Conclusion 
those that will challenge them in some way: 'a child has a past, present and a future to his 
reading development' (Benton and Fox 1985: 34). The 'future' - ability to read challenging 
texts - will, in part, depend on a background of wide reading, for 'all new reading depends on 
previous experience' (Chambers 1993: 65). While this is no longer a particularly new 
observation, it becomes one in a multicultural context. 
The readings of The Tunnel show how the text was able to touch the children in a way 
that went deeper than their culture, enabling all the groups to relate to and develop their own 
sense of childness while also challenging this. The study exemplifies the importance to all 
children of experiencing texts that extend and transform their conceptions of what reading is. 
A book like The Tunnel, as discussed earlier, makes explicit the processes of reading and 
meaning making through what Scholes (1985) refers to as 'failures' which compel readers to 
become active interpreters or, in Barthes's terms, to become the sites in which the text is 
rewritten. 
Picture-books are able to present this challenge through the levels of meaning and the 
ambiguities created in the relationship between words and pictures. In response to polysemy, 
readers must continually develop and discover new ways to read them, and so such books 
continually provide new reading lessons. Sendak' s Where the Wild Things Are (1963) works 
in this way as children, from whatever culture, come to realise that Max's voyage is a dream 
and that the monsters represent his coming to terms with inner feelings. Even a seemingly 
simple and apparently monocultural book for young children like You'll Soon Grow Into 
Them, Titch (Hutchins 1983) reveals themes of growth, change and independence when 
words and pictures are read together. 
Such dual-address books can challenge both the young child and the adult who reads 
aloud; but there are also picture-books that should form part of the reading diet of older 
children. The illustrations and page layout in The Lion and the Unicorn (Hughes 1998), for 
instance, suggest the possibility of meanings beyond the verbal text as well as revealing 
complex emotions. Books by John Burningham, such as Come Away from the Water. Shirley 
(1978) or Where's Julius? (1986), develop readers' awareness of the contrasts between the 
mundane quality of everyday speech and the language of the imagination, while Janet and 
Alan Ahlberg playfully subvert the discourses of everyday life and common sayings in The 
Jolly Postman (1986) and The Clothes Horse (1987). Books by postmodernist authors, such 
as David McKee's I Hate My Teddy Bear (1982) and John Sczieska' s The Stinky Cheese Man 
(1993), are about story and storytelling in ways that experiment with the familiar rules of 
Conclusion 
layout and narrative, and thus make new demands upon the reader. The author/illustrator 
Sarah Fenelli is also boldly experimental with the picture-book form. In Dreamtime (1999) 
she draws on techniques of modern art and design so that her pages visually explode upon her 
readers, compelling them to look and read in new ways. These books require a special kind of 
reading. Like The Tunnel, they have the power to transform: 'they can provoke reading as 
well as promote it. They also know how to change it.' (Meek 2000: 199). 
Innovative picture-books should be read alongside children's novels. These may 
include such books as Alan Ahlberg's The Better Brown Stories (1995), or Philip Pullman's 
Clockwork (1996), both of which draw attention to the constructedness of texts (Meek 2000), 
or David Almond's Skellig (1998) with its rich symbolism and levels of meaning. They may 
also include the many classic authors such as Philippa Pearce or Lucy Boston who make new 
demands of their readers in relation to time and space and inner and outer reality, while also 
teaching them how they are to be read. Books of this kind are 'in the van of those who help 
children, the new community, to reach beyond the tired limits of the community into which 
they happen to be born' (Chambers 1985: 76). In other words, they can contribute to the 
process of transition for all children. Given their particular demands upon readers, it is the 
role of the teacher to initiate children into the pleasures they offer. Following the view that 
the complex processes required to read a text are at least as important as its cultural content, I 
am proposing a substantial extension of the criteria employed in choosing books for the 
multicultural classroom. 
Interactions with the text 
The nature of teaching that can both initiate and develop readers requires serious 
reconsideration, especially in the context of the Literacy Framework, which ostensibly sets 
out systematically to teach literary competencies. The lessons that the study'S children 
learned about the social nature of reading demonstrate the importance of exploratory talk in 
developing literary competencies, and support Vygotsky's view of the central role of talk in 
learning. As they conjectured, discussed and sometimes argued, they could be seen to be not 
only learning through but about language. The learning environment was one where the 
children felt relaxed and confident, and in which their contributions were valued, so that they 
were able to experience what it feels like to be a reader. Their reading demonstrates the way 
in which children approach texts within their own cultural semiosphere, and need the 
freedom of exploratory talk to express this and draw upon it if they are also to transcend it. 
Conclusion 
Referring to the need for children to talk about books in a way that will allow them to relate 
their own lives and cultures to the text, Rosenblatt writes: 'Transactions with texts that offer 
some linkage with the child's own experiences and concerns can give rise aesthetically to 
new experiences' (1993: 19). In the light of this study, I take her remark to refer, not to a 
match between child and textual content, but to the space offered by complex works for 
children's semiospheres to be included. 
The study also underlines the importance of the role of the teacher. The discussion 
was open-ended, and the teacher was prepared to 'lead from behind,' as in Wells's examples 
(1981) ofadultlchild language interactions. Children developing competencies in this way are 
also shown in Creating a Community of Readers (King and Robinson 1993). The children are 
discussing books in 'literature circles' and the teacher leads them both to reflect on their own 
reading processes and to discuss them with one another, at first with her guidance and then in 
independent groups. One member of the group is a Punjabi girl who has been in the country 
for three years, and the group interactions that are set up under the guidance of the teacher 
allow her to draw on her own knowledge to develop her reading, so that later in the term she 
can be seen taking a leading part in a discussion of Anthony Browne's Gorilla. Thus all the 
children are developing their literary semiospheres through talk by building a classroom 
culture - a community of readers. The video demonstrates the importance of the teacher's 
role. The children are encouraged to express what they feel, think and picture as they read, 
and thereby increase their awareness of their own reading processes. 
Collaborative activities to develop literary competencies 
The study has shown the combined importance of the text and open-ended discussion around 
it in developing literary competencies. It has drawn attention to the need for books that will 
challenge and promote new ways of reading them, so that such texts have the power to teach 
their young readers the nature of reading itself as a transformative process. As seen above, 
inexperienced readers will especially benefit from a teacher who is able to support and extend 
their reading, and initiate close reading of books in a collaborative situation. This practice 
may be supported by a variety of interactive reading activities: discussion with a certain 
focus, for instance, such as comparisons between particular texts and the reformulation of 
ideas drawn from the text through maps, posters and charts, together with children's own 
imaginative drawing. It may also include producing their own texts - for example, rewriting 
Conclusion 
part of the story from the point of view of another character, or exploring the book through 
drama. 
Beneficial though all these ways of exploring texts are, the research shows the basic 
importance of close reading and rereading. Words and pictures may first be read together, 
then possibly separately, in order to make the levels of meaning and the ambiguities created 
by the relationship of words and pictures more explicit, before again reading the two. It was 
close reading and rereading that enabled the children in the study to bring their own cultural 
resources to their reading and at the same time to discover a richness of meaning beyond 
these, and this in tum opened up new ways of reading. Group A were able to experience the 
power of affective reading as a way of discovering possibilities of deeper meanings; the 
children from School B, in particular B-3, discovered the joys of using their own knowledge 
of intertext and stories to produce other meanings within this text; and Group C found 
reading to be a worthwhile activity, one in which they could become deeply engaged. Each 
group learned and experienced the transforming power of the text and what it means to be a 
reader, all of them emerging from the encounter changed in some respect. 
It is this kind of interaction with books that teachers must value and promote, since 
without it - despite the learning objectives of the National Curriculum and the Literacy 
Framework - children will not attain the full experience of reading that should be their 
entitlement, of literature that is 'felt on the pulses first of all' (Rosenblatt 1993: 20). It is the 
evidence of the power of such reading with all the children that marks this research as 
making a distinctive contribution to the study of literacy education in the multicultural 
classroom. 
The context of multicultural education 
During the last three decades, our understanding of multicultural Issues has developed 
through a substantial body of research into its various aspects These include the broader 
multicultural curriculum (Jeff coate 1979; Houlton 1986; Grugeon and Woods 1990), and the 
need to value children's language and home culture (Blackledge 1994), and children's 
entitlement to opportunities to develop a critical reflexiveness towards their own culture 
(James 1981). 
Much interest has centred on linguistic diversity, with studies on the nature of 
bilingualism (Wright 1982; Houlton and Willey 1983; Miller 1983; Skutnabb-Kangas 1984; 
Cummins and Swain 1986), and theories of second-language acquisition (Richards 1978; 
Conclusion 
Krashen 1982; Ellis 1985; Gravelle 1996). Many of those who advocated certain classroom 
pedagogies saw the value of books and stories as a means of learning another language, of 
valuing the children's own narrative traditions and helping them to learn about other cultures 
(Hester 1983; Blackledge 1994). 
Theories about becoming literate in a second language are more recent. Barton 
(1994), Minns (1996) and Gregory (1996) have researched what it means to be a reader in 
different cultural contexts, and Gregory (1995) - informed by an understanding of different 
cultural approaches to teaching literacy - has also developed a pedagogy for teaching children 
to read in a second language. Children's books have themselves become a site of debate 
about how to convey cultural and racial values, and criteria have been published for the 
selection of non-racist books (Dixon 1977; Klein 1985; Pinsent 1992). 
Through this body of research, our knowledge of teaching in a pluralist society has 
developed considerably. Despite the interest in books and stories that runs through much of 
the research, however, what is still lacking is a theory of how children read literature from 
other cultures and of how they develop literary competencies. It is this subject that the thesis 
addresses. Although recent books on teaching reading refer to the importance of polysemic 
books (Bearne 1998; Browne 1998; Riley 1999), the value of using such texts in the 
multicultural classroom needs further research and discussion, together with the important 
questions of the competencies we wish children to develop, and of whether we should aspire 
to develop the same competencies in all pupils from whatever culture. 
Alan James's (1981) conclusions on the purpose and nature of multicultural teaching, 
and the importance he puts on all children developing a critical awareness of their own 
culture, discussed in Chapter 2, are worth reconsidering in this context. All children, 
whatever their cultural background, have a right to a critical literacy that will enable them to 
read against the text and, in order to develop this, we have to build upon and extend their 
strengths. They need texts that will move them towards an understanding of polysemy, like 
School C; they also need the kind of attention to detail and awareness of multi consciousness 
that B-3 demonstrated. In order to achieve this kind of literacy, we have to teach children 
within that constantly changing but creative zone of intersection between their own 
semiosphere and that of the text. Teaching in this way will provide the transformative 
experience for all children described by Scholes (1989: 92): children are transformed as 
readers, the text is transformed in the sense of being constructed by the children, and the 
culture is transformed because a process of cultural interaction is taking place. 
Conclusion 
The study looked closely at the readings of a few groups of children, and the nature of 
their responses indicates that there is now a need for research on a larger scale to provide 
additional information on cultural interpretations of literature. One of the pleasures of reading 
with the children was that I was able to do much more than I set out to do. My original 
question related to the use and transformation of culture in the process of reading, but among 
my discoveries was the ludic quality of the children ' s reading - what Fox (1996: 168) calls 
' adventurous mental play.' Theirs was a deep play through which what is cultural could be 
subverted and transformed. Bakhtin writes of the centrifugal and centripetal forces of 
language, through which language simultaneously unifies and diversifies so that it is 'a 
contradiction-ridden, tension-filled unity of two embattled tendencies in the life of 
language' (1981 : 272). 
This heteroglossia finds form in literature: a text like The Tunnel, with its play on 
codes, can help to guide its readers towards an understanding of the literary competencies 
required to read literary discourse, the centrifugal force of literature, but by its subversive 
quality encourages play and imagination, the centripetal force that both builds on and 
transforms culture. 
Men-an-Tol , 
Cornwall 
c. 2000BC 
Bibliography 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Adams, J. (1986) The Conspiracy of the Text: The Place of Narrative in the 
Development of Thought. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
Adelman, C., Jenkins. D. and Kemmis, S. 'Rethinking case study: notes from the 
Second Cambridge Conference' in H. Simons (ed.) 1980. 
Alderson, B. (1986) Sing a Songfor Sixpence: The English Picture Book Tradition 
and Randolph Caldecott. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press with the 
British Library. 
Applebee, A. (1978) The Child's Concept of Story: Ages Two to Seventeen. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 
Appleyard, J. (1990) Becoming a Reader: The Experience of Fiction from Childhood 
to Adulthood. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Amheim, R. (1969) Visual Thinking. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Atkinson, P., Delamont, S. and Hammersley, M. 'Qualitative research traditions' in 
M. Hammersley (ed.) 1993. 
Baddeley, P. and Eddershaw, C. (1994) Not-So-Simple Picture Books: Developing 
Responses to Literature with 4-12 year olds. Stoke-on-Trent: Trentham Books. 
Bain, B. (ed.) (1983) The Sociogenesis of Language and Human Conduct. New York: 
Plenum Press. 
Baker, C. D. and Luke, A. (1991) Towards a Critical Sociology of Reading Pedagogy. 
Amsterdam, Philadelphia: John Benjamin Publishing Company. 
Bakhtin, M .. M. (1929, 1981 edn) The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays. Austin: 
University of Texas Press. 
Ball, H. and Smith, G. (1992) Analyzing Visual Data. London: Cape. 
Ball, SJ. 'Self-doubt and soft data: social and technical trajectories in ethnographic 
fieldwork', in M. Hammersley (ed.) 1993. 
Barratt, P .E.H. (1971) Bases of Psychological Methods. Queensland: Wiley &Sons. 
Barthes, R. (1966; 1977, 1984 edn) 'Introduction to the structural analysis of 
narratives', in R. Barthes (trans. S. Heath). 
Bibliography 
----- 'Style and its lineage', in S. Chapman (ed.) 1971. 
----- (1957, 1973 edn) Mythologies. New York: Hill & Wang. 
----- (1974, 1993 edn) SIZ (trans R. Miller). London: Cape. 
----- (1977, 1984 edn) Image Music Text (trans. S. Heath). London: Fontana. 
----- 'From work to text', in P. Rice and P. Waugh (eds) 1993. 
Barton, D. (1994) Literacy: An Introduction to the Ecology 0/ Written Language. 
Oxford: Blackwell. 
Barton, D. and Hamilton, M. (1998) Local Literacies: Reading and Writing in One 
Community. London & New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
Baxandall, M. (1972) Painting and Experience in Fifteenth Century Italy. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 
Bearne, E. (ed.) (1998) Use o/Language across the Primary Curriculum. London & 
New York: Routledge. 
Bearne E. and Watson V. (eds) (2000) Where Texts and Children Meet. London & 
New York: Routledge. 
Belsey, C. (1980) Critical Practice. London & New York: Methuen. 
Benedict, R. (1935, 1961 edn) Patterns o/Culture. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
Benson, C. (1986) 'Art and language in middle childhood: a question of translation' , 
Word and Image, 2: 2. 
Benton, M. and Fox, G. (1985) Teaching Literature: Nine to Fourteen. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 
Bettelheim, B. (1976, 1991 edn) The Uses of Enchantment: The Meaning and 
Importance of Fairy Tales. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books (first published 
London: Thames & Hudson). 
Bettelheim, B. and Zelan, K. (1982) On Learning To Read. London: Thames & 
Hudson. 
Blackledge, A. (ed.) (1994) Teaching Bilingual Children. London: Trentham Books. 
'We can't tell our stories in English: language, story and culture in the 
primary school', in A. Blackledge (ed.) 1994. 
Bohannan, L. (1966) 'Shakespeare in the Bush', Natural History, August/September. 
Booth, W. (1961) The Rhetoric o/Fiction. Chicago & London: University of Chicago 
Press. 
Bibliography 
----- (1988) The Company We Keep: An Ethics of Fiction. Berkeley: University of 
California Press. 
Britton, J. (1970) Language and Learning: Importance of Speech in Children 's 
Development]. London: Allen Lane. 
'The role of fantasy', in M. Meek et al. (eds) 1977. 
Browne, A. 'Making picture books', in M. Styles et al. (eds) 1994. 
Browne, A. (1998) A Practical Guide to Teaching Reading in the Early Years. 
London & California: Paul Chapman. 
Bruner, J. 'Vygotsky: a historical and conceptual perspective', in J. Wertsch (ed.) 
1985. 
----- (1986) Actual Minds. Possible Worlds. Cambridge, MA & London: Harvard 
University Press. 
----- (1990) Acts of Meaning. London: Harvard University Press. 
Butler, D. (1979) Cushla and Her Books. Auckland, London: Hodder & Stoughton. 
Campbell, J. (1988) The Hero with a Thousand Faces. London: Paladin. 
Carr, W. and Kemmis, S. (1986) Becoming Critical: Education. Knowledge and 
Action Research. London: The Falmer Press. 
Chambers, A. (1985) Booktalk: Occasional Writing on Literature and Children. 
London: Bodley Head. 
'The reader in the text', in A. Chambers (ed.) 1985. 
Chapman, S. (ed.) (1971) Literary Style: A Symposium. New York: Oxford. 
Childs, C.P. and Greenfield, P.M. 'Informal modes ofleaming and teaching; The case 
of Zinacenteco weaving', in N . Warren (ed.) 1982. 
Chukovsky, K. (1963) From Two to Five (trans. M. Morton). Berkeley & Los 
Angeles: University of California Press. 
Coffey, A. and Atkinson, P. (1996) Making Sense 0/ Qualitative Data: 
Complementary Research Strategies. United States: Sage Publications. 
Cohen, L. and Manion, L. (1980, 1994 edn) Research Methods in Education. London 
& New York: Routledge. 
Cole, M. 'The zone of proximal development: where culture and cognition create 
each other', in J. Wertsch (ed.), 1985. 
Cook-Gumperz, J. (1986) The Social Construction o/Literacy. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Bibliography 
Cooke, I. (1987) Mermaid to Merrymaid: Journey to the Stones. Penzance: Men-an-
Tol Studio. 
Committee of Inquiry in the Education of Children from Ethnic Minority Groups 
(1985) Education/or All [The Swann Report]. London: HMSO. 
Cott, J. (1984) (ed.) Victorian Colour Picture Books. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Coward, R. and Ellis, J. (1977) Language and Materialism: Developments in 
Semiology and the Theory 0/ the Subject. London & Boston: Routledge & 
Kegan Paul. 
Crago, H. (1995) 'Serious reconsiderations', Children's Literature Association 
Quarterly, 4, 20. 
'The roots of response', in P. Hunt (ed.) 1990. 
Crago, H. and Crago, M. (1983) Prelude to Literacy: A Pre-school Child's 
Encounters with Pictures and Story. Urbana: Southern University Press. 
Creating a Community 0/ Readers (1993). Videotape, University of Brighton. 
Crane, W. (1870) Toybooks: Little Red Riding Hood. London: George Routledge. 
Cronbach, L. J. (1982) Designing Evaluations o/Educational and Social Programs. 
San Francisco: Jossey Bass. 
Crosman, R. 'Do readers make meaning?', in S. Suleiman & I. Crosman (eds) 1980. 
Culler, J. (1975) Structuralist Poetics: Structuralism, Linguistics and the Study of 
Literature. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
'Prologemena to a theory of reading' , in S. Suleiman and I. Crosman (eds) 1980. 
----- (1981) The Pursuit o/Signs: Semiotics, Literature, Deconstruction. London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
Cummins, J. and Swain, M. (1986) Bilingualism in Education: Aspects o/Theory, 
Practice and Research. London: Longman. 
Delamont, S. (1992) Fieldwork in Education Settings: Methods, Pitfalls and 
Perspectives. London & Washington, DC: Falmer Press. 
Denham, R. D. (ed.) (1954, 1978 edn) Culture and Literature. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press. 
Denzin, N.K. 'Interpretive interactionism', in G. Morgan (ed.) 1983. 
Denzin, N.K. and Lincoln, Y.S. (eds) (1994) Handbooko/Qualitative Research. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 
Bibliography 
Derrida, J. 'Structure, sign and play in the discourse of the human sciences', in J. 
Derrida (ed.) 1966. 
----- (1966) Writing and Difference (trans A. Bass). London: Routledge. 
Dey, I. (1993) Qualitative Data Analysis: A User-Friendly Guidefor Social 
Scientists. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
Diener, E. and Crandall, R. (1978) Ethics in Social and Behavioral Research. Chicago 
& London: University of Chicago Press. 
Dixon, B. (1977) Catching Them Young: Vol. 1, Sex, Race and Class in Children's 
Fiction. London: Pluto. 
Doonan, J. (1993) Looking at Pictures in Picture Books. Stroud: Thimble Press. 
----- (1997) 'Drawn to illustration: Greenaway Artists in 1997', Signal 84. 
----- (1988) 'The idle bear and the active reader,' Signal, 55,33-47. 
Eagleton, T. (1983) Literary Theory: An Introduction. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 
----- (2000) The Idea of Culture. Oxford, MAhusetts: Blackwell. 
Egoff, S., Stubbs, G.T. and Ashley, L.F. (1980) Only Connect: Readings on 
Children's Literature. New York & Toronto: Oxford University Press. 
Ellis, R. (1985) Understanding Second Language Acquisition. Oxford & New York: 
Oxford University Press. 
Evans, E. (ed.) (1992) Young Readers, New Readings. Hull: Hull University Press. 
Fine, G.A. and Sandstrom, K. (1988) Knowing Children: Participant Observation 
with Minors. California: Sage Publications. 
Fish, S. (1980) Is There a Text in This Class? Cambridge, MA & London: Harvard 
University Press. 
Fielding, S. (1749) , "Preface" to The governess, or little female academic', in 
P. Hunt (ed.) 1990. 
Flavell, J. H. (ed.) (1981) Social Cognitive Development: Frontiers and Possible 
Futures. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Flynn, E. and Schweickart, P. (1986) Gender and Reading: Essays on Readers, Texts 
and Contexts. Baltimore & London: Johns Hopkins University Press. 
Fox, C. (1983) Opening Moves: Work in Progress in the Study o/Children's 
Language Development. London: Institute of Education, University of London. 
----- (1993) At the Very Edge of the Forest: The Influence of Literature on 
Storytelling. London: Cassell. 
Bibliography 
----- (ed.) (1996) Challenging Ways o/Knowing in English, Mathematics and 
Science. London: Falmer Press. 
Fox, G. (ed.) (1995) Celebrating Children's Literature in Education. London: Hodder 
& Stoughton. 
Fox, G. 'Reading picture books ... how to?', in M. Styles et al. (eds) 1996. 
Freud, S. (1953) The Standard Edition o/the Complete Psychological Work Vol. IX. 
London: Hogarth Press & Institute of Psychoanalysis. 
----- (1900, 1976 edn) The Interpretation o/Dreams. Hannondsworth: Penguin 
Books. 
Frye, N. 'Forming fours', in R. D. Denham (ed.) Culture and Literature (1954, repro 
1978). 
Geertz, C. (1973) The Interpretation of Cultures: Selected Essays. New York: Basic 
Books. 
----- (1983) Local Knowledge: Further Essays in Interpretive Anthropology. New 
York: Basic Books. 
Genette, G. (1972, 1980 edn.) Narrative Discourse. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 
Gergen, K.J. (1973) 'Social psychology as history', Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 26. 
Giddens, A. (1976) New Rules o/Sociological Method: A Positive Critique of 
Interpretative Sociologies. London: Hutchinson. 
Glaser, B. and Strauss, A. (1967) The Discovery o/Grounded Theory. Chicago: 
Aldine. 
Goelman, et al. (eds) (1984) Awakening to Literacy. Portsmouth, NH, & London: 
Heinemann Educational Books. 
Goetz, J.P. and Le Compte, M. D. (1984) Ethnography and Qualitative Design in 
Education Research. Orlando: Academic Press. 
Gombrich, E. (1960, 1962 edn) Art and Illusion: A Study in the Psychology of 
Pictorial Representation. London: Phaidon. 
----- (1982) The Image and the Eye: Further Studies in Pictorial Representation. 
London: Phaidon. 
Goodman, N. (1968) Languages of Art: An Approach to a Theory o/Symbols. 
Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill. 
Bibliography 
Goody, J. (1977) The Domestication of the Savage Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
----- (ed.) (1968) Literacy in Traditional Societies. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Goody, J. and Watt, I. 'The consequences of literacy', in J. Goody (ed.) 1968. 
Gosse, E. (1907, 1994 edn) Father and Son: A Study of Two Temperaments. (ed. 
A.O.L. Cockshut). Keele: Ryburn Publishing. 
Gravelle, M. (1996) Supporting Bilingual Learners in Schools. Stoke on Trent: 
Trentham Books. 
Greene, G. (1980) Ways of Escape, 1904. London: Bodley Head. 
Greenfield, P. (1972) 'Oral or written language: the consequences for cognitive 
development in Africa, U.S. and England', Language and Speech, 15,2. 
Gregory, E. (1996) Making Sense of a New World: Learning to Read in a Second 
Language. London: Paul Chapman. 
----- (ed.) (1997) One Child, Many Worlds: Early Learning in Multicultural 
Communities. London: David Fulton. 
Grugeon, E. and Woods, P. (1990) Educating All: Multicultural Perspectives in the 
Primary School. London & New York: Routledge. 
Guba, E.G. and Lincoln, Y.S. (1981) Effective Evaluation: 1mproving the Usefulness 
of Evaluation Results through Responsive and Naturalistic Approaches. San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
----- (1982) 'Epistemological and methodological bases of naturalistic enquiry', 
Educational Communication and Technology Journal, 30. 
Hall, S. (1982) 'Culture and the state', in The State and Popular Culture. Milton 
Keynes: Open University Press. 
----- (1997) Representation: Cultural Representations and Signifying Practices. 
London: Sage Publications. 
Halliday, M.A K. (1975) Learning How to Mean. London: Edward Arnold. 
Hammersley, M. (ed.) (1993) Educational Research: Current Issues. London: Paul 
Chapman. 
----- (ed.) (1993, 1999 edn) Social Research: hilosophy, Politics and Practice. 
London: Sage Publications. 
Bibliography 
Hammersley, M. and Atkinson, P. (1983) Ethnography: Principles in Practice. 
London: Tavistock. 
Harding, D.W. 'Psychological processes in the reading of fiction', in M. Meek etal. 
(eds) 1977. 
Harding, D.W. 'What happens when we read?" in M. Meek et al. (eds) 1977. 
Hardy, B. (1964) The Appropriate Form: An Essay on the Novel. London: Athlone 
Press. 
Heap, J.L. 'A situated perspective on what counts as reading', in C.D. Baker and A. 
Luke (eds) 1991. 
Heath, S. Brice, (1982) 'What no bedtime story means: narrative skills at home and at 
school', Language in Society. 2, 1. 
----- (1983) Ways with Words: Language. Life. and Work In Communities and 
Classrooms. Cambridge & New York: Cambridge University Press. 
----- (1992) The Braid of Literature: Children's Worlds of Reading. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press. 
Henwood, K and Pidgeon, N. 'Qualitative research and psychological theorising', in 
M. Hammersley (ed.) 1993. 
Hester, H. (1983) Stories in the Multilingual Primary Classroom: Supporting 
Children 's Learning of English as a Second Language. London: ILEA. 
Hirsch, E.N. (1967) Validity in Interpretation. New Haven: Yale University Press. 
Holland, N. (1975) 5 Readers Reading. Newhaven & London: Yale University Press. 
Holland, N. and Sherman, L. 'Gothic possibilities', in E. Flynn and P. Schweickart 
(eds) 1986. 
Hollindale, P. (1997) Signs of Child ness in Children's Books. Stroud: Thimble Press. 
Holub, R. (1984) Reception Theory: A Critical Introduction. London & New York: 
Methuen. 
Homan, R. (1991) The Ethics of Socia I Research. London: Longman. 
Houlton, D. (1986) Cultural Diversity in the Primary School. London: Batsford. 
Houlton, D. and Willey, R. (1983) Supporting Children 's Bilingualism. London: 
Longman. 
Huberman, A.M. and Miles, M.B. 'Data management and analysis methods', in N.K. 
Denzin and Y.S. Lincoln (eds) 1994. 
Bibliography 
Hundeide, K. 'Exploring Vygotskian perspectives in education: the cognitive value of 
peer interaction', in J. Wertsch (ed.) 1985. 
Hunt, P. (ed.) (1990) Children's Literature: The Development a/Criticism. London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
----- (1991) Criticism, Theory and Children's Literature. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 
Inglis, F. (1981) The Promise o/Happiness: Value and Meaning in Children's 
Fiction. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Iser, W. (1974) The Implied Reader: Patterns a/Communication in Prose Fiction 
from Bunyan to Beckett. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. 
----- (1978, 1980 edn) The Act 0/ Reading: A Theory 0/ Aesthetic Response. 
Baltimore & London: Johns Hopkins University Press. 
----- 'Interaction between text and reader', in S. Suleiman and I. Crosman (eds) 1980. 
Jacobi, J. (1968) The Psychology o/e. G. Jung: An Introduction with Illustrations. 
London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
Jakobson, R. (1962) Selected Writings. The Hague: Mouton. 
James, A. 'The multicultural curriculum', in A. James and R. Jeffcoate (eds) 1981. 
James, A. and Jeffcoate, R. (eds) (1981) The School in the Multicultural Society: A 
Reader. London: Harper & Row. 
Jeffcoate, R. (1979) Positive Image: Towards a Multiracial Curriculum. London: 
Writers & Readers Publishers. 
John-Steiner, V. and Tatter, P. 'An interactionist model oflanguage development', in 
B. Bain (ed.) 1983. 
Jung, C.G. (1964) Man and His Symbols. London: Aldus Books. 
----- (1966, 1992 edn) Two Essays on Analytical Psychology. (translated R.F.C. Hull) 
London: Routledge. 
Kapitzke, C. (1995) Literacy and Religion: The Textual Politics and Practice 0/ 
Seventh-Day Adventism. Amsterdam, Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing 
Kelle, U., Prein, W. and Bird, K. (eds) (1995) Computer-aided Qualitative Data 
Analysis: Theory, Methods and Practice. London: Sage Publications. 
Kelly, G. (1963) A Theory 0/ Personality: The Psychology 0/ Personal Constructs. 
London: W.W. Norton. 
Bibliography 
Kennode, F. (1979) The Genesis of Secrecy: On the Interpretation of Narrative. 
Cambridge, MA & London: Harvard University Press. 
King, C. and Robinson, M. (1993) Creating a Community of Readers Part 2. 
Brighton: University of Brighton Media Services. 
Kingman, L., Hogarth, G. and Quimby, H. (1978) Illustrators of Children 's Books. 
1967-1976. Boston: The Hom Book. 
Klein, G. (1985) Reading into Racism: Bias in Children 's Literature and Learning 
Materials. London: Routledge. 
Klein, M. (1933, 1977 edn) Love. Guilt and Reparation and Other Works. London: 
Hogarth. 
Krashen, S. (1982) Principles and Practice in Second Language Acquisition. Oxford: 
Pergamon Press. 
Lacan, J. 'The insistence of the letter in the unconscious', in o. Lodge (ed.) 1988. 
----- (1977) Ecrits: A Selection, (trans. A. Sheridan). London: Tavistock Publications. 
Laing, R.O. (1974) Knots. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books. 
Lanes, S.G. (1980) The Art of Maurice Sendak. London: Bodley Head. 
Langer, J. (1995) Envisioning Literature: Literary Understanding and Literature 
Instruction. New York: Columbia University Teachers College Press. 
Laquer, T. (1976) The Cultural Origins of Popular Literacy in England. 1500-1850. 
New Haven: Yale University Press. 
Leader, Z. (1981) Reading Blake's Song. London & New York: Routledge & Kegan 
Paul. 
Lee, B. 'Intellectual origins ofVygotsky's semiotic analysis', in J. Wertsch (ed.)1985. 
Leenhardt, J. 'Towards a sociology of reading', in S. Suleiman and I. Crosman, (eds) 
1980. 
Levine, K. (1986) The Social Context of Literacy. London & New York: Routledge & 
Kegan Paul. 
Lewis, C.S. (1952) 'On three ways of writing for children', in S. Engoff et al. (eds) 
(1980). 
Lewis, O. (1990) 'The constructedness of texts: picture books and the metafictive', 
Signal, 62. 
----- (1995) 'The picture book: a form awaiting its history', Signal, 77. 
Bibliography 
Lock, A.J. (ed.) (1978) Action, Gesture and Symbol: The Emergence of Language. 
London: Academic Press. 
Lodge, D. (1980) 'Analysis and interpretation of the realist text' , Poetics Today, 1. 
----- (1988) Nice Work. London: Secker & Warburg. 
----- (1984, 1985 edn) Small World: An Academic Romance. Hannondsworth: 
Penguin Books. 
----- (1988) Modern Criticism and Theory: A Reader. London: Longman. 
----- (1990) After Bakhtin: Essays on Fiction and Criticism. London & New York: 
Routledge. 
Lorraine, W. 'Book illustration: the state of the art', in L. Kingman et al. (eds) 1978. 
Luke, A. and Kale, J. 'Learning through difference: cultural practices in early 
childhood language socialization', in E. Gregory (ed.) 1997. 
McGann, J. (1991) The Textual Condition. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Mason, J. (1996) Qualitative Researching. London & Thousand Oaks: Sage 
Publications. 
May, S. (1999) Critical Multiculturalism: Rethinking Multicultural and Antiracist 
Education. London: Falmer Press. 
Meek, M. (1980) 'Prolegomena for a study of children's literature or "Guess what's in 
my head"', in Approaches to Research in Children's Literature. Southampton: 
University of Southampton Department of Education. 
----- (1982) 'What counts as evidence in theories of children's literature?', Theories 
into Practice 21: 4. 
----- (1988) How Texts Teach What Readers Learn. Stroud: Thimble Press. 
----- (1991) On Being Literate. London: Bodley Head. 
----- (1996) Review of J. Langer (1996), Changing English, 3: 1. 
----- 'Transitional transformations', in E. Bearne and V. Watson (eds) 2000. 
-----'The Englishness of children's books' in M. Meek (ed.) 2001. 
----- (ed.) (2001) Children's Literature and Nationalldentfty. Stoke on Trent: 
Trentham Books. 
Meek, M., Warlow, A. and Barton, G. (eds) (1977) The Cool Web: The Pattern of 
Children's Reading. London: Bodley Head. 
Milgram, S. (1974) Obedience to Authority. New York: Harper & Row. 
Bibliography 
Miller, J. (1983) Many Voices: Bilingualism, Culture and Education. London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
Mines, H. (1986) 'It's the Word of God, Miss', Language Matters, 2. 
----- (1988) Each, Peach, Pear, Plum: A Study of a Text and its Readers. 
Unpublished MA dissertation, Institute of Education, University of London. 
Minns, H. (1990) Read It To Me Now: Learning at Home and at School. London: 
Virago Press. 
Mitchell, W. (1981) On Narrative. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Moebius, W. (1986) 'Introduction to picture book codes', in Word and Image, 2: 2. 
Morgan, G. (ed.) (1983) Beyond Method: Strategies for Social Research. Beverley 
Hills: Sage Publications. 
Morriss, P. (1994) The Bakhtin Reader: Selected Writings 0/ Bakhtin, Medvedev, 
Voloshinov. London: Edward Arnold. 
Morrison, A. (1896, 1996 edn) A Child of the Jago. London: Dent. 
Nelson, K. 'Social cognition in a script framework', in 1. H. Flavell and L. Ross (eds) 
1981. 
Nikolajeva, M. (1996) Children's Literature Comes of Age: Towards a New Aesthetic. 
New York & London: Garland Publishing. 
Nodelman, P. (1988) Words About Pictures: The Narrative Art o/Children's Picture 
Books. London: University of Georgia Press. 
Ochs, E. 'Transcription as theory', in E. Ochs and B. Schieffelin (eds) 1979 
Ochs, E. and Schieffelin, B. (eds) (1979) Developmental Pragmatics. London: 
Academic Press. 
Olson, D. (1977) 'From utterance to text: the bias of language in speech and writing' , 
Harvard Educational Review, 47. 
Parsons, M. (1987) How We Understand Art: Cognitive Developmental Account 0/ 
Aesthetic Experience. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Paul, L. (1987) 'Enigma variations: what feminist theory knows about children's 
literature', Signal, 54. 
Pinsent, P. (ed.) (1992) Language, Culture and Young Children: Developing English 
in the Multi-Ethnic Nursery and Infant School. London: David Fulton the 
Roehampton Institute. 
----- (1997) Children's Literature and the Politics of Equality. London: David Fulton. 
Bibliography 
Polkinghorne, D. (1988) Narrative Knowing and the Human Sciences. Albany: SUNY 
Press. 
Potter, J and Wetherell, M. (1987) Discourse and Social Psychology. London: Sage 
Publications. 
Pullman, P. (1996) Clockwork or All Wound Up. London: Transworld Publishers. 
Rashid, N. and Gregory, E. 'Learning to read, reading to learn: the importance of 
siblings in the language development of young bilingual children', in E. 
Gregory (ed.) 1997. 
Rice, P. and Waugh, P. (eds) (1992) Modern Literary Theory. London: Edward 
Arnold. 
Richards, I.A. (1929) Practical Criticism: A Study of Literary Judgement. London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
Richards, J. (ed.) (1978) Understanding Second and Foreign Language Learning. 
Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
Ricoeur, P. 'The narrative function', in P. Ricoeur (ed.) 1981. 
----- (1981) Hermeneutics and the Human Sciences (ed. and trans. J.B. 
Thompson).Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Riley, J. (1999) Teaching Reading at Key Stage J and Before. Cheltenham: Stanley 
Thomes. 
Robertson, L. 'From Karelia to Kashmir: ajoumey into bilingual children's story-
reading experiences within school and community literacy practice', in E. 
Gregory (ed.) 1997. 
Rogoff, B. (1990) Apprenticeship in Thinking; Cognitive Development in Social 
Context. New York & Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Rose, J. (1984) The Case of Peter Pan, or The Impossibility of Children's Fiction. 
Basingstoke: Macmillan Press. 
Rosenblatt, L.M. (1968) Literature as Exploration. London: Heinemann. 
----- (1978) The Reader, The Text, The Poem. Carbondale: Southern University Press. 
'The literary transaction: evocation and response', in K. Holland et af. (eds) 
1993. 
Scafe, S. (1989) Teaching Black Literature. London: Virago. 
Schafer, R. 'Narration in the psychoanalytical dialogue', in W.J.T. Mitchell (ed.) 
1981. 
Bibliography 
Scholes, R. 'Language, narrative and anti-narrative', in W.J.T. Mitchell (ed.) 1981. 
----- (1985) Textual Power: Literary Theory and the Teaching of English. New 
Haven & London: Yale University Press. 
----- (1989) Protocols of Reading. New Haven & London: Yale University Press. 
Schwartz, J. (1982) Ways of the Illustrator: Visual Communication in Children's 
Literature. Chicago: American Library Association. 
Seidal, J. and Kelle, U. 'Different functions of coding in the analysis of textual data', 
in U. Kelle et al. (eds) 1995. 
Shakespeare on The estate. (1994) Video-tape. London: BBC. 
Shields, M. 'The child as psychologist', in A.J. Lock (ed.) 1978. 
Shipman, M.D. (1972) The Limitations of Social Research. London: Longman. 
Simons, H. (ed.) (1980) Towards a Science of the Singular. Norwich: Centre for 
Applied Research in Education, University of East Anglia. 
Skutnabb-Kangas (1981) Bilingualism or Not. Clevedon, OH: Multilingual Matters. 
Smith, H.W. (1975) Strategies of Social Research: The Methodological Imagination. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 
Solsken, J. (1993) Literacy, Gender and Work in Families and in School. Norwood, 
NJ: Ablex. 
Stephens, J. (1992) Language and Ideology in Children's Fiction. London: Longman. 
Stephens, J. (1998) Retelling Stories, Framing Culture: Traditional Story and 
Metanarratives. New York, London: Garland Publishers. 
Stewart, S. (1984) On Longing: Narratives of the Miniature. the Gigantic. the 
Souvenir, the Collection. Baltimore & London: Johns Hopkins University Press. 
Stone, M. (1981) The Education of The Black Child: the Myth of Multicultural 
Education. London: Fontana. 
Strauss, A. (1987) Qualitative Analysis for Social Scientists. New York: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Strauss, A. and Corbin, J. (1990) Basics of Qualitative Research: Grounded Theory 
Procedures and Techniques. London: Sage Publications. 
Street, B. (1984) Literacy in Theory and Practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
----- (ed.) (1993) Cross-Cultural Approaches to Literacy. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Bibliography 
Styles, M. (ed.) (1994) The Prose and the Passion: Children and their Readings. 
London: Cassell. 
Styles, M., Bearne, E. and Watson, V. (eds) (1996) Voices Off: Texts, Conditions and 
Readers. London: Cassell. 
Suleiman S. and Crosman, I. (eds) (1980) The Reader in the Text: Essays on Audience 
and Interpretation. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Swift, O. (1996) Last Orders. London: Picador. 
Tesch, R. (1990) Qualitative Research: Analysis Types and SoJtware Tools. London: 
Falmer Press. 
Todorov, T. 'Reading as construction', in S. Suleiman and I. Crosman (eds) 1980. 
----- (1990) Genres in Discourse. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Trevarthen, C. (1974) 'Conversations with a two-month old', New Scientist, 2. 
Trevarthen, C. and Hubley, P.(1978) 'Secondary intersubjectivity: confidence, 
confiding and acts of meaning in the first year', in AJ. Lock (ed.) 1978. 
Volosinov, V.N. 'Marxism and the philosophy oflanguage', in P. Morriss (ed.) 1994. 
Vygotsky, L.S. (1956) Izbrannye Psikhologicheskie Issledovaniya [Selected 
Psychological Research]. Moscow: Izdatel'stvo Akademii Pedagicheskikh 
NaukRSFSR. 
----- (1960) Razvitie Vysshikh Psikhicheskikh Functii [The Development oj Higher 
Mental Functions]. Moscow: Izdatel'stvo Akademii Pedagicheskikh Nauk 
RSFSR. 
----- (1962) Thought and Language (ed. and trans. E. Hanfinann and O. Vaker). 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
----- (1978) Mind in Society: The Development oj Higher Psychological Processes 
(ed. M. Cole et al.). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
----- (1979) 'Consciousness as a problem in the psychology of behavior' , Soviet 
Psychology, 17, 4. 
----- 'The genesis of higher mental functions', in J.V. Wertsch (ed.) 1981. 
Wall, B. (1991) The Narrator's Voice: The Dilemma oJChildren 's Fiction. 
Basingstoke: Macmillan. 
Warner, M. (1994, 1995 edn) From the Beast to the Blonde: On Fairy Tales and Their 
Tellers. London: Vintage. 
----- (1998) No Go The Bogeyman. London: Chatto & Windus. 
Bibliography 
Warren, N. (ed.) (1982) Advances in Cross-Cultural Psychology (Vol. 2). London: 
Academic Press. 
Watson, K. 'Personal readings, cultural readings', in E. Evans (ed.) 1992. 
Wells, G. (1981) Learning Through Interaction: The Study 0/ Language 
Development. Cambridge & New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Wells, G. and Nicholls, J. (eds) (1985) Language and Learning: An Interactional 
Perspective. London: Falmer Press. 
Wertsch J. V. (ed.) (1981) The Concept of Activity in Soviet Psychology. Annonk, NY: 
Sharpe. 
----- (ed.) (1985) Culture Communication and Cognition: Vygotskian Perspectives. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
White, D. (1954) Books Be/ore Five. [New Zealand Council for Educational 
Research]. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann Educational. 
Williams, R. (1961, 1973 edn.) The Long Revolution. Harmondsworth: Penguin 
Books. 
----- (1958, 1963 edn) Culture and Society 1780-1950. Hannondsworth: Penguin 
Books. 
Winnicott, D.W. (1971,1980 edn) Playing and Reality. Hannondsworth: Penguin 
Books. 
Wolcott, H. (1994) Transforming Qualitative Data: Description, Analysis and 
Interpretation. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 
Wollheim, R. (1987) Painting as an Art. London: Thames & Hudson. 
Wolf, S.A. and Heath, S.B. (1992) The Braid of Literature: Children's Worlds of 
Reading. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Woolf, V. (1953) A Writer's Diary: Being Extracts/rom the Diary o/Virginia Woolf 
(ed. L. Woolf). London: Hogarth Press. 
----- (1925, 1957 edn) The Common Reader: First Series. London: Hogarth Press. 
Wright, J. (1982) Bilingualism in Education. London: ILEA. 
Wright, E. (1984) Psychoanalytic Criticism: Theory in Practice. London & New 
York: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
Zec, P. 'Multicultural education: what kind of relativism is possible?', in A. James 
and R. Jeffcoate (eds) 1981. 
Bibliography 
Zipes, J. (1983) Fairy Tales and the Art o/Subversion: The Classical Genre/or 
Children and the Process 0/ Civilization. London: Heinemann. 
----- (ed.) (1993) The Trials and Tribulations o/Little Red Riding Hood. London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
Children's books 
Ahlberg, A. and Ahlberg, J. (illus.) (1978) Each, Peach, Pear, Plum. Hannondsworth: 
Kestrel Books. 
----- (1981) Peepo. Hannondsworth: Penguin Books. 
----- (1986) The Jolly Postman. London: Heinemann. 
----- (1987) The Clothes Horse. London: Viking Kestrel. 
Ahlberg, A. (1995) The Better Brown Stories. Hannondsworth: Penguin Books. 
Almond, D. (1998) Skellig. London: Hodder. 
Browne, A. (1981) Hansel and Gretel (trans. E. Quarrie). [Brothers Grimm]. Julia 
MacRae Books. 
----- (1983, 1992 edn) Gorilla. London: Walker Books. 
----- (1987) Through the Magic Mirror. London: Macmillan. 
----- (1988) Alice's Adventures in Wonderland [Lewis Carroll]. London: Walker 
Books. 
(1989) Piggybook. London: Little Mammoth. 
----- (1989, 1992 edn) The Tunnel. London: Walker Books. 
----- (1990, 1993) Changes. London: Walker Books. 
(1992) Zoo. London: Julia MacRae Books. 
(1994) King Kong. London: Julia MacRae Books. 
----- (1998) Voices in the Park. London: Transworld Publishers. 
----- (1998) Willy the Wimp. London: Walker Books. 
----- (2000) My Dad. London & New York: Doubleday Books. 
Burningham, J (1984) Granpa. London: Jonathan Cape. 
----- (1978) Come Away From the Water Shirley. London: Jonathan Cape. 
----- (1986) Where 's Julius? London: Jonathan Cape. 
Fenelli, S. (1999). Dreamtime. London: Heinemann Young Books. 
Bibliography 
Hughes, S. (1978) Alfie Gets in First. London: Picture Lions. 
----- (1985) Chips and Jessie. London: Bodley Head. 
Hutchins, P. (1983) You'l/ Soon Grow into Them, Titch. London: Bodley Head. 
----- (1968) Rosie's Walk. London: Bodley Head. 
Lindgren, A. (1954, 1976 edn) Pippi Longstocking (trans. E. Harup, illus. R. 
Kennedy). London: Penguin Books. (Pippi Langstrump [1945]. Stockholm: 
Raben ochsjogren.) 
McKee, D. (1980) Not Now Bernard. London: Anderson Press. 
----- (1982) I Hate my Teddy Bear. London: Anderson Press. 
Scieszka, J. and Smith, L. (1992, 1993 edn) The Stinky Cheese Man and Other Fairly 
Stupid Tales. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books. 
Sendak, M. (1963) Where the Wild Things Are. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books. 
Waddell, M. and Firth, B. (illus.) (1988) Can 'I You Sleep Little Bear? London: 
Walker Books. 
Appendices 
Appendix 1 
School A reading 1 
Appendix I: A-I 
SCHOOL A READING 1 
CHllDREN HEATHER 
Do you know this one? 
1 Yes 
Do you know it? What's it about? 
2 (whispering) 
What's it about? 
3 (whispering) 
What can you see in that picture? 
4 Children 
You can see a girl can't you? 
5 Yes 
And what's she doing? What is she doing 
in that picture? 
6 (several) Mm-ah- she's going 
7 urn - she going * * - she's 
8 she's going into there 
What's this? 
9 He got put in -
Yes a book there she's going to a dark 
tunnel isn't she would you be frightened to 
go into a dark tunnel? 
10 (several) What's that? Yeah 
11 No I'm not - what's that? 
I would but you wouldn't 
12 * * *? 
That's the publisher that's the person who 
prints the book 
13 Yes 
There's a book about the tunnel and it's by 
Appendix 1: A- 1 
14 (several) * * * * * 
15 Boy-
16 * * * * * * 
17 (several) I got - I got -
18 I got * 
(19 I got a brother 
20 Seven 
21 His birthday is January 
22 Noone brother 
23 Umone 
24 (several) One - ah -three sisters 
25 Naqui (giggles) 
26 Two 
27 Karu and Imran 
28 I don't know 
somebody called Anthony Browne and it's 
about a girl called Rose 
And it's about a girl called Rose and it's 
about a boy 
Her brother 
Have you got a br- have you got a brother 
Fatima? 
You've got a sister how old is your sister? 
Seven 
She's just a little bit older than you but you 
haven't got any brothers 
One brother how old is your brother? 
One oh a baby 
Three sisters and one brother ah and what 
about Naqui Nazia have you got a brother? 
How many brothers have you got? 
Two brothers what are their names? 
Karu and Imran and are they big are they 
how old are they? 
You don't know but they're big and - have 
Appendix 1: A- 1 
29 * * 
30 (Bengali?) she little 
31 Yeah five 
32 I've got urn four brothers 
33 Yeah 
34 I've got two sisters 
35 Yes 
36 (several) No I've got * brother he's 
37 he's one year old 
38 (several) * * * * * * * * 
39 My baby's lucky 
40 My brother is cute 
you got a sister? 
Have you how old is your sis- is she a little 
sister or a big sister? 
Little sister and have you got a sister? 
Five sisters and do you sometimes -
Fi ve sisters and four brothers and you so 
there's ten in the family? 
Your mummy must be very busy-
You've got two sisters 
Right and do you sometimes quarrel with 
your brothers and sisters? Do you 
sometimes fight? And shout? 
He's only one - oh that's that's nice you 
don't quarrel with your sisters well that's 
nice do you quarrel with your sister-
brothers and sisters? 
Is he? He sounds it do you do you do you 
never fight and quarrel with your brothers 
and sisters? 
Appendix 1: A- 1 
41 No 
42 I carry my brother 
43 Yes 
44 *********** 
45 * * an' his sister hit him 
46 He's very naughty 
47 Yes 
48 Yes he's shouting 
49 I like to play I can tackle it 
50 (several) I like to play Hopscotch 
51 I like -
52 Yes 
53 (several) Yeah I like-
You're always nice to one another? 
You carry him yes you love each other 
Do you quarrel with your brothers and 
sisters? 
Well-
Your sister hits you well in this story the 
brother and sister do quarrel a bit and the 
brother Jack isn't nice to his sister he's not 
nice he's unkind to her-
He's very naughty yes he is very naughty 
(reads pp 3and4) 
Now let's look at the pictures 'cos the 
pictures are part of the story can you see the 
picture? 
He is isn't he and he's kicking do you like 
to play football? 
Dh can you? 
You like hopscotch it is a nice game-
Do you like playing outside too? 
Yes and do any of you like reading books? 
You all like reading books do you? 
Appendix 1: A-I 
54 Urn 
55 I like football 
56 I like football 
57 I like that picture 
58 I like 
59 * * * * 
60 Which one? 
61 He's frightening her 
62 Yes * 
63 * * * * 
64 Head 
65 Dragon's head Yeah 
66 Dragon head 
67 A monster 
68 Why is he standing there 
69 Yes this thing -
You like football yes it's good-
Yes (reads p. 5 until 'night') 
(reads p.5 until end) 
Yes look at the picture Fatia he's 
frightening her what's he doing? 
What's he doing in the picture? What's he 
doing to frighten her though can you see? 
What's he doing? 
What's he got on his head? 
I think it's a wolf's head what do you think 
that is? 
Well that's Jack see there he is and he's put 
a thing on his head 
Creeping in to frighten her 
Appendix 1: A-1 
70 Monster's head 
A monster's head and there she is and she's 
very frightened isn't she? 
71 It's very dangerous 
Very dangerous yes that's it can you see 
anything on the wall -? 
72 * and very dangerous 
73 I can see a house 
Little house yes -
74 I like that house 
Yes do you know what house what story 
that house comes from? 
75 No 
No I think it's Hansel and Gretel's little 
house and do you know what's in the 
picture on the wall? 
76 No 
I bet you do it's a story I bet it's a story you 
77 Let me see 
78 The story and the what's that? 
79 I know that story - What's that story? What is it? 
80 Let's see Do you know? 
81 A * * 
It' Little Red Riding Hood 
82 Let's see 
Do you know I'm going to ask your teacher 
if she'll tell you the story-
83 (several) * * * 
84 * * * -of Little Red Riding Hood 
85 Red Riding Hood 
You know that story do you? 
Appendix 1: A - 1 
86 It's my it's in my home 
87 (several * ** 
88 And I've got a * 
89 It is lost now 
90 I've got Riding Hood on film film 
91 What's that 
92 He's he * 
93 Cloak (?) coat 
94 The light the light 
95 The bed the carpet 
96 What's that? 
97 Flowers 
98 Why? 
99 The *** 
100 He go to this school 
You've got it at home in English or 
Bengali? 
Bengali right will you show it to me one 
It's lost now 
Film have you? Well you know it don't 
you? Right well that's the picture isn't that 
Little Red Riding Hood when she meets the 
wolf -
-in the forest? 
That's that's good Jaqui to see that I think 
that's Rose's cloak isn't it? 
But it's a little bit like the one that Red 
Riding Hood was wearing 
Yes the light 
Anyway (reads p.7 until 'fought ') 
(reads p. 7 until end) 
(reads p.8) 
I think he's going to the - well we'll see * * 
Appendix]: A- ] 
101 What is going * * ? His home? 
102 He's going to * park? 
103 No 
104 * this? 
105 This that one jumpers 
106 Yes yes 
107 Why is she wearing that red and blue? 
108 Yes he's going to 
109 Nice coat this is a nice coat 
110 This is nice coat 
111 I like it 
* * look she doesn't look happy does she? 
(discussion about correct pronunciation of 
'Fatiha') (reads p.9) 
He's going to to explore to see what's there 
to find out things 
No this is the waste ground and he wants 
to see he wants to see what's behind there 
and what's round the comer he wants to 
find everything that's there explore does 
she doesn't want to though does she? 
What she wants to do is sit and read her 
That's her dress her skirt 
Yes she's wearing - good boy Jaqui she's 
wearing that isn't she? 
Yes her red coat 
Like Red Riding Hood yes ' 
(reads p.l] until ' there') 
(reads until end) 
This is a nice coat 
Wonder what's through the tunnel what do 
you think could-
Appendix 1: A- 1 
112 (several) * * * * 
113 * * Goblins 
114 * * * * 
115 * Dragon 
116 * * * * * * * * 
117 * * a cat 
118 A dragon 
1(19 * * * 
120 Yes I did * I did * look 
121 (Bengali?) 
122 * * * 
123 Why are you urn urn * changing them? 
- be at the other end of the tunnel? 
Goblins 
What do you think could be at the other end 
of the tunnel? 
Dragon what do you think could be down 
the tunnel? 
What might be in the tunnel? Urn? 
A cat there might be a cat what do you 
think might be down the tunnel? 
A dragon I might be frightened of a snake 
down the tunnel anything could be down 
the tunnel 
(reads p. 13) 
So she's very frightened but she goes down 
the tunnel she's very brave isn't she? 
Would you go down to rescue your brother 
or sister? 
(reads p. 15 and 16) 
Urn? What you say? What does he say? 
Changing them? Oh why are the pictures 
Appendix 1: A- 1 
124 He's coming to the 
125 What does * * ? 
126 Ssh 
127 In the monsters 
128 He not coming 
129 Look at 
130 Monsters monsters 
131 It's the monsters 
132 Monsters 
133 Fire 
134 Fire 
135 And there's these * 
136 The fire's going * 
137 See dragon it's the dragon there he is 
138 He's dangerous and he's coming along 
139 and that is dangerous 
140 And he's going running and going aaah 
changing? Right because he's she's inside 
the tunnel isn't she going along 
Yes (starts p. 17) 
(reads p.17 until 'brother') She couldn't 
see her brother anywhere. 
Yes (reads p. 17 until 'forest') 
(reads p. 17 until could not') 
(reads until 'frightened') 
Monsters (reads' and to run ') mm what 
else can you see? 
I know is it * * 
Yes lots of dangers * * * 
Yes what else look very hard at that picture 
because there are other things in it 
Appendix 1: A- 1 
141 And that's a house 
142 Let's see 
143 Yes? 
144 And it's coming to that? 
145 Monsters big big monsters 
146 What's he doing? 
147 Where is he the boy? 
148 Yes this is the dog 
149 Or the dog it's like a fox look 
150 What's that? 
151 What's the that and the that? 
152 I like the story it's a nice story 
153 Are you going to the house? 
154 He's got stone 
155 Are you going in the home? 
Yes good boy Jacquir what's that little 
house like? 
What's that little house? 
I think it's like that (turns back to picture of 
bedroom) 
Mm and what's that? 
Yes what sort of monster? 
What's he doing? 
He's not there is he? That do you think that 
looks like a wolf? 
Yes where' s the door? 
That's his legs 
His stick 
His stick and he's leaning on his stick 
(reads p. 21) 
What's happened to him? 
Yes he's turned into stone 
No they're not at home 
Appendix 1: A- 1 
156 How how? 
157 He go to park 
158 I don't know 
159 He's colour 
(reads p. 24) 
160 He going to home 
161 and he want to 
162 go to the ready dinner 
163 Look at the finish 
164 I like that story 
He can't move 
(reads p. 23) 
Look there you see he's stone you see 
Ah they love each other there don't they 
got their arms around each other and he' s 
smiling at her 
(reads p. 25 until . table') 
(reads p. 25 until end) 
(Discussion about the story) 
Appendix 2: A-2 
Appendix 2 
School A reading 2 
Appendix 2: A-2 
SCHOOL A READING 2 
CHILDREN HEATHER 
(General sound of children looking at book and talking about it) 
1 Why is coming? 
2 Is dangerous 
3 Naughty 
4 * * * 
5 That house 
6 My brother is little 
7 (several) * and three girls (?) 
8 That house in in there 
9 That * 
10 I know (?) 
11 ** 
12 (whispers) * 
13 Look 
Why is he coming? He's coming to I think 
he's coming to frighten her mm 
He's dangerous he's naughty naughty to 
scare your sister 
He is naughty isn't he? 
You wouldn't scare your sister would you? 
No your brothers wouldn't scare you 
would they? 
Yes yes 
There it is 
Appendix 2: A-2 
14 And look at the monster 
15 look at the monster 
16 (several) Where's his *eyes? 
17 Where's his brother 
18 (Confused) 
(19 (Several, talking about the picture) 
20 * * * * 
21 Ijust Ijust * * * 
22 * * * the colour coming 
23 (several) Yes 
24 I like that 
Oh yes it's the same isn't it? It's the same 
house 
Yes it's not nice is .. ? yes 
Where's his eyes? 
We want to get it round so we can all see 
can you see the monster's eyes? 
He's made of stone isn't he? 
Yes shall I read the story again to you 
and we'll look at the pictures as we go? 
(Administrative section omitted 1min 12 sec) 
25 Yes 
26 (several) * * * 
27 * * * (Bengali?) 
28 I can 
29 * * * 
Have you been looking at the book in your 
classroom Jaquir? 
And you have as well? 
Did your teacher read -
Put it like that Jaquir and then she can see 
as well all right can you see? 
And you can tum the pages right? 
That's it can you see can you see now? 
Appendix 2: A-2 
30 (book voice) Once upon a time 
31 a brother and sister 
32 Different colour 
33 * * * 
34 * * * 
35 The brother played ball 
36 Yes look at shouting 
37 Shouting like that * 
38 shouting 
39 Yes she's * 
40 Red coat 
41 And that's the slide 
42 and that's the * 
43 (whispers) Red Riding Hood 
44 Mm what is there? 
45 Table there * * 
(Reads p. 3 to 'alike') 
(Finishes p. 3) 
Different colour yes 
(reads p4) 
(reads p 5 until 'night') 
That's it that's her red coat 
(reads p 5 until 'crept') 
That's right do you know what that what's 
that a picture of? 
Red Riding Hood yes do you know the 
story of Red Riding Hood? 
I don't know it looks like a tail doesn't it? 
Perhaps she thinks -
Appendix 2: A-2 
46 Looks like a bed 
47 Is like a snake 
48 Yes'" snake 
49 Mm 
50 Too frightened 
51 too er urn urn 
57 He opens his door and sleep 
58 Yes 
59 Yes 
Like a snake yes 
The snake yes and here comes her brother 
(whispers) and she's so frightened that she 
can't go to sleep you ever frightened in bed 
at night aren't you? Are you ever 
frightened in bed at night? 
Yes sometimes sometimes I am are you 
frightened are you frightened Jaquir? 
When you're in bed at night-
... ... ... - and it's all dark 
Sometimes you're frightened too what are 
you frightened are you frightened of the 
dark? 
What's he frightened of? 
He opens his door does he 
And he feels safe then? 
Yes yes well anyway Rose is afraid-
Appendix 2: A-2 
61 * * 
62 * * 
63 Look at him 
64 Why? 
65 What is doing? 
66 Yes 
67 No 
68 I play with my big sister 
69 She she so nice 
70 Yeah one day my uncle give 
71 me presents 
72 Yes 
73 No my brother is little 
afraid of the Rose poor Rose is afraid of the 
(readsp 7) 
He's pointing -
Er er she's looking at her book no she's not 
that's for her dinner isn't it? 
And I think he's telling her off he's telling 
her what to do isn't he? Yes 
(reads p. 8) didn't want her to come and 
play with him do you go and play with your 
brother? 
She's nice and you play with your sisters 
and -
Oh what what did he give you? A game 
did he? And is it a game like that a board 
game where you move things along the 
board? 
Yes well that's nice and then do your 
brothers go outside and play football? 
Oh he's too little yes yes right well anyway 
Appendix 2: A-2 
74 * * 
75 He read with the book 
76 And he walk with him (?) 
77 She's walk with him 
78 she's reading book 
79 I dunno 
80 Like Jaiad's 
81 Yeah 
82 (several) * * * 
83 * * * 
84 * * * 
85 Orsnake 
86 Or dragons 
87 Or snake 
88 Or dragons 
he doesn't want his sister with him 
(starts p. 9)-
Put it like put it like that Jaquir and then 
Fatima can see the pictures 'cos there's lots 
of things in that picture 
(reads p. 9 until 'everything') 
(reads p. 9 until end) 
She is isn't she? Yes she is I wonder what 
she's can we see what she's reading? Look 
at the picture what's she reading I wonder 
Is she? 
It looks like -
Yes it looks like that 
Right (reads p.ll until 'goblins') 
Or snakes yes 
Or dragons yes could be anything couldn't 
Snake yes 
(reads p.ll until end) he's not listening is 
Appendix 2: A-2 
89 He's naughty 
90 Where is her ball? 
91 * * 
92 Where is his gub there? 
93 He's going there 
94 No 
95 I don't want to 
96Igo 
97 Yes 
98 I wouldn't 
99 I wouldn't 
100 I wouldn't 
101 1** 
102 And book 
I think think that's his ball isn't it? 
Yes that's his ball he's not going to take it 
is he no 
Why why is what? 
Why is he going there? To explore to see 
what's down the tunnel would you go? 
You would 
You would would you? Would you go 
Jaquir? 
You'd go down the tunnel to see what's at 
the other end? You wouldn't be frightened 
'cos it's dark? 
You wouldn't? 
I would (laughs) 
Mm (reads p. 13) 
she's going to find her brother isn't she? 
She's left her book yes he'd left his he'd 
left his football and she's left her book 
Appendix 2: A-2 
103 Yes 
104 (several)"'''' 
1 05 Look at his nice nice 
1 06 That one nice and that one nice 
107 Yes 
1 08 I like the book 
109 I like that book 
110 the key 
112 The key'" ... 
113 ... ... 
114 ... ... 
116'" ... 
117 * ... * ... 
118 * ... * 
1 (19 And look at hands 
120 Witches hands * hands 
Do you think she's a very brave girl to go 
down that tunnel? 
She is isn't she? 
What's nice? 
That picture's nice? 
'Tis a nice book isn't it? yes 
We all like the book don't we? 
(reads p. 15 and 16) 
She's crawling along it isn't she? wonder 
what she's thinking wonder what she's 
thinking inside her head? 
(reads p. 17 until 'witches') 
Appendix 2: A-2 
121 I know look hands 
122 Yeah 
123 And look at my hands look 
124 Very very very dangerous 
125 and look at the fire 
126 I dunno 
127 The witch's 
128 He look at the tree 
129 I dunno 
130 Yes 
131 I like that -
132 Red Riding Hood 
133 Yes 
134 I watch Red Riding Hood * 
135 Got in my house 
136 She * to * yeah 
Where's the hands? 
Oh yes look can you see the big thumb? 
Yes it's big isn't yes 
Yes I think it is 
I wonder whose fire that is? 
Do you know whose fire it could be? 
Could be the witch's fire couldn't it? Yes 
And I wonder who that who that belongs to 
that rope? 
Someone's climbed up there haven't they? 
You know the story of Red Riding Hood? 
Do you think that could be some a 
woodcutter or something? 
Yeah the woodcutter in Red Riding Hood-
Oh right 
(reads p.17 'she was' until end.) 
Can you see anything else in there * * * ? 
Appendix 2: A-2 
138 This is one house (?) 
140 Yes she's -
141 I know she's house 
142 she's house 
143 Iknow 
144 Yes is the same the window 
145 (several) door the door 
146 the same 
147 That is'" 
148 That is brown 
149 Yeah the door is same 
there's a 
That is a house 
Who's house is that? 
That's right but do you know do you know 
what house that is? 
Yes I know it's I know it's that one there 
'tis it's the same isn't it? 
We'll have a look and see 
Now have a look can I just show them is it 
the same? 
Mm but the light is different makes it look 
a different colour it's nearly the same isn't 
Yeah do you know who's house -
Do you know in the story who's house that 
is do you know the story of Hansel and 
Gretel? 
Do you know the story of Hansel and 
Appendix 2: A-2 
152 The same that nor same 
153 that nor same-
154 Look one window 
155 * * 
156 * * 
157 Look at the window 
158 Where is 
159 his hands? 
160 Yes 
161 Look 
162 look is coming 
163 Ghost a ghostmans 
164 And then ghost eye (?) 
165 (several) Look at 
166 * look 
167 Yes look 
168 And what is hands like that? 
169 What is hands (whispers) 
170 What one was that one? 
171 (looking and talking satta voce) 
Gretel? 
Nice do you * * ? 
What do you think it is? 
I don't think it's a window d' you know 
what it is? Well d' you know what it looks 
like to me it looks like a gravestone 
Like you get can you see what I mean you 
know the gravestones 
Do you think it looks like that? 
Look at it 
What is that? What is that? 
Is a ghost s' a real ghost? 
* * * 
* * * 
Look at can you see any other n - mm-
What that one that looks like a wild boar 
doesn't it? 
Appendix 2: A-2 
172 * * dangerous 
173 Look what is that? 
174 (whispering) * * * 
175 Very very very very 
176 (quietly) very * 
177 Em fox 
178 That says 'very dangerous' 
179 Look look look look look 
180 * * * 
181 It's very dangerous look 
182 That is tree (?) dangerous 
183 And look at his look at his eyes 
184 Look where are the black (?) 
185 Is very very very dangerous ) 
186 (another softly speaking) * * *) 
187 And she's and she's * running 
188 * * 
It's it looks like an animal doesn't it a wild 
Dangerous yes can you see any other 
animals in there? 
Where? 
Very dangerous have you seen that - it's a 
wolf actually it's a big wolf have you seen 
that -
Have you seen that wolf anywhere else? 
Yes isn't it? 
Yes yes 
Black eyes yes yes 
Yes oh look at poor Rose 
She's running fast isn't she sbe's very very 
frightened isn't she? 
Don't you think she's brave though to -
Appendix 2: A-2 
189 She's sad 
(190 Because her book (?) 
(191 How you know? That's his 
(192 window coming the floor (?) 
(193 Hurt 
(194 That * coming there in the 
(195 that window and a coming 
(196 there 
(197 Yes 
(198 That one in come there -
(199 -and and he's floor 
200 - That one there and 
201 run run run and he go to the 
202 there and that one there and 
203 one little coming and he's there 
204 go to the floor 
205 Yes 
206 * * 
207 Yes 
208 * * * 
209 That one coming there 
- and look for -why is she sad? 
Her brother's hurt she thinks her brother's 
hurt mm yes sorry Jakir what did you say? 
You think you go through that window and 
you go under the ground to get into that 
little cottage do you? 
Could be 
Yes -
And in in-
Could do 
We have a secret tunnel right under the 
floor that it? 
Sh sh just a minute 
Ah and you climb yes climb up and you go 
Appendix 2: A-2 
210 Yes 
211 He's crying 
212 What is going is is going 
213 the home an he run -
214 She's going to urn help him 
215 He's running 
216 Yeah 
217 What is that? The light 
218 The colour coming 
2(19 The colour-
220 Look 
221 the witch 
along there 
(reads p. 20) 
She is crying he can't cry 'cause he's made 
of stone-
She is but she she she didn't she didn't 
know to begin with did she? Look at him 
standing what is he doing? 
He was running wasn't he I think he was 
running along and he was turned to stone 
and he looks frightened doesn't he? Does 
he look frightened? 
Yes I wonder what happened to him 
wonder who turned him to stone? 
I don't know Jakir it's to do with the 
heating why do you think who's who's 
turned the brother to stone d'you think? 
Who's turned the brother to st- who's 
turned Jack into stone? 
You think the witch -
Appendix 2: A-2 
222 * * 
223 Or dragon 
224 Or dragon 
225 I don't know 
226 What is that? 
(Section omitted discussion o/water heater) 
227 Yes ) 
228 No ) 
229 * * * 
230 Brother love him 
231 * * 
232 * * Look at the 
233 Look at the don do running 
234 the colour coming 
235 Yes 
236 Yes 
Could have done -
Or the dragon Jakir who's turned Jack into 
stone? 
You don't know no we we never know it 
never tells us does it? Look he's standing 
in a magic circle do you see the magic 
circle? 
Look all the trees are cut down aren't they? 
You see it's not the same as that is it? 
Someone's cut down all the trees mm 
(starts p. 23) -
She loves him yes 
The colour's coming yes 
Yes (starts p. 23)-
Appendix 2: A-2 
237 There is colour coming 
238 And this co is coming colour 
239 and the ... coming 
241 Look at the ... 
242 (pointing) 
243 Yes 
245 It's not dangerous 
246 (several) No 
247 It's not dangerous 
248 That is dangerous 
249 That is dangerous 
250 ... coming and ... 
251 That is dangerous 
252 That where's that one is there 
253 That'" 
254 What is that? 
255 No (?)'" ... 
Yes that's right it's coming slowly isn't it? 
(reads pp. 23 and 24 until 'move') 
What's that? 
Oh yes there's the tree 
(reads p. 24 until 'forest') 
Look it's it's it's ni - it's blue sky there 
now isn't it it's not a dangerous wood do 
you think that's a dangerous wood there? 
Not now is it? 
Yes that's dark there isn't it? 
That's right 
That's a tree 
Appendix 2: A-2 
257 * * Two * 
258 * * look at that(?) 
259 There there monster 
260 What is is brother? 
261 Where? 
262 That's his brother 
263 Finished 
264 I like that story 
265 (several) * * 
266 * 
267 I like all 
268 Urn I like this -
269 Mm uh 
270 This is my best book 
271 Urn urn this one 
272 I like that one 
273 * * * 
That's it 
(reads p. 25 until 'table') 
You think they're monsters they might be 
(reads p. 25 until 'right') 
Here's her brother 
It is a nice story which bit do you like the 
best? 
Which bit do you like which? 
Which bit do you like best? 
Which is your favourite picture Jakir your 
favourite? 
You like why do you like -? 
You like the one of urn turning Jack back 
when she turns him back brings him back 
to life why do you like that one? 
Appendix 2: A-2 
275 Yes 
276 I like that one 
277 And that one 
278 (Several) * * 
279 I like * 
280 * all * 
281 I like all 
282 All the pictures 
283 (several) I like -
284 And I like * 
285 All * * 
286 I like all the pictures 
287 I like that one 
288 I like that one 
289 I like that one 
290 I like that one 
291 all the pictures 
292 I like all the pictures 
Because it's happy isn't it? 
You like that one where she goes -
Right and-
- goes through the tunnel 
All you like them all don't you lakir? 
(laughs) 
You like all the pictures 
And and writing you'd like to write it 
would you? Mm 
If we found if you found a tunnel if you 
found at a tunnel just behind the school and 
you went down the tunnel I wonder what 
you would find at the other end -
Appendix 2: A-2 
293 That's is is shoes 
294 Why is not sleepy? 
295 What is that? 
296 Wolf 
297 (wolf noise) And that's is 
298 is shoes 
299 and that's is some * 
300 like a snake 
301 * * * 
302 What is that? The light 
303 Door 
304 What one? 
305 That one light 
306 Mm 
307 Yes 
308 Yes 
309 I got a red carpet 
What do you think you'd find down the 
tunnel Jakir? 
She's she was afraid she's scared 
Well that's Red Riding Hood and that's the 
Yes it does look like a snake 
Mm .. 
* see yes that's the I. .. 
Yes that's the door and that's the light 
that's on outside -
This is the door 
And that's where it's it's light outside 
And that I think that's the carpet 'sa red 
carpet isn't it? 
) Have you? 
Appendix 2: A-2 
310 I've got a urn 
311 red carpet 
312 I've got a green carpet 
313 A * 
314 I have a 
315 purple carpet 
316 I've got red 
317 * black 
318 Yes 
3(19 My dad has got a 
320 red and purple carpet 
321 My got it that colour carpet and 
322 my dad goes go to the bin 
323 Bin 
Red carpet 
A black carpet? 
Well that sounds all right 
Goes to the? 
Dh he put that carpet away in the bin did 
(Further discussion about children's bedrooms and Heather's when she was a child) 
Appendix 3 B-1 
Appendix 3 
School Breading 1 
Appendix 3 B-1 
SCHOOL BREADING 1 
Pleased to have copy of book each. Predicted: 'It's going to be nice '; 'Red Riding Hood', 
CHILDREN HEATHER 
Wow flowers    pattern 
It is a nice pattern isn't it it's wallpaper 
2 It's like something smells 
Yes like plants and things yes smells 
3 I hate that smell 
Do you you don't like it? 
4 I hate this wall 
Yes it's bricks isn't it a brick wall 
5 I like this best 
You like the flowers that's right 
6 I like the smell of the wall 
Let's turn over then 
7 I love the smell of the wall 
(reads pages 3 and 6) 
8 Two people two boys 
9 No it's the same boy that's him 
10 he's in his bed 
11 He's asleep 
Can you see the girl in bed? 
12 Yes 
13 She looks like a boy 
14 *  a wolf 
Ohyes 
15 Where? 
Appendix 3 B-1 
16 Yeab the Red Riding Hood there's 
17 a wolf like a like a 
18 There's a old wolf old (Bengali) 
(19 Yeabanoldwolf 
20 He's not a old wolfhe's a cowboy 
21 I know this looks like Red Riding 
22 Hood's shoe 
23 It's like a Red Riding Hood coat 
24 And that's like Grandma's house 
25 That's like urn Gretel urn 
26 Yes Gretel's house yes 
27 Witch house that's sweets on 
28 We got that in our house 
29 Yes 
30 Heather feather is 
31 Is like because she's got flower in 
32 she's clothes that's why she's got 
33 flower in there he got this that's 
34 why he's got this 
35 Heather 
Cowboy wolf with a hat on yes he does 
look like that doesn't he can you see 
anything else in that picture? 
It's just like Red Riding Hood's coat isn't 
It is like Grandma' shouse 
Hansel and Gretel yes 
What a lampshade like that? 
Yes it's pretty isn't it? 
(readsp.7) 
That's right yes 
Appendix 3 B-1 
36 Heather is the boy and girl alone 
37 with us Mum? 
38 Why does she do that? 
39 He will go 'eeergh' 
40 I can see a picture of him 
41 Look look 
42 Where where is there look 
43 One man is there look the feet 
44 Yes 
45 That must be a shoe 
46 Yes that must be a boot 
47 That must be a short **. 
48 Yes a burn fire 
49 That must be a short burn and a boy 
50 was in here and he died in the fire 
51 because of his shoe 
52 Yeah 
53 No 
I don't know where the Mum is we can't 
see her can we but there she is there's her 
arm there 
Well let's see (reads page 8 and 9) 
Oh yes the feet sticking out 
That's good isn't it? 
A boot 
A sharp bend? 
Oh he died in the car 
So he died when the car burned oh dear 
that's not very nice is it? 
Appendix 3 B-1 
54 maybe the other car . .in the shop one 
55 tyre just went in and the boy was at the 
56 shop and the tyre went over him and 
57 then he then the fire came it was a fire 
58 look the fire the fire wall 
59 Look the the the tree 
60 Where? 
61 Where? 
62 You're reading us the scary part 
63 There's the house somebody's house 
64 and look woodcutter one man cut wood 
65 Look a fire 
66 Maybe this one a man was in here and 
67 then he stick the woodcutter and 
68 no his brother 
69 And then he put the fire and then he 
70 put it in here and then he burned here 
71 Yeah and you went fire then he take 
72 the woodcutter then ... he put it on the 
Maybe 
Oh yes the tree trunk 
There there 
There it is 
(reads pages 11 -16) 
(reads pages J 7 and J 8) 
Why do you think he's been there then? 
Oh I see so you think he cuts down the 
things in the forest and then takes it through 
to the waste ground and bums it? 
Appendix 3 B-1 
73 yellow fire then he bum all of it 
74 Teddy bear 
75 No 
76 Yeah a rope look 
77 A rope danger 
78 In there in a stick ... 
79 Look 
80 Fire fire 
81 I don't know what it is 
82 Yeah there's his brother 
83 There's a house 
84 Where 
85 I know I know somebody's maybe 
86 somebody 
87 Somebody's died 
88 There's a house 
89 Is it real this 
90 He's a teddy bear 
91 It looks like a teddy bear 
92 It's a real teddy bear 
Look at the picture can you see anything 
there 
Where a rope yes 
What's that what's that you're pointing to 
(looks at p (19) 
Now let's look there she is she's very fast 
Could be 
What do you think 
Appendix 3 B-1 
93 It's only a tree (Bengali) 
94 No that's a teddy bear 
95 It's a tree 
96 It's a it's like her brother how it was 
97 There's ... look this looks it looks like 
a pig 
98 Piglet 
99 What? 
100 A wild boar. .. wild pig 
101 Look 
102 In the tree . .. lots of things in the tree 
103 A house look 
104 A crocodile and a frog 
105 Pig pig 
106 There 
107 Look 
108 There's the wolf. .. the wall 
109 There's a ... it's just like a Dracula 
110 What's this then? 
111 What's this it's like 
I think ... yes 
Like her brother yes 
Yes it does do you know what we call a pig 
like that? 
It's a wild boar and they're very dan -
Yes I don't know what that is 
Yes what else can you see? 
Where's a crocodile and a frog? 
Just like a Dracula 
What's that? 
What's that? 
Appendix 3 B-1 
112 It looks like a urn 
113 A leopard 
114 It's like a frog 
115 Like a leopard 
116 It's like a crocodile face 
117 Leopard look there's a house 
118 I know what's inside the hole 
1(19 She's just come up come up the hole 
120 Look a gorilla a gorilla head 
121 Yes 
122 Yeah 
123 There's a little gorilla 
124 There's a house (gasp) 
125 No 
126 Yes the witch's house 
127 The witch's sweets 
128 Like a real house like our house 
129 It looks like Hansel and Gretel 
130 There he is 
131 Look his mouth screamed 
Like a frog 
A gorilla head 
'Tis a little bit yes 
Is the house like anything? 
Yes I think it does 
(reads p 20 - children moan and cry) 
(reads page 22) 
132 Look here his (makes screaming sound; 
Appendix 3 B-1 
they all join in) 
133 Can you see it changing? 
134 Why? 
13 5 It's coming real 
136 That's the giant's hand 
137 His head.. rock 
138 I want some more 
139 Another story 
(pages 21 and 22: . reads page 21) 
She's putting her arms round him and he 
slowly -
(reads page 23) 
Yes it is isn't it? (reads page 24) 
Appendix 4 B:2 
School BReading 2 
Appendix 4 
Appendix 4 B:2 
SCHOOL BREADING 2 
CHILDREN HEATHER 
(Looking at page J) 
1 Look this one looks like coffee 
2 Yes 
3 Smelly 
Like the coffee plant you mean? 
4 Yes 
Have you seen coffee growing then? 
5 Yes 
(reads p. 3and 4) 
6 That's not nice 
Isn't it? 
7 He he broke the window 
Well he's kicking the ball 
9 He's tackling 
10 But he he he's not minding the window 
11 Yeah he's not 
12 There's Red Riding Hood's cloak (reads p. 5) 
13 Who is he? 
14 The wolf wolf is in her * 
15 Is it boy? Is he a boy? 
16 No he's a boy to make her scared 
17 isn't it? 
He's got a mask on his face 
Appendix 4 B:2 
18 He's too bad 
(19 'Cos he's bad he's bad to his sister 
20 And a girl 
21 Yes she wasn't * * like that 
22 She's scared 
23 Because she .. you can see her eyes * 
24 Why what's that? 
25 What's that 
26 His brother 
27 Where? 
28 'Tis his brother 
29 Yeah maybe Somebody's shoes 
30 No his brother climbing out 
31 Oh 
32 Oh them two yeah yeah yeah she go 
33 her shoe under the ground  crocodile 
34 Because she's not because she's a 
35 girl she's not a boy she's not a boy 
36 She don't want a boy in a girl's bed 
Yes that's not nice is it? 
Does she look frightened do you think? 
Yes she's got the covers up hasn't she? 
That's right you can because she's so 
frightened 
What's what? 
Oh yes what's that? 
Well it can't because there's the brother 
Maybe it's just her shoes that are under the 
(reads p. 7and 8) 
He doesn't want his sister it's not very nice 
is it? 
Appendix 4 B: 2 
37 Look mummy's hand and his hand 
(readsp.9) 
38 (gasp) somebody's head 
Is that a head that little one there? 
39 And their feet 
40 Where? Where? I can't see it 
41 (Bengali speech and then some argument) 
42 (whispers) * * * ) 
43    ) 
(reads p. II -17) 
44 Heather Heather maybe the ftre 
45 em all them the 
46 Look at her him look at 
47 Maybe the ftre urn who live here em 
48 open the tunnel with the ftre he can 
49 er he's got a magic thing 
50 No 
51 Then he be gagging (?) then he can 
52 go over it and he can die then he can 
S3 then he can er can't walk 
S4    then his head went little 
Right so it's a special special magic ftre 
SS Yeah magic fife 
Magic fIre yes 
Appendix 4 B:2 
56 (indecipherable excited talk) 
57 Here's a house 
58 Look this is a wolf 
59 No 
60 Pillow that's a pillow because look look 
61 at here look at this this is a pillow 
62 Look look look at it 
(reads p. 17 looks at p. (J 9) 
Have you seen that wolf before? 
It does look a bit like a pillow where have 
you seen that wolf before? 
(some of the group need to leave and those remaining look for the 
picture of the wolfwhich they find with some difficulty) 
63 'Nother one like a pig 
64 Look look look look look at 
65 looks like a hand 
66 There 
67 Because urn 
68 I because urn because he's he's wait here 
69 this is because he's going in a crack this 
70 is a crack so he can turn into a stone 
Urn where? 
Does look a little bit like an arm 
(reads p. 20) Why do you think he's got 
turned to stone? 
Right 
71 He went stone really he runned he runned 
72 so hard that he quickly * * * then the cold 
73 * turned him to real stone he * * * a stone 
Appendix 4 B:2 
He met turned him into stone? 
74 Yes that's right he runned 
Who turned him into stone? 
75 I know I know I know I know 
76  
Oh right the like the bear 
77 No him no him the wolf he's creeping 
78 to there then maybe he went to there 
79 and he's got a magic magic stone things 
80 and he can go there to just then he can 
81 turn into a stone 
Right 
82 I know 
83 Because his circles a lots of stones that's 
84 the cracks is because he ran he ran so 
85 Quickly he leaves are thicker that's why 
86 crack in stones there are crack in stone 
87 the crack eye got eyes that's goes shhhh 
88 it done magic eyes 
Oh I see yes 
89 Then he commed there 
Right like magic rays from his eyes 
90 Magic stones 
91 I know I know I know maybe he zapped 
92 he wented   (Bengali speech) 
93 When he was this one he can be invisible 
94 things so he can he can zap all the   can 
95 turn him to stones and 
Oh right 
96 He can only move slowly he's invisible 
97 and then he can go as as slowly slowly 
98 slowly slowly slowly slowly slowly 
Appendix 4 B: 2 
99 slowly slowly then he can go to the boy 
100 then he can turn him into a stone 
101 Like this flI'St he was a boy then he go 
102 wala wala wala wala wala 
103 First he was a boy a then 
104 Hands hand 
105 Look look there's hands hands 
106  
107 Where? 
108 Yeah 
109 No that's not a hand 
110 In there eyes 
III Where? Where the eyes? Eyes eyes eyes 
112 Is just the stick got into his * 
113 Heather Heather Heather Heather 
114 maybe really he was turned into a stone 
115 that's may be turned into a stone then 
116 maybe he can turn him into stone here 
117 Who? 
118 Him on the other side 
1(19 Who? 
120 (Bengali speech) 
121 Then he    make me a stone and too 
122 then the hand said then the then the 
(reads pp. 22 - 23 until 'It began to move ') 
(reads 'Her brother was there ') 
Where is the hands? 
Dh right in the tree behind 
They think that's a hand 
Appendix 4 B:2 
123 stone said urn then the hand said urn 
124 tum the little boy in nonnal then he 
125 tum into normal 
126 I know 
127 No 
128 I know first he was a boy and then he 
129 was running and then he got a little bit 
130 like that and then he was and then he 
131 got a statue 
132 Yeah 
133 Heather Heather 
134 Maybe he ran he ran he ran and ran 
13S and ran and he can;'t run then the 
136 then he tum into a stone maybe    
13 7 only he have to only ran in here he 
138 only have to run not stop then he stop 
139 then he turn into a stone 
140 Got stop run 
141 Because they're friends 
142 No more cross 
Don't you think it was Rose who rescued 
him by putting her arms round him? 
You don't think so? 
Oh I see so you think it starts from there? 
Right 
(reads p. 24) 
Oh right yes he turned into a stone because 
he stopped running 
(reads p. 23) Why do you think they're 
smiling at one another? 
Appendix 5 B:J 
Appendix 5 
School Breading 3 
Appendix 5 B: 3 
SCHOOL BREADING 3 
CHILDREN HEATHER 
(look atfront cover) 
1 Sleeping Beauty 
Sleeping Beauty? It could be 
(look at p. 3) 
2 Look it's the girl 
3 Oh I know this one 
4 Look because I know it because 
5 the girl is reading 
She is she's reading it looks like the same 
book (reads p.3) 
6 Not true 
7 Miss the mouth's the same the 
8 mouth's the same 
(reads p.4 - dreaming) 
9 Why? 
10 No (reads p.4 - friends) 
11 That's why they made a wall 
Why's that? 
12 Because he the brother goes outside 
13 and the girl stay inside that's why 
14 they are a wall 
15 Ohno Yes that's a good point 
16 Look at window broken 
(finish reading p4 ) 
17 I know why it's broken they 
18 play football there 
Appendix 5 B: 3 
(19 She made this story in this book 
20 Yes. 
21 She made a story 
22 With this little house 
23 Like a little witch house 
24 No 
25 We know this story 
26 It's like little witch take the boy 
27 and put him in a cage 
28 (Bengali words) 
29 Little Red Riding Hood 
30 The Little Red 
31 (Bengali phrase) 
32 Little Red Riding Hood jacket 
33 And she's 
34 And fox is wolf is there urn and 
35 He put a mask on 
36 Yes 
37 And he he's dreaming about he's 
38 went creeping on her sister 
39 And then she's shoe 
(readsp. 5) 
Yes she did do you know what's the little 
house which story does the little house 
It's like -
Yes Hansel and Gretel that's right 
She's got Little Red Riding Hood's-
Yes just like the story the wolf coming in 
I think he might be yes 
Appendix 5 B: 3 
Yes there's her shoe sticking out 
40 And there she's coat 
41 No someone's dead someone's dead 
You think someone's dead? 
42 Or someone's under the bed hiding 
43 big brother - big brother 
44 No his brother is here 
4S No that's his big brother 
46 Maybe she's brother 
47 Is it him? 
I think so don't you? 
48 No 
49 I think so 
Don't you think that's the brother? 
50 He made the he made the mouse 
You think the one under the bed's the boy? 
51 Sho-oo-e (drawn out) 
52  
53 This could be his sister little sister 
54 and little brother's got no string 
55 No 
56 Then she she's scared 
57 Big baby 
58 He chasing 
He's chasing her yes 
59 And there's the little star 
Yes little stars above his bed 
60 And this is the world and this is a rna 
Yes it could be it could be 
61   light 
Appendix 5 B: 3 
62 And there she's coat and dress and there 
63 she (Bengali words) 
64 Little Red Riding Hood 
66 boy match look look Heather 
67 The Red Riding Hood no scared of 
68 the wolf 
70 No this one 
71 And this one like his brother 
72 This is like a  
73 Cowboy cooking cooking 
74 The wolf 
75 Look match match match 
76 This is like the Superman 
77 Superman 
She's got a nice light hasn't she? 
Oh yes her dress sticking out of the 
wardrobe and her red coat 
Little Red Riding Hood it's like Little Red 
Riding Hood 
Just a moment 
The Little Red Riding Hood in the picture 
she's not scared of the wolfis she? No 
she' s not that's good 
Oh yes the girl's face looks like a little egg 
Oh yes in the picture Little Red Riding 
Hood's face does look like a little egg 
(starts p.7) 
What his sleeve? Oh yes pointing like 
Superman 
Appendix 5 B: 3 
(restarts p. 7)' 
78 Look * * * 
79 Same colour 
80 * * * crying 
(Reads pp. 7and 8 until 'Just for once ') 
81 That's how he ... .Iook ... the boy's doing 
82 that the mum is doing the same 
83 Look they've got the same and he said 
84 no you can't go 
8S And she's crying 
86 She's being sad now * * * 
87 She go to the school and she be sad 
88 They're being sad 
89 'Cos he doesn't want his sister to come 
90 sister want to come 
Yes exactly (finishes p. 8) 
Yes exactly yes 
Yes yes 
They are both look sad don't they? 
91 No she don't want she want to stay inside 
That's right with her book 
92 The brother is bad 
He is a bit bad isn't he? 
93 He don't give her her sister outside 
No no he doesn't want her there 
94 Look the same (pointing to table mats) 
Yes the same    
9S He's kicking it No she's putting leg *  
96 * * colour .. that's Superman's colour (mat) 
That's right 
97 Cool cool cool 
Shall we tum over now then? 
98 There's a good picture that (mat) 
Appendix 5 B: 3 
99 Picture that 
100 Here star 
What was that? 
Where's the picture? 
Oh yes the star it's like the stars and stripes 
isn't it? (pp. 7 and 8) 
(babble of noise everybody talking at once) 
101 * * * frightened 
(more confused noise) 
102 Look it's like a spider 
103 He is not frightened 
104 It's like a spider *  
105 Web 
106 And this is moon and sun and moon 
107 And you got um 
108 Miss that's flowers flowers you give 
itto  
109 Flowers you give it your flowers 
110 And this one make a garden 
And everything's break 
The girl is frightened 
He's not frightened no 
It's like a kind of spider's web yes it is 
It is the sun and moon 
Oh you spray oh right yes 
Right yes 
Everything's broken there isn't it? 
Appendix 5 B: 3 
III Yes 
112 It's a ladder ladder 
113 Ladder 
114 There 
115 Yes 
116 There's a broom 
117  (some Bengali words) 
118 Ladder 
Leather? 
Ladder? Where' s the ladder? 
There? 
Oh yes it is 
A broom where's a broom? 
1(19 That's not a ladder that's a step No 
120 And look a door little door 
121 Where? 
122 What a drawer? 
123  ladder ) 
Well it might be which one you pointing 
126 This one ladder this one here may be ladder 
127 Ladder 
128 There's a comb there's a comb 
129 Yeah 
130 This one is a cupboard 
(Bengali words) 
Oh there oh yes I see what you mean yes it 
is a ladder 
A comb? 
What with shelves? We don't know it 
could be upstairs 
Appendix 5 B: 3 
131 Ladder ladder 
132 You put your um key 
133 This is * * *  
134 TV (Bengali words) 
135 This one this one do you see? This one 
136 Freezer freezer 
137 That's Coca Cola bottle 
138 And there's carpet or   
139 And this is ice 
140 Heather feather Heather there's 
141 settee settee 
142 No bed *. 
143 No sofa that's the sofa 
144 And that's marzi 
145 (talking at once) 
146 There's a bicycle 
147 Pipe 
148 A lock a shoe 
149 Someone's shoes someone's dead 
150 Shoe 
151 Someone's dead do you know who's 
152 dead? Shall I show you? Shall I show 
Oh yes that does look like a * 
Yes it looks like a freezer 
Sofa yes it could be 
And what's under the 
What have you got your? What are you 
looking at? 
A shoe 
153 you who's dead? (turns to p.18 ) Who made 
154 this fire? He's dead here he made that ftre 
155 was he *  ftre? 
Well there are a lot of shoes in this story 
Appendix 5 B: 3 
156 Is looking like sh sh 
157 Is a man 
158  ruler 
aren't there? 
159 A head looks like somebody else somebody's 
160 here actually   (turns to next page) 
161 His brother and he's gone under the * * 
162 Tunnel 
163 * *   
164 The girl not the boy 
165 CD 
166 That's not a CD 
167 Cooker cooker 
Yes (reads p. II. They turn back to pp. 9 
and 10) 
It might be it might be it's very hard to tell 
(furn to p. 13. A lot of laughter) 
Why are you laughing? 
168 Sad sad story look a sad story she's sad 
(more chuckles) 
169 Look at the * (points to p. 10) look 
170 it's different look it's 
171 the lion here and that it isn't 
172 Sleeping Beauty 
173 Oh lots of lots of lots of there's 
Yes she is sad there she is holding her boots 
Well she's turned over some pages she's 
read a lot while she's sitting there 
Appendix 5 B: 3 
174 Sleeping Beauty and there's    
175 There's Cinderella 
176 I've got like that 
177 My book's Sleeping Beauty one 
178 like Cinderella 
179 All together gether gether 
179a There might be monsters 
Ohyes 
Oh yes I know all in one book (reads p. 
179b She's crying doesn't want to be in inside 
180 No 
181 Yes 
182 I'm no going 
183 She's scary 
184 She's scared and she's going in there 
She doesn't want to go in the tunnel would 
you like to go in the tunnel like that? 
No (starts p. 13) 
(confused all talking at once) (reads rest of p. 13 then pp. 15 and 16) 
185 They have to take torch light 
186 And look she's hair ) 
187 She has to take light ) 
188 Look it's like a light this one's like a 
189 light little light 
(190 When she was there belly bone 
(191 Hair band 
She hasn't got a light though has she? 
Yes but she hasn't got a light 
A little tiny light coming from the end 
What's 'belly bone?' 
Appendix 5 B: 3 
(192 Like circle 
(193 This is a hand somebody put it here like 
(194 when she goes there they will kill her 
(195 And there's the string 
Hair band oh yes just up there? 
Yes tiny though isn't it? (Read p. 17. 
Interspersed with 'This part is so nice this 
part is so nice isn't it?') 
(196 And there's the rabbit's or mouse's house 
(197 There's the hand big hand) 
 ) 
(198 Maybe the brother go there 
( 199 Yeah because he had to get out of this 
201 There's the basket ) 
Where's the mouse's house? 
Ohyes 
202 He wanted to go under there and he put this 
203 The basket the basket 
(chorus of 'Yes ') 
204 That's the bird 
Oh yes can you see the little basket? 
206 put it round her feet and she would know 
207 she's going this way 
It'll trip her up 
208 And they' II tie it and get it up 
209 Yes yes I expect 
210 This is a green tree and this is a brown 
211 Look a beanstalk beanstalk 
Appendix 5 B: 3 
212 Look look there 
213 Somebody there that's why and 
214 somebody's house and somebody kill 
215 from this house and somebody see her 
216 A witch maybe 
217 This is like a animal this one and this *) 
218 There's a black ) 
220   statue 
221 Look there's a house 
222 Somebody dead from this house 
223 Maybe *. * 
224 Witch house 
225 Maybe 
226 Look someone is dead 
227 Maybe ... because look they put there 
228 He he died you see that shoes? He died 
229 Yeah 
230 Dh 
231 Can I see it? Dh I like this one 
232 Look see? He died (shoes on waste) 
233 Look a mous ... a pirate his head behind 
234 there and he's here 
235 Where? 
236 There's owl 
*  * 
I think it's like Jack and the Beanstalk too 
Do you think that's a witch's house? 
Dh right that could be it 
Ah that's his gravestone? 
Yes right 
Does look a little bit like a pirate 
Appendix 5 B: 3 
237 Look like urn urn urn ... there 
238 And there's got long long nails 
Where's the owl? 
239 Looks there's baby pig baby pig baby pig 
240 That looks like ant 
241 There's big pig 
242 (Bengali talk) 
243 Snake snake snake you see him 
244 Notthat 
245 * * * * * 
246 It looks like somebody's dead a monster 
247 No that looks like a snake and this one 
248 looks like ant coming inside and they 
249 made a * *. 
250 Look two eyes look like two eyes 
252 No ) 
253 There's a bear 
254 There's a bear 
255 That's the monster's hand 
256 Look that's the bear (excited) 
257 There's scary things 
258 Second bear 
259 That's a wolf 
260 Yeab I thought that wolf come in here 
261 come here there's that wolf 
262 Look he there and he there there and 
263 that and that 
264 Everything is same here 
Does it? A little bit 
Yes they do 
Yes what about that one then 
Appendix 5 B: 3 
265 I know there's the she's the Red 
266 Riding Hood he's the wolf  like that 
267 I know that wolf was here she photocopied 
268 she photo the tunnel with the other time 
269 because it same 
270 And he's seen (been?) the wolftoo 
271 And that's the and that's the same in 
the jungle 
272 Look look the hand 
273 And that's the same wolf that's the same 
Mm the same wolf isn't it? 
274 Look this one is the statue boy(on p 21) 
275 Every time the scary picture 
276 Some of the trees are cut 
277 Yes 
278 Heather these are these trees are cut 
279 Heather that's the boy running 
280 And he be a statue and then 
281 Look I know why he be a statue look 
282 there's magic things here if you step 
283 here then you're a statue 
(They turn to p. 22) 
284 This is their his brother this is 
he's brother look 
Mm 'tis a scary picture isn't it? 
The trees are cut yes 
I know 
Yes it's a magic circle isn't it? (reads p. 
Look at him he's running 
Appendix 5 B: 3 
285 Do you know why? If she gone 
286 She will be statue now 
287 Look she's a statue now with his brother 
288 Very nearly look these are magic seeds 
289 these are something magic seeds these 
290 are the no these are not a people not a 
She's not (reads p. 22 up to 'Change 
colour 1 
291 stone these are not * * stone this stone here 
292 This * * now happy 
293 Where's the tunnel? 
294 And his ball * * 
295 This look like 
296 and they all together again 
297 And there's the ball and book His ball 
298 and she's and the brother's ball and she's 
299 the girl's book there's the one book 
Yes (reads p. 22-23) 
Dh it doesn't show you going back through 
the tunnel (reads p. 24) 
300 there's the ball that's the left that's left in 
301 Give the book back 
302 No no no 
303 He just saw the giant 
Do you think that Jack sawall the same 
animals in the forest as Rose did? 
304 Look she's scared and she's running away 
to see her brother 
305 Because he's lost and all 
Well why do you think the boy looks as if 
he's running? 
Appendix 5 B: 3 
307 He was running 
308 He was running magic seeds from the cloud 
309 Not the cloud 
310 Stone 
311 And that's 
312 And he was running   seed seed seed 
313 Do you know what seed? 
314 And he's stuck in the stone 
315 (Do you know what seed? 
316 (  he was running because there the 
Magic seed from the cloud? 
Stones you think 
Don't shout 
317 seeds look they're growing growing to flowers 
Oh seeds not stones but seeds 
318 Yeah magic seeds 
Magic seeds 
3( 19 Because they're going to grow sunflowers 
Right 
Appendix 6 C-J 
Appendix 6 
School C reading 1 
Appendix 6 C-J 
SCHOOL C READING 1 
CHILDREN 
1 You see a wall 
2 Hey there's a book another book 
HEATHER 
A wall and-
Another book down the wallpaper 
3 Yeah there's going to be books on every 
4 page I think 
(reads pp. 3 and 4) 
5 I think it's clever how he does that shoe thing 
6 Kicking 
7 Kicking kick the ball 
8 A little tear there on his nose 
It is very clever 
Yes it's how he makes it look as though the 
boy's foot is moving 
9 One coming down his nostril there and there 
10 Oh yeah you found one I found one 
11 There's smashed windows 
12 maybe they smashed the windows 
13 Yeah maybe 
14 And that book in the picture 
There are smashed windows where do you 
think they're playing? 
Well it looks as though those windows have 
been smashed by more than one ball 
doesn't it? 
Perhaps it's a waste ground do you think? 
Yes what's in the picture do you think? 
15 In the book in this book there's a house trees 
16 Chimney 
Appendix 6 C-l 
17 There's a wood 
18 Urn let me read the title 
(19 'Hansel and Gretel' 
20 Yes 'cos there's a house in my 
21 Hansel and Gretel 
22 I know that looks like a house 
23 Hey I think they've got the 
24 Big Bad Wolf in there 
I just wonder 
It is a wood what sort of story is she 
looking at then? 
Do you think so Lianne and Lauren? 
(reads pp. 5 and 6) 
25 Yeah they've got the Big Bad Wolf picture 
I think so yes 
26 Little Red Riding Hood 
Yes yes 
27 Look that's the Hansel and Gretel house there 
It is isn't it with the roof all made of 
sweeties 
28 (several) Yeah urn yeah (loud eating noises) 
29 It's a night light isn't it? 
30 I would eat it 
31 Yes she's left a book on her bed 
32 SoamI 
33 I love reading space books 
34 Yes there's a fairy 
She's very fond of reading isn't she? 
So are you yes 
Yes well she likes stories doesn't she she 
looks as though she likes fairy stories 
Appendix 6 C-I 
35 Yeah 
36 yes it's a fairy story book fairies 
37 Yeah 
38 Definitely about fairies 
39 Hey I think I see Father Christmas in there 
40 In the book 
41 Hey the brother's telling her off 
42 Haha 
43 'Cos he's going - (points) 
44 Yeah and she looks sad 
Where? Where's Father Christmas? 
In the book maybe maybe 
(readsp.7) 
He is isn't he? 
How do you know that? 
45 Aha you're a very naughty * (pretend gruff voice) 
46 Together 
47 Hey I see an old boot 
48 Look at that broken - I got 
49 one of them at home 
50 I got one of the things that are on 
51 top of submarines a real one 
52 Real 
53 I found it on Pevensey beach 
54 hey there's a little mask 
(reads p. 8) They don't look very pleased to 
be going out do they? 
(readsp. 9) 
Ohyes 
Have you where did you get that from? 
A little mask 
Appendix 6 C-l 
55 Yeah 
56 I found a bullet inside with a dent in it 
Oh that is exciting very unusual fmd 
57 I wish I could go there and make things 
58 The next one's in the Tunnel 
59 Yeah 
Would you like to? 
You'd like to make a robot from that would 
60 I'd like to go there and make a robot and then 
61 I wouldn't have to do all the cleaning up 
62 I would get a robot to fight my sister so 
63 when my sister goes like that and then whack 
64 Hey in there there's a big 
65 bommy knocker with spikes on 
66 Yeah there is in her book 
67 In her book 
68 Yeah 
69 There 
70 Hey there's a fire 
71 And there's a little lunch box 
72 Where? 
73 There 
74 Yeah 
Where' 5 that? 
Oh in the book that she's looking at 
(reads p. 1 I) (silence) 
Would you -
(reads p. 15 - 17) 
(know 
Appendix 6 C-l 
75 There in the comer in that little comer 
76 Yeah a basket 
77 And a little lunch box and a little 
78 round 
79 Red Riding Hood's? 
80 Yeah and probably she's gone into 
the land of story books 
Where's the lunch box? 
Oh yes it's a basket really isn't it? 
I wonder whose basket it was? 
Could be couldn't it? 
Maybe (turns to double spread showing 
Rose running through forest) 
81 Boy you can see her clothes running behind 
82 That looks like a secret door 
It does doesn't it? 
83 And a pig 
84 And it looks like a face on a tree 
A wild boar it looks like 
85 Yeah I've seen a wild boar with its head 
86 chopped off hey there's a house 
A house? 
87 Yeah a little house that must be 
88 the Big Bad Wolfs 
89 Little Red Riding Hood's granny's 
Might be 
90 (A little hole in a tree that was- The house -- ) 
91 000 the house was her lamp that 
92 was Hansel and Gretel's house 
It could be Hansel and Gretel's house 
93 There's a little house 
Where the where? 
Appendix 6 C-l 
94 Hey is it a wolf? 
95 No 
96 It might be her house 
97 or it might be 
98 Red Riding Hood's 
99 house 
100 That looks like a door actually 
101 Yeah that 
102 Yes 
103 Naaa looks like a grave to me 
104 Yeah actually yeah like a gravestone 
105 A gravestone 
106 We'll have to fmd out 
107 I know what the last picture 
108 I do 
109 There see a monster a monstery, a wolf 
110 the wolflook 
111 Yeah on the tree 
112 The wolf 
113 Aah 
114 (sing-song) I saw it too-oo 
I know B thought it might be Hansel and 
Gretel's house do you think it look 
No but there was a Hansel and Gretel house 
It could be couldn't it yes 
You think it looks like a door 
It could be either couldn't it? 
any other animals you can fmd in that 
picture? 
(starts to read p. 20) 
A wolf leaning over his stick and looking 
down at her (reads to end of book) 
Appendix 6 C-l 
(Girls like the picture where Rose finds Jack and the last page Oliver likes picture where 
Jack scares Rose. Barnes likes wood picture.) 
Appendix 7: C-2 
Appendix 7 
School C reading 2 
Appendix 7: C-2 
SCHOOL C READING 2 
CHILDREN 
1 It was about urn a tunnel and there 
2 was this boy and urn he went down it 
3 and his sister followed him and his sist 
4 his sister got lost and urn there was all 
5 these trees which looked like wolves 
6 and monsters and stuff and she came 
7 out the woods and there was all these 
8 tree-trunks and her brother which was 
9 turned to stone and urn and she hugged 
10 him and it went away the stone went 
11 away really slowly and urn they went 
12 back home. 
13 And and when they got back their 
14 mother was setting up the table 
15 Yes 
16 The book again the book down there 
17 (looles at endpaper at back of book) 
HEATHER 
Very well remembered Barnes you 
remembered a lot of that 
That's right all ready for dinner 
wasn't it? 
Yes the book again the book's got 
almost the same sort of pattern on 
the cover as the pattern on the 
wallpaper actually hasn't it? 
Appendix 7: C-2 
18 Yes I just noticed 
(19 I know why they put a brick bricks 
20 there and wallpaper there 
21 That's at home and that's outside 
22 The Tunnel 
23 Yes I do too 
24 Me too 
25 Could be just a shade   -
26 I I think I know because that's a 
27 tall building and there's the two 
28 chimneys and there's stuff written 
29 on it because somebody writ it on 
30 and there's the tunnel behind 
31 Or tunnel -
32 Yes 
33 Can you read it again? 
34    
35 There's good effects there 
I think you're probably right yes 
Yes the title The Tunnel 
I always wonder why do you think 
he's got that chimney picture there? 
With the gr with the graffiti there I 
don't know 
Could well be 
It could be couldn't it? 
Yes I'll read it do you want to .? 
A.ppendix 7: C-2 
36 it looks like it looks 
37 like he's kicking 
38 the ball 
39 Tum the page 
40 The brother's taller than the girl 
41 (mumbling) * * 
42 Yes 
43 Yes) 
44 Yes) 
45 The wallpaper and the bricks 
46 That must be the carpet 'cos it's 
47 not on there 
48 Yeah she's got her slippers on 
(reads p 3-4 ) 
He's taller than she yes he is he 
must be a little bit older than her 
mustn't he bit bigger 
Yes yes Ah yes yes it's the same 
wallpaper isn't it Lianne. is that 
what you're pointing to? 
Yes she's got the wallpaper he's got 
the bricks 
And actually if you look at that 
picture (Rose indoors on the 
window seat) 
That's right she likes to be inside 
reading and he likes to be outside 
I don't know that's the window seat 
isn't it so that's the wall under the 
window sill I think she's kind of 
perched up on the window sill 
reading and looking out 
Appendix 7: C-2 
49 Wbere's he 
50 Yeah she loves pink 
51 So's my sister 
52 I don't like ) 
53    
54 Outside the broken house 
55 Just outside his door and there 
56 might be a broken house next to his 
57 Kicking it against the wall and 
58 this would be the goals 
59 lust there 
60 there probably 
61  
62 Maybe just another  ) 
63 The girl comes a little ) 
64 bit further and that's where they play 
65 Could be in one of those houses 
66 Yeab they've got broken windows 
67 That hasn't  that one has 
she has hasn't she she like's pink 
too doesn't she? 
A bit of a girlie girl isn't she pink 
and she likes -
She likes pink too does she? 
Yes it's urn where do you think the 
boy's playing actually? 
Broken house yes 
Could be 
couldn't it? 
Where do you think they live then? 
Mm could be yes? 
Could be in a house like one of 
those couldn't it yes 
(reads p. 5) Here she is now look 
carefully at that picture because 
Appendix 7: C-2 
there's quite a lot of little things in 
that bedroom 
68 Yeah and there's blue all over his 
69 face and the pillow 
That's the way the book's been 
printed I think that's the way the 
colour's been laid 
70 Yes on 
71 I can see her eyes open 
They're just peeping aren't they? 
72 They're just going (mimes) 
That's right 
73   when my dad watch telly he 
74 closes his eyes and says he's asleep 
7S (laughs) so he can't get us anything 
76 when mum's at work like last night 
77 he done that to me 
Oh I see (laughs) that's not a bad 
78 I jump on my dad in the morning 
Do you what while he's still in bed? 
79 I I um wake my mum up 
Do you? 
80 I wake my dad up 
I don't expect they're very pleased-
81 'Cos in wake my mum up she 
82 wouldn't be very pleased No she wouldn't would she? Have a 
look at the room and see if you can 
see anything in that picture 
83 Which room? 
The bedroom the others have read 
the book before 
84 There' s some shoes there 
I know whose shoes are they do you 
Appendix 7: C-2 
think? 
85 Urn the little girl's 
I think they're the little girl's but 
what do they look like? 
86 I don't know 
87 Slippers 
88 They look like shoes 
Well you see I think they look I 
know they're not they're hers but I 
think they look like somebody 
under the bed sticking their feet out 
at the side don't you? 
89 Yeah 
90 Look there's a little rope down there 
Yes yes that's it what do you think 
that is? 
91 A man's under the bed holding the 
92 rope (laughs) 
93 It might be - a trip somebody up 
Yes it looks as though it might 
belong well I dunno looks like a tail 
or something 
94 A tail 
95 No 
96 A teddy maybe a teddy under the bed 
I don't think it is really but I I think 
perhaps even the urn belt on her 
dressing gown you know how you 
have these long cords -
97 Ohyes 
I think that's what it might be but I 
think that while she's in bed she's 
scared there might be a man under 
Appendix 7: C-2 
98 Yes 
99 That's the dressing gown I think 
100 Pink 
101 No it's lighter 
102 Yeah but look ) 
103 Little Red Riding Hood ) 
104 Look at that bit there 
lOS I know I knew that 
106 it looks like Little Red Riding Hood 
107 Look there like that 
108 It hasn't got any anns in 
109 But Little Red Riding Hood hasn't 
the bed and she's scared there might 
be an animal or something under the 
There isn't really and I think that 
those two are what she's imagining 
in her mind can you see anything 
else in that picture? 
I think that's her coat 'cos she wears 
a red coat doesn't she? 
Later on she wears a red coat look 
there's -
Well that's all right then I what does 
it remind you of that red coat? 
It does me as well 
Yes that's where the light's shining 
on it well spotted Oliver 
It does does 
MIn it has yes it has look there's an 
Oh no she hasn't hers is a sort of 
cape isn't it? There she is Little Red 
Riding Hood in the picture looking 
Appendix 7: C-2 
110 Wolf 
III The Big Bad Wolf(/aughs) 
112 Boys The Big Bad Wolf The Big Bad 
113 Poo poo poo poo-
114 Sister blister 
115 Sister blister 
116 * * * 
117 I turned my page already 
118 He looks like Tom doesn't he? 
119 He's in the school 
120 YesTomW. 
121 Probably because-
122 There's a little hand there . . .. ) 
123 been naughty and he's tell her ofT) 
124 ? That's her mother ) 
125 That's her mum that's her mum go ... out 
126 Yes that's her brother that's her 
127 brother and that's her mum 
128 Yes and going to school 
130 * * that school * outside) 
131 and come back at dinner time 
132 Yes that's * there 
133 (several) No 
attheum 
Looking at the wolf 
And there's poor little -
That's it 
Right 
I wonder why er Rose 
I think so (starts p. 7) 
Is Tom a friend of yours? 
He's in the school 
Right (reads p. 7)wonder 
what they're fighting about 
there? 
Yes - that's you're quite 
right Oliver. that's um her 
brother isn't it? 
Mm that's right well-
Well-
Do you think Jack is nice to his 
sister? 
I mean look he's got his fork up 
Appendix 7: C-2 
134 Well-
135 Yes 
136  like that      
137 Yeah I do I do it to you 
138 Yes because he's -  
139  
140 (laugh) She's got a flower mat 
141 and he's got a different mat 
142 Yeah he's got a football mat 
143  got blue and orange things 
144 You can see what he's 
145 got in that other picture 
146 Which picture? 
147 boing boing boing 
148 (wordlessly looking at picture) 
149  
ISO   scratch 
151 Girls. No 
152 Boys. Yes Yes You can fmd things 
153 and build something like a robot 
154 What if there's glass there? 
155 Yeah and you can build something 
156 Yeah like a robot a j inormous one 
157 and then drive it home 
158   (excitedly) ) 
159 Or a radio what you can listen to ) 
160 I got one of them -
161 Or a little game or something 
162 Look Oliver. that's electric look er er 
163 that urn that thing there 
like that hasn't he? 
Do you see well he's holding his 
fork up in one hand and he's 
pointing with the other and it's 
very very fierce isn't it? 
You don't think it is you don't think 
he's being a bit fierce to her? 
Mm and she looks a bit sulky 
doesn't she? 
(starts p. 8) 
Yes we can't see what he's got but 
you can tell it's -
Oh right 
Uhoh-
Yes you can see his football there 
(readsp.8) 
(readsp.9) 
Would you like to have somewhere 
like that to go and play?' 
Sh sh sh-
That's right you could -
Appendix 7: C-2 
164 No that red line 
165 that red line 
166 Wow a smashed TV 
167 Where? 
Well that that was what you you 
discovered you told us what that 
was that was the submarine top isn't 
it do you mean that little thing there 
like an old radio next to it an old 
battery? 
Is that what you mean? 
Oh yes a red a red a red wire 
168 There urn mm There 
169 I've got one of those little faces 
170 Shall I bring my one of them in? 
171 Got one of them 
172 Look there's a smashed TV 
173  
174 Urn 'sonly about that tall and then 
175 mm bit here 
176 Several. Look that thing 
177 I'm going to bring it in 
178 That's a fridge could be 
179 That's a fridge 
180  a TV in the picture 
181 And there's a broken TV 
182 On top of this thread there 
183 must be glass 
184 There's a TV 
Have you? Little rubber one? 
Well-
As a teacher it's a little bit big to 
bring in just for this actually em 
Barnes but-
How big is it Barnes. ? 
Well see what your teacher thinks-
I mean I expect your teacher 
I wonder what that is actually that 
door thing? 
Yes quite likely 
Course you know about fridges 
don't you you know that they're 
very dangerous? 
You know-
(discussion of dangers to children of dumped fridges) 
185 What's what? 
186 That 
187 I know When they put people in 
188 there when they're dead sometimes 
Appendix 7: C-2 
189 Why? Why? 
(190 What? What? Arrows in where? ) 
(191 Um that is um *  ) 
(192 Yeab I seen one of them before 
(193 I think it's an arrow fridge thing 
(194  * 
(195 There's a broken TV 
(196 There see that little broken TV? 
(197 I seen one of them before 
(198 Yes 
(199 What's that thing there? that little 
200 thing-
201 I turned over 
202 That might be the top of an aerial 
203 from a walkie-talkie or that wonky 
204 thing on our television (mumbling) 
205 Yeah that wonky thing 
206 Ha I turned over and there's 
207 Oh that's the tunnel bit 
208 Where? 
209 Yeah turn the page 
210 Tunnel *. 
211 * turn these  pages 
212 Maybe it's just an arch thing 
213 I think I know 
214 because somebody hid it with them 
215 and somebody stuvved it and chopped 
216 it down and there was just one person 
217 they got turned to stone far far away 
218 from the brother and um just stayed 
2(19 like that 
220 Ever since 
A gravestone well they wouldn't 
put a gravestone in a rubbish dump 
would they it's got a marking on the 
comers -
Didyeab -
It may just be a big cardboard box 
mightn't it and that's the comer of it 
sticking up a bit 
of foam rubber there and there just 
behind 
just behind him 
where's the broken TV? 
Oh yes yes just a little -
Right *  
(reads p. J J) And off he's going I 
wonder why it's got all that ivy 
growing round it 
Yes it's um it's 
Ever since 
MIn the ground's the same as that 
isn't it you've got that sort of 
Appendix 7: C-2 
221 Yes 
222 Yes got that's got 
223 stuff ) 
224 (another child humming) ) 
And then you've got the same same 
there 
(Accidental re-reading; discussion of this and physical state of the book) 
225 (Several) Yes. No. Yes 
226 I wouldn't go 
227 I'd take a torch 
228 Witches in  
229 And the queen that's-
230 Hey this picture is the same as um 
231 That's the same as the front that is 
232 that picture 
233 Yes same as the front Anthony 
234 Browne 
235 and 
236 and slimy (giggles) 
237 (laughs) I don't like -
238  
239  
240 I can't open the page 
(reads p.13)Do you think she was 
brave to go into that tunnel? 
Yes I wouldn't I wouldn't go it's 
quite dark there isn't it? 
And what has she been reading 
about before she went in? 
Yes she's been reading you can see 
the witch can't what story is that in? 
Looks to me like - what do you 
think the story is there? 
Oh yes so it is 
(reads p.5-6) 
That's right 
and scary 
Looks as though it's quite a long 
tunnel too doesn't it? 
Do you want another one because 
that one seems to have quite a few 
sticky pages shall I give you another 
copy no good having a book you 
can't open that one should be all 
right 
Appendix 7: C-2 
241 These pages are easier 
242 There's a little fire down there 
243 Indians? 
244 Goblins 
245 But I'm not scared of them 
246 No neither am I 
247 Might be her brother's brother's 
248 No must wait and see if it is 
249 Indians always have fires 
250 Er somebody who left the fire 
251 Maybe it was her brother and then 
252 he just leaved it 
253 I turned over 
254 He didn't didn't  
255 Anaxe 
256 Tum the page 
257 There's a little road going down 
258 there 
(reads p.17 until 'could not ') 
wonder what whose fire it is? 
Indians 
Goblins 
Yes they send smoke signals don't 
they they used to yes yes who else 
has been there then? 
Well wait a minute 
But somebody somebody else has 
been there haven't they what other 
sign have you got that somebody 
has been there just a few minutes 
Yes someone' s actually working 
there aren't they chopping down 
trees 
Wbydo  
Appendix 7: C-2 
259 Where the  is very good 
260 there's a  there's a mon - there's 
261  
262 (singing) there's a house) 
263  a warthog ) 
264 A bear and there's the Big Bad Wolf 
265 And there's door and a real house 
266   there's a walking stick 
267  There's a house with a door 
268 in that picture 
269 And  
270 Yeab and there's a house ) 
271 *  one .** ) 
272 Look there's a house -
273 Look there she is 
274 Look she's  wooaah Isn't she? 
275 Voom She's going vooab 
276 (several) No Inol 
277 somebody'syes 
278 Somebody's carving those 
279 with that axe 
280 (several) * */carving it/yes 
281 imagining it 
282 Yeah they've carved it and she's 
283 imagining it's real 
Looks like-
She is isn't she? she's running as 
fast as she could do you think you 
might run as fast as you could in 
that wood? 
Do you think they have? 
You think she's imagining it 
Bames? 
Appendix 7: C-2 
284 (severa/)YeahII see urn pictures 
285 on the trees I - I -there's a picture 
Of course sometimes trees do you 
know that - you go in Wilderness 
Wood? 
286 in everything 'cos I was making a chip 
287 butty last night um and I was just putting 
288 the chips and fish fmgers and tomato 
289 ketchup and everything and it made a 
290 face upside down 
291 I wasn't making one upside down-
292 Yes once I saw a shape Concorde 
293 Yes with granddad 
294 No not with my granddad my granddad 
295 was up there 
296 he's up in heaven 
297 Yep 
298 (several) Yes 
No it just did and sometimes when 
there's clouds in the sky and you 
look at them do you ever see shapes 
Concorde 
With your granddad and shapes -
Oh your granddad -
Oh right 
I see and you saw his shape in a 
cloud did you ? 
Right well I I see things - no it's the 
nursery out - well I see things like 
urn dragons up in the clouds do you 
see dragons in the clouds? 
Dragon shapes not really dragons I 
think that's what the trees are like I 
think they've just grown and I think 
Appendix 7: C-2 
299 (several)  
300 (several) and the warthog is moving 
301 isn't like that it's like a pig 
302 Not long like that is it? 
303 No it's a warthog 
304 They've grown it and chopped them off 
305 What? 
306 What? 
307 Yeah but not real-
308 it's  
  fire 
310  
311 Turned to stone 
312  
313 Turned to stone into stone 
314 I don't know 
315 I know the person who lived in 
316 a house 
317 Because because the person who 
318 lives in the house was a goblin or 
you're absolutely right Barnes it's 
imagination isn't it? 
That's right it's the roots of the tree 
Yes that's right 
Yes no no it's not-
Yes that's right that's where the 
woodcutter's cut - but there's 
certainly that's not imagination 
though is it -
that's a real axe -
- and a real fire and a real house 
Um somebody's-
(reads p. 20) 
What's happened to her brother? 
I know but let's have a think about 
it who's turned him into stone? 
Why is it going like that? 
A.ppendix 7: e-2 
3(19 something he made him into stone 
320 or a witch or something 
321 'Cos he's because he's urn shouting 
322 Yes 
323 Yes (laughs) 
324 Yes ring of stones round him 
325 Mm 
326 Ah I forgot 
327 Yes there is a ring around him 
328 All the trees have been cut down 
329 I think I know who turned him into 
330 stone 
331 Urn somebody who lived in that house 
Yeab why is his mouth like that? 
Yes I think he's actually he's 
running isn't he he's running away 
from something I think Jack is 
scared this time he looks as though 
he is to me 
In fact he looks to me as though 
he's quite terrified 
And who else you noticed last time 
didn't you? 
Ring of stones you know what a 
ring very often in fairy stories 
means -
- what does it mean? 
It's magic isn't it you get fairy rings 
goblin rings and when you step into 
the ring you're in their power so 
maybe he' s stepped into this ring I I 
don't know 
What else do you notice about this 
picture? 
They have haven't they well who's-
332 that house Could be 
333 It might be it was the tunnel 
334 No the tunnel couldn't have done it 
335 Yeah 
336  those little 
337 holes going up and somebody went 
338 like that to them 
339 their power and it turned it into stone 
Well no  might have part of the 
truth 
You think it puts a spell on you 
when you go through -
the tunnel 
Appendix 7: C-2 
340 I know I think I know 
Mm I wonder why that person's cut 
down all the trees? 
341 in case any people coming to fight him 
342 and he can see 'em because if there was 
343 some trees in the way he can't see through 
344 the trees he can see over them now 
345 so they're all cut down 
346 That tree cut down 
34 7 Yes because if you sit on the front 
348 and jump over them and jump on to 
349 them and stuffand *-
350 Yeah I like that picture 
351 If see a ring of stones I'm not 
352 stepping into them would you Oliver? 
353 Neither would I 
354 I wouldn't/I amII * 
355 There's the big daisy 
356 Look there's the -
357 How could I?) 
358 * turned to stone 
359 * / * / *(excited) 
360 That axe that axe didn't -
361 The animals in the picture 
362 that can be cut away * that 
363 I want to know * -
Well which do you think looks 
nicest this forest or this with the 
trees cut down? 
You like that picture do you you'd 
like the trees cut down would you? 
(laughs) 
And you and you cut down all your 
trees would you make it nice and 
safe? 
That's right right -
Sh (whispering) have to be quiet 
because of the people through there 
Yes that's what I wondered yes 
There when she comes into the 
wood there are all the trees that's 
before you get into the deep forest 
Appendix 7: C-2 
364 YesandI*-
365 *. little caves 
366 That's little caves there * * 
367 In a tree 
368 * * 
369 * * * that fIre 
370 Yes going under 
371 And stepped into and stepped into 
372 a ring of daisies 
373 Where? 
374 There 
375 Ring - ring 
376 of daisies must mean 
377 It's can you come back tomorrow? 
378 Stones there 
379 And it stays the same *  
380 /*/ * * * as welV 
381 getting alive look 
and there she is and you see the 
three little birds picking up bread 
and when he's running 
running and turned to stone all those 
trees are cut down aren't they? 
'Tis like a little cave 
It is yes or a ladder but yes but 
somebody somebody's urn -
so you can't go into it 
Of course you know that's another 
tunnel in a way isn't it but they've 
boarded it up another tunnel under 
the ertree 
Yes let's tum over let's tum over 
because Oliver doesn't know you 
Ye yeah mm 
Appendix 7: C-2 
382 I know the right colour 
383 Yes 
384 Look on  page * * 
385 The dress lighter and lighter 
386 Yes and gets lighter and lighter 
387 That's because that's in the deep 
388 forest and it's getting lighter 
389 Yes it's the same place Oliver. and 
390 the um forest * * * do you see? 
391 That's because of the sun behind the 
392 trees there by the * there there 
393 and there and be a * -
394 Probably because he's in stone 
395 Lighter and lighter 
396 * *  trees chopped down over there 
397 I think I know why 
398 because the rings go round there 
(reads p. 22) poor Jack I feel very 
sorry for him he has I mean that I 
think on that frrst picture with his 
mouth open I think that's quite a 
terrifying picture 
(reads p. 23) Now just before we 
turn over just look across those 
pictures do you notice any other ch -
yes go on 
It does doesn't it do you notice that 
it's really dark here -
But it's the same place 
Mm I think-
Yes well I that's what I tried to to 
work out there are the chopped 
down trees-
and there are the chopped down 
trees and yes go on 
Appendix 7: C-2 
399 and there and on there 
400 and there's daisies there and urn she 
401 might have ran on out of that place 
402 She might of 
403 Probably 
404 Well I think the urn the same as * 
405 YeahII don't I think it's the same ring 
406 they've chosen the daisies 
407 Yeah but yeah but -
408 In that case it's all cut down there's 
409 no trees and now all those trees are 
410 here 
411 The trees /  
412 I think I know 
413 I think I know 
414 I think I know 
415 Look down there 
516 Trees are  might be down here 
517 I think I know 
518 Well urn when he gets back bring 
519 back to life that might just be another 
520  and he he he gets bring back to life 
521 the trees grow again and that might 
522 just be another place for them trees 
523 chopped down with another ring in it 
Well she might what do you think? 
What do you think girls what do 
you think Lianne and Lauren? 
You think it's a different ring 
somewhere else? 
Do you think that -
It could be that the picture's come 
from oh no this picture -
this picture's taken from there 
from there so maybe the trees are 
sort of here 
Could be it could be it could be after 
all if she could put her arms around 
Appendix 7: C-2 
524 Yes 
525  /what's that?/  
526 Next page 
527 Just in time for tea 
528 Lunch lunch 
529 Look now there's a football and a 
530 book outside and on the front there's 
531 no football 'n' there's only a book on 
532 the other side 
533 I know why probably because they 
like each other 
534 Yeah and the girl wants to go outside 
535 and reading 
536 No/nolbecause they like each other 
him and bring him back to life then 
perhaps the fact the way she brings 
him back to life can change the 
stones into daisies and make the 
daisies and bring back some of the 
trees 
I don't know I don't know why the 
trees are there 
There you are 
(reads p. 24) Right now let's have 
a little-
little 
(laughs) Yes just in time it doesn't 
say that but that's 
what it looks like doesn't it yes 
(laughs) 
Yes I expect she does I don't 
expect do you think Jack goes on 
laughing at Rose for being a baby 
any more? 
537 And also Yes? 
538 oh I thought that wallpaper was on 
539 that side 
540 Stick um leaf 
I know a teacher with her class of 
children she got them to act this out 
they had to pretend you know what 
they would be like if they were 
really scared in the forest one of the 
things she got them to do was to 
bring back one thing out of the 
forest and I wonder you know if you 
had to bring back one thing from the 
forest have a minute and think what 
you might bring back 
Appendix 7: C-2 
541 A stick is a dagger or a smaller 
542 something 
543 I found this really good stone it was 
544 chalk it looked like this wn this um 
545 white stone it was really nice it was 
546 really nice I kept it 
547 No 
548 Um I'd bring two books back ifI 
You mean a stick that looks like a 
sword or a dagger 
What about you Lauren is there 
something that you would bring 
back? 
No you wouldn't what about you 
Lianne? 
549 found them Two books (laughs) very good 
550 Or a lost football one time I went to 
551 this um building I found this lost foot-
552 ball I just booted it into the forest and 
553 I found it again Oooh 
554 Did you kick it *? 
	341283_001
	341283_001a
	341283_002
	341283_003
	341283_003a
	341283_004
	341283_005
	341283_006
	341283_007
	341283_008
	341283_009
	341283_010
	341283_011
	341283_012
	341283_013
	341283_014
	341283_015
	341283_016
	341283_017
	341283_018
	341283_019
	341283_020
	341283_021
	341283_022
	341283_023
	341283_024
	341283_025
	341283_026
	341283_027
	341283_028
	341283_029
	341283_030
	341283_031
	341283_032
	341283_033
	341283_034
	341283_035
	341283_036
	341283_038
	341283_039
	341283_040
	341283_041
	341283_042
	341283_043
	341283_044
	341283_045
	341283_046
	341283_047
	341283_048
	341283_049
	341283_050
	341283_051
	341283_052
	341283_053
	341283_054
	341283_055
	341283_056
	341283_057
	341283_058
	341283_059
	341283_060
	341283_061
	341283_062
	341283_063
	341283_064
	341283_065
	341283_066
	341283_067
	341283_068
	341283_069
	341283_070
	341283_071
	341283_072
	341283_073
	341283_074
	341283_075
	341283_076
	341283_077
	341283_078
	341283_079
	341283_080
	341283_081
	341283_082
	341283_083
	341283_084
	341283_085
	341283_086
	341283_087
	341283_088
	341283_089
	341283_090
	341283_091
	341283_092
	341283_093
	341283_094
	341283_095
	341283_096
	341283_097
	341283_098
	341283_099
	341283_100
	341283_101
	341283_102
	341283_103
	341283_104
	341283_105
	341283_106
	341283_107
	341283_108
	341283_109
	341283_110
	341283_111
	341283_112
	341283_113
	341283_114
	341283_115
	341283_116
	341283_117
	341283_118
	341283_119
	341283_120
	341283_121
	341283_122
	341283_123
	341283_124
	341283_125
	341283_126
	341283_127
	341283_128
	341283_129
	341283_130
	341283_131
	341283_132
	341283_133
	341283_133a
	341283_134
	341283_135
	341283_136
	341283_136a
	341283_137
	341283_137a
	341283_138
	341283_139
	341283_140
	341283_141
	341283_142
	341283_143
	341283_144
	341283_145
	341283_146
	341283_147
	341283_148
	341283_149
	341283_150
	341283_151
	341283_152
	341283_153
	341283_154
	341283_155
	341283_156
	341283_157
	341283_158
	341283_159
	341283_160
	341283_161
	341283_162
	341283_163
	341283_164
	341283_165
	341283_166
	341283_167
	341283_168
	341283_169
	341283_170
	341283_171
	341283_172
	341283_173
	341283_174
	341283_175
	341283_176
	341283_177
	341283_178
	341283_179
	341283_180
	341283_181
	341283_182
	341283_183
	341283_184
	341283_185
	341283_186
	341283_187
	341283_188
	341283_189
	341283_190
	341283_191
	341283_192
	341283_193
	341283_194
	341283_195
	341283_196
	341283_197
	341283_198
	341283_199
	341283_200
	341283_201
	341283_202
	341283_203
	341283_204
	341283_205
	341283_206
	341283_207
	341283_208
	341283_209
	341283_210
	341283_211
	341283_212
	341283_213
	341283_214
	341283_215
	341283_216
	341283_217
	341283_218
	341283_219
	341283_220
	341283_221
	341283_222
	341283_223
	341283_224
	341283_225
	341283_226
	341283_227
	341283_228
	341283_229
	341283_230
	341283_231
	341283_232
	341283_233
	341283_234
	341283_235
	341283_236
	341283_237
	341283_238
	341283_239
	341283_240
	341283_241
	341283_242
	341283_243
	341283_244
	341283_245
	341283_246
	341283_247
	341283_248
	341283_249
	341283_250
	341283_251
	341283_252
	341283_253
	341283_254
	341283_255
	341283_256
	341283_257
	341283_258
	341283_259
	341283_260
	341283_261
	341283_262
	341283_263
	341283_264
	341283_265
	341283_266
	341283_267
	341283_268
	341283_269
	341283_270
	341283_271
	341283_272
	341283_273
	341283_274
	341283_275
	341283_276
	341283_277
	341283_278
	341283_279
	341283_280
	341283_281
	341283_282
	341283_283
	341283_284
	341283_285
	341283_286
	341283_287
	341283_288
	341283_289
	341283_290
	341283_291
	341283_292
	341283_293
	341283_294
	341283_295
	341283_296
	341283_297
	341283_298
	341283_299
	341283_300
	341283_301
	341283_302
	341283_303
	341283_304
	341283_305
	341283_306
	341283_307
	341283_308
	341283_309
	341283_310
	341283_311
	341283_312
	341283_313
	341283_314
	341283_315
	341283_316
	341283_317
	341283_318
	341283_319
	341283_320
	341283_321
	341283_322
	341283_323
	341283_324
	341283_325
	341283_326
	341283_327
	341283_328
	341283_329
	341283_330
	341283_331
	341283_332
	341283_333
	341283_334
