Room to Grow 
Local knowledge, land use and legumes in the 
farming systems of northern Namibia 
Anne Elizabeth Margaret Hillyer 
A Thesis Submitted in Fulfilment of the Requirements for the Degree of Doctor of 
Philosophy at the School of Development Studies of the University of East Anglia 
July 2004 
 This copy of this thesis has been supplied on the condition that anyone who consults it is understood to 
recognise that its copyright rests with the author and that no quotation from the thesis, nor any information 
derived therefrom, may be published without the author's prior, written consent 
Table of Contents 
3.9.2 
3.9.3 
3.9.4 
Table of figures, maps and tables 
Abstract 
The complex and diverse nature of African contexts requires local solutions 
derived with local farmers. The challenge is to find approaches that 
strengthen farmers' capacity to adapt their systems sustainably. This 
research, about the role of legumes in the farming systems of northern 
Namibia, suggests an approach for improving the interface between farmers, 
agricultural extension officers and researchers for generating and adapting 
legume technologies for soil fertifity management. 
Objectives include: an exploration of biophysical and socio-economic 
contexts of the production environment to appreciate their affects on legume 
production and productivity; an investigation of farmers' livelihood objectives, 
choices, management practices and outputs and the bearing these have on 
their use of legumes; an assessment of local and scientific knowledge 
relating to farming the northern Namibian environment; an evaluation of 
future legume prospects in northern Namibia. Research methods include 
participatory mapping using Geographic Information Systems (GIS), rapid 
rural appraisal and conventional agronomic techniques. The Sustainable 
Livelihoods framework is used to analyse the effect of natural and human 
capital assets on the role of legumes. A framework of local knowledge allows 
spatial analysis to distinguish the impact of land diversity on farming choices 
for different socio-economic groups. 
Results identify the diversity of the biophysical and socio-economic 
environment of northern Namibia. The local knowledge framework 
distinguishes a number of land units facilitating an exploration of farmers' 
rationale with respect to crop choices, management practices and 
perceptions generally. Cowpea (Vigna unguiculata), planted by the majority, 
is the most important legume food crop. Wealthy farmers have larger and 
more diverse land plots, labour and seed assets than do poorer households. 
They are likely to grow a larger variety and quantity of grain legumes than 
poor farmers. Legume technology for soil fertility management is not known 
and local notions of fertility differ to those of formal science. 
Acknowledgements 
It has taken just over six years to produce this thesis and in that time, a lot 
has happened. I want to thank all those, including people not named here, 
who have helped and supported me. At the beginning, my father who brought 
me up to face challenges with courage and conviction, on his deathbed, 
encouraged me. My mother, Nora and brothers Alan and Harvey, are 
reminders of the love and commitment so poignant in the last days and hours 
of dad's life with us. A second bereavement, when my beloved partner, and 
emotional mentor Joe gave up his fight against a brain tumour, almost broke 
my resolve. Honouring his memory reinforced my determination to continue 
and complete. Now, graced with a new husband and daughter, Sean and 
Samantha are a tremendous source of joy and inspiration. They make the 
greyest days, bright and meaningful. Thanks to all of you. 
In Namibia, my greatest thanks go to all the farmers who gave so much of 
themselves. Also to my friends and colleagues at the Ministry of Agriculture 
Water and Rural Development, including those since retired or resigned. 
Particular thanks go to Alex Verlinden and Irene Shilulu for their dedication 
and good humour. Also to Philippe Talavera, Louise and Coenie van Zyl and 
Hans Langenhoven who were always there in times of need. Other 
colleagues deserving special acknowledgement are Magdelena Hangula, 
Aini Shetunyenga and Nikki Haiyambo. Also to Elias Nailulu who was loyal 
and motivated, teaching me much about Owambo custom and culture. 
My gratitude goes to the team at the Overseas Development Group and the 
School of Development Studies at the University of East Anglia who reliably 
supported me from a distance. On my return this continued through good 
times and bad and special thanks go to Liz Gibson, Jo Jones, Jane 
Donaldson and Jane Bartlett. Thanks also to Christine Okali whose excellent 
advice and encouragement got me through some difficult situations. Finally, 
John McDonagh and Jim Sumberg are both thanked for their unstinting 
supervision. After all these years, I hope the result does justice to their 
valuable input. 
Acronyms 
ICRISAT 
KFSRE 
MAWRD 
African Conservation Tillage Network 
Agricultural Development Centre 
Agro-Ecological Zoning Programme (Namibia) 
Agriculture Research Council 
Chief Agricultural Research Officer (DART) 
Community Forestry and Extension Development Project 
Directorate of Agricultural Research and Training 
Directorate of Extension and Engineering Services 
Department for International Development (UK) 
European Union 
Ethnopedological Studies 
Food and Agriculture Organisation 
Farming Systems Research 
Farming Systems Survey 
Farmers Systems Research and Extension 
Global Positioning System 
Geographic Information System 
Government of the Republic of Namibia 
Deutche Gesellschaft fur Technische Zusammenarbeit 
International Institute of Tropical Agriculture 
International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics 
International Fund for Agricultural Development 
Integrated Pest Management 
Local Land Unit 
Kavango Farming Systems Research and Extension unit 
Mashare Agricultural Development Institute 
Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Rural Development 
Ministry of Environment and Tourism 
Ministry of Lands, Resettlement and Rehabilitation 
Namibia Agriculture Union 
NCR North Central Regions (Omusati, Ohangwena, Oshana and 
Oshikoto) 
North Central Division 
Namibian Finland Forestry Programme 
Non Government Organisation 
Northern Namibia Environmental Project 
NNFU Namibian National Farmers Union 
NNRDP Northern Namibia Rural Development Project 
NOLIDEP Northern Regions Livestock Development Programme 
NOREESP Northern Regions Epidemiology, Extension and Research 
SARDEP 
SOILNET 
SOTER 
UNESCO 
Support Programme 
Pearl Millet Survey 
Participatory Rural Appraisal 
Plant Science Project 
Rapid Rural Appraisal 
Rural Development Support Program 
Research and Extension Management Programme 
Southern African Development Community 
Sustainable Range Development Project 
Soil Fertility Management 
Soil Management Network of Namibia 
Global Soil and Terrain Digital Database 
Senior Agricultural Research Officer 
Technical Co-operation Project 
Thematic Mapper 
United Nations Education, Science & Culture Organisation 
University of Namibia 
United States Department of Agriculture 
Voluntary Service Overseas 
1 Introduction 
This thesis is about the role of legumes in the pearl millet based farming 
systems of northern Namibia. It investigates the dynamic nature of this role in 
a broad spatial and temporal context. An historical analysis begins with the 
role of legumes in the Agricultural and Industrial Revolutions of Great Britain 
and Europe as this has influenced the ways in which legumes have been and 
continue to be promoted elsewhere. Despite considerable international 
support and effort, the anticipated impact of legume technology has not been 
felt outside its area of origin. A renewed interest in legumes and legume 
technologies has developed since the growth in popularity of the theory of 
'sustainable development' since the 1980s. More recently, a quest began into 
why African farmers, in particular, have not adopted legume technologies 
such as annual rotations, leys or mulches. This research addresses this 
question in a semi-arid environment in sub-Saharan Africa. 
Key themes for agricultural development in rural Africa relevant to this thesis 
are smallholder farming, formal and informal knowledge systems, research / 
extension and farmer relations. The themes of poverty alleviation and 
strategies for achieving livelihood security have become central to the debate 
on rural development. The themes in agricultural development are not the 
same as the themes in rural development with the shift to thinking about rural 
people rather than agricultural production. These themes are now frequently 
combined to create a powerful and emotive story to justify a wide range of 
development interventions, including those promoting legumes. The general 
case made for legume promotion is as follows. In Africa the soils are old and 
depleted of nutrients; the traditional farming systems of slash and burn or 
shifting agriculture, have broken down due to population growth, and 
degradation and drought are increasing phenomena. New, more effective 
systems such as mixed farming or the use of high yielding varieties and 
mineral fertilisers, have not established for many reasons including 
insufficient funds, input supply problems, lack of credit and poor education. 
As a result, there is widespread food insecurity, famines occur more 
frequently and the rural poor suffer most. Taken separately, these points can 
all be corroborated but they are often taken out of context, conflated and 
used to portray an image of Africa in crisis. 
In the search for agricultural technologies to alleviate "the plight of poor 
African farmers", the rhetoric of legumes has matured as follows. They fix 
their own nitrogen (N), often grow in dry and marginal soils and offer a cheap, 
organic method of maintaining soil fertility. They can be used in many ways: 
to deposit and build up N reserves in rotations or as a green manure, to 
conserve soil fertility and to feed human and animal populations. Legumes 
supply a substantial and balanced food that contributes an important source 
of vegetable protein as well as carbohydrate and fat to diets. When dried they 
store relatively well compared to other foods. 
Promoted in this way, legumes neatly fulfil the moral obligation and need for 
action in Africa. However, the reality is that African farmers have not adopted 
the legume technologies promoted. This thesis investigates the reality in 
specific biophysical and socio-economic contexts and provides some 
answers to the question - what is the potential of legumes for enhancing the 
livelihoods of smallholders in this environment? The prospects for legumes 
are assessed in terms of their current position in the farming systems of 
northern Namibia compared with their position elsewhere in semi-arid Africa. 
Agricultural and rural research and development methods have evolved over 
the past 20-30 years from generic and reductive methods towards more 
contextual and farmer centred approaches (Chambers, 1983; Conway, 
1987). Farmer centred methods and participatory approaches more broadly 
have generated different outcomes that often emphasise diversity and 
differentiation. Consequently, questions have been raised about conflicting 
epistemologies. Conventional agronomic techniques and the results 
generated on research stations have been critiqued for their lack of relevance 
to specific local contexts (Richards, 1983). At the same time there has been 
a resurgence of interest in local knowledge and the practices it generates. 
While it is common to view these two perspectives as conflicting, this study 
harnesses both local and scientific knowledge to develop a tool for 
integrating the two. In the process of dOing this research, existing research 
on what are referred to in this thesis as 'local land units' suggested a possible 
device for exploring farmer knowledge and practice. 
The main aim of this study was to explore the actual and potential role of 
legumes in the farming systems of semi-arid northern Namibia, in order to 
learn something more about their role in similar environments, elsewhere. 
The first objective was to investigate and understand the context in which 
legumes are grown within the communal farming systems of northern 
Namibia. This context is broken down in this research into two broad 
categories of the biophysical environment and the socio-economic 
circumstances with a particular focus on the factors that have an effect on 
legume cultivation. The second was to identify and explain how the 
biophysical and socio-economic factors affect legume production and 
productivity. Third was to understand why farmers do not grow more legumes 
or harness common legume technologies that exploit their N fixation 
capabilities such as annual rotations, leys or mulches. Fourth was to identify 
farmers' objectives to see where legumes fit in and how they set out to 
achieve those objectives. Furthermore, whether they fulfil them and if not, 
why not? A fifth objective, based on what currently happens in farmers' 
fields, was to explore the prospects for legumes in the future. Finally, a 
methodological objective was to find out how local and scientific knowledge 
and associated practice influence actual legume cultivation outcomes in 
farmers' fields and to explore how they might work better together. 
Chapter two reviews literature covering the main themes relevant to this 
study and so covers a range of natural and social science research fields. 
The first section about rural development includes an analysis of legumes 
that follows the trajectory of agricultural revolution technology from Europe to 
Africa. Models and methods for the research and development of agricultural 
technology are discussed from an historical perspective. The sustainable 
development movement is considered, with a look at methods and 
frameworks used to analyse land management and livelihoods. The second 
section, about agronomy and agronomic issues, consists of an historical 
analysis of methodological changes within the discipline that charts its 
expansion from an applied natural science to one that increasingly embraces 
and integrates social science components. The literature comprising the 
research field of ethnopedology is reviewed and discussed in some detail. 
Following this is a review of the physiology and environmental adaptation of 
the crops most relevant to this thesis. They are the staple crop. pearl millet. 
(Pennisetum glaucum) and the three main legumes that are grown in 
Namibia; cowpeas (Vigna unguiculata), bambara groundnuts (Vigna 
subterranea) and groundnuts (Arachis hypogaea). 
Chapter three describes the research process and how it evolved over the 
course of the investigation. The chapter begins with the research context in 
which the fieldwork was carried out and follows on with the aims, objectives 
and conceptual frameworks underpinning the research. It proceeds to 
describe changes in local circumstances and how these impacted the sites, 
methods and outputs of the research. The approaches and methodologies 
used in field research are covered including procedures for site and 
household selection. Multiple datasets of qualitative and quantitative data 
were generated and where appropriate and possible, these were analysed 
and integrated into the analysis. Two different surveys are described: a 
farming systems survey that adopted participatory research tools and a 
survey of millet fields that incorporated conventional crop and soil sampling 
techniques. The individual case studies and the various methods used for the 
investigation of local knowledge around land units and their management are 
followed by an outline of the statistical methods and indices used for 
analysing data and the software packages exploited to integrate datasets. 
Chapter four explores the biophysical environment in view of the 
physiological needs and adaptation of different field crops. Primary data are 
compared with existing secondary data to supply a view of the locations over 
time. Chapter five investigates the socia-economic context of the study sites 
and uses a Sustainable Livelihoods Approach to analyse the assets available 
to the local farming population. Chapter six takes a closer look at farmers' 
fields, perceptions and management practices using farmers' own framework 
of local land units. It explains from a biophysical perspective why agricultural 
revolution technologies do not work in these circumstances and how farmers 
use legumes. 
Chapter seven looks again at the key assets farmers need for legume 
production and applies a diversity index to the data enabling analysis of how 
farmers' socio-economic circumstances impact on their farming choices and 
legume productivity. In chapter eight results are used to assess the current 
situation regarding legume production and productivity at the study sites and 
to explain how the biophysical and socio-economic variation impacts on 
these. With reference to literature, distinctions are made between what is 
known from other African sites, knowledge gaps are identified and 
methodological issues are discussed. This leads into a section about legume 
potential and opportunities in northern Namibia. The implications for national 
and international policy are discussed before reaching some final 
conclusions. 
2 Literature Review 
2.1 Introduction 
The central theme of this research is the role of legumes in farming systems 
of dryland Africa. The research employs methods from both the natural and 
social sciences, reflecting the combination of socio-economic and biophysical 
factors surrounding legume use on farms. It echoes a general trend in 
contemporary research towards more integrated approaches, in both 
conceptual and methodological terms, to enhance understanding of natural 
resource management issues. This chapter encompasses a discussion on 
aspects of soils and legumes. Each section reviews and critiques the 
literature from a mixture of natural and social science perspectives. 
2.2 Legumes 
2.2.1 The role of legumes in Europe 
Legumes occupy an important place in European history. They are 
considered to be one of the key components that fuelled the Agricultural 
Revolution (Overton, 1996). Other factors include the removal of common 
property rights and the selective breeding of livestock along with improved 
labour productivity and farm management systems. The Agricultural 
Revolution in turn fuelled the Industrial Revolution and the modern world as 
we know it; as a result of improvements in labour productivity the proportion 
of the British population in the agricultural labour force dropped making 
labour available for industry and services (Overton, 1996). Taking Overton's 
causal analysis a step further, legumes can be explicitly linked to 
modernisation. Legumes are closely associated with the improvements in 
land and labour productivity and these fuelled the Agricultural Revolution. 
The labour movements caused by the Agricultural Revolution facilitated the 
Industrial Revolution, leading to modernisation. This link between legumes 
and modernisation, although rarely so explicit, underpins the dominant view 
of the importance of these nitrogen - fixing plants. 
The association with all the positive attributes of the Agricultural Revolution 
vested legumes with an image of "absolute goodness" that persists today 
(Sumberg, 2001). Sumberg suggests that the problem with this image is that 
it fails to acknowledge the specificity of the European context, where the 
models of mixed crop-livestock and legume rotations emerged. Also, it does 
not allow for situations where legumes are unsuitable and is revered as a 
universal key to more environmentally friendly and sustainable production 
systems. The increase in legume use, cereal yields and food supply all took 
place within a specific biophysical and socio-economic context including the 
climate, soil and the availability of land, labour and markets. 
Although there is considerable controversy about the dates (between 1500 
and1850) and details of the agricultural revolution, legumes have been sown 
in Britain since at least the Middle Ages. There is some evidence to suggest 
that the Romans developed the idea of crop rotation where legumes were 
grown every four years in a rotation with non-nitrogen-fixing crops. In Britain, 
from the mid1ih century, farmers grew clover in their rotations and by the 
19th century the quantity of N available in the soil for cereal crops had 
dramatically increased (Overton, 1996). 
Prior to the Agricultural Revolution farmers were unaware, in any formal 
sense, of the existence of N fixation. There was however discussion 
throughout the 19th century about the positive effects of legumes on 
subsequent wheat crops. By 1880, a range of experiments conducted by 
Hellriegel and Willfarth on poor soils confirmed the fixation of gaseous N by 
legumes and Beijerinck isolated rhizobium as the bacteria responsible in 
1888 (Hall, 1921). Despite the lack of scientific proof for N fixation prior to 
and during the Agricultural Revolution, Overton (1996) argues that farmers' 
management practices at that time may be interpreted as comprising a 
utilitarian knowledge of the existence and augmentation of N stocks in the 
soil. The evidence for this is that between 1700 and 1850, the area sown to 
legumes in Norfolk doubled and a switch to clover resulted in cereal yields 
rising exponentially i.e. by a quarter between 1700 to 1800 and then again by 
half from 1800 to 1850 (Overton, 1996). This was no spontaneous accident, 
but the result of deliberate choices and co-ordinated farm management 
strategies across a wide area. 
When circumstances changed in Europe, as they did after the Second World 
War with the availability of mineral fertilisers, the role of legumes also 
transformed and became less prominent. Wheat yields continued to rise 
dramatically and many agronomists argue that modern systems are as 
sustainable as the earlier, more organic systems that relied on legumes (and 
animal manure) for added fertility. Long running experiments on the 
Broadbalk field at Rothamsted are held up as evidence of this (June 2003, 
http://rothamsted.bbsrc.ac.uklarchive). Clearly, the function of legumes 
during the Agricultural Revolution in Europe was contextual; as the context 
changed so also did the role of legumes. Despite legumes' innate abilities to 
contribute fertility to a farming system there is no guarantee that in different 
circumstances the effect will be the same. Yet, legumes and legume models 
arising from that time are still promoted in the same way and for the same 
reasons, throughout the world. Namely, legumes can fuel yield 
improvements, food surpluses, sustainable farming systems and ultimately, 
modernisation. 
2.2.2 The role of legumes in Africa 
Prior to the colonial period, grain legumes already featured prominently in 
traditional African farming systems and were important food crops across the 
continent. Indeed sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) is the centre of origin for 
bambara groundnuts and cowpeas (Begemann July 2003, 
http://www.ipgri.cgiar.org). Recognising their importance, Hall recommended 
the establishment of an African Research Centre to focus on legumes, in 
1936 (Sumberg 2001). Sumberg (2001) reminds us that planting fodder 
legumes specifically for soil fertility management or pasture improvement 
was unknown in most of SSA. Decades of research investment have resulted 
in poor adoption of legumes for soil fertility purposes (Sumberg, 2001; 
Snapp, 2002; McDonagh and Hillyer, 2003) or for fodder (Sumberg, 2001; 
Miles, 2001.) 
The common belief of legumes' ability to boost farm productivity was 
transferred to Africa, during the colonial period, along with European models 
of mixed farming and soil fertility management. Mixed farming appeared to 
offer a technical solution to the perceived crisis in African agriculture 
(Sumberg, 2001), namely, widespread degradation caused by increasing 
population pressure, shifting agriculture and deforestation, with low and 
declining productivity of crops and livestock. The European mixed farming 
model also represented an opportunity for the social transformation of rural 
Africa (Sumberg, 1998; Woolmer, 2000). Colonial scientists were particularly 
concerned with the long-term prospects of monocropping, focussing in their 
early research on rotations (Scoones, 2001). 
Scoones (2001) reports the results of a literature search done on soil fertility 
in African journals1 between the 1930s and the 1980s. This shows that during 
the 1930s, agricultural research emphasised soil conservation and organiC 
matter management; green manuring, composting and mulching. The 1940s 
were dominated by a concern with rotations and leys while the 1950s saw a 
shift to experiments with inorganic fertiliser. During the 1960s the UN Food 
and Agriculture Organisation, FAO, launched its "Freedom from Hunger 
Campaign" involving fertiliser testing across Africa. Mineral fertiliser research 
continued to grow and dominate the research scene until the mid 1980s. 
More recently, areas of interest from the 1930s are reappearing supported by 
work emphasising the need to understand biological, chemical and physical 
soil processes and to improve nutrient use efficiency (Scoones, 2001 )2. This 
area of research focuses more on "nutrient-cycling" or "nutrient dynamics" 
and in line with this, the FAO has shifted away from its previous focus on 
mineral fertilisers towards an Integrated Nutrient Management approach. 
1 Including the East African Agriculture and Forestry Journal and the Rhodesian Agricultural 
Journal (later Zimbabwe Agricultural Journal). 
2 Other reviews of soil fertility management research in Africa include: Anderson and Ingram, 
1993; Buresh et aI., 1997; Giller et al., 1997; Sanchez et al., 1997; Bationo et al., 1998. 
A literature search conducted in July 2003 using SCIRUS search engine and 
keywords "legumes" and "Africa" returned 720 journal articles dating back to 
1968. According to this database, about SO articles were published in the 25-
30 years from the early 1960s to the end of the SOs. The early 1990s were 
also quiet but since 1995 there has been a flourishing interest, with between 
50-SO articles being published every year. Using the same keywords and the 
Science Direct search tool of Elsevier Science in 2001, around 250 articles 
were returned. About half of these articles relate to medical and 
pharmacological research fields, while the rest relate to agronomy, with the 
earliest reference published in 1986 (database records from 1966). Both data 
sets are consistent with Scoones' findings from African literature that the 
research focus of the 1950s to 1980s was on mineral fertilisers and not 
legume technologies. 
The resurgence of legume research also began in the 19S0s and grew in 
earnest during the 1990s. Four categories of legume research dominated the 
decade 1991-2000: soil fertility management (30) forage legumes (2S), 
symbiotic processes (1S) and legume pests (14). Forty percent of articles 
published between 1991 and 2000 appeared during the years 1999 and 
2000, when the first three categories increased dramatically. Research on 
symbiotic processes saw the largest increase, with 67% of these articles 
appearing in the years 1999 and 2000. Likewise, 53% of the articles on soil 
fertility management and 36% of those on forage legumes emerged during 
these two years. The soil fertility articles were largely about nutrient cycling (8 
out of 16) so that, taken together with articles about symbiosis, the recent 
research focus has been on processes and a renaissance of interest in 
legume nutrient dynamics is implied. This pattern of legume publication 
mimics that shown by research on sustainable development suggesting that 
a link might be being made between legumes and sustainable development. 
While this may be a chance event it certainly does indicate a simultaneous 
increase in research funding for these two research areas. 
The expected (Goldman and Smith, 1995) "green revolution" did not take 
place in Africa, or in parts of India and South Asia. Sumberg (2001) questions 
why, after over 70 years of research in Africa, farmers have not adopted 
fodder legumes and Snapp et 81 (2002) ask the same question with regard to 
legume technologies for soil fertility management. Sumberg identifies the gap 
between general thinking on legumes and the context specific perspective 
required for technology choice, calling for more realistic and strategic 
approaches to fodder legume research and promotion. Scoones (2001) 
identifies the gap between macro and micro level data sets and analyses, 
calling for a more balanced approach incorporating local diversity and 
dynamics and setting soil fertility management in a broader livelihood 
context. 
Specific contextual factors that inhibit legume technology adoption in Africa 
have been identified by a string of authors. Miles (2001) says research in 
tropical pasture plant breeding is constrained by inherent biological 
obstacles, but also the lack in understanding of the socio-economic 
environment and inadequate institutional support. He cites the inappropriate 
choice of species, premature launching of hybridisation programmes and 
inadequate germplasm resources. In respect of grain legumes, biophysical 
factors, particularly unreliable rainfall in semi-arid environments, limited 
market access and diversified livelihoods are highlighted by McDonagh and 
Hillyer (2003) while Snapp et 8/ (2002) acknowledge labour constraints and 
the need for food security, especially for the poor. Intercropping is thought to 
limit the use of grain legumes for soil fertility by Dakora and Keya (1997) 
while Mortimore et 8/. (2000) notice other multiple and competing uses for 
plant biomass. Lack of extension information, limited credit and seed 
supplies, high costs of fencing materials, livestock diseases, invasion of 
grasses and weeds and damage done by fire are all identified as constraints 
by Elbasha et 8/ (1998). Sumberg (2002) argues that the shortage of labour, 
inappropriate land tenure and land scarcity are contextual reasons and 
argues that rather than being seen as constraints to adoption, they should be 
regarded as fundamental system properties which define the technology 
environment. Snapp et 81 (2002) find that despite similar results for legume 
technologies across regions of Malawi, specific market conditions, farm 
resources and household composition stimulate different technology choices. 
In common, most of these authors call for contextual biophysical and socio-
economic factors to be integrated within mainstream agricultural technology 
research and development approaches. As yet, there is no consensus about 
how this can be done but certain themes are reiterated and explored below. 
2.3 Agricultural research and rural development 
Agriculture is lithe science or practice of cultivating the soil and rearing 
animals" (Oxford University Press, 1996). It is an applied science so that 
irrespective of the interest and value of theoretical aspects of the research, 
the development of agricultural technology3 is the main objective. Agricultural 
technology is an important component of natural resource and rural land 
management and as such, plays a pivotal role in sustainable development 
generally (section 2.3.2). 
The evolution of agricultural research and development and discussions 
around concepts and methods are akin to those found in rural development. 
They have been reviewed, modelled and discussed in detail elsewhere 
(Chambers, 1983; Farrington, 1987; Biggs, 1990; Okali et aI., 1994; Scoones, 
1994). While agricultural research is arguably one of the oldest sciences 
known to humankind, in a formal sense it only dates back to the 19th century. 
In recent years it has been argued that formal science is not the only source 
of agricultural innovation, that informal processes are equally important 
(Biggs 1990) and that local knowledge and people should be taken seriously 
(Chambers 1983). 
A common caricature of the colonial period was of early colonial officers 
taking their "scientific perspective" to educate the "ignorant natives", initially 
with agricultural revolution technologies e.g. legume rotations and leys and 
then later with green revolution technologies such as high yielding varieties 
and mineral fertilisers (Scoones, 2001). This approach, of experts leading the 
unskilled, has been named the 'Transfer of Technology' (TOT) model. It has 
3 In its broadest sense includes knowledge, practice, biological inputs and tools. 
been described as a 'central source' model that is hierarchical, linear and 
unidirectional (Biggs, 1990) and is supported by the diffusion of innovations 
theory (Rogers, 1983). In some circles, this perspective exists today and in 
some circumstances it is the dominant approach. Fortunately, it is not the 
only approach and the discourse has moved on. 
2.3.1 Farming systems research 
Farming Systems Research (FSR) developed through the 1970s and 1980s 
and represented a shift away from the single commodity focus that had 
previously dominated agricultural research (Okali et a/1994). The genesis of 
FSR arose from the failure of the commodity research programmes to 
generate a "green revolution" or to meet the needs of rain fed agriculture in 
the tropics, especially in Africa (Collinson, 2000). Systems thinking marked 
the beginning of a more holistic, less reductionist mode of research that 
persists today. Since its conception the definition of what comprises the 
"whole" system has continued to expand. The placement of boundaries was 
always an issue for FSR, for example where the farm unit begins and ends 
and which imported/exported factors are relevant. More recently the 
boundaries have been expanded to include biophysical, socio-economic and 
cultural aspects as well as their spatial and temporal dynamics. Some argue 
that the confusion over scope has blurred its role and that FSR has lost its 
identity (Collinson 2000). As a result, frameworks and methodologies are 
transforming. Established techniques from different disciplines are being 
integrated. This transformation is akin to the 'multiple sources' model that 
embraces innovation from formal and informal sources, including scientists, 
farmers and others, as conceived by Biggs (1990). Some consider the 
Sustainable Rural Livelihoods (SRL) approach (Chambers and Conway, 
1992; Ellis, 2000) to be a framework for broadening the FSR approach to 
encompass cultural issues, access to assets and the vulnerabilities that 
impact on natural resource management decisions. 
Besides the main shift away from commodities and towards a holistic 
approach, several other interlocking themes, trends or agendas may be 
traced through the development of FSR. Criticism that station based research 
was irrelevant, remote, too expensive and long-winded, resulted in some 
research moving off station to on-farm. This required more understanding 
about farmers' systems and practices and was a daunting task requiring 
quick and non-expensive investigative methods. A collection of techniques 
known as Rapid Rural Appraisal was devised (McCracken et al., 1988). On 
farm research largely consisted of scientists learning about and 
understanding farmers' conditions as opposed to farmers learning and 
adapting technology (Okali et aJ., 1994). Agricultural trials conducted on-farm 
in the 1980s and 1990s, sparked a methodological dilemma about the 
relevance of conventional techniques for designing, measuring and analysing 
experimental treatments. This revolved around assumptions of spatial and 
temporal uniformity and the statistical evaluation of variance that remains an 
anomaly today. Recently this dilemma has also been acknowledged as an 
issue for precision agriculture in Europe (McBratney and Whelan, 1999; Lark, 
2001). 
The shift to on-farm research was seen by many as a bridge between 
research and extension activities, although some critics considered it a mere 
extension of the linear, top down, central source model (Collinson, 2000). 
Nevertheless compelling arguments in favour of farmers' contextual 
knowledge and ability to adapt technologies to their particular needs 
(Chambers, 1983; Richards, 1983; Okali et aJ., 1994) fundamentally changed 
FSR by the 1990s. The image of farmers changed to that of experts with an 
intimate knowledge of their local biophysical and soico-economic context and 
at least in one case, formal research that involved farmers earlier in the 
research process supplied well-adapted technologies, more rapidly than the 
formal system working alone (Sperling, 1993). 
Although some critics consider them to be distinctly different domains, 
Participatory Rural Appraisal techniques began to dominate FSR. 
Increasingly farmers were regarded as a diverse range of individuals and 
farming households with complex livelihood strategies (Ellis, 2000). 
Differentiation by a wide range of social categories including gender, age and 
wealth became a routine procedure. An international focus on poverty 
alleviation also focused more attention on marginal areas, especially the 
semi-arid and dryland environments (Harris, 1996; Scoones, 1996; 
Mortimore, 1998). 
Currently farmers' knowledge is embraced and seen as indispensable for 
effective innovations research4, with most scientists now acknowledging that 
they must start with the end-users and their system, "that science be brought 
into the system rather than the system into science" (Mortimore, 2000). 
However there is still much room for debate about precisely how farmer and 
scientific knowledge are and can be integrated. There are differences in 
opinion regarding the synergy or otherwise of their respective epistemologies 
(Collinson, 2000; Mortimore, 2000; Sumberg et a/., 2003) and especially 
about methods for investigation and integration (Oudwater, 2003). 
2.3.2 Sustainable development 
Although sustainable development appeared as a formal concept over fifteen 
years ago, its roots extend back to the 1950s and 1960s to a movement that 
emerged as a backlash against the indiscriminate use of chemicals in 
farming (Carson, 1962). Though there is no need to review the extensive 
sustainable development discourse here, it is important to note that it was 
initiated by the Brundtland Commission (WCED, 1987) and reinforced by 
Agenda 21 (UNCED, 1993). It has been flourishing for the past fifteen years 
and has become a common concept to lay people all over the world. 
By now the concept of sustainable development has been reinterpreted and 
reapplied so many times and to so many disciplines that a simple review of 
its many meanings (Pearce, Barbier and Markandya, 1990) is a protracted 
affair. Young's (1992) seminal text identifies three common concerns: the 
effects of present day activities on the future; the importance of maintaining 
4 There has also been a shift to talking about innovations rather than technologies which 
makes it clear that the discussion is not always about breeds etc. but also for example, about 
changes in markets. 
ecological processes; and the benefits of improving the quality of life now 
without denying future generations a similar opportunity. 
The concept of sustainable development has encouraged new thinking about 
the utilisation of natural resources, about the need for ecosystem health for 
maintaining the quality of the environment and about the rates of resource 
consumption. In terms of research and development, new and unmet needs 
have been identified. These include more information, better understanding 
between disciplines and sustainable innovations that will move society 
toward a 'sustainable biosphere'. These technologies should be ecologically 
sound, economically feasible and socially just (Lubchenco, 1998). It has also 
brought new controversy about what the research and development priorities 
A major issue for rural development policy in Africa is achieving a sustainable 
agriculture sector by improving soil fertility management. The World Bank, 
with the FAO and other international donors, launched its latest Soil Fertility 
Initiative at the World Food Summit in 1996. Analysing policies for soil fertility 
management, Scoones and Toulmin (1999) review key documents from 
these prominent players; the World Bank, the FAO, the UN Environment 
Programme and members of the Consultative Groups on International 
Agricultural Research. They find the dominant international policy perspective 
to be based on a few highly influential stUdies that highlight processes of 
nutrient depletion and declining yields that threaten livelihood security across 
the continent. The main causes are considered to be population growth, land 
shortage and unsustainable land use practices while barriers to land 
improvement are identified as low incomes and short-term perspectives by 
farmers. In short, it frames the situation in Africa as a crisis requiring rapid 
action and public intervention. The options for the recapitalization of African 
soils focuses on an increased use of inorganic fertilisers, especially rock 
phosphate and recycling biomass of which legumes and legume technologies 
are an intrinsic part. 
Examining a number of detailed field studies Scoones and Toulmin (1999) 
conclude that the soil fertility problem in Africa is more complex and diverse 
requiring alternative approaches that take into account the spatial and 
temporal biophysical, socio-economic and institutional dimensions of the 
system being studied. They find this high level of diversity in African farming 
systems to be in stark contrast to the global generalisations regarding the 
perceived crisis. They acknowledge that the international level rhetoric is 
necessary to win attention and funds for a previously neglected area, against 
many other competing claims for donor support. However, a danger of this 
kind of oversimplification is a misleading and potentially damaging 
assessment of what is actually happening, leading to poorly formulated 
interventions. They argue that the current debate talks of the importance of 
participation but also urge rapid action and that these are antagonistic. 
Scoones and Toulmin recommend an alternative more cautious way forward 
that "recognises scientific uncertainty and proceeds adaptively through 
farmer learning and experimentation, monitoring and sequential learning as 
part of a longer term participatory process." A more plural policy debate is 
suggested that scrutinises the scientific data and its implications, tackles the 
issues of complexity and diversity and that recognises the need for local 
solutions that provide positive messages to counteract the pessimistic global 
views. They conclude that there is a need for combined approaches that give 
special attention to strengthening farmers' capacity to adapt their systems 
over time for a more sustainable agriculture sector. The research described 
in this thesis, though not initially designed to do so, answers this call with 
empirical evidence and an approach that combines methods to produce a 
framework for understanding a complex environment from the land-users' 
perspective. 
2.3.3 Sustainable Livelihoods 
The Sustainable livelihoods Framework, SLF (DfID, 2001), emerged in the 
late 1990s but is linked to the earlier work of Chambers and Conway (1992). 
The definition adopted by the Department for International Development 
(OfIO) and by many other agencies is fashioned on their definition (Carney, 
1999) "a livelihood comprises the capabilities, assets (stores, resources, 
claims and access) and activities required for a means of living. A livelihood 
is sustainable when it can cope with and recover from stresses and shocks 
and maintain or enhance its capabilities and assets both now and in the 
future, while not undermining the resource base". 
The SLF was developed as a tool to understand and analyse the livelihoods 
of the poor, for fulfilling the goals and policy directions laid out in the UK 
Government's 1997 White Paper on International Development. The 
framework views people as operating in a context of vulnerability that is 
mediated by their 'assets' categorised as five different types of capital: 
Human, Social, Natural, Physical and Financial Capital (DfID, 2001). The 
social, institutional and organisational environment influences how these 
assets may be deployed by individuals for achieving their livelihood 
objectives. The core characteristics of the approach are that it is people-
centred, holistic, dynamic and sustainable (OflO, 2001). Furthermore, that it 
focuses on strengths, potential and opportunities rather than on needs and 
finally, that it bridges the gap between micro level practice and macro level 
policy. 
The framework is compelling because it neatly orders and standardises 
information for comparative analysis. However, problems arise with 
categorisation and with links between categories. Particularly there is a risk 
of missing or duplicating important factors that either do not fit into particular 
categories or fulfil more than one set of criteria. For example, livestock as 
biological organisms deployed in ploughing and planting activities could be 
classified as natural capital, whereas cattle often represent a store of 
financial capital to their owners. Also definitions of terms such as "farm", "non 
farm" and "off farm" income are somewhat arbitrary and are often loosely 
applied by different analysts so that comparisons are not meaningful. A 
danger of all frameworks is the propensity to use them too rigidly so that 
linkages between categories and the dynamics of time and place are lost. 
The stated core concepts of the framework (DfID, 2001) depend on the 
subjective interpretation of these ideas and the process and methods used to 
achieve them. For example 'people-centred' could be interpreted as more or 
less participatory and represent a range of methods from those that include 
'ordinary people' from planning through to analysis to those that simply use 
people as informants. 'Holistic' implies capturing the 'whole system', yet 
systems research and communication relies on reducing the whole to 
manageable parts. Choices must be made about divisions and boundaries. 
Likewise, including the dynamics also requires choices about time periods 
and areas that directly influence analysis. Finally, sustainability is a term that 
has many meanings in different contexts. For example, the Broadbalk field is 
presented as an example of sustainable farming (June 2003, 
http://rothamsted.bbsrc.ac.uklarchive) and represents considerable change 
over time in terms of inputs and management practices including the 
importation of fertility. Others would argue that a system must be internally 
regenerative to qualify as being sustainable. 
A number of different agencies have adapted the SLF and the similarities and 
differences between these have been thoroughly reviewed (Ashley, 1999; 
Carney, 1999; FAO, 2000; FAO, 2001; Farrington, 2001; Hussein, 2002). 
SLAs have been applied and tailored to many different issues including 
migration (De Haan, 2000; Kothari, 2002), fair trade (Bird, 2002; OfID, 2002) 
and water policy (001, 2003) and many projects in various countries and 
continents (Carney, 2002; Hussein, 2002). The flexibility this demonstrates is 
considered to have added value to the approach (Carney, 2002) and to be a 
major strength especially in faCilitating cross-sectoral analysis (Hussein, 
2002). 
Despite its strengths and rapid growth, there are weaknesses in the 
approach and unfulfilled intentions have been identified. For example, rather 
than bridging the gap between practice and policy, the SLA is criticised for its 
flaws in linking the micro to the meso and macro levels. Some agencies have 
deployed and integrated more conventional methods of analysing policy to 
address the problem (Hussein, 2002). A weakness in the arena of power, 
rights and governance is highlighted (Carney, 2002) while the institutional 
change required for embedding SL principles represents a major future 
challenge (Hussein, 2002). 
As a result of livelihood analyses carried out over recent years, some 
generalisations can be identified. By and large livelihoods are found to be 
diverse. Assets, activities and income are factors that can be used 
individually to measure livelihood diversification but when these factors are 
a" used together a clearer image of the extent of that diversification becomes 
available (Barrett et al., 2001). Diversification rises with wealth, so that the 
wealthy have greater freedom to choose among a wider range of options 
than do the poor (Barrett et al., 2001). Potentially, ownership or access to 
productive assets are the foundation of pathways out of poverty for the poor 
(Moser, 1998). But, an asset poverty trap exists whereby entry barriers leave 
the poor with less diversified asset and income portfolios (Barrett et al., 
2001). Viable livelihoods are generated from deepening and broadening 
asset holdings over time by supporting a broader range of activities and 
supplying scope for substitution between assets (E"is and Bahigwa, 2003). 
Non-farm activity is found to be highest in areas of better agricultural 
productivity (Barrett et al., 2001) emphasising increasing and reinforcing links 
between assets, opportunities, monetary income and asset productivity (E"is 
and Bahigwa, 2003). The poor have less land and livestock assets resulting 
in them diversifying out of farming into unskilled, off farm labour. The policy 
implication is the need to focus more on non-farm income earning 
opportunities in rural development policy formulation while bearing in mind 
that poor people may still be able to engage in some production for home 
consumption given the right support policies. 
2.4 Agronomy and Agroecology 
A common definition of agronomy is the science of soil management and 
crop production and there are a number of disciplines that contribute to its 
identity. These range from the applied biological, chemical, and physical 
sciences through to the social, economic and political sciences. They include 
but are not confined to crop physiology, environmental measurement, crop 
pests and entomology, agrochemicals and regulation, genetics and 
bioengineering, pedology, soil fertility, hydroponics, nematology, agricultural 
engineering, agricultural economics and management. Each subject contains 
its own body of theory, concepts and methodologies, some being more 
interdependent than others but all contributing towards the multi-disciplinary 
science of crop production. 
The term 'agroecology' distinguishes a shift from the conventional agronomic 
approach towards more environmentally and socially sensitive approaches to 
agriculture (Hecht, 1987). Examining its epistemological basis, Norgaard 
(1987) perceives agroecology to be sharing "an epistemological base with 
cultural ecology where evolution of culture is explained with reference to the 
environment and the evolution of the environment is explained with reference 
to culture" (Norgaard 1987). In his view it challenges the reductionist, 
mechanistic and narrowly defined, scientific thinking that originated in Europe 
and Northern America that characterises agronomy although agronomy, as a 
discipline, is not confined to it. Altieri (2002) agrees with Norgaard (1987) and 
characterises agroecology as an holistic science with a systems focus that is 
participatory in nature, pro poor and scale-neutral, based on traditional 
knowledge and a 'bottom-up' approach. Agronomy is portrayed as a 'top-
down', single commodity focussed discipline deploying reductive science and 
harnessing economies of scale deSigned to benefit those already well off. 
Altieri (1987) acknowledges that the conventional agronomic approach has 
been highly successful in its objective of increasing productivity of individual 
crops, but considers it to have failed to deal with the flaws of modern 
agriculture, as a result of its single commodity focus. Overall Altieri (2002) 
criticises a discipline-based approach and therefore distances agroecology 
from modern agronomy and aligns it with organic and sustainable agriculture. 
The productivity objective that has driven agronomy since the agricultural 
revolution has also been shown to be too simplistic. It is logical and rational 
to assume that some farmers will always appreciate more output for the 
same level of or similar inputs and that some can benefit from 'economies of 
scale'. What has become clear though is that this is not an uncomplicated, 
single objective. In some circumstances farmers prioritise a lower but stable 
output for the same or reduced inputs, perhaps leaving them with resources 
for other activities. Others seek to diversify and to maximise their system 
outputs rather than individual commodities, a strategy termed as 'economies 
of scope' (Barrett et a/., 2001). While not everyone may agree with the 
dichotomy suggested between agronomy and agroecology the study of crop 
management is no longer confined to a study of the crop and its physical 
environment. 
2.4.1 Soil science 
Soil science first developed in the temperate regions of the Soviet Union, 
Europe and the United States (Sanchez, 1976). Vernacular soil names 
provided the basis of modern scientific soil classifications (Krasilnikov and 
Tabor 2003) but the strong genetic bias of early systems resulted in 
stereotypical soil groups based on concepts of a uniform environment and six 
completely different systems that impeded any meaningful correlation 
(Sanchez 1976). Early pedologists of the 19th century are responsible for the 
widespread view that tropical soils are uniformly poor although developments 
over the last 50 years have shown that tropical soils exhibit a broad range of 
properties (Mermut & Eswaran 2001). 
The modern era of soil science began after World War II when the search, by 
the colonial powers, for natural resources led to a major investment in soils 
research (Mermut & Eswaran 2001). In a systematic effort to understand the 
factors and processes controlling soil formation and crop productivity, the 
Food and Agriculture Organisation - United Nations Education, Science and 
Culture Organisation (FAO-UNESCO) decided in 1961, to document global 
soil resources. The FAO-UNESCO Soil Map of the World was published in 
1974. The mapping legend facilitated the grouping of soils according to 
morphological features, rather than to the genesis theories that had 
dominated previously (Sanchez 1976). The map has been developed further 
over the last 40 years and good progress was made between 1963-96 on the 
systematic storage and correlation of soil resource information in the format 
of Global Soil and Terrain Digital Database (SOTER) (Nachtergaele et al., 
2000). 
However Mermut & Eswaran (2001) point out that these developments 
created an important dichotomy between scientific standardisation and global 
policies resulting from the integration of many nationally developed systems 
and the very limited location specific, farm level information available to 
poorer countries, especially with regard to soil quality. Many authors have 
identified the difference between the utilitarian, contextual nature of local 
systems with the universal, generic nature of scientific systems (Habarurema 
and Steiner, 1997; Gobin et al., 1998; Steiner, 1998; Barrera-Bassols and 
Zinck, 2000; Niemeijer and Mazzucato, 2003; WinklerPrins and Sandor, 
2003). Concern is expressed about the inevitable modernisation process, in 
which contemporary systems and soil mapping progressively replaces folk 
taxonomies and local knowledge systems, especially in developing countries 
(Krasilnikov and Tabor 2003, WinklerPrins and Sandor 2003). Migration, a 
common phenomenon in developing countries, is highlighted as an important 
cause of local soil knowledge first becoming irrelevant and then being lost 
altogether (Krasilnikov and Tabor, 2003). The value of these local systems, 
for understanding landscape structure, function and change, is now widely 
accepted (Oudwater and Martin, 2003). 
The late 20th century brought dilemmas for agronomy and for the well-
established methods of soil science. Most soil scientists are aware of the 
problems associated with destructive sampling and the importance of placing 
soil processes in the context of the physical framework of the soil. Until 
recently, the heterogeneity in the physical architecture of soil has been 
beyond theoretical and experimental techniques and understanding. The 
arrival of rapid computers and smart systems (intelligent software) has 
facilitated the modelling of soil processes. One example and application of 
this is the use of fractal theory for modelling root distribution (van Noordwijk 
and Mulia, 2002). New methods and models for characterising variability 
suggest that the study and description of soil structure is developing into a 
new discipline (Mermut and Eswaran, 2001). This research in northern 
Namibia highlights the relevance of new thinking about the physical 
architecture of soils. 
2.4.2 Ethnopedology 
Ethnopedology can be defined as "a hybrid discipline structured from natural 
and social sciences, encompassing all empirical soil and land knowledge 
systems of rural populations" (Barrera-Bassols and Zinck, 2003). It 
represents a broad church of disciplines, reflecting a wide variety of methods 
and epistemologies and as such sits at the intersection of the natural and 
social sciences and the humanities (WinklerPrins and Sandor, 2003). From 
the viewpoint of this research, the interest in ethnopedology rests in its 
concern with the knowledge of rural populations, or what might be termed 
broadly as 'local knowledge'. WinklerPrins and Sandor (2003) define local 
soil knowledge as "the knowledge of soil properties and management 
possessed by people living in a particular environment for some period of 
time". They comment that it is complex, multifaceted and often quite subtle in 
its expression. Sillitoe (1998) describes it "as much a skill as knowledge" and 
as "the heritage of practical everyday life, with its functional demands". 
There has been an explosion of papers dealing with ethnopedology in the 
last few years, though awareness of the importance of indigenous knowledge 
on soils has been appreciated for somewhat longer. The first attempt to 
compile information on ethnopedological studies (EPS) at an international 
level was done by Barrera-Bassols and Zinck (2000). Their annotated 
bibliography cites 895 books and papers dating from 1935 to 1999 of which, 
48% focus on the analysis of local soil perception, knowledge and 
management; the remaining 52% are 'associated issues' and set in a broader 
context. The studies reviewed are distributed over 61 countries, covering 217 
ethnic groups and as such are disparate and diverse. Since 1989 there has 
been an average of 33 studies per year. The increase has paralleled a 
general increase in the social sciences and the number of studies dealing 
with soil fertility management, soil conservation and erosion control, reflect 
the broader concern with sustainable development (Barrera-Bassols and 
Zinck, 2000). 
A more recent and very thorough review by Barrera-Bassols and Zinck 
(2003) analyses and defines the research field of ethnopedology in terms of 
its conceptual scope, methodological approaches and dominant research 
themes. They chart the development of the field from its descriptive 
ethnographic origins, through a comparative phase, to its current more 
integrated, explanatory and applied nature. In analysing the distribution of 
EPSs, Barrera-Bassols and Zinck show the highest concentration to be in 
Africa (35%) and particularly sub-Saharan Africa, although Mexico is the 
most prominent of all individual countries. They also conclude that dry areas 
seem to have attracted more studies than humid or temperate areas and 
semi-arid areas alone account for 37% of the studies. In explaining this, they 
comment that local farmers have developed highly sophisticated land and 
water management practices to cope with water scarcity and unpredictable 
rainfall variability and EPS are a tool to explore these. A correlation has also 
been found by others between ethnological richness and biological diversity 
(WinklerPrins and Sandor 2003) with a strong relationship between the 
original centres of plant domestication in the world. Attention is placed on 
spatial soil variability related to biodiversity, the pattern of polycultural land 
use and the management of specific agroecological niches. Finally 
WinklerPrins and Sandor identify a relationship between linguistic and 
ethnopedological diversities, stating that 90% of local languages currently 
used will vanish during the 21 st century and with them, associated 
ethnopedological knowledge. 
The research currently available can be divided into four main subject areas: 
description of local classification schemes and criteria (descriptive); 
comparison between local and scientific classification systems (comparative); 
contextual assessment of local management practices (applicative); and, 
analysis of local land evaluation systems (analytical). The earliest 
ethnographic work falls into the first category and most of the more recent 
EPS fall into one of two trends within the comparative category, either 
seeking to correlate local systems with formal scientific soil taxonomies or to 
develop new 'natural' or 'objective', universal taxonomies (Barrera-Bassols 
and Zinck, 2003). Few discuss how such taxonomies might be of use to 
others such as extension officers and other professionals. The other two 
categories represent the most recent studies and they focus on listing and 
describing local practices but they often stop short of explaining when and 
why the practices are used. Only 16% of reviewed materials include any 
analysis of perceptions or underlying beliefs, symbols and rituals (Barrera-
Bassols and Zinck, 2003). 
Farmers classification schemes and criteria 
In their 2003 review, Barrera-Bassols and Zinck compare taxonomic systems 
from 62 ethnic groups and 25 countries in Africa, America and Asia. Ignoring 
methodological inconsistencies, they identify a number of recurring 
characteristics of local systems; complex, dynamic, utilitarian and symbolic 
with multiple categories that are mUlti-dimensional. Local systems are also 
often based on morphological attributes and no clear-cut distinctions are 
made between land and soil. Mean number of taxa recognised per ethnic 
group is 12 and 56% of that sampled work with 8-14 categories. The most 
common diagnostic classification criteria are colour and texture (98-100% of 
those sampled), soil moisture and consistency (55-56%), organic matter, 
stoniness, topography, land use and drainage (34-48%) and fertility, 
productivity, workability, structure, depth and soil temperature (2-26%). 
Reviewing the literature in greater depth appears to show that while these 
criteria are indeed common, the percentages given are more likely to reflect 
methodology and depth of study than the local knowledge systems 
themselves. 
Many studies record or refer to details of colour and texture while only more 
detailed studies explore local knowledge about processes such as drainage, 
fertility and productivity as did Niemeijer and Mazzucato (2003) in Burkina 
Faso. For example, in one study in Niger, farmers were shown to primarily 
use texture and colour to identify soils but, when these were removed from 
the site, as soil scientists regularly do as a matter of course, they required a 
spatial reference before being able to classify them (Osbahr and Allan, 
2003). This research reported that farmers perceived soil fertility not as an 
intrinsic property of soil, but as a consequence of different types of rainfall 
and that relative fertility of different soils/locations are determined in terms of 
crop production; grain size had the closest correlation to local divisions of soil 
types indicating the importance of water holding capacity on soil productivity. 
Niemeijer and Mazzucato (2003) also discovered that "hydrology" of the soils 
was an important indicator of soil productivity and sometimes this reflected 
intrinsic water holding capacity while at other times it reflected the micro 
topography of the surface. As in Niger, farmers in Burkina Faso determined 
the quality of a field according to rainfall, topography and crops. They 
distinguished between sites that were good for maize and those that were 
good for groundnuts, reporting that a soil could be 'too fertile'. Likewise, 
Gobin et a/. (2000) in their research in south-eastern Nigeria found that 
farmers judge the suitability of land in terms of the position and slope of 
landscape, amount of stones present, soil texture and soil colour. They also 
go beyond inherent soil suitability in their assessment to include drainage, 
workability, erosion sensitivity, and water-holding capacity. Taking the 
analysis further, these researchers learnt that drainage and water retention is 
associated with position in the landscape, the occurrence of stones and soil 
texture. Workability is linked to the occurrence of stones and soil texture and 
erosion sensitivity, to the gradient of slope and soil "stickiness". 
Comparison between local and scientific systems: 
There seems to be a wide consensus in the literature on the fundamental 
differences between local and formal systems (hereafter referred to as 
scientific) and the need to understand these. Scientific systems are based on 
genesis theories and subsoil levels, defined in terms of artificial units and 
laboratory diagnostics while local systems are utilitarian, generally based on 
topsoil characteristics, divided into contextual ecological units and defined by 
morphological diagnostics. However, there is less agreement on the 
similarities as some say there is good correlation between systems 
(Birmingham, 2003; Cools, 2003) while others consider them completely 
incomparable (Gray, 2003; Niemeijer and Mazzucato, 2003). The degree to 
which these systems are related, the potential synergy between them and the 
designs for bridge building between the two are contentious and unfolding 
themes (Gobin et al., 2000; Barrios and Trejo, 2003; Grossman, 2003; 
Niemeijer and Mazzucato, 2003; Oudwater and Martin, 2003; Payton et aI., 
2003; Philip, 2003) to which this research makes a contribution. 
Crop management systems: 
Barrera-Bassols and Zinck's analysis (2003) categorised the disparate 
studies of crop management practice according to the prevailing conditions of 
different ecological zones and their climatic features. They show fertility 
conservation and/or restoration to be dominant in the warm moist lowlands 
where fields are often planted densely to maintain soil productivity and are 
monitored for early identification of any decline. In the warm dry lowlands, 
they identified the main issue determining crop management systems to be 
the scarcity and irregularity of rainwater supply. Here, land management 
strategies included soil protection and moisture maintenance in the arable 
layer. In the cold dry highlands, farmers invest in terraces and bench 
construction to protect soils from erosion and to mitigate natural hazards. 
However, even within these general categories there is considerable 
variation in crop management practices reflecting the diversity of local 
landscape / climate interactions and prevailing socio-economic conditions. 
Other studies demonstrating this variability showed that crop choice, rotation 
and planting dates vary with soil landscape along a toposequence according 
to farmers' assessment of soil suitability (Habarurema and Steiner, 1997; 
Gobin et al., 1998). Gobin et al. (2000 and 2001) find that management 
concepts are embedded in local soil classification systems. For example land 
preparation depends on the type of crop grown and the water moisture 
regime while time of planting. field layouts and size and direction of mounds 
or ridges differed with the local soil class. Also different crops have different 
rooting systems to exploit different soil layers for moisture and nutrients and 
this varies with class. Niemeijer and Mazzucato (2003) find that the 
Gourmantche of Burkina Faso have distinctive manure management 
strategies. These are based on the differences between wet and dry manure 
and their interaction with soil type. In drought prone Senegal, Mauritania and 
Mali farmers make fine distinctions between soils with respect to their period 
and frequency of flooding and adapt their management practices accordingly 
(Krasilnikov and Tabor 2003). 
Local land evaluation systems 
Most farmers have good knowledge of their soils and the earliest studies 
focussed on the soils and how farmers classified them. The ethnographical 
approach clearly identified that soil knowledge was contextual, utilitarian and 
culturally embedded. However, it was only with the comparative analyses 
between local soil knowledge systems and scientific ones that it was 
appreciated that they are environmentally embedded as well. Soils cannot be 
taken out of the context of their location in the landscape (Osbahr and Allan 
2003) nor their valuation and management. Land use decisions made by 
local people are more accurate and better adapted than those made by 
researchers and extensionists (Habarurema and Steiner 1997). 
Since the 1970s techniques described in section 2.3.1 have been used for 
appraising farming systems for rural research and development. In the 1990s 
the participatory dimension was added. Now, in the 21 st century, these 
methods are being incorporated, using GIS as an integration domain, with 
other soil and land evaluation methods to facilitate a more complete 
understanding of local land use systems (Gobin et a/ 2001, Cools et a/ 2003, 
Payton et a/2003, Oudwater and Martin 2003). 
Mermut & Eswaran (2001) assert that, with the challenges of the new 
Millennium, especially in relation to the concept of sustainable development 
and enviro-centrism, soil science has undergone a paradigm shift. Towards 
the end of the 20th century new sub-disciplines emerged dealing with soil and 
land quality, degradation and desertification bringing new methods and 
research priorities especially as information technologies, such as GIS and 
remote sensing, became more cost effective. New concepts such as multi-
functionality of land, soil quality, sustainability of agriculture and carbon (C) 
sequestration are requiring new management strategies. Barrera-Bassols 
and Zinck (2003) identify the emerging integrated methodological approach 
as distinguishing and stimulating the relationship between cultural and 
scientific information to promote feasible and sustained local development 
according to local contexts. They conclude that the new approach is still 
hampered by the need for integration of natural and social sciences. 
There have been various attempts to integrate data sets and a recent one by 
Payton et al. (2003) discuss two different methodologies for generating and 
integrating social science datasets into soil scientific data on land evaluation. 
At two sites, identical methods for the scientific analysis of soils were used 
while two different methods were used for assessing local perspectives. At 
one site participatory rural appraisal methods (PRA) were used whereas the 
other used more conventional ethnographic methods. The first encountered 
problems in relating farmers' mind maps to the GIS maps and this was 
resolved by geo-referencing farmers maps. However they considered the 
ethnographic method generated better quality local knowledge but they had 
difficulty in relating the databases of NU*DlST and ArcView software 
packages (Payton et a/., 2003). They also noted the bias imposed by 
particular coders and their disciplines, the problem of interpreting local its 
ability to universalise this often causes cultural differences to be obscured. 
Although it is true that problems of bias and interpretation will always affect 
the outcome of research, the integration of datasets can be improved with 
careful planning, as was discovered during the analysis for this research. 
Agreeing on what is local knowledge is also a problem. Knowledge is not 
distributed evenly within communities and there is a difference in perception 
within a community of what is locally accepted knowledge and there are 
certainly problems with how local knowledge is corroborated. WinklerPrins 
and Sandor (2003) discuss these issues especially in relation to different 
language and ethnic groups while Birmingham (2003) emphasises 
differences between age groups and points to individual variation in 
articulation, interests and cultural interests in West Africa's Ivory Coast. 
Gobin et a/ 1998 found the greatest level of understanding of soil and soil 
processes to be among a small group of experienced and skilled farmers in 
Nigeria, while Haburema and Steiner (1997) found older farmers in Rwanda 
to be the most knowledgeable. Oudwater and Martin (2003) dealt with this 
problem by stratifying their sampling by age, gender, years of residence and 
location of residence. They concluded that iteration and triangulation 
throughout the research process was important as knowledge varied 
considerably. A group discussion and consensus completed the process and 
their final classification was only generated at the end. 
The study of local knowledge is immense and fraught with problems related 
to the endless variation that exists not only between ecosystems but also 
within communities. If it can be agreed who knows what and what is linked 
with practice in terms of land management, then that would seem to be the 
starting point. It follows then, that those with the longest experience of land 
management practice would be the ideal place to begin. This should not be 
interpreted as meaning that communication is easy or that everything one is 
told is true. Far from it; knowledge interface problems are a subject of study 
in their own right (Long and Long, 1992). However, with an awareness of the 
complexity of the knowledge sharing process between local and formal 
research, and with cross-checking etc., the research described here 
demonstrates that considerable learning is possible. 
2.4.3 Summary 
Legumes' nitrogen fixation abilities played an important role in the 
Agricultural Revolution, enabling the Industrial Revolution and modernisation 
as we know it. Prior to the scientific proof for nitrogen fixation farmers already 
had a practical knowledge of the benefits of legumes for increasing soil 
fertility for subsequent cereal crop production. As a result of this early role, 
legumes earned an image of being a panacea for addressing soil fertility, but 
that role was contextual. Agricultural development policies for Africa followed 
those in Europe first of all with legume technologies being promoted, then 
mineral fertilisers and then a return to legume technologies again. But, after 
years of promotion in Africa, legumes are primarily grown for food and not for 
soil fertility purposes. Calls to identify constraints to adoption have resulted in 
a long list of factors. Calls to identify opportunities for adoption are less 
common but factors such as farm resources, household composition and the 
market environment have been identified in Malawi. 
Agricultural research and development, formalised since the 19th century, has 
been through some significant changes. The early formal science of the 
colonial period has been characterised as a central source model, supported 
by the TOT model and both based on the diffusion of innovations theory. It is 
now widely accepted that innovations are derived from multiple sources 
including informal sources, and local knowledge and local people are now 
taken more seriously. 
The advent of Farming Systems Research brought a new more holistic 
approach to agricultural research with a focus on rural people and 
acknowledging temporal and spatial variability of local systems. A plurality of 
methods replaced conventional approaches to research and the integration 
of disciplines precipitated questions about the synergy of contrasting 
epistemologies. The sustainable livelihoods' approach of the 90s heralded a 
renewed focus on poverty by highlighting the vulnerability of the livelihoods of 
many rural people. It emphasises again the need for agricultural researchers 
to examine their potential rural clients within the broad perspective of their 
livelihoods and the implications of this for their research. 
Meanwhile, the concern with sustainable development has brought new 
thinking to natural resource utilisation and research and development more 
generally. In line with sustainable development agendas the World Bank 
launched a new international soil fertility initiative. This was criticised for not 
being sufficiently sensitive to the diversity and complexity of African systems. 
A more plural policy debate was recommended that acknowledges scientific 
uncertainty and seeks to strengthen farmers' capacity to adapt their own 
systems. At the same time, agroecology is being promoted as being more 
holistic and more environmentally and socially sensitive than agronomy (and 
more useful for addressing sustainability issues) and ethnopedology has 
evolved from simply describing local systems to seeking to explain local 
knowledge and systems. 
2.4.4 Food crops 
Pearl millet 
Generally, pearl millet is the staple crop of the more marginal and drought 
prone areas as it dominates systems receiving between 400-600mm mean 
annual rainfall (Bidinger et al., 1981). It is the basis of the farming systems in 
northern Namibia (Matanyaire, 1998) and is therefore covered here in some 
detail. It is well adapted to harsh conditions where rainfall is low, 
temperatures are high, soil fertility is poor and soils have a low water holding 
capacity. It is considered to be a drought tolerant crop as it is known to yield 
even with low rainfall (300mm), truncated rainy seasons and mid season 
droughts. It is one of the few crops adapted to the deep sands of the Sahel. 
Pearl millet is grown across India, America and Australia as well as Africa 
and it is very well adapted to the conditions found in northern Namibia. Crop 
statistics for pearl millet are scant but the major producers are said to be 
India, Nigeria, Niger, Mali, Chad and Senegal in decreasing order of 
production with India producing about 6 million tons annually (Norman et al., 
1995). It is thought to have originated along the southern fringes of the 
Sahara, although wild types are found in Namibia (pers. comm. Maggs, 
1998). Of the genus Pennisetum, the crop plant was originally named P. 
americanum but was renamed P. glaucum (L.) R. Brown. It is a cross-
pollinated cereal, known to be morphologically and phenologically extremely 
diverse. Both open-pollinated and hybrid cultivars are available, but it is the 
open pollinated types that are most common in Africa. Genotypes vary in 
duration from short to long season: from 55 to 180 days or more (Bidinger et 
al., 1981). 
Short and long season cultivars seem to be differentiated by the 
developmental period from floral initiation to anthesis. This period occupies 
one third of the life span in the case of short season cultivars and one sixth 
the life span of long season types (Powers et al., 1980). In most cases, floral 
initiation is stimulated by short daylength. Genotypic variation in the duration 
of the grain filling period is small, but the rate of grain growth during this 
period is substantial (Fussell and Pearson, 1978). Duration of grain filling is 
very sensitive to temperature while the rate of growth is unaffected by 
temperature. In high stress situations grain yield depends on viable tiller 
number as grain size will be small. Tillering is exceptional in pearl millet; 
basal tillering occurs between the thirteenth and fortieth day after sowing 
(DAS) when as many as forty tillers may be produced. In droughted 
conditions axillary tiltering from the upper nodes can occur throughout grain 
development (Norman et a/. , 1995). 
Pearl millet grows best on light loams, is preferred to sorghum on sandy soils 
and does not tolerate water logging (Kowal and Kassam, 1978). Seeds are 
very small and this is problematic for establishment in crusting soils. High 
temperatures increase speed of germination while reducing variation in crop 
germination and emergence. Very high soil temperatures (> 50C) result in 
seedling death. Soil water at field capacity may kill seedlings whereas soil 
water between 50% and 75% field capacity does not influence germination 
(F awusi and Agboola, 1980). At the other end of the spectrum soil that is too 
dry at sowing and establishment is commonly understood to limit crop growth 
and waste seed. 
The C4 photosynthetic pathway leads to high potential growth rates and 
sensitivity to low temperatures (Pearson, 1994). Leaf area increases linearly 
with temperature but frequently radiation interception is the primary constraint 
during vegetative growth. Crop growth rate is linearly related to intercepted 
radiation. leaf area development, water use and energy balance has been 
investigated and compared in Indian and African cultivars (Craufurd and 
Bidinger, 1989). African types have a longer vegetative phase until floral 
initiation, are taller and have a lower harvest index than Indian types, but they 
achieve equal (grain) yields under good conditions despite greater 
competition between stem and panicle. 
Water use efficiencies are generally high in comparison to maize. Millet has 
a reputation for being drought tolerant and more productive than maize and 
sorghum at low soil water content. Water deficit of 4 kPa may reduce leaf 
area and light interception by 40% but the impact is reduced if it occurs 
before flowering, during the vegetative phase (Squire 1990). Pearl millet is 
most susceptible to drought during flowering. Drought induced yield loss can 
be compensated to a greater extent than in maize or sorghum. In partitioning 
studies it is found that pearl millet is drought tolerant and deep root 
penetration over 1 m depths whereas the roots of other cereals tend to be 
found in the top 30 cm of the profile (Gregory and Squire, 1979). Planting 
density and pattern affects water use efficiency of pearl millet so that narrow 
spacing encourages deeper roots but wide spacing produces more above 
ground dry matter as a result of tiller survival (Azam-Ali et al., 1984; Azam-Ali 
et aI., 1984a; Azam-Ali et al., 1984b). 
Millet has been found to be able to extract greater quantities of nitrogen (N), 
phosphorus (P) and potassium (K) than sorghum or sudan grass (Smith and 
Clark, 1968). Where ability is probably also related to its deep rooting. 
Responses to nutrients are strongly linked with water availability and use. 
Where water is not limiting, pearl millet response to N is linear up to a high 
level of N but in limited conditions N stimulates vegetative growth, depleting 
soil water and depressing reproductive growth and grain yield. High 
responses to P have been recorded in Africa and surface available P (in the 
top 0-15cm) seems to be most important for uptake. Millet also has a high 
requirement for K. It is more tolerant of acid soils than sorghum and it is 
moderately tolerant of salinity. 
Pearl millet is frequently grown in mixed cropping patterns. In Nigeria, 90% of 
land area sown to millet is also planted with other crops. In West Africa two 
distinct types of millet are often planted together; short season non-
photoperiodic and long season photoperiodic types. Short season types are 
planted first to provide early food for consumption. Since the release of 
Okashana 1 (see 2.4.8), this has also become common practice in Namibia 
(Matanyaire, 1998). In India, pearl millet is commonly grown in an intercrop 
with pigeon-pea, in the same way as when sorghum and grown together. 
This pattern of planting a short season cereal with a longer season legume, 
makes use of stored water at the end of the season. 
Legumes 
Aerial species - Cowpea Vigna unguiculata 
There are hundreds of different varieties and landraces of cowpea and many 
different ones are grown in Namibia. In northern Namibia only one annual 
legume field crop is widely grown and that is the cowpea. It is the most 
important legume cultivated by farmers in the northern communal areas. At 
least 95% of households in northern Namibia grow some cowpea and after 
pearl millet, it is considered the second to third most important crop, 
competing for this position with sorghum (Keyler, 1995). In most cases 
cowpea is intercropped with cereals, but large areas of monocropped 
cowpea may be found (pers. comm. Fleissner 1999). It is an important part of 
the household diet and is considered the best food for children and there is a 
thriving local market for cowpeas with fluctuating prices reflecting availability 
throughout the year. Small-scale farmers consider their production of cowpea 
to be insufficient and in most cases this is blamed on the local varieties since 
they are considered to be late maturing, low yielding and susceptible to 
drought (MAWRD 1999). Other causes cited for low production are field 
pests, mostly aphids and storage pests, mainly the common weevil. 
Nevertheless, Namibia appears to reflect the situation in Africa more 
generally, where yields of between 198-260 kg/ha are common but are 
considerably lower than those achieved in Asia, 703-767 kg/ha (Summerfield 
and Lawn, 1987). 
Varieties are adapted to widely different environmental conditions and some 
have high degrees of adaptation to poor soil fertility and low rainfall 
(Rowland, 1993). Varieties are not equally tolerant to drought and 
temperature although in general they are known for their heat tolerance. 
Temperatures in the range 20-35 C are most suitable and above 35 C roots 
are retarded and plants shed flowers and pods (Squire 1990). Cowpeas are 
very sensitive to frost and are intolerant of temperatures below 15 C, 
especially as seedlings. Cowpeas may be of determinate or indeterminate 
habit and varieties vary in their sensitivity to daylength and drought. Cowpea 
cultivars are divided into three groups that are defined by photoperiod 
sensitivity and determinacy (Steele and Mehra, 1980). The first two groups 
are both photo-insensitive and are either determinate or indeterminate in 
habit. Cultivars of the third group are photosensitive and indeterminate in 
habit. These characteristics allow cowpeas to be grown in many 
environments across Africa and they are well adapted to being intercropped 
(Rowland, 1993). 
The Namibia Agricultural Research Plan prioritised research on cowpea after 
Independence (MAWRD, 1996) and in line with this, cowpea varieties from 
International Institute of Tropical Agriculture in Nigeria have been tested on-
station since 1990 and on-farm since 1995. The first set of varieties brought 
significant improvement concerning earlier maturity and higher yields and 
three varieties, identified in the process, are being considered for release 
(Fleissner in (MAWRD, 2000). However, although farmers welcome new 
varieties, they also complain about small seed and pod size. Since 1997, in 
attempts to locate varieties with larger sized seeds and pods, Namibian 
cowpea germplasm has been collected in Kavango and NCD regions of 
northern Namibia and planted for observation and data col/ection at 
Mahanene Research Station (Fleissner, 2000). Meanwhile, IITA has 
continued its cowpea breeding program and developed new varieties 
focussing on still earlier maturity, intercropping and resistance against pests 
and parasitic weeds. These new materials have shown promising results with 
average yields above 1600kg/ha (Fleissner in MAWRD 2000). 
Subterranean species 
There are only a few subterranean species and the two that are grown by the 
small-scale farmers in northern Namibia are bambara groundnuts and 
groundnuts. Both crops produce pegs and pod underground and are known 
for their drought tolerance. However they have subtly different biophysical 
requirements and are not always grown in the same places. In much of Africa 
bambara ground nut is the third most important legume after groundnut and 
cowpea (Azam-Ali et al., 2001b). Little information is available in Namibia 
about the yields or areas under these two crops, especially in the communal 
farming areas. In the commercial areas, groundnuts are the only legume crop 
grown and production has been diminishing steadily since Independence in 
1990. In the communal areas, bambara groundnuts are significantly more 
widespread than groundnuts, although the reasons for this have not been 
studied and are poorly understood. Statistics are not available for groundnut 
production but 82% of communal households in North Central Regions, 
NCR5 and 67% of those in Kavango grew bambara groundnuts during the 
1993 season (Keylert 1995). Using these percentages on the basis of an 
average of  400 m2 per farm, Fleissner estimates a total production area for 
bambara groundnuts of around 3000 hectares (MAWRD, 1999). 
Groundnuts Arachis hypogaea 
Groundnuts are now cultivated between 36 North to 36 South in a range of 
temperature and rainfall regimes. They generally need at least 550mm of rain 
to reach maturity but some varieties are more adapted to dry conditions than 
others. Unlike cowpeas and bambara groundnuts, ground nuts are insensitive 
to daylength but both temperature and radiation play an important role in 
developmental events and this varies with cultivars (Norman et a/1995). 
Despite contrasting evidence from controlled environment and field 
experimentation, water is found to be the main constraint to yield (Virmani 
and Singh, 1986); groundnut is adapted to high relative humidity, has 
relatively poor water use efficiency and yields reflect the pattern of soil water 
availability (Norman 1995). Drought during the early reproductive stages 
reduces flowering and peg initiation but plants are able to recover 
subsequently if water is made available (Chapman et al., 1993a). Yield is 
irrevocably reduced by up to 45% if drought occurs during pod filling 
(Chapman et al., 1993b). 
5 Ohangwena Region, Omusati Region, Oshana Region and Oshikoto Region. 
The best soils for groundnuts are light textured for easy sowing and 
establishment. Large stem diameter ensures emergence through surface 
crusts (Arndt, 1965) but surface crusting can adversely affect peg penetration 
and pod development (Underwood et al., 1971). Soils must be loose and 
porous as even small reductions in porosity can severely affect root growth 
(Nicou and Choupart, 1979). Heavy clay soils reduce yields through peg 
fracture and they make harvesting more difficult. 
Soil calcium is important for pod development and deficiency reduces yield; 
vegetative growth increases but with infertile flower production or aborted or 
shrivelled kernels. Normal pod and kernel development is dependent on 
direct uptake of calcium from the soil by the pod (Walt and Adams, 1979) 
and drought can reduce yield by inducing a calcium deficiency (Rajendrudu 
and Williams, 1987). In calcareous soils groundnut is susceptible to chlorosis 
as a result of iron deficiency (Graham, 1986). It fixes N and can nodulate 
effectively with Bradyrhizobium (occurring with cowpea) but is unpredictable. 
N fixation by groundnut and other grain legumes is reviewed by Peoples and 
Craswell (Peoples and Craswell, 1992). 
Bambara groundnuts Vigna subterranea 
Although considerable research has been done over the years on 
groundnuts, bambara ground nuts are an under researched and underutilised 
crop (Linnemann and Azam-Ali, 1993). The growth habit and reproductive 
behaviour of bambara groundnut was first described in 1969 but the breeding 
system is still not well understood and the crop is usually cultivated from 
landraces (Azam-Ali et al., 2001b). Comparing the growth and yield of 
bambara groundnuts with groundnuts confirmed it is more drought tolerant 
than groundnuts and able to grow in environments where the latter may fail 
(Linnemann and Azam-AIi, 1993). 
Research on the ecological adaptation of bambara groundnuts finds that 
bambara groundnuts grow in harsh environments, tolerate low rainfall and 
poor soils and grow where other crops can't (Aquilar-Manjarrez and Morteo, 
1999). Of 702 collection sites, 94% of sites were located in areas where there 
are no other crops, 4% were located in cropland areas, and 2% were located 
in areas classified as "crops, natural vegetation mosaic" (Aquilar-Manjarrez 
and Morteo, 1999). This result supports the finding that bambara ground nut 
can grow in environments that are marginal for other crops. They also show 
that bambara groundnuts are grown successfully above and below latitude 6 
North and that 96% of sites were found between 0 - 1500 m of altitude. The 
limit for bambara groundnut is an elevation of 1580m (Begemann, 1988). 
Bambara groundnut tolerates 500 - 41 OOmm precipitation but is best adapted 
to 900 to 1200 mm depending on rainfall distribution (Begemann, 1988). It 
requires an even moderate rainfall from sowing until flowering and can be 
grown successfully in dry savannah areas with a rainfall of 600-750 mm 
(http://www. icrisat. org/textlresearch/g rep/homepage/arch ives _cd/arch ives/ng 
csata.htm 2002). Rowland (1993) suggests that bambara groundnuts can be 
found growing successfully where annual rainfall is less than 500mm. 
Aquilar-Manjarrez and Morteo's (1999) work found 93% of sites were situated 
where rainfall was between 800-1600 mm annual rainfall. 
Bambara groundnut is adapted to a wide range of soils, but it thrives well on 
light, sandy, well drained loams with pH of 5.0-6.5. Reviewing research, 
Begemann (1988) finds it is intolerant to calcareous soils but that it tolerates 
a pH of between 4.3 and 6.5. It is reasonable to assume that the physical 
restraints to growth in groundnuts, e.g. the impedance of capping to peg and 
pod formation, are similar to those for bambara groundnuts. Optimum day 
temperature is 20-28 C and bambara ground nuts cannot tolerate frost. 
Temperature and photoperiod regulate flowering and podding in complex 
ways and this varies with genotype (Brink et al., 2000). Flowering in many 
land races is unaffected by daylength but pod filling requires 12, or less, hours 
of daylight (Linnemann, 1994). This may explain some variability in African 
yields, where crops are sown in response to the onset of rains and not to 
daylengths (Azam-Ali et al., 2001b). Agronomic potential of bambara 
groundnut is found to be considerable using a process based crop simulation 
model, BAMnut that was developed using physiological principles to describe 
the capture of environmental resources (Azam-Ali et al., 2001b). A method, 
to assess potential production across the world, integrating BAMnut with a 
GIS, may provide a basis for assessing potential of other underutilized crops 
(Azam-Ali et al., 2001a). 
2.4.5 Summary 
Pearl millet is well researched and is physiologically adaptable to diverse 
environments; it has opportunistic mechanisms to survive and exploit dry 
environments and variable/unpredictable weather. It is an ideal cereal for 
northern Namibia and can be managed in different regimes. Equally cowpeas 
are well researched and are very diverse with a range of mechanisms for 
environmental adaptation. For example, indeterminate habits and seed/pod 
coat colour and composition. There is a research programme in Namibia to 
find and exploit different cowpea varieties adapted to the local condition and 
circumstances. Bambara ground nuts are not so well researched and there is 
altogether a different pattern of crop research and knowledge that 
accumulates collective knowledge of its ecological adaptation and 
management. They are well adapted to dry environments and are found 
growing where other crops cannot. They are important food crops in Namibia 
but not much is known about their spread, use and management. 
Groundnuts are known in world markets as a cash crop and are very well 
researched and bred. They are known to be quite fussy and are not that 
important in Namibia. 
2.5 Conclusion 
The trend within agricultural research and rural development more generally 
has been a shift towards more plural, participatory and integrated methods. 
This is represented clearly within the research field of ethnopedology where 
the most recent research, including the research presented in this thesis, 
integrates natural and social science approaches to bring scientific clarity and 
rigour to explain local knowledge systems. Integration is achieved by using 
location as the common domain between datasets. Issues arising from that 
integration include the variability of population and knowledge and the 
interpretation and subjective bias of researchers' respective disciplines. The 
former may be addressed with careful design, selection of methods and 
sampling strategies, and cross-checking. The latter will always be a facet of 
research. Furthermore these research shifts have also had to incorporate 
shifts in development concerns more widely, and especially issues of poverty 
and sustainability. This research explores the problem of assessing the 
potential of legumes by integrating different research approaches and basing 
much of the field analysis on the detailed crop information reviewed above. 
3 Research context and methodology 
3.1 Introduction 
The fieldwork for this research was conducted while I was working on a 
project "Increasing pearl millet productivity with the use of grain legumes and 
manure in the communal farming systems of northern Namibia" funded by 
the Plant Sciences Programme of the Department for International 
Development. The field study period, for data generation and data collection 
in Namibia, was two and a half years, beginning in January 1998 and 
finishing in June 2000. During that period the socio-political climate changed 
significantly with insurgency and insecurity and these impacted the study. 
Methods were adapted where possible and some research locations were 
abandoned while new opportunities were created and exploited. 
The biophysical environment in northern Namibia displays extreme variability 
and these dynamics also required flexibility within the methodology, for 
example the flooding in the Oshanas. As a result, the intended form of the 
study evolved somewhat throughout the research period. The way the 
methods altered and the research transformed are more accurately 
described as a process, which is related in this chapter. 
Beginning with information about the research context, this chapter covers 
the general physical and human geography of Namibia as well as information 
about land tenure, the farming systems and agricultural research for northern 
Namibia. Then the aims and objectives of the research are reiterated. The 
next section. about the research framework and conceptual understandings, 
discusses the research process and how local knowledge and land units 
became an object of research and then, became a key research tool for 
understanding the role of legumes. The chapter continues with a description 
of the four villages originally selected as study sites and then how the focus 
came to rest on only one. Early on in the research a large number of 
households were selected and in the end a handful in one village was used 
for detailed case studies. The different methods and techniques deployed 
within each individual study are presented in turn. Within these individual 
studies, the sampling strategies that produced nested datasets, enabling 
integration are specified. Two different survey methodologies are described: 
one general farming systems survey; and the second, a survey specific to the 
cUltivation of pearl millet. Then follows a description of the approach used for 
the case studies looking at individual farm households and fields. A short 
section on secondary data follow the set of techniques used to study farmers' 
knowledge, the physical characteristics and management of local land units. 
Finally, there is a section on analyses. 
3.2 Nambia 
Namibia (formerly South West Africa) is one of Africa's youngest nations, 
having gained independence from South Africa in 1990. Angola and Zambia 
border Namibia to the north, Botswana and Zimbabwe to the east, the 
republic of South Africa to the south and the Atlantic Ocean on the west. 
Total land area is about 825,000km2 which can be divided into three main 
topographic regions: the western coastal plain of the Namib desert (15%); the 
central plateau stretching from the southern to northern border (>50%); and, 
the Kalahari zone lying along the east of the country. 
3.2.1 Population 
The national population is currently estimated at 1.7 million with a population 
growth rate 3.2% per annum. Approximately 73% of the population is rural 
but the annual urban population growth rate is 5.4% giving a projection of, in 
ten years time, a rural population diminishing to 57% while people living in 
urban areas rising to 43% (Vigne and Whiteside, 1997). Regionally there are 
large variations in population density (Map 1) with heavy concentrations 
reaching 100 persons per km2. Mean concentrations range from 2.7 persons 
per km2 in Kavango to 25.5 km2 in the Oshana region while the national 
average is 1.8 persons km2 (Totemeyer et al., 1997). Another measure of 
population density is the agro-climatic population density assessed as the 
number of persons per million kilocalories of production potential, estimated 
at the intermediate technology level for developing countries. Using this 
measure, Namibia is the only country in sub-Saharan Africa that has already 
reached a density of 250 persons per million kilocalories of production 
potential; Botswana is predicted to reach that density by 2023 and Zimbabwe 
by 2032 (Binswanger and Pingali, 1988). About 45% of Namibia's population 
live in the North Central Regions, NCRs, in an area of about 52,000 km2while 
only about 10% live in Kavango. Currently, approximately 90% of people in 
NCR and 95% of people in Kavango live in rural areas. 
Household demographics vary considerably across Namibia and there are 
eight distinct ethnic groups (Malan, 1995). The Ovambo people, located 
mostly in the NCRs, are the largest and dominant group. Data collected 
across Ovamboland and Kavango during 1992-1994 to analyse the economic 
sub-sector of pearl millet, showed that average household size in Ovambo 
was 9.0 while in Kavango it was 7.9 members (Keyler 1995). Female headed 
households accounted for 40% of the population in Owamboland and 20% in 
Kavango. 
3.2.2 Economy 
Four sectors dominate the economy: mining, government, trade and 
agriculture. Mining accounts for 31 % of GOP and over 75% of exports. 
Agriculture despite accounting for only 9% of GOP and 14% of exports is the 
largest employer supporting (directly or indirectly) 70% of the population 
(IFAD 1997). 
3.2.3 Land and land tenure 
Land is divided administratively into districts and regions. The area formerly 
called Ovamboland is divided into four regions; Oshikoto, Ohangwena, 
Oshana and Omusati (Map 2). This study focuses on Kavango and NCR (the 
latter is often referred to here as Ovamboland since it is still commonly 
known by that name in Namibia). There are two main categories of land 
tenure in Namibia. About 45% of the country is commercial farmland under 
freehold tenure while the remainder is government owned land (MLRR, 
1993). About 41% of government land is allocated to communal areas. The 
communal areas are situated in contiguous blocks across the north of the 
country including the NCRs and Kavango. This is a legacy of the South 
African government's policy of separate development. The dominant land use 
in these areas is agropastoralism; where rainfall is sufficient, crops are 
cultivated and where it is not, livestock are grazed. In practice there are two 
types of land tenure in operation in the communal areas; usufruct rights are 
normally allocated to individual households for cropping activities while 
grazing areas remain under common ownership and can be used by all 
members of the community. A process of communal rangeland enclosures, 
essentially the privatisation of land, is depriving communal households of 
access to seasonal grazing land (Werner, 1998). Similar to other parts of 
Africa land use and tenure is highly contested (Hangula, 1998). Commercial 
farmers complain about the allocation of northern communal land on the 
basis that it is the most productive agricultural land and should therefore 
attract freehold tenure. In communal areas there is local contestation 
between individuals; struggles exist involving traditional law mediated by 
traditional leaders on the one hand, while on the other, current national 
legislation is mediated and enforced by the judiciary. Some of the most bitter 
struggles are around the location and use of cattle posts (situated on 
communal land) in the NCRs and what is seen by local people as 
encroachment on the borders between Oshikoto and Kavango. 
3.2.4 Oshanas 
The only perennial rivers in Namibia flow along the northern and southern 
borders (Map 2) and the country is almost entirely dependent upon 
ephemeral rivers and groundwater. The NCRs, are approximately 1100m 
above sea level and are characterised by the oshanas, interconnected 
periodic and episodic watercourses running in a north-south direction. Low 
ridges no more than ten metres high, separate the oshanas so that as a 
whole, the area appears to be almost completely flat. The oshana system 
(Marsh and Seely, 1992) extends north across the border to Angola and is 
fed by rainfall there. Only the central oshanas have perennial headwaters in 
Angola. The western drainage flows in years of good rainfall while the 
eastern oshanas are dormant and only flow in years of extraordinary rainfall. 
The flow of water in the oshanas is very slow and ends in the Etosha Pan 
immediately to the south. The oshanas are the most important source of 
groundwater recharge and are very important to agriculture in the region. 
Map 1: Population density of Namibia 
Source: Totemeyer, Tonchi and du Pisani (1997) 
Population denSIty, 1991 
(people per square kilometer) 
Less than 0 1 people 
o 1 - 0 5 people 
o 5 - 1 0 people 
1 0 - 100 people 
More than 10 people 
Map 2: Namibia and the North Central Regions 
Angola 
OkavangO RIver 
Karas 
South Africa 
Source: Mendelsohn et al. (2000) 
Botswana 
Zambia 
 Outapt 
 Eenhana 
Ohangwena 
Omusati 
Oshlkoto 
3.2.5 Farming systems in northern Namibia 
Pearl millet is the most widely grown crop in the north. It is also the most 
common and preferred food staple (Keyler 1995) which is known locally as 
'mahungu'. Cropping in the north is largely for subsistence though some 
farmers perceive millet to be both a food and cash crop (Matanyaire, 1998). 
National figures estimate area planted to pearl millet (and sorghum)6 to have 
risen from 166,000 hectares in 1990/91 to 320,000 hectares in 199617, that is 
in the years since independence. At a household level, average area planted 
to pearl millet is about 3.5 ha (Matanyaire, 1998). 
Farmers in the communal areas of northern Namibia used shifting cultivation 
as a strategy to sustain crop production. Evidence shows this practice has 
stopped altogether in the NCR while about a third of farmers in Kavango are 
able to continue with it (Keyler 1995). Cultural practices for managing 
cropping land are necessarily under pressure to adapt and change 
(Matanyaire 1998). Keyler (1995) shows that in NCR more than 80% of 
farmers' use manure and or fertiliser to maintain soil fertility whereas in 
Kavango less than 7% use such inputs. 
Several studies have been conducted investigating cultural practices in 
different part of the country and it is known that there is considerable 
variation across the north, but this variation has not been fully analysed. 
However, some general points can be made. The farming systems in 
northern Namibia are dependent on family labour. Primary tools for land 
preparation are the hand hoe and the animal-drawn plough. About half the 
population across the region owned both a plough and draught animals. The 
hiring of draught animals is common and the demand for mechanical 
ploughing services is high (Keylert 1995). Planting is generally on the flat 
except in the Cuvelai catchment where many farmers' plant on ridges or 
broadbeds to aid drainage and avoid crops being water logged or washed 
away (Matanyaire 1998). Crop rotation is virtually unknown in northern 
6 National statistics aggregate pearl millet and sorghum production figures but sorghum is 
estimated to be about 5% of these figures. 
Namibia while intercropping is the most common practice; 45% of land being 
regularly intercropped and another 34% being occasionally intercropped 
(Keyler 1995). The majority of farmers intercrop millet with cowpeas and the 
ratio of cowpeas to millet is thought to be low but it has never been measured 
(Matanyaire 1998). Most households retain seed for planting in subsequent 
years (Keyler, 1995). 
3.2.6 Agricultural production 
The cultivation of rainfed crops is regionally concentrated according to rainfall 
and is mainly confined to the northern communal areas, apart from a small 
but significant area of commercial maize production, in the middle of the 
country, known as the maize-triangle. This area centres on Tsumeb in 
Oshikoto. Crop production statistics are concerned with commercial 
production and focus on the cereals. Pre-Independence, statistics were 
produced for commercial groundnut production but this has been diminishing 
steadily and is no longer important. More recently statistics have been 
generated for individual regions and while these focus on cereal production 
they also include data for "beans". There is no distinction made between 
legume species but in NCRs and Kavango "beans" are an important crop. 
National annual cereal production (roughly 5% wheat, 25% maize and 70% 
millet and sorghum) fluctuates considerably. Post independence production 
has varied from 33,800 tonnes to 173,000 tonnes between 1991 and 1996n. 
The Namibia Early Warning Food Information System (1997) estimated 
national demand to be 260,000 tonnes per year so that Namibia must import 
a significant amount of its cereal requirements. Namibia imported 107,400 
tonnes of cereal during 199an (MAWRO, 1997). Some consider the shortfall 
between supply and demand to be sufficiently small as to make long term 
cereal self-sufficiency a realistic and achievable goal (Keyler, 1995). There is 
some controversy surrounding this issue as national statistics are thought to 
underestimate supply while statistics gathered at the household level are 
thought to overestimate supply (Rohrbach and Lechner, 1998). However, the 
idea of cereal self-sufficiency is commonly known to be a personal objective 
of the President and official policy or not, achievable or not, it seems to be a 
popular ideal. 
3.2.7 Agricultural Research and Extension 
Prior to independence, in 1990, the agricultural research and extension 
service was relatively small and targeted at the commercial farms to the 
south, which are invariably livestock enterprises. Since independence, the 
client base was redefined and as a result, research objectives were more 
aligned to the needs of communal area farmers in the NCRs, Kavango, 
Kunene and Caprivi. Part of this realignment involved significant expansion of 
the Directorate of Extension and Engineering Services (DEES). A 
consequence of these developments was that the Directorate of Agricultural 
Research and Training (DART) employed mainly Afrikaans people while the 
majority of DEES personnel originated from the NCRs or other communal 
areas and communication and understanding between departments was 
poor. In 1999, in an attempt to cause research to be more sensitive to its 
client base, farming system research units (FSRUs) were set up within the 
Department of Engineering and Extension with crop (livestock and forestry) 
researchers attached in an advisory capacity. Initially there was controversy 
around this new development and the management and co-ordination of 
these units was problematic. However, their activities did bring a range of 
different NGOs, projects and professionals from different disciplines together 
and it is here that I first came into contact with work on "indigenous land 
units". 
Regarding the crop research programmes, Namibia has been a full member 
of the Sorghum and Millet Improvement Programme managed by fCRISAT in 
Bulawayo, Zimbabwe since 1990. This programme has concentrated on the 
improvement of pearl millet through participatory breeding and selection. The 
GRNIICRISAT participatory breeding process developed material (originally 
from Mali) with local farmers in the NCRs to produce a short season variety 
called "Okashana 1 ". Since its release, this variety is grown by a majority of 
farmers; estimates suggest that between 50-90% of households have bought 
(or obtained) some 'Okashana 1', (Rohrbach and Lechner, 1998). Other 
varieties have also been released and yet more are currently under 
development. In addition to the breeding work on pearl millet there has been 
some experimental work on its response to fertiliser and manure. A breeding 
programme for groundnut in conjunction with IITA was stopped in preference 
for research on the more common legume crops of cowpeas and bambara 
groundnuts. There has also been research on sweet potatoes, rice and 
cotton. 
3.3 Aims and objectives 
The general aim of this research was to explore the actual and potential role 
of legumes in the farming systems of semi-arid northern Namibia in order to 
learn something about their role in similar environments elsewhere. 
Objectives and specific questions changed during the research process as 
new concepts arose, prompting a revision in thinking. "New concepts" refers 
mostly to land units and the framework of local knowledge that was 
discovered towards the end of the fieldwork and has been used as a tool to 
investigate the role of legumes. Essentially, land units are patches of land 
that have distinct properties and behaviours according to local perceptions 
(3.4, 3.9 and Ch6). "New concepts" also refers to capital assets and the 
sustainable livelihood framework (2.33, 3.9 and 3.11) that was adopted quite 
late during the analysis phase of the research. Although these concepts do 
not represent "new knowledge" in social terms (i.e. to the human race) both 
were new to this research. As far as I am aware, it is the first time that the 
knowledge about local land units (LLUs) specifically applied to cropping 
practice has been recorded and I am solely responsible for the analysis and 
interpretations presented here. 
The key objectives of the research are listed below. Specific research 
questions are raised and answered within the text of the result chapters (4-7) 
and in Appendices I and II. Table 3.1 presents the research framework 
itemising the major research issues, the data required for addressing these 
issues, the methods used for generating different datasets and the outputs of 
research in terms of statistics and analyses. It can be read in conjunction with 
Figure 1, which is a simple model to conceptualise how farmers mobilise their 
assets, with an emphasis on the experience and knowledge of land, to 
achieve different crop production outcomes. 
 To investigate and understand the contexts in which legumes are grown 
within communal farming systems: the biophysical environment and 
socio-economic circumstances. 
 To identify and explain how biophysical and socio-economic factors affect 
legume production and productivity. 
 To understand why farmers do not grow more legumes or harness 
common legume technologies that exploit their N fixation. 
 To identify farmers' livelihood objectives, where legumes fit in and the 
management strategies created to achieve those objectives. 
 Based on what currently happens in farmers' fields, to explore what the 
prospects are for legumes in the future. 
 To find out how local and scientific knowledge and associated practice 
influence legume cultivation outcomes and to explore their integration. 
3.4 Research frameworks and conceptual understandings 
The framework (Table 3.1) presented above differs from the original pre-
fieldwork outline in two respects. The original plan did not group resources 
into different types of capital assets. Instead, resources (e.g. soils, rainfall, 
seed, land, labour, experience and knowledge) were listed under the generic 
terms "biophysical environment", "farmers skills" and "socio-economic 
factors". Farmer management practices were visualised as distinct activities 
(e.g. ploughing, planting and weeding) as opposed to forming part of a 
strategy, which implies a pre-conceived or partially pre-conceived, rational 
plan of activities. The links between soillland quality and crop yield were to 
be measured with soil/crop samples and eventually to be analysed using a 
probability map. In the end, the acknowledgement of the importance of local 
land units and associated management practices superseded this. The shift 
towards the use of local land units precipitated issues of sampling and 
analysis of quantitative data, which in turn resulted in new thinking around 
the interface between local and scientific knowledge. 
Table 3.1: Research Framework 
ISSUE DATA 
FARMERS ASSETS: 
Natural Capital Soils 
Rainfall 
Temperature 
Evapotranspiration 
Climatellandscape interactions 
Human Capital Household demographics 
Labour resources 
Experience and knowledge 
Financial Capital Wealth ranking 
Pensions, cash income, livestock, 
land, seeds, manure, fertiliser, 
Physical Capital Dams, wells and pumps 
Roads and Government services 
Schools, clinics, shops, churches 
Ploughs, hand hoes, fences etc 
Social Capital Community organisation and custom 
Social status and networks 
Relatedness, reciprocity and 
exchanges 
- - - -- -
METHOD OUTPUT 
Pearl Millet Survey Soil analyses 
Local Land Unit Study Rainfall analyses 
Case Studies Local land unit analyses 
Secondary sources Spatial diversity analysiS 
Farming Systems Survey Household analyses 
Local Land Unit Study Local land unit 
Case Studies framework and analyses 
Farming Systems Survey Wealth and diversity I 
Case Studies analyses 
Farming Systems Survey Farming systems 
Case Studies analysis including 
Secondary sources and external links and 
grey matter access to institutional 
services 
Farming Systems Survey 
Local Land Unit Study Historical analysis 
Case Studies Settlement patterns 
Secondary Sources Local perceptions 
---_.-
FARMERS 
MANAGEMENT 
PRACTICES 
FARMERS CROP 
PRODUCTION & 
PRODUCTIVITY 
I NATIONAL and 
REGIONAL 
PRODUCTION 
LEGUMES ROLE in 
AGRICULTURAL 
RESEARCH & 
DEVELOPMENT 
SOIL SCIENCE & 
ETHNOPEDOLOGY 
- - ._- - - --- --- _.-
Available choices and selection for: 
land preparation, seeds and crop 
combinations, seeding rates, thinning 
weeding harvesting, fertility 
management, water harvesting etc 
Plant and hill counts 
Crop combinations/planting patterns 
Yield weights and grain grades 
National and regional agricultural 
production 
National and regional population 
Census data 
Research fields: legumes, 
sustainability and soil fertility 
management 
Research fields old and new 
-----.- . ---
Farming Systems Survey Understanding farmers' 
Pearl Millet Survey perceptions, strategies, 
Local Land Unit Study actual practice and 
Case Studies outputs. 
Pearl Millet Survey Production statistics 
Local Land Unit Study Crop architecture 
Case Studies 
Secondary sources and Statistics 
grey matter 
Literature and secondary Historical analYSis 
sources Research field analyses 
Literature and secondary Analysis 
sources 
CROP RESEARCH: 
Millet, Cowpeas, 
Bambara groundnuts & 
Groundnuts 
RESEARCH & 
DEVELOPMENT 
METHODS 
_ ... _--
Research fields: established data, on Literature and secondary Analysis 
physiology, management and sources 
adaptation 
Agricultural experimental methods, Literature and secondary Analysis 
Formal I informal processes and sources 
integrated approaches, Farming 
Systems Research, Participatory and 
Rapid Rural Appraisal, Participatory 
and Geographic Information Systems, 
Sustainable Livelihood Approaches. 
Figure 1: Model of fanners' strategies and land use for crop production 
Human Capital.~ ___________________ ---. 
e.g. Labour ... Choices 
Experience 
Knowledge 
Financial, Physical 
& social capital 
e.g. Pensions 
Cash income 
Livestock 
Seed stocks 
Plough/hoe 
Roads 
Water pump 
Fences 
Strategies 
Crop Development 
1 I I 1 I 
Social networks Natural Capital 
Kinship networks 
Community organisation 
Custom 
Crop species & varieties or land races 
Type of land preparation 
Type of fertiliser 
Amount of weeding / thinning etc. 
Type of harvesting 
Which plot is cleared first / last 
Where & when manure is used 
To monocrop and/or intercrop 
Which plot is weeded first / last 
Where to harvest first / last 
Germination 
Emergence 
Growth stages 
Flowering 
Grain / pod filJing 
Maturity 
Local land units 
Rainfall & soils 
Land / climate interactions 
Temperatures 
Rooting depths 
Rhizobia 
e.g. Quantity of grain & biomass 
Quality of grain & biomass 
Number & varieties of species 
Labour productivity 
Land productivity 
The simple conceptual model (Figure 1) underpinning the research has 
changed very little throughout the process and this has been its main value. 
Especially during the fieldwork, when a considerable conceptual shift 
occurred, the model was useful in keeping the research on a path to fulfil the 
main aim and objectives. Changes to the model have mainly been in 
nomenclature; a shift from the term "resources" to "capital", "decisions" to 
"choices" and "activities" to "strategies". The terms "resources" and "assets" 
are used interchangeably throughout the thesis but the term capital implies a 
particular grouping; for example what are usually referred to as natural 
resources become natural capital and human resources are referred to as 
human capital. These are the two main assets used in farming that are 
emphasised in this thesis. The other assets, financial, physical and social 
capital are less scrutinised in this research. The term "choices" is used 
instead of "decisions" to emphasise the less resolute more fluid nature of 
decision making in such an unpredictable environment. 
The original research plan was to generate data in three stages. First of all a 
farming systems survey (3.6) to collect general baseline information on four 
village sites along the northern rainfall gradient. Second to conduct a more 
widespread survey across eight villages to assess interfield crop productivity 
and different management practices (3.7). The third stage was to assess 
intrafield crop productivity by focussing on a few households in two villages 
representing different annual rainfall and farming systems. The case study 
households would be selected from those sampled in stage one and stage 
two to produce nested datasets. The case studies (3.8), conducted over two 
seasons would be used during the second season to identify soil type, crop 
species, population density and productivity by sampling systematically 
across the case study fields. In this way, field variability and the role of 
legumes in farmers' fields could be quantified. Regular interviews with 
individual households to explore the farming process from the identification of 
strategies to management activities and their respective outputs were 
expected to yield qualitative data about the role of legumes. The approach 
included using a range of participatory and rapid rural appraisal tools (3.6-
3.8) as well as conventional agronomic sampling techniques (3.7- 3.9) 
The first two stages were completed as planned but the third and most 
important stage was interrupted soon after it began. The rebel war in Angola 
shifted into Kavango bringing with it regular and savage land mine attacks, 
abductions and murders. It was no longer safe to travel or to work in 
Kavango and expatriates were advised to leave. Local people also became 
very frightened and suspicious so that they were no longer open and willing 
participants in research. The research had to change and effectively, one of 
the two research sites had to be abandoned. At first, the idea was to carry on 
with the original plan but in only one village in the north central region 
(Oshaala). This meant that data from the first two phases would still be 
relevant but the intended comparison, between two different villages and the 
full use of the nested datasets, would be lost. In short, data from a single 
village would seriously limit the results and analysis. When this happened, 
the cropping season had already begun so that redesigning the research was 
not a viable option. 
Then, other pioneer research being conducted in the north central region, on 
"indigenous land units" and local knowledge, opened up a new dimension 
that was too exciting and potentially too important to ignore. This pioneer 
research was investigating local knowledge about soils and land use for 
forestry activities. Among a range of activities, local people identified some of 
the "indigenous land units" as being useful for growing crops. However, crop 
farming was not the focus of the study and so there was no detailed research 
of the use and management of those land units for cultivating crops. What 
was particularly interesting to me was that it appeared that farmers' fields 
contained more than one land unit and sometimes several. Since I had been 
studying variation in farmers' fields, it occurred to me that these land units 
could be the biophysical basis of variability in farmers' fields and that this 
deserved investigation. I discussed this with an ecologist and GIS expert 
already working on the "indigenous land units" project and he agreed. By a 
stroke of luck, a recent GRN survey had generated detailed information, 
including global positioning system, GPS, data on the households and fields 
of Oshaala. There were also high quality aerial and satellite maps available. 
This offered a unique opportunity to conduct a GIS study of land units local to 
Oshaala. There was also a possibility of adding value to the datasets already 
generated and to advance the research on "indigenous land units" and local 
knowledge. 
A choice now had to be made. For me, there was an opportunity cost in 
terms of the time and resources available. I could continue with the original 
plan that was now limited due to losing half of the datasets. Or, shift the 
research in a new direction that offered a chance of yielding a better 
understanding of the variability in farmers' crop fields that so far had been 
difficult to penetrate. If successful, this could represent a tangible research 
contribution. However if it failed, the redirection of time, effort and resources 
could completely compromise my research. It was completely uncharted 
territory and I had no idea how long the research would take or whether it 
would in the end lend itself to quantitative data generation and analysis. 
Additionally, the eXisting opportunity of willing professionals and essential 
technology might never coincide again. After consideration I decided that the 
potential research gains outweighed the potential losses and it was worth 
taking the risk. I decided to continue with the case studies alongside the new 
study as far as time and resources allowed. However, I could not anticipate 
the outcome. 
Once the investigation began, it became clear that the "indigenous land unit" 
frameworks could be used to explain field variability to some extent but to 
what extent was a mystery. Management practices and crop choices varied 
with each land unit according to farmers' understanding of the land unit's 
biophysical nature and it's response to the weather, particularly to rainfall. 
Individual farmer strategies varied according to number and size of different 
land units, as well as to other resources required to exploit these land units 
e.g. seeds and labour. New research questions then became: 
 How much intra and inter field variation can be explained using the 
frameworks? 
 Who has access and control of which land units and how does this impact 
the role of legumes both in the field and in household farming and 
livelihood strategies? 
The spatial proximity of land units in farmers' fields and the knowledge about 
how farmers managed them, meant that for production data to be 
meaningful, new samples selected from within discrete land units would be 
required. The only fields that were being studied intimately and where 
permission had already been given to take crop samples, were those of the 
case study households. If the existing case study data were to remain 
relevant, then the new samples must be selected from within the case study 
fields. The sampling method that had been deployed for two years had to be 
retained as there was no time for retraining assistants and there was too 
much work to be undertaken by one person, myself, alone. 
There were four problems with the scientific method and statistical analyses 
planned and these were not easily assessed or solved, under time (and heat) 
pressures in the field. They were:- 1) five case study fields were not really 
enough to make the sample set representative 2) not all land units were 
contained within the five fields and to conduct an analysis of variance, an 
equal number of samples was required 3) if results were to be comparable 
across land units, a common crop had to be sampled 4) usually land 
homogeneity is assumed for an analysis of variance and yet it was unknown 
to what extent this was true. 
Harvesting was already underway in the village and the decision was taken 
to sample land units as individual "treatments" and to do as much as possible 
in the time available. Six samples of soil and six of pearl millet were to be 
sampled for each of seven land units, in different farmers' fields and to 
include all the land units within the case study fields, as a subset. In practice, 
it was not so easy to fulfil even this apparently simple sampling strategy as 
many farmers had already harvested or had not planted pearl millet on some 
of the land units. Nevertheless, the land units in each case study field were 
sampled and some more besides. The final sample set was too small to be 
representative but could be used indicatively. Had the discoveries about land 
units emerged earlier in the research process, a much larger set of samples 
could have been arranged and this would have been preferable and more 
representative. 
The full impact of the gains and losses of the research only emerged after the 
fieldwork was complete and during desk-bound analysis. All the quantitative 
field data generated during the first season, from randomly selected samples, 
were now irrelevant and there was no way of locating the samples according 
to the land units where they originated. These realisations brought a new set 
of choices. The land unit study could be dropped altogether and the analyses 
rely on the data collected according to the original research plan, now 
compromised by focusing on only one village and minimal intrafield data. Or, 
despite its limitations regarding the amount of quantitative data available, the 
land unit study could remain the central focus. This choice would mean that 
most of the previously generated agronomic data could not be used in any 
meaningful way. The insights about farmers diverse land resources and how 
they used them in their farm management strategies particularly regarding 
legume cultivation were too important to be dropped altogether. The different 
crop sampling strategies could not both be used and so the land unit study 
and the compromise on quantitative production data were chosen. 
To compensate for the losses there were also important gains. The 
secondary datasets of household and field data allowed a village wide 
analysis of land and labour resources. The land data facilitated the use of an 
index that reduced intrafield diversity to a single statistic that in turn enabled 
an analysis of household wealth rank and field diversity. This quantitative 
analysis could then be interpreted using information gained from qualitative 
data collected over a two-year period and with the more recent research 
about farmers' management of different land units. This wealth analysis 
encouraged thinking about poverty and vulnerability and the uneven impact 
of household resources on the role of legumes in the farming system, village 
and individual households. The sustainable livelihood framework then lent 
itself as a tool to aid this thinking and as a structure for the written analysis. 
Hence although the sustainable livelihoods approach was not deployed in the 
original research design or in the fieldwork, in the end it served to bring 
together the multi-disciplinary elements of the research. 
3.5 Study Sites 
Research began in four villages, Oshaala in Omusati Region, Ekolola in 
Ohangwena Region, Eefa in Oshana Region and Katope in Kavango Region. 
These villages were selected along a transect running roughly west/east 
through the NCRs and Kavango (Map 3). It follows an average rainfall 
gradient of about 350-550 mm per year. Following discussions with DEES 
and other NGOs working in the regions these villages were chosen, along the 
transect, to represent a range of environments including soils, rainfall and 
relief. With the oshana system being so important to the NCRs two villages 
were selected one in the central area close to the city and a rural one 
towards the edge of the system. Another village in the forest towards the 
border was chosen and then another in the pioneer forest zone in Kavango. 
Katope is an inland community in Kavango Region that is situated in the 
forest zone north of the Mangetti. The nearest small town, Mpungu, is about 
30km down the valley and boasts a school and clinic whereas the nearest 
hospital and other government services are either about 100km away at 
Nkurenkuru, or at Rundu some 300~350km further east. Ekolola is also a 
forest community about 400km west of Katope in Ohangwena Region. This 
village is situated close to Eenhana, a small but well serviced town a few 
kilometres south of the Angolan border. The majority of the people of this 
village were exiled during the war, only returning to their land after 
Independence. Eefa is a peri-urban village located on the outskirts of the 
rapidly growing town/city of Oshakati in the Cuvelai Basin of Oshana Region. 
Oshaala is another 150-160 km further west of Oshakati in Omusati Region. 
It is located in the Mopani Bush close to the Olusati Dam and the closest 
government services are about1 0-20km away at Onesi and Eunda. 
Initially the intention was to work in all four villages, sampling widely across 
each village and eventually narrowing to a small number of purposely 
selected case studies. Even during the first cropping season it was not 
possible to treat each village equally, so the approach demanded adjustment. 
There were three main reasons for this. The first related to location and the 
environment, the second related to language and translators and the third 
related to government extension policies and staff. In the first year, due to 
low rainfall and traversable roads, Oshaala was the most accessible 
community. Although it was much more difficult to reach, moderate rains at 
Katope made it relatively accessible. Despite being only a few kilometres 
from the thriving urban centre of Oshakati, Eefa village was mostly 
inaccessible even by foot. Roads to Ekolola were erratically accessible 
throughout the season. 
Language also became an issue early on. Initially I understood that Oshaala, 
Ekolola and Eefa fell within one language group and hired a translator 
accordingly. Different dialects were spoken in each of the vii/ages and the 
translator, speaking only one, created both bias and confusion. Finally, 
extension support and policy for the four vii/ages was entirely different and it 
became clear that this generated a significant bias. Eefa and Ekolola enjoyed 
strong support and hosted a range of experimental trials, conducted by the 
government and NGOs, while Katope and Oshaala received none. Since the 
research was investigating the effect of farmers' resources and practices on 
the role of legumes, it did not serve the research to include households 
receiving variable quantities of seed, fertiliser and other inputs including 
extensive advice from external sources. A combination of these factors 
necessitated a research focus on the two villages of Katope and Oshaala. 
This occurred until the rebel insurgency cut off access to Katope and caused 
the research to be recast as previously described. 
Map 3: Location of the main village sites used in the research 
-...j 
14 45 ' 
North Central 
Indicating Oshaall , 
Eaf. , Ekoka and 
Kltope villages 
158 30' 
Map compU.d by: 
Natura' Resource Inform.tlon Service CNRIS) 
Ministry of lind. , R ... tttement and Rehabilitation 
P/ Ba; 5571 
Osh,katt 
rol : 065224502 
E..",all : nris . fr iclonlln  . eom .na 
18- 15 ' 
Legend 
Main roads 
o Etosha Park 
troo' 17-"5 ' 
Okongo 
17"00 ' 17 45 ' 
Major towns Sealo 1 : 1, aoo , 000 
30 30 60 Kilometer. 
HI 8 30 ' 
 Katope --
18 30' 
w-<r E 
3.6 Farming Systems Survey 
A farming systems survey (Appendix I) was done with the main objective of 
characterising the pearl mittet based farming systems. The survey took place 
in all four villages, over a period of a month, just after harvest time in 
June/July 1998. Data were analysed during the dry season months July to 
September. Subsequently, case study households were selected from the 
households sampled for the farming systems survey to supply nested 
datasets. 
3.6.1 Wealth ranking and sampling frames 
The starting point for this research and the farming systems survey was to 
establish sampling frames. Difficulties were encountered in all villages in 
setting up these initial sampling frames due to problems of establishing 
village boundaries and problems related to household names. Fluid 
boundaries occurred for different reasons in different places painting a 
picture of mobility and changing settlements. Katope for example is a 
dispersed settlement with a central area comprising a number of kuuka7 
shops, a borehole and a primary school. The centre is surrounded by a 
number of satellite settlements of up to 15 'compounds' and situated up to 
20km from the centre. Oshaala is a large and expanding village nestling 
alongside a dam. It is made up of sub-villages under four different headmen 
who provided information about individual households under their 
responsibility. Again there is a central service area, with kuuka shops, a 
school and a clinic. Eefa is a rambling suburb of Oshakati, and an initial set 
of names put together by a member of the village committee were found to 
include a number of households not officially registered under Eefa. While 
Ekolola residents often named absent household heads and other household 
members who either had never returned after the war or perhaps reside on 
the other side of the border yet wishing to retain Namibian rights. Across al 
7 small establishments that serve locally brewed beverages and/or commercially produced 
alcoholic drinks. Many of the kuuka shops also serve pre-cooked snaCKS such as fat cooKies, 
fresh bambara groundnuts, deep fried flying termites or smoked mopani worms. 
the villages, male heads were often named when absent and also sometimes 
when deceased. 
Initially, wealth ranking exercises were conducted in each village to provide 
basic knowledge about the communities. In the cases of Katope, Oshaala 
and Ekolola wealth ranking was completed with headmen and in Oshaala 
with sub-headmen8 . In Eefa, the same exercise was done with a member of 
the village committee. The method relied on informants' knowledge and 
memory and on individual perceptions of wealth but the eventual focus on 
Oshaala, allowed triangulation and corroboration of those perceptions. Lists 
of village households generated by these wealth rankings were used as 
sampling frames and purposeful samples were selected from them for the 
surveys and for the case studies. Households across wealth and gender 
categories were chosen so that access according to location was also 
ensured. 
The wealth ranking process involved asking each informant to first list all the 
households in the village and then to group these households according to 
which looked or appeared to be similar. They then reviewed their groupings 
and moved any that had been misplaced. They were then asked to describe 
each group and the criteria they used were recorded. Follow-up questions 
were asked for clarity. For example, which cluster contained particular social 
groups such as female~headed households, old people or young newly 
married couples? 
3.6.2 Sampling and Data collection 
The survey to gather baseline data was conducted in all four villages, 
Katope, Oshaala, Ekolola and Eefa. An initial sample of 12 households, 
stratified by wealth category, was selected in each village and an additional 
number of female~headed households were purposely selected. Individual 
survey respondents were mostly female despite the majority of household 
heads being male (Table 3.2). 
8 The headman had district level responsibility and three others had local responsibilities. 
Table 3.2: Respondents by village 
Villages 
Households (n=57) Individuals (n=62) 
Male Heads Female Heads Males Females 
Eefa 12 5 3 16 
Ekolola 7 6 2 10 
Oshaala 9 3 5 7 
Katope 12 3 7 12 
Totals 40 17 17 45 
Community meetings were held prior to the start of the survey to inform the 
communities of the proposed programme and to engage in a general 
discussion about seed selection and supply, manure availability and the 
existence of formal or informal markets for these inputs. These occasions 
were also used to produce community maps that served the dual purpose of 
sampling frame verification and for finding individual households. 
As far as possible, interviews were held with individuals responsible for 
decision-making regarding individual fields. This was especially important for 
Katope, where a number of households had more than one field and in this 
case, although the sample only covered 15 households, 19 individuals were 
interviewed. In the north central villages, responsibility for the one field 
surrounding the compound was often shared among household members, 
and in this case the household head or acting household head was 
interviewed. Often male household heads delegated their wives or other 
female members to answer questions relating to legumes and other field 
crops. 
Information was collected using semi-structured interviews. A questionnaire 
(Appendix I) designed to provide information on the farming system of 
selected households was combined with the use of selected PRA tools. In 
particular, mapping, ranking and classificatory tools as well as labour 
calendars were used. Both quantitative and qualitative data were generated 
in the process. 
3.7 Pearl Millet Survey 
A second survey conducted over the 1998/1999 season concentrated on the 
cultivation of the staple food crop, pearl millet. Analysis was done during the 
dry off-season months of July through September. This survey took place in 
eight villages across the north with the original four villages included as a 
subset of this population to fulfil the nested dataset intention. 
After the farming systems survey and field observation, it became clear that 
the role of legumes could not be assessed in isolation from pearl millet. 
There was little existing information on the farmers' management practices 
and so the main objective of this survey was to gather quantitative data on 
the management practices and yields of pearl millet cultivation. A secondary 
objective was to identify how legumes were used in millet fields. Information 
was collected in two stages and on both occasions quantitative and 
qualitative data were generated. 
A questionnaire (Appendix II) was used for gathering information from 
farmers while researchers generated data using direct observation and 
measurements in the fields. The first phase was undertaken in February 
1999 at an early stage of crop growth and development. It involved: an 
interview with the farmer; selection of the sampling site in the field; soil 
samples; and crop measurements including millet hill configuration and 
population density counts. The second stage, which took place around 
harvest time in April, comprised another brief interview with the farmer and 
field measurements including population density counts, crop sampling and 
yield (biomass and grain if ready) weights. GPSs were used in order to 
record the locations of each sample site. 
3.7.1 Sampling 
Eight villages across all four of the north central regions were selected, 
including the original four villages of Katope, Oshaala, Eefa and Ekolola. The 
villages were selected by location to give broad coverage of the different 
agroecosystems present in these regions. Another important criterion was 
the availability of sampling frames that, in this case, were supplied by the 
extension service. The implication of there is a potential bias towards 
households receiving support from the extension services. It is not possible 
to know what percentage of the village was on the Jist or if there were any 
households missing. The final structure of the sample is presented in Table 
Within each village ten farms were randomly selected. At each farm, one 
farmer responsible for the crop was interviewed, while one field site was 
randomly selected. The field site sampled was an area of 10 square meters 
within which all plant hills, plants and stems were counted and/or measured. 
The first sampling stage involved only non-destructive measurements while 
the second stage required non-destructive and destructive measurement. 
The site was clearly marked during the first visit so that it could easily be 
identified in the second. 
Table 3.3: Villages, individuals, fields and grain samples 
Fields Fields Farmers interviewed 
Village Grain 
first visit second visit Males Females 
Okongo 10 9 0 10 5 
Eefa 10 7 8 2 7 
Okahao 10 10 5 5 10 
Ogongo 12 12 6 6 11 
Onkani 10 10 6 4 10 
Onankali 10 10 4 6 9 
Ekolola 11 11 7 4 6 
OshaaJa 10 10 4 6 10 
Total 83 78 40 43 68 
3.8 Household and field study 
The detailed household and field study was conducted throughout two 
cropping seasons that ran until June 2000 in Oshaala. In Katope some data 
were collected during the second season but the collection was supervised 
from a distance and in the end the data were of little value. The main 
objective of the household study was to gather more detailed information 
about household assets and how these determined crop farming practices 
and were used for household food production. The main objective of the field 
study was to gather quantitative data about crop management practices, 
tracing the crop through growth stages to harvest and to measure the yields 
generated. 
3.8.1 Sampling 
Initially between four and five case study households were selected per 
village. All the household heads were consulted about their willingness to 
participate in the whole process prior to any case study interviews. The 
selected households represented the main wealth groups of wealthy, medium 
wealthy and poor as well as both female and male headed households. 
Additional households with absent male heads and comprising only women 
were selected. Data collection in the second year was more systematic, until 
Katope was cut off due to military action. At this point, some elements of 
Katope case studies continued although confidence in the data diminished. 
On the other hand, work intensified in the case study households of Oshaala, 
especially with the addition of the local land unit study and confidence in 
these data increased. 
At the beginning of the season, each household was given a diary and asked 
to record all labour activities in the field. This was possible as all households 
had a member who could read and write although in some cases this was a 
child. They recorded their activities in their local language and this was 
translated at each visit. Visits began at a frequency of once a month but 
these were intensified in Oshaala after Katope became inaccessible. 
Each household was also interviewed about different aspects of their 
decision-making and farming practice. For example, early in the season they 
were asked about the timing, order and pattern of ploughing and planting. 
Specifically, who made these decisions and why. Also, how and why these 
decisions might alter from year to year. Details of activities were explored to 
achieve some clarity about exactly what happened, who and why particular 
members did particular activities. By way of verification, much of this was 
repeated again after the LLUs and their different associated management 
practices had been identified. The households were interviewed about other 
aspects of their livelihoods and lifestyles including other activities such as 
fishing, basket-making, pottery, dressmaking, carpentry, roofing, and fencing. 
Likewise they were asked about absent household members, remittances 
and other off-farm income. 
Also at the beginning of the season, each field was measured and mapped to 
include important features such as trees, termite mounds, standing water, an 
apparent change in soil type. These maps were compiled over the season to 
identify where and when particular crops were planted, transplanted or 
replanted. Sample sites of 10m2 were marked in the fields and notes were 
made about the crop mixtures and population hill counts. At the end of the 
season, final hill counts and yield measurement were made at the sample 
sites. After the LLU patches had been identified within the case study fields, 
new sites were randomly selected within each land unit and pearl millet 
samples collected. Composite soil samples were also taken from these land 
unit patches. In the final analysis, these last samples were the only ones that 
were relevant to the study. 
3.9 Local Land Units 
The concluding part of the field research was the study of local knowledge 
and management practice relating to different land units. This took place 
unexpectedly in Oshaala village only in the final months of research, from 
January to June 2000. This was an exciting and busy period as much had to 
be done in a very short period of time. It became clear that the local 
classification system of land units could be used to explain the role of 
legumes in this farming system but the full implications of this was only 
realised during analysis. 
3.9.1 Identification 
The method for distinguishing the LLUs was developed as the research 
progressed. Initial background work was done prior to the field visits using 
satellite photographs to identify broadly different land areas. Aerial 
photographs matched for scale and position were superimposed on satellite 
images for capturing roads, other distinct landmarks and farm boundaries. 
The next stage was to gather a group of knowledgeable farmers, referred to 
as 'expert' farmers, to locate different land units in the village. This entailed 
driving and walking around the village with this group, discussing the land 
and taking GPS readings of each category as the farmers distinguished 
them. They identified vegetative, crop, soil and site characteristics of 
respective land units. GPS readings of some field boundaries were also 
taken at this time for orientation and verification of other field boundary data. 
Identification of the individuals making up this group of farmers is covered in 
3.9.2. 
After this first field visit, a database of GPS readings of farmers' field 
boundaries9 were combined with the field readings and the original 
photographs, to produce a map of the LLUs across the village. This map was 
printed in large format and taken back to the village for subsequent group 
discussions and verification. A preliminary task was to verify the location of 
basic land units in the village and their specific characteristics. With this 
done, the group was asked to discuss the use and management of each unit. 
There were three group discussions held over a period of about a month and 
the information generated was tested with other individual farmers. This 
enabled assessment of knowledge and management practices common 
among the villagers and less well known or controversial. Later, at harvest 
time, the soils and crops of different LLUs were sampled across a range of 
fields including those of case study households. The three basic techniques 
of i) personal communication with farmers, ii) soil sampling and iii) crop 
sampling, are described in more detail below. 
9 GPS readings of the boundaries of farmers' fields were obtained from the Directorate for 
Rural Water Supply fol/owing a survey done by them in 1999 prior to the provision of new 
boreholes in the area. This data have been spot checked and are believed to be reliable. 
3.9.2 Farmers 
The group of 'expert' farmers comprised six male elders. At first, case study 
farmers and a random selection of villagers were asked who should be 
interviewed about the land in the village. Various elders and headmen were 
suggested but it was decided to invite an equal number of men and women 
across the wealth categories, to join a discussion group. All the women 
declined the invitation saying that they did not know as much about land as 
the older men. When encouraged to do so, some women agreed to discuss 
the results of the mapping exercise and to talk about specific management of 
the land units in their field. 
The final expert group was self-selected according to their knowledge and 
willingness to participate. It was made up of six elders including several of 
the sub-headmen and among them, was the first pioneer settler. After the 
first visit, spectators accompanied the original six so that the size of the 
meetings grew and this was welcomed. On each occasion the group was 
asked to reach a consensus and to be as specific as possible about their 
knowledge, use and management of each LLU. All information generated 
during the meetings was recorded and written up. It was then checked and 
verified by the same group at the next visit. As well as the group verification, 
other farmers (especially case study farmers) were consulted informally, on 
an individual basis, to ascertain some idea of the scope and nature of LLU 
knowledge in the village. 
3.9.3 Soils 
Six sites were sampled for each LLU except for the olumas where it was only 
possible to sample two sites. Each sample represented a composite sample 
of three individual samples taken from the top 25cm of soil. A total of 42 
composite samples were collected and these were then dried and analysed 
at a soil laboratory in South Africa. Standard methods (Page, 1982)were 
used in laboratory analyses for physical characteristics, pH, CECs, organic 
matter content, total N, total and exchangeable P, K, calcium, magnesium 
and sodium. 
3.9.4 Crops 
A purposeful sample of sites, in farmers' fields across the village, was taken 
to ascertain crop productivity of different LLUs. Case study fields were 
included in this sample. Each sample comprised all the millet plants growing 
within a 10m2 area, randomly selected in LLU patches of farmers' fields. 
Fresh weights were taken in the field. Samples were then bagged, oven dried 
(2 days at 60C) and threshed before re-weighing at Mahanene Research 
Station. Samples were taken over a week during harvest time. The fields had 
been planted at different times and although they were all about ready for 
harvesting, there was some variation in crop maturity that could not be 
quantified in the data. 
3.10 Secondary data 
In addition to the dedicated field data, secondary data have been used to fill 
gaps, to support eXisting primary data and sometimes are used for 
comparison. Farm household data col/ected by the Department of Rural 
Water Affairs (RWA) in the MAWRD were used in the ArcView 
(Environmental Systems Research Institute, Inc.) spatial analysis and to 
support the wealth/diversity analysis. These data were col/ected as part of an 
extensive survey of the Oshaala area to support plans to supply water to 
these viI/ages. Other secondary sources range from national statistics to 
regionally based government sponsored research and that of non-
governmental organisations, NGOs. Where appropriate, PSP analyses and 
data are used to supplement information relevant to this thesis but beyond its 
scope for fieldwork. This mostly involves data generated in farmers' trials, 
through survey work on N fixation and work on modelling N flows in the 
system. Where this occurs, it is clearly referenced as such. 
3.11 Analysis 
For mapping and analysis of LLU areas establishing household field sizes 
and for determining the spatial distribution of the second survey of millet 
cultivation, ArcView was used. All other data analyses were done using 
SPSS (SPSS Inc.) and Excel (Microsoft Corporation) software packages. 
Excel was used for analysing most of the agronomic data while SPSS was 
used for survey data. Agronomic results in Excel were matched with 
households and added to survey data in SPSS to allow an integration of 
quantitative and qualitative datasets. Spatial data from ArcView were 
transferred to Excel to apply a "diversity index" and then these were 
integrated with survey and wealth ranking data in SPSS to achieve the full 
analyses reported in chapter seven. 
The analysis of wealth and household land diversity was quite complex, 
requiring several distinct stages. The first stage was a spatial analysis, using 
the Geophysics extension in ArcView, to identify the number of different LLUs 
within each household farm boundary and their relative surface areas. These 
data were then transferred into Excel, to apply a diversity index, in order to 
express the proportional contributions of LLUs to each farm as a single value. 
The formula used for generating the index is one originally proposed by 
Chang (1997, in Ellis 2000). The index values calculated for each household 
used the entire range of LLUs contained within the farm boundaries, so that 
the maximum value is equal to the number of different LLUs on the farm. The 
formula for calculating the index is relatively simple: 
Sum of squares of proportional contributions to total field size 
The index generated was then transferred to the SPSS database for the final 
analyses. This stage required a standardisation of wealth data to facilitate 
inter-village analyses. This standardisation was possible because ranking 
criteria were so similar (Section 7.2.1). It was achieved with a re-ranking of 
data entailing a simplification to three categories to ensure that categories 
were not misrepresented. Once this activity was complete, means were 
calculated for each village and income group. 
Much of the other statistical analysis used throughout this thesis is relatively 
simple drawing on the use of sample ranges, means, medians and modes. 
Other frequently used routines are the analysiS of variance, (ANOVA) and the 
least significant differences between means, (LSDs). One and two tailed 
tests have been used and tests have been mostly conducted at p=O.05. 
Where strong significant differences appear they have been tested again at 
p=O.01 but this is specified where it occurs. Data tables in the text identify 
significant differences with different letters. Additionally there is some use of 
correlation and regression where appropriate. 
A final word is required on the analysis used in chapter five and applied 
throughout the thesis. The Sustainable Livelihoods Framework (OfIO 2001) 
discussed in chapter two was used mainly for structuring the analysis. It was 
not initially included in the design of methodology and so data were not 
collected specifically to serve this analysis. However. during the writing up 
period. it became clear that the framework could be applied to data in order 
to make comparisons between the village sites and to aid thinking about 
vulnerability, risk and opportunity, hence its inclusion. 
4 The context: biophysical factors 
4.1 Introduction 
Local circumstances can be diverse and complex and often differ widely from 
global generalisations claiming an African 'crisis' (Mortimore, 1998). 
Recognising the impact of this gulf on policies for soil fertility management in 
the drive for sustainable development in rural areas, it is suggested that 
careful attention be given to the spatial and temporal biophysical, socio-
economic and institutional dimensions of local contexts (Scoones and 
Toulmin, 1999). To understand the role of legumes in Namibian farming 
systems it is important, first of all, to understand the local context in which 
farmers operate. 
This chapter is about Namibia. In particular, it is about the natural 
environment of northern Namibia. Relevant secondary data and some 
primary data are used to set the biophysical scene for the research that 
follows. The information covers the seasonal aspects of climate; temperature, 
radiation, rainfall and evapotranspiration. Other locally important aspects of 
water such as rainfall run-off, subterranean rivers, perched water and the 
oshana system are also investigated. Soils are explored and analysed from 
several different perspectives, but the emphasis is on soils for the purpose of 
crop agriculture and particularly for the pearl millet based farming systems 
found in the communal areas. The image is one of a diverse, complex and 
unpredictable environment. During the three seasons of field research the 
landscape appeared as a barren parched and degraded desert and as a 
vigorous green and watery world. These extremes, the soil water regime and 
the elastiCity displayed by the landscape are all important when it comes to 
understanding how farmers manage this environment. 
4.2 The biophysical environment 
4.2.1 Temperature and daylength 
Average temperature regimes, derived from long term data (Coetzee, 2000), 
are very similar between Kavango and the NCRs, rising from about 16C/17 
C in June and July, to about 26 C in October, November and December 
(Figure 2). The long term mean annual temperature is 0.5 C higher in NCR 
than Kavango. Maximum daily temperatures are known to have risen as high 
as 40 C from October to February and occasionally night temperatures drop 
below 0 C between May and August. It is common for daily temperatures to 
reach 30 C in the summer and night temperatures to drop below 10 C in the 
winter. Daily highs and lows are considerably different from monthly means 
given by the long term data and it is these daily temperatures that are most 
important for the growth and development of field crops. The high daily 
temperatures achieved during the northern Namibian crop season can 
support C4 pathway crops such as millet, sorghum and maize as well as heat 
tolerant C3 crops such as cowpeas, bambara ground nuts and peanuts. Many 
of the cucurbits, especially the melons, also perform we If in these 
temperatures. Daylength varies from about 11 hours in June and July, to 
about 13 hours in November and December. Daylength is only an issue for 
photoperiod sensitive crops and this is confined to 'new' crops, those that are 
not adapted to the local environment or when irrigated crops are grown out of 
season. 
4.2.2 Rainfall 
Standard agricultural text books state the minimum annual rainfall required 
for cropping is 400mm. The long-term averages show that large areas of 
northern Namibia receive less than this (Table 4.1). Yet farmers all across 
this northern region sow and harvest something most years. Closer 
inspection reveals the standard deviation for each site is large and annual 
rainfall figures range between outright drought, adequate and sometimes 
excessive rainfall. Drought is normal in Namibia (Keyler 1995) but rarely is 
too much rainfall discussed, despite it also being a regular occurrence. 
Looking more closely at data for individual sites (Figure 3) shows inconsistent 
rainfall patterns. Long term data from Ombalantu, the small town closest to 
the research sites of Oshaala and Mahanene, suggest that rainfall is 
diminishing over time and is becoming insufficient for cropping. In 
Ondangwa, a site some 150km further east and close to the research site of 
Eefa, the rainfall appears to be more stable and in the adequate range for 
growing crops. The long term data for Opuwo, situated 1S0-200km west of 
Ombalantu, show relatively stable albeit much lower, mean annual rainfall. It 
would be unwise therefore to assume from these data, as some do, that 
rainfall is decreasing in the west. 
Table 4.1: Long term rainfall from selected sites across northern Namibia 10 
Min Max No. of 
Period of Mean annual Standard 
annual annual years that 
records rainfall (mm) deviation 
rainfall rainfall data exist 
Opuwo 1940-96 312 62 837 45 144 
Ombalantu 1961-96 339 41 737 36 188 
Ogongo 1974-96 384 168 593 22 127 
Oshakati 1967-93 370 90 704 17 172 
Ondangwa 1961-90 442 125 909 30 172 
Kavango 1937-75 601 38 
(compi/ed from Totemeyer et al., 1997; Coetzee, 2001) 
Rainfall data collected over two years at the research sites show how erratic 
rainfall can be both temporally and spatially (see Figures 4-9). In Oshaala, 
the sites of the two rain gauges were within 1 km of each other and in Katope 
all 3 measurements were taken within about Skm of each other and yet the 
total annual rainfall varies by almost 1 OOmm 11. Likewise the rain gauges at 
Mahanene and Oshaala were within 10km of each other (Figure 6). Temporal 
variability is displayed with the decadal dataset from Mahanene and also at 
Katope, showing how the rain can differ dramatically from one year to the 
next at one site (Figure 7 & 8). Allowing for some error contained within the 
data due to erratic recording times and other inaccuracies in farmers records, 
these results are consistent with well-established variation found at other 
semi-arid sites (Mortimore, 1998). 
10 Sites are organised top to bottom running from the west of north central region eastwards 
to Kavango. 
11 Elsewhere the difference of 100mm may not seem very much but in this context it 
represents between about 15 and 25% of the total annual rainfall. 
Notwithstanding the unpredictable nature of rainfall, farmers continue to plant 
each year providing that there is enough rainfall for germination. Farmers 
estimate the sufficiency of the first rains by touch, according to the depth of 
water penetration into the soil. Wetting needs to exceed the depth of an adult 
hand (about 15-20cm) and this is usually estimated in northern Namibia to be 
between 20-40mm of rain. The depth of penetration also depends on the 
physical aspects of soil. Depth of soil wetting, soil and air temperatures and 
wind determine how long the soil retains moisture and this in turn determines 
what can be planted. Millet seed germinates fast, taking 2-7 days whereas 
legumes take longer, from 4-9 days to emerge. Timing of the first planting 
can therefore be critical. 
The long-term data show that since 1927 the first rains have not started 
before September and on the occasions when they did start in September, 
the rain was minimal and insufficient for germination and establishment. 
When it rains in September it is known locally as a "false start" and few will 
plant, irrespective of the quantity of rain received. The monthly averages 
taken from long-term data over 20 northern sites show that most rain falls 
during the months of January to March, when more than 50mm can be 
expected (Figure 9). Once again, the long-term data mask the common or 
more 'normal' story that the rains do not start until December or January. 
They also mask the usual occurrence of a mid season drought that can last 
for between 4-6 weeks after the first rains as can be seen in the local 
datasets collected for this research. Rains that start late often limit the 
growing season and prohibit longer season crops from maturing for harvest. 
Mid-season dry periods can kill plants that are not well established and 
prompt the onset of premature flowering before a plant has sufficient 
vegetative growth to ensure its ability to produce grain worth harvesting. 
Figure 2: Temperatures for Rundu and Ondangwa, northern Namibia 
Rundu (1937-1975) 
- - - - - - -T rrax - - - - t nin ---t rrean 
40 r-------------------------------------~ 
Q) ... 
ia 20 ... 
-'" .. ... 
" ~ ,"" 
''\ , 
O LI------------------------------------~ 
J F M A M J J A SON 0 
Months 
Charts produced from tabulated data in Coetzee 2001 
Ondangwa (1961-1990) 
- - - - - - -Trrax - - - -t nin ---t rrean 
40 r---------------------------------------~ 
ia 20 ... 
------..." 
" ' ,-- ./ 
,.. , , 
O~~---------r_--~---r_~---~ 
J F MA M J J A SO NO 
Months 
--- -
1955-64 
1957-66 
1959-68 
1961-70 
-I 1963-72 
1965-74 
D> 1967-76 ., 
CD 1969-78 ., 
Q. 1971-80 
1973-82 
1975-84 
1977-86 
1979-88 
1981-90 
rainfall (mm) 
'" (,.oJ ",. 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 
~--l[-
1961-70 
1963-72 
1965-74 
c: 1967-76 
:s 1969-78 
A '< CD 
c: D> 
:::s 1971-80 
"0 CD II) 
:::s ., 
CD o 1973-82 
1975-84 
1977-86 
1979-88 
1981-90 
rainfall (mm) 
'" (,.oJ "'" a a a a a a a a 
I I I 
I I I I 
I I I 
I I I 
I I I 
I , I 
I I I I 
I I I 
I I I 
I I I I 
'" '" a a a a 
1961 -70 
1963-72 
1965-74 
:::s 1967-76 c.. 
I :::s 1969-78 
CQ -I 
I ~ CD 1971-80 :s 
0 CD 1973-82 III 
I "0 1975-84 I CD 
IU ... 
I :::s o 1977-86 
I Q. 
1979-88 
i 1981-90 
1983-92 
1985-94 
1987-96 
rainfall (mm) 
'" "" 
",. (Jl 
'" a a C> a a a 
0 0 0 0 0 0 
= = --
:::s .. 
c: ., 
(Q -(I) 
(I) ., 
0' ., 
CD ., 
Figure 4: Rainfall at different farms in Oshaala 99/00 
Rainfall at Antonio's E 
80 800 E 
E 70 700:-
E 60 600 C 
= 50 500 . ~ 
.~ 40 400 > 
'- 30 300 ro 
>- ::::J 
m 20 200 E 
U ::::J 
10 100 U 
U  ID o Z 0 
c.o'-'->-
ro ID ro Cl. ro 
Jl.L~G::~ 
Rainfall at Shivute's 
80 800 E 
E 70 I t 700 g .s 60 600 ~ 
ro 50 500 . ~ - '-
. ~ 40 ro 
;:, 30 
ro 20 
400 ID 
300 .~ 
:::::l 
200 E 
100 G 
o I i 111111 II  I' I J ~ II I I 0 
UOIDroID 
oZoJl.L 
'- '- >-
lU Cl. lU 
~G::~ 
From farmers own data. These two farms are located within 1 km of each other in Oshaala 
Figure 5: Rainfall at different farms in Katope 99/00 
Rainfall at Reino's farm 
80 800 
-70 mo-
E 60 600 C 
'--' 50 500 .~ 
ro Q)-
E 40 400 .~ ~ 
~ 30 300 ro ~ 
= 20 200 E ro ~ 
"0 10 100 0 
o 0 Q) 
o Z 0 
C.oL-L-~ 
ro Q) ro a. ro 
-, IL :2: -< ~ 
~ Rainfall at Gombo's farm 
I 80 ~ 800 
-70 700 -E ro 
E 60  600 C 
~ 50 500 .~ 
:g 40 400 .~ ~ 
~ 30 300 ]1 ~ 
= 20 200 E co ~ 
"U 10 100 0 
o Z 0 
C .0 L.. L.. ~ 
ro Q) ro CL co 
-'u.~-<~ 
I Rainfall at Manfred's farm 
80 , , 800 
E .s 60 
.~ 40 
L.. 30 
ro 20 
500 ro 
400 ~ E 
300~ .s 
100 ~ 
"">OC.oL..L..~ 
o OQ)ro Q)roCLro 
OZO-'LL~-<~ 
From farmers own data. Farms were located within a 5km radius of each other. Gombo's and Manfred's farms being closest to 
each other, about 1 km apart, in the forest. Reino was situated in the centre of Katope. 
Figure 6: Rainfall at Oshaala and Mahanene Research Station 99/00 
Mean monthly rainfall at Oshaala 
.e= l 
r= I v-- .- f-
u 0 (]) (U 
o Z 0 --"J 
Month 
L L >-
(U a. (U 
:2 <:( :2 
Mean monthly rainfall at Mahanene 
200,"'" ---
150 ' / 
Month 
Mean data for Oshaala are from farmers' measurements and for Mahanene are from researchers measurements on station . 
The two locations are within 10km 'as the crow fl ies'. 
Figure 7: Temporal differences in monthly rainfall at Katope 
Monthly rainfall at Katope 98/99 
Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May 
Month 
Monthly rainfall at Katope 99/00 
E 150 -
a LJ 0 c:::# / 
Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May 
Month 
Data are from farmers own measurements over two seasons. The location for 1998/99 was at Reina's farm in central Katope and 
in 1999/2000 data represents means from three farms (see figure 5) 
Figure 8: Rainfall at Mahanene Research Station showing temporal variability 
Rainfall 1998199 Rainfall 1999/00 
100 600 100 
E 80 500 ro E 80 
60 ro 60 ro 
300 . ~ 
. ~ ro 40 +-' 40 
200 ~ 
>, >, 
ro 20 100 ~ 
Oro 20 
0 0 0 
0 0 0 
+-'>OC..oL..L..>, +-'>0 c..oL..L..>, 
0 0<1> ro Q) co Cl..ro OOQ)roQ)roCl.. ro 
Date Date 
Data are from researchers measurements on the station. 
I I Rainfall 1988/99 
~~ hififtITTIjOOD -
+-' ro 100 200 ~ L.. 
100 ~ CJ) ..- M U"l r-- CJ) 
00 C> N ~ <C 00 
00 0> 0> 0> 0> CJ) 
CJ) 0> 0> 0> 0> 0> 
..- ..- ..- ..- ..-
I I Year 
Figure 9: Mean monthly rainfall from long term data 
Rainfall from 20 northern Namibia sites since 1927 
120 ~ 
- 60 l1li: c- 1-
I r- t- I-.-
r- l- t- l-I 
E-- E-- > U Z co :r: 0.. U 0 UJ  UJ u UJ 0 ;z: 0 ..., L.L. ~ C/) 
Month 
-----
Data courtesy of the Northern Namibian Rural Development Project 
IIIIIIII 
4lI-~ ~ ~ 
...l >- UJ >- 0 
~  z ...l ::> 
~ ::> ::>  0.. -, -,  
Most of the farmers (77%) interviewed during the farming systems survey 
cited rainfall as being a problem while 60% said it was their most important 
problem. The farmers' view is also mirrored by agricultural researchers' in 
their annual reports of trial results (MAWRD 1997-2000). Extension workers 
cite it as being the main reason for the failure of their trials and other work 
conducted or overseen by them. It is common to hear "that the harvest is not 
good because of the rain" or "that there are no results because of the rain" or 
that "the rains have been bad this year". In spite of farmers and others 
regularly complaining about the rain, rarely is the specific problem identified, 
distinguished or explained and often, it is not obvious what is the real 
problem. 
The farming systems survey established that rainfall is perceived as being a 
problem by most farmers but it failed to determine what farmers meant by the 
problem. When asked about the long-term productivity of their fields, 12% of 
the sample insisted that rainfall determines this productivity and not the soil. 
Many of these comments arose from the farmers of Oshaala who possibly 
have a more developed sense of risk associated with their particular context. 
This village has the lowest precipitation of all those surveyed and it is also in 
the path of oshana waters, with all the costs, benefits and extreme 
differentiation that that brings (see section 4.2.4). 
Following the initial survey, group discussions were held in all the research 
villages to identify the nature of specific rainfall related problems. Collectively, 
the problems were found to be wide ranging. Individually, some farmers 
suffered more from a particular problem than others and this was found to be 
related to location and is discussed in more depth in chapters six and seven. 
The rainfall problems include the following: 
 insufficient rainfall causing drought, 
 mid season dry periods prompting premature flowering, 
 dry periods at critical growth stages such as after germination, 
 heavy rainfall causing run-off of soil and seed, lodging, water 
logging, rotting and premature germination, 
 rains starting too late and limiting the growing period, 
 rains starting too early before farmers are prepared, 
 rains finishing too late and causing lodging and germination of the 
harvest, 
 rains finishing too early so there is insufficient water for grain filling 
 too much rain causing flooding, run-off and salinity. 
4.2.3 Evapotranspiration 
Evaporation rates are determined by a combination of factors: temperature, 
humidity, wind and vegetation cover (Figure 10). The strongest winds are 
from August to November and come from the East and the North-East. This 
period also has high temperatures and heralds rising evaporation. Highest 
evapotranspiration rates are between September and January. Long term 
averages suggest that reference crop evapotranspiration is over 100mm 
higher in the NCRs and that evaporation reaches its annual peak several 
months earlier than in Kavango (Coetzee, 2001). Since average annual 
rainfall varies from about 300-600mm per year across the regions, between 
three and seven times more water evaporates than falls. It is this difference 
between low rainfall and high evaporation rates that produces the regions' 
arid environment and the western regions are considered more arid than 
Kavango (Coetzee, 2001). Locally, these same western regions are 
considered to be superior for crop production and since this cannot be 
attributed to annual rainfall it may instead be partly attributed to the regions 
unique oshana system, which is covered in the next section. 
Figure 10: Evapotranspiration, rainfall and wind speed 
Evaporation 
300 r I " - .. Rainfall Wind speed I 08 
Q) ... -Q) 
~ 100 
Jul Aug Sap Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun 
Source: Mendelsohn et at. (2000) 
~ .., 
4.2.4 Runoff and the oshana system 
Recently, much has been written about the oshana system (Mendelssohn et 
al 2000) but what is important here is the relevance to agriculture and 
particularly to cropping. The oshana system in the Cuvelai basin is a system 
of ephemeral rivers and lakes important to the sustenance of the crops grown 
there. The oshanas (lakes) themselves are formed mainly from runoff water 
from the rains in Angola and this is added to by local rainfall. Over the long 
term, the movement of this body of water, both horizontally and vertically, has 
shaped the landscape in ways that may not be immediately apparent. Water 
flows and collects in similar ways and similar places from year to year but 
differs according to the quantity of water in motion. Some years the oshanas 
are wider and deeper than other years, some years they are absent or short 
lived and others they endure for many months. 
Important factors that impact on cropping are the deposition of fertility that 
comes with the water as well as the removal of fertility as it flows through. 
This varies according to the topography of the land, the physical 
characteristics of the soil and hence, the flow and retention of water. The 
overall result is a highly differentiated undulating landscape, even though it 
may appear as relatively flat and uniform. It is these small changes in 
topography with the concomitant water 1 soil relationship that makes all the 
difference between a good place to crop and a poor one. There may also be 
processes yet little understood such as vertical and below ground horizontal 
flow of water related to the numerous underlying hardpans. 
4.2.5 Subterranean rivers, hardpans and perched water 
There are many hardpans of variable permeability and depth that capture 
and retain water as it percolates through the soil and this can be accessed by 
crop and tree roots. As discovered during the course of this research and 
covered in detail in chapter six, farmers' local knowledge and experience 
about where water is retained and the processes involved can make a 
considerable difference to the success or failure of a crop. Across northern 
Namibia there is evidence of these same processes occurring according to 
the topography of the land, the presence or absence of hardpans and the 
flow or retention of rain and run-off water. The main difference in the Cuvelai 
Basin is the high degree of land differentiation as a result of the sheer 
quantity of water moving across and through the landscape regularly and 
over a long period of time. In the west, the underground river system known 
locally as omurambas, feeds into the Okavango Delta. Omuramba is thought 
to be an Herero 12 word meaning 'vague river bed' and is used to identify 
drainage lines that rarely, if ever flow above the ground but which often give 
rise to water-holes along their course. 
There is much evidence in Namibia of farmers achieving a harvest with 
considerably less than the conventional norm of 400mm of rainfall. The 
clearest example of this is the Himba 13 people who crop maize in the western 
deserts. Table 4.1. shows the long term mean precipitation for Opuwo (the 
largest Himba town) to be 312mm and the desert to the west, where maize is 
grown, is often drier (see Figure 11). The Himba grow their indigenous multi-
coloured maize over omurambas in the desert. They know of sites (possibly 
near cattle watering points) where this water is closer to the soil surface. It 
seems that once a desert maize crop has germinated and established 
sufficient root systems from rain water supplies, the below surface water 
becomes accessible to the crop sustaining it through dry periods and 
enabling it to reach maturity and to produce grain. 
4.2.6 Soils 
Historical to current context 
little formal soils data for the northern regions existed prior to independence. 
Surveys done are at a coarse scale and inconsistent in format. Since 1993 
the MAWRD has been engaged with the 'National Agro-Ecological Zoning 
(AEZ) Programme' to create inventories, computerise and analyse the 
12 Herero are one of the ethnic groups in Namibia 
13 Himba are an ethnic group 
Figure 11: Namibia vegetation and rainfall distribution 
Main Vegetation Types 
" .  \ . . , 
 . , 
  \ . . 
 0, ' 
D Desert 
Savanah 
Woodland 
Source: Totemeyer, Tonch i and du Pisani (1997) 
Distribution of Annual Rainfall 
"   \ . . 
  , 
""0 .'~ 
" '"-0 
D < 50mm 
D 50 - 100 mm 
100 -200 mm 
200 - 300 mm 
300 - 400 mm 
400 - 500 mm 
500 - 600 mm 
600 -700 mm 
> 700 mm 
Figure 12: Survey areas and scales for the National Soil Survey 
Areas to be 
surveyed at three 
different scales 
 1:100000 scale 
D 1:250000 scale 
D 1: 1 million scale 
Source: National Soil Survey (Coetzee 2000). Main objectives of the survey to soil map the 
whole country at 1: 1 million scale, map the Kavango River terrace and the densely 
populated North Central area at 1:100,000 scale and map the three best growing period 
zones in the northeast at 1 :250,000 scale 
natural resources of the country (Coetzee, 2000). The programme 
incorporates several projects including a National Soil Survey (Figure 12) and 
aims to link all the databases with GIS to produce the National Agricultural 
Resources Information System (NARIS). Preliminary Agro-Ecological Zoning 
is based on the 1:5 million scale FAO-UNESCO Soil Map of Africa (FAO, 
1973) and with low resolution, soils could not be used as a defining feature of 
the zoning. Main defining features are growing period zones, land systems 
and geology. Since aggregated data can mask important variation, the 
method used smooth out differences, losing applicability at the local level. 
Planned outputs of NARIS include user-friendly thematic maps for the 
farming community for information on effective rooting depth, texture classes, 
fertility status, parent material, present land use, topography and landform 
(Coetzee, 2000). The National Soil Survey has been completed and much 
work has been done with GIS to link the databases for NARIS. It is uncertain 
whether the soil data are sufficient to supply the maps intended for the 
farming communities (Coetzee, 2001). This issue about the scale at which 
data are generated and who data are being generated for is brought sharply 
into focus. It remains to be seen whether the scale of the soil survey, the 
aggregation of other climatic data and the lack of sensitivity to local 
conditions allow it to be as useful for farmers as expected. 
Other studies, conducted by NGOs and other departments and divisions of 
MAWRD at the same time as the National Agro-Ecological Zoning 
Programme, were based on primary data produced with participatory 
methodologies. They include a study on local soil fertility (Rigourd and 
Sappe, 1999), a study of indigenous soil classification (Shitundeni and 
Marsh, 1999), a study of indigenous land units (Dayot and Verlinden, 1999; 
Verlinden and Dayot, 2000) and a research project dedicated to soil fertility 
issues (McDonagh and Hillyer, 2000). The research for this thesis was in the 
same vein and to the best of my knowledge, the first to focus on farmers' soil 
and crop management practices associated with distinct local land units. A 
benefit of participatory studies is responsiveness to local people and 
environments. The drawbacks include inconsistency of approach and 
method, small sample sizes, compromised accuracy and less confidence in 
statistical analyses. As a result, extrapolation and cross comparisons must 
be done with care. This study deploys conventional quantitative methods with 
more qualitative people-centred research to compare, contrast and where 
possible, to combine datasets to analyse farmers' choices, actions and 
outcomes. 
Classification 
The National Soil Survey (Figure 12) classifies soils according to several 
conventional systems including the common and widespread FAO system. 
This has the benefit of being compatible with wider (macro-scale) databases, 
for being universally comparable and useful for policy makers. However, as 
discussed above, it may not be as useful as originally intended for farmers 
(Coetzee, 2000). The survey conducted at the 1 :100000 scale identified nine 
classes of soils ranging from good agricultural to very poor agricultural soils 
and within these classes there are variations. 
In a study of NCR nine different types of soils including several different 
clayey and loamy soils are identified (Mendelsohn et a/., 2000). They say 
these broad soil categories differ in their potential for crop production 
according to depth, nutrient content, water-holding capacity, salinity and 
other chemical aspects such as acidity and alkalinity. These soil categories 
and their distribution were identified according to vegetation units 
distinguished by an interpretation of Thematic Mapper Landsat images as 
well as fieldwork done in 1997 (Mendelsohn et a/ 2000). Focus group 
discussions, individual interviews with farmers and a tree-soil survey 
identified eight common soil types (Shitundeni and Marsh, 1999). This study 
investigated the indigenous soil classification system, the associations 
between these soil classifications and trees, and the relevance of these for 
forestry extension work. Five different soil types were identified (Rigourd and 
Sappe, 1999) and these were matched with farmers' local names and 
classified according to the FAO taxonomy (FAO-UNESCO, 1974). For each 
of their soil types, farmers had several local names while only two of the 
types could be classified according to the FAO system. The typology 
described by Mendelsohn et al (2000) appears to incorporate elements of 
both these studies but there is no mention of local names, nor do they 
attempt to classify according to any formal taxonomic system. This PhD 
study identified eight distinct soil types classified by the local system and 
analysed these using conventional soil sampling and laboratory techniques 
(Appendix III). What becomes clear is that farmers' classification system is 
utilitarian and operates at a far finer scale than the more formal systems. 
Spatial variability and diversity 
Spatial variability is common to all the various descriptions and analyses of 
the soils in the region. The survey of soils and N fixation (McDonagh and 
Hillyer, 1999) and the pearl millet survey (Hillyer and McDonagh, 1999c) 
conducted across ten villages deployed conventional sampling methods and 
laboratory analysis of soils as described in chapter three. The range of pH 
shows considerable variability across the region although the means are 
fairly consistent between pH 6.5 - 7.5, a healthy status for cropping (Tables 
4.3 & 4.4). Millet production levels were also established for the soils 
sampled in the second survey and these were found to be significantly 
different between the villages (Hillyer and McDonagh, 1999c). 
Moller (Moller, 1997) says some soils have relatively high production 
potential but they are distributed in "small, highly scattered patches". 
Mendelsohn et al (2000) explains that the erosive effects of water and wind 
have reworked the landscape so that anyone area now consists of a "mosaic 
of different kinds of soils". Rigourd and Sappe (1998) recognised that within a 
farm boundary soils are "highly heterogeneous". Spatial variability was 
identified early on in this PhD study and farmers were asked, during the 
farming systems survey, how many different soils they had in their fields. The 
large majority, across all villages, reported access to two different soil types 
that were either sandy or clayey soils. The farming systems methodology and 
limited local terminology didn't facilitate a finer analysis at that stage. 
Whereas an local soil classification study done about the same time in the 
NCR, found an average of between two and five different soil types on farms 
and up to seven soil types in the ash ana settlements (Shitundeni and Marsh 
1999). Their results are consistent with results discussed in chapter six 
where up to seven different land units were identified on a single farm. 
Table 4.3 Summary of analysis of soil samples collected in April 1998. 
Village/station pH Ecw OM Olsen P Texture' Sand Silt Clay 
(water) (J,ls/cm) (%) (ppm) (%) (%) (%) 
Shikoro 7.03 52 0.40 3.4 s 94 3 4 
Mbore 7.13 30 0.45 0.8 s 94 3 3 
Mayana 7.54 31 0.33 2.1 s 92 2 6 
Katope 5.94 44 0.85 1.7 Is 82 1 6 
Mashare Station 7.56 49 0.59 14.0 s 85 4 12 
Oshaala 7.04 106 0.42 2.7 slls 88 6 6 
Onesi 8.41 349 1.04 43.0 Is 84 4 12 
Mahanene 6.52 36 0.26 50.0 Is 87 7 6 
Station 1 
Mahanene 7.12 35 1.60 1.6 Is 88 7 6 
Station 2 
Mean for 7.17 35 0.42 1.9 93 3 4 
farmers' fields in 
Kavango 
Mean for 7.23 140 0.51 2.7* 
87 6 7 
farmers' fields in 
Overall mean for 7.19 71 0.45 4.1 91 4 5 
farmers' fields 
, s = sand, Is = loamy sand. * P value excluded as it was extraordinarily high (43 ppm). 
Ecw = electrical conductivity of applied water. OM = organic matter. Olsen P = phosphorus 
with the Olsen methods 
Table 4.4 Summary of analysis of soil samples collected in April 1999. 
Village Mean pH Min pH Max pH 
Eefa 8.97 8.00 10.19 
Ekolola 6.37 5.50 8.60 
Ogongo 7.37 6.44 8.47 
Okahao 7.21 6.18 8.69 
Okongo 6.65 5.63 8.50 
Onankali 6.86 5.50 8.54 
Onkani 6.78 6.17 7.40 
Oshaala 7.08 6.35 8.00 
Total 7.13 5.50 10.19 
Chemical factors and soil fertility 
The general mean from samples of farmers' fields in 1998 is pH 7.19 (Table 
4.3) which is in the adequate range for cropping. Likewise the mean pH from 
samples in 1999 is relatively neutral at 7.13 (Table 4.4) and indicates a good 
average pH for crop potential. This masks the full range of pH found from pH 
5.94 - 8.41 (Table 4.3) and from pH 5.50 - 10.19 (Table 4.4) incorporating 80 
soil samples from farmers crop fields. Surprisingly, all the soils represented in 
Table 4.4 were sampled from millet fields where farmers said they have their 
best productivity. The normal expected range for crop fields would be 
between about 6.3 and 7.5 with severe phosphate deficiencies appearing in 
soils with pH below 5.5 and above 8.0 (Landon, 1991). It appears from both 
surveys in 1998 and 1999 that somehow, millet crops tolerate pHs above 8.0 
and up to 10.19 in northern Namibia. 
Generally soils in the region are typical of arid and semi-arid environments. 
They are shallow. infertile sandy soils with a low water holding capacity. 
Although there is considerable variation across the region, common features 
include low N, P and organic matter contents (McDonagh & Hillyer 1999). 
The exchangeable K concentrations are frequently low but are less likely to 
cause K deficiencies in sandy soils than in clay or loam soils. There are 
areas where the ratio of K and magnesium concentrations cause problems 
and soil studies by Matanyaire (Matanyaire, 1993a) show that some of the 
sandiest soils are bordering on magnesium and K deficient. Relative 
concentrations of calcium (Ca) and magnesium (Mg) can also be 
problematic; high Ca can inhibit the availability of P. Areas displaying high 
levels of calcium and sodium levels can also be prohibitive. 
Until recently, soils in the project areas have been investigated on a 
piecemeal basis. Moller (1997) says the parent material across the NCR is 
uniform and of a strongly saline, medium textured material. He recognises 
two different solonetz soils with B horizons of varying depth and permeability. 
Rigourd & Sappe (1998) identify arenosol and solonchak soils as well as 
higher fertility soils that they are unable to classify with the FAD system. 
Marsh and Seely (Marsh and Seely, 1992) report the common occurrence of 
a laterite level at depths varying between 20 and 100 cm below the surface. 
There are also the deep Kalahari Sands derived of aeolian coarse textured 
material that are non-saline and non-solonetz (Moller 1997). Moller also 
reports the heavy textured black clays found in the oshanas, but notes that 
little is known about their production potential. The soil survey recently 
completed (as part of the Agro-Ecological Zoning Programme) by MAWRD 
has classified the soils according to several formal systems including the 
FAO system as used by the previously cited analysts. In the study areas the 
identified soil categories are broad and include: arenosols, calcisols, 
cambisols, fluvisols, leptisols, luvisols, regosols, solonetz' and vertisols. As 
expected these soil categories range from agriculturally fertile to infertile 
soils. 
Nitrogen and biological fixation 
Nitrogen is an essential nutrient of all plants and is one of the major 
constituents of plant biomass. This nutrient has a significant impact on the 
growth of plants and especially in managed crop regimes, may be limiting. It 
is particularly difficult to measure soil available N in the rural African context 
because laboratory analYSis must be carried out within hours of field 
sampling. This was not possible for this research in Namibia. Total N is 
estimated from soil C assuming C: N ratios from similar environments 
elsewhere (McDonagh and Hillyer, 2003) and soil N is considered low and 
limiting (when rainfall is adequate) across the research regions. 
With adequate rainfall mineral N can improve crop yields (8ationo, 1992) but 
in dryland areas where rains frequently fail there is a relatively high risk 
associated with the application of mineral N fertiliser; it may "burn" the crop 
or be wasted. The alternatives are not common or easy but biological fixation 
is one option. The Plant Science Project conducted research on this topic in 
order to model legume N fixation in Namibia and ascertain the benefits of 
different legume technologies. Field measurements were made and a simple 
model designed to test legume contributions using the 15N natural abundance 
technique (McDonagh and Hillyer, 1999); (McDonagh and Hillyer, 2000; 
Hillyer and McDonagh, 2000b). The results showed that N fixation rates 
varied quite considerably between site and season and confirming what has 
been stated elsewhere that not enough is known about these dynamics. 
Using the most optimistic of these rates, the modelling results showed that 
the yield benefits in this context are negligible and therefore unlikely to be 
used much by small-scale farmers (McDonagh and Hillyer, 2003). 
Phosphorus 
Phosphorus is also an essential plant nutrient needed for growth and 
metabolism. For some 50 years now, it has been recognised by soil and plant 
specialists that P deficiency is a major constraint to crop growth in semi-arid 
Africa (Buresh et al., 1997). Data from different soil studies across the 
regions show that plant available P levels in Namibia are in the range of 0.5-5 
ppm (McDonagh & Hillyer 1999) i.e. generally low and limiting for crop 
growth. Despite continuous cropping these levels of P have not reduced over 
a period of at least 30 years (McDonagh & Hillyer 1999). Since mineral 
fertilisation is hardly used by the small farmers of Namibia, the maintenance 
of plant available P levels can only be explained by the continuous 
replenishment from other labile and non-labile P sources in the soil. Mero 
(Mero, 2000) quantified different bound P pools in a north central soil and 
discovered that cowpea and millet each have distinctive P uptake strategies 
drawing on these different pools. Cowpeas extract significantly more P from 
Ca bound P than millet, in a soil where Ca bound P was in the range of 2-
3ppm (Mero 2000). To an extent, this may explain the lack of competition 
between millet and cowpea when intercropped on soils that contain these 
different pools of P. Mero's results also showed a significant response by 
millet to manure and a concomitant decrease in the rate of mycorrhizal 
infection. Mero recommends further research on the changes in the inorganic 
fraction of P in the north Namibian soils and on the relevance of mycorrhizal 
associations. 
PhYSical factors and soil water dynamics 
The surveys and studies that have been done and the results presented later 
in chapter six, show clearly that the majority of soils in the region are sandy. 
Patches of loamy and clayey soils are common and sites of almost pure clay 
also exist. These physical characteristics are relevant to crop growth in that 
some crops are better adapted to certain physical conditions than others. The 
interactions between these physical characteristics and the weather are also 
relevant; this confers a temporally variable nature to these soils. Soil capping, 
for example, when a soil with some clay in the surface layers dries out in the 
sun, may prevent germinated seedlings from emerging through the crust. 
Other physical factors mentioned in previous sections are also extremely 
important in the northern Namibian context. For example, hard pans lying 
below the surface may limit the rooting zone for crops and sometimes retain 
water in the rooting zone for crop utilisation. Few data are available on these 
physical factors as is acknowledged in the recent national soil survey report 
(Coetzee 2001a). It is these temporal aspects of soil water dynamics, 
associated with the physical properties of soils that are most limited and 
potentially, most useful to farmers and other agricultural professionals. 
4.3 Conclusion 
This chapter has started to explain the choices that are available to farmers 
by emphasising elements and dynamics of the environment that elsewhere 
are repeatedly either over simplified or overlooked altogether. This begins a 
process of understanding the gap between farmers' actions and outputs and 
promoted practice and expected outputs. 
The chapter has mainly examined the biophysical context of farms and its 
role in explaining farmers' management choices and practices. The main 
biophysical aspects covered were the climate, the landscape and interactions 
between them. The data provided portray an extreme and unpredictable 
climate, characterised by erratic rainfall, and an equally diverse and complex 
landscape, shaped over time by the climate. 
High daily temperatures achieved during the crop season in northern 
Namibia can support C4 and heat tolerant C3 pathway crops such as millet, 
sorghum, maize, cowpeas, bambara groundnuts and groundnuts. Many 
cucurbits are also successful in this context. Daylength is usually only a 
problem for crops that are not fully adapted to the local environment. 
Seasonal precipitation in this context is low as well as temporally and 
spatially variable. The regions' arid environment arises from the large 
difference between low rainfall and high evaporation rates and the data show 
that the western regions are more arid than the Kavango region. Direct 
precipitation is not the only or even the most reliable source of water 
available to crops in northern Namibia. Other important sources of crop water 
are the oshana system and the omurambas. There are also hardpans of 
varying depth, composition and permeability that could playa crucial role in 
the flow and percolation of water through the land but little is known about 
these in any formal sense. 
Researchers, extension workers and farmers, perceive rainfall to be 
problematic. When the problems with rainfall are analysed, they are found to 
range from concerns associated with too little rain through concerns 
associated with too much rain. All these problems were found to be 
widespread across the northern regions being studied although their severity 
and the regularity with which they appear to be of importance, varied 
according to the interaction between preCipitation and specific locality 
situations. It therefore became important, despite the cost in extra effort and 
resources, not to over generalise about findings but rather to retain important 
detail in the process of the research and analysis. 
Historically, soil data for northern Namibia have been inadequate but since 
Independence this has been acknowledged and tackled. Much more 
information is now available, generated at several scales, using various 
methodologies and serving different people. However, it is considered that 
the emerging and conventional classification systems are not compatible. 
Formal claSSification systems adopt a universal approach and are useful for 
policy makers. Local classification systems distinguish soils at a finer level 
and are more useful for farmers and those that service them. Potentially, GIS 
offers a better understanding of local systems and an opportunity to bridge 
the gaps between local and global, policy and practitioners, but issues of 
methodology and management still need to be reconciled. 
Soils are spatially variable across the region displaying a range of chemical 
and physical characteristics, fertility and productivity. Commonly, crop 
availability of major nutrients, Nand P, are low and it is no simple matter to 
add mineral N to the system or to boost naturally occurring N through 
biological fixation. Recent research has shown that local types of millet and 
cowpea have developed distinctive uptake strategies that access soil bound 
pools of P. Finally, while information accrues on chemical properties and in-
situ soil fertility, relatively little is known about the in-situ physical 
characteristics of soils. Particularly, those aspects associated with soil water 
dynamics and how these differ seasonally and with rainfall incidents. 
Since legumes and cereals have different biophysical requirements, the soil 
environment limits where these crops can grow and defines choices available 
to individual farmers. Legumes tolerate low fertility sandy soils while cereals 
can tolerate less well-drained clayey soils. As has been discussed throughout 
this chapter, these environmental niches are dependent on location in the 
northern Namibian context. As a result some soils can support legumes or 
cereals and others are able to support both. Since some soils can support 
legume / cereal intercrops and others cannot, the biophysical context also 
delimits management choices, for example to intercrop or to sole crop. There 
are also other factors that influence farmers' management practices and 
these will be addressed in the next chapter. 
5 The context: socio-economic factors 
5.1 Introduction 
The previous chapter explored the biophysical context within which farmers 
operate. The emphasis was on the dynamics of the climate and the 
landscape. This chapter is about the wider socio-economic context within 
which northern Namibian communal farmers work. The chapter is organised 
around three main resources required for cropping (land, labour and seed) as 
these are indispensable to farmers' strategies whatever their objectives or 
livelihoods. Since both men and women are involved with crop cultivation, the 
gendered aspects of access to resources are dealt with throughout the 
chapter. The Sustainable Livelihoods Framework is used mostly to structure 
the analysis and to aid thinking about the importance of vulnerability, risk and 
opportunity. It was not used in the field as a framework for collecting 
information. Nevertheless the chapter touches on all the assets; human, 
social, natural, financial and physical capital, although the emphasis is on 
human and natural capital. 
Land is covered first, beginning with an analysis of the different study sites 
and their agroecosystems. It is argued that the roles of water and livestock 
are the distinguishing factors in different agroecosystems. The layout and 
social organisation of the villages is explored before turning to the pattern of 
settlement and the acquisition of land. Finally, individual and household land 
assets are investigated and this shapes the choices available to farmers 
which in turn link to food security. Labour or human capital is analysed 
according to the size and composition of households. The gendered division 
of labour is also investigated. Livestock and seed resources are considered 
as natural capital although livestock are also sources of financial capital and 
as labour saving devices during ploughing and planting. The access to and 
control of resources impacts on the activities and outputs of crop farming and 
food secu rity. 
5.2 Land 
5.2.1 Farming systems and land 
Information gathered from the farming systems survey and other secondary 
sources enables a general snapshot to be taken of the similarities and 
differences of the basic resources at the study sites. Table 5.1 presents the 
major features characterising the four research locations and they are 
arranged, left to right, from west to east (Map1). 
The location of these villages affects the infrastructure and services available 
to them. Eefa is a peri-urban village sitting as it does on the outskirts of 
Oshakati, regarded as the northern capital of Namibia. It is very close to the 
tarred road and has many dirt roads that only become problematic in the wet 
season. Eeta is very close to all the public services available to the 
inhabitants of Oshakati including transport, markets, medical care and 
schools. Eefa is not on the electricity grid or city water supply but has a 
borehole and for power, many people use car batteries or gas obtained from 
the town. Most people still use wood for cooking, although wood is becoming 
progressively scarcer and wealthier households may have gas stoves 
instead. 
The other study sites are not so well serviced by infrastructure. The most 
remote of the villages is Katope which lies about 25 km from the nearest dirt 
road and another 150-200 km to the tarred road and city. This also means 
poor access to the public services mentioned above. Katope has its own 
borehole and the headman installed the first battery powered refrigerator in 
2000. Most villagers use candles for light and a few have battery-operated 
radios. Wood is in plentiful supply and everyone uses it for heating and 
cooking. Ekolola is on the border with Angola 14 but is adjacent (about an 
hours walk) to a well serviced rural town, Eenhana. The tarred road was 
extended to Eenhana and 
14 There is very little infrastructure in the southern forests of Angola and the people who live 
there would often cross the border for work, supplies and services. 
Table 5.1: Characterisation of the four study villages 
Village name Oshaala Eefa (Oshana) Ekolola Katope 
(region) (Omusati) (Ohangwena) (Kavango) 
Location Cuvelai Basin Cuvelai Basin Forest Forest 
Type Savannah/dam Peri urban Border Remote, pioneer 
community 
Annual mean 350-400 400-450 450-500 550-650 
rainfall (mm) 
Mean 13.9 25 21 2.7 
population 
density 
(persons/km2) 
Run-offl Western edge of oshanas Small pans Omuramba 
drainage oshanas & dam Small pans 
Land No new land No new land No new land New land 
availability available available available available 
SOils/nutrient Sands, loams, Sodic and clayey Deep Kalahari Deep Kalahari 
status sodic and clayey sands and some clayey and some clayey 
sands sands sands 
Cattle posts some none some Many 
Regional Winter: 11-20 Winter: 1-5 Winter: 11-20 not known 
average Summer: 6-10 Summer: >1 Summer: 6-10 
livestock 
density (heads 
of cattle km2) 
Regional 218,000 39,000 130,000 circa 500,000 
cattle 100,000 (official 98,000 in 1993 
populations 
(heads km2) 
stats) (official stats) 
Strategy for Add manure plus Adds manure and Shifting cattle Shifting 
sustaining some limited use fertiliser (area kraals, add agriculture, 
fertility of fertilisers. working with manure and opening of new 
Some new fields legumes and forest products. fields 
of poor quality projects for < 4 Limited used of 
years. No new fertilisers. No new 
fields fields 
Crop field Around the Around or Around or Gardens adjacent 
location household adjacent to the adjacent to the to household. 
household household Communal area 
fields at the 
Omuramba 
Fencing Fenced Fenced Fenced Fenced against 
livestock but not 
to delineate 
access/control 
Compiled from own data and (Keyler, 1995; MAWRD, 1996; 
rights 
Totemeyer et al., 1997; 
Mendelsohn et al., 2000). 
opened in 2000. Ekolola has access to the entire infrastructure available in 
Eenhana including transport, a market, a clinic and a primary school. The 
MAWRD has rural offices in that town which is also served with municipal 
electricity and water. Villagers of Ekolola are not on the grid or the town water 
supply yet and most people use candles and firewood for light. Firewood is 
still plentiful on the border. 
Oshaala is further off the tarred road (about 15 km) and a greater distance 
from the nearest town with rural government offices. It is not as remote as 
Katope as there are a couple of towns within 60 km. Oshaala's benefits 
include its proximity to adam 15 and to an agricultural research station. It has 
its own primary school and clinic. Most people still use candles and firewood 
although there are a couple of battery operated refrigerators in local kuuka 
shops. Firewood is available but becoming more scarce as people have to 
walk further afield to gather it. A few of the wealthier villagers have cars or 
access to cars in Oshaala, although most do not. Private minibuses run along 
the tarred road regularly and on a good day, it is possible to get to the market 
in Oshakati and back again. 
These villages represent quite different circumstances with regard to physical 
capital. The biggest differences however are in their natural resources and 
how these are managed. Although there is an increasing gradation of annual 
rainfall from west to east, it is not the determining characteristic of the 
existing farming systems as discussed in chapter four. The study sites of 
Oshaala and Eefa are located in the oshana system; Oshaala on the western 
fringes and Eefa in the heart of Oshana Region. Rainfall runs off, shifting and 
relocating clay and other soil particles as it passes. Over time, the landscape 
has become highly differentiated and the soils are inherently more fertile than 
those found to the east of the oshanas. Deep Kalahari sands are found to the 
east, with some clayey sands found in small pans and towards the foot of 
slopes. Throughout Kavango, water is channelled through the Omurambas, 
15 Plans and negotiations with the Department for Rural Water began, just before the end of 
this research for Oshaala to have water piped directly into the village 
also described in chapter four. The areas surrounding the Omurambas, are 
the prime sites for crop fields. In the Cuvelai Basin, as well as the sands and 
clayey sands there are also loams, sodic sands and sodic clayey sands. The 
whole area is slightly saline but this only limits crop growth in specific small 
areas. 
Differing land use across the villages is mostly associated with the role of 
water and livestock and this produces markedly different farming systems. In 
the west (Eefa and Oshaala villages), the oshana system introduces fish, 
deposited soils, water for crops and fresh pasture. Official cattle posts 16 are 
situated to the south and to the west. They are usually such a long way from 
the crop fields that the livestock and crop elements of the farming system are 
effectively spatially separate. It was not always like that however as first 
settlers arrived with their cattle. Now though, cattle are kraaled much further 
afield as demand for crop land around the villages increases. The actual 
distance varies according to where individual farmers have secured their 
current cattle posts. However, the case studies suggest that cattle posts are 
several days walk for most households. 
The opposite is true in the forests of the east where the soils are mostly well 
drained, deep Kalahari sands and the annual rainfall is appreciably higher. In 
this system, livestock are the dominant component, with farmers relying on 
many different social arrangements for the care and management of cattle 
herds. Unlike in the west, livestock and cropping practices are more spatially 
integrated and manure is more likely to be deposited in situ than applied and 
incorporated by hand. Shifting agriculture still exists in parts of this region, 
including at the study site of Katope. As such, it can be considered still to be 
a pioneer zone for farmers. 
During the farming systems survey, farmers were asked how long their fields 
had been cropped. Across all sites there were a few fields that had been 
16 Areas deSignated by the government as communal grazing areas for cattle and goats. 
Officially, permanent settlement and planting crops is not allowed in these areas although in 
practice this is neither adhered to, nor enforced. 
almost continuously cropped for up to fifty years (Table 5.2). The majority of 
fields, 72.5% (45/62), had been continuously cropped for 10-50 years and 
most of these were located in the NCRs. Mean field age by village was 28 
and 31 years for Oshaala and Eefa respectively whereas it was 14 and 15 
years for Katope and Ekolola and this difference is significant (p=0.05). Only 
in Kavango was there a significant proportion of 'new' fields (p=0.05) and 
here, over a third of the sub-sample, representing 13% of the total sample, 
had been cropped for between one to five years. In the NCRs only two fields, 
representing 3% of the total sample, had been cropped for less than five 
years. This shows that fields of the NCRs are older and more permanent, 
whereas in Katope village at least, farmers can exploit the fertility 
opportunities of 'new' fields. This information supports the perception of 
Kavango as a 'pioneer zone', whereas the NCRs contain fields that have 
been continuously cropped for many years. 
Table 5.2: Number of years that fields have been continuously cropped 
No. of years Oshaala Ekolola Eefa Katope Total % whole 
cropped Mean = 28 Mean = 15 Mean = 31 Mean = 14 sample 
1-5 1 1 8 10 16 
6-10 3 4 9 15 
11-15 1 3 4 6 
16-20 2 4 2 3 11 18 
21-25 1 2 4 6 
26-30 2 3 5 8 
31-35 2 2 4 6 
36-40 1 4 2 7 11 
41-45 2 1 3 5 
46-50 1 3 1 5 8 
Total 12 12 19 19 62 100 
Although the soils are depleted of major nutrients and considered relatively 
poor for cropping across virtually the whole country, the Cuvelai Basin 
supports a dense human and livestock population, averaging 40 persons per 
and 11-20 head of cattle per km2 (Mendelsohn et a', 2000). Human 
population density drops considerably in Kavango to a mean of 2.7 persons 
per km
, while livestock averages are about the same as in NCRs. Livestock 
numbers and densities are notoriously difficult to evaluate in northern 
Namibia. Individuals are reluctant to reveal their livestock assets and 
mobility, especially across the Namibian-Angolan border, makes it almost 
impossible to monitor. A great deal of cattle theft persists in the region and 
this is reported to have risen exponentially in 1999/2000 when rebel and 
military activity at the border escalated. 
Although population densities are not a measure of productivity, they are an 
indicator. The agro-climatic population densities 17 of Zimbabwe, Botswana 
and Namibia are compared and the highest density of 250 persons per 
million kilocalories of production potential is found in Namibia (Binswanger 
and Pingali, 1988). Botswana and Zimbabwe are not expected to reach this 
level for another 20 years. This is cited as a national mean, but it is known 
that the spatial distribution of Namibia's population is highly differentiated. 
The northern part of the country supports about 60% of the national 
population and about 45% reside in the NCRs representing 6.3% of the 
country's land area. It is conceivable that the disaggregated data would show 
a local mean for the NCRs as even higher. These population densities mirror 
the common perception that the NCRs are inherently more fertile and more 
productive than the Kavango region. 
5.2.2 Village and household land resources 
This section compares population by number of households, village land use 
and social organisation. Initially village resources were explored with 
community mapping exercises, as described in chapter two. Subsequent 
wealth ranking exercises enabled verification of the size of the villages 
according to the number of households. Table 5.3 below shows the number 
of households in the villages at the time of data generation. These exercises 
generated discussions about village boundaries and allegiances to different 
headmen. It transpired from these discussions that allegiance is very often 
17 A unit that takes account of land quality and climate - the number of persons per million 
kilocalories of production potential estimated at the intermediate technology input level for 
developing countries 
related to where a household draws water and is a matter of local 
negotiation. Both the villages of Oshaala and Eefa are similar in that they are 
large and sprawling whereas Ekolola and Katope are more compact. Katope 
was growing fast with satellite settlements emerging and expanding. 
Household population and village boundaries are so fluid that by the end of 
the research, the populations had changed. 
Table 5.3: Number of households in the villages in 1998 
Female headed households 
Male headed households 
Total 
Oshaala 
Ekolola 
Katope 
Oshaala is made up of four sub-villages, each with their own sub-headman 
and they merge into one larger settlement on the bank of the dam. It was 
during the wealth ranking exercises that it transpired that Oshaala was 
actually a conglomeration of four villages. The original village was named 
Oshaala and, as the village was settled and expanded, responsibility and 
authority was divided among the elders. Ekolola is a small self-contained 
border village, itself a satellite settlement of the nearby rural town of 
Eenhana. Eefa can be described as a sprawling suburb of the urban centres 
of Ongwediva and Oshakati. 
In terms of land resources, the NCR villages are organised in a similar way 
while Katope is markedly different. The farming systems survey showed that 
86% (37/43) of sampled households in the NCR villages 'own' only one field, 
whereas in Katope, 44% (11/19) 'own' more than one field (Table 5.4). In 
Katope, areas of the most productive soils are delineated as the communal 
crop fields. These are at the Omuramba as discussed in chapter four where 
crop water supplies are more reliable. These fields are fenced around the 
outside to prevent animals from roaming into the crops and individuals use 
branches to delineate their individual patches. Individuals can have usufruct 
rights over a crop field irrespective of whether or not they are head of a 
household and this is negotiated directly with the village headman. As a 
result, each household may collectively 'own' several or even many crop 
fields. 
Table 5.4: Number of fields owned by households in the villages 
No. of fields Oshaala Ekolola Eefa Katope Total 
11 10 16 11 48 
2 1 1 3 5 10 
3 1 2 3 
4 1 1 
Total 12 12 19 19 62 
Each household head is also allocated a plot of land for their compound 
(including threshing floor and storage huts), a kraa/(s) and a plot for their 
household garden. The gardens are usually located in the forest zone 
whereas the Omuramba are more like plains. The gardens may be 
immediately adjacent to the house or a 5-10 minute walk away. Sometimes 
there may be more than one garden. This is the case for polygamous 
households when each wife can expect to have, and look after her own 
garden. 
Although NCR households tend to have one field only (Table 5.4), the 
household plots are generally larger and spread over a wider area than in 
Katope and this is explored in more detail later. The household plots contain 
the crop fields within their outer fences and there are no separate communal 
crop fields. As all cropping is done within the confines of the household plot, 
the household is dependent on the soils contained within the boundaries. 
Some households may also have a small kraal within the fence for goats but 
cattle kraals are at the cattle post. Land is officially allocated to the household 
head (usually male) who must first of all fence it. Individual household 
members may be allocated their own patch within the field for planting their 
own seed but households may also operate more collectively. Discussing the 
small percentage of NCR households that 'own' more than one field, a 
community leader of Eefa explained that good land is rare now and with more 
people moving in all the time, some take crop fields in the forest while 
maintaining a household in the village. Although against national law, some 
people clear and plant a plot at their cattle post. The law is not enforced. 
5.2.3 Allocation and distribution of land in the villages 
This section is mainly about human and social capital and how this is used to 
secure natural and financial capital. Specifically, this section uses case 
studies 18 and other secondary data to explain how individuals and kin secure 
land. Farmers' testimonies describe the knowledge, skills and process for 
identifying 'good' land through to the organisation of settlements and their 
unfolding social networks. They also touches on the current tensions 
between traditional practices and national laws that impact on the usufruct 
rights in a SOCiety that appears to be moving towards a system of private 
freehold tenure. 
When an individual wishes to establish a household in a village, they must 
first approach the relevant headman for permission. A discussion takes place 
about available land, the requirements of the household and established 
village norms concerning rights and responsibilities. These norms vary 
between villages and the household head or individual must accept to 
conform to these norms before agreement is reached. Sometimes there are 
other negotiations (though not all admit to this) around some payment for 
rights to land. The final selection of land will be a negotiated agreement 
between the headman and the person seeking land rights. A criterion for 
allocation is usually the resources a household is able to access. For 
example, in Oshaala a household must fence the land allocated and must 
demonstrate they possess the financial and human capital (timber, cash and 
labour) to do this effectively and within an agreed time limit. In Katope, the 
main requirement is that the individual demonstrates the natural and human 
capital (seed, tools and ability) to plant and maintain the land under 
cultivation. 
from Oshaala and Katope only 
Although in many instances the two villages, Oshaala and Katope are very 
different the case studies revealed some important historical similarities. The 
original settlers of the two villages were said to have moved in around the 
same time. In Oshaala this was said to be 50 years ago whereas in Katope it 
was 48 years ago. Clearly these two villages have developed at different 
speeds which relates to the natural and physical capital available to them, as 
discussed previously in section 5.2.1 however the pattern of settlement is 
similar. In both villages, the earlier settlers hold the largest quantity and best 
quality land. 
In Katope village, the longest established kinship groups and those who also 
hold positions of authority appeared to have the best ability to requisition 
land. One individual who held an important position in the village explained 
that he had recently chosen to open up new land away from the central 
village area (Box 5.1). Likewise, other well-established households in the 
village accumulate land resources; as individual members reach maturity, 
they claim a field in their own right according to the resources they are able 
to access and control. Resources (seed, tools and labour) are often shared 
or traded within kinship groups and in this way claims on land are built up. 
Box 5. 1: Acquiring and maintaining land assets in Katope 
Having managed cattle in the forest for many years, Philipus said he knew the soil 
and vegetative characteristics of the environment very well. He selected several 
adjacent sites, established agreement with the headman and then cleared the 
forest, using the timber resources to build two separate households, one for each 
of his wives and their respective families. Each household had a crop field and a 
sipata (garden). The household land he vacated to open up these new sites was 
passed on to a son and hence he retained a kinship claim on the land. He also 
retained a claim on another field that was not planted that particular year, the 
justification being the poor rains and so he argued, it was not abandoned. His sons 
and their wives had taken over the claims on other plots at the Omuramba. 
In Oshaala, the first settler told a very similar story (Box 5.2). After he settled 
a few others followed quite quickly. Others came more slowly and only 
recently, so many arrived. The size and type of land holdings in Oshaala are 
explored in more detail with the LLU study, covered in chapter six. More 
information and analyses of individual household assets and settlement 
patterns is provided in chapter seven. 
Box 5.2: Acquiring and maintaining land assets in Oshaala 
Paulus explained how he had got to know the area as a young man when looking 
after cattle with other male kin. He said that when the rains in Angola were good, 
water passed through the place that they called Oshaala. There were some 
particularly good patches of vegetation for the cattle and he explained that 
whatever the rainfall was like, the cattle could usually find some grazing there. In 
bad years they would walk to this place as a last resort. When he was about to get 
married he identified some prime land and sought approval from the King to 
establish his household there. 
It appears that traditionally, knowledge about land type and vegetation was 
often learned by travelling with older male kin and cattle. The best land has 
been occupied for some time and farmers settling more recently have a 
considerably reduced choice. This choice is not only limited by the availability 
of land, but also by their knowledge of the land type and its behaviour. With 
the expanded opportunities for schooling in northern Namibia, boys are now 
less likely to travel with cattle and kin or if they do, to spend considerably less 
time doing so. The traditional type of schooling and knowledge is being 
replaced with another. Discussions with the elders and other individuals 
suggest that this local ecological knowledge is not evenly spread among the 
community. While it is shared with women and younger people, it still rests 
largely with the older male population and as a result of development it could 
be disappearing. 
Allocation of land for establishing a household farm in a village falls under the 
jurisdiction of the village headman or headmen. Land rights are most 
commonly granted to men in the process of marrying and establishing a 
household. In the absence of spouses, wives have usufruct rights. At death, 
a man's resources (livestock, ploughs, timber etc) pass to his nearest male 
kin, while in theory, the land returns to the headman's jurisdiction. In practice, 
after a husband's death, women can make representation to headmen to 
secure usufruct land rights for themselves. Wealthier women with their own 
resources are often able to secure land usufruct rights from a headman, 
providing they are able to manage and maintain that land. Female headed 
households that range between 12.5% and 40% of all households in the 
research sites, may also negotiate land rights even if they are poor (Box 5.3). 
Box 5.3 Nangula negotiates for communal land 
A poor, young woman with two children, returning from an urban area after her 
husband passed away, was able to secure land rights and establish her own 
household back in the vii/age. Her mother lived in the village and petitioned for her, 
guaranteeing her access to oxen and plough. Within a few years she had 
established her household with crop fields, garden and a very successful kuuka 
shop that extablished her place in the village in her own right, as a female headed 
household. 
5.2.4 Household land resources and crop fields 
This section is about household land assets and how these assets influence 
the choices available to farmers and hence their management practices. 
Objectives from the outset of this research were to identify the heterogeneity 
of household land resources, the factors influencing this heterogeneity and 
the impact of land variation both on crops in the field and on farmers' 
management choices. The initial line of enquiry was part of the farming 
systems survey when farmers were asked about the different soil types that 
they have in their fields. Subsequent case studies explored this in more 
depth in the two villages of Katope and Oshaala. Eventually, the study of 
local land units in Oshaala furnished a much clearer picture of the land 
resources at the village and household levels. 
The first data generated on land gave an initial indication that the majority of 
farmers, 54%, had two or more soil types in their fields and this supported the 
observation of patchiness in farmers' fields (Table 5,5). In the pioneer zone 
village of Katope, 60% of the farmers said they had access to two or more 
different soil types whereas in the NCR villages where land is more limited, 
only 50% reported having more than two. This percentage was reduced to 
only 36% in Ekolola where the land is generally more homogenous than in 
Oshaala and Eefa, due to the oshanas as discussed in chapter four (Table 
5.6). Eefa particularly has a more differentiated landscape, sitting as it does 
in the heart of the Cuvelai Basin. Here 59% of farmers said they had access 
to more than two soil types. 
Table 5.5: Different soil types in farmers crop fields by region 
NCR Katope All 
Soil types 
Frequency % Frequency % Frequency % 
Only 1 18 50 8 40 26 46 
2 or more 18 50 12 60 30 54 
Total 36 100 20 100 56 100 
Table 5.6: Different soli types In NCR farmers' fields 
Oshaala Ekolola Eefa 
Soil types 
Frequency % % Frequency % Frequency 
Only 1 4 50 7 64 7 41 
2 or more 4 50 4 36 10 59 
Total 8 100 11 100 17 100 
At this stage of the research, there was little understanding beyond this of the 
relevance of different patches of land in farmers' fields, or how these were 
managed to suit farmers' objectives and livelihood requirements. Two years 
later, with the study of local land units, it became possible to make links 
between different soils and farmers management of them. This is covered in 
depth in the next chapter. In an attempt to link soil types with productivity 
farmers were asked during the farming systems survey about the productivity 
of their fields or field patches. While half of the farmers either did not respond 
or did not really know, over a third of the sample said it was definitely 
declining and the responses were approximately even across the villages. 
However farmers commented that field productivity only depends on rainfall 
and this was subsequently followed up in group meetings and is reported on 
in chapter four. 
Case studies conducted in Oshaala and Katope over a period of two years 
generated more detailed information about farmers' land resources. Fields 
were measured and mapped, soils and crops sampled from those fields and 
farmers were interviewed throughout the seasons about different aspects of 
their resources and management. The case studies confirmed what has 
already been discussed in the previous section with regard to land 
acquisition. In both villages, the fields belonging to wealthier farmers are 
larger and more productive than those of poorer farmers. The case studies 
also revealed that wealthier farmers had considerably more complex farming 
enterprises and the complexity seemed to confer wealthier farmers with more 
choice and food security. 
In Katope the wealthier households are characterised by having a larger 
quantity of fields situated in different places and with different soils (Figures 
13 & 14). Individuals within households also have their own fields and this 
adds to the complexity of the household land assets. Different crops are 
grown in different places and fields. For example, beans are often grown in 
the gardens and sometimes green maize, whereas millet and sorghum are 
more likely to be grown at the omuramba. Individuals maintain their own seed 
stocks so that a household may contain several different stores comprising a 
range of seeds grown in different places. In this way, not only is biodiversity 
protected but also the household gains some security in the face of adversity. 
In Oshaala, the wealthier households are characterised by larger fields 
containing a wider range of soils within their boundaries. This is explored in 
more detail in chapter seven. As in Katope, different crops are grown in 
different places and soil environments and this is discussed in chapters six 
and seven, with the data and analysis of local land units. 
Figure 13: Household land resources of a wealthy farmer in Katope 
FOREST 
Fallow 
field 
To Katope 
FOREST 
FOREST 
Road to Katope 
Muheke 
: Ndombehdte 
 Ndombe 
I Fleld2 
--''> 
~dombe) I Garden 3 
Muheke = sandy soil , Ndombeheke = a mixture of sandy and clayey soil , Ndombe = clayey soil. 
FOREST 
Figure 14: Household land resources of a poor farmer in Katope 
Field at the Omura mba 
j MUheke 
 [ House-hold ---I 
,/   [~~ -~i~::~:a~k~n~ -[------ ((i'_ 5 minutes walking 
FOREST 
Muheke = sandy soil , Ndombe = clayey soil. 
Sipata Garden 
Muheke 
Ndombe 
5.3 Labour 
This section contains the analysis of labour resources. It begins with the 
household profile data generated during the farming systems survey, which 
are disaggregated by region and by village. Finer detail was gained about 
labour resources and their allocation during the cropping season from the 
case studies. 
5.3.1 Household profiles 
Data from the wealth ranking exercises show that across the two regions, a 
mean of 72% of households have a male head, while 28% are female 
headed (Table 5.7). The distribution across the villages however is uneven; 
there is a much greater concentration of female headed households in the 
villages of the NCRs than in Kavango while Ekolola has almost double the 
percentage of female headed households of all other villages. Some of this 
information can be explained by looking at recent histories of the villages. 
Table 5.7: Household types from wealth ranking exercises 
Households Oshaala Ekolola Eefa Katope All 
Female headed 34% 40% 24% 12.5% 28% 
Male headed 66% 60% 76% 87.5% 72% 
Since Ekolola is situated close to the Angolan border, it was an exile 
community during the war. The ratio of men to women is almost even, but the 
age distribution across the households suggests that this village has a 
younger male population than the others and that a generation of men did not 
return to Ekolola after the war. Women confirmed this but also added that 
many other males work away from home. Katope, the most rural of the 
communities, displays the greatest imbalance between men and women. 
This is due to men leaving the village for employment opportunities in the 
urban centres. Sometimes, they never return. Eefa, the village closest to an 
urban centre has almost equal numbers of adult men and women. This can 
be explained by the local employment opportunities for men that allow them 
to remain with their families. 
The size and composition of households (Table 5.8) represents the human 
capital available for investing in different activities. Mean household size is 
larger in Katope than in all the other villages. This represents a greater labour 
resource for agricultural investment. The distribution of adult men and women 
is important in two respects. The first is the extra resources men can access 
and contribute to the household, while the second concerns their active 
labour. A working man may supply cash and other resources, but not be 
present for some of the most important tasks such as ploughing. The 
timeliness often required for ploughing and planting can be severely 
compromised in the absence of adult males, the impact of which is a 
diminished harvest. 
Table 5.8: Mean size and demography of households 
Means Oshaala Ekolola Eefa NCR Kavango All 
{n=12} {n=12} (n=19} (n=43} (n=19} (n=62} 
Size of 
8.8 (3.4) 9.9 (3.8) 9.5 (3.8) 9.4 (3.6) 10.4 (4.7) 9.7 (3.9) household 
Number of 
1.7 (1.7) 1.3(1.0) 0.8 (0.8) 1.2(1.2) 1.5 (0.9) 1.3(1.1) men 
Number of 
2.4 (1.2) 1.8(1.1) 1.5 (0.6) 1.8(1.0) 2.6 (1.3) 2.1 (1.2) women 
Number of 
4.7 (2.2) 6.9 (2.5) 7.2 (3.4) 6.4 (3.0) 6.3 (4.0) 6.4 (3.3) children 
Standard deviations are in brackets 
Case studies from this research showed that while female labour is 
responsible for the large majority of crop management tasks, the adult male 
contribution makes a big difference. Women do the majority of manure 
spreading, planting, weeding and harvesting but the male input to ploughing, 
sowing and harvesting can be critical. As such, it is common for men working 
away from the village to take a holiday and return to the village with the first 
rains and then to do so again at harvest time. 
Child labour is also important for particular tasks and children that are 
schooled locally are often expected to work before and after the school day. 
It is customary for children to plant legumes and melons. They are also 
expected to weed and scare birds. At harvest they can tend the legumes and 
melons and then help with the millet and sorghum. Having able children living 
at home is a boon to any household with crop fields to tend. Today it is more 
common for children, especially older children, to be away at school and 
unavailable for the majority of agricultural tasks. This is reflected in the lower 
number of children in Oshaala and the higher number of children found in the 
peri-urban village of Eefa. It is also common for children of poorer parents to 
be accommodated by 'uncles' where often they work in the field for their 
keep. 
5.4 Inputs 
This section contains results and analyses about other aspects of natural 
capital: that of livestock and crop seeds. These data once again were 
generated during the farming systems survey and their analyses 
subsequently informed by case studies. The latter part of this section 
concentrates on natural capital. It cannot easily be isolated from the 
management decisions required in selecting seed that is suitable for the land 
and labour resources available, for example, selecting seeds that may be 
intercropped. The knowledge and skill necessary for management choice 
falls under human capital assets. 
5.4.1 Livestock 
Individual farmers were asked about their ownership of livestock so that it 
was possible to identify which households have direct access to draught 
animals and animal manure. The distribution of livestock among the 
population varies with household type, particularly with the gender of the 
household head (Table 5.9). More female than male headed households 
have no animals, but the most significant difference is between cattle and 
goat ownerShip. Few female headed households own cattle and those that 
do have considerably smaller herds than male headed households. More 
female headed households own goats, but male headed households still own 
larger herds. 
Table 5.9: Livestock ownership by female and male headed households 
Female headed Male headed 
Type of livestock All households (%) 
households (%) households (%) 
no livestock 16 10 6 
some livestock or 
smallstock 
84 18 66 
cattle 61 5 56 
goats 74 15 59 
donkeys 27 3 24 
pigs 18 3 15 
Data relating to the size of herds are notoriously unreliable, however the 
analysis shows that male headed households in Katope and Ekolola have the 
largest herds and these villages are close to good cattle grazing areas and 
areas where cattle are kraaled all year round. The ownership and kraaling 
sites for livestock are also important for manure use on crop fields. Men own 
the kraals and the manure supplied by them. Male headed households then 
have more access to and control of manure resources and these resources 
are also more plentiful than those available to female headed households. 
Cattle ownership also influences ploughing both in terms of timeliness and 
the amount of land that can be prepared and planted. 
5.4.2 Crops and cultivation 
Millet is considered the staple crop of northern Namibia. Other crops grown 
include: sorghum, maize, cowpea, bambara groundnut, ground nut, water 
melons, sweet sorghum, melons, spinach, pumpkins, squash, sweet 
pumpkin. Farmers were asked to rank the crops they grow in order of 
importance (Table 5.10). The majority of farmers ranked millet first, sorghum 
second, cowpea third and bambara groundnut fourth. For those who grow it, 
groundnut was generally ranked the fifth most important crop. All but three of 
the farmers interviewed ranked millet as their most important crop. Of the 
three who did not rank it first, two grow sorghum for commercial beer-making 
purposes and so prioritised the beer making while another farmer (with fields 
located on relatively good soils in Kavango) prefers to grow and eat maize 
and therefore ranked it first. The smaller group of farmers, who grew maize 
during the 1997/98 season, ranked this as the second most important crop 
(13132) while 27% of farmers (17/57) ranked cowpea as the second most 
important crop. 
Table 5.10: Importance of crops and cultivation practices (% farmers). 
Crop Modal rank: % Grown as an intercrop Grown as a monocrop 
Millet 1st : 94 93 7 
Sorghum 2nd: 46 78 22 
Maize 2nd: 22 48 52 
Cowpea 3rd: 49 90 10 
bambara 
4th: 43 17 83 
groundnut 
Groundnut 5th: 14 20 80 
Watermelons Not ranked 96 4 
sweet sorghum Not ranked 91 9 
Melons Not ranked 71 29 
Pumpkin Not ranked 88 12 
Cultivation practice is relatively similar across the whole sample in that the 
large majority of farmers (93%) say they intercrop or sometimes intercrop 
their millet seed. Only 7% of farmers interviewed said they never intercrop 
their millet but always plant it separately (Table 5.10). Many different 
combinations of species and varieties can be found intercropped with millet 
and the table shows the range of species and the percentage of farmers who 
intercrop them. Commonly millet is found intercropped with cowpeas, melons 
and pumpkins. 
While sorghum and maize can be found intercropped with millet in many 
fields, a good proportion of farmers prefer to plant these cereals separately. 
Almost a quarter of farmers plant sorghum apart whereas almost half of 
those planting maize plant it separately. Many farmers commented that 
sorghum and maize have different requirements and tolerate different 
conditions to millet. For example, several farmers explained they preferred to 
plant sorghum in areas of the field prone to water logging because millet 
can't tolerate those wetter areas. 
Table 5.10 also shows that while 90% of farmers commonly intercrop their 
cowpeas, over 80% of them crop bambara groundnuts and groundnuts 
alone. Reasons given for this were that these crops need well-drained and 
loose soil and that they need more attention than cowpeas because they 
must be covered at flowering. 
Farmers were also asked how many different varieties of each crop they 
grew during the 1997198 season. The most common combinations are shown 
in Table 5.11 along with the percentage of farmers who cultivate a particular 
combination. The maximum number of varieties grown on any single farm is 
also shown. For example, two millet varieties were grown by 56.5% of 
farmers and up to four different varieties were grown by some farmers, 
whereas 45% of farmers did not grow maize but of those who did, some grew 
up to three different varieties (or landraces). Subsequent research revealed 
that seed resources are often personal to both men and women though 
women tend to be the seed guardians. Considerable swapping and sharing 
occurs especially within households and between households of kin. 
Table 5.11: Number of varieties and/or landraces grown by farmers 
Crop Modal no. of varieties 
% Farmers growing Maximum no. of 
the modal number varieties grown 
Millet 2 56.5 4 
Sorghum 2 42 4 
Maize 0 45 3 
Cowpea 2 43.5 6 
bambara groundnut 1 43.5 4 
Groundnut 0 72.5 2 
About three quarters of the sample grow more than one type of millet and of 
these, about 15% grow more than two. Of those growing only one type of 
millet (16 farmers) three choose Okashana 1 in preference to all other 
varieties but the large majority, 81%, grew their own 'farmers local'. Of those 
farmers who grew two or more different types all grew some of their own 
'farmers local' and 87% of them chose Okashana 1 as one of their varieties. 
This supports the earlier findings of an impact study suggesting the uptake of 
Okashana 1 is widespread (Anandajayasekeram et al., 1995) and that the 
combination of Okashana 1 and 'farmers local' reflects farmers' concerns 
with system stability rather than yield maximisation (Matanyaire, 1998). This 
could also be a good example of "economies of scope" (Barrett et al., 2001) 
where land productivity and yield are optimised as a result of this particular 
intercrop. 
The number of different sorghum varieties grown by farmers is spread fairly 
evenly across the villages whereas the diversity of maize varieties is 
concentrated in Kavango. This most likely reflects the fact that the rainfall in 
Kavango is more suitable for growing maize. Farmers across the whole 
region grow a combination of two or three different cowpea varieties but 
some farmers grow up to six varieties. The larger number of cowpea varieties 
can be accounted for by the efforts of the GRN research and extension 
services since they are found in the villages where cowpea research 
programmes are operating. Up to four different bambara groundnut varieties 
or landraces are grown on farms but reports across the region describe 
significant losses of seed, particularly in Kavango. The story behind 
groundnut is less clear, many farmers do not grow this crop and say they 
have never grown it and yet two different types are found across the region. 
Given that commercial farmers were encouraged to grow it prior to 
Independence and seed was readily available, it is likely that seed was taken 
north but was not well adapted to the environment and now is only found in 
niches where it grows better. 
Farmers were also asked where the seed they planted originated. The three 
most common answers were that the seed was retained from the previous 
harvest, it was purchased and it was exchanged or received as a gift. Where 
farmers planted more than one variety, many reported that they had, for 
example retained one, bought another and received yet another from 
relatives (Table 5.12). The majority of seed is retained from the previous 
season and purchased seed is relatively low for all crops as is seed 
exchanged or received as a gift. Interestingly, the majority of millet seed falls 
under the multiple sources category and a larger number of purchases, 
exchanges and gifts of 'new' seed explain this. More farmers reported buying 
legume seed and particularly cowpeas, than any other crop. 
Table 5.12: Seed sources of different crop species. 
Farmer Retained Purchased Exchanged Multiple 
count (%) (%) or Gift (%) sources (%) 
Millet 59 27 8.5 12 52.5 
Sorghum 55 74.5 5.5 13 7 
Maize 32 56 13 15.5 15.5 
Cowpea 60 62 12 10 17 
bambara groundnut 47 79 8.5 8.5 4 
Groundnut 17 47 18 18 18 
5.5 Conclusion 
This chapter has analysed the socia-economic context and its role in 
understanding and explaining farmers' management choices, their practices 
and the outputs they achieve. The sites most developed and with access to 
more agricultural resources in the way of markets and other inputs are those 
with the best physical capital. Eefa is the most advantaged in this sense 
while Katope is the least advantaged and this has an impact on the farming 
systems. However, differences in natural capital, have a more significant 
impact on the farming systems and this is largely attributed to the water and 
livestock elements of the systems. However, natural capital cannot be 
considered in isolation from the users and it is the way in which it is actually 
used that confers real difference. In Katope communal crop fields and 
gardens are separated from the household and kraals but manure is used as 
a fertiliser. Livestock graze crop residues in situ during the dry season and 
generally are a fully integrated component of the farming system. In NCR 
villages, crop fields are contained within the boundaries of the household 
plot, whereas kraals are found at the cattle posts and so considerable 
distances separate them. Other than for those able to transport manure, the 
livestock and crop elements of the farming system are not available for use 
as fertilizer. In this sense the NCR villages are disadvantaged. 
The data and analysis demonstrate considerable variation in land available to 
households. Earlier and more established households have more land and 
better quality land than those that arrived later. All the evidence suggests that 
households with more land (wealthier households) also have larger and more 
complex land assets (different types of fields and therefore crops), than 
households with less land (poorer households). While land resources are 
important, the ability to use these resources depends on the human capital 
resources available and in this respect wealthier households are also larger 
households with an ability to maintain a larger land area. Both male and 
female labour is essential because of gender divisions of labour and as is 
widely reported elsewhere, female-headed households are most 
disadvantaged because they are smaller in size and have less male labour 
available; they depend on male labour from other households. Again, Katope 
is advantaged in this respect because it has the lowest percentage of female 
headed households and larger households overall. 
In this region, the ability to grow a range of crops and varieties, depends on 
the ability of farmers to maintain their own seed resources. Seed assets are 
personal to men and women though there is considerable exchange between 
kin and neighbours. However, no detailed information was collected on seed 
exchanges between villages and households. The data show that there are 
multiple sources for millet seed whereas the majority of other crop seeds are 
more likely to be retained by each household from the previous season. 
Legumes are the most commonly purchased seeds and of these more 
people buy cowpea seed than any other. In terms of seed selection, it is 
possible that farmers select combinations of species and varieties or 
land races that confer system stability and maximise economies of scope. 
6 Accounting for the legume gap: local land use 
6.1 Introduction 
The previous two chapters have explored the context within which communal 
farmers of northern Namibia operate. Both biophysical and socio-economic 
elements of the environment are important in influencing farmers' 
management. The analysis in chapter four presented an image of a 
biophysical environment that is diverse, complex and unpredictable. The 
temporal and spatial dynamics affect when, where and how effectively 
specific crops may grow and develop. Likewise, the results and analysis 
presented in chapter five illustrate how the social setting is also complex and 
diverse. The social construction of communities influences how assets 
accrue to different households and individuals, whilst the distribution of 
assets affect what is and what is not possible for crop farming. 
This chapter considers farmers' own experience and knowledge of their 
environment and how this frames the choices and possibilities available to 
them. It begins by outlining a framework of land classification used by 
resident farmers in the Oshaala area. Throughout the rest of the chapter this 
framework is explored using a range of different methods and analyses. 
Section 6.3 characterises each of the land units, with results drawn from 
group meetings with village elders and interviews with individual farmers. The 
following section compares results from laboratory analyses (of soils sampled 
from the land units) with the farmers' classification and assessment of soil. 
Then the suitability and capability of different land units, as mapped using 
GIS, is discussed. Further corroboration of land unit capabilities is 
established with productivity analyses from crop samples. 
The chapter concludes by evaluating the land units in each of the four 
villages around Oshaala. It explores the influence of land resources on crops 
grown and the potential impact on food security. Assessing the biophysical 
assets and farmers' management of them in this way facilitates an 
explanation of why legumes are not grown as extensively or intensively as 
might be expected. The relationship between farmers' assets in land units 
and wealth is also explored. While this chapter establishes the validity of 
basic assumptions, drawn initially from farmers' knowledge and experience, it 
is used in subsequent chapters to expand the analysis of the role of legumes. 
6.2 Local knowledge 
Research literature about other local land and soil classification systems 
have been reviewed and critiqued in chapter three. The main criticisms of 
these have been that they are locally specific so that, while they may be 
useful in their context, they have no wider application. It is said that since 
farmers' systems discriminate at a fine scale, they are often data hungry and 
prohibitively expensive to investigate, especially given their local specificity 
and narrow client roster. Scientific classification systems, on the other hand, 
are standardised and generic, verified with well-established analyses and 
therefore have wide application. Hence investment in scientific systems is 
viable and worthwhile. Local systems have nevertheless received more 
attention since sustainable development and participatory research 
imperatives have gained ground. 
As noted earlier, local systems of classifying land in Namibia have only 
recently been recognised as worthy of research attention. NGOs working 
together with the Namibian government's agriculture and forestry extension 
departments first carried out studies on local systems in the late 1990s. The 
information presented in this chapter includes primary data collected as part 
of this research and secondary data from these other studies. Although 
much of the data collection was done in collaboration with an ecologist 
researching local land units in northern Namibia (Dayot and Verlinden, 1999; 
Verlinden and Dayot, 2000), the analysis and interpretation is mine . The 
methodology described in chapter three was agreed after discussion with the 
ecologist, extension workers and local headmen. The group of 'experts' was 
identified after discussion with case study farmers and others engaged in 
farm trials and through their own willingness to partiCipate. Initially, aerial 
photographs were examined for orientation (Figure 15). In the field, the group 
of farmers pOinted out vegetative, crop, soil and site characteristics of each of 
these land units and these results are outlined below. After the map (Map 4) 
was produced and verified, it was possible to interview farmers more about 
particular crops and practices used on different land units. Ideas about soil 
and crop processes were pursued when they arose and it was appropriate to 
do so. Subsequent soil and crop sampling facilitated a comparative analysis 
of farmers' perceptions of land units with a more formal assessment of 
productivity. 
6.3 Characterisation and Crop Management 
This section characterises each of the individual land units identified at 
Oshaala. The information already established before beginning research in 
Oshaala showed that the classification system was more than soil taxonomy. 
Each land unit could be identified according to its topographic position in the 
landscape along with other features such as soil colour and textural 
properties (Table 6.1). Uncultivated land units could also be identified by the 
vegetative species found growing there (Verlinden and Dayot 1999). 
Although the land unit study in this research was only completed for Oshaala, 
it is relevant for other locations; the knowledge extends widely throughout the 
region although this is difficult to verify because of the variation in 
nomenclature. Naming of these land units varies from language group to 
language group. However, it is possible to recognise similar land units from 
their fundamental properties. This problem can only be resolved with more 
extensive research. For example, the land unit known as etathapya is one of 
the most important cropping units to the Oshaala farmers but it has not yet 
been possible to identify other names. While there are other land units that 
have been identified as prime cropping units in villages elsewhere, it has not 
been possible to confirm that they are the same/similar units to the Oshaala 
etathapyas, and no information is available about their cropping potential. 
Aerial photograph of Oshaala Area 
Figure 15: Aerial photograph of Oshaala Courtesy NNRDP 
Oshaala's land units 
2 o 2 --
Map 4: Land units of the Oshaala area, with farmers fields superimposed 
Tracks 
N MainRoads 
Ir Health posts 
D Falms 
 Villages 
o Edhlya 
D Ehenene 
D Ehenge 
c::::J E tal< a 
o Etathapya 
. Lake Olushandja  Etunu Omufrtu 
B Omutunda Ondombe 
D Oshana 
4Mil~ 
Table 6.1 Descriptions of each of the land units found In Oshaala 
LLU name19 Location in the landscape Colour Type 
ehenene oshihenene, 
low lying land unit, found 
Sand overlying 
alongside pans and other Light grey 
oshitenenge, olundanda hard pan 
depressions 
raised even areas in the dune 
valleys of the Kalahari dune 
ehenge oshihenge system in what were the former Light grey soft sand 
dunes of the old inverted dune 
landscape 
raised dunes in the Oshana 
etathapya system and inverted dune valleys Dark grey softish sand 
of the Kalahari sand dunes 
Termite enriched areas within or 
etunu oshitunhu, etuntu adjacent to the omutunda sites of Reddish Hard compact sand 
the inverted dunes 
Omufituhenge, ehengefitu, Transition zone between the 
Yellowish 
okahengethitu, omufitu plains and ehenge Soft sand 
okahengefitu elevations 
Dark grey 
Clayey with surface 
edhiya, oluma ediva, elonzi depressions crust, cracks in dry 
to black 
season 
omufitu, oshiku, elondo, 
plains Yellow Soft, loose sand 
efululu 
elevated undulating areas that 
Loamy sand 
were former depressions of the Medium 
omutunda oshipya hardish and 
now inverted dunes in the grey 
Kalahari sand dune system 
compacted 
Adapted from Verlinden and Dayot, 2000 
For elsewhere in the NCR, LLU farmer participatory research has revealed 
farmers' knowledge about the underlying hardpans. What has been possible 
with the Oshaala research reported here has been to identify the specific 
importance of these hardpans for cropping. It was found that not only do 
farmers have good knowledge about where these hardpans occur and how 
19 First name is that used in Oshaala, others are alternative names for the same land unit 
deep they are, but also about the interactions between water, soil texture and 
the impact of changing air and soil temperatures. Farmers explained in some 
depth that when temperatures drop at night water rises up through the soil 
profile (capillarity) depending on the depth of hardpan, the soil texture and 
the amount of water present (Table 6.2). 
Table 6.2 characterisation of the soil and water dynamics of each LLU 
Hardpan 
Water in the Water in the 
LLU Drainage Cohesion rooting zone rooting zone 
(depth m) 
GRY PRY 
Ehenene <0.30 
Poorly Strong-very Waterlogged 
Becomes 
drained strong hard 
Moderately 
Rises at night 
Rises at night 
Ehenge 1-2 well Moderate sufficient for 
drained 
sufficient for S 
1-2 Well Rises at night 
Rises at night 
Etathapya Moderate sufficient for 
drained sufficient for Mz 
Etunu < 1 
Strong Retained 
Becomes 
drained hard 
Omufifuhenge >2 
Well Moderately Rises at night No 
drained weak sufficient for M 
Poor- very 
Oluma poorly Very strong Waterlogged Retained 
drained 
Omufitu None 
Very well 
Weak No No 
drained 
Omutunda < 1 
Imperfectly Moderately Rises at night Becomes 
drained strong sufficient for S hard 
GRY- good rainfall year, PRY=poor rainfall year, M=millet, Mz=maize, S=sorghum 
Farmers' explanations included a comparison of these water dynamics 
between different LLUs, different crops and also between different rainfall 
years. So for example, in discussing millet it was explained that etathapya is 
usually reserved for cropping millet only, as it is produces the best yield; the 
largest millet heads and grains. Sorghum can not tolerate this environment 
well because during the daytime, when temperatures rise, it wilts and is 
unable to recover at night when the temperatures drop again as millet does. 
Farmers also explained that in dry years, ehenge can produce a better millet 
crop than etathapya, as the daytime soil temperatures are more tolerable for 
the crop. This is because farmers put more manure on etathapya and gets 
much hotter, therefore than ehenge. In moderate or wet years millet will do 
better in etathapya and omutunda where there is more fertility. 
Discussions with the group of elders showed that they had a sophisticated 
understanding of water dynamics and how these vary with temperature 
fluctuations. They also showed good understanding of soil water and nutrient 
dynamics. Water and nutrients can both be limiting in the same year but in 
different parts of the same farm. Equally, water and nutrients may be limiting 
to yield, not because there is too little of these resources but because there is 
too much. For example when a soil becomes waterlogged or when a fertile 
soil containing manure "burns" the crop. Farmers have good practical 
knowledge of how different parts of their farm respond to different rainfall 
events. They use this knowledge to decide where to plough and plant and in 
what order to plant each crop and in what pattern (Table 6.3). Other factors 
also influence decisions about ploughing, planting and crop strategies and 
these are covered in chapter seven. 
While farmers have good practical knowledge of how their land behaves 
under different climatic conditions they must still make choices without 
knowing quite how the season will turn out. It does not follow that good early 
rains mean that the whole season will be good. Decisions and action must be 
taken as the season progresses and farmers will plan more seed or less 
commonly, thin crops as and when necessary, providing labour is not limiting. 
For example, a crop that starts out as a sale millet crop on an etathapya may 
end up as an intercrop with maize if the rainfall is sufficient to support it. 
Equally what starts out as a sole crop of millet on ehenge may end up as a 
complex intercrop with maize, sorghum, cowpeas, pumpkins, melons, 
bambara groundnuts and groundnuts by the end of the season. 
Table 6.3 Management strategies for different land units 
Ehenene 
Ehenge 
Etathapya 
Etunu 
Omufituhenge 
Oluma 
Omufitu 
Omutunda 
Crops in 
M, S, Mz, 
CP, P, 
Mn, BGN 
M+ Mz 
M, CP, P, 
Mn, BGN 
BGN, GN 
M, S, Mz, 
CP, P, 
Crops in 
M, S, CP, 
P+ Mn 
M, Mz, CP, 
P+ Mn 
M+ Mz 
Crops in 
M, CP + P 
CP, BGN + 
CP + BGN 
S+ Mz 
CP + BGN 
M,CP, P, 
Mn with S 
at low 
edges 
Nothing 
BGN/nothin 
M, CP, P + 
Cropping 
pattern 
Intercrop 
Intercrop 
Sale crop or 
cereal intercrop 
Sale crop or 
cereal intercrop 
Sole crop or 
intercrop 
Sale crop or 
cereal intercrop 
Sole crop or 
legume 
intercrop 
Intercrop 
Manure 
management 
To improve 
drainage 
Effect lasts 5-6 
years 
Effect lasts >10 
years 
Never used 
Effect lasts 2-3 
years 
To improve 
drainage 
Effect lasts < 2 
years 
Effect lasts 2-5 
years 
GRY = good rainfall year, MRY = moderate rainfall year, PRY = poor rainfall year, 
M=millet, Mz=maize, S=sorghum, CP=cowpeas, P=pumpkins, BGN=bambara groundnuts, 
GN=groundnuts, Mn=melons 
Farmers say that land units respond differently to manure application as well 
as to rainfall events and this affects when, where and how much manure is 
applied (Table 6.3). Etathapyas retain manure nutrients for longer than any 
other land unit, more than ten years, whereas omufitu loses them quickly, 
less than two years, depending on rainfall. If rains are good manure 
disappears from omufitu very quickly if not, it may remain for longer but 
farmers rarely use manure on omufitu because it is "wasteful". Instead 
manure resources are concentrated where they will give the greatest benefit. 
Although manure can be retained in omutunda for similar periods of time to 
ehenge, farmers will prioritise ehenge for receiving manure applications. This 
is because omutunda is said to attract and support termites where ehenge 
doesn't and termites are known for adding fertility to soil (corroborated by 
chemical analyses in section 6.4). 
Farmers' choices and actions then are influenced not only by the weather, 
but also by the land resources contained within their farm. A farmer that has 
more land units has more choice about actions that can be taken. This 
includes choices around what crops can be planted where and when. It also 
increases choices regarding fertilisation strategies. It follows then, that 
farmers with more choice have the ability to be more flexible with climatic 
fluctuations and perturbations. Such flexibility is likely to affect the farm 
output and resultant food supplies. The relationship between wealth, diversity 
of LLU holding, choices and food security is explored later in section 7.2. 
6.3.1 Summary 
This section has characterised the local land units. Earlier work demonstrates 
that land units are characterised by their topographic position in the 
landscape, soil colour and other textural properties and that farmers 
throughout the region have considerable knowledge about the soil water 
dynamics of land units. It is suggested from this research that water and 
nutrients may both be limiting, in different parts of the same farm, in the same 
year, and that farmers have sophisticated strategies for managing this 
diversity. The strategy a farmer selects depends on their available land units, 
labour and seed but especially on their knowledge of the soil I water I crop 
interactions of their land units with seasonal changes. The more choices and 
knowledge available to a farmer, the more complex and flexible the 
management strategy can be. The section concludes that it is this flexibility, 
in the face of climatic unpredictability, that affects crop yields and food 
security. 
6.4 Soil properties 
Results presented in this section pertain to 44 samples taken from specific 
land units in farmers' fields in Oshaala. Conventional physical and chemical 
laboratory soil analyses were done on all the samples as detailed in chapter 
three. The results are used to identify and explain differences between the 
land units. 
6.4.1 Physical properties 
Table 6.4 shows that the USDA20 classification for physical soil properties 
puts all the LLUs into the broad category of 'sand', except for the oluma 
which is classified as "loamy sand". The assumptions being that these soils 
are broadly similar. However, this broad classification is insufficient for dry 
sandy environments where varying particle size translates into widely 
different soil characteristics. Particle and pore size affects the functioning of a 
soil, particularly in relation to its water holding capacity and to the movement 
of soil water through the horizons. Some analytical systems account for the 
different fractions of particle, from coarse to very fine sand, but most do not. 
Table 6.4: Physical characteristics 
LLU % clay % sand % silt USDA class 
omufitu (6) 6.2 a 91.7 a 2.1 a sand 
omufituhenge (6) 7.0 ab 91.1 a 1.9 a sand 
ehenge(6) 7.5 ab 89.5 ab 3.0 a sand 
etathapya(6) 7.5 ab 89.4 ab 3.1 a sand 
ehenene(6) 7.9 ab 90.2 ab 2.0 a sand 
omutunda(6) 8.3 bc 88.2 bc 3.5 a sand 
etunu(6) 8.7 be 87.7 be 3.7 a sand 
oluma (2) 18.0 d 74.2 d 7.8 b Sandy loam 
Means not fol/owed by a common letter are significantly different (p<0.05) 
Sandy soils are often considered to be unproductive and not worthy of 
deeper, more expensive investigation. Even more detailed particle analysis 
would not supply sufficient information about the water holding capacity or 
hydraulic conductivity of these soils and it is these aspects that are most 
likely to account for major distinctions and differences in productivity. Such 
research would require in-field, non-destructive sampling that is costly, time 
consuming and beyond the scope of this investigation. Furthermore, the 
importance of local infiltration characteristics was not recognised at the time 
of sampling. 
In contrast, farmers' descriptions recognise quite subtle distinctions between 
the soils and their classification is a reflection of this. This is understandable, 
as farmers' daily reality is a range of different sandy soils and their relative 
comparisons are bound to make quite fine distinctions. For example an 
oluma soil can from the laboratory analysis be classified as "loamy sand" 
while farmers describe this as a "clayey" soil. Relative to the other soils it is 
'clayey'. It has significantly more clay in it than any other category. likewise 
the omutunda under the USDA system is a 'sand' whereas it is significantly 
different from what farmers call sand, namely omufitu and omufituhenge 
soils. What is clear from Table 6.4 is that there is a gradation through the 
land unit categories that is consistent with farmers' classifications and 
descriptions of those soils. Furthermore, significant differences in the table 
are consistent with their position in the landscape, for example between the 
highest and lowest land units. The pattern of statistics in the table matches 
the locational arrangement in the landscape (see Maps 2 & 3). Namely 
omufitu, is next to omufituhenge which is the transition zone adjacent to 
ehenge. Ethathapyas are very often adjacent to ehenge and omutundas. 
etunu are only found within the omutunda landscape not the ehenges and 
both oluma and ehenene are the topographically lowest spots in the 
landscape. It is likely that larger sample sizes would emphasise these 
statistical differences. 
6.4.2 Potential Hydrogen 
Measurements of pH do not have preCise significance due to the methods 
used for field sampling, the soil being measured and the method used for 
20 United States Department of Agriculture 
analysis. An acid soil responds differently to an analysis done in water than in 
K chloride, KCI, and likewise the same is true of an alkaline soil (Landon 
1991). This is a problem when analysing samples that have a large range of 
pH as with this data set. However, it is still a useful measure for general 
interpretation and that is all that is possible or necessary within the scope of 
this study. 
Table 6.5: land unit pH 
LLU pH 
omufitu 6.82a 
omufituhenge 7.06 a 
ehenge 7.12 a 
oluma 7.75 ab 
ehenene 7.88 b 
omutunda 7.90 b 
etunu 7.91 b 
etathapya 7.99 b 
Means not followed by a common letter 
are significantly different (p<0.05) 
Table 6.6: pH requirements of crops 
Crop Optimum pH Range of pH 
tolerance 
Maize 
Millet 
Sorghum 
Cowpeas 
Bambara groundnuts 
Groundnuts 
Pumpkins 
Melons 
5.5 - 7.0 
5.5- 7.0 
5.5 -6.5 
6.0 - 7.0 
5.0 -6.5 
5.3 - 6.6 
5.0 - 8.0 
5.0-8.0 
5.0 -8.5 
5.5 - 7.5 
4.3-6.5 
5.0 - 7.0 
Sources Landon 1991; Begemann 1988 
The given pH results were analysed in water (Table 6.5) but had they been 
done with potassium chloride (KCI), most of the values would be lower by 
about 1 unit. The accepted optimal range for cropping is pH 6.3-7.5, so it is 
slightly surprising that the soils farmers say are the most productive (Le. the 
etathapyas) appear to be the most alkaline of the samples. Although given 
potential error due to methods, it is likely that all the soils are in the optimal 
cropping range. Further analysis into the crops grown in the area makes 
more sense of farmers' classification. Legumes generally prefer a more 
acidic pH than cereals, which have an alkaline tolerance (Table 6.6). 
Comparing crop pH tolerances (Table 6.6) with farmers' management of 
these crops (Table 6.4) confirms that farmers grow legumes on the more 
acidic and sandier spots, while cereals are grown on more neutral and 
alkaline land units. Section 6.5 explores crop and soil suitability's in more 
depth. 
Most interesting in the pH analysis are the statistical differences between the 
groups; omufitu, omufituhenge, and ehenge are significantly different to 
ehenene, omutunda etunu and etathapya (p=0.002-0.004). This result is 
fairly consistent with what has already been learnt from farmers and the 
results of the physical properties; omufituhenge is a mixture of omufitu and 
ehenge but completely different from ehenene, omutunda etunu and 
etathapya. Surprisingly, while oluma is the only land unit to be classified by 
farmers as clayey and by the USDA system as the only sandy loam in the 
group, it is not significantly different to any of the other land units for pH. The 
land unit that is most similar to oluma is ehenene that is found in the 
topographically lower locations of the landscape. It is conceivable that the 
finer particles carried by horizontal water movements are largely responsible 
for topsoil pH. 
6.4.3 Cation Exchange Capacity (CEC), organic matter and nitrogen 
CEC measurements give a general indication of a soil's potential fertility. 
Estimates are achieved by leaching a soil sample with a buffered solution of 
a particular cation. CEC values depend on pH and are variable with it. More 
precise results are achieved when the buffer solution is selected according to 
the pH of the source sample. This is a problem when a comparison of 
samples is required and the samples display a range of pH, as this data set 
does. These samples were all leached with Potassium Chloride (KCI) to 
render the results comparable and although there is likely to be some error 
within the data set due to methods, it is still a useful exercise and the best 
currently available within budget restrictions. 
CEC results show a range from 3.74 - 14.02 me/100g of soil (Table 6.7). 
Generally 5-15 me/100g of soil is considered to be low while anything below 
5 me/100g of soil is considered to be very low with poor nutrient reserves. 
Organic C is also often used as a measure of soil fertility with anything under 
2% (by weight) being very low. All the figures in the data set are extremely 
low. Likewise, mineral N, being a major plant nutrient, is also important but 
notoriously difficult to measure due to its rapid transformation over time. Plant 
available N is very variable with moisture while total N is not. Total N was all 
that could be measured in this context and all values below 0.1 % (by weight) 
as these are, are considered to be very low indeed. C: N ratios are usually 
low, often less than 10: 1 in tropical soils with their high temperatures and 
rapid microbial activity and they are not an accurate indication of organic 
matter content (Landon 1991). 
Table 6.7: Cation exchange capacity, organic C and total N content 
LLU CEC me/100g %C W_Black Total N (%) 
omufitu 3.74a 0.23 ab 0.013a 
omufituhenge 4.38ab 0.20 a 0.012a 
ehenge 4. 77abc 0.23 ab 0.017ab 
ehenene 5.55abc 0.27 ab 0.014 ab 
omutunda 6.04bcd 0.36 b 0.021be 
etathapya 6.19 bed 0.42 b 0.025ed 
etunu 6.S1cd 0.45 b O.030d 
oluma 14.02e 0.87 c 0.047e 
Means not followed by a common letter are significantly different (p<0.05) 
In terms of statistical differences between the groups, a similar pattern 
emerges (Table 6.7). The oluma is significantly different to all other soil 
samples and the omufifu, omufifuhenge and ehenge soil samples all fall into 
a similar grouping that show varying significance in fertility to omutunda, 
etathapya, etunu and oluma. These last four do appear to be the more fertile 
of the LLUs although the measured differences are relatively small. 
6.4.4 Phosphorus 
Total P is useful to get an idea about the amount of background P that 
includes non-available and potentially available (fixed) as well as plant 
available P. The process that yields plant available P from the background is 
one of the most complex of soil nutrient processes and it is difficult to 
measure. Soils have a "capacity" (potentially available or fixed P) that is 
transformed slowly into a form that plants can use, the available P. It is the 
concentration of plant available P that is most important for crop growth and 
this is Significantly higher in etunu, the termite enriched soil, than all the 
others (Table 6.8. column two). Only etunu. oluma and etathapya show levels 
that are considered satisfactory for crops (i.e. above 5 mg/kg) and these are 
significantly higher than the other land units except for omutunda. Although 
the level for omutunda is lower than satisfactory. it is still significantly higher 
than omufitu. omufituhenge. ehenge and ehenene land units. 
Table 6.S: Different measures of P in the land units 
Available P as % of 
LLU P Bray1 mg/kg P Total mg/kg 
Total P 
ehenene 2.50 a 51.67 a 6.02 a 
ehenge 2.58 a 52.13 a 5.26 a 
omufituhenge 2.70 a 50.60 a 6.43 a 
omufitu 3.32 a 72.34 a 4.80 a 
omutunda 3.95 b 70.35 a 5.76 a 
etathapya 6.67 b 74.00 a 8.35 a 
oluma 16.65 b 171.50 c 9.88 a 
etunu 35.28 c 118.30 b 28.37 b 
Means not followed by a common letter are significantly different (p<0.05) 
The samples also show there is a strong correlation (P<0.01) between 
available P and total P in all the LLUs. The olumas and etunus show 
significantly higher total P (non-available and fixed P) and the etunus have a 
significantly higher intensity of plant available P in the profile. Additionally. the 
etunus supply about 20% more available P from total background P than any 
of the other soil types (p< 0.001). Based on this evidence. either termites 
existence and lifestyle makes a difference to these soils especially in respect 
of plant available P or. termites are able to select soils where total P and 
plant available pools of P are naturally higher. Whichever is the case. these 
results confirm why termite inhabited soils and termite mounds are valuable 
to local farmers. This is worthy of more exploration. 
6.4.5 Summary 
Statistical analyses show that the physical and chemical properties of the 
land units are consistent with the farmers' classification system. The physical 
properties reflect their topographical position in the landscape and significant 
differences are found between some of the groups. Whereas using the USDA 
system of classification loses variability and classifies seven out of the eight 
soils as being simply "sandy". Analysis of pH produces two broadly different 
groups, those below pH 7.5 and those above. Not only is this consistent with 
the difference between the sandier and the less sandy, the higher and the 
lower soils but it is also consistent with the sites where farmers grow legumes 
and cereals. Legumes like well drained sites and are more tolerant to acid 
soils. Cereals are more tolerant to alkaline and prefer soils that retain 
moisture. 
Likewise, similar patterns emerge when soils are analysed for their nutrient 
contents; omufitu, omufituhenge and ehenge soil samples all fall into a 
similar grouping that show differences of varying significance but lower in 
fertility to omutunda, etathapya, etunu and o/uma. Legumes can manage in 
low fertility soils and do better in these places than cereals. P levels are 
particularly striking and significant in the etunu soils, supporting farmers' 
knowledge and use of these highly fertile patches for growing staple cereal 
crops. Legumes are known to have developed different uptake strategies for 
extracting P from soil bound pools, particularly calcium bound pools (Mero 
2000), partially explaining their success in the soils with lower plant available 
P. The ehenene soils are different from the other groups, consistent with 
farmers' views as being a difficult soil to manage. While the analyses 
generate many differences, some significant, it is considered that larger 
sample sizes would emphasise the differences between the land units more 
effectively. 
When assessing all the factors known about these land units together, what 
farmers say about manure and their manure strategies makes very good 
sense. For example, omufitu is a coarse sandy soil of loose deep sands with 
no underlying hardpan. They are indeed well drained and also well leached. 
Termite enriched soils do contain more nutrients and especially P. Since 
there is a relationship between mineral fertiliser and crop yield that is more 
than Simply additive, it makes sense to prioritise manure additions on the 
best soils rather than trying to improve poorer ones. Adding manure to soils 
that have an underlying hard pan may also be another way to retain nutrients 
within the rooting zone or within a retrievable zone. 
6.5 Suitability and productivity 
This section summarises information from the group of elders conferred 
about which lands units support which crops and the productivity of different 
land units. The text refers to maps produced as a result of this information 
(Maps 6-11). There is also a quantitative analysis of the millet productivity of 
the land units based on field samples taken at harvest time. Since legumes 
are planted less extensively than millet it has not been possible to capture a 
similar comparative view of land units' legume productivity. In this context, it 
is not possible to analyse legume productivity in isolation from millet 
productivity. 
6.5.1 Crop suitability of land units 
Crop suitability maps were produced based on information given by the 
group of farmers. These maps were then shown to the group and discussed 
to verify the information that had been given. The maps capture a general 
image of farmers' recommendations for crop suitability but they are not ideal. 
They do not capture the detailed seasonal variations. Nevertheless they are 
useful visual representations of farmers' knowledge and with more research, 
this kind of map could be developed in several ways. A range of maps could 
illustrate the temporal dynamics of these land units for example, where to 
plant sorghum in a year of good and even rainfall or, in a year with a mid 
season drought. Maps like these would be a useful planning tool for 
experimental research both on station and on farm. They could be used for 
selecting field sites to test new crops, for informing the blocking of field trials 
and to aid the research and development of targeted technologies. They 
could also provide a valuable guide for extension workers at the interface 
with farmers. The maps could be particularly useful as a training device for 
new extension officers and for those being transferred from one area to 
another. Finally, they could also be used as a means of improving 
communication between extension officers and professionals of one ethnic I 
language group and farmers of another. 
Bambara groundnuts (Map 6) 
The map developed as a result of elders' information indicates omufitu, which 
is a sandy well-drained environment, to be the most suitable area for 
cultivating bambara groundnuts. The central areas of omufitu are often too 
dry and sandy without soil improvement but this is very costly as manure 
disappears too fast. It is better to plant bambara groundnut towards the edge 
of the omufitu and particularly at the transition with ehenge, in the 
omufituhenge (or ehengefitu). Bambara groundnut will grow in ehenge and 
etathapya but are less likely to produce pods. It is not advisable to plant 
bambara ground nuts in omutunda, ehenene or o/uma. 
Groundnuts (Map 7) 
Groundnuts grow best in the transition between omufitu and ehenge, at the 
omufituhenge. They grow better in ehenge than bambara groundnuts but less 
well in omufitu, unless it is a good rainfall year. Groundnuts are not tolerant to 
dryness and will not do well in the dry parts of omufitu or ehenene and 
omutunda or o/uma. 
Cow peas (Map 8) 
Cowpeas have a much wider range than bambara groundnuts and 
ground nuts. They grow well in ehenge but also in omufituhenge and 
omutunda. According to the rainfall, neither too wet nor too dry, they can also 
do well in ehenene. It is not advisable to plant cowpeas in etathapya unless 
they are being grown for the leaves, as they are less likely to pod well here. 
Millet (Map 9) 
Etathapya and omutunda are usually reserved for growing millet since this is 
the main staple crop. Etathapya can produce very good heads and grain with 
good rainfall. Millet will also grow but produce less well on ehenge. Providing 
the rainfall is neither too great nor too little, millet can produce a crop on 
ehenene but it will not usually grow well on omufitu. 
Sorghum (Map 10) 
Sorghum grows best in ehenge and less well in omutunda. Etathapya is 
usually too hot and dry during the daytime for sorghum though millet is more 
tolerant of these conditions. Yields can be high in ehenene, but risks are high 
as this environment is prone to water logging or drying out because of the 
proximity of the hard pan. Sorghum does well at edges close to oshanas and 
edhiyas21 . This environment is particularly good for red sorghum which 
tolerates more moisture than white sorghum. 
Maize (Map 11) 
In a good rainfall year maize will grow in omutunda, etathapya and ehenge. 
Old kraal sites on these environments are a good place as are etunu sites. 
ehenene is too risky for maize and omufitu too dry. 
21 An Ediya is a clayey depression that holds water in the wet season (see Table 6.1) - they 
are smaller than oshanas. 
Uutapi area land units 
 ... 
-~_x::---
1 ... :.::---.  
... --
8 o 12 Miles 
~~~----~~~~~----------
Map 5: LLUs across the Uutapi area, on which the suitability maps have been created 
N Main Roads 
y Villages 
I .;"" .,.j Edhiya 
o Ehenene 
o Ehenge 
o Etaka 
D Etattlapya 
DEtunu 
D::J Lake Olushandja 
D Omufitu 
o Omutunda 
DOndombe 
DOshana 
Bambara Groundnuts Suitability 
7 o 7 14 MI.s 
Map 6: Land units ' suitability for growing Bambara groundnuts 
A/Main roads 
_ very high 
_ high 
medium 
very low 
~ .., .--.-.c 
cu .., .-
,... ...J 
r..:. 
~ .., .--.-
ns .., .-
0 ... 
Ol ... 
-----.c 
ns .., 
Q) ----
-. 
C) ... 
Sorghum Suitability 
7 o 7 14 Miles 
Map 10: Land un its ' suitability for growing sorghum 
N Malnroads 
_ very hlyh risk 
high risk 
medium 
very low 
Maize Suitability 
7 0 7 14 Miles 
Map 11 : Land units ' suitability for growing maize (year of good rainfall) 
AI Mai n roads 
_ high 
very low 
6.5.2 Productivity of land units 
Productivity of the land units was measured by taking crop samples of millet 
only (Table 6.10). These results can only be used to verify the millet 
productivity of the land units and the results are consistent with farmers' 
expectations. The soils from etathapya land units are producing up to 435% 
more millet grain than all the other land units and this is significantly more 
than the sandy omufitu soils. The fertile organic nature of these soils 
supports farmers' claims. Equally, the low fertility sandy soils from omufitu 
land produce the lowest millet yield, while ehenge and the transition zone 
between the two land units, omufituhenge, appear to produce higher yields 
though this difference was not significant. Production on omutunda soils was 
less than on ehenge soils, but sample size is low. With larger sample sizes 
and adequate to good rainfall, the mean production value for omutunda is 
likely to be higher than ehenge. 
Table 6.10: Pearl millet field measurements and grain dry weights 
Whole plant Number of 
Hill count Head Om Grain Om 
LLU (n) fresh weight heads 
(OOOtha) 
kg/ha (OOO/ha) 
kg/ha kg/ha 
omuf;tu (6) 12 a 3967 ab 26b 551 b 385 b 
omutunda (2) 17 13500 77 731 473 
omufituhenge (3) 22 b 2700 b 62ab 692 ab 5441b 
ehenge (1) 13 3000 66 1245 720 
ehenene(4) 20 b 8150 ab 82 ab 1677 ab 1250 ab 
etathapya (6) 17 ab 13400 a 110 a 2757 I 2059 I 
oluma (1) 28 9000 117 2700 2187 
Different letters indicate significance at p<O.OS. No letters indicates test was not run (low 
sample size) 
The apparent productivity of ehenene soils is more complex and the mean 
value for grain is quite high but is not significantly different from the other 
land units. The range of data for ehenene could be due to its high potential 
but also high risk associated with the depth of the hardpan, the extent of 
annual run-off water and any subsequent water-logging. Noticeable is the 
high mean hill count suggesting good germination and establishment. If crops 
on ehenene become established to the extent that their roots are able to 
penetrate the hardpan, they will probably be able to withstand mid season 
drought and short periods of water-logging. If not they will suffer severely and 
maybe fail altogether. These soils are probably quite nutrient rich, as the 
position in the landscape suggests that some of the finer particles of clay, silt 
and sand are deposited here. Also the shallow hardpan prevents leaching of 
the nutrients gained from rainfall run-off. If well established, then millet crops 
on ehenene can do well under stress. 
Olums being a clayey soil is relatively fertile and consequently produces very 
good yields. However these patches are usually small and unfortunately, only 
one area of olums was sampled. 
The quantitative analysis of millet productivity supports what farmers say 
about the various land units and their strategic management of the land and 
the data show that the etathapyas are the most productive of the land units. It 
must be acknowledged though that the variable and small samples taken 
limit the value of the data and the findings are only indicative. In addition, 
data only exist for one cropping season. The Oshaala rainfall data (section 
4.2.2) indicate that it was a comparatively dry year with most of the rain 
falling in the first half of the season. Farmers report that comparatively, millet 
does better in ehenge than omutunda in dry years and vice versa in 
moderate to wet years. Since this was a dry year, the data supports farmers' 
expectations. 
Legume productivity and farmer strategies 
It was not possible to sample legumes across all the same land units. Since 
millet is the staple crop and is prioritised by farmers, some will try to cultivate 
millet in all the land units whereas this does not apply to legumes. 
Consequently it was possible to sample millet from a range of existing plots 
in farmers' own fields. To sample legumes across the same land units would 
have required establishing legume plots in places where farmers do not 
usually plant legumes. Although there are no legume-specific productivity 
data for the land units, it is possible to use secondary data from the PSP 
project to get an idea of the range of values that farmers achieve in their 
fields. Most of these data are based on mean values calculated from many 
plots across farmers' fields with no reference to the type of land on which 
they were planted. 
Over two years and two villages the means generated for a range of 
monocropped cowpea variety and management trials varied from 100 kg/ha 
to 2000 kg/ha (Hillyer and McDonagh 1999, Hillyer and McDonagh 2000) 
with the majority falling around the 400-600 kg/ha mark. For samples taken 
from intercropped fields the cowpea grain yield averaged 80 kg/ha, while the 
yield from small monocropped plots and scaled up was under 1000 kg/ha 
(McDonagh and Hillyer 2003). Data from research station trials with high 
density millet (8,000 and 16,000 hills/ha) intercropped with cowpeas on an 
omufituhenge land unit give similar values. The range of yields for different 
cowpea and millet combinations at the two different densities were 120 to 
270 kg/ha and 151 to 1209 kg/ha respectively for the 1998/99 and 1999/00 
seasons (Hillyer and McDonagh 1999, Hillyer and McDonagh 2000). Less 
data were generated for bambara groundnuts and groundnuts but in 
Oshaala, during the 1999/00 season, means of 483-787 kg/ha were recorded 
for different varieties of bambara groundnuts and a mean of 474 kg/ha for 
ground nuts (Hillyer and McDonagh 2000). 
It is a pity that cited data is unspecified in terms of the land units that farmers 
planted. While the results from the research station trials are not indicative of 
farmer practice on omufifuhenge soils, it is possible to achieve a cowpea 
yield of over 1000 kg/ha even when intercropped with millet. Based on the 
evidence of millet productivity of land units in this section, it is reasonable to 
assume that farmer perceptions of relative legume productivity will be equally 
reliable. Drawing on farmer knowledge and their reported strategies 
therefore, it is possible to summarise what is known about the legume 
productivity of land units. Legumes, especially local land races that produce 
subterranean pods (e.g. bambara groundnuts) are well adapted to omufifu 
and omufifuhenge land units. Since very little else does well in these land 
units, farmers almost exclusively use them for cultivating these legumes. 
Other land units such as omutunda and ehenge are usually intercropped with 
a combination of cereals, legumes and melons. Legumes that pod aerially 
(i.e. cowpeas) are usually used on these land units as the harvesting 
operation is simpler and quicker. Also, depending on the weather, omutunda 
and ehenge can be too hard for subterranean legume species, whereas 
aerial species are more tolerant. The choice of legumes for planting depends, 
at least partially, on the land units the household fields contain. 
6.5.3 Summary 
This section has examined the information about where different crops 
perform best. Initially farmers' testimonies were used to produce maps 
showing the best places for different crops given adequate but not excessive 
rainfall. The land units were then sampled to ascertain their actual 
productivity. Millet is grown more extensively than any other crop, so this was 
used as the standard crop for sampling across the land units. The mean 
millet productivity of etathapya was found to be over 2000 kg/ha and 
significantly greater than the 385 kg/ha for omufitu land units. 
Farmer estimates were used to assess relative legume productivity. Omufitu, 
omufifuhenge and ehenge land units are said to be the most suitable places 
for cowpeas, bambara groundnuts and groundnuts while cowpeas can also 
be grown in omutunda. The other land units are considered to be either 
completely unsuitable for legumes or they will produce good biomass but 
poor pod production. The analyses presented in section 6.7 and in the 
remaining chapters rely on the assumption that farmers' assessment of the 
legume productivity of different land units is reliable. 
6.6 Local land units 
The concept of the local land units has already been discussed in Chapter 
three. This section enters into more detail about farmer knowledge of these 
and provides a critique of their potential value for research. 
Local classification systems are recognised as being more than soil 
taxonomy and are linked to specific land units (Rigourd and Sappe, 1999; 
Shitundeni and Marsh, 1999; Verlinden and Dayot, 2000). Essentially, local 
systems integrate an understanding of soil characteristics in conjunction with 
relief and location of the soil relative to important water bodies of the Oshana 
system. The common features recognised by these studies and confirmed by 
this work are that: 
 local systems are 'utilitarian' and not confined to agricultural 
uses22 
 local systems are sophisticated and farmers discriminate at a 
very fine scale 
 transitional zones between one class and another are 
recognised and classified accordingly 
 soil mixtures are recognised, very often in the transitional 
zones 
 among the classes used for cropping, classification revolves 
around the opportunities and constraints to production 
 local systems account for soil depth and particularly the 
presence or absence and depth of a hard pan 
 local systems are complex and incorporate an understanding 
of the soil response to water and this is not confined to the 
response to rainfall 
 farmers have a good understanding of the soil/water 
interactions and their suitabifity for different crops 
 local names of units within the systems vary making it difficult 
to generalise about the units beyond specific sites 
The local concept of a land unit is neither simple nor straightforward. Defining 
it is complicated since it means a variety of things to people at different times. 
For example, some land units are good for building and poor for farming, 
while a land unit that works well for one enterprise in a wet year may be poor 
in a dry year and vice versa. Land unit function and value can change with 
the socio-economic environment and land classification systems are political. 
The classification of land units is based on multiple criteria and not all criteria 
are available for all land units. For example vegetation criteria may no longer 
be used once land is cleared and with the removal of the vegetative cover the 
ecology of the land unit alters. Classifications can also change with time and 
use. A plot which has been used for a household compound may become a 
fertile plot for crop farming while the household compound is rebuilt on an 
exhausted plot. Criteria can vary from place to place. For example, an 
omufitu may be red in one area and yellow in another. To compound the 
problem, criteria are often used comparatively and this can cause confusion. 
Likewise contradictions can arise when some farmers recognise sub-groups, 
binary soil mixtures and transitional zones. Different dialects further 
complicate nomenclature, as the use of synonyms is common. 
Despite such complexity and the problems of establishing clearly bounded 
land units, the classification systems and the land units themselves are worth 
exploring since they embody valuable knowledge about land management 
and farmers' cropping practices. While previous studies in Namibia have 
recognised that farmers have distinct strategies for different land units, these 
have not been detailed or corroborated. This study uses the farmers own 
classification system as a framework for describing and analysing the 
opportunities and constraints to crop production at the local level. 
Furthermore, it offers a unique opportunity to look beyond farmers' 
management to their perception and understanding of processes in order to 
inform the analysis of why 'new' legume technologies are not adopted more 
extenSively. 
22 For example some classes are used for pottery, others for building. 
6.7 Distribution of Local Land Units 
6.7.1 Village land 
Based on what farmers say about land, plus empirical measurement and 
GIS, a spatial analysis can now be used to characterise the four villages 
(Map 12) of the Oshaala area (Tables 6.11 and 6.12). The analysis only 
includes land inside farmers' fences and as such it focuses mainly on crop 
land. Common access land, that is land for grazing and scrub land found 
outside the fences is disregarded. The land unit called Omufituhenge, the 
transition zone between omufitu and ehenge units is not delineated since this 
unit is difficult to identify from satellite images and is omitted from the spatial 
analysis. While legumes may be grown in both ehenge and omufitu land 
omufituhenge is considered to be one of the best environments for growing 
legumes. The best environment for growing millet is etathapya but ehenge 
and omutunda are also good depending on the type of rainfall. 
Although Okamwandi Kamadhinga village has the largest surface area of 435 
hectares, it has no omufitu or omufituhenge land. While this is a limitation for 
legume cultivation, especially the subterranean species, the farmers of this 
village have good land assets for millet. Etathapya and omutunda occupy 
the largest proportion of land area and these are likely to do well in good 
rainfall years. In poor rainfall years the large area of ehenge potentially 
secures a staple harvest in this village. Okamwandi Kamadhinga has the 
highest percentage of ehenene land of all the villages which makes this 
village vulnerable to a high degree of run off water and standing water in wet 
years (Table 6.12). Indeed this village was the most difficult to access in the 
wetter season of 1999/2000 due to a great deal of standing water and 
waterlogged areas. In this village, farmer participation in the legume trials 
was the lowest and this can now be attributed to their lack of suitable land for 
legumes. 
Villages and farm boundaries 
Map 12: Farmers fields in the Oshaala area, identified by their sub-village 
Tracks 
ty=t~=s 
D Fa.ms 
 V_ages 
Engombe 
Okaanga 
Oshaala 
Engombe had the second largest land area. Unlike Okamwandi Kamadhinga, 
it has some omufitu, ehenge and omufituhenge land, although not much; only 
5% of the land unit area is comprised of ehenge which limits possible millet 
production in dry years. Especially in dry years Engombe farmers are likely to 
be very vulnerable although it is well endowed with land suitable for growing 
millet in good rainfall years. Engombe has only a small proportion of the good 
legume land, omufituhenge. 
Table 6.11: Areas of land units (ha) contained within each village 
Okamwandi 
Engombe Okaanga Oshaala Totals 
Kamadhinga 
ehenene 38 28 75 35 176 
ehenge 20 50 84 42 197 
omufitu 30 54 0 32 116 
omutunda 179 29 150 93 451 
etathapya 163 93 125 89 469 
Totals 430 254 434 291 1409 
Table 6.12: Village land units as a percentage of the whole 
Okamwandi 
Engombe Okaanga Oshaala 
Kamadhinga 
ehenene 8 11 17 12 
ehenge 5 20 19 14 
omufitu 7 21 0 11 
omutunda 42 11 35 32 
etathapya 38 37 29 31 
Totals 100 100 100 100 
What is noticeable about Okaanga and Oshaala is that while they have 
considerably smaller land areas, they have a much more even spread of land 
units. This is particularly so in Okaanga where the first inhabitants in this area 
settled. These villagers benefit by having land that is suitable for growing 
both legumes and millet. Their land should also produce a millet harvest in 
both good and poor rainfall years and this is supported by farmers' accounts. 
Okaanga farmers have an advantage over Oshaala farmers for several 
reasons. First of all 37% of Okaanga land is etathapya, the best millet land in 
good rainfall years, while only 30% of Oshaala land is occupied by this type 
of land unit. Secondly, Okaanga has 20% of ehenge which can produce a 
relatively good crop in poorer years while Oshaala has 15% of ehenge. Third, 
Okaanga is better endowed with legume land, around 100 hectares, whereas 
Oshaala has around 70 hectares. Finally Okaanga is adjacent to the lake and 
has easy access to water, albeit slightly saline. Okaanga is known to occupy 
better land and is home to two of the four headmen. Oshaala, on the other 
hand has more ehenene both proportionally and in real terms, than Okaanga. 
Ehenene that is not in the path of runoff waters is a good site for building and 
it is here that services such as the kuuka shops, small supermarket, clinic 
and school are located. 
6.7.2 Distribution of village land among farm households 
Whether or not a village is better endowed in terms of land units also 
depends on the population dependent on the land. Table 6.13 presents data 
on land holdings held by the individual households (Table 6.13). The data 
show that both the largest and smallest land holdings are found in Okaanga. 
This is the smallest village in total land area and has the smallest number of 
households. Collectively, these households have the best spread of land 
units for diverse crop farming. They also have above average sized patches 
for all the most useful land units for cropping (Table 6.14). Only patches of 
ehenene and omutunda are below the overall mean while etathapya, ehenge 
and omufitu are well above the local mean. It is no coincidence that it is here 
that the longest standing and often wealthier residents live alongside the 
poorer households that have more recently moved in to fill the uninhabited 
corners. Reciprocal relationships are established between these rich/poor 
households based on labour and food crop exchanges. This is particularly 
evident in Okaanga. 
Overall, the smallest land holdings are found in Engombe. These vil/agers do 
not have access to such diverse cropland but it is sufficient for a good 
harvest providing the rainfall is adequate. Farms in this village have below 
average sized patches of all the land units except omutunda; omutunda is 
able to support a good crop of millet, other cereals and cowpeas in a year of 
good rainfall but in a poor year, it becomes too hard and limits cultivation. 
However these villagers have the advantage of being quite close to Oshaala, 
where the market and other services are found. 
Table 6.13: Field size (ha) by village 
Village name No of Mean Median Mode Max Min Std Dev 
Households 
Engombe 58 8 8 11 16 2 3 
Okaanga 26 13 9 7 33 1 7 
Okamwandi Kamadhinga 46 11 9 4 29 4 6 
Oshaala 36 9 8 22 22 1 5 
Group Total 166 10 9 4 33 1 6 
Table 6.14: Mean size of LLU plots (ha) by village 
Engombe Okaanga Okamwandi Oshaala Totals 
Kamandingha 
ehenene 1.2 1.1 1.6 1.3 1.4 
ehenge 1.5 2.8 2.7 2.1 2.4 
omufitu 2.8 4.1 0 2.3 3.1 
omutunda 3.8 2.9 3.1 2.5 3.2 
etathapya 3.8 4.4 3.5 4.0 3.9 
Overall 2.6 3.1 2.7 2.5 2.7 
Okamwandi Kamadhinga is more remote but it is closer to the local source of 
drinking water. It is the largest village in land area and supports 28% of the 
population of these villages while the average land holding is also larger than 
the overall mean, at 10 hectares. The village land units therefore, while 
limited for diverse cropping, are adequate for ensuring a crop most years. 
The households of Okamwandi Kamadhinga have above average sized 
patches of ehenge and etathapya land units that will secure quite good 
harvests in good rainfall years. 
Oshaala is the social hub of these villages and supports 22% of the 
households. The field sizes are smaller than the overall mean but the land is 
sufficiently diverse to support a variety of crops and to secure a harvest in 
most years. Households in Oshaala have below average sized patches of all 
the land units except etathapya which is well above the local mean. 
tathapya can produce substantial millet harvests in good rainfall years. 
These farmers have the advantage that in poor rainfall years they are on the 
spot for getting to the market first, when food supplies are scarce. 
The households in all four villages have an average of three different land 
units within their farm boundaries. However Engombe is the most limited in 
that three land units is the maximum any household can have (Table 6.15) 
and this impacts the farming choices available to these households. Okaanga 
and Oshaala households have a wider range of land units than those in 
Okamwandi Kamadhinga, giving these households much more choice for 
crop selection and management. 
Table 6.15: LLUs found individual farms of the villages 
Mean Mode Median Max Min 
Engombe 3 3 2 3 1 
Okaanga 3 3 3 5 
Okamwandi Kamadhinga 3 3 3 4 1 
Oshaala 3 3 3 5 1 
Overall 3 3 3 5 1 
Table 6.16: Average and range of diversity Indices 
Mean Max Min Median Mode Std Dev 
Engombe 1.93a 3.74 1.00 1.92 1.00 0.68 
Oshaala 2.34b 4.66 1.00 2.14 1.00 1.07 
Okamwandi Kamadhinga 2.43b 3.99 1.00 2.15 1.00 0.81 
Okaanga 2.52b 4.82 1.00 2.20 1.00 1.12 
Group Total 2.26 4.82 1.00 2.08 1.00 0.91 
Means not followed by a common letter are significantly different (p<O.05) 
Village diversity is explored further by applying a diversity index to the data 
(see chapter three) and results confirm that households in Okaanga are the 
most diverse, while those in Engombe are the least diverse (Table 6.16). The 
range of diversity indices for Oshaala households is higher than for 
Okamwandi Kamadhinga households but the mean diversity of households is 
smaller. The diversity indices between the vii/ages are significantly different 
(p=O.01) and the largest and most significant differences are between 
Engombe and all the other villages (p=O.05). More analysis of the 
significance of this diversity is presented in chapters seven and eight. 
6.8 Conclusion 
This chapter started the process of accounting for why legumes are not 
grown as extensively or intensively as might be expected from the discourse 
on legumes by focusing on the biophysical aspects of the system. It began by 
explaining the framework used for the classification of local land units which 
forms the basis of the options available for farmers in this area. While the 
land units have recently been explored and documented, they have not been 
used for the analysis of cropping strategies. The framework was verified 
using conventional soil and crop data. While farmers manage different land 
units according to their perceived potential, these data demonstrated that the 
land units fell broadly into two groups. The first group of omufitu, 
omufituhenge and ehenge land units are sandier, well drained, more acidic, 
lower in fertility and generally will support legume species. The second group 
of omutunda, etathapya, etunu and oluma land units despite being more 
alkaline, is considerably higher in fertility, retains more moisture and is 
capable of supporting cereal crops. However, both spatially and temporally, 
the situation is more complex and varies according to the soil I water crop 
dynamics and the characteristics of the season. Some land units are able to 
support different crops species and varieties or combinations, while others 
cannot. As a result some land units are habitually intercropped while others 
are not. Maps of land unit suitability were produced and these have potential 
for development. 
The land unit framework was then used to undertake an analysis of land 
diversity and use at the village level. The next chapter extends the same 
analysis to the household level and takes into consideration household 
wealth differences. The underlying assumption of this analysis is that land 
assets and their management may be used as a proxy for understanding the 
crop combinations and outputs that farmers currently achieve. 
7 Accounting for the legume gap: linking other factors 
7.1 Introduction 
This chapter extends the analysis of the legume gap by shifting the focus 
from the biophysical to social factors and from the village to household level. 
It seeks to understand the impact of land diversity on the way farmers use 
legumes and their use of other resources that shape their livelihoods and 
lifestyles. The chapter begins with an analysis and discussion of wealth 
ranking data in the four villages around Oshaala. Distribution of land between 
the different wealth groups is then investigated. The links between wealth 
and land are explored, including an historical analysis of viI/age settlement. 
Gender aspects are also reviewed. The chapter then moves on to emphasise 
legumes, beginning with an analysis of legume land assets as distinct from 
land used for millet and other cereal crops. However, since legumes are but 
a part of the farming system, they cannot be completely decoupled and so 
this section and subsequent sections include comparisons with other parts of 
the system. The next section focuses on the labour inputs needed for legume 
production and the impact of labour constraints. The penultimate section 
looks at legume seed inputs and the analysis investigates how these various 
inputs affect the role that legumes play in different households. The final 
section summarises the results and the analysis. 
7.2 Land, wealth and livelihoods 
7.2.1 Wealth ranking 
Wealth ranks were determined according to the method described in chapter 
three. Initially these data were used as a sampling frame for surveys and 
case study selection. They supplied an image of the socio-economic 
character of the village and a baseline from which to develop further 
research. These rankings were explored further, especially in case study 
fieldwork, and since then have been incorporated into a database and used 
for analysis of farmers' assets and asset deployment. The criteria used by 
informants, the households they identified and the gender of the head of 
household, are presented in Tables 7.1-7.4. 
Table 7.1 Wealth ranking of Engombe households 
Rank Description Total Hhs Male Hh Female Hh 
Work hard, good field and better harvest. Own 
cattle, goats, and donkeys. Some have jobs. 23 23 0 
Some have more labour 
" Hardworking, OK fields. Some have cattle and 8 4 4 some goats 
III Goats only. Hire donkeys for ploughing. One 
has only child labour. There are worse off 5 4 
households 
IV No animals and hire for ploughing. Many older 
women. Those who are young have children 
17 4 13 
in school. Wife of polygamous husband and 
some widows but not all. 
V No animals. Small household and small field. 
One has just arrived. One has husband 3 2 1 
working away but she is alone and poor. 
Table 7.2 Wealth ranking of Okaanga Households: 
Rank Description Total Hhs Male Hh Female Hh 
Hard working and good fields 
Some have cattle but some have only goats 
11 7 4 
" Fields didn't do so well. Not all about labour but they are not so careful. 5 4 
Some have only goats 
III Not enough labour. No young people. 
4 2 2 
2 are widows and 1 is very old 
IV Have very small fields and even the house is 
7 1 6 
small. They don't fit in anywhere else 
Table 7.3 Wealth ranking of Oshaala households: 
Rank Description Total Hhs Male Hh Female Hh 
Own cattle, goats, and donkeys. 
19 17 2 
More have jobs. 
II Donkeys and goats 12 10 2 
III Goats only. Hire donkeys for ploughing 10 8 2 
IV No animals. Hire donkeys, house and fields. 
18 4 14 
Some are old (11) 
Table 7.4 Wealth ranking of Okamwandi Kamadhlnga: 
Rank Okamwandi Kamadhinga Total Hhs Male Hh Female 
Cattle, goats and donkeys. Some have jobs. 
Some have bicycles 
13 10 3 
II Mostly have goats and some donkeys. 7 6 1 
III Only goats and smaller households. Some old 
5 3 2 
people 
IV No animals. Small households and not many 
10 2 8 
children 
Headmen were the informants in this process and as such results are biased 
according to their perceptions. Four wealth groups were identified by most of 
the informants while one divided the village into five categories. Criteria 
include livestock assets such as cattle and goats and other items such as 
bicycles. All informants mentioned cattle and most mentioned jobs as a 
characteristic of wealthier households, while quantity and quality of labour 
distinguished other wealth groups. Consistent with data from elsewhere in 
Africa, more female-headed households and a larger proportion of old people 
are found among the poorer households. Informants' criteria show strong 
similarities between the groups and villages, while all of them used animals 
and jobs as a determinant of wealth. 
The strengths and weaknesses of this system of wealth analysis are 
reviewed at length elsewhere. For this research, its ability to capture an 
image of village residents quickly made it especially valuable in an 
environment where migration, allegiances to headmen and village 
boundaries are always shifting. Data from the wealth ran kings of the four 
villages were checked in several ways. Lists of village households were 
compared to those of the GIS database23 (Table 7.5). Numbers and names of 
households listed for the villages were broadly similar between the data sets. 
Names given in the wealth ranking for Oshaala were found to duplicate those 
in adjoining villages, accounting for that difference and reinforcing the idea of 
fluid boundaries and allegiances. Some cross checking of households 
categorised under particular wealth groups was carried out with declarations 
of assets such as those given for livestock. This process increased 
confidence in the village lists and ranked data. 
Table 7.5 Comparison of households in different data sets 
Name of village No. of Hhs named by No. of Hhs appearing in GIS 
informants database 
Engombe 56 
Okaanga 27 
Okamwandi Kamadhinga 35 
Oshaala 59 
Total 177 
On this basis and assuming similarity in the level of wealth between these 
adjoining villages, data were re-coded (Table 7.6) to facilitate a broader 
analysis of household assets and the impact of these assets on farmers' 
choices and livelihood strategies. 
Table 7.6 Standardising and re-codlng wealth categories 
Original Rank II III IV V 
Engombe 1 2 2 3 3 
Okaanga 1 2 2 3 
Okamwandi Kamadhinga 1 2 2 3 
Oshaala 2 2 3 
1 = wealthiest, 2 = medium wealthy, 3 = poorest 
23 Secondary data from the Directorate for Rural Water Supply 
7.2.2 Field size 
Do wealthier households have more land? The data for household field size 
were disaggregated into three categories and re-coded, as described in the 
previous section, according to comparative ranks of wealthy, medium wealthy 
and poor. Data across the villages gave a mean field size of 13, 8 and 7 ha 
for the wealthiest, medium and poorest groups respectively. Field size differs 
significantly with wealth (p=O.01) so that the wealthiest have significantly 
larger fields than those of the medium wealthy and poorest groups (Table 
7.7). Some inter-village differences are also apparent, with the wealthy 
farmers of Okaanga owning the largest land-holdings and the poorest 
farmers of Okamwandi the smallest. 
Table 7.7. Mean household field size (ha) by village and wealth category 
Engombe Okaanga Okamwandi Oshaala All villages 
(ha) (ha) Kamadhinga (ha) (ha) (ha) 
wealthiest 10 a 21 a 13 a 14 a 13a 
medium wealth 7b * 9b 9b 8b 
poorest 7 be 8b 5e 7 be 7be 
* no data. Means not followed by a common letter are significantly different (p<0.01) 
7.2.3 Field diversity 
Having shown that wealthy households have larger land holdings, the next 
step is to establish if there is a link between wealth and diversity of land-
holdings, i.e. the number of different types of land-unit held by a household. 
The overall mean number of land units held across the villages and wealth 
categories is consistently 3, but this hides the diversity revealed by closer 
analysis. Although the differences are not great, wealthier households have 
significantly (p=O.05) more land units than poorer households (Table 7.8). 
More specifically, the wealthy households of Okaanga have the largest 
number of land units, while the households in Okamwandi and Engombe 
have the smallest number. Engombe has significantly (p=O.05) fewer land 
units than all the other villages. 
Wealthier households not only have more land units but this also translates 
into more diversity, as shown by the diversity indices in Table 7.9. The 
difference in land diversity between the wealth groups is highly significant 
(p=O.02). The greatest difference appears between the wealthy and poor and 
to some extent between the medium and poor, but there is no significant 
difference between the wealthy and medium categories. 
Table 7.8: Mean no. of household land units by village and wealth group 
Wealthiest Medium Poorest Overall 
Engombe 3 3 2 3 
Okaanga 5 * 3 3 
Okamwandi Kamadhinga 4 2 2 3 
Oshaala 4 4 3 3 
Overall 4a 3 2b 3 
* no data. Means not followed by a common letter are significantly different (p<0.05) 
Table 7.9: Mean diversity indices by wealth and village 
Wealthiest Medium Poorest Overall 
Okaanga 3.74 * 1.99 2.57b 
Okamwandi Kamadhinga 2.83 1.75 1.87 2.43b 
Oshaala 3.11 3.41 1.97 2.27ab 
Engombe 2.04 2.08 1.64 1.93a 
Overall 2.57a 2.34ab 1.78c 2.25 
* no data. Means not followed by a common letter are significantly different (p<0.05) 
Disaggregating data further by village reduces the numbers per category and 
while trends are suggested, it generates no significant differences. 
Households in Okaanga have the most diverse land assets, while those in 
Engombe have the least diverse. Table 7.9 shows that the most diverse land 
assets accrue to the wealthiest households of Okaanga, while the least 
diverse land assets belong to the poorest households of Engombe. Engombe 
is significantly (p=O.05) less diverse than Okaanga and Okamwandi 
Kamadhinga but not Oshaala. Other villages do not differ significantly from 
one another. 
The analysis of land diversity is interesting because it was an unknown factor 
when the wealth categories were ranked towards the beginning of research. 
Variability was clear to see but the degree to which this was the result of 
deliberate choice ,and strategic management was not clear. The categories 
for wealth ranking are based on informants' perceptions of wealth and a 
"good field" was mentioned as one of the criteria for wealth. Farmers were 
never asked directly if a diverse field is a desirable characteristic. Farmers 
did suggest that, having access to a variety of soils enabled them to grow a 
greater range of crops and this was a good thing. In light of the analysis of 
LLU form and function, diversity appears to be an important aspect of what 
constitutes a "good" field. 
7.2.4 Gender differences 
The information on gender differences reported here relates to male and 
female headed households. Investigating differences between male and 
female headed households shows that, although female headed households 
have smaller fields (Table 7.10) and smaller patches (Table 7.11) of 
individual land units than male headed households, the diversity of their fields 
(Tables 7.12 and 7.13) is similar to that of their male counterparts. 
The tables show that female headed households have significantly (p=O.01) 
smaller fields and this result is repeated in all villages except in Engombe 
where there is no significant difference. No significant differences were found 
in the average number of land units contained in the fields of male and 
female headed households, or the diversity index of their fields. A larger field 
is able to support a bigger crop and can potentially produce a larger yield. In 
this sense, households with a male head are better off than female headed 
households. Also, female headed households often have less access to 
labour than male headed households (section 7.4) and this can account for 
the difference in actual field size (section 5.2), and crop yield. However, 
women have access to the same land diversity as men and potentially are 
able to grow a similar range of crops as male headed households. 
Table 7.10: Field size (ha) by gender of the household head 
Village name 
Maximum (ha) Minimum (ha) Mean (ha) 
Female Male Female Male Female Male 
Engombe 14 16 3 2 9a 8a 
Okaanga 20 33 5 1 10a 14b 
Okamwandi Kamadhinga 23 29 4 4 10a 12b 
Oshaa/a 12 22 2 8a 11b 
Overall 23 33 1 1 9a 11b 
Means not followed by a common letter are significantly different (p<0.05) 
Table 7.11: Land unit plot sizes (ha) by gender of the household head 
Local Land Unit Maximum (ha) Minimum (ha) Mean (ha) 
Female Male Female Male Female Male 
Ehenene 3.5 9.7 0 0 1.2 1.4 
Ehenge 6.1 9.4 0 0 2.4 2.4 
Omutunda 12.9 10.7 0.1 0 2.9 3.4 
Etathapya 12.0 12.3 0 0 3.7 3.9 
Omufitu 5.1 14.1 0.1 0.1 2.2 3.6 
Overall 12.9 14.1 0 0 2.5 3.0 
Table 7.12: Land units in male and female headed household fields 
Village name Maximum Minimum Mean 
Female Male Female Male Female Male 
Engombe 4 4 1 3 3 
Okaanga 5 5 1 2 3 3 
Okamwandi Kamadhinga 4 4 2 2 3 3 
Oshaa/a 5 5 2 3 3 
Overall 5 5 1 3 3 
Table 7.13: Diversity indices of male and female headed households 
Village Maximum Minimum Mean 
Female Male Female Male Female Male 
Engombe 3.7 3.1 1.0 1.0 2.1 1.9 
Okaanga 4.6 4.8 1.0 1.1 2.5 2.5 
Okamwandi Kamadhinga 3.6 4.0 1.2 1.6 2.4 2.4 
Oshaala 4.5 4.7 1.2 1.0 2.5 2.3 
Overall 4.6 4.8 1.0 1.0 2.4 2.2 
7.2.5 Employment and settlement patterns 
Secondary data were obtained for the analysis of employment of the head of 
households in the four villages. This information was re-coded and grouped 
into four main categories: 'undeclared', 'farming only', pensioner and 'paid 
employment' (Table 7.14). During the farming systems survey farmers were 
asked how long their fields had been cultivated. Specific dates were given for 
the first year of ploughing and field planting and these can be used to 
estimate when the household head initially took possession of the land 
(Table 7.15). 
Table 7.14: Declared main income source of household heads (%) 
Engombe Okaanga Okamwandi Oshaala Overall 
Kamadhinga 
Nothing declared 0 4 15 6 6 
Farming only 23.5 33 7.5 16 19 
Pension 47 59 46 59 51.5 
Paid employment 29.5 4 31.5 19 23.5 
Total 100 100 100 100 100 
In both Okaanga and Oshaala almost 60% of household heads are of 
pensionable age whereas household heads in the other two villages are 
younger. Okaanga contains the first settled site, where land was planted in 
1948. The mean period of settlement in this village is 34 years (Table 7.15). 
Oshaala was also settled early in 1956, with a mean settlement period of 33 
years. 
All dates given by the farmers are consistent and indicate that the 'best' land 
was settled by the end of the sixties, although that was not the end of village 
expansion. More recent settlements, found in Engombe and Okamwandi 
Kamadhinga, are where the poorer, more marginal land is located which is all 
that remains for newcomers. Engombe and Okamwandi Kamadhinga both 
support a younger population. The more marginal the land for cropping the 
more important cash income becomes to supply food for the household. 
Table 7.15: Date fields were first cultivated and mean field/household age 
Earliest Latest Mean length of Std Deviation 
settlement 24(years) 
Engombe 1954 1992 26 19 
Okaanga 1948 1981 34 17 
Okamwandi Kamadhinga 1968 1983 21 8 
Oshaala 1956 1975 33 10 
Overall 1948 1992 28 13 
The evidence presented further corroborates the hypothesis that land has 
been selected on the basis of diversity, since Okaanga and Oshaala have a 
greater diversity of land units than Engombe and Okamwandi Kamadhinga 
(Tables 7.B and 7.9). They are able to support a wider variety of crops as well 
as providing the opportunity for achieving a millet harvest in most years as 
presented and discussed in Section 6.7. Also, Okaanga supports the highest 
percentage of households that derive their income from farming only (Table 
7.14). It is likely that this would only be possible on land that is well adapted 
to crop farming in this semi-arid environment and climate. In Oshaala, the 
percentage of sole farmers is bound to be lower due to the inflated number of 
paid employees that live there to run the local services as presented and 
discussed in chapters five and six. That is, the nurses, school teachers and 
shopkeepers all live in central Oshaala. Engombe and Okamwandi 
Kamadhinga are both less diverse for cropping and more risky for securing 
regular and sufficient millet harvests. It is logical that these households will 
require other sources of income to support their families. Indeed the highest 
percentages of full time employees Iive25 in these two villages and those that 
support their household by farming income alone are considerably fewer. 
It has been established that land settlement has been a gradual process of 
farmers moving in and selecting the best land for their purpose, in this case 
crop farming. Clearly the early settlers and their descendants have an 
24 Measured from the date of first cultivation to 1998 when the survey was conducted 
25 Many of these employees are absentee household heads i.e. they work in the town/city 
and return to the household periodically. 
advantage in that their land assets are more valuable for farming purposes 
than those who arrived later. 
7.2.6 Linking field diversity, crop diversity and food security 
Based on previous data, analyses and discussion, a diverse household field 
is a good one on two counts. Firstly a diverse field means that a wider range 
of crop species and varieties can be grown. Secondly, providing it is not a 
drought year, a harvest can be produced whether the rainfall is 'good' or 
'bad'. Clearly a wider selection of crops secures access to a more balanced 
diet for the household. It may also afford the opportunity to sell the crop for 
cash or to exchange it with neighbours for other goods and services. In short 
a wider selection of crops gives the farm household more choices and more 
flexibility (see Box 7.1). 
Box 7.1 Helena's strategy for a balanced diet: 
Effectively, she ran her household alone. Her husband worked as a driver and 
sometimes sent her money but rarely came home. She had a few goats and had 
bought a pig that she was fattening to slaughter and sell. Her field was not as 
diverse as many, but she made good use of what was there. She was lucky to get 
her whole field ploughed by a neighbour (for a fee) with the early rains. The field 
was on a gentle slope and she planted millet across almost all of it. She had a 
small seasonal pond towards the top of the hill on the edges of which she planted 
some sorghum that she would use for brewing local beer. On a low mound, that 
was once a termite hill, she planted a small quantity of maize that the family would 
eat fresh through the season. Later, she passed through the field randomly 
planting cowpeas and melons among the millet plants. On one side of her field 
there was a sandy patch where she planted Bambara qroundnuts. 
In terms of food security, the more diverse the field, the stronger the chance 
that some part of the field will produce a crop. The best combination of land 
units for millet security, as discussed in chapter six, is etathapya and ehenge. 
Omutunda and ehenge, especially an omutunda with a history of termite 
activity, would be an acceptable second best combination. Equally, as 
assessed in chapter six, the best combination of land units for producing a 
regular legume crop is omufifuhenge, ehenge and omufitu. In wet years 
cowpeas can also be grown in omutunda. A combination of all the land units 
secures the ability to grow a wide range of species and varieties including 
cucurbits (e.g. pumpkins and melons) and perhaps even some root crops 
such as cassava or sweet potato. 
7.3 Legume land 
As discussed in chapter six and reviewed in the previous section, the best 
land and best combination of land for growing legumes is ehenge, omufitu 
and omufituhenge; ehenge and omufituhenge are good for growing cowpeas 
while omufitu and omufituhenge are better for growing bambara groundnuts 
and groundnuts. The areas of ehenge and omufitu land are largest in 
Okaanga and Oshaala, smaller in Engombe while Okamwandi Kamadhinga 
has no omufitu but plentiful ehenge land (Table 7.16). Omufituhenge is the 
transition zone between adjacent ehenge and omufitu units and is only found 
in Okaanga, Oshaala and Engombe. 
Table 7.16: Village legume land assets 
ehenge Village land omufitu Village omufituhenge 
area (ha) % area (ha) land % 
Engombe 20 5 30 7 Yes 
Okaanga 50 20 54 21 Yes 
Okamwandi 84 20 0 0 No 
Kamadhinga 
Oshaala 42 15 32 11 Yes 
Table 7.17: Villages ranked for legume land assets 
Engombe 
Okaanga 
Okamwandi Kamadhinga 
Oshaala 
*1 is best 
Cowpeas 
Bambara groundnuts and 
groundnuts 
Combining data with previous analyses, the villages can be ranked for their 
ability and extent to which they are able to support different legume crops. 
While Okamwandi Kamadhinga is ranked first (Table 7.17) for having the 
largest amount of land well adapted for growing cowpeas, it is not able to 
support any subterranean species. The other villages are able to support all 
the legume species, but Okaanga has the best spread and extent of land for 
doing this; 20% of Okaanga's land resources can support cowpeas and 
another 21 % can support the two subterranean species. Oshaala has a total 
of 26% legume land while Engombe has only 12%. 
Having established which villages are best endowed for growing legumes, 
attention can next focus on the households. Land units are not evenly 
distributed among households in that some have larger fields as well as more 
diverse fields than others. A relationship exists between size and diversity of 
land holdings with wealth, so that wealthier households are able to grow 
more food crops than others. However not all households have good land for 
growing legumes (Table 7.18). For example, none of the households in 
Engombe or Okamwandi Kamadhinga have the versatile combination of 
ehenge and omufitu and the latter has no omufituhenge land at all. Okaanga 
(35%) and Oshaala (25%) households have a combination of land units that 
are good for growing legumes. In Okamwandi Kamadhinga, 70% of 
households have one type of good legume growing land while in Engombe 
only 41 % have and the legume species that can be grown there are limited. 
There are some households in every village that do not have good legume 
land and in Engombe this is 59% of households. Okamwandi Kamadhinga 
and Oshaala have 30 and 39% of households respectively that do not have 
good legume land while only 7% of Okaanga households are without good 
legume land. Furthermore, it is the poorer households that have less of the 
good legume land while wealthier households are more likely to have a 
combination of different legume lands (Table 7.19). Lacking good legume 
land limits farmers' ability to cultivate these crops for food or for seed. In 
practice, cowpeas are often planted in omutunda or another land unit in the 
hope that sufficient rain will yield a crop. But regularly, these households 
must find other ways of accessing legumes, for example buying or bartering 
for them, if they are to be retained in the diet. 
Table 7.18: Households with ehenge and omufltu land 
No. ehenge omufitu Both Neither (%) one (%) both (%) 
Engombe 58 13 11 0 59 41 0 
Okaanga 26 19 14 9 7 58 35 
Okamwandi 46 32 0 0 30 70 0 
Kamadhinga 
Oshaala 36 18 13 9 39 36 25 
Total 166 82 38 18 39 51 11 
Table 7.19: Household possession (%) of legume land 
No No 
ehenge omufitu Only 1 Both None 
ehenge omufitu 
Wealthy 
66 34 34 66 44 28 28 
(n =29) 
Medium wealthy 
50 50 29 71 50 14 36 
(n=14) 
Poorest 
19 81 31 69 50 0 50 
(n=16) 
Assessing the likelihood of different wealth groups having good legume land 
as opposed to good millet land illuminates the priorities more clearly. The 
majority of wealthy households have a combination of legume and millet land 
but only 38% of poor households have these assets (Table 7.20). 
Furthermore, while only 28% of wealthy farmers have land suitable for 
growing only millet, over half (56%) of all the poorer households are confined 
to the staple crop. A poor household that had only suitable land for legumes 
is summarised in Box 7.2. 
Box 7.2: Irene sells legumes for lunches 
With only Omufituhenge land that was not good for growing millet she swapped 
and collected a range of different types of cow peas, Bambara groundnuts and 
peanuts and grew these on her land. She planted them with the first rains while 
other farmers were still ploughing and planting millet so that she had one of the 
earliest crops of beans in the village. She continued planting with later rains to 
ensure she had B good supply of beans through the wet season and beyond. She 
rose early each day to pick, prepare and cook her beans and walked into Oshaala 
village to sell them at lunchtime, giving her a small and regular cash income. 
Table 7.20: Households that have millet and legume land (%) 
Millet only (%) Legume only (%) Millet and legume (%) 
Wealthiest 
28 0 72 
n = 29 
medium wealth 
36 0 64 
n = 14 
Poorest 
56 6 38 
n = 16 
Ehenge is a more versatile land unit than omutunda, in that it is able to 
support a wider range of crops in most years, as discussed in chapter six. 
Farmers are more likely to be able to grow and harvest cowpeas and millet 
on ehenge land year after year, than on omutunda land, where cowpeas may 
be grown during wetter years only. Only 19% of poor farmers have ehenge 
land as opposed to 81% that have omutunda land (Table 7.21). While 
omutunda is useful for millet security and may support cowpeas in some 
years, it is not useful for stable legume harvests year on year. Poorer farmers 
are less likely to have all types of these land units and combinations of land 
units than wealthier farmers. More specifically, these data show that poorer 
farmers are less likely to have legume land than wealthier farmers and less 
likely to have combinations of legume land than millet land. 
Table 7.21: Households that have millet land (%) 
(I) & 
~ ai (I) 
.c:: .c:: 
(I) (I) 
~ ~ 8. 
'0 '0 '0 
c: c: c: 
(I) c:: ~ 
~ co co co 
Ol ~ .2 ~ Q) ~ m~ ~ c:: .s c: ~c:: Q) Q) Q) 
~ 0 ~ 
~ Ol .c:: E ,lg CIl.2 .2 (I) c:: Q) ~ 0 :S Q) ~ :S :S:::, ~ :; c: Q) 
0 g 0 ,lg 0 c: ,lg ,lgE E 0 .c:: 0 ~ Q) z z Cb z Cb Q) 0 0 z 
Wealthiest 
66 34 83 17 93 7 10 14 31 0 45 0 n = 29 
medium wealth 
50 50 86 14 71 29 21 7 36 7 29 0 n = 14 
Poorest 
19 81 81 19 69 31 25 12 50 6 0 6 n = 16 
Equally, while 45% of wealthy farmers have all combinations of good millet 
land only 28% have a combination of good legume land and none of the 
poorest farmers have these combinations at all. Likewise 28% of wealthy 
farmers do not have good legume land whereas none lacks good millet land. 
Irrespective of wealth, millet land takes precedence over legume land and 
this is more pronounced among poorer farmers. Wealthier farmers have the 
lUxury of maintaining legume land as well as millet land whereas poorer 
farmers are more likely to have good millet land than good legume land. 
Isolating the legume land holders from this data set gives a sample 
comprising 48 households representing 35% of all ehenge owning 
households (and 35% of total ehenge land area) and 50% of all omufitu 
owning households (and 44% of total omufitu land area). Wealthier 
households appear to have more legume land than poorer households do, 
but the difference is not Significant (Table 7.22). This is not surprising given 
the small numbers and wide variation within the wealth groups. Having direct 
access to good legume land confers wealthier households with the choice to 
invest in and use legume crops and legume technologies while poorer 
households do not have that lUxury. 
Table 7.22: Size of land holdings of legume specific land 
Ehenge omufitu 
Sum Mean Number of Sum (ha) Mean Number of 
(ha) (ha) households (ha) households 
wealthiest 54.23 2.85 19 34.49 3.45 10 
medium wealth 9.27 1.32 7 3.23 0.81 4 
poorest 4.54 1.51 3 13.23 2.65 5 
Total 68.04 1.90 29 50.95 2.30 19 
7.4 Legume Labour 
Is labour a problem for farming households and if so, what is the impact of 
that labour shortage? The initial farming systems survey did not set out to 
ask this question speCifically, but farmers were asked to comment on and 
rank their problems more generally. Of those surveyed, 27% of households 
said labour was one of their main problems. Of the households that flagged 
labour shortages, 65% had seven or fewer household members including 
both adults and children, the rest had households comprising more than 
seven members. A third of the households that said they had a labour 
shortage were female headed households which is not unexpected given 
their smaller size. 
The results presented in chapter four detailed household profiles and the 
allocation of tasks among household members. Those data covered a range 
of villages and outlined differences between villages and the farming systems 
in operation. There were marked similarities in the way tasks were allocated 
to household members. For example, it was common for men to plough and 
for women to plant and weed. Labour is often allocated by priority to different 
crops: the main millet crop will be planted first followed by other cereals and 
only then, by legumes and other vegetables. Children commonly plant 
legumes, especially cowpeas, after the main staple crop has been sown. 
Women also plant legumes but it is rare for men to do these tasks. 
Timeliness is critically important for crop farming in this region. Referring 
back to the rainfall data in chapter four, there are usually only a few large 
rainfall events during the season and they rarely come together at the 
beginning of the season. Seed must be sown shortly after the first main rains 
in order to maximise the period of time for crops to grow and mature. 
Consequently, it is a labour intensive time when many strenuous tasks have 
to be completed almost on top of each other. It also coincides with the time of 
year when food supplies are lowest and both people and draft animals are at 
their weakest. The impact of these factors is that the whole household is 
called into action to get the fields planted while the moisture is sufficient for 
the seed to germinate and establish. 
While larger households have the benefit of having more labour to mobilise, 
they also have more mouths to feed and more food preparation work as a 
result. Also, due to the way that tasks are allocated among household 
members, it makes a difference whose labour is available in the household. A 
large household with male and female adult members as well as a large 
number of children will have a distinct advantage over the female headed 
household that has only a couple of adult females and a large number of 
children. Nevertheless, most households face a labour bottleneck at sowing 
time. It is noticeable in northern Namibia that large numbers of urban workers 
travel back to their rural homesteads when the first main rains arrive. 
Supplying additional labour to the family household at this crucial time 
secures the right to return again at harvest time and to take a proportion of 
the harvest with them to their city dwelling. 
Since all households prioritise labour to sowing the staple millet crop, 
legumes are only planted if there is sufficient labour to complete the task and 
sufficient soil moisture to avoid losing the seed. Due to the limited opportunity 
for planting the whole field, the planting of legumes, as noted above, 
commonly falls to children and these tasks are often done before or after 
school. It is a bonus if the main rains coincide with the school holidays and if 
they do not, labour-scarce households may keep children away from school 
to work in the fields while the main crops are planted. Legumes, as a second 
priority, are less likely to be planted by smaller households, or households 
that for some other reason26 are short of labour. 
Due to the way that labour is allocated to different crops and crop tasks, it 
becomes useful to look again at the household profiles in the study area to 
see how this impacts legume cropping and the role of legumes. The first 
noticeable characteristic is that mean household size is larger in the two 
villages that also have the largest areas of land most suitable for growing 
legumes, Okaanga and Oshaala (Table 7.23). They are also the two villages 
that were settled first in the area. The larger households have more adult 
members, both male and female than the average household and they also 
have more children. So, the households of Okaanga and Oshaala not only 
have better legume land assets than the other two villages but they also have 
more labour for cultivating legumes. 
26 E.g. sickness in the household 
Table 7.23: Mean household size and composition 
Mean size Mean no. Mean no. of Mean no. of Nomen 
of of men women children (%) 
household 
Engombe 6.9 1.9 2.2 2.8 10 
Okaanga 8.7 2.4 2.8 3.4 12 
Okamwandi 7.7 1.8 2.2 3.6 13 
Kamadhinga 
Oshaala 8.0 2.3 2.4 3.3 8 
All 7.6 2.1 2.4 3.2 11 
Households that have no adult male labour are particularly stretched at 
planting time, as the women also have to do tasks that would otherwise be 
done by men. The largest percentage of these households is found in 
Okamwandi Kamadhinga although there are also quite a few female only 
households in Okaanga as well. Among all the villages, Oshaala has the 
least female headed households. 
Further analysis to correlate household size with wealth shows that mean 
household size is larger with greater wealth and that the poorest households 
are below average with the smallest households (Table 7.24) and this 
impacts the crops they are able to plant with the first main rains. Since millet 
is planted first, legumes are one of the first casualties of labour shortages. 
Poorer households find themselves less able to plant early legumes, even 
when they do have appropriate land assets, although they may well be able 
to plant legumes after the initial rains, when the labour bottleneck is relieved. 
However, there is still likely to be a negative impact on the legume harvest 
due to the shorter growing period available to the late crop. It is also the case 
that some legumes are photoperiod sensitive as discussed in Chapter 2. If 
they are not planted at the correct time of year, they will not flower and 
mature to harvest. A late crop may still be worth planting in case the rainy 
season is longer than normal and as the green leaf can always be eaten as a 
vegetable. If the legume does not reach maturity, the seed will be lost and 
this is a risk some households cannot afford to take. The loss of legume seed 
was one of the problems commonly cited during the initial farming systems 
survey. 
Table 7.24: Mean household size by wealth group 
Wealth Mean Std Deviation Sum Count 
Wealthiest 10.0 3.4 299.0 31.0 
Medium wealthy 6.8 2.3 102.0 15.0 
Poorest 6.0 3.4 102.0 17.0 
All 8.1 3.6 503.0 63.0 
The labour input to legumes does not cease with planting. Weeding is an 
important activity for all crops, in order to limit the competition for water and 
nutrients with the young plants. The benefit of spreading varieties of cowpea 
is that once established they tend to smother other weeds and so a second 
weeding may be avoided if labour is short. However, this is not the case for 
bambara groundnuts and ground nuts. They are much more labour intensive 
as they need a second and even third weeding plus they need mounding up. 
Labour is prioritised first to the staple millet crop and for smaller poorer 
households there may simply not be sufficient labour to complete these tasks 
satisfactorily. 
When it comes to harvesting, cowpeas are again quicker and easier to 
harvest than bambara groundnuts and groundnuts. Cowpeas carry their pods 
aerially and can be picked with relative ease and little exertion. Sambara 
groundnut and groundnut plants must be pulled or dug up, shaken free of 
earth and then the pods picked off one by one. The labour requirement is 
both more time and energy consuming than for cowpeas. Harvesting 
bambara groundnuts and groundnuts must also be done altogether once the 
beans are ready whereas many cowpea varieties are indeterminate in nature 
and can be harvested over a considerable period of time. A labour-short 
household may not have the lUxury of growing these higher value legumes 
and choose instead to allocate their time to crops that give them a higher 
return for their limited labour supply. 
7.5 The Legume Seed Gap 
All households reported planting some cowpeas during the 1997/98 season 
while 76% said they planted bambara groundnuts and less than a third 
planted ground nuts (Table 7.25)27. The majority of households planted two 
different cowpea varieties and one of bambara groundnuts. Of those planting 
groundnuts, few planted more than one type. Some households planted up to 
six different types of cowpea while a small minority planted up to four 
different bambara groundnut varieties. Only two varieties of groundnuts were 
found across the whole sample. 
It was not possible to gauge the extent of crop biodiversity maintained by the 
community, due to the use of multiple names. Furthermore, genetic 
identification or other seed classification was beyond the scope of this study. 
It is clear that cowpeas are grown more than any other legume; a number of 
different combinations of varieties are planted and by a larger percentage of 
the population. It is also clear that groundnuts are much less common than 
the other two species. Bambara groundnuts are more popular and more 
prevalent than groundnuts and some households maintain a wider selection 
of different bambara groundnut seeds than other households. 
Table 7.25: Species and varieties of legumes grown by households 
Number of different % households growing % households growing % households growing 
varieties grown cowpeas bambara groundnut groundnut 
0 0 24 71 
1 14 43 21 
2 43 27 8 
3 30 5 0 
4 8 2 0 
5 2 0 0 
6 3 0 0 
Tables 7.26-7.28 show the distribution of legume species and varieties 
among the surveyed villages. In the North Central villages all households 
planted at least two types of cowpea while in Katope, Kavango, 45% of 
households only planted one. The data show that the Oshaala area was 
already relatively well endowed with cowpea seed as 42% of those 
households planted four different varieties that year. In Eefa 16% reported 
planting five or six cowpea varieties. The distribution of bambara groundnuts 
and ground nuts shows a similar pattern in that farmers of Katope, Kavango 
had fewer varieties than farmers in the North Central villages and a smaller 
percentage of households planted these crops. Likewise, Oshaala was 
relatively well endowed with different varieties and for bambara groundnuts, 
all households reported planting some of the crop. 
Table 7.26: Households growing cowpeas (%) 
Number of Oshaala Ekolola Eefa NCR Katope Overall 
varieties grown 
1 0 0 0 0 45 14 
2 25 50 58 47 35 43 
3 33 50 26 35 20 30 
4 42 0 0 12 0 8 
5 0 0 5 2 0 2 
6 0 0 11 4 0 3 
Table 7.27: HousehOlds growing Bambara groundnuts (%) 
Number of Oshaala Ekolola Eefa NCR Katope Overall 
varieties grown area Kavango 
0 0 25 16 14 45 24 
1 67 75 21 49 30 43 
2 17 0 58 30 20 27 
3 8 0 5 5 5 5 
4 8 0 0 2 0 2 
Table 7.28: Households growing groundnuts (%) 
Number of Oshaala Ekolola Eefa NCR Katope Overall 
varieties grown 
0 50 100 74 74 65 71 
1 25 0 21 16 30 21 
2 25 0 5 9 5 8 
27 Rainfall in 1997/98 started relatively well and it was not a bad season. Most farmers 
planted legumes, especially cowpeas in the hope of getting a harvest. Not all did, 
The results above show how uneven legume crop distribution is across the 
regions. While this distribution may vary from season to season, the 
variability is consistent with other data and results presented throughout the 
thesis. In Katope 35% households explained they had lost legume seed from 
recent, successive years of drought in the village. Wealth analysis showed 
these were among the poorest households surveyed. Katope is also the most 
remote of the villages. It is the furthest away from a town or city and it had 
little input from the government agricultural research and extension 
departments, plus there had been no previous NGO involvement in the area. 
When asked where they got their seed, a third reported buying cowpeas and 
bambara ground nuts, while half of those that grew groundnuts said they had 
bought them. Those that didn't buy their seed had mostly retained it from 
previous years and a few had received it from family members. 
In comparison, the majority of Eefa and Ekolola households reported 
retaining seed from the previous year while a few households in both villages 
said they had got seed from friends and neighbours but only two households 
said they had bought seed. Both households had bought cowpeas while one 
had also bought bambara ground nut. Both Eefa and Ekolola had active 
agricultural extension departments nearby, although Ekolola is more remote 
than Eefa and used to experience more supply problems as a result. Legume 
seed was one of the inputs included in the programmes of both Extension 
Teams and the programme had been running for longer in Eefa than Ekolola. 
This explains why Eefa shows more species and varieties than Ekolola. 
Oshaala, on the other hand did not have any official research or extension 
programme running but it boasts more seed than any of the other villages, 
including two varieties of groundnut that are relatively uncharacteristic for the 
region. Nearly all the households in Oshaala said they had retained seed 
from the previous season. No one bought seed and only one household 
reported receiving seed from a neighbour. Oshaala is locationally close to an 
Agricultural Research Station and although there was no official involvement 
with the station it seems that seed may well have made its way into the 
village by informal processes. It has also been shown that Okaanga and 
Oshaala households are well endowed with good legume growing land. 
They also have sufficient labour, so that these farmers stand a good chance 
of maintaining legume seed from one year to the next. 
Previous analysis in chapter four identified that millet was prioritised as the 
most important crop by 95% of households surveyed. Many households 
prioritised sorghum and maize above legumes and the large majority, 
prioritised cowpeas as the most important legume (Table 7.29). 
Table 7.29: Importance of legumes to the household 
Rank Cowpea Bambara groundnut Groundnuts 
Frequency % Frequency % Frequency % 
1 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2 17 27 1 2 0 0 
3 31 49 2 3 0 0 
4 5 8 27 43 0 0 
5 2 3 11 17 9 14 
6 1 2 3 5 5 8 
7 2 3 0 0 2 
not ranked 5 8 19 30 48 76 
The table shows that while no one ranked legumes first, cowpeas are the 
most important legume. Over a quarter of all the households ranked it as the 
second most important crop to the household; second to millet, in most 
cases. While nearly half of all the households put it as their third most 
important crop; this was usually third to millet and sorghum. A small minority 
of households ranked bambara ground nuts more important than cowpeas but 
the majority of those growing it, 43%, placed bambara groundnuts in fourth 
place. The few that ranked bambara groundnuts above cowpeas were 
households that added value by cooking and selling their produce to earn 
cash. They were particularly poor households. Overall, groundnuts were 
relatively unimportant, with the majority not even ranking them at all. When 
the uses of these crops were explored (and reported in chapter four) 
cowpeas were shown to have multiple uses for human and livestock 
consumption, whereas bambara groundnut and groundnut tend to be used 
for human consumption only. 
7.6 Conclusion 
The previous chapter began accounting for why legumes are not grown as 
extensively or intensively as might be expected from the discourse on 
legumes. It focussed on the biophysical aspects of suitability and capability of 
different land units. This chapter has continued the analysis by focusing on 
social factors and on the assets needed for cultivating legumes at the 
household level. 
Initially the relationship between wealth, land and livelihood was explored. 
Wealthy households are found to have larger and more diverse fields than 
the poorer households and there are distinctions between the villages. The 
longest settled villages contain larger and more diverse land assets than 
those settled more recently. Likewise, the former comprises more full time 
farmers whereas the latter, more people employed outside agriculture. 
Female headed households have smaller but equally diverse land assets 
compared to their male counterparts. Field diversity is linked to crop stability 
and food security. The earlier settler, by having the most valuable land 
assets, in both size and diversity, experience more crop stability and high 
yields. 
Distinctions between village land assets are magnified when focussing on 
land that is good for growing legumes. Okaanga and Oshaala have more of 
such and more diversity for cultivating a larger crop and a wider range of 
legume varieties. The same is true for wealthy households across the 
villages. Poor households have smaller plots and fewer types of land suitable 
for growing legumes. As a result, the poor are more limited in the legume 
food crops they can grow and sustain from year to year. The same is found 
to be true of millet land and millet crops, in that poor households are more 
millet vulnerable and food insecure than wealthy households. Irrespective of 
farmers' wealth, millet land takes precedence over land for legumes. 
However access to legume land confers wealthier farmers with the choice 
and ability to invest in legumes that is denied to many poor households. 
Household type and size are linked to labour shortages and the potential 
impacts of these shortages are assessed for legume cultivation. The majority 
of households complaining of labour shortages were smaller in size and 
included female-headed households which are more likely to experience 
labour shortages than male headed households. While most households 
reported labour bottlenecks at sowing and harvest times, smaller households 
are affected more acutely. Since planting millet is prioritised over legumes, 
the smaller households are less likely to be able to plant legumes in time to 
capture sufficient residual moisture for germination and establishment. Poor 
households are also less likely to risk lOSing precious legume seed as a 
result of failed germination or establishment. 
The composition of households is also important due to the gendered division 
of labour. Ploughing is largely a male task and more men own cattle and 
oxen than females. Women and children usually plant legumes and weeding 
is a task for adult females. While both men and women can harvest millet, 
most often women and children harvest legumes. The subterranean legume 
species are considerably more labour intensive than aerial species, requiring 
time inputs at different stages of the cycle, from adult males, adult females 
and children. Labour short and poor households are less likely to fulfil the 
labour requirements for cultivating legumes, especially the subterranean 
species. 
Results showed that wealthier households were larger than the mean 
household size and so they had better labour profiles for cultivating all types 
of legumes. The largest households were found in the two villages with the 
largest areas of land most suitable for growing legumes, Okaanga and 
Oshaala. So these villages contained households that have both legume land 
assets and sufficient labour to plant and harvest them. On the other hand, 
smaller households that have legume land assets may not be able to exploit 
these for lack of labour. 
Cowpeas are the most important and widespread legume crop, found across 
the study sites and northern Namibia more generally. They have multiple 
uses and may be prepared in many different ways. All the surveyed 
households reported planting cowpeas, but the number of varieties varied 
across the sites. The same was true for bambara ground nuts and 
groundnuts, although these are much less widespread. 
The distribution of legume seed across the study sites was found to be 
uneven and this is consistent with the land suitability assessments and the 
diversity analyses presented earlier. Households, particularly the poorest of 
those surveyed, reported losing legume seed through successive poor crop 
seasons. Villages with better physical and social assets recover more 
quickly, as seed may be accessed through a number of different channels. 
Households in the more remote villages could only buy replacement seed 
and they reported using precious cash to buy mostly cowpeas. However, 
poor households with few financial resources are less able to replace seed in 
this way and as such, they are more vulnerable. 
This chapter focuses on the assets needed for cultivating legumes at the 
household level and explains, from this perspective, why legumes are not 
grown as extensively or intensively as might be expected. Cowpeas are the 
most widespread legume crop grown across the study sites and northern 
Namibia more generally. They are easier to grow in many respects than 
bambara ground nuts and groundnuts. More land is adapted for cowpea 
cultivation and they also require a smaller labour input from sowing through 
to harvest. Poorer households have more limited land assets and labour 
supply than wealthier households and these factors impact on the role of 
legumes in the household. Smaller and poorer households are more likely to 
be able to grow cowpeas than any other legumes. Households with good 
legume land have a benefit over those without and the larger, wealthier 
households are more likely to be able to maintain all types of legume seed 
from year to year. In the event of losing seed due to poor rainfall and drought, 
location is important. Remote villages must buy seed to replenish their stocks 
whereas villages closer to urban and agricultural services are able to get 
seed through friends, neighbours and other formal and informal processes. 
8 Discussion: Reassessing legumes 
8.1 Introduction 
This chapter focuses on the central theme of this research, examining the 
actual and potential role of grain legumes in Namibia, in order to contribute to 
the understanding elsewhere in semi-arid Africa. The chapter begins with an 
elucidation of the importance of legumes in northern Namibia that covers 
their uses, practices, farmers' perceptions and national statistics. Then the 
areas cropped, production levels and productivity of legume cultivation by 
communal farmers are discussed. The section acknowledges the difficulties 
in assessing these figures due to inherent biophysical and socio-economic 
diversity. The next two sections go on to discuss the particular aspects of the 
biophysical and socio-economic variation found in Namibia that impact on the 
actual role of legumes and how this concurs with, diverges from or fills the 
gaps in current published research. After addressing the potential role of 
grain legumes in Namibia and semi-arid Africa, the implications for policy are 
discussed before reaching some final conclusions. 
8.2 Actual role of legumes in northern Namibia 
8.2.1 Importance of legumes 
Consistent with literature reviewed in chapter two, this research has shown 
that legume crops in Namibia are grown almost exclusively for human 
consumption. Food can be prepared from fresh or dried grain legumes and 
when dried, they store relatively well, although some species and varieties 
are more susceptible to weevils and storage pests than others. Young 
cowpea leaves are regularly picked as a fresh green vegetable during the 
rainy season and legume residues are commonly left in the field for animals 
to graze after the harvest. A small number of farmers collect cowpea 
residues and store them for dry season animal feed but, consistent with the 
literature, legumes are not grown specifically for fodder in this area. The 
leaves of the two subterranean species are not used for human consumption 
at all and are only occasionally used to feed livestock. There have been a 
number of projects testing and promoting the use of legumes for pasture 
improvement (Sweet, 1996fi) yet there has been little success or uptake by 
communal farmers in Namibia. There is also no history of the systematic use 
of legumes for soil fertility management. They are simply not known for this 
purpose in Namibia. Many farmers have seen the nodules on legume roots 
but don't know of their function. However, they know that legumes can grow 
well where millet does not do well and they are much appreciated for this 
characteristic. 
Data in 5.4.2 show that grain legumes vary in importance to farmers. For the 
majority of surveyed farmers (53%), cowpeas ranked as the third most 
important crop after millet and sorghum, but 29% of farmers ranked it second 
only to millet. These results are consistent with Keyler's analysis (1995). 
Bambara groundnuts are less important than cowpeas with 43% of the 
farmers ranking them fourth, (only 5% ranking them higher and 22% ranking 
them lower than fourth). Few farmers considered groundnuts were important 
with 76% not ranking them at all and only 14% placing them in fifth place. It is 
clear that while it is generally the case that cowpeas are more important than 
bambara groundnuts which are more important than groundnuts, this is not 
the case for all households and villages. 
The spread of grain legume species and varieties is uneven across 
households and villages (section 7.5). Reasons for this variable importance 
are not simply due to personal preferences but to the different choices 
available to farmers according to their individual circumstances. Farmers' 
biophysical and socio-economic contexts confer a range of choices on which 
farmers devise their individual farming strategies. Poor households have 
fewer choices and fewer strategies for producing food generally. Grain 
legumes are less important to poorer villages and households due to a web 
of factors including land quality, land interactions with weather, poor and 
missing markets as well as changing social networks (discussed in chapter 
seven). 
Despite cowpeas being identified as the second or third most important food 
crop to farmers in the NCRs and Kavango, they are not treated as important 
in the collection of national statistics. There are no national figures on 
cowpea or bambara ground nut production and figures for commercial 
groundnut production have been steadily diminishing since Independence in 
1990. Groundnuts are now an unimportant cash crop relative to millet 
sorghum, maize and even cotton (MAWRD, 1997). Regional Household 
Economic Surveys have started to record "bean" production in the communal 
areas (MAWRD, 1996; MAWRD, 1999; MAWRD, 1999a; MAWRD, 1999b; 
MAWRD, 2000) but different grain legume species are conflated into a single 
statistic. Furthermore the three most important crops are listed as millet, 
sorghum and maize despite the figures telling a different story. Maize was 
grown on 9% of surveyed plots, whereas 63% were planted with beans 
(MAWRD 2000). It is clear that maize is an important crop in the commercial 
belt of the 'Maize Triangle', in Kunene to the Himba and in other niches of 
Namibia. However in the NCRs and Kavango maize is nowhere near as 
important as cowpeas. 
The impact of missing national statistics and the lack of disaggregated 
regional statistics for grain legumes is that the real importance of these crops 
is unknown to policy makers. While grain legumes remain invisible there is 
little chance of understanding communal farmers' livelihoods and priorities at 
the planning and policy level and there is virtually no information to inform 
policy formulation. Policy for encouraging the use of grain legumes for soil 
fertility purposes, or otherwise, in this context is a non-starter. Furthermore 
there are no existing indicators to assess the influence of the agricultural 
research and extension services on the production, productivity or use of 
grain legumes. 
Existing data of households that grow cowpeas in Kavango and NCRs 
(Keyler, 1995) and for those growing bambara groundnuts in NCRs, are 
consistent with this research. However data, for the percentage of 
households growing bambara ground nuts in Kavango, drop by 12% between 
1992/93 (Keyler, 1995) and 1997/98 when the farming systems survey for 
this research was done (section 7.5). Farmer's reports suggest the reduction 
may be due to legume seed losses during the drought years. Slow recovery 
from these losses is thought to be due to a combination of poor seed supply, 
changing social networks, limited market access and cash (section 7.5). 
However the lack of production statistics prevents any real assessment of the 
impact of drought on household, village or regional bambara groundnut seed 
supplies or the knock-on effect on food production. Monitoring recovery or 
decline following drought years is precluded and policy measures to support 
legume seed supplies do not appear to exist. 
The importance of legumes has been explored in this research by asking 
farmers to rank their importance and over an extended period of time by 
collecting qualitative data during semi-structured interviews as part of the 
case studies. More conventional empirical methods for investigating the 
relative importance of crops involve evaluating the areas, production and 
productivity of crops (section 8.2.2). While the farming systems survey results 
showed that households planted legumes in 1997/98 (section 5.4.2 and 7.5), 
it says nothing about where they were planted, what areas were sown or 
what yields were obtained. Subsequent empirical research showed that 
assessing grain legume production is a difficult task due to the complexity 
and diversity of land-types and farming strategies in northern Namibia 
(section 6.5). Farmers sometimes intercrop and sometimes monocrop grain 
legumes and at considerably different sowing rates according to their 
resources and personal preferences. Although not easy, by designing a 
sampling strategy stratified to account for the biophysical and socio-
economic variability of the regions, it becomes possible to evaluate 
production and productivity figures. 
Results and analysis discussed in the previous chapter show that more 
farmers sow legumes (section7.5) than actually have good land for cultivating 
them (section 7.3). This implies that most farmers want to plant legumes and 
will do so with even a remote chance of getting a crop. While land quality 
does not dictate where legumes can or cannot be planted, it does affect 
resultant yield and productivity. By the time this research had identified the 
possible impact of different land units on yield and productivity it was only 
possible to sample for millet crops. It wasn't possible to generate data for 
legume productivity but the minimal quantitative data gathered for pearl millet 
confirmed the validity of using local land units as categories for a stratified 
sampling strategy (section 6.5.2). There is currently no easy way of 
extrapolating figures generated with this sampling strategy to the macro level 
useful for policy analysts. But if GIS technology could be used to distinguish 
regional/district level areas of different land units then extrapolation becomes 
possible. Data would still need to be sensitised to socia-economic variables 
but this could be achieved by using geographic location as an interface 
dataset, in the same way it is used in this research. Potentially, integrating 
datasets in this way could furnish policy makers and planners with useful 
production and productivity data for crops grown in the communal areas. 
8.2.2 Area, production and productivity of legumes 
Statistics on the areas, production or productivity of legumes in northern 
Namibia do not exist and they are difficult to generate as discussed above. 
The general finding of this research is that most households plant some 
legumes each year but the quantity and variety sown, the regularity and yield 
of harvests depends on the weather and land and labour assets. These 
assets vary considerably with location and between wealth groups. Poor 
farmers have significantly fewer opportunities and choices than wealthier 
farmers have for growing legumes and especially for testing new legume 
technologies. Equally some villages have larger endowments of legume land 
than other villages and in this research the households of those villages were 
better off in terms of land assets for size and diversity. 
Households do not have the same opportunities for growing crops. Only 58% 
of households in the Oshaala villages have land appropriate for growing both 
cereals and legumes. Disaggregated data show that 72% of wealthier 
households, 64% of medium wealthy and only 38% of the poorest 
households have this opportunity. A mean of 69% of households have some 
good legume land but only 21% of households have the choice of growing 
both legume types (subterranean or aerial). When disaggregated data show 
that none of the poorer households have appropriate land for growing both 
types of legumes while 14% of medium wealthy and 28% of the wealthiest 
households did. The majority of poor households (56%) only have land 
suitable for growing millet while 38% have land suitable for growing millet and 
cowpeas but not the subterranean species. A minority of households (6%) 
has land suitable for growing legumes only and the strategy is to grow 
legumes for sale and to purchase millet or receive it in exchange for labour. 
The link between assets, choice and opportunity, central to the sustainable 
livelihoods framework (Ellis, 2000) are well demonstrated in these data. 
The mean land holding of good cowpea land in the Oshaala villages is 1.9ha 
per household, but when disaggregated by wealth rank it becomes 2.85 ha 
for wealthy, 1.32 ha for medium wealthy and 1.51 ha for the poorest 
households. However it is unlikely this area will all be planted with cowpeas, 
as this land is also suitable for other crops and is usually intercropped with 
millet, sorghum, cowpeas and pumpkins. The percentage of cowpeas 
intercropped with millet has never been studied (Matanyaire 1998) but it is 
rare to see a mixture with more than 50% (by density) of the crop sown to 
cowpeas. The cowpea component is more likely to be somewhere between 
10 to 30%, approximating to a monocrop equivalent of about 0.2-0.6 ha per 
household, depending on assets. The final mixture of crops planted will 
depend on the other LLU plots contained within the household field, seed and 
labour resources as well as household food needs and preferences. 
Seasonal rainfall will also affect the final field composition and planting 
configuration. 
The average land holding of good bambara groundnutlgroundnut land 
(largely omufitu) in Oshaala is 2.3 hectares but once again, wealthier 
households have more of this land type than the poorer households. 
However it is highly unlikely that this area will all be planted to these legumes 
either. The central part of omufitu will be too dry most years to support crops 
at all so the amount of this land unit that is planted each year will be heavily 
dependent on seasonal rainfall, as well as seed, labour resources and 
household food needs and preferences. These areas are usually 
monocropped with legumes, as they are too well drained and leached to 
support more N and water hungry crops like cereals. Fleissner (2000) 
estimates those communal households that grow bambara groundnuts plant 
about 400m2 and, scaling this up, an overall estimate of 3000 hectares is 
given. This legume researcher also reports that some farmers' plant up to a 
hectare or more of these legumes and that some villages produce 
considerably more than others (pers. comm. Fleissner, 1998). His view is 
consistent with this research that shows the villages of Okaanga and 
Oshaala are better endowed for growing legumes (section 6.7 and 7.3). 
Furthermore, by extending this type of land unit analysis to a district/regional 
level, information could be generated to identify the areas that produce 
greater quantities of bambara groundnut and/or other legumes. This 
information would be useful for identifying legume vulnerable areas as well 
as for planning strategy to replenish seed stocks and maintain biodiversity 
following droughts. 
Areas sown to legumes are not previously known and farm based research 
on legumes has been scant. Likewise, the evaluation of legume productivity 
and production in farmers' fields is difficult. Station based trials are rarely 
indicative of farmers' land or their management practices and results are not 
appropriate for extrapolation. Two seasons and three years of farm based 
legume research with the Plant Science Project generated some useful data 
(Hillyer and McDonagh, 1999a; Hillyer and McDonagh, 2000a). All the data 
were generated using standard agronomic experimental techniques with the 
associated problems of assumptions and sampling strategies discussed in 
chapter three. Sources of variation could not be accounted for and 
coefficients of variation were large (often above 50%). Since little was known 
about field variability, small plots adjacent to each other were used and the 
results scaled up. Most of the analyses rely on mean values calculated from 
many plots across farmers' fields. No reference was made to the type of land 
unit on which they were planted because this information was not known at 
that time. Management practices were standardised only to the degree of 
understanding and consensus between farmers and individuals were not 
closely monitored. Despite the lack of precision (unquantifiable sources of 
variation in land, variety and management among other unknown sources), 
the quantitative data give some idea of the range of mean yield values 
achieved by farmers, although the results are more useful for comparative 
estimates of different treatments. 
Over two years at two villages, the means generated for a range of 
monocropped cowpea variety and management trials varied from 100 kg/ha 
to 2000 kg/ha (Hillyer and McDonagh 1999, Hillyer and McDonagh 2000), 
with the majority falling between 400 to 600 kg/ha. For samples taken from 
intercropped fields, the cowpea grain yield averaged 80 kg per hectare, while 
the yield from small monocropped plots and scaled up was under 1000 kg/ha 
(McDonagh and Hillyer, 2003). For comparison, 2000 kg/ha appears to be 
the maximum attainable when intercropped with millet in a rain fed semi-arid 
environment (Christianson, 1990; Bationo, 1993). There were fewer data 
generated for bambara ground nuts and groundnuts, but in Oshaala during 
the 1999/00 season, means of 483-787 kg/ha were achieved for different 
varieties of bambara groundnuts and a mean of 474 kg/ha for groundnuts 
(Hillyer and McDonagh, 2000a). 
On the basis of these data several things follow. Monocropped cowpea yields 
of 2000 kg/ha are achievable in Namibia, but not everywhere. Cowpeas and 
other grain legumes are not and cannot be grown in all fields, due to a 
combination of biophysical and socio-economic factors. Farmers do not 
prioritise legume production and productivity in the same way as millet and it 
would be prudent to take this into account when planning further research. In 
Malawi, despite high productivity levels for legumes, farmers were concerned 
about the marginal loss of maize production (Snapp, 2002). Considering 
millet productivity in Namibia, farmers seek to fill their grain stores and 
achieve a stable level of production and food security first. Management 
options for improving legume productivity are therefore only likely to be 
entertained if the millet priority is not put at any risk. This accounts for the 
rapid spread and expansion of Okashana 1, the improved short season millet 
variety selected with participatory methods during the 1990s (Rohrbach and 
Lechner, 1998). 
Improving legume production and/or productivity will need to have a positive 
or neutral effect on millet yields to be taken seriously. Boosting legume 
production and productivity ultimately depends on farmers' assets and 
choices. While most farmers plant some cowpeas, it likely to be the wealthier 
households that have the ability to expand production since wealthier farmers 
have the necessary combinations of millet and legume land and sufficient 
labour. Consequently, they are less likely to lose millet yields as a result of 
expanding legume production. Previous research shows non-farm activity 
and livelihood diversity to be greatest in areas of highest agricultural activity 
(Barrett et al., 2001). This research shows highest agricultural activity is the 
prerogative of wealthy farmers and it is they that could be encouraged to 
expand legume production in Namibia. If this could also be achieved in areas 
(i.e/ villages and districts) of highest agricultural activity the opportunity for 
trickle down through legume market development becomes a distinct 
possibility. 
8.2.3 Biophysical factors influencing variability 
As reviewed in chapter two, the spatial and temporal variation of the 
biophysical environment in dryland Africa has been recognised and 
acknowledged in studies of indigenous knowledge, local soil taxonomies and 
land classification systems. A distinction can be made between spatial and 
temporal variation. Spatial variation relates to soil and land type according to 
its physical location, whereas temporal variation mostly relates to interactions 
of these sites with the dynamics of the weather. Many authors have 
described the influence on cropping of the biophysical condition of the land; 
in particular soil colour, texture, moisture, topography, drainage and organic 
matter are indicators of this (Steiner et a/1998, Gobin at a/1998, Haburema 
and Steiner 1998, Gobin et a/2000, Neimeijer and Mazzucato 2003). Others 
report that the main influence on management is the rainfall received at a site 
(Osbahr and Allan 2003, Krasilnikov and Tabor 2003) and that dry 
environments tend to display management practices that maximise moisture 
maintenance (Barrera-Bassols and Zinck, 2003). However few, if any, have 
systematically explored the different management practices of different sites, 
or explained the logic behind these practices and how they change in 
response to year by year variation in the weather. This study began by 
identifying the spatial and temporal variation across northern Namibia. It then 
analysed farmers' land and crop management practices, attempting to 
explain farmers' logic and rationale. 
Data in chapter four show just how spatially and temporally unpredictable 
rainfalls are in Namibia. The two study seasons for this research were 
markedly different. The 1998/99 season was dry but the rain was relatively 
evenly spread across the months. The 1999/00 season had more annual 
rainfall but experienced a long mid season drought in January and February 
followed by flooding in NCR during March and April. Kavango received an 
average of between 70 and 110 mm more annual rainfall than NCR in 
respective seasons. 
Extreme problems with rainfall from drought through to flooding were found to 
be widespread across the north although regularity and severity of these 
problems was more localised. Likewise, soils are spatially variable across the 
north. These soils have received more formal scientific attention since 
Independence and are better understood in terms of their chemical 
properties, but little is known about their in-situ physical characteristics, 
especially regarding soil water dynamics. The local knowledge system, 
explored in chapter six, characterises and captures the complex soil water 1 
nutrient dynamics in farmers' fields and explains farmers' management 
practices. The local land units fall broadly into two groups: i) those that are 
sandier, well-drained, more acidic, lower in fertility and more suitable to 
legume species, and ii) those that are more alkaline, more fertile, moisture 
retaining and capable of supporting cereal crops. Some land units are able to 
support different crop species and varieties or combinations and are 
habitually intercropped, while others cannot and are usually monocropped. 
This analysis begins to explain why legumes are not grown more extensively 
from a biophysical perspective and how local and scientific knowledge may 
be integrated to yield a more complete knowledge of this environment. 
Despite the compatibility of formal scientific and local knowledge systems 
that is highlighted by the results of chapter six, many anomalies and 
unanswered questions also arise. These mostly relate to concepts of soil 
fertility, the processes that support it and the biophysical aspects of 
temperature and moisture that appear to control it. Farmers' concerns about 
marginal losses of staple crops, especially in the most productive of fields, 
are understandable, but there appears to be more to this story. Namibian 
farmers say they are unwilling to plant legumes in their best millet fields, 
because the fertility is too high for them to grow well. Niemeijer and 
Mazzucato (2003) reported the same perception in Burkina Faso where 
farmers will not plant groundnuts in their maize fields. Formal science tends 
to place the greatest emphasis on chemical fertility, on plant available 
nutrient stocks and nutrient management. This research has demonstrated 
that, in many cases, soil physical characteristics such as texture, soil 
capillary properties, the nature of the hardpan and soil colour are at least as 
important as the soil chemical properties in influencing productivity and 
management. 
Informal discussion with Namibian farmers suggested that high soil fertility is 
conceptualised as "organic soils" implying a greater incidence and 
concentration of micro flora and fauna as well as organic matter. They said 
that something would "eat" the undeveloped bean pods, preventing them 
from ever reaching maturity. This logic does not hold for aerial beans as 
these pods are not so easily colonised by soil fauna and yet they also are 
rarely found in the best millet producing fields. Whether ants, termites, worms 
or other soil fauna and pests literally colonise and consume subterranean 
beans, or whether there are other physiological explanations for poor bean 
production, perhaps related to N fixation, remains to be seen. But irrespective 
of the cause, farmers believe it is not worth planting valuable beans in high 
fertility soils and they rarely do it. 
Namibian farmers show they have a good understanding of manure use and 
decomposition in different places. They concentrate its use on chosen land 
units to build up fertility, so maximising the returns on labour invested in 
applying the manure. They distinguish between wet and dry manure as was 
also found among the Gourmantche of Burkina Faso (Niemeijer and 
Mazzucato, 2003). Farmers consider mineral fertiliser is inferior to manure, 
as it does not last as long and they often complain about the "burning" effect 
of fertiliser in hot soils. They distinguish different topsoils by colour, texture, 
moisture and temperature, among other features. These factors are related 
to ideas of soil fertility, water flow and dynamics to serve different crop 
tolerances and are used to reach decisions about management as discussed 
in chapter six. 
Formal science tells us that the decomposition of manure, crop residues and 
other organic matter are all processes in which heat and moisture play an 
important role (Wild, 1988). The roles of temperature and moisture, in the 
decomposition of organic matter in tropical soils, are complex and not fully 
understood. Various types of surface absorb and I or reflect heat in particular 
ways, as do soils of different texture or colour. Soil water retention curves are 
affected by temperature and temperature effects vary between soils and for 
different water contents with the same soil (Landon, 1991). 
High temperatures can kill or inhibit N -fixing bacteria whilst low temperatures 
delay the onset of nodulation, diminishing fixation (Giller and Wilson, 2001). 
Rhizobial populations are found to vary with depth of soil. Lower populations 
exist in the hottest topsoil and these increase to depths of 20-25cm below the 
surface. Cowpea rhizobia isolates from hot dry savannah can tolerate 
daytime temperatures of 40C, whereas those from cooler climates can not 
and different bacteria respond differently to temperature. Optimal 
temperatures for N fixation are known to vary with legume species and 
perhaps with genotype. This suggests that soil specific temperature effects 
such as those incorporated into the LLU system can have a significant 
influence on legume performance. 
Just as temperature affects the vitality of rhizobia, so does the moisture 
regime and other soil fauna and flora. Although Bradyrhizobium (those that 
colonise cowpeas, bambara groundnuts and groundnuts) are more tolerant to 
drought, numbers of rhizobia decline as soil dries out and N fixation rates are 
sensitive to reduction in soil water content. Competition with (and antagonism 
by) other soil organisms influences the survival and growth of N fixing 
bacteria. This could be in the form of competition for nutrients, antagonistic 
effects of toxin production, predation and parasitism. The extent and 
importance of these processes is unknown. Sanchez (2003) discusses 
current research that seeks to establish indicators and assess critical levels 
of soil biota for evaluating soil quality. While the role of soil biotic organisms 
in ecosystem functions such as decomposition, nutrient cycling, N fixation, 
soil organic matter formation and mineralization is established, the level of 
biodiversity required to maintain these processes is unclear. 
There is increasing interest in functional aspects of soil microbial diversity 
and soil quality (Sanchez 2003). Farmers in Namibia frequently refer to the 
temperature and moisture of topsoils and their effects on crops. It is possible 
that working with farmers to understand their conceptualisation of abiotic and 
biotic factors and their interaction, along with the practices they use to 
manage these dynamics in different soils and seasons, could supply this new 
research area with added momentum. 
The discussion in the above paragraphs does no more than suggest possible 
explanations for the suitability of different land units for different crops, 
claimed by farmers and integrated into their management framework. Clearly 
the verification of each of these processes would be time consuming and is 
beyond the scope of this study. There is, however, sufficient uncertainty 
around the effects of soil physiochemical properties on key soil processes, 
groups of micro-organisms and, ultimately, on productivity that gives no 
reason to doubt that farmers' beliefs are well founded. 
In this research, millet was used as an indicator crop to ascertain how yields 
altered across different fields in the same village and between villages. Millet 
can be used in this way because it is a highly adaptable crop with 
physiological mechanisms for tolerating extreme and diverse environments 
(reviewed in chapter two). It is the priority and staple crop and it is the only 
crop to be planted across most land units. Even though farmers know there 
are some land units where it performs badly, some will still plant in these 
places in an effort to meet their household millet needs. The other cereal, 
legume and vegetable crops are not used in the same way and are rarely 
planted across all land units. Although it has not yet been fully studied, it can 
be assumed that, like the distribution of different land units across the 
Oshaala villages, those across the whole region are patchy and uneven. The 
land units are linked to millet productivity and wealth (chapters six and seven) 
and the LLU framework provides an opportunity to account for some of that 
variability. Since agricultural services have been poorly targeted in Namibia 
(Hansohm and Presland, 1998) the framework could be useful in redressing 
the balance. The framework could be used in several ways (section 6.5): as a 
training tool for research and extension officers to familiarise with local land 
and associated management practices, as a sampling frame for blocking 
agronomic experiments, as a planning device for targeting villages/areas or 
socio-economic groups. 
An overall mean of 300 kg/ha was generated by sampling across a range of 
115 random sites (McDonagh and Hillyer, 2003). This is consistent with other 
statistics for NCR; 310 kg/ha in 1992/93 season (Keyler, 1995) and 281 
kg/ha for the Omusati region in 1998/99 (MAWRD, 2000). When research 
deliberately explored the variation in farmers' best millet fields across the 
region in a study during the 1998/99 season (Hillyer and McDonagh, 1999c), 
an overall mean was returned that at least doubled those figures. This was 
659 kg/ha, with individual means ranging from 242 to 1770 kg/ha and an 
overall range of 20 to 4441 kg/ha. Oshaala was one of these villages and its 
mean was below the average, at 428 kg/ha, ranking it in sixth place of eight 
villages. Oshaala farmers' trials during that same year (but spread across 
land units) yielded a range of means from 780 to 1480 kg/ha (Hillyer and 
McDonagh, 1999a) and in 1999/2000 from 240 to 510kg/ha (Hillyer and 
McDonagh, 2000a). In the same season, the mean millet yield, stratified 
according to land units, range from 385 to 2059 kg/ha and returned an overall 
mean of 1088 kg/ha (section 6.5.2). As would be expected, means returned 
from random samples are lower than those returned from stratified village 
and land unit data. However they mask great variability between households 
and are not very useful for guiding policy, interventions or support targeted at 
the household level. 
Policies informed by lower random figures are more likely to generate 
solutions aimed at crisis management, such as food aid and drought 
planning. This may support the view that crop farming is not appropriate in 
this environment and development would be better targeted at other sectors. 
Alternatively, when production figures are stratified and disaggregated, a 
different image emerges. Certainly some households can only produce low 
yields of around 300 kg/ha or less, whereas others can supply up to 4000 
kg/ha. Figures generated during a single/couple of seasons are likely to vary 
with the rainfall and run-off of different seasons but relative differences will 
remain and these are considerable. 
Households clearly have different livelihoods and needs, which when taken 
into account for policy and planning purposes are likely to generate a 
different portfolio of recommendations. A proportion of households may well 
require emergency food aid. Generally, it would be better to support 
households with carefully targeted agricultural research and extension 
programmes, sensitive to land type and different socio-economic groups. 
Furthermore it is now believed that areas of high agricultural production are 
also sites of high non-farm activity and more diverse livelihood opportunities 
that supply trickle-down benefits to poorer people (Barrett et al., 2001). To 
target such sites with policy measures to support more vulnerable people 
requires in the first instance, identifying areas and sites of higher agricultural 
activity. The methods used in this research to identify land units, the 
frameworks and crop productivities could be used and developed for such a 
purpose. 
Unlike the analysis for millet, it was not possible to review legume production 
variation across vii/ages of the region or different LLUs. The simple reason 
for this, as already discussed, is that legumes are not prioritised and planted 
everywhere in the same way as millet, hence they could not be sampled in 
the same way. The explanation for the localised planting of legumes is 
complex and the biophysical reasons have not been previously targeted or 
studied. However this has now been achieved, to some extent, by drawing 
together what is known about the northern Namibian environment, individual 
crops and agronomic processes from both existing evidence and the results 
of this study. 
Certainly, cowpeas are the most important and widespread legume crop in 
northern Namibia and this is consistent with literature reviewed in chapter two 
which shows that cowpeas have a wide sphere of adaptation. Cowpea habits 
facilitate intercropping with millet and other crops, unlike the subterranean 
legume species. These need specific management practices and are labour 
intensive as discussed in chapter seven. Productivity results presented 
earlier in section 8.2.2 show once again extreme variability, but these results 
are drawn from random samples denying the ability to disaggregate data or 
sensitise them to inherent variation in land type shown to exist. Since the 
temperature and water regimes differ between LLUs and these both affect 
plant growth, development and, possibly, the N fixation processes that serve 
them, it can be expected that specific location will have an impact on cowpea 
productivity. Likewise, seasonal weather promotes extreme temporal 
variation. Despite cowpeas being known for their promiscuity, these factors 
could explain some, but not necessarily all, of the differences obtained with 
the results for N fixation (McDonagh and Hillyer, 2003). 
Considerably more research has been done on groundnuts than on the other 
legumes grown in northern Namibia. They are known to be more water 
hungry than other legumes and to have specific nutrient requirements. They 
are often highly bred and recognised for being fussy; while they nodulate with 
Bradyrhizobium strains they are not commonly promiscuous and have an 
unusual mechanism of mycorrizhal infection (Brodrick and Giller, 1991). 
Nitrogen fixation efficiencies for groundnuts rose in the second season, 
mimicking, but more dramatically so, the pattern of results for cowpeas. 
Since ground nuts have a more limited adaptation to environment than 
Cowpeas, these results might be expected. The pattern of movement for 
bambara groundnuts moved in the opposite direction with higher N fixation 
efficiencies in the drier of the two seasons (McDonagh and Hillyer, 2003). 
From literature reviewed in chapter two, the distribution pattern of bambara 
groundnuts in Africa has shown they are adapted to dry environments and 
are mostly grown where other crops are not. They are known to form 
associations with Bradyrhizobium strains and are very promiscuous (Brodrick 
and Giller, 1991). The rise in N fixation efficiencies for cowpeas and 
groundnuts and the drop for bambara groundnuts in the second, wetter 
season, could be related to the soil/water/temperature dynamic of the two 
seasons. However, without more research designed with the specific 
intention of disaggregating temporal and spatial variation, this is only 
conjecture. 
Quite a lot is known about the physiology of millet and cowpea crops, their 
environmental adaptation and use in northern Namibia. Both crops are 
adapted for dealing with the inherent temporal and spatial variation i.e. basal 
and aXillary tillering in the case of millet and indeterminate growth habit that 
allows continuous flowering and pod production in the case of cowpea. What 
is known about the environmental variation in northern Namibia also explains 
why other crops such as bambara groundnuts or sorghum are usually only 
grown in certain places. Understanding the reasons and processes for the 
environmental adaptation of crops is an important step towards finding or 
developing new varieties and technologies for any given environment. 
Successful introduction of new crops or practices requires a thorough 
understanding of local environmental variation in order to match up 
biophysical crop needs with existing resources (Azam-Ali et a/., 2001b) and 
this has not hitherto been the case in northern Namibia. However, there is 
potential for using frameworks such as the LLU knowledge system discussed 
in this research. Respectful and well managed participatory approaches are 
known to shorten the time frame and improve on the outputs of agricultural 
research objectives (Sperling, 1993; Rohrbach and Lechner, 1998). There is 
already a precedent in Namibia with the release and rapid spread of 
Okashana 1. Further participatory approaches, especially with respect to 
local land use and management practices, could be harnessed to great effect 
in this context. 
8.2.4 Socio-economic factors influencing variability 
Little published work dedicated to the role and soil fertility potential of 
legumes in small-scale African farming communities has appeared. One 
particular study, in a similar setting in Malawi, provides a unique opportunity 
for a comparative analysis. Smallholders in Malawi seek to satisfy their food 
requirements for their staple crop, maize, before expanding to legumes or 
other crops (Snapp, 2002). Similarly, this research shows that, in Namibia 
farmers prioritise millet above all other crops. In Malawi, legumes and cash 
crops are more likely to be grown by farmers owning and planting larger land 
areas. Households with the smallest farm size and smallest cultivated area 
grow almost no legumes. Overall, the largest area is planted with maize. This 
research corroborates those findings, as in northern Namibia, millet covers 
the largest cropped areas. It is grown on all types of land, irrespective of 
quality and all households have some millet land to crop. Furthermore, this 
research has been able to disaggregate data by wealth group and, using a 
diversity index, shows that the richest farmers have the largest and most 
diverse land holdings, while those of the poorest are smaller and less 
diverse. It is argued in this research that the diversity of cropland is as 
important as farm size with respect to whether legumes are grown 
successfully or not. 
In Malawi, highly populated areas faced constraints for legume production, 
just as found in the Oshaala villages of Namibia. In the latter context, these 
areas are more recently populated and are considerably less diverse, with 
limited legume land and available labour resources. There is also a higher 
incidence of full time employment providing cash incomes that can be used 
to purchase beans for consumption. Indeed, there is now a healthy local 
market for cooked beans, especially as food for school children. It is logical 
that the newer residents, lacking legume land and labour but having cash 
income, will create demand in the local market. Longer standing residents, 
wealthier farmers and others that have adequate land, labour and seeds for 
legumes, cultivate and supply the local market, adding extra value with 
preparation and cooking. However while this may be true locally for Oshaala, 
generally the legume markets in Namibia are weak and unreliable. Part of the 
reason for this is that legume supply is modest, irregular and uncoordinated. 
In Malawi, female headed households were particularly concerned about 
early food production and were the most vulnerable households. In Namibia, 
female headed households were found to have equally diverse but much 
smaller land holdings than their male counterparts and as such are less likely 
to grow legumes or to maintain legume seeds from one year to the next. 
Likewise, female headed households tend to be smaller and experience 
more labour shortages. This particularly impacts on their ability to grow 
legumes, especially the subterranean species that require more intensive 
labour inputs. Case studies found a poor female headed household 
harnessing natural, human and social capital to generate cash income from 
legumes (Box 7.2). Equally, to many poor households, legumes represent a 
crucial source of protein that is not available to them from meat, while 
wealthier households obtain protein from both sources. In terms of quantity 
and choice, legumes play a more limited role in poor households than in 
wealthier ones and this is clearly exacerbated for female headed households. 
In both countries, irrespective of wealth or extent of land holdings, legumes 
are primarily grown for food and cash, whilst soil fertility is a distinctly 
secondary concern. 
The farm survey results in Malawi highlight the competition between legumes 
and other crops for the allocation of the household's limited land, labour and 
cash resources. Farmers indicate strong concerns about the returns for 
labour invested and agronomists are criticised for underestimating the 
importance of labour requirements (Snapp, 2002). likewise, in the Oshaala 
villages, poor households have less labour for producing legumes especially 
the subterranean species and less ability to maintain biodiversity and seed 
supplies. Despite this, most households across all wealth categories try 
growing some cowpeas each year, even if their land is not ideal legume land. 
This can be explained because cowpeas are an aerial species that require 
less labour input and are more widely adapted to a broader range of soilfland 
environments. The most popular local cowpea varieties in Namibia are 
indeterminate in nature so it is no surprise that legumes promoted by 
different agencies in Malawi have converged upon a few cowpea varieties 
that are all indeterminate in growth type (Snapp, 2002). 
In Namibia, the distribution of legume seed was found to be uneven across 
the study sites and mean legume productivity and biodiversity was greater in 
NCR than in Kavango. Households in Katope had good labour profiles for 
farming and for growing legumes but they complained about losing legume 
seed to drought and many had to buy replacement seed from distant 
markets. The environment in this area is less conducive to growing legumes. 
Due to its remote nature, lost seed is not easily replaced from markets or 
other sources. This supports conclusions reached by Snapp at 8/ (2002) who 
say that prospects for legume intensification in Malawi differ between regions 
and those areas with the best prospects are where grain legumes are already 
grown and market access is better. Results from Namibia show best 
prospects are likely to be in the places where legumes are most well 
established and where markets are thriving. It would be negligent not to 
acknowledge the need and importance of supplying seed markets and other 
supply mechanisms to service the more remote areas, like Katope, that are 
vulnerable to legume seed losses. As in the Malawian case, it is likely that 
legumes uptake will be influenced more by market development than 
perceived soil fertility benefits. 
In the Oshaala villages, more recent settlers have smaller and less diverse 
land holdings, limiting their yields and especially their ability to cultivate 
legumes. Likewise, in Katope the longest standing residents were found to 
have the largest and most complex land holdings with some 'owning' multiple 
fields in different places. It was not possible to ascertain how these land 
holdings impacted on crop choices, management practices and yields, due to 
the methods used. In Katope, prior to the emergence of the LLU system, a 
farming systems survey was followed by transect mapping, field mapping, 
crop identification, population counting, crop and soil sampling and 
successive farmer interviews. These data were useful for describing the 
complexity of the field, farming system and farmers practices (chapter five) 
but insufficient for understanding and analysing them. Later, the participatory 
GIS methods used in Oshaala to elucidate the local management framework 
enabled more scrutiny and insight as well as supplying a medium for 
integrating qualitative with quantitative data (chapters six and seven). Payton 
at al (2003), after comparing and contrasting two different qualitative 
methods, also acknowledges the value of GIS as an integration domain. 
Although there are similarities with the studies reported by Payton at aI, this 
research is unique in relating ArcView with SPSS to apply the diversity index 
and generate a wealth analysis. Its weakness though, in common with the 
Payton et a/ research, is the subjective bias introduced as a result of coding 
by the researcher. The main benefit of the GIS has been the additional 
information it supplies, the deeper analysis it encourages and the integration 
it facilitates. 
The rural livelihoods analysis used in this research has also proved a 
valuable tool in expanding the perspective beyond the vii/age boundaries to 
include their external linkages and regional background. It has also proved 
useful for highlighting the importance of assets other than those used directly 
in farming (land, labour and seed), for example physical assets of location 
and the accessibility of infrastructure including markets, as well as social 
networks. It has stimulated thinking about the links between farmers' assets, 
management practices and vulnerability in terms of food crops and stocks. 
More extensive studies to incorporate other locations and linking other assets 
and market data with GIS could be considerably more effective, but this is not 
within the scope of this study. Lacking this higher technological information, 
the SLA has been effective and relatively cheap in identifying major 
differences in physical, social and financial capital between villages. It has 
been sufficient to identify the importance of these types of capital, particularly 
with respect to market access and seed supply. This shows more remote 
rural areas to be considerably more vulnerable to seed losses, crop diversity 
maintenance and food scarcity, especially in the poorer households. 
However, it is not sufficient for making more specific recommendations as 
this analysis was applied later in the research process and was not an 
original design feature. It therefore does not go far enough in identifying the 
current opportunities and limitations of legume markets and seed supply 
which could be an important next step for supporting communal Namibian 
farmers' livelihoods. 
8.3 Potential role of legumes in northern Namibia 
In agronomic terms 'potential' productivity is often referred to and evaluated 
as what is possible in ideal and non-limiting circumstances. It is a theoretical 
concept used as a benchmark, to monitor crop development progress or a 
target to aim for and as such, is not meant to be 'realistic'. However, this 
conceptualisation is partly responsible for past weaknesses when research 
stations in tropical developing countries sought to increase potentials only to 
find the results not relevant to ordinary farmers. There is also a danger that 
when actual productivity falls well short of what is known elsewhere, research 
is abandoned in favour of higher productivity areas. Where production 
statistics are based on wide-scale and very small random samples, as is 
usually the case and has shown to be true for Namibia, these figures can 
mislead researchers and policy makers into assuming that there is little hope 
for achieving agronomic potentials. When spatial and temporal variation is 
taken into account in places where variability is known to be high, a different 
story emerges. What is possible in one place, at one time and to one 
household differs dramatically from another and this is critically important. 
For example, high or low productivity niches may be widespread and worth 
targeting with different policy measures to maximise food and seed supply or 
mitigate food shortages. 
This research has placed actual practice at the centre of the analysis and 
takes a view on what is possible based on that, as opposed to the standard 
agronomic approach which places potential at the centre and then research 
and development seeks to achieve it. While the standard agronomic 
approach has been highly successful in the context from which it arose (i.e. 
European and other temperate environments), simply transferring 
expectations in terms of potentials and practices with no reference to local 
context, is not always effective. 
There is no doubt that legumes played an important part in the European 
Agricultural Revolution and were a catalyst for the Industrial Revolution but, 
as discussed in chapter two, this was contextual and dependent on 
biophysical and socio-economic factors of the time and place. Since this 
combination of factors was unique, the results cannot be easily replicated. So 
while the general potential of legumes is undeniable, the extent to which the 
potential can be realised changes with the context. Unlike the Eurocentric 
view of legumes that assumes cereal increases are fuelled by using clovers 
in rotations which leads naturally to growth and modernisation, the Namibian 
perspective is altogether different. Grain legumes are used for food and cash 
first and foremost, while soil fertility is at best, a secondary concern. Land 
and labour resources, as well as farmers' food security priorities, make 
annual legume rotations completely inappropriate. Additionally, more 
legumes appear to be grown where markets and infrastructure exist. In 
northern Namibia, these are often patchy and underdeveloped espeCially in 
the more remote rural areas. 
There is potential in Namibia for more legumes to be grown, for new 
technologies to be created and adopted or old technologies to be adapted by 
farmers and for the development of legume markets and seed supply 
mechanisms. The big question is whether this deserves attention and 
investment above other agricultural research and rural development 
considerations. This thesis has identified that important legumes have 
previously been overlooked in favour of crops that are less important to 
northern communal farmers, such as groundnuts and maize and this could 
be redressed. It has also identified that local people are those best placed to 
assess the most likely ways of harnessing the unique benefits from legumes. 
For this to happen, agricultural researchers at the very least need to identify 
technologies that could suit local contexts in order to give farmers the 
opportunity to choose. The first step in this process is for researchers to 
know the various (biophysical and socio-economic) contexts that 
technologies are required to serve. It is also possible that entirely new 
technologies are required to suit the new and changing circumstances in 
Namibia and if so, this is not easy. Farmers cannot be expected to achieve 
this alone and they may well require additional technology and institutional 
support to achieve this practically. This implies an investment by the 
agricultural research and extension services. 
An example of a new technology tested by PSP on a research station on 
omufifuhenge land, (land that is low yielding for millet) involved intercropping 
cowpeas with millet. The millet and cowpea were planted with the first rains 
and then an early bean crop was harvested and the remaining biomass was 
used as a green manure. The resulting millet crop, grown in the same 
season, produced 50% more millet than the control, hence fulfilling farmers 
requirements of no loss in millet yield (Hillyer & McDonagh, 2002). Based on 
results from this thesis, this kind of technology might be useful to households 
that have some omufifuhenge land and sufficient labour to cultivate an early 
cowpea crop. It must be noted though that this is merely an example of the 
type of targeting of recommendations or interventions that is possible using 
the LLU framework as a tool. Other legume technologies could be explored 
to suit other socio-economic groups with similar asset profiles. For example, 
legume technologies designed for minimising weeding operations and 
maximising N release from biomass within the cropping season could be 
attractive to farmers with viable land assets but little available labour. New 
varieties that are well adapted to local circumstances could offer further 
opportunities. The only way of identifying suitable technology worthy of 
investment is initially achieving a common understanding of contextual 
circumstances and then to work in partnership with local farmers. 
This research reveals that in northern Namibia biophysical and socio-
economic variation is considerable, complex and important. Equally, farmers 
and scientists have similar knowledge in many respects, but they may have 
entirely different concepts of what is important, such as those previously 
discussed for crop productivity and soil fertility processes. This presents 
certain challenges that run to the very core of individual, ethnic, disciplinary 
or even, national perceptions. For research purposes, this requires at the 
very least, an acceptance that alternative paradigms exist simultaneously. It 
especially requires articulation, listening and consistent corroboration of 
understanding between local people and assisting professionals. All of this 
arises before considering the problems of misinterpretation due to language 
and translation. These logical and practical difficulties clarify why there has 
been so little progress over such an extended period of time, but this is not 
an excuse for inaction. Rather, it is a reason for finding new models of 
communication to bridge the knowledge gaps and to generate legume 
technologies that are locally appropriate and effective. 
Elbasha et al (1998) conclude that legumes in Africa are not a general 
solution but only occupy a niche in these systems and Sum berg (2002) 
questions whether this is the sign of a new realism. Perhaps the fundamental 
problem is that legume technologies do not and never will reliably and 
economically deliver benefits that interest farmers. While this is generally a 
pessimistic view, this research shows that it may well apply to a considerable 
proportion of the poorest farmers. This does not mean that poor farmers can 
never grow and eat legumes or that they have no need or desire for them. 
This research concurs with the more optimistic view that soil fertility may be 
pursued as a by-product of market development and best prospects are 
where grain legumes are already grown and where market access is better 
(Snapp, 2002). But once again, the context is emphasised. That is, while 
some poor farmers may never have the chance to realise the benefits of 
legume technologies, other farmers may intensify legume production, boost 
soil fertility and supply markets that in turn help to maintain crop biodiversity 
and productivity in the area. In addition, an enabling policy environment could 
support legume seed supply with incentives to public and I or private 
institutions. 
This research certainly supports the hypotheses that legumes and legume 
technologies only occupy particular niches (Elbasha at al., 1998) and the 
proposition that legumes are no panacea (Sumberg 2002) or simple pathway 
to growth and modernisation. However, it is possible that as more local 
environmental knowledge is explored, these niches may be replicated across 
semi-arid Africa and perhaps other sub-continents. If this were shown to be 
so, there would be a strong case for considerably more investment into 
'niche-focussed' research and development irrespective of whether it is 
legume or other technologies that are targeted. It is conceivable that 
participatory and GIS techniques for understanding local land use and 
management practice, such as that used in this research, could be combined 
with other methodologies and expert systems. Such integration could 
facilitate expansion from specific sites to multiple sites, from the micro to 
macro levels and to integrate qualitative with quantitative data. This would be 
more expensive and time consuming than established methods and it would 
require considerable testing but in time the costs would likely fall, increasing 
productivity. 
Under the current international poverty agenda, it would be especially 
important if these niches could serve the poorest people in particular. This 
would be a new departure in research approaches that fully acknowledge 
system properties, such as those of diverse crop land of varying quality and 
limiting labour resources. Furthermore, that local people and their knowledge 
are indispensable and that respectful, participatory approaches are vital. All 
knowledge systems, including scientific knowledge, are incomplete and 
imprecise so that there is always potential for new knowledge and 
technologies to expand existing ones. Creating partnerships that facilitate 
such development may well require new models of communication and 
knowledge sharing that so far evades the majority of research and 
development practitioners. Finally, this approach may be not fulfil the "quick 
and cheap" requirement (Scoones and Toulmin, 1999) but then again, it may 
be much quicker and cheaper than what has gone before. 
8.4 Opportunities for legume research and development In Namibia 
The conventional approach to agricultural research and development is to 
identify constraints to fulfilling potentials and then to seek to remove those 
constraints. For example in the case of adding mineral fertilisers where 
nutrients are limiting or irrigation where water is limiting. This research 
presents a different perspective that begins with what is already there and 
then seeks opportunities for supporting, improving and possibly transforming 
that. Issues arising from the local contexts that have been explored in this 
research include the erratic climate, land diversity, seed supply, poverty, 
knowledge gaps and world views 
Farmers identify rainfall as a major limitation to crop productivity and it could 
be considered as a significant barrier to fulfilling legume potentials. However, 
this research finds that problems with rainfall are widespread and that 
specific problems, such as flooding, are often localised. Since it is not 
possible to control rainfall, the next best option is to understand its impact in 
order to find ways of mitigating its worst and maximising its best effects. 
Farmers already do this. Hence, their contextual knowledge in the form of the 
LLU framework is the most useful tool in formulating activities and practices 
to achieve legume crop stability and productivity. Unfortunately though, this 
knowledge is unevenly distributed and is possibly being eroded and lost. 
Local land units are extremely diverse so that legume development patterns 
derived from western contexts and models do not fit local contexts and are 
ineffective. Acknowledging this and beginning instead with the capability and 
suitability of local land and other resources facilitates the creation of new and 
more effective models. The local land unit framework is a model that can be 
used to support farmers in their own endeavours and to explore the 
possibilities of new legume technology options. 
Biodiversity is linked to climate and its impact on the landscape so that 
blighted areas are susceptible to erosion. Areas and seasons that are less 
conducive to growing legumes increase farmers' vulnerability to seed loss, 
unless this seed can be replaced through informal channels. While regularly 
afflicted areas may be better off adapting 'new' crops to their particular 
circumstances, isolated perturbations deserve replenishment of existing seed 
resources. Markets and other seed supply mechanisms can mitigate losses 
but in Namibia they are small and unreliable and would benefit from policies 
directed at boosting them. 
Social networks are important but are changing with the process of 
urbanisation and modernisation. Traditional networks are not being replaced 
by public services at the same rate, so that such things as seed and seed 
networks, if they ever were, are no longer sustainable. This is evidenced by 
the legume seed losses in Kavango that followed drought and have not yet 
recovered. Infrastructure is uneven so that the more remote rural areas 
remain without active government services and support. As a result, these 
areas remain isolated. They are poorer, more vulnerable and limited in their 
choices. On the other hand these areas, known as frontier areas, represent 
opportunities for market development. 
Wealth as defined by local people appears to be determined by spatial and 
temporal settlement patterns. Longer standing residents have access and 
control to crucial resources and more choice on which to fashion their 
farming and livelihood strategies. Wealthier households have larger and 
more diverse fields as well as larger households representing more labour. 
Limited choice means that those in poverty are the most vulnerable. Poor 
people want legume seed and inclusion in projects but they may not have the 
capacity to take the risks required by research and development. It is 
pertinent to take this into account when planning and designing farmer 
participatory legume research. Wealthier households could certainly be 
encouraged to participate in testing new legumes and developing new 
legume practices. 
The uneven distribution of local knowledge has been identified and 
acknowledged during the course of this research. This phenomenon extends 
far beyond the farming community to those that service them from the 
government and beyond. Agricultural professionals, well educated in their 
Own discipline, are largely ignorant of knowledge held by local people about 
their environment and that has evolved over generations. In many cases, 
access to these frameworks of knowledge would make their work more 
useful and relevant. Sectoral, racial, political, economic and linguistic 
divisions, eXisting in Namibia, present substantial challenges. Distinct 
knowledge systems with big differences are liable to generate 
misunderstanding and misinterpretation. These encourage prejudice, making 
communication and partnerships more difficult. There is no easy solution, but 
more complete knowledge is a better basis for understanding different 
realities. An active acceptance of these realities could pave the way towards 
better communication. 
Local knowledge and science have different perspectives that produce 
different agendas, methods, and outputs. If these are in operation 
simultaneously in the same place but unrecognised, then results will be 
confounded, causing confusion, lack of confidence and disassociation. The 
way forward could be, to acknowledge and communicate these perspectives, 
to identify complimentary aspects or potential synergies that might exist. This 
thesis shows that integrated methodologies and GIS have a role to play. 
8.5 Implications for policy. 
An important conclusion for national and international policy is the 
requirement to reflect and respond to local realities and needs. This is 
especially true for highly variable biophysical and socio-economic 
environments like those found in northern Namibia. Local people have 
frameworks and systems for guiding management choices that offer an 
opportunity for generating contextually sensitive policies. This approach 
assumes that system properties are fundamental and that realistic 
possibilities are preferable to hypothetical ones. A first step in the Namibian 
case could be to generate national statistics that reflect the local importance 
of legumes, especially cowpeas that have not previously been available to 
decision-makers. 
Next, the local framework has broader implications for soil management 
interventions and efforts to target particular groups. In Namibia some farmers 
can produce considerable quantities of millet and legume grain while others 
cannot grow enough food to avoid annual hunger gaps. As already discussed 
social groups require entirely different policy responses. Vulnerable 
households may require short-term emergency food aid and seed 
replenishment. While more food secure households may be engaged in long 
term institutionalised agricultural research, development and extension 
provision for protecting and improving biodiversity and sustainable farming 
practices. Likewise different technologies may suit different social groups. 
For example, indeterminate, short season cowpeas used to supply an early 
grain legume crop and then incorporated as a green manure to support a 
later maturing millet crop, may suit female headed households' needing an 
early food supply. Evidence from elsewhere has shown that participatory 
agricultural research and development can speed up effective targeted 
technology development. This entails the integration of institutional and 
farmers research for testing seed and developing technology. It is the most 
realistic approach for diverse and complex environments like Namibia and 
common to SSA. However it is not simple, easy or necessarily cheap 
requiring considerable institutional investment. On the other hand after 
generations of financial expenditure and poor policy impact it could be more 
economically efficient and effective in the long run. 
Institutional factors are clearly important and perhaps a weakness of this 
research is that insufficient attention has been afforded to them. 
Nevertheless issues have arisen that deserve some emphasis. Where land 
units are particularly diverse and infrastructure is developing, legume 
markets for seed and cooked food are thriving. This could be investigated 
more thoroughly but it appears that the physical capital involved may be a 
prime motivator for these markets. Certainly an enabling policy environment 
is needed to support seed supply whether it is through markets or other 
public mechanisms. A key institutional requirement is the attention to health 
and safety issues of uncontaminated seed that requires monitoring and 
regulation. 
Other policy implications lie in the removal of barriers to local development 
such as those that encourage the erosion of local knowledge. This is highly 
controversial since highly prized education programmes could be identified 
as culpable. In principle, there is no reason why local knowledge could not be 
incorporated in school and college curriculums. However this comes back to 
the issue of the compatibility of different knowledge systems and how 
apparent contradictions are dealt with in pedagogy. 
The value of the local classification system has been demonstrated in the 
approach to integrate scientific and local knowledge and practices. A key 
assumption is that different internally consistent paradigms exist 
simultaneously. Acknowledging the uncertainties of all epistemological 
systems shifts the valuation and the dynamics of respect and status. So the 
local framework has been used to analyse established knowledge, 
uncertainties and gaps between the different local and scientific viewpOints to 
guide potential research on a more effective course to fulfil local needs and 
advance global knowledge and understanding. The implication for national 
and international policy is that existing knowledge systems need to be 
acknowledged, identified and explored as a prerequisite to practical 
intervention. 
MisSing statistics are not unusual in the African context but they are not as 
damaging as false or misplaced statistics that actively mislead policy. 
Unfortunately this is what appears to happen with international policy that 
over generalises and oversimplifies circumstances. Generalisation in the end 
comes down to the issue of how to extrapolate from micro level data to the 
macro level needed for decision making. This is only a problem when 
circumstances are highly heterogeneous as in the case of Namibia or other 
parts of SSA. It is suggested that GIS technology has potential for bridging 
this gap by allowing extrapolation from single sites to multiple ones and that 
what is currently seen as individual and independent niches may well have 
wider applicability across continents. Furthermore, GIS technology has been 
successfully used in this research as an integration domain for qualitative 
and quantitative datasets and this is recommended. This possibility facilitates 
linking social with natural science data that has applicability far beyond its 
use in this research. 
8.6 Results summarised 
While millet is the most important, most prioritised and staple food crop, grain 
legumes are also an essential food in northern Namibia. Cowpeas are rated 
as the second and third most important food crop by a large majority of the 
study households. Although cowpeas are sometimes grown by nearly all 
those households, bambara groundnuts and groundnuts are found to be a 
luxury. They are mostly grown by wealthier households with more and 
diverse land, labour and seed assets though a small minority of other farmers 
exploits them for cash income. Legumes are not usually grown for animal 
feed and though some farmers have seen nodules on legume roots, they are 
not known for their benefits to soil fertility. 
Early in the research process it was clear that the farming environments in 
northern Namibia are patchy and complex with variable productive capacity. 
However the main factors influencing this variability were not immediately 
apparent. A framework of local knowledge pertaining to land, land use and 
management were explored. The framework incorporates the spatial and 
temporal diversity and dynamics that to a large extent, explains the local farm 
management practices. Subsequently, the framework was tested with 
conventional agronomic techniques and was found to be logical and 
internally consistent. 
Legumes are not grown in all land units but thrive where other crops do not. 
Millet, on the other hand, is grown in all land units but with highly variable 
productivity and it thrives in patches where legumes are rarely planted. Some 
but not all land units are suitable for intercropping in some seasons and in 
these places, cowpeas but not usually subterranean legumes, are cultivated 
together with millet. This type of farming system renders legume technologies 
based on annual rotations or leys incompatible and inappropriate. In light of 
this it is reasonable that farmers do not adopt such technologies. 
Identification and development of effective legume technology in this context 
can only be achieved with an understanding of the reasons behind current 
local management practices. 
The framework has also been used to identify different types of natural 
capital and how it accrues to different social groups in order to explore how 
this affects choices and the sustainability of different livelihoods. Those with 
diverse and more resilient natural capital appear not to be as vulnerable as 
those with less flexible natural capital. Other forms of capital such as human 
and financial capital compensate for failings in natural capital. For example, 
households in Engombe have less diverse and more marginal land but they 
are more likely to diversify in other ways such as securing cash income with 
full time paid employment to buy grain from local markets. Likewise physical 
and social capital can compensate for weak natural capital as in the case of 
biodiversity seed losses in Katope. As such, the institutional and policy 
environments are crucial for identifying and supporting the most vulnerable 
villages and households. 
Comparing local knowledge with formal scientific knowledge revealed many 
similarities but also areas of difference where farmers' perceptions could not 
be corroborated or contradicted due to incomplete scientific information and 
knowledge gaps. Research into soil quality is a nascent research field that 
engages with the topics that farmers talk about and that underlies their 
management decisions. That is the 'organic' or biotic nature of the soil and its 
abiotic, in situ physical characteristics. While farmers have an understanding 
based on practice, science seeks to understand principles for more general 
application. It is the gaps and differences between the two that hold the most 
potential for future developments, as these are the areas that have yet to be 
thoroughly explored and explained. Scientific attention to local perceptions 
and knowledge systems may well lead the way to new technology well 
adapted to the local environment and that may have wider application in 
similar niches across the continent and the world. Identifying them is but a 
first step. 
GIS technology has been a key for the integration of qualitative and 
quantitative methods and datasets used in the course of this research. It is 
therefore recommended as an integration domain and recognised for its 
potential to address the scale issues of linking micro level data to macro level 
information needs. This kind of interdisciplinary research certainly has 
obstacles and requires more scrutiny and modification. However it has 
yielded a replicable approach that fosters participation from locals and 
professionals and provides an opportunity to increase the likelihood of 
success and the value of professional agricultural services. 
8.7 Conclusions 
This study has investigated the biophysical and socio economic contexts of 
small-scale farmers living in the communal areas of Kavango and the NCRs 
to explain some of the most important factors affecting legume production 
and productivity. Legumes are cultivated and can grow well in a group of land 
units that are sandier, well drained, more acidic and lower in fertility than 
those used for growing millet or other crops. Due to low fertility some of these 
land units are only suitable for growing legumes. Higher fertility land units are 
suitable for cultivating millet and are sometimes intercropped with cowpeas 
but prioritising millet production is a common strategy and these land units 
are often reserved for millet alone. Low and erratic rainfall in this context is 
supplemented by run-off water via oshanas and omurambas. Over time, this 
water flow has shaped the landscape into highly differentiated cropping 
environments. While problems with rainfall and water flow are widespread, 
the severity and regularity of specific problems are localised. The impact of 
this variable biophysical environment on legume production and productivity 
is that some areas are more vulnerable and lose seed while others are 
conducive and are able to maintain and even augment biodiversity. 
This research showed that many households located in the most vulnerable 
village, Katope, lost legume seed following consecutive drought years. This 
village being remote with little physical capital found it difficult to replace lost 
seed either from markets, extension, research or development organisations, 
or social networks. On the other hand, despite not being known specifically 
for growing legumes, the villages around Oshaala boasted many varieties 
and species. These villages are supported by social and informal networks 
as well as local markets as a result of being located within easy reach of 
urban centres and government services. Across all villages people reported 
buying more legume seed, especially cowpeas, than any other crop implying 
that market demand exists for cowpeas and legumes irrespective of location. 
Analysis in this study showed that the way the land and its management is 
organised varies between ethnic groups but the principle of sharing different 
cropping environments among members of the community is the same. In 
practice however, longer standing residents and wealthier households across 
locations have a distinct advantage for legume production while poorer 
households face entry barriers. Wealthier households have larger, more 
diverse and complex land assets that confer millet stability and the 
opportunity for producing a wider range of legume species. Poorer 
households are more likely to only have land for growing millet and this may 
not be sufficiently flexible to supply a stable crop every year. If legumes are 
planted at all, cowpeas are likely to be intercropped in their millet fields. 
Wealthy households tend to be larger and they have more labour for 
cultivating more types of legume and larger quantities. Smaller and poor 
households are less likely to take risks planting legume seed if rainfall does 
not look good and labour will be allocated first to millet crops. 
This research has also demonstrated that households with a poorer natural 
resource base are nevertheless able to exploit income-earning opportunities 
outside production once there are no barriers to entry. In two entirely different 
locations (Katope and OshaaJa) where female headed households tended to 
have smaller fields than male headed households but relatively equal access 
to different cropping environments, it was the poor female headed 
households that seized the opportunity of earning cash from legumes by 
cooking beans for sale to local people. 
Through an understanding of the contexts in which legumes are produced 
the reasons why farmers do not grow legumes more intensively or 
extensively become available. Traditionally, shifting agriculture was used as 
a strategy for maintaining soil fertility irrespective of suitability and capability 
of the land being cultivated. Legumes were never known for their ability to 
contribute nitrogen but were appreciated for being able to grow well where 
millet did not. With more permanent settlements, legumes were regularly 
cultivated in places where millet did not do so well. As settlements grew and 
the choice of land and land units diminished fewer households had the ability 
to secure legume land assets. Currently, few households have resources for 
growing a range of different legumes and this explains why legumes are not 
grown more extensively than they are. 
The reasons for not growing legumes more intensively or for soil fertility 
purposes are more difficult to explain. Legumes are not known for their 
nitrogen fixation abilities and the logic of local cropping models emphasises 
different aspects to those in European models. In the research sites and 
similar locations elsewhere the emphasis appears to be first on the physical 
soil/water dynamics of different crop environments and secondly on the biotic 
or "organic" nature of fertility. Formal scientific perspectives begin with the 
chemical nature of soils and the physical soil/water dynamics or biotic nature 
follows as evidenced by more recent developments in soil science research. 
In addition, the rational dedication of specific crops to particular land units is 
antithetical to European models of crop farming that deploy technologies 
such as annual legume/cereal rotations to modify the biophysical crop 
environment. 
The potential for legumes in this context is uncertain. Legumes are not new 
and they are widely appreciated but market supply of legumes is low, erratic 
and uncoordinated. This research shows there is a market demand for 
legumes in cash-poor, vulnerable areas as well as in thriving settlements 
where many residents are unable to grow their own. Since market demand 
exists and supply is unreliable an opportunity to fill this gap in the market 
exists. The issue then becomes how to boost and stabilise legume supply. 
Previous research shows that best prospects exist where legumes and 
legume markets are already thriving (Snapp et a', 2002). 
With less "new" land available, the opportunities for extending legume 
production could be limited. Intensification is an option but this is not easy 
(McDonagh and Hillyer, 2003) and as noted already, there is no history of 
legume use for soil fertility management. Furthermore, this research shows 
that promoting legumes for soil fertility purposes is more like marketing an 
entirely new technology than upgrading or adapting an old one. To be 
effective, this requires careful targeting of geographic areas and socio-
economic groups most likely to use such technologies. In the absence of 
reliable data as is the case in Namibia and in many other African countries 
with diverse and complex environments, this is problematic. This research 
has taken a first step in identifying a useful tool for generating locally 
sensitive data that could be used for targeting. It has been shown that by 
using the LLU framework as a sampling frame it is possible to investigate the 
variability of biophysical contexts and concomitant productivities. 
Furthermore, socio-economic contexts may be explored using a common 
database of geographic references in a GIS to facilitate the integration of 
qualitative and quantitative datasets. What then becomes possible is policy, 
planning and development initiatives that support local people in their own 
endeavours and in the development of new technologies most likely to be of 
use to them. 
Science is often at its best and most appreciated when it has developed 
technology that satisfies unmet needs and fills gaps in the market. Both these 
Circumstances have been identified as existing in Namibia. Formerly, 
agricultural research sought to achieve agronomic potentials by identifying 
and removing constraints or limitations, only to face criticism that their results 
were no longer relevant to local farmers. This research began with farmers' 
contexts to identify their choices, strategies and outputs. At the outset 
"farmers' contexts" was understood to mean their variable biophysical and 
socio-economic circumstances but this was changed during the research 
process. The farmers' knowledge systems, understanding and approaches to 
farming that at the very least have a different emphasis to those of formal 
science that have been adopted in Europe, were incorporated into the 
research and became an integral part of the context. It has not been possible 
through this research (and probably never will be possible) to generate a 
perfect image of Namibian farmers' conceptualisation but by bringing science 
to their systems it has been possible to gain more insight into the foundations 
of their knowledge. 
Application of the local knowledge frameworks, as a tool for informing 
professionals and improving communication at the interface with local 
farmers, is valuable. The LLU framework can also be used for blocking 
experimental trials to test new technologies or for targeting older more 
established ones. The frameworks enable brainstorming of professionals and 
local people around what could be useful. For example green manuring millet 
within the season, or intercropping established legume species with "new" 
ones on dedicated legume land to supply an early crop, a late one and 
perhaps even a perennial crop. 
The method used in this research to identify local land units that then led to 
the more extensive knowledge systems can easily be used elsewhere. In this 
research the fieldwork was done rapidly and while the work could have 
benefited from more time in planning and implementation, it shows that 
results can be accomplished relatively quickly. The main principles of working 
with local "experts" to identify land units could also be used with more simple 
maps. This would still supply a useful tool for agricultural professionals 
working in partnership with local farmers. However the more sophisticated 
version becomes a useful policy tool as demonstrated in the discussion. GIS 
may not be cheap but it is one of the few technologies currently available that 
has the capacity to overlay datasets and to deal with the complex situations 
that are common across the African continent. For this research, its main 
value lay in the opportunity it provided for integrating social and natural 
science perspectives and quantitative and qualitative data. 
9 Bibliography 
Altieri, M. A. (1987). "Agroecology: the scientific basis of alternative 
agriculture." Westview Press. Boulder. USA. 
Anandajayasekeram, P., Martella, D. R., Saunders, J. and Kufuma, B. 
(1995). "Report on the impact assessment of the SADCIICRISAT sorghum 
and millet improvement programme. vol 1." ICRISAT, Bulawayo, Zimbabwe 
Anderson, J. M. and Ingram, J. S. I. (1993). Tropical Soil Biology and Fertility. 
Wallingfort, UK, C.A.B. International. 
Aquilar-Manjarrez, P. and Morteo, K. (1999). "Mapping Bambara groundnut 
information related to genetic resources and environmental data (BAMMAP)." 
http://apps3.fao.org/bambara/BAREPORT.htm. 
Arndt, W. (1965). "The impedence of soil seals and the forces of emerging 
seedlings." Australian Journal Of Soil Research 3: 55-69. 
Ashley, C. (1999). "Sustainable Livelihoods: Lessons from early experience." 
DFID. London. 
Azam-Ali, S. N., Aquilar-Manjarrez, P. and Bannayan, M. (2001a). "A Global 
Mapping System for Bambara Groundnut,." FAa Monograph. 56 pages 
(FAO. Rome). 
Azam-Ali, S. N., Gregory, P. J. and Monteith, J. L. (1984a). "Effects of 
planting density on water use and productivity of pearl millet growth on 
stored water. I. Growth of roots and shoots." Experimental Agriculture. 20: 
203-214. 
Azam-Ali, S. N., Gregory, P. J. and Monteith, J. L. (1984b). "Effects of 
planting density on water use and productivity of pearl millet growth on 
stored water. II. Water use, light interception and dry matter production." 
Experimental Agriculture 20: 215-224. 
Azam-AIi, S. N., Sesay, A., Karikari, S., Massawe, F. J., Aguilar-Manjarrez, 
J., Bannayan, M. a. and Hampson, K. J. (2001b). " Assessing the potential of 
an underutilised crop - a case study using bambara groundnut." Experimental 
Agriculture 37: 433-472. 
Barrera-Bassols, N. and Zinck, J. A. (2000). "Ethnopedology in a worldwide 
perspective: an annotated bibliography." ITC Publication 77(ITC, Enschede). 
Barrera-Bassols, N. and Zinck, J. A. (2003). "Ethnopedology: a worldwide 
view on the soil knowledge of local people." Geoderma 111(3-4): 171-195. 
Barrett, C. B., Reardon, T. and Webb, P. (2001). "Non-farm income 
diversification and household livelihood strategies in rural Africa: concepts, 
dynamics and policy implications." Food Policy 26(4): 315-331. 
Barrios, E. and Trejo, M. T. (2003). "Implications of local soil knowledge for 
integrated soil management in Latin America." Geoderma 111(3-4): 217-231. 
Bationo, A, Christianson, C.B., Baethgen, W.E., Mokwunye, AU., (1992). "A 
farm - level evaluation of nitrgen and phosphorus fertilizers use and planting 
density for pearl millet production in Niger." Fertilizer Research 31: 175--184. 
Bationo, A, Christianson, C.B., Klaij, M.C., (1993). "The effect of crop 
residue and fertilizer use on pearl millet yields in Niger." Fertilizer Research 
34: 251--258. 
Bationo, A, Lompo, F. and Koala, S. (1998). "Research on nutrient flows and 
balances in West Africa: state-of-the-art." Agriculture. Ecosystems & 
Environment 71 (1-3): 19-35. 
Begemann, F. (1988). Ecogeographic Differentiation of Bambarra Groundnut 
in the collection of I.I.T.A., IITA. 
Bidinger, F. R, Mahalakshmi, V., Talukdar, B. S. and Alagarswamy, G. 
(1981). "Improvement of Drought Resistence in Pearl Millet." International 
Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics Conference Paper No 44~ 
ICRISAT, Hyderabad, India. 
Biggs, S. D. (1990). "A multiple source of innovation model of agricultural 
research and technology promotion." World Development 18(11): 1481-1499. 
Binswanger, H. and Pingali, P. (1988). "Technology priorities for farming in 
sub-Saharan Africa." Research Observer 3: 81-98. 
Bird, P. (2002). "Learning Together: An exploration of market access and 
livelihoods by Traidcraft and DfiDs Sustainable Livelihoods Support Office." 
DFID, London. 
Birmingham, D. M. (2003). "Local knowledge of soils: the case of contrast in 
Cote d'ivoire." Geoderma 111(3-4): 481-502. 
Brink, M., Sibuga, K. P., Tarimo, A. J. P. and Ramolemana, G. M. (2000). 
"Quantifying photothermal influences on reproductive development in 
bambara groundnut (Vigna subterranea): models and their validation." Field 
Crops Research 66(1): 1-14. 
Brodrick, S. J. and Giller, K. E. (1991). "Root-nodules of phaseolus - efficient 
scavengers of molybdenum for n2-fixation." Journal Of Experimental Botanv 
42: 679-686. 
Buresh, R A., Smithson, P. C. and Hellums, D. T. (1997). Building soil 
phosphorus capital in Africa. Replenishing Soil Fertility in Africa. Buresh, 
Sanchez and Calhoun. Madison, Wisconsin, SSSA. Special Publication no. 
51: 111-150. 
Buresh, R. J., Sanchez, P. A. and Calhoun, F. (1997). "Building soil nitrogen 
capital in Africa." SSSA. Madison. Wisconsin Special Publication no. 51. 
Carney, D. (2002). "Sustainable Livelihoods Approaches: Progess and 
Possibilities for Change." DFID, London. 
Carney, D., Drinkwater, M., Rusinow, T., Neefjes, K., Wanmali, S. and Singh, 
N. (1999). "Livelihoods Approaches Compared: A brief comparison of the 
livelihoods approaches of the UK Department for International Development, 
CARE, Oxtam and the United Nations Development Programme." DFID, 
London. 
Carson, R. (1962). "Silent Spring." Houghton Mifflen, New York. 
Chambers, R. (1983). "Rural Development: Putting the last first." Longman 
Scientific and Technical, Harlow. 
Chambers, R. and Conway, G. (1992). "Sustainable rural livelihoods: 
Practical concepts for the 21st century." IDS Discussion Paper 296. IDS, 
Brighton. 
Chapman, S. C., Ludlow, M. M., Blamey, F. P. C. and Fischer, K. S. (1993a). 
"Effect of drought during early reproductive development on the growth of 
cultivars of groundnut(Arachis hypogaea L.) I. Utilisation of radiation and 
water during drought." Field Crops Research 32: 193-210. 
Chapman, S. C., Ludlow, M. M., Blamey, F. P. C. and Fischer, K. S. (1993b). 
"Effect of drought during early reproductive development on the growth of 
cultivars of groundnut(Arachis hypogaea L.) II. Biomass production, pod 
development and yield." Field Crops Research 32: 211-225. 
Christianson, C. B., Batiano, A., Baethgen, W.E., (1990). "The effect of soil 
tillage and fertilizer use on pearl millet yields in Niger." Plant and Soil 123: 
51--58. 
Coetzee, M. E. (2000). "Project to Support the Agro-Ecological Zoning 
Programme in Namibia. Main Report of the Cooperation Project between the 
Minsitry of Agriculture, Water and Rural Development of Namibia, the 
Cartographic Institute of Catalonia and the Spanish Agency for International 
Cooperation." MAWRD, Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Rural 
Development., Directorate of Agriculture, Research and Training., GRN, 
Windhoek, Namibia. 
Coetzee, M. E. (2001). "NAMSOTER: A SOTER database for Namibia." 
Agroecological Zoning Programme, Directorate of Agriculture, Research and 
Training., Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Rural Development., GRN, 
Windhoek, Namibia. 
Collinson, M. (2000). "A history of farming systems research." CABI 
Publishing, Wallingford. 
Conway, G. R. (1987). "The properties of agroecosystems." Agricultural 
Systems 24: 95-117. 
Cools, N., De Pauw, E. and Deckers, J (2003). "Towards an integration of 
conventional land evaluation methods and farmers soil suitability 
assessment: a case study of northwestern Syria." Agriculture. Ecosystems 
and Environment 95(1): 327-342. 
Craufurd, P. Q. and Bidinger, F. R. (1989). "Potential and realized yield in 
pearl millet (pennisetum americanum ) as influenced by plant population 
density and life-cycle duration." Field Crop Research 22: 211--225. 
Dakora, F. D. and Keya, S. O. (1997). "Contribution of legume nitrogen 
fixation to sustainable agriculture in sub-saharan Africa." Soil Biology and 
Biochemistry 29(5-6): 809-817. 
Dayot, B. and Verlinden, A. (1999). "Indigenous knowledge systems on 
integrated resource use: local land classification and resource management 
in North Central Division In: MAWRD., Proceedings of the Annual 
Conference on Agricultural Research Swakopmund, Namibia 6-10th 
September 1999., Windhoek, Namibia." 
De Haan, A. (2000). "Migrants, livelihoods and rights: the relevance of 
migration in development policies." Working Paper No 4. Social Development 
Department, DflD, London. 
Dent, D. L. (1997). "Policy for the management of natural resources." Land 1: 
3-26. 
DflO, O. f. I. O. (2001). "Sustainable Livelihoods Guidance Sheets." Issues 
series:OFID, London. 
OfIO, D. f. I. O. (2002). "The challenges of assessing the poverty impact of 
ethical trading: what can be learnt from fair trade initiatives and the 
sustainable livelihoods approach?" DFIO, London. 
Elbasha, E. H., Thornton, P. K. and Tarawali, G. (1998). "An Ex-Post 
Economic Impact Assessment of Planted Forages in West Africa." ILRI 
Impact Series No 2, Addis Ababa. 
Ellis, F. (2000). "Rural Livelihoods amd Diversity in Developing Countries." 
Oxford Univ Press, Oxford. 
Ellis, F. and Bahigwa, G. (2003). "Livelihoods and Rural Poverty Reduction in 
Uganda." World Development 31(6): 997-1013. 
FAO (1973). "FAO-UNESCO Soil Map of Africa." FAO, Food and Agriculture 
Organisation., Rome, Italy. 
FAO (2000). "Inter-agency experiences and lessons: from the Forum on 
Operationalizing Participatory Ways of Applying Sustainable Livelihoods 
Approaches. Pontignano (Sienna) 7-11 March 2000." Food and Agriculture 
Organisation. 
FAO (2001). "Proceedings of the Forum on Operationalizing Participatory 
Ways of Applying Sustainable Livelihoods Approaches. Pontignano (Sienna) 
7-11 March 2000." Food and Agriculture Organisation. 
FAO-UNESCO (1974). "Soil Map of the World, volume 1: legend." UNESCO, 
Paris, France. 
Farrington, J., Chapman, R. and Slaymaker, T. (2001). "Sustainable 
Livelihoods Approaches in Practice: Potential and Constraints." Sida: 
Stockholm. 
Farrington, J. a. M., A (1987). "Farmer participatory research: a review of 
concepts and practices." Agricultural Administration Research and Extension 
Network Discussion Paper 19, Overseas Development Institute, London. 
Fawusi, M. O. A and Agboola, A A. (1980). "Soil moisture requirements for 
germination of sorghum, millet, tomato and Celosia." Agronomy Journal 72: 
353-7. 
Fussell, L. K. and Pearson, C. J. (1978). "Course of grain development and 
its relationship to black region formation in Pennisetum americanum." Field 
Crops Research 1: 21-31. 
Giller, K. E., Cadisch, G., Ehaliotis, C., Adams, E., Sakala, W. D. and 
Mafongoya, P. L. (1997). Building soil nitrogen capital in Africa. In 
Replenishing Soil Fertility in Africa (Eds) Buresh, R J. Sanchez, P A 
Calhoun, F. Special Publication no. 51. SSSA. Madison, Wisconsin: 151-192. 
Giller, K. E. and Wilson, J. W. (2001). "Nitrogen Fixation in Tropical Cropping 
Systems." CAB International, Wallingford, UK. 
Gobin, A, Campling, P., Deckers, J. and Feyen, J. (1998). "Integrated 
toposequence analysis at the confluence zone of the River Ebonyi headwater 
catchment (south eastern Nigeria)." Catena 32(3-4): 173-192. 
Gobin, A, Campling, P., Deckers, J. and Feyen, J. (2000). "Integrated 
toposequence analyses to combine local and scientific knowledge systems." 
Geoderma 97{1-2): 103-123. 
Gobin, A, Campling, P., Deckers, J. and Feyen, J. (2001). "Integrated land 
resources analysis with an application to Ikern (south-eastern Nigeria)." 
Landscape and Urban Planning 53(1-4): 95-109. 
Goldman, A. and Smith, J. (1995) 'Agricultural transformations in India, and 
Northern Nigeria: exploring the nature of Green Revolutions'. World 
Development, 23 (2) : 243-263 
Graham, R. A. (1986). "Effects of soil ameliorants on lime-induced chlorosis, 
growth and nodulation in groundnuts." Tropical Agriculture 63: 61-2. 
Gray, L. (2003). "Reconciling indigenous knowledge with scientific 
assessment of soil fertility changes in southwestern Burkina Faso." 
Geoderma 111(3-4). 
Gregory, P. J. and Squire, G. R. (1979). "Irrigation effects on roots and 
shoots of pearl millet (Pennisetum typhoides)." Experimental Agriculture 15: 
161-168. 
Grossman, J. M. (2003). "Exploring farmers knowledge of soil processes in 
organic coffee systems ofChiapas, Mexico." Geoderma 111(3-4): 267-287. 
Habarurema, E. and Steiner, K. (1997). "Soil suitability classification by 
farmers in southern Rwanda." Geoderma 75: 75-87. 
Hall, A. D. (1921). "Fertilisers and Manures." John Murray, London. 
Hangula, L. (1998). "Natural resource management - the use, availability and 
management of land in post- independent Namibia." In Search of Research: 
Approaches to socio-economic issues in contemporary Namibia, The 
Namibian Economic Policy Research Unit, Windhoek, Namibia. 
Hansohm, D. and Presland, C. (1998). "Poverty, inequality and policy in 
Namibia, the state of knowledge and the way ahead in poverty research." In 
Search of Research: Approaches to socio-economic issues in contemporary 
Namibia, The Namibian Economic Policy Research Unit, Windhoek, Namibia. 
Harris, F. (1996). "Intensification of agriculture in semi-arid areas: lessons 
from the Kano Close-Settled Zone, Nigeria." Gatekeeper Series No 59, 
Sustainable Agriculture Programme, International Institute for Environment 
and Development. 
Hecht, S. B. (1987). "The evolution of agroecological thought. In 
Agroecology: the scientific basis." Agroecology: the scientific basis of 
alternative agriculture. Westview Press, Boulder, USA 
Hillyer, A. E. M. and McDonagh, J. F. (1999a). "On farm soil fertility research 
1998/1999. In Proceedings of Namibian Agricultural Research Planning and 
Reporting Conference 1999. Swakopmund, Namibia, GRN." 
Hillyer, A. E. M. and McDonagh, J. F. (1999c). "A Survey of Pearl Millet 
Cultivation in the North Central Regions of Namibia. In Proceedings of 
Namibian Agricultural Research Planning and Reporting Conference 1999. 
Swakopmund, Namibia, GRN." 
Hillyer, A. E. M. and McDonagh, J. F. (2000a). "Increasing pearl millet 
production through improved use of grain legumes and animal manures. 
Results and recommendations: On farm trials. In Proceedings of Namibian 
Agricultural Research Planning and Reporting Conference 2000. 
Swakopmund, Namibia, GRN." 
Hillyer, A. E. M. and McDonagh, J. F. (2000b). "Increasing pearl millet 
production through improved use of grain legumes and animal manures. 
Results highlights and recommendations. modelling and on station work. In 
Proceedings of Namibian Agricultural Research Planning and Reporting 
Conference 2000. Swakopmund, Namibia, GRN." 
Hussein, K. (2002). "Livelihoods Approaches Compared: A mUlti-agency 
review of current practice." Overseas Development Institute, London. 
Keyler, S. (1995). Economics of the Pearl Millet Subsector in Northern 
Namibia. A summary of Baseline Data, ICRISAT Southern and Eastern Africa 
Region. 
Keyler, S. (1995). Economics of the Pearl Millet Subsector in Northern 
Namibia: A summary of baseline data. Bulawayo, SADCIICRISAT Sorghum 
and Millet Improvement Program. 
Kothari, U. (2002). "Migration and Chronic Poverty." Working Paper No 16. 
Institute for Social Development Policy and Management, University of 
Manchester. 
Kowal, J. M. and Kassam, H. (1978). "Agricultural Ecology of Savannah." 
Clarendon Press, Oxford. 
Krasilnikov, P. V. and Tabor, J. A. (2003). "Perspectives on utilitarian 
ethnopedology." Geoderma 111(3-4): 197-215. 
Landon, J. R. (1991). Booker Tropical Soil Manual. A handbook for soil 
survey and agricultural land evaluation in the tropics and subtropics. New 
York, Longman Inc. 
Lark, R. M. (2001). "Some tools for parsimonius modelling and interpretation 
of within-field varoation of soil and crop systems. II Soil and Tillage Research 
58(3-4): 99-111. 
Linnemann, A. R. (1994). Photothermal regulation of phenological 
development and growth in bambara groundnut (Vigna subterranea (L.) 
Verde.). Wagenigen, Wagenigen Landbouuniversteit. 
Linnemann, A. R. and Azam-AIi, S. N. (1993). "Sambara groundnut (Vigna 
subterranea). In." Underutilized Crops: Pulses and Vegetables, (Ed 
J.T.Williams). Chapman and Hall, London. 
Long, N and Long, A. (eds), (1992). "Battlefields of knowledge: the 
interlocking of theory and practice in social research and development." 
Routledge, London 
Lubchenco, J. (1998). "Entering the century of the environment: A new social 
contract for science." Science 279(5350): 491-497. 
Malan, J. S. (1995). People of Namibia. Pretoria, South Africa, Rhino 
Publishers. 
Marsh, A. C. and Seely, M. K. (1992). "Oshanas: sustaining people, 
environment and development in central Owambo, Namibia." Desert 
Research Foundation and SIDA., Windhoek, Namibia. 
Matanyaire, C. M. (1993a). On-Farm Agronomy Research Results 1992/93. 
Tsumeb Agricultural Office, Tsumeb. Namibia. 
Matanyaire, C. M. (1993b). Namibia On-Farm Research Program 1992/93. 
Tsumeb Agricultural Office, Tsumeb. Namibia. 
Matanyaire, C. M. (1998). "Sustainability of pearl millet (Pennisetum 
g/aucum ) productivity in northern Namibia: current stuation and challenges." 
South Africa Jounal of Science 94: 157-165. 
MAWRD (1996). Farm Management Survey of the Okavango Region, 
MAWRD. 
MAWRD (1996). Namibia Agriculture Research Plan. Windhoek, Namibia, 
Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Rural Development. 
MAWRD (1997). Annual Report. Windhoek, Ministry of Agriculture Water and 
Rural development. 
MAWRD (1999). Farm - household Economics Survey of the Ohangwena 
Region Namibia. Windhoek, Namibia, Directorate of planing. 
MAWRD (1999). "Proceedings of the National Annual Agriculture Reasearch 
Reporting Conference." Windhoek. 
MAWRD (1999a). Farm - Household Economics Survey Of The Caprivi 
Region Namibia. Windhoek, Namibia, Directorate of Planing. 
MAWRD (1999b). Farm - household Economics Survey of the Ohangwena 
Region Namibia. Windhoek, Namibia, Directorate of planing. 
MAWRD (2000). "Farm-Household Economics Survey of the Omusati 
Region, Namibia. September 199B-June 1999. Analysis Report I." MAWRD, 
Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Rural Development, Directorate of 
Planning, Windhoek. 
MAWRD (2000). "Proceedings of the National Annual Agriculture Reasearch 
Reporting Conference." Windhoek. 
McBratney, A B. and Whelan, B. M. (1999). "The 'null hypothesis' of 
precision agriculture." In: Proceedings of the Second European Conference 
on Precision Agriculture, July 11-15 1999, Odense, Denmark. 
McCracken, J. A, Pretty, J.N. and Conway, G.R. (1988). "An Introduction to 
Rapid Rural Appraisal for Agricultural Development." liED, UK. 
McDonagh, J. F. and Hillyer, A E. M. (1999). "Soils and Nitrogen Fixation in 
northern Namibia. In Proceedings of Namibian Agricultural Research 
Planning and Reporting Conference 1999. Swakopmund, Namibia, GRN." 
McDonagh, J. F. and Hillyer, A E. M. (2000). "Soil fertility. legumes and 
livelihoods in northern Namibia. In Plant Science Research Programme 
Annual Report, 1999." 
McDonagh, J. M. and Hillyer, A E. M. (2003). "Grain Legumes in Pearl Millet 
Systems in Northern Namibia: An assessment of potential nitrogen 
contributions." Experimental Agriculture 39: 1-14. 
Mendelsohn, J., el Obeid, S. and Roberts, C. (2000). "A profile of north-
central Namibia." Environmental Profiles Project.. Directorate of 
Environmental Affairs., Ministry of Environment and Tourism . Windhoek, 
Namibia. 
Mermut, A. R. and Eswaran, (2001). "Some major developments in soil 
science since the mid-1960s." Geoderma 100(3-4): 403-426. 
Mero, M. (2000). "Sun, sand and cow dung: Improving soil phosphorus status 
and availability in Namibian smallholder agriculture." Masters Thesis., 
University of Helsinki., Faculty of Forestry and Agriculture. 
Miles, J. W. (2001.). "Achievements and perspectives in the breeding of 
tropical grasses and legumes." In: J.A. Gomide, W.R.S. Mattos and S.C. da 
Silva, Editors, Proceedings of International Grassland Congress, 19thSAo 
Pedro, SP, Brazil. 11-21 February, 2001. Funda~ao de Estudos Agrarios 
Luiz de Queiroz-FEALQ, Piracicaba, SP, Brazil (2001): 509-515. 
MLRR, (1993). "Land as a factor in poverty alleviation in Namibia." Ministry of 
Lands, Resettlement and Rehabilitation. Government of the Republic of 
Namibia. Windhoek, Namibia. 
Moller, L. (1997). Soils of Omusati , Ohangwena, Oshana and Oshikoto. 
Oshakati" Ongwediva Teachers' Resource Centre. 
Mortimore, M. (1998). Roots in African Dust: Sustaining the drylands. 
Cambridge, United Kingdom, Cambridge University Press. 
Mortimore, M., Adams, W. M. and Harris, F. M. A. (2000). "Poverty and 
systems research in the drylands." Gatekeeper Series No SA94, International 
Institute for Environment and Development. 
Mortimore, M., Adams, W.M. and Harris, F.M.A. (2000). "Researching 
Poverty in the Drylands of Africa and India. II Gatekeeper Series, International 
Institute for Environment and Development. 
Moser, C. O. N. (1998). liThe asset vulnerability framework: reassessing 
urban poverty reduction strategies." World Development 26(1): 1-19. 
Nachtergaele, F. 0., Spaargaren, 0., Deckers, J. A. and Ahrens, B. (2000). 
"New developments in soil classification: World Reference Base for Soil 
Resources." Geoderma 96(4): 345-357. 
Nicou, R. and Choupart, J. L. (1979). "Root growth and development in 
sandy and sandy clay soils of Senegal." In Soil Physical Propertiesand Crop 
production in the Tropics ed R. Lal and D.J. Greenland. Wiley, Chichester. 
Niemeijer, D. and Mazzucato, V. (2003). "Moving beyond indigenous soil 
taxonomies: local theories of soils for sustainable development." Geoderma 
111 (3-4). 
Norgaard, R. B. (1987). "The epistemological basis of agroecology." 
Agoecology: the scientific basis of alternative agriculture Westview Press, 
Boulder, USA. 
Norman, M. J. T., Pearson, C. J. and Searle, P. G. E. (1995). The Ecology of 
Tropical Food Crops. Great Britain, Cambridge University Press. 
001, O. D. I. (2003). "Water Policy Brief. Issue no 4 January 2003. Water 
Policy Programme." Overseas Development Institute, London. 
Okali, C. Sumberg, J. and Farrington, J (1994). "Farmer Participatory 
Research: Rhetoric and reality." Intermediate Technology Publications, 
Overseas Development Institute, London. 
Osbahr, H. and Allan, C. (2003). "Inidgenous knowledge of soil fertility 
management in southwest Niger." Geoderma 111(3-4): 457-479. 
Oudwater, N. and Martin, A. (2003). "Methods and issues in exploring local 
knowledge of soils." Geoderma 111(3-4): 387-401. 
Overton, M. (1996). "Agricultural Revolution in England: The Transformation 
of the Agrarian Economy 1500~ 1850." Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge. 
Oxford University Press. (1996). "New Shorter Oxford English Dictionary" 
Oxford University Press, Clarendon, Oxford. 
Page, A. L. (1982). "Methods of Soil Analysis. Part 2. Chemical and 
Microbiological Properties. 2nd Edition." The American Society of Agronomy, 
Inc. The Soil Society of America, Inc. Madison, USA. 
Payton, R. W., Barr, J. J. F., Martin, A., Sillitoe, P., Deckers, J. F., Gowing, J. 
W., Hatibu, N., Naseem, S. B., Tenywa, M. and Zuberi, M. I. (2003). 
"Contrasting approaches to integrating indigenous knowledge about soils and 
scientific soil survey in East Africa and Bangladesh." Geoderma 111(3-4): 
355~386. 
Pearce, D.W., Barbier, E. and Markandya, A. (1990) "Sustainable 
development: economics and environment in the Third World." Earthscan, 
London. 
Pearson, C. J. (1994). "Sustainable Dryland Cropping in Relation to Soil 
Productivity." FAO, Food and Agriculture Organisation., Rome, Italy. 
Peoples, M. B. and Craswell, E. T. (1992). "Biological nitrogen-fixation: 
investments, expectations and actual contributions to agriculture." Plant and 
50il.141: 13-39. 
Philip, K. S. (2003). "Indigenous Knowledge: Science and Technology 
Studies." International Encyclopedia of the Social and Behavioural Sciences. 
Powers, D., Kanemasu, E. T., Singh, P. and Kreitner, G. (1980). "Floral 
development of pearl millet (Pennisetum americanum)." Field Crops 
Research 3: 245-66. 
Pretty, J. (1997). "The sustainable intensification of agriculture: making the 
most of the land." Land 1: 45-65. 
Rajendrudu, G. and Williams, J. H. (1987). "Effect of gypsum and drought on 
pod initiation and crop yield in early maturing groundnut genotypes." 
Experimental Agriculture 23: 259-271. 
Richards, P. (1983). "Indigenous Agricultural Revolution: Ecology and food 
production in West Africa." Unwin Hyman Ltd, London, U.k. 
Rigourd, C. and Sappe, T. (1999). "Investigating soil fertility in the North 
Central Regions In: Kaumbutho, P.G. and Simalenga, T.E. (Eds) 
Conservation Tillage with animal traction., Rundu, Namibia." 
Rogers, E. M. (1983). "Diffusion of Innovations." The Free Press, New York. 
Rohrbach, D. and Lechner, W. R (1998). IIlmpact of pearl millet breeding and 
variety selection in Namibia. II Unpublished paper. 
Rowland, J. R (1993). "Dryland Farming in Africa." Macmillan Press ltd, 
London/Basingstoke. 
Sanchez, P. A. (1976). Properties and Management of Soils in the Tropics. 
New York, John Wiley and Sons. 
Sanchez, P. A, Shepherd, K. D., Soule, M. J., Place, F. M., Buresh, R. J., 
Izac, AN., Mokwunye, AU., Kwesiga, F. R, Ndiritu, C. G. and Woomer, P. 
L. (1997). Soil fertility replenishment in Africa: an investment in natural 
resource capital. In Replenishing Soil Fertility in Africa. (Eds Buresh, R. J. 
Sanchez, P. A. and Calhoun, F.) Special Publication no. 51. SSSA Madison, 
Wisconsin: 1-46. 
Scoones, I., Chibudu,C., Chikura,S., Jeranyama,P., Machaka,D., 
Machanja,W., Mavedzenge,S., Mombeshora,B., Mudhara,M., Mudziwo,C., 
Murimbarima,F., and Zirereza,S. (1996). Hazards and Opportunities: 
Farming Livelihoods in dryland Africa. Zed Books Ltd, London 
Scoones, I., Thompson, J. (1994). Beyond Farmer First. London, UK, 
Intermediate Technology Publications Ltd. 
Scoones, I. and Toulmin, C. (1999). IIPolicies for Soil Fertility Management in 
Africa. Issues series. 1I DFID, London. 
Scoones, I. E. (2001). "Dynamics and Diversity: Soil fertility and farming 
livelihoods in Africa." Earthscan, London. 
Shitundeni, J. and Marsh, A (1999). "Indigenous Soil Classification and its 
possible relevance to forestry extension in central north Namibia." 
Community Forestry and Extension Development Project, Directorate of 
Forestry. Ministry of Environment and Tourism. Ongwediva, Namibia. 
Sillitoe, P. (1998). "Knowing the land: Soil and land resource evaluation and 
indigenous knowledge." Soil Use and Management 14(4): 188193. 
Smith, D. T. and Clark, N. A. (1968). "Effect of soil nutrients and pH on nitrate 
nitrogen and growth of pearl millet (Pennisetum typhoides), and sudangrass 
(Sorghum sudanese)." Agronomy Journal 60: 38-40. 
Snapp, S. S., Rohrbach, D.O., Simtowe, F. and Freeman, H.A (2002). 
"Sustainable soil management options for Malawi: can smallholder farmers 
grow more legumes?" Agricultural Ecosystems and Environment 91: 159 
Sperling, L., Loevinshohn,M. and Ntabomvuru,B. (1993). "Rethinking the 
farmers role in plant breeding: local bean experts and on-station selection in 
Rwanda." Experimental Agriculture 29(509). 
Squire, G. R. (1990). The Physiology of Tropical crop Production. Oxon, UK, 
C.A.B. International. 
Steele, W. M. and Mehra, K. L. (1980). "Structure, evolution and adaptation 
to farming systems and environments in Vigna." In Advances in Legume 
Science ed. R.J. Summerfield and A.H. Bunting, Royal Botanic gardens, 
Kew.: 393-404. 
Steiner, K. (1998). "Using farmers knowledge of soils in making research 
results more relevant to field practice: Experiences from Rwanda." 
Agriculture Ecosystems and Environment 69(3): 191-200. 
Sumberg, J. (1998). "Mixed Farming in Africa: The search for order, the 
search for sustainability." Land Use Policy 15 (4): 293-317. 
Sumberg, J. (2001). "The Logic of Fodder Legumes in Africa." Food Policy 
27(3): 285-300. 
Sumberg, J., Okali, C. and Reece, D. (2003). "Agricultural research in the 
face of diversity, local knowledge and the participation imperative: theoretical 
considerations." Agricultural Systems 76(2): 739-753. 
Summerfield, R. J. and Lawn, R. J. (1987). "Tropical Grain Legume Crops: A 
commentary." Outlook on Agriculture 16(4): 189-197. 
Sweet, R. J. (199617). "NOLIDEP adaptive research programme9S17." 1--15. 
Totemeyer, G., Tonchi, V. and du Pisani, A. E. (1997). "Namibia Regional 
Resources ManuaL" International Development Consultancy, Gamsberg 
Macmillan, Windhoek, Namibia. 
UNCED (1993). "Agenda 21: Programme of action for sustainable 
development. Proceedings: UN Conference on Environment and 
Development." UNCED, New York. 
Underwood, C. V., Taylor, H. M. and Hoveland, C. S. (1971). "Soil physical 
factors affecting pod development." Agronomy Journal 63: 953-4. 
van Kessel, C. (2001). "Landscape research - exploring ecosystem 
processes and their relationships at different scales in space and time." Soil 
and Tillage Research 58(3-4): 97-98. 
van Noordwijk, M. and Mulia, R. (2002). "Functional branch analysis as tool 
for fractal scaling above- and belowground trees for their additive and non-
additive properties." Ecological Modelling 149(1-2): 41-51. 
Verlinden, A. and Dayot, B. (2000). "Working with local knowledge systems in 
a GIS for natural resource assessment, planning and management in North 
central Namibia. In Carron, P., Swanepoel, F. and Stroebel, A. (Eds) 
Proceedings of the "Regional Workshop on Spatial approaches for land use 
and local governance". pp 63-78 University of Pretoria, Postgraduate School 
of Agriculture and Development." 
Vigne, P. and Whiteside, M. (1997). "Encouraging sustainable smallholder 
agriculture in Namibia." Agricultural Services Reform in Southern Africa. 
Phase 2 - Working Papers. Environment and Development Consultancy Ltd., 
Virmani, S. M. and Singh, P. (1986). "Agroclimatological characteristics of the 
groundnut-growing regions in the semi-arid tropics." In Agrometeorologyof 
Groundnut. ICRISAT, Patancheru, India. 
WCED,. (1987). "Our Common Future." Oxford Univ Press, Oxford. 
Werner, W. (1998). "Natural resource management with particular focus on 
land issues." In Search of Research: Approaches to socio-economic issues in 
contemporary Namibia, The Namibian Economic Policy Research Unit, 
Windhoek, Namibia. 
Wild, A. (1988). Russell's Soil Conditions and Plant growth. Harlow, Essex, 
Longman Grouup UK. 
WinklerPrins, A. M. G. A. and Sandor, J. A. (2003). "Local soil knowledge: 
insights, applications and challenges." Geoderma 111(3-4): 165-170. 
Wolt, J. D. and Adams, F. (1979). "Critical levels of soil and nutrient solution 
calcium for vegetative growth and fruit development of Florunner peanuts." 
Soil Science Societv of America Journal 43: 1159-65. 
Woolmer, W. a. S., I. (2000.). "The science of 'civilized' agriculture: the mixed 
farming discourse in Zimbabwe." African Affairs 99(397 (2000).): 575-600. 
Young, M. D. (1992). "Sustainable Investment and Resource Use: Equity, 
Environmental Integrity and Economic Efficiency." UNESCO, Paris, France. 
Appendix I 
Plant Sciences Project Survey June-July 1998: The pearl millet based farming 
systems of Kavango and North Central Regions 
Background 
The overall aim of the project is to improve pearl millet production through the use 
of grain legumes and manures in Kavango and North Central Region of Namibia. 
The environments, soils and rainfall patterns in these regions are diverse. Average 
annual rainfall varies between 25Q-450 mm and shows a general trend of 
increasing dryness towards the east. There are large differences in tribal group, 
population density and farming systems between the two regions. Also a number of 
different 'projects' operate in one, other or both regions as well as the national 
agricultural research and extension services. The latter are in a phase of change 
and have recently established new multidisciplinary farming systems research and 
extension units in an attempt to co-ordinate the various activities. These units 
concentrate their efforts within a number of 'focus communities' so that these 
communities effectively become the sampling frame for this project. As such there 
are already data available for some but not all of the communities. The existing data 
are patchy and variable but duplication will be avoided wherever possible. Broadly 
speaking, this survey will provide baseline data of farmers perceptions and 
practices relating to soil fertility in the two areas. 
The main objectives for the survey are: 
1. To examine the characteristics of the pearl millet based farming systems 
2. To ascertain if farmers perceive there to be a problem with declining soil fertility 
affecting crop yields and how they rank the importance of this problem. 
3. To identify cultural practices currently used by farmers for maintaining soil 
fertility and crop yields 
4. To better understand farmers indigenous knowledge relating to soil fertility 
issues 
5. To identify farmers own ideas and experimentation for maintaining soil fertility 
and sustaining production levels 
6. To identify farmers with whom it might be appropriate to work with in later 
project activities. 
Methods and approach: 
The survey will be conducted in three different villages in each of the two regions. 
These villages are selected along a transect running roughly east/west through the 
regions. They will represent a range of environments including soils, rainfall and 
orientation to surface water sources. Farmers selected will reflect a range of wealth 
and other social categories identified by the communities themselves. Fifteen 
farmers from each community will be chosen to participate. The survey style will 
include a combination of PRA tools (mapping. transects. ranking, cropping 
calender, activities schedule), semi-structured and in-depth interviews with the 
fifteen key informants and also community meetings, for wider discussions and 
more general information. Community meetings will be used for col/ectlve exercises 
such as village mapping, seasonal activities and cropping calenders and for more 
general discussion about seed selection, seed supply, manure supply and existing 
formal or informal markets for these inputs. The question/data sheets (and 
accompanying notes) to be used for the individual interviews are attached. 
Notes to accompany the survey data sheets: 
Plant Science Project Survey '98 
I. Household identification 
This section is for general details about the size of the production and consumption 
unit. 
1. 2.- 4. are self explanatory. 
2. Record multiple entries if more than one person is being interviewed. Use their 
initials to identify which specific sections or questions they answer. 
3. This information does not need to be detailed, for example on Education - the 
highest level attained (e.g. second grade, fifth grade, diploma) is enough. 
Occupation if paid worker or 'farmer'. 'Work on farm' is not for listing activities 
but to indicate whether the individual works on the farm or not - tick for yes and 
cross for no. If ticked ask approximately what proportion of time is spent working 
on the farm i.e.full time if no other occupation, after school and in holidays for 
children, artisans may do some work on the farm - ask them to estimate the 
proportion. The same question can also be put to women. Answers need not be 
in depth, just sufficient to give an idea of the amount of labour available to the 
farm. 'Own field or crops' and 'own livestock' is for an indication of who 'owns' 
individual fields, plots or perhaps particular crops or animals. Again accuracy is 
not important so that for ownership a tick or cross indicates yes or no - if ticked 
get an idea of numbers if possible. For livestock - less than five, less than ten, 
more than ten etc. will do. For fields - number of fields then later these can be 
identified on the farm map. If specific crops - note which. 
II. Field Production and Management 
1. Preferably the map should be drawn by the farmer and family (perhaps in the 
sand and copied onto paper) - get an idea of the size by the number of fields 
and estimation of area (by pacing one - approximations are OK). Remember to 
number the fields (for later referencing with other info) note the soil types by 
field, the crops and the % of the area cropped, also whether it is/was sole 
cropped or intercropped and if there are any trees (identify if poss.). If any 
rotations become apparent make a note of these. Mark East/West on the map 
and mark on the position of the homestead and the kraal or the direction and 
approximate distances of these two if they are further away. 
2. This must be done after the farm map so that specific fields can be referred to 
by the number used on the map. The intention is to get an idea of the field 
cropping history, the condition of the fields and normal farm practice in terms of 
crop residues and so on. Yield - accuracy is not expected or required: g/m/p for 
good moderate or poor for this season. Crops planted this year in each field. 
Years since first cropped - try and get actual years but otherwise approximate i.e 
in last 5, 5-10, 10-20. Ditto for the number of years since the field was last 
fallowed. The yield column is to ask the farmer for an idea of the direction of the 
harvest yields are they increasing ), decreasing (, staying the same (=) or 
don't know (1). Use the comments column for any other information the 
informant offers on the condition and/or reasons for the condition of his/her 
fields. 
3. Ask why particular crops are intercropped 
4. And why other crops are planted as monocropped plots 
5. If there is a deliberate rotation ask for the reasons why. 
6. Ask about crop residues: what they are used for and whether there are different 
uses for different residues. Are they left in the field, removed, fed to animals, 
burnt, incorporated, used for fencing or housing etc. 
7. To find out whether there is access to grazing land or other land for 
fallowing/cropping/building etc. Note any details offered. 
III. Cropping System 
This section is to give some idea of the size and diversity of the farm enterprise. 
1. The field column is for the number of field which will be added after the farm 
walk and mapping exercise. Species and variety columns are for an idea of the 
number of different crops and varieties (or landraces) the farm has access to. 
'seed' columns to find out who the decision makers are and whether the seed is 
imported or retained. 811 is merely whether sale cropped or intercropped. If it is 
both this information can be separated on the farm map. 'Manure or fertiliser' -
M/F indicates which is used also identify which mineral fertiliser or manure 
(probably cow dung). If possible estimate quantity - use farmers units but be 
sure to note them e.g. two cart loads. Try to see the cart for an estimation of 
size but if not, this can be done at a later date. Find out if the manure is their 
own or imported - if former, is it from the kraal or if latter, where is it from. 
Comments column can be used for information which doesn't fit e.g. the 
sorghum crop belongs to brother in law or friend who works in Windhoek and is 
not part of the household. Finally, when all crops have been listed ask the 
informant to rank the crops in order of importance using 1 for the most important 
and higher numbers for less important. Using identical numbers for crops of 
equal importance is OK. 
2. Perhaps this year islwas an unusual year so that information about anything 
different last year may be important. Also with different projects giving away 
different seed, it may be useful to know about differences and the reasons. 
3. Why didn't they plant the same crops this year. 
4. Equally if the farmer is planning something different for the next season it would 
be useful to know what. Or, if they would like to plant something different -
what? 
5. Also find out why they have this plan or preference. 
6. Encourage the farmer to list the reasons (criteria) for growing legumes or their 
qualities e.g. taste, good fodder. good yields, drought resistant, good to 
intercrop etc. Using this list ask the informant to rank each legume grown 
against each criterion. Use low numbers for best and high numbers for worst ie. 
If three types of legume rank 1 for best and 3 for worst. Again. identical 
numbers for equal rank is OK. 
7. Ask which qualities need improving and circle the relevant cells. If something 
completely new mentioned, list under this question. 
a. A throwaway question to find out if seed supply is a major problem. 
IV. Livestock Management 
1. This section is to find out about how livestock are managed in relation to 
cropping. The first column refers to the livestock unit, there may be several 
mentioned under section I - if so they should be dealt with separately. Tick or 
cross whether the animals are kept in a kraal. If they are then note when they 
are kept there in the daily and seasonal columns. Tick or cross for whether 
manure is actively collected. Ask the informant to estimate the quantity of 
manure collected using their own units (make notes about this). This is different 
to the earlier question in section " which refers specifically to the quantity 
applied to particular crops/plots and fields. Under the treatment column, record 
what the farmer does to any collected manure i.e piles it up and leaves it to dry, 
mixes with straw, adds water etc. Ask how the manure is transported to the field 
i.e. donkey or ox drawn cart, by donkeys in cans, by oxen on sledges, get an 
idea of quantity. Note who does the moving or supervises the moving and 
application. Use the comments column for other information offered or 
problems raised by the informant. 
2. To discover if all manure is used on the land if not does it have other uses. 
3. If it is not all used what is done with the rest. Is it sold for example. 
4. A question about manure availability and informal markets - these may have 
been tackled at a community meeting and therefore can be omitted. 
5. To ascertain the value of manure 
6. To discover the reasons why the farmer does not use manure or fertiliser 
V. Problems, Solutions and Experimentation 
1. Ask whether the farmer achieves what he/she would like from the crop fields. If 
not then ask the informant to list which problems particularly prevent him or her 
from achieving the harvests he/she would like to. Then ask them to rank these 
problems - this is not for a general 'wish list' (though this is what might be given) 
but to ascertain how serious and analytical the farmer is and whether he/she 
actively tries things out - i.e. the degree of conservativeness or risk aversion. 
2. If the farmer is an experimenter then what is the area of interest or expertise? 
Plant Science Project Survey. June -July 1998: 
The pearl mIllet based farming systems of Kavango and North Central 
I. Household identification: 
1. Region 
2. District 
3. Village 
4. Name of household head M/F 
5. Name of informant(s) M/F 
Questions or comments 
(final question to informants before offering thanks) 
Any Notes 
Interviewer Interpreter Date 
Household Characteristics 
Household members: 
i. Men (adults children, infants): 
Age Relation to household head Marital 
status 
Occupation/s Full/part-time? Own field or Own livestock? 
plot/crops (Yes/No) 
~----~-~.--- ----- ---~ 
ii. Women (adults children, infants): 
Relation to household head Occupation/s Full/part-time Own field or Own livestock? 
h Field production and management 1 
1. Household Farm Map (to cover all fields and kraals [if any] and house/s) 
Do you (to be asked of each individual for whom field data collected) have access to any other land? What do you use it for? 
1 NB: No of fieIdsI Size of fields Soil types Crops Area cropped Sole or intercropped/ Rotations Trees Orientation / Distance from kraaU Distance 
from homestead (see following table for recording of details of crops discussed while preparing the map) 
III. House and Kraal movement (to be discussed with the individual/s responsible) 
1. How many times have you moved the house?s? 
2. Why was the house/s moved? (Can you tell us more about the reasons for this movement and what affects the decision to move and where to?) 
3. How many times have you moved the kraal/s? 
4. Why was the kraalls moved? (Can you tell us more about the reasons for this and what affects the decision when to move and where to move 
IV. Field characteristics 
 Field No. Prodn. this Crops planted this year When 1 at cropped 
g/mlp 
Continuous, fallowed, Prodn. Comments 
rotation >=<? 
v. Cropping Practices 
1. Rotation of any kind and purpose or reasons for this? 
2. Do you do anything (else) to maintain good crops in your field(s) 
VI. Cropping system: 
1. Crops this season ('97/8) 
Field Crops grown 
No. Species I Variety or type I Rank 
N 10: Name of individual and field numbers: 
Seed Crop mixed or not and why Crop residue use 
Wherefrom I Who 5/1 I 
decides 
---- - - -- - - -- ----
VII. Legumes 
1. Do you have enough legumes? If not what prevents you from producing more? (refer to specific legumes) 
2. Which legumes should be improved and why? 
3. Which characteristics should be improved (in legumes)? 
VIII. Manure management 
10: Name of individual livestock ownerl manure user: ... 
1. M 1\ d r 
Livestock or Kept in Kraal Manure collection and transportation 
smallstock Yor N Daily Seasonal Any treatment How Who 
unit moved moves 
Comments 
Where app Whenapp Time taken 
- ----
IX. Access to Manure 
Is one type of manure better for soil fertility and crop growth? Yes/No 
Which and why? 
Livestock owners using manure: 
Do you use all your manure? (If own manure used) If not, what do you do with the rest? 
Can you obtain manure from elsewhere? (If own manure used) Yes/No If yes, from where? 
What is the cost/value? 
Are you using (or have you ever used) fertilizer? 
Manure users (not own manure): 
Where do you get your manure from? 
What is the costlvalue of the manure? 
Are you using (or have you ever used) fertilizer? 
(for additional comments, add on reverse of page) 
10: Name of individual and field numbers: 
Yes/No If yes, What is your experience? 
Yes/No If yes, What is your experience? 
X. Problems, solutions and experimentation (first ask about constraints to higher crop production, then rank these before filling other 
columns) 
Rank Problems What have you tried 
Final Discussion: Links with development agency/extension/research. 
Ever worked with ? (detail doing what) 
10: Name of individual and field numbers: 
Other ideas to try 
Appendix II 
Name of household head 
Name of farmer 
Hill (row or Number of shoots 
station number) 
Plant type (millet, 
sorghum, cowpea ... ) 
r-------/--------+---.~.---------.-------
r-------~------+-----------.,--,,-
.-----/--------+-------------" .. , 
.-----/--------+--------_ .. _ .. _ .. " 
Name of researcher 
Plant name (Okashana ... ) 
Please draw the arrangement of the plants growing in the plot (not weeds) and identify them with 
Label in the key below 
Okashana 1 o 
Please use this page to map any details about the plot itself. If there is any obvious water logging 
or soil crusting. Does the plot slope? If so indicate the direction with an arrow. Ifthere any other 
features for example trees or hedges near by. You can draw these things onto this map. 
Please ask the farmer the following questions. Make it clear you only want to discuss the plot you 
have marked out. (It is important you talk to a person who knows exactly what was planted and 
when it was planted). 
I. Did you plant the plot? YES / NO (If Yes go directly to question 3, if No, go to 2.) 
3. What did you plant and what date did you plant it? 
Crop type (e.g. millet, sorghum, cowpea) Name (e.g. Okashana 1) Date planted 
t--------------+-----------t-------------- 
J----------------I------------+----------. -- ------.. -. 
t---------------+--------.-.-----.- ----.----.---
J----------------I------------+---------------.- .. ---
Ifthere is a mixture in the plot then ask the following questions if not go directly to question 6. 
4. Did you mix the seed before coming to the field? YES/NO 
5. How did you mix the seed? (e.g. 50% millet and 50% sorghum, or I cup of Ok ash ana and 2 
cups of traditional millet - ask them to be clear about the type and quantities) 
6. How did you plant the seed? (ask them to describe the procedure and the pattern make 
concise notes e.g. planted Okashana in rows on 241h Dec. I came back the next day to plant 
cowpeas between the rows) 
7. How many seeds did you plant in one hill ( hole or spot) 
8. Will you thin the plot? 
YES I NO (If Yes, go to 9. If No, go to 
9. How many plants will you thin (how many will you leave growing)? 
10. What soil is it in the plot? (include any local names) _. 
II. Are there any recurring problems on the plot? (e.g. water logging. crusting. fertility) 
12. Did you ever use manure or fertiliser on this plot? YES I NO (fYes, go to 13. (fNo. go to 
14. When did you put on? (e.g. before ploughing, many years ago) 
15. Is there anything else you want to tell me about this plot? 
Name of Household Head, ___________ _ Date, _____ _ 
Name of Fanner" ________________________________ ___ 
Name of Village 
Name of Researcher _________________________ _ 
Comments 
Type of Millet 
Number of Hills 
Number of Viable Heads 
Fresh Weight of Heads 
Fresh Weight of Sample 
Dry Weight of Heads 
Soil Type 
GPS Reading 
	405715_001
	405715_002
	405715_003
	405715_004
	405715_005
	405715_006
	405715_007
	405715_008
	405715_009
	405715_010
	405715_011
	405715_012
	405715_013
	405715_014
	405715_015
	405715_016
	405715_017
	405715_018
	405715_019
	405715_020
	405715_021
	405715_022
	405715_023
	405715_024
	405715_025
	405715_026
	405715_027
	405715_028
	405715_029
	405715_030
	405715_031
	405715_032
	405715_033
	405715_034
	405715_035
	405715_036
	405715_037
	405715_038
	405715_039
	405715_040
	405715_041
	405715_042
	405715_043
	405715_044
	405715_045
	405715_046
	405715_047
	405715_048
	405715_049
	405715_050
	405715_051
	405715_052
	405715_053
	405715_054
	405715_055
	405715_056
	405715_057
	405715_058
	405715_059
	405715_060
	405715_061
	405715_062
	405715_063
	405715_064
	405715_065
	405715_066
	405715_067
	405715_068
	405715_069
	405715_070
	405715_071
	405715_072
	405715_073
	405715_074
	405715_075
	405715_076
	405715_077
	405715_078
	405715_079
	405715_080
	405715_081
	405715_082
	405715_083
	405715_084
	405715_085
	405715_086
	405715_087
	405715_088
	405715_089
	405715_090
	405715_091
	405715_092
	405715_093
	405715_094
	405715_095
	405715_096
	405715_097
	405715_098
	405715_099
	405715_100
	405715_101
	405715_102
	405715_103
	405715_104
	405715_105
	405715_106
	405715_107
	405715_108
	405715_109
	405715_110
	405715_111
	405715_112
	405715_113
	405715_114
	405715_115
	405715_116
	405715_117
	405715_118
	405715_119
	405715_120
	405715_121
	405715_122
	405715_123
	405715_124
	405715_125
	405715_126
	405715_127
	405715_128
	405715_129
	405715_130
	405715_131
	405715_132
	405715_133
	405715_134
	405715_135
	405715_136
	405715_137
	405715_138
	405715_139
	405715_140
	405715_141
	405715_142
	405715_143
	405715_144
	405715_145
	405715_146
	405715_147
	405715_148
	405715_149
	405715_150
	405715_151
	405715_152
	405715_153
	405715_154
	405715_155
	405715_156
	405715_157
	405715_158
	405715_159
	405715_160
	405715_161
	405715_162
	405715_163
	405715_164
	405715_165
	405715_166
	405715_167
	405715_168
	405715_169
	405715_170
	405715_171
	405715_172
	405715_173
	405715_174
	405715_175
	405715_176
	405715_177
	405715_178
	405715_179
	405715_180
	405715_181
	405715_182
	405715_183
	405715_184
	405715_185
	405715_186
	405715_187
	405715_188
	405715_189
	405715_190
	405715_191
	405715_192
	405715_193
	405715_194
	405715_195
	405715_196
	405715_197
	405715_198
	405715_199
	405715_200
	405715_201
	405715_202
	405715_203
	405715_204
	405715_205
	405715_206
	405715_207
	405715_208
	405715_209
	405715_210
	405715_211
	405715_212
	405715_213
	405715_214
	405715_215
	405715_216
	405715_217
	405715_218
	405715_219
	405715_220
	405715_221
	405715_222
	405715_223
	405715_224
	405715_225
	405715_226
	405715_227
	405715_228
	405715_229
	405715_230
	405715_231
	405715_232
	405715_233
	405715_234
	405715_235
	405715_236
	405715_237
	405715_238
	405715_239
	405715_240
	405715_241
	405715_242
	405715_243
	405715_244
	405715_245
	405715_246
	405715_247
	405715_248
	405715_249
	405715_250
	405715_251
	405715_252
	405715_253
	405715_254
	405715_255
	405715_256
	405715_257
	405715_258
	405715_259
	405715_260
	405715_261
	405715_262
	405715_263
	405715_264
	405715_265
	405715_266
	405715_267
	405715_268
	405715_269
	405715_270
	405715_271
	405715_272
	405715_273
	405715_274
	405715_275
	405715_276
	405715_277
	405715_278
	405715_279
	405715_280
	405715_281
	405715_282
	405715_283
	405715_284
	405715_285
	405715_286
