DEVELOPMENT AND ASSESSMENT OF AVIAN AND OVINE 
ANTIVENOMS FOR EUROPEAN VIPER VENOMS 
KENNETH LOUIS HARRISON 
BSc.(Hons) Applied Biology 
MSc.Molecular Pathology 
Department of Chemical Pathology, 
St Bartholomew's & The Royal London School of Medicine & Dentistry, 
London, UK. 
A thesis submitted to the Faculty of Medicine, 
University of London, 
the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy 
BROKEN TEXT AND SOME 
POOR QUALITY IMAGES IN 
ORGINAL THESIS. 
ABSTRACT 
This research was undertaken in order to design techniques and processes that 
enable the manufacture of effective antivenoms. 
To prepare a broad specificity anti venom for European vipers from chicken yolk it 
was first necessary to develop a simple effective method to extract avian 
immunoglobulin (lgY). A specific fluoroimmunoassay was developed to monitor 
IgY recovery and serum IgY levels in immunised hens. 
The most promising extraction methods from the literature were compared using a 
triglyceride kit to monitor lipoprotein removed and SDS-PAGE and ELISA to 
monitor purity and activity respectively. Caprylic acid followed by ammonium 
sulphate proved the best method. Unfortunately only low levels of specific IgY 
were achieved and it was necessary to include an affinity purification step to 
demonstrate their effectiveness in an EDso test. 
Pepsin, papain and trypsin all produced Fab' fragments from IgY but only pepsin 
digested the resultant Fc fragments. Pepsin could also digest other proteins in egg 
yolk, thereby avoiding the need to salt fractionate IgY prior to its digestion with a 
consequent improvement in the recovery of Fab'. 
A small scale affinity purification (SSAP) assay was developed, characterised and 
used to determine specific antibody levels in ovine antisera. Small doses (l5IAg) of 
venom produced significant specific levels but larger doses produced a better 
response and were used to produce anti venom. Binding studies with SSAP 
demonstrated a high concentration of specific antibodies in V.latastei antisera that 
bind to components in the venoms of other European vipers. A specific ovine 
F(ab')2-based V.latastei antivenom approximately twice as potent as the anti venom 
used currently in Spain was prepared from the ovine antisera. 
Evidence is presented that SSAP should supersede manual ELISA for assessing 
specific antibody levels in antisera. 
No major gain in recovery and purity resulted from processing whole blood rather 
than serum for preparing antivenom. 
ABBREVIA TIONS 
AR : Analytical recovery 
CNBR : Cyanogen bromide 
CV : Coefficient of variation 
E050 : Median effective dose of antivenom 
EOTA : Ethylenediamine tetra-acetic acid 
ELISA : Enzyme linked immunosorbent assay 
FITC : Fluorescein isothiocyanate 
HB : Histidine base 
HBS : Histidine buffered saline 
HRP : Horseradish peroxidase 
IgG : Immunoglobulin G 
t.m. : Intramuscular 
t.v. : Intravenous 
IgY : Immunoglobulin Y 
kDa : Kilodalton 
L050 : Median lethal dose of venom 
NSB : Non specific binding 
00 : Optical density 
OPO : O-phenylenediamine dihydrochloride 
PBS : Phosphate buffered saline 
PEG : Polyethylene glycol 
SOS - PAGE : Sodium doedecyl sulphate - polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis 
: Small scale affinity purification 
: Tris(hydroxymethyl) aminomethane 
Figure Number 
Figure 1.1 
Figure 1.2 
Figurel.2a 
Figure 1.3 
Figurel.4 
Figurel.5 
Figure 1. 6 
Figure 1.7 
Figurel.7a 
Figure 1. 8 
Figure 1.9 
Figure2.l 
Figure2.2 
Figure2.3 
Figure2.4 
Figure2.5 
Figure2.6 
Figure2.7 
Figure2.8 
Figure2.9 
Figure2.10 
Figure 2.11 
Figure 2.12 
Figure 2.13 
Figure 3.1 
Figure 3.2 
Figure 3.3 
FIGURE LIST 1 
Description 
Summary of why antibodies have evolved 
Schematic of an IgG molecule 
Cleavage of human IgG 1 by pepsin and papain 
Structure of fluorescein isothiocyanate 
Schematic of the components of a simple fluorimeter 
Six activities involved in provision of antivenom 
Typical egg structure 
Five part structure of chicken oviduct 
A simplified model of a mammalian immunoglobulin 
compared with an avian immunoglobulin 
Classification of important venomous snakes 
European vipers 
Assessment of the antibody:Sepharose solid phases 
prepared with serum batch 1013 
Assessment of the antibody Sepharose solid phases 
prepared with serum batch 1014 
Assessment of the antibody:Sepharose solid phases 
prepared with sodium sulphate fraction of serum batch 
Standard curves for chicken IgY in serum 
Within assay percentage coefficients of variation were 
calculated from the results of ten replicates for each 
standard 
Incubation and elution studies 
Samples, all serially diluted in assay buffer, and the 
resulting curves compared against that of the standards 
Cross reactivity of chicken serum IgY 
Application of the IgY immunoassay to estimate total 
serum IgY concentrations in immunised hens 
Capacity determination of venom-coupled Sepharose 
matrices and eluate identity assessment 
Assessment of between and within column variation of 
replicate matrices 
Assessment of incubation time and wash volume 
Assessment of specific antibody concentrations over 
Use of IgY immunoassay to monitor IgY purification 
procedures and to assess the effect of yolk freezing on 
IgY recovery during lipoprotein extraction 
Lipoprotein extraction and IgY purification 
as assessed by SDS-PAGE 
IgY purification by caprylic acid and ammonium 
sulphate precipitation with two washes as assessed 
by SDS-PAGE 
Page Number 
FIGURE LIST 2 
Figure Number Description Page Number 
Figure 3.4 Serum and egg yolk titre assessments by ELISA over a 99 
22 week period 
Figure 3.5 IgY recovery from total yolk after five replicate 100 
purifications with caprylic acid and ammonium sulphate 
Figure 3.6 SDS-PAGE and ELISA titre of replicate IgY 101 
purifications 
Figure 3.7 Proteolytic enzyme digestion of a commercial 109 
preparation of IgY 
Figure 3.8 Pepsin digestion of Ig Y 111 
Figure 3.9 The effect of pH on the pepsin digestion of caprylic acid 112 
extract 
Figure 4.1 Biophysical comparison by 12% non-reducing 126 
SDS-PAGE of the venoms of V.b.berus, V.a.ammodytes 
V.a.aspis and V.latastei 
Figure 4.2 Estimation of specific antibody concentrations in 127 
V.latastei antisera that bind to V.latastei, V.a.ammodytes 
V.a.aspis and V.b.berus venom solid phases respectively 
Figure 4.3 Monitoring by SDS-P AGE of serum before and after its 128 
direct digestion with pepsin and further processing with 
centrifugation and diafiltration followed by ion 
exchange chromatography 
Figure 4.4 The effect of pH on the pepsin digestion of ovine blood 129 
Figure 4.5 Scanning (200nm-800nm) spectrograph of pepsin 131 
digested and diafiltered ovine blood 
Figure 4.6 Scanning (200nm-800nm) spectrograph of pepsin 132 
digested, diafiltered and anion exchanged ovine blood in 
histidine buffer containing 20,40,80 and 150mM NaCI 
respectively 
Figure 4.7 SDS-PAGE comparison of digested and diafiltered ovine 134 
blood without anion exchange and with anion exchange 
Figure 5.1 Laboratory and scale up preparation of caprylic acid 140 
extract 
TABLE LIST 
Table Number Description Page Number 
Table 1.1 A classification of types and sources of 10 
antibodies for therapeutic use 
Table 1.2 Some therapeutic applications of exogenous 22 
antibodies 
Table 1.3 Summary of laboratory assessment 26 
techniques 
Table 1.4 Some potential side-effects associated with 29 
the systemic administration of 
exogenous antibodies 
Table 1.5 General characteristics of the egg 32 
Table 1.6 Relative composition of the egg 32 
Table 1.7 Percentage composition of the shell, white 32 
and yolk 
Table 1.8 Comparison of mammalian IgG and avian 36 
Table 1.9 Representative composition of egg white 37 
solids 
Table 1.10 Envenoming by European vipers 46 
Table 2.1 Immunisation protocol for sheep dose 74 
response study 
Table 3.1 Constituents of SDS-PAGE gels 89 
Table 3.2 Immunisation protocol for hens 91 
Table 3.3 Summary of triglyceride assessments for 94 
Step 1 extraction procedures from 
Lion egg yolks 
Table 3.4 Triglyceride assessment for five replicate 100 
extractions with caprylic acid 
from viper venom immunised chicken yolks 
Table 4.1 Summary ED50 results 124 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I would like to thank Professor John Landon for his guidance and support and for 
giving me the opportunity to perform these studies and Professor Tim Chard, for 
kindly allowing the use of his laboratory. 
I am also greatly indebted to Dr David Smith for his invaluable suggestions and 
comments during the writing of this thesis and to Sophia Rawat for performing 
venom toxicity and antivenom potency determinations. 
Finally, many thanks to MicroPharm Ltd and the EPSRC (GRlN23677) for helping 
to support me financially during the course of this work. 
This work is dedicated to my wife Maria 
CHAPTER 2:IMMUNOLOGICAL METHODS FOR THE ASSESSMENT OF TOTAL 
2.2 Simple assessment methods: Characterisation of a small scale affinity assay for 
CHAPTER 3:PREP ARATION OF A BROAD SPECIFICITY ANTIVENOM FOR 
3.1.3.6 Affinity purification of caprylic acid and ammonium sulphate precipitated 
3.2.3.2 Pepsin digestion of IgY prepared by caprylic acid followed by ammonium 
3.2.3.4 Comparison of recoveries of IgY fragments prepared with and without 
3.2.4.2 Pepsin digestion of IgY prepared by caprylic acid followed by 
CHAPTER 4:THE PREPARATION AND EV ALU AnON OF A SPECIFIC OVINE 
4.3.1 Assessment of V.latastei venom and comparison with other European vipera 
4.3.5 Investigation of production conditions required for making antivenom from. 120 
4.4.1 Assessment of V.latastei venom and comparison with other European vipera 
CHAPTER 1: 
GENERAL INTRODUCTION 
1.1lmmuDotherapy 
1.1.1 History and general introduction 
Inoculation with crusts derived from the pustules of favourable cases of smallpox was 
practiced widely by many cultures in Asia, Africa and even in the rural areas of western 
Europe. Voltaire speculated that inoculation might have originated with the Circassians to 
protect the beauty of their daughters, whom they could not sell pock-marked into the harems 
of the Ottoman Empire (Silverstein, 1984). 
It was in this context of three quarters of a century of smallpox inoculation that Edward 
Jenner published, in 1798, his report on a safer and more efficacious vaccine against small 
pox, derived from cowpox pustules. Jenner appears never to have speculated on why his 
vaccine caused immunity, perhaps influenced by the earlier advice of his teacher John 
Hunter: " Why think? Why not try the experiment." 
Louis Pasteur led the battle to convince the scientific community of the validity of the germ 
theory. His report in 1880 that prophylactic immunisation against chicken cholera was 
possible, marked the start of scientific immunology (Silverstein, 1984). As new pathogens 
were identified, each was the subject of intensive investigation to develop a suitable vaccine. 
In 1888 Emile Roux and Alexandre Yersin demonstrated that a soluble toxin could be 
isolated from the supernatants of cultures of the diptheria organism and in 1890 Von 
Berhing and Kitasato demonstrated that animals immunised with diptheria and tetanus 
toxoid produced something in their blood that could neutralize the toxin. Antitoxic sera from 
experimental animals were quickly tested in infected children and were shown to produce 
remarkable and rapid cures. The substance that acted against the toxin was called anti-toxin, 
and soon the more general and non-committal term antibody was used to describe the new 
class of substances. 
In 1887 Henry Sewall immunized pigeons against rattlesnake venom by injecting them with 
very low and progressively increasing doses of the venom. 
Calmette, who was a physician, had acquired experience in scientific experimentation while 
training in microbiology at the laboratory of Emile Roux in the Institut Pasteur in Paris. He 
had investigated the physiological effects of snake venoms in several animals and postulated 
an analogy between the components of snake venoms and bacterial toxins. He published his 
investigations using Cobra venom, which form the basis of anti venom therapy, in the 
Annales de l'Institut Pasteur (1894). Phisalix and Bertand (1894) presented their own 
observations on the antitoxic properties of the blood of animals immunized against viper 
venom in the same year and in the same journal. 
Although antivenom therapy was thus independently discovered by two groups, the general 
consensus is that Albert Calmette is the true father of anti venoms. 
1.1.2 Definitions of immunity (McFerran, 1995) 
1.1.2.1 Active 
Immunity that arises when the body's own cells produce, and remain able to produce, 
appropriate antibodies following an attack of an infectious disease or deliberate stimulation. 
1.1.2.2 Passive 
The immunity which results when an animal is injected with immunoglobulins obtained by 
the active immunisation of another animal. 
1.1.2.3 Natural 
The immunity which a young animal acquires from its mother's immunoglobulins. 
1.2 Immunoglobulins 
1.2.1 Wby they have evolved (Roitt, 1988) 
When microbes penetrate the body, two main defensive operations come into play (Figure 
1.1). The first in evolutionary terms, is referred to as the "innate" system because it is not 
affected by prior contact with the infectious agent. It includes phagocytosis, the process by 
which special cells engulf a foreign organism and enclose it within their cytoplasm. Before 
phagocytosis can occur the phagocyte must home in on the microbe, adhere to it and 
undergo membrane activation which initiates engulfment. Some bacteria produce chemical 
substances which attract phagocytes, some microbes adhere to the phagocyte's surface and 
some spontaneously provide the appropriate membrane initiation signal. However many 
microbes have evolved mechanisms to avoid phagocytosis and, to counteract this, the body 
evolved the second component of "innate" protection namely the complement system. This 
comprises a complex series of proteins which form one of several triggered enzyme systems 
found in plasma and characteristically produce a rapid, highly amplified response to a 
stimulus, involving a cascade whereby the product of one reaction is the enzymic catalyst of 
the next. Complement has a range of biological functions that include adherence reactions to 
microbes and the creation of lesions in their membranes. 
Again microbes have evolved strategies to evade such defences. For example some bacteria 
have shaped their exteriors to avoid complement activation completely. Thus the body 
needed to "devise" a second system of defence mechanisms individually tailored to every 
type of microbe encountered. The evolutionary process came up with a solution that 
involved a molecule intrinsically capable both of activating the complement system and of 
stimulating phagocytic cells, as well as adhering specifically to the offending microbe. 
From the onset such molecules had one region concerned in communicating with and 
activating complement and phagocytosis (the effector component) and another devoted to 
binding specifically to an individual microbe (the binding component). While the effector 
component can be common, the body has to be able to make millions of binding components 
with different recognition sites. The recognition and effector components make up the 
molecules we recognize as antibodies and the humoral immune response is the mechanism 
whereby the body synthesises large numbers of appropriate antibodies in the event of 
microbial infection. This is part of the second major defensive mechanism. 
PHAGOCYTIC CELLS KILL MICRO-ORGANISMS 
COMPLEMENT FACILITATES PHAGOCYTOSIS 
ADDITIONAL MECHANISMS PROVIDE A SECOND DEFENSIVE STRATEGY 
(a) Acute phase proteins 
(b) Interferons 
(c) Natural killer cells 
(d) Eosinophils 
The body needed to devise defence mechanisms designed individually to each organism 
involved 
ANTffiODY THE SPECIFIC ADAPTOR 
Evolutionary processes have shaped an adaptor molecule intrinsically capable of activating 
complement, stimulating phagocytic cells, and binding to the offending microbe. To do this 
the body has to be able to make myriad adaptors with different recognition sites 
Figure 1.1 Summary of why antibodies have evolved. Adapted from Essential 
Immunology (Roitt, 1988) 
1.2.2 Types and sources (Landon and Chard, 1995) 
Antibody preparations can be discussed according to their source and whether they are 
monoclonal or polyclonal (Table 1.1). Antibodies used for therapeutic purposes are usually 
of the IgG class because of their high circulating concentrations, excellent affinity and 
stability. Human immunoglobulins are often used to treat infectious diseases, especially in 
immunocompromised patients. Unrefined human plasma, collected by venepuncture or 
plasmaphoresis, can be infused with little risk of inducing side effects. However, supplies of 
human plasma are limited; it is unethical to immunize subjects with infectious agents, 
tumour products or drugs; the affinities and titres of specific antibodies in human plasma 
tend to be low and there is a risk of transferring infections such as hepatitis. 
These problems are all overcome by the use of other mammalian immunoglobulins, but are 
then replaced by the more serious risk of causing an allergic response. Therapy usually 
demands large amounts of antibody and polyclonal immunoglobulins for this purpose are 
normally produced in sheep or horses and administered in the form of purified concentrates. 
Avian antibodies, derived from hens' eggs, may well prove to be ideal for oral use, but the 
risk of causing severe allergic reactions may prohibit their systemic administration. 
1.2.3 Structure and function 
1.2.3.1 Overview (Huber, 1984; Roitt, 1988; Bentley, 1994) 
The basic structure of all immunoglobulin (Ig) molecules (Figure 1.2) comprises two 
identical light (L) chains and two identical heavy (H) chains linked together by disulphide 
bonds. There are two different classes (isotypes) of light chains, A and 1(. Heavy chains, by 
contrast, have five different isotypes that divide the immunoglobulins into different 
functional classes, namely, IgG, IgM, IgA, IgD, and IgE, each with different effector 
properties. Each class of heavy chain can combine with either of the two different classes of 
light chain. 
Immunoglobulins of class G (IgG), which is the major type of immunoglobulin in nonnal 
Polyclonal antibodies 
Intact: 
Human IgG Given as plasma or an immunoglobulin concentrate: The latter 
may be enriched with IgM 
AnimallgG 
Usually an equine immunoglobulin concentrate 
Given orally and usually from bovine milk 
Avian IgY Given orally as whole egg, egg yolk or purified IgY 
Fragments: 
F(ab')2 
Usually equine 
Usually ovine 
Monoclonal antibodies 
Normal or activated human B lymphocytes 
Activated primate B lymphocytes 
Human myeloma cells 
Hybridomas 
Quadromas 
Transfectomas 
Transgenic animals 
Homogeneous, usually murine:murine 
Heterogeneous, usually human:murine 
Table 1.1 A classification of types and sources of antibodies for therapeutic use. (Landon 
and Chard, 1995) 
party copyright material excluded from digitised thesis. 
Please refer to the original text to see this material. 
human serum, are monomers of the basic unit. Each chain of an IgG molecule is divided 
into domains of about 110 amino acid residues with the light chains having two such 
domains, and the heavy chains four. The amino-terminal domain of each polypeptide chain 
is highly variable whereas the remaining domains have constant sequences for each class. A 
light chain is thus built up from one amino-terminal variable domain (V d and one carboxy-
terminal constant domain (Cd while a heavy chain has one amino-terminal variable domain 
(V H)' followed by three constant domains (CHi. CH2, and CH3). 
The variable domains are not uniformly variable throughout their lengths. In particular, three 
small regions show much more variability than the rest of the chain and are called the 
hypervariable or complementarity determining regions, CDRI-CDR3. They vary both in 
size and in sequence between different immunoglobulins and are the regions that determine 
the specificity of the antigen -antibody interactions. 
Each Ig molecule is bifunctional, with one part binding to the target antigen and the other 
mediating the effector functions. The latter include: (i) elimination or neutralization of 
antigen (as for example with toxins); (ii) binding of antigen to tissues by interaction with 
Fc to assist phagocytosis, antigen processing or the release of antimicrobial factors; and (iii) 
fixation of complement. 
1.2.3.2 Enzymatic cleavage 
1.2.3.2.1 Pepsin (Samloff, 1971) 
Pepsin is an acidic protease (MW35,OOODa: Isoelectric point pH 1), and the principal 
proteolytic enzyme of vertebrate gastric juice. 
There are several minor pepsins designated B,C and D; the major component is A to which 
the following information applies. Pepsin is derived from its precusor pepsinogen by 
autoactivation at acidic pH. It adopts a bilobal structure with the first 171 amino acids 
forming one lobe and the subsequent residues 172 - 327 forming the other lobe. The active 
site cleft lies between the two lobes which are structurally similar and thought to have arisen 
after duplication of an ancestral gene. 
Pepsin is composed of a high proportion of beta sheets and relatively few alpha helices. 
Each lobe of the enzyme contributes one aspartic acid residue to the catalytic apparatus and 
in pepsin, the catalytic aspartic acid residues are at positions 32 and 215. It is the essential 
role of these residues to co-ordinate a water molecule for nucleophilic attack. 
Pepsin has a broad range of substrates and also demonstrates esterase activity. 
1.2.3.2.2 Papain (Liener, 1974) 
Papain is a cysteine endopeptidase (MW 23,OOODa: Isoelectric point pH 9.6) and a major 
protein constituent of latex from the melon-like green fruit of the small softwood tree Carica 
papaya. Since native crystalline papain is unreactive until acted upon by mild reducing 
agents, such as cysteine, it may exist as a zymogen. A single peptide chain of 211 residues is 
folded into two parts that form a cleft. The enzyme has a broad range of substrates and also 
demonstrates esterase activity. 
Pepsin and papain cleavage points of human IgO 1 are shown in Figure 1.2a. 
1.2.3.2.3 Trypsin (Walsh, 1970) 
Trypsin is a serine endopeptidase (MW.23,800: Isoelectric point pH 10.5) produced as an 
inactive precursor called trypsinogen in the pancreas. It is cleaved initially by a specific 
enteropeptidase secreted in the duodenum to produce a small amount of active trypsin which 
can then activate more trypsinogen. Preferentially cleaves substrates containing Arg or Lys. 
1.2.3.3 Genetics (Branden and Tooze, 1991; Lesk and Tramontano, 1992) 
The genetic infonnation for antibody diversity is contained in about 1000 small segments of 
DNA. The gene segments encoding the variable and constant regions of antibodies are 
clustered in three gene pools on separate chromosomes. One is for the heavy chain and one 
each for the two light-chain isotypes. In the heavy-chain gene pool, the variable domain is 
encoded by three types of segments, V, D, and J. The V segment codes for about the first 90 
1,111 
I )\.~ .. fT' '.'Vl 
' 'Ilpt 11i.~ ,.. 
[ I l J l 
PI PSIN 
PAPAl 
Figure 1.2a. Cleavage of human IgG 1 by pepsin and papain. Numbers refer to the 
Amino acid sequence. Trypsin primarily cleaves the molecule at position 
222. Adapted from Steward (1981) 
residues, 0 for the hypervariable region CDR3, and J for the remaining 15 residues of the 
variable domain. There are about 1000 different V segments, about 10 different 0 segments 
of variable lengths and about 4 different J segments in the heavy-chain gene pool. The DNA 
for the variable domain of a new B cell is assembled by random joining of one of each of 
these segments into a single continuous exon. This process is called combinatorial joining. 
Since the joining of these segments is not precise this creates additional diversity, called 
junctional diversity, where 0 recombines with V and J. In addition, extra nuc1eotides can be 
added during the joining procedure, giving still further diversity. As discussed above, the D 
segment encodes C03, which is thus a focus of particular diversity in the heavy chain. 
The newly created V -O-J exon becomes joined to one of the eight C segments that encode 
the constant region domains of the heavy chains as separate exons. The genetic mechanisms 
underlying light-chain diversity are similar except that there are no D segments, and the 
diversity of COR3 therefore depends largely upon junctional diversity generated during V-J 
joining. 
1.2.3.4 The antibody-antigen reaction (Steward, 1981) 
The interaction of antibody and antigen at equilibrium may be expressed in the following 
Ab + Ag kd~ka Ab-Ag (1) 
where Ab represents free antibody~ Ag, free antigen; Ab-Ag, the antibody-antigen complex; 
and ka and ~. the association and dissociation constants, respectively. 
Applying the law of mass action. 
ka[Ab][Ag] = ~[Ab-Ag] (2) 
Thus the equilibrium constant or affinity (K) may be calculated: 
kJkd = K = [Ab-Ag] I [Ab] [Ag] 
The intermolecular forces which contribute to the stabilization of the complex are the same 
as those involved in the stabilisation of the specific configuration of proteins and other 
macromolecules. Antibody affinity may be considered as the summation of attractive and 
repulsive non-covalent intermolecular forces resulting from the interaction of the antibody 
binding site and the antigen. 
1.2.4 Applications of immunoglobulins 
1.2.4.1 Diagnostic 
1.2.4.1.1 Classification of immunoassay procedures 
All immunoassays depend on the reversible, non-covalent binding of the analyte by the 
binding sites of specific antibodies in a reaction that obeys the Law of Mass Action. 
They can be categorised into three groups. The first require no labelled reactants, and are 
based on the detection of large antigen-antibody complexes, either as a precipitation line in a 
gel or by turbidometric or nephelometric means. These are relatively insensitive techniques 
relying on the formation of optically detectable lattices of antibody/antigen molecules. The 
second involves use of a labelled antigen to act as a 'tracer' (Edwards, 1985). The 
possibilities of using a labelled antigen, which allows the differential distribution of antigen 
between antibody-bound and free phases to be monitored, was first explored in 1960 by 
Yalow and Berson and by Ekins for the quantitation of human insulin and human thyroxine 
respectively. Separation of the phases is not always essential. Thus if the characteristics of 
the tracer in the bound and free phases are sufficiently different, then no separation is 
necessary. With its greatly enhanced detectability, the use of a radioactive tracer was a 
milestone in immunoassay technology and, in conjunction with improvements in 
radiolabelling techniques, revolutionized many fields such as endocrinology. Finally, there 
are immunoassays based on the use of labelled specific antibodies, which offer significant 
advantages in some circumstances. 
There has been a steady move from immunoassays based on radio labelled tracers to those 
based on enzymes, fluorescent or chemiluminescent molecules amongst others. Non-
radioisotopic labels have gained increased popularity due to their long shelf-lives and to the 
avoidance of the potential risks associated with the handling and disposal of radioactivity. 
On the debit side, most non-radioisotopic labels are susceptible to non-specific background 
interference from biological samples, resulting in the reduction of assay sensitivity. An 
important advantage of radioactive isotopes is that no endogenous material in a biological 
sample will interfere with their measurement (Edwards, 1985). 
1.2.4.1.2 Principles of fluorescence (Burrin, 1986) 
Fluorescence is the phenomenon whereby a molecule, after absorbing radiation, emits 
radiation of a longer wavelength. This increase in wavelength is known as the Stokes' shift. 
At room temperature most organic molecules are in the ground state and absorption of 
photons elevates electrons in these molecules to a higher energy state in less than 10-15 
seconds. Energy is then lost very rapidly by collisional degradation (as heat), resulting in the 
energy of the excited molecules falling rapidly to that of minimal vibrational energy in the 
lowest excited state. The energy emitted from a limited number of molecules in regaining the 
ground state results in fluorescence. 
The choice of a fluorophore is critical In designing a fluoroimmunoassay (FIA) and 
fluorescein (Figure 1.3) is the most widely used because it has a high quantum yield and 
absorbance spectrum in a range that allows excitation by a variety of light sources. Its 
emission maximum at -522nm is suitable for most photomultiplier tubes, it shows no 
significant photolability under normal conditions, ambient temperature changes cause little 
effect on its fluorescence and many fluorescein-labelled materials have a virtually indefinite 
Figure 1.3 Structure of fluorescein isothiocyanate 
shelf life. Its fluorescence life time of about 4 - 5 nanoseconds is appropriate for 
polarization measurement and, fmally, it is hydrophilic and this may increase the solubility of 
the labelled compounds. 
1.2.4.1.3 Fluorimetry (Burrin, 1986) 
In a typical fluorimeter (Figure 1.4) a solution of fluorescent molecules is excited with light 
of an appropriate wavelength. This light (usually from a xenon or mercury lamp) is focused 
by an optical system and the desired wavelength isolated by a monochrometer or filter 
before passing through into the sample compartment. A second optical system at right 
angles to the first directs emitted light via another filter or monochrometer onto a 
photomultiplier tube, which is connected to an amplifier and a signal recording or display 
system. 
When the fluorescent molecules in solution are excited at a suitable wavelength, the total 
intensity of emitted fluorescence is proportional to the intensity of exciting light, the 
concentration of the fluorophore, its extinction coefficient and its quantum yield. 
1.2.4.1.4 Types of fluoroimmunoassay (Chard, 1990) 
FIA methods may be classified into assays that require a separation step and those that do 
not. Only separation FIA are relevant to the experimental work described later. Thus the 
separation step has two important functions: 
1) To separate the bound and free fractions of the fluorescein-labelled antigen. 
2) To allow the removal of non-specific fluorophores or other interfering substances 
present in the sample prior to signal measurement. 
The second function enables a greater sensitivity than can be obtained by non-separation 
FlA. In order to increase sensitivity a washing step can also be introduced. Precision can be 
maximized by introducing solid phase techniques such as covalently coupling the antibody 
to magnetizable particles, activated glass or Sepharose as described later. 
Oplical syste-m Sample 
I Excitatior'l light 
( ~----~~------------~ 
Light source - Excitatior'l 
finer 
com;:>or lme-nt 
- O;ltic:o\ 
System 
Emi 5sion 
\e-r fi 
'Em, 'He'd light 
ore s.ce-nce) (Flu 
omultiptier 
t.be 
Oisploy lrit AmpUi.:-r 
Figure 1.4 Schematic of the components of a simple fluorimeter 
1.2.4.2 Therapeutic (Landon and Chard, 1995) 
There is virtually no limit to the potential of antibody-based products for therapeutic 
purposes and there has been a general (probably misconceived) acceptance that monoclonal 
antibodies will dominate. 
At present, monoclonal antibodies have not enjoyed the same success when used 
therapeutically as they have for diagnosis. Many believe that such lack of success is only 
temporary and will be corrected by the replacement of murine monoclonal antibodies by 
their humanised or human equivalents. Others consider that the choice between a 
monoclonal and a polyclonal antibody for a particular clinical situation will depend in large 
part on the mechanisms involved. 
Some therapeutic applications of exogenous antibodies are listed in Table 1.2. 
1.2.4.2.1 Snake antivenoms 
We have identified six activities involved in the provision of antivenom (Figure 1.5) and 
their general characteristics are described below: 
1.2.4.2.1.1 Venom supply 
This involves the collection of large numbers of snakes from several sites within the region 
where the resultant anti venom will be used. The snakes are usually housed in a herpetarium 
and their venom collected regularly, usually monthly. 
Venom is a complex mixture of substances, mainly proteins, produced by a specialized sero-
mucus gland and inoculated under pressure by modified teeth (fangs) into the tissues. Its 
variability has been reviewed extensively by Chippaux et al. (1991) and is due to both 
different concentrations and biochemical differences between certain venom components 
(Nkinin et al.I997). Thus it is essential to ensure that pools of venom have been sourced 
from the appropriate species of snake and retain their main components in active form. The 
toxicity of the pool is measured by in vitro assays to determine the dose which kills 50% of 
For oral use 
To prevent and/or treat gastrointestinal infections 
To prevent absorption of drugs and other potentially toxic compounds 
For systemic use as therapy 
For replacement in immunodeficiency states 
To bind to and thereby neutralize the biologic effects of : 
Haptens Cardiac glycosides, steroid hormones, tricyclic antidepressants 
Macromolecules Toxic constituents of snake, scorpion and spider venoms 
Microbial endotoxins and exotoxins 
Mediators of toxic shock 
Platelet-derived and growth factors 
Human chorionic gonadotrophin for fertility control 
Autoantibodies in idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura 
To bind to and thereby block cell surface epitopes: 
Receptors Such as that for IL-l or the Fc part of immunoglobulins 
Adhesin molecules 
Glycoproteins Such as those necessary for platelet aggregration 
To bind to cell surface epitopes and thereby help to destroy the cell: 
Examples include CD3 on T lymphocytes 
Rh(D) on neonatal red cells 
Tumour associated antigens on haematologically derived and 
solid tumours 
IgE-bearing cells 
Microorganisms including parasites, bacteria and viruses 
Catalytic antibodies 
For systemic use to deliver therapy 
Antibodies attached covalently or non-covalently to: 
Radionuclides(yttrium-90) 
Foreign toxins(ricin A chain, diphtheria toxin) 
Enzymes(to convert prodrugs to drugs or to bring tP A or urokinase to the site of 
thrombus) 
Drugs(adriamycin) 
Natural protective molecules(TNF, IL-2) 
Cytotoxic cells, using bifunctional antibodies 
For extracorporeal use 
With blood (to remove apo B) 
With bone marrow(to remove T lymphocytes or neoplastic cells) 
Table 1.2 Some therapeutic applications of exogenous antibodies (Landon and Chard, 
1995) 
fARMJNO 
PROVISION OF AN ANTIVENOM 
IMMUNlSIN<M 
BlEEDING 
I..ABORATORY 
ACTlvrnES 
PRECLINICAL 
TESTING 
1t-.'1TlAL EnRACTION PURIFICATION 
Figure 1.5 Six activities involved in provisi.on of anti venom 
fllJ.JNG 
LABEl...l..lJIiO 
a group of animals (LD50). The most common animal used is the white mouse. 
1.2.4.2.1.2 Antiserum production 
Inoculation of the crude venom usually provides the highest titre; however, whole venom is 
often badly tolerated by the animal (Chippaux and Goyffon,1998). As a result toxoids have 
been prepared by biological detoxification of the venom which preserve its immunogenicity. 
The most usual toxoiding procedures are complexing with an aldehyde such as formalin 
(Ramon, 1924) or glutaraldehyde. Detoxified or not, the venom preparation used for 
immunisation is often associated with an adjuvant. The precise role of the adjuvant has not 
been elucidated (Bomford, 1989) but it is thought to act in a controlling manner by 
decreasing the rate of release of venom and thus stimulating further the immunological 
response. The most commonly used adjuvants are Freunds (Chotwiwatthanakun et aI. 2001; 
Sriprapat et aI. 2003), bentonite (Sunthomandh and Ratanabanangkoon, 1994), aluminium 
hydroxide (Rucavado et al. 1996) and sodium alginate (Angulo et al. 1997). 
The immunisation protocols depend on the toxicity and the immunogenicity of the venom, 
the animal model used for immunisation and the quality of the immune response of the 
animal (Chippaux and Goyffon, 1991). The optimum dose for immunisation is generally 
obtained by trial and error to obtain a sufficient antibody titre. Ten to fifty injections 
performed over a period of 3 to 15 months may be necessary to obtain hyperimmunisation 
(Chatterjee et al. 1968). The preferred animal for immunisation is the horse because of the 
large blood volume available, but other species can also be used (Russell et al. 1970; Carroll 
et al. 1992; Sjostrom et al. 1994). 
Antivenom is monospecific if only one venom is used, or polyspecific if the animal being 
immunised receives a mixture of venoms from different species. 
1.2.4.2.1.3 Product manufacture 
Although crude serum was originally used for therapy, for many years antivenom has been 
purified by successive steps in order to reduce anaphylactic reactions (Christensen, 1966; 
Kirkpatrick, 1991; Grandgeorge et al. 1996). 
After elimination of the cellular elements by centrifugation, non-immune proteins and 
especially albumin, are discarded by precipitation with ammonium or sodium sulphate. The 
immunoglobulins are digested using either pepsin to produce F(ab')2 fragments (Sanchez et 
al. 2003 ) or papain to produce a smaller Fab (Meyer et al. 1997; Ariaratnam et al. 1999) 
fragment. These purified products are then ampouled for marketing, either in liquid form or 
more rarely as a lyophilised preparation. Conventionally the times of expiry are usually 3 
and 5 years respectively. 
Before final packaging the anti venom is submitted to vanous controls: bacteriological 
culture in an appropriate medium, toxicological studies using animal inoculation for 
pyrogenicity and immunological studies to measure the neutralising efficiency of the 
product. 
1.2.4.2.1.4 Laboratory assessment 
Any unit raising antisera and intending to manufacture anti venoms needs to provide a range 
of microbiological, biological and analytical procedures (Table 1.3). Thus it is essential to 
ensure that pools of venom have been sourced from the appropriate species of snake and 
retain their main components in active form; that all animals being immunised are mounting 
an adequate humoral immune response; and in particular that the vials of anti venom that 
have been manufactured are likely to be both effective and safe. 
1.2.4.2.1.5 Clinical trials and regulatory scrutiny 
At a recent WHO meeting it was noted that most anti venom centres "accepted the standard 
maximum lethality assay (LD50 of venom and ED50 of anti venom) as the yardstick for 
assessing antivenom preparations". However, it was appreciated that the results didn't 
always correlate with clinical efficacy (Theakston et al. 2(03). Indeed the efficacy and 
Microbiological 
Of manufacturing facilities 
Of manufacturing staff 
Of final product 
Biological 
Of venom 
Of final product 
General 
Of venom 
Of water-in-oil emulsion 
Of individual antisera 
Of antivenom pools 
Of final product 
- regular viable and non-viable particulate 
count on air sample 
- multiple settle plates and swabs 
- regular finger "dips" 
- bioburden 
- sterility using PH Eur membrane-ftltration 
method 
-LD50 
-ED50 
- pyrogen testing in rabbits 
- safety testing in mice and guinea pigs 
- HPLC to ensure correct source 
- drop and standing tests to ensure stability 
- ELISA or small scale affinity 
chromatography at week 14 on each 
individual sheep 
- gel filtration chromatography 
- protein concentration 
- Fc and albumin 
- ampoule integrity 
- colour/clarity/particulates 
- protein concentration 
- Fc and albumin 
- gel filtration chromatography 
-EDso 
Table 1.3 Summary of laboratory assessment techniques 
freedom from side-effects of a new anti venom can only be assessed by means of a suitable 
clinical trial and the WHO meeting concluded" This neglected field (clinical trials) should 
be given a much higher priority in the future". 
The results of clinical trials play an important role in deciding whether, or not, the 
appropriate regulatory authorities will allow a new product to be used routinely. These 
authorities will also want assurance that there has been some virological screening of the 
animals being used to raise antisera (such as in the case of horses, screening for equine 
infectious anaemia and African horse sickness). The regulatory authorities also insist on 
specific data for the production process for each specific product and ban the use of anti-
microbial agents such as cresol and toluene. Hence, the need for a robust, simple, platform 
technology and a clean manufacturing environment. 
1.2.5 Side-EtTects (Sutherland, 1977; Landon and Chard, 1995) 
The benefits of therapy must outweigh any risk involved and every effort must be made to 
reduce the incidence and severity of side effects to a minimum. This can be achieved only if 
all deleterious effects are recognized and if mechanisms are fully understood. The risks of 
passive immunization are considered under three headings in Table 1.4. Those that are an 
inevitable consequence of specific binding by the therapeutic product; those of an allergic 
nature; and finally a range of non-specific effects. 
Allergic responses are described in more detail below because this is the main area of 
concern with passive immunization. Hypersensitivity reactions range from a mild rash to 
severe, sometimes fatal anaphylactic shock; all are examples of an inappropriate immune 
response that may lead to tissue damage. In general, the less pure the protein, the more 
foreign its nature and the larger the amount given, the greater is the risk of an allergic 
reaction. 
Type I anaphylactic hypersensitivity requires prior exposure to the foreign antibody (or 
contaminating protein) and it is mediated by IgE. Specific IgE secretion is stimulated by the 
first exposure. Some becomes attached to Fc receptors on mast cells. A second exposure to 
even small amounts of the protein leads to bridging between two IgE, with degranulation of 
mast cells and release of histamine and other vasoactive molecules. Clinical manifestations 
occur within minutes of re-exposusre and can include tachycardia, hypotension, 
bronchospasm and angioneurotic oedema. Type I hypersensitivity reactions were common 
with equine-based products due, for example, to prior exposure to tetanus antitoxin derived 
from horses. 
Type III immune-complex-mediated hypersensitivity is more common than type I reactions 
and is mediated by IgG. Each IgG molecule or its F(ab'h has two binding sites which 
permit "cross-linking" to occur if the antigen has more than one epitope. Thus immune 
complexes can be formed comprising many antibody and antigen molecules. Some immune 
complexes remain in solution in the circulation; others precipitate out or become fixed to the 
wall of a blood vessel. All immune complexes can cause platelets to aggregate and release 
vasoactive amines such as serotonin. Macrophages attach to the Fc and initiate phagocytosis 
and release cytokines. The simplest example of mechanisms by which immune compelexes 
are formed is when exogenous antibodies bind macromolecules (such as the constituents of a 
snake venom) already present in the patient. Much more common are primary (delayed) and 
accelerated serum sickness, in which the patient's own antibodies are involved. 
1.3 Transmission of avian immunity to the egg 
1.3.1 History and general introduction 
In 1893, Klemperer showed that antibodies produced in the hen as a result of an 
immunogenic challenge transfer from the circulation to the egg yolk. Fraser and his 
colleagues (1933) conducted two studies, the fITst in hens and the second in ducks. These 
showed that immunisation of the birds with diphtheria toxoid resulted in the appearance of 
antitoxin both in their serum and in the yolks of their eggs. The serum antitoxin 
concentration fell rapidly after injections were discontinued at a time when the birds began 
1. Due to specific effects of the exogenous antibodies 
Recurrence of cardiac problems, with excess anti digoxin Fab 
Characteristic symptom complex following fIrst administration of antilymphocyte 
globulin and OKT3 due to T lymphocyte destruction 
Increased incidence of lymphoproliferative disorders following use of OKT3 
Potential deleterious effects due to blocking biologically important molecules 
2. Allergic response 
(i)To exogenous antibodies(or contaminating proteins) 
Type I anaphylactic hypersensitivity 
Type III immune-complex-mediated hypersensitivity 
- primary(delayed) serum sickness 
- secondary(accelerated) serum sickness 
Humoral immune response blocking or enhancing clearance of exogenous 
antibodies 
Possible immunomodulation 
(ii)By exogenous antibodies 
Type III immune-complex-mediated hypersensitivity 
-involving foreign antibodies as the binding reagent with infusion of antibody aggregates, 
including idiotype:anti-idiotype compexes 
3. Non-specific side-effects 
Microbial contaminants 
-endotoxins 
-bacteria 
-mycoplasma and fungi 
-conventional human, rodent and bovine viruses 
-slow viruses 
Other contaminants such as prions 
Potential tumorigenicity 
Cardiac 
Renal 
Table 1.4 Some potential side-effects associated with the systemic administration of 
exogenous antibodies (Landon and Chard, 1995) 
to lay eggs and the concentrations of antitoxin in the yolk were found to correlate directly 
with the concentrations in serum. In 1946, Brandley et al used hens which had been 
immunized with, or recently recovered from Newcastle virus to show transfer of specific 
antibodies to the egg yolk. 
1.3.2 Antibody production from chicken eggs 
The inherent advantages of chicken eggs for antibody production are listed below based on 
conclusions drawn from a series of five papers (Kuhlmann et al. 1988; Schmidt et al. 1989; 
Wiedemann et.al. 1990; Jungling et al. 1991; Wiedemann et al. 1991). 
These are: 
1. The productivity of eggs is high and one egg contains approximately 15ml yolk with at 
least 8g11 of chicken antibody. 
2. Collecting eggs is easier than taking blood and less stressful for hens. 
3. Eggs can be stored at room temperature for several weeks. 
4. It may be better to immunise several individual hens with single different microbes 
rather than each individual with multiple different microbes. If necessary a "cocktail" 
can then be obtained by mixing individual eggs. 
5. Chickens, via egg yolk, can provide small amounts of antibody of nearly constant 
quality over a long time while colostrum is only available for 1 to 2 days. 
6. Chickens are more effective antibody producers, being able to produce approximately 
20 times more antibody quantity per kg bodyweight than does the cow in the colostrum. 
Also it is less expensive to house 20 chickens than 1 cow. 
1.3.3 Chemical and physical aspects of a typical egg 
The simplistic classification of the egg into three distinct fractions, the yolk (ovum),white 
(albumen) and shell (calcified exterior, cuticle and membranes) is used in Tables 1.5, 1.6 
and 1.7 to create a physical and chemical picture of a typical chicken's egg (Gilbert, 1967). 
I have included a schematic of a typical hen's egg (Figure 1.6) to illustrate why it is 
simplistic to divide the egg into three fractions but the sub-categories of these three fractions 
will not be discussed. 
1.3.4 Reproductive anatomy of the chicken (Gilbert, 1967) 
The following is a brief description of how and where in the chicken, the main events in the 
formation of yolk, white, and egg shell occur. In the hen only the left ovary is functional 
since its early oestrogenic secretion prevents the right from developing. Removal of the left 
ovary results in the right ovary developing into a testis. When the hen becomes sexually 
active at about 20 weeks, there is a hundred-fold increase in ovarian weight due to 
developing follicles. In the sexually active bird the oviduct is a tube some 80cm long 
extending from the single ovary to the cloaca and occupying a large part of the abdominal 
cavity. The development of the oocyte into a yolk takes place entirely in the ovary and can 
be divided into three phases. First a period of slow growth lasting for months or even years, 
following which the oocyte measures only I mm. The second phase lasts about 60 days after 
which the oocyte measures about 6mm. During this phase large vacuoles appear and this 
type of yolk is called white yolk and has a relatively high protein content. Finally there is a 
rapid growth phase during which the main mass of yellow yolk is deposited and the yolk 
reaches its full size (l9.0g). This takes about 7-11 days and terminates just prior to 
ovulation. 
The oviduct can be divided into five parts; infundibulum, magnum (albumen secreting part), 
isthmus, uterus (shell gland) and vagina. During ovulation the oviduct synthesises the coats 
which surround the ovum, the magnum forming the albumen, the isthmus the shell 
membranes and the uterus the shell, pigment and cuticle. 
The vagina does not contribute to the formation of the egg. Figure 1.7 illustrates a schematic 
of the five-part structure of the oviduct. 
1.3.5 Immunoglobulin classes in the chicken 
Leslie and Clem (1969) concluded that the domestic hen has at least two immunoglobulin 
classes. One, with a molecular weight of approximately 900,000 Da, is very similar to 
mammalian IgM. The other has a similar structure to mammalian IgG but with sufficient 
differences for the author to give it a different name, Ig Y. The differences between avian 
IgY and mammalian IgG are listed in Figure 1.7a and Table 1.8 (Landon and Chard, 1995). 
Weight 58g 
Long axis 5.7cm 
Short axis 4.2cm 
Long circumference 15.7cm 
Short circumference 13.5cm 
Volume 53.Oem3 
Gross surface area 68.Oem3 
Table 1.5 General characteristics of the egg. 
Percentage of Water; Percentage Solids; Percentage 
whole of total egg of total egg 
White 58.0 76.2 20.0 
Yolk 32.0 23.6 51.0 
Shell 10.0 0.2 29.0 
Table 1.6 Relative composition of the egg. 
Chemical Class Shell White Yolk 
Water 1.0 88.5 47.5 
Protein 4.0 10.5 17.4 
Lipid N.A. N.A. 33.0 
Carbohydrate Some in protein 0.5 0.2 
Inorganic ions 95.0 0.5 1.1 
Table 1.7 Percentage composition of the shell, white and yolk (Gilbert, 1967). 
party copyright material excluded from digitised thesis. 
Please refer to the original text to see this material. 
Rose et al (1974) concluded that immunoglobulin classes in the hen's egg are segregated 
between the yolk and white. Thus the egg yolk contains at least two antigen-binding 
subclasses of IgY derived from the hen's serum but no IgM or IgA classes while the egg 
white contains IgM and IgA but no IgY. 
1.3.6 Composition of egg white and egg yolk 
The composition of egg white is summarised in Table 1.9 (Gilbert, 1967). 
The micro structure of egg yolk was described by Bellairs (1961). It consists of large 
spherical bodies (25-150l-lm diameters), distributed in a continuous phase, and smaller 
granules (up to 20l-lm diameter) found both within the yolk spheres and in the 
continuous phase. Egg yolk contains approximately 50% water and the remainder is 
predominantly proteins and lipids in the proportions of 1 :2; the lipid is present as 
lipoprotein. The proteins and lipoproteins are partitioned between the yolk structures (Cook 
1968). The granules, which may be obtained by centrifugation of diluted yolk, account for 
approximately 23% of the yolk solids. They contain a phosphoprotein termed phosvitin, and 
two high density lipoproteins, the lipovitellins, in a complex in which most of the yolk 
calcium and iron are present (Burley and Cook, 1961). They also contain a small amount of 
low density lipoprotein. Phosvitin and the lipovitellins account for about 4% and 16% of 
yolk solids respectively. 
During centrifugation the yolk spheres disintegrate, the granules they contain 
sediment, and the supernatant is thus derived partly from the spheres and partly from the 
continuous phase. The supernatant contains a low density fraction which can be 
obtained by flotation in an ultracentrifuge and which consists of low density lipoprotein 
containing only about 12% protein. It accounts for 65% of yolk solids and 
95% of yolk lipid. The supernatant also contains a heterogeneous group of water 
soluble proteins, the livetins, which together account for less than 10% of the yolk solids. 
Chicken IgY 
VI. CL 
Mammalian IgG 
V'VVV 
-- x x CL 
Figure 1.7a 
Cll(4) 
A simplified model of a mammalian immunoglobulin compared with an avian 
immunoglobulin. Differences are revealed in the number of constant domains of the heavy 
chain, the carbohydrate chain(x) and the hinge region(HR) which is much more evident in 
the case of IgG. L = light chain, H= heavy chain, V = variable domain, C=constant domain. 
Adapted from (Schade et ai. 2001). 
Mammalian IgG HenlgY 
Structure Comprise 2 heavy Comprise 2 heavy 
and 2 light chains and 2 light chains 
Molecular weight About 160,000 About 180,000 
Hexose chain 1% 2.22% 
Mean pI 7.8 6.8 
Pepsin Digestion To F(ab'h + Fc To x2 Fab +Fc 
Papain Digestion All to x2 Fab + Fc Only about 70% to 
x2 Fab + Fe 
In 1. 15M Saline No aggregation Considerable 
aggregation 
Binding to: 
Complement Yes No 
Macrophages Yes No 
Protein A Yes No 
Protein G Yes No 
Rheumatoid Factor Yes No 
Table 1.8 Comparison of mammalian IgG and avian IgY. Adapted from (Landon and 
Chard, 1995) 
Egg white solids Percentage of total solids 
Ovalbumin 54.0 
Ovotransferrin l3.0 
Ovomucoid 11.0 
Ovomucin 1.5-2.9 
Lysozyme 3.5 
G2-Globulin 4.0? 
G3-Globulin 4.0? 
Ovomacroglobulin 0.5 
Ovoglycoprotein 0.5-1.0 
Flavoprotein 0.8 
Ovoinhibitor 0.1 -1.5 
Avidin 0.05 
Unidentified proteins About 8.0 
Table 1.9 Representative composition of egg white solids (Gilbert, 1967) 
Patterson et al. (1962) demonstrated the transfer of [1311]_ Y globulins from the blood 
to the developing ova. Martin and Cook (1958) isolated y livetin and Williams (1962) 
provided immunoelectrophoretic evidence that it was largely plasma y -globulin. 
1.4 Venomous Snakes 
1.4.1 General introduction (Mattison, 1995) 
It is accepted generally that snakes evolved from their closest relatives the lizards and that 
they first appeared between 100 and 150 million years ago. Between then and now they 
have evolved into approximately 2,400 currently recognized species. 
Colubrid snakes appeared approximately 60 million years ago. Approximately two thirds of 
all snakes belong to the family Colubridae and are found throughout the temperate, tropical 
and desert regions of the world. These generally have either rear fangs or solid teeth and 
their small fangs usually render them harmless to man, although the Montpellier snake 
(Malpolon monspessulanus) of the Mediterranean region, the cat snake (Telescopus Jallax) 
found in south-eastern Europe, and the African boomslang (Dispholidus typus) can inflict 
dangerous bites. The venom of Colubrids is usually of low toxicity to man, and the small 
volumes that can be obtained from individual snakes has resulted in the chemistry of the 
venoms from this family being relatively poorly studied. 
Approximately 25 million years ago representatives of two other important families of 
venomous snakes, the Elapidae and the Viperidae appeared. 
The Elapidae is the second largest family and contains nearly half of all known venomous 
snakes. They are distributed throughout Africa, Asia, the southern parts of North America, 
Central and South America and Australasia. The snake fauna of Australia is unique in that 
the elapids constitute the majority and also represent the widest variety of forms. 
The Elapidae are thought to have evolved from the Colubridae, from which they differ in 
having a more efficient system for injecting venom; the fangs are effectively tubular and 
positioned at the front of the mouth where they may be brought into use more easily. 
Most of the remaining venomous snakes are to be found in the major family, Viperidae. 
They are distributed allover the world with the exception of Australasia. The Viperidae is 
further divided into two sub-families (Figure 1.8), the largest sub-division being represented 
by the Crotalinae which are better known as pit vipers. 
However, the number of species is no indication of abundance and the sub-family Viperinae 
contains some of the most widely distributed venomous snakes. Indeed, one of these, 
Vipera berus, has the widest known distribution of all the world's snakes. All the members 
of the Viperinae are restricted to the eastern hemisphere. 
Atractaspidae is a small family of venomous, burrowing snakes restricted to Africa and the 
Middle East. 
Antivenoms against venoms of snakes of the genus Vipera will be studied in this thesis. 
1.4.2 European venomous snakes (Phelps, 1981) 
The phylogenetics and systematics of the Vipers may be determined by: (1) external 
morphology (2) ethology (3) immunological studies and (4) comparison of chromosomal 
characteristics. Most of the European vipers are stout-bodied with a short tail and a 
distinctive flat and triangular head (Figure 1.9). They are slow moving, usually lie in wait 
for their prey and strike when it comes within distance. Their diet consists mainly of small 
rodents. Hibernation usually takes place from October to April and mating occurs following 
emergence in the spring with the young being born in the summer or fall. Most genera are 
ovo-viviparious, the young being born enveloped in a membrane from which they 
immediately free themselves. Some sub species of V.lebetina and V.palestinae lay eggs. 
Most adapt readily to captivity, the notable exception being V.berus, which is very difficult 
to rear and maintain successfully. 
1.4.2.1 Epidemiology 
1.4.2.1.1 Snake species distribution 
Snakes are poorly represented in Europe, for two reasons. Firstly the number of species is 
generally higher in warmer than in temperate zones and secondly the geologically recent ice 
ages in Europe had a devastating effect on the survival of cold blooded animals. 
The most common naturally occurring venomous snakes in Europe belong to the family 
Viperidae, genus Vipera (Figure 1.8). V.berus, V.aspis and V.ammodytes are the most widely 
distributed venomous snakes in Europe (Steward, 1971). A few venomous colubrid species 
also occur in Europe, including Malpolon monspessulanus, which may be of medical 
importance. 
V.berus occupies a larger land area than any other poisonous snake. It occurs in almost the 
whole of Europe below the arctic-circle except for Ireland, the more southerly parts of the 
continent and the larger Mediterranean islands. It extends eastwards through Asia to the 
Pacific Ocean (Steward, 1971). V.aspis occurs in vast regions of France and Italy, in the 
Pyrenees and the Alps, but it has been reported from other parts of south Europe and 
southern Germany. V.ammodytes is widespread in south-eastern Europe and is also found in 
northern Italy, Austria and Turkey. V.ursin;; occurs in restricted areas in central and eastern 
Europe. V. latastei is common on the Iberian Peninsula. 
V.lebetina and V.xanthina are found in Cyprus, Turkey, West Asia and North Africa. V. 
palestinae occurs in the Middle East (Klemmer, 1968). 
1.4.2.1.2 Incidence of bites 
The incidence of venomous viper bites in Europe is difficult to assess. Statistics from poison 
centres do not seem to be complete, as many cases apparently are not reported (European 
Commission report, 1996). An investigation by Pozio (1988) in Italy shows that 2,329 
patients were admitted to 292 hospitals during 1980-1984 and 286 of the cases were studied 
in detail. Bites by V.aspis dominated heavily. In a Swiss report recorded over 16 years 
(Stahel et al. 1985), 113 cases of V. berus and V. aspis bites were studied. In France the 
number of viper bites has been estimated at around 2,000 per year with a few fatalities 
(Chippaux and Goyffon, 1989) and Claud et al.( 1989) found that 80 patients had been 
Family - Viperidae 
Kingdom - Animalia 
Phylum - Chordata 
Class - Reptilia 
Order - Squamata 
Suborder - Serpentes 
Family - Elapidae 
Subfamily - Viperinae + Subfamily - Crotalinae 
Genus - Vipera 
I-----Common Name 
Species - ammodytes 
- aspis 
- berus 
- kaznakovi 
-Iatastei 
- seoanii 
- ursinii 
-Iebetina 
- xanthina 
- Sand Viper 
Asp Viper 
- Adder 
- Caucasus Viper 
- Snub-nosed Viper 
Iberian Cross Adder 
- Meadow Viper 
- Blunt-nosed Viper 
- Coastal Viper 
Family - Atractaspidae 
Figure 1.8 Classification of important venomous snakes. 
Adapted from (Phelps, 1981; Mattison, 1995) 
party copyright material excluded from digitised thesis. 
Please refer to the original text to see this material. 
treated for viper bite in one French hospital between 1980-87. In another French 
publication, seven serious envenomations are presented (period 1976-1986) in which three 
of the victims died (Rowsselot et al. 1991). In the United Kingdom the number of bites was 
estimated in the seventies to be lower, around 100 per year, with only one death since the 
last decade (Reid, 1976). In a study in Sweden (Persson and Irestedt, 1981) it was found 
that around 150-200 people are hospitalized annually because of V. herus bites. The total 
incidence of bites in Sweden was estimated in the 1950' s to be around 1,300 per year 
(Marquard, 1951). 
Estimations made by Gonzalez (1991) are of a total incidence of 15,000-20,000 venomous 
snakebites and 50 deaths annually in Europe as a whole. These figures may be accurate but 
difficult to assess. 
Snake bite also presents a problem to domestic livestock, including cattle and horses. 
1.4.2.2 Symptoms and signs 
1.4.2.2.1 Toxins and mechanisms of action 
The European vipers are closely related to each other and there are only minor differences in 
the composition of their venom and the symptoms of their envenoming. The venom contains 
a mixture of proteins with enzymatic and toxic activity such as proteolytic enzymes, peptide 
hydrolases, hyaluronidase, phospholipases A2, phosphodiesterases and L-amino acid 
oxidase. In addition, there are amino acids, carbohydrates, toxic polypeptides and metallo 
proteinases (Persson, 1995). 
A neurotoxin has been isolated from the venom of V.ammodytes, but it is questionable 
whether this has any clinical significance (Harris, 1982). There is also evidence of a 
neurotoxic component in V. aspis venom as certain neurological symptoms have been 
observed after bites (Scholer, 1970). The more dramatic central nervous system symptoms 
occasionally seen in envenoming by European vipers, like somnolence, unconsciousness, 
urine and faecal incontinence and convulsions, have mostly been attributed to sudden and 
profound hypotension. 
Local spread of the venom is facilitated by the action of hyaluronidase. Proteolytic enzymes 
cause damage to subcutaneous tissue structures including capillary and lymphatic 
endothelial cells with leakage of lymph, plasma and erythrocytes. This will, depending on 
the amount of venom injected, lead to extensive oedema that gradually undergoes 
haemorrhagic discolouration. Local and systemic haemolysis and coagulopathies may also 
be induced. 
A spectrum of systemic effects may follow the release of highly active endogenous 
substances including histamine, bradykinin, prostaglandins and serotonin. 
1.4.2.2.2 Circumstances. Route of exposure 
Bites most commonly occur outdoors when people come across the snakes in their natural 
habitat. They occur mainly on the extremities (the hands or feet) in connection with picking 
wild berries and mushrooms or during gardening. Although much rarer, bites are also 
observed on the trunk, neck and head. They may happen during swimming or when lying 
down on the grass. V.latastei, may sometimes be found in trees, with a consequent increase 
in bites to the head or trunk, for example in farmers harvesting fruits. 
The snake releases the victim directly after the bite. Bites can occur at any time of the day 
but not during the winter season in northern countries. Bites occur most commonly in warm 
and dry weather and the snakes are mostly found in sunny, rocky parts of forests, in 
meadow-land, in mountain districts (even at high altitude) and along the coasts. Vipers can 
both swim and climb. 
Route of exposure is mostly intradermal or subcutaneous and rarely intramuscular. The 
venom cannot penetrate the skin. 
1.4.2.2.3 Symptomatology 
Most patients bitten by European vipers will have a relatively mild clinical course, but 
severe cases are constantly reported. The main features of envenoming are local tissue 
damage, gastrointestinal symptoms and systemic circulatory disturbances (Table 1.10). In 
addition, there is a wide variety of symptoms, many of which are related to the main features 
mentioned earlier. 
Symptoms of systemic envenoming usually develop rapidly, often within minutes, but may 
also be delayed for many hours after the bite. The local reaction starts slowly and may 
continue to develop for two or three days. Many of the serious complications, like severe 
anemia, haemolysis, renal impairment, pulmonary oedema and bleeding are late 
complications. 
1.4.2.2.4 Laboratory assessment 
With viper bites the initial assessment should include pulse and respiration rate, blood 
pressure, temperature, evaluation of skin discolouration and the presence and extent of 
oedema. Haematological tests should include an erythrocyte count and the measurement of 
haemoglobulin and haematocrit to indicate if there is any internal bleeding or haemolysis. 
The white cell count is a useful and simple non-specific test of systemic envenoming and 
values of 2x 1 010 IL may indicate the need for antivenom. Most of the haematological 
changes involve coagulation and in severe cases, the prothrombin time and partial 
thromboplastin time are increased. The platelet count may be depressed although it is often 
normal. In severe cases changes in urine composition (protein, blood, albumin, glucose, 
urea and creatinine) should be monitored. Any cardiac abnormalities should also be checked 
for by an electrocardiogram and serum concentration of aspartate aminotransferase and/or 
creatinine phosphokinase. A low bicarbonate concentration reflects the metabolic acidosis 
that is a feature of severe experimental viper bite poisoning. Potassium concentrations are 
sometimes raised. 
Psychological reactions 
Local symptoms 
Gastrointestinal symptoms 
Circulatory disturbances 
Central and peripheral nervous system disturbances 
Renal dysfunction 
Respiratory symptoms 
Angioneurotic oedema 
Haematological changes 
Coagulopathy 
Others 
Late symptoms 
Table 1.10 Envenoming by European vipers. Overview of symptoms (Persson, 1995) 
1.4.3 11. a~stei a~stei 
1.4.3.1 Description (Steward, 1971). 
See Fig 1.9 (p. 42). 
Full grown adults measure about 20 to 22in in length but exceptionally reach about 29in. 
The head is distinct from the neck. The snout is upturned and usually ends in a short, scaly 
hom, more or less obliquely tilted backwards. The ground colour is usually grey or brown, 
often reddish brown in females. Along the back is a series of black-edged, dark brown 
rhombs running together to form a wavy or zigzag stripe. A series of dark spots along the 
flank correspond with the indentation in the dorsal stripe. A dark streak runs from the eye to 
the angle of the mouth, and there may be small, dark markings on the top of the head. The 
undersides are yellowish or grey, speckled or marbled with black, and often with some white 
speckling. The underside of the tip of the tail is normally yellow, or spotted with yellow. 
1.4.3.2 Species distribution 
Lataste's Viper can be found in the western region of the Mediterranean. According to 
Saint Girons (1980), there are currently three sub-species. V.l.latastei is mainly found in 
the Iberian Peninsula, V.l.gaditana mainly in the southwest of the Iberian Peninsula and in 
North Africa and V. I. monticola in the Atlas mountains of Morocco, between 4,000 and 
12,OOOft above sea level. The latter is a dwarf subspecies 12in length. 
1.4.3.3 Incidence of bites 
According to Gonzalez the number of venomous snake bites in Spain was 1,500-2000 
per year between 1980 and 1987 with between 2 and 8 fatalities annually during this period. 
V.latastei was responsible for approximately 80% of these cases and V. aspis and V. seoanei 
for the remainder. V. latastei is the most aggressive of the afore mentioned and its bite the 
most dangerous (Gonzalez, 1991). 
Vipers are nocturnal reptiles but their habits change according to the climate, feeding and 
habitat. In Spain, V.latastei is more active during the day in spring and autumn. In 
mountainous regions and during stormy summers they become diurnal, thus the incidence of 
bites increases. Also V.latastei may adopt arboreal habits, thus causing severe bites in the 
head, face and trunk (Gonzalez, 1991). 
1.4.3.4 Venom toxicity 
The venom of V.latastei has not been extensively studied. Salva Miguel (1946) reported 
that the venom possessed haemolytic, coagulant and anticoagulant actions. The latter could 
only be appreciated in vivo. Also experimentally, intravenous administration of the venom 
produced irreversible collapse of the peripheral nervous system. 
Zeller (1948) compared the enzymatic activity of the venom with that of other Viperidae and 
found them to be similar. For a long time the venom of V. latastei was considered to be less 
dangerous than that of V.aspis as reported by Boulenger in 1913 in the first work in the 
English language dealing with snakes of Europe. It was later reaffirmed by Steward (1971), 
who may not have read the work by Salva (1946) who claimed the opposite in mouse 
studies. This contradictory evidence may be due to the fact that the toxicity of the venom of 
each species and sub-species is affected by many factors, including the time of year, climate 
and diet. Thus comparisons between venoms of Vipera species and subspecies may be 
difficult to make. Gonzalez (1991) claims that V.latastei bites result in a larger proportion of 
deaths than those of V.aspis and V.seoani. From studies of in vitro antigenic properties, 
Detrait et al.(1983) conclude that V.latastei venom is similar to V.aspis venom but very 
different from V.ammodytes venom. More importantly, Detrait et al. (1983) showed that V. 
l.gaditana venom is neutralized effectively by anti venoms against V. berus, V. aspis and 
V.ammodytes. 
1.4.3.5 Clinical features (Gonzalez, 1991) 
1.4.3.5.1 Local signs and symptoms 
1.4.3.5.1.1 Fang marks 
The distance between the fang marks varies from Smm for young small -sized snakes to 
20mm for adults. Subsequently, a small erythematous halo surrounds the marks, later 
becoming ecchymotic with a mild local haemorrhage. 
1.4.3.5.1.2 Pain 
Pain usually occurs immediately but its intensity is variable and may be mild or absent. If 
the patient has not seen the reptile, which is the case in approximately seventy per cent of 
cases, the bite may be mistaken for a puncture or a bum caused by a plant. The pain may 
disappear in minutes and sometimes indefinitely but can persist for a variable period. 
1.4.3.5.1.3 (}e<lema 
Oedema is the most reliable SIgn of local envenomation, because it occurs early and 
progresses during the first hours, when general features have not yet developed. Indeed 
envenomation is practically ruled out in its absence. It usually appears within minutes after 
the bite but, exceptionally, may be delayed up to 12 hours following general 
symptomatology. The oedema becomes highly painful on palpation and it extends within 36-
72 hours. It may last for weeks and it may produce an inability to use the affected limb, for 
several months. An evaluation of the rapidity of development, extension and duration of the 
oedema will give an idea of the severity of the envenomation. 
1.4.3.5.2 General signs and symptoms 
General symptomatology varies in intensity. It may be absent in mild envenomations; in 
severe cases, however, it may appear immediately or within a few hours. Gastrointestinal 
and cardiovascular manifestations with extracellular dehydration are the most frequent 
features. Neurological, respiratory, renal and haematological (haemolysis and impairment of 
coagulation) manifestations are less frequent. 
1.4.3.5.3 Complications 
The need for amputation of the affected limb is infrequent in cases of V.latastei bite, 
although it is aggravated by the inadequate maintenance of tourniquets. 
1.4.3.6 Treatment 
Gonzalez (1991) has reported that out of 1,500-2000 bites per year in Spain between 1980 
and 1987 (eighty percent of which are V.latastei bites) antivenom therapy was used in 
approximately fifty per cent of cases, with the remaining cases being successfully managed 
symptomatically. Antivenom was efficacious in restoring blood coagulation and resolving 
systemic symptoms. Gonzalez (1991) employed anti venoms from Pasteur and Lelong 
(France), Zagreb (Yugoslavia), Behringwerke (Germany), and Slavo (Italy). The best results 
were obtained with those from Zagreb and Behringwerke. Allergic reactions, including early 
anaphylactoid reactions and late (serum sickness) reactions, have been reported following 
administration of all anti venoms with the Behringwerke anti venom inducing mild reactions 
in 16 of his patients. 
CHAPTER 2: 
IMMUNOLOGICAL METHODS FOR THE ASSESSMENT OF TOTAL AND 
SPECIFIC ANTIBODY CONCENTRATIONS 
2.1 The development and application of a specific fluoroimmunoassay for chicken 
immunoglobulin Y 
2.1.1 Background 
Since Williams in 1962 established that chicken egg yolk was a useful source of antibodies, 
investigators have used these antibodies for both diagnostic (Polson et al. 1980; Schade et 
al. 1991) and therapeutic applications (Akita et al. 1992, 1993; Almeida et al. 1998). This 
has stimulated researchers to attempt to develop extraction and purification methods that 
are simple, rapid, easily scaled up and which preserve the activity of the IgY. 
In the past investigators employed non-labelled immunoassays to monitor IgY recoveries 
(Mclaren et al. 1994). However these methods are time consuming, require technical 
expertise to produce precise results and are dependent upon the molecular state of the 
antigen under study. More recently a one site (Losonczy et al. 1999) and a two site (Fischer 
and Hlinak, 1996) immunoenzymometric assay (ELISA) with a colorimetric end point 
were developed. However, such assays demand careful attention to factors such as 
temperature and timing. 
We have developed a solid-phase fluoroimmunoassay for the quantification of IgY to 
compare the various extraction/purification methods with respect to IgY recovery. 
2.1.2 Materials 
Fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) isomer I and chicken immunoglobulin (lgY) were 
obtained from Sigma~ ovine anti-chicken IgY serum (Batches 1013 and 1014) and an ovine 
anti-snake venom serum to act as a control (NSB) from MicroPharm Ltd~ cyanogen 
bromide activated(CNBR) 4 Fast Flow Sepharose and Sephacryl S-I00 from Amersham 
Pharmacia Biotech~ Sartocon Micro with a 30kDa pore size membrane from Sartorius~ 
ChromPure ovine and equine IgG from Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, Inc; and 
chicken eggs (medium/class A) from Lion. All other chemicals were from Sigma. 
2.1.3 Methods 
2.1.3.1 Preparation of fluorescein-labelled chicken IgY 
Chicken IgY (Molecular Weight = 180 KDa) and FITC (Molecular Weight = 389 Da) were 
reacted in a bicarbonate buffer (Pourfarzaneh et al.1981) overnight at a molar ratio of 1: 3 
by adding ImL of IgY (l6g1L) to ImL of FITC (0. 12glL). FlTC-IgY was purified from 
unconjugated FlTC by collecting ImL fractions from a 1.5cm x 30cm column of Sephacryl 
S-I00 eluted with bicarbonate buffer. The fluorescein-labelled IgY was quantitated by 
assuming that all the IgY was coupled to FITC. Thus 16gIL was diluted by a factor of two 
when reacted with FITC to give 8gIL and ImL (Smg) of this solution was loaded on to the 
Sephacryl S-100 column and collected in 2mL to give a final concentration of 4glL. 
2.1.3.2 Preparation of antibody:Sepharose solid phase 
Ovine anti-chicken IgY serum and the non-specific serum (NSB) were coupled to CNBr 
activated 4 Fast Flow Sepharose following the manufacturer's instructions. Thus Ig of 
CNBr activated Sepharose, which gives about 3.5mL final gel volume, was washed, 
reswollen using lmM HCl (200mUg), centrifuged at 3,500xg for 5 minutes at 20C and the 
supernatant discarded with each wash and swell cycle. A total of O.5mL, ImL and 2mL of 
serum batches 1013 and 1014 and of NSB serum were coupled respectively per gram of 
Sepharose. A sodium sulphate fractionation (18% (w/v)) with two washes was carried out on 
each of these serum batches to obtain partially purified IgG and 0.5mL, ImL and 2mL 
sulphate fractions obtained from the serum batches (1013 and 1014) were coupled per gram of 
Sepharose. In addition 0.05mL, O.lmL and 0.25mL of serum batch 1013 and of NSB serum 
were coupled respectively per gram of Sepharose. Each volume of serum or sodium sulphate 
fraction was diluted 1:2 in bicarbonate buffer (O.1M, pH 8.3) prior to coupling. End-over-end 
mixing was continued overnight at 4C. and the remaining active groups blocked with 1M 
ethanolamine for 2hr at room temperature. Excess protein and blocking agent were washed 
away employing alternate low (acetate buffer, O.IM, pH4, containing O.5M NaCl) and high 
(bicarbonate buffer, O.1M, pH 8.3, containing O.5M NaCI) pH cycles. Finally the protein-
Sepharose conjugates were resuspended in twice their original volume of bicarbonate buffer 
(O.IM,pH 8.3) and stored at 4C. ready for use. The coupling efficiency for each protein-
Sepharose conjugate was calculated by carrying out an absorbance (280nm) reading of the 
starting material to be coupled and of the material remaining in the supernatent after coupling 
and calculating the percentage of the latter. 
2.1.3.3 Anti-IgY dilution curves 
Principles of dilution curves 
Labelled ligand (fluorescein-labelled IgY in this example) assays involve two basic 
experimental procedures - antibody dilution curves and standard curves. The antibody 
dilution curve involves the incubation of a fixed amount of tracer ligand with different 
concentrations of the antibody; for example, serial doubling dilutions of an antiserum. 
Following incubation the distribution of the tracer in the bound and free fractions is 
ascertained. Given a suitable set of reagents, the construction of the dilution curve is the 
first step in setting up a binding assay system, since the result may determine the amount of 
antibody for use in a standard curve. 
Using the solid phases described above, doubling dilutions of the anti-IgY solid-phase from 
approximately 17mg to O.03mg of Sepharose gel were made in borate buffer (4.8gIL di-
sodium tetraborate, pH 9, containing lmUL Triton X-IOO). To lOOJlL of each dilution was 
added 50JlL borate buffer and 200JlL of fluorescein-labelled chicken IgY (1.6Jlg IgY). The 
tubes were incubated for 30min at room temperature while mixing on a mechanical shaker. 
Volumes were made up to ImL by addition of borate buffer and separation of the unbound 
fraction achieved by centrifugation for 5 minutes at 3,500rpm and 4C, followed by 
aspiration of the supernatant. The bound fraction was eluted with 1.5mL of elution reagent 
(O.1M sodium hydroxide, containing ImLlL Triton X-IOO) for 10min at room temperature 
on a mechanical shaker and then centrifuged for S minutes at 3,SOOrpm and 4C. 
Fluorescence intensities of the supernates were determined using a Perkin-Elmer LS-20 
filter fluorimeter. 
2.1.3.4 Standard curves 
Principles of standard curves 
The standard curve involves the incubation of fixed amounts of tracer ligand (fluorescein 
labelled IgY in this example) and antibody (determined from the dilution curve) with 
different concentrations of unlabelled ligand. When the sample is substituted for the 
standard, and using the same fixed concentrations of antibody and tracer, the value 
determined for the distribution of bound and free phases will be equivalent to some value 
on the horizontal scale of the standard curve. This value can be read by simple 
extrapolation. The standard curve is the basic requirement for quantitation of the ligand in 
unknown samples. 
Protein-Sepharose conjugates were made with O.SmL/g and O.osmUg for serum batch 1013 
and O.smUg for serum batch 1014. 
A stock solution of chicken IgY was prepared using Sigma chicken IgY in saline (150mM 
NaCl) and determining the protein concentration by absorbance at 280nm with an 
extinction coefficient of 1.4 (lgIL solution, lcm path length). The IgY standards (doubling 
dilutions of a 1 gIL solution with a final standard concentration of 0.002g1L) were prepared 
by appropriately diluting the stock solution in borate buffer. To duplicate tubes containing 
SOJlL of each standard was added 200JlL (1.6Jlg IgY) of fluorescein-labelled IgY, followed 
by lOOJlL (2mg of O.SmL serum per gram (batchesl013 and 1014) and 10mg of 0.05mL 
serum per gram of Sepharose solid phase (batchl013)) of the anti-IgY sepharose solid-
phase in borate buffer. Incubation, separation and fluorescence measurements were carried 
out as described above. 
2.1.3.5 Precision 
The precision profiles were constructed for standard curves employing O.SmL and O.OSmL 
of serum (batch 1013) per gram of Sepharose solid phase (2mg and 10mg respectively of 
solid phase). The mean and standard deviation for ten replicates were used to calculate the 
coefficient of variation, which was plotted against the standard concentration. 
All further standard curves were prepared using 10mg of solid phase prepared with O.OSmL 
of serum batch1013 per gram. 
2.1.3.6 Incubation time 
Standard curves were compared using incubation times of 30, 60, 120, 240 minutes and 
overnight. 
All further standard curves were incubated for 120 minutes at room temperature. 
2.1.3.7 Elution time 
Standard curves were compared using immediate, 10 and 20 minute elution times. 
2.1.3.8 IgY recovery 
The removal of lipoproteins from chicken egg yolk was carried out using five different 
methods: PEG (Polson et al.1980), chloroform (Polson et al.1990), dextran sulphate 
(Jensenius et al. 1981), freezing and thawing (Jensenius et al. 1981) and caprylic acid 
(McLaren et al. 1994). These methods will be described in detail later in the project. 
Samples produced by each method and chicken serum samples were assessed for their IgY 
content as above. Each sample was then diluted in assay buffer to give IgY concentrations 
close to 4mglL. Exogenous chicken IgY (Sigma) was added to each sample to give a final 
concentration of S6mgIL following which the samples were reassayed. 
2.1.3.9 Parallelism 
Samples produced by each of the lipoprotein removal methods were diluted serially in 
assay buffer and the resulting curves compared with those of the standards. 
2.1.3.10 Cross-reactivity with equine and ovine IgG 
The cross reactivity of IgY from chickens was compared with that of ovine and of equine 
IgG. It was defined as the concentration of chicken IgY that produces 50% tracer bound, 
divided by the concentration of cross-reactant required to produce 50% binding. 
2.1.3.11 Sensitivity 
The sensitivity was calculated from ten replicates of the zero concentration of chicken IgY. 
The standard deviation of the signals from these replicates was used to estimate the 
minimal detectable concentration giving a 95% confidence level. 
2.1.3.12 Assay application 
The standard curve was used to estimate total Ig Y serum concentrations in immunized 
hens. 
2.1.4 Results 
2.1.4.1 Preparation of fluorescein-labelled chicken IgY 
The eluted peak corresponds to labelled chicken IgY. 
2.1.4.2 Anti-IgY dilution curves 
Ovine anti-IgY sera from two different sheep were used to prepare antibody:Sepharose solid 
phases (Figure 2.1 and 2.2) and assessed by dilution curve. The purified IgG from serum 
sample 1013 was also evaluated (Figure 2.3). There was no significant difference between the 
dilution curves for the two different sheep serum samples and no advantage gained by using 
sodium sulphate-precipitated IgG. 
Based on the antibody dilution curves, approximately 10mg of Sepharose particles were 
chosen for the construction of the standard curve, which resulted in approximately 70% of 
the labelled IgY being bound in the absence of unlabelled IgY. 
(lJ 60 
g> 50 
0... ?D 
100 10 0.1 0.01 
Mass of Sepharose Partlcles(mg) 
(a) 0.5mL serum per gram of Sepharose. 
"  70 
ID 50 
 :r 50 
A. 20 
o~~~~~~~~~~ 
100 10 1 0.1 0.01 
"  70 
CD 80 
 ' 50 
~a .. ot Sepharole Particlellmg) 
(b) 1 mL serum per gram of Sepharose. 
it 30 
A. 20 
1~t-~~~~::~~~~~~ 
100 10 1 0.1 0.01 
Mil. ot S,pharo., Particl .. lmgl 
(c) 2mL serum per gram of Sepharose. 
Figure 2.1 Assessment of the antihody:Sepharose solid phases prepared 
with serum batch 1013. Dilution curve(o), NSB (D). 
g> 50 
a; 30 
0... 20 
o k",-,.---r---,rTTTT~ ~ , I'"'''' I " "I" , -, 
100 10 0.1 0.01 
Mass of Sepharose Particles(mg) 
(a) 0.5mL serum per gram of Sepharose. 
III 110 
:: 50 .. 
D.. 20 
100 10 0.1 0.01 
ID 110 
:: 50 
'C 40  u 
D.. 20 
Ma.. of Sepharolt Particlel(mg) 
(b) 1 mL serum per gram of Sepharose. 
o~~--~~::~~~~ 
100 10 1 0.1 0.01 
Ma.. of Sepharole Particlel(mg) 
(c) 2mL serum per gram of Sepharose. 
Figure 2.2 Assessment of the antibody Sepharose solid phases prepared 
with serum batch 1014. Dilution curve(o), NSB (0). 
100 10 1 0.1 0.01 
MI .. of Saphlro.a Plrticla.(mgl 
(a) O.SmL sodium sulphate fraction per gram of Sepharose. 
100 10 1 0.1 0.01 
"  70 
CD 80 
 : 50 ... 
0.. 20 
MI .. of Saphlro .. Plrticle.lmgl 
(b) 1 mL sodium sulphate fraction per gram of Sepharose. 
o~~~~~~~~~~ 
100 10 1 0.1 0.01 
MI" of Sephlro .. Plrticle.(mg) 
(c) 2mL sodium sulphate fraction per gram of Sepharose. 
Figure 2.3 Assessment of the antibody:Sepharose solid phases prepared 
with sodium sulphate fraction of serum batch 1013. 
Dilution curve( 0). NSB (0). 
2.1.4.3 Standard curves 
The standard curves covered a range of IgY concentrations from approximately lOmglL to 
2000mglL (Figure 2.4 a and b). 
2.1.4.4 Precision 
The within assay coefficient of variation (%CV=standard deviation/mean x 100) calculated 
from the results of ten replicates for each standard was less than 10% covering the range of 
values from 30mg/L to 800mg/L (Figure 2.5 b) for a standard curve constructed with 10mg 
of solid phase. 
2.1.4.5 Incubation and elution times for standard curve 
Incubation for 2hrs (Figure 2.6a) and elution for 10 minutes (Figure2.6b) was satisfactory. 
2.1.4.6 Analytical recovery 
Recoveries of IgY, when added to give exogenous IgY concentrations of 56mg/L in yolk 
extracts prepared by freezing and thawing, dextran sulphate, caprylic acid, chloroform and 
PEG lipoprotein were 98%, 112%,97%,97% and 98% respectively. For chicken serum the 
recovery was 96%. 
2.1.4.7 Parallelism 
When diluted serially in assay buffer, yolk extracts obtained by caprylic acid, dextran 
sulphate, chloroform, freezing and thawing and polyethylene glycol gave curves paralleling 
those of the standards (Figure 2.7a). A chicken serum sample diluted serially in assay 
buffer also gave a curve with values paralleling those of the standards (Figure 2.7b). 
2.1.4.8 Cross-reactivity with ovine and equine IgG's 
When tested at a concentration of Ig1l there was no detectable immunoreactivity (Figure 
2.8). 
2.1.4.9 Sensitivity 
Sensitivity was calculated from the mean signal of ten replicates of the zero concentration 
for IgY and the standard deviation. The mean minus two standard deviations was used to 
::I .g 20 
::I .g 30 
10 100 1000 10' 
IgY Concentration(mg/L) 
(a) 2mg of solid phase prepared with 0.5mL serum (batch 1013) per gram 
of Sepahrose. 
10 100 1000 
IgY Concentration(mg/L) 
(b) 10mg of solid phase prepared with 0.05mL serum (batch 1013) per 
gram of Sepahrose. 
Figure 2.4 Standard curves for chicken IgY in serum (0). 
10 100 1000 
IgY Concentration (mg/L) 
(a) 2mg of solid phase prepared with 0.5mL serum (batch 1013) per gram 
of Sepharose. 
o 10 ----- ----------------------
10 100 1000 
IgY Concentration(mg/L) 
(b) 10mg of solid phase prepared with 0.05mL serum (batch 1013) per 
gram of Sepharose. 
Figure 2.5 Within assay percentage coefficients of variation were 
calculated from the results of ten replicates for each 
standard. 
o 30 m 
10 100 1000 
IgY Concentration(mg/L) 
(a) Incubation time in minutes: 30min (0), 60min (D), 120min (~), 240min 
(V) and overnight (~). 
o 30 m 
10 100 1000 
IgY Concentration(mg/L) 
(b) Elution time in minutes: Immediate (0), 10min (D) and 20min (~). 
Figure 2.6 Incubation and elution studies 
-g 50 
04-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
o 40 m 
10 100 1000 10" 
IgY Concentration (mg/L) 
(a) Samples produced from five lipoprotein removal methods: Caprylic 
acid(.), chloroform(_), polyethylene glycol(.), dextran sulphate(T), 
and freezing and thawing( *) . 
O+-~~~.-~~~~~~~~~~ 
10 lOa 1000 10" 
IgY Concentration (mg/L) 
(b) Chicken serum sample(_). 
Figure 2.7 Samples, all serially diluted in assay buffer, and the 
resulting curves compared against that of the standards ( 0). 
C/) 50 
.g 30 
10 100 1000 
IgY Concentration (mg/L) 
Figure 2.8 Cross reactivity of chicken serum IgY (0) compared with ovine 
IgG(_) and equine IgG(.i.). 
-...J 20 -Q "E' 
';::; 15 
III ... ... 
Ie ., 
u 10 c: 
Figure 2.9 Application of the IgY immunoassay to estimate total 
serum Ig Y concentrations in immunised hens. 
Preimmune and 22 week serum samples in hens (n=3) 
immunised with snake venom:adjuvant emulsion 
estimate the minimal detectable concentration as15mgIL . 
2.1.4.10 Assay application 
There was no major difference in IgY serum concentrations between preimmune and 22 
week immunised hens for chicken groups (n=3) immunised with low and medium venom 
doses. There may be a difference, albeit small, for chickens immunised with the high 
venom dose (Figure 2.9). 
2.1.5 Discussion 
Dilution curves of two ovine anti IgY sera were similar with regards to non-specific and 
maximum binding and specific antibody titre. No advantage was gained by purifying the 
ovine immunoglobulins prior to use. Standard curves constructed using 2mg of solid phase 
prepared by coupling 2mL of each serum per gram of solid phase were also similar. Serum 
batch 1013 was chosen for further work because larger stocks were available. The 
precision profile using 0.5mL of antisera per gram of Sepharose (Figure 2.5) was 
acceptable (less than 10%) only over a narrow range. This was attributed to the 
unintentional loss of some particles during aspiration and it was decided to increase the 
mass of solid phase used without altering the volume of the reactants. This was achieved by 
coupling only 0.05mL serum per gram of solid phase and using 10mg of solid phase (five 
times that used previously). The coefficient of variation was in the acceptable range (of less 
than 10%) over a wider range which extended from approximately 20 to 800mg/L. 
With the small numbers of hens studied there was no significant difference in total IgY 
serum concentrations before and after a 22 week course of immunisation of hens with low 
and medium venom doses. There might be some difference albeit small in the chicken 
group immunized with the high venom dose. 
The fluoroimmunoassay described above offers several advantages. These include sensitivity 
and specificity sufficient for all analytical tasks under consideration and results are obtained 
on the same day with good precision. 
2.2 Simple assessment methods: Characterisation of a small scale affinity assay for 
determining specific antibody concentrations 
2.2.1 Background 
Since Theakston et aI. (1977) described the use of the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA) to detect venom antigen and antibody in snakebite patients, this technique has 
been applied widely to the study of snake bite and assessment of anti venoms. 
Ho et aI. (1986) argued that the ELISA technique, as described by Theakston et al. (1977), 
had been applied (Coulter et al. 1980; Theakston et al. 1981 a, b) without properly defining 
important parameters such as sensitivity and specificity based upon studying non-specific 
and cross reactivity. As a result, many of the published earlier findings and conclusions 
were open to question. They concluded that venom antibody detection ELlS As were at a 
much less satisfactory stage of development than those for antigen and that their role in 
screening of anti venoms was doubtful unless defined toxic venom components were used 
as antigen. 
In our laboratory, we employ manual ELISA in the screening of the humoral immune 
response in different host animals, using the host's pre-immunisation sample as its own 
control, thus following one of Ho et al. (1986) recommendations. Cross reactivity is not a 
problem in this application but we have encountered another difficulty with ELISA not 
mentioned by Ho et al. (1986), namely marked imprecision. This may be due to the fact 
that ELISA has multiple steps and the reactants involved in each step may not come to 
equilibrium before moving on to the next step. Such assays are also extremely sensitive to 
temperature fluctuations. Despite this, our ELISA method has been useful in screening 
large numbers of animals being immunised with venoms. 
The aim of this work is to characterise a procedure based on small scale affinity 
chromatography as an alternative to the ELISA method currently in use. The method is 
simpler. more precise and enables the actual physical quantities of the therapeutic 
antibodies in host animals to be determined in gIL (as opposed to the 50% binding titre 
results obtained from ELISA). It also requires less expensive equipment so providing a 
simple, inexpensive method suitable for use in developing countries. Such a procedure was 
described by Smith et al. (1992), but no development and optimisation studies were 
included. Studies with V.latastei venom are used as a model. 
2.2.2 Materials 
Cyanogen bromide activated 4 Fast Flow Sepharose (CNBr) was obtained from Amersham 
Pharmacia Biotech; V. latastei venom was donated by Dr. Delfin Gonzalez, Spain and 
ovine donor sera by MicroPharm Ltd. Glass columns (l x IOcm) were from BioRad and all 
other chemicals from Sigma. 
2.2.3 Methods 
2.2.3.1 Preparation of venom:Sepharose solid phase 
One gram of CNBR activated 4 Fast How Sepharose (which gives about 3.5mL final gel 
volume) was washed and reswollen using ImM HCI (200mUg), and centrifuged at 3,500xg 
for 5 minutes at 200C. This was repeated and the supernatant discarded with each wash and 
swell cycle. V. latastei venom was then coupled to the sepharose following the manufacturer's 
instructions. 
A 2gIL venom solution was prepared in bicarbonate buffer (O.lM, pHS.3). The coupling 
reactions were carried out by incubating 0.5mL, 2.5mL and 5mL (lmg, 5mg and 10mg) 
respectively of the venom solution with the activated Sepharose while 5mL of bicarbonate 
buffer was incubated with Sepharose to prepare a control matrix. 
End-over-end mixing was continued overnight at 4C, and the remaining active groups 
blocked with 1M ethanolamine for 2hr at room temperature. Excess protein and blocking 
agent were washed away alternately with acetate buffer (0. 1M, pH4 containing 0.5M NaCl) 
and bicarbonate buffer (O.IM, pHS.3 containing 0.5M NaCI). Finally the venom:Sepharose 
conjugates were resuspended in twice their original volume of phosphate buffered saline 
(PBS), poured into a glass column (lxlOcm) and stored at 4C ready for use. The coupling 
efficiency for each venom:Sepharose conjugate was calculated by reading the absorbance 
(280nm) of the starting material to be coupled and of the material remaining in the 
supernatant after coupling. 
A total of Img, Smg and lOmg of V. latastei venom were coupled in triplicate per gram of 
Sepharose. In addition, ten replicates of Smg of V. latastei venom were coupled per gram 
of Sepharose. 
2.2.3.2 Small-scale affinity purification (SSAP) 
All procedures were performed at ambient room temperature as described below, unless 
otherwise stated. 
The SSAP columns were removed from the refrigerator, placed in a suitable rack and 
allowed to equilibrate to room temperature and then washed with 2SmL of washing buffer 
(lOmM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.S, containing 9gIL sodium chloride). Each column 
was allowed to drain until there was no liquid on top of the venom:Sepharose matrix. 
All antiserum samples were centrifuged (20 minutes, 3S00rpm, 2S0C) before typically 
adding 0.5mL to the SSAP column. Assuming that the bed volume of the column was 
3.5mL, sufficient washing buffer was added to make the total volume in each column up to 
lOmL. Each column was capped and the contents mixed on an end-over-end mixer for Ih at 
room temperature. The columns were returned to the rack, the gel matrix allowed to settle, 
and they were then drained until there was no liquid on top of the matrix. Next each 
column was washed with 25mL of washing buffer and allowed to drain until there was no 
liquid on top of the matrix. 
Finally 20mL of elution buffer (lOOmM glycinelHCL, pH 2.5) (This elution buffer has 
been used in-house satisfactorily for other applications) was applied to each column to elute 
the bound specific antibodies and the entire eluate (20mL) was collected and set aside for 
optical density measurement. After use, each column was washed with 25mL of washing 
buffer and then stored at 2 - 8C. 
Using a UV spectrophotometer and cuvettes with lcm path length, the optical density (OD) 
at 280nm of each column eluate was measured using elution buffer to blank the 
spectrophotometer. The concentration of specific antibodies in the antiserum sample was 
calculated using the following equation: 
Concentration in sample = (ODIE) x (20N). 
Where E is the extinction coefficient for ovine IgG (1.5) (Curd et a1. (1971)) and V is the 
volume of antiserum sample added to the affinity column. 
2.2.3.3 Capacity determination of venom:Sepharose column matrices 
A total of 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, 4, and 8mL of ovine V. latastei antisera containing high 
concentrations of specific antibodies and of donor sera respectively were added to each 
previously prepared Sepharose matrix coupled with 0, 1, 5 and 10mg of V. latastei venom 
per gram of Sepharose. The serum samples were assessed following the SSAP procedure 
described above. 
2.2.3.4 Between and within column variation of replicate matrices 
2.2.3.4.1 Between column variation 
0.5mL of V. latastei antisera was added to each matrix and the serum samples assessed 
following the SSAP procedure described elsewhere (See section 2.2.3.2 ,p.70). 
2.2.3.4.2 Within column variation 
Seventy four SSAP procedures have been carried out on the same matrix with the addition 
of O.SmL of V. latastei antisera. A SSAP procedure with addition of O.5mL donor serum 
was carried out after the first SSAP with V. latastei antisera and this was repeated after the 
seventy-fourth procedure in order to monitor non-specific binding (NSB). 
2.2.3.5 Identity of eluate 
Six SSAP procedures were carried out with the addition of 0.5rnL of V. latastei antisera. 
The eluate was collected in 1 mL x 20 fractions for each procedure and an optical density 
measurement carried out for each ImL fraction. The fractions for each procedure (typically 
3mL) contributing to approximately seventy five per cent of the total optical density were 
pooled and dialysed over night in 10L washing buffer(10mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 
7.5, containing 9gIL sodium chloride). The dialysed samples were then assessed by SDS-
PAGE as described elsewhere (See section 3.1.3.3.3, p87). 
2.2.3.6 Analytical recovery 
The dialysed samples from the six runs produced in the "Identity of eluate" study were 
pooled and their optical density (280nm) estimated. Two mL of sample (concentration x 
gIL specific IgG) was added to 2mL of donor serum and assuming the bed column volume 
was 3.5mL, 2.5mL washing buffer was added to make the total volume in each column up 
to 10mL. The samples were then processed following the SSAP described elsewhere (See 
section 2.2.3.2 ,p.70). This experiment was carried out in triplicate. The analytical recovery 
(AR) was calculated using the following equation: 
AR = ((Total measured (mg) - Img of NSB)ffotal added (mg)) x 100. 
2.2.3.7 Incubation time 
SSAP procedures were compared using incubation times of 0, 15,30,60, 120,240 min and 
overnight. 
2.2.3.8 Wash volume 
SSAP procedures were compared using wash volumes of 12.5, 25, 50 and lOOmL.The 
experiments were repeated with donor serum. 
2.2.3.9 Assay application 
All SSAP procedures henceforth were carried out employing a one hour incubation time at 
room temperature and a 25mL wash volume. 
The SSAP procedure was used to estimate the dose response of sheep immunized with 
progressively lower doses of venom of V. latastei (Table 2.1) at four week intervals over 
forty four weeks by MicroPharm Ltd. The sheep were sampled two weeks after every 
immunisation. 
2.2.4 Results 
2.2.4.1 Coupling efficiency 
This was calculated as being greater than 80% for all venom:Sepharose conjugates prepared. 
2.2.4.2 Capacity determination 
The 1mg/g matrix was sufficient for volume loads of specific antisera of 0.25 and 
0.5mL.Thereafter its capacity for specific antibodies began to be saturated. The 5mg/g and 
10mg/g matrix were suffIcient for volume loads of up to1mL but began to be saturated when 
larger volumes were added. All matrices inclusive of the Omglg demonstrated non-specific 
binding corresponding to a protein concentration in the sample (employing extinction 
coefficient 1.5) of 19IL or less (Figure 2.10a). All SSAP procedures henceforth were carried 
out using a 5mg/g Sepharose column matrix with a O.5mL serum sample load. 
2.2.4.3 Between column variation 
The coefficient of variation (%CV =standard deviation/mean x 1(0) of the concentration in 
the sample (gIL) as calculated from ten replicates was less than 5% (Figure 2.11a). The non-
specific binding characteristics of the solid phase calculated from ten replicates with coupled 
venom and donor serum was 1 gIL or less (Figure 2.11 b). 
2.2.4.4 Within column variation 
The coefficient of variation from seventy four replicates was approximately 6% (Figure 
2.11c). There was little or no evidence of decline in result with time. However, these 
studies will be extended to assess column useful lifetime over one hundred runs. 
2.2.4.5 Identity of eluate 
Immunogen Dose (mg) per sheep 
Immunisation Weeks post Group Group Group Group Group Group Group 
Sample primary I II III IV V VI VII 
immunisation (6 sheep) (6 sheep) (6 sheep) (6 sheep) (3 sheep) (3 sheep) (3 sheep) 
Primary 0 0.015625 0.03125 0.0625 0.125 0.25 0.5 0.5 
immunisation 
Re- 4 0.015625 0.03125 0.0625 0.l25 0.25 1 1 
immunisation 
Sample 6 
Re- 8 0.015625 0.03125 0.0625 0.125 0.25 1 2 
immunisation 
Sample 10 
Re- 12 0.015625 0.03125 0.0625 0.125 0.25 1 4 
immunisation 
Sample 14 
Re- 16 0.015625 0.03125 0.0625 0.125 0.25 1 4 
immunisation 
Sample 18 
Re- 20 0.015625 0.03125 0.0625 0.125 0.25 1 4 
immunisation 
Sample 22 
Re- 24 0.015625 0.03125 0.0625 0.125 0.25 1 4 
immunisation 
Sample 26 
Re- 28 0.015625 0.03125 0.0625 0.125 0.25 1 4 
immunisation 
Sample 30 
Re- 32 0.015625 0.03125 0.0625 0.125 0.25 1 4 
immunisation 
Sample 34 
Re- 36 0.015625 0.03125 0.0625 0.125 0.25 1 4 
immunisation 
Sample 38 
Re- 40 0.015625 0.03125 0.0625 0.125 0.25 1 4 
immunisation 
Sample 42 
Re- 44 0.015625 0.03125 0.0625 0.125 0.25 1 4 
immunisation 
Sample 46 
Table 2.1 Immunisation protocol for sheep dose response study 
"1::1 
G) -:3 
0 2 4 6 8 
Serum volume added(ml) 
(a) Omg/g ( . ),lmg/g (e ), 5mg/g (. ),lOmg/g C~ ) assessments with specific 
antisera. All donor serum assessments of matrices 1,5, and lOmg/g are 
also represented by the symbol( . ). 
E E E E E E M 
20SkDa 
116kDa 
97kDa 
84kDa 
66kDa 
55kDa 
45kDa 
36kDa 
(b) Six replicate eluates (E) and molecular weight markers. 
Figure 2.10 Capacity determination of venom-coupled Sepharose matrices(a) 
and eluate identity assessment(b). 
7 8 9 10 
Column number 
(a) Between column variation with specific antisera 
20.9 I-
'" U 0.8 
E 0.7 .. 
.. 0.6 ,--
.- 0.5 
.g 0.4 .. 
::; 0.3 
~ 0.2 
<3 0.1 
O ~~~,L~~~~~~~~ 
Column number 
(b) Between column variation with donor serum 
- 14 =a, - 12 Q) 
c: 6 0 
4 ... -c: 
2 Co) 
Run number 1 - 74 
(c) Within column variation with specific antisera 
Figure 2.11 A sessment of between and within column variation of replicate matrices 
SDS-PAGE assessment of the eluate of replicate SSAP procedures resulted in a dominant 
single band corresponding to the molecular weight of IgG (Figure 2.10(b)). 
2.2.4.6 Analytical recovery 
The mean recovery of specific IgG when added to donor serum was 74%. 
2.2.4.7 Incubation time 
An incubation time of 30 to 60 min at room temperature was satisfactory (Figure 2.12(a)). 
2.2.4.8 Wash volume 
Approximately seven column volumes (2SmL) was found to be satisfactory (Figure 2.12 
(b) and (c)). 
2.2.4.9 Assay application 
After the first immunisation of O.Smg of venom per sheep in group seven the mean specific 
antibody concentrations were estimated at 7 gIL. This concentration increased with two 
subsequent immunisations of 1 and 2mg of venom to means of 10g/L (Figure 2.l3(a)). A 
further eight consecutive immunisations with 4mg of venom resulted in a mean of 12g1L. 
Overall, the specific antibody concentrations increase with subsequent dosing and then 
reach a maximum and plateau in sheep in all venom dose groups (Figure 2.13(b)). 
2.2.5 Discussion 
The venom:Sepharose solid phase prepared with Smg of venom per gram of Sepharose was 
considered the most satisfactory for the analytical tasks under consideration and enabled an 
economical use of the venom. No advantage was gained from using a solid phase coupled 
with 10mg of venom. Furthennore, there may be a limit to the amount of specific 
antibodies that can bind to the solid phase due to steric hindrance or interference; thus 
increasing the amount of coupled venom may not result in more antibody binding. This 
':j -01 10 .-
~ 8 .. 
. 5 8 
r- r- r- r-
o 15 30 tlO 120 2"0 720 
Incubation tim.(min.) 
(a) Incubation time comparison 
Q Co. 
e 8  .. 
.S e c 
0 S -.:  .. :I 
c 3  u 
12.5 25 50 100 
Wash Voume(mll 
(b) Wash volume comparison with specific antisera 
cao.s .. 
.S 0.4 
c : O.l 
 i 0.2 
l5 0.1 
2S so 
Wllh Volum,lml) 
(c) Wash volume comparison with donor antisera 
Figure 2.12 Assessment of incubation time and wash volume 
. 15 
III .., 
.5 10 
.2 r: .. III ... .. 
0 ,-, 
0 II 10 ,. 18 22 26 30 34 38 42 46 
Week Number 
(a) Example of specific antibody concentrations in group VII sheep 
0 .; .. .. .. 
Group Number 
6 10 14 18 22 26 30 34 38 42 48 
Week Number 
(b) Summary of mean specific antibody concentrations in all dose groups 
Figure 2.13 Assessment of specific antibody concentrations over time 
observation needs further investigation. 
The non-specific binding characteristics of the solid phase with and without coupled venom 
were similar at I gIL or less. This suggests that the Sepharose matrix was responsible for the 
observed non-specific binding and that the coupled venom even at a concentration of 
lOmg/g of Sepharose was not a contributing factor. It has to be emphasized that the value 
for non specific binding determined here assumes a worst case scenario as it is determined 
using donor serum from a sheep that was been immunised with venom. If increased 
accuracy and reliability were requirements then it may be necessary to investigate strategies 
for reducing non-specific binding, using donor serum as a model. 
Confirmation that the eluate is mainly IgG by SDS-PAGE increases confidence in the use 
of optical density at 280nm for determining the concentration of specific antibodies. 
Sheep immunized with subsequent 4mg doses of venom (group VII) produce the highest 
concentrations of specific antibodies reaching a maximum and mean plateau of 
approximately 12g1L. In view of the latter we have chosen a 4mg venom dose for future 
immunization programmes. 
Sheep in the lowest venom dose group (group I) were still able to produce specific 
antibodies with a mean plateau of 3 gIL. It will be interesting in a future study to 
investigate the concentration of specific antibodies in sheep immunised with venom doses 
lower than 16~g and include a control group of sheep immunized with adjuvant only. 
The low coefficient of variation between columns (approximately 5%) suggests that we can 
estimate the between animal variation in their capacity to produce specific antibodies to the 
venom at around 19% (results calculated from sheep in group VII). 
The SSAP procedure above offers several advantages. These include sensitivity, analytical 
recovery and longevity sufficient for all analytical tasks under consideration and results are 
obtained on the same day with good precision. 
This work illustrates how SSAP can be used for the assessment of antisera; furthermore this 
analytical technique could be employed for the assessment of processing strategies for 
antisera to produce antivenoms. 
CHAPTER 3: 
PREPARA TION OF A BROAD SPECIFICITY ANTIVENOM FOR EUROPEAN 
VIPERS FROM YOLK IgY 
3.1 Improved extraction and purification techniques for yolk 
3.1.1 Background 
Until the 1950's, preparative procedures for egg lipoprotein involved their precipitation 
from salt solutions by dilution, and extraction of the protein solution with ethyl ether to 
remove free lipid. Lea and Hawke (1952) had recognized that the solubility of the egg 
lipoproteins was seriously altered by freezing, drying and treatments that removed the 
bound fat and advised that all physical measurements be made on freshly prepared samples. 
Vandegaer (1956) pointed out that extraction with ethyl ether also changed the solubility of 
the lipoprotein fractions and recommended high-speed centrifugation rather than ether 
extraction to remove free lipid. During this period, investigators were trying to identify the 
different components of egg yolk and emphasis was placed on extraction strategies that had 
the least possible effect on samples that were going to be subject to subsequent analytical 
investigation. 
Once Williams (1962) had established yolk as a source of antibodies, researchers were 
further stimulated to investigate extraction methods that were cost efficient, simple, rapid, 
easily scaled up and preserved the function of the globulin fraction. 
Jensenius et al. (1981) pointed out that earlier published methods had limited value since 
they included extraction with organic solvents and ultracentrifugation. Subsequently, 
attempts were made to develop more efficient and convenient methods. The most 
promising of these involved precipitation of lipoprotein with polyethylene glycol (Polson 
and von Wechmar 1980), dextran sulphate (Jensenius et a1.1981) or caprylic acid (McLaren 
et al. 1994) and dilution and freeze-thawing (Svendsen et a1.1995). However it is difficult 
to compare results since the yield and purity of the isolated IgY are not always given and 
different methods were used to measure the activity of IgY. 
In order to compare these methods, a triglyceride enzymatic assay (McGowan et al.1983) 
was employed to monitor lipid removal, an immunoassay for IgY to determine yield, SDS-
PAGE to assess purity and ELISA to monitor activity. 
3.1.2 Materials 
fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) isomer I and chicken immunoglobulin (Ig Y) were from 
Sigma; ovine anti-chicken IgY and an ovine non-specific binding control (NSB) from 
MicroPharm Ltd; cyanogen bromide (CNBr) activated 4 Fast flow Sepharose from 
Amersham Pharmacia Biotech; chicken eggs (medium/class A) from Lion ( eggs from 
caged hens chosen in order to minimize between egg yolk variation ); egg yolk and serum 
from hens immunised with a mixture of European viper venoms (V. berus, V.ammodytes 
and V.aspis} from MicroPharm Ltd; chloroform and caprylic (N-Octanoic) acid from BDH; 
centrifuge tubes from Greiner Labortechnik; glass fibre prefilters from Sartorius; 
disposable cuvettes from Kartell (Part No.1941); Triglyceride Reagents A (Sigma, 337-
40A) and B (Sigma337-10B) and glycerol standard; 250mg/dL (Sigma G 1394); molecular 
weight markers from Sigma; polystyrene 96-well micro-titre plates from Nalge Nunc 
International; and horseradish peroxidase labelled sheep anti-chicken IgG from 
MicroPharm Ltd. Dextran sulphate (average molecular weight of 500,000) from Sigma. All 
other chemicals were obtained from Sigma. 
3.1.3 Methods 
3.1.3.1 Preparation of egg yolk 
The white was separated from the yolk using an egg separator taking care not to break the 
yolk. Each yolk was washed with 3 x 50mL saline and dropped into a measuring cylinder 
and its volume recorded (average 15mL). The yolks from a dozen eggs were pooled and 
half was frozen at -20oe overnight while the other half was stored at 4e until needed. All 
subsequent work was carried out using 5mL aliquots of the pool and the results scaled up to 
15mL, representing the average yolk volume. 
3.1.3.2 Purification of IgY from egg yolk 
On the basis of available knowledge purification was divided into two distinct steps namely 
lipoprotein removal (Step 1) and protein separation (Step 2). Several methods were 
compared. 
3.1.3.2.1 Caprylic acid and ammonium sulphate (McLaren et a1.1994) 
Ten mL of acetate buffer (0.06M, pH4) was added to 5mL of egg yolk and the pH adjusted 
to 4.8 by dropwise addition of 0.2M NaOH. Then 304~1 of caprylic acid per mL of yolk 
was added dropwise with vigorous mixing, which was continued for one hour followed by 
centrifugation at 2750xg for one hour at 20"C. This produced an infranatant aqueous layer, 
with the lipid mass on its surface. Thus centrifugation was carried out in plastic tubes and a 
needle was used to pierce the latter and withdraw the aqueous layer leaving the lipoprotein 
mass behind (See Figure 5.1(a) p.l40). The infranatant was filtered through a glass fibre 
filter to remove egg yolk sac debris, its pH adjusted to 7.5 with 1 M Tris pH 8 and solid 
ammonium sulphate added to a concentration of 1.75M. After stirring at 4C for one hour 
followed by centrifugation for 10 minutes at 2750xg and 25C the supernatant was 
discarded and the pellet washed by resuspending in 1.75M ammonium sulphate to a volume 
equal to that of the undiluted harvested egg yolk and recentrifuged. A second wash with 
1.75M ammonium sulphate was carried out and the washed pellet was then dissolved in 
PBS pH 7.5 to a volume equal to that of the undiluted harvested egg yolk. 
3.1.3.2.2 Chloroform and polyethylene glycol (Polson, 1990) 
Egg yolk was diluted 1:3 in 10mM phosphate buffer pH 7.5 containing O.lM NaCI and two 
volumes of chloroform added. After mixing for one hour on a roller at room temperature 
and centrifugation at 2,750xg for lhour at 20C, the supernatant was removed to a fresh 
tube and solid polyethylene glycol 6000 added to a final concentration of 12% (w/v). The 
latter was mixed for one hour on a roller at room temperature, centrifuged at 2,750xg for 1 
hour at 20C, the supernatant discarded and the pellet dissolved in PBS pH 7.5 to a volume 
equal to that of the undiluted harvested egg yolk. 
3.1.3.2.3 Dextran sulphate and sodium sulphate (Jensenius et al. 1981) 
Egg yolk was mixed thoroughly with four times its volume of saline and lOOIlL of a 10% 
(w/v) dextran sulphate solution and 300IlL of 1M calcium chloride added per mL of 
yolk/saline suspension. After mixing for one hour and then centrifugation at 27S0xg for 1 
hour at 200C, the supernatant was decanted, dialysed against SL of PBS pH 7.S. Solid 
sodium sulphate (20g perl OOmL) was added, mixed on a roller for half an hour at room 
temperature, centrifuged at 2750xg at 2SoC and the supernatant discarded. The precipitate 
was washed twice by resuspension in sodium sulphate (20g perlOOmL) to a volume equal 
to that of the undiluted harvested egg yolk and recentrifuged. The washed pellet was 
dissolved in PBS pH 7.S to a volume equal to that of the undiluted harvested egg yolk. 
3.1.3.2.4 Dilution, freezing and thawing and sodium sulphate (Svendsen et a1.1995) 
Egg yolk was diluted 1: lOin distilled water and the pH corrected to pH 7 using 0.1 M 
NaOH. The diluted egg yolk was frozen for 24 hours at -20C and then thawed at room 
temperature and centrifuged at 2,7S0xg for 1 hour at 4C. Solid sodium sulphate 
(20gl100mL) was added to the supernatant, mixed on a roller for half an hour at room 
temperature and centrifuged at 2750xg. The supernatant was discarded and the precipitate 
resuspended in 20gl100mL sodium sulphate to a volume equal to that of the undiluted 
harvested egg yolk and recentrifuged. Two washes with sodium sulphate were carried out. 
The washed pellet was dissolved in PBS pH 7.5 to a volume equal to that of the undiluted 
harvested egg yolk. 
3.1.3.2.5 Polyethylene glycol (PEG) (Polson et al. 1980) 
Egg yolk was diluted 1:3 in 10mM phosphate buffer pH 7.5 containing O.lM NaCl. 
Polyethylene glycol 6000 was added to obtain a final concentration of 3.5% (w/v) and, after 
mixing on a roller for one hour at room temperature, centrifuged at 2,700xg for 1 hour at 
20C. The supernatant was removed to a fresh tube and solid polyethylene glycol 6000 
added to obtain a final concentration of 12% (w/v). The latter was mixed for one hour on a 
roller at room temperature and centrifuged at 2,750xg for Ihour at 20C. The supernatant 
was discarded and the pellet dissolved in phosphate buffered saline pH 7.5 to a volume 
equal to that of the undiluted harvested egg yolk. 
3.1.3.3 Assessment 
3.1.3.3.1 Triglyceride removal 
Triglyceride (GPO-Trinder) working reagent was prepared by combining 4mL of 
Triglyceride Reagent A with ImL Reagent B and warming to 37C. The spectrophotometer 
was set at a wavelength of 540nm and the absorbance reading was set to zero with water as 
a reference. Then I.OmL of working reagent was dispensed into disposable cuvettes and 
10~1 of distilled water, standard or sample added and incubated for 5 minutes at 37C. 
The absorbance of blanks, standards and samples at 540nm was recorded against water. 
Assay principle (McGowan et al. 1983) 
Hydrolysis of triglycerides is catalyzed by lipase to produce glycerol and free fatty acids. 
The glycerol generated is then phosphorylated by adenosine 5'- triphosphate in the 
presence of glycerol kinase. Oxidation of the glycerol 3-phosphate to produce hydrogen 
peroxide is catalyzed by L-a-glycerophosphate oxidase. An intense red chromogen is 
produced by the peroxidase catalyzed coupling of 4-aminoantipyrene and sodium 2-
hydroxy-3,5-dichlorobenzenesulfonate with hydrogen peroxide. The chromogen system 
facilitates a linear response to serum triglyceride concentrations. 
3.1.3.3.2 IgY recoveries 
This was determined by a specific fluoroimmunoassay for chicken immunoglobulin Y 
described below. An antibody solid phase was prepared by covalently coupling O.05mL of 
ovine anti-chicken IgY serum per gram of Sepharose, following the manufacturer's 
instructions. Chicken IgY was labelled with RTC. A stock solution of Sigma chicken IgY 
was prepared in saline (150rnM NaCl) and the protein concentration determined by 
absorbance at 280nm with an extinction coefficient of 1.4 (lgIL solution, lcm path length, 
Sigma product information). 
IgY standards (doubling dilutions of a IglL solution) were prepared by appropriately 
diluting the stock solution in borate buffer (4.8gIL di-sodium tetraborate, pH 9, containing 
ImLIL Triton X-loo). To duplicate tubes containing 50llL of each standard was added 
200llL (1.61lg IgY) of fluorescein-labelled IgY, followed by l00IlL (lOmg) of the anti-IgY 
solid-phase in borate buffer. The tubes were incubated for 30min at room temperature 
while mixing on a mechanical shaker. Volumes were made up to 1 mL by addition of borate 
buffer and separation of the unbound fraction achieved by centrifugation for 5 minutes at 
2750xg and 4C followed by aspiration of the supernatant. Then 1.5mL of elution reagent 
(O.IM sodium hydroxide, containing ImLIL Triton X-IOO) was added and mixed for lOrnin 
at room temperature on a mechanical shaker. After centrifugation for 5 minutes at 2750xg 
at 4C the fluorescence intensities of the supernates were determined using a Perkin-Elmer 
LS-20 filter fluorimeter. 
3.1.3.3.3 Sodium dodecyl sulphate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) 
SDS-PAGE gels were prepared between two glass plates which had been thoroughly 
cleaned using distilled water and acetone. The plates were separated using Teflon spacers 
with the base of the gel sealed using a rubber seal onto which the glass plates were pressed. 
Separating gel (Table 3.1) was poured between the plates and then covered by an overlay 
solution (acetone) to ensure even setting at the acrylarnide/acetone interface. Once set, the 
overlay solution was washed off with distilled water and the stacking gel (Table 3.1) 
poured and a Teflon comb inserted at the top to form the wells. Once set, the comb was 
removed and the sample wells and upper and lower buffer chambers filled with running 
buffer (Tris 25mM, glycine 0.192M, sodium dodecyl sulphate 0.1 % w/v, pH 8.3) before 
The samples were diluted at least 1:4 with non-reducing sample buffer containing 62.5mM 
Tris-HCI (pH6.8), 2% (w/v) SDS, 10% glycerol and 0.05% (w/v) bromophenol blue for 
non-reducing conditions. The molecular weights of unknown proteins were calculated by 
running the molecular weight standards, myosin (205kDa), J3-galactosidase (l16kDa), 
phosphorylase b (97kDa), fructose-6-phosphate kinase (84kDa), albumin (66kDa), glutamic 
Dehydrogenase (55kDa), ovalbumin (45kDa), and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate 
dehydrogenase (36kDa) on the same gel and plotting a calibration curve of the Rr (distance 
moved by solute from origin divided by distance moved by solvent from origin) against 
molecular weight. 
Gels were run at a constant voltage (150V) and visualised by staining with Coomassie 
brilliant blue G 0.05% (w/v) for 1 hour before being de stained with water/acetic 
acid/methanol mixture 5: I :4 prior to drying. 
3.1.3.4 Immunisation of hens with snake venoms 
3.1.3.4.1 Immunogen preparation 
Twenty mg of each of the three European viper venoms was weighed, dissolved in 2mL of 
saline and mixed together to give a total volume of 6mL at a concentration of 10mglmL. 
The stock venom mixture was stored at -20C and from this stock the doses for each group 
in Table 3.2 were prepared. 
3.1.3.4.2 Immunisation, serum sampling and egg collecting 
This was carried out by MicroPharm Ltd. according to the schedule in Table 3.2 with three 
hens per dose group. Employing Lm. pectoral immunizations. 
3.1.3.4.3 Yolk and serum preparation for titre assessment 
Separating Gel Stacking Gel 
7.5% 10% 12% 
Water 4.8SmL 3.8SmL 3.1SmL 6.lmL 
1.SMTris-HCl,pH8.8 2.SmL 2.SmL 2.SmL Not applicable(N/A) 
O.SM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8 N/A N/A N/A 2.SmL 
10%(w/v)SDS stock lOO~L l00~ l00~ l00J1L 
AcrylamidelBis (30 I 0.8% w/v) 2.SmL 3.SmL 4.2mL l.3mL 
10% ammonium persulphate SOJ1L SOJ1L SO~ SO~ 
TEMEO S~ S~ S~ 10~ 
Table 3.1 Constituents of SOS-PAGE gels 
The white was separated from the yolk of every egg within a few days of laying and each 
yolk was then frozen in a 50mL centrifuge tube at -20C until assessed (See section 3.1.3.1, 
p.83). For assessment, the yolks were thawed at room temperature and each yolk volume 
topped up with saline to a volume of 50mL and centrifuged at 2750xg for 20 minutes at 
25C and the supernatant collected. Yolk and serum samples for the three hens in each 
group were pooled and initially diluted 1: 100. 
3.1.3.4.4 Serum titre and egg yolk assessment by ELISA 
Serum and egg yolk titres directed against European viper venoms, were determined by 
ELISA. Polystyrene 96-well micro-titre plates were coated with a solution of mixed venom 
(2mglmL in sodium carbonatelbicarbonate buffer O.IM, pH 9.6) by incubating 100~ per 
well for 2 hours at 37C. Coated plates were washed three times with 300J.lL of ELISA 
washing buffer per well(NaCI 137mM, Na2HP04 8.lmM, KCI 2.68mM, NaH2P04.2H20 
1.28mM, Thimerosal 0.247mM, Tween 0.1 %(v/v), blocked with ELISA washing buffer 
for a further 2 hours at 37C and finally washed to remove any unbound antigen. The plates 
were then incubated with 1 OOIlL of doubling dilutions of the immune serum diluted with 
ELISA washing buffer. A reference antiserum (from a pool of sera with an established 
titre) and a non-specific sheep serum were included on each plate as controls. 
All dilution curves were performed in duplicate. Plates were incubated at 37C for 1 hour, 
washed three times and then incubated with 100J.lL of donkey anti -chicken 
immunoglobulin (1:1000 dilution in ELISA washing buffer) to which had been conjugated 
horseradish peroxidase (HRP). Colour development was achieved at room temperature 
using l00J.1L of o-phenylenediamine dihydrochloride (OPD, O.lmglmL in citrate buffer, 
0.07M, pH 5.0) with hydrogen peroxide (0.02%) and stopped after 15 minutes with 50J.lL 
of 3M sulphuric acid. The optical density (492nm) was read using a Titertek Multiscan 
PLUS (MKII) plate reader and the mean of the duplicates calculated. 
Actions Venom dose 
Weeks Low dose Medium dose High dose 
(mg/Hen) (mglHen) (mglHen) 
0 Immunisation/Serum O.l 0.1 O.l 
samplinglEgg 
collecting 
4 Immunisation 0.25 0.25 0.25 
6 Serum sampling /Egg 
collecting 
8 Immunisation 0.25 0.5 1.0 
10 Serum sampling /Egg 
collecting 
12 Immunisation 0.25 0.5 1.0 
14 Serum sampling /Egg 
collecting 
16 Immunisation 0.25 0.5 1.0 
18 Serum sampling /Egg 
collecting 
20 Immunisation 0.25 0.5 1.0 
22 Serum samplinglEgg 
collecting 
Table 3.2 Immunisation protocol for hens 
Titres were determined at 50% of the background normal chicken serum corrected 
absorbance and values corrected for between assay variation using the reference antiserum. 
3.1.3.5 Caprylic acid and ammonium sulphate precipitation. Replicate extractions 
Five replicate extractions and purifications were carried out as previously described on yolk 
from eggs laid by the three hens on the low dose immunisation schedule (Table 3.2) at 22 
weeks. Fifteen egg yolks were prepared as previously described and pooled and frozen at 
-20De. The average yolk volume was 15mL. Replicate extractions were carried out using 
5mL aliquots of the thawed pooled yolk and all results scaled up to 15mL. 
3.1.3.6 Affinity purification of caprylic acid and ammonium sulphate precipitated IgY 
AI: 1: 1 mixture of V.a.ammodytes, V.b.berus and V.a.aspis venom was coupled to CNBR 
activated 4 Fast Flow Sepharose (5mglg) following the manufacturer's instructions. The 
coupling efficiency for the venom:Sepharose conjugate was calculated as described 
elsewhere (See page 70, section 2.2.3.1) and was satisfactory. 
50mL of a 17gIL solution of IgY prepared from eggs laid by three hens on the low dose 
immunisation schedule (Table 3.2) was recirculated overnight at 2mUmin. in the column 
described above. The bound material was then processed as described in section 2.2.3.2 
except that the eluted affinity purified IgY was immediately neutralized with an equal 
volume of 1 M trisodium citrate and then dialysed against a 20mM sodium chloride solution 
and finally freeze dried. From approximately 850mg of total protein loaded onto the 
affinity matrix, 8mg of specific Ig Y (1 % ) was collected and freeze dried. 
3.1.3.6.1 Assessment 
The replicate extractions were assessed for triglyceride concentrations, IgY recovery, purity 
by SDS - PAGE and activity by ELISA. The potency of the IgY was assessed before and 
after affinity purification by EDso as described in Chapter 4. 
3.1.4 Results 
3.1.4.1 Assessments 
Fresh yolk was used throughout unless otherwise stated. 
3.1.4.1.1 Triglyceride removal 
Ninety nine percent or greater of the triglycerides were removed by all the Step 1 extraction 
procedures studied (Table 3.3) except for dilution, freezing and thawing which removed 
approximately ninety five per cent. 
3.1.4.1.2 IgY recoveries 
IgY recovered for Steps 1 and 2, respectively, were 163mg and 144mg for caprylic acid and 
ammonium sulphate, 162mg and 80mg for dextran sulphate and sodium sulphate, 151 mg 
and 150mg for chloroform and PEG, l04mg and 28mg for dilution, freeze, thaw and 
sodium sulphate and 85mg and 87 mg for PEG (3.5% and 12%) using fresh yolk (Figure 
3.1(a)). 
The values of 163mg, 162mg, 151mg, l04mg and 85mg respectively for the different Step 
1 lipoprotein extraction methods (Figure3.l(a)) using fresh yolk decreased to 150mg, 
126mg, 135mg, 37mg and 66mg when the same yolk source was frozen and thawed prior to 
extraction (Figure 3.1.(b)). 
3.1.4.1.3 Purity by SDS-PAGE 
Purification by the Step 1 plus Step 2 methods above (Figure 3.2(a)and (b)) did not result in 
IgY preparations of satisfactory purity. Thus the preparations contain proteins of less than 
36kDa and up to 66kDa as well as IgY. However, IgY purification by caprylic acid and 
ammonium sulphate followed by two washes (Figure 3.3(a) and Figure 3.3(b)) resulted in 
an IgY preparation of satisfactory purity where most unwanted proteins have been 
removed. 
3.1.4.1.4 Assessment of serum and egg yolk titres by ELISA 
Triglyceride Volume Remaining Percentage 
concentration from trig} ycerides remaining 
Method in the product 5mLof for a typical egg trigl ycerides 
(mgldL) yolk (lSmL of yolk) from total yolk 
(mL) (mg) 
Caprylic acid 22 9.5 6.3 0.2 
PEG 28 9 7.8 0.3 
Chloroform 30 11 10 0.4 
Dextran sulphate 44 27 36 1 
Dilution, freezing 106 45 143 5 
and thawing 
Total yolk not 18100 15 2715 100 
processed 
Table 3.3 Summary of triglyceride assessments for Step 1 extraction procedures from 
Lion egg yolks 
----. 150 
'4-- 100 
::2 50 
I - Step 1= Lipoprotein removal 
II - Step 2= Protein separation 
(a). IgY recovery from 15mL of fresh egg yolk after purification 
with caprylic acid and ammonium sulphate (Ai), dextran 
sulphate and sodium sulphate (Bi),chloroform and PEG (Ci), 
dilution, freezing and thawing and sodium sulphate (Di) and 
PEG (Ei). 
(b). IgY recovery from a typical fresh (i) and frozen (ii) egg yolk (15mL) 
after Step 1 lipoprotein extraction with caprylic acid(A), dextran 
sulphate (B),chloroform (C),dilution, freezing and thawing (D) and 
PEG (E). 
Figure 3.1 Use of IgY immunoassay to monitor IgY purification 
procedures (a) and to assess the effect of yolk freezing on 
IgY recovery during lipoprotein extraction (b). 
205kDa 
1 16kDa 
97kDa 
84kDa 
66kDa 
55kDa 
-I5kDa 
36k1)a 
205kDa 
11 6kDa 
97kDa 
84kDa 
66kDu 
55kDa 
45k.Da 
16kDa 
M D D B E A c s 
(a).Lipoprotein extraction by dilution, freezing and 
thawing CD), with dextran sulphate(B), PEG (E), caprylic 
acid (A), and chloroform(C). 
(M) molecular weight markers and (S) Sigma IgY. 
Di Di Bi Ei Ai Ci s 
(b). IgY purification by dilution, freezing and thawing and 
odium ulphate (Di), dextran sulphate and sodium 
sulphate (Bi), PEG (Ei), caprylic acid and ammonium 
ulphate (Ai) and chloroform and PEG (Ci). 
Figure 3.2 Lipoprotein extraction (a) and IgY purification (b) 
as as es ed by SDS-PAGE (7.5%(v/v. 
205lcDa 
116kDa 
97lcDa 
84lcDa 
66kDa 
55lcDa 
45kDa 
36kDa 
20SkDa 
116kDa 
97 kDa 
84kDa 
66kDa 
55kDa 
45kDa 
36kDa 
M a b c d S S 
(a). IgY purification by caprylic acid and ammonium 
ulphate with two washes. 
Extraction with caprylic acid (a), precipitation with 
1.7SM ammonium sulphate (b), first wash (c) and second 
wash (d) with 1.7SM ammonium sulphate.Molecular weight 
markers (M) and Sigma IgY(S). 
M e f g h s s 
(b) Extraction with caprylic acid (e), supematant collected 
from ammonium sulphate precipitation (f), and supernatant 
from first (g) and second (h) washes. 
Figure 3.3 IgY purification by caprylic acid and ammonium 
sulphate precipitation with two washes as assessed 
by SDS-PAGE (lO%(v/v)). 
Frozen and thawed egg yolk was used throughout unless otherwise stated. 
Figure 3.4(a) and (b) show the time course of the immune response from pooled serum and 
egg yolk samples respectively from the low, medium and high dose groups. Taking into 
consideration the variability involved in ELISA, after 14 weeks the yolks have higher titres 
on average while after 22 weeks the sera appears to have slightly better titres. The hens 
responded better to immunisation with the low dose of venom than with the medium and 
high doses. 
3.1.4.2 Assessment of reproducibility of IgY purification 
Frozen and thawed egg yolk was used throughout unless otherwise stated. 
3.1.4.2.1 Triglyceride removal 
Mean removal of triglyceride from (Figure 3.5, Table 3.4) is 98.9%O.33 (meanSD). 
3.1.4.2.2IgY recovery 
Values of 86mglOmg (meanSD) after triglyceride removal with caprylic acid, 
72mg11mg (meanSD) after precipitation with 1.75M ammonium sulphate and 
68mg13mg (mean SD) after first wash and 67mg12mg (mean SD) after second wash. 
3.1.4.2.3 Purity by SDS-PAGE 
The replicate IgY purifications (Figure 3.6 (a)) resulted in IgY preparations of satisfactory 
purity where most unwanted proteins have been removed. 
3.1.4.2.4 ELISA titre recovery 
Values of 50% antibody titre of 876 44(meanSD)after triglyceride removal with caprylic 
acid and 77663(meanSD)after second wash with 1.75M ammonium sulphate(Figure 
3.6(b)). 
3.1.4.2.5 Potency of total and specific IgY 
EDso result quoted with 95% confidence limits in parenthesis. 
The total Ig Y did not protect the mice when the latter were tested with a mixture (1: 1 : 1) of 
V.a.ammodytes. V.b.berus and V.a.aspis venoms and thus specific antibodies had to be 
affinity purified from the total IgY. Potency of specific antibodies was estimated at 11311g 
r: .. 
II  ~ 
10000 
4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 
Time (weeks) 
(a). ELISA titres for European viper antiserum samples pooled from 
each group(n=3) of hens immunised with low (_), medium (.) and 
high (~) mixed venom doses. 
 .. .. 
'0:; ... 
4 I 8 10 12 14 18 18 20 22 
Time (weeka) 
(b). ELISA titres for egg yolk samples pooled from 
each group(n=3) of hens immunised with low (_), medium (.) and 
high (~) mixed venom doses. 
Figure 3.4 Serum (a) and egg yolk (b) titre assessments by ELISA over a 22 
week period. 
Triglyceride Volume Remaining Percentage 
concentration From trigl ycerides for remaining 
Sample Number in the product 5mLof a typical egg triglycerides 
(mgldL) yolk (l5mL of yolk) from total yolk 
(mL) (mg) 
1 169 5.7 29 I 
2 125 6.7 25 0.9 
3 159 6.7 32 I 
4 150 6.5 29 1 
5 256 6 46 1.7 
Total yolk not 18100 15 2715 100 
processed 
Table 3.4 Triglyceride assessment for five replicate extractions with caprylic acid 
from viper venom immunised chicken yolks. 
Ct100 
II1II 
U .a, 
II1II 
>-... 
CD ... 
A B c o 
Purification Stages 
(a). IgY recovery from the extraction with caprylic acid(A), 
precipitation with 1.75M ammonium sulphate(B), frrst wash(C), 
and second washeD) with I.75M ammonium sulphate. 
Figure 3.5 Summary table of remaining triglycerides and IgY recovery from total 
yolk after five replicate purifications with caprylic acid and ammonium 
sulphate. 
205kDa 
I 16kDa 
97kDa 
84kDa 
66kDa 
55kDa 
45kDa 
36kDa 
>- 600 
r 400 ('Q 
M 2 3 4 5 
(a). Five (1, 2, 3,4, 5) replicate IgY purifictions by caprylic acid and 
ammonium sulphate with two washes assessed by SDS-
PAGE (7.S0/0(v/v)) . Molecular weight markers(M). 
Punficatlon stages 
(b). LISA titre recovery of specific IgY from the extraction with 
caprylic acid (A) and after a second wash (B) with 1.7SM 
ammonium sulphate. 
Figure 3.6 SDS-PAGE and ELISA till'e of replicate IgY purifications. 
(96Ilg-130llg) of IgY per mouse when the latter were tested with the (1:1:1) venom 
mixture. Assuming that the capacity of the affinity matrix had not been exceeded, the 
recovery of Smg of specific from SSOmg of total suggests that approximately one percent of 
total IgY is specific to the venom constituents. 
3.1.5 Discussion 
Avian egg yolk contains at least 30% by weight of lipid with 67% of the lipid being 
triglycerides (Burley, 1971). Thus it was reasonable to monitor the effectiveness of the 
lipoprotein removal protocols studied here by measuring the disappearance of triglycerides. 
Dilution, freezing and thawing removed approximately 95% while at least ninety nine 
percent were removed by all the other protocols when using fresh yolk. Caprylic acid and 
ammonium sulphate and chloroform and PEG demonstrated the highest and comparable 
IgY recoveries. The dextran sulphate and sodium sulphate and PEG demonstrated lower 
recoveries and freeze and thaw and sodium sulphate demonstrated the lowest recovery. 
It may be that the recovery of IgY and its dilution factor in the relevant lipoprotein removal 
protocol is affecting its subsequent precipitation by salt fractionation. Thus the lipoprotein 
removal step with the highest dilution factor (1: 10), that is dilution, freeze and thaw 
demonstrates the lowest subsequent recovery with sodium sulphate, and caprylic acid with 
the lowest dilution factor (1:3) demonstrates the best subsequent recovery with ammonium 
sulphate. 
It follows that it may be possible to improve recovery of IgY using the dilution, freeze and 
thaw protocol followed by sodium sulphate by attempting to reduce the dilution step during 
lipoprotein removal. The dilution, freeze and thaw method has the advantage of being 
inexpensive but fails to remove as much triglyceride as the other protocols studied. This 
therefore seems to lack promise. 
It was necessary to study the effects of freezing yolks and the subsequent recovery of IgY 
because all the yolk from immunised hens with European Viper venoms at our disposal had 
been stored frozen. These studies show that freezing affects IgY recovenes with all 
lipoprotein removal protocols but that lipoprotein removal with caprylic acid is affected the 
least. It is recommended, based on these results, not to store yolk frozen prior to IgY 
purification if possible. Also, it is necessary to study what is the effect on eggs or their 
yolks if they are kept at 4e. and not frozen and for how long they can be stored in this way 
and still be useful. 
Assessment by SDS-PAGE shows that a one step purification protocol post-lipoprotein 
removal is not enough and that in the case of caprylic acid and ammonium sulphate two 
subsequent washes with the latter (1.75M) were required. 
The assessment of serum and egg yolk titres, in viper venom immunized-hens, by ELISA 
showed that these hens responded better to a low than a medium or high dose but that 
overall only approximately one percent of the total IgY was specific. This suggests that to 
produce an effective anti venom with the current immunisation protocol we would have to 
affinity purify the total IgY product because the latter was shown not to protect the mice in 
the relevant potency assessment. This adds complexity and cost to the manufacture of the 
antivenom. 
Further work in the area of selection of animal species is indicated by these results. 
Studies of reproducibility of purification were carried out using caprylic acid followed by 
ammonium sulphate (1.75M) precipitation and two further ammonium sulphate washes 
because at this stage in the work the latter purification protocol was proving the best 
candidate for frozen egg yolk mainly from the point of view of IgY recovery. The 
triglyceride concentrations remaining after lipoprotein removal averaged one percent 
compared with 0.2% for Lion eggs and the IgY recoveries were approximately two thirds 
of those obtained from Lion eggs. This difference may be due to the different yolk source, 
the effects of prolonged freezing or both; this requires further investigation. 
Overall. caprylic acid and ammonium sulphate with two washes for lipoprotein removal 
and IgY purification respectively results in good IgY recovery of satisfactory purity and 
ELISA titre. The use of caprylic acid for lipoprotein removal has not been promoted in the 
scientific literature but these studies have shown it to be a good protocol both from the 
point of view of triglyceride removal and IgY recovery. One practical disadvantage of 
caprylic acid is that it produces an infranatant aqueous layer, with the lipid mass resting on 
its surface, which makes the removal of the liquid difficult. This requires further 
investigation if it is decided to scale up the protocol for large scale processing of egg yolk. 
3.2 Enzymatic cleavage of IgY from chicken egg yolk with proteolytic enzymes 
3.2.1 Background 
Porter (1959) used proteolytic enzymes to elucidate antibody structure and showed that 
rabbit IgG antibodies could be split by the proteolytic enzyme papain into three large 
fragments. He concluded that two of the fragments were identical and retained univalent 
binding capacity (Fab fragments), whereas the third could be crystallised (Fc fragment). 
Today, enzyme cleaved antibodies, mainly of equine origin are used widely throughout the 
world for the treatment of, for example, victims of snake and arthropod envenoming 
(DosSantos et al. 1989; Smith et al. 1992; Jones and Landon, 2(02). 
The yolk of eggs laid by immunised chickens has been recognised as an excellent source of 
polyclonal antibodies by Polson (1980) and Jensenius (1981), with potential for diagnostic 
and therapeutic applications. 
Akita and Nakai (1993) describe methods for the production of Fab and Fab' fragments 
from chicken egg yolk IgY by papain and pepsin digestion respectively. The latter was 
achieved by first removing the lipoproteins using water dilution and then carrying out 
successive precipitations with ammonium and sodium sulphate before digestion. 
The aim of the present work is to produce chicken egg yolk IgY fragments of acceptable 
purity for therapeutic application by directly digesting the extract resulting from lipoprotein 
removal using caprylic acid and thus by-passing the need for a salt fractionation step post 
lipoprotein removal and predigestion. 
3.2.2 Materials 
Chicken immunoglobulin (IgY) was obtained from Sigma. Egg yolk from hens immunised 
with a mixture of European viper venoms (V.berus, V.ammodytes and V.aspis) was 
obtained from MicroPharm Ltd; centrifuge tubes from Greiner Labortechnik; caprylic(N-
octanoic) acid and papain were purchased from BDH; dialysis membrane was obtained 
from Medicell; and all other chemicals were purchased from Sigma. 
3.2.3 Methods 
3.2.3.1 Proteolytic enzyme digestion of a commercial preparation of IgY 
Unless stated otherwise all assessments were carried out with SDS-PAGE (7.S%(v/v. 
3.2.3.1.1 Papain digestion 
Papainl6% (w/w) was added to IgY (lOgIL) prepared in lOOmM phosphate buffer, pH 7.0, 
containing 3mM EDT A and 10mM cysteine hydrochloride. During incubation at 37C 
samples were removed at set time intervals and the reaction was terminated by adding 
iodoacetamide to each sample to a final concentration of 30mM. 
3.2.3.1.2 Trypsin digestion 
Trypsin 2% (w/w) was added to IgY (lOgIL) prepared in lOOmM Tris buffer pH 8. During 
incubation at 37C, samples were removed at set time intervals and the reaction was 
terminated by adding phenylmetbylsulphonyl fluoride to each sample to a final 
concentration of 1 OOmM. 
3.2.3.1.3 Pepsin digestion 
Pepsin 2% (w/w) was added to IgY (l0g/L) prepared in SOmM sodium acetate buffer at pH 
4.2. During incubation at 37C samples were removed at set time intervals and the reaction 
was terminated by adjusting the pH of each sample to around 6. 
A pool of frozen and thawed egg yolk was used throughout unless otherwise stated. 
 ~..' 
NUMBERING 
AS ORIGINAL 
--:--... ; 
added to a concentration of 1.75M. After stirring at 4C for one hour followed by 
centrifugation for 10 minutes at 2750xg and 25C, the supernatant was discarded and the 
8~,t~ by resuspending in I.75M ammonium sulphate to a volume equal to that of 
ammonium sulphate was carried out. The washed pellet was dissolved in 50mM sodium 
3.2.4.1.1 Papam (Figure 3.7.(a)) 
acetate buffer at pH 4.2. and made up to an estimated concentration of 1 Og/L by' 
By comparison with the zero sample in figure 3.7(b) it can be seen that the IgY is atfecteo 
reconstituting.the pellet in apprpx~ately 10~L of acetate buffer. l1tis was then confirmed 
by the ingreolents of the paprun dlgestlOn mIxture. Thus degradatlOn products of around 
by absorbance at 280nm with an extinction coefficient of 1.4 as 9.7g1L. The IgY solution 
116 KDa can be observed before the enzyme is added. 
(10mL) was dialysed against 10L of 50mM sodium acetate buffer, pH 4.2 at 4C over three 
No IgY starting matenal can be observed after one hour of digestion, by which time Fab 
days with a Ix 1 OL buffer change every twenty four hours to remove the ammonium 
fragments of molecular weight around 55 KDa are produced together with fragments 
sulphate. 
smaller than 45 KDa. The intensity of the stained band corresponding to the 55kDa 
The IgY prepared above was warmed to 37C in an incubator and 2%(w/w) pepsin added. 
fragment increases during 48 hours and the intensity of the stained band corresponding to 
During incubation at 37C samples were removed at set time intervals and the reaction was 
the latter decreases during the same time period but never disappears completely. 
terminated by adjusting the'pH to around 6. 
3.2.4.1.2 Trypsin (Figure 3.7(b)) 
Fab fragments of molecular weight around 55 KDa are produced after one hour of digestion 
together with other randomly sized fragments spread across the molecular weight raJ~g 
described by the markers (116 KDa to 36KDa). This pattern persists for four hours. After 
24 hours all fragments are digested except for a broad band of weakly stained material 
corresponding to a molecular weight of smaller than 55 KDa. 
After 48 hours the latter had faded further. 
3.2.4.1.3 Pepsin (Figure 3.8(a)) 
After one hour digestion with pepsin, Ig Y starting material and fragments of around 116 
KDa can be observed together with Fab fragments of molecular weight around 55KDa. 
During a four hour period the stained band corresponding to IgY and the stained band 
corresponding to the 116 KDa fragment gradually decreases while the stained band 
corresponding to 55 KDa increases in intensity. After 24 hours the IgY band and the 116 
KDa band have disappeared and there is only one remaining band corresponding to 55 
3.2.3.2 Pepsin digestion of IgY prepared by caprylic acid followed by ammonium 
KDa. The latter persists for 48 hours. 
sulphate precipitation 
Thirty millilitres of acetate buffer (O.06M, pH4) was added to 15mL of egg yolk and the pH 
aJjusted to 4.8 by uropwise addition of O.2M NaOH. TIlen 304il of caprylic acid per mL 
of yolk was added dropwise with vigorous mixing which was continued for one hour 
followed by centrifugation at 2750xg for one hour at 20C. This produced an infranatant 
aqueous layer, which will be referred to as the caprylic acid extract, with the lipid mass 
resting on its surface. Centrifugation was carried out in clear plastic tubes and a needle 
used to pierce the latter and withdraw the aqueous layer leaving the lipoprotein mass 
~nlTlU. l'll\ muanaUUll WCl,l) lI1l~,-CU \[mJugu ",~J."':S:' JOIe Il1lt:I .. 0 l'l:muvc t.gg yUlJ'-: .~'-l" 
3.2.3.2 Pepsin digestion of IgY prepared by caprylic acid followed by ammonium 
sulphate precipitation 
Thirty millilitres of acetate buffer (0.06M, pH4) was added to 15mL of egg yolk and the pH 
adjusted to 4.8 by dropwise addition of 0.2M NaOH. Then 304IAI of caprylic acid per mL 
of yolk was added dropwise with vigorous mixing which was continued for one hour 
followed by centrifugation at 2750xg for one hour at 20C. This produced an infranatant 
aqueous layer, which will be referred to as the caprylic acid extract, with the lipid mass 
resting on its surface. Centrifugation was carried out in clear plastic tubes and a needle 
used to pierce the latter and withdraw the aqueous layer leaving the lipoprotein mass 
behind. The infranatant was filtered through a glass fibre filter to remove egg yolk sac 
debris, its pH adjusted to 7.5 with 1 M Tris buffer pH 8 and solid ammonium sulphate 
added to a concentration of 1.75M. After stirring at 4C for one hour followed by 
centrifugation for 10 minutes at 2750xg and 25C, the supernatant was discarded and the 
pellet washed by resuspending in I.75M ammonium sulphate to a volume equal to that of 
the undiluted harvested egg yolk and recentrifuged. A second wash with 1.75M 
ammonium sulphate was .carried out. The washed pellet was dissolved in SOmM sodium 
acetate buffer at pH 4.2. and made up to an estimated concentration of 10gIL by 
reconstituting the pellet in approximately 10mL of acetate buffer. This was then confrrmed 
by absorbance at 280nm with an extinction coefficient of 1.4 as 9.7g1L. The IgY solution 
(10mL) was dialysed against tOL of SOmM sodium acetate buffer, pH 4.2 at 4C over three 
days with a IxlOL buffer change every twenty four hours to remove the ammonium 
sulphate. 
The IgY prepared above was warmed to 37C in an incubator and 2%(w/w) pepsin added. 
During incubation at 37C samples were removed at set time intervals and the reaction was 
terminated by adjusting the pH to around 6. 
3.2.3.3 The effect of pH on the pepsin digestion of caprylic acid extract 
The caprylic acid extract was prepared as previously described (See Section 3.1.3.2.1 p.84) 
and a rough estimate of the protein concentration of the solution (38g1L) was determined by 
absorbance at 280nm with an extinction coefficient of 1.4. The extract was aliquoted into 
four x 5mL samples and the pH of each sample was adjusted to 3, 3.S, 4 and 4.S 
respectively with O.lM HCI and then warmed to 37C in an incubator. Next, 2% (w/w) 
pepsin was added to each sample and during incubation at 37C, samples were removed at 
set time intervals and the reaction was terminated by adjusting the pH to 6. 
3.2.3.4 Comparison of recoveries of IgY fragments prepared with and without 
ammonium sulphate precipitation 
3.2.3.4.1 Pepsin digestion of IgY prepared by ammonium sulphate precipitation 
IgY fragments were prepared as previously described with the difference that after the 
second wash with 1.75M ammonium sulphate the pellet was dissolved in SOmM sodium 
acetate buffer, pH 4.2 and made up to a volume equal to that of the undiluted harvested 
Also the reaction with pepsin was carried out at 37C over 24 hours and was terminated by 
adjusting the pH to 6 with 0.1 M NaOH. 
The resulting IgY fragments were dialysed in PBS pH 7.5 at 4C to remove unwanted 
digested protein material over three days with a 1x10L buffer change every 24 hours. The 
protein concentration of the solution before and after dialysis was determined by 
absorbance at 280nm with an extinction coefficient of 1.4. 
3.2.3.4.2 Pepsin digestion of IgY prepared without ammonium SUlphate precipitation 
The caprylic acid extract was prepared as previously described and its pH adjusted to 4.5 
with O.IM Hel and warmed to 37C in an incubator. Then 2% (w/w) pepsin was added and 
the reaction solution incubated at 37C over 24 hours. The reaction was terminated by 
adjusting the pH to 6 with O.lM NaOH. The resulting IgY fragments were dialysed and 
assessed for protein concentration as described previously. 
3.2.4 Results 
3.2.4.1 Proteolytic enzyme digestion of a conunercial preparation of IgY. 
3.2.4.1.1 Papain (Figure 3.7.(a 
By comparison with the zero sample in figure 3.7(b) it can be seen that the IgY is affected 
by the ingredients of the papain digestion mixture. Thus degradation products of around 
116 KDa can be observed before the enzyme is added. 
No IgY starting material can be observed after one hour of digestion, by which time Fab 
fragments of molecular weight around 55 KDa are produced together with fragments 
smaller than 45 KDa. The intensity of the stained band corresponding to the 55kDa 
fragment increases during 48 hours and the intensity of the stained band corresponding to 
the latter decreases during the same time period but never disappears completely. 
3.2.4.1.2 Trypsin (Figure 3.7(b 
Fab fragments of molecular weight around 55 KDa are produced after one hour of digestion 
together with other randomly sized fragments spread across the molecular weight range 
described by the markers (116 KDa to 36KDa). This pattern persists for four hours. After 
24 hours all fragments are digested except for a broad band of weakly stained material 
corresponding to a molecular weight of smaller than 55 KDa. 
After 48 hours the latter had faded further. 
3.2.4.1.3 Pepsin (Figure 3.8(a 
After one hour digestion with pepsin, IgY starting material and fragments of around 116 
KDa can be observed together with Fab fragments of molecular weight around 55KDa. 
During a four hour period the stained band corresponding to IgY and the stained band 
corresponding to the 116 KDa fragment gradually decreases while the stained band 
corresponding to 55 KDa increases in intensity. After 24 hours the IgY band and the 116 
KDa band have disappeared and there is only one remaining band corresponding to 55 
KDa. The latter persists for 48 hours. 
205 kDa 
116kDa 
97 kDa 
84 kDa 
66 kDa 
55 kDa 
45 kDa 
205 kDa 
J 16 kDa 
97 kDa 
84 kDa 
66 leDa 
55 kDa 
45 kDa 
)6 kDa 
M 0 2 4 24 48hrs M 
(a). Papain digestion 
M 0 2 4 24 48hrs 
(b). Trypsin digestion 
Figure 3.7 Proteolytic enzyme digestion of a commercial preparation of IgY 
3.2.4.2 Pepsin digestion of IgY prepared by caprylic acid followed by ammonium 
sulphate precipitation (Figure 3.8(b 
Description the same as for figure 3.8(a). 
3.2.4.3 The etTect of pH on the pepsin digestion of caprylic acid extract 
After one hour of digestion at pH 3 (Figure 3.9(a there is a faint band corresponding to 55 
KDa fragments. This gets progressively fainter with time and after 48 hours has virtually 
disappeared. After one hour digestion at pH 3.5 (Figure 3.9(b a more discernible band in 
the same molecular weight range as the latter can be observed with a dispersed area of 
staining below it. In the next four hours the staining of the band corresponding to 55 KDa 
and the disperse area of staining below it gets progressively fainter until after 24 hours 
when it has virtually disappeared. 
For up to four hours digestion at pH 4 (Figure 3.9(c results are similar to those obtained at 
pH3.5. However after 48hours the 55 KDa fragments persist albeit the staining of the band 
is weak. At pH 4.5 (Figure 3.9(d the 55 KDa fragment still persists after 48 hours with no 
significant loss of staining. 
3.2.4.4 Comparison of recovery of IgY fragments by absorbance (28Onrn) 
It was possible to recover 56mg of IgY fragments after pepsin digestion of IgY prepared by 
ammonium sulphate precipitation from a typical egg (15mL yolk). This recovery 
approximately doubled (1l0mg) when the pepsin digestion was carried out directly from 
the caprylic acid extract without carrying out the salt precipitation. 
3.2.S Discussion 
Akita and Nakai (1993) determined the optimal pH conditions for IgY peptic digestion to 
be pH 4.2 and the enzyme: protein ratio 1 :50 with a digestion time of 9 hrs. I adopted the 
recommended pH and enzyme:protein ratio in this study but felt it was important to carry 
out a timed digestion study as it was not possible at present to estimate the potency of the 
pepsin that was available, also Akita and Nakai (1993) did not give any potency data about 
the pepsin they had used. The results of the study shows that a 24 hr digestion time was 
205 kDa 
116 kDa 
97 kDa 
84 kDa 
66 kDa 
55 kDa 
4S kDa 
36 kDa 
o o 1 2 4 24 48hrs 
(a) Digestion of a commercial preparation of IgY 
205 kDa 
116 kDa 
97 kDa 
84 kDa 
66 kDa 
55 k.Da 
45 kDa 
36 kDa 
M 0 o 1 2 4 24 48hrs 
(b) Digestion oflgY prepared by ammonium 
sulphate precipitation 
Figure 3.8 Pepsin digestion of IgY 
205 kD. 
11 6kD. 
97 kDa 
84 kD. 
66 IeDa 
55 kD. 
45 kD. 
36 kD. 
MOO 1 2 4 24 48hrs 
(a) pH 3 
MOO 1 2 4 24 48hrs 
(b) pH 3.5 
MOO 1 2 4 24 48hrs 
(c) pH 4.0 
MOO 1 2 4 24 48hrs 
(d) pH 4.5 
Figure 3.9 The effect of pH on the pepsin digestion of caprylic 
acid extract 
necessary compared to the 9 hr recommendation by Akita and Nakai (1993) and thus feel 
that in view of this result the decision to carry out a timed experiment was justified. 
Although other investigators (Jones and Landon, 2(02) have shown that pepsin can 
completely digest serum proteins and produce F(ab')2 from IgG nobody has shown until 
know that pepsin can completely digest egg proteins and produce Fab from IgY . As a 
result I feel it was fully justified to have investigated the time of digestion which was 
determined as 24 hours and pH which was determined at pH 4.5 conditions required for the 
digestion of a caprylic acid extract to produce Fab instead of relying on the previously 
optimised conditions for the digestion of Ig Y obtained from an ammonium sulphate 
precipitation of the caprylic acid extract. 
All the enzymes studied produce Fab fragments when digesting IgY. This was also found 
by Akita and Nakai (1993), who studied pepsin and papain digestion of IgY. We can add 
the results of trypsin digestion to these findings. 
Of the enzymes studied, only pepsin digests Fc fragments. The production of other 
fragments as well as Fab following trypsin and papain digestion of Ig Y means that further 
methods would need to be developed to remove them, thus adding to the cost and 
potentially increasing the loss of Fab in the process. Also, we have shown that pepsin can 
digest other proteins in egg yolk as well as the Fc component of the IgY, thereby doing 
away with the need to salt precipitate IgY so as to remove unwanted proteins prior to 
digestion. Pepsin digestion of Ig Y prepared without ammonium sulphate results in 
approximately twice the yield of Fab as when these are prepared from caprylic acid 
followed by ammonium sulphate precipitated IgY. 
I have not shown that the activity of the fragments is conserved after digestion as this 
has been well documented by Jones and Landon (2002). 
Although egg yolk has been recognized as a convenient and inexpensive source of 
antibodies it has not found widespread use as one might expect. This may be attributed in 
part to difficulties in isolating Ig Y from yolk and to the potential for increased risks of 
allergenicity that may be associated with egg proteins. The protective effect of specific 
chicken antibodies should be conferred by either the whole IgY or the antigen binding 
fragment. Consequently for the people who may be allergic to egg protein attempts should 
be made to reduce or eliminate allergenicity. It is known that the Fc fragment is the most 
antigenic portion of the immunoglobulin molecule (Porter, 1959). Thus cleavage of the Fc 
fragment may be beneficial since it will reduce the number of allergenic sites on the IgY 
molecule without adversely affecting its function. 
CBAPTER4: 
THE PREPARATION AND EVALUATION OF A SPECIFIC OVINE ANTIVENOM 
AGAINST V.IATASTEl VENOM 
4.1 Background 
Gonzalez (1991) has treated successfully many victims of envenoming by V.latastei with 
anti venoms manufactured by Pasteur (IPSER Europe), by Behringwerke or Zagreb. These 
are all equine based and contain specific antibodies directed against V. asp is, V.berus and 
V.ammodytes venoms for the Pasteur product and, in addition, V.lebetina and V.xanthina 
venoms for the Behringwerke product. The Zagreb product is raised against only 
V.ammodytes venom but is described as being useful for all European snakes from the 
Vipera family. The studies of Detrait et al (1983) showed that V. latastei gaditana venom 
in mice may be neutralised by V.berus, V.aspis and V.ammodytes antisera which supports 
the clinical observations that a specific V. latastei anti venom is not necessary to treat cases 
of V.latastei envenomation. 
A Spanish group (perez et al.1999), has welcomed a new antivenom, Viperfav (Institut 
Pasteur-Merieux, France), as a replacement for IPSER Europe (Pasteur Merieux, France). 
Thus whilst it contains the same specific antibodies as the latter (viz directed against 
V.aspis, V.ammodytes and V.berus venoms), it has been purified more extensively to obtain 
a product that can be given safely by the intravenous route, whilst the latter could only be 
used intra muscularly under its product licensing (though often given Lv. by clinicians). 
Nonetheless, Perez and his colleagues (1999) argue that although Viperfav may solve the 
problem of anaphylactoid reactions in patients treated for envenomation by V. latastei, it 
does not contain antibodies directed specifically against V. latastei venom. They conclude 
that, since V.latastei bites are potentially serious and since most cases of snakebite in Spain 
are from these snakes, there may be justification for having specific antibodies against 
V.latastei venom in the Pasteur product. 
Another argument for producing a specific V.latastei anti venom for the Iberian peninsula is 
presented by Cheng and Winkel (2001). They argue that there is a global loss of 
momentum in anti venom research, development and financing. Although neglected, snake 
bite is eminently treatable and with this in mind we have been encouraged to manufacture a 
geographically relevant anti venom for Spain in collaboration with Dr Delfin Gonzalez, 
Spain's leading authority on snakebite. Then it is intended to help transfer the appropriate 
technology to enable Spain become self-sufficient in anti venom production. 
The aim of the work was to prepare and evaluate a specific ovine F(ab'h antivenom for V. 
latastei. Sheep were immunised and their antisera pooled and used to produce antivenom 
by means of 'enhanced pepsin digestion' a method recently developed in our laboratories 
(Jones and Landon, 2002). We also extended this concept directly to whole blood since this 
could further simplify the process and increase yields. The potential disadvantages, such as 
a requirement for more pepsin than that used for serum digestion, larger processing 
volumes owing to initial dilution of the blood and decreased purity of the finished product, 
were also addressed. 
4.2 Materials 
V.latastei venom was kindly donated by Dr Delfin Gonzalez. Serum and blood from sheep 
immunised with V.latastei venom were obtained from MicroPharm Ltd and venoms of V. 
ammodytes, V. aspis and V.berus from Latoxan. CNBR activated 4 Fast Flow Sepharose 
and Q Sepharose fast flow were from Amersham Pharmacia Biotech. The chromatography 
system (Econo system) was obtained from Biorad. Lithium heparin tubes were purchased 
from Fisher Scientific. All other chemicals were purchased from Sigma. 
4.3 Methods 
4.3.1 Assessment of V.latastei venom and comparison with other European 
Vipera venoms 
4.3.1.1 Physical assessment 
The venom samples were assessed by 12% SDS-PAGE as described elsewhere (See 
section 3.1.3.3.3, p.87). 
4.3.1.2 Venom lethality 
Venom lethality was tested by MicroPharm Ltd. using the median lethal dose (LDso) 
method. 
Principle (Klaassen and Eaton, 1985) 
The LD50 is defined as the dosage of venom required to produce 50% death in a population 
of outbred white mice. A range of venom doses (five in this case) containing increasing 
amounts of venom is tested such that all mice survive at the lowest dose group, die in the 
highest dose group and have some survivors in the remaining three groups. 
Method 
Where possible all solutions were sterile filtered (0.2J.lm) prior to use. The LDso of the 
venom (the amount that causes the death of 50% of the animals) was assessed by Lv. 
injection of various doses of venom in 0.2mL of physiological saline into the tail vein of 
18-20g male out-bred white mice. Animals were placed under a heat lamp to dilate the tail 
vein and, thereby, aid injection. Five mice were used for each venom dose and the LDso 
was calculated from the number of deaths within 24hr by probit analysis. Animals were 
regularly checked during the 24hr period and dead animals removed. Any animals in severe 
distress and likely to die before the full 24hr period were humanely killed according to 
Home Office guidelines. 
4.3.2 Production and assessment of antisera 
4.3.2.1 Antisera production 
The blood and serum used in the digestion protocols described below were obtained from 
sheep immunized with V. latastei venom every 28 days employing a dose regimen of 0.5, 1, 
2, 4, 4, 4, 4, 4, 4, 4, 4mg over a forty-six week period. The concentration of specific 
antibodies in these sheep were assessed and the results discussed in Chapter 2. 
Antisera were precipitated and washed (x2) with an 18% (w/v) fmal concentration of 
sodium sulphate to remove serum albumin before assessing its potency. 
The concentration of IgG was estimated at 23g/L by absorbance at 280nm. 
4.3.2.2 Antisera assessment 
4.3.2.2.1 Potency of antisera 
The effectiveness of the antisera was assessed by MicroPharm Ltd., using the effective dose 
(EDso) test (which may also be termed the median potency dose) in outbred mice. 
Principle (Klaassen and Eaton, 1985) 
The EDso is defined as the dosage of antivenom required to protect or neutralise 50% of a 
population of treated animals against a multiple of the LDso of the venom. In all studies in 
this thesis, 2x LDso was used and the venom and antibody was pre-mixed and incubated for 
30 min. prior to injection. A range of dose groups (five in this case) containing increasing 
amounts of antisera was studied such that all mice survive at the highest antisera dose 
group, die in the lowest dose group while there are some survivors in the remaining three 
groups. 
Method 
To assess antivenom potency, various amounts of antivenom were mixed with two times 
the LDso of venom; the mixture was then incubated at 37C for 30 min and injected 
intravenously into mice. Five mice were used at each venom dose the EDso or median 
effective dose of the anti venom was calculated from the number of deaths within 24 hr after 
injection of the venomlantivenom mixture using probit analysis. 
4.3.2.2.2 Binding of antisera to venom from other European vipers 
4.3.2.2.2.1 Preparation of venom:Sepharose solid phase 
V.l.latastei, V.b.berus, V.a.ammodytes, and V.a.aspis venom were coupled to CNBR 
activated 4 Fast Flow Sepharose (Smglg) following the manufacturer's instructions. The 
coupling efficiency for each venom:Sepharose conjugate was calculated as described 
elsewhere. 
4.3.2.2.2.2 Binding studies 
All SSAP procedures were performed as previously described in Chapter 2. 
V.latastei antisera were assessed on a V.latastei:Sepharose matrix and on similar matrices 
conjugated with V.a.ammodytes, V.a.aspis, and V.b.berus venoms. 
4.3.3 Production of antivenom from antisera and assessment 
4.3.3.1 Antivenom production by direct serum digestion 
The method was adapted from Jones and Landon, 2002. 
Pools of V.latastei antisera were diluted with 0.75 volumes of 0.116M Hel, to both adjust 
the pH of the serum to 3.5 and to dilute it. Pepsin was then added at a ratio of 2% (w/w) of 
total protein based on the assumption that the concentration of protein in serum is l00glL. 
The digestion mixture was incubated overnight at 37C, after which 200mM L-histidine 
base (HB) was added at a ratio of (volume of digestion mixture x 0.45 of HB) to adjust the 
pH to 6.0 and thereby stop the reaction. The digestion mixture was then centrifuged at 
3,500 RPM for 45 minutes at 25C and the supernatant collected and diafiltered (xl0 
volume) against 20mM HBS, pH 5.8 - 6.2). The diafiltered supernatant was then anion-
exchanged using 40mL of Q Sepharose Fast Flow packed in a suitable column housing, 
with a lOem bed height equilibrated with 200mL of HBS. The digested, diafiltered 
material was pumped down the column while monitoring A280nm of the eluted material, 
followed by pumping fresh buffer (HBS) until the A280nm returned to baseline. All the 
unbound material, corresponding to the purified F(ab'h. was collected and stored at 2-8C. 
Bound contaminants (acidic aggregates and pepsin) can be eluted to regenerate the column 
using a gradient with 20mM histidine buffer (pH 5.8-6.2) containing 1M NaCl. Flow rates 
of 10mUmin were used throughout. 
4.3.3.2 Antivenom assessment 
4.3.3.2.1 ~rity 
This was assessed by 7.5% SDS-PAGE as described elsewhere ( See section 3.1.3.3.3, 
p87). 
4.3.3.2.2 Potency 
This was assessed by EDso as described elsewhere (See section 4.3.2.2.1, p 118). 
The concentration of F(ab'h was estimated at 24gIL by absorbance at 280nm. 
4.3.4 Assessment of Zagreb antivenom 
4.3.4.1 Purity 
This was assessed by 7.5% SDS-PAGE as described elsewhere. 
4.3.4.2 Potency 
This was assessed by ED so as described elsewhere. 
The concentration of equine immunoglobulin fragment (F(ab')2) was estimated at 144g/L 
by absorbance at 280nm. 
4.3.5 Investigation of production conditions required for making antivenom from 
blood 
All blood used in these experiments was collected into lithium heparin tubes. 
4.3.5.1 Dilution and acidification 
A 2.5mL aliquot of ovine blood was diluted with an increasing volume O.116M Hel to 
establish the amount of the latter required to adjust its pH to 2.5, 3, 3.5, 4 and 4.5 
respectively. 
4.3.5.2 pH conditions 
The pH of 2.5mL x 5 aliquots of ovine blood were adjusted to 2.5, 3, 3.5, 4 and 4.5 
respectively with O.116M HCI and their final volume adjusted with water so that the 
original blood volume was diluted by a factor of 1 in 3. This was necessary because any 
lesser dilution resulted in the blood sample congealing during overnight incubation. The 
acidified blood was then warmed to 37C in an incubator and 2% (w/w) pepsin added. 
During incubation at 37C, O.5mL samples were removed at set time intervals of 0, 1, 2, 4, 
24 and 48 hours. The reaction was tenninated by adjusting the pH of each sample to 6 by 
adding O.35mL of HB. The concentration of total protein in blood was assumed to be 
200gIL. 
4.3.5.3 Pepsin mass 
The pH of 2.5mL x 2 aliquots of ovine blood were adjusted to 3.5 and the final volume 
adjusted with water so that the original blood volume was diluted by a factor of 1 in 3. The 
acidified blood was then warmed to 37C in an incubator and 1 % and 0.5% (w/w) pepsin 
was added to each respectively. During incubation at 37C, 0.5mL samples were removed 
at set time intervals of 0, I, 2, 4, 24 and 48 hours. The reaction was terminated by adjusting 
the pH of each sample to around 6 by adding 0.35mL of HB. 
4.3.5.4 Optimization of ion-exchange conditions 
Twenty nine millilitres of blood containing antibodies to V.latastei venom were acidified 
with 48.6mL of 0.116M HCl. and a further 10mL of water was added to give a total volume 
of 87.6mL with the original blood being diluted by a factor of 1 in 3. The pH was adjusted 
to 3.5 and the acidified diluted blood then warmed to 37C in an incubator; 2% (w/w) 
pepsin was added and the mixture incubated for a further 24 hours at 37C. The digestion 
was terminated by adjusting the pH of the reaction mixture to around 6 by adding 60 mL of 
HB. After centrifugation at 2750xg for 45 minutes at 25C, the supernatant was collected 
and diafiltered (xlO volume) against histidine buffer, pH 5.8 - 6.2 containing 20mM 
sodium chloride, employing a tangential-flow ultrafiltration unit with a 50 cm2 30,000 Da 
nominal molecular weight cut-off polyethersulphone membrane and a peristaltic pump 
capable of delivering a flow rate of 200-400 mUmin, at approximately 2.5 bar back 
pressure. The diafiltrate was aliquoted into four 20mL volumes. To three of these, sodium 
chloride was added to attain a concentration of 40,80 and 150mM NaCl respectively. 
Each of the above was anion-exchanged using 40mL of Q Sepharose Fast Row as 
previously described with the proviso that the column bed was equilibrated with 200mL of 
the buffer containing the relevant sodium chloride concentration prior to the digested 
material being pumped down the column. The unbound material collected for each run was 
scanned for absorption with a spectrophotometer over the range of 200 to SOOnm and was 
also assessed for purity by 7.5% (v/v) SDS-PAGE. 
4.3.5.5 Potency of antivenom produced from blood 
This was assessed by ED 50 as described elsewhere. 
The concentration of F(ab')2 was estimated at 10gIL by absorbance (2S0nm). 
4.3.5.6 Assessment of recovery of F(ab')2 prepared from blood and serum 
Blood (400mL) was obtained from a single sheep immunised as described in 4.3.2.1. and 
200mL was processed by MicroPharm Ltd. to produce 134mL serum. The remaining 
200mL was kept as blood. The ratio of serum to blood volume when comparing F(ab'h 
recoveries, was conserved at approximately 70% (v/v). Thus the recovery of F(ab'h from 
30mL serum prepared as described in 4.3.3.1. was compared with that of F(ab'h prepared 
from 43mL of blood as follows. 
The pH of 43mL of ovine blood was adjusted to 3.5 with O.116M HCI and the final volume 
adjusted with water so that the original blood volume was diluted by a factor of 1 in 3. The 
acidified blood was then warmed to 37C. in an incubator and 2% (w/w) pepsin was added. 
The reaction was tenninated after 24 hours by adjusting its pH to around 6 by adding 79mL 
of HB and then centrifuging at 2750xg for 45 minutes at 25C. The supernatant was 
collected and diafiltered (xlO volume) against histidine buffer, pH 5.S - 6.2 containing 
20mM sodium chloride employing a tangential-flow ultrafiltration unit with a SO cm2 
30,000 Da nominal molecular weight cut-off polyethersulphone membrane and a peristaltic 
pump capable of delivering a flow rate of 200-400 mUmin, at approximately 2.5 bar back 
pressure. The diafiltrate was aliquoted into two 20mL volumes. To the second volume, 
sodium chloride was added to attain a concentration of 40mM NaCl. 
Each of the above was anion-exchanged as described previously. The unbound material 
collected for each run was assessed for purity by 7.5% (v/v) SDS-PAGE and for total 
protein by absorption at 2S0nm. 
F(ab'h recoveries from the two methods were estimated by comparing the total protein at 
280nm. 
4.4 Results 
All LDso and EDso results are quoted with 95% confidence limits in parenthesis (Table 4.1). 
4.4.1 Assessment of V.latastei venom and comparison with other European Vipera 
venoms 
4.4.1.1 Physical assessment 
All the venoms exhibit protein bands that correspond to molecular weights from greater 
than 66kDa to smaller than 24kDa (Figure 4.1). Protein bands corresponding to 
approximate molecular weights 30 and 57 kDa can be found in all venoms. V.berus and 
V.aspis venoms have a protein band in common of approximately 40kDa. V.berus venom 
has a protein band not shared with other venoms of approximately 24kDa. V.ammodytes 
venom has an approximate 66kDa protein band not shared with other venoms and V.aspis 
venom has a protein band that it does not share with other venoms of approximately 62kDa. 
4.4.1.2 Venom lethality 
LD50 for V.1atastei venom was 17.8J.lg (13J-tg-22J-tg) per mouse. LD50for a 1:1:1 mixture of 
V.a.ammodytes, V.b.berus, and V.a.aspis venom was 6.7J.lg (6.3J-tg-7.2J-tg) per mouse. 
4.4.2 Production and assessment of antisera 
4.4.2.1 Antiserum assessment 
4.4.2.1.1 Potency 
The ED50 was estimated at 564J-tg (480J-tg-640J-tg) and 414J-tg (320J-tg-520J-tg) of IgG per 
mouse for mice tested with V.latastei and a mixture (1:1:1) of V.a.ammodytes, V.b.berus 
and V.a.aspis venoms respectively. 
4.4.2.1.2 Binding studies 
There are 12,9, 12 and 11 gIL of specific antibodies in the V.latastei antisera that bind 
respectively to solid phases coupled with V.latastei, V.a.ammodytes, V.a.aspis and 
Description V.latastei venom 
V.ammodytes, 
V.berus and V.aspis 
venom mixture 
(1:1:1) 
V.latastei antiserum 564 (480-640) 414 (320 -520) 
Micrograms of V.latastei antivenom 393 (350-430) 181 (140-220) 
immunoglobulin or (From Serum) 
immunoglobulin 
fragment per mouse 
Zagreb anti venom 836 (510-1220) 460 (410 - 510) (~g) 
V.latastei antivenom 576 (470 -670) Not carried out 
(From Blood) 
Table 4.1 Summary EDso results .All results are quoted with 95% confidence limits in 
parenthesis and the various amounts of immunoglobulin/immunoglobulin 
fragment were premixed with two times the LDso of the relevant venom 
V.b.berus venom (Figure 4.2). 
4.4.3 Production and assessment of antivenom from antisera 
4.4.3.1 Antivenom assessment 
4.4.3.1.1 Purity 
SDS-PAGE assessment of serum digested and purified using the method adapted from 
Jones and Landon (2002), resulted in a dominant band of satisfactory purity corresponding 
to the molecular weight of F(ab')2 (Figure 4.3d). The effects of diafiltration and anion 
exchange in purifying the serum digest (Figure 4.3) are not apparent on SDS-PAGE gels 
because impurities run off the gels under the conditions used. 
4.4.3.1.2 Potency 
The ED50 was estimated at 393""g (350""g-430llg) and 1811lg (140Ilg-220Ilg) of F(ab'h per 
mouse, for mice tested with anti venom against V.latastei and a mixture (1: I: 1) of 
V.ammodytes, V. herus and V.aspis venoms, respectively. 
4.4.4 Assessment of Zagreb antivenom 
4.4.4.1 Purity 
Two dominant bands can be observed at approximately 97kDa and approximately 84kDa. 
There is also a band at the top of the gel indicating the possible presence of some 
undigested whole immunoglobulin (Figure 4.3). 
4.4.4.2 Potency 
Estimated at 8361lg (510Ilg-1220Ilg) and 460llg (410Ilg-510llg) of immunoglobulin 
fragment per mouse, for mice tested with V.latastei and a mixture (1:1:1) of V.ammodytes, 
V.berus and V. aspis venoms respectively. 
4.4.5 Investigation of conditions required for making antivenom from blood 
4.4.5.1 pH 
After one hour of digestion at pH 2.5 (Figure 4.4a), there remains only a faint band 
corresponding to IgG (approx 160,000 MW) and this has virtually disappeared after four 
611k l )" 
.'\6kl)a 
2IJkDa 
20k l )a 
M a b c d d di M 
Fi 'ure 4.1 Biophysical c mpari on by 12% non-reducing 
 1 , -PAGE of the yen m of (a) V.b.berus (b) V.a.ammodytes (c) 
V.lI.ll\pis nd Cd) V.Lata tei . (di) i an increased (x4) sample 
load of (d). M are molecular weight marker. 
- 10 ...J 
C) -Q) -Q. 8 
4 ... c: 
0 2 0 
0 -+----
Ammodytes Aspis Berus 
Figur 4.2 timati n of pecific antibody concentrations in V.latastei antisera that bind to 
V.latastei (i), V.a.ammodytes (a), V.a.aspis (b) and Vb.berus (c) 
venom olid phase Ie pectively 
205kOa 
116kDa 
97kDu 
H4kDa 
66kDa 
55kDa 
45kDa 
36kDa 
M e e d c b a 
Jiigur 4.3 Monit ring by D -PAGE of serum before (a) and after its direct 
digc ti n with pcp in (b) and further processing with centrifugation and 
diufiltrati n (c) followed by ion exchange chromatography (d) . Zagreb 
antivcn m ( ). M are molecular weight markers. 
205kDa 
116kDa 
97kDa 
84kDa 
66kDa 
55kDa 
45kDa 
~6kDa 
20C;kDa 
116kDa 
97kDa 
84kDa 
66kDa 
C;C;k Da 
1C;kDa 
36kDa 
20C;kDu 
116kDa 
97kIJa 
84kDa 
66kDa 
C;C;kDu 
4C;kDa 
36kDa 
M o 2 4 24 48hrs M 
(a) pH 2.5 
M 0 2 4 24 48hr 
(b) pH 3 
M o 2 4 24 48hr M 
(c) pH 3.5 
~'i ur 4.4 The effect of pH on the pepsin digestion of ovine blood 
hours. Concomitantly, a dominant band appears corresponding to the molecular weight of 
F(ab'h (Jones and Landon, 2002), with a dispersed area of staining corresponding to 
approximately 45kDa. Both bands get fainter with time. 
Low molecular weight material of less than 36kDa present in the original sample has 
virtually disappeared after 4 hours. 
At pH 3 (Figure 4.4b) the results are similar to that described above, except that after 48 
hours the band corresponding to F(ab')2 and the 45kDa band are less faint than that 
obtained for the same time interval at pH 2.5. 
At pH 3.5 (Figure 4.4c) the band corresponding to IgG does not disappear until 24 hours 
with a dominant band corresponding to F(ab')2 appearing over the same time period. Also, 
other breakdown products of molecular weight intermediate in size between 55 and 36kDa 
can be observed alongside the already described dispersed area of approximately 45kDa. 
The latter is present until 48 hours. 
Digestion at pH 4 and 4.5 produced results of no practical value to this work and have not 
been included. 
4.4.5.2 Pepsin mass 
Digestion at pH 3.5 with 0.5 and 1 % (w/w) pepsin produced results of no practical value to 
this work and thus have not been included. 
4.4.5.3 Optimization of ion-exchange conditions 
4.4.5.3.1 Visual inspection and scanning spectrophotometry 
Digested and diafiltered ovine blood resulted in a F(ab'h product that exhibited 
green/yellow colouration by visual inspection. 
Scanning spectrophotometry confmned that there was absorbance (Figure 4.5a and b) 
around 400nm as was expected from the visual inspection. Chromatographic separations by 
anion exchange with eluant buffer containing decreasing concentrations of NaCI (Figures 
4.6 a , b, c and d), that is 150, 80, 40 and 20mM, showed a maximum peak at 400nm 
\I I. 
~-/I \ 
',------------
+0.00A ~V_' ____ ~----~~ ____ 4_ ____ ~==~~+==---~ 
~~ r'l 
8CO.0 
13.500 
( /01 1. 
200.0 
(a) Digested and diafiltered (histidine buffer, containing 150mM NaCl) 
ovine blood 
v L A L __ -+-------=:::::=~====--------.-4 H M 
200.0 
800.0 
(b) ige ted and diafiltered ovine blood diluted 1:5 
Fi ure 4.5 canning (200nm- 800nm) spectrograph of pepsin digested 
and diafiltered ovine blood 
~;W3. f 
(a) 150mM NaCl 
"  OIlH r 
.~. e 
11.:1 I) 
,.01 v. ) 
-~----t-l 
~- J tH1 
1 Ij .80Hl U1')') 13013.(' 
(b) 80mM N aCl 
too.o "M DIU.) 8MO.O 
(c) 40mM NaCl 
10 .IlC HI"' DIU.) SOO.0 
(d) 20mM NaCl 
Figure 4.6 Scanning (200nm-800nm) spectrograph of pepsin digested, 
diafiltered and anion exchanged ovine blood in histidine buffer 
containing 20,40,80 and 150mM NaCl respectively 
4.4.5~.2 ~rity 
Digested and diafiltered (histidine buffer, containing 20mM NaCO ovine blood resulted in a 
dominant band (Figure 4.7a) corresponding to the molecular weight of F(ab')2 with two 
other fainter bands, one of molecular weight approximately of 116kDa and the other of 
approximately 45kDa. After anion exchange purification with buffers containing 150, 80, 
40 and 20mM NaCI the 116kDa band virtually disappeared from the eluted F(ab'h 
peak with all NaCl concentrations whereas the 45kDa band was retained (Figure 4.7 b, c, d 
and e). 
4.4.5.4 Potency of antivenom produced from blood 
Estimated at 576~g (470~g-670f.1g) of F(ab')2 per mouse for mice tested with V.latastei 
venom. 
4.4.5.5 Assessment of recovery of F(ab')2 prepared from blood and serum 
For 30mL of serum it was estimated at 480mg. For 43mL of blood processed with 20 and 
40mM NaCI it was estimated at 307mg and 299mg respectively. 
4.5 Discussion 
The physical assessment of the venoms carried out by SDS-PAGE suggests that although 
there are some proteins bands observed on SDS-PAGE that are specific to each venom 
tested, for example V.ammodytes venom has an approximate 66kDa protein band that is not 
shared with other venoms; there is a large number of bands that can be found in all the 
venoms studied. That is, protein bands corresponding to approximate molecular weights of 
30 to 57 kDa. This may be an indication that the components of the venoms studied may 
possess similar activity. 
A venom mixture of V.b.berus, V.a.aspis and V.a.ammodytes in 1:1:1 proportion is 
approximately two times more lethal than V.latastei venom as determined by LD50 The 
binding studies indicate that there is a high concentration of specific antibodies in V.latastei 
antisera that bind to components in V.a.ammodytes, V.a.aspis and V.b.berus venoms as well 
2())kDa 
116\"'()a 
l)7kl )a 
X4kDa 
f,f,kDa 
))kl>a 
45kDa 
~6k l)a 
M a b c d e a 
14 igu rc 4.7 , 1 -P A 4 C mpari on of dige ted and diafiltered (histidine 
buff r, C ntaining 20mM NaCl) ovine blood without anion 
e change (a) and with anion exchange (histidine buffer, 
c ntaining 150mM (b), OmM (c), 40mM (d) and 20mM (e) NaCl) 
as V.latastei venom. This result together with the observation that there is a large overlap 
of protein bands from venoms assessed by SDS-PAGE lends support to the suggestion that 
it is not necessary to use specific antisera to treat V.l.latastei envenomings. 
We have shown that it is practicable on the bench scale to produce a specific ovine F(ab'h 
anti venom of acceptable purity and potency for V.latastei from serum employing the 
enhanced pepsin digestion method described by Jones and Landon, (2002). Also, we have 
shown that this anti venom is approximately twice as potent as the Zagreb antivenom in an 
EDso mouse model when tested against V.latastei venom and a mixture of European Vipera 
venoms and that the Zagreb anti venom may contain undigested whole immunoglobulin 
molecules. These results are interesting because the Zagreb anti venom has been raised 
specifically against V.ammodytes venom and our anti venom specifically against V.latastei 
venom. They suggest that an anti venom produced from V.latastei antisera could be used to 
treat envenomings by the common European Vipera species and lends support to the fact 
that it may not be necessary to use specific antisera to treat V.latastei envenoming. 
Unfortunately, it was not possible to obtain Viperfav from Pasteur-Merieux for a 
comparative evaluation. 
We have shown that to produce V.latastei antivenom directly from blood the processing 
volume must be twice the volume for serum because more concentrated blood solutions 
result in coagulation during overnight incubation. The pepsin mass must be twice that used 
for serum over the same digestion time interval to cope with the extra protein content 
contributed by the haemoglobin, viz an extra lOOgL. The use of a comparable pepsin mass 
to that used for serum resulted in incomplete digestion of IgG. The pH must be 3.5 as pH 
2.5, and 3 respectively lead to degradation of the main F(ab')2 band within the time interval 
under investigation and a pH of 4 and 4.5 result in incomplete digestion of IgG and other 
serum proteins within the same time interval. We have shown that the anion exchange 
protocol in Jones and Landon (2002), which included the use of a histidine buffer 
containing 150mM NaCI, is not optimal for processing F(ab'h from blood in that it results 
in antivenom containing a yellow coloured impurity. We have been able to produce a 
colourless product by reducing the NaCI concentration to 20mM, but this resulted in only 
approximately fifty percent of the recovery achieved using serum. To improve on this 
recovery in the future it may be necessary to explore other ways of removing the yellow 
coloured impurity. For example. filtration strategies or positive ion-exchange 
chromatography where the product binds the ion-exchange column and the impurity travels 
through it depending on the choice of conditions. 
Essentially the reaction conditions for the direct digestion of blood are the same as for 
direct digestion of serum. The only differences are that a dilution factor of 1:2 is 
implemented for serum wereas a minimum dilution factor of 1:3 is needed for blood and 
further processing with ion-exchange chromatography necessitates a large reduction of the 
NaCI content of the buffer. 
We have also shown that there is a residual impurity seen on SDS-PAGE gels from the 
digestion of blood that may have originated from over-digestion of F(ab')z to Fab fragments 
due to the extra pepsin requirement or to a by-product of blood digestion that is resistant to 
pepsin. None-the-less the potency of the resultant F(ab' h from blood is comparable to that 
produced from serum. 
CHAYI'ER5: 
FINAL DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
The customary method of refining and concentrating antitoxins during the early part of the 
last century entailed fractional precipitation of the different serum proteins by the addition 
of inorganic salt (Gibson, 1905). Later Parfentjev (1936) discovered that, by the use of 
proteolytic enzyme digestion, it was possible to purify and concentrate the antitoxin further 
than was possible by salt fractionation alone. This was the last significant advance in the 
manufacture of antitoxins until the late 1960's when a group in Boston raised antibodies 
directed against the cardiac glycosides and showed that they could reverse the clinical 
manifestations of digoxin overdose (Butler and Chen, 1967). Three important innovations 
were incorporated into the development of a subsequent therapeutic product (Digibind) 
manufactured by Wellcome. First, sheep were preferred to horses; second, the 
immunoglobulins were cleaved with papain to produce Fab; and third, only Fab directed 
specifically against cardiac glycosides were used after separation from the much larger 
amounts of non-specific Pab by affinity chromatography. Such products have been given 
to many hundred patients and have an enviable reputation as regards both efficacy and 
safety (Antman et al. 1990). 
We have summarised the steps involved in making an anti venom (Figure 1.5, p.23). This 
work has been concerned primarily in the areas of immunising and bleeding, laboratory 
assessment, initial extraction and purification. The other areas have not been considered 
and will not be discussed further. 
Appropriate assessment methods are essential in comparative studies of the humoral 
response in different animal species and in following extraction and purification 
procedures. 
Kowalczyk et al.( 1985) reported that it was possible to recover approximately 120mg of 
IgY per egg; whilst Losch et a1.(J986) reported values ranging from 40 to 500mg IgY and 
McLaren et al.(l994) approximately l30mg per egg. Our studies, based on a 
fluoroimmunoassay developed for these purposes, gave recoveries of approximately 145mg 
of IgY per fresh egg using the extraction method of choice. The fluoroimmunoassay may 
also have application in documenting the immunological status in the chicken by 
monitoring totallgY concentrations in serum in response to immunisation. 
The manual ELISA method, although very widely used for assessment of antisera and 
antivenoms (Theakston et al.1977~ Sjostrom et al. 1996) has many difficulties and 
disadvantages. These include the need for specialised and expensive equipment (plate 
washers, plate readers, multichannel pipettes)~ non reusable materials and 
consumables(microtitre plates, venom for coating, second antibody for detection)~ and the 
use of an enzymatic detection step, often with potentially carcinogenic substrates requiring 
special disposal. The method is multistep and labour intensive which, together with the use 
of a temperature dependent enzyme detection step, results in marked imprecision of titre 
values. Typically 20 - 50% coefficients of variation have been observed in various in-
house manual ELISA systems used by myself and co-workers. A further drawback of 
manual ELISA is that it provides results in arbitrary titre units, which cannot be related 
directly to the actual antibody content of the antisera. 
A small scale affinity purification method was optimised and characterised during this 
work whose only requirements were small venom affinity columns and a UV 
spectrophotometer. Compared with ELISA, the advantages of SSAP are the use of simpler, 
less expensive instrumentation (important for the third world); simpler reagents, with the 
capability to reuse venom coupled columns (unlike coated ELISA plates which must be 
discarded after a single use)~ a simple procedure with fewer steps, leading to improved 
precision (CV about 6%)~ and determination of actual physical quantities of specific 
antibodies in gIL. 
Chicken egg yolk is a potential source of inexpensive antivenoms, provided simple, 
inexpensive methods of extracting and purifying its IgY can be developed. 
The purification of IgY from egg yolk was divided into two distinct areas, namely 
lipoprotein removal (stepl) and IgY separation (step 2). It was shown that caprylic acid 
was the best lipoprotein removal method from a panel of candidate methods frequently 
used in practice. This finding was unexpected because caprylic acid has been described in 
the literature only once for this application (McLaren et al. 1994) and has never been 
promoted. This may be because it produces an infranatant aqueous layer which is difficult 
to handle (Figure 5.1 a). We have been able to scale up the use of caprylic acid by the use 
of air filled blood bags (Figure 5.1 b) which can be centrifuged and punctured to obtain the 
infranatant layer without difficulty. This innovation enabled the processing of large 
numbers of eggs (to date, up to approximately 30) with satisfactory purity and recovery 
(results not reported here). No innovations were made in step two of the purification. 
It was disappointing to find that total IgY did not protect the mice in the relevant potency 
assessment and that we had to affinity purify the latter to produce an effective antivenom. 
Other investigators (Almeida et al. 1998; Maya et al. 2002) have managed to produce 
effective anti venoms without affinity purification and thus further studies are indicated. 
Possible areas for investigation are: dose/response studies. Thus the present studies used 
the venom doses typically used in sheep protocols and more studies are required to show 
the ideal venom dose regimen for hens, the route (i.m. pectorally) and the frequency of 
immunisation. 
As early as 1936 Parfentjev recognized the potential of proteolytic enzyme digestion for the 
removal of unwanted proteins. Pope (1938) used these findings as the basis of a peptic 
digestion method for the purification of antitoxic plasmas and the latter has been updated 
by Jones and Landon (2002). 
In this work we have used pepsin as described by Akita and Nakai (1993) to make IgY Fab' 
(a) Laboratory cale. infranatant aqueous layer 
(b) cale up. Inflated centrifuged blood bag 
(c) Punctured bag to obtain infranatant layer 
F igur 5.1 Lab r tor and calc up preparation of caprylic acid extract 
fragments from IgY processed from chicken eggs. We have gone a step further and have 
shown that it is not necessary to salt fractionate the caprylic acid extracted IgY prior to its 
digestion. This has both simplified the procedure and resulted in improved recovery of 
Fab'. 
To my knowledge the direct digestion of whole blood with pepsin has only been described 
by Harms (1948), who noted that the product was less pure (on the basis that it was darker 
in colour) but with better recovery (albeit only moderately better) than product produced 
from plasma. He concluded that there was no advantage to be gained by processing whole 
blood and didn't describe his procedure in detail. Our contribution here has been to obtain a 
pure, colourless product from direct blood digestion with pepsin by a combination of 
diafiltration and anion exchange chromatography. The latter required careful selection of 
the salt strength of the ion exchange buffer. These techniques had not been invented in 
1948 and thus were not available to Harms. Diafiltration and ion exchange chromatography 
were used by Jones and Landon (2002) to remove small molecular weight products of 
digestion and aggregates, respectively after pepsin digestion of whole serum. We have 
extended its use here to whole blood digestion to remove coloured products. 
At present our findings agree with those of Harms (1948). That is that no major advantage 
is gained by processing whole blood over serum other than missing out the blood clotting 
step. None the less we cannot rule out some use for blood digestion in the future. 
Overall, the use of pepsin to eliminate unwanted proteins has made it possible to reduce the 
total number of processing steps necessary to produce immunoglobulin fragments. Thus, in 
egg yolk and serum processing we have been able to do away with the salt fractionation 
step and in blood processing we have been able to remove both the clotting and salt 
fractionation steps. 
BffiLIOGRAPHY 
Akita EM, Nakai S. Immunoglobulins from egg yolk: Isolation and purification. J Food Sci 
1992;57:629-34. 
Akita EM, Nakai S. Comparison of four purification methods for the production of 
immunoglobulins from eggs laid by hens immunized with an enterotoxigenic E.coli strain. 
J Immunol Methods 1993;160:207-14. 
Akita EM, Nakai S. Production and purification of Fab' fragments from chicken egg yolk 
immunoglobulin Y. J Immunol Methods 1993;162:155-64. 
Almeida CM, Kanashiro MM, Rangel Filho FB, Mata MF, Kipni TL, DaSilva WD. 
Development of snake anti venom antibodies in chickens and their purification from yolk. 
Vet Rec 1998;143:579-84. 
Angulo Y, Estrada R, Gutierrez JM. Clinical and laboratory alterations in horses during 
immunization with snake venoms for the production of polyvalent (Crotalinae) anti venom. 
Toxicon 1997~35:81-90. 
Antman EM, Wenger TL, Butler VP, Jr., Haber E, Smith TW. Treatment of 150 cases of 
life-threatening digitalis intoxication with digoxin-specific Fab antibody fragments. Final 
report ofa multicenter study. Circulation 1990;81:1744-52. 
Ariaratnam CA, Meyer WP, Perera G et al. A new monospecific ovine Fab fragment 
anti venom for treatment of envenoming by the Sri Lankan Russell's viper. A preliminary 
dose-finding and pharmacokinetic study. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1999;61 :259-65. 
Arnold EN, Burton JA. A field guide to the reptiles and amphibians of Britain and Europe. 
London: Collins, I 992. 
Bellairs R. The structure of the yolk of the hen's egg as studied by electron microscopy. J 
Biophys Biochem CytoI1961;11:207-25. 
Bentley GA. A structural view of immune recognition by antibodies. Res Immunol 
1994; 145:31-45. 
Bernardi G, Cook WHo An electrophoretic and ultracentrifugal study on the proteins of the 
high density fraction of egg yolk. Biochem Biophys Acta 1960;44:86-96. 
Bomford R. Adjuvants for anti-parasite vaccines. Parasitol Today 1989;5:41-46. 
Boulenger GA. Poison apparatus - Different kinds of venom. In The Snakes of Europe. 
Methusen & Co. Ltd of London, 1913,35-39. 
Branden C, Tooze J. Recognition of foreign molecules by the immune system. In 
Introduction to Protein Structure. New York and London: Garland Publishing, 1991, 179-
Brandly CA, Moses HE, Jungherr EL. Transmission of antiviral activity via the egg and the 
role of congenital passive immunity to Newcastle disease in chickens. Poult Sci 
1946~25:397-98. 
Burley RW, Cook WHo Isolation and composition of avian egg yolk granules and their 
constituent a. and ~ lipovitellins. Can J Biochem Physiol 1961 ;39: 1295-307. 
Burley RW. Lipoproteins. In Johnson AR, Davenport JB, eds. Biochemistry and 
Method%RY of Lipids. New York: Wiley Interscience, 1971,85-106. 
Burrin DH. Spectroscopic techniques. In Wilson K, Goulding KH, eds. A Biologist's Guide 
to Principles and Techniques of Practical Biochemistry. Suffolk: Edward Arnold, 1986, 
270-312. 
Burrin DH. Immunochemical techniques. In Wilson K, Goulding HK, eds. A Biologist's 
Guide to Principles and Techniques of Practical Biochemistry. Suffolk: Edward 
Amold.1986. 116-52. 
Butler VP. Jr .. Chen JP. Digoxin-specific antibodies. Proc Natl Acad Sci 1967;57:71-78. 
Carroll SB. Thalley BS, Theakston RDG, Laing G. Comparison of the purity and efficacy 
of affinity purified avian anti venoms with commercial equine crotalid antivenoms. Toxicon 
1992;30: 1017-25. 
Calmette A. Contribution a l'etude du venin des serpents. Immunisation des animaux et 
traitement de l'envenimation. Ann Inst Pasteur 1894;VIII:275-291. 
Chard T. An introduction to radioimmunoassay and related techniques, 4 ed. 
Elsevier,1990. 
Chatterjee SC, Dass B. Devi P. A comparative study on different methods of 
hyperimmunization of horses for the preparation of polyvalent anti-snake venom serum. 
Indian J Med Res 1968;56:678-85. 
Cheng AC. Winkel K. Call for global snake-bite control and procurement funding. [letter; 
comment.]. Lancet 2001 ;357: 1132. 
Chippaux JP, Williams V, White J. Snake venom variability: Methods of study, results and 
interpretation. Toxicon 1991;29:1279-303. 
Chippaux JP, Goyffon M. Venoms, antivenoms and immunotherapy. Toxicon 1998;36:823-
Chippaux JP, Goyffon M. Les morsures accidentalles des serpents en France 
metropolitaine. Presse Med 1989~18:794. 
Chotwiwatthanakun C, Pratanaphon R, Akesowan S, Sriprapat S, Ratanabanangkoon K. 
Production of potent polyvalent anti venom against three elapid venoms using a low dose, 
low volume, multi-site immunization protocol. Toxicon 2001;39:1487-94. 
Christensen PA. The preparation and purification of antivenoms. Mem Inst Butantan Simp 
Internac 1966;33 :245-50. 
Claud B, Chague A, Tourret J. Morsures de viperes. Cah Anesthesiol 1989;37 :259-64. 
Cook WHo Egg Quality. In Carter TC, ed. A Study of the Hen's Egg. Oliver and Boyd: 
Edinburgh,1968,109-32. 
Coulter AR, Harris RD, Sutherland SK. Clinical laboratory: Enzyme immunoassay for the 
rapid clinical identification of snake venom. Med J Aust 1980; 1 :433-35. 
Curd J, Smith TW, Jaton J-C, Haber E. The isolation of digoxin-specific antibody and its 
use in reversing the effects of digoxin. Proc Nat Acad Sci 1971;68:2401-6. 
Debra 11, Donald Capra J.Immunoglobulins: Structure and Function. In Paul WE, ed. 
Fundamental Immunology. New York: Raven Press, 1984, 131-165. 
Detrait J, Naulleau G, Saint-Girons H. Contributi6n it l'etude du venin de V. latastei 
Bosca, 1878. Munibe 1983;35 :81-86. 
Dos Santos MC, D'lmperio Lima MR, Furtado GC, Colletto GM, Kipnis TL, Dias DS. 
Purification of F(ab')2 anti-snake venom by caprylic acid: A fast method for obtaining IgG 
fragments with high neutralization activity, purity and yield. Toxicon 1989;27:297-303. 
Edwards R. Historical development of immunoassays. In Immunoassay an introduction. 
London: William Heinemann Medical Books, 1985. 1-11. 
Ekins RP. Estimation of T4 in human plasma by an electrophoretic technique.Clin Chim 
Acta 1960; 5:453 -9 
European Commission report. Poison centres:Collection of the annual reports 1994 
Analysis and synthesis. SOC 95 201617 05F03. 1996. Bruxelles, Europlus s.a. 
Fischer M, Hlinak A. An ELISA for the quantification of chicken immunoglobulin(lgY)in 
various liquid media. ALTEX 1996;13:179-83. 
Fraser R, Jukes TH, Branion HD, Halpern KD. The inheritance of diptheria immunity in 
ducks. J ImmunoI1933~26:437-46. 
Gibson RB. The concentration of antitoxin for therapeutic use. J Bioi Chem 1905; 1: 161-70. 
Gilbert AB. Advances in Reproductive Physiology. London: Logos Press, 1967. 
Gonzalez D. Snakebite problems in Europe. In Tu AT, ed. Handbook of Natural Toxins, 
Reptile Venoms and Toxins. New York: Marcel Dekker, 1991,687-751. 
Grandgeorge M, Veron JL, Lutsch C et al. Preparation of improved F(ab')2 antivenoms. An 
example: New polyvalent European viper antivenom (equine). In Bon C, Goyffon M, eds. 
Envenomings and their treatments. Paris: Foundation Marcel Merieux, 1996,161-72. 
Harms AJ. The purification of antitoxic plasmas by enzyme treatment and heat 
denaturation. Biochem J 1948;42:390-397. 
Harris JB. Toxic constituents of animal venoms and poisons. Adv Drug React Ac Pois Rev 
1982~1:65. 
Ho M, Warrell MJ, Warrell DA, Bidwell D, Voller A. A critical reappraisal of the use of 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays in the study of snake bite. Toxicon 1986;24:211-21. 
Huber R. Three-dimensional structure of antibodies. Behring Inst Mitt 1984;76:1-14. 
Jenner E. An enquiry into the causes and effects of the Variolae vaccinae.Sampson Low, 
No.7 Deawick Street, Soho, London. 1798; 1-85. 
Jensenius J, Andersen I, Hau J, Crone M, Koch C. Eggs:Conveniently packaged 
antibodies. Methods for purification of yolk IgG. J Immunol Methods 1981 ~46:63-68. 
Jones RG, Landon J. Enhanced pepsin digestion: A novel process for purifying antibody 
F(ab'h fragments in high yield from serum. J Immunol Methods 2002;263:57-74. 
Jungling A, Wiedemann V, Kuhlmann R, Erhard M, Schmidt P, Losch U. Chicken egg 
antibodies for prophylaxis and therapy of infectious intestinal diseases. IV. In vitro studies 
on protective effects against adhesion of enterotoxogenic Escherichia coli to isolated 
enterocytes. Zentralbl Veterinarmed fBJ 1991;38:373-81. 
Kirkpatrick CH. Allergic histories and reactions of patients treated with digoxin immune 
Fab (ovine) antibody. The Digibind Study Advisory Panel. Am J Emerg Med 1991 ;9:7-10. 
Klaassen CD, Eaton DL. Principles of Toxicology. In Amdur MO, Doull J, Klaassen CD, 
eds. Casarett and Doull's Toxicology:The basic science of poisons. New York: Pergamon 
press, 1985, 12-49. 
Klemmer K. Venomous Animals and their Venoms. New York: Academic Press, 1968. 
Klemperer F. Uber naturliche Immunitat und ihire Verwerthung fur die 
Immunisierungstherape. Arch Expl Pathol PharmakoI1893;31:356-82. 
Kowalczyk K, Daiss J, Halpern J, Roth TF. Quantitation of maternal-fetal IgG transport in 
the chicken. Immunology 1985;54:755-62. 
Kuhlmann R, Wiedemann V, Schmidt P, Wanke R, Linckh E, Losch U. Chicken egg 
antibodies for prophylaxis and therapy of infectious intestinal diseases. I. Immunization and 
antibody determination. Zentralbl Veterinarmed EBl 1988;35:610-616. 
Landon J, Chard T. Therapeutic Antibodies. London: Springer-Verlag, 1995. 
Lea CH, Hawke JC. The influence of water on the stability of lipovitellin and the effects of 
freezing and of drying. Biochem J 1952;52: 105-114. 
Lesk AM, Tramontano A. Antibody structure and structural predictions useful in guiding 
antibody engineering. In Borrebaeck CAK, ed. Antibody engineering: A practical guide. 
New York: W.H.Freeman and Company, 1992,1-35. 
Leslie GA, Clem LW. Phylogeny of immunoglobulin structure and function. J Exp Med 
1969;130: 1337-52. 
Liener I. The sulfhydryl proteases: Food related enzymes. In Whitaker J, ed. Advances in 
chemistry series 136. Washington DC: American Chemical Society, 1974, 202-220. 
Losch U, Schranner I, Wanke R, Jurgens L. The chicken egg, an antibody source. Zentralhl 
Veterinarmed B 1986;33:609-19. 
Losonczy S, Szab6 C, Kiss Z, Bardos L. Application of an anti-HQlgY antibody for the 
measurement of IgY concentrations of hen's and quail's serum and yolk. Acta Physioiogica 
Hungarica 1999;86:253-58. 
Marquard H. Recherches statistique sur les accidents par morsure de serpents au Danemark 
et en Suede de 1900 a 1947. Presse Med 1951 ;59:1110. 
Martin WG, Vandegaer JE, Cook WHo Fractionation of livetin and the molecular weights 
of the a and ~ components. Can J Biochem PhysioI1957;35:241-50. 
Martin WG, Cook WHo Preparation and molecular weight of y-livetin from egg yolk. Can 
J Biochem PhysioI1958;36:153-60. 
Mattison C. The Encyclopedia of Snakes. London: Blandford,1995. 
Maya DC, Vasantha BM, Krishnan LK. Development of viper-venom antibodies in chicken 
egg yolk and assay of their antigen binding capacity. Toxicon 2002;40:857-61. 
McFerran TA. Minidictionary for Nurses, Third ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press,1995. 
McGowen MW, Artiss JD, Strandbergh DR, Zak B. A peroxidase-coupled method for the 
colorimetric determination of serum triglycerides. Clinical Chemistry 1983;29:538-542. 
McLaren RD, Prosser CG, Grieve RCJ, Borissenko M. The use of caprylic acid for the 
extraction of the immunoglobulin fraction from egg yolk of chickens imrnunised with ovine 
a-lactalbumin. J Immunol Methods 1994; 177: 175-84. 
Meyer WP, Habib AG, Onayade AA et al. First clinical experiences with a new ovine Fab 
Echis ocellatus snake bite antivenom in Nigeria: Randomized comparative trial with 
Institute Pasteur Serum (Ipser) Africa antivenom. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1997;56:291-300. 
Nkinin SW, Chippaux JP, Pietin D, Doljansky Y, Tremeau 0, Menez A. Genetic origin of 
venom variability: Impact on the preparation of antivenin serums. Bull Soc Pathol Exot 
1997;90:277-81. 
Parfentjev, A. I. Method for the purification of antitoxins and the like. Patent [2065196]. 
1936. United States Patent. 
Patterson R, Younger JS, Weigle WOo Antibody production and transfer to egg yolk in 
chickens. J Immunol 1962;89:272-78. 
Persson H. Clinical toxicology of snake bite in Europe. In Meier J, White J, eds. Handbook 
of clinical toxicology of animal venoms and poisons. New York: CRC Press,1995, 413-32. 
Persson H, Irestedt B. A study of 136 cases of adder bite treated in Swedish hospitals 
during one year. Acta Med Scand 1981 ;210:433-39. 
Perez MJF, Ferrieu PDM, Pequeno GB. Suero antiofidico frente a Vipera latasti. Medicina 
C[{nica 1999;113:754-55. 
Phelps T. The vipers.1n Poisonous snakes. Poole, Dorset: Blandford Press, 1981,85-117. 
Phisalix C, Bertrand G. Sur la propriete antitoxique du sang des animaux vaccines contre Ie 
venin de vipere. C R Acad Sci 1894;118:356-358. 
Polson A, Barbara von Wechmar M. Isolation of viral IgY antibodies from yolks of 
immunized hens. Immunological Communications 1980;9:475-93. 
Polson, A. Isolation of IgY from the yolks of eggs by a chlorofrom polyetheylene glycol 
procedure. Immunological investigations 1990; 19: 253-258 .. 
Pope CG. Disaggregation of proteins by enzymes. Br J Exp Patho11938; 19:245-51. 
Porter RR. The hydrolysis of rabbit gamma-globulin and antibodies with crystaline papain. 
Biochem J 1959;73: 119-27. 
Pourfarzaneh M, Nargessi RD. Composite polyacrolein-coated cellulose magnetisable 
particles: An "autoreactive" magnetisable solid-phase with superior buoyancy properties. 
Clinica Chimica Acta 1981; 111 :61-63. 
Pozio E. Venomous snake bites in Italy: Epidemiological and clinical aspects. Trop Med 
Parasitol 1988;39:62-66. 
Ramon G. Des anatoxines. C R Acad Sci 1924;178:1436-39. 
Reid HA. Adder bites in Britain. Br MedJ 1976;2:153-56. 
Roitt 1M. Essential Immunology, Sixth ed. London: Blackwell Scientific Publications,1988. 
Rose ME, Orlans E, Buttress N. Immunoglobulin classes in the hen's egg:Their segregation 
in yolk and white. Eur J ImmunoI1974;4:521-23. 
Roux P, Yersin A.Contribution a l'etude de la diphterie. Ann Inst Pasteur 1888;2:629-649 
Rowsselot JC, Berthier JC, Roze JC, Floret 0, Vidailhet M. Envenomation viperine grave. 
Arch Fr Pediatr 1991A8:589. 
Rucavado A, Moreno E, Gutierrez 1M. Effect of adjuvants on the antibody response of 
mice to Bothrops asper (Terciopelo) snake venom. Braz J Med Bioi Res 1996;29: 1337 -40. 
Russell FE, Timmerman WF, Meadows PE. Clinical use of antivenin prepared from goat 
serum. Toxicon 1970;8:63-65. 
Saint Girons H. Biogeographie et evolution des Viperes europeenes. Bull Soc Zool Fr , 
1980; 1 03: 155-66. 
Salva M J A. Estudio farmacologico del veneno de la Vipera Latasttei Bosca. Trab [nst Nac 
Cienc Med, 1946;6:397-409. 
Samloff 1M. Pepsinogens, pepsins, and pepsin inhibitors. Gastroenterology 1971 ;60:586-
Sanchez EE, Galan JA, Perez JC, Rodriguez-Acosta A, Chase PB, Perez JC. The efficacy 
of two antivenoms against the venom of North American snakes. Toxicon 2003;41 :357-65. 
Schade R, Pfister C, Halatsch R, Henklein P. Polyclonal IgY antibodies from chicken egg 
yolk-an alternative to the production of mammalian IgG type antibodies in rabbits. ATIA 
1991 ;19:403-19. 
Schade R, Erhard M. Short introduction to hen's humoral immune system. In Schade R, 
Behn I, Erhard M, Hlinak A, Staak C. Eds. Chicken Egg Yolk Antibodies, production and 
application.Berlin Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2001,1-8. 
Schmidt P, Wiedemann V, Kuhlmann R, Wanke R, Linckh E, Losch U. Chicken egg 
antibodies for prophylaxis and therapy of infectious intestinal diseases. II. In vitro studies 
on gastric and enteric digestion of egg yolk antibodies specific against pathogenic 
Escherichia coli strains. Zentralbi Veterinarmed [B] 1989;36:619-28. 
Scholer H, Wuthrich W. Clinical and toxological problems in poisonous snake bites. 
Schweiz Med Wochenschr 1970;100:1761-66. 
Sewell H. Experiments on the preventive inoculation of rattlesnake venom. J Physiol 
1887;8:203-210. 
Shephard CC, Hottle GA. Studies of the composition of the livetin fraction of the yolk of 
hen's eggs with the use of electrophoretic analysis. J bioi Chem 1949;179:349-57. 
Silverstein MA. The history of immunology. In Paul WE, ed. Fundamental Immunology. 
New York: Raven Press,1984, 23-40. 
Sjostrom L, Al Abdulla IH, Rawat S, Smith DC, Landon J. A comparison of ovine and 
equine antivenoms. Toxicon 1994;32:427-33. 
Sjostrom L, Karlson-Stiber C, Persson H, Al Abdulla IH, Smith DC. Development and 
clinical application of immunoassays for European adder (Vipera berus berus) venom and 
antivenom. Toxicon 1996;34:91-98. 
Smith DC, Reddi KR, Laing G, Theakston ROO, Landon J. An affinity purified ovine 
antivenom for the treatment of Vipera berus envenoming. Toxicon 1992;30:865-71. 
Smith HM, Smith RB, Sawin Lewis H. A summary of snake classification 
(Reptilia,Serpentes). Journal of herpetology 1977;11 :115-21. 
Sriprapat S, Aeksowan S, Sapsutthipas S et al. The impact of a low dose, low volume, 
multi-site immunization on the production of therapeutic antivenoms in Thailand. Toxicon 
2003;41 :57-64. 
Stahel E, Wellauer R, Freyvogel TA. Poisoning by domestic vipers (Vipera berus and 
Vipera aspis). A retrospective study of 113 patients. Schweiz Med Wochenschr 
1985;115:890-896. 
Steward JW. The snakes of Europe. Newton Abbot: David and Charles Limited, 1971. 
Steward MM. Affinity of the antibody-antigen reaction and its biological significance. In 
Glynn LE, Steward MW, eds. Structure and function of antibodies. Chichester: John Wiley 
and Sons,1981, 233-59. 
Sunthomandh P, Ratanabanangkoon K. A comparative study of three vehicles on antibody 
responses against elapid snake neurotoxin immunogens. Toxicon 1994;32:561-71. 
Sutherland SK. Serum reactions. An analysis of commercial antivenoms and the possible 
role of anticomplementary activity in de-novo reactions to antivenoms and antitoxins. Med 
J Aust 1977;1:613-15. 
Svendsen L. Crowley A. Ostergaard LH, Stodulski G, Hau J. Development and comparison 
of purification strategies for chicken antibodies from egg yolk. Laboratory Animal Science 
1995;45:89-93. 
Theakston ROO, Lloyd-Jones MJ, Reid HA. Micro-ELISA for detecting and assaying 
snake venom and venom-antibody. Lancet 1977;2:63941. 
Theakston RDO, Pugh RN, Reid HA. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay of venom-
antibodies in human victims of snake bite. J Trop Med Hyg 1981;84:109-12(a). 
Theakston ROO, Reid HA, Larrick JW, Kaplan J, Yost JA. Snake venom antibodies in 
Ecuadorian Indians. J Trop Med Hyg 1981 ;84: 199-202(b). 
Theakston ROO, Warrell DA, Oriffiths E. Report of a WHO workshop on the 
standardization and control of antivenoms. Toxicon 2003;41:541-57. 
Vandegaer JE, Reichmann ME, Cook WHo Preparation and molecular weight of lipovitellin 
from egg yolk. Arch Biochern Biophy 1956;62:328-37. 
Von Behring E, Kitasato S. Ueber das Zustandekommen der Diphtherie-immunitat und der 
Tetanus-immunitat bei Thieren. Dtsch Med Wochenschr 1890;16:1113-1145. 
Walsh K, Kauffman D, Sampath K, Neurath H. On the structure and function of bovine 
trypsinogen and trypsin. Proc Nat Acad Sci 1964;51 :301-308. 
Whitaker J. The sultbydryl proteases: Food related enzymes. Adv in Chern 1974;136:202 -
Wiedemann V, Linckh E, Kuhlmann R, Schmidt P, Losch U. Chicken egg antibodies for 
prophylaxis and therapy of infectious intestinal diseases. V. In vivo studies on protective 
effects against Escherichia coli diarrhea in pigs. Zentralbl Veterinarmed [B 1 1991 ;38:283-
Wiedemann V, Kuhlmann R, Schmidt P, Erhardt W, Losch U. Chicken egg antibodies for 
prophylaxis and therapy of infectious intestinal diseases. III. In vivo tenacity test in piglets 
with artificial jejunal fistula. Zentralbl Veterinarmed [B]1990;37: 163-72. 
Williams J. Serum proteins and the livetins ofhen's-egg Yolk. Biochern J 1962;83:346-55. 
Yalow RS, Berson SA. Immunoassay of endogenous plasma insulin in man. J Clin Invest 
1960;39: 1157-1175. 
Zeller E. Enzymes of snake venoms and their biological significance. Adv Enzymol , 
1948;8:459-95. 
	413414_001
	413414_002
	413414_003
	413414_004
	413414_005
	413414_006
	413414_007
	413414_008
	413414_009
	413414_010
	413414_011
	413414_012
	413414_013
	413414_014
	413414_015
	413414_016
	413414_017
	413414_018
	413414_019
	413414_020
	413414_021
	413414_022
	413414_023
	413414_024
	413414_025
	413414_026
	413414_027
	413414_028
	413414_029
	413414_030
	413414_031
	413414_032
	413414_033
	413414_034
	413414_035
	413414_036
	413414_037
	413414_038
	413414_039
	413414_040
	413414_041
	413414_042
	413414_043
	413414_044
	413414_045
	413414_046
	413414_047
	413414_048
	413414_049
	413414_050
	413414_051
	413414_052
	413414_053
	413414_054
	413414_055
	413414_056
	413414_057
	413414_058
	413414_059
	413414_060
	413414_061
	413414_062
	413414_063
	413414_064
	413414_065
	413414_066
	413414_067
	413414_068
	413414_069
	413414_070
	413414_071
	413414_072
	413414_073
	413414_074
	413414_075
	413414_076
	413414_077
	413414_078
	413414_079
	413414_080
	413414_081
	413414_082
	413414_083
	413414_084
	413414_085
	413414_086
	413414_087
	413414_088
	413414_089
	413414_090
	413414_091
	413414_092
	413414_093
	413414_094
	413414_095
	413414_096
	413414_097
	413414_098
	413414_099
	413414_100
	413414_101
	413414_102
	413414_103
	413414_104
	413414_105
	413414_106
	413414_107
	413414_108
	413414_109
	413414_110
	413414_111
	413414_112
	413414_113
	413414_114
	413414_115
	413414_116
	413414_117
	413414_118
	413414_119
	413414_120
	413414_121
	413414_122
	413414_123
	413414_124
	413414_125
	413414_126
	413414_127
	413414_128
	413414_129
	413414_130
	413414_131
	413414_132
	413414_133
	413414_134
	413414_135
	413414_136
	413414_137
	413414_138
	413414_139
	413414_140
	413414_141
	413414_142
	413414_143
	413414_144
	413414_145
	413414_146
	413414_147
	413414_148
	413414_149
	413414_150
	413414_151
	413414_152
	413414_153
	413414_154
	413414_155
	413414_156
	413414_157
	413414_158
	413414_159
	413414_160
	413414_161
