Attlee, Bevin and the role of the 
United Nations 1945-1949 
Zulkanain Abdul Rahman 
A thesis submitted for the-Degree of 
Doctor of Philosophy 
in the 
Sc~ool of History 
University of East Anglia 
Norwich, England 
May 2006 
C This copy of the thesis has been supplied on condition that anyone who consults it is understood to 
recognise that its copyright rests with the author and that no quotation from the thesis, nor any information 
derived therefrom. may be published without the author's prior. written consent. 
ABSTRACT 
This study examines the dilemma of the 1945-1951 Labour Government in placing 
the United Nations within British foreign policy, and the United Nations' role in 
international politics at the onset of the Cold War. In particular, it explores the 
contrasting views over the issues raised by the creation of the United Nations from 
1945 to 1949 of Labour's two most prominent political figures - Attlee and Bevin. 
These issues include the international trusteeship scheme, the international control of 
atomic energy, and the idea of a United Nations international force. 
Attlee's foremost consideration in advocating internationalist ideas in the first two 
years in office were Britain's economic constraints resulting from the Second World 
War, and the new advancement in technological warfare, such as the invention of 
atomic bomb and bomber aircraft. Attlee foresaw the presence of the United Nations 
as the best way to manage the new world order, and eventuany, to end the balance of 
power politics in the post-war world. 
Bevin's traditionalist and imperialist political outlook was the antithesis to Attlee's 
desire for internationalism. He was in favour of balance of power politics with the 
United Nations second only to the British Empire in international politics. His 
ultimate aim from the very beginning of his career as Britain's first post-war Foreign 
Secretary was to re-establish Britain's power and prestige in international politics. 
Bevin had no intention that Britain, as one of the world powers in the post-war world, 
should subordinate itself, nor surrender its sovereignty to the United Nations. In fact, 
the fate of the United Nations was in the hands of the United Kingdom, rather than 
the reverse. To Bevin, Britain despite its financial difficulties, needed to reassert its 
power and prestige if it was to playa significant role in world politics and ensure the 
survival ofthe British Empire in the coming years. 
Internationalist ideas, such as those that Attlee strongly advocated, were not practical 
politically. The United Nations suffered from the unwillingness and hesitation of the 
world powers to make it the centre of world affairs. Instead, the world powers, 
committed to balance of power politics, were the key actors in international politics. 
CONTENTS 
Abstract 
Contents 
Acknowledgments 
Abbreviations 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
Introduction 
The Significant of the Study 
The Structure of the Thesis 
Sources 
Chapter 2: The Context 
Introduction 
The Development of Labour Party Foreign Policy 
Background to Attlee and Bevin 
Attlee and Bevin on Labour's International Issues 
The British Empire 
The League of Nations 
Anglo-Soviet Relations 
Collective Sepurity 
Attlee's Government of July 1945 
Domestic Political Environments 
Economic Constraints 
The United Nations in 1945 
Chapter 3: The International Trusteeship System 
Introduction 
Attlee's Government and the Colonial Issue 
The United Nations Trusteeship Scheme 
Attlee's Perspective on the UN Trusteeship System 
Attlee's Attitude to the former Italian Colonies 
Bevin's Perspective on the UN Trusteeship 
Bevin and the ex-Italian Colonies 
Conclusion 
Chapter 4: International Control of Atomic Energy 
Introduction 
Attlee and Bevin on Collective Security 
International Control of Atomic Energy 
Bevin on International Scheme 
The Foreign Office on International Control 
The United States on Atomic Energy 
Conclusion 
Chapter 5: A United Nations Force 
Introduction 
Chapter 6: 
Bibliography 
Attlee on the United Nations Force 
The Military Staff Committee Deadlock 
Bevin on the United Nations Force 
The COS and the FO on United Nations' Force 
Attlee's Reaction 
Conclusion 
Conclusion 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I won a grant as a full time student with study leave abroad for three years. This is the 
only opportunity I have had in the whole of my life to enhance and better my 
knowledge of modem European history. For this, I must express my appreciation to 
the Ministry of Higher Education of Malaysia and to the Training and Staff 
Development Division of the University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia for 
offering me these facilities. 
In completing the thesis, I must also express my gratitude to my supervisor, Professor 
John Charm ley, Head of the School of History at the University of East Anglia. His 
academic encouragement, guidance, constructive comments and inspiring questions 
from the very first day I registered as an MPhiJlPhD student at the School of History 
stimulated my interest and desire to know more about the topic of my thesis. I also 
wish to express my appreciation to the Librarians in the main Library, University of 
East Anglia, and at the Public Record Office in Kew Gardens for their kind assistance 
in finding the sources I needed and teaching me how to use the microfilm. 
Lastly yet importantly, to my family, who have been with me constantly for these 
three years in Norwich. Their moral support and understanding during the time that I 
have devoted to my research is invaluable. 
LPACR 
UNAEC 
ABBRIVIATIONS 
Advisory Committee on Atomic Energy 
British Documents on the End ofthe Empire 
Cabinet Office Record 
Cabinet Meeting 
Column 
Commonwealth 
Chiefs of Staff 
Communist Party of Great Britain 
Documents on British Policy Overseas 
Document 
Foreign Office 
Foreign Relations of the United States 
HislHer Majesty's Ambassador 
Independent Labour Party 
League of Nations 
Labour Party Annual Conference Report 
Labour Representative Committee 
Military Staff Committee 
North Atlantic Treaty Organisation 
Number 
Prime Minister 
Prime Minister's Office 
Social Democratic Federation 
Soviet Union 
Transport and General Workers Union 
Trade Union Congress 
United Kingdom 
United Nations 
United Nations Atomic Energy Committee 
United Nations Security Council 
United States 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
Volume 
World War 2 
Chapter 1 
Introduction 
Introduction 
This study concerns British foreign policy regarding the United Nations (UN) at the onset 
of the Cold War. The thesis examines the attitude of the Labour Government of 1945-
1949 towards the issues raised by the creation of the UN. Clement Richard Attlee, the 
Prime Minister, had a long record in opposition as an internationalist, and belonged to 
.that idealistic strand in Labour thinking which saw the UN as an answer to the problems 
facing the world after 1945. His Foreign Secretary, Ernest Bevin, shared none of these 
assumptions. He was a pragmatic nationalist in a tradition going back at least to 
Palmerston, and viewed the UN less optimistically than Attlee. The thesis examines the 
ongoing tension between these two perspectives, using a series of case studies to 
illuminate the dialogue between the two men. Their debate was informed by their very 
different interpretations of the Soviet Union's international policy. The case studies used 
were chosen because the moments of crisis that they represent throw a particularly vivid 
light on the development of the argument between the two men, and help to explain why, 
despite the fact that Attlee was Prime Minister, it was Bevin's point of view that 
prevailed. 
The question of placing an international organisation such as the League of Nations 
(LON) and the United Nations (UN) within British foreign policy and its role in the 
international arena prior to the fonnation of Attlee's government in July 1945 was not a 
new one. The debate between prominent British politicians over the idea of creating the 
LON had taken place towards the end of the First World War. Lloyd George's 
Conservative dominated government of the time, however, had the impression that if the 
LON, as world government, were more powerful than the British Empire, it would 
jeopardise not only Britain's traditional strategies and interests worldwide, but also its 
prestige and status as an undisputed world power. Lloyd George's Cabinet members, 
senior diplomatic and military advisers shared this view. Eventually, Britain only 
supported the idea of creating the LON on the basis of facilitating a general Anglo-
American peacemaking strategy. I 
This meant that while accepting the idea of creating the LON in the aftermath of the First 
World War, the established Conservative government committed to a non-compromise 
policy by not allowing the LON to interfere in matters concerning the British spheres of 
influence, security, defence, imperial affairs, and its decisive role as a world power in 
international politics. This mainstream nationalist and imperialist political attitude 
continued throughout the interwar years. Nevertheless, unlike the United States, which 
never joined the LON, Gennany, which joined only from 1926 to 1933, or the Soviet 
Union, which joined in 1934 and left in 1939, the United Kingdom maintained its 
membership of the LON throughout the interwar years. 
I O.W. Egerton, Great Britain and the Creation of the League of Nations: Strategy. Politics and 
International Organisation 1914-1919, (The University of North Carolina Press: Chapel Hill, 1978), p. 
202. . 
Then, in the Second World War, the United Kingdom under Winston Churchill's 
premiership played a significant role in establishing the United Nations (UN). Churchill, 
however, who was well-known to favour power politics, foresaw that the establishment 
of the UN would pose more of a challenge than an opportunity to the United Kingdom in 
tenns of preserving its own power, status and prestige as a world power in peacetime? To 
Churchill, not only the future of international peace and security, but also the fate of the 
UN itself as world government was in the hands of the world's powers. The significance 
of these historical developments suggests that the Conservative Governments in Britain 
from the early twentieth century to the end of the Second World War traditionally 
regarded international organisations, particularly the LON and the future UN, as 
peripheral issues within British foreign policy, their role secondary to the British Empire 
in international politics. The United Kingdom, as one of the world's powers, intended to 
continue to playa decisive and leading role in world affairs in the twentieth century. 
The Conservative Party was not alone in regarding international organisations such as the 
LON and the UN as outside the framework of British foreign policy, and playing only a 
secondary role in the international arena. Bevin, a member of the Labour Party and the 
leading trade union leader of the time, shared the political view that Britain should pursue 
and uphold its standing as a Great Power. In fact, he was a well-known figure in the 
Labour Party in the 1930s for attacking and condemning internationalist and pacifist 
views concerning the presence and role of the LON in the international arena. He 
Z E. J. Hughes, 'Winston Churchill and the Formation of the United Nations Organisation', Journal of 
Contemporary History, Vol. 9, No.4, October 1974, p. 187 
continued to hold his nationalist and imperialist views in peacetime, even though it was 
in conflict with the internationalist view of his own Prime Minister. 
The Labour Party came to power in July 1945. Attlee, the party leader, well-known for 
his internationalist outlook within the Labour Party in the interwar years, considered that 
it was timely to make the UN more powerful in international politics if peace and security 
were to be preserved. He was committed to the internationalist view that the presence of 
world government was necessary in the management of the new international order 
between states in peacetime. Thus, he had no hesitation in committing Britain to this new 
direction in its foreign policy. To Attlee, all states, including the world powers, were not 
only to base their policy on the UN, but also to subordinate themselves to the UN as the 
world's highest authority. 
This was a fresh departure from balance of power politics, and a drastic change in the 
history of British foreign policy in the twentieth century. Britain's ratification of the 
Charter of the UN on 22 August 1945 under AttIee's premiership meant that Britain not 
only intended to maintain its membership, but also regarded the UN as the cornerstone of 
its foreign policy. In fact, in its election manifesto of May 1945, the Labour Party 
emphasised its intended priority to make the UN the highest world authority, above 
anything else including all the world powers. It was timely for the Labour Party to fulfil 
its manifesto. Internationally, the United States of America's ratification of the Charter of 
the UN in July 1945 also encouraged Attlee to put the UN at the centre of world affairs in 
peacetime. In contrast to their isolationist policy of not joining the LON in the interwar 
years, the United States for the first time committed to active participation in UN affairs 
in the coming years. In peacetime, the United States wanted to give the international 
community the impression that it was not only a member of the UN, but also its patron 
and guardian. 
This was the issue - the dilemma of the Labour Government of 1945-1951 in placing the 
UN within British foreign policy, and the UN's role in international politics that this study 
will attempt to examine in depth. The study focuses on Attlee's and Bevin's perspectives 
on the issues raised by the creation of the UN, namely the peaceful settlement of 
conflicts, the international trusteeship system, the international control of atomic energy, 
and the creation of the UN's force. This is a study of high politics, since both Attlee and 
Bevin, as the policy makers, had a profound influence on the formulation and direction of 
the Labour Government's foreign policy from 1945 to 1949. 
The Significance of the Study 
The number of scholarly works on British foreign policy under Attlee's government is 
impressive. Nevertheless, there are at least three practical reasons why this study needs to 
be undertaken. First, this is one of the most important topics left unexplored by scholars 
looking at the making of Labour foreign policy under Attlee and Bevin. Understanding 
the first post-war British government's attitude to the UN is crucial. The UN was to 
provide an alternative to the old-fashioned balance of power politics, which matched 
Attlee instincts. The position occupied by the UN as relations with the Soviet Union 
worsened tells us much about the changing priorities of the government; it also tells us 
something about Attlee and Bevin. That is the second reason for attempting this study: to 
examine the contrasting roles played by Labour's 'Big Two', although some 
contextualisation is necessary to place them within the traditions of Labour's stance on 
foreign policy. Finally, the different positions of AttIee and Bevin on the role of the UN 
are indicative of the dilemmas facing a government that was determined to reassert 
British power and prestige, as well as acting as commentary on what those concepts 
meant to each man. In light of these practical reasons, it is hoped that this study 
contributes a new interpretation of how Attlee's government dealt with the issue of the 
UN in the context of early Cold War developments. 
At present, historical literature shows that the place of the UN within British foreign 
policy and its role in international politics from 1945-1949 has not only captured little 
scholarly attention, but has also been over-simplified and largely neglected. The existing 
literature fails to make a sufficient effort to critically examine Attlee's and Bevin's 
thoughts on the UN in the context of the new international circumstances resulting from 
the Second World War. The book Britain and the United Nations (1957) written by 
Geoffrey L Goodwin, discusses British policy towards the United Nations from 1946 to 
1955. Goodwin, however, focuses his work more on the strengths and weaknesses of the 
United Nations in the context of international politics during the first ten years of its 
existence. In Chapter two of his book, he rightly Suggests that from the outset of the 
establishment of the UN, Britain had little faith in the international organisation, 
particularly its ability to safeguard British interests worldwide. In his assessment, 
Goodwin does not hesitate to suggest that the UN's role in world politics was 
insignificant in terms of ending the numerous international disputes at the time, such as in 
Iran, Syria, Lebanon, Greece, the Italian colonies and Indonesia. Eventually, according to 
Goodwin, British dissatisfaction at the credibility of the United Nations as guarantor of 
world peace and security encouraged Attlee's government to form a regional pact in the 
creation of the North Atlantic Organisation in 1949. Goodwin's work also briefly touches 
on the clash of interests between the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union in the UN 
Security Council, and he discusses the disagreement between Bevin and Molotov during 
the very first meeting ofthe Security Council. 
C M Woodhouse's work, British Foreign Policy since the Second World War (1961) also 
offers a glance at the Labour government's policy concerning the United Nations, 
although only one chapter is devoted to this. Moreover, Woodhouse's discussion 
concentrates on Bevin's dissatisfaction with the United Nations from the outset over the 
issues such as the misuse of veto, Soviet criticism of British action in Greece and 
Indonesia, and the inability of ~e Military Staff Committee to fulfil its task of forming an 
international force at the UN's disposal. Bevin was also dissatisfied with the failure of the 
Security Council to settle n\lmerous international crises, such as the British dispute with 
the Albanian government, the Greek civil war and the Anglo-Iranian crisis. In short, 
Woodhouse shares the same perspective as Goodwin. Nevertheless, Woodhouse's work 
ignores Attlee's internationalist intentions and his willingness to base British foreign 
policy on the United Nations at the onset of his government in July 1945. 
Winston Churchill's views on the future UN in wartime, and his role in forming the 
United Nations is discussed in the article 'Winston Churchill and the Formation of the 
United Nations Organisation' (1974) written by E. J. Hughes. Hughes argues that during 
the war, Churchill was inclined to form a regional body with an international air force 
and an international court. Churchill's main concern was Europe and regionalism, rather 
than a new universal organisation. From Churchill's point of view, the formation of the 
United Nations was essential to ensure that the United States permanently participated in 
world affairs. According to Hughes, Churchill emphasised the continuing role of the 
world powers rather than the UN in the field of security and peace in the aftermath of the 
Second World War. Churchill foresaw that the fate and success of the new international 
organisation depended largely on the integrity and unity of the great powers. Further, he 
did not believe that the new world body would revolutionise international politics. 
Nevertheless, as noted in Hughes' early approach, the discussion concentrates solely on 
the UN from Churchill's point of view, excluding those of Attlee and Bevin. 
Allan Bullock, in his massive and highly academic work, Ernest Bevin: Foreign 
Secretary 1945-1951 (1983) offers only very limited discussion of Labour's policy 
towards the United Nations. In fact, the discussion on the United Nations only appears as 
a SUbtopic in his third and fifteenth chapters. Although Bullock does mention that Bevin 
had difficulties in dealing with the internationalists, who put their faith in the United 
Nations, he does not specifically point out or elaborate on the individuals Bevin had to 
confront concerning the role of the UN in international politics. Nevertheless, Bullock's 
works stimulate a desire to know more about Bevin's position on the UN's role and place 
in British foreign policy from 1945-1949. 
Another work that touches very briefly on Bevin's attitude and views on the role of the 
UN in British diplomacy is in a chapter of Geoffrey Warner's 'Ernest Bevin and British 
Foreign Policy 1945-1951' (1994). According to Warner, Bevin's prime task in his 
capacity as Foreign Secretary was the restoration of Britain's credentials as a world 
power. From Warner's point of view, Bevin committed himself to traditional balance of 
power politics and was determined to resist any attempts of other powers or organisations 
to intervene in Britain's internal and international affairs. Bevin was sceptical of the hope 
that the Soviet Union and the United States would collaborate with the United Kingdom 
under the UN framework in promoting peace and security, as he had the impression that 
both the Soviet Union and the United States were in fact committed to extending their 
political grip all over the world. Furthermore, Bevin was reluctant to fulfil Soviet 
demands to place Tripolitania under international supervision. Nevertheless, the United 
Nations issue is only a peripheral issue in Warner's work. He does not highlight Attlee's 
and Bevin's positions regarding the place of the UN within British foreign policy nor its 
role in fnternational politics in the post-war world. 
Meanwhile, in the context of early Cold War developments, historical debate largely 
focused on Soviet-American rivalry, rather than including Britain's role and response as 
one of world powers shaping international politics at the time. In fact, in the post-war 
world, Britain continued to be one of world powers with worldwide interests and 
influence, playing a crucial role in shaping international politics. As a result, in the early 
1980s, leading British historians started to devote their work to describing Britain's role 
and contribution in the formative years of the Cold War. One of the earliest historical 
works to balance and highlight Britain's significant role in the world in the early years of 
the Cold War is Victor Rothwell's Britain and the Cold War 1941-1947 (1982). 
Rothwell's work, however, excludes the United Nations' crucial role at the end of the 
Second World War from the perspective of the world powers, particularly Britain. Next, 
the compilation of articles under the title Britain and the First Cold War (1990), edited 
by Ann Deighton, critically examines Britain's significant contribution in intensifying 
and accelerating the phases of the Cold War. One of the articles, written by Edward 
Johnson, concentrates on Britain's hesitation as a permanent member and a world power 
in the United Nations, in accepting and accelerating the process of creating an 
international force at the disposal of the United Nations. Johnson's discussion, however, 
does not make sufficient attempt to highlight the issue of a United Nations force from 
either Attlee's or Bevin's perspective. 
In addition, Sean Greenwood, in his Britain and the Cold War 1945-1991 (2000) insists 
that Britain's greatest contribution was to the origin of the Cold War. Greenwood's work, 
however, only touch briefly on the issue of the future United Nations in wartime from the 
perspective of the Foreign Office. The Foreign Office, according to Greenwood, had 
foreseen many political difficulties in the attempt to preserve and institutionalise 
international cooperation under the aegis of the United Nations in the post-war world. 
There is no further discussion in Greenwood's work of the role and place of the United 
Nations in British foreign policy. Another work that explores Britain's political reaction 
at the onset of the Cold War is Cold War Britain 1945-1964: New Perspective (2003) 
edited by Michael F. Hopkins, Michael D. Kandiah and Gillian Staerck. None of the 
articles in this Cold War History series, however, explores the role of the United Nations 
in British foreign policy and in the world from 1945 to 1949. In short, it is no 
exaggeration to suggest that although historical works highlight Britain's part in the onset 
of the Cold War, the role and place of the United Nations in British foreign policy at the 
time captured little attention from scholars, and is under-explored. 
In relation to the contrasting views of Attlee and Bevin over the place of the UN in 
British diplomacy and its role in the international arena in peacetime, the existing 
literature largely focuses on their distinctive views concerning the position of Britain in 
the Middle East and the Mediterranean. The historical writings that emphasise Attlee's 
and Bevin's disagreement over the question of the British sphere of influence in the 
Middle East contend with the conventional works on their role in formulating and 
directing Labour's external policies from 1945 to 1951. According to traditional 
interpretation, Attlee and Bevin formed a strong political team in handling Labour's 
external policy, regardless of the issue. In fact, Bevin had Attlee's support from the very 
beginning of his career as foreign secretary in deciding and formulating the external 
policies of the Labour government. In other words, both of them shared similar political 
views. As a result, conventional works largely understate Attlee's role, in the sense that 
he is described as being very marginal and his contribution insignificant with regard to 
the formulation and direction of Labour's foreign policy from 1945 to 1951. 
Francis Williams' work, A Prime Minister Remembers (1961) points out that Attlee and 
Bevin worked closely together and trusted each other. Based on the recorded 
conversation Williams conducted with Attlee on his 76th birthday on January 1959, 
according to Williams Attlee himself emphasised that he and Bevin had agreed that the 
United Nations was the key to co-operation between the 'big three'. Furthermore, both of 
them had called for a neutral zone in the Middle East, and they were able to face up to the 
reality of Soviet ambitions for that area. These statements are found to be only partially 
valid if historical sources on this aspect are analysed critically. Astonishingly enough, 
Attlee himself did not emphasise his distinctive opinions on issues concerning the United 
Nations. 
In addition, Avi Shlaim, Peter Jones and Keith Sainsbury, in British Foreign Secretaries 
. Since 1945 (1977) under-rate Attlee's role in shaping the foreign policy of the Labour 
government. Their works focus on Bevin's career as Foreign Secretary to the Labour 
government in numerous world issues. The authors understand that Attlee and Bevin 
were united in determining the main line of Labour's external policies. AttIee, they add, 
made no point of intervening and both of the 'Big Two' in Attlee's government were 
probably closer than any other members of the cabinet, as there was no evidence that 
Attlee and Bevin disagreed on any external issues. This interpretation can be seen to be 
incorrect if one refers to Attlee's and Bevin's distinctive opinions, first over the Middle 
East question and second, as this study attempts to examine in depth, their position over 
the issues rose by the creation of the UN from 1945 to 1949. 
Another work that emphasises Bevin's role more than Attlee's in directing Labour's 
foreign policy is Allan Bullock's Ernest Bevin: Foreign Secretary (1983). Bullock clearly 
exaggerates Bevin's role in the field of foreign affairs between 1945 and 1951. He argues 
that Bevin's view met with no opposition from the Prime Minister on the handling of the 
Labour government's external affairs, including its economic and defence policies. In 
fact, Bullock points out that Attlee was an ineffectual leader, lacking in ideas on how to 
handle international issues. Consequently, Bullock concludes that Bevin, rather than 
anyone else - including Prime Minister Attlee - was the champion of the British nation, in 
that he preserved Britain's status and prestige as one of the world powers. According to 
Bullock, in his six years as Foreign Secretary to Attlee's cabinet, Bevin contributed 
enormously to the British nation. To Bullock, Bevin managed to preserve Britain's 
position as one of the world powers, and initiated the steps leading up to persuading the 
United States to grant the Marshall Plan, and to the creation of NATO. In short, Bullock 
pictures Bevin's relationship with the Prime Minister from the very beginning of the 
Labour government as easy, smooth and harmonious. Bullock's interpretation needs to be 
re-examined. Attlee was in fact very consistent in his internationalist desire during his 
first two years in office. He contested Bevin's inclination to pursue the balance of power 
politics in light of the way he regarded the UN as world government. 
In the fifth chapter of The Attlee Governments 1945-1951 (1992), Kevin Jefferys argues 
that the reality of Labour's international affairs was that Bevin was mainly responsible 
for fonnulating and deciding all major issues from 1945 onwards. He further adds that 
Bevin successfully imposed his view on AttIee's Cabinet and the Prime Minister, 
including the high-ranking government officials who consistently supported Bevin during 
and after 1947. A recently-published book by William D. Rubinstein, Twentieth Century 
Britain: A Political History (2003), accepts the historical interpretation that Attlee and 
Bevin conducted the Labour's government foreign policy in close partnership. 
Rubinstein's work focuses on the big political figures in the Labour government, 
including Attlee, Bevin, Harold Laski, Herbert Morison, and Hugh Dalton. Nevertheless, 
he largely ignores the fact that Attlee belonged to the internationalist and idealist strand 
of Labour politics, and fails to highlight the contrasting views held by Attlee and Bevin 
regarding Britain's commitment and role in the Middle East. In short, all the above 
literature portrays Attlee and Bevin as always agreeing with each other, and sharing 
similar political outlooks in fonnulating Labour's external issues. These works largely 
fail to highlight the significant differences of position and perspective between Attlee and 
Bevin over the issues raised by the creation of the UN from the very beginning of the 
Labour government. 
Nevertheless, the new published literature does emphasise that both Attlee and Bevin 
differed significantly in terms of their political outlook in formulating and directing the 
external policy of the Labour government. According to this revisionist work, Attlee was 
Bevin's only political contender in deciding the government's external policies, 
particularly in his first two years in office. Bevin, who was nationalist and imperialist in 
his political outlook, contested. Attlee's internationalist political vision. Nevertheless, as 
mentioned earlier, the attention of scholars has largely focused. on Attlee's and Bevin's 
disagreement over British influence in the Middle East and Mediterranean, rather than 
examining their contrasting views on the place and role of the UN within British foreign 
policy and international politics between 1945 and 1949. 
One of the earliest works to focus on Attlee's active involvement and his close interest in 
Labour's external affairs is Attlee (1982) by Kenneth Harris. The author highlights 
Attlee's role and contribution in conducting the foreign affairs of Labour governments. 
According to Harris, Attlee's contribution derived from the fact that he had much 
experience in Churchill's wartime Cabinet, and he actively participated in planning post-
war reconstruction. Harris also states that Attlee's neutral attitude within his cabinet was 
his main strength as a politician. Attlee was a good manager of men, in the sense that he 
managed to control and calm down Bevin's left wing critics. Harris's work, however, only 
briefly states that Attlee was a committed internationalist in favour of the presence of 
world government to manage the new international order in the post-war world. Harris 
does not elaborate or examine further, how consistent Attlee was in translating his 
internationalist ideas into an action, nor Bevin's reaction and its results. 
Another fascinating study which challenges the traditional view is an article by Raymond 
Smith and John Zametica entitled 'The Cold Warrior: Clement Attlee Reconsidered 
1945-47' (1985). These scholars emphasise that Attlee had his heart on the UN in the 
post-war world. He committed himself to translating his internationalist ideas into action 
within his first two years in office, challenging the advocates of power politics over the 
British sphere of influence in the Middle East. Attlee's proposal was that Britain should 
disengage itself from the area in order to avoid a clash of interests with other world 
powers, particularly the Soviet Union. In addition, he was reluctant to accept the view 
that the Soviet Union was committed to spreading its influence worldwide. Attlee insisted 
that the UN rather than the United Kingdom, should take part in sharing the duty, 
responsibility, and economic burden of the administration of the Middle East. The 
advocates of balance of power politics, in particular Bevin, senior officials at the Foreign 
Office and the head of the British Army, however, were reluctant to agree to Attlee's 
internationalist plan to reduce Britain's role as world power in the Middle East. Attlee, 
according to Smith and Zametica, finally agreed to keep his desire for internationalism to 
himself after the Chiefs of Staff threatened to resign in January 1947. However, it is 
argued that the main reason for Attlee to do this was unknown, as both Smith and 
Zametica based their assumption mainly on the testimony of Field Marshal Montgomery, 
and this testimony was not always the most reliable.) Smith and Zametica's study, 
however, focuses on Attlee's view of the question of the Middle East between 1945 and 
1947 in contrast to that of Bevin and the Chiefs of Staff. Their discussion does not deal 
precisely with Attlee's and Bevin's thoughts on the place and role of the UN in British 
foreign policy between 1945 and 1949. 
John Kent, in his 'The British Empire and the Origin of the Cold War 1944-49' (1990), 
also points out that Attlee was Bevin's main opponent in the fonnulation and direction of 
Labour's external policy from 1945 to 1947. Kent's justification is that Attlee was much 
more interested and committed to internationalist ideas, having great hopes for the UN as 
world government, and promoting international collaboration for the sake of peace and 
3 See the discussion in Sean Greenwood, Britain and the Cold War /945-9/, (The Macmillan Press Ltd: 
London, 2002), p. 34. 
security. To Kent, this was the centre of Attlee's political thought. In addition, Kent 
argues that Attlee did not concur with Bevin and the Foreign Office over the issue of the 
Soviet Union's desire to extend its influence worldwide in the aftermath of the Second 
World War. Attlee's and Bevin's contrasting views over the issues raised by the creation 
of the UN are ignored in Kent's discussion, however. Next, Peter Hennessy's work Never 
Again: Britain 1945-1951 (1992) emphasises that relations between Attlee and Bevin 
were always uneasy, the Middle East being the major area of contention between them. 
Yet again, Hennessy describes the same area of contention between Attlee and Bevin; the 
Middle East. 
There was general agreement among most, if not all, of the senior decision-makers within 
the Foreign Office on matters such as the role and place of the Empire and the growing 
threat of the Soviet Union in the aftermath of the Second World War. This is one of John 
Saville's main arguments in his book The Politics of Continuity: British Foreign Policy 
and the Labour Government 1945-46 (1993) to justify his thesis that there was continuity 
between the Attlee's government's foreign policy and that of the wartime government 
under Churchill. Saville's work emphasises that Attlee and Bevin differed significantly 
in the first two years of Attlee's government. According to Saville, Attlee was the only 
political opponent, not only of Bevin, but also of the high-ranking government officials at 
the Foreign Office and the head of the army, particularly in the field of foreign policy. 
Nevertheless, Saville's works again refer to the area of contention between Attlee and 
Bevin as the Middle East, rather than the issues raised by the creation of the UN. 
Moreover, Saville limits his discussion to pre-1947, and offers no further discussion on 
how AttIee increasingly came to share Bevin's point of view in the light of the growing 
threats from the Soviet Union and his disillusionment with the UN as a world 
government. 
The work of Jerry H. Brookshire, Clement Attlee (1995) also explores AttIee's significant 
role in the foreign affairs thinking of the Labour Party. Brookshire agrees with Harris's 
explanation that Attlee had the ability to handle numerous world issues. Brookshire's 
argument is that Bevin was AttIee's closest political ally in the Labour Cabinet. If there 
was a divergence of view, both politicians managed to keep their disagreement private. 
The author, however, does not specifically discuss the issues on which Attlee and Bevin 
agreed or disagreed in public and in private. In this respect, Brookshire's argument raises 
some questions about AttIee's and Bevin's distinctive opinions on the direction of 
Labour's external policy, including the UN. 
John Charmley's fascinating book on Churchill's Grand Alliance: The Anglo-American 
Special Relationship 1940-1957 (1995) also draws attention to the political disagreement 
between Attlee and Bevin in fonnulating and directing the Attlee government's foreign 
policy. Channley's work is exceptional in the sense that it largely motivated this study to 
further explore Attlee's desire for internationalism and its result between 1945 and 1949. 
In Chapter fifteen of his book, Charmley argues that Attlee, who was of the idealist and 
internationalist strand of Labour's politics, wished to oppose the traditional British 
foreign policy based on the Great Power thesis. Instead, according to Charmley, Attlee 
was committed to a new foreign policy based on the UN as an alternative to power 
politics. Attlee foresaw the creation of the UN as world government at the centre of world 
politics as the answer to the existing world affairs. Thus, in the light of new international 
circumstances resulting from the Second World War, particularly the invention of the 
atomic bomb, Attlee contested Bevin's inclination to pursue his nationalist and 
imperialist attitude, such as in defending Britain's position in the Middle East. To Bevin, 
it was not timely for the United Kingdom, as a world power, to base its policy on the UN 
as Attlee strongly advocated. Bevin did not easily accept the internationalist view of 
allowing the UN to intervene in Britain's affairs internally or internationally. Despite the 
fact that Charmley's book highlights Attlee's desire for internationalism and how his 
political version contrasted with the nationalist political outlook, such as that held by 
Bevin, Charmley does not elaborate further on Attlee's and Bevin's perspectives on the 
issues raised by creation of the UN from 1945 to 1949, which this study attempts to 
examine. 
One of the compilations of articles that explores the achievements of the Labour Party 
internally and internationally in the twentieth century under the title 'Labour and 
International Affairs', by Stephen Howe (2000), does emphasise Attlee's desire for 
internationalism in the post-war world. Howe shares John Saville's view that Attlee was 
the only significant senior critic of British foreign policy. To Howe, Attlee had the 
impression that Britain could no longer continue its leading role in international politics 
in the light of new international circumstances and internal economic weaknesses. 
Howe's article, however, does not highlight the dilemma of the Labour government in 
placing the UN within British foreign policy from 1945 -1949. 
The Structure of the Thesis 
This thesis is arranged broadly along chronological lines, charting Attlee's and Bevin's 
political outlook in the 1930s and up until the late 1940s. 
The first chapter is the introduction to the thesis. The aim of the second chapter is to put 
Attlee and Bevin into context as historical figures within the Labour Party, as well as in 
British' politics. It focuses on the main developments in Labour's foreign policy; Attlee's 
and Bevin's backgrounds; their involvement in debates on foreign affairs and their 
political outlook before they both came to power in July 1945. The last part of this 
chapter highlights the internal developments of Attlee's government, particularly its 
economic aspects and the internal political circumstances, as these internal developments 
underpinned the direction of the government's foreign policy from 1945 to 1951. 
The issue of the international trusteeship scheme is the subject of Chapter Three. The 
discussion highlights the controversy between AttIee and Bevin over the issue of placing 
ex-Italian colonies under the international trusteeship system. Attlee resolved to place 
these and other British colonies overseas under international supervision. His justification 
in advocating the international trusteeship scheme was that it would provide a period of 
preparation and transition towards the colonies' self-government and self-determination. 
To Bevin, the fate of the colonies was in the hands of the British Empire rather than those 
of the UN. Thus, he did not wish to place the ex-Italian colonies and the British colonies 
overseas under international management, the United Kingdom itself remaining 
responsible for them. Generally, most British government ministers such as Bevin 
opposed international management of colonies. Bevin's reluctance to accept international 
management of the colonies in the aftennath of the Second World War also meant that he 
was committed to limiting UN attempts to intervene in British colonial affairs. 
Chapter Four concentrates on the issue of international control of atomic energy. This 
was the attempt to put into practice the Collective Security system under the UN 
framework. Attlee's aim was that atomic energy should be controlled internationally, to 
ensure that it would only be used for peaceful purposes. He persuaded the United States 
to participate in the international control scheme. Bevin, on the other hand, was doubtful 
as to whether a world power, which possessed the atomic bomb, in this case the United 
States, would share its knowledge of how to build the bomb with other nations including 
the United Kingdom. As a result, Bevin encouraged Britain to develop its own atomic 
bomb in early 1947, as possession of such a weapon conferred power. 
While Chapter Four is concerned mainly with the international control of atomic energy, 
Chapter Five deals with another attempt to promote a universal Collective Security 
system; the creation of a UN international force. This chapter explores the UN's 
justification for having an international force at its disposal. Attlee, the advocate of the 
Collective Security system, was willing to place Britain's national forces at the disposal 
of the UN force. The aim of the creation of the Military Staff Committee (MSC) was to 
facilitate the formation of the international force. The MSC, however, had difficulties in 
creating an international force, largely due to the unwillingness of world powers to place 
their forces at the UN's disposal. Bevin was less enthusiastic about the idea of a UN 
force, nor was he keen to contribute Britain's national forces to it. Bevin's foremost 
concern was the political implications of Britain's taking part in the international force 
scheme. Finally, Chapter Six is the conclusion of the study. 
Sources 
This study relies mainly on official documents, and uses the official unpublished 
government records deposited at the National Archives in Kew, particularly the original 
documents in PREM 8 (The Prime Minister's Office), FO 800 (Bevin's Private Papers), 
FO 371 (General Correspondence From Political and Other Departments), CAB 121 
(Cabinet Office), CAB 128 (Cabinet Conclusions) and CAB 129 (Cabinet Memoranda). 
PREM 8 consists of personal letters and important messages between Attlee and Bevin, 
Attlee's official telegrams, his short notes and comments, his reports and memoranda, 
and extracts from Cabinet Meetings in which he directly participated. FO 800 consists of 
the relevant minutes made by senior Foreign Office officials, Bevin's private papers such 
as his official letters to high-ranking officers at the Foreign Office, and his letters to the 
British Ambassador to the United Nations. This file also contains Bevin's memoranda 
and reports to the Prime Minister about United Nations matters, and the minutes of 
meetings over which he presided. Bevin also had his special files on United Nations 
matters marked FO 8001UN. In this file are letters he received from the British 
Ambassador and British delegates at the United Nations in New York. This study refers 
to these unpublished documents for relevant evidence and facts related to Attlee's and 
Bevin's perceptions of the United Nations. 
The study also depends heavily on the massive published volumes of House of Commons 
Debates, or Hansard. This source is essential to the study, as speeches in House of 
Commons can give useful insights into a government's thinking on how it presents its 
ideas to the public. AttIee and Bevin were active participants in the debate sessions in 
their capacities as Prime Minister and Minister for Defence, and Foreign Secretary to the 
Labour government. Attlee's and Bevin's arguments, their clarification on policy and 
answers to questions put to them at the House of Commons are essential, as they reflect 
their attitudes towards the United Nations. 
AttIee's and Bevin's speeches are also printed in the Labour Party Conference Report. 
The Labour Party Conference decisions were not binding on the government though 
government might want to present its policies to Confo/ence in a careful way, so as to 
avoid opposition from within party. Attlee's and Bevin's speeches and views on the 
party's external policies are valuable to this study. The study also refers to The Yearbook 
of the United Nations, the official yearly publication of the United Nations headquarters 
in New York, which contains security and political matters referred to the Security 
Council for collective action from 1946 to 1951. 
There are limitations to using these official documents. For instanc~ some of AttIee's 
and Bevin's letters are hand-written and in parts are illegible. Moreover, the original 
sequence of documents on microfilm is incomplete, and the original documents are not 
fully accessible, only parts of the full text appearing such as extracts of meetings and the 
conclusions. In addition, Attlee and Bevin seldom wrote comments or suggestions on 
letters addressed to them. Attlee, for instance would only make a short note at the bottom 
or top of a letter, such as 'go ahead' and 'I agree', without further elaboration. 
Conclusion 
In examining and analysing the dialogue between the 'Big Two' over the issues raised by 
the creation of the UN from 1945 to 1949, it is hoped that what will follow will make a 
significant contribution to understanding the attitudes and perspectives of Labour's policy 
makers in placing the UN within British foreign policy and the UN's role in international 
politics at the onset of the Cold War. 
Chapter 2 
The Context 
Introduction 
The main objective of this chapter is to put Attlee and Bevin into perspective as historical 
figures within the Labour Party, as well as in British politics generally, before they came 
to power in July 1945. To achieve this, the chapter is divided into five parts. The first part 
outlines the development of the Labour Party's foreign policy from the early formation of 
the party to the establishment of Attlee's government in July 1945. The second part 
provides both Attlee's and Bevin's personal and political backgrounds within the Labour 
Party. The third part discusses some of Attlee's and Bevin's thoughts on Labour's 
international issues in the 1930s and early 1940s. The fourth part highlights the internal 
developments in Attlee's government, as these internal developments are interconnected 
in determining Attlee's foreign policy. The final part is the conclusion. 
The Development of Labour Party Foreign Policy 
From the very early days of its fonnation in 1900 as the Labour Representation 
Committee (LRC), officially known as the Labour Party in 1906, trade union movements 
rather than socialist organisations dominated the British Labour Party in terms of 
membership and voting power. l Prior to the end of the First World War, the Labour Party 
played a decisive role as opposition party, and concentrating more on domestic than on 
international issues. Nevertheless, one of the remarkable features in Labour's politics in 
the interwar years (1918-1939) is that the issue of its foreign policy increasingly captured 
the attention of its members, particularly amongst the upper echelon of the party in the 
1930s. At the time, Labour's external policy invited political confusion and contention 
among party members in terms of its interpretation, priority and implementation. 
There are at least three main points to discuss in relation to the development of Labour's 
foreign policy. The first point is that the principle of internationalism, inherited from the 
Victorian radical liberalism of the nineteenth century and influenced by Christian 
socialism was the most basic principle in Labour's foreign policy.2 Labour's foreign 
policy was largely an application of the ideas of liberal internationalism rather than a 
distinctive socialist foreign policy. Internationalism is a political program for peace and 
security. The key feature of internationalism is the creation of strong world government 
as the highest authority in international politics to enforce its law and decisions on all 
I RhiannOD Vickers, The Labour Party and the World: '11Ie Evolutioll of Labour's Foreign Policy /900-
1951, Vol. 1, (Mancbester University Press: Manchester and NewYorlc, 2004), p. 20. 
Z Ibid, p. 6, and Stephen Howe, 'Labour and International Affairs', in Duncan Tanner. Pat Thane IDd Nick 
Tiratsoo (Eds.), Labour's Fint Century, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000), p. 120. 
states.3 The stronger the world government, the better the world may achieve permanent 
peace and security. In addition, internationalism means to employ conciliation and 
compromise rather than use force or violence as a means to deter aggression. In other 
words, internationalism emphasises peaceful settlement of inter-state conflict. The belief 
in internationalism led the internationalists and the pacifists within the Labour Party to 
support the creation of an international organisation such as the League of Nations (LON) 
in the aftermath of the First World War. To Labour internationalists and pacifists, the 
establishment of the LON was not only the best way for nations to be organised, but also 
best for world government. The presence of world government as the world's highest 
authority was vital for the management and supervision of international affairs, as well as 
of relations between states, for the sake of peace and security. This meant that the Labour 
Party had a strong political tradition of supporting international organisations compared 
to the other British political parties such as the Conservative Party. Eventually, in the 
interwar years the LON occupied a central place in the foreign policy of the Labour 
Party. 
The second point is that prior to the formation of Attlee's government, there were only a 
few prominent political figures within the party who actively participated in Labour's 
international affairs debates.4 One of the reasons for this was that regular members of the 
party were more interested in domestic issues such as unemployment, inequality, poverty 
and workers' welfare. From the establishment of the Labour Party prior to the First 
World War, the most dominant political figures in debating Labour's international issues 
3 K. Goldmann, The Logic of Internationalism: Coercion and Accommodation, (Routledge: London and 
New York, 1994), p. 2. 
4 Stephen Howe, 'Labour and International Affairs'. p. 124. 
were Ramsay MacDonald and Arthur Henderson. In the 1930s, only Attlee, Bevin and 
Dalton actively engaged in discussing Labour's external issues. 
The third point is that in the Party's political tradition from 1930 onwards, the major area 
of contention, particularly amongst the senior members of the Labour Party, was foreign 
policy, rather than domestic issues. The divergence of opinion concerning Labour's 
international affairs, such as the issues of collective security, war and reannament, was 
largely due to the fact that the British Labour Party was a coalition of trade union 
movement, socialist organisations such as the Independent Labour Party (ILP), the 
Fabian Society and the Social Democratic Federation (SDF), and various Marxist groups. 
Each of these groups had their own political views on how to deal with international 
affairs.5 On one occasion, Ramsay Macdonald, a pacifist, clashed with those who 
supported the First World War. In the 1930s, the prominent political figures in the Labour 
party divided over the issues of reannament and appeasement. In relation to reannament, 
George Lansbury, the leader of the Labour Party at the time, had to resign from his post. 
Lansbury, who was a pacifist and inclined to protest against the use of violence and war 
in international politics, continuously expressed his disagreement over the issue of using 
force in order to stop aggression in the case of Italy against Abyssinia. Even~lly, 
Lansbury came under great internal political pressure, particularly from realists such as 
Bevin, trade union leader, to agree with the resolution to use force if necessary to stop 
aggression. Having been defeated in the vote, Lansbury resigned. 
5 Rhiannon Vickers, The Labour Party and the World: The Evolution of Labour', Foreign Policy 1900-
1951, p. 33. 
Background to Attlee and Bevin 
It is essential to highlight Attlee's and Bevin's personal and political background prior to 
the formation of Attlee's government of July 1945. One of the obvious reasons to do so is 
that these backgrounds will help in understanding the nature of their political thought and 
the way they were to react to events in the coming years. 
Concerning Attlee's personal and political background, three points need to be stressed. 
First, Attlee was from a middle-class Victorian family and was well-educated.6 He 
studied law at University College, Oxford and taught at the University in 1912. The 
second point is that prior to his active engagement in Labour politics in early 1920s, 
Attlee had his own experience of the First World War, which remained intact in his mind 
in the coming decades. Initially, he was a captain in the British army, and was then 
promoted to the rank of major in 1919. Nevertheless, fighting in the war taught him 
much. Attlee saw the catastrophic impacts of war on human life and civilisation. He 
himself suffered illness and was wounded at Gallipoli, Mesopotamia and in France.' 
After the war, he maintained his interest in military matters. He had the impression that 
the prime cause of war between nations was the desire of each nation, particularly 
European nations, to compete with each other for world supremacy in terms of prestige, 
power and influence. In addition, the impacts of war injected a moral element of 
promoting goodwill for the sake of human civilisation, peace and security. It is suggested 
6 Robert Pearce. Attlee. (Longman: London and New York, 1997). p. 8. 
7 Jo1m Swift, Labour in Crisis: Clement Anlee and the Labour Party tn Opposition 1931-40, (Palgrave: 
Basingstoke. 2001). p. 6. 
that this impression continued to influence Attlee's thought on military matters in the 
coming decades. 
The third point is that Attlee became actively engaged in Labour's politics as an ethical 
socialist.S Prior to the First World War, he participated in socialist organisations rather 
than the trade union movement. He first joined the Fabian Society, a socialist 
organisation, in 1907. Later, he joined another socialist organisation, the Independent 
Labour Party (ILP), which worked closely with the trade union movements.9 The ILP, 
under its leading figure, Kier Hardie, affiliated itself with the Labour Party. In 1922, he 
contested the parliamentary seat for Limehouse and won the seat. From 1935 onwards, 
he was the opposition leader in British politics, as he was made the Leader of the Labour 
Party to replace George Lansbury. Thus Attlee had long experience as a prominent 
internationalist and opposition figure in the British political arena before he came to 
power in July 1945. 
There are also three main points to stress concerning Bevin's personal and political 
background. First, Bevin was semi-literate. He received no higher education and did not 
write any books, unlike Attlee. Second, Bevin was working class in origin, coming from 
an agricultural labourer's family. He himself used to work as a farm labourer and van 
driver before entering British politics. to The third point is that Bevin was the leading 
figure in the trade union movement from the 1920s onwards. Initially, Bevin became 
 Robert Peace, 'Clement Attlee 1935-55', in Kevin Jefferys {Bds.}, Leading Labour From Kier Hardie To 
Tony Blair, (I. B. Tauris: London and New York, 1999), p.82. 
9 Kenneth Harris, Attlee (Weidenfeld and Nicolson: London, 1982), pp. 25-26. 
10 AUan Bullock, Ernest Bevin: Foreign Secretary 1945-1951, (Heinemann, Londo", 1983), p. 1. 
increasingly known as a trade union leader when he was made the first General Secretary 
of the Transport and General Workers Union (TGWU) in 1921. His appointment as the 
first secretary of the TGWU made him one of Britain's Labour leaders. He went on to the 
General Council of the Trade Union Congress (TUC), a federation of all British trade 
unions from 1925 to 1940. It is suggested that Bevin projected his image as a political 
defender of the working class in the Labour Party through the trade union. He tried to 
satisfy working class grievances in terms of gaining better material improvements such as 
wage, working hours, welfare and safety. In 1940, Bevin became the Minister of Labour 
in the wartime Cabinet under Churchill's premiership. The significance of these facts is 
that Bevin's personal experience In handling numerous working class issues in 1920s and 
1930's through the trade union movement and as Churchill's cabinet member did provide 
him some diplomatic skill particularly on how to bargain and negotiate in the field of 
foreign affairs. 
Last, yet importantly, both Attlee and Bevin were aware of the glory and prestige of the 
British Empire at the turn of the twentieth century. Britain's naval supremacy was 
capable of furthering and protecting British interests worldwide. I I The United Kingdom, 
as an undisputed world power before the Second World War, played a significant role in 
maintaining world peace and security. In addition, Britain was the world's financial 
centre, with worldwide economic activities focusing on the United Kingdom as it 
controlled essential raw materials, which came mainly from its colonies in Asia and 
Africa Undoubtedly, both Attlee and Bevin, as part of the British nation, were proud of 
II Ibid, p. 16. 
the British Empire. Britain's global power and decisive role in international affairs was 
soon to influence their political outlook in the coming years. 
AUlee and Bevin on Labour's International Issues in the 1930's 
Given AttIee's background, namely his Victorian middle class family, Oxford education, 
war experience and his commitment to ethical socialism, and on the other hand Bevin's 
working class, non-socialist origins and his decisive role in the trade union movement, it 
is essential to give an overview of Attlee's and Bevin's thoughts on some of Labour's 
external issues. The discussion in this part covers the period from the 1930s to the early 
1940s. It attempts to highlight Attlee's and Bevin's political outlook as prominent 
opposition figures in British politics where Labour's external issues were concerned, 
particularly as expressed at Labour Party conferences, in the House of Commons and, in 
the case of Attlee, in his own book. Both Attlee and Bevin were increasingly involved in 
Labour's,extemal policy debates from the 1930s onwards, as Bevin was the leading trade 
union leader, and from 1935 onwards Attlee was the leader of the Labour Party. It was 
during this period, before they came to power in July 1945, that Attlee and Bevin 
developed and strengthened their political views on Labour's international affairs. 12 In 
other words the series of events in the 1930s undoubtedly influenced and shaped both 
Attlee's and Bevin's political views in terms of providing experience and justification 
concerning how to deal with these issues in the future. This meant that both Attlee and 
12 John Swift, Labour in Crisis: Clement Attlee and the Labour Party in Opposition 1931-40, p. 4. 
Bevin came to power in July 1945 with their own political map, particularly regarding 
how to handle Labour's external issues. 
In the 1930s, the Labour Party needed to deal with numerous international issues such as 
the rise of fascism in Europe, the extension of Germany's power led by Hitler, the 
Spanish civil war and imperial issues such as in India.13 However, the scope of this part 
does not allow coverage of all these events. Thus, the discussion in this part concerns 
only Labour's external issues such as the League of Nations (LON), the British colonies 
overseas, collective security, and the Soviet Union, from Attlee's and Bevin's point of 
view. One of the obvious reasons to discuss their perspectives on these selected issues is 
that at the time these were the dominant issues within the Labour Party itself. In addition, 
it is suggested that these issues continued to be the most crucial and challenging issues in 
peacetime in relation to Attlee's government foreign policy. A final reason for outlining 
Attlee's and Bevin's attitudes towards these external issues in the 1930s is to demonstrate 
that both Attlee and Bevin's perspectives and attitudes concerning Labour's international 
affairs differed significantly, even before they came to power in July 1945. 
The British Empire 
Of the numerous external issues in the interwar years, the issue of controlling colonies 
such as in Asia and Africa was crucial to Labour, as it carried the connotation of the 
economic exploitation of colonial peoples. Imperialism and colonialism were not new 
phenomena in twentieth century world politics. Britain had been committed to 
13 John Swift, Labour in Crisis: Clement Aulee and the Labour Party in Opposition 1931-40, (palgrave: 
Basingstoke, 2001), p. 66. 
imperialism and colonialism since the Industrial Revolution in the eighteenth century. 
Consequently, at the tum of the twentieth century the British Empire was at its zenith, 
and one third of the world's land surface was under British rule. In other words, Britain 
was truly a world power with huge colonies in Asia and Africa. 
Concerning the British Empire, Attlee disagreed with the nature of imperialism and the 
concept of empire. From his point of view, imperialism and empire were seen as a prime 
cause of the world's disputes and conflicts, and a source of exploitation. He stated that 
imperialism is necessarily anathema to the Labour Party. which no more believes in the 
exploitation of one people by another. 14 Eventually, Attlee opposed imperialism because 
it meant the economic exploitation of the peoples of Asia and Africa. To Attlee, Britain 
had to share the blame and the responsibility, as the British Empire possessed colonies. 
Attlee indicated his perspective clearly in 1937: 
Socialists took their full share in denouncing and exposing the 
exploitation of the black, brown, and yellow races, which was 
invested with so much glamour by Joseph Chamberlain and the 
apostles of the idea of Empire. IS 
Instead, Attlee wished to transfonn the British Empire into one political entity, which 
would be called a world state. This meant that all nations, including Britain, should 
surrender their sovereignty to the super-state. Further, the British Empire, as well as 
British citizens, would be secondary to the world state, and Britons would eventually 
become world citizens. Attlee expressed his idea concerning the world state to Labour's 
delegates in 1934: 
14 Clement R. Attlee. The Will and the Way To Socialism, (London: Methuen & Com. Ltd, 1935). p. 87. 
IS Clement R. Attlee, The Labour Party In Perspective, (London: Victor 00l1ancz Ltd, 1937), p. 228. 
We have absolutely abandoned every idea of nationalist loyalty. 
We are deliberately putting a world order before our loyalty 
towards our own country. We will be called very disloyal 
because we own allegiance here to a world order rather than to 
what is called patriotism. We say we want to see put on the 
statute book something which will make our people citizens of 
the world before they are citizens of this country. 16 
For Attlee, the creation of the world state would mean that all nations, including the 
British nation, would have equal opportunities to develop their own destiny and ensure 
the survival of human civilisation in a peaceful and harmonious world. He mentioned in 
the House of Commons in 1940 that: 
Our aim is to try to establish a world of peace and of free people. 
That does not mean the kind of peace in which everybody is 
subdued to the will of one man or one nation. It means a peace of 
free people, such as we civilised people understand it, and what 
we are asking for ourselves we are asking for all other nations.17 
Concerning the issue of colonies of the British Empire such as in Asia and Africa, Attlee 
called for colonial liberation and the right of all nations to self-government. As a first 
stage in forming their own governments and embarking on economic self-improvement, 
Attlee suggested that these colonies should be placed on a trusteeship scheme under 
international management. One of Attlee's reasons for 'this was to avoid the continuous 
economic exploitation of one nation of the other nations. Under international supervision, 
the colonies and their peoples would have a chance to gain experience of administering 
their own government and to develop their natural resources for their own benefit. Attlee 
16 The Labour Party Annual Conference Report (thereinafter LPACR), 1934, col. 174. 
17 Ha1/Sard, sib Series, Vol. 367, 5 December 1940, col. 754. 
mentioned without hesitation that undoubtedly during the last half-century the doctrine of 
trusteeship has to a large extent replaced mere imperialism.18 
Attlee's denunciation of the British Empire in the 1930s indicated that he had little faith 
in pursuing power politics. From his point of view, the division of the world into spheres 
of influence, the politics of alliance and balance of powers would only lead to political 
competition and war, rather than peace and global stability. In this regard, AttIee's views 
were conventional on the political left-wing at the time. Attlee took for granted that the 
Labour Party were behind him in opposing power politics and the use of violence to deter 
aggression. As he wrote in his book: 
The Party is agreed in its rejection of the policy of the balance of 
power and of the use of force as an instrument of policy. It is 
agreed on the objective of a World Co-operative Commonwealth. 
It aims at the subordination of national sovereignty to world 
loyalty, the reduction of all national armaments to the lowest 
possible by international agreement, and to the substitution of 
arbitration for war. 19 
Attlee continued to denounce power politics in wartime as a prime cause of war. In 1943, 
in the House of Commons, he pointed out: 
I hope we have got away from that idea of the value of the 
extreme fragmentation of the world under absolute sovereignty. 
That has certainly not brought peace. Free association, of which I 
believe we are a notable example, is to my mind the way to 
greater stability, and it is important that this immense area and 
their populations, all brought together with peaceful co-
operation, should be there in the world as one of the big units.20 
II Clement R. Attlee, The Will and the Way To SocIalism, p. 87. 
\9 Clement R. Attlee, The Labour Party in Perspective, p. 214. 
lO Hansard, S Series, Vol. 395, 2 December 1943, col. 63S. 
However, Bevin held different views concerning the issue of British Empire and Britain's 
colonies in Asia and Africa. In fact, he was a supporter of the British Empire and an 
advocate of the balance of power in the interwar years. Bevin was determined to ensure 
the survival of the British Empire as it was, with worldwide responsibility. To justify his 
nationalist and imperialist attitude, Bevin stated that having an empire was not a strange 
political practice in the twentieth century. He clarified that: 
Empire is not limited to the British Empire. The United States of 
America is as much an empire as the British Empire. So is 
Russia. The Russians have different methods of extending their 
empire but it is an em~ire nevertheless and their attitude to 
subject races is the same. 1 
The above statement was a clear indication that nations such as the United States and the 
Soviet Union had and continued to have their own empires and colonies. At the 1935 
Labour conference, Bevin told delegates that America, for example, had committed itself 
with the Monroe Doctrine to protect the North and South American continents from 
invaders. Soviet Russia, on the other hand, had a great territory, which consisted of 
200,000,000 people with different languages, histories, religions and cultures. 'Japan, 
meanwhile, was fighting a series of expansionist wars in East Asia.22 Therefore, as a 
great nation, the United Kingdom was doing nothing wrong in possessing its own empire 
with colonies in Asia and Africa; it was a political culture of the great nations in the 
twentieth century. In fact, from Bevin's point of view, the larger the British Empire, the 
better for the United Kingdom in terms of power, status and prestige in the international 
arena as a world power. In addition, Bevin emphasised that the preservation of the British 
21 Francis Williams. Ernest Bevin: Portrait of A Great Englishman, (London: HutcbiDson, 1952), p. 1 S4. 
22 LPACR, (1935), col. 178. 
Empire in the coming years was vital, as it was proven that the empire played a vital role 
in creating global peace. He mentioned explicitly to Labour's delegates in 1935 that: 
Here is the British nation controlling one-third of the world's 
surface. It is no use telling me our forefathers got it, it is here; 
and, however we got it, a large portion of it has been put under 
self-government, and they have much freedom in the Dominions 
as we have got at home. Then we ask ourselves, if we go. on 
being merely anti-imperial where does it lead? It leads to a 
scramble in the world. It will lead to wars all over the world.23 
If new political circumstances appeared internally and internationally in the coming 
years, Bevin's political approach would be to take up the challenge and adopt the change. 
The flexibility of the empire was essential in order to ensure its survival in the coming 
decades. Thus, in relation to the British colonies and with the changing political climate 
and the growing number of self-determination movements he foresaw in the future, he 
would have no hesitation in granting independence to the colonised peoples. The faith of 
the peoples was determined by the British Empire, rather than any other powers or 
organisation. Thus, the issue of the trusteeship and international supervision of British 
colonies as a stage 'to self-government, as Attlee had expressed earlier, was out of the 
question, as the British Empire had its own way on how to deal with the issue. Bevin told 
the Labour delegates in 1935 that: 
23 Ibid. 
First, wherever we could get peoples and territory and could give 
self-government, we would give it. Secondly, where it was 
possible we would move this empire principle over to world 
organisation to supersede the old empire concept. We have the 
basis to work upon.24 
24 Ibid, col. 179 
Bevin wanted to give the impression to the delegates that he was pragmatic and did 
realise the changes coming in international political circumstances in the coming years. It 
was clear that Bevin's attitude was to work with the British Empire rather than to reduce 
its power, status and prestige to a super-state, as Attlee strongly advocated. The British 
Empire would not easily subordinate itself to any other higher authority such as a super-
state. As Bevin was a supporter of the British Empire, he undoubtedly was one of the 
advocates of a balance of power in the interwar years. In fact, he stressed that I regard 
the last war and possibly the next war as a struggle for spheres of influence and the 
d , if t'l 2s ornmatzon 0 raw rna ena s. 
In addition, as Bevin was committed to ensuring that the British Empire should continue 
to play a decisive role in international arena in the coming decades, he refused to 
surrender Britain's sovereignty to a world state such as Attlee had in mind. In other 
words, he had no intention of surrendering Britain sovereignty, or any parts of the British 
Empire, to any other power or international organisation, regardless of the reasons. In 
fact, if nations or powers indicated interest or attempted to intervene in the affairs of the 
British Empire, he would regard it as a direct threat to the British nation. 
Further, Bevin believed that the colonies were the sources of wealth for the British 
Empire, as well as a symbol of prestige showing that Britain was one of the world 
powers. The colonies in Africa, the Middle East and Asia were rich with natural 
resources such as gold, tin, rubber and oil which were vital to the British economy and to 
improving the standard of living of the British nation. Bevin told the conference that the 
2S Francis Williams, Ernest Bevill: Portrait of A Great EIIglishmtm, p. 153. 
colonies did contribute to overcoming economic difficulties such as the Great Depression 
of 1929-1931.26 Undoubtedly, Bevin saw the British colonies as sources of Britain's 
economic strength, and Britain's prosperity would depend on them heavily in the coming 
years. 
The League of Nations 
The League of Nations (LON) emerged as an international organisation resulting from 
the political turmoil of the First World War. The main aims of this international body 
were to avoid another world war and to promote the political co-operation of all nations. 
In the 1930s, the Labour Party supported the League of Nations in its role of to settling 
international conflicts and disputes. Attlee was supportive in his attitude towards this 
international organisation. In fact, he wanted to see the LON play a vital role in 
promoting peace in the interwar years. 
As the Second World War approached its end, Attlee indicated his disappointment in the 
attitude of the National government for neglecting the LON. From Attlee's point of view, 
the Conservative-dominated National Government in the 1930s continued to pursue 
national aims and followed the path of power politics. Attlee expressed his 
disappointment to Labour delegates in 1944: 
After the last war, an attempt was made through the League of 
Nations to get a world organisation to ensure peace. We always 
supported to the full this endeavour. Wherever we were in office 
26 LPACR, (1939), col. 244-245 
we did all in our power to strengthen the authority of the League. 
At all times we pointed out that unless the League was made 
effective, we should be plunged into war. Unhappily our 
warnings were disregarded. The League fell not because its 
principles were wrong but because they were not practised.27 
Bevin, on the other hand, showed little interest and less hope that the League of Nations 
could maintain peace in interwar years. To him, the LON did not have the political or 
military ability to take the British role in world affairs. He insisted that the British 
Empire, rather than the LON, played a vital role in preserving world peace. The impact 
would be catastrophic if the British Empire were to end its role abruptly. He warned 
Labour delegates in 1934 that: 
The British Trade Union Movement has always believed that the 
basis of the Versailles Treaty was wrong. Equally, we agree that 
the maintenance of what is called Empire conception, as we 
understand it, is inconsistent with world organisation. We were 
faced, therefore, with this position: should we break the thing 
up? If we did, it might produce the very conditions that would 
bring about war.28 
Bevin's speech reflected that he had little faith in the League of Nations in the matter of 
peace and security in the 1930s. The League of Nations failed to prevent aggression, as in 
the case of Japan's invasion of Manchuria in 1931 and the Abyssinian crisis in 1935. This 
meant that the LON was far from capable of safeguarding the British nation and British 
interests worldwide in the light of future aggression. In 1936, Bevin clearly condemned 
advocates of the LON and undermined the LON role in security and peace matters. He 
told Labour delegates that: 
27 LPACR, (1944), col. 133. 
21 LPACR, (1934), col. 172. 
Reference has been made to the League of Nations. It has been 
proved weak. Do not let us get into that attitude of mind. We 
have had Empires that took centuries to build. The League of 
Nations is the first puny attempt at world organisation. Empires 
cannot last; that we are all agreed upon.29 
In addition, Bevin hesitated to commit himself to the recommendation of cementing 
issues of economic collaboration between nations through the LON framework. He 
would agree only if: 
On the other hand, if we could create a world organisation, with 
proper regard to the economic side, it would offer a means of 
transition from the Empire conception to world organisation, and 
as a fundamental basis of that, we ask that there shall be a 
beginning boldly made by the Labour Government, we ask that 
one of the first essentials shall be the international control of raw 
materials. The nations of the world should have access to raw 
materials by purchase and not by conquest. 30 
In order to achieve this aim, he was looking for effective economic collaboration, 
particularly with the United States. According to Bevin, countries such as Scandinavia, 
Holland, Belgium, France, Russia and the United States were interested in economic 
rather than political co-operation under the framework of the international organisation. It 
is clear that Bevin's approach to global political sta1?i1ity was to tackle and solve the 
economic problems. He believed that the economic factor contributed greatly to world 
tensions. Bevin was an internationalist in the sense that he was in favour of creating an 
international economy with freedom of trade and free access to raw materials. His 
internationalist attitude was different to that of Attlee, who was an idealistic 
internationalist who put his faith in the League of Nations. 
29 LPACR, (1936), col. 204. 
30 LPACR, (1934), col. 172. 
Anglo-Soviet Relations 
Anglo-Soviet relations from the 1920s to 1930s were coloured by mistrust, doubt and 
suspicion. On the one hand, the Soviet Union was seen as a sponsor and organiser of 
subversive activity in Britain. On the other hand, Britain was seen as an interventionist 
power in the Russian Civil War in the early 1920s?1 The National Government in Britain 
under the Conservative Party until the mid-1930s had made little effort to improve the 
relations between the two countries. Only the Labour Party under Ramsay McDonald's 
premiership recognised and established diplomatic relations with the Soviet government 
in 1924. In addition, the Labour Party opposed the breach of relations with the Soviet 
Union by the Conservative government in 1927.32 
As a leading Trade Union leader from the early 1920s, Bevin was not sympathetic to the 
nature of the dictatorial political system practised in the Soviet Union. In fact, in the 
1920s and 1930s he strongly resisted every attempt made by the Communist Party of 
Great Britain (CPGB) to infiltrate the trade unions and the Labour Party. This was 
because the CPGB had received strong support from the Soviet Union, and their goal was 
to establish socialism in Britain. In the 1926 General Strike, the Trade Union Congress, 
under Bevin's leadership, refused to accept money from Soviet trade unions.33 It was 
clear that Bevin strongly rejected the intention to create an alliance for collaboration 
between the CPGB and the Labour Party. Furthermore, Bevin had his own personal 
31 Graham Ross, The Foreign Office and the Kremlin: British Documents On Anglo-Soviet Relations 1941-
45, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984), pp. 1-2. 
32 Curtis Keble, BriUlin and the Soviet Chtion 1917-89, (London: Macmillan Press, 1990), p. 119. 
33 F. S. Northedge and Audrey Wells, Britain and Soviet Communism: The Impact of a Revoilltion, 
(London: Macmillan Press, 1982). p. 198. 
frustrations in dealing with the Soviet Union. In 1925, for instance, there was an attempt 
from the T.U.C to establish effective cooperation with the Russian trade unions through 
two channels; first, through the Anglo-Soviet Trade Union Unity Committee, and second, 
through the International Federation of Trade Unions. Both attempts, however, ended in 
failure due to difficulties in dealing with the Soviet Union.34 
Bevin had emphasised that as a leading trade unionist he was open-minded in handling 
the Soviet Union. He pointed out to Labour delegates in 1935 that I have no reason to 
love the Russians: they have given me a hell of a time, but that does not influence my 
mind in foreign policy.3s Bevin was not seeking confrontation with the Soviet Union, 
even though he had personal experience in dealing with it. He had only had difficulties in 
dealing with the Soviet Union in the interwar years. 
On the other hand, as the Second World War progressed, Attlee's interest in cooperating 
with the Soviet Union grew steadily. In wartime, the Soviet Union was Britain's ally in 
defeating Germany. The coalition government, under Churchill's premiership, strongly 
supported the Soviet Union's endeavour to win the war. As deputy prime minister in the 
Coalition government, Attlee told the House of Commons that: 
Meanwhile we are helping. We are helping by continuing to send 
supplies. We entered into definite engagements with Russia that 
we would send month-by-month supplies of tanks, aeroplanes, 
and other weapons of war. We are keeping to our programme.36 
34 Francis Williams, Ernest Bevin: Portrait of A. Oreat Englishman, p. 156. 
35 lJ'ACR, (193S), col. 179. 
36 Hfl1ISard, S Series, Vol. 380,19 May 1942, col. S6. 
Attlee was hoping to preserve this wartime collaboration in peacetime, not only with the 
Soviet Union, but also with other powers, for the sake of world peace and security. 
Attlee expressed his desire to preserve this wartime unity in 1943: 
We have set out our international policy for the post-war period. 
You know there is a wide agreement on this subject, but do not 
be afraid of us. We have always believed that there must be order 
in the world and that the rule of law must be backed by adequate 
force. We believe there must be the closest co-operation between 
the British Commonwealth, the United States, Russia and China 
to lead on to agreement between the nations, and we have always 
stressed the need for co-o~eration in the economic sphere as well 
as in the political sphere. 3 
Col/ective Security 
Another dominant issue in relation to Labour's external policy in the 1930s was the threat 
of war. The number of international disputes and conflicts increased around the world. 
Britain's interests worldwide and prestige as a world power could be affected if its 
military capability was inferior compared to that of other nations. The arms issue was a 
constant topic for debate at the Labour Party conference and in the House of Commons 
between the 1930s and early 1940s. 
The alternative to the arms struggle between nations, proposed by Attlee, was collective 
security - the agreement by all states to unite against an aggressor. This meant that under 
the collective security system, an attack on one is an attack on all. In this regard, the 
collective security system is crucial to ensure global peace and security. To Attlee, the 
37 LPACR, (1943), coL 122. 
collective security system was essential to prevent future war and significantly reduce the 
defence expenditure of all states. The idea behind collective security was that each state 
must limit and restrict its ambition to increase the number of its own forces. 38 In 
addition, control of the arms trade should be imposed on all states. These measures would 
mean that states would have no opportunity to prepare for war against each other. Attlee 
clarified in the House of Commons in March 1945 that: 
If we look at Europe, looking backwards to the past, we see a 
whole congeries of armed States competing with each other, 
anxiously looking to see whether they are goin, to be attacked, 
or looking possibly for opportunities for attack. 3 
Attlee believed that the League of Nations could resolve conflicts by peaceful means and 
conciliation rather than the use of force. To Attlee, force would be used only as a last 
resort. If the use of force was necessary, the decision must come from an authoritative 
body such as the international organisation. In such cases it should be monitored, as it 
would only be employed to stop aggressive action, and not to pursue imperialist aims. 
AttIee pointed out clearly in 1935 that we are against the use of force for imperialist and 
capitalist ends, but we are in favour of the proper use of force for ensuring the rule of 
law. tiD 
The ability of the LON to preserve peace without use of force to settle crises or conflicts 
was tested in 1931 in the case of the Manchurian crisis, and then once again in 1935 
when Italy invaded Abyssinia. In the Manchwian crisis of 1931 for example, Japan 
31 W. Go11ant, 'The Emergence of C. R. Attlec as Leader of the Parliamentary Labour Party in 1935' J The 
Historical Joumal, xm, 2 (1970), p. 32S. 
311 Hansard, S ... Series, VoL 408,1 March 1945, coL 1617. 
40 LPA.CR, (193S), col. 173. 
launched a series of attacks in Manchuria in order to protect its interests.41 Consequently, 
the LON decided to impose economic and military sanctions against Japan. However, 
the League's action was insignificant and powerless in the sense that both Great Britain 
and France were unwilling to impose economic or military sanctions against Japan, and 
risk upsetting their good relations with Japan. In addition, the United States, which was 
not member of the League, continued to be Japan's major trading partner. In this regard, 
the LON had no power to force Japan, Britain, France and United States to comply with 
its resolutions. Consequently, Japan withdrew from the organisation. Then, in the case of 
the Abyssinian crisis of 1935, the LON took the same decision to impose economic 
sanctions against Italy, and if necessary, to use force to stop any aggression. The 
League's action, however, was ineffective as the United States continued to sell oil to 
Italy. Britain and France had agreed not to push economic sanctions to the point of 
risking war with Italy. The significance of these historical developments is that strong 
force, rather than words or resolutions was needed to stop any aggression. AttIee's desire 
to advocate a peaceful means of settling disputes between nations through the LON was 
unlikely to be fulfilled. 
In addition, the collective security approach could only succeed if all states, including the 
great powers, disarmed. To Attlee: 
We have to stand up against having national forces of any kind. I 
believe that the biggest thing we can go for is the 
intemationalising of aviation, because that will supersede all 
other armed forces. I believe we have to say definitely that we do 
not envisage a League of Nations with limited liability, with a 
minimum of control, but we state quite definitely we are out for a 
41 A. Le Roy Bennett and James K Oliver, International Organisation Prlnctples and Issues, (Prentice Hall: 
New Jersey, 2002), pp. 38-39. 
world state. We are out for the abolition of war, we are out for 
the abolition of armed forces. 42 
Later, Attlee clarified that he was not proposing total abolition of national forces. Britain, 
he stated, has to have a national army, but its volume must not exceed the level of the 
international armed forces. 
We say we must fix the level of British armaments with regard to 
our position in a system of collective security, not with regard to 
a competition with other anned Powers, and we have announced 
perfectly clearly our position here: that we reaffirm our policy to 
maintain such defence forces as are consistent with our country's 
responsibility.43 
As a result, in the 1930s, Attlee strongly opposed the National government policy of 
rearmament. He felt that defence allocations for military purposes would only increase 
the economic burden on the British nation, and eventually lead to another war between 
nations for world supremacy. He pointed out to Labour delegates in 1936: 
. .. that this resolution commits the Labour Party to supporting 
the Government's rearmament policy. I say it does nothing of the 
kind. There is no suggestion here that we should support the 
Government's rearmament policy.44 
In relation to the Second World War, Attlee emphasised that the war could be avoided if 
the National Government in Britain in 1930's followed the path of the collective security 
system, as he strongly advocated. However, his idea had been ignored. Eventually he 
42 LPACR, (1934), col. 174. 
43 LPACR, (1936), col. 206. 
44 Ibid., col. 20S. 
expressed his disappointment in the failure of the past two British prime ministers to 
avoid war. He told Labour delegates in 1941 that: 
Throughout these years, we have stood for Collective Security 
and the rule of law. How abundantly justified have we been 
What is the tragedy of Europe today? If our policy had been 
followed, you would never have had this war. It is only by 
adopting those principles of Collective Security that when this 
war is ended we can establish a lasting peace. 45 
At the same time, Attlee joined the coalition government under Churchill's premiership 
in 1940 as a Deputy Prime Minister. He supported the national war effort. He clarified 
his attitude of supporting the war based on moral values. His thought at the time was 
that if the Nazis won the war, it would be the end of freedom of thought and conscience 
in human civilisation. He was looking for unity of men, peace, and security. Attlee, as a 
leader of the Labour Party, assured the British nation that he was behind Churchill's 
leadership against Hitler. He urged Labour delegates to lend their support to national 
efforts to defeat Nazism. He said in the first years of the war that: 
What I am appealing for today is for the Labour Movement to 
stand firmly together in this national war effort. We must win 
this fight, we must defeat Hitler, we must build a just peace, we 
must end war. You cannot end war by surrender to Hitler. You 
cannot J:?;et a just peace by surrendering to Nazism. We have got 
to win.4~ 
On the other hand, Bevin was committed to a strong national defence policy, and 
declined to accept Attlee's idea of universal collective security. Bevin told the Labour 
Party conference in 1939 that the universal collective security approach, as advocated by 
45 LPACR, (1941), col. 133. 
46 LPACR, (1940), col. 125. 
Attlee, would contribute to worsening conflicts or disputes rather than settling them. 
Bevin told the conference that: 
I have been gravely concerned in connection with the 
propaganda for Collective Security, which I support, with the 
lack of clear understanding as to the natural consequences of 
Collective Security. If Collective Security is to be made a really 
workable proposal there must be something for every party to 
secure. Even then, Collective Security can never be effective as a 
final custodian of peace if it is merely based on the pooling of 
arms and overwhelming naval and military superiority. 47 
The difficulties in implementing collective security worldwide were clear to Bevin. He 
believed that rather than collective security, national arms were essential to defend 
British sovereignty and territories at any time and anywhere. Nations without a strong 
national defence were easily defeated. For instance, Bevin pointed out that Japan had an 
opportunity to invade Manchuria in 1931 because China did not have strong national 
defences to protect her nation and territories. Furthennore, looking back into the history 
of the British Empire, Bevin told delegates that the superiority of forces were needed to 
conquer colonies as well as look after British interests worldwide. He said that you must 
remember we took most of our colonies by force. either for the raw materials we could 
obtain or for strategic purposes. That was the main moiive.48 
As Minister for Labour during the Second World War in the coalition government, 
Bevin's prime task was to ensure that human resources were sufficient to produce 
weapons. He was also responsible for calling up the men and women needed for fighting. 
47 LPACR, (1939). col. 243. 
41 Ibid. col. 245. 
All segments of British society, including women, must take responsibility for defending 
their nation. Bevin's nationalist attitude of support for the war paralleled the Cabinet's. 
Bevin always emphasised that he carried out his duties based on collective decisions, and 
not on his own. In 1943, in the House of Commons, he stated: 
I have assumed that in doing this I have been carrying out the 
will of this house, because the detennination of this house and of 
the nation has been to win this war. 49 
Under Churchill's premiership in wartime, the Cabinet decided that bomber and other 
forces must not only be maintained but must also expand. One strategy was to increase 
the capability of the air forces. Bevin agreed with this decision. He told the House of 
Commons that the step was necessary to minimise losses and win the war as soon as 
possible: 
I would ask hon. Members to appreciate the fact that the more 
you increase your bomber forces and the more targets you hit, 
the less loss you get. Therefore, the 'priority is given in 1943-44 
to aircraft. so 
Given the thoughts of Attlee and Bevin on Labour's external issues from 1930s to the 
early 1940s, namely the British colonies overseas, the LON, the collective security 
system and Anglo-Soviet relations, it is clear that Attlee was committed to 
internationalism while Bevin was imperialist in his political outlook. On the issue of the 
British Empire and its colonies, Attlee rejected power politics, denounced imperialism 
and colonialism as they led to economic exploitation. In addition, he was in favour of the 
rights of colonised peoples to self-detennination. 
49 Hansard, S Series, Vol. 392, 23 September 1943, col. 461. 
50 Ibid, col. 466. 
Meanwhile, Bevin was the advocate of the British Empire, firmly against transferring 
British power and its sovereignty to other powers or organisations and continued to 
pursue power politics. The colonies were seen as a source of British economic strength 
and a symbol of the prestige and status of Britain as a world power. Attlee placed great 
hope in the League of Nations, as he felt it was the organisation to promote international 
politics and economic collaboration between all nations for the sake of peace and 
security. To Bevin, the League of Nations was incapable of ensuring the survival of the 
British Empire and safeguarding British interests worldwide. 
In relation to the Second World War, Attlee had two perspectives. First, he denounced 
the war, as he felt it could have been avoided. Second, he supported it on moral rather 
than imperialist grounds. Bevin, however, clearly supported the war from the beginning 
to maintain Britain's power and prestige. He believed that the British nation was behind 
him. Finally, yet importantly, on the matter of Anglo-Soviet relations, both Attlee and 
Bevin were not seeking confrontation. Nevertheless, based on his own experience in 
dealing with the Soviet Union in the interwar years, Bevin could foresee difficulties in 
cementing a political relationship with the Soviet Union in the coming decades. 
Attlee's Government of July 1945 
This part outlines the main domestic background of Attlee's government. This is 
essential, as the domestic background, particularly the economic aspect and internal 
political development, interconnected with and underpinned the formulation and direction 
of Attlee's foreign policy from 1945 to 1951. 51 
Domestic Political Environments 
On 26 July 1945, Attlee formed the first post-war British government as the Labour Party 
won a clear majority of 146 seats for the first time in the general election. There are a 
number of explanations as to why the Labour Party won this election. These include the 
massive support from every segment of British society, particularly the working class, the 
young, and the middle class. Of these three main groups, the support of the working class 
was crucial in bringing the Labour Party to power. 52 In addition, Labour's election 
manifesto itself managed to attract a large proportion of British votes. Labour's 
manifesto, Let Us Face the Future was a combination of moderation and socialist 
messages to combat unemployment and inadequate living conditions, and to ensure food 
and security for the British nation. 53 
Labour's victory in July 1945 was remarkable in that the Labour Party did not need to 
seek support from any other political party to form a government or to pass a resolution, 
as it had had to do in its 1924 and 1929-1931 governments. The Labour Party was able to 
deal with internal and international affairs in its own way for the frrst time. Eventually, 
51 Rhiannon Vickers, The Labour Party and the World: The Evolution 0/ Labour's Foreign Policy 1900-
1951, p. 2. 
52 Andrew Thorpe, A History o/the British Labour Party, p. 112. 
5) Labour's election manifesto drafted in January 1945 and the Chairman of Labour's Policy Committee 
was Herbert Morrison. See Stephen Brooke, 'The Labour Pm, and the 1945 General Election', 
Contemporary Record, VoL 9. No.1, Summer 1995. pp. 11-15. 
Attlee, as Leader of the Labour Party since 1935, became the first post-war British Prime 
Minister. Attlee was already experienced in running day-to-day government internal 
business in wartime, as he was second only to Churchill in the wartime Cabinet. His 
experience in wartime undoubtedly helped him to monitor and administer his twenty 
Cabinet members,54 of which six, including Bevin and Bevan, were trade unionists. 55 
In his capacity as Prime Minister, Attlee played a significant role in deciding the right 
person for the right post to serve as his Cabinet members. Their selection and 
appointment, however, were not without political controversy and contest. Attlee was 
aware of the existence of political rivalries within his party, including his Cabinet 
members, in July 1945. Attlee himself was part of the political struggle in 1935. At the 
time, Labour needed to appoint a new leader, as George Lansbury had resigned. There 
were only a few potential candidates for the post at the time, namely Herbert Morrison, 
Arthur Greenwood and Attlee himself. S6 In this crucial political contest, Bevin, as leader 
of the trade union movement, played a decisive role. He managed to influence many 
senior Labour politicians, particularly those sponsored by his union to support Attlee 
rather than Morrison or Greenwood. Eventually, Attlee was elected to replace Lansbury, 
and Greenwood was appointed his deputy. 
As the outcome of the general election of July 1945 became known, Morrison, together 
with Laski, Ellen Wilkinson and Maurice Webb, delayed Attlec's acceptance of the 
54 The twllist of Attlee's Cabinet members of July 1945 to October 1951 is printed in Andrew Thorpe. A 
History o/the British Labour Party. (The MacmiDan Press: Basingstoke, 1991). Appendix 3. pp. 246-247. 
5S Ibid, p. 115. 
S6Kenneth Harris. Attlee. p. 121. 
King's invitation to fonn the new British government.57 To them, first Labour's MPs 
needed to confinn Attlee's position as their leader and future Prime Minister, before he 
could accept the royal invitation. Once again, Bevin's role was significant in settling this 
political contest. To Bevin, Attlee's position as Labour leader was unquestionable, as he 
had led the party in the wartime coalition government, during the general election of July 
1945, and had been invited by the King to fonn the new government.58 
Given these internal political battles between Attlee and Morrison and between Morrison 
and Bevin, Attlee undoubtedly needed the political loyalty and support of his closest 
politicians, particularly Bevin, while he was in power from July 1945 onwards. On each 
occasion, Bevin's political loyalty to AttIee was unquestioned. Political attempts to 
topple Attlee as Labour's leader and as Prime Minister would only have succeeded ifhe 
wanted to, but this was not to happen. In return, Attlee's policy was to avoid serious 
political disputes, particularly with Bevin, in order to sustain Bevin's support. 
Undeniably, Attlee was uncomfortable with the political game of sustaining power. He 
was a politician. He had no choice but to commit himself to this policy if he wanted to 
ensure his own survival as Labour leader and Prime Minister, and the political unity and 
stability of the Labour Party itself. If political competition between senior members of the 
Party were to get out of control, the crisis would give the opposition and the public the 
impression that it was in disarray and incapable of running the government. In forming 
his Cabinet, Attlee decided to keep Bevin and Morrison apart. Bevin was put in charge of 
foreign affairs, and Morrison was appointed Deputy Prime Minister, to deal with 
57 Hemy Pclling, A Short History o/the Labour Party, (The Macmillan Press: Basingstoke, 1993), p. 9S. 
sa Kenneth Harris, Attlee, p. 263. 
domestic policy. In doing this, Attlee managed to restore internal stability among his 
Cabinet members. Political stability and a harmonious relationship between his Cabinet 
members was essential in order to achieve a collective commitment to implement the 
domestic and external policies of the Party. Nevertheless, political rivalry between Bevin 
and Morrison on the one hand, and between Attlee and Morrison on the other, continued 
to overshadow the government's internal politics in the years to follow. In fact, Stafford 
Cripps led a second attempt to topple Attlee as British Prime Minister between July and 
September 1947.59 
Economic Constraints 
A domestic issue of paramount importance to Britain's first post-war government was 
economic recovery. It should be emphasised that Britain's financial primacy had already 
been lost as a result of the First World War. In addition, worldwide economic depression 
in the 1930s had contributed to Britain's relative economic decline.60 This meant that 
Britain's economic fragility at the end of the Second World War was not new; AttIee's 
government had inherited these economic constraints from the interwar years. Thus, an 
attempt to improve Britain' economic performance was one of the fundamental tests for 
AttIee's government. 
In the context of the Second World War, national wealth had been used to support the 
war for six years. In addition, Britain had devoted more time to producing military 
59 Peter Shore, Leoding the Left, (Weidenfeld and Nicolson: London, 1993), p. 47. 
 Alec Caimcross, T1Ie British Economy Since 1945: Economic Policy tmd Perfomumce 1945-1990, 
(Blackwell Publishers: Oxford, 1992, p. 57. 
requirements. Moreover, Britain's role as the world's financial centre was declining 
steadily, due to slow international trading activity.61 Britain was almost bankrupt, with 
huge foreign debts resulting from the Second World War. Thus, an attempt to accelerate 
Britain's economic recovery in the post-war world was essential, not only to raise the 
nation's standard of living, but also to protect its national interests worldwide and 
strengthen Britain's international position as world power.62 It is argued that in order for 
Britain to overcome its economic fragility in the aftermath of the Second World War, it 
would be relying on the Empire to help restore its solvency. In addition, the low reserves 
of gold, the shortage of dollars and the weak pound also meant that the United Kingdom 
was seeking financial support, particularly from the United States, to rebuild its economic 
foundations.63 However, economic aid to the United Kingdom was subject to United 
States' government policy. Thus, if the United Kingdom managed to boost its economic 
activities quickly, it would be able to become financially independent of the United 
States. This was essential if Britain wanted to gain respect and playa decisive role as the 
United States' partner in international politics in the coming decades. 
As mentioned earlier, these economic constraints posed a great challenge to Attlee's 
government, and the issue captured much attention from his Cabinet members, including 
Dalton, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Attlce himself, and Bevin, who was in charge of 
foreign affairs. Dalton wrote in his diary in August 1945; I am conscious o/having some 
mountainous problems in front of me, especially with 'overseas finanCial liabilities " 
61 L. J. Butler, Britain and Empire: Adjustillg to a POlt-lmperial World, (J.D. Tauris, London and New 
York, 2002), pp. 60-62. 
62 Ronald Hyam (Ed), BDEE, Series A, VoL 2, Part 1, (London: HMSO, 1992), Introduction, p. xlii. 
63 Andrew Thorpe, A History of the British lAbour Party, p. 117. 
referring to the shortage of gold and dollar reserves in Britain in the aftermath of the 
Second World War.64 In his capacity as newly appointed Foreign Secretary, Bevin's first 
speech in the House of Commons in August 1945 stressed that internal economic 
reconstruction was Britain's highest priority in pursuing foreign policy.6S Attlee referred 
to the cancellation of the United States' Lend Lease contracts to Britain, and the internal 
economic deficit with huge foreign debt at the onset of his government, as an immense 
and enormous task ahead.66 Financial difficulties demanded that Attlee's government re-
examine British commitments overseas and its defence allocation. In the light of this 
internal economic fragility reSUlting from the war, the government was in a dilemma in 
terms of prioritising and balancing internal economic recovery while sustaining its 
leading role in international politics and prestige as a world power. 
The United Nations in 1945 
In 1945, the world's leaders set up the United Nations (UN) to foster international 
cooperation between nations and maintain international peace and security. The world 
powers played a substantial role in forming the United Nations. In fact, the fate and 
success of the United Nations in the coming years was largely based on the goodwill of 
the world powers. Four points need to be stressed in relation to the formation of the UN . 
.. Ben Pimlott (Ed), 71te Political Diary of Hllgh Dalto" 1918-40, 1945-60, (Jonathan Cape: London, 
1986),17 August 1945, p. 362. 
6S HDllSard, Vol. 413. 20 August 1945, col. 287. 
"Hauard, Vol. 413,12 August 1945, cols. 955-956. 
First, its fonnation as a new international organisation in the aftennath of the Second 
World War had its origin in wartime. In August 1941, Great Britain and the United States 
signed the Atlantic Charter and agreed to establish a wider and permanent system of 
general security. 67 Then, in October 1943 during the Moscow Declaration, 
representatives from the United States, Great Britain, China and the Soviet Union 
recognised the necessity of establishing at the earliest practical date a general 
international organisation for the maintenance of international peace and security.68 In 
June 1945, during the San Francisco Conference, the representatives of fifty countries 
drew up the United Nations Charter, and there was an agreement that the UN should have 
as wide a membership as possible. Finally, the Charter was signed on 26 June 1945 by 
the representatives of fifty countries. The United Nations officially came into existence 
on 24 October 1945 when the Charter had been ratified by five pennanent members of 
the Security Council and by a majority of other signatories. 
The second point is that Britain's role in drafting the Charter of the UN and fonning the 
new international organisation was significant.69 This balances the impression that the 
creation of the UN was exclusively and fundamentally the work of a particular world 
power such as the United States.70 In fact, Britain had experience in dealing with 
international organisations as it was a member of the LON until that organisation was 
dissolved with the onset of the Second World War. In wartime, Gladwyn Jebb of the 
67 United Nations Documents, (Royal Institute of International Affairs, London and New York, 1946), p. 
61 Ibid, p. 13. 
e Adam Roberts, 'Britain and the Creation of the United Nations' in Wm Roger Louis (ed.). Still More 
Adventures W'Jth Brlltmnia: Personalities, Politics and Culture in Britain, (I. B. Tauris: London, 2003), p. 
70 See for example Ruth B. Russell, A History of the United Nations Charter: The Role of the United States 
1940-45, (The Bookings Institution, Washington, 1958). Introduction, p. 1. 
Economic and Reconstruction Department of the Foreign Office, and Professor Charles 
Webster, an historian, played a significant part in drafting and bringing into existence a 
new international organisation. Gladwyn Jebb, for instance, in discussing the lack of 
interest in Britain concerning the formation of the United Nations, highlighted Britain's 
substantial role as one of the guardians and patrons of the UN in the post-war world. As 
he emphasised in his minute: 
Yet it cannot be denied that, in the production of the great plan 
now brought to fruition at San Francisco, His Majesty's 
Government in the United Kingdom played a very great, perhaps 
even a preponderating part. The very basis of the scheme, 
namely continued co-operation between Great Powers, and 
notably between the Soviet Union, the United States and the 
United Kingdom, had its origin in this country and was imparted 
by devious means to our great Allies. The Military Staff 
Committee is a purely British invention, and the Economic and 
Social Council is modelled on the Bruce Report, which was in 
accordance with British ideas.71 
In addition, Webster proudly claimed that the inclusion of the chapters concerning 
dependent territories was the first comprehensive statement of colonial policy to be 
included in an international instrument, and was due to Britain's initiative and lead in the 
drafting of these chapters.72 Moreover, the first meeting of the General Assembly of the 
United Nations was held in London, and its temporary headquarters before moving to 
United States was in London.73 Despite Britain's substantial role in drafting and forming 
the United Nations, Gladwyn Jebb, explicitly recommended in his minute that it was a 
wise strategy at the time not to emphasise our achievements in public, but rather to allow 
the Americans to claim the principle credit for the production of the Charter as a 
71 FO 371/507321U5998112170 Foreign Office Minute, 'Reflection on San Francisco', 25 July 1945. 
72 FO 3711S07341U6324/12170 Foreign Office Minute, 'Commenting on the United Nations Charter by 
ProfcssorWebster', 8 August 1945. 
73 Adam Roberts, 'Britain and the Creation of the United Nations', p. 236. 
whole.
The motive of doing so, according to Galdwyn Jebb, was to persuade the 
American people that the new organisation is, so to speak, their property, thereby 
overcoming the/orces 0/isolationism.7S 
Meanwhile, in 1945 the Foreign Office wished to make a success of the United Nations 
in the coming years. Gladwyn Jebb explicitly expressed his personal stand: 
In the long run too, the prospects seem to be better, and not 
worse, than they were in 1919. An organisation has now been 
created which will include all the existing major Powers. Those 
Powers which recently bid for domination of the world have 
been, or shortly will be, smashed to pieces, and are not likely to 
recover for a very long period. It is essential that the major 
Powers should continue their co-operation for a long period to 
come, and it is not unreasonable to hope that they may do SO.76 
Moreover, concerning the Charter of the United Nations, the Foreign Office sent a minute 
suggesting a few points that the Prime Minister might wish to include in his speech in the 
House of Commons. The points suggested included the democratic manner in which the 
United Nations Charter was voted; that the world powers were obliged to obey the 
Charter on matters such as not using force except in accordance with the purposes and 
principles of the Charter and to ensure that international disputes should be settled in 
accordance with justice; and that the organisation was to promote respect for human 
rights and fundamental freedoms without distinctions of race, sex or religion. n Despite 
the fact that the Foreign Office realised the difficulties of fonning the United Nations, it 
74 FO 371/507321U5998/12170 Foreign Office Minute, 'Reflection on San Francisco', 251u1y 1945. 
7S Ibid. 
76 Ibid. 
71 FO 3711S07361U6S49/12170 Foreign Office Minute, 'Points for Prime Minister's speech on the United 
Nations Charter', 20 August l~S. 
wished to help the United Nations become a successful international organisation in the 
field of international politics in the years to come. As one of the permanent members of 
the Security Council of the UN, Britain, under Attlee's government, had appointed Sir 
Alexander Cadogan, former Permanent Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, as 
the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom on the Security Counci1.78 
Third, the United States, which was not a member of the LON and had been isolationist 
in the interwar years, joined the United Nations in 1945 as one of its permanent members. 
In fact, the United States' Senate was one of the earliest legislatures governments to 
ratify the Charter of the United Nations with 89 votes to 2 on 28th July 1945.79 In other 
words, the United States was one of the patrons and guardians of the United Nations. 
Gladwyn Jebb, who was a member of the United Kingdom Delegation at San Francisco, 
had the impression that the United States' representatives at the San Francisco 
Conference placed great interest in the new world organisation. According to Gladwyn 
Jebb: 
There is no question of the interest which Americans take in the 
whole affair, and the general impression created is that they are 
willing and anxious to assume responsibilities and will not fall 
by the wayside if the United Nations does not work out in quite 
the way which is now expected.80 
On another occasion, the British Embassy office in Washington reported that in the 
United States, Senator Arthur Vandenberg of Michigan, while expressing his doubts 
about the Soviet Union's intentions and motives in the United Nations, felt great 
71 FO 8001508lUN/4617 Bevin to Attlee 30 January 1946. Sir Onne Sargent then replaced Alexander 
Cadogan as the Permanent Under Secretary of State. 
79 FO 3711507321US794112fl0 From Washington To Foreign Office, 291uly 1945. 
so FO 3711507321U5998112fl0 Foreign Office Minute, 'Reflection on San Franc::isco', 25 July 1945. 
enthusiasm for the United Nations' role in international politics in years to come. In fact, 
Senator Vandenberg wished to back it [the United Nations] to the limit.8 Webster, of the 
Reconstruction Department of the Foreign Office, suggested the reason for the United 
States' enthusiasm in joining the United Nations: 
Inasmuch, moreover, as the name United Nations is universally 
attributed to President Roosevelt, and the birth of the United 
Nations Charter took place in San Francisco, Americans as a 
whole are bound to feel a certain proprietary pride in any United 
Nations success. This in itself is perhaps the best augury for 
sustained and effective United States participation in the 
objective of the World Organisation.82 
In relation to the question of the United States' membership of the United Nations, the 
report by the Senate Committee shed some light on the United States' stand on the new 
international organisation. According to the report, the General Assembly of the United 
Nations would not be a super state.83 In addition, concerning the interwar practice of the 
balance of power politics, the report mentioned that the Monroe Doctrine remained 
completely unimpaired and that the purposes and objectives of the Charter strengthened 
rather than weakened the doctrine. Moreover, according to the report, the provisions of 
the Charter did not affect the exclusive power of Congress to declare war.84 Thus, it was 
suggested that while accepting the Charter of the United Nations and as one of the 
pennanent members of the United Nations, the United States was sceptical about the 
implications and requirements that the United States needed to fulfil in the coming years. 
81 FO 371/S0734IU6301112f70 Washington to Foreign Office, 'Senator Vandenberg's off-the-record views 
onlntemational Organisation', 18 August 1945. 
12 PO 3711507361U6649/12f70 From Washington to Foreign Office, 'Report of the growth of the 
movement in favour at World Organisation', 21 August 1945. 
83 FO 371/S0733IU6037/12f70 From Washington to Foreign Office, 'United Nations Charter: Report by the 
Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs', 7 August 1945. 
84 Ibid 
Last, but not least, it should be noted that the fonnation of the UN was not without 
controversy issues, particularly among the world powers. Professor Webster of the 
Reconstruction Department of the Foreign Office, who was directly involved in drafting 
the United Nations Charter, admitted that the formation of the United Nations was not 
without disagreement, particularly between the world powers: 
No doubt imperfections still remain. A few articles are obviously 
compromises between different points of view. No state 
represented at the Conference obtained all that it desired. The 
delegation of the United Kingdom would have changed several 
of the provisions had it been possible to do so with general 
agreement. Such compromises are inevitable in the making of a 
great international instrument like the Charter. 85 
One of the most debateable issues between the world powers was the power of veto. 
During the Yalta Conference of February 1945, the Soviet Union was unhappy with any 
restrictions at all on the use of veto. Then the United States introduced the idea of a veto 
vote. Nevertheless, the issue of veto was controversial from the earliest days of the 
formation of the UN86 in the sense that the world powers were divided over whether, as 
permanent members of the Security Council, when party to a dispute they should use the 
power of veto or not. The United States and United Kingdom agreed that the world 
powers should not vote. The Soviet Union, however, disagreed. Furthermore, the veto 
was a controversial issue as it reflected inequality in formulating and making UN 
decisions. The grounds were that small states that were members of the UN but not 
85 FO 371/507341U6324112f10 Foreign Office Minute, 'Commentary on the United Nations Charter by 
Professor Webster', 8 August 1945. 
16 See the discussion in Llewellyn Woodward, British Foreign Policy in the Second World War, Vol. V, 
(Her Majesty's Stationary Office: London), pp. 137-139. 
pennanent members of the Security Council did not have the power of veto. The 
significance of these facts is that only if the world powers were willing to compromise 
for the sake of peace and security would the UN be able to fulfil its task of maintaining 
international peace and security. Despite these difficulties, the world powers agreed to 
fonn the United Nations for the sake of international peace and security. 
Attlee's and Bevin's Perspective on the United Nations in 1945 
As Attlee was a keen supporter of the United Nations, and committed to a new foreign 
policy based on the United Nations' Charter, it is essential to understand how he saw the 
United Nations. The essence of AttIee's political framework was that the United Nations 
was the world's highest authority in deterring aggression as well as in running the 
international political system in peacetime.s7 As the United Nations was the hub of world 
affairs, all states were subordinate to it and their policy had to be fitted to, and parallel 
with, the Charter of the United Nations. In addition, for Attlee, the Security Council was 
to provide the method for the settlement of disputes, with multilateralism replacing 
bilateralism or unilateralism. Thus, one of the remarkable features of Attlee's 
internationalist attitude was his desire to use negotiation and discussion rather than force 
to resolve disputes arising between states in peacetime. He believed that the use of 
negotiation and the possibility of dialogue between states within the United Nations 
framework were essential to achieving world peace. In August 1945 for instance, he 
17 Raymond Smith aDd John Zametica, 'The Cold War Warrior: Clements Attlee Reconsidered 1945-47' 
International Affairs, Vol. 61, No.2, 1985, p. 239. 
expressed explicitly his expectations of the role and function of the Security Council in 
international affairs: 
We sought, and sought successfully, to make it a place where the 
policies of the states, and especially the greater states, could be 
discussed and reconsidered for the time, especially when they 
showed signs of such divergences as to threaten the harmony of 
international relations. . . . What, I think is required is a 
continuous discussion of international affairs, not spasmodic 
action at times of crisis. 88 
Attlee's clarification of the Security Council's role and function in the international arena 
indicated at least two things. Firstly, he tried to promote the use of dialogue and 
diplomacy rather than force in ending or avoiding clashes of interest between the world's 
powers within the United Nations framework. Secondly, he insisted on greater United 
Nations' involvement in settling international conflicts in years to come for the sake of 
peace and security. In short, he strongly believed that the United Nations was to playa 
decisive role in world politics, and that it was capable of handling numerous international 
disputes in peacetime. 
Historically, Attlee's interest in achieving greater United Nations participation in the 
international arena for the sake of world peace and security grew steadily as the Second 
World War approached its end in August 1945. An example of his high expectations of 
United Nations involvement in world politics was evident in his speech to the Labour 
Party conference in May 1945, two months before the general election took place in 
Britain. He told delegates that: 
II Hansard, Vol. 413,22 August 1945, col. 665. , 
We believe and it has always been our policy that the problem 
of peace can only be solved by building up an international 
organisation for its maintenance. I have just come back from 
San Francisco, where the delegates of nearly fifty nations are 
seeking to get agreement on Ute Charter of a World 
Organisation. I hope that, despite all the difficulties, agreement 
will be reached. I believe that we must get a World 
Organisation.89 
AttIee added that if the Labour Party were in power after the general election of July 
1945, the United Kingdom would put its best effort into ensuring that the United Nations 
worked smoothly and effectively in world politics. As he clearly expressed: 
Let us remember that if we advocate a World Organisation, 
that if we advocate the rule of law in the world, if we advocate 
that there should be power to enforce the rule of law in the 
world, we ourselves must be prepared to make our 
contribution. This is inescapable.90 
Another indication of Attlee's interest in bringing active United Nations involvement into 
international politics in peacetime came during his speech to the United Nations 
Association in October 1945. In his speech, he declared that the United Kingdom would 
not only base its foreign policy on the Charter of the United Nations as soon as it came 
into effect; the United Kingdom would also be responsible for taking the lead in ensuring 
the success of the new international body in years to come. As he passionately decared: 
As Prime Minister, I wish to say quite simply that it is the firm 
intention of His Majesty's Government to make the success of 
the United Nations the primary object of their foreign policy.91 
19 LPACR, 21-25 May 1945, p. 107. 
90 LPACR, 21-25 May 1945, p. 107. 
91 R. Jenlcins, (ed.), Purpose and Policy: Selected Speeches By the Prime Minister The Rt. Hon. C. R. 
Attlee, (London: HutchiDson, 1946), p. 128 
Later, the General Assembly of the United Nations was scheduled to meet in London for 
its first meeting in January 1946. In his speech to the opening session on 10 January in 
London, he forwarded two practical grounds as to why he was so convinced about basing 
British foreign policy on the Charter of the United Nations. The first was that the Charter 
of the United Nations dealt not only with governments, states, politics and war, but also 
with the simple elemental needs of human beings, regardless of race, colour, or creed. 
The second reason was that he regretted the attitude of states, including that of the United 
Kingdom in ignoring and limiting the role of the League of Nations in the international 
arena. In other words, the League of Nations was largely regarded as something outside 
the ordinary range of foreign policy during the inter-war years. Attlee believed that 
governments which continued to work along the old lines, pursuing individual aims or 
following the path of power politics in the aftermath of the Second World War, did not 
understand that the world had passed into a new epoch. 92 All these historical 
developments were a clear indication of Attlee's desire to promote active United Nations 
participation in the international arena towards achieving world peace and security. 
On the other hand, as an influential and prominent political figure in British politics, the 
deterioration of Anglo-Soviet relations was very important to Attlee. Accordingly, his 
overriding concern at the time was to maintain harmony within the Anglo-Soviet 
relationship. A good relationship between these two countries was essential to ensure that 
the United Nations worked effectively for the sake of peace and security. Attlee believed 
that the only way to accelerate the process of cementing the relationship with the Soviet 
Union in peacetime was through the framework of the United Nations. 
92 R. Jenkins, (eel.), Purpose and Policy, p. 132. 
The deterioration of the relationship between these two countries was evident from July 
1945 to early January 1946. The United Kingdom and the Soviet Union failed to 
compromise on numerous European issues such as the future administration of Germany, 
and the recognition of Rumanian and Bulgarian governments during the Potsdam 
Conference of July and August 1945.93 Furthermore, there was a deadlock between these 
world powers concerning the disposal of the Italian colonies at the meeting of the Council 
of Foreign Ministers in September 1945. The Moscow Conference of December 1945 did 
little to resolve these outstanding European issues. All these instances indicated that there 
was little progress in resolving the numerous unsettled questions reSUlting from the war. 
The continuation of cordial Anglo-Soviet relations faced difficulties in peacetime as well 
as preventing future war. 
In the meantime, Attlee was able to promote his wish to foster international collaboration, 
particularly between the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union under the aegis of the 
United Nations on several occasions. In May 1945 for instance, he emphasised that the 
great powers must cooperate as equal partners and trust each other in the new world 
organisation. In particular, collaboration between the United Kingdom and the Soviet 
Union was essential to ensure the United Nations success in playing a decisive role in 
preventing future war. Attlee was very bopeful that the wartime alliance could be 
preserved even though the war was over. Addressing Labour delegates in May 1945, he 
said; 
I have heard speecbes sometimes that suggested that all 
international problems could be solved if we could only get a few 
93 Graham Ross, 17re Foreign Office cuul the Kremlin: British Documents on A.nglo-Sovlet Relations 1941-
45, (Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, 1984), p. 62. 
over-stress the need, the utter vital importance, of these three 
great nations working together in harmony for the peace of the 
world. It is a condition precedent to any succesS.94 
As soon as the war was over in August 1945, Attlee in his capacity as British Prime 
Minister sent a letter to Stalin congratulating him on their mutual victory of the war. He 
took the opportunity to promote his desire to continue the wartime alliance with the 
Soviet Union in peacetime. In his letter to Stalin of August 1945, he wrote: 
It is, therefore, my earnest hope that the friendship and 
understanding, which has grown up between the USSR and the 
United Kingdom during the war, may endure and expand still 
further in the years of reconstruction and that our Treaty of 
Alliance mal be the basis of close and lasting collaboration 
between us.9 
Another signal of Attlee's desire to continue wartime collaboration with the Soviet 
Union was that he disagreed with the final report of Berlin Conference, sent to him by 
Marshall Smuts in August 1945, which portrayed the Soviet Union as a future enemy of 
the United Kingdom. Instead, Attlee suggested that tension between the Soviet Union 
and Britain should not be provoked as this would lead to disunity between the great 
powers, which would jeopardise the success of the United Nations. Attlee argued that: 
We must at all costs avoid trying to seek a cure by forming blocs 
aimed at Russia. . .. we believe that the only road to safety lies in 
the maintenance of trust and understanding between the great 
powers, which will give some opportunity for the successful 
establishment and functioning of the World Organisation on 
which our hopes for the future are based.96 
,. LPACR, 21-25 May 1945, p. 107. 
95 FO 8001501lSU/45/10 Foreign Office To Moscow, 17 August 1945. 
96 FO 8001443/COMl45/10 Attlee To Field Marshal Smuts, 31 August 1945. 
Meanwhile, as discussed earlier, Bevin had his own thoughts about the League of Nations 
in the interwar years. It is argued that Bevin's perception that the League of Nations was 
only second to the British Empire in the field of international politics continued in the 
post-war world. Nevertheless, as an influential and prominent political figure in British 
politics, Bevin, as a wise politician and pragmatic realist, gave the impression in public 
that in his capacity as Foreign Secretary to the Labour Government he intended to work 
closely and wished to make the United Nations a successful international organisation for 
maintaining international peace and security. In his letter to Molotov, the Soviet Foreign 
Minister, he insisted that he was hoping that the Soviet Union and the United Kingdom 
would collaborate in both the political and the economic field in years to come. Bevin 
emphasised that co-operation between these two countries was vital to ensure the success 
of the United Nations in the field of international politicS.97 In addition, in debating the 
Charter of the United Nations in the House of Commons, Bevin insisted on his wish to 
make the Security Council a place for solving international conflicts, and we for our part, 
intend to do all we can to make it the very centre of the world's international affairs. 98 
Bevin concluded his speech by saying that: 
We as a Government intend to use this instrument to the full. We 
do not intend merely to adopt the Charter tonight and then forgot 
it. We intend to proceed to work out our responsibilities and 
details under it, and to see to it in all our actions we shall square 
up to our responsibilities, if we enter it.99 
,., FO 800J461IFFJ45128 From Foreign Office to Moscow, 15 August 1945. 
91 Hansard, Vol. 413, cols. 942-943,23 August 1945. 
"Ibid, col. 949. 
Conclusion 
It is in this context, namely internationalism as the central principle underlying Labour's 
foreign policy; Attlee's and Bevin's personal backgrounds; their internationalist and 
nationalist political outlooks from the 1930s to early 1940s; and the domestic background 
to Attlee's government that this study examines Attlee's and Bevin's positions and 
perspectives on the place of the UN and its role in British diplomacy. The following 
chapter concentrates on the international trusteeship system to illuminate the dialogue 
between these two men in their desire for internationalism and balance of power politics 
in the post-war world. 
Chapter 3 
The International Trusteeship System 
Introduction 
The discussion in this chapter concentrates on the issue of the Trusteeships scheme 
for the former Italian colonies in Africa. The aim of this chapter is to explore 
Attlee's and Bevin's opinions on whether or not to place the ex-Italian colonies) 
under United Nations' trusteeship from July 1945 to March 1947. The Italian 
question was an important political subject for the victorious powers after the 
Second World War. These four world powers, namely the United Kingdom, the 
Soviet Union, the United States of America and France, were responsible for 
determining the future of the former Italian colonies? As one of the parties signing 
the agreement with Italy, Attlee's government needed to make a decision on how to 
run the colonies. 
I There were three Italian colonies: Somaliland, Britrea and Libya. Libya in particular. consists of 
three provinces namely Cyrenaica in the east, Tripolitania in the West and pczzan in the south-west. 
See Wm Roger Louis,lmperlalism at Bay: TIre United Statu and the Decolonization o/the British 
Empire, 1941-1945, (Clarendon Press: Oxford, 1998 Reprinted), p. 59. 
2 PRaM 8151 S Cabinet on Policy in Libya: Memorandum by the Secretary of States for Foreign 
Affairs, 23 September 1946. Article 17 of the Draft Peace Treaty with Italy provided that: 
a) Italy renounces all right and title to the Italian territorial possessions in Aftic:a, i.e. Libya, Britrea 
and Italian Somaliland; b) Pending their final disposal, the said possessions shall continue under 
their present administration; and c) The final disposal of these possessions shall be determined 
jointly by the Governments of the USSR, United States, United Kingdom and France within one 
The controversy over the fate and future of the ex-Italian colonies, particularly 
Tripolitania, Cyrenaica and Fezzan, not only reflected a difference of opinion 
between Attlee and Bevin. The decision on whether the territories should be placed 
under the collective international trusteeship system or direct individual state 
control also sparked the wider issue of imperial strategy worldwide. In addition, it 
reflected the failure of the world powers to decide promptly on the fate of the 
colonies in the aftermath of the Second World War. In this context, the discussion 
examines a number of questions, including Attlee's expectations of United Nations 
Trusteeship and how far he was willing to place the ex-Italian colonies under the 
trusteeship system. Why was he keen to do so? Next, did Bevin support AttIee's 
view, or was he strongly opposed to his ideas about the system? What were Bevin's 
practical grounds for his stand on collective trusteeship? Finally, why was he 
committed to limiting the trusteeship scheme? 
This chapter consists of four main parts. The first part provides a background to the 
colonial issue in the aftermath of the Second World War and the formation of the 
trusteeship system. The second deals with AttIee's view of the system and the fate 
of the former Italian colonies. The third part discusses Bevin's lack of belief in 
United Nations trusteeship, as well as his hesitation to place the former Italian 
colonies under international management and administration. The final part is the 
conclusion. 
year of the coming into force of the present Treaty. in the manner laid down in the joint declaration 
Attlee's Government and the Colonial Issue 
The colonial issue was a delicate and vital one for Attlee's government to handle in 
cabinet meetings, Labour Party conferences, and the House of Commons. Britain 
was indisputably the world's largest colonial power, as confinned by her victory in 
the war. For a Labour Government, the possession of a colonial empire was 
something of a mixed blessing. The war had witnessed growth in the nationalist 
movements in India and other parts of the empire. Its financial and military 
demands had weakened Britain's physical ability to hang on to its empire, whilst 
both the United States and the United Nations offered other challenges to the status 
quo; nor was the Communist USSR likely to regard the British Empire favourably. 
Like the Dutch and the French, the British were to come under pressure to relax the 
bonds of empire. Even though the Second World War ended in August 1945, the 
British Empire had retained many colonies overseas, particularly in Africa an4 Asia, 
as a symbol of the prestige of being one of the world powers. It should be noted that 
as well as being this symbol of prestige, Britain's overseas colonies were expected 
to playa crucial role in tenns of Britain's own economic recovery in the aftermath 
of the Second World War. As Attlee's cabinet was the first British government in 
peacetime, it fell to it to create a clear policy concerning these colonies in peacetime. 
It is argued that the issue of the colonies was vital to Attlee's government due to a 
number of interrelated events resulting from the Second World War. These 
ciIcumstanccs included the growing of anti-colonial movements in the colonies, 
financial constraints to continuing overseas commitment, the existence of the 
of [date] issues by the said Governments. 
United Nations, and pressures and challenges in the international arena, particularly 
from the United States and the Soviet Union, against Britain's inclination to retain 
so many colonies in peacetime. Of all these events, the anti-colonial movements 
were key in pressing colonial powers such as the British, the Dutch and the French 
to grant independence to their colonies. 
The growing anti-colonial movements in colonies in Africa and Asia in the 
aftermath of the Second W orId War were significant in terms of their demand for 
self-government and independence from the European colonial powers. For 
instance, as soon as the Japanese army surrendered in August 1945, the European 
colonial powers in South East Asia such as Britain, Holland and France reoccupied 
their colonies. These European colonial powers needed to reassert their power, rule 
and influence over their colonies such as Malaya, Indonesia and Indo-China 
respectively, largely for strategic and economic purposes. Nevertheless, the return 
of the colonial powers to their colonies was seen by nationalists as well as by the 
ordinary peoples under colonial rule in South East Asia as a continuation of foreign 
political domination, economic exploitation and military subjugation.3 It must be 
emphasised that in the post-war world, anti-colonial movements varied from one 
place to another in tenns of size, time and cause. In the case of Malaya for instance. 
the anti-colonial movement to oppose British administration undeniably existed in 
various part of Malaya from the late nineteenth century onwards. Nationalist 
movements to oppose British administration in Malaya, however, were scattered 
and disunited. Not until the British announcement of their intention to implement 
the Malayan Union scheme in April 1946 did the nationalist movement gain strong 
l Robert Johnson. BrlIisla Imperialism. (palgrave Macmillan: Hampshire. 2003), p. ix. 
momentum, becoming united and more focused. 4 Consequently, under strong 
political pressure from various groups, particularly from the Malays united under 
the United Malays National Organisation (UMNO), the Malayan Union scheme was 
cancelled. 
Thus, the presence of these European colonial powers was not, in the mam, 
welcome. Instead, due to political changes derived from the war itself, such as the 
encouragement of loyalty, patriotism, and the idea of the right of every nation to be 
an independent nation state, nationalists in South East Asia demanded self-
government and independence from their colonisers. S Even though the scale, 
frequency, timing and means varied from one colony to another, the principle aim 
was the same; to gain national self-government. In the context of the growing anti-
colonial movements, it was hard for colonial powers such as Britain to ignore and 
resist the strong national feeling in the colonies. Consequently, Britain needed to 
reconsider its policy towards the colonies, withdrawing from territories where 
remaining was not practicable, and consolidating its position in others. 
Britain had used one quarter of its national wealth during the war to defeat the Axis 
powers. 6 As a result, the country faced economic difficulties such as inflation, 
shortages of consumer goods and an inability to provide sufficient accommodation 
for its population in the aftennath of the Second World War. To make matters 
worse, Britain's role at the centre of international trade and finance declined 
steadily after the war because much of its human resources had been concentrated 
.. A. J. Stockwell (Ed), BDEE, Series B, Vol. 3, Part I, Malaya: The Malaytlll Union Experiment 
/942-/948, (HMSO: London, 1995), Introduction, p.lix. 
5 Trevor Lloyd, Empire: The History of the BrUlsIa Empire, (Hamblcdon and London, 2001), p. 167. 
on war industries rather than producing good for export. In the light of Britain's 
financial constraints, the United Kingdom as an undisputed colonial power in the 
interwar years needed to reconsider and adjust its policy of continuing overseas 
commitment, particularly in maintaining the colonies. Overseas commitment was 
costly, even though some of the colonies, particularly in Africa and Asia, could 
continue to contribute their natural resources to boost Britain's economy. 
Furthermore, the existence of the United Nations created pressure on Britain as a 
colonial power in peacetime. This was due to the fact that the leaders of the 
colonised peoples took the opportunity to influence the United Nations against 
colonialism in order to put pressure on the European colonial powers to grant 
independence immediately.' The leaders of the colonised peoples saw the formation 
of the United Nations as an opportunity in terms of their chances of gaining 
independence. Thus the United Nations became a source of embarrassment to 
Britain, as its new members used it as a forum to condemn Britain as the leading 
colonial power in the international arena. 8 
Finally, yet importantly, both the United States and the Soviet Union challenged 
Britain in the international arena over retaining its colonies. On the one hand, the 
United States had an anti-colonial tradition and favoured radical post-war treatment 
of colonial problems, particularly the right to self-detennination and independence. 
From the United States' point of view, the competition between the European 
, Alan Sked and Chris Cook, Post-War Britain: A PolUlcal History 194$-1992, (penguin Book, 
London, 1993), p. 26. 
7 Kenneth J. T., 'The Colonial Powers and the United Nationa' Joumal of Contemporary History, 
Vol. 4, No.1, January 1969, p.168. 
 L. J. Butler, Britain and Empl,.: A.djusting to a Post-lmperl4/ World, (I.B. Tauris: London, 2002), 
p.81. 
colonial powers in acquiring new territories in the late nineteenth century and their 
ambition to retain a large number of colonies in the aftennath of the Second World 
War was a prime potential cause of future war.9 Thus in the interwar years as well 
as in wartime there were a number of instances of Anglo-American friction over the 
colonial issue. In the aftennath of the First World War, for instance, the United 
States, led by Woodrow Wilson, insisted that fonner Gennan colonies and parts of 
the Ottoman Empire should be placed under League of Nations management, and 
not under any particular colonial power. 10 Another example of Anglo-American 
friction over the colonial issue occurred during the war. The United States, under 
President Franklin D. Roosevelt's administration, and the United Kingdom, under 
Winston S. Churchill's premiership, offered different interpretations of the Atlantic 
Charter of August 1941.11 Churchill contended that the Atlantic Charter was only 
applicable to all states under Axis occupation in Europe. The United States, 
however, wished to apply the Atlantic Charter to all colonies as well. 
During the Yalta conference of February 1945, the United States administration 
strongly recommended that territories presently under the League of Nations 
mandate system and those detached from Axis powers as an outcome of the war 
should be placed under United Nations management and adrninisttation. 12 These 
instances illustrate that the United States and the United Kingdom were united 
against the Axis powers in wartime, but divided on issues concerning the British 
Empire and its colonies. As William Roger Louis had pointed out, however, there 
was a shift in the United States' attitudes on colonialism and Britain's possession of 
II Wm. Roger Louis, Imperialism at Bay, P. 1. 
10 Ibid. 
II Kenneth J. T, 'The Colonial Powers and the United Nations'. p. 171. 
12 Ibid, p. 176. 
colonies towards the end of the war. In fact, according to Louis, after 1943 the 
United States' policy tended to support rather than seek to break up the British 
Imperial system because the United States military was keen to have access to 
colonies as bases.13 Consequently, at the San Francisco Conference of May 1945, 
the United States aligned itself with the imperial powers and accepted that self-
government rather than independence should be the goal for colonial territories. 14 
On the other hand, the Soviet Union challenged British supremacy in Asia, the 
Middle East and North Africa. In order to undermine British power and prestige, the 
Soviet Union endeavoured to gain a political foothold in these areas. Its strategies 
include sympathising with those people under colonial rule. In other words, the 
Soviet Union manipulated the colonial issue and the policy of retaining large 
numbers of colonies in order to bring into question Britain's prestige and status as a 
colonial power in peacetime. IS Thus, the development of the Cold War encouraged 
Attlee's government to reconsider its purpose and policy concerning the colonial 
territories in order to limit the Soviet Union's attempts to get a political foothold in 
the British sphere of influence, as well as to avoid a clash of interests between the 
two countries. 
Due to this combinatipn of events, the colonial issue was vital to Attlee's 
government. Since it was the first post-war government in Britain, and since the 
Labour Party had made a promise in wartime to support the right of the colonies to 
self-government and independence in peacetime, it was the Attlee government's 
task and responsibility to fulfil and deliver this promise. Meanwhile, the survival, 
13 Wm Roger Louis, Imperialism at Bay, pp. 238-242. 
power and prestige of the British Empire in the international arena were also ~rucial 
to Attlee's government. Thus his Cabinet was in a dilemma as to who should run or 
administer the colonies; the advantages or disadvantages of maintaining them; 
whether they should be granted independence; and whether all or only a few 
colonies should be placed under the international trusteeship system. 
The United Nations Trusteeship Scheme 
The Charter of the United Nations provided for the fonnation of the international 
trusteeship system, particularly with chapters XI, XII and XIII, which replaced the 
previous mandate system under the League of Nations. 16 The objectives of the 
international trusteeship system included strengthening international peace and 
security, encouraging respect for human rights, ensuring equal treatment for all 
members of the United Nations and encouraging the progress of the inhabitants of 
the 'trust territories' politically, economically and socially toward self-government 
and independence. 17 Based on the Charter of the United Nations, the international 
trusteeship system could be applied to former mandated territories, territories 
separated from ex-enemy countries defeated in the Second World War, and 
territories voluntarily placed under international management by the states 
responsible for their administration. 18 Since the United Nations came into being, the 
issue of the international trusteeship system managed to capture world attention, 
particularly that of the peoples under colonial administration who were aiming for 
self-government or independence. They were boping that the world powers would 
14 Wm Roger Louis, Imperialism III Bay, p. 522 and 531. 
IS Trevor Lloyd, Empire: 17te History olllle British Empire, p. 168. 
J6 The Charter of the United Nations was signed on 26 June 1945 in San Praacisco. 
commit to applying and extending the international trusteeship system as soon as 
possible. 
Britain, as one of the colonial powers in the aftennath of the Second World War, 
needed to make a stand concerning the issue of the international trusteeship scheme. 
Professor Webster, of the Reconstruction Department of the Foreign Office, who 
was directly involved in drafting the Charter of the United Nations, had foreseen the 
implications of these Chapters for British colonies or protectorates in the corning 
years. In his comment concerning the Charter of the United Nations after the San 
Francisco Conference, he insisted that Chapters XI, XII and XIII did not empower 
the United Nations to intervene in the application of these principles by the Powers 
concerned. 19 He argued that the Charter itself placed no territories under the system, 
but provided means for bringing under that system such individual territories in 
each of the categories in future. Thus, according to Webster, these chapters in no 
way affected the status of any territories belonging to the categories specified in the 
articles.2o In short, the commitment to apply and extend the international trusteeship 
system was purely voluntary, and there was no legal obligation for colonial powers 
such as Britain to place any territories under the scheme. 
It should be noted that internationally, the political desire of the world powers in 
terms of extending the international trusteeship system in the aftermath of the 
Second World War was not impressive. In fact, the attitude of the world powers 
was not what the colonised people expected. The United States, for instance, as one 
.7 Yubook 011114 United Nations 1946-47, p. 577 . 
 1 Yearbook of the United Nations. 1946-47, p. 573. 
19 FO 371/S073W6324112170 Foreign Office Minute, 'Commentary OIl the United Nations Charter 
by Professor Webster', 8 August 1945. 
of the signatories to the Charter of the United Nations, gave lukewarm support to 
the trusteeship system in terms of extending the scheme in the post-war world. As 
mentioned earlier in this chapter, there was a shift in the United States' attitude to 
colonialism towards the end of the war in 1945. Thus the United States' stand 
concerning the trusteeship scheme was to support the system but not to extend it 
particularly if the implementation of the international trusteeship scheme would 
jeopardise the United States' national interests. In debating the consequences and 
requirements of the United States as a member to the United Nations, the report on 
Foreign Relations of the Senate Committee of July 1946 insisted that the United 
States needed to be very careful in accepting the implementation of the international 
trusteeship systern.21 This was to ensure that the international trusteeship scheme 
would not conflict with the security interests of the United States. Later, in January 
1946, Truman, the President of the United States, clear indicated in his press 
conference that it had always been the intention of the United States to retain the 
territories captured from the Japanese, particularly in the Pacific Islands, under their 
firm control. 22 If the United States were to accept the implementation of the 
international trusteeship system in the Pacific Islands, the President insisted that the 
United States would continue to hold and exclusively operate these territories. The 
President repeated his assurance in another press conference that the national 
defence necessities of the United States in the Pacific Islands would not be 
sacrificed. In addition, according to the report, not only is Congressional opinion in 
a state of flux, but there is also good reason to believe that differences between 
20 Ibid. 
21 FO 37t1507331U6037/12170 From Washington to Foreign Office, 'United Nations Charter: Report 
7 the Senate Committee on Foreign Relation', 7 August 1945. 
FO 37 liS 1606lAN 193/114S From Washington to Foreign Office, 'Weekly Political Summary', 20 
January 1946. 
states and service departments are still unresolved. 23 This meant that the Pacific 
Islands were vital to the United States' security in the post-war world. Thus, any 
fonn of international control and interference should be avoided. The United States 
would not compromise its national interests, particularly on strategic grounds, in 
supporting the international trusteeship system. It was a clear indication that the 
United States had no desire to place any of its territories under international 
management in the coming years. 
The Soviet Union, too, had no political inclination to extend the international 
trusteeship system. This was because it had no intention of placing any of the 
territories it had won in the war, such as the fonner Baltic States, under 
international contro1.24 However, in light of the colonial powers' inclination not to 
apply and extend the international trusteeship system, the Soviet Union publicly 
gave the impression to the members of the United Nations that they supported the 
scheme. The international trusteeship scheme, according to N. Nivikov, the Soviet 
delegate at the Plenary Session on Trusteeship, was essential, as the system would 
accelerate the progressive development of the peoples under colonial administration 
towards self-government and independence. Thus the Soviet Union was surprised as 
the colonial powers, in presenting the draft agreements on trusteeship over eight 
former LON mandated territories, did not indicate the length of the trusteeship 
period. This meant that, from the Soviet Union's view, the colonial powers in the 
post-war world desired to hold on to these colonies indefinitely and were not 
committed to their development towards self-government and independence. If in 
Z3 F03711S 1606/AN2S7/114S From Washington to Fcnign Office, 'Weekly Political Summary', 28 
January 1946. 
24 FO 3711S16061AN193/114S From Washington to Foreign Office, 'Weekly Political Summary', 20 
January 1946. 
the coming years the colonial powers declined to apply and place more mandated 
territories or protectorates under the international trusteeship system, the Soviet 
Union insisted that: 
Such a tendency, if it takes effect, would be tantamount to 
the annexation of territories under trusteeship by the 
mandatory countries, which would constitute a violation of 
the Charter?S 
In light of these historical developments, the world powers as permanent members 
of the United Nations foresaw the impracticability of extending the international 
trusteeship system both on political and strategic grounds. 
Attlee's Perspective on the United Nations Trusteeship 
System 
It should be emphasised from the beginning that Attlee was in favour of 
international administration of colonies in peacetime. He was hoping that the 
interna~onal trusteeship system would be implemented immediately in all colonial 
territories, including existing British colonies, as soon as the United Nations had 
ratified and institutionalised the system. He had, from the early days of his career as 
Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, continuously advocated that the 
administration of colonial territories should be a matter for international 
responsibility and control under the aegis of the United Nations, and not under one 
particular great power. He regarded the United Nations as the only authoritative 
body fit to manage the colonies, rather than any individual state or colonial power. 
It is worth noting that Attlee's inclination to support the international management 
and administration of the colonies derived from the fact that he rejected power 
politics and the creation and preservation of spheres of influence in peacetime. 
Attlee appeared to propose a reversion of foreign policy from that of the interwar 
years. He emphasised that the very concept of balance of power was not suited to 
the new circumstances in the international political arena. Attlee was convinced that 
the practice of exclusive zones of occupation would inevitably lead to tension 
between states and international conflict. Thus in July 1945, a week before he was 
made the first post-war prime minister of the United Kingdom, he suggested to 
Eden that strategic areas should be placed under United Nations administration. 
Attlee wrote: 
If we take a stand on the basis of our particular interests 
in such areas as the Western and Eastern exits from the 
Mediterranean, we are, I think, fighting on weak 
ground. . .. the concept of the special interest of Great 
Britain in the strategic areas and the acceptance of 
responsibility for them involves us in a continuing heavy 
burden of defence expenditure. Similarly, the conception 
of the paramount interest of Russia in the Baltic and 
Black sea exits is based on the old conception of naval 
defence. In my view, the only realistic policy is that of 
placing all these strategic areas under international 
control, not the control of one or two powers, but of the 
United Nations.26 
The statement indicated that Attlee was in favour of the international ownership and 
management of all strategic areas in the world for the sake of global peace and 
security. He suggested that world leaders should be concerned with 
internationalising a number of strategic areas worldwide when the United Nations 
became effective. Attlee repeated the same suggestion to Churchill in July 1945: 
zs FO 371/S96991UN474619ns Soviet News, 'Our View on Trusteeship', 19 December 1946. 
26 DBPO, Series I, Vol. I, The Conference at Potsdam July-August 1945, (London: HMSO, 1984), 
doc. no. 179, 'Minute &om Attlee to Belen', 18 July 1945, p.364 
I suggest, therefore, that we should take the line that the 
whole question of the control of strategic areas should be 
taken uf when the United Nations organisation comes into 
being.2 
If Attlee had recommended placing all the strategic areas under United Nations 
responsibility, he also had a similar attitude towards the colonial territories. In 
relation to the fact that the British Empire retained a large number of colonial 
territories and the control of strategic areas in many parts of the world, Attlee 
suggested surrendering all these territories to international ownership and 
management He believed that this step was necessary, timely and the most 
effective means of preventing tension and competition between states bent on 
acquiring new territories and continuing to monopolise strategic areas as in the 
interwar years. 
Thus, as he began his career as the first post-war prime minister of the United 
Kingdom Attlee continuously promoted his idea of placing all colonies under 
international management and administration. The United Nations Cha.rter had 
institutionalised its policy on colonial territories in June 1945. Attlee was delighted 
that the United Nations had taken a clear stand over the colonial question. Asking 
for ratification of the Charter of the United Nations in the British Parliament in 
August 1945, be said: 
The doctrine of trusteeship as a guiding principle in 
colonial policy is nothing new. It has been our guiding 
policy in this country for many years, but the Declaration 
in Chapter n of the United Nations Charter is the first 
general international declaration of colonial policy.28 
27 DBPO, Series I. Vol. I, doc. no. 237, 'Minute from Attlee to Churchill', 23 July 1945, p. 574. 
21 HtlllSard, Vol. 413,22 August 1945, col. 668. 
One of the central features of the international management and administration of 
the colonies as advocated by Attlee was international collaboration. The world 
powers had collective responsibility and acted collectively towards the colonies 
inside the framework of the United Nations. International cooperation, 
particularly between the five permanent members of the United Nations, was 
essential in order to share the burden of holding the colonies as well as the cost of 
defending them. None of the world powers would have any opportunity to further 
their national interests, such as by having military bases in the so-called 'trust 
territories'. Thus there would no longer be competition between states to acquire 
new territories or new exclusive zones of occupation. There would be no more 
buffer zones and satellite states. Instead, Attlee believed that the international 
trusteeship system would prevent future war and foster collabomtion between 
states for the sake of peace and security. Attlee further elabomted his attitude and 
hopes for the implementation of the international trusteeship system. According to 
him, the aim of the international trusteeship system would avoid the continuous 
exploitation of the inhabitants of the colonies. Instead, the responsibility and 
priority of the colonial powers under the trusteeship system was the welfare of the 
people. Attlee pointed out: 
The colonial powers who have signed this Charter 
recognise the principle that the interest of the inhabitants 
of non-self-governing territories are paramount and 
accept as a sacred trust, the obligation to promote to the 
utmost, within the system of international peace and 
security established by the present Charter, the well-being 
of the inhabitants of these territories.29 
at Hansard, Vol. 413,22 August 1945, col. 667. 
To achieve this objective, he added that there was a provision in the Charter of the 
United Nations which demanded that the colonial powers submit regular reports and 
information to the Secretary General of the United Nations regarding the economic, 
political, social and educational progress of the respective 'trust territories'. 30 He 
added that the ultimate aim of the international trusteeship system was to grant 
independence to the respective colonies, and not to continue their exploitation. 
To Attlee, the United Nations trusteeship differed significantly from the old system 
of mandate territories under the League of Nations in at least two ways. First, the 
international system aimed to promote the wen-being of the inhabitants of the 
respective territories. In the field of defence, for instance, Attlee highlighted that the 
local people of the mandate territories were isolated and received limited training in 
administering and defending their own territories. The United Nations Charter, 
however, recognised the positive obligation that the inhabitants of the trust 
territories should make their full contribution towards defending their territories.31 
Secondly, the international trusteeship system was friendlier to local peoples 
because there was an opportunity for self-government International management 
also meant that the colonial powers, including the United Kingdom, should 
surrender direct control of and responsibility for the colonies to the United Nations. 
This was to ensure that the United Nations had more influence and power than the 
colonial powers in deciding the fate and future of the inhabitants of colonial 
territories in terms of political, economic and social development In this regard, the 
international management of the colonies was very positive as well as protective of 
30 Ibid. 
the peoples of the colonial territories. The new era had begun, and the people 
themselves had to decide their own destinies, such as determining their new form of 
government as part of the world community. According to Attlee, the mandate 
system operated to the disadvantage of the iIihabitants of the territories. Attlee 
referred to the colonies in Africa to justify his argument and he was speaking before 
the colonies' potential contribution to Britain's post-war economic recovery had 
been fully appreciated. He told the House of Commons that the colonial powers 
were more interested in protecting and safeguarding their interests in the territories 
than in promoting those of the local peoples. There was also uncertainty over the 
long-term development of the peoples and the territories themselves in the political, 
economic and social arena. The new provision in the United Nations Charter 
required colonial powers to subordinate their national interests in the 'trust 
territories'. Instead, the priority was to guide and further the needs of local peoples 
in all respects until they were in a position to manage their own territories.32 In 
other words, Attlee expected a higher ethical stance on the part of the colonial 
powers towards the inhabitants of the trust territories, as well as their responsibility 
to grant independence as soon as possible. 
As the Trusteeship Council of the United Nations was being formed to supervise the 
colonies in December 1946, Attlee indicated his willingness to place more 
territories under international administration. He emphasised that the United 
Kingdom must take the lead in participating in the international scheme. In June 
1946, he said at the Labour Party conference that: 
31 Ibid, col. 668. 
3Z Hansard. Vol. 413, 22 August 1945. col. 669 
We have set an example in the United Nations Organisation, 
where we were the first to proclaim our readiness to hand 
over our possessions from the last war under a system of 
trusteeship.33 
Later, in October 1946, Attlee reminded his Cabinet that the Labour government 
had taken the initial steps towards the full implementation of the international 
trusteeship starting in January 1946. In other words, the process of surrendering 
British colonies overseas to international management and administration had just 
begun. As he proudly pointed out in the House of Commons: 
Last January, His Majesty's Government took the lead in 
announcing their intention to place Tangayika, Togoland 
and the Cameroon, at present administered under mandate, 
under trusteeship. Negotiation of the draft terms of 
trusteeship has been completed, and these draft terms will 
be submitted to the General Assembly. This is just another 
instance of the many actions of His Majesty's Government 
that give the lie to the parrot call of 'British Imperialism,.34 
In short, Attlee's commitment to accept the international responsibility and control 
of the colonies indicated that he was willing to place more colonies under the 
international scheme. Attlee strongly recommended placing the ex-Italian colonies 
under United Nations trusteeship. 
Attlee's Attitude to the former Italian Colonies 
Cyrenaica and British Somaliland were under British military administration as a 
result of the treaty signed with Italy at the end of the Second World War. These two 
territories remained under British control and respoDSlbility, until within one year of 
33 LPACR, 10-14 June 1946, p. 126. 
the date of agreement, the world powers decided who should run them. Initially, the 
second category of the so-called 'trust territories' in chapters XII and XIII of the 
Charter of the United Nations applied to the former Italian colonies in Africa. This 
was because the allied army had captured them during the war. 
Attlee continually pressed for collective trusteeship of the fonner Italian colonies. 
His inclination to place the colonies under international management is evidenced 
in his memorandum to the Cabinet dated I September 1945. A week before, Bevin 
and G. H. Hall, the Secretary of State for Colonies, had presented their 
memorandum regarding the ex-Italian colonies for further cabinet discussion. 3s 
Thus Attlee's memorandum was his reaction to ;Bevin's and Hall's 
recommendations. Attlee started by suggesting that the world powers should 
compete under the aegis of the United Nations for the sake of peace and security. 
He wanted to see the world powers collaborating to make the United Nations 
effective rather than trying to cement their political grip in particular zones of 
occupation by securing new military bases. In Attlee's opinion, the holding of 
colonies such as Cyrenaica was an economic burden to the United Kingdom. In his 
memorandum he questioned the financial advantages to the United Kingdom if 
territories such as Cyrenaica and Tripolitania were under British control. He wrote: 
Cyrenaica will saddle us with an expense that we can ill 
afford. Why should we have to bear it? Why should it be 
assumed that only a few great powers could be entrusted 
with backward peoples? Why should not one or other of the 
Scandinavian countries have a try? They are quite as fitted 
to bear rule as ourselves. Why not the United States~ 
34 Hansard. Vol. 427.23 October 1946. col. 1673. 
35 Sce the discussion under the sub topic Bevin and the ex-Italian colonies. 
J6 BDEE, Series A, Vol. 2, Part III, doc. no. 273, 'Future of the Italian colonies: Cabinet 
memorandum by Attlce', 1 September 1945, pp. 207~208. 
Attlee also questioned the advantage of continuing to hold British Somaliland. He 
condemned the action, saying that: 
British Somaliland has always been a dead loss and a 
nuisance to us. We only occupied it as part of the scramble 
Somaliland. Why not let them have it if they like? It will be 
a sop to their pride, and may help them to put up with the 
loss of their position in the Levant. 37 
In short, financial constraint was one of Attlee's main arguments against Bevin's 
and Hall's suggestion to claim British trusteeship of Cyrenaica as well as British 
Somaliland. Besides the financial considerations, Attlee also argued that he did not 
want the other world powers or even the world community to have the impression 
that the United Kingdom was committed to acquiring new territories or extending 
the British Empire in peacetime, as such a situation would only lead to tension 
between states and future war, rather than global peace and security. In addition, 
the locations of former Italian colonies such as Cyrenaica, Tripolitania and Somalia 
for naval base purposes were useless due to new advancements in warfare such as 
the use of air force and the atomic bomb. Attlee pointed out at the end of his 
memorandum that the best option for the Italian colonies was to surrender the 
respective territories to international management and administration. These steps, 
be believed, were essential to ease financial difficulties in Britain' as well as to 
ensure global peace and security.38 Attlee concluded his memorandum by saying 
that he bad no objection to trying the experiment of international administration in 
these territories. 
37 Ibid. 
3. Ibid. 
Attlee's willingness to place the ex-Italian colonies under the international 
trusteeship scheme continued throughout 1946. In his memorandum to the Cabinet 
Defence Committee on 2 March 1946, for instance, he used the same grounds as he 
had forwarded in 1 September 1945 to oppose any recommendation from his 
colleagues to retain British control of the former Italian colonies such as Cyrenaica, 
Somalia or Tripolitania. He. continued to insist on the new circumstances in the 
international arena, and condemned the suggestion of retaining the British sphere of 
influence in particular areas as in the interwar years. In his own words, he said: 
In the changed conditions of the world and in the modern 
conditions of three-dimensional warfare, it is, I think, 
necessary to review with an open mind strategic 
conceptions which we have held for many years. In the 
present era, we must consider very carefully how to make 
the most of our limited resources. We must not, for 
sentimental reasons based on the past, give hostages to 
fortune.39 
Bevin's Perspective on the United Nations Trusteeship 
Attlee's attitude in pressing the immediate implementation of the international 
trusteeship system invited controversy from his closest political colleagues, 
particularly Bevin. The latter was not only sceptical of the effectiveness of the 
international trusteeship system; he also refused to surrender any British colonial 
territories to United Nations trusteeship, even though this was a costly commitment. 
He rejected the idea of multinational administration of the colonies, and felt that the 
United Nations should not share the power to control and administer the colonies. 
In short, Bevin's recommendations concerning United Nations trusteeship differed 
from those of Attlee. He was determined to limit rather than extend the scheme to 
the present British colonies. Thus it is worth examining Bevin's opinion of United 
Nations trusteeship, as it reflects why he was so reluctant to accept it. 
One of the reasons that Bevin had so little belief in United Nations trusteeship was 
that he was committed to pursuing Labour's thinking on colonial territories in 
wartime. In August 1943, the Labour Party unanimously passed a detailed statement 
of colonial policy to be applied after the war, mainly to the people in Africa and 
Asia. 40 The general aims were to accelerate the economic and educational 
development of the colonial peoples and train them to govern themselves in the 
shortest possible time. In fact, the Colonial Office at the time privately welcomed 
Labour's thinking on the colonial territories, as the policy was in line with current 
government thinking. It is suggested that Bevin, as a prominent political figure in 
the Labour Party at the time, in power in the post-war government, committed 
himself to pursuing this policy. In the post-war world, the international management 
of British colonies such as in Asia and Africa had to be avoided as it was not 
concordant with Labour's thinking on the colonial territories. 
In Bevin's opinion, the United Nations was not competent to handle the colonies. It 
was a new body with little knowledge or experience of these matters. Instead, 
Bevin's highest priority was the decisive role of the British Empire in administering 
and controlling the colonies. In other words, the essence of Bevin's political 
framework was that the British Empire, and not the United Nations, stood at the 
centre of world affairs. The United Nations was secondary to the British Empire. He 
39 BDEE, Series A, Vol. 2, doc. no. 276. 'Future of the Italian colonia: memorandum by Attlee for 
Cabinet Defence Committee', 2 March 1946. p.21S. 
strongly opposed any move to break up the British Empire or to end its vital role in 
international politics. Bevin had supported the decisive role of the British Empire in 
world politics even before Attlee appointed him as Foreign Secretary to the Labour 
government. This was evident in Bevin's speech during the Labour Party 
conference two months before the general election in July 1945. As a prominent 
political figure in the Labour Party, he told delegates that his political priority was: 
... to form a Government which is at the centre of a great 
Empire and Commonwealth of Nations, which touches all 
parts of the world.41 
Bevin's speech was remarkable in the sense that the Labour Party manifesto for the 
general election in 1945, Let Us Face the Future, paid little attention to how to 
ensure the continuation of the prestigious role of the British Empire in international 
politics. Instead, the manifesto largely focused on the vital role of an international 
body in the field of international affairs.42 
In his career as Foreign Secretary to the Labour government, Bevin had indicated 
his sceptical attitude, not only towards the machinery of United Nations trusteeship 
but also to the United Nations as a whole, as early as August 1945. He told the 
House of Commons that he doubted that the United Nations would quickly become 
able to be effective. As he pointed out: 
In theory, I do not disagree, but I believe it was the Hon. 
and learned Member for Montgomery (Mr. C. Davies), who 
40 A copy of a publication (pamphlet) describing the Labour Party's post-war policy for the African 
and Pacific colonies is available in CO 323/185819 'The Colonies': The Labour Party's Post-War 
Policy for the African and Pacific Colonies, March 1943. 
41 LPA.CR, 21-25 May 1945, p. 114. 
42 LeI Us Face The Future: A. Declaration 0/ Labour Policy For the Corulderatioll oflhe Nations, 
(Labour Party Pamphlet, April 1945). 
pointed out that it would take time, and he called attention 
to the length of time it had taken to make Britain Great.43 
This statement was an indication that Bevin doubted the effectiveness of the United 
Nations in world governance, as Attlee had strongly advocated. Furthennore, Bevin 
emphasised that the United Kingdom should not be in a huoy to place its belief in 
the United Nations. It would take time before the progress and ability of such a new 
body in handling numerous and fonnidable world affairs, including colonial 
questions, would be evident. In relation to United Nations trusteeship, he was 
hesitant to place British colonies under the scheme. In his own words, he said: 
As far as the administration of our existing mandate is 
concerned, there has been no change in the policy to which 
we were all a party in the coalition government. [Colonel 
Stanley] asked me a rather more difficult question when he 
said; would I give an assurance that no colony would be 
placed under trusteeship? That is a rather wide and 
sweeping suggestion. In general, I answer Yes'."" 
Furthennore, in November 1945, Bevin emphasised that the United Kingdom was 
not committed to acquiring new territories in peacetime, nor to surrender any 
territories it had acquired before the war. The United Kingdom, rather than the 
United Nations, should hold onto the control of and responsibility for the existing 
colonies. He insisted on the responsibility for defending the British Empire if 
another power threatened the empire. As he said: 
At Moscow, at Yalta and the rest of those conferences, no 
one dreamed there would be further tenitorial demands 
except here or there, and the Straits adjustment One would 
have thought everything had been conceded. I must say that 
having conceded all this, and not having taken one inch of 
territory, or asked for it, one cannot help being a little 
suspicious if a great power wants to come right across, 
43 HQlfSQrd. Vol. 413. 23 August 1945. col. 947. 
44 Ibid. col. 942. 
shall I say the throat of British Commonwealth, which has 
done no hann to anybody, but fought this war.4S 
It was clear that neither the United Nations nor the international trusteeship scheme 
interested him. Instead, he was willing to defend the British Empire in his capacity 
as Foreign Secretary. On one occasion, he needed to answer a question about to 
what extent he would safeguard British interests worldwide. Bevin replied 
confidently that he was ready to defend the British Empire at any time and 
everywhere.46 Thus, he never had any intention of ending the role of the British 
Empire in world affairs. To him, if the British Empire were destroyed, it would 
create political instability not only in Britain but also in the world. This tremendous 
political chaos would lead to another major war in the future. As he warned the 
House of Commons in February 1946: 
When I say I am not prepared to sacrifice the British 
Empire, what do I mean? I know that if the British Empire 
fell, the greatest collection of free nations would go into the 
limbo of the past, and it would be a disaster. I know, further, 
it would mean that the standard of life of our constituents 
would fall considerably.47 
In October 1946, Bevin explained to the House of Commons that Great Britain had 
an historic part to play in the field of international politics. As a matter of fact, 
Great Britain was the undisputed world power during the interwar years. He 
demanded appreciation from the world for what the United Kingdom had 
contributed to world stability during that period. The United Kingdom, he added, 
was in a position to continue her decisive role in world affairs in peacetime. He said: 
4' Hansard, Vol. 415, 7 November 1945, col. 1342. 
46 Hansard, Vol. 419,21 February 1946, col. 1357. 
47 Ibid, col. 1365. 
Great Britain, after all, has a great past. ... She is entitled to 
expect that this great experiment should be examined by 
the rest of the world. Her moral example, her steadiness 
and if I may say so, the economic stability she is now 
showing after the terrible devastation of war from which 
she has suffered, place her in a position to render great 
assistance in the resettlement of the world. We shall stand 
finn in our purpose. 48 
As a result, Bevin felt that for the international body to handle colonial matters 
would be a formidable task, and the time had not yet come for the United Kingdom 
to place her colonial territories under international management. He foresaw that 
only when the international trusteeship system was firmly established would the 
United Kingdom possibly consider placing new territories under the system. In 
other words, the collective trusteeship of the United Nations organisation was 
experimental. It was also vital to control and administer the colonies under British 
supervision if Britain intended to playa dominant role in world affairs, as well as to 
maintain its prestige as one of the world powers in years to come. Bevin was 
sceptical of the expectation that the United Nations trusteeship would grow steadily, 
and his attitude was made still clearer in terms of his refusal to place the ex-Italian 
colonies under the system. 
Bevin and the ex-Italian Colonies 
As mentioned earlier, Bevin's attitude was that the colonial powers should retain 
direct control and responsibility in the colonies. Bevin declined to accept any fonn 
of collective trusteeship and direct international administration for any colonies, 
including those formerly belonging to Italy. His position was opposite to that of his 
41 Hansard. Vol. 427, 22 October 1946, col. lS21. 
prime minister on the question. First, he suggested that the United Kingdom should 
retain control and responsibility in Cyrenaica. Concerning British Somaliland, 
Bevin recommended merging the two parts of Somalia to fonn 'Greater Somalia', 
also under British administration.49 In other words, Bevin had to battle with his 
prime minister's internationalist recommendations to place the former Italian 
colonies under the United Nations trusteeship scheme. 
It should be emphasised that the issue of the ex-Italian colonies, particularly 
Cyrenaica, Tripolitania and British Somaliland, had captured Bevin's attention from 
his early days as Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs in Attlee's Cabinet. In 
August 1945, he already had a clear policy towards the territories. He and the 
Secretary of State for Colonies, G. H. Hall, had forwarded a memorandum to the 
Overseas Reconstruction Committee regarding the United Kingdom's 
recommendations concerning the former Italian colonies, for the forthcoming 
meeting of the Council of Foreign Ministers in September. They insisted that the 
United Kingdom, rather than the United Nations, should maintain control and 
responsibility in these territories. 
Bevin based his claim to continuing to maintain British military administration in 
territories such as Cyrenaica and British Somaliland on a number of practical 
reasons. First, the United Kingdom had conquered the territories during the war, 
and not in peacetime. The United Kingdom was not interested in gaining new 
territories in peacetime, as this involved financial commitment as well as breaching 
the Atlantic Charter of August 1941. Another reason was that the former Italian 
.., DBPO, Series I, Vol. II, doc. no. 12, 'Memo on future of Italian colonies and Mediterranean 
colonies were strategically located on the air and sea routes to Asia through the 
Mediterranean and the Red Sea. Finally, Bevin felt that none of these territories had 
the political maturity necessary to form a government. As a result, under all these 
circumstances, the fate of these territories was in the hands of the United Kingdom 
rather than the United Nations. From Bevin's and Hall's point of view, financial 
deficiency was only a peripheral issue to the major question of strategy, defence, 
prestige and the survival of the British Empire in justifying their stand to retain 
British control. Thus, in his joint memorandum with Hall, he explicitly 
recommended: 
We must therefore ensure that [the former Italian colonies] 
do not come under the control of any State, which is 
potentially hostile or incapable of providing for the 
maintenance of orderly conditions and for their defence in 
peace and war. There are unlikely to be many candidates 
who will at once fulfil these qualifications and be willing to 
undertake the role of protector of these barren and 
unproductive areas. By force of circumstance, we may thus 
be compelled to undertake responsibility, which we would 
rather avoid. so 
Besides insisting that the United Nations was a new irttemational body 
inexperienced in handling formidable colonial affairs, Bevin also had the 
impression that the United Nations would attempt to interfere in the internal affairs 
of the British Commonwealth with the implementation of the international 
trusteeship system. This was because international trusteeship management 
involved multinational administration and periodical visits to the respective 
countries. The administering nations might further their national interests in these 
territories. Thus, he opposed the supervision of the former Italian colonies by the 
islands', 25 August 1945, p. 27. 
so Ibid, p. 27. 
international body. As he and Hall wrote in their memorandum, international 
management: 
... would mean an administration composed of many 
different nationalities. Although control by an international 
commission worked satisfactorily in modem European or 
quasi-European conditions (e.g., the Saar or Tangier), it 
would be an altogether new experiment to introduce direct 
international administration over primitive races and it 
seems doubtful whether such an experiment would be 
successful. 51 
Bevin was consistent in his stand over the Italian question from August 1945 to the 
first meeting of the Trusteeship Council of the United Nations in the middle of 1947. 
In fact, during the Potsdam meeting in July 1945 he had taken the initial steps 
towards the United Kingdom's gaining control over the respective territories. The 
Potsdam meeting had referred the issue to the Council of Foreign Ministers, which 
took place in September 1945 in London.52 Bevin intensified his efforts to gain 
British trusteeship of Cyrenaica and British Somaliland at the Council of Foreign' 
Ministers meeting. 
Meanwhile, the United States was disinterested in taking any of the former Italian 
colonies under its own control or responsibility. At the Council of Foreign Ministers 
meeting the United States was in favour of collective trusteeship administered by 
the United Nations. 53 There are a number of explanations for the Americans' 
inclination to surrender the former Italian colonies to United Nations trusteeship. 
First, the United States was committed to fulfilling its promise made in the Atlantic 
Charter of 14 August 1941 and the Moscow Declaration of 27 December 1945. As 
51 Ibid, p. 28. 
52 DBPO, Seriest, Vol. II, doc. no. II, 'Memo on peace treaty with Italy', 2S August 1945, p. 23. 
one of the parties on both occasions, the United States emphasised that they 
understood that in principle the world powers had agreed not to acquire new 
territories in the aftermath of the Second World War. Thus, the Americans opposed 
any intentions of other powers to gain new territories in peacetime. Second, the 
United States wished to see the peoples of the respective colonies determine their 
own destiny and gain independence within a specific timeframe. Fourth, if the 
Italian colonies were under international management, the potential of another 
nation to develop military or air bases would be minimised. Instead, the Security 
Council itself would decide the locations for strategic bases in the area. 54 
Nevertheless, the Italian question was unresolved, due to disagreement between the 
representatives on who should run these colonies. 
Attlee's Cabinet held a meeting on 15 September 1945 to decide whether or not the 
Labour government should support the collective trusteeship of the ex-Italian 
colonies as proposed by the United States. During the meeting, Bevin pointed out 
that he had had difficulties in handling the Italian question during the Council of 
Foreign Ministers. According to Bevin, the world powers bad agreed to place the 
ex-Italian colonies under. the international trusteeship scheme during the meeting. 
Nevertheless, these powers disagreed on the question of whether the territories 
should be placed under individual or collective trusteeship.55 Bevin forwarded his 
arguments against collective trusteeship. He clearly expressed his lack of faith in 
the international trusteeship system. He doubted, for instance, whether the system 
53 DBPO, Series I, Vol. D, doc. no. 53, 'Council of Foreign Ministers meeting on Gennan 
reparations and control, Italian peace treaty, espec:ia1ly colonies', 14 September 1945, p. 159. 
54 DBPO. Series I, Vol. II, doc. no. 53, 'Council of Foreign Ministers meeting on Gennan 
~arations and control, Italian peace treaty, especially colonies', 14 September 1945, p. 164. 
55 BDEE, Series A, Vol. 2, Part III, doc. no. 285, 'Tripolitania: colonial trusteeship: Cabinet 
conclusions', 15 September 1945, p. 233. 
could work properly and play a decisive role in helping the inhabitants of the 
former Italian territories towards self-government. He did not want to take the risk, 
as the international trusteeship system was a new experiment. He also doubted that 
the United Kingdom would be able to alter the international system if it failed.56 
Nonetheless, having discussed the arguments for and against collective trusteeship, 
the meeting decided to support it. The meeting had authorised Bevin to pursue the 
Cabinet decision even though he himself was against the collective trusteeship 
proposal. 57 Thus, the issue of the Italian question was not ended with the cabinet 
conclusion on 15 September 1945. 
Instead, Bevin stood firmly by his earlier suggestion that the United Kingdom 
should retain control of Cyrenaica and British Somaliland. The territories should be 
under British administration until the machinery of the international trusteeship 
system worked effectively. Bevin's strategy was to play for time in order to retain 
British control of Cyrenaica as well as British Somaliland. The United Kingdom 
was also reluctant to place these territories under United Nations trusteeship in 
order to avoid misinterpretation. The minutes of the cabinet meeting on the disposal 
of the Italian colonies and the Italian Mediterranean on 11 September 1945 reported 
that: 
In all the circumstances it seemed to [Bevin] that the wisest 
course might be to aim at keeping both Cyrenaica and the 
Somaliland under British military government until the 
World Organisation had been set up. It might be 
embarrassing to seek to establish the areas under 
trusteeship before the machinery of the trusteeship Council 
bad been worked out.S8 
" Ibid, p. 234. 
57 Ibid, p. 238. 
Later, in early 1946, Bevin, mentioned explicitly to the members of the United 
Nations that the territories previously administered under the mandate system of the 
League of Nations such as Tanganyika, Cameroon and Togoland would have to be 
placed under United Nations trusteeship. The United Kingdom had administered 
these territories for 25 years. At the first General Assembly of the United Nations in 
January 1946, he said: 
We intend to continue this policy under the trusteeship 
system. We are ready to accept the obligation, which will 
rest upon us as an Administrating Authority under this new 
system. Now, if that is to be achieved it is most important 
that the people of the territories themselves, and the world 
at large, should be left in no doubt that continuity of 
administration will be maintained until the ultimate 
objective of the trusteeship system - self-government or 
independence as the case may be - is attained. 59 
Thus, the members of the United Nations, particularly the peoples under colonial 
administration and the other world powers themselves had the impression that the 
United Kingdom under the Labour Government was not only committed to taking 
part and ensuring that the international trusteeship system worked effectively under 
the aegis of the United Nations, but was also inclined to extend the trusteeship 
scheme in years to come. The public in the United States generally welcomed 
Bevin's announcement and described it as more concrete than any of all speeches 
made by the representatives of the Great Britain so far. 60 
sa BDEE, Series A, Vol. 2, Part III, doc. no. 284, 'Disposal of Italian colonies and of Italian 
Mediterranean islands: Cabinet conclusion', 11 September 1945, pp. 231-232. 
"The full text ofBcvin's speech at the first Oeneral Assembly of the United Nations on 17 January 
1946 is printed in The Earl of Lytton (cd.), First Assembly: The Birth of the United Nations 
Organisation, Hutchinson and Co. (London: 1946), pp. 41-47. 
60 FO 3711S16061AN193/114S From Washington to Foreign Office, 'Weekly Political Summary', 20 
January 1946. 
In relation both to Bevin's public speech at the First General Assembly of the 
United Nations and to the Soviet Union's and United States' proposals over 
international arrangements for the fonner ex-Italian colonies in Africa in September 
1945, Field Marshal Smuts, the Prime Minister of the Union of South Africa, sent a 
letter to Sir Evelyn Baring, the British High Commissioner in South Africa. Baring 
forwarded Smuts' letter to Viscount Addison, the Secretary of State for Dominion 
Affairs.61 In his letter to Baring, Smuts explicitly expressed his personal stand and 
insisted on the impracticality both militarily and politically of the international 
trusteeship scheme. He was very concerned about the issue of the international 
arrangement for the ex-Italian colonies and regarded the issue as far too serious to 
ignore. He questioned Bevin's conditional acceptance of the United States' proposal 
for an international trusteeship administration of the Italian colonies as a 
compromise alternative to the Russian demand for individual trusteeship of 
Tripolitania. Smuts insisted that the international trusteeship scheme of the Italian 
colonies in Africa must be considered in the wider setting offuture world peace and 
power politics and of its intimate relation to the vital communication of the 
Commonwealth.62 He argued that under the international trusteeship management of 
the ex-Italian colonies in Africa, the Soviet Union would claim a major share. 
Consequently, the Soviet Union, according to Smuts, would have the opportunity to 
intervene or achieve a political foothold in the British sphere of influence. In 
addition, the United States had publicly declared that America would continue to 
hold on to necessary territory conquered by the United States as long as these 
territories, particularly in the Pacific, were in its interests. Smuts suggested that we 
must above all play for time and delay the distribution of these colonies until we see 
61 PREM 81515 From the High Commissioner for the Union of South Afiica to the Secretary of 
more of the shape of the future. 63 In his conclusion, Smuts made a strong appeal to 
the British government to reconsider the matter seriously. 
Attlee received the copy of Smuts' letter and asked the Foreign Office and the 
Chiefs of Staff's views on Smuts' stand on the arrangement for international 
trusteeship administration of the Italian colonies in Africa.64 Bevin, even though 
reluctant to share fully Smuts' personal view, and particularly his opinion of the 
Soviet political penetration of the post-war world, admitted the impracticality both 
politically and militarily of Britain's accepting the United States' proposal to place 
the former Italian colonies in Africa under the international trusteeship scheme. In 
his letter to Attlee, Bevin explicitly mentioned that: 
I share Field Marshall Smuts' fears about Russian 
intentions and his desire to play for time is very 
understandable. Whilst I have no intention of being rushed 
into an early decision, we cannot very well refuse, in view 
of my conditional acceptance of the American plans for 
United Nations trusteeship, to discuss now at Lancaster 
House the practical application of international trusteeship 
to the Italian colonies. Indeed in my view no final plan 
should be agreed without prior approval of the United 
Nations Organisation and some expression of a view by 
Italy and the native population. 65 
With regard to Bevin's public declaration at the General assembly of the UN in 
January 1946 in favour of continuing and extending the United Nations trusteeship 
scheme in years to come, Bevin's attitude actually opposed his own public 
statement In short, Bevin's announcement was far from realistic. Instead, he 
States for Dominions Affairs, 26 January 1946. 
62lbtd. . 
63 Ibid. 
64 PREM 81515 T. L. Rowan to P. J. Dixon, 30 January 1946. 
65 PREM 81515 Bevin to Attlee, 9 February 1946. 
committed to limiting the international trusteeship scheme for the fonner Italian 
colonies. 
Meanwhile, as Attlee had instructed earlier, the Chiefs of Staff offered their 
opinions on Smuts' letter about the impracticality of the international arrangement 
for the ex-Italian colonies. The Chiefs of Staff held a special meeting to examine 
both the implications of individual trusteeship under the UN as proposed by the 
Soviet Union, and collective trusteeship under the UN as proposed by the United 
States. Despite the fact that the Chiefs of Staff emphasised that the mistrust of 
Russian intention is the dominatingfactor in his mind, their stand was that: 
We are in general agreement with Field Marshal Smuts' 
views and we share his mistrust of Russian intentions 
which have, during the past few months, become more 
openly directed towards strategic and political influence in 
the Mediterranean and Middle East. 66 
The Chiefs of Staff then recommended that under no circumstances would sole 
Russian trusteeship of any of the Italian colonies be acceptable, and combined 
trusteeship should only be agreed to as a last resort on condition that the Principle 
Administrator in any particular colony would not at any time be Russian.67 
Meanwhile the Dominion Governments also held a meeting to discuss and express 
their view of Smuts' message.68 The meeting generally agreed with Smuts' point of 
view and regarded the issue of the disposal of the Italian colonies in Africa as a 
matter of first class importance for the British Commonwealth in which it was vital 
66 PREM 81515 Chiefs ofStaffCommittec on Futw"C of the Italian Colonies, 13 February 1946. 
6' Ibid. 
61 PREM 815 IS Italian Colonies: Notes of a Meeting in the Dominions Office, 15 February 1946. 
Viscount Addison presided the meeting with the representatives from Canada, Australia, New 
Zealand and South Africa. Bevin, A. Creech Jones and Major 0eneraI Jacob were also present. 
for the members of the British Commonwealth to get their aims clear. To those who 
attended the meeting, the Mediterranean line of communications was vital and the 
efficacy of United Nations had yet to be tested. They were concerned at the attempt 
to extend Soviet influence into the Mediterranean. If this were to happen, in the 
sense that the Soviet Union obtained a political foothold in Africa, the whole 
continent might ultimately be thrown into a state of unrest. The United States 
proposals needed very careful consideration before they were adopted. The United 
States Government was obsessed by the principle of trusteeship and did not 
understand the importance of the Mediterranean to British security. The members of 
the meeting welcomed Bevin's sympathies with Smuts' suggestion to delay. 
These historical developments suggested that the Foreign Office under Bevin's 
headship, the Chiefs of Staff and the Dominion Governments shared little 
enthusiasm for Attlee's internationalist desire to place the ex-Italian colonies under 
international management. The central point in their policy was that under the 
international trusteeship scheme, the Soviet Union would have an opportunity to 
acquire a foothold in Africa. If the Soviet Union succeeded in getting a base in any 
part of Africa, it would use the opportunity to extend its political influence on the 
continent. In other words, Soviet influence would have to be kept out of Africa. 
Attlee, however, was sceptical about Bevin's, the Dominion Governments' and the 
Chiefs of Stairs attitude concerning the impracticality ofintemational management 
)fthe ex-Italian colonies. He emphasised Britain's economic constraints in holding 
md administering the ex-Italian colonies in Africa. As he wrote in his memorandum: 
I consider that we cannot afford to provide the great sums 
of money for the large forces involved on the chance of 
being able to use the Mediterranean route in time of war. I 
should like the Chiefs of Staff to consider the arguments 
put forward here and to let the Defence Committee have an 
appreciation of the strategic position of the British 
Commonwealth in the light of our resources and of modem 
conditions ofwarfare.69 
In relation to the divergence of opinion between Attlee and Bevin, the Chiefs of 
Staff and the Dominion Governments over the issue of the ex-Italian colonies in 
Africa, Bevin continuously pressed his imperialist attitude. Bevin however, had 
limited success in securing British control in this area. For instance, he had to put 
aside his ambition to create 'Greater Somalia' as soon as the second meeting of the 
Council of Foreign Ministers had ended in Paris. On 22 June 1946, Bevin had sent a 
telegram to Hall, pointing out that he had not pressed the United Kingdom's 
proposal for the creation of a 'Greater Somalia'. The Cabinet discussed the matter, 
and concluded on 24 June 1946 that: 
... the cabinet assumed that international discussion of the 
possibility of creating a United Somalia under some other 
fonn of administration was postponed and not abandoned 
and did not desire the matter to be so left that they were 
precluded from putting this possibility forward at some 
later stage.70 
Meanwhile, the establishment of the Trusteeship Council of the United Nations 
took place on 14 December 1946, after more than a year's delay. This was due to 
the slow progress of the 'administrating states' in presenting a draft agreement for 
General Assembly of the United Nations' approval. The General Assembly had 
adopted a resolution to invite the respective 'administrating states' to submit the 
draft agreement on 9 February 1946 in order to form the Trusteeship Council. 
Unfortunately, nothing happened. The First Secretary of the United Nations, Trygve 
69 PREM 815 IS Future of the Italian Colonies: Memorandum by the Prime Minister and Minister of 
Defence, 19 February 1946. 
Lie, reminded the 'administrating states' on 29 June 1946 to submit the draft 
agreement as soon as possible.71 Some members of the Preparatory Commission, 
such as the Soviet Union, refused to accept the draft agreement for General 
Assembly approval. The Soviet Union rejected it on the basis that they were not 
invited to prepare the draft before it was presented to the General Assembly. 72 
Under these circumstances, the Trusteeship Council did not have their first meeting 
until 26 March to 28 April 1947.73 The Soviet Union, however, boycotted this first 
Council meeting. The Trusteeship Council was one of the main organs of the 
United Nations, and had ten members including the five permanent members of the 
Security Council. 74 The Council's tasks included considering reports, accepting 
petitions, supervising and monitoring the so-called 'trust territories' and making 
arrangements for periodical visits to the territories. In relation to the formation of 
the Trusteeship Council of the United Nations in December 1946, Bevin declared 
his policy to the Cabinet that Britain was responsible for putting forward 
information about the non-self-governing territories to the United Nations. 7s In 
addition, as the issue of the future of the former Italian colonies was unsettled, 
Bevin told the Cabinet on the same day that it was unlikely that the world powers 
would reach agreement about the disposal of the Italian colonies. Consequently, 
these territories would remain under British administration. 76 As a result, there 
70 BDEE. Series A, Vol. 2, Part III, doc. no. 293, 'United Somalia: Cabinet conclusions on 
~roposals', 24 June 1946, p. 259. 
I Ibid, p. 575. 
72 Ibid, pp. 185-186. . 
13 The first president of the Trusteeship Council of the United Nations was Francis B. Sayre from the 
United States, and the vice president was Carl Berendsen from New Zealand. See Yearbook of the 
United NaJiollS 1946-1947, p. 578. 
74 There were two categories of membership in the Trusteeship Council. The first category was the 
'administrating states' such as Australia, Belgiwn, New Zealand, United Kingdom and France. The 
second type of membership was the 'non administrating states' such as the United States. the Soviet 
Union, China, Iraq and Mexico. 
7S CAB 12819 C.M. (47) 1- Conclusions, 2 January 1947. 
7'Ibid. 
were only eight territories under Trusteeship Council management and 
administration up to March 1947.77 
Conclusion 
There are a number of conclusions to this discussion. 
First, Attlee and Bevin differed significantly on the issue of United Nations 
trusteeship. Attlee was inclined to apply, develop and extend the international 
trusteeship system even to colonies under British administration. As has been 
shown, a significant difference of attitude regarding United Nations trusteeship 
between Attlee and Bevin arose following the decision on how to run the former 
Italian colonies, particularly Cyrenaica, Tripolitania and Somalia. Attlee was 
strongly in favour of the collective management of the ex-Italian colonies. He used 
arguments such as the advancement of new technology in warfare, the economic 
burden, minimising the risk of a clash of interests between the world powers 
worldwide, and condemnation of imperialism and colonialism to justify his attitude 
to collective trusteeship. To internationalists such as Attlee, international 
collaboration in the context of United Nations trusteeship to share the burden and 
responsibility was essential for the welfare of the inhabitants of the colonies. 
Bevin, however, declined to accept international supervision and administration of 
the colonies. As has been shown, he was sceptical of the effectiveness of the 
United Nations trusteeship system and his attitude was consistent from August 1945 
77 These tenitories included British Tanganyi1ca, Togoland, and Cameroon; French Togoland and 
Cameroon; New Ouinea (under Australia), Western Samoa (under New Zealand), and Ruanda-
to January 1947. He endeavoured not only not to surrender colonies to the United 
Nations, but also to limit United Nations' influence in the colonies as well as in the 
international trusteeship scheme. In other words, it was not easy for a nationalist, 
imperialist and realist such as Bevin to accept United Nations' trusteeship. Instead, 
in relation to the ex-Italian question, he proposed that the United Kingdom, rather 
than the United Nations, should administer these colonies. He wanted the United 
Kingdom to have full control and responsibility in Cyrenaica. The Foreign Office, 
the Chiefs of Staff, the Secretary of State for colonies, and the Dominion 
governments were with Bevin in wishing to limit the international trustee~hip 
scheme. Thus they offered suggestions exactly the opposite to those of Attlee over 
the ex-Italian colonies. 
Second, the United Nations trusteeship system was unable to work effectively from 
July 1945 to March 1947. Besides delaying the formation of the Trusteeship 
Council of the United Nations, there were no new 'trust territories' placed under the 
Council's supervision and administration to March 1947. The Trusteeship Council 
of the United Nations ~as responsible for managing and supervisin.g former Italian 
colonies such as Cyrenaica, Tripolitania and Somalia as these were territories 
occupied by the Allied powers as a result of the war. Next, the colonial powers were 
unwilling to surrender any of their colonies on a voluntary basis to the Trusteeship 
Council. All these instances indicated that colonial powers in the United Nations 
were reluctant to extend the United Nations trusteeship scheme as Attlee expected. 
Urundi (under Belgium). See Yearbook o/the UnUed Nati01lS. 1946-1947, p. 576. 
Third, the world powers manipulated the United Nations trusteeship issue to further 
or safeguard their own national interests worldwide, rather than for the welfare of 
the peoples in the colonies. The Soviet Union, for instance, was interested in 
accepting United Nations trusteeship if Tripolitania were to be under its control. 
This was its initial step towards gaining a base in North Africa. In addition, the 
Soviet Union disrupted the Preparatory Commission of the Trusteeship Council by 
refusing to accept the draft agreement for General Assembly approval. Then, even 
though the United States was committed to the collective trusteeship of the ex-
Italian colonies, it refused to surrender its mandate territories, located in the Pacific 
Islands, to the Trusteeship Council of the United Nations for security purposes. The 
United Kingdom too was reluctant to surrender Cyrenaica, Tripolitania, British 
Somaliland or the existing colonies to United Nations trusteeship, except for 
territories administered previously under the mandate system of the League of 
Nations. Bevin was very reluctant to surrender Cyrenaica, Tripolitania or British 
Somalia to United Nations administration. All these historical developments reflect 
the fact that United Nations trusteeship was highly politicised, and that the world 
powers were divided over extending the international trusteeship system. 
Chapter 4 
International Control of Atomic Energy 
Introduction 
As the Second World War ended in August 1945, the issue of international peace 
and security became prominent in the international arena, and captured the 
attention of nations worldwide. The serious casualties and destruction caused by 
the atomic bombs in Japan demanded that the victorious powers, namely the 
United Kingdom, the Soviet Union and the United States re-evaluate and 
refonnulate their policy on world peace and security. The world powers needed to 
collaborate and compromise with each other to ensure a future world free from 
aggression, confrontation and conflict. It is in this context that the issue of 
collective security within the United Nations framework became a crucial point to 
the preservation of international peace and security. 
The question of collective security was another one where the differences 
between Attlee and Bevin about the role of the UN were exposed. Once again, the 
picture that emerges is the familiar one, with Attlee looking towards the UN as 
the forum for collective security, and Bevin taking a less progressive view. Bevin 
favoured the right to self-defence in order to safeguard British national interests, 
and its territories and interests worldwide. For Bevin, what mattered was that 
Britain should be able to defend itself and should be able to sustain its world 
power and carry out an effective foreign policy; self-defence was the antithesis of 
collective security - at least for Bevin. 
The question of control over the new power given by Atomic energy was a major 
one for the Labour Government. Attlee's internationalist faith led him to propose 
that it should be controlled by an agency of the UN. Bevin's pragmatic scepticism 
led him towards a different conclusion. This chapter will examine why Attlee 
was so interested in using the international control of atomic energy as a means of 
security, and how he tried to promote this scheme.
It will also examine the way 
in which Bevin, and the United States, responded to Attlee's enthusiasm. It will 
examine, in the first place, Attlee and Bevin's ideas on the subject of collective 
security, before moving on to explore the views of Attlee, Bevin and the Foreign 
Office on the idea of international control of atomic energy. Thirdly, it will look 
at the American scepticism towards the notion of collective control over atomic 
power, before drawing some broader conclusions at the end. 
I It should be noted that in correcting this chapter, almost all unpublished documents which are 
related to Aulce's government policy on atomic energy control between 1945 to 1949 located in 
PRBM 8, PO 371 and CAB 80 at the National Archieves in Kew Gardens were in use by 
government departments. An attempt was made to recall these unpublished materials, but 
unfortunately it failed. 
Attlee and Bevin on Collective Security 
To evaluate the effectiveness and limitations of the concept of collective security, 
it is worth first exploring the main features embodied in collective security itself. 
The concept of collective security was aimed at preventing war. One of the 
remarkable features of collective security is that it urged the collective 
responsibility of all states, instead of one particular power in security and defence 
matters.2 The basic requirements for such collective action would be mutual trust 
and agreement between states. This was because all states favoured hannonious 
relations between states in times of peace. Under the concept of collective 
security, all states, including small states would possess the same rights and duties 
in security matters, such as protection if attacked by other states, participation in 
decision-making, and the obligation to sanction aggression either by military or 
non-military means to end disputes.3 In short, all sovereign states should act 
collectively as a community, sharing the burden of preventing future war, 
aggression, confrontation and conflict to ensure the survival of human civilisation. 
In this regard, the concept of collective security tried to foster collaboration 
between states for the sake of peace and security regardless of the size and power 
of the states. 
Next, the concept of collective security insisted that war and violence should be 
outlawed if world peace was to be preserved.4 In order to ban war and establish 
2 Roland N. Stromberg. 'The Idea of Collective Seemty'. JO&IT1UJl oftlte HIStory ofltkos. Vol. 
XVII, Number 2, April, 1956, p. 255. 
, M. V. Naidu, Collective Security and the United Nations, (London: The Macmillan Press Ltd, 
1974), p. IS. 
4 William B. Rappard, 'Collective Security'. 'I'M Journal of Modem History, Vol. XVIU, No. 3. 
September 1946, p. 195 
the rule of law in peacetime, controlling and reducing both conventional weapons 
and weapons of mass destruction would be essential. By mutual agreement, all 
states would agree to limit arms production, reduce the size and number of 
national forces, and ban trade in arms in peacetime. 
Further, the sole superior authority in security matters in peacetime was to be the 
United Nations. The Security Council of the United Nations would be responsible 
for maintaining and preserving world peace. As -the only authoritative body in 
handling security matters, the Security Council would be responsible for settling 
disputes between states, for approving the use of forces and the distribution and 
size of such forces worldwide, and for arms control. In order to enforce law and 
deter aggression, the Security Council of the United Nations would have to have 
powerful, effective and highly capable international military forces at its 
disposal. S The formation of the international forces would be on a voluntary basis, 
and would not depend heavily on the world powers. All states should contribute a 
considerable number of national forces in order to create a strong international 
military force. Nevertheless, all states would continue to have the right to self-
defence as long as the size and number of national forces did not exceed the 
strength of the international force. Thus, all states would be seeking protection 
from the United Nations rather from than one great power against aggression and 
foreign invasion. As a result, military alliances, coalitions and sPhere of 
influences would be unnecessary in peacetime. 
5 Edward Jobnson, 'British Proposals for a United Nations Force 1946-48'  in Ann Deighton 
(Ed.), Brital" anJ the Flnt Cold War, (The Macmillan Press: London. 1990) p. 109. 
It must be noted that the issue of collective security started to receive major 
attention from political leaders in 1930s. Attlee was one of the many prominent 
political leaders attracted to this concept. Since he was in cabinet in July 1945, he 
tried to bring the concept into reality in peacetime. In fact, his enthusiasm for 
practicing collective security under an international body in peacetime was 
evident even before he was in a position of power. In May 1945, he mentioned to 
the Labour Party conference that he believed that the problem of maintaining 
peace could only be solved by building up an international organisation.6 In other 
words, Attlee committed himself to promoting collective security under the aegis 
of the United Nations because he felt that it was timely to do so. Thus, he strongly 
recommended that all states including the United Kingdom, base their security on 
the United Nations security system. For instance, in his speech to the United 
Nations Association in October 1945, he suggested that: 
The security of the British Empire and Commonwealth is 
bound up with the success of the United Nations. If we 
accept this fact, we must base our policy upon it. The 
Charter is our first line of defence. 7 
This was a clear indication that Attlee was undoubtedly ready to rely on the 
United Nations security system for British security. Later, in January 1946, he 
assured the Labour Party that his Cabinet were committed to promoting and 
implementing collective security. As he mentioned: 
We are carrying out, in foreign affairs, our Party policy, 
and we bring to foreign affairs as to other spheres, the 
touchstone of our socialist faith. We arc seeking to 
promote world peace by collective security. For many 
6 LP.4CR, 21-25 May 1945, p. 106. 
7 R. Jenkins, (ed.), Purpose and policy: Selected Speeches by the Prime Minister, (Hutchinson: 
London, 1946) p.129. 
years, we have been faithful to that doctrine when others 
fell away.8 
Attlee was convinced that it was time to promote collective security under the 
shelter of the United Nations as the best alternative in maintaining global security. 
All states including the world powers should subordinate themselves to the United 
Nations, basing their defence policy on the Security Council of United Nations. In 
his own words, he said: 
Our defence policy must be dependent on what is worked 
out at the United Nations organisation, because we desire 
to take our part in a great security organisation that will 
make not just one nation, but all nations secure.9 
While Attlee was very interested in the concept of collective security, Bevin was 
not. To a nationalist and realist such as Bevin, the very concept of collective 
security was ambiguous and arguable. He believed that the collective security 
system that Attlee strongly advocated was not congruous with international 
politics in the aftermath of the Second World War. One basic reason for this 
belief was that the world powers in the post-war world continued to pursue power 
politics, and eventually safeguarding their national interests worldwide. In fact, 
Bevin strongly doubted the effectiveness of the collective security plan even 
before he held the post of the Foreign Secretary in Attlee's government in July 
1945. In May 1945, Bevin told Labour members that: 
In our foreign policy we stand, as Attlee has said, for 
collective security. Collective security involves 
commitments and I beg Labour not to bury its head in the 
sand. It is no use talking about an international police 
force unless you supply policemen, and decide the means 
by which you will supply them ... .1 am not prepared at 
this stage to commit this Movement to a long term policy. 
I do not know how the World Organisation will turn out, 
 IPA.CR. 10-14 June 1946, p. 126. 
9 Hansard. vol. 420, 4 Marcb 1946, col. 40 
whether it will be effective until we know exactly what is 
going to happen. IO 
Bevin's lack of confidence in the collective security system was largely due to the 
fact that it demanded greater national sacrifice such as the acceptance of foreign 
interference and influence in terms of allowing United Nations inspection and 
paralleling the British defence policy with the Charter of the United Nations. In 
addition, under the system of collective security of the United Nations, Britain 
would need to eliminate certain weapons such as the atomic bomb from its 
national armament, and to reduce British troops overseas. To Bevin, these 
elements were essential to national security. The rationale was that the British 
government had a role and duty not only to safeguard the British nation and its 
interests worldwide, but also to sustain global peace and security as it did in the 
inter-war years. As he expressed explicitly to the House of Commons in 
November 1945: 
I recognised, as I said yesterday, that there are great 
powers, which, if exercising their responsibilities rightly 
and justly, can be a great umbrella for the security and 
peace of millions throughout the world. II 
Thus, Bevin favoured the world powers, particularly Britain, to playa significant 
role in maintaining global security. It is argued that this perception strongly 
shaped his hesitation to accept the international control of atomic energy under 
the aegis of the United Nations. 
10 LPACR, 21-25 May 1945, p. 117. 
II Hansard, Vol. 416,23 November 1945, col. 762. 
International Control of Atomic Energy 
Scientific research and discoveries in the interwar and war years were impressive, 
with the invention of radar, radio, new fuels for rockets and submarines, high 
temperature alloys used in the manufacture of jet engines, penicillin and the 
atomic bomb. 12 Of all these scientific discoveries, the atomic bomb as a weapon 
of mass destruction for the Allied powers to defeat their enemies was one of the 
greatest achievements of human civilisation at the time. Initially, there were those 
who argued that atomic energy should benefit human life as a source of power, in 
industry, in medicine and in scientific research. Nevertheless, the use of atomic 
energy for military purposes in wartime attracted great attention from political 
leaders worldwide. This was partly due to the terrifying nature of the atomic 
bomb itself, as demonstrated in the cities of Nagasaki and Hiroshima in August 
1945, and partly to its potential as a prime cause of dispute or conflict in the 
future. 13 As a result, the issue of atomic energy was of paramount importance in 
both British and international politics in the aftermath of World War II. Advances 
in warfare technology, particularly the creation of the atomic bomb which led to 
mass destruction, worried political leaders. The crucial issue at the time requiring 
urgent attention from the Labour Government in Britain was what to do in 
peacetime with the knowledge and technological information gained in the field 
of atomic energy. 
12 Guy Hartcup, The Effect of Science 011 the Second World War, (palgrave Publishers Ltd: New 
YorIc, 2000), p. xi. 
13 H. B. Wimperis,  Atomic Bnergy Control: The Present Position', l111ernt1t1tmal Affain, No.4, 
October 1948, p. SIS. 
Initially Britain and the United States developed their own atomic programme, 
largely for military purposes in war. In 1943, the United States and Britain agreed 
to collaborate in the field of atomic energy. The entire effort to develop atomic 
energy was moved to the United States due to its strategic, technological and 
expertise. 14 However, it must be emphasised that many of Attlee's cabinet 
members in July 1945, including Attlee himself as Deputy Prime Minister and 
Bevin as Minister of Labour in the wartime coalition government under Winston 
Churchill's premiership, knew little about the existence of atomic energy and its 
production in collaboration with the United States. IS In the aftermath of the 
Second World War, the issue of atomic energy development attracted greater 
attention from members of Parliament, including opposition political leaders. 
British politicians were interested not only in how to limit the manufacture of the 
bomb to control its use in peacetime, but also in the question of Britain's future 
possession of atomic bombs. 
To Attlee, the opportunity to translate his desire to promote collective security 
into reality had come. The dilemma over atomic energy was one of the reasons 
that he strongly advocated collective security within the United Nations 
framework at the end of World War II. The United Nations was the starting point 
for the acceleration and extension of the concept of collective security. In fact, the 
prime purpose in creating the United Nations was that it shOUld be an instrument 
to maintain peace and security. In this regard, the international control of atomic 
energy issue was important to Attlee. In its report to Washington, the Foreign 
14 J. A. Jukes, 'Nuclear Energy: A Survey of Britain's Position',lntematiollal Affairs, No.3, July, 
1956, p. 273. 
15 Margaret Gowing, 1ndependence and Deterrence: Britain and Atomic Energy /945-/952, Vol. I, 
(The Macmillan Press: London, 1974), p. 19 
Office in London had had the impression that Attlee was expecting that 
international collaboration based on the trust and goodwill of the world powers to 
bring about the international control of atomic energy might pave the way for 
similar cooperation in the field of international peace and security, such as the 
control of other weapons of mass destruction and ultimately the outlawing of war 
in years to come. 16 
There are a number of explanations to justify the need for international 
management and supervision within the United Nations framework concerning 
atomic energy in the aftermath of the World Warn. One practical reason was that 
there was no such scheme to control atomic energy collectively since the dropping 
of the atomic bomb in Japan in August 1945.17 As a result, not only did all states 
feel insecure, but also human civilisation was jeopardised. Furthermore, if a state 
rather than an international authority monopolised the knowledge and 
technological information on atomic energy, that state could misuse the atomic 
bomb in the future in its own national interests. Thus the state that possessed the 
ability to manufacture the atomic bomb would become the most powerful state on 
earth. In short, atomic energy needed to be controlled collectively by all states in 
peacetime, as it was the potential prime cause of future conflict or war. 
In this regard, the adoption of an international scheme was of paramount 
importance in preventing states throughout the world from acquiring or 
manufacturing the ultimate weapon. Prominent political leaders such as Attlee 
\6 CAB 12613 to Prom Poreign Office to Washington, 27 November 1945. 
17 Robert Oppenheimer, 'International Control of Atomic Energy', Foreign Affair8. Vol. 26, No.2, 
January t 948, p. 244. 
insisted on outlawing all states from manufacturing weapons of mass destruction. 
In his own words to the House of Commons of November 1945: 
Note also, that it is not only atomic energy which is to be 
dealt with, but also all weapons adaptable for mass 
destruction; no one of these weapons has any legitimate 
place in the armaments which are necessary for ordinary 
purposes of internal security, or for the protection of a 
government against lawlessness. 18 
Attlee continued by expressing his frustration over the attempts to eliminate 
certain weapons and methods of warfare, such as gas, in the interwar years, which 
had ended in failure. 19 To Attlee, the elimination of weapons of mass destruction 
including gas and the atomic bomb would be beneficial to all states, as they were 
a threat to states, the environment, the economy and the future of the human race. 
The immeasurable destruction of great cities and human casualties resulting from 
the use of the atomic bomb in W orId War II was a clear indication that all states 
needed to re-evaluate their policy in order to prevent the misuse of atomic energy 
in the future. As he told the House of Commons in August 1945: 
We have been living through great events, and we have to 
realise that we are living in a new world. We have seen in 
action a new force, the result of scientific discovery , the 
far reaching consequences of which, I think, we find it 
difficult to grasp; but I think we can all realise we shall 
have to make a re-evaluation of the whole situation, 
'especially in the sphere of international relations.2o 
In his desire to produce an international scheme, Attlee was also encouraged by 
the recommendation of British scientists working in the field of atomic energy of 
the urgent need to put an international scheme into place. In fact, their view was 
similar to Attlee's; that atomic energy should be placed under international 
.. Hansard, Vol. 416,22 November 1945, col. 608. 
"Ibid, col. 60S. 
20 Hansard, Vol. 413,16 August 1945, col. 99 
control. In a memorandum to the Prime Minister of September 1945, the British 
Group of Scientists at Berkeley, California, emphasised that: 
We recognise the great efforts that have been and are being 
made to this end by leaders of our government. We 
therefore urge speed in endeavouring some form of 
international control by the United Nations of the use of 
exchange of all scientific and technological information 
and freedom of discussion and visit on both sides.21 
As Attlee became convinced of the urgent need to establish an international 
scheme concerning atomic energy in the aftermath of World War n, he initiated 
the process. He believed that the control of atomic energy was only possible if all 
states were willing to share the burden and the duties of preventing the dangerous 
possibilities of the atomic bomb, and proceeded in his aim to secure the 
agreement of all states. In other words, he endeavoured to push his ambition to 
promote international control of atomic energy within the United Nations 
framework. To Attlee, the United Nations would playa greater role and increase 
its prestige as a powerful body in the international arena if it managed to produce 
a scheme to control atomic energy in peacetime for the sake of world peace and 
security. This was his ambition. 
Under the international scheme, Attlee was hoping that all states would act 
collectively, based on mutual agreement under the aegis of the United Nations, to 
prevent the misuse of atomic energy, and particularly against the building of 
atomic bombs as weapons of mass destruction. This meant that all states needed 
to adopt an open attitude, without secrecy, concerning atomic energy. Next, the 
21 PRBM 81114, Memorandum from British Group of Scientist at Berkeley California to Prime 
Minister, 19 September 1945. 
international scheme would outlaw the atomic bomb, and no atomic weapons 
should be in the hands of any national authority, including the world powers, to 
prevent misuse of the atomic bomb for such purposes as human slaughter. Further, 
international ownership of all stocks and deposits of raw materials such as 
uranium and thorium was essential, and the international authority should have 
full inspection rights in all states when it was felt necessary. Thus, the adoption 
of the international scheme was an effective measure towards peace and security. 
Nevertheless, it is suggested that historical developments in Britain from August 
1945 onwards were moving in the opposite direction. International control of 
atomic energy was an ideal; the establishment of the Atomic Energy Advisory 
Committee of the United Kingdom (AEAC) in August 194522 and the Official 
Cabinet Office report of October 1945 suggested that Britain's own atomic energy 
development in the post-war world was essential if Britain was to play a 
significant role in international affairs. Britain needed to accelerate its atomic 
programme, even with its limited expertise and knowledge in the field of atomic 
energy. Sir John Anderson, who had great experience i:p handling atomic matters 
in wartime, was appointed chairperson of the AEAC as the key committee to 
advise Attlee's government on atomic questions.23 The tasks'of the committee 
included investigating the implications of the use of atomic energy, advising on 
government steps for its development either for military or industrial purposes, 
21 The decision to set up the Advisory Committee on Atomic Bnergy made on 10 August 1945 
during the 'meeting of ministers', later called OBN 75 Committee. OEN 75 consisted of senior 
ministers of Attlcc's cabinet including Attlee himself, H. Monison, Bevin, Sir Stafford Cripps; R. 
Campbell, B. Bridge, and D. Rickett ofCabiDet Office. DBPO, Series I, Vol. II, doc. no. 186,8 
August 1945, footnote no. 12, p. 520. 
23 Alexander Cadogan, Field Marshal Alan Brooke, Alan Barlow, Edward Appleton, Henry Dale, 
Professor P. M. S. Blackett, lames Chadwich and George Thompson made up thi. Committee. 
Hansard. Vol. 413, 21 August 1945, col. 443. 
producing a proposal for international control of atomic energy, and accelerating 
international collaboration, particularly with the United States, in the field of 
atomic energy. 24 One of the Committee's tasks was to advise the present 
government on steps for atomic energy development, for military or industrial 
purposes in Britain. It could be argued that the creation of the AEAC was an 
attempt by Attlee's government to leave the door open to Britain's own nuclear 
weapons programme in years to corne. 
Secondly, Attlee himself agreed with the one of the conclusions and 
recommendations of the Official Cabinet Office report of October 1945 before he 
left for Washington in early November. At the time, the United Kingdom had the 
impression that the United States Congress would rule out the exchange of 
technological information about the manufacture of atomic bombs with other 
countries, including Britain. As a result, the Cabinet Office strongly 
recommended the need for Attlee to emphasise to the President of the United 
States that the United Kingdom are naturally interested in the development of 
atomic energy. both as means of self defence and as a source of industrial 
power?S In light of these two events it could be argued that the imminent decision 
in 1945 to build Britain's own bomb made involvement in an international 
scheme unnecessary. Instead, the international scheme was Britain's strategy to 
acquire the secret of how to build the atomic bomb. In the post-war world, Britain 
would proceed with its atomic energy development even without the help of the 
United States. It is suggested that this was the key reason behind the United 
24 DBPO, Series 1, Vol. II, doc. no. 186, 'Memorandum for Bevin on 'Tube Alloys" 8 August 
1945, p. 520. 
2S DBPO, Series I, Vol. U, doc. no. 213, 'Memorandum on international control of atomic energy', 
5 November 1945, p. 587. 
Kingdom's continuous efforts from August 1945 onwards to persuade the United 
States to agree to the international scheme. 
Bevin on the International Scheme 
If Attlee was a keen supporter of the international control of atomic energy, 
Bevin's attitude was the reverse. Bevin's lack of interest in extending the 
international scheme and encouraging Britain to participate in it was evident in his 
speeches to the House of Comm"ons, his memoranda and his official letter to the 
Foreign Office and the British Ambassador at the United Nations. Bevin's attitude 
was partly the result of his lack of confidence in the United Nations collective 
security system as a whole, and partly to the political aspects of the international 
scheme itself. 
Concerning the latter, Bevin strongly doubted that all states, including the Soviet 
Union, would agree on the main principles of international control, such as 
sharing secrets, multinational inspection, international ownership of raw materials, 
and elimination of the atomic bomb from national armaments. In his letter of 
November 1945 to Lard Halifax in Washington concerning the question of 
procedure for bringing the proposals in the tripartite declaration of November 
1945, Bevin expressed his opinion that obviously we want above all to get the co-
operation of the Soviet Government and any procedure which secured this would 
be the best. But we are very doubtfol on past experience whether the Soviet 
Government would associate themselves in sponsoring a statement about which 
they were not consulted, particularly as the proposal would be to place the matter 
on the agenda of the General Assembly. 26 
As a result, Bevin was detennined to limit United Nations domination and 
influence by refusing to adopt the international control of atomic energy within 
the United Nations framework. One of Bevin's objections to the main principles 
embodied in the international scheme that Attlee tried to produce was his 
inclination to secrecy. Asked in the House of Commons in August 1945, for 
instance, about the suggestion to surrender Britain's atomic energy secrets to the 
Military Staff Committee of the United Nations or other states, Bevin said: 
Then I have been asked: Why not give the secrets of the 
atomic bomb to the three Great Powers? My answer would 
be: To whom are we to give those secrets? Merely to the 
three Great Powers? Or to the five? Or to the world 
organisation? I think we must postpone consideration of 
this question until the world organisation is established and 
we can see clearly how matters stand.27 
It was clear that Bevin was committed to secrecy rather than openness in tenns of 
sharing knowledge about atomic energy with other states, and felt that it was not 
possible for the world powers to reveal their atomic secrets to all states, including 
the United Nations. At the time, he felt that the United Kingdom and United 
States should be allowed to sustain their leadership in the field of atomic energy 
until effective international control was established. In partiCUlar, Bevin did not 
want to reveal the secret of atomic energy to the Soviet Union. In the first meeting 
of the GEN 75 Committee of August 1945, he asked the Committee's opinion on 
the practicality of bringing the Soviet Union into atomic energy development in 
26 CAB 1261310 From Bevin to Lord Halifax, 27 November 1945. 
27 Hansard, Vol. 413, 23 August 1945, col. 946. 
peacetime. 28 The rationale behind this was that the Soviet Union had not 
participated in the collaboration not had it contributed to development in the field 
of atomic energy during the war. As a result, the Soviet Union was not entitled to 
share the outcome of the wartime effort on atomic energy. 
As his main concern was the political aspect of international control of atomic 
energy, Bevin insisted that the policy of states largely contributed to war. Thus 
the real issue was not to control scientific discoveries in the field of atomic energy 
but to ensure that all states, including the world powers, put aside their political 
ambition or desire to go to war if peace was to be preserved?9 To Bevin, even 
though the Second World War was over, the security of all states, particularly the 
United Kingdom, was the responsibility and duty of their own governments. He 
explicitly expressed that the international political climate at the time did not 
encourage states, including Britain, .to rely on the United Nations security system 
or to accept an international scheme for controlling atomic energy. In his own 
words of November 1945 to the House of Commons: 
... that is when that organisation accepts fully "SUch an 
obligation and policy, and you can trust their word 
without having to send a policeman round every time. We 
have got to arrive at that stage, but we have not arrived at 
it yet. I think we are still too near the war.3D 
Another of Bevin's objections to the international scheme was the issue of 
prohibiting the inclusion of the atomic bomb in national armaments, as declared 
in the tripartite declaration of November 1945 by the Prime Ministers of Canada, 
the United Kingdom and the President of the United States. In fact, John 
21 DBPO, Series I, Vol. II, doc. no. 186, 'Memorandum for Bevin on Tube Alloys', 8 August 
1945, footnote no. 12, p. 520. 
29 Hansard, Vol. 413,23 August 1945, col. 945 
Anderson's Committee proposal of October 1945, as agreed by Attlee, also 
recommended outlawing the atomic bomb in peacetime. To Bevin, possessing 
atomic energy was necessary, particularly for security purposes. He pointed out 
his doubts about eliminating the atomic bomb from national armaments in his 
letter to Attlee: 
I would admit that I was puzzled as to how some of the 
principles in the Tripartite statement were to be carried 
into effect. For example, how was it proposed that the 
atomic bomb and other weapons of mass destruction 
should be eliminated from national armament? 31 
All these historical developments indicated that Bevin's attitude to extending the 
international scheme differed significantly from that of Attlee, with the aim of 
limiting United Nations influence in the internal affairs of all states, and 
particularly Britain's. In addition, he did not favour sharing knowledge and 
technological information on atomic energy, particularly with the Soviet Union. 
Britain should acquire its own atomic bomb as quickly as possible, and should not 
welcome the multinational team for inspection. 
The Foreign Office on International Control 
Bevin's attitude towards the international control of atomic energy was shared by 
the Foreign Office of which he was head. The Foreign Office encouraged Bevin 
to try to limit Attlee's scheme and to oppose measures such as multinational 
inspection, which would lead to UN intervention. Bevin and the Foreign Office 
diplomats lived in a world where power was invested in the nation-state, and they 
could not conceive of this changing. Of course, because he was Prime Minister, 
30 Hansard, Vol. 415, 7 November 1945, col. 1342. 
Attlee's views had to be treated with respect; and because those views were 
shared by others in the Labour Party, they had to be taken seriously; but it is clear 
that as far as the Foreign Office was concerned, they must not prevail. 
From the very start, the Foreign Office had its doubts about the international 
control of atomic energy, and in a memorandum written in August 1945 two 
points in particular were highlighted.32 The Foreign Office argued that based on 
its preliminary study, it had a feeling that neither Congress in the United States 
nor the Soviet government would agree to the international scheme. On imparting 
atomic knowledge to the Soviet Union, the Foreign Office explicitly declared that 
it was very doubtful whether there would be any practical advantage in doing so. 
This was because the perception in the Foreign Office was that the Soviet Union 
policy is based exclusively on the pursuit of it own national interest, and day-to-
day experience in both large matters and small bears testimony to the truth of this 
statement. 33 Instead, the Foreign Office recommended that the United States and 
the United Kingdom should act as a trustees and guardians of the dread secret 
while awaiting the effective establishment of the international scheme under the 
United Nations. 34 This was a clear indication that the Foreign Office was 
committed to secrecy about its atomic knowledge. Bevin made a note on this 
memorandum that he supported the Foreign Office on this point, as it reinforced 
his inclination against adopting the international scheme. 
31 PREM Sl118 Bevin To Attlee, 12 December 1945. 
32 DBPO, Series I, Vol. II, doc. no. 190, 'Memorandum on Tube Alloys and question of imparting 
tcchnical information to Soviet Government', 18 August 1945, p. 525. 
33 Ibid. 
34 Ibid, p. 527. 
In March 1946, once again the Foreign Office repeated its two main objections of 
August 1945, even though it generally agreed with the recommendation of the 
Advisory Committee on Atomic Energy, under John Anderson's leadership, as to 
the need for the international control of atomic energy.3S In the minute from N. M. 
Butler, the Assistant Under Secretary of State, concerning Foreign Office 
instructions to the British Ambassador at the United Nations, Alexander Cadogan, 
the Foreign Office agreed on two points; first, to an exchange of knowledge and 
expertise in the field of atomic energy, and second, that international authority 
should take stock of the raw materials that were the essential components in 
producing atomic energy, such as uranium and thorium, worldwide.36 In fact, the 
Foreign Office warned of the danger to this country of no international control at 
all. However, as previously highlighted in its memorandum of August 1945, the 
Foreign Office was wondering how to implement such an international scheme. 
Thus, it reiterated its doubts, questioning whether the idea of the control of atomic 
energy by the way of inspection was politically practicable to protect complying 
states from the hazards of violation or evasion. 
The Foreign Office also disagreed with the crucial point on the prohibition of the 
atomic bomb from national armaments. One of the recommendations of the 
Advisory Committee on Atomic Energy on 14 March 1946 was that: 
(10) The control of atomic weapons may be concerned 
either with their production or with their use or with both. 
The system which we have discussed in detail is one 
under which their production would be totally prohibited 
in any country. 37 
3S DBPO, Series I, Vol. IV, doc. no. SO, 'Minute by Butler on ACAB draft instruction to UK 
representatives on UNABC', 18 March 1946, p. 161. 
36 Ibid. 
37 Ibid. Annex to No. SO, p. 165. 
In this regard, the Foreign Office questioned Attlee's stand on the elimination of 
the atomic bomb from national armaments. Attlee had clearly ruled out the 
decision of the Cabinet Office of October 1945 that Britain should possess its own 
atomic bomb as soon as possible, expressing the need for atomic energy for 
industrial purposes and for continued research into new and powerful types of 
bomb.38 In fact, Attlee indicated his support on all these points before he left for 
Washington in November 1945.39 However, he changed his mind and took the 
matter in his own direction, particularly in his wish to prohibit the atomic bomb 
from national armaments as explicitly stated in the Tripartite declaration of 
November 1945, ignoring the October 1945 decision of the Cabinet Office. 
The Foreign Office was displeased with Attlee's decision on this point. It 
considered that in an atomic world the United Kingdom needed its own atomic 
bomb, continuing and accelerating its efforts rather than abolishing them. This, to 
the Foreign Office, was a crucial point if Britain wanted to maintain its prestige as 
a world power and receive international respect in the atomic world. N. M. Butler 
of the Foreign Office, minutes that: 
The Prime Minister in Washington had to waive Ministers' 
objections to inspection in order to get a Tripartite 
Agreement; but it is difficult to believe that he also 
abandoned his view that it is essential that atomic weapons 
should be available to restrain aggression.40 
31 DBPO, Series I, Vol. II, doc. no. 210, 'Summary of conclusions and recommendations of 
officials' report on international control of atomic energy', 29 October 1945, p. 575. 
39 DBPO, Series I, Vol. II, doc. no. 213, 'Memorandum on international control ofatomic energy', 
5 November 1945, p. S86. 
40 DBPO, Series I, Vol. VI, doc. no. SO, 'Minute by Butler on ACAE draft instruction to UK 
representatives on UNABC. 16 March 1946, p. 162 
Butler was confused by the COS' stand, which supported Attlee's opinion that 
atomic energy should be prohibited from national armaments. He referred to the 
letter sent by the Secretary of the COS, Major General Hollis, to the Prime 
Minister about John Anderson's committee's proposal of October 1945,41 in 
which Major General Hollis mentioned that the Chiefs of Staff strongly support 
John Anderson's proposal, including the prohibition of the atomic bomb. 
Nevertheless, the COS also reminded the Prime Minister that in the event of 
failure to secure an international agreement, possession of an atomic bomb of our 
own would be vital to our security.42 The COS agreed with John Anderson's 
proposal and eventually shared the Prime Minister's opinion on the elimination of 
the atomic bomb from national armaments, agreeing that if the atomic bomb were 
permitted it would be difficult to devise a plan for international ownership, and 
would encourage the Soviet Union to manufacture its own bomb in the near future. 
The Foreign Office was unconvinced by the initial view of the COS, John 
Anderson's Committee's proposal and the Prime Minister's opinions on the 
elimination of the atomic bomb from national armaments. As a result, the Foreign 
Office instructed and authorised Sir Alexander Cadogan, as United Kingdom 
representative on the Security Council and the United Nations Atomic Energy 
Committee, to agree on international control, but not on the prohibition of the 
manufacture of the bomb until the United States gave its opinion on the matter.43 
41 DBPO, Series 1, Vol. II, doc. no. 199, 'Letter to Attlee giving COS' view on international 
control ofatomic energy, 10 October 1945, p. 558. 
42 Ibid, p. 559. 
43 DBPO, Series I, Vol. IV, doc. no. SO, 'Minute by Butler on ACAB draft instruction to UK 
representatives on UNABC', 16 March 1946, p. 161. 
Hence the Foreign Office had a significantly different point of view on the 
international scheme and proceeded with its own stand even though this 
contradicted Attlee's views. On the other hand, the Foreign Office view was 
similar to Bevin's concerning the political difficulties inherent in accepting the 
international scheme. It encouraged Bevin to doubt the prospect of producing an 
international scheme and limiting the United Nations interference in Britain's 
internal affairs. In his letter to Alexander Cadogan on 22 March 1946, Bevin 
instructed Cadogan not to regard John Anderson's Committee Report on 14 
March 1945 as United Kingdom policy, but only as general guidance on the 
question of atomic energy while awaiting the establishment of an effective 
international scheme.44 Based on a minute from 1. G. Ward, of the Reconstruction 
Department of the Foreign Office, there were three reasons for the Cabinet's not 
regarding John Anderson's Advisory Committee recommendations of March 
1946 as official British policy on the international control of atomic energy. These 
reasons were that the exchange of basic scientific information would not be of 
much value in eliciting Russian co-operation; that inspection was unlikely to be 
effective in Russia; and that it would be unwise to prohibit production of atomic 
weapons in return for unreliable inspection.4s In June 1946 the Foreign Office 
condemned the British Scientist scheme on the international control of atomic 
energy which was published on 1 st June 1946 in The Times newspaper. In its 
scheme, the British Scientist insisted on the urgent needs to implement 
international control of atomic energy under the United Nations framework. J. G. 
Ward's reaction was that: 
44 DBPO, Series I, Vol. IV, doc. no. 54, 'Bevin to Cadogan on Anderson Committee's Report', 
22 March 1946, p. 183. 
45 FO 371/596371UN72S16I78 Foreign Office Minute by J. G. Ward on 'Atomic Energy: Brieffor 
Meeting of Ministers'  12 July 1946. 
The obvious criticism of the memorandum is that it begs 
the whole political question by assuming that the United 
Nations Organisation is a genuine international body, with 
the will and capacity to act as a sort of super state and to 
override the Governments of sovereign states. This is the 
common weakness when scientists launch out as prophets 
in the field of international politics.46 
Thus it is argued that Bevin's lack of support for an international scheme 
combined with Foreign Office objections, particularly on the elimination of 
atomic bombs from national annaments, putting a significant amount of pressure 
on Attlee as he pursued his desire for international control of atomic energy 
between August 1945 and June 1946. 
The United States on Atomic Energy 
In the international arena, Attlee also endeavoured to secure the United States' 
collaboration, both in sharing knowledge and technological infonnation and in 
participating in the international scheme to control atomic energy. If the United 
States agreed to support and collaborate on these two points, it would be a clear 
indication that Attlee had managed to influence them in the direction of collective 
security. In pursuing his aim, Attlee's first step was to initiate an international 
discussion with the United States on limiting the manufacture of the atomic bomb 
and preventing the misuse of the weapons of mass destruction as soon as the 
Second World War ended. He felt that the frank collaboration and exchange of 
information in the field of atomic energy in wartime was necessary between 
46 FO 3711S96311UN3716nS From J. O. Ward to D. H. F. Rickett of Cabinet Office, 17 June 1946. 
Britain and the United States and needed to continue, as world peace depended 
ultimately on this collaboration.47 
Since the United States was the first and only power to use the atomic bomb in 
wartime, and since Attlee considered that a new factor pregnant with immense 
possibilities for good and evil has come into existence, 48 the United States' 
agreement to accept the international scheme was vital to him. In his letter to 
President Truman of September 1945 he forwarded a number of explanations as 
to why the United States should participate in the international scheme.49 First, 
only the United States had the expertise in the field of atomic energy and the 
technical 'know-how' to manufacture the atomic bomb. Second, there was a 
potential for other states which possessed the necessary scientific and industrial 
resources to manufacture the bomb in the near future. Third, the United States 
controlled only certain but not all areas of the world that were rich in the raw 
materials needed to manufacture the atomic bomb. Fourth, he insisted that the 
United States was only leading the world for a temporary period. Fifth, in the 
future, the cost to manufacture the bomb would be lower, but the tremendous 
destructive power of the bomb would be higher than it was when the bomb was 
first produced. Eventually, the number of atomic bombs in peacetime would 
increase as states competed with each other.to possess them. He emphasised that: 
It is clear to me, therefore that as never before, the 
responsible statesmen of the great powers are faced with 
.. 7 DBPO, Series I, Vol. II, doc. no. 189, 'Message form Attlee to PresicJcnt Tnunan on continued 
collaboration in defence research and development', 17 August 1945, p. 523 . 
... DBPO, Series I, Vol. II, doc. no. 187, 'Message tTom Attlce to President Tnunan suggesting 
joint declaration on atomic energy', 9 August 1945, p. 521. 
49 DBPO. Series I, Vol. II, doc. no. 196, 'letter from Attlcc discussing international implications 
of atomic bomb', 25 September 1945, pp. 545546. 
decisions vital not merely to the increase of human 
happiness, but to the very survival of civilisation. so 
All these reasons for the United States' participation in the international scheme 
indicated that Attlee tried to push his desire not only to produce such a scheme, 
but also to attract the United States in the direction of collective security. 
On the other hand, in the context of securing the United States' agreement to 
share technological information and eventually to adopt the international scheme, 
it is argued that this was also an attempt by Attlee's government to exercise 
partnership, in particular with the United States, in the field of atomic energy. In 
the atomic world, the United States should not be in a position to monopolise 
knowledge and technological information. Instead, the United Kingdom was 
entitled to share the fruits of Anglo-American wartime collaboration in the 
development of atomic energy. SI 
However, the United States appeared to show a lack of interest either in sharing 
knowledge and technological information or in participating in an international 
control scheme. In particular, this meant that the United States was committed to 
denying Britain's attempt to persuade it to share scientific technological 
infonnation or to assist Britain to build its own atomic bomb. If the United States 
was inconsistent in its policy on atomic energy, it also felt insecure, as its prestige 
and power in the international arena depended on the atomic bomb. 52 In fact, in 
November 1945, the British Cabinet was informed that the United States 
50 Ibid, p. 546. 
51 Alfred Goldberg, 'The Atomic Origins of the British Nuclear Deterrent' ,/lIIemational Affairs, 
No.3, July 1964, p. 410. 
Government were apparently resolved not to disclose detailed information about 
the practical industrial application of atomic energy until satisfactory safeguards 
against its use for destructive purposes had been devised. 53 In January 1946 the 
United States Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended that there should be no military 
and political rival to sustain the United States monopoly in the field of atomic 
energy in peacetime. S4 This meant that all states, including the United Kingdom, 
should look for other alternatives if they were interested in producing the atomic 
bomb. In addition, the United States was not obliged to offer any assistance in 
building the atomic bomb. The Joint Chiefs of Staff argued that in pursuing its 
national interests and continuing its monopoly the United States did not wish to 
share its atomic secrets with other states before the establishment of an effective 
international scheme, as it would create difficulties in adopting such a scheme in 
the near future. S5 
Despite the lack of interest and reluctance of the United States to share its 
knowledge and technological information on atomic energy even with the United 
Kingdom, its closest partner in wartime, the United States, at least in public, 
agreed on the need to control atomic energy in peacetime. In November 1945, the 
United 'Kingdom, the United States and Canada made a tripartite declaration in 
Washington that these three governments agreed in principle on the need to 
establish a Commission at the earliest practical date within the United Nations 
52 Larry G. Gerber, 'The Baruch Plan and the Origin of the Cold War', Diplo1fUltic History, Vol. 6, 
No. I, 1982, p. 77. 
53 CAB 12812 C. M. (45) 53n1 Conclusions, IS November 1945. 
54 FRUS, Vol. 1,1946, 'Guidance as to the Military Implications ora United Nations Commission 
on Atomic Bnergy', 23 January 1946, p. 739. 
55 Ibid. 
framework. 56 The main task of this Commission, as declared by the Prime 
Ministers of Canada and the United Kingdom and the President of the United 
States of America, was to: 
... make a specific proposal. .. for the elimination from 
national armaments of atomic weapons and of all other 
major weapons adaptable to mass destruction and ... for 
effective safeguards by way of inspection and other 
means to protect compl~ng states against the hazards of 
violations and evasions. 7 
The acceptance of the Anglo-American-Canadian declaration of November 1945 
in Washington indicated that the United States agreed with the main principles 
embodied in the declaration, such as ensuring that atomic energy was only used 
for peaceful purposes, and the prohibition of weapons of mass destruction from 
national armaments. The tripartite declaration was the long-term approach to 
preventing the dangerous possibilities of atomic energy in peacetime. It must be 
stressed that the reason that the United States accepted the tripartite declaration 
was largely due to Attlee's initiative. To Attlee, the signing of the tripartite 
declaration was the gateway to producing an international scheme for controlling 
atomic energy and all weapons designed for mass destruction. S8 It was an early 
sign of success in the move towards a collective security system. 
To proceed with the agreement based on the Anglo-American-Canadian 
declaration, the meeting of foreign ministers in Moscow of December 1945 
recommended setting up a United Nations Commission for the control and use of 
atomic energy. The membership of the Commission consisted of a representative 
$6 DBPO, Series 1, Vol. II, doc. no. 233, 'Text of agreed declaration on atomic energy', 15 
November 1945, p. 619. 
57 PRBM 81118 Text ofCommuniquc' on Atomic Energy, IS November 1945. 
51 CAB 12812 C. M. (45) 55 Conclusions, 22 November 1945. 
from each member of the Security Council. One of the resolutions adopted during 
the first session of the United Nations on 24 January 1946 was the establishment 
of the Atomic Energy Commission of the United Nations (UNAEC).59 The idea 
behind the establishment of this Commission was that the United Nations should 
playa greater role in eliminating the desire to exploit the discoveries of science 
for the purposes of war or human destruction. Amongst major elements suggested 
by the Commission was the elimination of atomic weapons, as well as of other 
weapons of mass destruction. The Commission would be responsible for making 
the inspection of member countries at any time and wherever they felt it necessary 
to ensure that atomic energy was only used for good in those countries. 
Thus,atomic energy would be under international management, and all countries, 
including the world powers, had no reason to conceal how much atomic energy 
they possessed. In addition, all countries should be ready to open their frontiers to 
inspection, as the Commission was authorised to know exactly the amount of raw 
materials, locations and stores at any location, and which country possessed 
atomic energy at any time. 
Nevertheless, there were few historical developments to justify the United States 
not revealing its atomic secrets to other states, even though it was one of the 
tripartite signatories. It was essential to its own national interests and security for 
the United States to continue its monopoly. As early as August 1945, the United 
States' reluctance to share its atomic energy secrets was clear. In his reply to 
Attlee's letter of August 1945 about the need to continue the wartime 
collaboration on atomic energy, President Truman did not state expljcitly whether 
S9 Yearbook of the United Nations 1946-47, p. 444. 
he agreed to do so or not. Instead, he mentioned only that the United States 
government would study the practicality of Mr. Attlee's proposal. 60 Further, in 
his comment concerning the declaration of November 1945, the United States 
Secretary of State, James F. Byrnes, insisted that the United States needed the 
atomic bomb in peacetime as it could use it as a threat to force concession from 
other governments. 61 
On 16 April 1946, Attlee sent a letter to President Truman asking him to clarify 
the United States' inconsistent attitude regarding the full and effective co-
operation in the field of atomic energy and full interchange of information and a 
fair division of the material between Britain and the United States.62 Attlee did 
this because he was gravely disturbed about the outcome of the Atomic Energy 
Combined Policy Committee, which had met on 15 April 1946. Initially, the 
Committee had discussed further steps in implementing the tripartite declaration, 
of which the United States was one of the signatories. Nevertheless, there was a 
deadlock during the meeting on the issue of sharing atomic energy information. 
In his reply to Attlee's letter, President Truman wrote explicitly that: 
I must say that no one at any time informed me that the 
memorandum was proposed with the intention of having 
the United States obligate itself to furnish the engineering 
and operation assistance necessary for the construction of 
another atomic energy plant. Had that been done I would 
not have signed the memorandum.63 
ao DBPO, Series I, Vol. II, doc. no. 189, 'Message from Attlee to President Truman on continued 
collaboration in defence research and development', 17 August 1945, p. 523. 
61 James F. Byrnes, Speaking Fran/cly, (William Heinemann Ltd: London, 1947), p. 265. 
62 DBPO, Series I, VoJ.IV, doc. no. 72, 'Transmits personal messages from AttJec to Truman and 
Mackenzie King urging further attempt to reach basis of atomic cooperation', 16 April 1946, p. 
Truman added, concerning the recommendation forwarded by the Anderson 
Committee of March 1946 to share knowledge and technological information in 
the field of atomic energy, that the memorandum had not requested the United 
States to offer information as to construction and operation of plants whenever it 
was requested to any other states including the United Kingdom. He emphasised 
that the Anderson Committee's recommendation applied only to thefleld of basic 
scientific information. 64 
Meanwhile, Foreign Office officials held an informal meeting with Canada, the 
third signatory of the tripartite declaration in May 1946 to discuss the deadlock in 
securing the United States' collaboration in disclosing its technical information on 
atomic energy. According to J. G. Ward's minutes, the point of view of Norman 
Robertson of the Canadian Department of External Affairs was that the 
difficulties were due to a genuine belief that this would be incompatible with the 
United States' policy of international approach to the problem of atomic energy. 
and would create serious division of opinion among the American public. with 
consequent internal difficulties for the United States administration. 65 Thus those 
at the meeting felt that there was little chance to secure the United States' 
collaboration in 'sharing its information on atomic energy. In light of the 
uncooperative attitude of the United States, John Anderson, the Chairman of the 
AEAC, discussed the matter with the Prime Minister. He suggested the Prime 
61 DBPO, Series, I, Vol. VI, doc. no. 79, 'To AttIee: Denies US obligation to help build UK. atomic 
energy plant', 20 April 1946, p. 261. 
64 Ibid. 
6.5 CAB 1261310 Note on informal conversation with Mr Norman Robertson of Canadian 
Depannent of External Affairs on 28 May 1946. British officials who attended the meeting were 
Mr. Nevile Butler, Mr. Rickett, Mr. Lindsell and J. O. Ward himsel 
Minister make another attempt by sending a letter to the President.66 In Attlee's 
June 1946 letter to President Truman, he stressed that our continuing co-operation 
over raw materials shall be balanced by an exchange of information which will 
give us, with all proper precautions in regard to security, that foil information to 
which we believe that we are entitled, both by the documents and by the history of 
our common efforts in the past. 67 Nevertheless, Attlee's attempts failed to change 
the United States' stand. In peacetime, the United States was committed to 
secrecy and a policy of non-compromise where their atomic energy information 
was concerned. Truman's administration had no intention of sharing their atomic 
knowledge with any other state, including Britain. The United States was playing 
with the interpretation of the tripartite declaration in order to sustain its monopoly 
in the field. 
The Baruch Plan of June 1946 was another sign of the lack of United States' 
interest in revealing its atomic secrets to the world and eventually to adopt the 
international scheme. In its proposal, presented to the first meeting of the United 
Nations Atomic Energy Commission of -June 1946, the United States' 
representative to the United Nations, Bernard Baruch, once again announced 
publicly that the United States placed great interest in accepting international 
control of atomic energy. 68 Under the Baruch Plan, the United States 
recommended that the United Nations should be powerful. This was essential to 
the control and monitoring of the right use of atomic energy and protected 
complying states from dangerous atomic activities. Research in the field of atomic 
66 FO 371/59632IUN 157/6/78 From Cabinet Officc to Washington, 5 June 1946. 
67 FO 3711S96321UN22116/8 Copy of the Prime Minister Telegram to the President of the United 
States on 'The Exchange oflnformation on Atomic Energy'. 6 June 1946. 
energy was only to be permitted if a state was in possession of a licence from the 
international authority.69In addition, all states had the freedom to participate in 
regular inspections approved by the international authority. In fact, the United 
States called for the outlawing of the atomic bomb and international control of all 
essential raw materials to build it. Any state violating or breaching the mutual 
agreement should be punished. The United States, however, in its proposal, only 
agreed to adopt the international scheme on the condition that in exercising its 
authority in inspection and enforcement the international body was not subject to 
veto by any single power. The United States was playing for time to continue its 
monopoly in the field of atomic energy while waiting for all states, including the 
world powers, to agree on its conditions, and eventually to adopt the international 
scheme. 
The Baruch Plan of June 1946 was never adopted by the United Nations, as the 
world powers, and particularly the Soviet Union, contested the United States' 
proposal. 70 According to the report from Moscow to the Foreign Office, the 
Soviet Union insisted that their proposal of June 1946 differed in essence from the 
United States' proposal on two points. First, the Soviet Union suggested the 
complete banning of atomic weapons in peacetime. The Baruch plan, from the 
Soviet point of view, only limited itself to vague and confused promises on this 
61 CAB 1261310 Statement tabled in the House of Representatives by the Acting Minister for 
External Affairs, Hon. N. J. O. Makin, 1 August 1946. 
69 Ibid. 
70 FO 3711S9632IUNIS3/6178 From Washington to Foreign Office on 'Report on Congressional 
and Public Opinion in the United States on the Usc and Control of Atomic Energy' , 31 May 1946. 
Based on this report, there were also internal pressure in the United States itself particularly from 
the internationalists who criticised and condemned the lack of action on international atomic 
energy control by the United Nations. The internationalists in the United States insisted the 
Department of State of the United States should act urgently in ending the deadlock between the 
world powers in implementing the international scheme for the sake of international peace and 
security. 
point. Second, the Soviet government insisted that their proposals be drawn up 
within the framework of United Nations Organisation and in full accordance with 
its principles. The Baruch Plan, according to the Soviet Union, was an effort to 
weaken the United Nations and ultimately bury the Charter. 71 In another report 
from Washington to the Foreign Office concerning the use and control of atomic 
energy, Soviet opposition to the Baruch Plan received little sympathy or even 
careful analysis in the United States from either the Congressmen or the public. 
Instead, according to the report, in the United Sates, the Soviet attitude is 
generally denounced as reflecting retrograde nationalism or a plot to further 
world communism.72 The rejection of the Baruch Plan by the United Nations was 
another indication of mistrust between the world powers. Instead, the failure of 
the United Nations to adopt. the United States' proposal and eventually 
international control accelerated the competition between the world powers to 
possess the atomic bomb in peacetime. 
The United States went further when the President of the United States approved 
the McMahon Act in August 1946. This enabled the United States to continue its 
monopoly in the field of atomic energy with an internal grant of approximately 
$500,000,000 a year from its own treaSury.73 The approval of the McMahon Act 
was the clearest indicator of the United States' commitment to opposing the 
sharing of its atomic knowledge with other states. The Act imposed limitations on 
the United States in international activities, such as prohibiting the transference to 
any other states of the scientific and technological information necessary to build 
71 FO 371/596381UN89216178 From Moscow to Foreign Office, 22 July 1946. 
12 FO 371/596431UN134016178 From Washington to Foreign Office. 15 August 1946. 
73 Caryl P. Haskins.  Atomic Bnergy and American Foreign Policy' Foreign Affairs, No.4, July 
1946. p. 601. 
the atomic bomb. In his reaction the passing of the McMahon Act Attlee decided 
that: 
Once Congress proceed to pass the McMahon Bill we had 
to go ahead on our own .. .It had become essential. We had 
to hold up our position vis-a-vis the Americans. We could 
not allow ourselves to be wholly in their hands and their 
position was not awfully clear always. . .. The manufacture 
of a British atom bomb was therefore at that stage essential 
to our defence. . .. We had worked from the start for 
international control of the bomb. We wanted it completely 
under the United Nations. That was the best way. But it 
was obviously going to take a long time.74 . 
All these developments show that the world powers not only undermined Attlee's 
and the internationalists' desire to produce an international scheme for controlling 
atomic energy; the world powers, including the United States, also breached the 
tripartite declaration of November 1945. TJtis was a betrayal of the agreement 
between Attlee and the President of the United States. In addition, the United 
States denied British entitlement to share the fruits of their wartime collaboration. 
In short, the non-collaborative attitude of the United States was a setback to 
Attlee's desire to produce an international scheme and promote collective security 
within the framework of the United Nations. N. J O. Makin, Acting Minister for 
the External Affairs of Australia, in tabling Australia's contribution and 
participation in the UNAEC .and the future of the international scheme in the 
House of Representatives in August 1946 described that the difficulties in 
implementing international control of atomic energy were a great political 
problem as well as a scientific and organisational problem, and it would be 
foolish and blind not to recognise that after the first month's work the political 
7. Francis Williams, A Prl",e Minister Remembers, (Heinemann: London, 1961), pp. 118-119. 
obstacles seem far greater than the technical and organisational di,fficulties.
his letter to Bevin of November 1946, Attlee expressed his disappointment, 
particularly about the United States' uncooperative attitude in fulfilling the 
promise it had made in Washington. Eventually, it was impossible for the world 
powers to reach a satisfactory agreement to adopt international control of atomic 
energy. Attlee admitted in his letter that: 
The result is that the clause in our agreement, signed in 
November, by which the Combined Policy Committee was 
to recommend the arrangement required for continued 
cooperation has remained a dead letter... We do not see 
how it can be claimed that the present state of affairs can be 
called 'full and effective co-operation.' 76 
In light of the discouraging international political climate regarding the adoption 
of the international scheme, Attlee expressed his feelil1gs about the future of a 
collective security system under the shelter of the United Nations. In his address 
to the House of Common of November 1946, he stated that: 
We want a great instrument of peace there, under which 
all the nations will dwell in security, but that security has 
not yet been achieved, and even at the start, when it is, we 
must have some provision for police force - as you might 
call them - garrison forces to maintain ourselves even 
under a United Nations Organisation, and we have got to 
make our contribution to the United Nations Organisation. 
We do not know quite what that will be.77 
Bevin saw things differently. The United States' reluctance to participate in the 
international scheme was almost welcome, as it was parallel to his own stance in 
tenns of opposing multinational inspection and sharing atomic secrets with the 
7S CAB 1261310 Statement tabled in the House of Representatives by the Acting Minister for 
Bxternal Affairs. Hon. N. J. O. Makin, 1 August 1946. It should be noted that Dr Bvatt, the 
Minister ofBxternal Affairs of Australia was elected as the first Chairman of the UNABC. 
76 DBPO, Series I, Vol. VII, doc. no. 97, 'Prom Attlee on proposals for international control of 
atomic energy', 27 November 1946, p. 300. 
Soviet Union. Thus, Bevin took advantage of the United States' hesitation as one 
of his strong grounds in limiting the international scheme. In his letter of March 
1946 to Cadogan concerning the Foreign Office discussion on the John Anderson 
Committee Report, he instructed Cadogan: 
Ministers felt that we should not ourselves take any 
initiative in this matter on the Atomic Commission before 
we had ascertained the views of the United States. We must, 
therefore, be in a position to dissuade the United States 
goveinment from advocating any scheme which would 
involve a greater sacrifice of our immediate security than 
that proposed in the Committee's Report.78 
This was a clear indication that Bevin regarded the United States as a means to 
achieve his aim of Britain possessing its own atomic bomb for its defence and 
security. The uncooperative attitude of the United States regarding adopting the 
international scheme was for Bevin helpful rather than a disappointment. In light 
of the many political difficulties in implementing the international scheme under 
the aegis of the United Nations, the Cabinet meeting in January 1947 suggested 
that its seems desirable that our representatives should call attention to the 
difficulty of giving practical effect to any prohibition of research into atomic 
weapons. If this is so it seems inevitable that we [Britain] should undertake such 
research in this country. 79 As a result, Britain started to accelerate the 
development of its own atomic weapons programme at the onset of the Cold War. 
77 HanstJI'd, Vol. 430,12 November 1946, col.38. 
71 DBPO, Series I, Vol. IV, doc. no. SO, 'Minuto by Butler on ACAB draft instruction to UK 
1'OpI'OSODtatives on UNABC', 16 March 1946, p. 161. 
79 PREM 81911 Research on Atomic Weapons: Note for Meeting of Ministers to be held on 8 
January 1947 
Conclusion 
Attlee placed great emphasis on the international control of atomic energy, 
endeavouring to convince all states, particularly the world powers, to adopt the 
international scheme within the United Nations framework. His eagerness for the 
international control of atomic energy reflected his desire for a collective security. 
His willingness to produce an international scheme for the sake of peace and 
security was evident in his efforts to form the United Kingdom Advisory 
Committee on Atomic Energy, the initiation of the Anglo-American-Canadian 
discussions on atomic matters, and his signature to the tripartite declaration of 
November 1945. The outcome of the Washington declaration and the Foreign 
Ministers' meeting of December 1945 in Moscow was the formation of the United 
Nations Atomic Energy Commission in January 1946. Attlee also tried repeatedly 
to persuade the United States to accept the international scheme, despite the 
passing of the McMahon Act in June 1946. These events indicate Attlee's 
consistent desire to produce international control of atomic energy between 
August 1945 and June 1946, as he regarded this the most effective means to peace 
and security. 
In pursuing his aim of producing an international scheme, however, Attlee faced 
difficulties. Internally, Bevin, the GEN 75 Committee and the Foreign Office had 
little interest in adopting international control of atomic energy in order to 
safeguard complying states from its dangerous potential. In addition, Bevin, the 
GEN 7S Committee and the Foreign Office were confused about the methods to 
be used to implement the international scheme, particularly concerning the 
inspection and elimination of the atomic bomb from national annaments. They 
believed that Britain should possess its own atomic bomb if it wanted to maintain 
its power and prestige and receive international respect. This was the effective 
means to peace and security, in their view. 
Internationally, the breach of the Anglo-American-Canadian declaration of 
November 1945, the failure of the United Nations to adopt the Baruch Plan in 
June 1946 and the uncooperative attitude of the Soviet Union and the United 
States made it impossible to adopt the international scheme. In short, from August 
1945 to June 1946 there was no mutual trust, openness, international ownership of 
raw materials essential for building the atomic bomb, multinational inspection or 
elimination of the atomic bomb from national armaments, contrary to Attlee's 
hope for the international scheme. In fact, the world powers in particular rivalled 
each other in the field of atomic energy for world supremacy. In addition, the 
failure to produce international control of atomic energy under the shelter of the 
United Nations manifested the uncertain prospect of the concept of collective 
security itself. The rationale was that at the time, international control of atomic 
energy under the collective security system was nothing more than an ideal, rather 
than a realistic approach to world peace and security. 
Chapter 5 
A United Nations Force 
Introduction 
If the question of the international control of the newest fonn of military might 
was answered in the way Bevin expected, then the same was true when it come to 
older types of military force. One of the problems of the old League of Nations 
(LON) was that it lacked 'teeth'; it had no military force of its own: would its 
successor fare any better? It was obvious that to be effective, the UN would need 
forces of its own, but who would provide them - and even more important, who 
would control them? The UN's advocates wanted a multilateral force under its 
own control that could be used wherever it was needed; but the questions of 
composition, command, size, location also need to be settled. 
By this stage of the argument, it will occasion no surprise that Attlee and Bevin 
took up diametrically opposite positions on this question: as ever, the Prime 
Minister saw the possibilities of internationalism and wanted to help realise them; 
Bevin took his stand on the eternal realities of the power of the nation state. In the 
first place, this chapter will examine Attlee's views on the question of the 
international force, and then it will look at the way Bevin reacted to them. ThIrdly, 
it will explore the reaction of the Foreign Office to the idea of force under UN 
control. Then, in an attempt to place the British reaction in context, it will deal 
with the reaction of the United States and the Soviet Union to this vital issue, 
before lookingat where the argument ended up. 
Attlee on the United Nations Force 
As the Second World War approached its end, wartime Allied political leaders 
took the initiative to form an international force under the future supervision of an 
international organisation. In August 1944, at the Dumbarton Oaks Conference, 
the Soviet Union proposed the establishment of an international force for the 
enforcement of world peace and security on a permanent basis. 1 The United States 
and the United Kingdom, however, rejected the Soviet Union's proposal. Instead, 
both countries favoured establishing an international force on an on-call basis. 
Thus, in accepting the Charter of the UN in June 1945 in San Francisco, the world 
powers agreed collectively to form an international standby force. The world's 
powers, however, paid little attention to details such as how to organise such a 
force and how far they were wil~ing to take part in the force in terms of placing 
their national contingents at the disposal of the UN military system. 
The issue of forming an international force re-emerged when the Second World 
War finished in August 1945. It is suggested that the mass destruction and 
catastrophic results of the use of the atomic bomb in Japan in August 1945 
I FRUS, 1946, Vol. 1,24 May 1946, Appendix, p. ?98. 
encouraged political leaders worldwide to think about how the UN could be used 
as an effective instrument to achieve peace and security. Political leaders needed 
to act collectively in recognising the necessity of forming a multinational force to 
be at the UN's disposal. In other words, the formation of a UN force was a 
crucial and urgent mattei for political leaders in the aftermath of the Second 
World War. The UN should have a highly trained and well-equipped on-call or 
mobile force at its disposal to deal with security matters. 
Attlee needed to formulate a clear policy concerning the question of a UN force, 
as the United Kingdom was one of the permanent members of the Security . 
Council and had ratified the Charter of the UN in August 1945. It should be 
stressed that the idea of a UN force was in line with Attlee's internationalist 
attitude. Thus, Attlee felt that the formation of such an international force at the 
UN's disposal was essential and timely, regarding the idea as an opportunity 
rather than a challenge in terms of promoting a collective security system. 
As discussed in the previous chapter, Attlee was an advocate of the collective 
security system. In relation to the idea of a UN force, he was confident that a 
world security system offered by the UN would be far more effective than the 
League of Nations had been in the interwar years. In addition, he believed that the 
UN security system would be effective in protecting not only the United Kingdom, 
but also all human civilisations if all states were willing to take part in the 
international force scheme. Attlee told Labour delegates in May 1945 that: 
The mere absence of war is not peace any more than the 
existence of a police force can, by itself make for all the 
happiness and prosperity of a city. Under the shelter of a 
world security organisation, we must seek to build up a 
real world society of nations, positively co-operating for 
the common good.2 
Attlee later added that: 
I say that only under World Organisation can we progress 
towards reducing the burden of armaments, and only 
under this protection can we build up world prosperity. 3 
Parallel to his desire to promote a collective security system within the UN 
framework, Attlee had no hesitation in directing the United Kingdom to 
participate in the international force scheme. Thus, Attlee in his capacity as Prime 
Minister and Minister of Defence assured the world community that the United 
Kingdom would give its full support in the matter. The United Kingdom was not 
only willing to take part in establishing an international force scheme; it would 
also accelerate the process of forming an international force as well as 
contributing its national forces as required under Articles 43 to 48 of the UN 
Charter. In fact, Attlee was consistent in his desire for a UN force both publicly 
and in private. For example, Attlee publicly expressed his desire for the UN to 
have its own force at its disposal as soon as possible while presenting the Charter 
of the UN in the House of Commons for ratification in August 1945.4 Attlee tried 
to give the impression that the Military Staff Committee (MSC) would work 
smoothly and effectively in the future to establish a UN force. 
Attlee was hoping that the world powers would be willing to take part in the 
multinational force scheme by contributing their national forces to the UN 
militaIy operation. To him, participation in such scheme indicated agreement to 
1 LPACR. 21-25 May 1945, p. 108. 
take collective action under the aegis of the UN for the sake of peace and security 
rather than pursuing national ends. If the participation of all nations, including the 
world powers couJd be achieved as he so strongly advocated, the international 
force under the collective security system would offer better protection and 
security to all nations than the League of Nations had done in the interwar years. 
Consequently, there would be no military alliances or power politics in peacetime. 
The UN military system would also reduce economic constraints for all states, 
including the world powers, in sustaining national forces in terms of number, size 
and their distribution worldwide. In fact, the ultimate aim of a UN force was that 
national forces would no longer be needed, as all states would rely entirely on the 
international fOlee. Thus, Attlee's desire to make the UN an effective instrument 
of peace and for all states to base their defence policy on the UN, proved to be a 
correct and successful one. To Attlee, the sooner the formation of the UN force 
came about, the safer the world would be. In this regard, undoubtedly, Attlee was 
a genuine supporter of the idea of a UN force. 
In 1946, Attlee continued to uphold his desire to make the UN force happen as 
soon as possible. Thus, he was attentive to the establishment of the Military Staff 
Committee (MSC1 and to the committee's progress in dealing with the issue. In 
January 1946 for instance, an article in the Evening News highlighted the issue: 
'We Seek London Talks on World Police Force'. The press assumed that the 
leaders of world powers would shortly meet in London to accelerate the process 
of forming a UN force. J. G. Ward of the Reconstruction Department of the 
Foreign Office, noted at the end of the article that the prime minister talces a close 
] Ibid. 
interest in this [the United Nations Force] as Minister of Defence.s In fact, 
Ward also warned senior officials at the Foreign Office to infonn Attlee, in his 
capacity as a Minister of Defence of the latest infonnation from the MSC. This 
was because Attlee bad rebuked General Ismay, the military secretary to the 
Cabinet earlier as the latter had not consulted him before the names of the British 
representatives to the MSC were announced. 6 
Another indication that Attlee was genuinely willing for Britain to take part as 
well as to accelerate the process of forming an international force was during his 
meeting with the Defence Committee in February 1946.' Attlee insisted during 
the meeting that: 
It will fall to His Majesty's Government to conclude an 
agreement under Article 43 of the Charter for the 
provision of forces, facilities and assistance, to be on call 
by the Security Council, and to be at a prescribed state of 
readiness and in certain generallocations.8 
A week later, in his note concerning the United Kingdom Defence Policy in 1946, 
he again emphasised the duty and responsibility of the United Kingdom as one of 
the pennanent members of the Security Council, to support the fonnation of an 
international force.9 In light oftbese events, it is very clear that Attlee took a close 
interest in establishing the UN force. In fact, he had the desire to direct the world 
powers, including Britain into. a collective security system within the UN 
framework. 
4 Hansard, Vol. 413,23 August 1945. col. 665. 
s F03711S70611U1S8I3I7O J. O. Ward on MSC, 4 January 1946. 
6 FO 3711S706SIU25S213170 J. O. Ward to Mr. Clccia.l March 1946. 
7 Attlee himself was the Minister of Defence tiom 27 July 1945 to December 1946. A. V. 
Alexander was then appointed as the Minister of Defence on December 20"', 1946. 
 FO 800/4S1IDEF/4612 Draft White Paper an Defence, 8 February 1946. 
The Military Staff Committee (MSC) deadlock 
This section explores the MSC deadlock in relation to Attlee's internationalist 
desire and Bevin's lack of interest in the UN force. There are a number of 
practical reasons for doing so. First, it was the duty and responsibility of the MSC 
of the UN to arrange the best way of establishing a UN force; second, it highlights 
. the reasons for the lack of progress at MSC meetings; third, the reluctance in 1946 
and 1947 of the world powers to place their national forces at the UN's disposal 
reflected the disunity between them concerning acting collectively in security 
matters and promoting a collective security system within the UN framework. 
Fourthly, the deadlock in the MSC indicated that the idea of a UN force was 
contested not only in Britain but also in the international political arena. Lastly, 
this section explores how Britain turned the Soviet Union's refusal to forward its 
proposal on the UN force scheme to its own advantage. 
The MSC was set up in accordance with Article 47 of the Charter of the UN. It 
consisted of the Chiefs of Staff of the Permanent Members of the Security 
Council. 10 The MSC was to assist the Security Council in military and security 
matters. Based on Article 47 ofthc Charter, its task was 
p PREM 8/175 Defence Policy in 1946. IS February 1946. 
10 FO 3711S70611U443/3170 Military Staff' Committee: British Representation, 4 January 1946. 
British representatives on the MSC were Admiral Sir Henry Moore. General Sir Edwin Morris and 
Air Marshall Sir Guy Oarrod. 
 .. to advise and assist the Security Council on all questions 
relating to the Security Council's military requirement for 
the maintenance of international peace and security. the 
employment and command of forces placed at its disposal, 
the regulation of armaments and possible disarmament. II 
In particular, the MSC was to arrange the establislunent of a standby force at the 
UN's disposal. This force would be the UN's main tool for maintaining the peace. 
It must be emphasised that the scheme for the fonnation of the UN force was 
based on the assumption that the permanent members of the Security Council 
agreed to contribute and make their national forces available as required by the 
Security Council. Article 43 of the Charter made it clear that it was the duty and 
responsibility of all members of the UN, and particularly of its permanent 
members, to provide and contribute forces, facilities, or assistance as required by 
the Security Council for the maintenance of international peace and security.12 
The MSC met for the first time in its role of assisting the Security Council in 
February 1946 in London. 13 The purpose of the first MSC meeting was: 
To examine from the military point ofview the provision of 
Article 43 of the Charter and to submit the result of the 
study and any recommendations to the Security Council in 
due course. 
In pursuing the aims of the Charter's Articles 43 and 47, the world powers, as 
permanent members of the UN Security Council, bad first to reach an agreement 
on the nature of the proposed force. This was vital before they could proceed to 
form the force itself. However, from early 1946 onwards the representative~ of the 
world powers in the MSC failed to compromise, ewn at this initial stage. They 
II Yearbook oltlle United Nations, 1946-1947, p. 422-
12 Ibid. 
13 Ibid, p. 423. 
were divided on issues such as the nature of the force, its size, location, and 
composition, all of which limited and delayed its formation. 
In light of the United States' own heavy post-war defence commitments, it is 
worth examining where it stood regarding the proposed UN force. If the 
international military force were to be created, the United States' willingness to 
be directly involved in the scheme was essential. By ratifying the UN Charter, the 
United States would be showing that it publicly supported the idea of a UN force. 
In peacetime the United States, as a permanent member of the Security Council, 
would contribute to the proposed UN force from its own national forces. President 
Truman expressed his view in July 1945 that the United States Congress had no 
objection to accepting and implementing the scheme.14 In addition, Byrnes, the 
United States Secretary of State, said in opening the general debate in the General 
Assembly of the United Nations that special agreement on the issue of a UN force 
should be concluded as soon as possible. From the United States' point of view, 
the UN force constituted a long-term system of international security under the 
shelter of the UN. Thus, the longer the political leaders defe"ed. the more the 
risk that the world would fall back into the old system of rival alliances .IS 
In supporting the idea of an international military force, however, the United 
States did not propose the means of implementing it, contribute to making the 
arrangements, or propose a date by which the force should be fonned . As early as 
August 1945, John Balfour, of the British Embassy Office in Washington, 
reported to the Foreign Office that it is conceivable, althougla admittedly' not likely, 
14 FO 37 11S07321US7991 1 2170 Washington to Foreign Office, 30 Julyl94S. 
that a majority oj either house. or even a majority in one oj their committees 
might block effective United States military collaboration with the United 
Nations. 16 This was because the United States' congressmen questioned the 
practicality of the United States' fulfilling its military commitment to the United 
Nations in peacetime. As a result, the President and Under Secretary of the United 
States instructed the United States Department of State to discuss the issue further 
with the Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs, and a conference was held in 
Washington in April 194617 to debate the February 1946 paper on 'United States 
Guidance as to the Anned Forces to be made available to the Security Council of 
the United Nations,.ls 
It is argued that the opinions and suggestions forwarded during this conference 
largely reflected the United States' attitude and willingness to fulfill its military 
commitment to the United Nations in peacetime. The conference raised and 
debated particular issues, such as the operational cost of the United Nations force, 
the United States' contribution to it and the use of the new force in the United 
States' strategic areas.
It was suggested that the operational cost of United Nations military opemtions 
should be borne by the United Nations. Concerning the size of the contribution to 
IS FO 37l1S70621U837/3170 The Reconstruction Department of the Foreign Office on Item 
Concerning Military Agreements Under Article 43 of the Charter of the UN. IS January 1946. 
16 FO 371/S07361U6495112f70 Balfour to Foreign Office on 'Powers of the US Delegates to the 
Organisation [United Nations)'. 28 August 1945. 
17 FRUS, 1946. Vol. I, 1 April 1946, p.771. 
II Ibid, p. 769. This paper was an interdepartmental statement of the United States policy 
concerning the implemen~tion of the idea of a United Nations force. Acheson, the Actin, 
Secretary of State at the time had discussed the paper informally with President Truman on 27 
March 1946. The President approved the paper on the same day. 
the force the United States' needed to make available to the United Nations, it 
was agreed that the permanent members of the Security Council should initially 
provide the major portion of the international force. The conference suggested, 
however, that the force be as small as possible. In addition, the United Nations 
force would in any event only be used on the 'littlefellow' and other powers, and 
therefore could not be used against the United States. 20 The conference also 
insisted that non-permanent members of the Security Council should be invited to 
contribute from their national forces in years to come in order to avoid a heavy 
military and economic burden on the permanent members of the Security Council. 
In fact, according to the conference, th~ contribution of forces to be made 
available to the United Nations was to be based on willingness and ability rather 
thap obligation to the permanent members of the Security Council. On the point 
of the use of United States strategic areas for UN military operations, the 
conference refused to allow the UN force to enter territories under its political 
control, even temporarily. The United States' perception at the time was that the 
UN force was a multinational force which would interfere in the political affairs 
of United States territories. As a result, Senators Vandenberg and Austin 
expressed their doubts and disagreed with the proposition that the UN should use 
the international force in any part of the world. If the United States accepted this 
phrase it would mean that the force would be able to freely use any territories 
under United States' control at any time for UN military operations. Instead, 00111 
senators recommended excluding the non-American forces from the Western 
Hemisphere in order to show that the Monroe doctrine is unaffected.21 During the 
discussion both insisted that non-American forces, particularly Soviet Union 
\9 Ibid. pp. 772-773. 
forces, should not be allowed to enter, for instance, Latin America. As a result, 
the meeting recommended replacing the phrase in any part of the world with in 
the particular part of the world. 
At the meeting in April 1946 between the Department of State and the Senate 
Committee on Foreign Affairs, the United States' Joint Chiefs of Staff also 
expressed their view concerning the United States' military commitment to the 
United Nations in peacetime, which echoed that of the conference held previously 
the same month. Apart from the many difficulties in fulfilling the United States' 
military commitment to the United Nations such as operational costs, percentage 
of the force contributed, and use of United States' strategic areas, the Joint Chiefs 
of Staff also ilsisted that the international military force at the disposal of the 
United Nations should be fonned on standby and not on a pennanent basis, which 
would be contrary to United States policy. The Joint Chiefs of Staff also 
questioned who would take effective control of the United Nations force, 
suggesting the appointment of a supreme commander immediately after the world 
powers agreed to place their national forces at the disposal of the United Nations. 
A supreme commander, according to the Joint Chiefs of Staff, should have 
military operational command of all contingents and should administer all 
external and intercontingent logistical matters for the forces under his 
command.22 The Joint Chiefs of Staff then sent both the notes from the April 
1946 conference and their minutes to the United States representatives on the 
MSC for guidance. 
:10 Ibid. 
It is suggested that the United States' stand concerning the international military 
scheme contributed to the deadlock of the MSC rather than accelerating the 
process of forming the United Nations force. The United States was trying to 
avoid direct and permanent peacetime military commitment to the United Nations, 
and was only willing to place its national forces at the disposal of the UN if the 
international military scheme would not jeopardise US national interests. In light 
of the United States' hesitation to support the idea of the proposed force and of 
the MSC deadlock, the United Kingdom delegation to the United Nations insisted 
to the Foreign Office that: 
The basis of the American fears which caused them to use 
the somewhat unhappy arguments which are recorded is the 
risk of being led into constitutional difficulties or being 
forced against their will to provide larger contingents than 
Congress ~ould allow. This fear was evinced earlier on 
when reference was made to the necessity for only a 
relatively small force since the whole weight of the United 
Nations would be behind it. The Americans then pointed 
out that while constitutionally they could guarantee a force 
of a given and agreed size, they could not write a blank 
cheque, i.e. guarantee in advance the entire American 
strength to back up this force [the United Nations Force] 
should it prove insufficient for any given task.23 
The Soviet Union was also reluctant to take part in the scheme. It strictly opposed 
contact between permanent members of the Security Council before the MSC was 
formally established, contending that it was premature to study or discuss the 
activity of the MSC without the committee set up by the Security Council. This 
was not timely, because the Security Council had not been set up in the first place. 
In his letter of January 1946 to the Foreign Office in London, Molotov, the Soviet 
Union Minister of Foreign Affairs, explained that: 
2\ FRUS, 1946, Vol. I, 1 April 1946, p. 772. 
21 FRUS, 1946, Vol. 1,24 May 1946, p. 801 
In the opinion of the Soviet government, the discussion of 
the question [the UN force] should begin after the setting 
up of the Security Council at the forthcoming session of the 
General Assembly, and after the former has made a 
decision with regard to Item 8 of its a~enda as to the place 
and date for convening the Committee. 4 
The Soviet Union refused to forward its proposal on the basic principles of the 
proposed force, as required by the Security Council in February 1946. At the first 
meeting of the MSC on 25 March it was decided that all permanent members of 
the Security Council should submit their basic proposals for the UN force not 
later than 3 April. The Soviet Union failed to put forward its proposal by that 
date.2s Furthermore, the Soviet Union protested against the United States' desire 
to table its proposal at the MSC meeting in May 1946. The reason for this was 
that if the United States managed to .do so discussion on the formation of the UN 
force would begin immediately. Thus the Soviet Union endeavoured to stop the 
United States from tabling its proposal from the very beginning, contending that it 
needed more time to understand and evaluate the United States' proposal before 
forwarding its own 26 The Soviet Union continued to delay in forwarding its 
proposal to prevent the MSC from discussing the UN force. In August 1946, 
George C. Kenny, the chairman of the MSC, sent a reminder to A. F. Vasiliev, the 
Soviet Union representative on the MSC, asking him to forward the proposal 
immediately. Vasiliev replied with the same reason he had previously given; that 
23 CAB 1211891 Vol. l/A1Policy/Allies From United Kingdom Delegation to the UnitcdNations 
to Foreign Office, 10 February 1947. 
14FO 3711S70611U 32S13nO From Molotov to Foreign Office on 'Activity of MSC', 3 January 
1946. 
:as Edward Johnson, 'British Proposal for a United Nations Force 1946-48', p .. 117. 
Z6 DBPO, Series I, Vol. VII, doc. no. 49, 'Review ofprcscnt situation regarding MSC', 31 May 
1946. notes no. 4. p. 134. 
the Soviet Union was not yet in a position to be ready for the discussion either in 
the sub-committee or in the MSC. 27 
There are a number of interpretations of why the Soviet Union refused to submit 
its proposal to the MSC meeting. Alexander Cadogan, British Ambassador to the 
UN, believed that it distrusted the other world powers' motives in establishing the 
force. The Soviet Union also lacked experience of collective action and felt that 
the political atmosphere in the MSC was the same as that in the Security 
Council. 28 In his memorandum of March 1947 to Attlee concerning the MSC 
deadlock, Cadogan condemned the Soviet Union, saying that: 
To the outside observer it must appear that the MSC, which 
has been holding meetings since February last, has up to 
the present performed no useful finction. The lack of 
progress can be laid entirely at the door of the Soviet 
delegation. The MSC has been able to make progress only 
when it suited the Russians, who, in spite of strongest 
pressure from the other delegations, have called the tune 
throughout. 29 
Meanwhile, the British Military Representatives on the MSC believed that the real 
reason for the Soviet Union's delay in submitting its proposal was its political 
difficulties with the other world powers on the Security Council since early 
1946.30 They reported to the Foreign Office that the pennanent members of the 
Security Council were mainly divided on four issues. They saw these divisions as 
the issue of the number and size of contributions of forces to the international 
military force by individual members of the Security Council; the question of a 
27 FO 371/ 596701UN 11788 A. F. Vasiliev to George C. Kenny, 23 August 1946. 
21 DBPO, Series I, Vol. VII, Appendix II, 'Annual Report on the UN for 1946',27 March 1947, p. 
29 Ibid, pp. 346-341 
JO DBPO, Series I, Vol. VII, doc. no. 49, 'Review of present situation regarding MSC', 31 May 
1946, notes no. 7, p. 136. 
time limit for the withdrawal of the proposed United Nations force after the 
completion of its task; the principle with regard to the provision of facilities and 
assistance, with particular reference to the utilisation of member nations' bases; 
and the location of the international force when standing by.3) They concluded 
their report insisting that the reasons for the four fundamental divergences are 
basically political and cannot be resolved in the MSC without political 
agreement. 
Based on these historical developments, the world powers, including the United 
States and the Soviet Union, foresaw many military, economic and political 
difficulties in implementing the standby United Nations force in peacetime. As a 
result, they were reluctant to place their national forces at the.UN's disposal. Even 
though the United States and the Soviet Union had agreed in wartime to the idea 
of a UN force, their views on how to implement and establish it in peacetime 
diverged widely. 
Bevin on the United Nations Force 
As a nationalist and realist, Bevin was less enthusiastic than Attlee about the idea 
of the UN force, or about putting the United Kingdom's national contingent at the 
UN's disposal. It is suggested that Bevin's lack of interest was largely due to its 
political implications. He saw the UN force as a challenge rather than an 
opportunity in tenns of sustaining and continuing the British role, responsibility 
31 CAB 121190 From United Kingdom Delegation, New York to Foreign Office, 9 May 1947. 
3lIbid. 
and prestige in security matters in" the international arena as one of the world 
powers in peacetime. 
Bevin had his own thoughts on the collective security system, as discussed in the 
previous chapter. His view was that the UN force was another experiment such as 
the international control of atomic energy. Both of these experiments were aimed 
at promoting the collective security system within the UN framework. Thus from 
1946 onwards Bevin held the opposite attitude to that of Attlee regarding forming 
a multinational force at the UN's disposal or directing the United Kingdom into 
the UN military system. 
Bevin's public and private attitudes regarding the proposed UN force. appear to 
have been different. He and the Reconstruction Department of the Foreign Office 
seemed to publicly support the establishment of the force. In his speech to the 
General Assembly of the UN on security and the MSC, he stated that: 
His Majesty's Government pledge themselves to give their 
utmost support to the Security Council and to make their 
full contribution under the Charter towards endowing it 
with the necessary backing of military force. In particular, 
HMG welcome the provision in the Charter for the 
formation of a Military Staff Committee to advise and 
assist the Security Council in the organisation and 
maintenance of security. Now is the time to place that 
experience at the disposal of the UNO, so that the peace-
loving world may never again appear to be left defenceless 
at the mercy of an unscrupulous aggressor.33 
1.G Ward of the Reconstruction Department at the Foreign Office drafted Bevin's 
speech. Bevin and the Reconstruction Office wanted to give the impression to the 
33 PO 3711S70621U837/3nO Notes for the Secretary of State [Bevin] speech to the Oeneral 
Assembly on Secwity and MSC. 8 January 1946. 
world that the United Kingdom, as one of the ptmnanent members of the Security 
Council, was committed to contributing its national forces to the UN military 
system, echoing Attlee's approach. 
As far as the documentation shows, however, in private Bevin's attitude to the 
proposed force was different. As the UN force was to be multinational, Bevin did 
not intend to let it replace Britain's historic responsibility in security matters, 
weakening the United Kingdom's status and prestige as one of world powers in 
maintaining peace and security. His prime motive was the interests and 
preservation of British prestige in peacetime as one of world powers, relying fully 
on Britain's national forces in security matters. Bevin contended that Britain 
needed to continue to have its own highly capable military forces in peacetime to 
safeguard the British nation as well as its interests worldwide. In the House of 
Commons in August 1945, he proudly clarified that the United Kingdom had 
played a vital and significant role in security matters. He said: 
It has been argued by many people that the coming of the 
atomic bomb would wipe out the need for armies, navies 
or air forces. I think that is quite a misconception. What 
are the duties, apart from fighting, of armies, navies or air 
forces? If you take 100 years, I suppose it would be fair 
to say that for 85 to 90 percent of that time their duties 
have been police duties. In this world, you must ke~ law 
and order ... we have policed the world for 300 years. 4 
Bevin reminded the House of Commons that the United Kingdom should continue 
to play its role in security matters in peacetime. He continued that Britain needed 
to adjust to, rather than summder, its military role in the international arena even 
34 Hansard, Vol. 415, 7 November 1945, col. 1340. 
in the light of financial constraints in peacetime. 3S Bevin tried to give the 
impression that Britain's national forces had offered and continued to offer better 
protection to the world than the future multinational UN force would be capable 
of. Thus he had no desire for Britain to place its forces at the UN's disposal, as he 
was confident in the ability of Britain's forces to protect not only the British 
nation but also the world. He placed little belief in the security system offered by 
the United Nations, doubting that it could provide effective security for the United 
Kingdom compared to its present national security system. 
As part of his reluctance to direct the United Kingdom into the UN military 
system and place Britain's national forces at its disposal, Bevin questioned where 
the UN force should be stationed. Initially, the UN needed to list in advance the 
locations at which it intended to station its force. The UN would have to make an 
agreement with the states concerned to use their territory for future operations. 
Bevin was not prepared to allow the UN or any other power to station forces on 
British bases. This question was, to him, one of the crucial issues in dealing with 
the idea of a multinational UN force. He had the impression that other world 
powers, such as the United States and the Soviet Union, would use their 
partnership through the UN force to acquire the bases they desired in foreign 
territories. If this happened, the United States or the Soviet Union would have an 
opportunity to secure a political foothold in the British sphere of influence. Bevin 
felt strongly that they would not reciprocate by allowing the United Kingdom into 
their spheres of influence. The United States, for instance, had asked the United 
Kingdom several times to allow its forces to use British bases in the Pacific for 
JS Ibid 
military operations. Bevin, in light of this, granted the UN permission to use 
United Kingdom bases only for specific UN military operations as requested, the 
duration of stay to be limited. Another condition he explicitly mentioned in his 
memorandum of April 1946 was that: 
... there should not be earmarking of specific bases for use 
by the Security Council but the MSC should ask member 
States to make any bases available on call to the Security 
Council for specific operations. . .. to make United 
Kingdom bases available to the Security Council at need 
provided they [British bases] remain under British garrison 
and full control. 36 
Bevin sent a personal letter concerning the MSC deadlock in arranging the 
formation of the UN force to Attlee in October 1946. He highlighted the 
unwillingness of the world powers to accelerate the process of forming the UN 
force and the impracticality in creating the force in terms of time. As a result, he 
felt that this Committee [the MSC] has not been allowed to function more 
effectively. 37 He was hoping, however, that the UN would have its own force if 
the MSC managed to end the deadlock urgently. 
The COS and the Foreign Office on United Nations' Force 
When considering Attlee and Bevin's attitudes to a UN force it is also necessary 
to explore the perceptions of the Chiefs of Staff (COS) and senior officials at the 
Foreign Office. One reason to do so is that the attitudes of both the COS and the 
Foreign Office regarding the UN force strengthened Bevin's detennination not to 
direct Britain into the UN military scheme. It is argued that by 1946, both the 
36 DBPO, Series I, Vol. IV, doc. no. 69, 'Memorandum by Bevin on United States request for 
bases', 13 April 1946, p. 237. 
37 FO 8001S08lUN/4613S Bevin to Attlcc, 21 October 1946. 
COS and the Foreign Office felt that the world situation made the implementation 
of the United Nations peacetime force impractical. Thus from March 1946 
onwards the COS and senior officials at the Foreign Office were committed to a 
non-compromise policy, partly to sustain British prestige and status as a world 
power, and partly to safeguard British interests worldwide. 
On the one hand, the COS played a significant role in formulating policy 
concerning Britain's participation in the future UN force. The issue of Britain 
providing a national force to the UN in peacetime was not new to the COS. 
During the war and under Churchill's premiership the COS was one of the bodies 
responsible for dealing with the international armed force3s and had approved a 
Foreign Office memorandum of April 1944 regarding a future international police 
force. The COS thought at the time that the formation of an international police 
force was impracticable due to difficulties in getting agreement between states on 
issues such as the size, composition, maintenance, location and command of the 
force. 39 In other words, the issue of contributing national forces to the UN, from 
the COS' point of view, posed significant practical difficulties in peacetime. In 
light of the difficulty in getting international cooperation on the UN's military 
system the COS was inclined to emphasise an Anglo-US combined military 
cooperation outside the UN framework.
40 In fact the COS continued to uphold 
this policy in dealing with the issue of the UN force up to the end of 1947. 
JI Edward Johnson, 'British Proposal for a United Nations force 1946-48', Ann Deighton (ed.), 
Britain and the F1nt Cold War, (Macmillan Press: London), 1990, p. 110. 
J9 Llewellyn Woodward, British Foreign Policy ill th, Second World War, (Her Majesty's 
Stationary Office: London), 1962, pAS? 
40 Edward Johnson, 'British Proposal for a United Nations Force', p. 112. 
From 1946 to the end of 1947 the COS agreed to the idea of a UN multinational 
force as advocated by Attlee. The COS, however, were doubtful and cautious 
about directing the United Kingdom to place its national forces at the UN's 
disposal. One of their reasons was that the formation of such a force would have 
far reaching political implications for the United Kingdom in sustaining its status 
and prestige as one of the world powers in peacetime.41 In fact, in one of the 
recommendations in the COS memorandum of February 1946 on the size and 
general location of the forces at the disposal of the Security Council, the COS 
insisted that the agreements are both in the interest of international peace and 
compatible with our own legitimate interests.42 This was a clear indication that the 
COS wanted to ensure that the formation of the UN force would not undermine 
Britain's role as a world power and jeopardise its interests worldwide. The COS 
also suggested that: 
a. We want the Security Council and the Military Staff 
Committee to be effective instruments for maintenance of 
international peace. 
b. We do not wish the aggregate size of the forces at the 
disposal of the Security Council to be so large that our 
contribution will appear insignificant. 
c. We wish to avoid undertaking commitments which will 
place an undue strain on our manpower and economic 
resources. 
d. We do not wish the commitment for the provision or 
operation of forces by the Security Cotmcil to be used by 
a great power as a pretext either for maintaining 
unnecessarily lar~e forces or for using its forces to further 
its own interests. 3 
The COS argued that they agreed to put the United Kingdom's national bases at 
the disposal of the UN in emergency, under full British management and 
 DBPO, Saies I, Vol. VII. doc. no. 16. 'Memorandum on size and general location of the forces 
at the disposal of the Security Council', 27 Pebruary 1946, p. 36. 
G Ibid. 
supervision. In addition, the COS explicitly mentioned in their memorandum of 
February 1946 that 
We do not consider that there is a requirement at the 
present time, in any part of the world, for international 
force to be located permanently together in international 
bases. Nor do we see any necessity at resent for 
permanent international bases to be established. 
All these recommendations were the COS' conditions for Britain's participation 
in the UN force scheme. In other words, the COS was committed to a policy of 
non-compromise of British interests and historic role in security. The UN should 
first fulfil the United Kingdom's requirements rather than the reverse. The COS' 
attitude to the UN scheme was consistent both in the interwar years and in 
peacetime. The COS also bighlighted Britain's economic constraints in peacetime 
as grounds to justify their lack of enthusiasm for encouraging Britain to take part 
in the UN force. In light of these constraints, the COS insisted, the United 
Kingdom was not in a position to contribute its own national forces, particularly 
its armed force, as required by the UN. Instead, the COS offered Britain's air and 
naval forces for use in the UN military operations. Their argument was that: 
It is clear that it will be extremely difficult, in view of our 
many commitments, and the reduction proposed in the 
planned size of our forces, for the United Kingdom to agree 
to make any significant contribution at the presemt time in 
respect ofJand forces.4s 
It must also be stressed that the COS drafted the memorandum of February 1946 
in consultation with the Foreign Office, and therefore the memorandum was in 
accordance with the view of the Foreign Office. Orme Sargent,Permanent Under 
U Ibid. 
44 Ibid, pp. 41-42 
45 DBPO, Series I, Vol VII, doc. no. 16, p.41 
Secretary to the Foreign Office, made a note that the COS memorandum of 
February 1946 was in line with the Foreign Secretary's views.46 This meant that 
the COS' detailed examination of the question of the UN force suited Bevin's 
hesitation to commit to the idea. 
On the other ~ the Foreign Office officials shared the COS' views of the 
matter. One reason was that the formation of the UN force would shift the duty 
and responsibility for security matters from the world powers to the UN.47 The 
Reconstruction Department of the Foreign Office questioned the practicality of 
taking part in the scheme in terms of time and the goodwill of the world powers. 
Commenting on the international force scheme in March 1946, for instance, the 
Reconstruction Department emphasised that it would not be practicable in the 
present state of affairs to station British national forces in foreign territories,48 
justifying this stance by highlighting the likely military difficulties if British 
national forces operated under UN supervision in foreign territory, such as the 
maintenance of military equipment, supplies, and spare parts. The Reconstruction 
Department, however, suggested that: 
We must be careful not to let our planning out-run the 
development of international cooperation. We have to take 
account of realities and, while many of us would like to see 
a much greater and more rapid progress towards the idea of . 
a genuiDely international police force, we cannot overlook 
the fact that many states are not prepared to accept this idea. 
Articles 43 and 45 of the Charter are at present the lowest 
common denominator of world opinion on this question. 
Our aim should be to use them as a foundation upon which 
to build. However, we are only at. the very beginning of the 
Charter's scheme for the organisation of collective military 
46 Ibid, note no. I, p. 35. 
41 DBPO, Series I. Vol. VII, doc. no. 54,  Letter to L. Hollis regarding UNMSC. I July 1946, p. 
41 FO 371157316103362170 The R.ecaastruction Department of the Foreign Office m International 
Armed Force, 6 March 1946. 
force and we may hope that, as time goes by, there will be 
many interesting developments tending towards the closer 
integration of national forces within the framework of 
Articles 43 and 45. <49 
As a result the Foreign Office took DO initiative to end the deadlock in the MSC 
which held from March 1946 onwards, considering that alloWing it to continue 
would delay the formation of the UN force. The Foreign Office was playing for 
time, not wishing to commit the United Kingdom's forces unless the MSC 
managed to solve its own problems. Thus, in the context of securing agreement 
from the world powers to forward their proposals on the future UN force, the 
Foreign Office took the opportunity of the failure of the Soviet Union to do so to 
the United Kingdom's political advantage. The more time the Soviet Union took 
to submit its proposal, the longer the United Kingdom could put off placing its 
national contingents at the UN's disposal. Thus the international community 
would not have grounds to blame the United Kingdom for the MSC's failure to 
form the proposed force. In May 1946, for instance, British representatives at the 
MSC meeting asked for Foreign Office advice concerning the MSC deadlock. In 
their memorandum of ,May 1946, British representatives proposed three 
alternatives for dealing with the situation. so These were to take no positive action 
to break the deadlock; to exert pressure on the Soviet Union; and to proceed with 
the process of forming the UN fmce without Soviet collaboration. The British 
representatives in the MSC concluded that at the time they were committed to the 
first course of action and: 
49 Ibid. 
... the selection of the future course of action must be 
determined primarily by political considerations and must 
so DBPO, Series I, Vol. VII, doc. no. 49.  Review of present situation regarding MSC', 31 May 
1946, pp. 137-138. 
be closely related to our attitude towards Russia in the 
political field.51 
The Foreign Office shared the opinion of the British representatives in the MSC, 
and advised them not to attract the world's attention to the present MSC deadlock 
in order to avoid public disputes, particularly between the world powers, over the 
issue of the UN force. In his recommendations to British representatives at the 
MSC meeting in May 1946 on bow to deal with the deadlock, J. G. Ward of the 
Reconstruction Department at the Foreign Office said that: 
We need not despair yet of making some use of the MSC. I 
am sure it would be bad tactics to provoke a showdown. I 
suggest we take no action now. If there is publicity, then 
we should make it plain that it is the Russians who are 
holding things up. 52 
In addition, Orme Sargent, the Permanent Under Secretary to the Foreign Office, 
also instructed the News Department to take no initiatives in calling attention to 
the deadlock but if questioned explain that this is due to Russian silence without 
trying to give reasons for the silence. 53 In June 1946, Orme Sargent assured Air 
Marshall Garrod, one of the British representatives at the MSC meeting, that 
Bevin would agree to the present policy of not putting pressure on the Soviet 
Union to end the deadlock. This was because, from Sargent's point of view: 
In any case, the Russians did DOt respond easily to 
diplomatic pressure, and iftbey began to cooperate with the 
MSC, it would much more likely be as a result of a general 
'loosening' consequent upon the successful outcome of the 
Paris meeting. S4 . 
51 Ibid, p 138. 
52 FO 371/S70691US48113170 J. o. Ward notes GIl RcpcIrt From New York on The Work of the 
MSC, 23 May 1946. 
53 DBPO, Series I, Vol. vn. doc. no. 49, 'Memonuaduaa bytbe UK Representatives on the MSC", 
31 May 1946. p. 138, note no. 9 
54 FO 3711S96661UN27010 Prom Foreign Office to United Kingdom Delegation to the United 
Nations. 18 JWlc 1946. 
These developments denoted that Bevin and senior officials at the Foreign Office 
were committed to not accelerating the MSC's progress in forming the UN force. 
The COS, however, questioned this Foreign Office policy. In their view it was not 
timely and it was wrong to let things drift on ill the present fashion. 55 Instead, the 
COS suggested that the other members of the MSC should continue with the 
process of forming the UN force without the collaboration of the Soviet Union. 
The COS also suggested that the other members of the MSC remind the Soviet 
Union of its duty and responsibility as one of the pennanent members of the 
Security Council to forward its proposal immediately. Orme Sargent explained 
that the Foreign Office had no alternative but to commit to the present policy 
while waiting for the outcome of the Council of Foreign Ministers in Paris. In a 
letter drafted by the Reconstruction Department to the Cabinet Office in July 1946, 
Sargent defended the Foreign Office policy. saying that: 
The Foreign Office attaches real importance to the 
agree, therefore, with the COS that our policy should 
be to accelerate the proceedings of the MSC. The 
question, however, is one of timing. I think, therefore, 
that it would be mistake to start putting my pressure, 
however gentle, upon the Russians in respect of the 
MSC while the Paris Conference is in progress. I am 
sure that the Secretary of State [Bevin] would agree 
with this view. 56 
Based on these developments, it is suggested that by 1946 the Reconstruction 
Department, the Permanent Under Secretary of the Foreign. Office, the Chiefs of 
Staff and the British Ambassador at the United Nations foresaw the impracticality 
of creating a United Nations force and placing the United Kingdom's national 
forces at the disposal of the UN, primarily for political reasons. They did not 
5' DBPO. Series I. Vol. VII. doc. no. 54, 'Letter from Sir O. Sargent to Major--Oeneral Sir L. 
deem it timely for the United Nations to replace Britain's prestige, role and 
responsibility as one of the world powers in security matters. Thus, they were 
determined not to direct the United Kingdom into the path of the collective 
security system, as Attlee was hoping they would. 
Attlee's reaction 
A UN force for the maintenance of world peace was a new experiment in the 
collective security system. As has been shown, the process of reconciling the 
views, perceptions and interests of the world powers, namely the Soviet Union, 
the United Kingdom and the United States, was bound to be a slow and delicate 
task. The world powers were cautious about placing their national forces at the 
UN's disposal. Consequently, up to the end of 1947, no UN force, such as Attlee 
was eager to see, materialised. The provision in the UN Charter for the 
establishment of an international force at its own disposal to deal with threats to 
world peace remained a dead letter. 
Attlee explicitly expressed his frustration at the failure of the permanent members 
of the UN, in particular to act collectively within the UN framework to establish 
the proposed UN force. The failure was a setback not only to the idea of the UN 
force itself, but also to the world powers compromising by offering 1heir national 
forces. In other words, it was another failure of the collective security system so 
strongly advocated by Attlee. In the House of Commons in October 1946, Attlee 
said: 
Hollis', 1 July 1946, pp. 149-150, note no. 2. 
56 Ibid, pp. ISO-lSI. 
To this end, there is a provision in the Charter for the 
establishment of a MSC. It is a matter of great regret that 
this Committee has not been allowed to function more 
effectively. 57 
He did not, however, elaborate further on why the MSC had failed to work as 
smoothly as he had hoped, continuing instead to insist that it was vital for the UN 
to have a force at its disposal in peacetime. The world powers, including Britain. 
he emphasised, needed to compromise and act collectively within the UN 
framework for the sake of security, rather than safeguarding their own national 
interests. In November 1946 he publicly condemned the supporters of power 
politics in Britain for their reluctance to encourage Britain to place its national 
force with the UN. Undoubtedly, Bevin, the senior officials at the Foreign Office 
and the COS were included in Attlee's condemnation. To publicly support the 
idea of a UN force was not enough. Attlee wished the United Kingdom to 
translate its support into action by placing its national forces at the UN's disposal. 
He said in the House of Commons: 
Let me say that from such talks as I have had with our 
friends among foreign statesmen, I do not think. they would 
be awfully pleased if we said 'Yes, we will come into the 
UNO, but we are not going to put our armed forces into the 
pool'. We have to make our contribution, and we are 
prepared to make our contribution.s8 
Attlee continued to be committed to his internationalist desire to promo1e the UN 
force as part of the collective security system within the UN framework. In. 
December 1946, however, he was unable to hide his frustration. The possibility of 
the UN force coming into being seemed very unlikely.59 
S7 HQ1ISQ1'd, Vol. 427,23 October 1946, col. 1676 
If Attlee was frustrated at the failure of the world powers to act collectively to 
form the UN force, Bevin was not. As has been shown, his support from the very 
beginning was lukewarm. To Bevin, as there was no international force to deal 
with the issue of security, the duty and responsibility for this should rest on the 
shoulders of the world powers. This meant that in security matters, the UN could 
not offer better protection to the world than the world powers themselves. Bevin 
thus had an opportunity to publicly highlight the significant role of the United 
Kingdom in security matters both in the interwar years and in peacetime. In the 
House of Commons of May 1947, he said: 
Here I wish to say that His Majesty's Government do not 
accept the view that we have ceased to be a great power, or 
the contention that we have ceased to play that role. We 
regard ourselves as one of the powers most vital to the 
peace of the world, and we still have our historic part to 
play.60 
In 1948 he once again publicly insisted that the UN would not gain his confidence 
in the collective security system. He explicitly said that: 
We cannot get it [the collective security system]. The 
Military Committee has been a complete failure, like 
other things. I will not say a word as to who is to blame 
and who is not. I will not waste my time in appointing 
praise or blame.61 
Conclusion 
A number of conclusions can be drawn from an examination of the issue of the 
UN force. Attlee, as might by now have been expected, was an enthusiast for the 
sa Hansard, Vol. 430.18 November 1946. col. S86 
" Hansard. Vol. 430. 12 December 1946. col. 38. 
idea of a UN force, and for British participation in it; this was consistent with his 
belief in internationalism. Collective security marked a new beginning for all 
states, and even the Great Powers should, he thought, rely on the UN rather than 
their own limited resources. For Attlee, collective security marked the way to a 
future where the old causes of war, such as balance of power, would become 
outmoded, and his support for the UN force was part of this worldview. 
By contrast, the notion attracted Bevin not at all, since it ran counter to his more 
traditional views on British foreign policy. His job was to promote the security 
and prestige of Britain and its Empire, not to act as the .world's policeman. The 
British army was an instrument for these purposes, and he preferred to rely on it, 
rather than on the( UN. The idea of a UN force was an experiment, and he felt it 
was too risky for the United Kingdom to rely on it. Thus, despite his support in 
public such as at the General Assembly of the UN in January 1946, he did nothing 
more to fulfil Attlee's internationalist desire to promote the UN military system. 
As discussed, Bevin sent a personal letter to Attlee in October 1946 expressing his 
feeling that a UN force was very unlikely to happen, due to the divergence of 
opinion at the MSC meeting. Bevin, then, took no initiative either to highlight or 
to end the MSC deadlock by pressing the Soviet Union to forward their proposal 
urgently. In addition, he was reluctant to allow the UN to use British bases for UN 
military operations, unless the bases were to remain under full British control. 
Bevin was not alone in resisting Attlee's desire for the UN to have a force at it 
disposal. He welcomed and supported the COS memorandum of February 1946 
and the view of the senior officials at the Foreign Office, which was in line with 
~ Hansard, Vol. 437, 16 May 1947, col. 1965. 
his own. Bevin did not believe that it was timely for all states, particularly the 
United Kingdom, to rely on the UN military system as Attlee advocated. Instead, 
the United Kingdom, rather than the UN, should continue to play a significant 
role in peacetime security matters. 
Second, as the idea of a UN force was based on the goodwill of the world powers 
to act collectively for the sake of peace and security, it was contested 
internationally, primarily for political reasons. The other world powers, as 
permanent members of the Security Council, and particularly the Soviet Union 
and the United States, did not share AttIee's enthusiasm for promoting the force, 
nor for contributing their national forces to UN military operations. In fact, the 
world powers were unable t~ compromise within the UN framework and accept 
an international force scheme under the MSC arrangement. They agreed to 
disagree about taking part in the international force scheme. Bevin's impression 
of the delicate task of getting the world powers to act collectively on security 
matters proved to be correct. The issue at stake at the time of establishing a UN 
force was the willingness of the world powers to act collectively. As has been 
shown, the world powers used issues such as the nature of the UN force, its size 
and the composition of national contributions as reasons to justify their lack of 
interest in putting their national contingents forward. In light of their divergent 
opinions, nothing happened up to the end of 1947. There was no international 
force at the UN's disposal. Instead, the world powers, rather than the UN itself, 
continued to playa significant role in security matters. 
61 LPACR. 17-21 May 1948, p. 198. 
Chapter 6 
Conclusion 
Attlee and Bevin had significant differences of opinion and attitude regarding the 
place of the UN within British foreign policy between 1945 and 1949. Attlee, who 
belonged to the internationalist strand in the Labour Party in the interwar years, was 
committed to internationalism, while Bevin's outlook was realist and nationalist. The 
growing differences between the 'Big Two' were evident through the differences in 
their opinions and commitment to the international trusteeship scheme, the 
international control of atomic energy and the idea of a UN force. Attlee was an 
idealist, although his idealism found no outlet beyond his memoranda - at least for 
Bevin. 
Through the series of issues raised by the creation of the UN, as discussed in this 
thesis, Attlee is shown to have been consistent in his desire for internationalism from 
the very start of his tenure as Prime Minister. He played a leading role in advocating 
world government as the answer to the problems facing the world in the aftennath of 
the Second World War. This was the essence of Attlee's political vision. He foresaw 
the existence of the UN as the world's highest authority, at the centre of world politics 
and with all states subordinate to it. Since the main task of the UN was to prevent 
future war, it would actively playa greater role in the international arena than the 
world powers, namely the United Kingdom, the United States and the Soviet Union. 
This meant that on the one hand, Attlee exaggerated Britain's post-war weaknesses, as 
he saw the decline of British power and prestige in the international arena as a 
continuous process, while on the other, his inclination towards world government 
indicated his condemnation of the Great Power thesis as impractical in peacetime. 
Attlee played a significant role in advocating and directing Britain into the new 
diplomacy based upon the presence of world government. 
To Attlee, the UN was a setting in which to cement and foster international 
collaboration for the sake of peace and security, rather than to pursue national 
interests. He based his assumptions on the Allied powers' wartime co-operation to 
defeat Germany. He expected this unity to continue, believing that the acceptance of 
the UN Charter made the Soviet Union and the United States Britain's willing 
partners in placing the UN at the centre of world politics. He was not convinced by 
the mainstream political perception, held by the advocates of power politics in Britain 
such as Bevin. that the communist USSR harboured the political intention to infiltrate 
the world. 
In contrast, from July 1945 onwards Bevin consistently continued to support and 
uphold the traditionalist attitude he had held during the interwar years. His ultimate 
aim was to re-establish British leadership in the international arena. Thus, as an 
advocate of the balance of power. he was determined to restore Britain's credentials 
as one of the world powers, and eventually to ensure the survival of the British 
Empire. This was of paramount importance if Britain wanted to playa decisive role in 
world politics and to keep the respect of the United States and the Soviet Union. 
Bevin believed that there would be many political difficulties ahead if Britain were to 
accept the internationalist world view. To him, the presence of the UN as world 
government in the aftennath of the Second World War was a threat to Britain's status 
as one of the world's powers. 
Through the issues raised by the creation of the UN between 1945 and 1949, Bevin's 
policy towards the UN was to limit its influence in the international arena as a means 
by which to achieve his prime aim of recovering British power and prestige, making 
the UN second in importance to the British Empire. He believed that the UN's fate as 
a new international body in world politics would be largely detennined by the world 
powers themselves. He was committed to the Great Power thesis, and he believed that 
the decline of British power and prestige in international politics in the post-war 
world was temporary rather than penn anent. The United Kingd~m only needed time 
and internal economic recovery to continue to playa significant role in world politics. 
Bevin managed to preserve Britains status as a world power, and defended the 
country's national interests in tenns of independence and security. He committed 
himself to adapting to change wherever possible, but not to subordinating or 
surrendering Britain's sovereignty to the UN. The UN certainly had no opportunity to 
usurp Britain's prominent role in shaping world politics in peacetime. 
In upholding his prime task of re-establishing British power and prestige, Bevin 
watched both the Soviet Union and the United States carefully. He had the impression 
that they had their own political motives, in tenns of pursuing their national ends 
through membership in the UN. There were plenty of events to justify his impression 
of the Soviet Union's political behaviour at the UN. On the issue of the international 
trusteeship scheme, the Soviet Union challenged British influence in Tripolitania, 
insisting on its right to control this territory. The Soviet Union also intended to 
acquire infonnation concerning atomic energy from the United Kingdom or the 
United States, via the international control of atomic energy under the aegis of the 
UN. In addition, the Soviet Union misused its veto to counter UN resolutions that they 
perceived to be contrary to their interests. The fonning of the Slav bloc at the UN to 
support the Soviet Union was another indication of the Soviet Union's real intentions 
within the UN. 
Bevin fonned the same impression about the motivation of the United States. In 
relation to the international trusteeship scheme, the United States, which had a long 
tradition of anti-empire-building and anti-imperialism, supported the international 
management of colonies as a means to force Britain to reduce the num>er of its 
colonies, such as in Asia and Africa. Furthermore, the United States refused to allow 
other powers, including the United Kingdom, to use the territories in the Pacific 
islands under its control for the UN force to conduct military operations. Despite the 
fact that the United States publicly gave the impression that it supported the 
international control of atomic energy, it had no desire to share the fruits of Anglo-
American wartime collaboration to build the atomic bomb. 
Despite all of these circumstances, however, Bevin was not seeking confrontation, 
although he saw both the Soviet Union and the United States as continuing to 
undermine Britain's role in the international arena through their attempts to gain a 
political foothold in the British sphere of influence, and by denouncing the British 
Empire. He needed to stand firm against any attempts to intervene in Britain's internal 
and external affairs. If the United Kingdom did not resist such attempts from the very 
start, both the communist USSR and the Americans would have great opportunities to 
extend their political interests within the British sphere of influence via their UN 
membership. If this were to happen, Britain would immediately lose its role as a 
world power in the international arena, something that Bevin could not accept as an 
advocate of power politics. 
Bevin was not alone in pursuing a traditional line in British foreign policy. The COS 
and senior officials at the Foreign Office, particularly the Permanent Under-Secretary 
and heads of Foreign Office departments such as the Western Department and 
Reconstruction Department, British diplomats overseas especially in Moscow, 
Washington, and Tehran, and the British Ambassador at the UN, generally shared his 
view regarding the place of the UN within British foreign policy and its role in the 
international arena. Bevin had the core supporters of the British Empire behind him in 
achieving his ultimate aim. 
Bevin realised that his perspective on the question of placing the UN within British 
diplomacy and on the UN's role in international politics differed from that of his 
Prime Minister. However, he treated Attlee's desire for internationalism with respect 
from the very beginning of his career as Foreign Secretary. This was the beauty of 
Bevin as pragmatic politician. He was playing Attlee's game, in that he did not 
recommend that the United Kingdom should withdraw from its membership of the 
UN Security Council. Neither did he suggest that the United Kingdom should abstain 
from the UN's annual meetings. Instead, Bevin was one of the Cabinet members who 
took the collective decision to ratifY the UN Charter in the House of Commons in 
August 1945. Then, in his capacity as Foreign Secretary, he himself delivered a 
speech at the first UN General Assembly in January 1946, and was responsible for 
appointing a British Ambassador to the UN. Britain's permanent membership of the 
UN, with the power to veto, was useful. This was because Britain's membership of 
the UN could prevent the other permanent members forming a bloc within the UN 
against the United Kingdom. Finally, Britain needed to sustain its political image in 
the eyes ofthe international community as one of the UN's guardians and patrons. 
Given all these circumstances, and despite the fact that he found himself in 
fundamental disagreement with his Prime Minister in placing the UN within British 
foreign policy, Bevin gave Attlee the impression, in public at least, that he was 
committed to working with the UN occasionally. At the same time, he endeavoured to 
convince Attlee of the impracticality of advocating a new diplomacy based on the 
UN. In other words, Bevin forced Attlee to learn from the issues raised by the creation 
of the UN, particularly the many political difficulties involved and the other world 
powers' commitment to placing the UN at the centre of world politics. Thus it is clear 
that Bevin was highly diplomatic in dealing with his Prime Minister's desire for 
internationalism between 1945 and 1949. 
In studying and analysing Attlee's and Bevin's perspectives on the place of the UN 
within British diplomacy at the onset of the Cold War, one cannot ignore the fact that 
the UN was an organisation that reflected international crises. The series of case 
studies in this thesis reveals that the world powers were unwilling to subordinate 
themselves to the UN as the world's highest authority. As a result, the UN suffered 
from the non-cooperative attitude of the world powers in refusing to place it at the 
centre of world politics. Instead, the world powers, namely the United States, United 
Kingdom and the Soviet Union, rather than the UN, were the key playerS in shaping 
future world politics. In this sense, the post-war world was similar to that of the past, 
and the Great Power thesis continued to be the key feature of international politics at 
the onset of the Cold War. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Unpublished Primary Sources/Archival Sources 
CAB 121 Cabinet Office Record 
CAB 128 Cabinet Conclusion 
CAB 129 Cabinet Memoranda 
FO 371 General. Correspondence From Political and Other Departments 
FO 800 Private PaperlEmest Bevin 
PREM 8 Prime Minister's Office 1945-1951 
Published Primary Sources 
Butler, Rohan, and Pelly, M. E. (eds.), Documents On British Policy Overseas: The 
Conference at Potsdam July-August 1945, Series I, Vol. I, (London: HMSO, 1984). 
Bullen, Roger, and Pelly, M.E. (eds.), Documents On British Policy Overseas;' 
Conferences and Conversation 1945 London, Washington, Moscow, Series 1, Vol. II, 
(London: HMSO, 1985). 
Bullen, Roger, and Pelly, M. E. (eds.), Documents On British POlicy Overseas: Britain 
and America: Atomc Energy. Bases and Food 12 December 1945-31 July 1946, Series I, 
Vol. IV, (London: HMSO, 1987). 
Yasamee, H. J. and Hamilton K. A., (eds.), Documents On British Policy Overseas: 
United Nations: Iran. Cold War and World Organisation, Series 1, Vol. VII, (London: 
HMSO,1995). 
First Assembly: The Birth of the United Nations Organisation, (London: Hutchinson & 
Co., 1946). 
House of Commons Debate, 5th Series, VoL 413- 470 (1945-1950). 
Hyam, Ronald (Ed), British Documents on the End of the Empire, The Labour 
Government and the End of Empire 1945-1951, Part I: High Policy and Administration, 
Series A, Vol. 2, (London: HMSO, 1992). 
Hyam, Ronald (Ed), British Documents on the End of the Empire The Labour 
Government and the End of Empire 1945-1951, Part II: Economic and International 
Relations, Series A, VoL 2, (London: HMSO, 1992). 
Hyam, Ronald (Ed.), British Documents on the End of the Empire The Labour 
Government and the End of Empire 1945-1951, Part III: Strategy, Politics and 
Constitutional Change. Series A, Vol. 2, (London: HMSO, 1992). 
Hyam, Ronald (Ed.), British Documents on the End of the Empire The Labour 
Government and the End of Empire 1945-1951, Part IV: Race Relations and the 
Commonwealth, Series A, Vol. 2, (London: HMSO, 1992). 
Labour Party Annual Conference Reports 1930-1951. 
Public Papers of Secretaries General of the United Nations: Trygve Lie 1946-1953, Vol. 
1, Cordier, Andrew W., and Foote, Wilder, (ed.), (New York and London: Colombia 
University Press, 1969). 
Ross, G. D., (Ed.), The Foreign Office and the Kremlin: Documents on Anglo-Soviet 
Relations 1941-45, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984). 
United Nations Documents 1941-1945, (London: Royal Institute of International Affairs, 
1946). 
Woodward, Llewellyn., British Foreign Policy In the Second World War, Vol. V., 
(London: HMSO, 1976). 
Yearbook of the United Nations 1946-1947, Department of Public Information, Lake 
Success, New York, 1947. 
Yearbook of the United Nations 1947-1948, Department of Public Information, Lake 
Success, New York, 1949. 
Yearbook of the United Nations 1948-1949, Department of Public Information, Lake 
Success, New York, 1950. 
Memoi rs/Diaries 
Attlee, C. R., As It Happened, (London: Oldham Press Limited, 1954). 
AttIee, C. R., Purpose and Policy: Selected Speeches By The Prime Minister The Rt. Hon. 
e. R. Attlee, Jenkins, Roy. (Ed.)., (London: Hutchinson, 1946). 
Attlee, C. R., The Labour Party In Perspective, (London: Victor Gollancz Ltd, 1937) 
Dalton, H., High Tide and After 1945-1960, (London: Frederick Muller Limited, 1962) 
Dilks, D., (Ed.)., The Diaries of Sir Alexander Cadogan 1938-1945, (London: Cassel, 
1971). 
Lie, T., In The Cause of Peace: Seven Years With the United Nations, (New York: The 
Macmillan Company, 1954). 
Williams, F., A Prime Minister Remembers: The War and Post War Memoirs of Rt. Hon. 
Earl Attlee, (London: Heinemann, 1961). 
Books 
Aldrich, R. J., The Hidden Hand: Britain. America and the Cold War Secret Intelligence, 
(London: John Murray, 2001). 
Anderson T. H., The United States, Great Britain, and the Cold War 1944-1947, 
(Colombia and London: University of Missouri Press, 1981). 
Barker, E., Britain in a Divided Europe 1945-1970, (London: Weidenfeld and Nicholson, 
1972). 
Barker, E., The British Between the Superpowers 1945-50, (London: The Macmillan 
Press Ltd, 1983). 
Bennet, A. L. R and Oliver, J. K., IlIIemational Organisation Principles and Issues, 
(Prentice Hall: New Jersey, 2002). 
Blackwell, M., Clinging to Grandeur: British Attitudes And Foreign Policy in the After 
Math of the Second World War, (London: Greenwood, 1993) .. 
Brookshire, Jerry H., Clement Anlee, (Manchester: Manchester University Press), 1995. 
Bullard, R., Britain and The M'uJdle East From Earliest Time to 1952, (London: 
Hutchinson's University Library, 1952). 
Bullock, A., Ernest Bevin: Foreign Secretary 1945-1951, (London: Heinemann, 1983). 
Butler, L. J., Britain and Empire: Adjusting to a Post-Imperial World, (London: 1. B. 
Tauris Publishers, 2002). 
Caimcross, A., The British Economy Since 1945: Economic Policy and Performance 
1945-1990, (Blackwell Publishers: Oxford, 1992). 
Charmley, J., Churchill's Grand Alliance, The Anglo American Relationship 1940-1957, 
(London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1995). 
Coates, W. P., A History of Anglo-Soviet Relations 1943-1950, Vol. 2, (London: The 
Pilot Press, 1943). 
Curtis, M., The Ambiguities of Power: British Foreign Policy Since 1945, (London and 
New Jersey: Zed Books Ltd, 1995). 
Deighton, A., (Ed), Britain and the First Cold War, (London: The Macmillan Press, 
1990). 
Dilks, David., 'The British View of Security : Europe and a Wider World 1945-1948', in 
Dockrill, M. and Mckercher, B., Diplomacy and World Power: Studies in British Foreign 
Policy 1890-1950, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996). 
Dockrill, M.C., and Young, J. W., (ed.) British Foreign Policy 1945-56, (London: 
Macmillan, 1989). 
Doerr, P. W., British Foreign Policy 1919-1939: hope/or the Best, Prepare for the worst, 
(Manchester and New York: Manchester University Press, 1998). 
Dotivet, Louis., The United Nations: A Handbook on the New World Organisation, 
(London: Phoenix House, 1946) 
Egerton, G. W., Great Britain and the Creation of the League of Nations: Strategy, 
Politics and International Organisation: 1914-1919, (Chapel Hill: The University of 
North Carolina Press, 1978). 
Goldmann, K., The Logic 0/ Internationalism: Coercion and Accommodation, (London 
and New York: Routledge, 1994). 
Goodwin, Geoffrey L., Britain and the United Nations, (London: oXford University 
Press, 1957). 
Gonnly, James L., The Col/apse of Grand Alliance 1945-1948, (Baton Rouge and 
'London: Luisiana State University Press, 1987). 
Gowing, M., Independence and Deterrence: Britain and Atomic Energy 1945-1952, Vol. 
L (London: The Macmillan Press, 1974). 
Greenwood, Sean, Britain and the Cold War 1945-1991, (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 
2000). 
Harris, Kenneth, Attlee, (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1982). 
Hartcup, G., The Effect of Science on the Second World War, (New York: Palgrave, 
2000). 
Hennessy, Peter., Never Again: Britain 1945-1951, (London: Jonathan Cape, 1992). 
Hopkins, M. F., Kandiah, M. D., and Staerck, G., (Eds.)., Cold War Britain 1945-1964 : 
New Perspectives, (New York: Palgrave, 2003). 
Hyain, R., Britain's Imperial Century 1815-1914: A Study of Empire and Expansion, 
Third Edition, (New York: Palgrave, 2002). 
Jefferys, K., (Ed.). Leading Labour from Keir Hardie to Tony Blair, (London and New 
York: LB. Tauris Publishers, 1999). 
Jefferys, K., The Attlee Governments 1945-1951, (London and New York: Longman, 
1992). 
John W. Young, Cold War Europe 1945-1991: A Political History, (London: Arnold, 
1996). 
Johnson, R., British Imperialism, (New York: Palgrave, 2003). 
Jones, B., The Russian Complex: The Labour Party and the Soviet Union, (Manchester: 
Manchester University Press, 1977). 
Keble, Curtis, Britain and the Soviet Union 1917-89, (London: Macmillan Press, 1990). 
Kent, John., 'Bevin's Imperialism and the Idea of Euro-Afiica 1945-49', in Dockrill, 
M.e., and Young, J. W., (eds.) British Foreign Policy 1945-56, (London: Macmillan, 
1989). . 
Kent, John., 'The British Empire and the Origins of the Cold War 1944-49', in Deighton, 
Ann., (ed.), Britain And The' First Cold War, (London: Macmillan, 1990). 
Kitchen, Martin., British Policy Towards The Soviet Union During the Second World 
War, (London: The Macmillan Press, 1986). 
Larres, Klaus., Churchill's Cold War: The Politics of Personal Diplomacy, (New Haven 
and London: Yale University Press, 2002). 
Lloyd, T., Empire: The history of the British Empire, (London: Hambledon and London, 
2001) 
Louis, W. R., Imperialism at bay: The United States and the decolonisation of the British 
Empire 1941-1945, (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1998). 
McmacIey, M., The Origins of the Cold War 1941-1949, (London and New York: 
Longman, 1995). 
Morgan, Kenneth 0., Labour In Power 1945-1951, (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1984). 
Naidu, M.V., Collective Security and the United Nations, (London: The Macmillan Press, 
1974). 
Northedge, F. S., British Foreign Policy: the Process of Readjustment 1945-1961 
(London: Allen and Unwin, 1962). 
Northedge, F. S. and Wells, A., Britain and Soviet Communism: The Impact of a 
Revolution, (London: Macmillan Press, 1982). 
Otte, T. G. (Ed), The Makers of British Foreign Policy: From Pitt to Thatcher, 
(Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2002). 
Ovandale, Ritchie., The English Speaking Alliance: Britain, the United States, the 
Dominions and the Cold War 1945-1951, (London: George Allen & Unwin, 1985). 
Painter, David S., The Cold War: An International History, (London and New York: 
Routledge, 1999). 
Pearce, Robert., Attlee, (London and New York: Longman, 1997). 
Pearce, Robert, 'Clement Attlee 1935-1955', in Jefferys, K. (Ed$.), Leading Labpur From 
Kier Hardie To Tony Blair, (1. B. Tauris: London and New York, 1999). 
Pelling, Henry., A Short History of the Labour Party, (London: Macmillan Press, 1976). 
Pelling, Henry., The Labour Governments 1945-51, (London: Macmillan Press, 1984). 
Reynolds, The Origins of the Cold War in Europe: International Perspectives, (New 
Haven & London: Yale University Press, 1994). 
Riste, Olav., (00.) Western Security: The. Formative Years European And Atlantic 
Defence 1947-1953, (Oslo: Norwegian University Press, 1985). 
Roberts, A. and Kingsbury, B., (ed.) United Nations, Divided World: The UN's role in 
International Relations, (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1993). 
Roberts, Adam, 'Britain and the Creation of the United Nations' in Louis, Wm Roger 
(ed.), Still More Adventures With Britannia: Personalities, Politics and Culture in 
Britain, (I. B. Tauris: London, 2003). 
Rosenberg, Jonathan., 'Before the Bomb and After: Winston Churchill and the Use of 
Force', in Gaddis, John Lewis, Gordon, Philip H., May, Ernest R., and Rosenberg, 
Jonathan (Eds.)., Cold War Statesmen Confront The Bomb: Nuclear Diplomacy Since 
1945, (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999). 
Rothwell, W., Britain And the Cold War 1941-1947, (London: Jonathan Cape, 1982). 
Rubinstein, W.D., Twentieth Century Britain: A Political history, (New York: Palgrave, 
2003). 
Russell, R. B., A History of the United Nations Charter: The Role of the United States 
1940-45, (The Bookings Institution: Washington, 1958). 
Sanders, D., Losing an Empire, Finding a Role: British Foreign Policy Since 1945, 
(Basingstoke: Macmillan Education, 1990). 
Saville, J., The Politics of Continuity: British Foreign Policy And the Labour 
Government 1945-46, (London: Verso, 1993). 
Schneer, Jonathan., Labour's Conscience: The Labour Left 1945-51, (London: Unwin 
and Hyman, 1988). 
Sewell, Mike., The Cold War, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002). 
Shlaim, A, Jones, P, and Keith, S., British Foreign Secretary Since 1945, (London: David 
and Charles, 1977). 
Shore, P., Leading the Left, (Weidenfeld and Nicolson: London, 1993). 
Sked, A. and Cook C., Post-war Britain: A Political History 1945-1992, (London: 
Penguin Book, 1993). . 
Smith, Raymond., 'Ernest Bevin, British Officials and British Soviet Policy 1945-47', in 
Deighton, Ann., (Ed.), Britain And The First Cold War, (London: Macmillan, 1990). 
Stephens, M., Ernest Bevin: Unskilled Labourer and World Statesman 1881-1951, 
(Stevenage: SPA, 1985). 
. tgg 
Swift, 1., Labour in Crisis: Clement Attlee and the Labour Party in opposition 1931-40, 
(New York: Palgrave, 2001). 
Tanner, D., Thone, P. and Tiratsoo, N., Labour's First Century, (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2000). 
Taylor, P. J., Britain and the Cold War: 1945 as Geopolitical Transition, (London: 
Printer Publisher, 1990). 
The Earl of Lytton (Ed), First Assembly: The Birth of the United Nations Organisation, 
(London: Hutchinson, 1946). 
Thorpe, Andrew., A History of the British Labour Party, (London: Macmillan Press Ltd, 
1997). 
Vickers, R., The Labour Party and the World: The Evolution of Labour's Foreign Policy 
1900-1951, Vol. I, (Manchester and New York: Manchester University Press, 2003). 
Warner, Geoffrey., 'Ernest Bevin and British Foreign Policy 1945-1951', in Craig, 
Gordon A., and Loewenheim, Francis L., (eds.) The Diplomats 1939-1979, (New Jersey: 
Princeton University Press, 1994). 
Warner, Geoffrey., 'From Ally to Enemy : Britain's Relations With The Soviet Union 
1941-1948', in Docrill, Michael., and McKercher, Brian., Diplomacy and World Power: 
Studies in British Foreign Policy 1890-1950, ( Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1996) 
Weiler, P., British Labour and the Cold War, (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1988). 
Williams, F., Ernest Bevin: Portrait of A Great Englishman, (London: Hutchinson, 
1952). 
Windrich, E., British Labour's Foreign Policy, (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 
1952). 
Woodhouse, C. M., British Foreign Policy Since The Second World War, (London: 
Hutchinson, 1961) 
Young, John W., Cold War Europe 1945-1991: A Political History, (London: Arnold, 
1997). 
Young, John. W., Britain and the World in the Twentieth Century, ( London: Arnold, 
1997). 
Articles 
Abram, Morris B., 'The United Nations and Human Right', Foreign Affairs, Vol. 47, No. 
2, January 1969, pp. 363-374. 
Adamthwaite, A., 'Britain and the World 1945-9 : The View From Foreign. Office', 
International Affairs, Vol. 61, No.2, Spring 1985, pp. 223-235. 
Adamthwaite, A., 'Over stretched and Over Strung: Eden, The Foreign Office and the 
Making of Policy 1951-55', International Affairs, Vol. 64, No.2, Spring 1988, pp. 241-
Altrincham, Lord., 'The British Commonwealth and Western Union', Foreign Affairs, 
Vol. 27, No.4, July 1949, pp. 601- 617. 
Aranha, Oswaldo., 'Regional System and the Future of United Nations', Foreign Affairs, 
Vol. 26, No.3, April, 1948, pp 415-420. 
Armstrong, Hamilton F., 'United Nations on Trial', Foreign Affairs, Vol. 39, No.3, 
April, 1961, pp. 388-415. 
AttIee, Clement R., 'Britain and America: Common Aims, Different Opinion', Foreign 
Affairs, Vol. 32, No.2, January 1954, pp 190-202. 
Ball, Simon 1., 'Bomber Bases and British Strategy in the Middle East 1945-1949', 
Journal o/Strategic Studies, Vol. 14, No.4, December 1991, pp. 515-533. 
Baylis, 1., 'British wartime thinking about a post-war European Security Group', Review 
o/International Studies, Vol. 9, No.4, October 1983, pp. 265-281. 
Baylis, J., 'The Brussels Pact and the Continental Commitment', International Affairs, 
Vol. 60, No.4, Autumn 1984, pp. 615-629. 
Bell, C., 'The United Nations and the West', International Affairs, Vol. 29, No.4, October 
1953, pp. 464-472. 
Beloff, M., 'Some Aspect of Anglo-Soviet RelatioDS~, International Affairs, Vol. 21, No. 
2, April 1945, pp. 168-179. 
Beloff, M., 'The Projection of Britain Abroad', International Affairs, Vol. 41, No. I, 
January 1965, pp. 478-489. 
Blackburn, Raymond., 'Bevin and His Critics', Foreign Affairs, Vol. 25, No.2, January 
1947, pp. 239-249. 
Bloomfiled, Lincoln P., 'The United Nations and National Security', Foreign Affairs, 
Vol. 36, No.4, July 1958, pp. 597-610. 
Boyd, Andrew., 'The United Nations Thirty Years On', International Affairs, Vol. 52, 
No.1, January 1976, pp. 67-75. 
Boyle, Peter G., The British Foreign Office View of Soviet-American Relations 1945-
1946, Diplomatic History, Vol. 3, No.3, Summer 1979, pp. 307-320. 
Brooke, S., 'The Labour Party and the 1945 General Election', Contemporary Record, 
Vol. 9, No.1, Summer 1995, pp. 1-21. 
Brookshire, Jerry H., 'Speak for England, Act for England: Labour's Leadership and 
British National Security Under the Threat of War in the Late 1930's" European History 
Quarterly, Vol. 29, No.2, April, 1999, pp. 251-287. 
Bruegel, B., 'Methods of Soviet Domination in Satellite States', International Affairs, 
Vol. 27, No.1, January 1951, pp. 32-37. . 
Bryant, A., 'Factors Underlying British Foreign Policy', International Affairs, Vol. 22, 
No.3, July 1946, pp. 338-351. 
Bundy, Mc George., 'The Test of Yalta', Foreign Affairs, Vol. 27, No.4, July, 1949, pp. 
618-629. 
Cecil, Robert., 'Potsdam and Its Legend', International Affairs, Vol. 46, No.3, July 
1970, pp. 455-465. 
Charmley, J., 'Duff Cooper and Western European Union, 1944-47', Review of 
International Studies, Vol. 11, No.1, January 1985, pp. 53-64. 
Clark, William., 'New Forces in the United Nations', International Affairs, Vol. 36, No. 
3, July, 1960, pp. 322-329. 
Clarks, G. N., 'British Newspaper and Information Services in International Affairs', 
International Affairs, Vol. 22, No.3, July 1946, pp. 326-337. 
Clemens, W. C., 'The Soviet World Faces The West 1945-1970', International Affairs, 
Vol. 46, July 1970, pp. 475-489. . 
Courtney, Kathleen D., 'The United Nations in a Divided World', International A.ffairs, 
Vol. 25, No.2, April 1949, pp. 168-174. . 
Cratts, S. W., 'The Attlee Government's Economic Information Propaganda', Journal Of 
Contemporary History, Vol. 21, NO.3, 1986, p. 453. 
. 202 
Cromwell, W. C., ' The Marshall Plan, Britain and the Cold War, Review of International 
Studies, Vol. 8, No.4, October 1982, pp. 233-249. 
Deighton, A., 'The Frozen Front: The Labour Government, the Division of Germany and 
the Origin of the Cold War 1945-47', International Affairs, Vol. 63, No.3, Summer 1987, 
pp. 449-465. 
Dulles, A. W., 'Disarmament in the Atomic Age', Foreign Affairs, No.2, January 1947, 
pp.204-216. 
Dulles, John Foster., 'The United Nations : A Prospectus , The General Assembly', 
Foreign Affairs, Vol. 24, No.1, October 1945, pp. 1-11. 
Frazier, Robert., 'Did Britain Start the Cold War? Bevin and the Truman Doctrine', 
Historical Journal, Vol. 27, No.3, 1984, pp. 715-727. 
Gerber, 1. G., 'The Baruch Plan and the Origins of the Cold War', Diplomatic History, 
Vol. 6, No.1, 1982, pp. 69-95; 
Golant, W., 'C. R. Attlee in the First and Second Labour Governments', Parliamentary 
Affairs, Vol. 26, 1972173, pp. 318-335. 
Golant, W., 'The Emergence of C. R. Attlee as Leader of the Parliamentary Labour Party 
in 1935', Historical Journal, Vol. XIII, No.2, 1970,pp. 318-332. 
Goldberg, A., 'The Atomic Bomb Origins of the British Nuclear Deterrent' International 
Affairs, No.3, July 1964, pp. 409-429. 
Goodwin, Geoffrey., 'The Expanding United Nations: I-Voting Pattern', International 
Affairs, Vol. 36, No.2, April, 1960, pp. 174-187. 
Goodwin, Geoffrey., 'The Role of the United Nations in World Affairs', International 
Affairs, Vol. 34, No.1, January 1958, pp. 25-37. 
Grantham, John T., 'Hugh Dalton And the International Post-war Settlement: Labour 
Party Foreign Policy Formulation 1943-44', Journal Of Contemporary History, Vol. 14, 
No.4, 1979,p. 713. 
Greenwood, Sean., 'Ernest Bevin, France and Western Union August " 1945-February 
1946', European History Quarterly, Vol. 14, No.3, July 1984, pp. 319-338. 
Gross, Ernest A., 'Revising The Charter. Is It Possible? Is It Wise', Foreign AjJaires, 
Vol. 32, No.2, January 1954, pp. 203-216. 
Hall, Duncan H., 'The British Commonwealth and Trusteeship', International A.ffairs, 
Vol. 22, No.2, April 1946, pp. 199-213. 
Harbutt, Fraser 1., 'Cold War Origins: An Anglo-European Perspective', Diplomatic 
History, Vol. 13, 1989, pp. 123-134. 
Haskins, C. P., 'Atomic Energy and American Foreign Policy' Foreign Affairs, No.4, 
July 1946, pp. 591-609. 
Holland, Robert., 'Trusteeship Aspirations', Foreign Affairs, Vol. 25, No.1, October 
1946, pp. 118-129. 
Howe, G., East-West Relations: The British Role, International Affairs, Vol. 63, No.4, 
Autumn 1987, pp. 555-562. 
Hughes, E. J., 'Winston Churchill and the formation of the United Nations Organisation', 
Journal O/Contemporary History, Vol. 9, No.4, October 1974, pp. 177-194. 
Jaster, R S., 'Foreign Aids and Economic Development: The Shifting Soviet View', 
International Affairs, Vol. 45, No.3, July 1969, pp. 452-464. 
Jay, D., 'The Attlee Government', Contemporary Record, Vol. 2, No.4. Winter 1988, 
pp.23-24. 
Jukes, 1. A., 'Nuclear Energy: A Survey of Britain's Position', International Affairs, No. 
3, July 1956, pp. 273-282. 
Kane, Keith R, 'The United Nations : A Prospectus, The Security Council', Foreign 
Affairs, Vol. 24, No.1, October 1945, pp. 12-25. 
Knight, Jonathan, 'Russia's Search For Peace: The London Council of Foreign Minister', 
1945, Journal OJ Contemporary History, Vol. 13, No.1, 1978. p. 137. 
Mayhew, Christopher., 'British Foreign Policy Since 1945', International Affairs, Vol. 
26, No.4, October 1950, pp. 477-486. 
Melissen, J and Bert, Z., 'The Aftermath of War : Britain and Western Europe 1945-51 : 
Opportunities Lost', International affairs, Vol. 63, No.1, Winter 1986/87, pp. 81-95. 
Merrick, Ray., 'The Russian Committee of the British Foreign Office and the Cold War 
1946-47', Journal OjContemporary History, Vol. 20, No.3, 1985, p. 453. . 
Morgan, K. 0., 'Labour Since 1945', Contemporary Record, Vol. 1, No.4, Winter 1988, 
pp.5-10. 
Newton, S., 'The 1949 sterling crisis and British policy towards European integration', 
Review o/International Studies, Vol. 11, No.3, July 1985, pp. 169-182. 
Nicholas, H. G., 'The United Nations in Crisis', International Affairs, Vol. 41, No.3, 
July, 1965, pp. 441-450. 
Niebuhr, Reinhold., 'The lllusion of World Government', Foreign Affairs, Vol. 27, No. 
3, April 1949, pp. 379-388. 
Northedge, F. S., 'Britain As a Second Rank Power', International Affairs, Vol. 46, 
January 1970, pp. 37-47. 
Oppenheimer, F. R., 'International Control of Atomic Energy' Foreign Affairs, No.2, 
January 1948, pp. 239-252. 
Owen, N., 'Attlee Governments: The End of Empire 1945-51', Contemporary Record, 
Vol. 3, No.4, April 1990, pp. 12-16. 
Painter, D. S., 'Oil and World Power', Diplomatic History, Vol. 17, No.1, Winter 1993, 
pp. 159-170. 
Paul, Kathleen, 'British Subjects' and 'British Stock': Labour's Post-war Imperialism, 
Journal of British Studies, Vol. 34, 1995, pp. 233-276. 
Pearson, Lester B., 'Force For United Nations', Foreign Affairs, Vol. 35, No.3, April 
1957, pp. 395-404. 
Rappard, William E., 'Collective Security', Journal of Modern History, Vol. XVIn, No. 
3, September 1946, pp. 195-201. 
Reston, James B., 'Votes and Vetoes', Foreign Affairs, Vol. 25, No.1, October 1946, pp. 
13-22. 
Rowse, A. L., 'The British Labour Party: Prospectus and Portents', Foreign Affairs, Vol. 
23, No.4, July 1945, pp. 658-667. 
Shlaim, A., 'The Partition of Gennany and the Origin of the Cold War', Review of 
International Studies, Vol. 11, No.2, April 1985, pp. 123-137. 
Smith, R., and Zametica, J., 'The Cold Warrior: Clement Attlee reconsidered, 1945-47', 
International Affairs, Vol. 61, ~o. 2, 1985, pp. 237-252. 
Tillapaugh, 1., 'Closed Hemisphere and Open World? The Dispute Over Regional 
Security at the United Nations', Diplomatic His~ory, Vol. 2, No.1, Winter 1978, pp. 25-
Twitchett, K. J., 'Colonial Power and the United Nations', Journal of Contemporary 
History, Vol. 4, No.1, January 1969, pp. 167-185. 
Veatch, Richard., 'The League of Nations and the Spanish Civil War 1936-9', European 
History Quarterly, Vol. 20, No.2, April 1990; pp. 181-207. 
Weiler, Peter, 'British Labour and the Cold War: The Foreign Policy of the Labour 
Government 1945-1951', Journal Of British Studies, Vol. 26, 1987, pp. 54-82. 
Wilson, Craig Alan., 'Rehearsal For A United Nations: The Hot Spring Conference', 
Diplomatic History, Vol. 4, No.3, Summer 1980, pp. 263-281. 
Wimperis H. E., 'Atomic Energy Control: The Present Position', International Affairs, 
No.4, October 1948, pp. 515-523. 
Winkler, Henry R., 'The Development of the League of Nations Idea in Great Britain 
1914-1919', Journal o/Modern History, Vol. 20, No.2, June 1948, pp.95-112. 
Yalem, Ronald., 'Regionalism and World Order', International Affairs, Vol. 38, No.4, 
October 1962, pp. 460-471. 
Yearwood, Peter J., 'Consistently With Honour: Great Britain, The League of Nations 
and the Corfu Crisis of 1923', Journal o/Contemporary History, Vol. 21, No.4, 1986, 
pp.559-579. 
	426227_001
	426227_002
	426227_003
	426227_004
	426227_005
	426227_006
	426227_007
	426227_008
	426227_009
	426227_010
	426227_011
	426227_012
	426227_013
	426227_014
	426227_015
	426227_016
	426227_017
	426227_018
	426227_019
	426227_020
	426227_021
	426227_022
	426227_023
	426227_024
	426227_025
	426227_026
	426227_027
	426227_028
	426227_029
	426227_030
	426227_031
	426227_032
	426227_033
	426227_034
	426227_035
	426227_036
	426227_037
	426227_038
	426227_039
	426227_040
	426227_041
	426227_042
	426227_043
	426227_044
	426227_045
	426227_046
	426227_047
	426227_048
	426227_049
	426227_050
	426227_051
	426227_052
	426227_053
	426227_054
	426227_055
	426227_056
	426227_057
	426227_058
	426227_059
	426227_060
	426227_061
	426227_062
	426227_063
	426227_064
	426227_065
	426227_066
	426227_067
	426227_068
	426227_069
	426227_070
	426227_071
	426227_072
	426227_073
	426227_074
	426227_075
	426227_076
	426227_077
	426227_078
	426227_079
	426227_080
	426227_081
	426227_082
	426227_083
	426227_084
	426227_085
	426227_086
	426227_087
	426227_088
	426227_089
	426227_090
	426227_091
	426227_092
	426227_093
	426227_094
	426227_095
	426227_096
	426227_097
	426227_098
	426227_099
	426227_100
	426227_101
	426227_102
	426227_103
	426227_104
	426227_105
	426227_106
	426227_107
	426227_108
	426227_109
	426227_110
	426227_111
	426227_112
	426227_113
	426227_114
	426227_115
	426227_116
	426227_117
	426227_118
	426227_119
	426227_120
	426227_121
	426227_122
	426227_123
	426227_124
	426227_125
	426227_126
	426227_127
	426227_128
	426227_129
	426227_130
	426227_131
	426227_132
	426227_133
	426227_134
	426227_135
	426227_136
	426227_137
	426227_138
	426227_139
	426227_140
	426227_141
	426227_142
	426227_143
	426227_144
	426227_145
	426227_146
	426227_147
	426227_148
	426227_149
	426227_150
	426227_151
	426227_152
	426227_153
	426227_154
	426227_155
	426227_156
	426227_157
	426227_158
	426227_159
	426227_160
	426227_161
	426227_162
	426227_163
	426227_164
	426227_165
	426227_166
	426227_167
	426227_168
	426227_169
	426227_170
	426227_171
	426227_172
	426227_173
	426227_174
	426227_175
	426227_176
	426227_177
	426227_178
	426227_179
	426227_180
	426227_181
	426227_182
	426227_183
	426227_184
	426227_185
	426227_186
	426227_187
	426227_188
	426227_189
	426227_190
	426227_191
	426227_192
	426227_193
	426227_194
	426227_195
	426227_196
	426227_197
	426227_198
	426227_199
	426227_200
	426227_201
	426227_202
	426227_203
	426227_204
	426227_205
	426227_206
	426227_207
	426227_208
	426227_209
	426227_210
	426227_211
	426227_212
