CyumaPhD2005
CONFLICT RECONCILIATION IN SOUTH AFRICA (1990-1998)  
AND ITS SIGNIFICANCE FOR  
THE MEDIATING ROLE OF THE CHURCH IN RWANDA (1990-2003) 
Samuel Cyuma 
OCMS, Ph. D 
ABSTRACT 
This study investigates the South African processes of conflict reconciliation (1990-98), 
focusing on the Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC), the role of churches and the 
lessons that South African experiences can offer to help resolve the ongoing crisis in 
Rwanda (1990-2003). The thesis takes into account that both South Africa and Rwanda 
experienced violent ethnic-based conflict, used as a means to control and acquire power 
and resources. In South Africa, however, representatives of the conflicting sides opted for a 
compromise to end the unrest of Apartheid and avoid an escalating war (1990). The TRC 
subsequently aimed to ease further the pain of the past and to support lasting peace by 
promoting unity and reconciliation. By contrast, the conflict and war in Rwanda, the 
subsequent killing and the failure of mediation led to the 1994 genocide. Consequently, ten 
per cent of the population died and the enmity continued. The new Rwandan leadership 
refused dialogue with the defeated leaders and rejected the TRC approach, but launched 
prosecutorial processes.  
The long-running Rwandan crisis involved both international intervention and inaction and 
led to crimes against humanity. It swept away national religion-based attempts at 
mediation. Even so, given the presence of a high proportion of Christians and a popular 
traditional method of dispute settlement, there is a chance to find a combined and much 
better model in Rwanda  involving church capacity and cultural means, and possibly a 
third party  to respond effectively to the post-genocide situation. With this model, the 
Roman Catholic Church could be most effective in procedures, given its influence and 
following in Rwanda. Likewise, Protestant Churches could contribute more effectively 
through their international organisations  i.e., the Anglican Communion, the World 
Council of Churches (WCC) etc.  in a joint effort with regional partners. 
This research entailed the use of a multidimensional methodology for gathering data, 
which is mostly qualitative, but also includes quantifiable hard facts, including 
descriptive statistics. The data collection required a pluralistic approach to identify and 
examine all relevant sources. The study reviewed lessons of conflict resolution worldwide 
and found that the South African pattern in particular fits the teaching of Jesus, which 
provides the basis for a universal model for conflict resolution. The study also found that 
unity and healing in Rwanda call for transformational theology in principle and practice. 
The findings recommend the adoption of alternative justice procedures embracing truth 
and mercy, eventually with the involvement of a neutral third party, be they religion-based 
or an international presence, to ensure equity and enhance initiatives for national 
reconciliation. International Christian initiatives may operate within the global framework 
to guide political efforts and support their Rwandan partners and churches. An effective 
solution for Rwanda seems to require a broad-based mechanism involving the church, and 
judicial, traditional cultural and community-based alternatives such as Gacaca (courts of 
equity that stress reconciliation). Further research should test the application of the model, 
which sets out the framework of the conciliation process and involves the church in 
promoting truth and equity and in encouraging community participation.  
CONFLICT RECONCILIATION IN SOUTH AFRICA (1990-1998)  
AND ITS SIGNIFICANCE FOR  
THE MEDIATING ROLE OF THE CHURCH IN RWANDA (1990-2003) 
Samuel Cyuma  
M.Th. (Edinburgh University) 
A thesis submitted in fulfilment of the degree of  
Doctor of Philosophy  
in the University of Wales 
November 2005 
Oxford Centre for Mission Studies
DECLARATION 
The author declares that the work of this thesis is the result of his own investigation, other 
than that duly acknowledged to other authors, and that none of the material contained in 
this thesis has previously been submitted for a degree in this, or any other awarding 
institution. 
          Signed:                                                        28 November 2005 
STATEMENT OF COPYRIGHT 
The copyright of this thesis rests with the author. No part of it should be reproduced 
without his prior consent, and information derived from it should be acknowledged. 
Permission is granted to the British Library, the University of Wales, and the Oxford 
Centre of Mission Studies to grant access to copies of the thesis held in their libraries and 
to make copies for library purposes only. 
Signed:                                                          28 November 2005 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work would not have been completed without the support of some specific people. 
Special gratitude goes to my supervisors, Professor Deryke Belshaw (Director of Studies) 
and Professor Haddon Willmer. I owe much gratitude to Canon Dr Chris Sugden, formerly 
Executive Director of the Oxford Centre for Mission Studies (OCMS), who in addition to 
academic enlightenment provided financial support when other sources were not available. 
In South Africa, the collaboration between churches and other organisations that followed 
the establishment of the TRC offered invaluable support throughout the field research. 
Unreserved gratitude goes to Revd Laurie Gaum, facilitator of the Year of Hope group of 
the Dutch Reformed Church (DRC) in Cape Town, for his guidance, hospitality and 
company. Dr Frits Gaum, Editor of the DRC Magazine, arranged most of the appointments 
in the country for gathering data relating to the churches. Levinia Brown, Personal 
Assistant to Archbishop Desmond Tutu at the TRC Main Office in Cape Town, provided 
most useful data relating to the Commission and guided further visits on the ground. A 
large debt is due to Archbishop Desmond Tutu for the written responses and references he 
provided for the research. Many church leaders, missionaries and scholars in South Africa 
provided responses and documentation that gave further enlightenment on the making of 
the TRC and the interaction between the Commission and the churches. My gratitude goes 
particularly to Rt Reverend Peter Lee, Bishop of the Diocese of Christ the King, Fr Guy 
Theunis and G. Williams, missionaries in Durban, for their responses and further 
comments. Equally, Professor Patrick Harries and Lazarus Kgalema from the University at 
Cape Town (UCT), Carnita Ernest of the Centre of the Study of Violence and 
Reconciliation (CSVR, Johannesburg) and Eldred de Klerk (CSVR, Cape Town) 
contributed significantly to this research.      
This work also owes much to Sias Meyer at the piloting stage for guidance on sources and 
informants in South Africa. More people contributed considerably on the ground: 
Archdeacon Rowan Smith Dean of St Georges Cathedral, Canon Karl Groepe of St 
Georges, Ben de Toit, Director of the Centre for Communication in the DRC, Douglas 
Tilton, Associate for Research Communication in the South African Council of Churches 
(SACC), and Revd Kay-Robert Volkwijn, Companionship Facilitator. Many other people 
shared their experiences in the process of the TRC and post-TRC. These include Fannie de 
Toit from the Institute for Justice and Reconciliation (IJR), Mongezi Mngese, 
Networker/Organiser at the Institute for the Healing of Memories, Revd Lionel Rown from 
the Centre for Conflict Resolution (CCR) in Cape Town, Shirley Gynn, former MK 
(Umkhonto weSizwe: Spear of the Nation) commander, a significant witness in the TRC 
hearings and a leading figure in Khulumani survivors groups.  
In Rwanda, the contributors to this research range from students, professors, medical 
doctors, NGO leaders and social workers. Hilda Baccarne and Daniel Mungwarakarama 
made the research on the ground possible. Likewise, Canon Barney Millingan and Kess 
Maxey contributed unreservedly to this work, each in two visits to Rwanda, searching out 
documentation on the ground. I convey my gratitude to other people whose names cannot 
be contained in these pages: those with whom the research continued in the field through 
distribution and collection of questionnaires on my behalf in Rwanda, or by their responses 
to the questionnaire. 
Many researchers from outside South Africa and Rwanda contributed to the data sources. 
These include Professor Piet Konings and the staff of the Afrika Studies Centrum Library 
of the University of Leiden for their contribution to the literature search. Dr Jan and 
Marijke van Butselaar, and the staff of the Council of Mission in the Netherlands, 
contributed much by facilitating multiple visits to their offices for the literature search in 
their records, and in libraries at the University of Amsterdam and the University of Leiden. 
My thanks go to the Revd Cess Overdulve for his responses, and Dr Grard and Auli vant 
Spijker for enabling me to visit the Inter-university Institute for Missiological and 
Ecumenical Research (IIMO) at Utrecht in Netherlands. Other thanks go to Dr Koen 
Stroeken of the University of Leuven and other colleagues in Belgium; their responses 
were important. I convey my warmest appreciation for their contributions and particularly 
to Alphonse Munyampundu for his assistance.   
Many scholars in the UK handed me material that provided new insights. To mention a 
few: Jenny Brown, Dr Nigel Elitringham, Professor Ian Linden and Revd Roger W Bowen 
shared their knowledge. NGO staff also helped in this respect. I convey my gratitude to my 
fellow committee members of the Conflict, Development and Peace Network (CODEP), 
the African Studies Association (ASA) and the Royal African Society (RAS).   
Gratitude is due to librarians at the School of Oriental and African Studies (SOAS), 
Church Mission Society (CMS), Irish School of Ecumenics (ISE), Newick Park Initiative 
(NPI), Bodleian Libraries, the British Libraries, and the Special Collections Department at 
the University Library, Birmingham. My thanks go to Christine Goller of the United 
Evangelical Mission (VEM) in Wuppertal, Wolfgang Apelt of Archiv-und- 
Museumsstiftung, Wuppertal, P. Ivan Page at the Archivo Generale, Roma, Elizabeth 
Williams of CMS Library, Chris Hindley from Mid-African Ministry, London Mennonite 
Centre, and Friends House Library. I owe much gratitude to Dr Ian Wallace and Dr Chris 
Richard for their comments, and Dr Ann Williams for proofreading the drafts of the thesis 
and for correcting the English language. 
The financial contributions to this research came from the generosity of the Noroton 
Presbyterian Church in Darien, Connecticut, the Presbyterian Church in Northern Ireland, 
the OCMS and Thames North Synod of the URC, who provided support for the academic 
period. In this respect, I am indebted to Revd Dr George Cladis, Revd Dr Edward Danks, 
Revd Connie Jordan Haas, Revd Terry McMullan, Revd Uel Marrs, Revd Roberta 
Rominger and Revd Fiona Thomas for their support. Finally, the contributions of the 
Carmichael and Montgomery Trust, the Presbyterian Church of East Africa (PCEA) and 
the Pastoral Institute were most appreciated, equally so the United Reformed Church 
(URC) and St Columbas and Vine Church, both of whom supported my family while I 
was not able to be present with them. 
                                     TABLE OF CONTENTS   PAGES 
      Table of Contents  .     iii 
List of Figures, Tables and Photos  ........     vi 
Acronyms              .........    vii 
PART  ONE:    THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 
  Chapter  1  General Introduction  ...    2 
      1.1     Setting the scene  ...    2   
      1.2     Problem statement  ..     7 
      1.3     Aim, scope and approach  ..   14 
      1.4     Data collection and research methodology  ..   20 
      1.5     Structure of the thesis  ..   22  
  Chapter  2  Conflict Concepts and Theory  ..   25 
      2.1     Terminology and categories of conflict  ...  26 
      2.2     Racism, ethnicity, ethnic cleansing and genocide  ..   28 
      2.3     Concepts and perceptions of conflict  ......   38 
      2.4     Conflict genesis and development  ..   40 
      2.4.1  Conflict dynamics  ......   48 
      2.4.2  Functions of conflict  ..   50 
  Chapter  3  Methods of Reduction and Resolution of Conflicts   ..   52 
      3.1     General considerations  ..   52 
      3.2     Main approaches to conflict resolution: schools of thought      57             
      3.3     Justice and truth  ....     66 
      3.4     Justice as social and legal means  ...      74 
      3.5     Amnesty  ...      80 
      3.6     Retribution and reparation/restitution  ...      82  
      3.7     Healing: restoration and memory  ...      86 
      3.8     Cultural methods  ...      88 
  Chapter  4  Conflict Reconciliation: Christian Perspectives  ...      98      
      4.1     General features  ....   100 
      4.1.1  Biblical approach     ....    101 
      4.1.2  Pauline theology of reconciliation  ....   104              
      4.1.3  Christian ministry and social reconciliation  .  106 
PART  TWO:    SOUTH AFRICAS  CASE 
  Chapter  5  Country Context: Formative Attitude  .....  127           
      5.3     The Church and socio-economic realities  ...    136 
      5.3.1  Early theological development  ...    137 
      5.3.2  Dutch Reformed Church  ....   138 
      5.3.3  Anglicans  ........   141 
      5.3.4  Roman Catholics  ....   142 
      5.3.5  Other churches  ...    143 
      5.4     Liberation theology and the struggle     144 
      5.5     South Africas neighbour-states  ....   149 
      5.6     Origin and philosophy of the TRC     151 
      5.7     Precursor of transitional processes     153 
  Chapter  6  TRC: Findings from Documentation and Field Interviews    159       
      6.1     TRC in South Africa: mandate, structure and methods     160 
      6.1.1  The mandate of the commission  ...    160 
      6.1.2  The task of the commission  ...    164 
      6.1.3  Structure, objectives and values  ....   166 
      6.1.4  TRC Methods: statement taking and data processing     169  
      6.3     Statistics and sampling in the TRC      171 
      6.5     Data analysis in the TRC  ....   174 
      6.6     The TRC mechanism in retrospect  ...    175 
      6.6.1  The TRC process proceedings  ...    185 
      6.6.2  Achievement and impact: the participation of churches         189 
    (a) Evangelicals  ....   193   
    (b) SACC member churches  ...    195 
    (c) Dutch Reformed Church  ...    198 
                   (d) Military chaplaincy  ...    201 
    (e) Other special submissions and hearings  ..     202 
    (f) Further role of the churches  ..     204 
      6.7     Catalytic factors  ...    213 
PART  THREE:    RWANDAS  CASE 
  Chapter  7  Country Context: Formative Attitude  ......     222  
      7.1    The pre-colonial epoch: origins of Rwandans  ...    224 
      7.2     Colonial era: ethnogenesis  ..     229 
      7.3     Independent Rwanda:  
    ethnic strategy, regionalism and the church ...    234 
      7.3.1  The war and the genocide  ...    234 
      7.3.2  Geo-politics and socio-economic realities  ..     252 
      7.3.3  Church planting: co-operation with the state  ..     255 
      7.4     Genocide climax, regional and international response     261 
 Chapter   8  Mediation and Reconciliation: Challenges to the Church     270                     
      8.1     Challenges to the churches in Rwanda  .....      270 
      8.2     Mediation: failure and premise of reconciliation  ..     275 
      8.3.1  Worldwide ecumenical efforts  .....      280  
                  8.3.2  Initiatives of the Rwandan churches  .     282 
       (a) Roman Catholic Church in Rwanda  ...    282 
         (b) The Presbyterian Church of Rwanda  ...    285 
                            (c) National ecumenical effort  ...    286 
      (d) Efforts of other specific groups   .      289 
       8.4.1  Worldwide ecumenical response  .....      295 
       8.4.2  The response of the Rwandan churches  .      300 
         (a) The new vision of the CNER  .....      306 
    (b) The response of other specific groups  .....      308 
      8.5     Further initiatives: reconstruction, unity and reconciliation    314 
      8.5.1  Judicial exertion and Gacaca  .....      316 
      8.5.2  National Unity and Reconciliation Commission  .      323 
      8.5.3  Collective memory, symbols and cultural performance     330 
PART  FOUR:    SIGNIFICANCE AND APPLICATION 
  Chapter  9  Comparative Approach to the Cases of South Africa and Rwanda 333         
      9.1     Retrospective assessment  ..     334 
      9.1.1  The sources  ......     334 
      9.1.2  Comparability of the two cases  ..     335 
      9.2.1  Comparative assessment of the processes  ..     343 
      9.2.2  Alternative Approaches  ...    349 
                (a) Judicial approach  ..     352 
                (b) Para-judicial approach  ......     354 
      9.3     Lessons and suggestions  ..     362 
      9.3.1  Application to Rwanda  ......     368 
      9.3.2  The state of the art  ..     374 
    (a) Constitutional reference   ..     374 
    (c) Judicial framework  ..........     376 
    (d) The role of the church  ......     377 
  Chapter  10  Concluding Summary  ...    383   
       10.1     Introduction  ..     383   
       10.2.1  Effective conflict resolution  ......     385 
       10.2.2  Conditions for successful reconciliation  .....      385 
       10.2.3  Difficulties in appertaining responsibility  .....     386 
       10.2.4  The multiple causality of the genocide  ...    387 
       10.2.5  The ramifications of long-running inter-ethnic hostility     ..     388 
       10.2.6  Inequalities in investigative and legal processes             ...    389 
       10.2.7  The churches reconciliation roles have yet to be filled         ...     390 
                   10.2.8  Applying South Africas reconciliation experience to                 
       10.3     Implications of this studys findings  .      393 
       10.3.1  General issues  .      393 
       10.3.2  Implications for the churches in Rwanda   .      394 
       10.4     Limitations of the research  ..... ...      398      
       10.5     Recommendations for action  .....      400 
  Sources and References  .      403 
  Appendices   
        2     Maps   .......    444 
        3     Questionnaire/questions for interviews  .... .     446 
        4     Countries profiles and economies: comparison  ..     448 
LIST OF FIGURES, TABLES AND PHOTOS 
Figure Number                 page             
  2.1 Conflict Intensification and Emotional Involvement.  39 
  2.2 Time Sequence of Conflict Development..  49 
   3.1 The Conflict-Partnership Pathway to Effective Conflict Resolution 59  
  3.2 Gaps in Building Peace.. .. 89 
  5.1  Population of South Africa (1994) ...       135   
  5.2     Organisational Structure of Peace Committees in South Africa      155 
  6.1     Organisation of the TRC      166 
   7.1 Population of Rwanda (1994) ...      223 
  9.1 Structure of Parallel Judicial and non-Judicial Organisations, 
  9.2  Levels of Mutual Participation in Search for Solutions   ...        380 
Table Number 
4.1 Test for Effective Model of Reconciliation       ...       122 
 6.1  List of the Commissioners of the TRC .      167 
 6.2 The three Statutory Committees of the TRC ..        168 
 6.3 Census in 1994, South Africa ..       190 
9.1 Similarities between South African and Rwandan Contexts ...       336 
9.2 Contrasts between South African and Rwandan Contexts      340 
9.3 Juxtaposition of South African and Rwandan Processes ..   371-3 
Photo Number 
6.1 The Commissioners of the TRC...        168 
6.2 Archbishop D. Tutu handing the TRC Report to  
President Mandela.       218 
ACRONYMS 
AACC  All Africa Conference of Churches  
ADL Association Rwandaise pour la Dfence des Droits de la Personne et des 
Liberts Publiques [Rwandan Association for the Defence of Human Rights 
and Public Liberties]  
ADR  Alternative Disputes Resolution 
AEE  African Evangelical Enterprise 
AFM  Apostolic Faith Mission [South Africa] 
AICs  African Initiated Churches [South Africa] 
ANB  Africa News Bulletin  
ANC  African National Congress [South Africa] 
APK  Afrikaanse Protestant Kerk [Afrikaner Protestant Church] 
APLA  Azanian Peoples Liberation Army [South Africa] 
APR  Arme Patriotique Rwandaise [Rwandese Patriotic Army]   
ARDHO Association Rwandaise pour la Dfence des Droits de lHomme [Rwandese 
Association for the Defence of Human Rights] 
ASF Avocats sans Frontires [Attorneys without Borders] 
AVP Association des Volontaires de la Paix [Association of Peace  
Volunteers, in Rwanda] 
AZAPO Azanian Peoples Organisation [South Africa] 
BATNA Best Alternative to a Negotiated Agreement 
BC [BCM] Black Consciousness [Black Consciousness Movement, in South Africa]  
CDR Coalition pour la Dfense de la Rpublique au Rwanda [Coalition for the 
Defence of the Republic in Rwanda] 
CESA   Church of England in South Africa 
CEV  Contemporary English Version [Bible] 
CIA  Central Intelligence Agency [USA] 
CMS  Church Missionary Society [United Kingdom] 
CND Conseil National pour le Dveloppement [National Council for 
Development, in Rwanda] 
CNER   Conseil National des Eglises au Rwanda [National Council of Churches in 
Rwanda] 
CODESA Convention for a Democratic South Africa 
CONADEP National Commission on Disappeared Persons [Argentina] 
COSATU Congress of South African Trade Unions 
CPSA  Church of the Province of South Africa [Anglican] 
CSVR  Centre for the Study of Violence and Reconciliation [South Africa] 
DDG  Database Development Group [TRC] 
DM Dpartement Missionnaire de la Swisse Romande [Missionary Department 
of French speaking Switzerland] 
DP  Democratic Party [South Africa] 
DPC  Detainees Parents Support Committee [South Africa] 
DRC [NGK] Dutch Reformed Church [South Africa] 
DRC  Democratic Republic of Congo (former Zare)1
EPR  Eglise Presbytrienne au Rwanda [Presbyterian Church in Rwanda] 
FAR  Forces Armes Rwandaises [Rwandan Armed Forces] 
FAZ  Forces Armes Zaroises [Zairian Armed Forces] 
FESA  Fellowship of Evangelicals in South Africa 
FOJUPET Forum pour la Justice, lUnit, la Paix et lEgalit pour Tous [Forum for 
Justice, Unity, Peace and Equality for All] 
FPR  Front Patriotique Rwandais [RPF: Rwandese Patriotic Front] 
  1 In this thesis the name Congo is used for the DRC: former Zare. 
FRD  Force de Resistance pour la Democracy [Resistance Force for Democracy, 
Rwanda] 
GDP  Gross Domestic Product 
GK  Gereformeerde Kerk [Reformed Church] 
GNI  Gross National Income 
GNU  Government of National Unity [Rwanda] 
HR  Human Rights  
HRC   Human Rights Committee [TRC] 
HRV  Human Rights Violation  
ICC  International Criminal Court 
ICC  International Centre for Censorship2
ICR  Interactive Conflict Resolution 
ICTR  International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 
IDASA Institute for a Democratic Alternative for South Africa 
idasa  Institute for Democracy in South Africa 
IFP  Inkata Freedom Party [South Africa] 
IJR Institute of Justice and Reconciliation [South Africa] 
IIMO Interuniversity Institute for Missiological and Ecumenical Research 
[Netherlands] 
IRIN  Integrated Regional Information Network [UN] 
LIPRODHOR Ligue Rwandaise pour la Promotion et la Dfense des Droits de lHomme 
[Rwandan League for the Promotion and Defence of Human Rights] 
MDR Movement Dmocratique Rpublicain [Democratic Republican Movement, 
in Rwanda] 
MK Umkhonto weSizwe [Spear of the Nation: armed wing of ANC] 
MP Member of Parliament 
MRND Movement Rvolutionaire National pour le Dveloppement [National 
Revolutionary Movement for Development, in Rwanda] 
NC  National Conference 
NGK  Nederduitse Gereformeerede Kerk [Dutch Reformed Church] 
NGKA Nederduitse Gereformeerede Kerk in Afrika [Dutch Reformed Church in 
Africa] 
NGO  Non-Governmental Organisation   
NGSK Nederduitse Gereformeerede Sendingkerk [Dutch Reformed Mission 
Church] 
NHK  Nederduistsch Hervormde Kerk [Dutch Re-formed Church] 
NMOG Neutral Military Observer Group [OAU] 
NNI  New Network International 
NOUER  Nouvel Espoir pour Rwanda [New Hope for Rwanda] 
NP  National Party [South Africa] 
NPI  Newick Park Initiative [UK] 
NURC  National Unity and Reconciliation Commission [Rwanda] 
OAU  Organisation for African Unity 
ORINFOR Office Rwandaise dInformation [Rwandas Office for Information] 
PAC  Pan African Congress [South Africa] 
PCUSA Presbyterian Church of the United States of America 
PDC  Partie Dmocratique Chrtien [Christian Democratic Party, in Rwanda] 
PL  Partie Liberal [Liberal Party, in Rwanda] 
PTSD  Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder 
RANU  Rwandan Alliance for National Unity 
  2 In this thesis, the abbreviation (ICC) is used for the International Criminal Court. 
RDR  Rassemblement Dmocratique pour le Retour des Rfugis [Rally for 
Democracy and Refugees Return, Rwanda]  
RFI  Radio France International  
RICSA Research Institute on Christianity in South Africa 
RPA Rwandese Patriotic Army [RPFs army] 
RPF  Rwandese Patriotic Front [FPR: Front Patriotique Rwandais]  
RTLM Radio Tlvision Libre des Milles Collines [Free Radio Television of the 
Thousand Hills, in Rwanda] 
SAAF  South African Air Force 
SACP  South African Communist Party 
SADF  South African Defence Force 
SAP  South African Police 
SAPA  South African Press Association 
SAT  Service dAnimation Thologique [Service for Theological Animation, 
Rwanda] 
SDU  Self-Defence Unit [South Africa] 
SSC  State Security Council [South Africa] 
SWAPO South West African Peoples Organisation [Namibia] 
TFF  Transnational Foundation for Peace and Future Research 
TJR  Truth, Justice and Reconciliation  
TJRC  Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission  
TRC  Truth and Reconciliation Commission [South Africa] 
UCT  University of Cape Town [South Africa] 
UDF  United Democratic Front [South Africa] 
UNAMIR United Nations Assistance Mission to Rwanda [1990s] 
UNAR Union Nationale Rwandaise [National Rwandan Union] 
UNHCR United Nations High Commission for Refugees 
UNREO United Nations Rwanda Emergency Office 
URC  United Reformed Church [UK] 
USAID United States Agency for International Development 
VEM  Evangelical Mission of Wuppertal [Germany] 
WARC World Alliance of Reformed Churches (Geneva) 
WCC  World Council of Churches (Geneva) 
WECAT Western Cape Action Tour [South Africa] 
WPP  Witnesses Protection Programme [South Africa] 
ZCC  Zion Christian Church [South Africa] 
PART  ONE:    THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 
Chapter 1 
General Introduction 
This research compares the experiences of South Africa during Apartheid with the 
genocide in Rwanda. It assesses the process of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission 
(TRC), in contrast with the attempts made and the prospects of resolving the situation in 
Rwanda. It stresses the role played by the churches in the two contexts and proposes 
possible ways in which the churches can contribute positively in Rwanda. In particular, it 
investigates the possibility of applying the TRC pattern in an attempt to settle the aftermath 
of the genocide in Rwanda. 
1.1 Setting the scene 
The compromise between antagonist forces allowed the transition to democratic 
institutions and the process of the TRC in South Africa in the 1990s, while negotiations 
collapsed and large-scale killings and genocide occurred in Rwanda. Both the South 
African and Rwandan phenomena opened new areas for research and policy debates. 
Debates focused on the claims of the TRCs success, and on the outcomes of attempts to 
resolve conflicts in other countries. Consequently, there is a large body of literature on the 
TRC, and on similar approaches in other countries (Hayner 1994). However, no work has 
consistently examined the role played by the churches in conflict resolution, or the 
possibility of applying the TRC model in other contexts. This thesis investigates whether a 
universal model of conflict resolution and post-conflict reconciliation can be identified; it 
investigates conflict variables and intervention variables, and assesses whether persistent 
conflicts  particularly in Rwanda  have been well examined and understood as a basis for 
settlement and to prevent further conflict.  
While the South African belligerent parties found a compromise by which they opted for 
peaceful means to end their longstanding hostilities, power-holders in Rwanda opted for 
prosecution (Moghalu 1998; Mamdani 1999). This thesis investigates whether the South 
African experience can inform the search for lasting peace, unity and reconciliation1 in 
post-genocide Rwanda, i.e. whether the TRC provides a transferable model of conflict 
resolution.  
Despite the various roles that Christianity had played in building Apartheid, there was a 
distinct change in attitude when the churches backed peace accords and the setting up of 
the TRC, and participated in the process of acknowledging the unjust practices of the 
Apartheid regime (Tutu 1999; Meiring 1999; Cochrane 1999). In the case of Rwanda, the 
role of churches regarding the genocide has come into question (Aguillar 1998; Gatwa 
2001; Graybill 2002); even transnational Christian organizations have failed to devise 
timely and effective ways of achieving reconciliation. 
Due to the magnitude of the continuing crisis in Rwanda, it is difficult to resolve the 
situation even now, ten years after the event. There is a lack of common vision and 
  1 By this is meant nationwide reconciliation, the process beginning with a single mark signalling that 
divided factions literally meet and sit together for the first time in an effort to exchange views and initiate the 
journey of accommodating past differences. The mark is a historic moment acting as a framework for the 
style, content and outcome of further actions along the trajectory, including the dissolution and merging of 
conflicting entities, to foster further socio-economic, political and religious initiatives at all levels. 
commitment; churches do not speak with one voice concerning the situation, either at 
national or international levels. Polarising opinions  even from Rwandan people  also 
mislead those who want to understand the root-causes and nature of the conflict and 
possible interventions (Vansina 2004; Overdulve 1997). Outsiders and some Rwandans 
rushed to implement a reconstruction plan shortly after the genocide. There are, however, 
other prerequisites for durable reconstruction: above all, a commitment to peace and 
reconciliation (Mulunda 1997; Mngise interview, 29 June 2001). This thesis suggests that 
fundamental elements of peace and reconciliation processes should include an explicit 
commitment to truth and impartiality (Barry 1996) and human rights. 
Apart from the 1994 genocide, other human rights abuses were or still are being committed 
in Rwanda. These have included blocking food supplies; refusing to rescue particular 
groups when it was certain that the refusal would lead to their death; or forcing people to 
go where they were likely to die. Other forms of abuse included withdrawing care and food 
from prisoners or delaying their release from custody. Therefore, there is a need to find 
correct approaches to matters of justice and reconciliation in Rwanda. Brand-Jacobsen 
(2000) asserted that for conflict-prevention measures to be effective, initiatives should not 
stop at short-term security, but should reach beyond to lasting peace, and should involve as 
many participants as possible. Scherrer (1999) claimed that some aspect of justice (e.g., 
equal treatment of individuals) is a requisite or a fundamental base for reconciliation.  
Envisaging the reconciliation at an early stage is crucial because it validates physical 
reconstruction. Without a degree of reconciliation, it is pointless to rebuild roads, schools 
and hospitals only to have them destroyed again because of the persistence of violence. 
Worldwide church and secular agencies (not just local churches or national institutions) 
can encourage people to adopt good practice in the midst of crises (Cyuma 2000).  
In African conflicts, protagonists utilise the language of race/ethnicity to generate support. 
The conflicts, however, are mostly driven by resource control and related levels of wealth 
(Johnston & Sampson 1994). It is evident that crises have provided sources of income for 
individuals who developed careers that could not exist without conflict. The late Dr J. 
Savimbi founded his career in the Angola war. In the late 1990s, Rwandan and Ugandan 
leaders took the lead in aggression within the Congo2, while Zimbabwe and Namibia found 
a pretext to intervene in favour of legitimate rule in the Congo (Carrero 2001). All four 
countries aimed to exploit the Congos natural resources. Such situations may also benefit 
multinationals hunting for spheres of influence, mining, and market expansion for arms. 
This implies that conflict has many causes with interests that are difficult to eliminate. 
Moreover, the West pressurises African countries to adopt principles of market economy 
and governance, including, among other things, globalisation and multiparty democracy 
governance, which in many ways are not conducive to Africas well being. African 
adventurers, strong countries, the power-hungry and warlords also adopt the same practices 
as instruments to shield their real interests. This perhaps explains some of the policies of 
Uganda under Y. Museveni and Rwandas Patriotic Front (RPF) regime, since they ignore 
many international conventions while avoiding international censure (Mugabe 2001; 
Carrero 2001; Pottier 2002). Thus, talking of peace and reconciliation entails risk, since it 
threatens political actors' business, property and income. Nonetheless, the situation needs 
to be addressed.  
The conflict in South Africa, although complex  racially and theologically driven, 
motivated by power and economic control during the Apartheid regime  ended peacefully. 
An appraisal of the transition from Apartheid to Democracy shows that the workings of 
post-conflict measures, particularly the TRC, were seen as successful. Perhaps this success 
  2 This thesis uses the name 'Congo' to refer to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.  
has been exaggerated. Some analyses object to the claim of the TRCs great success 
(Meredith & Rosenberg 1999); others conclude that the TRC was an unfinished venture 
(Mamdani 1998; Bell & Ntsebeza 2003). Rwanda still has crises that require a rethinking 
of the concepts and practices relating to the prevention and resolution of conflict. The 
measures may entail setting prior agreements between conflicting forces, or fulfilling 
existing ones to lessen tensions and to allow people to debate and share each others 
perspectives. Researchers such as Clapham (1996) and Vandeginste (1998a), and 
international leaders including Kofi Annan3, have suggested that the best way to tackle the 
aftermath of Rwandas genocide would be to adapt the South African TRC pattern. 
Belgium, the Netherlands and Switzerland offered to sponsor the replication of the TRC in 
Rwanda (NPI 1997; Vandeginste 1998a).  
After considering the TRC process and its Final Reports claims, this thesis seeks to 
examine whether and to what extent the pattern could help, if it were applied to or its 
principles replicated in Rwanda. It examines how far post-genocide Rwanda could 
positively embrace South Africas experiences, according to its own needs, paying special 
attention to the role of the church, and ascertaining other catalysts  cultural, spiritual, etc. 
 that could contribute to these objectives. In this perspective, reconciliation may be 
required not only between people but also between principles, methods, beliefs and 
subcultures within the same society, if the people are to come to terms with conflicting 
realities (Assefa 1999; Lederach 1999). Thus, the thesis examines how far both justice and 
reconciliation (or law and mercy) could be pursued in a complementary manner, for lasting 
peace in post-genocide Rwanda, in the interests of the nation as a whole. 
  3 In 1998, the United Nations Secretary General Kofi Annan has said he backs the idea of a "truth 
commission" on the genocide in Rwanda' Having said this, Annan met with the Secretary-General of the 
OAU, Ahmed Salim, to discuss how the proposal could work; both suggested that the commission would 
operate in a similar way to South Africas TRC, designed to heal Apartheid (SAPA -AP 1998, 1). 
1.2 Problem statement  
The above scenario suggests a two-fold research problem and subsequent questions. The 
first part of the problem relates to the past (what happened); the second concerns new 
perspectives (what could best be done). Consideration of the problem generated a 
hypothesis that the research sought to falsify.  
The main hypothesis is that inter-class/ethnic groups violence and exclusiveness in 
Rwanda have not been accurately examined at their roots  either by secular rulers or by 
the church  as the basis for settlement in particular.  
 Little regard has been given to truth and transparency in tabling, discussing and 
resolving Rwandas conflicts;  
 Settlement and post-genocide reconciliation in Rwanda could draw positive lessons 
from the general South African experience, the TRC in particular and the participation of 
the churches. 
Antipathy between Hutu and Tutsi groups emerged before colonisation and the entry of 
Christianity into Rwanda. This was increased by exclusionary practices in the colonial era; 
it spread within the churches and fuelled open violence (in post-colonial Rwanda), leading 
to the 1994 genocide (Vansina 2004; Corey & Joireman 2004). The thesis provides 
evidence that various conflicts in Rwanda have not been sincerely investigated. It adduces 
lessons from the TRC experience, which could help to solve Rwandas post-conflict crisis. 
It demonstrates, however, that unique root causes from both inside and outside Rwanda led 
to the genocide; post-conflict reconciliation requires full analysis of the two causes. The 
thesis argues that in spite of the course taken in response to Rwandas genocide at both 
internal and international levels  solely retributive justice  there are still possibilities for 
a better solution. The latter requires a policy change by the RPF and its sponsors, entailing 
a constructive combination of law and mercy and exploring catalysts for truth and other 
shared values. There are, however, other preconditions if a TRC-like pattern is to be 
applied effectively in Rwanda, including broad dialogue, mainly among the ethnic elite and 
among the church leaders. 
The research problem consists first of the causes and effects of the conflicts in South 
Africa, which, in spite of differences, have parallels in Rwanda (see Table 9.1), while the 
measures deployed for settlement of the two cases differ (see Table 9.3). Likewise, the 
churches contributions had different outcomes (Table 9.2). In both South Africa and 
Rwanda, ethnic exclusion had led to greater severity of conflict and vice versa, and 
involved the church. In both countries, the core cause of the conflicts  exclusion  derived 
from monopoly control over resources and power, even if this process was depicted in 
terms of race or ethnicity. Yet, the Rwandan conflict had unique features, including the 
nationwide impact of the killing (the genocide), and stronger external involvement. 
In South Africa, church people such as B. Naud, M. Lapsly, M. Cassidy and D. Tutu had 
kept courage and remained faithful to the struggle against Apartheid. They strove to recruit 
Christians and churches in support, whilst at the same time challenging those who 
participated in upholding Apartheid. In the 1990s, the churches contributed positively to 
the processes of peace making, the transition and the subsequent TRC process. This central 
role of the church has not been apparent in Rwanda to date. 
Unlike the positive changes in South Africa, in Rwanda the conflict worsened in the 1990s 
to the point of genocide and multiple divisions (Theunis 1995). While South African 
belligerents were moving from hostilities to negotiations, in Rwanda, belligerent forces 
blocked the dialogue: rather than joining forces for a common perspective; the wars ended 
with a victorious side and a defeated side. The South African conflict was mostly an 
internal struggle, while the Rwandan conflict involved international dynamics. The 
differences in nature between the two conflicts led to different endings, different 
consequences and dissimilar post-conflict situations, hence injecting differences or 
additions in the quest for reconciliation.     
Positive features in South Africa included the strong theological backing by the churches 
for the freedom struggle and the TRC, from inception to proceedings, and eventual 
cooperation between parties. These features are absent in Rwanda, and in addition, the 
church hierarchy, some clergy and many of the laity were themselves accused of acts of 
genocide (African Rights 1998; Rittner, Roth & Whitworth 2004). In 1999 and 2000, the 
debates4 stressed the trial of the Roman Catholic Bishop A. Misago and other clergy who 
were accused of acts of genocide. These included Bishop S. Musabyimana, the former 
Anglican Bishop of Shyogwe, who died in January 2003 in custody of the International 
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) in Arusha, Tanzania. Some other former church 
leaders and laity, even among those still in positions of responsibility in Rwanda, are also 
suspected of involvement in the genocide. 
African Rights (1998), a London-based NGO, produced a report portraying the attitude of 
Protestant Bishops and other representatives of the churches in Rwanda during the 1994 
genocide. The report substantiated its call to prosecute implicated church leaders, quoting 
statements made by international church leaders including the former Archbishop of 
Canterbury, G. Carey, and Rwandas new church leaders. T. Walker (in Times, 28 
February 1995) observed that P. Kagame  by then Vice-President of Rwanda  asserted 
that the Rwandan Roman Catholic Church was partly responsible for the genocide of 1994. 
  4 Kinyamateka (the popular Roman Catholic magazine in Rwanda) concentrated on this issue (1999 2000). 
However, there has been no unbiased examination of the situation to date (Butselaar 2002). 
A one-sided view has predominated which sympathises with victims from one side of the 
genocide (Pottier 2002; Butselaar 2002).5 It should be easier now to find an alternative, 
less biased position as a basis for applying judicial or reconciliation processes, or a 
combination of the two. This should be possible because there is no longer a threat to 
national security, as the other force  Forces Armes Rwandaises [FAR]  has been 
defeated. Both Hutu and Tutsi civilians live together and are tired of pointless hate and 
suspicion. While the Rwandan Patriotic Army (RPA) alone controls the country, an 
impartial solution including power sharing would help lessen hatred, speed up the 
reconstruction programme and avoid further loss of human life, especially death in prison. 
Sadly, to date no significant progress has been made regarding justice, and there is a much 
longer path to reconciliation. In line with the above argument, any constructive process 
concerning either justice or reconciliation needs to answer the following questions relating 
to conflicts causality and effect:  
(1) Why did the conflicts arise and persist? Have the situations been examined 
accurately and understood sufficiently for adequate solutions to emerge?  
(2) How did South Africa succeed in overcoming its longstanding conflict? In 
Rwanda, are there any potential issues or institutions that are capable of uniting the 
people around common objectives, which have been overlooked?  
(3) What has been the role of local churches in relation to either the cause or the 
reconciliation of the conflicts in Rwanda and South Africa?  
Second, the research problem relates to potentials, strategies, and actors and to the final 
goal of conflict resolution  either restoring the rule of law, reconciliation or both. 
Altogether, they define the choice of processes to apply. Although it was too late and too 
  5 Sympathising with Tutsi victims, while ignoring Hutu victims.  
little, at least the former President of the United States, Bill Clinton, acknowledged the 
failure of the international intervention in the Rwandan genocide. The Secretary General of 
the UN, Kofi Annan, also apologised for this weakness, ten years after the Genocide.6 
Most other states and organisations may still retain an unfair assessment of Rwandas 
crisis, and Rwandas respective leaders still appear to serve their own interests. 
Paradoxically, Rwandas Government and its international counterparts (including 
Christians) blame local churches for the genocide but do not challenge the international 
connections supporting Rwandas political regimes. This lopsided blame persists because 
the church leadership (mainly in Rwanda) lacks consistent theology, concrete teaching and 
solidarity to deploy in times of crisis.  
On the one hand, K. Maxey stated that he felt an element of anti-Roman Catholic bias in 
current church-state relations.7 On the other hand, Butselaar (2002) observes that while 
most new church leaders in Rwanda accuse their predecessors of doing little, they 
themselves remain inactive. Thus, the situation is open to criticism, rumours and suspicion.  
Martin, the editor of EFAC (the Evangelical Fellowship in the Anglican Communion) 
bulletin, asserted,  
There is no escape from the truth that the Christian Church has been a major player in the 
tragic events in Rwanda, which have horrified observers throughout the world in 1994. 
Churches have been the scenes of the massacres and church leaders have acquiesced to hideous 
cruelty. ... Rwanda is without doubt one of Africas most evangelized nations. Eight out of ten 
of its people claim to be Christians. Moreover, thanks to the East African Revival in the 1930s 
and a spontaneous movement of the Holy Spirit in the majority Roman Catholic Church in the 
1970s, Rwanda has been held up as one of the jewels in the crown of charismatic Christianity. 
  6 Cf. Nations Unies, Bureau de Coordination des Affaires Humanitaires, Vues de Bill Clinton sur le 
Gnocide de 1994 (Grands Lacs: IRIN-CEA Bulletin 1086, 5 January 2002). Kofi Annan apologised at the 
opening of a Conference to commemorate the tenth anniversary of the Genocide (2004). Bill Clinton also 
apologised for Americans inaction, while Kofi Annan acknowledged the objectivity of the report by a team 
commissioned by the UN; the Report blamed the latter and US passivity with regard to Rwandas genocide 
(Washington Post, 20 December 1999 [A32]). 
  7 Letter to the Revd P. Woods, Secretary for International Relations in the URC, commenting on the Report 
of a WARC delegations Visit to Rwanda  18-25 January 1999 (9 September 2000). 
So how is it that a Christian country deeply affected by revival should have perpetrated a 
holocaust of ethnic purification in the same league as the former Yugoslavia? (EFAC 1995 
[46], 1). 
Martin asks a valid question; until such issues are clarified, Christian denominations will 
continue to be accused. However, his assertion contains unverified and possibly misleading 
statements: local churches rarely act independently from their mother churches, worldwide 
Christianity and ecumenical partners. To some degree, international Christian actors share 
responsibility with local churches. Like Rwandas church leaders, Martins comments 
illustrate how some Christians produce an unbalanced questioning that rarely contributes to 
solutions. 
In Rwanda  as in most of Africa  successive regimes suppressed the objectives and 
active components of churches, traditional institutions, political opposition, trade unions 
and human rights groups. Confidence in pro-government groups (such as Ibuka and 
AVEGA, which Vandeginste [1998a] categorised as survivors syndicates for prosecution) 
by members of other groups or by society as a whole is absent, and suspicion grows greater 
(Theunis 1995). The problem is how to revitalise such groups for popular and positive 
action, to rebuild trust by the government in other groups and vice versa. Given that most 
Rwandans are Christian, and many initiatives operate from within church structures, the 
latter could play a constructive role in rebuilding confidence, promoting peace and 
reconciliation, and maintaining the culture of truth, impartiality and harmony that marks 
some societies. However, if churches are mismanaged, their ability to mobilise people can 
deepen destructive socio-political forces. 
Broadly speaking, wars reflect economic interests and protect entrenched powers, but the 
most recent wars are identity driven too. While the processes involved in economic and 
power-based conflict include diplomacy and the exchange of information, such processes 
are often manipulative, ending with unrealistic and partial solutions (Johnston & Sampson 
1994). It is unlikely that such methods are suitable for a category of conflict like 
Rwandas, whose motivations, in a way, are deeply rooted in culture, belief or myths. 
Given the subjective and objective mix of causes in their conflicts, the contexts of South 
Africa and Rwanda required multidisciplinary and multidimensional analyses, national and 
international initiatives to resolve them. Brand-Jacobsen (2000) suggests adding new 
strategies and approaches involving law, multiple identities, faith communities,8 belief 
systems, etc. to expand positive parameters of actions and to integrate further actors. 
However, Mulunda (1997) proposed to use largely context-based patterns of conflict 
resolution.  
Pope John Paul II (1984) suggested that the church  without identifying herself with the 
world or being of the world  is in the world and is engaged in dialogue with the world. It 
is therefore not surprising to notice, in the structure of the church herself, repercussions 
and signs of the division affecting human society. Likewise, the Rwandan and South 
African churches9 are part of the core component of society, and a powerful channel for 
social mobility; the churches are both an important generator and an integral part of civil 
society. Since the leaders of the communities and most politicians are church members, 
churches can either be negatively or positively active in the conflict, as they might also be 
effective in peacemaking.  
The argument above suggests that the following questions must be answered in order to 
effectively inform the search for strategies, actors, space and time for reconciliation: 
(1) Are there better Christian strategies for local churches to help resolve conflicts 
in general? If so, how can world Christianity contribute effectively?  
  8 Faith communities is an inclusive term used to avoid considering Christianity as the sole religious 
community. 
  9 This notion, churches, in this particular context, means the members of the Christian body as a whole. 
(2) Are there any lessons to learn from the South African post-conflict procedures 
and the TRC? Is the Commission transferable to Rwanda: are the conditions and 
resources or institutions that it depended on in South Africa prevailing in Rwanda?  
(3) What are the likely limitations of the TRC approach in the Rwandan context? 
How can suspicions be overcome and co-operation be instigated between different 
social groups, and between the people and the state in Rwanda?  
(4) What are the most contextually relevant and effective theological bases for 
peace and reconciliation, its presuppositions, and implications for Christian life that 
are useful for understanding the role of the church in the context?  
(5) Are there ideal periods of time and spatial arrangements, which can help to 
overcome tensions or establish genuine reconciliation?  
There are patterns to reform or reconstruct countries damaged by exclusion and 
racial/ethnic strife. The Nuremberg trial (1946) was an earlier type of approach, but the 
TRC was designed to settle one of the hardest and longest standing of such crises. Early 
research and proposals to settle the Rwandan crisis following the South African pattern did 
not materialise (Clapham 1996; NPI 1997; Vandeginste 1998a & b). There is, however, a 
chance to tackle Rwandas genocide-related crisis and subsequent bitterness more 
effectively if such alternatives are adapted to the context. Sections 1.3, 1.4 and 1.5 below 
outline how the thesis attempts to answer the questions mentioned. 
1.3 Aim, scope and approach 
This study aims to fill a gap in the research literature and academic knowledge about the 
similarities and contrasts between the South African and Rwandan conflicts and their 
respective settlement procedures. It aims to provide new insights that can enable human 
rights, peace building and post-conflict reconciliation initiatives to resolve obstacles to 
coexistence between Rwandan ethnic and political groups. It highlights the contribution 
that churches can make to promote human rights, constructive peace, changes and justice, 
and nationwide reconciliation. 
The thesis exposes the motivations and dynamics that nourished conflicts in South Africa 
and Rwanda. It assesses the extent to which the TRC succeeded and the role the churches 
played in the process. It probes the emerging lessons that South Africas experience can 
offer to the wider world community and its relevance to Rwanda, involving churches and 
eventually cultural values. The thesis focuses on truth,10 justice11 that embraces 
forgiveness12 and moral authority in fostering societal conciliation, healing and the 
prevention of further conflict. It examines alternative structures and processes of conflict 
resolution, in order to identify a model(s) that might be applicable in a variety of contexts. 
Given the volume of principles and the range of fields interacting within the subject of 
conflict resolution, the research stresses the significance of Rwandan concepts and values 
(e.g. ubwiyunge [reconciliation], Gacaca [community justice/reconciliation and court of 
equity], ukuri [truth] and umuhuza [third party conciliator or mediator], which mostly find 
parallels in Christian practice.  
The inquiry refers to judicial procedures, which seek to embody truth, equity and 
transparency criteria as aspects of human rights. It draws on the experience of conflict 
resolution in other countries in transition, including Latin America, and countries that have 
led processes of Truth Inquiry (Christie 2000; Buruma 2002; Hinton 2002). However, it 
is first a case study of the responses to Apartheid South Africa. Then, it focuses on the 
relevance of new strategies  for Rwanda  where the effects of genocide prevail. 
  10 Recuperation of factual accounts of what happened in the conflicts in South Africa and Rwanda.   
  11 Largely implying impartiality in peoples treatment, distribution of rights and the application of law. 
Justice my also imply restoration or restitution and eventual pardon or amnesty. 
  12 This involves confessions, both in the forms of repentance and pardon. 
Therefore, the research is not purposefully problem solving, but problem testing, seeking a 
contribution towards the solution. 
On the surface, both South Africa and Rwanda suffered from ethnic/racial exclusion; this 
factor needs to be considered in the settlement. Yet, early research has demonstrated that 
competition for means of control is at the core of the conflict in Rwanda (Maquet 1954, 
Newbury 1988; Kanyamacumbi 1995; Overdulve 1997). Similar dynamics motivated 
Apartheid in South Africa (Marais 1998; Barber 1999; Rotberg &Thompson 2000).  
The guiding theory that the thesis probes drew on the evolution of truth commissions and 
two schools of thoughts; linking to a co-operative approach to a problem solving, 
interest-based school, as represented by Fisher & Ury (1999, 41-57), and the 
conflict-partnership school as promoted by Weeks (1994, 71-87). Chapter 2 expands on 
these approaches. Techniques of conflict resolution must relate to the context of the 
problem, its nature and the actors objectives, taking into account the interests of 
conflicting parties. Lederach (1992a) asserts that people act because of the meaning things 
have for them. Thus, conflicting camps might have the attitude of all or nothing (winner 
takes all).  
The thesis examines the co-operative approach, which attempts to change the attitude of 
take it all to seeking a sharing perspective or give and take. The latter principle, which 
led to South Africas compromise and the TRC, calls for inclusion and dialogue, whilst the 
winner takes all perspective shaped Rwandas conflict, the negotiations in the 1990s13 
and the later legal system. In such a context, reconciliation requires prior practical and 
  13 Neither the former Rwandan Hutu-led regime nor the Tutsi-led front was ready for concession in the 
negotiations represented in the Arusha Accords. 
didactic choice and sensitisation to the principles of co-operation, as well as patient 
dialogue.  
The didactic theory of conflict resolution derives from prescriptive and elicitive 
modes,14 linking the experts knowledge and the participants needs, both of which 
determine the pace of the process (Lederach 1992a; Schrock-Shenk 2000). Prescriptive 
and elicitive patterns meet in practice the criteria of fast-slow and slow-fast 
approaches. The fast-slow approach  which post-genocide contexts fostered  considers 
top-down input, while the slow-fast approach gives priority to the conflicting parties, as 
post-Apartheid South Africa exemplified. Slow-fast is slow and time consuming, 
requiring more energy and commitment, but it is sure and effective (Lederach 1992a; 
Schrock-Shenk 2000). It matches the elicitive mode, and is more creative than fast-
slow, which matches the prescriptive mode (Chapter 2 expands on these theories). The 
thesis stresses the creativity that characterises elicitive/slow-fast approaches, which are 
effective for the initial stage of conflict resolution. With regard to Rwanda, the question is 
how to balance the efficacy of the slow-fast approach with the risk of further loss of life 
if we were to wait for a long time, given inhumane conditions in prisons, revenge, arbitrary 
arrests and the suffering of the genocide victims. Yet, in most situations, time (entailing the 
slow-fast method) is indeed the best healer.  
To improve peoples relations assumes a genuine conciliation of antagonists, and lasting 
peace presupposes a dialogue15 between all parties implicated in the conflict (Lederach 
1997; Weeks 1994). Genuine reconciliation is far from occurring when there is no dialogue 
between former enemies. Post-genocide Rwanda, however, may present limitations to both 
the investigation and the process of reconciliation. Tense situations and intimidation have 
  14 The term mode is preferred; it implies approach in theory and practice.  
  15 This implies a clear, sincere and extensive conversation. 
prevented the debating of some problems, and the use of certain sensitive language and 
terminology for ethnic or political questions is not acceptable for some groups such as RPF 
supporters (Sibomana 1999; Staub & Pearrlman 2001; Cyuma 2002). The RPF has not 
offered to dialogue with members of the former Hutu-led regime; nor has it allowed the 
participation of all Rwandans in the debate about reconciliation (Khan 2000). The idea of 
full reconciliation itself is not yet welcome to all Rwandans: the RPF and its allies pay only 
lip-service to this notion (Ndamage 2004; Sibomana 1999), and some Hutu do not see this 
as a solution, though they do not offer alternatives. Moreover, there are distortions of the 
truth and suppression of popular views by the leadership (Lederach 1997; Reyntjens in 
African Affairs 2004, 177-210) and some organisations of Tutsi survivors such as Ibuka 
[meaning remember]. The priority of the leadership and the organisations is to prosecute 
the Hutu at all costs (Vandeginste 1998a).  
Sibomana (1999) blamed the RPF regime for terrorising the population between 1994 and 
1998. In line with that, Lemarchand (1997, 69) stated:  
Rwanda is undergoing a major transformation in the sense that 90 percent of the population in 
Kigali today is Tutsi. Rwanda is becoming a society in which the trend  is in the direction of 
an urban-biased Tutsi population consisting essentially of recent returnees, and an essentially 
rural Hutu-biased population. 
Lemarchand (1997) asserted that the same trend expresses a government plan of ethnic 
inequality by spreading fear among educated Hutu in order to obstruct urban employment 
opportunities and to exclude Hutu from beneficial situations. He agrees with Des Forges 
(2004) that there appears to be an official policy of monitoring individuals activities and 
statements because of security fears, the possible disclosure of human rights abuses, and 
the breach and dereliction of duty in justice and prison management.  
The situation is different in the new South Africa, where there is freedom of expression, a 
culture of truth has been cultivated and race relations have improved. However, unfulfilled 
promises in the TRCs recommendations (e.g. concerning reparations) raise criticism about 
the governments care for the victims (Tutus Foreword to Time to Act, 1998). Yet, there 
are suspicions that individuals and organisations implicated in Apartheid tried to clean 
their past records by pressurising the process of reconciliation (Wilson 2001, 80-84). If this 
was the case, the pressure might have altered the data needed by the TRC and subsequently 
affect the research; however, the plurality of methods used in this research was effective 
for crosschecking. 
The motivation in this research emerged from many sources. (1) I was privileged to be a 
member of a team appointed by the Presbyterian Church in Rwanda (1992) to ponder and 
to help the people to respond objectively to the influence of democratisation and the new 
multiparty system. The team produced a pamphlet entitled Ukuri kubaka igihugu [Truth is 
constructive for the nation], which the conflicting sides appreciated; (2) My being both a 
Christian witness and a victim of preventable pain increased my concern to find a means of 
peaceful coexistence; (3) After the genocide, my fellowship with Harold Otto, Cathrine J. 
Hodder, Terrance Sawatsky (from the Mennonite Central Committee), and Sally and John 
Patrick (from World Relief Canada) revitalised my desire for peace and love. The method 
these persons took in helping the Rwandan community to overcome the crisis was a very 
good model which shaped my vision; (4) Subsequently, I attended workshops on peace and 
reconciliation in Congo, Kenya, South Africa and Namibia. These positive experiences 
added to my previous research  The Role of the Church in Ujamaa [1991]  and to my 
reading and teaching on the History of Mission in Africa and African Theologies.  
During that time, South Africa began to claim great success in reconciliation. While some 
form of reconstruction has been successful in Rwanda, reconciliation is still but a hope. My 
experience suggested that churches could help through their ministries, confronting issues 
that generated various conflicts, such as the arms trade, networks stimulating territory 
extension, mining, power madness and competition as a means of control.  
1.4 Data collection and research methodology 
The magnitude of the crises and the volume of literature available on the two contexts and 
other factors dictated the choice of techniques of data collection and the research 
methodology in general. The conditions required the use of multiple methods for gathering 
data, which are mostly qualitative, but also quantifiable hard facts, in-depth study and 
various types of descriptive statistics. Techniques used included conducting interviews, 
using structured questionnaires and participant observation. Special techniques included 
recording uninterrupted narration, group or seminar discussions and the use of research 
assistants and students, mainly in Rwanda.16 There were three considerations: (1) safe-
guarding the sensitivity of the information within the local context; (2) ensuring that 
techniques did not obstruct responses and deciding which questions should be direct or 
indirect, closed or open-ended; (3) matching the method with the specific information 
needed.  
Qualitative methodology dominated an interactive approach to the analysis and comparison 
of literature relating to the subject. Given the large literature, we gave priority to scholarly 
sources, first-hand experience and hard copies of primary sources. Grey material collected 
from the field research included brochures, dissertations, conference papers, reports from 
churches and non-government organizations (NGOs), political statements, liturgical 
material, local newspapers, cartoons, songs and audio and video tapes. 
  16 The choice of method for data collection considered the approach suggested by Narayan (1996, 59) that 
'no single data collection method is superior to another. Each is appropriate for gathering certain kinds of 
information. In deciding which data collection methods to use in a study, the logical starting point is defining 
the kind of information needed and then choosing data collection techniques best suited to generating that 
information.' 
Quantitative methods were applied mostly in listing various forms of evidence, victims, 
perpetrators and sequences of events. Recorded interviews and questionnaire responses 
served as primary sources. Collecting free narratives was an integral part of the 
methodology and was interchangeable with in-group participant observation. This was 
effective in churches, among survivors and witnesses, both in South Africa, especially with 
the Year of Hope, and Khulumani17 survivors support groups, and also with the groups 
involved in Rwanda. 
Gathering data required attending and recording discussions with implicated individuals. 
Eighty percent of informants on Rwanda were nationals; 20 percent were non-Rwandan 
experts and other foreigners working or having worked in the country. Care was taken to 
ensure a balance among the respondents interviewed, who included church people, 
researchers and politicians; but also to consider popular representations, life stories and the 
testimonies of survivors (men and women). It was necessary to select assistants to sample 
data on behalf of the researcher when he could not visit or could only afford a short stay.  
The researcher provided all necessary materials, including the questionnaire and 
guidelines, to guarantee accurate information and consistency of data. The materials 
included letters to introduce assistants to informants, a set of questions, a list of topics for 
the documentation needed, and a sheet to claim expenses incurred and the cost of 
documentation collected. After a piloting stage (2000), seven visits took place. My last 
visit to Rwanda needed updates from assistant researchers, students and NGO workers. 
Visitors to Rwanda, particularly Canon B. Milligan and K. Maxey, were also useful in 
transmitting the questionnaire and tracing the documentation (September 1999 and August 
2000). In addition to the help received, I visited Belgium in August 2000, ICTR in April 
  17 A Khosa word meaning those who speak out. 
2000, the Netherlands in July 2000 and September 2001 and South Africa in June and July 
2001.  
1.5 Structure of the thesis 
The thesis comprises four parts subdivided into ten chapters, each answering a number of 
questions.  
Part I presents the theoretical framework. It defines some basic concepts in the field of 
conflict studies, social sciences and theology. Chapter 1 is a general introduction that states 
the hypothesis and defines the research problem. It specifies the subject and related 
questions. It sets out the aim and methodology of the research, and clarifies the sources of 
data and the structure of the thesis. Chapter 2 clarifies the terminology relating to pain and 
conflict and the causes and development of conflicts, including racism and ethnicity. 
Chapter 3 describes the methods used in conflict reduction and resolution  including 
justice processes, political confessions and reparation  and conciliation, embracing truth, 
amnesty, restitution, memory, healing and cultural values. Chapter 4 outlines the biblical 
models of conflict settlement; it examines how much can be expected of churches in their 
ministry. It expounds the Christian concept of reconciliation and forgiveness (with 
confessions) and the role of the Church in social reconciliation.  
Part II deals specifically with South Africa. It focuses on the 1990s, looking at the way in 
which it was possible to overcome the social divide created by Apartheid, what the country 
did or did not achieve and the part the TRC and churches played in these outcomes. 
Chapter 5 portrays South Africas socio-political fabric and church development in relation 
to Apartheid. It describes the origin and motivation of the TRC. Chapter 6 sets out the 
structure and objectives of the TRC, and the principles and methodology followed in the 
proceedings. It analyses special submissions to  and public hearings of  the Commission. 
It investigates the key features of the TRC and its catalytic factors, what could or could not 
be done without the TRC and the participation of the churches. 
Part III deals specifically with Rwanda, again largely in the 1990s. It focuses on the 1994 
genocide, the attempts made to settle the situation and the prospects for post-genocide 
settlement. Chapter 7 mirrors Chapter 5 in analysing the origin of Rwandas conflict and 
the social fabric that nourished the 1990s crisis. It sets out the polarisation of ethnic 
categories in relation to church-state rapport. Chapter 8 is a critical assessment of attempts 
made to tackle the situation surrounding the Rwandan genocide and the role played by 
churches in this perspective. The inquiry anticipates a conflict resolution linking 
community-based justice (popular Gacaca) with the efforts of the state. It clarifies the 
reasons for Rwandas slow pace in reconciliation and the implications of collective 
memory and cultural performance. 
Part IV seeks to draw out the lessons of the South African experience, particularly 
regarding the TRC, and to apply them to Rwanda. Chapter 9 restates the hypothesis and 
contrasts the two contexts, their problems and their patterns of resolution. It seeks an 
approach to conflict settlement that embodies the rule of law and mercy, involving the 
church, an eventual third party and a pattern transferable to different contexts. It sums up 
the lessons learned in South Africa, and examines whether the conditions and resources the 
TRC depended on can exist in Rwanda. It sets out suggestions for Rwanda, implying the 
use of mechanisms previously ignored. Chapter 10 summarises the major findings for 
alternative justice and genuine reconciliation and the eventual role the churches ought to 
play in post-genocide Rwanda. It clarifies the limitations of the research and the areas that 
call for further inquiry and concludes with recommendations for action. 
The next chapter seeks a thorough understanding of conflict development and various 
perceptions of conflict; it anticipates an appraisal of the South African TRC and the search 
for reconciliation in Rwanda. Building on existing experience, the research probes a way 
ahead for Rwandas pioneering venture, church capacity, culture and eventual third party.  
Chapter 2 
Conflict: Concepts and Theory 
The two conflict cases the thesis examined are African, in that both happened in Africa: 
they have few other similarities. South Africa suffered from a strong state, in the modern 
sense, imposing an extremely oppressive system over decades, which caused immense 
suffering. It moved people from their ancestral lands and culture. Discrimination and social 
engineering were based on race; Apartheid appealed to legislation and theological 
argument in justifying its practices (see Chapter 5). South Africa, however, never 
descended into genocide. Rwandas state was different  it was not strong in economic 
power, legal and administrative culture or politics. Rwanda has not known spatial 
discrimination, segregation or exclusion supported by legal and theological bases, but it 
exhibited the worst mass killing and genocide (see Chapter 7). Yet, South Africa was 
European in many respects, while Rwanda was not. South Africa was in the eye of the 
world and of the world church for decades; Rwanda was not. Nor is that surprising, as 
there are many reasons for it: most lie in historical and economic connections.  
When it comes to post-conflict reconstruction, the differences above will have 
consequences (cf. Chapters 6, 8 & 9), which might be surmised from cursory reading and 
then tested in the body of the research. For instance, in South Africa, there was always a 
rational argument going on, politically, ethnically and religiously, around the wicked 
irrationality of Apartheid, which itself purported to be susceptible to rational defence. That 
meant that there was a political culture on both sides of the conflict, which could engage in 
discussion with enemies as well as armed conflict. Conversely, in Rwanda, this was far 
from being reality before 1994. Once a genocide was perpetrated, especially at such hectic 
speed, any culture of political rationality will have been totally undermined. In the 1980s, 
people in South Africa could work towards settlement through what they called negotiated 
politics, which had plausibility there, but this is still lacking in Rwanda.  
Bearing in mind the argument above, this chapter expands on the basic concepts and 
theories relating to the genesis, development and settlement of conflicts. It seeks to answer 
the following questions: 
 What generates conflicts? Why do they arise, persist or increase?  
 When and how do racism and ethnicity evolve into conflict? 
 What do conflicts express? How do individuals and societies perceive them and 
what are their eventual functions?  
2.1 Terminology and categories of conflict 
Weeks (1994, 8) and Laue (1987, 17) claim that conflict is an escalated natural competition 
between two or more parties over resources, power and prestige. Laue suggests that the 
aim of parties may variously be to defuse, dominate, injure or destroy one another. Weeks 
(1994) found that conflict is (1) a disruption of order or a mistake in a relationship; (2) a 
battle between competing and possibly incompatible self-interests; (3) an isolated event 
that we allow to define the entire relationship; and (4) a struggle between right and wrong 
or good and evil. The most classic writers in the field are Weeks (1994) and Fisher & Ury 
(1999). Alas, Leeds (1981) and Merrills (1993) dominate the discussion because of their 
ability to connect to economic and political issues, while Vandeginste (1998a) stresses the 
cases examined here. 
Conflict may imply latent tensions or violent confrontation. It describes a situation in 
which at least two actors or their representatives pursue their perceptions of mutually 
incompatible goals by undermining each others goal-seeking capability (Sandole & 
Samdole 1987). Weeks (1994) seems to agree with Merrills (1993) that to a lesser degree, 
a conflict or dispute is a specific disagreement concerning matters of fact, law or policy 
in which a claim or assertion of one party is met with refusal, counter-claim or denial by 
another. Merrills (1993) and Macdonald (2000) suggest that critical perceptions do not 
always view the concept negatively, since there are also constructive conflicts. Most 
societies, however, perceive conflicts as negative occurrences and tend to suppress or 
avoid them. 
It is assumed that democratic societies deal with conflicts by seeking to bring grievance or 
discontent into the open, to determine the sources and to take measures for their remedy. 
Such contexts recognise elections as safety valves, which allow people to let off steam. If 
they do not, violent forms of conflict may arise as a means of self-expression and a remedy 
for anger or grievance (Leeds 1981; Weeks 1994). A multiparty system is one option to 
moderate such a situation in a self-expressive society. As Leeds (1981) stated, totalitarian 
systems provide no official, institutional way for resolving conflicts, and power struggles 
therefore take place behind the scenes; these systems are vulnerable to unexpected 
changes, often of a violent nature, resulting from previously suppressed conflict.  
There is a distinction between interest-based (objective) and value-based (subjective) 
conflicts. But, there is also an overlap between the categories. While the parties involved 
may see objective conflicts as subjective, analysts may understand the same situation 
differently and classify it according to two different categories. For instance, many writers 
interpret the Hutu-Tutsi problem as an identity crisis, relating it to Tutsi superiority (Pags 
1933), while Rwandans relate their conflict to the groups interests: the means by which to 
control power and wealth. Vansina (1998) and Overdulve (1997) assert that the literature 
has created more myths18 that became part of the political ideology and conflict in Rwanda. 
Among other ingredients of conflict are needs, power and the perception of threat (Weeks 
1994). Objective conflict is a struggle over power, security or distribution of resources 
such as wealth and land. The result will probably be victory by either one side or the other. 
The Apartheid regimes conflict with its opponent Azania Peoples Organisation (AZAPO) 
exemplified an interest-based conflict, to some extent over land. Jobs and wages, however, 
are central in South Africa, as it is a post-agrarian economy. 
Weeks (1994) states that a value is something we consider significant. It can involve a 
belief, a principle or a pattern of behaviour, and may lead to conflict. Subjective conflict is 
over different beliefs, life-styles and moral realities. It may be interpreted along class, 
racial or ethnic identity, language, gender or even generation-based lines. However, White-
Black conflicts (in most cases), and even the Hutu-Tutsi crisis (mainly at the lower levels 
of Rwandas society) fall into overlapping categories, being both interest-based and 
value-based.  
2.2 Racism, ethnicity, ethnic cleansing and genocide 
  18 In addition to Rwandas ethnic stereotype, colonial anthropologists and even missionaries asserted that 
Tutsi are different from Hutu, not only by their origin, but also in terms of their beauty, manners, political 
skills and intelligence (Pags 1933; Overdulve 1997). 
Sources of conflict also include racism and ethnicity. Bolaffi et al. (2003) seem to agree 
with Chambers Dictionary (2003) that race refers to the descendents of a common 
ancestor, especially those who inherit a common set of characteristics. Chambers defines 
racism as hatred, rivalry or bad feeling between races; it is a belief in the inherent 
superiority of some race over others, usually with the implication of a right to be dominant. 
Racism then involves discriminatory treatment based on such a belief. Scholars debates, 
however, suggest that there can also be scientific racism. Whereas scientific work seeks 
to be objective, scientific racism emerges from work that claims to be scientific while 
actually being motivated more by political opinions than scientific observations (Bolaffi 
2003). 
Yinger (1994) suggested that physically distinct races may exist in theory, but claimed that 
in reality, the boundaries between physical races have become so blurred that groups of 
humans with or without distinct phenotype are difficult to distinguish. He asserted that 
socially defined races consist of ethnic groups who are seen by themselves or by others as 
having distinct biological [and cultural] characteristics, whether or not they really form a 
distinct biological group. 
The word ethnicity derives from the Greek word : multitude, nation or people 
(Eriksen 1993 cited in Haralambos & Holborn 2000, 222 ff). Modern anthropology and 
sociology see an ethnic group as being culturally rather than physically distinctive. Yinger 
(1994) defined an ethnic group or ethnie19 as a segment of a larger society seen by others to 
be different in some combination of the following characteristics: language, religion, race, 
and ancestral homeland with its related culture; the members also perceive themselves in 
that way, and participate in shared activities built around their real or mythical common 
origin or culture. 
  19 A French term used as a synonym for ethnic community. 
Haralambos & Holborn (2000, 223) appear to agree with Yinger (1994) that any group that 
believes itself to be an ethnie and/or acts in terms of that belief might be regarded for 
certain purposes as an ethnic group. These include immigrant populations sharing a 
common former citizenship, sub-social groups sharing common ancestry and cultural 
background, and groups  whether from different cultural or societal backgrounds  
identified on the basis of language, race or religion mixed with broadly similar statuses. 
Smith (1986) suggests that an ethnie unites cultural uniqueness with historical continuity. 
The ethnie then is defined by a set of features or dimensions: a collective name, a common 
myth of descent, a shared history, a distinctive shared culture, an association with specific 
territory and a sense of solidarity. Smith (1986, 15-16) asserted, however, that only myth-
symbols last long enough to sustain an ethnie through millennia until it emerges into the 
modern world as a nation. This may explain perhaps why Hutu and Tutsi realities persist as 
ethnic groups and that old royal symbols [drums], rites, codes, and the myth of superiority 
and origin embodying the Tutsi belief do not characterise those of the Hutu (Overdulve 
1997). 
Richardson (1990 cited in Haralambos & Holborn 2000, 223-224) considers three 
categories: race, ethnicity and black/white. Yet, he finds that territorial origin (e.g., 
Bangladesh, Pakistan and Indian) and religious affiliation (e.g., Hindus, Sikhs and Muslim 
Indians) provide sub-groups within ethnic groups. His classification is more flexible and 
adaptable than others and recognises that social division between groups may be created, 
maintained and altered or challenged. However, a religion like Islam does not create a sub-
group per se but an umbrella for many activities. 
Banton (1998) suggested seven classifications: race, implying designation (e.g. Whites, 
Negroes and Indians in America), origin, social status, class, social construct (socialization, 
learning), lineage and type or subspecies. Next to Bantons classification emerged two 
theories: the first was a monogenesis theory, regarding that humans belonged to a single 
species; inspired by Biblical sources, the theory suggested that human beings have a 
common origin. According to this view, differentiations of humans occurred later, perhaps 
at the time of flood and the fall of tower of Babel, subsequently leading to distinct lineages 
corresponding to differences in physical appearances and geographical origin between 
groups of humans. Secondly, the polygenetic theory is based on the belief that humans do 
not share common origin; it asserts rather that humanity is divided into distinctive groups 
from different origins. This view influenced 19th century anthropology, which led to 
various typologies suggesting that humanity has several different origins. The theory 
gained popularity in Europe. Other theories developed defining races as subspecies. The 
latter theories combined ideas of the first two theories with Darwins theory of evolution20 
assuming a species as a class that was distinctive because its members inherited common 
characters but inherited them in different combinations, which were subject to continual 
modification.         
Hoover (1997, 3) observed that at times, confusions exist when one is attempting to 
identify groups; the confusions may lead to more troubles in terms of not knowing who 
they are, as well as suspicion, which is bad enough within the group or among sub-groups 
like Hutu and Tutsi. Such a situation is called an identity crisis. This in itself is not fatal: 
Rwanda had known such an identity crisis for hundreds of decades before 1990s, but 
without genocide. Haralambos & Holborn (2000, 199ff) asserted that racism and conflict 
  20 The theory of evolution was developed by the Englishman Charles Robert Darwin (1809-1882). He noted 
that members of the same species could breed with one another and produce fertile offspring. Yet, because 
they are constantly changing and evolving, different branches, subgroups or subspecies may develop. For 
example, geographically separated groups within a species may breed only within that group and develop 
their own distinctive characteristics (Haralambos & Holborn 2000, 201).  
between ethnic and national groups has been a feature of human societies for a long time. 
Generally, biological theories of race attempt to establish a relationship between phenotype 
(physical characteristics such as hair and skin colour) and genotype, stressing the 
underlying genetic differences between groups of humans.  
Brown (1997 cited in Haralambos & Holborn 2000, 234-236) found three origins or factors 
of conflict between ethnic groups: security systems, domestic factors and mutual 
perception. First, Brown suggested that if ethnic groups live close to one another (as in 
Rwanda), conflict would be likely to occur, depending on the nature of the security 
systems in which the groups operate. However, conflict would not break out if national, 
regional or international authorities were strong enough to prevent it by controlling the 
potentially opposing groups. With no such control, conflict can also occur if one group 
believes it is in their interest to resort to violence (This is illustrated by the invasion of the 
Tutsi group in 1990 in Rwanda). Brown (1997) also suggests that conflict develops and 
persists when it is difficult to distinguish between the offensive and defensive forces of a 
potential adversary. He claims that groups that are able to organise state structure faster 
than others may seek to take advantage of the situation by seizing land.  
Second, domestic factors, including ways in which states address the concerns of their 
constituents, the impact of group relations and/or democratisation of the groups, may 
create ethnic conflict. Brown (1997) asserted that nationalistic sentiment is aroused in 
situations where people feel vulnerable because they feel they lack a strong state to protect 
them. Some analyses suggest that the 1994s genocide in Rwanda falls into this category. If 
a vulnerable group finds itself in a state dominated by another hostile ethnic group, conflict 
may occur. Sometime the group is blamed for failure by the other and responds by seeking 
to establish its own state, or ethnic nationalism evolves into trying to establish a nation-
state based around a particular ethnic group. 
Brown (1997) explained that processes of democratisation can produce problems in multi-
ethnic societies when new arrangements are being discussed, if there are ethnic groups who 
feel that they have been mistreated (like the Tutsi). They may seek retribution for past 
wrongs (as in the case of Abanyenduga [Hutu southerners] in Rwanda) and/or feel unable 
to work with members of the other group in a democratic system. In addition, politicians 
may seek to exploit ethnic differences to increase their support, and by so doing, they will 
heighten peoples consciousness of those differences and increase the significance they 
attach to them. 
Third, Weeks (1994) and Brown (1997) observed that the way in which ethnic groups 
perceive one another might generate conflicts. Hostility can increase through myths and 
false histories, which distort and demonise members of another group. This became 
obvious from 1990 in Rwanda; Hutu from the CDR (Coalition for the Defence of the 
Republic in Rwanda) saw themselves as sole defenders of the nation. Myths about other 
ethnic groups are likely to develop where an authoritarian regime has suppressed the 
histories of ethnic minorities and the critical examination of the past, leaving little 
challenge to the myths. This is highlighted by the situation in Rwanda in the 1990s, before 
the genocide. There was a missed opportunity, when the Habyarimana regime suppressed 
the request for refugees to return and resisted subsequent challenges that sought Hutu-Tutsi 
mediation.  
Richardson (1990) highlighted the advantage of stressing ethnicity rather that race. He 
noted that ethnicity is based upon cultural differences and highlights socio-cultural criteria, 
unlike the conventional race system. Thus, ethnicity accommodates a wide range of groups 
while the other two categories  race and white/black  do not (Haralambos & Holborn 
2000, 223). The common criterion by which to define an ethnic group, according to Brown 
(1997 cited in Haralambos & Holborn 2000) is to establish a name that identifies the 
group, whether the group believes that they have a common ancestry, sharing beliefs about 
their collective past and the culture passed on through combination of language, religion, 
laws and customs, dress and music, craft and architecture, and even food. Ethnic groups 
are also identified by the sense of adherence to a specific territory: if members hold such 
beliefs, they belong to an ethnic group.  
Hastings (1997) proposed a broader definition of ethnicity. He stated,  
By ethnicity, I mean the common culture whereby a group of people share the basics of life  
their cloth and clothes, the style of houses, the way they relate to domestic animals and to 
agricultural land, the essential work which shapes the functioning of a society and how roles 
are divided between men and women, the way defence is organised against intruders, the way 
property and authority are handed on, the rituals of birth, marriage and death, the customs of 
courtship, the proverbs, songs, lullabies, shared history and myths, the beliefs in what follows 
death and God, gods or other spirits (1997, 167). 
Ethnocentrism or ethnocentricity is the belief in the superiority of ones own cultural group 
or society and corresponding dislike or misunderstanding of other groups. In this way, 
ethnocentrism is similar to racism. Conflict between such groups may take a wide variety 
of forms through political processes, with or without violence being involved.  
The causes of conflict vary and take various forms, ranging from simple individual 
disagreement to group violence, war, ethnic cleansing and large-scale genocide. According 
to Ahmed (2002, 215ff.), Marxist theory asserted that only backward societies cling to a 
savage, tribal and primitive past. This referred mainly to Africa and Asia. Marxists asserted 
also that religion and ethnicity are the remains of discredited feudal and traditional order. 
Therefore, they believed that religious and ethnic identities would fade as the world moved 
towards modernity and people became equal citizens. Bowen (2002, 334) argued that there 
is a shared idea suggesting that the worlds current conflicts are fuelled by age-old ethnic 
loyalties and cultural differences. This notion, however, misrepresents the genesis of most 
conflicts and ignores the abilities of diverse people to coexist. 
 With regard to Rwanda, most research agrees that colonial powers and national 
leaderships succeeding them forced every person to bear an ethnic identity that determined 
ones place within the system. Through this division, colonial power sought partners from 
local groups, including local Christian groups. Explorers, anthropologist and missionaries 
were often instruments for the deviation of local reality. For example, the Englishman J. H. 
Speke (1864) discovered different groups of people in Central and Eastern Africa, 
including the Hutu and Tutsi. He suggested that the Hutu origin was from the Bantu of 
central and equatorial forests of Africa, while he associated the Watusi (Tutsi) with the 
Wahuma (Hima) and other peoples from the Abyssinian land and even Asia. Speke (1864, 
334-335) asserted:  another offshoot of the Cushite  Abyssinians, whom, crossing the 
Nile, took the name of Wahuma, and have spread as far as down south as Fipa, where their 
name, in course of time, had changed from Wahuma to Watusi  Later writings on 
Rwanda were eventually influenced by Spekes theory.  
Hastings asserted that Rwandas case is different from others: distinctions remained and 
hardened. 
Tutsi immigrant pastoral conquerors were unusual in that, while adopting the language of the 
previous Hutu occupants and to some extent even marrying with them, they failed to achieve 
an effective ethnic fusion; either because the time-scale was too short, the physical and 
occupational differences between the two groups too large or, even, because the relative 
number of Tutsi may have been more considerable than in most such cases (1997, 170-171). 
Bowen (2002, 336-337) stated that, In Rwanda and Burundi, German and Belgian 
colonizers admired the taller people called Tutsi, who formed a small minority in both 
colonies. He argued that colonial discrimination against Hutus created what had not 
existed before: a sense of collective Hutu identity, a Hutu cause. Around 1959, Hutu  
encouraged by Europeans (Belgians) who were then deserting Rwanda  rebelled against 
the Tutsi rule. Later, in 1990, the Hutu rule provoked Tutsi resentment and rebellion 
against the Hutu-led regime. 
Ethnic cleansing, like genocide in Rwanda, results from extension of such resentments. 
Hastings (1997, 113), however, claimed that genocide is always a decision of politicians, 
whether in fifteenth-century Spain or twentieth-century Germany, Bosnia or Rwanda. Fein 
(2002, 77) agrees with Hastings (1997, 113) that genocide is primarily a crime of the state 
(or other leadership).  
The Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide of 15 April 
1975, article II, defines genocide as acts committed with the intent to destroy, in whole or 
part, a national, ethnical, racial or religious group (United Nations 1996, 22). Hinton 
(2002, 216) asserts that ethnic cleansing is the sustained suppression by all means 
possible of an ethnically or religiously different group with the ultimate aim to expel or 
eliminate it altogether. Fein shows that among other objectives of the genocide ordered by 
Hitler was cultural discrimination. Thus, the genocide was aimed at both social 
disintegration and biological destruction of the group (2002, 77).   
Cultural discrimination or cultural genocide may be a tactic to assimilate or destroy a 
group, while ethnocide is a deliberate destruction of the culture of a distinct group without 
physical annihilation of its members (Fein 2002, 77). In the 1990s, in Rwanda, the killings 
by Interahamwe (people with the same aim) targeted at groups associated with the RPF 
(mostly Tutsi) were tactics that eventually forced them to accept the Hutu leadership. 
Similarly, the RPF killed groups associated with the then ruling Party (mainly Hutu).  
In Rwanda, the group annihilation was put in motion following political orders and fear  
in this case, Hutu, who were convinced that killing the Tutsi could stop the dangerous 
power of the RPA taking over their country. Some parallels may be found in other contexts 
such as South Africa (where freedom fighters targeted the Whites or their associates, and 
vice versa), where race was the driving force of discrimination. However, in some 
countries (including South Africa), the ultimate reaction has stopped before it explodes, 
with antagonists choosing to negotiate agreements.  
The state/leadership may attempt to minimise the destructive aspects of conflict and 
maximise the benefits of its constructive aspects for its society; however, it may end in 
dysfunctional or functional conflict. Although situations continue to evolve over time, a 
dysfunctional conflict might cause loss of life, especially when open violence breaks out. 
Functional conflict, in contrast, is creative and simply reflects differences: the variety of 
human opinions and activities. Thus, suppressing a conflict altogether may lead the society 
into a static situation (Leeds 1981; Weeks 1994; Macdonald 2000). 
Sometime, conflicts arise between similar groups. This is called symmetric conflict and 
often leads to conflicts that are more subjective than objective. A conflict between different 
groups with unequal power (such as states and individuals) is called asymmetric. Such 
conflict is mostly implicit and difficult to detect (Leeds 1981; Fisher & Ury 1999 passim; 
Weeks 1994).  
Depending on its nature and intensity, a conflict may be treated as constructive and benefit 
either sides readjustment to a situation. Suppressed conflict may lead to destruction, 
underdevelopment or to maintaining bad rapport among people. It is not always true, 
however, that the end justifies the means or that potentially positive results legitimise an 
unfair or cruel process. For instance, the Rwandans conflict, the RPF seeking Tutsi 
refugees repatriation and democratisation, provoked the genocide (1994), while there were 
promising peaceful means. 
2.3 Concepts and perceptions of conflict 
Researchers claim that conflict at most stages has certain predictable dynamics relating to 
social structures, processes and problems. Three main stages characterize conflict 
development (Lederach 1992a). (1) The early stage is a disagreement that transforms itself 
into personal antagonism. The difference over a specific problem evolves into charges 
against the other person and deductions about the persons character, intentions and 
motives. Instead of focusing on the problem they share, one side views the other as the 
problem. (2) As the conflict intensifies, it changes in respect to other related issues. The 
conflict may emerge around a single issue; then, over time, other problems become 
important. Subsequent confusion and unmanageability of the situation arise. (3) 
Communication between the opponents becomes less and less direct and increasingly 
inaccurate; their contact and dialogue decline, while contact and dialogue increase between 
those who agree with each other. Increasing emotion decreases the ability to listen and to 
communicate (Leeds 1981; Lederach 1992a; Weeks 1994). 
In Figure 2.1, point A indicates that there is little interaction. Then, conflict arises because 
of limited communication or lack of mutual understanding. Increased conflict does, 
however, serve to get us to think, to help us realise what the other person believes. This is 
not always a negative aspect; it may be a positive impulse pushing one to understand the 
others feelings and both parties to express more explicitly the truth about their identity, 
beliefs and understanding. Point B represents the maximum level of conflict intensity and 
emotional involvement that one can handle productively. If the conflict is not handled well 
at that point, communication will produce less and less understanding. Point C symbolises 
great intensity of conflict, emotional involvement and complete inability to listen, 
communicate and understand. An eye for an eye dynamics begins; this is what scientists 
call reciprocal causation. People start responding not to the original issue, but rather to 
the most recent response received from the other side (Leeds 1981). 
When problems intensify, polarisation sets in and individuals feel the need to move into 
one camp or the other. It becomes difficult to find neutral ground. While moderate and 
stabilising people have less influence at this level, extremists emerge and become key 
power players (Lederach 1992a). Members of the CDR (Coalition for the Defence of the 
Republic) party in Rwanda exemplified this in the early 1990s (Chapter 7 expands on this). 
These changes produce outcomes that distort the relationship and rarely resolve the 
essential issues. They preserve harmful components of conflict that drive out those holding 
any potential for regulating interaction. Extremism replaces moderation; antagonism 
replaces mere disagreement; assumptions and attributing motives replace dialogue and 
listening. Original concerns are lost in the preoccupation with responding to the latest 
offence and individual groups are increasingly considered as the problem (Lederach 1992a; 
Fisher & Ury 1999); such is the case in Rwanda, particularly after the genocide (see 
Chapter 8.5ff).  
Figure 2.1: Conflict Intensification and Emotional Involvement 
                  Here the conflict 
                      can be handled positively 
    Ability to                      B High    Peak 
    communicate                 
    accurately and              
    understand     
                               Low A  Conflict Intensification and Emotional Involvement  C High   
<Adapted from MCS 2000, 72 [Lederach 1992, MCS, Conciliation Quarterly Vol 6 no 3]> 
Some studies of dispute resolution make related observations, with more legalistic 
substance. Weeks (1994) agrees with Ury, Brett and Goldberg (cited in Hamber 1995, 4) 
that interests (needs), rights and power are three basic elements of dispute. In resolving a 
dispute, the parties may choose to focus their attention on one or more of these elements.21 
They may seek to (1) reconcile their underlying interests (2) determine who is right, and/or 
(3) determine who is more powerful.  
Judicial settlements are concerned with the second option: that of correlating some 
independent standards with perceived legitimacy or fairness in order to determine who is 
right. Not all disputes are suitable for adjudication, however; litigation is the exception, not 
the rule, and most conflicts are settled by other means. If the dispute engages associations 
or is an international matter, litigation is a way of depoliticising it. For example a state 
which goes to the Court is signalling its desire to reduce tension and pursue a peaceful 
settlement (Merrills 1993, 149). Litigation does not always aim at a definitive settlement, 
but serves many functions, such as narrowing the conflict or moving it nearer to resolution 
(Merrills 1993; Vandeginste 1998). 
2.4 Conflict genesis and development 
Broadly speaking, four schools of thought  functionalist, Marxist, Weberian and feminist 
 contributed to the knowledge of cause and development of conflict. Functionalists stress 
the importance of consent in society and suggest that conflict is a result of temporary 
disturbances in the social system. Hegel (1770-1831) represents, however, the whole 
human history as a series of dynamic conflicts. Likewise most Marxist theories suggest 
  21 Weeks (1994, 33-61) calls them conflict ingredients, to which he adds diversity and differences, 
perceptions, values and principles, feelings and emotions and internal conflicts. 
that conflict is a common feature in society and is inevitable, not a temporary aberration. 
Max maintained that as labour produced wealth in a slave society while lords owned the 
means of production, conflict was unlikely. Conversely, in feudal society, lords did not 
own the means of production: they exploited their serfs. Likewise, modern employers 
exploit their employees in capitalist society (Haralambos & Holborn 2000). This 
relationship based on means of production and labour  as in pre-independent Rwanda and 
mostly featuring in Apartheid  creates contradiction and conflicts of interest.  
Although most conflict theories draw back to the work of Marx (1818-83), some scholars 
including Collins (1975), Duke (1979) and Scimecca (1981)  both latter cited in Scimecca 
(1993, 214)  suggest that the work of Weber (1864-1920) offers a much more 
comprehensive and accurate description of the nature of conflict in society. However, the 
application of Marxs theory helps more to grasp the cases of South Africa and Rwanda. 
New research in conflict has classified theory types  relating to origins of conflict  in 
three schools identified with (1) inherency theories, (2) contingent and (3) interactionist 
approaches. The typology is more useful in conflict settlement than establishing the cause.  
Tidwell (2001, 42f) asserts that inherency theories built on the works of Thomas Hobbes 
(1974) and Sigmund Freud (1990). The theories suggest that aggression can be intrinsic to 
human behaviour and serves as a fundamental and essential means by which human protect 
and enhance their existence. Aggression then, from this perspective, is carried out as self-
preservation. Conversely, contingent theories assert that aggression is not innate, but its 
expression depends upon factors external to the person. These theories suggest that 
conflict may occur through a scarcity of and competition for resources, or through its 
maldistribution (Tidwell 2001, 48f). Therefore, supporters of the latter theories suggest that 
aggression is always a consequence of frustration. The interactionist approaches combine 
elements of the two previous schools (inherency, and contingent theories, respectively 
termed nature and nurture). However, interactionists do not debate the two types; they 
rather focus on how both genetics and social interactions commingle to create human 
behaviour. Interactionists claim that individuals are often pacific, but violence also as such 
is not aberrant. They suggest that human behaviour varies, with impulse that is often not 
clear. Yet, conflict may be one, but not the only response, to unmet needs. Interactionists 
argue that collective violence is either reactionary, or coolly calculated; again the tendency 
to violence may be affected by cultural learning, as it may be tempered by inherent impulse 
(Tidwell 2001, 55-58). Perhaps, this was the case in South Africa and Rwanda, mainly 
towards the end of the last century. 
When the dominant class  such as the Afrikaners in South Africa  seeks to hold on to 
control of the means of production, it often does so by exerting oppression and 
exploitation. Marx asserted that such a situation could not last. The lower class seeks 
change, whilst the dominant class creates ideas that aim to justify their power and privilege 
and to conceal the basis of exploitation and oppression on which their dominance is built 
(Haralambos & Holborn 2000). Marx (cited in Haralambos & Holborn 2000; see also 
Scimecca 1993, 215) referred to the dominant ideas as ruling class ideology, which is a 
distortion of the true nature of society.  
The search to monopolise the means of production (land, power, value, knowledge 
technology etc.) and to create ideology keeps conflict alive. Weber (1947) agreed with 
Marx on the idea of classes in economic terms, but did not find evidence to support the 
idea of polarisation of classes. Therefore, Weber rejected Marxs view of the inevitability 
of conflict mainly through proletarian revolution. Weber asserted that order rather than 
conflict prevails, but this order is achieved through the use of power to suppress or co-opt 
the underlying conflict (Scimecca 1993, 215). Feminists, however, see society as divided 
into different groups; with the divisions being between men and women (not classes). 
Feminists assert that conflicts arise because men seek to monopolise all positions of 
political power and better-paid jobs, and so to exploit women. 
So far, most research suggests that the causes of conflict entail interests (needs), rights, 
power, diversity and differences, perceptions, values and principles, feelings and emotions, 
and individual maladjustment (Hamber 1995; Weeks 1994). Economic and development 
specialists argue that current wars in developing countries are both sources and 
consequences of underdevelopment. 
When a large group of people organises itself to cause physical damage to life and the 
property of others, war occurs. As incidences of large-scale violence have followed those 
inspired by the Cold War, it is assumed that ... new conflicts have emerged with the 
subsequent relaxation of the big power controls (Stewart et al. 1997, 11-12). Direct ill 
effects of conflicts (killing or maiming people), as well as indirect adverse effects, are 
frequent consequences of economic changes and disruption. In many cases, it is difficult to 
draw a clear dividing line between national and international conflicts, since foreign 
countries can take a strong role in national conflicts (Stewart et al. 1997, 11-12) e.g., in 
defence of an existing state or attack against allies. Certain wars safeguard foreign lifelines 
or influence, or secure a countrys trade routes (e.g. the interest of Britain in the Suez 
Canal as the main route to India and the Far East).  
Most modern wars intend to defend countries interests or honour because of existing links 
between the countries involved. Former colonies often get support from metropolitan states 
in attacking or defending others. Domestic issues play a part, however, such as the lack of 
cohesiveness or the unpopularity of a regime, as in the cases of South Africa in the 1980s 
and in Rwanda in the early 1990s. Yet, it is important to distinguish between civil wars and 
crime. Civil war is organised to challenge the governments authority, and aims to 
overthrow or change the regime, whereas crime per se is not designed to initiate political 
change (Stewart et al. 1997, 12; Shaw 2003).  
The causes of wars may be economic need, in most cases overlapping with socio-
demographic realities relating to land and natural resources. Such situations promote arms 
manufacturing and primarily the Western arms businesses, military recruitment and 
warlords become active as a new market is opened up. Clear examples include the 
Rwandan conflict in the 1990s and subsequent war in the Congo. Other motivations for 
warfare are the existence of psychological, ideological and cultural factors. 
Ross (1993, 60f) seems to agree with Leeds (1981, 204) that aggressive impulses within 
the personality or the desire for excitement and escape from boredom may lead people to 
want war. Unbalanced psychological behaviour may result in faulty communication during 
decision-making, when one party misperceives unwelcome information because of 
previously held principles and interprets it in a way that achieves harmony with pre-
determined assumptions. New democratic theories and multiparty impulses in Africa often 
confirm this pattern. In the same way, capitalist and communist ideologies have spread and 
brought countries into conflict in the Third World as an aspect of the Cold War. 
Ideological factors are most active when there is a desire to defend, propagate or 
proselytise such creeds outside ones territory. 
The concept of functionality promoted by Coser (cited in Tidwell 1998, 33) identifies 
conflict as the clash of values and interests, the tension between what is and what some 
groups feel ought to be. Indeed, todays conflicts often presuppose cultural influences, 
which often embody ideological and psychological as well as economic factors. There may 
be passive, distinct subcultures within a state, based on language, belief, identity and other 
elements different from those of the dominant culture.22 Conflict arises as the other groups 
experience threatens their identity or existence; genocide and ethnic elimination may 
emerge in this context. This may be the reason why deception often arises when defending 
minority groups. For example, the minority rights argument in Rwanda refers to the Tutsi 
group  which is not a minority  helping them to get alleged justice, whilst ignoring the 
true minority of the Twa.  
Conflict is likely to happen between equally balanced groups such as Afrikaners and 
English speakers in South Africa, or the Walloons and Flemish in Belgium.23 Sometimes 
conflict is accentuated by the existence of racist or biological theories which assert that 
certain races are superior to others and more suited to rule (Leeds 1981, 205). Such a 
situation occurred when Western anthropologists and the Academy of Colonial Sciences 
(Belgian) polarised the relations between Hutu and Tutsi in Rwanda by applying foreign 
theories to the country, favouring a Tutsi culture. European literature sustained the myth of 
supremacy and born to rule based on phenotype, i.e. grounds for Tutsi pride, which 
alienated the other groups from power and the countrys assets (Maquet 1961; Vansina 
1962; Reyntjens 1985; Newbury 1988). The new construct has shaped the current conflict 
in the Great Lakes Region, but it is particularly deep-seated in Rwanda and Burundi.  
According to Marxist analysis wars are features of human behaviour, which develop with 
the rise of private property (as sources of wealth), and the division of society into classes 
with different privileges. Generally, socio-economic factors refer to stratification problems, 
  22 Researchers have distorted Rwandas case, due to either the lack of transparency or objectivity of 
informants. Another example is that in Rwanda, the first investigations were made among the elite (mostly 
Tutsi) - the only people Western anthropologists met at the Kings court and missionary stations (Overdulve 
(1997). The elite presented the version that preserved their beliefs and supremacy. The low class of poor 
Tutsi and farming Hutu were not involved. These factors twisted the understanding of the socio-cultural 
fabric of Rwandan society and created more conflicts. 
 23 A joke exemplifies the dormant conflict in Belgium: a signpost was put up at the end of the Walloon 
district reading, Here we speak French. The Flemish group then set up a signpost on their side reading, 
Here we do not talk; we work. 
inequalities in wealth distribution, power, prestige and widespread injustices, either 
domestically or internationally.24 In such a context, the outbreak of violence arises as a 
reaction to a sense of deprivation. Groups in less advantageous positions in education, 
employment, status, wealth and particularly political influence no longer tolerate the status 
quo and look for change (Leeds 1981; Weeks 1994). The co-operation between Tutsi and 
Hutu Banyanduga (southerners) in Rwanda against the Habyarimana regime and Akazu25 in 
the 1990s exemplified such discontent. Similar relations between South African Blacks and 
Whites led to a dissatisfaction that dismantled the Apartheid structures (Davenport & 
Saunders 2000; Gibson 2004). Thus, direct and structural violence may make people react 
with violence.  
Direct violence refers to physical injury, where identifiable people or organisations (such 
as former South African Police and Umkhonto weSizwe, or the Interahamwe in Rwanda) 
are responsible for the violence. Structural or indirect violence refers to living conditions, 
e.g. poverty, and physical or mental harm with the result that life expectancy is short and 
creative motivation reduced. In such a case, there is often no person or organisation to 
blame, since the problem may result from inherent inequalities in society or other welfare 
issues. Curle (cited in Leeds 1981) suggested listing under structural violence political 
oppression, economic exploitation, and the emotional manipulation or degradation of 
others. In Rwanda, the MRND regime that promoted the supremacy of Bakiga 
(Northerners) but excluded the Banyanduga and Tutsi exemplifies structural violence. A 
similar situation can be found within the current ethnic drive marking the RPF-led 
government that favours whosoever belongs to the Tutsi group (Lemarchand 1997, 69). 
  24 Chapter 7 investigates an aspect of this type in relation to Rwanda, referring to the North-South and Hutu-
Tutsi divides. 
  25 A term (literally meaning household or small house) used to typify Habyarimanas influential group from 
the north and his wifes kin. 
The distinction between direct and structural violence suggests that violence and conflict 
are broad notions, often ill defined or misunderstood. 
On one hand, a few writers in the social sciences, such as Storr and Ardrey (1966 cited in 
Leeds 1981), held that there is an instinctive or basic drive in man, which orientates him to 
fight, kill, and destroy. They believed that this instinct has creative potential as well, when 
diverted to dimensions such as areas of cultural or intellectual accomplishment. Other 
authors assert that crimes originate from a lack of self-discipline and parental control. The 
holders of this view assert that human nature is not capable of reform, but is susceptible to 
self-discipline, and that mans natural instincts will find undesirable outlets unless 
controlled (Leeds 1981, 208 f).  
On the other hand, psychologists such as Montagu (cited in Leeds 1981) assert that 
aggression is like other forms of behaviour, learned rather than inborn or natural: 
aggression arises from unresolved emotional conflict, or out of a sense of alienation, 
frustration with someone or a society as a whole or its government (Adorno et al. 1950 
cited in Jary & Jary 1995; Zartman & Rasmussen 1997). A person unable to take action 
against the cause of the discontent might find an outlet in aggressive behaviour: this is the 
basis of frustration-aggression-displacement theory. For example, discontent may be due 
to poor living and environmental conditions, or disagreement with prevailing moral 
standards, political culture, beliefs, inadequate opportunities to enable change, adjustment, 
improvement, etc. (Rapoport 1989, 35ff; Ross 1993, 60ff). Overdulve suggested that the 
1994 killings in Rwanda resulted from Hutu frustration (as a reaction), entrenched by Tutsi 
oppression (in the past) and their increasing influence through international connections 
(interview, 5 August 2000). 
Concisely, conflict originates from either an individuals psychological maladjustment or 
from socio-economic deprivation (injustice or unequal rights), political fanaticism, 
stress/tension, boredom, over-population and unstable gender relationships or reaction to 
political, racial or religious tyranny (Weeks 1994; Zartman & Rasmussen 1997). Thus, 
conflict may be inherent, reactionary, or coolly calculated. It is imperative, then, to identify 
the root causes, forms and evolution of a conflict in order to understand how to tackle it. 
This process is essential particularly for situations such as in Rwanda and South Africa, 
where the conflicts build-up from old, deep-seated hatred and abuses also nourished by 
ideologies and traditions.  
2.4.1 Conflict dynamics 
Conflict dynamics is the study of the identifiable patterns in conflict behaviour and the 
various stages involved (Chambers 2003). It studies how forces emerge, change and shift 
in relation to one another and identifies the relevant parties and interests. It also explores 
conflict change and productivity with regard to emotional, physical, economic, moral 
forces etc., and their inter-relatedness. 
The easiest moment to identify a conflict is when two parties align against each other in 
accusing one another or in defending themselves. They express grievance, its causes and 
objectives, and might seek agreement. Agreement at one level may not resolve the wider 
conflict. It was easy to associate the South African conflict with Whites-Blacks issue 
because of its clear nature and its structure of injustice and exploitation (Tutu 1999; TRC 
Final Report vol. 1, 1998), but also by the open antagonism expressed by the two groups. 
By contrast, it remains more difficult to grasp, explain and resolve Rwandas conflict, 
given divergences in the ways in which conflicting sides and intervening forces  the 
media, the national elite, and diplomatic and foreign analyses  interpret the reality 
(Sibomana 1999), and perhaps because of their involvement: there are no clear cut 
answers.  
Stages of conflict vary in accordance with time sequences, from the latent state to the 
period of solution, as the trajectory in Figure 2.2 illustrates. If a potential conflict situation 
can be identified while it is latent and brought into the open, the parties to the dispute can 
be clearly identified and their aims known, which will help in solving the problem (Leeds 
1981, 209). A conflict situation has got out of control if it results in direct violence. It is 
important therefore to investigate which methods are best able to help reduce the conflict 
before it has reached this stage. 
Figure 2.2: Time Sequence of Conflict Development 
       Escalation                                                           De-escalation             
                             A        Time Sequence                        C 
(Latent conflict)        (Parties identified)      (Aims known)        (Solution) 
<Adapted from Leeds 1981, 209> 
Leeds (1981) suggested that when crucial values are at stake and the time for reaching 
required decisions is perceived to be too short, a crisis is likely to arise. Under such 
conditions, insecurity and tensions build up and individuals performance declines, due to 
factors such as a heavy workload and reduced sleep resulting in fatigue. During this time, a 
number of gifted people are liable to become victims of emotional perceptions, even if they 
may be working hard for the interests of all sides. The atmosphere can greatly affect the 
interpretation of information, which is often selected only to confirm rather than challenge 
peoples earlier beliefs and/or prejudices. At that time, decision-makers may attempt to 
speed up decision-making with a small group of people and reject wider collaboration. 
This may lead people to attempt to bargain over their position, which constitutes a negative 
factor if mediation is to be effective (Leeds 1981; Fisher & Ury 1999). 
2.4.2 Functions of conflict 
Conflicts usually have negative functions, but positive functions may also result. They 
often bring a change of social organisation among groups or neighbourhoods. A conflict 
helps positively to establish ones personal identity and autonomy. At the earliest stage, it 
enables one to assert personal identity as distinct from the aspirations, beliefs and 
behaviour of ones neighbours. Moments of conflict demonstrate to parties which of their 
relationships are intimate and secure. Coser (1956, 33ff) claims that conflicts are group 
binding and group preserving. Yet, De Klerk (e-mail to T. Stove, 24 January 2000) 
asserted that honesty is an integral part of a strong relationship. This situation enables 
parties to share their feelings of both love and anger, and in this way they can measure the 
depth of their relationships. Thus, conflict may help to improve or generate new 
relationships. 
Conflict establishes and maintains balance of power, and interest in unity of the enemy. 
The closer the relationship the more intense the conflict can be. Conflict with out-groups, 
however, increases internal cohesion and defines group structure. Thus, conflict creates 
associations and coalitions (Coser 1956, 67ff). It has been proved that sharing common 
experiences from a conflict may serve as a safety-valve mechanism to let out excessive 
steam that otherwise would endanger human lives. The result is sustained relationships 
and an appreciation of the power of ones opponents, which can work positively in the 
redistribution of power and adjustment of societal structure (Coser 1956, 39ff). In the wake 
of democratisation, South Africans applied these practices, whilst Rwandans have not 
embraced this option, which was probably suitable for authentic Gacaca (culture 
community-based method of disputes resolution in Rwanda). If it prevails, a conflict may 
end in the re-establishing of boundaries among people, clarifying how everyone has an 
active part to play. Conversely, a resolved conflict may also unite individuals or groups 
(Leeds 1981; Leary & Hay 2000). 
In short, the major cause of conflict is unjust distribution of rights, power and wealth, or 
unmet needs in society. Again, conflicts arise, develop and persist because of limited 
communication or lack of mutual understanding. Conflicts then may be perceived as 
expressions of peoples grievances, dissatisfaction or of suppressed reality. Generally, 
conflicts are perceived negatively in society. They may, however, bring positive results, 
creating, modifying or clarifying rules and institutions. Developing cohesion or beliefs, 
such coalitions of groups or individuals may encourage those who were not part of the 
entity to grasp its meaning and become involved or interested in it. Yet, an open conflict 
may trigger the opportunity to identify setback and reconcile lasting enmity. Moreover, a 
conflict that is resolved may offer opportunities for development and positive change.
Chapter 3 
Methods of Reduction and Resolution of Conflicts 
We all manage conflicts at some level and at specific times, not necessarily seeking 
resolution but tackling the crisis in one way or another. Fisher & Ury (1999) state that 
whether we are conscious of it or not, we are all negotiators. This chapter answers the 
following question: How do different people deal with conflict and subsequent pain?  
3.1 General considerations  
Ury, Brett & Goldberg (1988, 3ff.) suggest that in resolving a dispute, the parties may 
choose to focus their attention on one or more of the basic factors  rights, power or 
interests  (1) reconciling their underlying interests, (2) determining who is right, and/or 
(3) discovering who is more powerful. Conflict management and conflict resolution are 
general terms that refer to the handling of conflicts. Fisher et al. (2000, 7) state that 
conflict management aims to limit and avoid future violence by promoting positive 
behavioural changes in the parties involved. Laue (1987, 18) asserts that we talk of 
conflict resolution, not conflict solution, since conflict may never be solved. Conflict 
resolution addresses the causes of conflict while seeking to build new and lasting 
relationships between hostile groups. The simplest method is conflict settlement, which 
Fisher et al. (2000) suggest aims to end violent behaviour by reaching a peace agreement. 
However, there are other methods of dealing with conflict. 
Conflict prevention is anything that may help to stop conflict from happening or prevent 
future outbreaks (Stove 2000; Fisher et al. 2000, 7). Peacekeeping force is one form of 
conflict prevention, usually aimed at averting escalation. This name refers especially to UN 
Blue Helmets and regional organisations. Lederach (1997) suggests that other preventive 
forms include education for peace, moral teaching, etc., but most measures comprise a 
certain degree of restraint.  
One of the ways of dealing with less violent conflict is transformation. This method helps 
people to develop and understand that conflict is normal and potentially healthy. Fisher et 
al. (2000, 7) assert that the method addresses the wider social and political sources of a 
conflict and seeks to transform the negative energy of war into positive social and political 
change. Macdonald (2000) suggests that transformative mediation techniques in 
alternative dispute resolution (ADR) stress the process rather than the result and are 
mostly used in social service resolution of family conflict situations. According to 
Scimecca (1993, 211), ADR  sometimes called delegalization  represents a movement 
away from formal adversarial proceedings [and strict punishment] on the part of the courts, 
towards informal processes: alternative or neighbourhood justice justice. Harrington (1985, 
1&11-33) states that as a reform, the movement emphasizes the need to shift resources and 
approach away from formal adversary proceedings and towards informalism and 
mediation. 
While the general term conflict resolution implies acts aimed at settling conflicts, 
reconciliation goes further, stressing understanding and healing, leading to forgiveness and 
the renewal of relationships. It embodies moral/spiritual and (mostly) cultural and 
economic elements (Shriver 1995; Schreiter 2002). Schreiter (2002) states that 
reconciliation must consist of both pragmatic strategies and spirituality. It is often reduced, 
however, to community building, regulation of social behaviour, moral confession 
(repentance and forgiveness), mutual coexistence, dissolution of conflicting identities, or 
meeting of opponents (individuals or groups) seeking to amend their relationships. The 
etymological meaning of reconciliation implies the meeting of opponents. National 
reconciliation requires events of that nature, marking the start of the process and a pact.  
In Africa, traditional mechanisms handle conflict by aiming to restore good relationships 
between conflicting parties and reintegrating individuals into society. The aim of a process 
is to reunite and re-establish good relations between former enemies. In Kinyarwanda, the 
word kunga (reunite) means both to heal physical fractures and to reconcile. Ubwiyunge (in 
Kinyarwanda), ukubuyisana (in Zulu) and upatanisho (in Swahili) render the full notion of 
reconciliation. The process seeks to locate and ascertain the degree of guilt and in response 
perform a ritual signalling repentance and forgiveness. These responses seal the act of 
reconciliation. Unlike tribunals, cultural mechanisms do not stress factual accounts, guilt or 
penalty, but focus on repentance in exchange for forgiveness, which guarantees the 
restoration of peace (Friedmann 1990 cf. LeBaron 2002). Traditional mechanisms also deal 
with conflicts without explicitly envisaging their positive impact.  
Nowadays, formal negotiation and mediation may involve some form of inquiry, 
eventually leading to conciliation and arbitration or adjudication (Vandeginste 1998a; 
Macdonald 2000). Where basic laws are violated, the state by definition has a clear part 
and duty to intervene in the situation when the conflict is likely to have serious 
consequences, when widespread violence is likely or when no other group is able to handle 
the situation. In this case, force (police and court prosecution) may settle the situation. 
Dealing with dispute, particularly in small social units, Macdonald (2000) prefers to use 
the ADR approach, which may involve negotiation, conciliation, mediation, arbitration, 
transformative mediation, mini-trials, private judging and summary jury trials. ADR does 
not imply compulsory litigation and prevention, but seeks harmonious relationships and 
progress. In the field of negotiation, Fisher & Ury (1999) advocate the search for the best 
alternative to a negotiated agreement (BATNA). They assert that the reason for 
negotiating is to produce something better than the results obtainable without negotiating. 
Ones BATNA, then, is the standard against which any proposed agreement should be 
measured. 
Actually, most resolutions require confrontation between conflicting sides, which may opt 
for negotiations and even concessions in order to find a middle ground: that is, a 
compromise or a give-and-take process, like the one that led to South Africas settlement. 
Although the compromise puts conflicting sides on the same footing, it also leaves both 
sides unsatisfied (Weeks 1994). The third way is a step further, a new alternative for 
handling conflict, which Macdonald (2000) and Tutu (1999) assert leaves both sides 
content with the outcome and all feeling that they have won.  
Safety may require the separation of spheres (land), be they by cordon sanitaire or fault 
lines, or the use of force. Arguably, time may be the best healer or help in making peace 
(Leeds 1981; Merrills 1993; Macdonald 2000). Although new patterns of conflict 
settlement have moved away from imposed solutions and even compromise positions, 
some situations may require urgent resolution on such a basis. 
Legal settlements or any judicial approach are concerned with rightness, correlating some 
independent standards with perceived legitimacy or equality in order to determine who is 
right. Not all disputes, however, are suitable for litigation. The latter is the exception, not 
the rule; many conflicts are settled by other means. If the dispute engages associations or is 
an international matter, however, litigation is a way of depoliticising it. For instance, a 
state which goes to the Court is also signalling its desire to reduce tension and pursue a 
peaceful settlement (Merrills 1993, 149). Even so, litigation does not always aim at a 
definitive settlement; it serves many functions, such as narrowing the conflict or moving it 
nearer to resolution (Merrills 1993; Vandeginste 1998).  
While the state may also lay down compulsory settlement procedures involving arbitration 
or adjudication in order to reach a settlement (Leeds 1981; Zartman & Rasmussen 1997), 
in voluntary settlement the state or international organisation may provide a negotiation 
procedure if the parties involved are prepared to accept this. This may evolve into a 
compromise or principled settlement. Long-term solutions may require changes to 
fundamental structures and attitudes, for example to eradicate inequalities in the system. 
Again, the resolutions may consist of decreasing inequality in the distribution of political 
and economic resources. Additional measures such as land redistribution, tax reform and 
the expansion of educational opportunities may be considered (Leeds 1981; Makinda 
1996). South Africa applied these measures; a similar trajectory is likely to help Rwanda. 
Some new procedures  mainly context-based  handle conflicts by adopting local cultural 
means, such as shaming wrongdoers, especially resilient ones, in public. The technique 
prepares parties to admit their wrong and to repair it. The TRC applied shaming in dealing 
with the supporters of Apartheid (TRC Final Report 1998; Krog 1998). The objective was 
to bring perpetrators to confess publicly. Such an approach does not address disputes 
between individuals alone, but particularly conflicts between leaders and their respective 
communities. There are indigenous systems that solve conflicts more positively than legal 
structures. 
In general, Leeds (1981) and Weeks (1994) argue that one way of devising methods of 
resolving conflict is to redefine a conflict situation in such a way as to bring out clearly the 
differences between individual self-interest and the collective interest of the parties. 
Therefore, reduction of conflict effectively occurs when all conflicting parties respond in a 
positive way to actions taken by the others to reduce tension. 
3.2 Main approaches to conflict resolution: schools of thought 
More specialised intervention relies on two schools of thought: an interest-based approach 
and conflict partnership. (1) The interest-based approach is tough on the problem; it goes 
deep to the roots. It is soft on the person and puts less stress on the subjective. Fisher & 
Urys (1999: 41- 43) approach focuses on interests, not positions. They assert that a wise 
solution reconciles interests, not positions Interests define the problem (Chapter 2.3) 
Behind opposed positions lie shared and compatible interests, as well as conflicting ones. 
This paradigm separates people from the problem and is unconditionally constructive. 
Contrary to a winner-takes-all-at-all-costs approach, Fisher & Ury (1999) offer an 
alternative, by removing or at least reducing antagonism between parties even if 
adversarial and competitive behaviour remains within this approach. Hamber (1995, 4) 
suggests that this approach is effective in negotiation within a community and can achieve 
long-term results. 
(2) The school of conflict partnership advocated by Weeks (1994) offers an alternative 
theoretical approach to that which Fisher & Ury (1999) propose. His paradigm corresponds 
substantially to the interest-based approach, save that the competitive aspect is entirely 
absent; the emphasis is on relationships. For Weeks, disputes do not relate to rights, power 
or interests. Underlying this approach is the fact that one comes into conflict only with 
people who are viewed as important. If someone is unimportant, the chances are that one 
will not have significant discord with that person. Conflict resolution, therefore, is about 
improving or rebuilding the relationship between parties to function in a mutually 
beneficial way and avoid conflicts in the future (Weeks 1992; Hamber 1995; cf. Figure 
3.1).  
The two schools of thought promote co-operation principles, and assert that any genuine 
reconciliation approach stresses co-operative effort. It is not a winner-loser scenario; all 
willing parties are expected to be winners in one way and losers in another at a level that a 
hope for a harmonious future requires. A willing loser in this circumstance may produce 
positive results and gain more satisfaction than one that merely aims at winning. In many 
cases, parties come from a position of having all or nothing. Co-operative behaviour 
builds on the assumption that conflict is to be understood in the context of overall 
relationships; a good solution to a dispute is one that improves relationships. From this 
perspective, parties do not adopt adversarial behaviour, but behave as a team, opposing the 
problem that brought them into conflict (Weeks 1994). A good result is mutually beneficial 
and focuses on both individual and shared needs. However, Fisher & Ury (1999) assert that 
standard strategies for negotiation often leave people dissatisfied, worn out or alienated  
and frequently all three.  
Techniques relate to the context, the nature of the problem and the objectives of actors 
involved, and should take into account the interests of conflicting parties. Lederach 
(1992a) suggested that the way people act is based on the meaning things have for them. 
When conflicting camps have the attitude of have it all or nothing, the situation requires 
those handling the conflict to engage in a co-operative approach with both parties. Thus, it 
is demanding in terms of both time and energy to reach positive results. Contrary to the co-
operative effort that shaped the South African processes from 1990, the all or nothing 
attitude characterised Rwandan negotiators of the 1990s. Consequently, reconciliation in 
Rwandas context ought to seek patient co-operation first. The approach increases the 
chances to achieve fixed goal and effective long-term results (Deutsch 1973, 20ff & 2000, 
22ff). 
Figure 3.1: The Conflict-Partnership Pathway to Effective Conflict Resolution 
Source: <Weeks 1994, 70> 
Some techniques are more important in the training or learning process for conflict 
resolution than in real contexts. Lederach (1996, 47-62) distinguishes training approaches 
that impose a conciliation model and mediator/trainers knowledge from approaches that 
draw out the common-sense knowledge of the disputants/trainees, stimulating the creation 
of new and contextually appropriate models. The prescriptive mode relates more to the 
knowledge of the expert. In the process, the needs of the participants might also be given 
Conflict partner              The relationship                      Conflict partner     
           (A)                                                                                                            (B)  
         needs           conflicts                  needs 
        values      commonality                     values 
    perceptions        differences                   perceptions 
         goals                  shared needs                  goals 
       feelings               feelings 
       interests              interests
(1) Create an effective atmosphere 
      (2) Clarify perceptions 
(3) Focus on individual and shared needs 
(4) Build shared positive power 
(5) Look to the future, and then learn from the past 
                                                          (6) Generate options 
(7) Develop do-able stepping-stones to action 
(8) Make a mutually beneficial agreement 
   Conflict partner          Improved relationship patterns               Conflict partner 
              (A)             (B) 
        in which differences and conflicts    
               are dealt with in ways that            
                                                   nurture mutual development 
attention. The prescriptive mode assumes that the expert knows what the participants need 
(Lederach 1996; Schrock-Shenk 2000). The knowledge of the expert (or mediator) 
becomes the key resource that is transferred and gives incentives to participants 
(negotiators, field workers or trainees) in peace building. The elicitive mode opens 
possibilities of discovering ways and means to catch fish in our own ponds (Lederach 
1992a). It does not transfer knowledge from expert to participants; rather, it leaves room 
for individuals to use their own creativity and initiative to devise appropriate models 
(Lederach 1996). 
Difficult situations such as post-genocide Rwanda might require an approach that uses 
prescriptive and elicitive (transfer and creativity) methods symbiotically, which could be 
more effective as it stresses the elicitive aspects, because parties would be free to expose 
their views and realise their vision. The prescriptive impulse would intervene at the start as 
a neutral third partys element to ensure that the process gets underway. Laue suggests that 
third party does not means literally the third party in a situation in which there are two 
other parties. First and second parties have direct interest or direct stake in conflict and its 
outcomes. The third party is one with less directly at stake. The third party certainly has 
something at stake (reputation or professionalism, for example)  but will not be affected 
by the allocation of resources, the exercise of power, the determination of new rules or 
other types of outcomes which may take place as conflict is processed. The third party 
stands on a different base (1987, 17-18). 
Both prescriptive and elicitive approaches are important at the beginning of training in 
conflict resolution to motivate the mediator (prescriptive) or to encourage the parties to 
discover the way ahead bit-by-bit (elicitive). The prescriptive attitude then progressively 
leaves more and more space for the elicitive one until the parties take everything into their 
own hands, when the expert no longer dictates the next move and his instruction may not 
be needed anymore. 
With the elicitive mode, the process becomes slower, involving more commitment from 
the parties than with a prescriptive one. It is sometimes painful, but it raises self-awareness 
and considers culture as fundamental. The process considers time as especially important 
(Lederach 1992a & 1996). Both prescriptive and elicitive methods empower facilitators 
and participants, but operate from different bases. Above all, the prescriptive approach 
fails to recognise that the expert (facilitator/mediator) may have certain levels of ignorance 
or other limitations and that his presence does not encourage parties creativity (Lederach 
1992a; Schrock-Shenk 2000).  
Other schools of thought promote fast-slow and slow-fast methods, which resemble 
prescriptive and elicitive patterns in general, because fast-slow gives priority to top-
down action, while slow-fast seeks the initiative of parties. Thus, the slow-fast model is 
slow and demanding in commitment, time and energy. However, it is sure and effective; it 
embodies elicitive aspects, allowing more creativity than the fast-slow approach, which 
matches the prescriptive pattern. Fostering creativity improves relationships. The slow-
fast method (like the elicitive approach)  contrary to fast-slow (which is like the 
prescriptive method)  helps in the initial work. Since the improvement of peoples 
relations is a way forward to reconciliation, dialogue and co-operation are commendable in 
order to reach peace; but the size of the conflict and the goal pursued determine which 
model should be deployed to handle the crisis. 
Some observers believe in the 'unchangeability' of human nature and advocate punitive 
measures or deterrents such as hanging, long prison sentences or hard labour, hoping to 
stop further crimes from happening (Leeds 1981; Marshall 2001). While violence and 
crime occurring among the deprived and poor classes of a society may be due to 
dissatisfaction, most current strife in poor societies also has external origins or backing 
from the prosperous world. Existing concepts and methods of conflict resolution are 
therefore likely to become inappropriate and need to adapt to the new reality (Johnston & 
Sampson 1994). In line with this reality, Peace Studies training courses ought to adapt to 
this new order as much as to new dynamics (for example, ideologies, business forms of 
leadership, power-mad elites, hungry economists and intellectuals) for emerging conflicts.  
Conflict may be ritualised or institutionalised, even in the process of peaceful pursuits such 
as sport, elections and intellectual games (Leeds 1981; Fisher & Ury 1999 passim). 
Interested parties may publicise aggression in order to distract attention from unpopular 
official policies. If a government is unpopular, it may also divert hostility against itself.1 
Such a regime encourages a divide and rule policy rather than allowing opponents to 
unite in opposition against its policies (Leeds 1981). Mediation as a form of negotiation 
may then require compulsory legal procedures (Helmick et al. 2001; Marshall 2001); these 
measures are less appropriate than attempts at reaching voluntary agreement between the 
antagonists. 2  
Fisher & Ury (1999) and Merrills (1993) suggest that in certain communal or internal 
problems, voluntary mediation helps the parties to arrive at a settlement. The main role of 
mediation is to make a start and encourage parties to reach an agreement that does not 
  1 Some examples are the Rwandan situation in the early 1990s, when the Government allowed militia to 
kill, loot and propagate hatred against Tutsis and opposition members. The other is the Mobutu regime in 
Zaire, where military people and officials were allowed to loot and ask for bribes. These policies sustained 
the regimes for many years without protest. 
  2 While mediation is a type of negotiation that requires a third party, Fisher & Ury (1999) suggest using 
principled negotiation, developed by the Harvard Negotiation Project. This focuses on what each side says it 
will and will not do. The principled method is between others previously known as hard and soft 
standards. 
appear to be a compromise3 by either group. There is a possibility in a number of conflict 
situations for the outcome not to be a win-lose one, but one that benefits both sides. 
Mediation then might enable parties to be more realistic in their perceptions, to change 
their goals and priorities as better options are discovered (Leeds 1981). These include a 
third way4 alternative that fosters collaboration between parties, seeking eventual 
correction and healing of all groups involved.  
Generally, in mediation and role-playing, most parties come to a meeting viewing their 
roles as representatives of their organisations. Their roles indicate that they are defending 
widely known fixed positions and will attack the case of their opponents. Mediation by a 
third party then helps parties to get off the hook in providing a face-to-face space to 
discover mutual concessions by the opposing sides, which they might otherwise find 
difficult to realise on their own (Leeds 1981; Fisher & Ury 1999; Merrills 1993; LeBaron 
2002).  
It is not easy, and is sometimes impossible, to transform certain objective conflicts (which 
some studies identify as zero-sum: where the parties involved have incompatible, fixed 
aims) into subjective (or non-zero-sum) outcomes in order to achieve a harmony of interest 
(Leeds 1981, 212-213 cf. Allen et al. 1990, 86ff). Therefore, a dispute is not simply a 
cake-sharing problem or an extending of wealth; it is sometimes objective (real) or 
subjective (over ideological issues). Voluntary mediation thus has limitations; the situation 
may call for a rights-based procedure (Leeds 1981, 212-213). Rights-based procedure is 
a court process and is mostly applied to solve conflicts involving at least two individuals. 
  3 Compromise obliges people to give concessions, and thus leaves them worn out and with some 
dissatisfaction. 
  4 The third way moves from imposed solutions by one side and compromise positions (Macdonald 2000); 
it seeks to satisfy all conflicting sides.  
However, litigation is neither suitable nor effective in public-order disputes, nor for 
disputes concerning the legitimacy and acceptability of the police (Hamber 1995). These 
conflicts are not predominantly rights-based.  
Two factors influence parties behaviour in negotiation: maximising of self-interest and 
maintenance of relationship between negotiating parties. Depending on the negotiators 
decision, one finds two major patterns of negotiation behaviour: competitive (adversarial) 
and co-operative (problem solving) (Hamber 1995; Fisher & Ury 1999). Competitive 
negotiators value self-interest more than the relationships, while co-operative negotiators 
consider the relationships more valuable. Competitive behaviour mostly dominates in 
negotiation or mediation; relationship behaviour is most sought by the mediating player, 
rather than the conflicting camps. In the Rwandan tradition, it was the responsibility of the 
family, people of good moral standing (abakuru: elders or wise people) to seek the 
solution to problems, even if these elders were related to the conflicting camps. Thus, 
reconciliation was considered as a virtue in the culture.  
According to Fisher & Ury (1999) and Allen et al. (1990, 87ff) competitive behaviour 
implies hard positional bargaining, while co-operative behaviour involves soft bargaining. 
Hamber (1995) suggests that the old Western legalistic order fostered competitive 
behaviour of the win-as-much-as-you-can kind. Although it has confrontational vision, it 
is one-sided, with negotiators making high demands but being reluctant to concede 
anything. In this option, power (the ability to coerce someone to do something s/he would 
not otherwise do) and imposing costs on the other party (mainly the loser) are the main 
ingredients. The old order then is state-based and only uses the police, defence forces and 
law without the consent of the loser. Although the judicial procedures replicate this pattern, 
it creates an unsafe environment.  
A community-based approach to resolution applied in traditional Africa and continues in 
rural areas today (this is justice under the auspices of customary chiefs or elders), while 
consent and community policing build a safe environment for all (Hamber 1995; 
Mukarubuga interview, 9 August 2000). In Rwanda, this process is called Gacaca (section 
3.8 expands on this). Although it is no longer an everyday practice, the community-based 
approach could have been an effective component in the TRC. New policies operating in 
both rural and urban environments (for example Gacaca and a church-based approach) 
foster co-operative behaviour with less confrontational aspects, focusing on the needs 
and/or shared interest and future of all parties (Friedmann 1990). Even when coercive 
power is used, it is in a positive and creative manner, contributing to the solution of the 
problem (Hamber 1995; Vandeginste 1998). This scenario falls into the category of 
principled conflict settlement.  
After World War II and the subsequent Nuremberg trials to judge Nazi military leaders, 
conflict resolution followed different trajectories; most of them were quasi-prosecutorial. 
In September 1984, Argentinas commission (CONADEP)5 expressed the formal objective, 
Nunca ms (never again), which led to further initiatives. Argentinas commission 
encompassed a previous pattern (the Chilean) but included a unique investigation on 
crimes. It sought truth about various sums of commission and omission in order to 
bring back harmony in the society (Minow 1998; Teitel 1999; Rigby 2001). In Brazil, the 
Catholic Archbishop of Sao Paulo and the WCC financed a private, secret initiative for 
four years to investigate various records concerning political murders and tortures. The 
initiative produced twelve volumes with a succinct summary volume (Brazil Nunca mais: 
Never again); it was different from Argentinas pattern, since at the start, it did not use any 
official knowledge (Minow 1998; Teitel 1999). 
  5 CONADEP: Comisin National Sobre la Desaparicin de Personas (National Commission on Disappeared 
People). 
3.3 Justice6 and truth7 
Judicial processes and truth recovery correspond largely to strategic and legal frameworks. 
In this study, justice refers to both individuals liability under legal requirements and 
impartiality in return to accountability with regard to the norms of the state and the society. 
This study stresses justice as designated by Leeds (1981, 230) fairness or rightness in the 
application of laws, the settling of disputes, the distribution of resources or benefits, and 
punishments between people. In some contexts, justice entails merit and worth: treatment 
of people according to their ability or achievements. Other views of justice involve 
satisfying the poor at the expense of the rich. However, true justice reflects the emphasis 
on established rights and the impartial application of the law.  
According to OLeary & Hay (2000) and Schreiter (2002), three aspects of truth are 
relevant for reconciliation: (1) Correspondence between an event and its narrative (fact); 
(2) Coherence and consistency of a set of beliefs or practices and social experience; (3) 
Narrative that illuminates human experience or individual experience. Therefore, 
correlation of fact, consistency and existence qualify truth (Schreiter 2002). In most cases, 
Truth in reconciliation has to be understood in terms of the lies that wrongdoers perpetrate in a 
situation of violence, and the environment of untruthfulness that is created. Lies about 
individuals, about groups, about society itself legitimate the violence with which the 
wrongdoers control the society. Individuals become enemies of the state, and so disappear, 
are tortured, and killed. Their surviving relatives and friends are stigmatized as also being 
suspect. Those in power legitimate their use of violence as the only means available to protect 
people from some internal or external threat. Things get turned on their heads... (Schreiter 
2002, 118). 
The process of reconciliation seeks to retrieve the truth of what happened, exposing 
deceptions and false perceptions, cutting through the skein of lies to make public the secret 
facts and events (Schreiter 2002; Ignatieff 2001). Bronkhorst (1995) and Schreiter (2002) 
  6 Justice in Greek, dik () means what is right; a judicial hearing, then punishment. In this thesis, it 
implies mainly impartiality in peoples treatment, distribution of rights and the application of law. 
  7 Truth in Greek, aletheia () means the reality lying at the basis of an appearance, the manifested, 
veritable essence of a matter. In relation to conflict, it is recuperation of factual accounts of what happened.   
agree with Habermas (cited in Vandeginste 1998a, 23) that truth is what corresponds to 
facts in a way that people understand and from a source they trust.   
In the interest of reconciliation, the truth must fit the facts as best they can be ascertained. 
Truth must come from a reliable source and be presented in a way that victims, their 
families and the whole society can comprehend. Confession and testimony from the 
offenders, and a report from a Truth Commission or, if possible, elders, confirm the 
veracity of the stories. Bethge (1965) asserts that Bonhoeffer advised that truth-telling 
should be adapted to the level of understanding and the ability of the hearer to digest it. 
However, such a perception of truth may not help in the reconciliation.  
Motmann (interview, 18 June 1999) agrees with Schreiter (2002) regarding the consistency 
of truth and recuperation of factual accounts. They suggest that the quest for truth sets a 
pattern of truthfulness upon which a new society can be rebuilt; in particular, establishing 
what happened to the dead helps moral reconstruction because it reduces suspicion and 
exposes individuals to repentance and forgiveness. Public participation in the search for the 
truth helps in rebuilding trust for the process itself, and between the authority and the 
people. The process eases the speaking and grasping of the truth, establishing who should 
confess and who will eventually be forgiven. Reconstruction then is not essentially 
material, but social and rational engagement. The result of truth seeking should be made 
public, as the reports containing facts and symbolic values form bastions against the lies 
told. Motmann (interview, 18 June 1999) and Schreiter (paper, 24 June 2003) stress 
establishing the truth for the dead: the exhaustive reconstruction of history, exposing the 
motives that lay behind the actions: knowing what happened to those who died, how they 
died, where they were buried and paying respect to them restore peoples dignity and heal 
surviving relatives. 
Truth (recuperation of facts) may be the only form of justice possible for the dead: 
recognising their dignity and the eventual injustice committed against them. Schreiter 
(2002) states that searching for truth is crucial, particularly where very little justice is 
likely to apply. Coherence plays an ultimate role in the processes of reconciliation, after 
the facts have been ascertained and the magnitude of wrongdoing has been grasped. The 
latter two elements nurture the thirst for public knowledge and eventually justice, which 
will be perceived to be done.   
Through symbolic art and performance, truth (existence) emerges as part of the core of 
social reconciliation. After a crisis, at first mostly punitive justice is sought: the arrest, trial, 
sentence and punishment of wrongdoers. In such a case, justice appears as a tool for 
vengeance. Des Forges asserted that even in cases where punitive justice is the peoples 
choice, this ought to be a genuine trial, rather than revenge (paper, 31 March 2004). 
Merrills (1993) and Marshall (2001) contend that justice (or trial) is not always for 
punishment, but can be another means of reducing disputes. Merrills (1993) and Schreiter 
(2002) further argue that even punitive justice, if it is fairly conducted, leads towards 
reconciliation. Volf (1996) observes, however, that the calls for truth and justice may lead 
to something else. He argues that there is far too much dishonesty in the single-minded 
search for truth, and too much injustice in the uncompromising struggle for justice.  
Sometimes, little can be done to bring the wrongdoers to justice; such a situation heightens 
the frustration of victims or their surviving relatives, and consequently raises the 
expectation that nothing can be done to help the reconciliation process until punitive 
justice has been exercised (Schreiter 2002). Post-genocide Rwanda exemplified such a 
situation. OLeary & Hay (2000), Schreiter (2002) and Mani (2002) pointed at the 
following forms of justice as useful for reconciliation:  
 Restitutive  justice  seeks  to  redress  matters  by  providing  reparation  to  victims, 
restoring education, improving human rights, caring for the health of formerly ill-treated 
families, etc. Schreiter (2002) asserts that most of this justice is a symbolic act to 
acknowledge that full justice could not be achieved, since the dead cannot come back to 
life, nor the sick be fully restored to health. This justice works if it is accepted forgivingly.   
 Corrective justice:  both Marshall (2001) and Mani (2002) assert that justice ought 
to be primarily corrective, a rectificatory process, whose concern is with the immediate 
human consequences of conflict in terms of the direct violence inflicted on people, human 
rights abuses, crimes against humanity and war crimes. 
 Structural justice tackles structural inequalities of a society that were at the source 
of conflict, for example land reform and power sharing redistribution, human rights, etc. 
Since society can no longer set economic policy in isolation from the rest of the world 
because of economic and political globalisation, economic aspects are the most difficult to 
address. Structural justice, however, is a cornerstone for long-term peacemaking; peace is 
akin to justice as a fruit of the tree that produces it (Isaiah. 32:16-17). Disregarding justice 
creates anarchy, and every injustice carries with it the seed of subversion. 
 Legal justice reforms laws and judicial systems that have been compromised. The 
legal system is essential for justice and the long-term reconstruction of society; if there are 
distortions of laws or abnormalities, the amendment of such laws and legal structures is 
required (Leeds 1981; Merrills 1993). Mani (2002, 3-22) emphasises the interdependency 
of the main dimensions (legal, rectificatory and distributive) of justice. He suggests that 
conflict settlement practice is mostly concerned with the legal and rectificatory 
dimensions, but often overlooks distributive justice. He further asserts that although it 
sounds erroneous to claim that issues of distributive injustice are the fundamental cause 
of/or a necessary underlying feature in international conflicts, they emerge as salient 
factors in most internal political conflicts. However, law, peace studies and conflict 
reconciliation do not often stress the moral dimension of justice.     
 Moral justice largely embodies equitability, which is also at the heart of the 
Christian message, and most religions and cultures profess some forms of justice. Connor 
(1998) states that processes in courts of justice deal with alleged wrong actions, and that 
those actors found guilty  breaking laws  are duly sentenced. Certain disputes are dealt 
with in courts of equity, whose purpose is to bring settlement between disputants rather 
than to seek to convict them for wrongdoing. Connor (1998) asserts that mercy stirs such a 
justice, which leads closer to reconciliation. The process seeks also to enforce rights. The 
Bible (Isaiah 5, 20) suggests that where all sense of right and wrong is lost, social chaos 
takes over. True justice is an expression of integrity. The Bible also asserts that the fruit of 
justice will be peace; the effect of justice will be quietness and security forever. Peace is 
related to justice as fruit to the tree that produces it (Isaiah 32, 17). 
   Restorative justice is harm-focused, engaging an enlarged set of stakeholders. 
Mika & Zehr (1999, in Mennonite Conciliation Service 2000, 92-94) asserted that 
restorative justice views crimes first as harm done to people and communities. Since the 
legal system focuses on rules and laws, it often loses sight of the reality that crime is 
essentially harm and makes victims a secondary concern of justice. Restorative justice 
focuses on harm, but also stresses an offenders accountability and responsibility in 
concrete and not abstract terms. It encourages offenders to understand the consequences of 
their actions or to sympathise with victims.8 Restorative trends assume that justice 
promotes healing, both individual and societal. Connor (1998) asserts that the restorative 
approach involves ones community and looks more to the future. In light of restorative 
justice, Mika & Zehr (1999, 9294) suggest that victim and offender need to get 
information about each other, exchanged either directly or by proxy, and to be involved in 
deciding what justice requires in the situation. Generally, restorative justice reflects values 
from the context in which the offender and victim grew up.  
  8 Accountability implies becoming able to understand harm and beginning to comprehend the consequences 
of ones behaviour and then taking responsibility to make things right, both concretely and symbolically.  
The above approach leaning differs from criminal justice, which tends to be purely 
punitive, conflictual, impersonal and state-centred. Criminal justice often leaves victims 
out, ignoring their needs, encourages the denial of responsibility and encourages empathy 
on the part of offenders. Although criminal justice is not purely retributive, it rarely 
achieves restoration (Connor 1998). A realistic goal is to move as far as we can in the 
process, putting victims, offenders and members of the affected community (even their 
needs, their role, etc.) at the centre of justice in order to promote healing. Where retributive 
justice stresses the application of the law to punish  as the state is also victim,  
restorative justice identifies obligations, meets needs and promotes healing. While the 
retributive process is a conflict between the adversaries, ending up with winning and losing 
sides, the restorative process involves offenders, victims and the community in the 
endeavour to identify obligations and resolutions through maximum exchange of 
information between them (Zehr 2002; Wright 1996; Williams 2005). 
As any genuine reconciliation presupposes a degree of peace, it also embraces truth and 
justice. The latter two are effective tools for securing rights and cohesion of communities, 
hence sustaining peace and furthering reconciliation. Both the victims and the offenders 
must be clear about the kind of truth and justice to realistically envisage before embarking 
on the reconciliation (Schreiter 2002).  
Assefa (1996) and Roht-Arriaza (1995) agree with Bronkhorst (1995) that justice plays a 
positive role in truth and reconciliation processes. Des Forges (2004) asserts, however, that 
if justice is intended to contribute to reconciliation, it should be impartial and be seen to be 
done. Through justice, the truth helps to shed light on the past. It establishes who the 
victims are and who is accountable. Reconciliation then seeks to heal the society and help 
it to come to terms with its past (Bronkhorst 1995). Therefore, the pursuit of the truth 
produces full justice that does not prevent reconciliation. 
Any efficient judicial process should embody corrective ingredients rather than being 
fiercely punitive (Marshall 2001). However, justice rarely refers to restorative practices; 
reconciliation, being relational and spiritual in essence, implies the restoration and healing 
process. Therefore, a genuine reconciliation is therapeutic, envisaging restoration of the 
victim or rehabilitation of the perpetrator. When individuals are recovering aspects of 
living in harmony and dignity, with their due social position and rights, they are also 
involved in rehabilitation practices.    
The UN Special Reporter Joinet (1996) examined the impunity of perpetrators in relation 
to civil and political rights and suggested principles classified into three categories, 
stressing the rights to know, to justice and to reparation. Vandeginste suggests that the 
right to know goes beyond an individual victims right to the truth. The right to know is 
also a collective right of society, drawing upon history to prevent violations from recurring 
in the future. The duty to remember on the part of the state corresponds to the right to 
know (1998a, 20). 
Vandeginste (1998a) and Roht-Arriaza (1995) assert, however, that internal peace and 
mediation initiatives under a national authority often do not recognise an international legal 
framework. Conversely, Bronkhorst (1995) argues that unfair trial or the reversal of 
judicial decisions by the executive power has disastrous effects on the credibility of the 
institutions. Likewise, Roht-Arriaza (1995) observes that the old judicial system depended 
on creating a real counter-power and consequently tolerated human rights violations. Such 
justice, steered by political motives  rather than rights and truth  may become partial and 
unpopular. Perhaps this was the case in Rwanda before 1959 with Tutsi rule, and between 
1960 and 1994 with Hutu rule. The same may be true for the transitional justice advocated 
by new schools of law (Teitel 2000), which suggests tolerating some abuses in order to 
bring about change; this may have allowed some imperfection within the South African 
process of reconciliation. Therefore, truth-telling is a piloting component of reconciliation 
The exposition of what one has seen, heard, told or done  the reality as closely as possible 
to the way it actually happened  is known in Kinyarwanda as icyabona (the act and 
witness). Legal processes differ from ethical perspectives in their ways of handling and 
communicating and their implications for the truth. 
Bonhoeffer (cited in Bethge 1965, 363-371) stated that telling the truth is not solely a 
matter of moral character, but is also a matter of correct appreciation of real situations and 
of serious reflection upon reality. The truth parents tell their children might differ from the 
way they communicate the same facts to adults. Such adjustment/handling of truth may 
also vary from one context to another. Bonhoeffers view (cited in Bethge 1965, 165) is 
aligned to the Rwandan way of handling the truth. However, in matters involving adults as 
well as in the judicial context, a Rwandan saying suggests that truth passes through fire 
without burning itself (Ukuri guca mu ziko ariko ntigushya). It implies that even if one 
attempted to distort the truth, the reality would remain unchanged. A person of integrity 
avoids distorting the truth. Even if s/he is intimidated at the time, the truth will still come 
out as it happened. In the Rwandans view, an adapted or diminished transmission of the 
truth given to a child is not truth at all. In general, mutual communication of factual truth is 
the foundation of forgiveness and constructive co-existence. Rwandans associate the truth 
with God: what is true is the truth of God or true before God (ukuri kwi Imana) or fact 
(impamo). 
It is not easy, however, to obtain or articulate the truth where there is a climate of terror or 
deception (Lemarchand 1997; Vendeginste 2003, 276). Fear arises from one ethnic group's 
supremacy over the others, as in the military and individuals threat to prosecute or to jail 
those who disclose a truth that endangers the comfort of another (Sibomana 1999; cf. 
Chapter 7). This climax has made the Rwandan populace mistrust their rulers and even 
suspect one another, as was the case in Apartheid South African. Sibomana (1999) and 
Murengerantwali (2000) asserted that Rwandas rulers promote a climate of silencing those 
who raise their voices to nurture the truth or claim their rights. It is at this point that the 
work of the church and spiritual values are effective tools to create the space for truth-
telling and free expression, including apologies and forgiveness, and to provide grounds 
for reconciliation. Schreiter (2003) states that spiritual and religious forces create an 
attitude of confidence and courage that promotes truth-telling. In such a climax, the 
judicial system may or may not apply its principles, depending on the degree of offence 
and the way offenders and victims respond to the reconciliation needs: truth and perhaps 
repentance and forgiveness. The truth/memory recuperation may imply getting all the facts 
in proportion, and the responses may imply full forgiveness or an unforgiving attitude. 
When the conditions are not conducive to knowing what actually happened, forgiveness is 
likely to be meagre or absent. Therefore, conditions conducive to full truth and forgiveness 
are a priority for justice and reconciliation. The conditions as they prevailed in Rwanda 
until 2003 were not conducive to reconciliation, since even spirituality tended to be 
superficial or manipulated by individuals desire to satisfy their self-interests (Schonecke 
1994; Theunis 1995). Where the right conditions exist, reconciliation and justice may be 
interchangeable. Even so, in the Rwandans understanding, punitive measures have no 
priority over forgiveness; as the saying goes, inkoni ikubise mukeba uyirenza urugo (throw 
away even a stick that hits your rival).  
3.4 Justice as social and legal means 
The following cases clarify the concept of justice from a scientific viewpoint. Bullock and 
Trombley (1999, 455-456) considered justice as the first of social virtues. Looking at 
recent political theory as too utilitarian and unconcerned with individual rights, their views 
on justice are summarised as follows: 
 Bullock and Trombley (1999) agree with Rawls (cited in Barry 1996, 54 & 192) 
that justice demands equal liberty and a redistribution of economic benefits, which makes 
the least-favoured person as well off as possible.  
 Then, justice is not a matter of how to distribute benefits, but a matter of protecting 
individuals rights to resources.  
 Authorities have the duty to distribute goods and opportunities in a way that 
furthers justice. The latter opinion, however, is incompatible with individual liberty. 
Moreover, one may argue that justice is more than the three perceptions above. Justice 
envisages equal liberty in a wider sense; but above all, it is about equitable distribution and 
the protection of benefits and rights. As Barry (1996) asserts, justice does not simply 
signify trial; it is more about impartiality (ubutabera) mostly in the application of judicial 
procedures.    
Chapter 2 highlighted the sociological implication of justice; Chapter 4 expands on its 
theological meaning. The study focuses on aspects embedding equal liberty and rights 
(equity: ubutabera) rather than mere trial (ubucamanza). Ubutabera/justice is the 
cornerstone of the reconciliation of individuals around their rights and interests. Even if 
justice needs to be punitive, in order to be just the penalty must be commensurate with the 
offence committed, not with the individuals status or ability. Therefore, punishment is not 
simply to reform some people and to deter others; the process rather leads those punished 
to serve as powerful witnesses to the constraints imposed by the moral and legal order 
(Marshall 2001, 110). Corrective justice then requires an exact correspondence between an 
offence and its punishment, while distributive justice aims at giving each member of the 
community a share of honours and goods proportionate to their merit. 
In view of the reconciliation perspective, this thesis considers the transitional alternative of 
justice suggested by Teitel (2000, 109-115), which explores a liberal narrative and 
revolutionary approach. Equally, it assumes that the will to reform existing law is a matter 
of choice as to which pattern of justice to apply and what it embraces, in order to enhance 
reconciliation. Teitels (2000) typology of justice listed six aspects: transitional, historical, 
administrative, criminal, reparatory and constitutional justice. Whereas Teitel (2000) 
makes use of many Biblical references (for example, Genesis 15:13-14) and expressions 
(such as messianic), she does not explicitly refer to moral justice. To some extent, a correct 
treatment of administrative justice encompasses the other aspects. While in practice the 
concern for post-genocide justice has focused on crimes, full justice requires a combination 
of most patterns of justice. It stresses impartiality through criminal, reparatory and 
restorative justice, which might incorporate the other features implying the rule of law, 
rectification and distribution as the need arises.  
Even if fair verdicts could contribute effectively towards reconciliation  as most 
respondents (77 percent) affirmed in this research,  one needs to examine each 
case/context separately: for example, how far a tribunal is able to enhance reconciliation in 
Rwanda. How is justice obtained in the situation when national courts (Rwanda: cf. 
Chapters 7 & 8) with laws different from those of the International Tribunals on similar 
cases  crimes committed at the same time, in the same place, and under the same 
circumstances  are judged by different tribunals and lead to different punishments? (ICTR 
Reports [2001] 09/03/2004, p 8.). With regard to Rwanda, a case in which the International 
Court applies detention in perpetuity, national courts apply the death penalty. What would 
be the meaning of justice in that context and who should define it? Again, how can one 
claim that justice has been secured when after a decade even the very few perpetrators 
prosecuted have been from one side only (for example, the Hutu in Rwanda)? Unless all 
killers are arrested  let alone tried  and most suspects are charged, can justice be said to 
have been done? 
The UN envisaged that the ICC (International Criminal Court) would administer criminal 
justice with supremacy over to national courts. However, national governments (for 
example, former Yugoslavia and Rwanda) do not appreciate the ICC trials, and 
victims/survivors expect reparatory measures from the judicial rulings. Therefore, it is 
evident that transitional justice does not necessarily enforce reconciliation and 
reconstruction. As Teitel (2000) asserts, international justice procedures primarily soften 
laws to enforce changes. The softness, however, dilutes, may endanger fairness or even 
create injustices such as those experienced in some countries longing for democratisation 
at all costs.  
The above metaphor is elicitive; one recalls that the Germans benefited from external 
support to purge Nazi ideology, but the ideology still stains their society (Teitel 2000, 177; 
Wolf in Hinton 2002, 193). Lemarchand (1997) remarked in similar vein that it is not 
going to be easy for Rwanda. He argued that it would take a very long time for society to 
reconstruct itself. One may argue that post-conflict situations also need neutral external 
support to launch specific and extra curricular education to purge the ideology (exclusive 
or ethnic) that has built up over centuries. Most vital and achievable, though, is peace: 
mutual acceptance between otherwise conflicting groups to allow fair justice to prevail. 
Again, if the law began to be applied justly, the state could set forth a programme of fair 
justice and rights. 
Broadly speaking, Teitel (2000, 41) and Mani (2002, 161 ff) suggest that historically, those 
considered most responsible for past wrongdoings in transition have been in the top 
political leadership. Contemporary successor trials demonstrate the difficulty of holding 
the political leadership accountable for the worst abuses of repressive rule. Even though 
the matter in both South Africa and Rwanda was mainly the criminality of the state 
administration  albeit their parties are no longer in power  which extended to (or 
originated from) individuals, in practice, justice applies to individuals. Bizimungu (cited in 
Dialogue 1999, 84), by then President of Rwanda, asserted that before tribunal courts, the 
principle becomes 'everyone for himself'. Bizimungu referred to post-genocide Rwanda; it 
is important, then, that individual leaders and military of the former regime are brought to 
account, but the party now in power should also account for crimes it committed during the 
period reconsidered (The Times, 9 August 2003).9 Otherwise, the situation will not allow 
the building up of a solid basis for reconciliation. From the case of Germany, a good 
example was set forth in banning the Nazi Party; any parallelism deserves the same action.  
When there is bias in the judiciary services, it often works through suppressing free speech 
and distorting the truth. Earlier experiences of genocide required the creation of a space for 
interaction between international law (mainly criminal justice) and national means. 
However, cultural means, implying conflict regulation and other domains, including 
religion, could also be encouraged to play a part in new approaches to conflict resolution. 
These measures could entrench the truth, calling for trustworthy persons in recounting 
what they have seen or heard, icyabona (uncontested document, witnesses, talk or action). 
Patrice (2000) suggested that such truth is testimony enough in itself (ukuri kwibera 
umugabo). From there, reconciliation would find its way ahead; free formal expression of 
truth could set forth an adequate transitional justice to respond to the crisis. The system of 
follow-up needs deep roots into such ground, which foresees a messianic perspective of 
law, which Teitel (2000) describes as an approach that changes things constructively. 
  9 See also FOJUPET @groups.msn.com (e-mail message, 29 July 2003).  
Lemarchand (1997) suggests that in Rwanda, the perspective should stress judicial and 
therapeutic processes equally. 
Teitel (2000) suggests that in such situations, a liberal narrative should embody stories, 
transformation, education and truth to reveal secret knowledge. A transitional justice of 
this kind involves the whole truth, political forgiveness, public hearing and healing so that 
reconciliation may take place. Teitel (2000) observes that constructivism characterises 
the role of law in good political change. In transition, jurisprudence defines the periods of 
political passage required to avoid public dichotomy and the fracture of history. This 
approach leaves room for law activists; human rights are also important, but more 
important are issues that answer the kind of uncertainty in local morality for which 
academic discourses and reflections alone do not sufficiently mirror the relevant actions 
and reality. 
However, it could be unacceptable for jurisprudence to define the transitional period, as 
long as a single group dominates the system. Again, Teitel (2000) suggests that voices 
ought to come from different disciplines. She argues that although human rights are 
universal, voices coming from different places have various properties: testimonies, 
community healing, different institutions and domains such as spirituality and culture that 
are conducive for reconciliation. Of the same importance are positive values like truth and 
transparency, for which the church is the best vehicle for bringing them into effect through 
spiritual activities, education and preparing people to bear witness to the truth in view of 
repentance in a process of forgiveness and reconciliation. 
Teitel (2000) argues that there is no one view of law and justice. The role of justice should 
not be to only trace facts as an end in itself, but above all to re-establish good rapport in 
society and with the governing authority. A situation where injustice has grown through 
cultivating corporate mistakes and guilt requires justice to establish the historical record or 
at least its symbolism, and above all to acknowledge what happened, and what provoked 
the event  let alone the genocide  because the truth about what the event entails could 
contribute greatly to the healing of society. Recovering cultural or moral justice and its 
context can have positive impacts. Yet, post-genocide justice ought to be mainly a ground-
level therapeutic intervention, altering peoples perceptions, enlightening and re-educating 
them to prepare them for eventual reconciliation (Lemarchand 1997). If international and 
Rwandas justice required the attention for the whole nation, with a vision for 
reconciliation, they could adopt this perspective. 
3.5 Amnesty 
Amnesty has been ill defined and poorly understood by many people. The concept derives 
from the Greek word  (Quicherat and Daveluy 1908). Schreiter (2002) claims that 
amnesty is a legal forgetting that the deed occurred. Chambers Dictionary (2003) defines 
amnesty as a general pardon, a period during which offenders may admit to certain crimes 
or infringements without penalty; it is an act of oblivion. Greenawalt (Roteberg & 
Thompson 2000, 189) states that, Amnesties typically refer to exemptions from criminal 
liability accorded to classes of individuals before trial. Minow (1998, 20-21) observes that 
amnesty is generally lawful amnesia, but when conditional upon the acknowledgment of 
particular acts of violence, it takes a different shape.  
To some extent, amnesty differs from pardon: the former may be limited in time and to 
specific categories of people and conditions, while the latter implies that there will be no 
punishment but does not forget that the wrong occurred. Schreiter (2002, 124) observes 
that both amnesty and pardon are the social and legal equivalents of forgiveness. He 
suggests that while forgiveness is an extension of the love of God, human forgiveness is a 
free decision by a victim not to be controlled by the effect of past deeds. Forgiveness does 
not erase deeds done in the past but helps to remember them in a different way; it is a 
moral act. Shriver (1995) contends that society can give amnesty and pardon or 
punishment but not forgiveness in its fullest sense. Contrary to amnesty, which is often 
conditional, forgiveness is an open offer. Perhaps amnesty translates better to what some 
writers call political forgiveness, which may simply imply a degree of mutual co-existence 
or co-operation of former enemies in order to move forward, envisaging hope for a future 
together. Minow (1998, 55-56) suggests that amnesty is made available, but only 
conditionally, to individuals who seek it by fulfilling conditions (this was the case in South 
Africa), by applying for it and fully disclosing evidences of misdeeds that could be fairly 
characterised as having a political objective.  
Mani (2002, 111) seems to object to the idea of oblivion through amnesty; he claims that it 
does not protect abusers from criminal prosecution: it must be proven that violations were 
politically linked to the situation the amnesty was given for (for example, war) and were 
not ordinary crimes. Teitel (2000, 53-54) asserts that the promise of amnesty for past 
wrongs appears to broker the political impasse, to enable liberalising change. Thus, 
transitional amnesty bargains stabilise and consolidate the transition. The self-interest of 
military and political leaders securing immunity from justice marks these negotiations. 
Likewise, clemency goes hand in hand with transition.     
Schreiter (2002, 125-126) and Rhot-Arriaza (1995) agree with Mani (2002, 111) that 
amnesty has some conflict with Human Rights. Chapman (in Helmick et al. 2002, 270 f) 
and Mani (2002) assert that amnesty is unpopular among human rights activists. Mani 
(2002, 111) states that the latter criticise amnesty because it has a well-earned reputation 
for bolstering impunity. He describes amnesty as a little researched measure, but a way of 
adapting legal mechanisms to suit the needs of post-conflict societies in order to attain 
peace. On the one hand, amnesty is sometimes necessary to prevent violence; it can elicit 
cooperation to investigate past wrongdoings. As Mani (2002, 113) and Teitel (2000, 54) 
clarified, this trajectory benefited South Africans. The National Party that was responsible 
for Apartheid crimes negotiated an amnesty, which the ANC skilfully accepted  
conditionally, in exchange for full truth  without precluding eventual prosecution. On the 
other hand, the perpetrator had to admit his guilt and apply for amnesty. The respondent  
the amnesty committee  had to pronounce the pardon. In this case, amnesty was a pardon; 
hence, the amnesty could be accepted or rejected accordingly. For instance, when the 
notorious E. de Kock acknowledged his crimes in the TRC hearings, the respondents did 
not believe his sincerity and amnesty was not offered. Politically, it could have been seen 
as correct for amnesty to be offered and for individuals to forgive, but justice was left to 
society to decide (Chapman & Spong 2003, 257). 
Amnesty makes aspects of social reconciliation possible. However, amnesty for human 
rights violations weakens the new social order and creates obstacles for individual 
reconciliation (Connor 1998; Schreiter 2002). In one way, amnesty implies that the process 
will have to focus on compromise for the sake of the future.  
3.6 Retribution and reparation/restitution 
The Chambers Dictionary (2003) defines retribution as requital. It means either repaying, 
rewarding or suitable punishment. The concept derives from the Latin word retribuere, 
meaning repayment (Marshall 2001, 109): giving back to someone what s/he merits or 
deserves in terms of either rewards or punishments. Broadly, reparation means to repair, 
replenish what has been wasted, amend, or compensate, often referring to a country after it 
has suffered through war.  
Minow (1998) asserts that the reparative approach helps victims to move beyond anger and 
a sense of powerlessness; it may imply the return of stolen items. Restitution is an act of 
restoration or compensation for what was lost, replacing everything taken away, which also 
implies restorative justice. The notion of retribution often has negative connotations, 
implying punishment for wicked deeds. However, Marshall states that in connection with 
Gods activity, as seen in the Bible, retribution restored shalom (peace), which flourishes 
only when true justice has been done, where harm has been repaired (2001, 121-125). 
Mosaic Law is based on equivalence of value (Exodus 21, 26-36). Punitive elements are 
seen in the ways some offences required double restitution or more (Exodus 22, 4-7). 
Punishment is also a symbol and an invitation for reintegration. Marshall (2001, 194) states 
that retributive language and metaphor categories in the New Testament safeguard Gods 
personal and sovereign involvement in dealing with evil.     
In practice, Minow (1998) suggests that restorative justice emphasises the humanity of 
both offender and victim, and seeks to fix social connections  communication between 
offender and victim  and to establish peace rather than retribution. Minow (1998, 93) 
claims that apologies may restore some dignity, but cannot bring back lives as they existed 
before. On one hand, Minow (1998, 107-112) believes that restitution, which demands the 
restoration of actual things that belonged to the victim, seems to be the easiest form of 
reparation. On the other hand, Minow (1998, 109-110) considers that it is difficult to 
compensate past victims without creating new ones. She asserts that social and religious 
meaning  returning symbols and values to communities and families  rather than 
economic meaning lies at the heart of reparations. In some situations, redistribution is a 
practical form of restitution for long-past misappropriation, if one needs to respond to 
present-day requirements. Minow (1998, 91) asserts that unlike punishment, which 
imposes penalties in justice, restitution seeks to repair the injustice, to make up for it, and 
to effect corrective changes in the record, in relationships, and in future behaviour; it 
encourages repentance and forgiveness.  
There are official and unofficial mechanisms for reparation. A government may be 
unwilling to do much to address the past, either for fear of revealing its own complicity or 
through hesitation to reopen past wounds. Independent civil society groups outside the 
authority of the state may assume the task of reparation. Mani (2002, 113) suggested that 
such groups might serve the role and functions of official mechanisms or even outdo them 
in providing measures of justice to citizens. The groups initiatives may accompany 
official mechanisms. Unofficial or semi-official and traditional mechanisms include forms 
of reparation, apologies, symbolic measures  commemoration and memorials, etc.  and 
education. Previous transition processes, including the South African TRC, have attempted 
most forms of these measures. Mani (2002) claims, however, that such mechanisms 
received less attention than trials, perhaps because the government or the international 
community did not often sponsor them. Indigenous mechanisms of dispute settlement in 
Rwanda made such reparations within the means of the offender or without provoking 
further tensions. 
Mani (2002, 113-114) suggests that reparation is often understood narrowly to mean 
monetary compensation. If this were the case, it might seldom be applicable in low-income 
post-conflict countries. Reparation is much broader, including both legal and social 
measures. There are many forms of reparation, which sometimes overlap. Indemnity and 
compensation are monetary forms of reparation. Indemnity aims to compensate for all 
damages that resulted from the unlawful act, including any profit that would have been 
possible in the ordinary course of the events, but not prospectively. Mani (2002, 114) 
asserts that compensation is defined as reparation in the narrow sense of the payment of 
money as a valuation of the wrong done.  
There are also non-monetary forms of legal reparation. Mani claims that  
Restitution in kind is designated to re-establish the situation which would have existed if the 
wrongful act or omission had not taken place, by performance of the obligation which the state 
failed to discharge: revocation of the unlawful act, return of property wrongfully removed or 
abstention from further wrongful conduct (2002, 114). 
Satisfaction (icyiru) is any measure that the offender has to take under customary law or 
agreement by parties to a dispute, apart from restitution or compensation. Traditional 
measures in Rwanda included giving a goat or a cow to the wronged side, or a drink that 
those who witnessed the settlement (plus the wronged and the offender) would share to 
mark the end of the dispute. On one hand, friends of the offender often contributed towards 
this satisfaction. On the other hand, both the friends of the wronged and those of the 
offender would persuade the wronged party to accept what the other side could afford, and 
not to demand too much, since heavy restitution would leave unhealed relationships 
between the parties. Mani (2002, 114) asserts that a declaratory judgement by a court 
regarding the illegality of the act of the defendant can constitute a measure of satisfaction. 
Some other measures deployed formally or informally in transitional situations are 
regarded as social reparation; they are not ordered by the ruling of courts. Like legal 
reparation, they seek to undo or mitigate the consequences of harmful deeds. Symbolic 
redress is most useful: public statements, apologies, public restoration of the name or 
reputation of victims, and innovative measures suitable for groups who have suffered 
injustice.10 When a head of state offers an official apology for state-sponsored crimes 
(whether or not he was in charge at the time), it carries powerful symbolic value. The 
opposite is true if the apology of such a leader is not full and sincere. L. Brown (interview, 
26 June 2001) and S. Gunn (interview, 07 July 2001) observed that the National Partys 
submission to the TRC lacked a full account and clear apology, which meant that it was a 
false step in the process. A similar observation was made concerning the ANC leaderships 
submission. 
  10 A good example of this in post-genocide Rwanda is that perpetrators are helping their victims to rebuild 
their homes; some families have been sharing their houses and crops with the returnees until the latter can 
find their own comes and produce their own food.  
Commemoration and shared situations help victims to heal internal wounds and address the 
victimization created between survivors and their society. This can be done through 
erecting memorials, monuments or museums, dedicating a day for the remembrance of 
victims and naming streets after certain people or events (TRC Final Report 1998; Zorbas 
2004). Reburials in South Africa and Rwanda and the commemoration of the genocide in 
Rwanda are good examples. Other measures refer to purging or catharsis (also implying 
cultural or religious rituals and symbols) and the cleansing of places affected by the 
offence; these measures may lead to correction of rules or the removal of people still in 
official service.  
3.7 Healing: restoration and memory  
Healing11 is an evolving notion, enriched by new findings from the field of conflict 
reconciliation. Healing takes place through physical and moral recovery, remembrance or 
recuperation of memory and history. This process can lead to the rediscovery of the 
original status: harmony and integrity; it recalls the past, even if it was painful in order to 
ease the memories. It embodies psychosomatic therapy, socio-political, economic and 
moral redresses. It is the core of reconciliation, particularly in Christian societies and 
others that avoid vengeful solutions. Jones (1995, 199) argues that confession of ones 
anger (especially by victims) or despair in the face of suffering leads to healing. Jones 
(1995, 146) suggests that Gods gift of forgiveness, like healing, are signs of his kingdom.     
Smith (2003, 149) states that the essence of healing is not just an individual or family 
affair, but a concern of the community, with individual and family aspects. Consequently, 
social conditions like poverty compromise healing in general terms. Healing from wrong 
  11  The word is common in the Old Testament; to heal in Hebrew () means to restore to normal. God 
performs the act of healing for individuals (Gn 20:17; Ps 6:2). The word is often used for the healing of the 
nation, which not only involves Gods grace and forgiveness but also the nations repentance (Hos 6:1 cf. Jr 
30:17 & 51:8-9). In Greek, to heal () implies to care for the sick. 
and suffering requires an environment where victims find safety, respect and willing and 
sympathetic listeners. Hamber (2003, 159-163) claims that truth commissions provide a 
psychological and political healing process. He contends that acknowledging others 
victimisation with respect and empathy contributes to the process of healing in many cases. 
He states that healing or restoration is mainly psychological. He notes, however, that the 
social process of acknowledging the pain of others and providing space for victims to 
speak out can be too slow.  
Hamber (2003, 156ff) suggests that the political process is fundamentally different from 
the individual process in that a countrys society and its politicians may be ready to move 
before individuals have come to terms with their personal pain (this seems to be the case in 
Rwanda). Individual pain has no quick fix or magic remedy. Hamber concludes that 
healing is an inescapably prolonged and enigmatic process. Minow (1998, 61-69) observes 
that in the healing process, there is a major task  social repair  for those who sympathise 
with victims and for those associated with the perpetrators, but also for the bystanders. 
Restoration is an aspect of healing; it means rediscovering ones initial social status, 
intellectual capacity, psychosomatic health and rights. While retribution often involves 
more punishment or costs than positive reward to one side or the other, restoration as an 
aspect of healing works in favour of all sides, addressing the causes of victimisation, 
wrongdoing and punishment. De Gruchy (2002, 46, 178, 197) suggests that whether in the 
family, in society, in politics or in religion, reconciliation entails the healing of 
relationships. It entails the healing of memories, which according to Schreiter (2002) 
implies putting the past to rest, which otherwise could foster bitterness and thoughts of 
revenge. In the process, honest recognition of guilt and genuine remorse heal perpetrators 
and make forgiveness and the healing of victims more probable. Healing then creates 
communities of hope and reconciled survivors. Perpetrators may find the space for healing 
in the communities. Christian communities receive a call or vocation to become healers of 
victims and wrongdoers. 
Schreiter (2002) asserts that the practices of healing create communities of memory, safe 
places to explore and untangle a painful past and to cultivate the telling of truth to 
overcome the lies of injustice and wrongdoing. Christian communities become reconciling 
venues from which healing takes place through the practice of telling the truth, and through 
the pursuit of justice as a means of making peace, correction and restoration mechanisms 
in particular. 
3.8 Cultural methods     
Most cultural (and religious) traditions embrace forms of conflict resolution and sets of 
requisites for reconciliation. Most cases require finding out the truth, publicly recognising 
guilt and repairing damage. It is necessary to restore the honour of victims, while the guilty 
persons undergo real or symbolic punishment. Friedmann (1990) agrees with Bronkhorst 
(1995) that conciliation based on international law embraces most of these elements.   
Khan (2000) and Sibomana (1999) agree with Assefa (1996) on the conditions for effective 
reconciliation.12 Khan contended that reconciliation succeeds if it evolves through efforts 
from the grassroots upward, rather than from the top of the pyramid downward. He agrees 
with Lederach (1999) that peace building consists of bridging gaps between different levels 
of the society. Lederach suggests that strong vertical and horizontal relationships in society 
(see Figure 3.2) build up using a pragmatic rather than a holistic approach. Regarding 
  12 Assefa (1996) suggests four preconditions if peace and reconciliation are to be effective: (1) Identifying 
and dealing with the root causes of the conflict, (2) Attention to justice and fairness of the process of 
settlement, (3) Consideration of peoples deeper needs, from which parties may discover commonality of 
interest and objectives that bring mutual acceptance and solution. Here, a third party whose perception is 
upright may be useful (M. Ghandi suggested that there is enough in the world for everybodys need but not 
enough for everybodys greed), and (4) Restructuring relationships (equality, respect, mutual enrichment and 
growth).  
Rwanda, Khan (2000) and Vandeginste (1998a & 2000) observed that traditional methods 
of reconciliation could play a vital role at local level outside the context of public 
administration and national politics. 
Figure 3.2: Gaps in Building Peace 
     Types of Actors         Approach 
  Top level leadership                Focus: high level negotiations, cease-fire 
  Military, Political and Religious  Led by highly visible single personality  
    Leaders with high visibility          Mediators 
     (Depends on very few)             (Affects many)                               
  Middle level leaders    Problem-solving workshops 
  People respected in sectors    Training in conflict resolution 
   Ethnic, religious leaders     Peace commissions       
   Academics, intellectuals     Insiders - partial teams  
   Humanitarians (NGOs)     
                               (Affects a few)                                                        (Affects more people) 
 Bottom level: grassroots leaders Local peace commissions 
  Local leaders, leaders of Grassroots training 
  Indigenous NGOs   Prejudice reduction  
  Community developers  Psychosocial work in   
  Local health officials and post-war trauma 
  Refugee camp leaders 
      (Affects more people)                                                    (Affects many people) 
<Adapted from Lederach (1999b, 29)> 
Although peacemaking can spring from all strata of society and the international 
community, achieving a minimum level of harmony is more urgent. One of the best known 
cultural methods for conciliation in Rwanda is Gacaca. Gacaca, literally meaning lawn, 
is a traditional institution. Most Rwandans, being poor and from the rural community, 
welcome settlements that give them a role in the initiatives of healing the memories and 
peace building, but which also involve economic reconstruction. In this approach, 
perpetrators meet the victims to apologise and receive forgiveness (www.internews.org 
ICTR report 2000).  
Traditional, Gacaca was popular because of its effectiveness as a community-based 
instrument for the settlement of disputes. It was grounded on shared values and norms of 
reciprocity (Vandeginste 2003, 271). Like most traditional systems, Gacaca was not a 
permanent judicial or administrative institution, but rather a meeting convened whenever 
the need arose; it served as a court of equity. Participants were often members of one 
family or inhabitants of one hill or local area. Vandeginste (2003) asserts that there were 
no criteria to determine the number of participants in the proceedings, which the family 
elders chaired. The main objective was to sanction the violation of rules and values that 
were shared by the community; the end of the process was to reintegrate the offender into 
society. The Gacaca dealt with conflicts about land use, land rights, cattle, marriage, 
inheritance rights, loans, and damage to property caused by a member of one of the parties, 
their animals or children. Serious crimes were dealt under the court of the mwami (king).  
Mukarubuga (2000) asserted that modern judiciary systems have superseded traditional 
practices of conflict regulation and the efficiency of the latter changes from one 
community to another. Vandeginste (Bigger 2003) agrees with Mukarubuga (2000) that the 
Gacaca was a unique endogenous process of regulation of social relations and 
safeguarding of social equilibrium. It continued alongside modern justice as an alternative 
method, lightening the liability and penalty while redressing social relations and 
reintegrating individuals into their society.  
There were three traditional judicial institutions in Rwanda, each with competencies and 
limits: (1) The family council (inama yumuryango), (2) the peoples jurisdiction (Gacaca) 
and (3) the tribunal of the king (urukiko rwumwami). Parties in conflict accepted and 
respected the decisions taken by these institutions. Mukarubuga suggested:  
The rule of traditional law is neither steady, general nor mandatory; it aims mainly at re-
establishing the harmony in the society. The system also recognised any sort of rights to the 
person, among others civil rights, human and constitutional rights, although these were not 
written. Gacaca (the lawn on which notables sat while arguing and giving a verdict on conflict 
cases) was not a tribunal with paid and permanent staff. Members were elected from the 
community for their wisdom, respect and impartiality (2000, 7). 
In line with Mukarubuga (2000), President P. Kagame asserted that in the past, impartial 
and honest people were chosen to judge those who were charged with various crimes [par 
le pass, on choisissait des gens intgres et honntes qui dirigeaient la Gacaca pour juger 
les personnes ayant commis differents crimes] (Jeune Afrique/LIntelligent no 2064, 1-7 
August 2000, 28). 
Beside conflict regulation, the Gacaca was a social tool for the management of public 
property: it organised public work and economic activities such as maintaining the wells. 
Although it was the lowest level of the judicial institution  a higher level dealt with 
difficult cases such as murder  first choice for the Gacaca enforced good habits. An old 
saying stresses this: before taking ones case to the kings court, it should be tried first by 
the elders/witnesses (Urujya kujya i bwami rubanza mu bagabo).     
The community elected individual Gacaca leaders (elders) that the society respected for 
their intelligence, impartiality and exemplary behaviour, which were expressions of 
wisdom. A Rwandan adage stresses that there is no good in a village without elders (nta 
agasozi katagira abasaza); it was believed that a village with no elders would always be 
troubled. Elders, abasaza or abakuru, implying wise, sat in a council not primarily to try, 
but to advise, on matters of infractions committed against either community or neighbour. 
They investigated the crisis and reconciled individuals, ensuring that social norms 
(solidarity, protection of vulnerable people etc.) were not broken (Ntampaka 1999 & 2001; 
Vandeginste in Bigger 2003). Failure to meet such values was a punishable situation. The 
community cursed and rejected people who persisted in crime, and the crimes continued to 
haunt offenders families. Families were eager to maintain a reconciled community, since 
unresolved problems could damage relationships in the whole community. Thus, the 
Gacaca was an informal jurisdiction but an effective process for mediation. It was highly 
appreciated for stable cohesion of the society; sanctions of the offender were limited to 
repairing damage and sealing the apology (Mukarubuga 2000; Vandeginste 2003).  
Ntampaka (1999 & 2001), Mukarubuga (2000) and Vandeginste (2003) assert that the 
traditional Gacaca presented advantages because it was culturally rooted and recognized by 
the whole community in social regulation, and maintained the fabric of society. Its 
structure grounded positive values in the community, such as mutual respect and equity. 
Although it did not operate at the national level, the community (families or village) 
generally considered the Gacaca capable of settling any case, whatever its gravity. 
Karekezi (1999) asserted that the purpose of such a mechanism was the reintegration of 
individuals, harmonious cohabitation and prevention of further crisis. 
Vandeginste (2003, 269) ascertains that the modern distinction between judges, parties, 
witnesses and audience is hardly applicable in these cultural settings. In cases involving the 
disruption of the social order, which affect all members of the society, the priority is not to 
determine guilt or to apply state law as such, but first to restore harmony in society and to 
reincorporate into it the people who caused the disorder initially. However, the Gacaca 
principles could evolve into interactive conflict resolution (ICR) model at any level, 
depending on the willingness of the conflicting sides and eventual intervention. According 
to Kelman (1997, 56ff) the ICR is mainly effective for a conceptual basis (in pre-
negotiation and para-negotiation) than sideshow. This may include workshop of unofficial 
representatives of conflicting sides in relatively isolated setting  for instance academic, 
religious etc.  to engage in face-to-face dialogue with guidance of facilitators, familiar 
with conflict theory, group process and regional question. Initiatives such as the Peace 
Accords, CODESA and other para-negotiations in South Africa (see Chapter 5.7), and the 
Rwandans Detmold Confession, Machakos Workshops, the Covenant of churches (see 
Chapter 8.4.1 & 8.4.2.b), etc. largely replicated the ICR model.  
Mukarubuga (2000) and Ntampaka (1999 & 2001) argued that it is not certain that the 
Gacaca would positively affect the situation if structures were produced from the top down 
by the state with new elements. Yet, whether the new Gacaca version would fit into a 
culturally accepted pattern is questionable. Vandeginste (2003, 259) asserts that the nature 
of the Gacaca has been vitally altered. The Gacaca has started to handle the post-genocide 
situation in Rwanda; in legal terms, revitalizing the system is regarded as the only way 
likely to bring about healing and reconciliation, and to be swift in trying the prisoners, 
provided it is applied without contradictions between the traditional pattern and modern 
justice. A combination of local and international initiatives was required to respond to the 
material and moral needs of the population, as a prelude to the Gacaca process.13  
One may anticipate that the Gacaca tribunals could still bring some positive results if the 
purposes were similar to those of the indigenous pattern, including popular participation in 
the organization of trials through the process of truth-telling, promoting unity and 
reconciliation. P. Kagame (interviewed by J-D. Geslin, Jeune Afrique/lIntelligent, 2000) 
vowed that the Gacaca system has a role in pronouncing on genocide cases, depending on 
the level of responsibility during the genocide. Mukarubuga (2000) concurs with Sarkin 
(1997) that such popular form of justice is appropriate in Rwanda, given that the genocide 
was committed within the population. The populace would find it easier giving their 
testimonies if the trial were to take place in the villages rather than in modern tribunals. 
Yet, as long as people participate, they will let those who committed genocide confront 
their responsibility while the victims learn to forgive. Despite Kagames argument, the 
priority for the renewed Gacaca was not truth recovery for reconciliation; it was rather the 
  13 Chapter 9 expands on this combination. 
necessity to solve the problem of overcrowded jails. Moreover, Gacaca is a much cheaper 
method and a socio-economic contribution in a very poor country. However, if Gacaca 
reduced suspicion and overcame groups and the states manipulation, it will assure the 
security of witnesses and reconciliation is likely to eventuate.   
P. Kagame (2000) stated that Gacaca process would establish the truth about the genocide 
and declare sentences on related crimes. One can anticipate certain limits, given the narrow 
scope of Gacaca. Mukarubuga (2000) claims that it is no longer as efficient on a large scale 
as it was in the past. She asserts that (1) it had been restricted to the family level because 
some modern factors led it to be undervalued. (2) Foreign systems inherited from the 
colonial rule and modern justice had progressively replaced the Gacaca. (3) Therefore, 
younger generations, which make up the majority of the Rwandan population, have no 
experience of the typical Gacaca. (4) Vandeginste (in Bigger 2003) concurs with 
Mukarubuga (2000) that cyclic conflicts have destroyed Rwandas social fabric, which 
served as the foundation of the Gacaca. (5) The extent to which people subscribe to social 
values such as respect for elders, unity, solidarity and equity has declined.   
The Gacaca, however, could still be creditable as a social mechanism to settle and prevent 
further discord; it can also fulfil the purpose designed by the current Rwandan State, even 
as tribunals, provided justice is seen to be done in terms of the active participation of the 
population to serve the social cause against vendettas (Vaneginste 2003, 274). Traditional 
Gacaca may not be able to handle violence on a national level and may not operate beyond 
national boundaries. Nevertheless, its principles can be adapted to many levels or domains. 
Mukarubuga (2000) agrees with Vandeginste (2003, 274-275) that the Gacaca would solve 
the problem of prisoners in Rwanda. It would assist in legal proceedings against those 
suspected of genocide, hence establishing interactions within the community.  
The controversies surrounding the new Gacaca are in relation to its top-down pyramid 
structure, its composition and its mandate, but particular problems revolve around the 
intentions of the Government to control the whole process through the Department of 
Gacaca Tribunals within the Supreme Court and the Ministry of Justice (Vandeginste 
2003, 273; cf. Mucyo 2001, 50). Since traditional Gacaca was a means of rapprochement 
for brothers and sisters, enabling estranged members to return home, its elders solved 
problems within one or between two or more families. The punishment, often in the form 
of a pot of banana beer, was only a sign of apology and repentance for forgiveness and a 
pact to let people recommence their unity (Uwitonze 2000). The process enabled the 
offender to beg for pardon and helped the victim to overcome anger, to forgive and to heal, 
while the community expressed repentance and received forgiveness on behalf of the 
offender. The process fits well with the principles and practice of Christian pastoral care14 
and the task for social repair (Minow 1998). 
To date, there have been four proposals in Rwanda, embodying the above principles:  
 Gacaca revitalised into new a Gacaca tribunal.  
 A more or less TRC-like Truth Commission, structured on the middle ground 
between the Nuremberg type and complete amnesia. 
 Rukokoma, an all-inclusive national conference: debate for a way ahead. 
 A society project (prepared by a round table), an all-inclusive plan to operate 
from the bottom up to national level, for a way ahead that is open to international 
participation.15 
Karekezi (1999) contended that traditional Gacaca aimed at reconciliation in the way Jesus 
advised (Matt. 5:21-26), not by trial. Hence, before the tribunal is over, one cannot leave 
  14 Chapter 4 expands on this point. 
  15 There are more explanations on this point in Chapters 8 and 9. 
before every part of ones reparation is paid. Yet, the old saying cautions that there is no 
prophet among his own; no judge tries himself (Nta muhanuzi mu babo cyangwa 
umucamanza wicira urubanza). This is much truer if Gacacas sole aim is carrying out 
trials by one's own community; even worse is doing this along borrowed lines: it requires a 
third party in order to ensure that confidence and power are not abused. Sheppard et al. 
(1989, 166ff) suggests that such a third party ought to have some historic link with 
conflicting groups and grasp the political and socio-cultural reality of the people. In other 
words, the third party might be a part of the dispute in some form or another. 
However, Karekezi (1999) argued that mixing modern justice and Gacaca, or intruding in 
the process, might bring more problems than solutions. He asserted that getting involved in 
the structure of legal justice without sufficient capability can make things worse: this refers 
to the modification of Gacaca and the introduction of new elements (laws and structures). 
He also asserted that only dealing with some aspects (with no power to conclude a verdict) 
might reveal, expose or lead people into new conflicts rather than resolution. Karekezi 
(1999, 1) states, 
Inzego zubutabera iyo bazishoyemo batabishoboye zirushaho gukurura ibibazo byinzitane.  
Gacaca nshya yari ikwiriye ahubwo kugira umugambi wo kunga Abanyarwanda aho kuba cira 
imanza, kuko niba abantu bashoboye kwiyunga bavuze ibyo bakoze, icyo gihe ubucamanza 
nyakuri buzoroherezwa umurimo. [When one intrudes in the ranks of judicial authority without 
adequate ability, such involvement brings more complicated problems than it solves. The 
renewed Gacaca, rather, ought to be intended to bring reconciliation for Rwandans rather than 
trying them, because if people are able to reconcile between themselves by telling the truth 
about their wrong doings, this would have softened the task for real justice]. 
One may agree with Sarkin (2001, 96) that if Gacaca were intended to solve the situation 
the best as it could, it ought to be inclusive, and if the population were able to reconcile and 
confess the truth about their ill actions, then the work of justice would be swift. It seems 
that Sarkin and Uwitonze (2000) agree with Karekezi (1999) and clarify that there are more 
contradictions about the Gacaca courts. Some people eagerly awaited the start of this 
approach, while others distrusted the recycling of Gacacas popular pattern. A further 
problem is that many Western people incorrectly compare the genocide in Rwanda with the 
one in Bosnia and would want the Gacaca formula to be similar to the system used to 
resolve the situation in Bosnia, while in fact the two situations are far different. 
Additionally, Rhot-Arriaza (2001, 55-64) ascertains that even the Bosnian process resulted 
in survivors using the mechanism as a way for revenge. It leads one to think that the same 
situation might happen in Rwanda if untested elements were forced into the Gacaca 
system.16 
In short, the reduction and resolution of conflict occurs effectively when all conflicting 
parties respond positively to actions taken by the others to lessen tension. Co-operative and 
elicitive/innovative options are most effective if they fit the third way and aim at reaching 
satisfaction on all sides. In some situations, historical recuperation, locating issues that 
people had suppressed or forgotten but that are still doing harm, might be the best catalysts 
for reconciliation. Most traditional mechanisms have aimed to restore good relationships 
between former enemies and to reintegrate individuals into society; they ought to be 
integrated into the new patterns. However, most previous mechanisms have failed to deal 
with individuals pain and to recover memories. Any constructive resolution ought to 
consider equally all parties  interests,  rights and their share of power.  A good result helps 
 parties to deal better with the next conflict.
  16 Gacaca, however, could apply National Conference (NC) principles and vice-versa, be they Rukokoma 
or pattern sanctioned by an international round-table; Rwanda could also combine the two patterns (Gacaca 
at local level gradually becoming NC at the higher level). The Rukokoma principles are intended to follow 
cultural experience. Rukokoma's argument was all-inclusive; it echoed the notion of Gacaca, in giving a 
voice to those at the grassroots level, but aiming to reach the national level in a round-table of dialogue of all 
parties. Rukokoma sought cleansing tools (catharsis) in many ways similar to the TRC. If it were applied in 
Rwanda, it would uncover those involved in crimes (Uwitonze 2000). 
Chapter 4 
Conflict Reconciliation: Christian Perspectives 
Christianity, in its own history has not been simply about reconciling. It lives in and with a 
biblical story that is similar. In South Africa, creation and election, read in the Old 
Testament way was the basis of Apartheid; the Old Testament can be appealed to in 
defence of ethnic cleansing. Yet, Christianity aims to be faith of the people, and so gets 
involved in their lives and ways: it supports their identities and thus their conflicts; it 
endorses the self-concerns that drive these conflicts. Christianity may aim to direct their 
lives, or to have power and privilege through some kind of Constantinean alliance. This 
means that Christianity has not been simply reconciling and pacifist.  
Other elements are often in the margins, crying in the wilderness for peace, for and in 
another world, for peaceable Christianity is impractical. It is hard, slow work to make it 
seem practical. This work has significantly grown in recent times, in response to the 
increasing destructiveness of wars and partnership with humanist secularity, which knows 
no hope beyond this present life and wants life before death: it cannot afford to waste life 
here waiting for compensation elsewhere. It is still a minority view, perhaps, but it has a 
much stronger argument and practical implementation. It still has to struggle not only 
against faithfulness inhumanity, but also against Christianities that make or acquiesce in 
 The analysis of these cases counts the presence and significance of Christians in society, 
and the assimilation of Christianity in the ways it is practised and thought, to social groups 
within society and to their needs and policies. It examines the subordination of Christianity 
to the dominant forces or conflicting groups in society, and the limited but real, yet often 
ineffectual, attempts by some Christians to think differently about society and its issues, by 
understanding Christianity under Christ, not under society as it is, following Christ in a 
practical way rather than adoring Him, although his way is thought to be impractical and to 
lead to living in dissent from other Christians. This happened in South Africa and in the 
world church, which attended to the issue of South Africa (see Chapter 5). However, it did 
not happen as such in Rwanda (see Chapter 7).   
These Christian attempts to be faithfully Christian and practically effective in society do 
not immediately produce commitment to reconciliation and ways of conflict resolution. 
Often, they lead to conflict: the conflict is defined according to Christian goals and values. 
The Christian West has been defended against Communism, and now  as some think  
against Islam. The Christian is called in faith to strive for justice, for liberation, not 
shirking conflictual revolution, as in some Liberation Theology. Hence, the Kairos 
Declaration (1985) regarded the language of reconciliation as an evasion of truth: it was 
the definition of a conflict. It belongs to the period in which South Africa was very close to 
civil war in a higher degree. So even for those who understand Christianity from its own 
sources, in its own integrity, and do not merely adopt uncritically the Christianity that is 
already there in society, reconciliation, peacemaking, resolving conflicts, is not the only 
way they can go.  
The argument above raises the question below, which this chapter attempts to answer in 
line with the biblical and theological basis of conflict reconciliation:   
 What is the compulsion in Christian sources, in Christian faith  i.e. God in 
Christ as witnessed in the Bible  to choose the contested option of peace and 
reconciliation?  
 How can that be worked out in ways that might really change societies, and 
enable them to move from deep conflict to life together? 
 Do the Bible or Christian tradition offer any models for conflict resolution and 
reconciliation? Are there any strategies for local churches that can help in conflict 
resolution?  
4.1 General features 
Scholars like Lash (1997) claim that churches are key integration factors in Christianised 
societies. Johnston and Sampson (1995) agree with Lash but question the effectiveness of 
religious presence in statecraft. Religion is, however, assumed to contribute positively to 
leadership, social cohesion and reconciliation of fractured communities. Alas, there is a 
limited contextually focussed and theologically authoritative literature on this perspective. 
The thesis is indebted to Schreiter (2002) and Hay (1999) for their grasp and focus on the 
cases we studied; Pope John Paul II (1984) is valued as a legitimate representative voice of 
the Church, theologically and practically sound.  
For Schreiter (2002), reconciliation embodies spirituality and strategies. Assefa (1996) 
asserts that reconciliation is conflict resolution with additional dimensions and profounder 
implications. While only rarely do theologies engage in reconciliation debates, social 
sciences deal much more with conflict resolution. Scholarly religious writings, Christian 
debates and church praxis have not yet stressed social reconciliation. Volf (1999) asserts 
that the churchs theological tradition offers very little insight into the social meaning of 
reconciliation.    
4.1.1 Biblical approach   
Biblical versions use various phrases to signify reconciliation. The Old Testament (e.g. 
Lev. 8:15 and Ezek. 45:20) suggests [to make] atonement. The New Testament (e.g. Heb. 
2:17) suggests [to make] atonement for the sins of the people, which implies propitiation. 
The biblical concept of reconciliation derives from the Greek verb , originally 
meaning to change or exchange money in particular. The other verb is  (to 
reconcile). The noun  signifies reconciliation relating to people and referring to 
change from enmity to friendship (Vine et al. 1985, 513f.). The root word reconciliatus1 
(Latin) implies coming together. The notion is better expressed in Acts 7:26 by  
referring to Moses attempt to bring peace between two Israelites. Thus,  is a 
unique word conveying the social meaning of reconciliation as understood in nation state 
societies. Closest to  is ; both verbs imply a mutual move for 
reconciliation.  
Although  and its correlates are used in relation to God, Rom. 5:8-11 clarifies 
that enmity comes from the human side alone, while the initiative for reconciliation comes 
from Gods side. Theologically speaking, this basis denies the claim that reconciliation 
requires a complete change in the basic nature of the person involved (2 Cor. 5:17). Yet, 
Rom. 5:8-11 states that God has expressed his love and performed the act of reconciliation 
of sinful man to God through Jesus Christ before the conversion of the sinner. The basis 
clarifies that reconciliation is a gift; it is primarily Gods initiative and the realisation of 
Gods will (Wells 1997), fulfilling Gods demand. 
The Bible offers three models of social reconciliation. (1) Gen. 50:15-21 is a good example 
of individual reconciliation. Josephs brothers came to him and confessed to his betrayal; 
  1 From the Latin word re [again], com [together] and calare [call]. Thus, the whole word means call 
together again or make friendly again (Redekop 2002, 285). 
although they had sold him, he forgave them. This pattern of reconciliation is reflected in 
Luke 15:18-24. (2) In Matt. 18:15-17, Jesus provided a complete pattern for conflict 
resolution and reconciliation procedures for communities.   
If one of my followers sins against you, go and point out what was wrong. But do it in private, 
just between the two of you. If that person listens, you have won back a follower. But if that 
one refuses to listen, take along one or two others. The scriptures teach that every complaint 
must be proved true by two or more witnesses. If the follower refuses to listen to them, report 
the matter to the church. Anyone who refuses to listen to the church must be treated like an 
unbeliever or a tax collector (cf. Luke 17:3-4 [CEV]).   
Luke paraphrases the teaching in these words: 
So be careful what you do. Correct any followers of mine who sin, and forgive the ones who 
say they are sorry. Even if one of them ill-treated you seven times in one day and says,  I am 
sorry,  you should forgive that person (17:4 [CEV]). When someone accuses you of 
something, try to settle things before you are taken to court. If you dont, you will be dragged 
before the judge. Then the judge will hand you over to the jailer, and you will be locked up. 
You wont get out until you have paid the last penny you owe (CEV 12:58-59). 
(3) In Eph. 2:13-22, Paul gives contextually specific principles of the harmonious 
community of believers. He highlights the social implications and Gods intervention in 
matters. He puts peace and reconciliation above laws and ethnic values. Conflict settlement 
and even ultimate reconciliation feature in other Pauline writings, particularly Rom. 5:1-11 
and 6:15-23; 2 Cor. 5:16-20; Eph. 2:15-16; Col. 1:19-21.    
In the biblical patterns, the offended plays a part in seeking harmony, as does the offender. 
The third model expands Jesus lesson (Matt. 5:21-26) that as long as the breakdown 
between human beings remains, the peoples harmony with God cannot be effective. 
Moreover, the biblical texts underline that not only should both parties move, but also 
bystanders have the duty to remind both the culprit to repent and the offended to forgive. 
Jesus sums up the biblical models in Matt. 5:21-26, but in Matt. 18:15-17 and Luke 17:3 he 
stresses the benefit of social reconciliation in contrast with punishment in the absence of 
that social move. The biblical models of reconciliation ought to guide Christian and church 
practice in wider society. 
One can refer to the model described in Matt. 5:21-26 as the Best Alternative to a 
Negotiated Agreement ([BATNA], Fisher & Ury 1991, 101ff.) for the wrongdoer. Jesus 
urged the offender to strive for reconciliation before the victim took the case to judges, 
since in tribunals it is harder to avoid a full punishment and subsequent pain. Again, after 
the trial and full punishment, reconciliation would be most difficult to achieve; the trial 
might increase hatred or not satisfy either side. Matt. 5:21-26 implies both the vertical and 
horizontal dimensions of reconciliation and their interdependency. However, the vertical 
motion (from humans to God) requires prior attention over horizontal relations (between 
humans).   
The ultimate reconciliation is expressed by  in Col. 1:20-22 and Eph. 
2:15-17, which implies Jesus breaking down the barrier of antagonism and making the two 
into one. If two people are in a bad relationship and the one who owes or has offended the 
other wants to put things right with God, the precondition is first to put things right with 
his fellow (Matt. 5:24). The appropriate words expressing the process between the two 
people are  and . A relationship is subject to change in reconciliation, 
indicated by  and .   
John Paul II (1984) and Schreiter (2002) suggest that the concept of reconciliation made 
Pauls teaching vibrant; Paul considered the Gospel to be a message of reconciliation (2 
Cor. 5:18-20). Willmer (2000) agrees with John Paul II and Schreiter that reconciliation is 
Gods demand from the beginning of the fall of man. The ministry of Jesus and his death 
exemplified Gods desire for the reconciliation of humanity. Jesus teaching and acts 
added a further dimension, making peace with a neighbour a prerequisite for reconciliation 
between man and God (Matt. 5: 23-26). The New Testament opens up the deeper 
significance of reconciliation. 
4.1.2 Pauline theology of reconciliation 
Paul provided a relevant scenario in relation to social reconciliation in Eph. 2:11-22. 
However, Willmer (2000) asserts that reconciliation is not purely Pauls idea. Like Assefa 
(1996), Willmer (2000) suggests that reconciliation bears a theological content. He 
suggests, 
The Pauline idea of reconciliation is basically theological, and so is politically limited. [It] is 
cosmic in a metaphysical, imagery sense  it depends on a theological vision, which can see the 
whole of the world and its history as a unity, like a walnut in Gods hand. People of special 
spirit and intellectual formation, as well as social location [] may cultivate this vision. 
Yet, Willmer (2000) emphatically questions the survival of this vision in the world of 
knights on horseback, the crusades and Machiavellian or modern politics. Shriver (1995) 
also cautions that the concept defines a process begun by forgiveness, which does not yet 
signify a final reconciliation. Volf (1996) adds that such a process has to be facilitated by a 
responsible theology. Most theologies agree with Hay (1998) that reconciliation is also a 
gift from God.   
Willmer (2000) contends that Paul practised a kind of community formation and mediation 
as one who founded and cared for the churches, linking them into a wider fellowship, 
within an eschatological perspective and under the compulsion of the ethic of love as 
exemplified in the Gospel of Christ, where Gods love precedes and founds human love. 
Without pointing at specific cases, he seems to acknowledge eventual legal influence to 
Pauline theology as asserted by Domeris (1987) and Marshall (2001, 234-240). He notes 
that Paul had a realistic sense of the order and disorder of the world and understood the 
role of government and the duty to live at peace with all as far as one is able. There is an 
obligation to love others generously, not merely to mind ones own business. This 
argument leads one to conclude that Paul was engaged in social reconciliation. However, 
Lash (1997) notes that Christians are aware that peace remains a hope, a duty and a 
promise, rather than a fact. 
Paul suggested that reconciliation and life in general ought to be meaningful before and 
after death. Volf (1999) observes that the Pauline vision of reconciliation entails a coherent 
set of fundamental beliefs about the nature of God, of human beings and about the relation 
between justice and love. The Pauline vision of reconciliation lies at the core of the 
Christian faith. The core masterpiece of social reconciliation in Pauline writings finds its 
expression in 2 Cor. 5:17-21; friendship with God (verse 20) as well as social 
reconciliation presupposes being in the right mind. Being out of ones mind and not being 
on good terms with ones fellow man affects relation between the person and God. 
Mosala (1987) asserted that Pauls theological metaphor of reconciliation between God 
and humans, and between God and the world, has its historical and cultural roots in socio-
economic meaning. Moreover, Milton (1996) added that 2 Cor. 5:19-29 implies two 
elements: the completed past action, within which in Christ God was reconciling the 
world to himself and the imperative, to be reconciled [] to God. Then 2 
Cor. 5:19-21 enfolds the call to become what has already been accomplished. 
The Pauline introduction to the theme of reconciliation asserts that the prior source of 
separation between God and creation has been overturned. Reconciliation has already been 
effected and will be made complete at a time in Gods future. Milton (1996) asserts that the 
Pauline theological understanding of reconciliation has a double emphasis: (1) further to 
the reality of the already and not yet is a notion of hope for perfection (as for salvation), 
face-to-face with Jesus. The future orientation of reconciliation is also a human task: to 
leave the past behind, to move into the new creation. The duty of the Christian community 
(the church) is to help people in this process. (2) Reconciliation often has an orientation 
from the past: easing the effects of history (human enmities), the past has also been 
affected because in Christ, relations between God and the world have been renewed.  
The most distinctive aspects of the Pauline theology of reconciliation are the eschatological 
dimensions inaugurated in earthly life in relation to the community of believers as a 
reconciled venue, and the soteriological dimension. The imperative to be reconciled (2 
Cor. 5:20) is the objective sustaining Christians in this position.  
4.1.3 Christian ministry and social reconciliation 
Reconciliation is a twofold exercise that entails spirituality and strategy. However, it is 
ultimately a spirituality, not a strategy (Schreiter 1999 & 2002). Full reconciliation 
includes both horizontal and vertical dimensions. Assefa (1999) states that, compared with 
other approaches to handle conflict, reconciliation is perhaps the least understood. Hay 
(1998) and Schreiter (2002) also suggest that there is no agreed upon definition of 
reconciliation in human societies. Specific circumstances for which reconciliation is 
needed have a profound effect on its meaning, e.g. the position of participants, the problem 
to be handled, what counts for truth, justice and the estimated end of the process. 
Paul, in 2 Cor. 5:17-20 highlights that the church must play its part in reconciliation: God 
has entrusted the church with a ministry of reconciliation. Gheorghita (1999, 13) stated 
that if the doctrine of reconciliation is misunderstood and /or improperly applied, the main 
culprits are our pulpits, with effects directly on preachers and indirectly on theological 
education. He urges that the social meaning of reconciliation must be mostly visible in the 
preaching ministry of the church. He stated that, The preaching of Gods Word, 
combining the exposition of biblical text with relevant application for the world in which 
we live is the most effective method.  
The church could contribute to reconciliation processes in two ways: in terms of resources 
and the role it can play. Schreiter (2002) suggested three major resources in the church 
generating reconciliation: its message and subsequent spirituality, its rituals power and its 
communities capacity (Redekop 2002 passim). 
Schreiter (2002, 127) asserted that the Christian message of reconciliation evolves from the 
spirituality and ministry, which focus on the plight of the victims and the restoration of 
their humanity. From this emerges a commission for the reconciled person to continue 
the reconciling work in the community and beyond. Equally, the message generates 
memory, forgiveness and the building of trust, by allowing victims to place their own 
stories in the teachings of Jesus, and so to become reconciled survivors.  
In the light of our previous analysis and the model of reconciliation highlighted in the 
Bible, like most scholars, Schreiters (1999; 2002; 2003) understanding (focussing on the 
plight and the restoration of the victim) is victim biased. He delivers half of the core 
teaching of Jesus on the practice of reconciliation, which stresses the correction of the 
sinner by encouraging signals from the victim and bystander. Schreiters emphasis may 
reflect the practice in churches, which sidelines the core of social reconciliation (see Matt. 
5:21-26 & Luke 12:58-59; Luke 15:11-32 cf. Matt. 18:15-17 & Luke 17:3-4). Such an 
orientation of the doctrine of reconciliation confirms Gheorghitas (1999) assertion that if 
the doctrine is misunderstood, it results in improper application, primarily in the churchs 
preaching and teaching. The church can provide ongoing schooling in the spirituality of 
reconciliation through preaching. 
While most theologies and church practices exemplify a victim-biased approach, Tutus 
(1999) theology and leadership focus on the centrality of correction. In shaping the TRC 
and subsequent theology, Tutu (1999) objected to the trend to focus exclusively on the 
plight of the victims and the restoration of their humanity. He asserted that the Christian 
perspective of reconciliation seeks the sinner (perpetrator) first, since the latter needs more 
care than the victim does; the victim is in a stronger position before God. 
In the ritual celebration of the Holy Communion, the church expresses symbols of the 
presence and absence of Jesus, and exemplifies how such expression embodies healing of 
memory and brings hope (Schreiter 2002). Johnston and Sampson (1995) also suggest that 
the ideology of most churches has a reconciliation component of social justice. However, 
Jesus model in Matt. 5: 21-26 is most practical and clarifies that a religious claim 
presupposes fulfilment of a social demand. The model holds together both spiritual and 
social demands. Likewise, most cultures have rituals expressing reconciliation.  
Christian and cultural rituals are positive means, values and strategies incorporating 
equally all three  the victim, the offender and the bystander  in the process of 
reconciliation. John Paul II (1984) and Hay (1998) agree with Schreiter (2002) that the 
celebration of the Eucharist can take in the principle of integration in the process of 
reconciliation. Hay (1998) and Schreiter (2002) suggested that one of the sacramental tasks 
in social reconciliation is dealing with the guilt of the bystanders. So-called bystanders 
may directly or indirectly commit more abuses than perpetrators on the ground in times of 
horrors or during the process of reconciliation. They could even be more accountable in the 
proceedings of reconciliation because of support given to conflicting parties in terms of, 
for example, arms, funds or media and political campaigning, ideological or religious 
backing and lobbying. The Rwandan case exemplified all these. Churches can make 
positive use of their resources (place, time and activities) for ritual moments, which reach 
beyond the life of the congregation to seal apologies (confession and repentance, setting up 
actions signalling genuine reconciliation), hear declarations of forgiveness and celebrate 
new dispositions (John Paul II 1984; Hay 1998; Schreiter 2002). Churches ought to be 
among (if not the major) states partners in reconciliation.  
Johnston and Sampson (1995) relate to Church space and capacity largely in socio-political 
terms; they hold that the theological and ecclesiastical domains might be a central force for 
change, through their international links, associated NGOs, schools, media, properties and 
lay-people. Given the size of its population, its involvement as opposition or an alternative 
to Communism, its ethnicity etc., the church may be very instrumental in creating unity, 
because it is the major public force in dialogue with the state. Schreiter (2002) argues that 
because of its moral standing in the society  if this has not been compromised  the 
church has the capacity and power to create communities that are spaces of safety, memory 
and hope that make reconciliation possible. By accompanying victims (or alternatively 
perpetrators), by creating secure zones through hospitality, by unfolding memories and 
making new connections in the stories of victims (and perpetrators), the church can create 
a body of people capable of transforming society. Again, by living as a reconciled 
community, the church becomes a model to the larger society of what is possible. Thus, the 
three areas  model, locus and connections  are strategic means by which the church 
offers resources to heal individuals and society. Christians ought to investigate how, when 
and where such strategic resources would develop to use them effectively.   
Baum and Wells (1997) suggest that the church could assist in situations requiring social 
reconciliation, in particular through the ministry that God has entrusted to her. Even so, 
each situation is different. Baum and Wells further observed that church leaders rarely 
exercise such a ministry, sometimes because of timidity and fear that an attempt to heal a 
divided society would carry the divisions into the churches. Some leaders fear that stirring 
the situation may put their own position at risk. Volf (1996) suggests that divisions are 
likely to be found already in the churches, often kept under the surface. 
Friedmann (1990) asserts that churches are often cut off from foreign financial help, and 
being short of funds, turn to internally organised programmes that are subsidised by the 
government. The difference in access to resources creates clashes even between leaders of 
church branches and negatively affects church-state relations. People take sides, causing 
further divisions, and then church leaders commit a number of aggressive actions. Wells 
(1997) agrees with Volf (1996) that the presumed agents of reconciliation (church 
members and leadership) are trapped in the claims of their ethnic and cultural community, 
and their desire to carry out the ministry of reconciliation fails. The leaders often become 
accomplices in the strife, by commission or omission, and fail to act out of guilt.  
Gheorghita (1999) states that the church as an international organisation has numerous 
opportunities to facilitate reconciliation through para-church initiatives, relief and 
development agencies and religious orders and to proclaim critical solidarity through sub-
activities such as lobbying and media campaign, rallies of Human Rights groups and 
advocacy for democracy. This is another way to redefine the churchs mission in the world 
today.   
Hay (1998) depicts positive means at hand in the church for reconciliation, on which he 
mostly agrees with John Paul II (1984), including the use of the preaching ministry 
(comprising repentance and forgiveness) as a social tool of communication. Hay (1998) 
adds programmes such as periodical schools focusing on key themes such as 
reconciliation and justice. 
At the centre of the biblical message, Jesus Christ designed a realistic template for 
reconciliation (Matt. 5:21-26) embracing social and moral aspects, viz. strategies where 
social requirements prepare individuals for spiritual obligations. Most cultures have a very 
distinct concept of reconciliation that is expressed ritually, where wrongdoing is 
acknowledged, the offender apologises, the apology is accepted by the community and the 
wrongdoer is ritually reintegrated into the community, signifying forgiveness (Schreiter 
2002; Friedmann 1990).  
In Rwanda, traditional Gacaca implied such a ritualised pattern of conflict settlement. This 
model differs from Jesus one in one aspect: the persons connection to God through 
sacrificial acts. Traditional Africa was not Christian, and its culture still strongly influences 
the current context within which Christianity operates. Friedmann (1990) suggested three 
stages that shaped contextual conflict resolution: (1) Producing into the public arena both 
the offender and victim, and identifying the negative contribution of both parties; (2) 
Ascertaining the degree of guilt and innocence of parties and undoing the harm done; (3) 
Handing out punishment proportionate to the degree of guilt. The community and later the 
church accompanied the parties through subsequent steps toward genuine reconciliation 
and the restoration of individuals into the community. Churches adopted the pattern to the 
point that even voluntary confessions could end with punishment for the penitent. Many 
African societies had little interest in punishment, and were often uninterested in 
discovering the guilty party: they emphasised healing through dialogue, counselling from 
elders and sharing drink2 with witnesses and members of the community.  
Context and circumstance affect how Christians both use the word reconciliation and go 
about achieving it (Schreiter 2002). Volf (1996) suggested that churches are presumed 
agents of reconciliation, but Christians are also committed to their traditional culture and 
thus are impotent in the strife. In an informal talk with Volf, the writer asked why church 
leaders often evade truth, objectivity and naming the evil in times of conflict. He 
suggested, it might be because leaders are conflicted with the interests of their people and 
do not want to choose whom to speak for, victims or perpetrators (Volf paper, 10 June, 
2002). 
  2 Inzoga yabagabo [beer for witnesses]. 
Biblical text suggests that 2 Cor. 5:17-20 is the measure against which to assess the 
Christian ministry and social engagement of churches, while the essence of Christian 
reconciliation is to be found in Rom. 5:8-11. Theologies present the foundation of 
reconciliation as an initiative taken largely by God. While there is little, if any, specific 
theology on reconciliation between people, previous analysis has validated that 
reconciliation with God expects reconciliation between people. Pauls teaching on 
reconciliation can be summarised in these points:  
 First, God initiates and completes in us reconciliation through Christ. This is the 
genesis of the spirituality of reconciliation. Volf (paper, 10 June 2002) advises that 
reconciliation should not be a premature closure, but should provide something we can 
work towards, making sure not to be authoritarian and not to oppress the people involved. 
Shriver (1995) asserts that forgiveness begins the process and cautions us not to call the 
evolving relationship between the wrongdoer and the wronged reconciliation, but to 
reserve the word for the end of the process. Shriver (1995) replicates the most common 
perception that makes church leaders think that nothing can be done to reconcile people, 
unless people repent first for others to forgive. Church leaders find reconciliation difficult 
to achieve because they expect it to be that final piece of the process. However, one 
cannot reach the end if one does not start. From beginning to end, the whole process 
should be called reconciliation.   
Schreiter (2002) observes that God generates reconciliation in the lives of victims to turn 
wrongdoers to repentance, because the latter are rarely willing to acknowledge their sins. If 
reconciliation depended entirely upon the wrongdoers initiative, it would occur only 
rarely. Thus, God begins by restoring the victims humanity, which the wrongdoer had 
destroyed. Victims are in a stronger position before God and their conscience than 
wrongdoers are. Henceforth, the process of reconciliation is the experience of grace: the 
restoration of the likeness of God (Tutu 1999; Gen. 1:26). The process that God begins 
leads to the reconciliation of the whole world in Christ (Col. 1:20) as exemplified on the 
cross. From the remaking of individuals that could easily happen among Christians through 
the churches ministry, the wider society can be healed.  
The process of human reconciliation by churches ought to follow Gods chosen strategy, 
beginning with the victim calling the wrongdoer to repentance through the disposition of 
victims to forgive. This explains the paradox that, seen from Gods perspective, repentance 
and forgiveness are not the preconditions for reconciliation, but the consequences. What is 
distinctive in Christian forgiveness is that we are not justified by our innocence, but 
forgiven if we accept the call to repent: Christians are forgiven sinners. The process is 
already underway by Gods initiative before any human intervention. Schreiter (2002) 
concludes that the moment of reconciliation comes upon the victim as surprise and the 
consequences take people where they had not expected to go, with Gods action moving 
the victim.    
 Second, reconciliation is a product of both spirituality and strategy. Schreiter (paper, 
23 June 2003) suggested that Christian spirituality is living out the imperative of the 
Gospel. OLeary & Hay (2000) assert that forgiveness and healing, reparation and 
reconciliation are not political words, but spiritual words. Not everyone agrees with this 
assertion, but it is true that Faith Communities are the custodians of these realities. 
Reconciliation is the cultivation of a relationship with God and the medium through which 
it can happen: there is an interaction of the divine and the human. That relationship 
expresses itself in spiritual practices that create space for truth, for justice, for healing and 
for new possibilities. Thus, reconciliation as spirituality is essential. John Paul II (1984, 
22-23) suggests, 
The churchs reconciling role must therefore be carried out in accordance with that intimate 
link which closely connects the forgiveness and remission of the sin of each person with the 
full reconciliation of humanity which took place with active redemption since sin is the 
principle of division Only conversion from sin is capable of bringing about a profound and 
lasting reconciliation... This pastoral activity would be lacking an essential aspect of its being 
and failing in an indispensable function if the message of reconciliation were not proclaimed 
with clarity and tenacity in season and out of season, and if the gift of reconciliation were not 
offered to the world The importance of the ecclesial service of reconciliation extends beyond 
the confines of the church to the whole world.   
Each faithful member at all levels, in all spheres and with all the means at her disposal 
(words, actions, teaching and prayer) leads individuals or groups to true penance, setting 
them on the path to full reconciliation (John Paul II 1984). As representatives of their 
brothers and sisters, the clergy should carry out the task through official statements, teach 
the word and administer the sacraments.   
John Paul II (1984) advises that church dialogue be a means, and a way, of carrying out her 
activity in the modern world. In addition to dialogue, truth telling, forgiveness and rituals, 
Schreiter (2002, 16-17) advises us not to by-pass strategies in the ministry, because the 
experience of reconciliation is not merely the opportunity to dwell in the overwhelming 
grace of God. The experience of reconciliation shall lead to action. Social reconciliation 
remains incomplete if it does not help rebuild and sustain the social fabric. In conjunction 
with this is the need for laws and pardon or eventual amnesty. The judicious use of these 
elements strengthens a new society if justice is clear and functional, but it requires strategic 
thinking and action.  There should be a balance between spirituality and strategy. A 
spirituality that does not lead to strategies does not fulfil its goal, and strategy that is not 
based in spirituality will fall short of the mark. There is a need for mutual interaction, in 
which the spiritual ought to guide the strategic, yet the strategy gives the spirituality form 
in action (Schreiter 2002, 17). 
 Third, the reconciliation moves/reforms both offended and offender (2 Cor. 5:17). It 
restores peoples humanity; restoration in God brings back the humanity, but is not a 
denial of the painful experience of injustice and violation. It is a transformation of the 
experience. Schreiter (2002, 17) argues that without spirituality, strategies make 
reconciliation a restoration of the status quo ante. Thus, reconciliation is not merely 
looking back, and no one can do real justice for the dead; it addresses the past adequately 
so that people can go forward, achieving something people cannot otherwise fully achieve. 
Victims and criminals find themselves in a new place and relationship. The new creation 
is a sign of Gods presence. The restoration of the humanity of the victim includes the 
painful experience of violence, as part of ones memory and change of identity. 
The church ought to be a community of reconciliation par excellence. Schreiter (2002) 
suggested that three features emerge in the communities of reconciliation. (1) Churches 
ought to be safe zones, where victims can examine and explore their pain. Safety is the 
basis for the rebuilding of trust; the experience of violence does the opposite. (2) Churches 
provide space where memories can be recovered, redemptive of the suffering of the past 
(Shreiter 2002; Volf 1996), and cease to destroy people and communities; people can recall 
together their common past. For Schreiter (2002), a society cannot reconcile itself on the 
grounds of a divided memory. Christian communities ought to be places where people 
learn again to speak the truth; otherwise they can find themselves distorting it and being 
drawn into lies imposed upon them by their overlords. (3) Churches are places to make 
connections, places of hope nurturing the seedling of a better and more just world in the 
future. Christians build a safe common future of effective justice and truth telling. 
In the ministry of reconciliation, spirituality develops best in learning to wait and in 
listening, which may help restored victims in identifying connections and commissions. 
Schreiter (2002) states that since Christians are people of resurrection and ministers of 
reconciliation, the reconciliation is the fruit of resurrection. The stories of the appearance 
of Christ, when read as stories of reconciliation, help to take in what both resurrection and 
reconciliation are about.   
Schreiter (2002,105) rates Bronkhorsts (1995) account of reconciliation efforts vis--vis 
Human Rights abuses as the best status quaestionis to date: the former suggests that no two 
social contexts of reconciliation are alike. Effective reconciliation is not an abstract idea; it 
involves coming to terms with a concrete past while working towards a different future 
within the politico-economic, socio-cultural and religious constraints of the context. 
Bronkhorst (1995) and Schreiter (2002) are among other researchers holding that any 
reconciliation process ought to begin by focusing on what it means in that context, who 
should be the actors, who needs it, what are the most efficacious means and the final state 
of the process.   
At early stage, persuading enemies to meet with one another can help to create a common 
understanding among those involved. Schreiter (2002) asserts that, at such a level, 
reconciliation does not engage discussion until there is deep division within the society. 
Yet, one should not expect unanimity to come about until discussion brings the parties 
hidden agendas to the surface.  
Churches are in a better position to facilitate  bringing the hidden agendas to the surface  
if not to initiate the work of defining the objects, subjects and efficient means. Defining the 
objects and subjects of reconciliation requires a consensus. Victims and offenders have 
different perspectives in this regard. Offenders are unlikely to admit what needs to be 
reconciled; most victims point to specific acts; onlookers often press for action: 
reconciliation (Schreiter 2002). Churches least tainted by Apartheid in South Africa or the 
genocide in Rwanda exemplified the latter attitude. For Rwanda, Schreiter (2002, 106-107) 
doubted whether the central point in reconciliation relates only to the slaughter that took 
place after the death of President Habyarimana (April 6, 1994), and whether the process 
should not look at the inequities between Hutus and Tutsis even under Belgian colonial 
rule. Further doubt was raised about whether there could be a consensus on where to begin; 
whether the reconciliation is the best way, or whether there is an alternative form of 
adjudication and what would happen to society if some form of reconciliation does not take 
place.  
Concerning the appropriate means, among other things, culture helps when it has patterns 
of reconciliation. It may also be effective to apply borrowed patterns for one setting, while 
they may be useless in another. Thus, reconciliation ought to be context based (Schreiter 
2002; Staub & Pearlman 2001). Borrowing culturally rooted forms requires deep 
knowledge of their context of origin and of the destination, however. Otherwise, if the new 
forms do not fit culturally, they could raise discontent in the other society.  
Churches could be the best watchdogs if difficulties arise with the legal system: if it is 
discredited by identification with a bad regime, then it becomes inadequate. The same 
could happen if new judges and lawyers are hastily trained and a tribunal convened, as is 
the case in Rwanda. Therefore, time may be another factor, with the new government, 
perhaps pressurised by outside agencies, wanting to deal quickly with the crisis or to 
concentrate all energy on reconstruction, which is a half measure. Such a call for a speedy 
process may come mostly from those who were part of the wrongdoing in order to cover 
up their crimes (Schreiter 2002). Constraint, then, may be linked with those powers that 
were responsible for the offence, if they are still in control. The examples of Chile, where 
Pinochet remained the chief of the army, and of Chad, where the commission of 
reconciliation was met with hostile actions from the entourage of the former President and 
witnesses who feared to give their testimonies, are cases in point.   
4.2 Forgiveness, confession and repentance 
Forgiveness is a term implying both action and reaction in both directions: from or to 
victim, from and/or to offender. Consistent with forgiveness is repentance, which is a 
component of conversion,3 but the latter two concepts are sometime interchangeable. 
Niebuhr (1959) contends that the doctrine of forgiveness is the crown of Christian ethics. 
He suggests that forgiveness is a moral achievement, possible only when morality is 
transcended by religion. The religious ideal of forgiveness is, however, more profound and 
difficult than the rational virtue of tolerance, whether it is mere pardon or general amnesty. 
Niebuhr (1959) argues that in an absolute sense, forgiveness is as impossible as any other 
portion of Christs perfectionism.   
Arendt (cited in Shriver, 1995, 6) stated that forgiveness is one of two human capacities 
that make possible genuine social changes, the other being the capacity to make new 
promises or covenants. For Shriver (1995, 7), forgiveness is a strange candidate for a 
central place in politics. It is associated with the vocabulary of religion and has a religious 
ring in the ears of most modern Westerners in way that justice does not. Forgiveness is the 
highest expression of love. Love and forgiveness can motivate a religious approach to 
social justice. However, forgiveness begins with memory, and together with love, it 
transcends justice.  
Niebuhr (1959, 201-206) stated: If one were to follow the words of Jesus,  Let him who 
is without sin cast the first stone,  without qualification, no criminal could be arrested. 
Yet, it is possible to deal with criminals in this perspective, qualifying to spiritual pride as 
guardians of public morals. Therefore, the spirit of forgiveness in social conflict does not 
depend upon the ability of men to reach an absolute perspective, which transcends the 
conflict (Niebuhr 1959). Forgiveness is a response to repentant offenders, and possibly to 
the disposition of the victims and their entourage (Matt. 5:21-26; Luke 12:58-59 cf. Matt. 
18:15-17; Luke 17:3-4). Christian understanding adds that prior forgiveness generates the 
  3 : a change of mode of thought and feeling [Matt. 3:8], reversal of the past [Heb. 12:17] or a 
turning around: . 
repentance and the disposition to forgive (2 Cor 5:18-21). For Christians, forgiveness  
like amnesty and pardon  does not necessarily result from the offenders truth telling or 
repentance (confessions); rather, the love towards and from God generates it. Contrary to 
repentance, which is a one-way exercise, forgiveness moves from both sides: if they 
believe, the loving victim might move first, then the sinner too. 
Morality, religious quality and spiritual rebirth generate forgiveness. In the same way, as 
Schreiter (2002, 14-15) observes, God initiates the work of reconciliation in the lives of 
victims to motivate the repentance of wrongdoers. God begins with victims to initiate the 
way to forgiveness; likewise, on the cross, God initiated the process that reclaims the 
reconciliation of the whole World in Christ (Col. 1:20). It is the priority of grace, which, 
seen from this perspective, justifies the strategy of reconciliation, and, paradoxically, the 
absence of preconditions is often the sign or consequence of reconciliation. Schreiter 
(2002: 14-15) states that this as a surprise to the victim, which takes people where 
otherwise they would not expect to go. From there, one can discern Gods action: moving 
the victim to express readiness to forgive his offender. Then forgiveness finds its 
expression in social gestures (rituals): former enemies embracing or visiting one another, 
working together or chatting with confidence.  
Arnold (2000) agrees with Schreiter (2002) that forgiveness does not wait for apologies. It 
helps the brutalised person not to harden the tension, or not to suffer more injustice. 
Likewise, it prevents the perpetrator from committing similar or further crimes. This 
argument fits with the Lords Prayer plea, forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors, 
contrary to the pitiless servant who was forgiven for a huge sum he could not clear, but 
strangled his fellow for a smaller debt (Matt. 18:23-35). However, as Schreiter (2002) 
asserts, the perpetrator does not recover true peace until he has exorcised his own evil; 
forgiveness only may end the cycle of violence.  
In social terms, context provides the significance of the reconciliation; it dictates when one 
is likely to forgive. Christian understanding is close to this principle: a person who does 
not relate fairly to his neighbour will not do so with God (Matt. 5:21-24). The African 
concept of forgiveness embraces the Christian influence at large in both the significance 
and practices. Although one may naively equate forgiveness with forgetting, it is arguable 
in the Rwandan tradition that forgiving is also forgetting, but the experience shows that 
forgiving also is remembering. One forgives what one recalls, recalling the way it 
happened, and accepting the release of the offender from her/his burden, which otherwise 
would require repairing the full damage and even punitive measures.   
The Rwandan concept of reconciliation embeds forgiveness, which implies a total 
acknowledgement of the wrong, then letting it all be forgotten if the wrongdoer or her/his 
representative apologises. If revenge is taken, it will not give healing. It may be thought 
that if there is someone to blame, then we can put the matter to rest because the victim will 
get some sort of justice, and the pain will go away, as if having the perpetrator dead would 
help. Arnold (2000) asserts that true forgiveness means looking steadily at the sin and its 
full consequences and seeing it in all its horror, but being wholly reconciled to the other 
person.  
In the Xhosa and Soto contexts of South Africa, forgiveness is a reciprocal exercise that 
cannot occur without meeting some conditions; to apologise means to beg forgiveness 
(Mafani 2000). Likewise, gusaba imbabazi in the Kinyarwanda language means begging 
forgiveness; it implies both apology/repentance and seeking forgiveness; it is seeking 
peace. Reconciliation is to reunite and re-establish the peace; forgiveness is entwined with 
apologies and pardon to produce reconciliation. It also involves physical unity and 
solidarity, both of which, like forgiveness, require progression through the stages of 
knowing what happened and apologising, and this in turn generates forgiveness.   
Ubwiyunge in Kinyarwanda, ukubuyisana in Xhosa and upatanisho in Swahili mean 
reconciliation or reunion. The unity entrenches social values, morality or spirituality. 
Ubwiyunge is both rapprochement and moral repair. Kunga in Kinyarwanda is to 
conciliate, reconcile or rather to mediate, which usually requires third-party intervention. 
Kwiyunga stresses reciprocity and does not call for a mediator. Kwiyunga leads to 
ubwiyunge (reconciliation), which ideally is a process from and towards both sides; the 
initiatives mostly originate from the conflicting parties, calling both sides to active 
participation. The process begins by considering ones own or the groups integrity and the 
recovering of rapport with others. Thus, kwiyunga is first putting oneself right or regaining 
valuable status in society. Kwiyunga in relation to two or more individuals or groups 
means coming back into dialogue, closeness and amicability with one another. The notion 
of ubwiyunge fits with the advice given by John Paul II (1984, 24) that authentic dialogue 
aims above all at the rebirth of individuals through interior change and repentance, with 
profound respect for consciences, with patience and at a step-by-step pace.  
In traditional African society, if someone was accused or acknowledged her/his offence 
and apologised, the society appreciated the apology. If it was acceptable, rituals to 
reintegrating the wrongdoer into the community followed; the process embodied 
forgiveness. The traditional process for reconciliation in Rwanda, i.e. Gacaca, fits the 
pattern of the Prodigal Son (Luke 15:11-32) that the South African TRC also replicated. 
The coherence of the Christian message makes it useful for a divided society. Churches 
can make use of their space for ritual, reaching beyond the life of the church to seal 
apologies and hear declarations of forgiveness, be they public confessions or written 
apologies; people can celebrate these moments. Through their ministry, churches ought to 
provide ongoing classes in the spirituality of reconciliation, calling for practical steps 
(Schreiter 2002; Hay 1998). John Paul II (1984) states that in preaching, the church ought 
to untiringly exhort people to enter into reconciliation. Churches ought to condemn evil; 
denunciation is not necessarily accusation, save when the wrongdoer persists, but to 
proclaim the need for  and ask people to be reconciled (2 Cor. 5:20). Like Jesus, 
the church always ought to proclaim those words of forgiveness and exemplify them in 
practice. The reconciling role of the church must accord with the intimate link that 
connects forgiveness and remission of the sins of individuals through faith in Christ with 
the reconciliation of humanity that took place within Gods act of redemption. Since sin is 
the active principle of division, only conversion from sin is capable of bringing about a 
profound and lasting reconciliation (Schreiter 2002). The spiritual dimension rebuilds 
shattered lives so that social reconciliation becomes a reality. 
Table 4.1:  Test for effective model of reconciliation 
      (1) Does the model consider the vertical dimension, top and bottom (in society, or society 
and individuals to God) and the horizontal dimension (between individuals in society)? 
      (2) Does it allow free, comprehensive narration and remembrance of the misdeed 
(truth, fact finding)? 
      (3) Is it ritualised (e.g. former enemies embracing one another or sharing food, drink etc.), 
incorporating a representative act and event as a sign of the acceptance of sacrifice even if there 
was loss?  
      (4) Does it give time to heal or allow for gradual progress in phases? For believers, God is 
above time and can accomplish reconciliation at any time. 
      (5) Does it allow face-to-face and equal attention (wronged <-> culprit)? Is the meeting 
ground levelled? 
      (6) Is it open to questions, public scrutiny, naming the evil and the wrongdoer, public 
confessions, forgiveness, exorcising demons; does it allow third-party intervention? 
      (7) Does it give priority to peace and reconciliation above law, culture and values (e.g. 
ethnic differences): does it attempt to  and eventually  forgive any kind of wrong at any level 
(Luke 17:4)? 
Society sets conditions that increase the possibility for effective reconciliation, but it 
cannot be achieved by those conditions alone. A stable state is able to set up commissions 
examining wrongdoing, but it cannot legislate the healing of memories. It can offer 
amnesty or mete out punishment, but it cannot guarantee forgiveness. Spirituality 
encompasses forgiveness, the most the church can offer to effect reconciliation. While 
various cultures have strategic practices of cleansing, reincorporating wrongdoers and 
deviants into their communities, Christianity adds the spiritual power and reality, rites and 
sacraments that foster full reconciliation. The cultivation of the relationship with God 
becomes the medium through which reconciliation can happen. God brings healing through 
forgiveness (Jones 1995); that relationship expresses itself in spiritual practices that create 
space for new possibilities and for truth, justice and healing. Such practices create 
reconciling communities of memory, safe places to explore, untangle a painful past and 
cultivate truth telling to overcome the lies of injustice and wrongdoing (Schreiter 2002).  
No one can change people, but with Gods intervention, people can change; Pauls 
conversion (Acts 9) confirms this. Jesus paradigm allows us to set seven tests (Table 4.1) 
to which any common model of reconciliation would respond positively.  
In short, the major biblical sources for conflict resolution and reconciliation are Matt. 5:21-
26 and Luke 12:56-59, which call the wrongdoer to initiate the process. Matt. 18:15-20 and 
Luke 17:1-4 are equally major sources, which call the offended and bystanders to initiate 
the process. Matt. 18:15-20, Rom. 5:1-11 and 6:15-23, 2 Cor. 5:16-20, Eph. 2:15-16 and 
Col. 1:19-22 underline Gods intervention in reconciliation. Gn. 50:15-21 and Luke 15:11-
32 exemplify the processes of conflict reconciliation, the presuppositions and the 
implications of forgiveness. These biblical sources nourished the Christian theology of 
reconciliation and can shape a Christian model of reconciliation that can be applied in most 
contexts. The model implies a degree of change of peoples nature and restitution and 
underlines the interplay of Gods grace and prior justification by God. Jesus teaching does 
not exclude legal aspects, but highlights the added dividends from repentance and 
forgiveness. The New Testament gives deeper significance to reconciliation, which has 
soteriological and eschatological dimensions: i.e. those reconciled to God are still called to 
the duty to reconcile. World Christianity ought to accompany and support local churches, 
enabling them to contribute effectively; it ought to positively influence the international 
community to impart politico-economic and humanitarian initiatives and peace building at 
national level. The most contextually relevant theological basis for peace and 
reconciliation is that the church is entrusted with a ministry of reconciliation that 
presupposes the gifts, sources and means that each Christian can receive and exhibit 
purposefully in his life (Wells 1997). 
Among other Christian strategies are responses to the needs of both victims and 
wrongdoers and the involvement of bystanders; the church provides space and resources 
and plays a part in reconciliation through its messages, rituals and capacity for 
communication. Other strategies include continuous schooling, celebration of the Holy 
Communion and the sermons. Churches provide places of safety because they are the main 
institutions that can dialogue with the state and other powers. It is unhelpful that church 
theologies and practices are often victim biased. They have misplaced the core of the 
teaching of Jesus, who stresses caring for both offender and victim. If churches follow 
Jesus model in their lifestyle, words and rituals, and in balancing their help to victims, 
perpetrators and onlookers, they can encourage and hear apologies. 
Churches have the opportunity to trigger the reconciliation process through lobbying, relief 
and development activities. Theological rethinking can stimulate social change. Churches 
are expected to provide the model, sources and resources to heal individuals and societies. 
Churches should emphasise the corrective aspect of justice and reconciliation even in their 
ranks, initiating local ADRs and setting structures (e.g. summer schools, small cells, 
special programmes and events like Holy Communion, material production, Bible studies, 
workshops, conferences, and interfaith consultations) on local, regional and national levels 
to allow education and facilitation for the reconciliation and healing processes. 
PART  TWO :  SOUTH  AFRICAS  CASE 
Chapter 5 
Country Context: Formative Attitude 
This chapter outlines the background to conflict reconciliation in South Africa. The 
rationale of the chapter derives from three questions: 
 How did the crisis escalate to Apartheid and the risk of destruction of South African 
society?  
 How did the parties come to agreement to bring about change, which the Apartheid 
regime had resisted for so long, and what made it possible? 
 To what extent did the church contribute to the genesis and to the solution of the crisis?  
5. 1 South Africas socio-political background  
The dominant feature of South Africas history is the deep conflict between a minority 
(White), which reserved for itself all control over the political instruments of the state, and 
a majority (Black) that sought to resist that domination. Mohamed stated, fundamental 
human rights became a major casualty of this conflictthe legitimacy of the law itself was 
deeply woundedin the face of this tragic conflict (TRC Final Report 1998 vol. I, chap. 
1). The conflict crystallised in the electoral victory of the Afrikaners National Party in 
1948 (Johnston & Sampson 1994). This conflict had three dimensions: internal (domestic), 
regional and global (international). 
Two elements require our attention: law and violence, and the relationship between them. 
In South Africa, violence was often a result of the government law (Acts) or the leadership 
of the liberation struggle. The TRC Final Report asserts:  
It was not the National Party Government that introduced racially discriminatory practices to 
this part of the world. Nor is it likely that the National Party Government was the first to 
perpetrate some or most of the types of gross violations of human rights recorded in the Report. 
The probable exception is that category of abuse that falls under the general rubric of contra-
mobilisation  exemplified by the deployment of surrogate forces such as the Caprivi-trained 
Inkatha supporters, the Witdoeke,  A-team1 and other politicised gangs, as well as those 
forces, such as UNITA, that were used to destabilise the region (1998, vol. I, chap. 2, 11).  
Violent law was first manifest concerning the importation of slaves into South Africa 
(1652-1834), centuries before internal and structured conflict. In the seventeenth and 
eighteenth centuries, the settler groups, both Afrikaner and British, carried out systematic 
hunting and elimination of the indigenous nomadic people (TRC Final Report 1998 vol. I, 
chap. 2; Elphick & Davenport 1997). The Mfecane2 event exemplifies another factor: 
thousands of African people died and others were displaced in a Zulu-inspired process of 
state formation and dissolution. During the Anglo-Boer war3, British forces herded Boer 
women and children into concentration camps where more that 20,000 died (TRC Final 
Report 1998 vol. I, chap. 2; Boraine 2000 passim). South Africa has known tribal wars, 
inter-tribal exclusion and violence. The examples above illustrate that the roots of 
discrimination on racial lines were deeply grounded in South Africa, since early contacts 
between Africans and Europeans.  
The domestic level also includes the Sharpeville massacre of March 21st 1960. This event, 
over the imposition in the school syllabus of the Afrikaner language, was one among many 
other killings of civilian protesters in South African history (Christie 2000; Elphick et al. 
1997; Ross 1999). A revisionist literature, however, suggests that the Land Act (1913) 
dramatically and drastically re-shaped the social map of South Africa, more than even gold 
and mining did. Africans land ownership outside the initial seven percent of land allocated 
to the so-called traditional reserves was prohibited, ending sharecropping and non-tenancy 
arrangements on White-owned farms. The violence arising from law continued to mount, 
particularly after the stewardship of Prime Minister Dr. Malane in 1948 (Johnston & 
Sampson 1994; Beinart & Debow 1999). Since that time, more violent strategies were built 
on the Land Act.  
Since 1949, eight Acts have operated at the internal level to cause inequalities and allow 
atrocities: (1) the Prohibition of Mixed Marriages Act (1949) and (2) the Immorality 
Amendment Act (1950) prohibited both interracial marriages and sexual contact across 
races. (3) The Population Registration Act (1950) classified every South African into one 
of four categories: White, and three categories of non-White. (4) The Suppression of 
Communism Act (1950) outlawed the Communist Party but was also a means to crush all 
forms of dissent: communist, racial, liberal, and radical religious tendencies. (5) The 
Separate Amenities Act (1953) allocated public facilities (parks, zoos, beaches, sports 
grounds, etc.) accordingly: most public facilities were closed to Black people. (6) 
Similarly, the Bantu Education Act (1953) laid the basis for a separate and inferior 
education system for African pupils, with mission schools being reduced, closed or forced 
into the states school system (Sundkler & Steed 2000; Barber 1999). (7) The Group Areas 
Act (1950), which was implemented from 1954, imposed zones for exclusive occupation 
by specified racial groups. This resulted in loss of property and income6 for non-Whites. 
(8) Finally, the Extension of the University Education Act (drafted in 1957, formalised in 
1959) denied Black students the right to attend the University of their Choice. Afrikaner 
campuses henceforth only accepted Black students with permission from the Ministry of 
Education. This resulted in the creation of ethnic colleges for Indians, Zulus, etc. (Mandela 
1996; Elphick & Davenport 1997; Barber 1999).  
Later, the effect of Apartheid legislation, which served White supremacy, equally 
contributed to a growing threat to White supremacy from local forces and the rising tide of 
African nationalism. Apartheid legislation, as a social engineering project from the 1950s, 
tore apart the rural and urban social fabric and created a series of racist blocks. The latter 
included urban suburbs and rural villages, traditional communities and homelands, schools, 
churches etc. Within this exercise, the state and its agents committed murders, abductions, 
and other violations of the Universal Rights of Black and Coloured people (TRC Final 
Report 1998).  
Under Apartheid, many killings and cases of torture occurred because of peoples 
resistance to the oppression. The Sharpeville massacre involved the unjustifiable use of 
force against opponents of the government and led to the slaughtering of Black 
schoolchildren (Mandela 1996; Elphick & Davenport 1997; Ross 2000). Moreover, the 
South African Police (SAP) shot several hundred Black protesters in the weeks following 
the June 16th 1976 events at Soweto. A year later, the Apartheid regime banned the Black 
Consciousness Movement in 1977 and subsequent attempts at protest (Elphick & 
Davenport 1997). The South African Government responded to this hostility and resistance 
in two ways: the introduction of security laws, and the ethnic project7 expressed within the 
Promotion of Bantu Self-government Act of 1959 that initiated the new reserves for 
Africans: homelands.  
The Black Nationalist movement, i.e. the African National Congress, lacked the capacity to 
translate its intentions into effective action because it was internally divided for decades. 
The movements assembled no evidence of, or made no strategic assessment about, the 
states use of violence against Black protesters. Thus, in spite of various forms of armed 
struggle, the South African Government had few difficulties in containing the opposition 
until the 1980s (TRC Final Report 1998 vol. I, chap. 2; Mandela 1996; Sundkler & Steed 
2000).  
The South African situation also had regional effects. South Africa received a mandate 
over Namibia from the League of Nations, but refused to relinquish the mandate when the 
United Nations resolutions requested and even when the International Court of Justice 
revoked the mandate (1966). In 1969, the Security Council decided that the South African 
occupation of Namibia was a violation of the territorial integrity (Asmal 1997). At that 
time, Angola became the Namibian Liberation Movements (SWAPO) forward base.  
The South African Defence Force (SADF) killed over 600 men, women and children, 
combatants and non-combatants, at Kassinga in Angola in 1978. The inability to develop 
secure and permanent rear bases in the neighbouring states, from which they were obliged 
to operate, obstructed the liberation movements efforts to mount an armed threat (Asmal 
1997). The South African Government had enjoyed co-operation with the British and 
Portuguese colonial administrations in the region. These allies would not have tolerated 
cross-border violations initiated by various other elements in the South African struggle. 
Since most neighbouring countries were helpless, compared with the strong economy of 
South Africa, the latter had the secret support of some governments or their security forces. 
From 1975, South Africa found it necessary to wage some form of war in Angola as an 
answer to its problem (TRC Final Report 1998 vol. I, chap. 2). Thus, the South African 
crisis became intertwined with the Namibian problem and the Cold War divisions. 
Although the South African problem had regional aspects, the Namibian question in 
relation to South Africa emerged in larger part at the international level. From 1975, South 
Africa waged a thirteen year long, full-scale war in Angola. The TRC Final Report (1998) 
suggests that three factors were evident. (1) Some decisions made long ago outside the 
African continent had affected the South African social structure. For example, the British 
Parliament had passed the South Africa Act (1909) merging the four British colonies into 
one nation. When granting independence, the constitutional arrangement transferred power 
to White minority voters with no positive provisions for the protection of the rights of 
Blacks. (2) The Namibian status in international law  forcibly kept under South African 
rule  had become a failing of the South African Government, which lost credibility before 
the international community. The South African ambition was to stop SWAPO (South 
West Africa Peoples Organisation), with its base in Angola, which was struggling to win 
independence for Namibia. (3) South Africa benefited from the climax of a shift of focus 
on the global scene from Europe to other parts of the world during the Cold War (1970s & 
1980s). It became aggressive towards Angola and destroyed the liberation forces under the 
pretext of combating Communist influence. During this period, powerful countries 
conflicting interests (USA & USSR) led Angola to become the site of confrontations 
(Asmal 1997; TRC Final Report 1998). 
The analysis above shows that the politics of South Africa in the second half of the 
twentieth century underwent a change of approach from the national to the regional and 
international levels. Then the racial conflict intertwined with the Cold War in the interests 
of capitalist Western countries fighting against the influence of the Communist Block. In 
this mood, the struggle to maintain the White minority privileges was rebuilt in an effort to 
hold western values (capitalism) against the evil forces of communism. Consideration of 
the South African problem within the global context delayed the termination of the internal 
exclusion. Meredith and Rosenberg (1999, 292 ff.) state that during that period, the South 
African Government overlooked very many human rights abuses.  
At its heart, the struggle for South Africa had a racial motive (TRC Final Report 1998 vol. 
I, chap. 3). Since the 1960s, particularly under Prime Minister Vorster, security legislation 
was introduced contrary to the principles of the rule of law. The other element of 
legislation is the ethnic project, which was the South African Governments second 
attempt to counter the growing sense of African identity and nationalism. The Promotion 
of the Bantu Self-government Act of 1959 also abolished indirect political representation 
of Africans in Parliament, which later made provision for the transformation of the African 
reserves, through stages, into fully independent states. The quest for White supremacy 
generated a search for stronger racial identity not only for the beneficiaries (White), but 
also for the racially excluded Africans and others. President F W. de Klerk stated that the 
National Party was primarily concerned with maintaining our [Afrikaners] right to self-
determination. He argued that the Bantustan project [reserves] was not without idealism 
(TRC Final Report 1998 vol. I, chap. 2).  
The project viewed the creation of ten distinct Black South African self-governing 
countries, each with its independence but all co-operating on a confederation basis. 
Conversely, in the 1980s the Bantustans became a critical revolutionary warfare 
programme countrywide and a vigilant force against the Apartheid (Barber 1999; Ross 
1999). 
The examples mentioned above suggest that there was institutional (structural) violence, 
particularly the violence of the law, for many generations before the transition. During 
the period of the South African state crisis (1980s), it became clear that the existing corpus 
of law had run its course and could no longer continue as such. There were numerous 
murders, mostly among Apartheids opponents inside the country. South Africas state 
sanctioned murders, inhuman treatment, racism and exploitation (Mandela 1996; TRC 
Final Report 1998; Tutu 1999). 
5.2 Apartheid in retrospect 
South Africa was split between four main groups: Black Africans (natives), White settlers 
(the majority of whom were Boers, originally Dutch, with some French Huguenots, both 
called Afrikaners, and Britons), Coloureds and Indians (Johnston & Sampson 1994; Ross 
1999). The year 1948 was identified with the birth of Apartheid: the politics that prevailed 
in the Republic of South Africa and Namibia and had influence in Southern Rhodesia 
(196580). 
In 1948, the National Party came to power, committed to a system of Apartheid 
(separateness): an essay in social engineering without precedent in its scale and 
thoroughness (Isichei 1995, 302). Intermarriage and inter-racial sexual relations became 
criminal offences, but one of the main facts was the division of people by their race, with 
the society being divided into Whites and non-Whites. The non-Whites were divided into 
Coloured, Indian and Bantu/Blacks. Apartheid was a policy of divide and rule, which 
engendered ethnic consciousness. Not only did the legal division deepen the conflict 
between White and Black; the policy has also been a long-term cause of Black-on-Black 
violence.  
Until 1998, the IFP (Inkatha Freedom Party), which is purely made up of indigenous 
Black, was not yet a committed participant in the promotion of national unity in South 
Africa. Chief M. Buthelezi, the leader of the IFP, achieved a political mobilisation of 
ethnicity to compete for power and privilege. The IFP were against the radical ANC 
groups; they threatened to wreck the 1994 election and eventually the process of unity as a 
whole (Meredith & Rosenberg 1999; Tutu 1999). The non-White community no longer 
owned their original homeland. Only Africans employed by Whites could live in the 
towns, whereas their relatives and others lived in the reserves. The Apartheid system 
forcibly relocated around 5.5 million people between 1962 and 1985. Waldmeir (1998, 10) 
asserts that segregation had been a fact of South African life before Afrikaners took power. 
Apartheid, however, created elaborate separateness in every area of life, and sustained 
inflated armed forces and relatively large numbers of bureaucrats. 
Figure 5.1: Population of South Africa (1994) 
Source: <adapted from Baur 1994, 523-527> 
In the 1980s, radical Christians redefined the character of the Apartheid as demonic. Its 
programme had sought justification in Biblical sources and its top architects were from 
strong Christian backgrounds. Dr Malan, a former Dutch Reformed Church minister, was 
the most notorious figure who exemplified the role of the church and Christianity in the 
shaping of Apartheid (Isichei 1995; Johnston & Sampson 1994). Bauer (1994) and Isichei 
(1995) are in agreement with de Klerk (TRC Final Report 1998) that at first, the intentions 
of the architects of Apartheid were not to oppress but to maintain the uniqueness of each 
group (Afrikanerdom in particular), with each having its separate spheres and culture.  
De Klerk deceived knowingly in suggesting that the homeland programme aimed at the 
good of the indigenous people (TRC Final Report 1998). The fact that oppressed and 
segregated people constituted 80 percent of the population, but lived only on 13 percent of 
the countrys land, portrayed the injustice of the system. Homelands were viewed as Third 
World regions, while White areas were the First World. There was a high standard of 
living for Whites, while the rates of suicide and mental breakdown among South African 
Blacks were the highest in the world. Because of the contrast, the Whites (wealthy) were 
5,000,000
10,000,000
15,000,000
20,000,000
25,000,000
30,000,000
35,000,000
Coloureds
31,200,000 
Others  
~3,900,000
Whites
~3,900,000
Coloureds 80 %
Others ~ 10%
Whites ~ 10%
insecure amid the mounting poverty of the oppressed Blacks. Isichei (1995, 303) suggested 
that liberation was necessary to free Whites from fear and Blacks from oppression.  
5. 3 The church and socio-economic realities  
The theology of the church in Apartheid South Africa (mainly the Dutch Reformed 
Church: DRC) was not spared from criticism, and the Kairos Document was at the 
forefront of that critique. Kairos (1985) suggested that English-speaking church leaders 
speeches and press statements about the Apartheid regime were a series of inter-related 
theological assumptions. The theology did not express the faith of the majority of 
Christians, while the media regarded opinions expressed by any church leaders as being the 
official opinions of the churches or the church theology. 
De Gruchy asserts that the Apartheid system was a scandal of faith, especially when the 
Church and other religious bodies replicated it in their structures (in Elphick & Davenport 
1997, 171). Thus, the countrys problem was not simply secular, nor could the solution 
come from one domain, but from concerted effort. The DRC was at the root of the South 
African crisis. While some Christian bodies such as the World Council of Churches 
(WCC) and the South African Council of Churches (SACC) contributed to the solution, an 
Anglican-led effort by Archbishop Desmond Tutu won the credit for reconciliation. 
Sundkler & Steed (2000) question what the Christian religion was doing in South Africa, if 
it were not succouring the helpless. Before segregation became institutionalised, it was 
firmly established in the English-speaking churches. The walkout of African leaders from 
several European churches into the independent churches provides an indication of the 
Africans protest against this reality (Lee interview, 23 May 2000; Sundkler & Steed 
2000). The African political groups, such as the ANC, trace their roots to these breakaway 
churches (Johnston & Sampson 1994). Increasing urbanisation brought a chilling decrease 
in relationships between races. Segregation in the form of Apartheid thus implied a 
prevailing attitude that marked relationships between Blacks and Whites, which affected 
the churches and their life of worship and community. Above all, relations between White 
missionaries, Black pastors and catechists were worsening. Generally, there was a self-
imposed reticence in the dominant group of Whites towards subordinate Black colleagues.  
Sundkler & Steed (2000) state that in many churches there was a lie in the soul, i.e. the 
pretence of a programme in the name of Christ, which was in effect in the name of self-
preservation and fear, with an acceptance of societys segregationist attitude and 
materialist values. Some DRC clergy left ecumenical posts such as the Christian Council to 
found a federation of Afrikaans churches in 1942 or to become political leaders. Sundkler 
& Steed (2000) suggest that this was another example of the close identification of church 
and state with the Afrikaners. Such a relationship was maintained throughout South Africa 
during the Apartheid era. 
5.3.1 Early theological development  
Studies of church development in the midst of the South African struggle of the last 
century until 1960 portray the churches theology rather than their practices. The profiles 
of both the state-related DRC and the major opponent of Apartheid policy, the Anglicans, 
exemplify this situation (Sundkler & Steed 2000). 
The churches provided either support, justification or challenge to the building up of 
separate development in the country. Ideological interpretations clarify that Apartheid was 
the brainchild of a Calvinistic theologising influence about elects and the Promised Land 
(Elphick & Davenport 1997; Johnston & Sampson 1994). Calvinist Afrikaners believed 
that they were a chosen people to whom God had given the land (South Africa) and the 
right to dominate other people in the land. Apartheid ideology was theologically loaded. 
A. Luthuli criticised the churches for representing something (through speech and 
theology) that was alien to the Spirit of Christ, a rather patronising social service. He 
asserted that church ministers were talking down to members instead of coming down 
among the grass roots, as Christ did. Luthuli also stated that White paternalist Christianity 
had shaped the Christian faith but estranged the people of South Africa from Christ 
(Sundkler & Steed 2000). Yet, the day-to-day relationships between White missionaries 
and Black clergy, like the early DRC theology and practices, exemplified the same notion 
(de Gruchy 1979; Elphick & Davenport 1997; Sundkler & Steed 2000). 
5.3.2 Dutch Reformed Church (DRC) 
Since manual work was considered dirty, only Coloured people or slaves did it. Bauer 
(1994, 191f.) observes that the Boers made a radical class distinction and needed religious 
sanction. Johnston & Sampson (1994, 185ff.) suggested that the Boers found Genesis in 
the Bible a good support:  
Cursed be Canaan The lowest of slaves will he be to his brothers  Blessed be the Lord, the 
God of Shem May Canaan be the slave of Shem May God extend the territory of Japheth 
May Japheth live in the tents of Shem, and may Canaan be his slave (Genesis 9, 25b-27 in 
NIV Bible). 
Earliest knowledge considered Cushites (Nubians), Egyptians and Canaanites as the 
descendants of Ham (called Hamites). Popular Christian interpretations understood 
Cushites (Greek Ethiopians) to mean all Africans, and saw the curse of Ham in force in the 
continent. Missionaries then would pray for the unfortunate children of Ham (Africans). 
The Calvinist Boers classified Africans as a cursed race in contrast to the Boers 
community of the elect (Bauer 1994, 191; Johnston & Sampson 1994, 185f.).  
Calvinist theology stresses the sovereignty of God and Gods intervention in all human 
activities. It asserts that God directs all human activities for His own purpose. Gerstner 
suggested,  
The doctrine of the sovereignty of God that accompanied the Dutch colonists to South Africa 
imparted a strong confidence to them in encountering the uncertainties and dangers of life in a 
new land. A God who is in control of the infinitely essential matters of eternity is also in 
control of the smallest details of life (Elphick & Davenport 1997, 17-18).  
While for John Calvin the elect community formed the invisible church, the Boers 
identified it with their racial group sojourning in a heathen land (Bauer 1994; Gerstner 
1997). Like Israel in the Old Testament, the Boers had experienced a great exodus from 
British oppression into a land of freedom and prosperity as Gods chosen people. They had 
to subdue their African neighbours and make them their servants (Bauer 1994; Johnston & 
Sampson 1994). In this way, the holy story sanctioned the social structure: White (master) 
and Black (servant). 
The ideology of segregation developed in South Africa alongside the master-servant 
concept even within the church. The DRC, which was the church of the Boers, suggested 
in 1857 that Whites sit apart from Coloureds during the services, and requested that special 
churches be built for the Hottentots group, leading later to an exclusive Bantu Church and 
schism in the DRC (Johnston & Sampson 1994; Sundkler & Steed 2000).  
Segregation in the form of Apartheid implied a prevailing attitude that marked Black-
White relationships, which also affected the churches. Even so, one wonders whether the 
conflict between the English and Boers was not another form of segregation on an 
ideological level; whether it had no ideological origin and was merely a clash between 
English imperialism and Afrikaner nationalism, or whether the core problem in South 
Africa was simply segregation and exclusion from the means of control. The tensions were 
quenched by the nationalist revival (1938-48) but surfaced again (1953-54) when the DRC 
attempted to call leaders of all churches to discuss Christian principles in multi-racial 
South Africa. B. B. Keet, by then an evangelical professor at Stellenbosch, suggested that 
the time had arrived for the church to lead the state in the direction of unity. This urge 
converged with the call by Mokitimi, a Methodist pastor, for Christian unity before it was 
too late (Sundkler & Steed 2000; Mandela 1996 passim).  
From the 1950s, the WCC established the contacts and some of its leaders from Geneva 
visited the DRC to discuss the fundamental problems of churches. A consultation was held 
in December 1960 at Cottesloe, Johannesburg, including eighteen Black participants with 
Bishop A. Zulu and Professor Z. L. Matthews (Sundkler & Steed 2000; Elphick & 
Davenport 1997). The conclusion from the consultation was that no one who believes in 
Jesus Christ may be excluded from any church on the grounds of his colour or race. In this 
perspective, the Evangelical section lifted its voice, but tensions were at the fore in the 
church. Verwoerd, by then Prime Minister, made a pronouncement condemning the stand 
taken by the DRC delegation. Thus, the ecumenical voice was silenced for a period of time 
(Sundkler & Steed 2000; Johnston & Sampson 1994).  
Political leaders, being both Christian and participants in church business, could easily 
carry out their plans in both the church and the state, because they were in control in both 
domains. Some changes took place within the Great Missionary Revival (1955-60), mostly 
in the Transkei. An important factor was the publication of a national commission report, 
called the Tomlinson Report (1955), for social and economic development of the Bantu 
Areas. Professor Tomlinson, a lay member of the DRC, was Chairman of the commission 
and signed a statement of 3,755 pages analysing the conditions of the Blacks in the 
country. He recommended that the government invest heavily in the homelands, if the 
latter aimed at the wellbeing of the Blacks, but Verwoerd opposed the recommendation 
(Barber 1999; Sundkler & Steed 2000).  
South Africa was well equipped with many missionary societies. An enormous drive of 
church development and building activity followed in the Transkei from 1955  the so-
called Golden Age of the DRC missions. The DRC was prepared to meet whatever 
development might arise, but since racial ideology was part of the church theology, it did 
not significantly affect the social relations of the time (Sundkler & Steed 2000).  
A Pentecostal breakaway from the DRC group referred to the latter as the rich mans 
church whereas the group saw itself as an Apostolic Faith Mission encompassing the 
Afrikaans-speaking Poor Whites in the city and farmland. Surprisingly, the group did not 
take a different racial stance from the established DRC after the National Party take-over in 
1948 (Elphick & Davenport 1997; Sundkler & Steed 2000). In the last period of the 
Apartheid, the DRC voice of liberation was heard only from theological debates 
spearheaded by some elements such as Allan Boesack. 
5.3.3 Anglicans 
The English-speaking community came mainly from the Anglican tradition, and initially 
made a difference in South African society. Most DRC theologians interpreted slavery in 
terms of the Old Testament as a right and household possession; they delayed the baptism 
of slaves until they were converted (Elphick & Davenport 1997). Since the last period of 
the 1940s, the Anglican Diocese of Johannesburg endured the struggle against the political 
and social consequence of the Apartheid. The major figures of the church were Fr. R. 
Raynes, the priest in charge of Sophiatown parish (1934 ff.), and Fr T. Huddleston, priest 
at the Church of Christ the King in Sophiatown (1943 ff). To the same list, one can add M. 
Scott (Sundkler & Steed 2000).  
In contrast to the situation in rural churches where missionaries were looked at as mothers 
and fathers by their church members (Africans), in the city, Whites and Blacks lived 
geographically, socially and economically far apart. The Western missionarys family was 
bourgeois, distant from the people, and so could not recognise the harsh conditions of the 
Africans. Sometimes, the bishops had to make very unpopular decisions, speaking out for 
the One Undivided Church. White Anglican members feared and detested the irresponsible 
radicalism of their bishops such as Bishop Clayton and Bishop W. E. Smyth (Sundkler & 
Steed 2000; de Gruchy 1986; Elphick & Davenport 1997). Thus, segregation was 
established in the English speaking church, before the DRC took the lead through the 
Apartheid. Yet, Naud (Johnston & Sampson 1994, 186) asserted,  
The root of the later Apartheid policy can be traced to the so-called native policy of the British 
colony of Natal with the concept of separate development and the reserve policy initiated by 
the native commissioner, Theophilus Shepstone, the son of an English missionary: this had 
nothing to do with Calvinism.  
Bishop Lee (paper 23 May, 2000) stated that exclusion might be evident in the English-
speaking community and churches in South Africa to date. However, for the last third of 
the last century, the Anglican Bishop of West Cape, Desmond Tutu (thereafter Archbishop 
of Johannesburg) was the spokesperson of the South African liberation struggle and the 
main outspoken church leader against the Apartheid practices. Between the 1960s and 
1990, when Tutu was leader in both politics and the church, a very prophetic voice 
emerged. This was during the detention of Nelson Mandela, the ANC leader. Since the 
release of Mandela in 1990, Tutu has retreated from political leadership to concentrate on 
his pastorate. It is evident that even in the Anglican Church  the Church of the Province in 
South Africa (CPSA),  the first challenge to Apartheid came from Western heroes such as 
T. Huddleston and M. Scott. 
5.3.4 Roman Catholics 
Until the 19th century, South Africa was a Protestant country; Roman Catholics were 
latecomers. In 1994, the proportions were 9 percent Catholics against 57.6 percent non-
Catholics (Bauer, 1994, 525). A teacher at St Francis training college (1915), Fr B. Huss, 
placed the Roman Catholic Church on the map in South Africa. In spite of facing distrust 
from Zulu and Sotho people, Huss did the work with good intentions. He travelled in many 
countries in the USA and Europe looking for ideas for co-operative movements, peoples 
banks and agricultural work. While Rome appointed the Dutch Dominican B. J. Gijlswijk 
as Apostolic Delegate in South Africa (1922), more missionaries had come to South Africa 
after the Versailles Conference of 1919. German Benedictines from Tanganyika moved to 
Zululand and the Alsatian Holy Ghost Fathers transferred to Kroonstad. The German 
Pallotines who were in Cameroon found their way to Oudshoorn and Queenstown. In 
1911, the Catholic Church comprised 24,000 Blacks and 25,000 Whites; by 1980, there 
were 1,500,000 Blacks and 500,000 Whites (Isichei 1985; Barber 1999; Sundkler & Steed 
2000). 
In 1947, there were two racially segregated theological seminaries, one for Whites and the 
other for Blacks (with a White rector who was only replaced in 1975 by a Black rector). 
Huss formulated an educational programme for Catholic action in the threefold sentence 
better hearts, better heads [fields], better homes (Bauer 1994; Sundkler & Steed 2000). 
This was in line with the social gospel, and ultimately, Catholics and especially Husss 
initiatives challenged the practices of exclusion. 
5.3.5 Other churches 
Lutherans developed a challenging theology, with two kingdoms, in order to manoeuvre 
some kind of co-ordination of church and state with a Bonhoeffer-inspired effort at 
conceiving a confessing church. Their reflections inspired some theologians, such as B. 
Naud, the founder of the Christian Institute. However, Lutherans were accused of much 
distance from ecumenical initiatives, which were seen as the main channels of prophetic 
voice and Christian unison (Elphick & Davenport 1997).  
Lutherans were dominant in the Transvaal countryside, but were not urban oriented 
communities because they were mainly Blacks, and no African church could afford to 
settle quietly in the urban areas. Their first African Bishop, M. Buthelezi from Zululand, 
was a radical theologian. The South African Government had banned him for five years 
before his election to the episcopate (Elphick & Davenport 1997; Sundkler & Steed 2000).  
Methodists existed in great number and in several branches: Wesleyans, United and 
Primitive Methodists. While Sundkler & Steed (2000) estimated multiplicity as an 
advantage for those holding a broader ecumenical view, the variety of Methodists was felt 
to be a threat by some people, because it did not help to exert a positive impact on racial 
controversies, nor against the oppressive South African regime. 
In the independent churches, Bhengu was seen as a powerful leader. After many years, he 
was linked to the American and South African Assemblies of God. He kept a low profile 
while maintaining a pietistic conviction  the Back to God Crusade  and attained 
popularity from the masses regarding politics. He stressed the social and moral aspects in 
his teaching. He stated, we will only be taken to freedom when we have complete faith in 
God alone (Sundkler & Steed 2000, 837). 
 5.4 Liberation theology and the struggle 
There were many attempts from churches and individual Christians to discuss and 
challenge the policies and practices of Apartheid. South African Liberation Theology 
emerged in the context of the Black Consciousness Movement (BCM) led by S. Biko. It 
started as a Black contextual theology in the name of the theology of liberation struggle to 
challenge the situation that Apartheid (being political and religious) had created. Apart 
from the oppressive and divisive practices that the church helped to establish, part of the 
church presented a distorted Calvinist theology (de Gruchy 1986; Elphick & Davenport 
1997).  
Three phenomena exemplify the role played by Christianity in the South African struggle: 
(1) the Belhar Confession, (2) the Kairos document, and (3) Ubuntu Theology (Battler 
1997; Elphick & Davenport 1997; Tutu 1999). The ideological, political and economic 
system of Apartheid drew much of its substance from church elements, particularly the 
Broederbond fraternity.  
The Broederbond was founded in 1918 to help Afrikaners newly arrived in the cities. It was a 
secret society, like Freemasonry, with its own rituals, its membership limited to White 
Afrikaner males who were members of the Dutch Reformed Church. It came to be an elite 
organisation of politically minded intellectuals. Its members, among them D. F. Malan, a Dutch 
Reformed Church minister who became Prime Minister in 1948, were the creators of Apartheid 
(Isichei 1995, 302-313).  
Malan asserted that the history [probably implying policies and strategies] of his time was 
the greatest masterpiece of the centuries. He stated, we hold this nationhood as our due for 
it was given to us by the Architect of the universe the history of the Afrikaner reveals a 
will and determination which makes one feel that Afrikanerdom is not the work of men but 
the creation of God (Isichei 1995, 305). This exemplifies how religion (one version of 
Christianity) shaped Apartheid. Moreover, 
It has been said that the Dutch Reformed Church was the National Party at prayer. Many DRC 
theologians wrote in Apartheids defence. Thereafter, Apartheid was called a heresy by its 
opponents but developed a civil religion. Afrikaner politics became bit by bit theologised. 
While the South African Constitutions preamble in the time mentioned much the same God, 
Kairos Documents authors called that God an idol as any of the idols that prophets of Israel 
had to contend with (Isichei 1995, 305-306). 
In the 1980s, the WARC (World Alliance of Reformed Churches) voted for the suspension 
of White Afrikaner Churches; the South African NGSK (Dutch Reformed Mission Church) 
synod adopted a Confession at Belhar. The draft of the confession was ratified after four 
years (1986) and took the name Belhar Confession. It focused on three themes: Christian 
unity, reconciliation as the centre for the Christian message, and the principles of justice 
and peace as rooted in God. The confession was issued while South Africa was under a 
state of emergency; President P. W. Botha condemned the challenge from Belhar as a total 
onslaught. The Nationalist Party saw the Belhar Confession and the Kairos Document 
(1985) as the religious veneer of communist indoctrination (Elphick & Davenport 1997; 
Sundkler & Steed 2000). 
Other Christian reaction against the Apartheid regime included the request sent to WCC to 
expel the DRC (Cape and Transvaal NGK [DRC] Synods) from its membership, after the 
event of the Sharpeville massacre (1960). Though this did not happen, the WCC 
challenged the situation and convened a conference of its South African members to debate 
on related points (Eliphick & Davenport 1997). Thereafter, Black theology took the lead in 
challenging the system within and outside the church. Church leaders who articulated the 
challenge included the Lutheran Bishop M. Buthelezi, the Reformed Pastor A. Boesak and 
the Anglican Archbishop D. Tutu, and from the evangelical wing, M. Cassidy. 
Distinguished theologians, mainly B Naud, J. de Gruchy, C. Villa-Vicencio, S. Maimela, 
F. Chikane and I. J. Mosala, provided weight to this change (de Gruchy 1986; Eliphick & 
Davenport 1997).  
Some evangelicals played a significant role from the 1970s in working for national 
reconciliation. A charismatic movement from the USA attracted a number of evangelicals 
and others within the mainline churches. The charm was also a reaction against the social 
and political activism of the mainline churches and hunger for spirituality. Cassidy (in 
Nurmberger & Tooke, 1988) observed that the political situation of South Africa created a 
climate of twin emotions, fear among Whites and anger among Blacks. Elphick & 
Davenport (1997) asserted that the charismatic movement offered a new sense of 
community, of personal meaning and of spiritual assurance among Whites, just as AICs 
did among Blacks. English-speaking congregations became open and flexible, attempting 
to develop a holistic spirituality in which social witness blended with prayer and worship. 
In that perspective, the new prayer book was published in South Africa (1989) in all 
languages used in the church. The latter sought to locate the liturgy within the context of 
the countrys crisis. The SACC and other activist Christian organisations confronted the 
state and the structures of Apartheid. Divisive theological issues were the legitimacy of the 
state, Christian support for the armed struggle against Apartheid, and the relationship 
between racial reconciliation and the demand for justice. In February 1980, a consultation 
convened by SACC at Hammanskraal called all White Christians to demonstrate their 
willingness to purge the church of racism. Black delegates called Whites to make obvious 
repentance in concrete actions and to witness to the Gospel of Jesus Christ by becoming a 
confessing church (Elphick & Davenport 1997).  
The culminating point of the South African liberation theology was the Kairos 
Document, which exposed the Governments illegitimacy and its tyrannical rule. The 
Document did not call openly to the armed struggle, but it advocated civil disobedience to 
resist Apartheid rule (de Gruchy in Elphick & Davenport 1997). 
Many of those who had abandoned the Church as an irrelevant institution that supports, 
justifies and legitimises this cruel Apartheid system began to feel that if the Church becomes 
the Church as expounded by the Document then they would go back to Church again (Kairos 
Document 1985, Preface).  
The authors of the Document believed that a critique of the then theological models 
determined the type of activities the church engaged in, in trying to resolve the problems of 
the country. The complete material of this debate appeared first in June 1985 (Elphick & 
Davenport 1997). 
Many theologians agreed with Kairos that there could be no reconciliation between good 
and evil, or God and the devil. However, Tutu took a different position from his early 
philosophy of ubuntu: the essence of being human (Tutu 1999) and merciful. Tutus 
theological focus on ubuntu might have softened the South African Christian theology of 
struggle (advocated by Kairos), to make a bridge to reach the compromise that ended the 
conflict.  
The official journal of the DRC, Die Kerkbode (October 21, 1994) agrees with F Gaum, 
(interview, 28 June 2001) and de Gruchy (2002) that during the Rustenburg conference, 
Professor W. Jonker gave a confession on behalf of the DRC. Archbishop Tutu embraced 
him as a sign of reconciliation and forgave him; then Tutu added, when that confession is 
made, then those of us who have been wronged must say, we forgive you, so that 
together we may move to the reconstruction of our land (Johnston & Sampson 1994, 198). 
The Moderator of the DRC, P. Potgieter, was present and endorsed Jonkers confession 
and made it an official expression of the DRC (Johnston & Sampson 1994; Tutu 1999, 23-
24). Thus, one man (W. Jonker) brought the whole DRC and other churches back onto the 
right track so that together they could progress further with the mediations between the 
political powers. 
In short, Kairos called for a prophetic theology that is biblical, spiritual, pastoral and above 
all, analytic. The theology should be solid and grounded in the Bible. Kairos called for a 
return to the Bible and a search through the Word of God for a message that is relevant. 
Such a theology differs from academic theology, which deals with biblical themes, 
drawing principles in a systematic manner. Prophetic theology concentrates on aspects of 
the Word of God with immediate bearing upon a critical situation in which we find 
ourselves. For Kairos, the starting point of the prophet is the experience, such as tyranny 
and conflict, in which people try to be Christians. The experience of the prophet provides 
the real politico-economic and religious realities. Four characteristics define the prophetic 
theology. (1) It calls to action, for repentance and change. (2) It stresses hope for the future 
and considers the after-life. (3) It is deeply spiritual, fearless, but with love and clear 
understanding; it also brings joy, power and the humility of being willing to forgive, pray 
and act. (4) Above all, it is pastoral and practical and denounces sins while announcing 
salvation. For example, it should name the sins of Apartheid, post-Apartheid, genocide and 
post-genocide, and should give hopeful news. In this respect, Volf (2002) asserted that it is 
a Christian duty to name the sin and denounce the sinner because it helps to carry out 
justice and eventually reconciliation. 
5.5 South Africas neighbour-states  
In the 1970s, among other Apartheid collaborates, there was Rhodesia under Ian Smith 
(Asmal 1997). Smaller former British territories (Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland) were 
not strong enough to pose any threat to South Africa. In addition to Namibia (its UN 
mandated territory) and Rhodesia (its White-rule partner), the Portuguese colonies (Angola 
and Mozambique) provided South Africa with a sympathetic neighbourhood because of 
their similar socio-political realities.  
In the 1970s, the liberation movements in Angola (MPLA) and in Mozambique (Frelimo) 
took power. South Africa began to feel threatened, and Apartheids White supremacist 
aspect with its religious support was transformed by the determination to crush its 
opponents. The South African state attacked its neighbours without impunity for a long 
period. Asmal (1997) states that in the 1970s and 1980s, South Africa carried out regional 
massacres, first and many times in Angola, then in Swaziland, Zimbabwe and Zambia, but 
also in the capitals of Lesotho, Botswana and Mozambique. At other times, South Africa 
attempted to assassinate the Prime Ministers of Lesotho and Zimbabwe. It backed dissident 
groups that fomented chaos into these two countries, disrupted the oil supplies to Angola, 
Botswana, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique and Zimbabwe and attacked Zambia (Asmal 
1997). 
Apart from Malawi, the other countries were united in the front line of opposition against 
Apartheid. These countries also suffered from attacks because they hosted the liberation 
movements that were fighting Apartheid. In this regard, Asmal (1997) suggests that the 
new South Africa owes a debt to the Front Line States. Tanzania played the leading role 
in the Front Line States under the late President J. Nyerere (Barber 1999; Asmal 1997). 
The fact that liberation movement members embraced violent initiatives (in the 1970s & 
1980s) and trained in host countries in order to sabotage Apartheid policy angered South 
African Whites. For this reason, South Africa set up illegal military bases in the Caprivi 
Strip (northern Namibia) so it could launch repeated attacks on Zambia and Botswana. It 
increased its control over the resistance through pressures on weaker states such as 
Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland. However, these countries did not stop harbouring South 
African refugees (Asmal 1997; Barber 1999).  
In the 1970s, South Africa had introduced Apartheid laws in Namibia, treating Namibias 
Blacks as if they were in South Africa (Asmal 1997). The Namibian liberation movement, 
SWAPO was treated with the same contempt and repression as the resistance in South 
Africa (Asmal 1997, 170). South Africa intensified its repression on Namibian people up 
to the 1980s, including the bombing of a SWAPO refugee camp at Kassinga in Angola in 
1978, an aggression that took the lives of 600 people and wounded a thousand (Tutu 1999; 
Asmal 1997). On many occasions, Apartheid bureaucracy used Namibia as a stepping-
stone for armed invasion to Angola to fight the regular influence of communism (TRC 
Final Report 1998: Tutu 1999).  
The period in which the Apartheid regime ruled was a time of unrest and restricted 
development in neighbouring countries. The Front Line States bore a large share of the 
costs for their resistance against Apartheid, especially Namibia, which also directly 
experienced the long-term presence of Apartheid.  
5.6 Origin and philosophy of the TRC 
The TRC arose from the context of conflict, human rights violation, violence and inhuman 
treatments that increased between 1960 and 1990. This section owes much to the three 
categories of sources mentioned above: the TRC Final Report, the members of the TRC,4 
and the Institutes for Peace and Conflict Resolution.  
Ntsebeza (2000, 2ff) locates the genesis of the TRC in the framework of International 
Human Rights and International Humanitarian Law (TRC Final Report 1998; Christie 
2000). The year 1998 marked the 50th anniversary of the passing of the Human Rights Act: 
it was 50 years since the UN General Assembly had proclaimed the Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights against the background of the effect of World War II and similar 
savageries. The world response to those held responsible for World War II was the 
establishment of the Nuremberg International Military Tribunal in August 1945, to 
prosecute the perpetrators of war crimes (Minow 1998; Teitel 2000; Rigby 2001; Hinton 
2002). 
After the Declaration, discrimination, violation, slavery, inhuman treatment and 
punishment were highlighted and arbitrary arrest prohibited. While the above celebration 
took place in 1998, in these 50 years, South East Asia knew genocide during the Pol Pot 
regime with the Khmer Rouge. The Balkans erupted into civil war, the West supported 
Latin American dictatorships and South African Apartheid was formalised (Ntsebeza 2000; 
Teitel 2000; Hinton 2002).  
Since 1948, different countries had envisaged two major methods of dealing with war 
crimes, Truth Commissions and Nuremberg models, which would implant a culture of 
observing human rights. In Latin America, the motto Nunca Ms (never again) is the 
  47 'Members' of the TRC here refers to its commissioners, the main office staff in Cape Town and those who 
attended, submitted or testified in the hearings. 
clearest expression of this intention. Chile, Argentina and Uruguay, among others, opted 
for the way closest to the South African TRC, which advocated exposing the truth about 
the past (Zartman et al. 1997; Minow 1998; Teitel 2000; Hinton 2002). The goal of these 
attempts often included a foundation for reconciliation in the affected communities (Sarkin 
1997; Ntsebeza 2000). The former Yugoslavia and Rwanda chose the criminal justice 
system because the world witnessed the increasing impunity of those committing gross 
violations of human rights.  
Mamdani, the Marxist scholar, at the ceremony of the TRC closure, asked whether 
reconciliation had replaced justice. He questioned how Asmal Kader, who had formerly 
campaigned for a South African equivalent of the Nuremberg trial, became a protagonist of 
the TRC, which sought a negotiated revolution (Mandani 1996). The change from the 
hardest attitude seeking a trial to a shared vision in South Africa was called a small 
miracle (Beinart paper, 3 June 2001). Ntsebeza states:  
The TRCs report claims that the process sought to heal the South African nation, to promote 
national unity, to grant amnesty to perpetrators, to give victims an opportunity to tell their 
stories and, hopefully, promote not only reconciliation, but also the observation of a human 
rights culture in South Africa, where violations of human rights would never take place again 
(Ntsebeza 2000, 5). 
Thus, the South African TRC, as an attempt to combat human rights violations, subscribed 
in the worldwide context to the intention to combat similar occurrences and subsequent 
impunity. The choice of the TRC in South Africa emerged in the same way other countries 
chose their approaches towards expressing their intentions of never again. 
The South African context, however, has unique particularities deep-rooted in its racial, 
political and anthropological history. Its end became uncertain between the late 1980s and 
early 1990s. Tutu (1999) and Boraine (2000) describe the context within which the 
Commission was established, while the TRC Final Report (1998, vol. I, chap. 2, 1) sets out 
the historical context of the mandate period (1960 to 1994) and the roots of the conflict that 
emerged during that period. It stresses that the Commissions brief mandate was to report 
only a small part of the much larger story of human rights abuse in the country.  
In the 1980s, the state still sanctioned murder; in his foreword to the report, Archbishop 
Tutu, the Chairperson of the TRC highlights the existing options for the transition to 
democracy. He further explains that the choice of a third way (the TRC) was the best 
possible option for the South African situation because the country was dedicated to the 
principle of fairness.  
5.7 Precursor of transitional processes 
The early vision for the transition from Apartheid to democracy, national unity and 
reconciliation was shaped in two phases. (1) The first phase stressed education for 
peacemaking and peace accords. In that phase, the churches launched a campaign in which 
most parties and NGOs were willing to get involved (Marks 2000; Christie 2000; Tutu 
1999). Apart from peace accord initiatives, secret negotiations had taken place since the 
mid 1980s. Then negotiations, particularly between the ANC and NP, opened out into 
debate (Mandela 1996; Christie 2000). At that time, churches and church related bodies 
visited exiled South Africans, mainly in the camps, to communicate the views from 
different sides. (2) The second phase was the call to opt for the negotiation. ANC, the 
South African Government and the NP supported President F. W. de Klerk and N. 
Mandela towards that end. Generals of security forces and other leaders welcomed the 
choice and some people from the International Community supported the motion (Villa-
Vicencio & Verwoerd 2000). 
The turning point came on 2 February 1990, when President F.W. de Klerk renounced the 
ban on the ANC, PAC, and SACP, and called for dialogue to end the bitter conflict. On 11 
February 1990, he declared his decision to release Nelson Mandela, who had spent 27 
years in prison; the decision materialised on 27 February 1990. The Indemnity Act 1990 
lifted prosecution against exiles and refugees returned home (Johnston & Sampson 1994; 
Christie 2000). These stages proved that the TRC emerged as a form of political settlement 
in itself. It began on one level with the development of the National Peace Accord (NPA) 
that both the National Human Rights Movement and the South African Council of 
Churches pushed forward. The NPA was signed in September 1991 by leaders of all the 
major political parties and it aimed to address the internecine civil strife taking place on a 
cross-country basis (Christie 2000, 70). 
The most significant church involvement towards the South African peace and 
reconciliation perspective was expressed through the launching of the Peace Accord. 
Gastrow (1999, 105) states, the church was the institution that first attempted a national 
intervention at the beginning of 1991. 
In 1991, the South African Council of churches (SACC) tried to take the lead in dealing with 
the escalating violence. At an upbeat conference in the town of Rustenburg in the Transvaal the 
previous November, under the leadership of the Reverend Frank Chikane, the South Africa 
Council of Churches general secretary, and Louw Alberts, a highly respected Afrikaner 
layperson, the SACC had issued what came to be known as the Rustenburg Declaration, which 
'denounced Apartheid, called for a democratic constitution and more equitable distribution of 
wealth, and urged churches to condemn all forms of violence.' It also made provision for a 
peace conference to be held in March 1991 (Marks 2000, 7). 
President de Klerk initiated the meeting of the government with the leaders of other 
organisations, including churches. His Christmas message to the nation in 1989 was, I 
need the Church to speak to me. This was the mark of the negotiation between the 
different religious and political forces and the state. President de Klerk withdrew as the 
convenor of the conference, because the SACC was not willing to participate as long as 
this event was sponsored by an entity that represented Apartheid. He stated that he was 
pleased that co-chairmen L. Aberts and F. Chikane would carry on the task (Johnston & 
Sampson 1994). 
When the conference planning was underway, Chief Mongosuthu Buthelezi, the leader of 
the IFP, attacked the church body and particularly the Reverend F. Chikane. Buthelezi saw 
the SACC paying support to the IFPs main rival, the ANC. Then, the church leaders 
abandoned the conception of the conference as their own initiative, as it became clear that 
the IFP would not attend it. Alberts, being an Afrikaner and member of the DRC, but also a 
strong advocate for change, ran the risk of being treated as persona non grata by some 
leaders of his own church. The concept of the conference became involved in a wide range 
of initiatives.  
After the abortion of the first attempt of the Conference for Peace Accord under the 
auspices of the churches, the internal conflict intensified. Between September 1, 1984 and 
September 30, 1993, a total of 17,636 people had been killed as a result of political 
violence  threatening the entire development of these embryonic negotiations and multi-
party negotiations on the constitution (Christie 2000, 70; cf. Marks 2000; Mandela 1994). 
As a result, the idea of the National Peace Accord gathered support countrywide. 
Figure 5.2: Organisational Structure of Peace Committees in South Africa (1992-3) 
National Peace Committee 
[National Peace Secretariat] 
Regional Peace Committee 
[Regional Peace Executive Secretariat] 
Local Peace Committees  <>   Local Peace Committees   <>    Local Peace Committee 
Source: <Marks 2000, 16-20> 
A network was organised and national leaders of major political organs were involved, 
with the exception of the right-wing party. On 14 September 1991, during the National 
Peace Accord Convention (NPA), the NPA was unveiled (Marks 2000). The initiatives 
result was unique in the history of South Africa; it created a breakthrough in the political 
transition (Christie 2000; Gastrow 1999, 108). Marks (2000, 10) suggested, the peace 
process set in motion by the launch of the Peace Accord provided a rickety way across the 
divide between Apartheid and democracy. 
The NPA was a pact between South Africas major players to try to stop the violence. The 
objectives of the NPA were: (1) to eliminate political violence, (2) to promote 
democratisation and (3) to facilitate reconstruction and development. The twenty-six 
signatories included the principal political parties and organisations, the government and 
security forces, the leadership of the independent and self-governing states, and business, 
trade union, traditional and church leaders (Marks 2000; Christie 2000). The NPA 
crystallised into the National Peace Committee (NPC). Although most investigations into 
the TRC ignore the existence and the role played by the Peace Accords and the Peace 
Committees in the making of the transition, they played an important role in the peace 
process. The CODESA I (Convention for Democratic South Africa) opened at Kenton Park 
(Johannesburg) with delegates from 19 political organisations. While the partners in the 
negotiation claimed their goal to be the same, the NP could not accept Black majority rule 
and the ANC thought the talks represented one pillar in the struggle for freedom. Beyond 
solving the conflict, the negotiation embarked first on constitutional issues through 
political, economic and social adjustment to fit into the renovated institutions. The process 
positively affected conflict resolution that could not otherwise have been reached (Christie 
2000; cf. Gastrow 1999, 107-111). Therefore, the CODESA has constituted itself as the 
multi-party forum.  
After the constitutional reform, a multi-party negotiation process followed from January 
1993 to January 1994 at the inauguration of the interim constitution. The constitutional 
reform ensured that the democratic principle was protected. It defined the period of 
transition and set guidelines for the elections while prescribing amnesty for political 
offences conducted before 6 December 1993 (Christie 2000; Mandela 1996). 
It was a member of ANC, Professor K. Asmal, who suggested in his inaugural lecture [on his 
installation on 25 May 1992] as Professor of Human Rights Law at the University of the 
Western Cape, that South Africa should look not to have Nuremberg trials but a Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission (Tutu 1999, 45).  
Asmal stated that South Africa must take the past seriously, as the past holds the key to the 
future. Later, a firm call came from the National Executive Committee of the ANC. The 
latter set up its internal commissions for inquiry and confirmed that gross human rights 
violations had been committed in their camps (TRC Final Report 1998; Tutu 1999). After 
the initiatives above, two realities marked the South African conceptualisation of the 
transitional processes: (1) Constitutional provisions for the legal reckoning with the 
Apartheid past; and (2) Promotion of the National Unity and Reconciliation Act (no 34 of 
1995). The two elements materialised through the process of the TRC. 
Negotiations had started to bring Apartheid and political conflict to an end before the 
elections, heralding the start of democracy. Negotiations took place within the international 
framework, stressing human rights and the need to deal with the past. The transitional 
constitution of 1994 presents a historic compromise between the last government of the old 
order and the liberation movements. That is the shift that Mandela baptised as the small 
miracle. There were two steps to dealing with the past:  
 The Restitution of Land Rights Act entrenched the restitution of land rights lost 
through the racist confiscations and forced resettlements since 1913. The Act provided 
alternative land and compensation, establishing a special Land Claims Court and Land 
Commission in order to mediate the claims (Werle 1996).  
 The Promotion of National Unity and Reconciliation Act refers to an earlier 
National Unity and Reconciliation provision within the South African Constitution. It 
emphasises the goal of national unity and proclaims national reconciliation to be its 
essential prerequisite in order to overcome the past divisions and conflicts. The Provision 
describes the basic principles that determine the way South Africa deals with the heritage 
of Apartheid: understanding rather than vengeance, reparation instead of retaliation, 
humanity and forgiveness (Ubuntu) in place of victimisation. In order to promote 
reconciliation and reconstruction, the country granted amnesty in respect of acts, omissions 
and offences relating to political objectives committed during the past. It allowed much 
interpretation and public debate on the limits of the constitutional ruling.  
The South African crisis emerged through social engineering and the shaping of Apartheid 
ideology and its implementation (Tutu 1999). The church twisted its theology (Calvinism) 
to justify Apartheid policies and practices. Later, social analysis and prophetic theology 
became instrumental in the struggle against the Apartheid. Churches participated in the 
setting up of peace processes and participated in all debates. The reckoning of the role 
played by all parties and by the church in the crisis allowed the coming to terms with 
Apartheids atrocities. Yet, the principle helped to find a compromise, leading to national 
unity. Cultural elements contributed no further than in peace committees. Subsequent TRC 
aimed at two main realities: the restitution of equal rights and eventual reconciliation. 
Individual personalities played notable roles because of their popular influence, mainly N. 
Mandela and D. Tutu on Blacks and F. W. de Klerk and L. Alberts on Whites. However, 
Archbishop Tutu of the Anglican Church, Reverend Boesack and Professor Jonker from 
the DRC were all instrumental in bringing the various forces to work for common benefit.
Chapter 6 
TRC: Findings from Documentation and Field Interviews 
This chapter establishes the principles, methods and objectives followed by the Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission in South Africa (TRC). It examines the extent to which 
proceedings of submissions (documents and hearings), findings and recommendations 
were reliable. It exposes the responses of the victims and perpetrators, and catalytic factors 
of the Commission. It stresses the contribution of the church, mainly the Dutch Reformed 
Church (DRC), the Church of the Province in Southern Africa (CPSA [Anglican]), and to 
some extent the effort of the Fellowship of Evangelicals in South Africa (FESA), which 
affected the process of the Commission. The answers to the questions below critically 
unfold the starting point that shapes the thesis.  
 What were the structures, institutions, mechanisms and principles that steered the 
Commission? What were the sectors explored and steps followed in the search for truth? 
How did the South African people overcome suspicion and instil co-operation between 
operating units and between individuals and the state?  
 Did the TRC contribute positively to the South African situation? Are there any 
unresolved problems that require further consideration, any lessons or findings that the 
South African experience might offer to other countries trying to settle their conflicts and 
to deal with a painful past?  
 Were the South African churches among the key-players in the process of the TRC? 
Are there better Christian strategies available for local churches to help in dealing with 
crises and painful pasts? Are there any particular lessons for churches in other contexts on 
how to optimistically impart conflict settlement procedures in their countries? 
From the vantage point of peacemaking, this chapter critically analyses the TRC and its 
impact in relation to its objectives and new perspectives. The chapter relies on first hand 
information, including personal interviews, other communications and grey material. The 
research relates these resources systematically to the TRC Final Report and subsequent 
evaluations. The argument in this chapter anticipates a parallel analysis of Rwandas 
prospect of reconciliation (in Chapter 8), and a comparative approach to the two situations 
and their settlements (in Chapter 9). 
6.1 TRC in South Africa: mandate, structure and method 
South Africa established the TRC by law to deal with the aftermath of Apartheid and 
violence in the country. The direct objective was to uncover as much as possible of the 
truth about past gross violations of human rights in order to promote national unity and 
reconciliation. The main goal was to heal the pain of past Apartheid and to bridge eventual 
gaps left by the transition to democracy. 
6.1.1 The mandate of the Commission 
The Promotion of National Unity and Reconciliation Act No 34 of 26 July 1995 defined 
the mandate of the Commission as follows: 
 To establish a picture, as far as possible, of the nature, causes and extent of gross 
violations of human rights committed during the period between 1 March 1960 and 10 
May 1994. 
 To grant amnesty to those perpetrators who made full disclosure of relevant facts 
relating to defined acts associated with political objectives during the period specified. 
 To recommend reparation or rehabilitation as measures to restore the human and civil 
dignity of the victims in response to those abuses, and to give to the victims an 
opportunity to relate the violations they had endured. 
 To produce a report of the findings and recommendations to the nation.  
Thus, the mandate of the Commission was to facilitate the recovery of truth, and to give a 
voice to the experiences of victims, witnesses and perpetrators of violence of the Apartheid 
era. The TRC acquired the power to subpoena and to grant amnesty (Hamber 1999; Lee, 
personal message, 17 April 2000; TRC Final Report 1998). It had to establish a picture of 
the causes and nature of such violence and write policy that would ensure reparation for 
the survivors and families of victims. The South African Government was held responsible 
for implementing the policy.  
By telling what had happened, the TRC broke the silence that characterised the conspiracy. 
The Commission uncovered the forces that had contributed to the behaviour of the 
perpetrators. It analysed the events to ensure that similar atrocities never occur again in the 
future. It integrated respect into the broader context of the international notion of human 
rights (Act No 34 of 26 July 1995; Villa-Vicencio & Verwoerd 2000). 
Hamber (1999) asserted, however, that the TRC  like all truth commissions  was 
essentially created for political reasons: mostly to assist in smoothing the political 
transition from authoritarian to democratic rule. The TRC Final Report (1998 vol. I, chap. 
4, 1) states, the Commission was conceived as part of the bridge-building process 
designed to help lead the nation away from a deeply divided past to a future founded on the 
recognition of human rights and democracy. 
During the introduction of the Promotion of National Unity and Reconciliation Act in 
Parliament, on 17 May 1995, Omar  by then Minister of Justice  suggested: its [the Act] 
substance is the very essence of the constitutional commitment to reconciliation and the 
reconstruction of society (TRC Final Report 1998 vol. I chap. 4, 1). The TRC then 
embodied the significance of the Bill (the reconciliation and reconstruction of the South 
African society).  
While Hamber (1999) asserts that the purpose of all Truth Commissions is to smooth a 
political transition, it would be mistaken to attribute the same purpose to the TRC because 
if the South African Commission aimed to smooth the transition, then it came too late; 
democracy had been established. Sarkin (1997) asserts that such a Commission comes after 
a period of political transition. Thus, we may rather suggest that the precursors of the TRC 
 namely the negotiation of political parties that ended in political compromise, the Peace 
Accords, the Peace Committees, the Constitutional Reform and elections  smoothed the 
transition. We noted that various interpretations of the mandate of the TRC carry certain 
confusions since each individual brings in his own feelings and expectations. For example, 
Tutu (1999) and Villa-Vicencio (2000)1 differ in their understanding on this subject.  
Tutu lifted the TRC to a spirituality that reflected his theology of ubuntu. Thus, he stressed 
rehabilitation and warned that the Commission was not a criminal court. The same feeling 
re-emerged from his appreciation of the outcome of the Commission in relation to its 
mandate, mostly the truth discovery. Tutu (1999, 33) stated: this was what could be 
  1 C. Villa-Vicencio was Director of Research in the TRC and was responsible for its final report. 
termed forensic factual truth  verifiable and documentable  and there was social truth, 
the truth of experience that is established through interaction, discussion and debate. For 
Judge Mohammed, personal truth, a truth of wounded memories was also a healing truth. 
Tutu (1999) asserted that a court of law would have ignored many of those who came to 
the TRC.  
Villa-Vicencio (2000) suggested that the mandate of the TRC was to overcome silence and 
denial, telling stories that would lead to the uncovering of the psychological and social 
forces that contributed to the making of perpetrators. Considering the many voices that 
engaged with the process of the TRC and similar initiatives, one finds the balance that 
Hamber (1999) expresses: the use of such a Commission shows the governments 
willingness to break with the past and usher in a new political and social order.  
In the minds of most South African people, the TRC process did far better than could have 
been expected from courts of tribunal. On this point, 68 percent of respondents to the 
research interviews were optimistic. The notion of reconciliation and unity, though, was 
not apparent in the early workings of the TRC. Tutu gradually made it the core of the 
Commission (Posel & Simpson 2002). Nevertheless, the Minister of Justice claimed that 
the Promotion of National Unity and Reconciliation Act no 34 of 26 July 1995 intended to 
establish such a foundation. In the same way, the TRC Final Report and comments by the 
commissioners suggest that the TRC's role was to initiate Unity and Reconciliation (Tutu 
1999; Meiring 1999; Boraine 2000).  
P. J. Lee (personal message, 17 April 2000) sums up the mandate of the TRC. He states 
that its objectives were three-fold, in line with the three parts of the Commissions work. 
(1) The first objective came within the remit of the Investigation Committee to get a 
representative sample of people telling their stories, actively seeking reconciliation with 
those who had injured them. In this way, the TRC was a representative and catalytic 
model, which set an example; it did not deal with every case. S. Gunn (interview, 07 July 
2001), a witness in the TRC, agreed with Lee. She stated, because of hearings which were 
public, though we were so few, the TRC was a catharsis for the nation. Our stories were to 
represent the story of the people. (2) The second objective was more legally specific and 
offered amnesty in terms of the law on certain clearly specific conditions (e.g., that the 
offence was politically motivated and that a full disclosure had been made). (3) The third 
objective came within the reparation process, but unfortunately it was de-linked from the 
amnesty process, since it appeared that White people (and most top leaders) were getting 
amnesty, while Black people (as the victims) were not given reparations. 
6.1.2 The task of the Commission   
To pursue its objectives, the TRC invited the people to give their statements on 
representative and demonstrative cases from which particular cases were sent to public 
hearings for confession and amnesty publication (Hamber 1999). Tutu (1999) viewed that 
in fulfilling its mission, the Commission would also contribute in bringing people to 
repentance for forgiveness. Most people could better establish the TRCs objectives in 
critical appraisal after they had observed its work. However, it was evident that the 
involvement of Archbishop Tutu and Dr. Boraine, both of whom were Christian leaders, as 
chairperson and deputy chairperson respectively, in addition to other leading theologians, 
gave the TRC considerable theological weight.  
The TRC granted amnesty to perpetrators who had committed politically motivated crimes 
only and fully disclosed all the information concerning their deeds (Hamber 1999). The 
TRC process started in December 1995 and ended in July 1998. At the end of its term, the 
Commission was required to write a policy suggesting the reparation to the survivors2 and 
families of victims. The government was responsible for implementing the policy. 
Four elements had a role to play in promoting national unity: (1) faith communities, (2) 
non-government organisations (NGOs), (3) community-based organisations and (4) 
ordinary citizens. The endeavour of these organs helped in telling the truth, reaching public 
knowledge, restoring peoples dignity and coming to terms with the past. Further vision 
indicated that the people of South Africa needed to continue to work towards unity and 
reconciliation after the closure of the formal Commission. As an appraisal for the 
Commission, the TRC Final Report (1998 vol. I chap. 1) concurs with the view of one 
anonymous participant (cited by the Report, vol. I chap. 4) at a public meeting, who 
advocated that reconciliation needs to be a mode of life [modus vivendi]. In much the same 
way, another observer, also anonymous (cited by the Report, vol. I chap. 4), objected to 
theory that the TRC could do no more than kick start the process of reconciliation. F. du 
Toit (interview, 29 June 2001) suggested that the TRC opened the way for churches in 
particular, to encourage the people to start a new life. In his view, churches should have 
continued to do something very consistent and practical. In other words, the formal 
proceedings of the TRC should not be an end in themselves.  
In short, the task of the TRC was to encourage victims to forgive and become reconciled 
with their offenders. The amnesty provision encouraged the perpetrators to testify about 
gross violations of human rights. While amnesty, forgiveness and reconciliation were 
unique features of the Commission, national unity and reconciliation were realisable only 
if the truth about past violations was brought to public knowledge (TRC Final Report 1998 
  2 S. Gunn (interview, 07 July 2001) stated that post TRC South Africans prefer using the term survivors 
when referring to victims who testified in the TRC. The term survivor conveys the message that particular 
victims who responded positively to the call of the TRC overcame anger (cf. Leary & Hay 2000).  
vol. I. chap. 4). Thus, truth disclosure was a prerequisite for amnesty and to some extent 
for forgiveness and reconciliation. 
6.1.3 Structure, objectives and values  
The South African Commission was set up as an independent body by a panel consisting of 
five politicians: one from each main political party plus three others. These three were 
Bishop Desmond Tutu, Frank Chikane and one Trade Union official (Sarkin 1997). The 
TRC Final Report (1998) suggests that President Mandela appointed 17 commissioners. 
The Act clarifies that the President also had to determine the seat of the Commission.  
Figure 6.1: Organisation of the TRC 
NATIONAL OFFICE (CAPE TOWN) 
                                                               Regional Offices 
   Cape Town <> Johannesburg <> East London <> Durban 
                                                       Satellite Offices 
                                  Port Elizabeth Bloemfontein 
Source: <TRC Final Report 1998, Vol 1, Chap 3, 1ff. > 
While President Mandela had to appoint the commissioners, in order to give credibility to 
the TRC undertaking, he extended his confidence to those whom the nation would trust 
together with him. Thus, he received suggestions of names through the panel and 
formalised their appointment. The panel created a structure that the people could accept, 
and this meant that there was no fear or bias in the TRCs findings. This is contrary to what 
many South Africans would have suggested: for example, Lamola (1991) believes that 
reconciliation is the prerogative of the victim. He states that the victim determines and 
decides whether to forgive, because for the victim, reconciliation is a process by which he 
is empowered. Therefore, deciding who the commissioners ought to be was a vital step in 
creating a credible structure. Sarkin (1997) concurs with Lamola that the commissioners 
had credibility, because if they had not, the results of the Commission would not have been 
acceptable. 
On 15 December 1995, the Government Gazette No 16885 made public the appointment of 
the commissioners. The Commission held its first meeting at Bishopscourt, the residence 
of the Anglican Archbishop of Cape Town, on the Day of Reconciliation (16 December 
1995). The national office of the Commission was set up in Cape Town (TRC Final Report 
1998; Boraine 2000). 
Source: 
<TRC Final Report 1998, Vol 1, Chap 3, 1; Boraine 2000, 76-83 > 
Four commissioners were responsible for the daily business of regional offices: Dr Wendy 
Orr in Cape Town, Dr Fazel Randera in Johannesburg, Revd Bongani Finca in East 
Table 6.1: List of the commissioners of the TRC 
1) Archbishop Desmond Tutu (Chairperson) Emeritus  
Anglican Archbishop of Johannesburg 
2) Dr Alex Boraine (Vice-Chairperson) formerly 
President of the Methodist Church in Southern 
Africa 
3) Ms Mary Burton 
4) Adv. Chris de Jager DRC member* 
5) Revd Bongani Finca 
6) Ms Sisi Khampepe 
7) Mr Richard Lyster 
8) Mr Wynand Malan DRC member* 
9) Revd Dr Khoza Mgogo 
10) Ms Hlengiwe Mkhize 
11)  Mr Dumisa Ntsebeza 
12)  Dr Wendy Orr 
13)  Adv. Denzil Potgieter 
14)  Dr Mapule F Ramashala 
15)  Dr Fazel Randera 
16)  Ms Yasmin Sooka  
17)  Ms Glenda Wildschut 
Prof. Piet Meiring (a DRC 
member) was later appointed 
to replace Adv. Chris de 
Jager. 
London and Mr Richard Lyster in Durban. After their appointment, all commissioners met 
and designated members of three statutory committees. 
Photo 6.1: The Commissioners of the TRC 
Source:  <Boraine 2000, 0> 
Mr Dumisa Ntsebeza was Head of the Investigation Unit. 
Source: < TRC Final Report 1998, Vol 1, Chap 3, 1 and Boraine 2000, 76-83 > 
Logistical difficulties delayed the staffing and setting up of the national office and the start 
of the work of the Commission and its committees. It took an additional three to four 
Table 6.2: The three statutory committees of the TRC 
Human Rights Committee 
Amnesty Committee 
Reparation & Rehabilitation 
Committee 
1)    Archbishop Desmond Tutu  
        (Chairperson) 
2)    Mr Mynand Malan  
        (Vice-Chairperson) 
3)    Ms Yasmin Sooka  
        (Vice-chairperson) 
4)    Dr Alex Boraine  
5)    Ms Mary Burton 
6)  Revd Bongani Finca 
7)  Mr Richard Lyster 
8)  Dr Faizel Randera 
1)    Adv. Chris de Jager 
2)    Ms Sisi Khampepe 
3)    Adv. Denzil Potgieter 
N.B. The President 
appointed   
         D. Potgieter.  
1) Ms Hlengiwe Mkhize 
(Chairperson) 
2) Dr Wendy Orr  
       (Vice-Chairperson) 
3) Revd Dr Khoza  
       Mgogo 
4) Dr Mapule F  
       Ramashala 
5) Ms Glenda  
       Wildschut 
months for regional commissions to finish establishing their infrastructure and staffing. 
The process became operative between December 1995 and early January 1996 (TRC 
Final Report 1998). 
6.1.4 TRC Methods: statement taking and data processing 
The methodology of the TRC built on the theory that objective knowledge about the social 
world in general, and about human rights violations in particular, is possible. Academic 
anthropologists, however, question the theory, viewing it as the decontextualisation of 
human rights reporting. Gender and power based networks usually consider human rights 
methods as more or less meaningless or superficial (TRC Final Report 1998). Thus, the 
TRC chose a methodological pluralism. The TRC viewed that rigour in systems analysis 
was imperative, in addition to contextual motives and perspectives. The rigour that was 
essential in the building up of a quantitative tool of the system analysis  in historical and 
ethnographic perspectives, pluralistic principles and approach  guided the TRC as a whole 
(TRC Final Report 1998; Posel & Simpson 2001). 
According to M. Weber, social analysis is sufficient to draw general conclusions, which it 
simultaneously preserves and reflects on individual case details. This argument assumes 
that analysts can identify general factors in the universe of examples by applying ideal 
types, and in this way, can illuminate the particular phenomena under investigation. It also 
assumes that general factors are understood through individual cases and a vocabulary-
coding frame before capturing the information. Building on this theory, the bases of 
quantitative analysis applied by the TRC were the comparison of patterns of violations 
among regions, across time, between types of victims and between groups of perpetrators 
(TRC Final Report 1998; Posel & Simpson 2002). Thus, the process of the TRC was both 
an experimental phase and an operational tool for truth finding and reconciliation in the 
country. Interactions of the field research and the literature research showed that the 
Commission designated a Database Development Group (DDG) to review the Act3 and 
determine the sources of legally accessible information. 
There were three levels for processing the data. First, the Commission received statements 
about human rights violation (HRV) from individual witnesses and amnesty applicants. L. 
Brown stated that the TRC went out to inform the public, individuals and institutions from 
various sectors about this opportunity to come and expose either the suffering or the HRV 
they had witnessed. The information was cross-examined and verified, because it should 
ultimately be available for archives and accessible to the public (interview, 26 June 2001; 
cf. Boraine 2000). Second, the Commission treated the data consistently and methodically 
to ensure that each statement or amnesty application received fair and equal evaluation. 
Third, once the Commission had stored the information, each of the regional offices had 
access to it. Each statement or amnesty application was allowed an application for hearing 
or further investigation from or in any of the TRCs offices (Brown interview, 26 June 
2001; Mngese interview, 29 June 2001). 
Krog (1998) has suggested that the main strength of the TRC has been its human rights 
violation hearings. For the first time, the country heard the previously silent voices and the 
police had to provide protection to those they had formerly persecuted. The TRC Final 
Report (1998) asserts that the Commission adopted the processing information flow system 
in these stages: (1) It computerised the data and analysed them using both qualitative and 
quantitative processes. (2) Techniques met the requirements of the Act. (3) It identified 
systematic abuses, using quantitative tools for analysis and statistical regularity. (4) It 
allowed description of the types of violation and how many violations were committed. (5) 
It produced a report on the Commissions activities and findings. The report included 
  3 The Act, in this chapter, always refers to the Promotion of National Unity and Reconciliation Act No 34 
of 26 July 1995. 
statistics and comments from people who made statements and those who applied for 
amnesty. 
6.2 Source for building the design 
The TRC benefited from previous experiences, mainly from Latin America. It drew on the 
Chilean commission, particularly the ideas on the production of a final report to the public 
(Minow 1998; Rotberg & Thompson 2000; Posel & Simpson 2002). Important 
international contributions came from Professor Carl Norgaard (at the time president of the 
European Human Rights Commission), his wife Helle Norgaard, and Pepe [Jos] 
Zalaquett, who was a member of Chiles Truth and Reconciliation Commission (Boraine 
2000, 49).  
The TRC Final Report (1998) states that the Commission drew on a variety of earlier 
human rights data projects in order to design its database. It consulted the Haitian National 
Commission for Truth and Justice, and the UN Commission for Truth in El Salvador. At 
that time, the latter two commissions were the only ones that had conducted qualitative 
data analyses for HRV on the scale that the TRC required. The South African Investigating 
Unit, however, learned primarily from the Kwa-Zulu Natal experiences of HRV data 
gathering (TRC Final Report 1998; Mekenkamp, van Tongeren & van de Veen 1999). 
Hence, NGOs with experience in human rights information systems were the most useful 
instrument for the Commissions Database Development (TRC Final Report 1998). 
6.3 Statistics and sampling in the TRC  
The Act (1995, 4, b) required that the Commission accept statements from all South 
Africans who wished to make them. There was no survey of violations from which to draw 
a probable sample of victims. In fact, the people who came forward determined the sample 
of those from whom the Commission received information. The freedom to come forward 
waived the possibility of intimidation and confrontation, which could have been 
influential. Nevertheless, there will always be cases where a witness could have crucial 
knowledge but be afraid to relate it. 
Before the launch of a project dealing with the documentation of human rights violations, 
'"Justice in Transition" printed 150,000 booklets entitled The Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission,' which dealt with the main ideas of the Commission (Boraine 2000, 51). The 
self-selection, however, suggests factors that could constitute a handicap. Because of 
difficulties of transport, people living far from the data collection offices were not able to 
testify, whereas those nearer to the offices had the chance to tell their stories. Energetic 
people were more likely to come than those who were injured or the elderly. Yet, 
experiences of deponents who died before the Commission began were likely to be 
distorted. In addition, individuals with less access to media were unable to communicate 
their knowledge.  
It is evident that hostile constituencies made fewer statements or did not come at all. This 
was apparent with the Inkata Freedom Party (IFP) led by Gatsya Buthelezi. Likewise, most 
right wing people and some former Apartheid clients did not appear before the TRC. 
Actually, some people had more to gain from the outcome of the TRC (e.g. diffusion of 
their beliefs or defence of their position, and the interests of relatives of victims or 
perpetrators) and were eager to testify for the benefit of their groups or against 
wrongdoers. It is likely that even the Commissioners exemplified this attitude in one way 
or another, such as when Tutu embraced deponents or prayed for others during the 
hearings (Meiring 1999). Krog (1998) suggested that the National Party (NP) often used 
the TRC for publicity purposes, while the IFP practically ignored it. The Freedom Front 
pleaded before it and the Pan African Congress accused it. Krog (1998) asserted, however, 
that the ANC also mismanaged the early days so badly that it was sometimes difficult to 
believe that it had actually played a major part in drafting the legislation setting up the 
process.  
6.4 Categories of witnesses  
The HRV committee defined the categories of witnesses according to the collection of 
allegations of gross violations of human rights gathered in 21,000 statements. The latter 
also constituted the basis for the committees conclusion about the nature of the conflict 
(Posel & Smpson 2001).  
The TRC Final Report (1998) acknowledged that the constituency that approached the 
TRC was in some ways partisan, because the Commission did not itself reach out to a 
sufficiently broad-based cross-section of people. Since deponents4 came to the TRC of 
their own volition, information came from those who wished to come and tell the 
Commission about the HRV they had experienced (Boraine 2000, 107). The TRC favoured 
the most self-selecting sample option. This exposed the Commission to criticism because 
the sample was likely to be biased.  
More women came to the TRC than men, particularly because more men died during the 
violence. The men dominated only the White, Coloured and Asian group of deponents. The 
field research findings concur with the TRC Final Report (1998) that many more Black 
Africans came to the Commission than other groups. Coloured people claimed that the 
TRC hearing was an affair of Black communities; one stated, you must ask Blacks and 
most are in areas like Langa, Nyanga, Gugulethu, Cross Road and Du Noon. Coloureds 
were not interested (interview, 24 June 2001). Most Coloured respondents complained 
  4 The Chambers Dictionary (2003, 401) suggests that a deponent is a person who makes deposition 
especially under oath, or whose written testimony is used as evidence in a court of justice. 
that both the Apartheid and post-Apartheid regimes ignored them. However, they could not 
explain the reason why they did not contribute to the TRC. They only repeated,  
In the past, Blacks were down, Coloureds in the middle and Whites far above all of us. Now 
Blacks have gone to top positions of means of control; they have replaced the Whites, but 
Coloureds have not moved, particularly in politics. We only acknowledge that Blacks were 
more oppressed than anybody else during the Apartheid (M. Pulse interview, 04 July 2001). 
Despite some objections, 68 percent of all interviewees affirmed that the TRC attained its 
objectives. Ninety percent of people who testified to the TRC were Black; most women 
came on behalf of men to whom they were related. People aged thirty-seven and above 
made more statements than the younger age group. Men dominated the younger age group. 
The 21,000 statements collected contained around 38,000 allegations of gross HRV, of 
which 10,000 were killings. It was clear that men were the most common victims of 
violations (TRC Final Report 1998). 
Due to limited resources and the short time frame, the TRC called willing individuals to 
reveal their painful experiences. Thus, it attracted those who suffered. Very few Whites 
attended, and most of those who did were in the category of perpetrators. The determining 
factor for these categories of participation is the period when the violation took place. 
6.5 Data analysis in the TRC  
The data could not provide the number of violations that took place for all potential 
victims. However, the pluralist ventures ensured that the findings could be corroborated. 
The data gathered from the HRV statements permitted reliable analyses of abuses to which 
victims were subjected (TRC Final Report 1998 vol.1, chap. 6  16). In addition to 
comparison on each occasion where multiple cases of different individuals and places were 
involved, quantitative data were linked to the accounts of journalists and the analyses of 
NGOs and human rights groups. The TRC Final Report (1998) suggests that the 
Commissions database embodies a unique collection of data on events that occurred in a 
unique period of the countrys history. In addition to the DDG, the Commission benefited 
from its department research thorough analysis of the data.  
In order to avoid errors of representation and analysis, the data analysis required many 
victims or witnesses to speak about one scene. For the same reason, the analysis entailed 
comparison of many violations and consideration of many perpetrators from different 
places and times (TRC Final Report 1998). The DDG managed the system with great 
flexibility, accepting multiple combinations of complexities. It assumed that accepting 
summarised versions of events could lead to distortion of the truth (TRC Final Report 
1998). The Promotion of National Unity and Reconciliation Act of 26 July 1995 also 
required that the findings should build on factual and objective information without 
simplification. It suggested giving respect to the deponents and victims, treating statements 
with integrity and keeping them intact. The information was protected from theft and abuse 
and received accurate analysis (TRC Final Report 1998; Boraine 2000).  
To maintain integrity, the narrative was not fragmented nor were portions discarded in the 
Commissions decision: there was adequate presentation. Before the hearings, 
briefing/debriefing services5 and statement takers gave information to both victims and 
perpetrators about the legal implications of their public submissions or testimonies (TRC 
Final Report 1998; Hamber 1999).  
6.6 The TRC mechanism in retrospect 
Sarkin (1997) contended that the determination of a period over which to examine human 
rights violations defines the acceptability of the Commission. He proposed three conditions 
 5 Briefers  also called cry people in South Africa  had skills in counselling, psychology, and handling post-
trauma stress disorder (PTSD) in order to prepare people psychologically to get ready: i.e. for perpetrators to 
submit and victims or witnesses to testify (Hamber 1999).  
for success: the origin of the Commissions sponsorship,6 the access to existing 
information about human rights abuses, and the ability to operate without fear of state 
intervention. Sarkin (1997) asserted that to promote true reconciliation, a Commission has 
to get political legitimacy. It must get an acceptable record of the history of human rights 
abuses from both sides and prevent future human rights abuses. Contrary to Hambers 
(1999) assertion that the Commission smoothes the transition, Teitel (2000) seems to agree 
with Sarkin (1997) that such commissions should start meeting only after a period of 
political transition. The research, however, noted that this is not absolutely ideal. 
Many investigations have listed National Truth Commissions worldwide, providing 
different figures (number of commissions in existence) over the same period. The lists 
often mix different types of commissions, including simple commissions of inquiry that 
have different perspectives and those which do not envisage reconciliation (see Villa-
Vicencio & Doxtader 2004, 123-4). Categorising the commissions correctly helps to avoid 
confusing their different motivations and perspectives. The commissions may be identified 
in terms of their motivation, components, process/phases and major goals and objectives.  
Commissions of inquiry may not go beyond a mere confirmation of whether something has 
happened and where and when it occurred. The South African TRC looked at the 
causalities and intentions of the problem and envisaged trying as much as possible to 
discover the truth about the event. It settled immediate problems though envisaging setting 
in motion the reconciliation of conflicting parties. Defining the purpose of the South 
African TRC as a bridge to smooth the transition (Hamber 1999), however, misplaces the 
significance of the process. Yet, the TRC appears to have met most of the conditions listed 
by Sarkin (1997). Besides the participation of faith communities and reference to justice, 
the stress on both truth and reconciliation also made South Africas Commission unique 
  6 Some sponsors may impose conditions, which would hinder the success of the process.  
and more significant than its predecessors. It became a new and commendable model. 
While previous models had either exemplified the victors vengeance (like Nuremberg) or 
sought facts and closed the book (most Latin American commissions), the TRC took the 
middle ground that qualified it as the Third Way, but also envisaged restitution, healing 
and punishment (Tutu 1999). Consistent research, however, has suggested that the TRC 
was not fairly restorative, as the promise of reparations has not materialised. Yet, it missed 
most of the effective input of the indigenous tradition in this perspective (Maepa 2005).  
In order to draw out transferable lessons from South Africa, further enquiries (in South 
Africa) focused on what brought people to work together and to accept the decisions of the 
TRC. In response, F. Gaum asserted, we had a passion for peace and common good 
(interview, 28 June 2001). M. Mngese, like many others, added,  
People looked for the interest of the whole nation; leaders made sure that people were pushed 
forward. We were very fortunate to have wonderful leadership such as Nelson Mandela, Walter 
Tisulu etc.; they were brilliant in their minds. There were good advisors, acting behind the 
scenes of the TRC. The President chose a few people, but allowed the whole public to 
participate in the whole process (interview, 29 June 2001).  
Moreover, researchers asserted that witness protection programmes and the provision of 
amnesty encouraged people to come forward (Boraine 2000; Christie 2000; Wilson 2001). 
Previous commissions had used a variety of means to repair past injustices and build 
democratic societies, but research has shown that through those processes, countries 
experienced more a change of regime than a fundamental break in the pattern of 
government (Sarkin 1997; Meredith & Rosenberg 1999). R. Smith and F. Gaum asserted 
that the TRC envisaged repair and reconciliation as equally important, but blended in 
additional elements to ease painful experience. Thus, it also embedded reconciliatory 
objectives that entailed spiritual ingredients: apologising and asking for forgiveness (R. 
Smith interview, 28 June; F. Gaum interview, 03 July 2001).  
Everett (1997) suggested that the notion of reconciliation could provide a vision of 
cultural, linguistic, economic and religious blending. He contended that reconciliation 
might not provide a commitment to discussion among different groups and individuals, 
which is very different from the rainbow nation. This notion welcomes multicultural 
aspects, race, etc. in harmony. Non-violent dispute resolution is crucial, whereas unity and 
reconciliation concepts may only increase suspicion, especially if truth has not been 
allowed to come out so that both victims and perpetrators tell their stories facing the truth. 
Everett (1999) stated that agreement to work towards the common good, be it political 
unity, within a constitutional framework, as in the TRC, leads to all other good.  
Close examination has shown that the Nunca Ms promoted by truth commissions did not 
fully materialise in practice. Bearing reconciliatory motives as part of the process and the 
goal of the TRC, in South Africa the factual truth was sought first. Previous conflict 
resolution processes embodying the truth had typified justice through punishment with no 
subsequent action. Conversely, the TRC departed from the negotiation to find truth, which 
is not negotiable (Everett 1997; Tutu 1999). However, the TRC provided for amnesty in 
exchange for full disclosure, rather than enforcing penalties (Minow 1998; Tutu 1999; 
Boraine 2000). While 34 percent of the researchs interview respondents affirmed that 
amnesty encouraged people to give testimonies, 66 percent of respondents objected to its 
effectiveness in terms of justice. This is what J. P. Lee expressed when he said that Whites 
were getting amnesty but Blacks were not given reparations (personal message, 17 April 
2000). 
In general, the TRC fulfilled its commitment vis--vis the objectives. Sixty percent of 
respondents to the research interviews confirmed that the TRC had reached its main goal. 
Nevertheless, the South African case was unusual: the damage of Apartheid was enormous 
and covered a long period that was impossible to redress perfectly. Thus, the TRC tried to 
enable a new beginning enforcing all-inclusive equality and rights. Even so, Everetts 
(1997) argument that unity and reconciliation concepts might raise suspicion is valid and 
throws light on the South African case. Questions arise about the kind of unity and 
reconciliation that was achieved after the Commission closed. Yet, the passion for 
reconciliation eclipsed full justice. Tutu later claimed, however, that the TRC 
recommendations were not a final word on anything. He stated, 'we did expect a 
responselet the debate begin' (Time to Act 1998, 2). Below are the response rates to key 
questions that emerged after the TRC work:  
1 - Was the TRC important in building a united South African nation? 
Source: <http://www.ijr.org.za/index. Accessed 4. 17.  2004 > 
2 - What were the key components of reconciliation? 
Understanding
Compensation
Forgiveness
Forgetting
Healing
Amnwesty
Agree
Neither
Disagree
Don't know
Source: <http://www.ijr.org.za/index. Accessed   4. 17.  2004> 
Agree Neither Disagree Don't know
Blacks
Whites
Coloureds
http://www.ijr.org.za/index
http://www.ijr.org.za/index
Is the TRCs claim of success justified without reparations to victims? How should one 
rate the submission and participation of the conflicting parties and the churches? The 
responses to these questions represent the discontent of some South African people, which 
the informants expressed during the research interviews. Most respondents concurred with 
critical researchers that corporate bodies, especially political parties and churches, 
produced large quantities of words during the submissions and hearings that meant very 
little as far as truth disclosure and apologies were concerned (cf. L. Brown interview, 26 
June 2001).  
Referring to the NP leader and former South African President F.W. de Klerk, L. Brown 
stated, this man came to talk on his behalf and on behalf of NP and as the last President of 
the Apartheid regime, but presented no confession or apology (interview, 26 June 2001). 
The majority of informants pointed to F.W. de Klerk and T. Mbeki disapproving of the 
kind of submissions made respectively on behalf of the NPs and ANCs. However, eighty 
four percent of respondents suggested that contrary to the top leaders, the common person 
came to the TRC willing to tell the truth about the wrongdoing and pain they suffered.  
As for churches, the DRC did not impress South Africans because it did not give an 
adequate apology for its support for Apartheid either in the written submission to the TRC 
or in public hearings. Even some DRC clergymen and members were very critical of their 
church. They asserted that the DRC was not a real player in the TRC process and that 
subsequently it is not doing enough. B. du Toit commented, people think that the DRC 
should apologise more unconditionally and straightforwardly (interview, 28 June 2001). 
F. Gaum argued to the contrary, the DRC participated in the TRC and the process of 
change in South Africa as a whole and on the day of the Church [s submission], the then 
Moderator of the General Synod attended the TRC on behalf of the DRC (interview, 28 
June 2001). 
B. du Toit cautioned that the churches should not be part of Party politics play. He 
suggested that unfortunately, churches in South Africa are divided along all these lines; 
there are even sometimes divisions within the same church, along ideological and ethnic 
lines, so the churches cannot do much. He stated, because of that, people no longer trust 
the church (interview, 28 June 2001). B. du Toit agrees with F. du Toit, however, that the 
TRC has affected the churches because reconciliation continued between churches 
themselves and within each church.  
IJR is doing reconciliation among groups and churches. There are initiatives resulting from the 
TRCs challenge: Windbag is in a process of becoming one church, merging Whites, 
Coloureds and Blacks. The Church was supposed to accompany people during the process of 
the TRC, but that did not happen. The TRC urged the members of churches to be there to hear 
people talking of their pain in order to take the TRCs model into their churches (F. du Toit 
interview, 29 June 2001).  
Both Canon K. Groepe (interview, 04 July 2001) and Bishop P. J. Lee (message, 17 April 
2000) from the CPSA disagree with Archdeacon Smiths praise of the part the churches 
played in the TRC. Smith asserted that the churches supported the TRC by providing 
church premises and commissioning the commissioners on these premises. He also stated 
that the Anglican Church allowed the early retirement of Archbishop Tutu so that he could 
chair the Commission. Smith stated, we accompanied the Commission in our prayers and 
encouraged our members to give their testimonies to the TRC (interview, 01 July 2001). 
While Groepe acknowledged the involvement of the churches in the TRC, he objected to 
the effectiveness of their part. He stated, we messed it up. By this, he meant that the 
churches did not grasp the significance of the TRC, and did not campaign enough for it or 
contribute energetically to its activities. He agreed with B. du Toit and F. du Toit that there 
was no joint effort from the churches to support the TRC (interview, 04 July 2001). 
The account above captures the degree to which the representatives of the churches and 
political parties represented their groups on the TRC. One would agree with Mngese 
(interview, 29 June 2001) that there was a positive impact, since the process disclosed 
some truths and improved the relations between racial and political groups. Yet, further 
initiatives followed because of submissions and apologies. Also, the TRC allowed people 
to express their fortunate or unfortunate experiences and find ways of dealing with the 
past: for example, Khulumani support groups and the Year of Hope projects replicate the 
TRC pattern. 
Despite the positive impact of the TRC, the socio-economic situation of the country 
declined and could not help in implementing the recommendations from the Commission. 
From the viewpoint of the beneficiaries of Apartheid  mostly Whites and Coloureds, but 
also dissatisfied survivors  the outcomes of the TRC could only be interpreted with 
discontent. Former MK commander S. Gunn said, you went as a witness and you got 
another name, victim or survivor. The TRC only changed people into victims overnight, 
but most survivors never heard from the TRC again after they testified (interview, 07 July 
2001). Like Gunn, many other survivors complained about the unfulfilled promises of the 
TRC in exchange for testimonies (interview, 07 July 2001). 
The discontent reflects unresolved realities that are crucial in the assessment of the post-
TRC South Africa: the kind of change and reconciliation achieved. The expenses accrued 
by the Commission, including the high salaries of commissioners, increased the discontent 
and suspicion. The total cost of the Commission in two and a half years was  14,027,500. 
S. Meyer concurred with Gunn and Lee that the TRC benefited the Whites, political 
leaders and the commissioners, but deceived the victims (interview, 17 May 2001).  
All informants asserted, however, that reaching political agreement and proceeding 
through the TRC prevented war and further abuses. Most South Africans I interviewed 
were convinced that the TRC has yielded many positive changes in terms of language, 
approach (e.g., within the DRC), race relations, and the countrys management and 
relations with the rest of the world. Referring to his church, Gaum, the editor of the DRC 
magazine, asserted, we acknowledged that Apartheid is wrong and the Synod sought ways 
and means to change the attitude of the church. Talking of Afrikaners in general, however, 
he stated, we have lost our power (interview, 28 June 2001). Some Afrikaners, including 
Christians, maintain that there were two aspects: good Apartheid and bad Apartheid 
(Botman 1997).  
Individuals opinions reflect the change brought by the process of democratisation and the 
subsequent TRC: 64 percent of informants were very positive. M. Mngese exclaimed, 
The change consists in the fact that Apartheid is no longer in the legislation books. I enter any 
bus, go to any beach and sit anywhere. There are no exclusive signboards anymore, one enters 
anywhere in the churches. The government carries out more changes in the ways in which it 
distributes the means of control applying the Affirmative Action Act which favours Blacks 
in the new employment regulation, reducing the possibility for Whites to hold the monopoly of 
politics and economy (interview, 29 June 2001).  
All South African people interviewed affirmed that there are many lessons that other 
countries could learn from the South African TRC, but Blacks and Whites were more 
positive than the Coloureds.  
Independence from the state gave the Commission a strong position. Parliament had 
delegated powers to a free body  the TRC , which had adequate staffing. The mandate 
and task of the Commission were clear and it was given sufficient time and scope (Tutu 
1999). However, Tutu (1999, 79) echoed the dissatisfaction concerning the workload of the 
Commission, the period over which it investigated and the term allocated to it to conclude 
its business. He asserted that the Commission was required to deal with a manageable 
portion of history in the relatively brief period of two years, which was later extended to 
nearly three. Thus, the Commission had no ambition to investigate all crimes or misdeeds 
of the past, as Apartheid had done sizeable damage. Generally, the TRC aimed to create a 
new ethos, leaving the past behind.  
Mamdani suggested that the mandate of the TRC was too narrow and resulted in the 
Commissions producing a diminished truth, which focussed on narrow categories of 
perpetrators (state agents) and victims (political activists) and obscured the links between 
the radicalised power of Whites and their privilege (James & van de Vijver 2000, 58-61). 
Nevertheless, Mamdani agrees with Krog (1998) that the TRC dealt with all kinds of HRV, 
most of which were exposed to public scrutiny. It brought out the view of important 
witnesses and additions to public knowledge. Conversely, Mamdani (2000) observed that 
there is a difference between public debates and intellectual debates on the TRC. By this, 
he expressed, in other words, what others had termed the unfinished business of the TRC.  
In response to questioning, Tutu (1999) stated that people should not expect the TRC to 
answer all questions, because it was set a definite goal within a prescribed period. He 
compared the role of the TRC with the objectives of each of the books of the Bible, which 
were written for a particular audience and time, to respond to specific questions. He 
suggested that the TRC should not be asked to be involved in objectives outside its original 
remit. L. Brown also stated, the TRC has finished its mandate and is closing to give place 
to eventual initiative[s] to carry on the work in accordance with the Commissions findings 
and recommendations (interview, 26 June 2001). Mamdani still wondered how a 
substantial minority that continues to be the beneficiaries of Apartheid will live together 
with the majority that continues to be its victims. He agreed with L. Brown (2001) that a 
different commission is needed to answer this question. 
Although it pardoned some criminals, the TRC model is widely appreciated because it 
carried out a professional and systematic inquiry with strong investigative powers; it was a 
nationwide affair, which received local and national credibility. It published a report that 
named individuals responsible for the human rights violations, and encouraged them to 
give submission or testimony. Mamdani (1998), stated that most remarkable was the 
attempt to carry out justice without punishment, by providing amnesty, rehabilitation and 
seeking reparation. Yet, because the TRC maintained its independence from the state, it 
achieved considerable success in shaming the police, military authorities and supporters of 
the Apartheid principles (TRC Final Report 1998).  
In other countries, models were prosecution-biased (e.g., in Ethiopia), or did not conclude 
the inquiry (e.g., in Argentina, Chile etc.). Yet, the other commissions had very limited 
mandates and were not separate from the state. The TRC process challenged all categories. 
To express this, Krog (1998, 230) stated, it gets to all of us, from Tutu to Mamasela: in 
other words, it reaches everyone from the innocent and people of dignity to cruel criminals, 
and from the top down to the bottom.7 There was no fear or bias in its proceedings and 
findings (Sarkin 1997; Tutu 1999). Consistent with this statement, eighty four percent of 
the research interviewees affirmed that the TRC closed its doors while many other 
individuals and groups were still willing to tell their stories. Many people proposed that 
such remaining stories should also be heard and dealt with. 
6.6.1 The TRC process proceedings  
In normal situations, telling the truth in public is not wrong; this principle guided the South 
Africans in giving their testimonies at the TRC. Moreover, witnesses were encouraged to 
disclose all the truth. The coverage did not allow fragmented information, which does not 
complete a whole story within its context (TRC Final Report 1998). The pluralistic 
approach, which applied across the proceedings, data collection and analysis, also balanced 
the participation of the conflicting forces: NP and ANC or IFP. In view of its unity and 
  7 Joie Mamasela was once an ANC member who later left the ANC to work as a police officer for the 
Apartheid regime at Vlakplaas (police station in Pretoria). He betrayed the ANC and exercised excessive 
cruelty during his later career. He was among those who offered touching testimonies about their misdeeds 
and led the TRC to believe that the process worked successfully (Krog 1998; Wilson 2001). 
reconciliation objectives, the TRC would have wasted time if it had listened to one side at 
a time. 
The TRC received 21,000 statements from survivors and/or families of victims of political 
violence. Public hearings were held, spanning a total of 244 days, at which victims told 
their stories. Then, 7,050 amnesty applications were received, but a relatively limited 
number were processed through public hearings or in chambers (Hamber 1999; Boraine 
2000, 115; Posel & Simpson 2002). 
The components of the process were the tasks of investigation and data gathering, story 
telling and submissions or decisions regarding amnesty. Both submissions and testimonies 
required responses from the TRC. Submissions in statement form largely reflected the 
positions and confessions of the institutions. In rare cases, the deponents sent only written 
submissions to the TRC, whereas individual testimonies or applications were presented 
live. The Commission responded to each deponent by granting or refusing amnesty, and 
proposing reparation or rehabilitation. Submissions and testimonies formed the two bases 
for assessing damage or pain. Although submissions and applications for amnesty required 
full disclosure, there were limits on some issues dealing, for example, with rape, police 
activities etc.; this exposed the TRC to criticisms.  
There was major criticism of the submissions of political parties and central organisations 
such as the SADF and the DRC. Given the damage that such organisations had caused, the 
publics expectation was that their submissions would shed light on the situation. However, 
these bodies could not clarify some issues or accounts, as their testimonies underwent 
strategic modifications before publication, which created suspicion. The four cases below 
represent the extent to which the proceedings were reliable and the grounds for criticism: 
 First, Magnus Malan, the former South African defence minister, admitted having set 
up the Civil Co-operation Bureau to disrupt the enemy but denied authorising the 
assassination of anti-apartheid activists. He admitted that he had overseen cross-border 
raids against enemy targets, but he did not apply for amnesty for such operations, as he 
considered them legal actions of the state (Graybill 1998).  
 Second, the DRC first declined to make any formal submission. Instead, it issued a 
document admitting that the church had not always heard the Word of God correctly 
regarding the racial policies of the government (Graybill 1998). F. Gaum (interview, 28 
June 2001), the editor of the DRC Magazine, was formerly Moderator of Western Cape 
Synod; he maintained that the theory of Apartheid had good intentions, but that its practice 
went bad because it was exclusive. The DRCs official position reflects a similar approach 
in The Story of the Dutch Reformed Churchs journey with Apartheid, 1960-1994, a 
testimony and confession, produced by order of the General Synod Commission of the 
Dutch Reformed Church. The document expresses the DRCs confession to God and to 
South Africans. On one hand, perhaps the DRCs reluctance to apologise in public 
hearings was intended to avert dangers arising from direct disclosure of the truth, rather 
than rejecting the significance of the TRC per se. On the other hand, the DRC exemplified 
the attitude of most churches. F. du Toit asserted that churches were too slow to be 
involved (interview, 29 June 2001). D. Tilton from the SACC doubted whether churches 
had grasped the goal of the TRC and its dynamics, given the short period of its mandate 
(interview, 04 June 2001).  
 Third, leaders of political parties admitted what they called excesses and apologised 
for these. Yet, they denied that murder, torture and other gross human rights violations 
were official policies of their parties. F.W. de Klerk, speaking on behalf of the National 
Party at its first submission in August 1996, denied that he or members of his cabinet had 
ever planned murders, torture or assassinations (Graybill 1998). The following year, de 
Klerk made a second submission in response to the TRCs request; the Commission 
released a document showing that he had attended a cabinet meeting in 1986, which 
decided creating a security force that would eliminate the states enemies. De Klerk 
denied that eliminate meant to kill (Graybill 1998; Wilson 2001). Relating to this case, 
L. Brown stated, this man came and said nothing consistent on behalf of the National 
Party and its government so long as confession is concerned (interview, 26 June 2001). 
 Fourth, T. Mbeki, by then Vice-President of South Africa, defended the policies of the 
ANC. Graybill (1998) stated that Mbeki denied that it was the ANCs official policy to 
attack civilians or to necklace Apartheids collaborators such as the A-team.8 Mbeki 
admitted that excesses had occurred in the ANCs exile camps (1980-1989), including 
the executions of thirty-four cadres in Angola accused of mutiny, murder and rape. At its 
second submission in May 1997, the ANC was more forthright; it admitted womens 
HRVs, assassination of informers who betrayed the struggle, setting up township self-
defence units in the early 1990s and bombing companies. It accepted responsibility for 
bombing the South African Air Force Headquarters in Pretoria in 1983.  
These four samples of submissions/hearings exemplify the kind of truth received. S. Gunn 
observed that more accounts of human rights violations by the liberation movements came 
out during the [second] hearings, whereas the Apartheid regime admitted very little of its 
misdeeds (interview, 07 July 2001). During the research interviews, as in the Commission, 
Blacks who were members of the liberation movements tended to tell most of the truth 
whereas Whites who were stakeholders in Apartheid avoided most of the facts about their 
misdeeds. These contrasting attitudes led many analyses to conclude that the TRC reached 
  8 The A-Team was a group of Blacks that served the cause of the NP, informing the Apartheid regime 
about the activities of the struggle movements. 
one-sided (Blacks) reconciliation rather than reconciliation of Blacks and Whites (P. J. 
Lee, personal message, 17 April 2000; M. Pulse interview, 05 July 2001).  
6.6.2 Achievement and impact: the participation of churches  
As South Africas religious communities had been implicated in Apartheid, they represent 
important sites of transformation. Within the same faith tradition, there were different 
interests and perspectives, victims and perpetrators and beneficiaries of Apartheid. A 
change from these communities could extend to the entire Christian community in the 
country. Thus, reconciliation within such communities could have a leavening effect over 
the whole society. The TRC Final Report (1998) stated that the Commission had a 
Christian/theological background. However, mainline churches  the major participants in 
the TRC  represent less than half of the South African Christian community. The African 
Initiated Churches (AICs) form the majority and thus could be stronger forces of change. 
Given this research's focus on mainline churches and their involvement in the atrocities of 
Apartheid as most closely representing the genocide situation in Rwanda, this section 
analyses the degree and impact of the participation of such churches, particularly their 
submission and public confession. 
In 1994, eighty two percent of the South African population was Christian (Table 6.3). 
Faith communities included the Baptist Union and the Jamiatul Ulama Transvaal, churches 
under the umbrella of SACC, the African religious community, the CESA, the Hindu 
community and Muslims. The Afrikaans Reformed Churches and the African religious 
community are largely associated with a cultural or ethnic group organically identified 
with its activities. Since each religious tradition has different groups, the question is which 
groups were represented in the hearings. The problem surfaced through the process, and 
the representations reflected a broad spectrum of religion (TRC Final Report 1998). 
Table 6.3: Census in 1994, South Africa 
Total members 
recorded by 
churches 
Christians in 
26,000,000 
Roman 
Catholics 
3,500,000 
Non-Catholics 
22,500,000 
Public census 
and polls 
Christians in 
32,000,000 
Muslims 
500,000 
Traditional 
Religions 
6,500,000 
Population 
39,000,000 
Source:  <Bauer 1994, 524-527> 
The TRC urged the faith communities to participate in the process and the communities 
had reminded themselves of their obligation i.e., testifying within their own circles and 
participating in the social transformation at large (Elphick & Davenport 1997). The DRC 
had started challenging its own theology and practice long before the TRC started (F. 
Gaum interview, 28 June 2001). Mayson (1999) suggested that the church was the site of a 
struggle that helped to move the country from a liberation mode to a transformation mode. 
Paradoxically, he stated that in the TRC process, Christians were misled to drop faith into 
deep freeze. In line with Maysons argument, Botman (1997) asserted that the DRC 
refused to testify before the TRC, but rather released the statement called The story of the 
DRCs journey with Apartheid 1960-1994.  
The TRC Final Report (1998) indicated that in total, 41 different communities made 
written submissions or gave representations at the hearings. A conference gathering of 
prominent church leaders and theologians had drafted and sent out an open letter to 12,000 
ministers; the collection of responses and the attached signatures were forwarded to the 
TRC and constituted the main submissions from churches on 15 November 1997. 
Subsequent to the conference, a seminar reflected on pertinent aspects for the church to 
encourage in confession. C. du Toit (1998) suggested that 34 documents of church 
confession were conveyed to the TRC. 
Regrettably, some important churches did not participate in the initiatives above. The 
Afrikaans Reformed Churches were identified with Afrikaner nationalism and were held to 
be complicit in Apartheid: the largest of this group is the Nederduitse Gereformeerde Kerk 
(DRC).9 In 1994, Coloured and Black Churches of this group amalgamated to form the 
Uniting Reformed Church of South Africa. A vision for inclusion of the White and Indian 
Reformed Churches was underway during the period of the hearings (TRC Final Report 
1998). During the research interview, F. Gaum (28 June 2001) stated that a convention was 
going to be held in the Great Kerk in Cape Town to review the unification process.  
For the majority of churches who did not respond to either ministers or to the TRCs 
invitation, their indirect involvement in the TRC might suggest that they were still 
watching the reaction of the DRC, which was identified with the oppressor (Confession & 
Reconciliation 1998). Although not all churches participated in the TRC, the fact that the 
DRC, the largest of the family of Afrikaans churches, made a submission was a major step 
towards the objective of the TRC.  
There were two types of substance in church submission: commission and omission. 
Commission related to situations in which the church exercised racism and oppression. 
Omission arose where churches tolerated racism: for instance, reinforcing the conviction 
that South African society was normal, whereas it was tangled by racial problems (Tutu 
1999). In their representations to the TRC, the churches acknowledged acts of 
legitimisation, as they or their members supported the building up of Apartheid. They did 
  9 Within the family of the DRC, there are three mission churches: the Nederduitse Gereformeerde 
Sendingkerk (Coloured), the Nederduitse Gereformeerde Kerk in Afrika (Black) and the Indian Reformed 
Church. 
not oppose the state because it claimed to be Christian, despite the fact that it was both 
oppressive and exclusive. The submissions revealed ways in which individual members of 
churches  even members of those churches that were outspoken against the government 
policies  co-operated with the regime or the Security Branch (TRC Final Report 1998). 
Although, Tutu (1999), Smith (2001) and Brown (2001) praised the churchs support for 
the TRC, L. Gaum (personal message, 03 April 2001) asserted that the response of the 
church to the TRC was inadequate as a whole. F. du Toit (personal message, 16 February 
2001), P. J. Lee (2000) and Groepe (2001) regretted that churches were too slow in the 
process. According to the TRC Final Report (1998, vol. 4, chap. 3) the only exceptions 
were some church-related bodies, mainly the Research Institute on Christianity in South 
Africa (RICSA) at the University of Cape Town, the Theological Faculty at the University 
of the Western Cape, and the SACC. The SACC comprises of the mainline churches that 
had been active in opposing Apartheid. 
Until November 1997, support for the TRC process from denominations and individual 
churches had been weak (Graybill 1998). On one hand, the TRC could function more 
successfully if Afrikaner churches lent their support to it. On the other hand, if the political 
parties of the Afrikaners, the Afrikaans newspapers and in particular the Afrikaans 
churches had entirely withdrawn their support and encouraged Afrikaners to refuse any co-
operation with the TRC, the latter would not have succeeded at all in its objectives.  
Speaking of the DRC, F. Gaum stated, we were not happy with the way Tutu handled the 
TRC. We wanted to get much more involved and suggested five names to be among the 
commissioners, but none of them was taken (interview, 28 June 2001). Gaum concurs 
with the declaration issued by the Northern Province Council of Churches in December 
1996. It echoed a critical challenge to the minimal assistance of the Afrikaner churches in 
the taking of statements, preparation for public hearings and counselling of the victims. 
Conversely, around November 1997, various churches began to show their interest and 
responded to the invitation from the TRC to participate in a special public hearing10 on the 
role of faith communities in relation to Apartheid.  
With regard to the post-TRC period and practical follow-up, the research interviews 
revealed that the DRC was among the churches that launched important initiatives. L. 
Gaum (personal message, 03 April 2001) stated, 'we have not achieved much reconciliation 
through the TRC, but I believe it is inescapable. Rather than courts, the Church didnt play 
a very meaningful role, except through its "institutionalisation" in the Commission through 
Tutu, Boraine, and Villa-Vicencio.' Relating to the effort of the DRC in post-TRC, he 
pointed to the Year of Hope Project, a programme of activities in which he is involved, 
focussing on reconciliation, poverty and moral-formation. 
The comments above agree with Tutus assertion at the opening of the special hearings. He 
stated that no church could claim a perfect record of opposing Apartheid and called upon 
all churches to confess their shortcomings. For three days, Christian denominations and 
other religious communities presented their confessions to the TRC, in the form of 
apologies for not having done enough to oppose the Apartheid Governments policies. 
They admitted rather to having benefited from Apartheid (Graybill 1998). 
a) Evangelicals  
In his submission, M. Nthla, the General Secretary of the Evangelicals Fellowship in South 
Africa, referred to government-sponsored youth camps, which targeted township children 
  57 Hayner (2000) suggests that other commissions had focussed on producing a final report, providing no 
window into truth seeking, while the TRC focussed on the process of gathering the truth, engaging the public 
in confronting the facts about the past. Villa-Vicencio et al. (2000) claims that the TRC included other 
aspects of inquiry  such as sectoral and institution-focussed hearings  not seen elsewhere. Hearings 
involved churches, NGOs, military, medical sector, media, prisons, business sector, youth, women, children 
etc. This opened the Commission to direct input from NGOs, policy advocates and others that monitored 
patterns of abuses in the past or had proposals for policy improvement in the future.  
for evangelism. The TRC Final Report (1998) asserts that the agencies of the government 
often used Evangelical churches to neutralise dissent. Individual evangelical 
denominations that participated included the Church of England in South Africa, the 
United Congregational Church, the Apostolic Faith Mission Church, the Assemblies of 
God and the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Southern Africa. 
The Church of England in South Africa, which claims to be the original representative of 
Anglicanism in South Africa, confessed to having been subjected to the state propaganda, 
especially in relation to the struggle against Communism. Such propaganda played on the 
fears of Whites and distorted the meaning of the Bible, which the church saw as 
authoritative (TRC Final Report 1998). On one hand, the confession suggested that the 
church had been misled into accepting a socio-economic and political system that was 
cruel and oppressive, and that it failed to understand adequately the suffering of its many 
Black members who were victims of Apartheid. On the other hand, the TRC Final Report 
(1998) asserts that it might be an over-statement to link such victimisation with the more 
direct and violent attacks by the state on anti-Apartheid leaders. Even so, Graybill (1998) 
suggests that the fears of White church members made them vulnerable to propaganda, 
leading them into sins of omission. For whatever reason, this church diluted its apology 
and authority by stating that it had been misled by the NPs misuse of the Bible and that it 
had believed the governments propaganda about the communist threat.  
The submission of the United Congregational Church revealed that it had always been 
concerned about the loss of life of innocent civilians in guerrilla attacks. Conversely, the 
TRC Final Report observed that this church never allied itself with the hysterical reaction 
against terrorism that the Apartheid Government orchestrated (1998 vol. 4, chap. 3, 1).  
The Apostolic Faith Mission Church  dominated by White Afrikaners  admitted that 
many of its members had been employed in the structures of the Apartheid government in 
which they had held top positions (TRC Final Report 1998). It confessed preaching that 
opposition to Apartheid was communist-inspired and aimed at the downfall of 
Christianity. The confession revealed one of the dark sides of the teaching of the church. 
Like many other churches, it admitted having propagated the states theology indirectly by 
promoting the idea that it was in the interest of Christian civilisation (Tutu 1999, 10-11).  
Leaders of the Assemblies of God confessed that in claiming to speak for eleven million 
Evangelical Pentecostals, they often travelled around the world denouncing the activities of 
anti-Apartheid Christians. Likewise, the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Southern Africa 
confessed to not having encouraged its clergy to speak out against atrocities and failing to 
give stronger support to those who did (TRC Final Report 1998). 
b) SACC member churches 
The majority of the churches above are members of SACC. The Roman Catholic Church 
joined SACC in 1994, the same day that the DRC became an observer member. Before the 
1990s, SACC drew most of its members from the English-speaking churches, whose 
membership became increasingly Black (Elphick & Davenport 1997; TRC Final Report 
1998).  
The SACC apologised for its lack of courage with regard to opposing Apartheid. In the 
church hearings (in August 1997), B. Bam, the then General Secretary of SACC, stated 
that the latter did not do enough to seek out the victims of the Apartheid; rather, it asked 
people to come to it for material assistance. Bam noted that the SACC served the practical 
needs of people better than their spiritual needs. On behalf of the SACC, Bam confessed 
this failure (SACC Submission to the TRC 1997; TRC Final Report 1998). The TRC Final 
Report (1998) suggests that many churches confessed to a lack of courage. The Church of 
England in South Africa (CESA), the Roman Catholic Church, the Council of AICs and 
the Presbyterian Church admitted that they could have been more aggressive in 
campaigning for reform. 
SACC related churches that played a major role in the hearings were the Salvation Army, 
the Roman Catholic Church, the CPSA and the Uniting Reformed Church. The 
representations of the Salvation Army confessed tacit support of racism. F. Esack, a non-
Christian witness, reacted to this submission by suggesting, the past was only partly about 
Apartheid, security law and so on: it was also about Christian triumphalism [of 
Christianity] (TRC Final Report). The argument follows that non-Christian faith 
communities had been victimised by an aggressively Christian state. Some aggression  
e.g. even by churches towards Muslims  took place alongside those the state committed 
against the church.  
The Roman Catholic Church leadership in South Africa stated that the church officially 
disavowed racial divisions while it exemplified racism in its confines. They confessed their 
silence in the face of Apartheid wrongs and admitted that this was perhaps the churchs 
greatest sin (TRC Final Report 1998). 
The CPSA apologised to Archbishop Tutu for its failure to support his call for economic 
sanctions against the Apartheid regime. On one hand, the apology highlighted the role that 
the Archbishop had played in the past, in addition to that of being a Christian leader of 
high profile and chairperson of the TRC. On the other hand, the apology unveiled the 
contradiction within the churches, and led a questioning of the capacity in which church 
leaders were selected to become members of the Commission.11 
In the 1980s, the Uniting Reformed Church was an important player in opposing the 
theological justification of Apartheid. However, it confessed to taking too long to make a 
stand against the migrant labour system. It stated that the ambiguous nature of the decision 
regarding justified actions against Apartheid was often left to the conscience of members 
(TRC Final Report 1998). 
Another SACC member that testified was the Baptist Convention. It identified places in its 
communities where some Black ministers earned as little as R 50 per month after thirty 
years of service (TRC Final Report 1998).12 Yet, the Baptist Convention had been accusing 
the Baptist Union of having a number of activist members; some were detained at Roben 
Island. Even so, the Baptist Union had previously refused to acknowledge them (TRC 
Final Report 1998). This attitude, as they confessed, was certainly one of conspiracy 
against prisoners. 
The Reformed Presbyterian Church confessed to having participated in the state machinery 
and admitted that some of its members took part in homeland structures. It confessed to 
having given qualified support to the government in the 1960s, in defending Bantustan 
  11 R. Smith (interview, 03 July 2001) stated that the clergy who were leading the TRC were there because of 
their personal commitment and the governments appointment. There was no resistance from the churches 
against the appointment of their representatives in the TRC; there was a silent approval. The CPSA is proud 
of the role Tutu played in the TRC as one of them. It is true to say that Tutu has always been vocal as 
individual, but his church has not done much more than others have. R. Smith, Dean of St George Cathedral 
in Cape Town, said, we supported the TRC, and we commissioned it in this church. We tabled the issue in 
our church meetings, encouraged our members to support it, and prayed for its work (interview, 03 July 
2001). To the contrary, Canon K. Groepe, from the same church, suggested that there was nothing to boast 
about at a practical level (interview, 04 July 2001). 
  12 B. du Toit asserted that similar situations occurred in some other denominations: inequality also 
depended on the financial capacity of each church (interview, 28 June 2001). 
policies in 1965 and the right of the state to suppress unlawful subversion (TRC Final 
Report 1998). 
c) Dutch Reformed Church (DRC) 
Because of the DRC link with the National Party, the relationship between the DRC and 
the TRC was divisive. The TRC Final Report (1998) suggests that the state agents had 
found positive support and blessing for their weapons of terror from the DRC. In this 
regard, the DRC confessed to having misled its members by presenting Apartheid as a 
biblical instruction. The church admitted that it often tended to put the interest of its 
people above the interests of other people. After this submission (in 1997), Tutu said, I 
am glad that you have seen the light. We are glad you are part of the process of healing in 
our land (Graybill 1998).  
Despite the approval above, neither the TRC nor the DRC was satisfied with their degree 
of mutual co-operation. The DRC continued complaining about the way TRC leadership 
perceived their contribution whilst criticisms arose later inside and outside the TRC about 
the form and substance of the DRCs submission (B. du Toit interview, 28 June 2001).  
The DRC confessed to bowing down in the presence of Apartheid. This also implied the 
right-wing Christian groups that had promulgated the state theology and acted as arms of 
the state, infiltrating especially the Evangelical and Pentecostal denominations. In the 
1970s, it was disclosed that the government was funding groups such as the Christian 
League (TRC Final Report 1998); this added to the list of church conspiracies. Graybill 
(1998) concluded that the DRC acknowledged very little about its wrongdoings and 
teachings, which had lent strong support to Apartheid. F. Gaum (interview, 28 June 2001) 
seems to agree with Graybill and F. du Toit (interview, 29 June 2001), save that the former 
adds that the DRC focuses on the consequent need for reconciliation, in practice, to be seen 
mainly as an economic reconciliation to alleviate inequalities caused by or not alleviated 
under Apartheid. 
 In contrast with the submissions from other churches, the DRC stressed the definition and 
development of Apartheid, and acknowledged that the church provided Apartheid with a 
theological justification. However, consideration of the extent and nature of the DRC 
involvement in Apartheid leads one to agree that this church expressed very little regret in 
its submission. Moreover, it did not give a formal apology to the public it had victimised; it 
simply submitted a document in which it explained its new position. B. du Toit (interview, 
28 June 2001) and F. de Toit (interview, 29 June 2001) concluded that the effort of the 
DRC did not meet the expectations of many South African people. 
The TRC Final Report (1998) reveals that in the wake of the TRCs hearings, the DRC did 
not promptly support the public submission, but rather began with private consultations 
with the former South African regime. This relates to Gaums objection that the DRC was 
not allowed to give its full input in the process (interview, 28 June 2001). Since the DRC 
had worked hand in hand with the NP in the inception and execution of Apartheid, there 
could be a positive reason for such a prior consultation, if it was intended to help the NP to 
re-examine its conscience and bring it to confession. Likewise, it could positively help 
both the DRC and the old regime to proceed on the process of preparing a submission and 
participating in the hearings on which unity and reconciliation were built. Consistent with 
this argument, F. Gaum asserted that the TRC began when the DRC had already turned its 
back against the Apartheid regime and was carrying out a self-assessment in relation to 
theology and praxis. In the same perspective, the DRC leadership had visited F.W. de 
Klerk, and invited N. Mandela to address the General Synod on 23 October 1994 
(interview, 28 June 2001 cf. DRC: Present Challenges in the Light of the Paste [no date]; 
Vir: Kovent-Kennisame [no date]).  
The field research focused on the DRC and the CPSA, the main players in relation to 
Apartheid and the TRC. The interviews revealed that the perception of the younger 
Christian generation concerning the TRC differs from that of the older generation. The 
former were not so impressed by the churches, whilst the latter were. On one hand, R. 
Smith (from the CPSA) praised Tutu and the churches. Equally, F. du Toit (from the DRC) 
and K. Groepe (from the CPSA) applauded Tutus impartiality and leadership of the TRC. 
On the other hand, F. du Toit (interview, 29 June 2001) asserted that Tutu gave an 
excellent example for churches to follow but felt that the churches had not responded 
actively to that challenge. He regretted that the DRC submission was a simple statement 
rather than an authentic apology for the wrongs the church did. He suggested that the TRC 
should open a door for the churches, calling them to attend the hearings, to follow up their 
members and to carry on the processes of healing and reconciliation within their churches. 
He stated, the churches are doing nothing in this direction. 
Generally, the churches responded to the call from the TRC to confess the wrongs of the 
past, but in the eyes of the majority, the submissions of the DRC were like those of the 
political leaders. The latter did not disclose the full truth or offer a genuine confession. 
However, it is a pity that the churches with strong constituencies  i.e., AICs and 
Lutherans  were not well associated in the initiation of the TRC or afterwards. While the 
TRC Final Report (1998) said almost nothing about the AICs, it suggested that most 
Lutheran churches submitted and attended the hearings either directly or through the 
Evangelical Alliance. Other Christian initiatives, even from the DRC, are committed to 
practical ventures meeting the Commissions recommendations. The work of unity and 
reconciliation have continued to some extent through some church initiatives, such as the 
Year of Hope [2001] in the DRC and other groups, including the Khulumani survivors 
support group and institutions (IJR, Healing of Memories and Trauma Centre). 
d) Military chaplaincy 
Issues relating to the military chaplaincy caused the most controversial debate before and 
during the submissions. Many submissions described courageous reactions against the 
manipulations by the government in the chaplaincy and military services. Individual 
Catholic Priests had refused to act as military chaplains or marriage officers, as did the 
Uniting Reformed Church. The United Congregational Church spoke of its contention 
against the chaplaincy arrangement and the church co-option into the SADF-sponsored 
Board for Religious Objection, as other churches had responded by supplying chaplains to 
the liberation movements (TRC Final Report 1998).  
During the Apartheid era, the churches participated in state structures, notably through the 
military chaplaincy. The TRC Final Report (1998, vol. 1, chap. 3, 1) suggests: 
The appointment of  chaplains was regulated by formal agreement between the State and the 
churches. According to a submission to the Commission by Chaplain General Johan de Witt, 
the Chaplains Services, as the official channel through which the churches were able to 
minister to their members in the South African Defence Force (SADF), provided services in 
the fields of pastoral care, crisis intervention, welfare problems, operational trauma and the 
handling of war-related stress and anxiety. 
In his submission, de Witt (1997) stated that chaplains often became fully part of the 
milieu in which they served. The service in military chaplaincy was a window into church-
state relations. General Magnus Malan, former Minister of Defence and former head of 
SADF, in an interview with the TRC (1995), spoke of the church assistance given to him 
and his colleagues in times of difficult decision-making in a war situation. He stated,  
The Christian Protestant faith is by far the strongest [religion] in the military and we received 
from the chaplains the correct guidance. We are all familiar with the church and the Christian-
ethical principles and we would like to say thank you for preceding us in prayer through the 
difficult decisions that had to be taken. The church has played a great role in the war 
situation and in the post-war situation. My family and I pray for the church (TRC Final Report 
1998 vol. I, chap. 3, 1). 
The TRC reporters contended that Malans words captured accurately the perception of the 
chaplaincy, as well as of most soldiers. As a reaction to the attitude of the churches, the 
SACC had proposed an independent chaplaincy service, with chaplains wearing distinctive 
uniforms and not receiving a salary from the state. Some churches even threatened to 
instruct their ministers not to wear military uniforms.  
During the hearings, N. du Plooy, a former SADF chaplain, testified that those who 
objected to service in the Defence Forces were described as unbelievers. Those who 
served were given a New Testament with a special message from South Africas then 
President, P.W. Botha, telling them that the Bible was their most important weapon. Du 
Plooy further mentioned that the appointment of chaplains and the involvement of the 
church in the forces followed an official agreement between the state and the DRC that 
sustained the Apartheid, which was approved by both the National Synod and the 
Parliament. N. Smiths testimony added that many perpetrators of human rights abuses 
were never challenged by the DRC but were tacitly encouraged in their activities (TRC 
Final Report 1998). If the DRC  which led the SADFs chaplaincy  had had the will, it 
had a legitimate channel through which to challenge Apartheids atrocities. 
e) Other special submissions and hearings  
Other means of churches participation in the TRC were the contribution of Christian 
institutions, individual Christians and literature. Potchefstroom University is a prominent 
Christian Institution providing a positive reflection of Christianity. At the hearing, Ponti 
Venter spoke of the effort by the Potchefstroom supporters of the National Initiative of 
Reconciliation to supply study spaces for Black matriculants during the 1980s. Under the 
watchful eye of the security forces, local churches labelled the initiative communist-
inspired and no church in town would grant it support (TRC Final Report 1998).  
Public confessions indicated that probably every South African Christian had something to 
confess in relation to political injustice. Even those who had produced the Kairos 
Document shared guilt through their support of violent uprisings. They did not forbid 
necklace killings and kangaroo courts. The advocate of a third way agrees that all 
violence, from whichever side of the struggle, was equally wrong (Tutu 1999). R. Smith, 
Dean at St George Cathedral, replicated this view (interview, 01 July 2001). Relating to 
violence, the United Congregational Church asserted that the answer was justice for the 
people of South Africa (TRC Final Report 1998). Yet, dealing with sins (reconciliation to 
God) and justice do not exclude one another; they may express the same thing, leading to 
both God and good for people. 
Analysis of various submissions proves that the leadership of the English-speaking 
churches in South Africa failed to express adequately the aspirations of their constituents, 
the majority of whom were Blacks. During the TRC and afterwards, these churches did not 
address practically the alienation of the people (TRC Final Report 1998; P. J. Lee 2000; K. 
Groepe 2001; F. du Toit 2001). In the hearings, Bernard Spong stated that because the 
SACC was a network of churches, it had reached every corner of society (TRC Final 
Report 1998). Its submission, however, was more an outline of its past role than a 
consistent confession, and no practical follow-up to the TRCs challenge is yet in place. 
Some individuals who led the fight against Apartheid, on the side of the church and the 
SACC, have left these bodies for secular posts (F. Chikane) or became trapped in fraud (A. 
Boesak).  
During the submissions, churches spoke of their suffering from the 1953 Bantu Education 
Act, which led to the closure of mission stations and schools that had been providing good 
quality education for Blacks. The TRC Final Report (1998) noted the regret in the Hindu 
submission referring to churches that bought their temple sites under compulsory sale. The 
submissions exposed the victimisation of one faith group by another, for example of 
Buddhists, Hindus and Muslims by Christians. The fact that faith communities  
sometimes within the same tradition  both suffered and benefited from the same series of 
relocations under the Group Areas Act (1950) and the Bantu Education Act (1953) 
highlights the need for reconciliation between communities. F. du Toit stated that the IJR is 
working on settling old disputes of this nature (interview, 29 June 2001). 
The analysis of the special hearings shows that specific damage from Apartheid divided 
the church locally, nationally and internationally. Christians became biased in providing 
backing either to the state or to the force of liberation. The consequences reached wider 
ecumenical bodies and affected their resources and theology. 
f) Further role of the churches  
Recent literature and scholarship debates argue that the church could be a leading ally in 
conflict settlement. Before World War II, churches seemed unwilling to become involved 
in conflict resolution and often stood apart from the political realm. Later, churches began 
participating, following the example of the Evangelical churches in Germany which 
attempted to handle the aftermath of Nazi horrors. Most of the significant contribution of 
the churches towards the settlement of South Africa predates the TRC and has continued in 
and beyond its term. In this research, regular contact was maintained with many South 
African theologians and members of the TRC in order to reach first hand information 
before in-depth assessment of the Commission.13 
  13 Many respondents, such as G. Irvine, referred me to the Chairperson of the TRC and its Office. Tutu and 
some other respondents (e.g., C. Spies) referred the questions to the IJR for more answers. The main 
respondents were, L. Brown, Tutus personal assistant at the TRC Office, C. Villa-Vicencio, the Director of 
the IJR who was in charge of the production of the TRC Final Report, and F. du Toit from the IJR. Others 
were F. Gaum, editor of the DRC magazine, and B. du Toit and L. Gaum, pastors of the DRC. Equally, R. 
Smith and K. Groepe from the CPSA, D. Tilton from the SACC, S. Gunn from Khulumani survivors support 
group, L. Row from the Centre of Conflict Resolution, L. Khaglema from the UCT, E. Carnita from the 
CSVR, M. Green from Trauma Centre, Fr. M. Lapsley and M. Mngese from the Healing of Memories, Fr. G. 
Theunis Catholic priest in Durban, and P. J. Lee Bishop of Christ the King, all these gave helpful responses. 
Both the SACC and the AACC asserted that churches should play a role in conflict 
settlement and take their stand in any conflict. In Uruguay, a bishop suggested that the 
Roman Catholic Confessional could be used as a means to allow the military to identify the 
secret graves of 32 people who disappeared under the brutal dictatorship between 1973 and 
1985. The Catholic Church was willing to act as an arbiter in the recovery of the past. 
Similarities appeared in the make-up of the South African TRC, where several theologians 
figure prominently (Christie 2000, 49). 
What made the South African Commission a unique model, and perhaps the most 
successful to date, was the impartial role played by the church and the Christian faith. 
Churches contributed morally and physically to seeking the truth and motivating the 
victims and perpetrators to come forward for testimonies and public hearings (L. Brown 
2001; R. Smith 2001; M. Pulse 2001). However, many respondents did not want to affirm 
that the churches had played a sufficient part. P. J. Lee (2000), F. du Toit (2001), K. 
Groepe (2001) and B. du Toit (2001) view as erroneous the claims that the confessions, 
truth telling, forgiveness and reconciliation through the TRC were explicit results of the 
work of the churches. Most Christian leaders referred or forwarded our research 
questionnaire to Archbishop Tutu as a sign that they had not been associated with the TRC. 
Well-informed individuals, however, answered promptly. As an example, F. du Toit, the 
DRC pastor working at the IJR, wrote,  
Church leaders were slow to get involved in the TRC process, and participated mainly in the 
'Faith Hearing' There was also an NGO created called 'The Religious Response to the TRC', 
but I have no details about that Presently the Dutch Reformed Church is launching a Year 
of Hope focussing on Reconciliation, Morality and Poverty. This commission is headed by 
Prof. Piet Meiring (who was also the DRC representative at the TRC) In addition very little 
is happening that I know of in churches. As IJR, we are involved in one or two projects of 
facilitating reconciliation between different church communities, but these are still in the 
inception phase (Fanie personal message, 16 February 2001). 
L. Gaum was not certain that so many perpetrators came forward because of the challenge 
of the churches. He believed that those who did might have to do with the fact that the 
TRC was part of a negotiated political settlement. He further asserted,  
Specifically, the DRC could have played a more positive role in pastoral [care] assisting 
perpetrators to come forward, I believe. Therefore, the church could play an important role  
It did play an important role to bring people forward, but on the other hand, it is felt that it 
cheapened the value of so many lives that have been lost which may be one of the reasons for 
all the crime at present. Some people do feel there has not been proper justice done. We have 
not achieved much reconciliation through the TRC, but I believe it is inescapable rather than 
courts. The church did not play a very meaningful role, except through its Institutionalisation 
in the Commission through Tutu, Boraine, Villa-Vicencio(L. Gaum personal message, 12 
April 2001). 
The responses above prove that this inquiry required the balancing of categories of 
informants  which was done  and their milieu of origin and involvement, such as the 
church, politics, business and scholarship. It was also necessary to define the extent to 
which the sources are related and their interest in the TRC process. 
Statistics concur with the research finding that people who were far-off were less involved 
in the Commission. Missionaries in the countryside and church leaders cut off from the 
activities of the TRC expressed either scepticism or ignorance about the motivation and 
impact of the Commission. Yet, these people do not show determination to value and 
follow up the initiatives of the TRC. G. Williams, an English missionary in Durban, wrote 
to the researcher,  
I find myself not sufficiently well informed to be of any assistance to you on the matter and I 
dont really know of any others which could be of help to you. My time is taken [up] in 
spiritual work amongst illiterate and lesser-educated people (04 August 2000).  
It was evident that leaders of churches or institutions with interest, and individuals close to 
members of the TRC, victims or their relatives etc. were supportive of it. Conversely, 
people from rural environments, cut off from cities, did not grasp the significance of the 
TRC. Yet, those people facing increasing criminality, poverty and HIV/AIDS still call for 
more pragmatism from the church and the state.  
Varied scepticism mounted in the post-TRC situation because of the disappointment felt by 
victims to whom promises had not been fulfilled, and because some victims were 
increasingly affected by unsustainable conditions. The former MK commandant S. Gunn, 
as a victim/survivor and witness in the TRC, said, we are really disappointed that 
reparations are not coming (interview, 07 July 2001). Y. Henry also expressed 
disappointment about the lack of follow-up of the TRCs recommendations. The latter, 
however, asserted that at least the TRC provided a safe space for some survivors of HRV 
to come forward and give their testimonies. He related his experience with the TRC, 
stating, the public domain became  apparent to me as my face and the story of a few 
moments of my life flashed across the country on television, in newspapers, in magazines 
and in books (interview & paper, 15 September 2000). From the side of the church, 
nothing is being done even for the care of the victims. S. Gunn added, as far as I know 
none of the existing initiatives is church-based (interview, 07 July 2001).  
The field research revealed the following levels of appraisal:  
 Christians associated with the TRC activities like R. Smith and L. Brown were excited 
about the TRC, recalling how they allied with Tutu in the process. For F. du Toit, in many 
ways, Tutu has given an exemplary attitude, which other church leaders ought to follow 
(interviews, 26 & 29 June 2001).  
 Others informed people  such as P. J. Lee and F. du Toit  were rather critical of their 
own denominations and the churches as a whole for their lack of practical vision, to find in 
the TRC an opened door of hope. Equally, survivors such as S. Gunn were disappointed by 
the lack of follow-up of the TRCs recommendations (including the lack of reparations) 
(interviews, 07 July 2001).  
 B. du Toit and K. Groepe were neither sceptical nor proud of the contribution of the 
church. Also, like N. Mngise and M. Green, they gave critical and helpful comments vis--
vis the contribution of the churches. Others were over-positive about the role of their 
churches, though they lacked tangible examples (interviews, 28 June & 04 July 2001).  
The interpretations above suggest a contradictory attitude to the role of the church and 
render necessary a consideration of the relationship of authority between Christian 
theology and church leaders. In spite of some frustration with the TRC, Meiring, a 
representative on the Commission and a highly regarded Afrikaner theologian from the 
DRC, provided great stimulus to the church (Meiring 1999 & 2000; Tutu 1999). Later, he 
was going to lead the DRCs Year of Hope project. Meiring has gathered indications that 
illuminate his overall evaluation in the area of the churchs role on the TRC. He noted a 
shift in the DRC that marked a positive move on ideological, theological and practical 
stances. 
Desmond Tutu from the CPSA was the chairperson of the TRC. Emeritus Archbishop of 
Johannesburg, Bishop of Cape Town and former General Secretary of the SACC, Tutu is 
recognised worldwide for his integrity. The leading role he played in the struggle against 
Apartheid impressed the Nobel Committee (Carr 1987). On a national level, his moral 
authority was a key management tool that united a diverse Commission. As the public face 
of the TRC, he was the moral leader (anchor) and helmsman, while Boraine was the man 
with the grasp of detail to make things happen (Ndebele 1998). 
Dr. Alex Boraine, the deputy chairperson of the TRC, was formerly President of the 
Methodist Church in South Africa. Although he was not in the TRC as church leader, he 
was a theologian and a political figure, and a former Member of Parliament (Brown 
interview, 26 June 2001). Therefore, he deserves consideration in this research.  
To the three personalities above should be added the Rev. B. Finca, the Rev. K Mgogo and 
the theologians who were on the TRC staff, as proof that the churches were well 
represented. Arguments simply object to their legitimacy, as they were appointed not by 
the churches, nor to serve [solely] the cause of the churches (Mululeke 1997, 115). 
Conversely, the thesis holds them, particularly Tutu and Meiring, as representing the 
churches because their vibrant voices  leave alone their writings (Meiring 1999 & 2000, 
Tutu 1999, etc.)  express the Christian position inside and outside the churches, rather 
than their personal views.  
The first hearing of the TRC was held in East London in Eastern Cape on Tuesday 16 
April 1996 (Boraine 2000; Meiring 2000). The most instructive was held in Johannesburg, 
starting on 29 April 1996, in the Central Methodist Church; Tutu discussed the programme 
for the day in the vestry with Dr Faizel Randera chief of the office. Randera and his 
colleagues raised the concern that the previous hearing in East London, as well as other 
TRC ceremonies of the previous weeks, was far too religious for their taste. Tutu attended 
most hearings wearing his archbishops vestment and crucifix and there were many prayers 
and the singing of hymns before and during the hearings. Thus, the religious wrappings of 
the process were considered to be out of place. Randera and his colleagues argued that the 
Commission was a legal process and should keep to a judicial style: following the 
Parliamentary example, there could be a moment of silence  of quiet meditation for those 
who felt like it  before getting on with the programme (Meiring 2000).  
Meiring (2000, 124) observes that Tutu gamely accepted Randeras idea, stating, I will do 
as you say. Then, the TRC procession entered the hall, Tutu shook hands with the victims 
before he addressed the audience and suggested that, we observe half a minutes silence, 
before we commence with our programme. When the first witness came to take the oath, 
Tutu was not yet comfortable and was unable to carry on with the proceedings. The first 
word he said to the audience was No This is not the way to do it. We cannot start without 
having prayed. Close your eyes The Archbishop asked Jesus Christ, as He Himself is the 
Truth, to guide the participants in the quest for truth, and for the Holy Spirit of God to 
grant the wisdom and grace needed. Afterwards, Tutu smiled and said, so now we are 
ready to start the days work. From that day onwards, all TRC hearings started  and 
closed  in that fashion (Meiring 2000, 124). 
 The above account reveals that it was in the mutual acceptance of both the juridical and 
Christian requirements that the TRC proceeded. This was not the only influence of the 
church in the TRC. The stable presence and input of church leaders in the proceedings, the 
use of church premises and the inclusion of hymns and prayers also had an impact. These 
church leaders could appeal to churches and their members to encourage victims and 
perpetrators to come and share their stories. Even so, credible criticism was built on the 
fact that the call for the churches to care for the victims and perpetrators after their 
testimonies seemed to be ignored. Most interviewees pointed out that the church is failing 
in its mission at this point. B. du Toit and M. Green (interviews, June-July 2001) suggested 
that they did not know of practical church-based initiatives in post-TRC South Africa.  
Many interviews with main church leaders were carried out on the telephone. The key 
question was about how the leaders had supported the TRC and followed-up its 
recommendations. The Catholic Archbishop, his Bishop and their parliamentary officer 
suggested that there was not much to do that would require that I visit them. Likewise, in 
spite of a pre-agreed meeting with the Archbishop of the CPSA (Cape Town, in June 
2001), on my arrival, we talked on the telephone: he judged a visit to the office pointless, 
since there was nothing to show. During my field research, 78 percent of informants  
mostly witnesses, victims, scholars and theologians  regretted that churches were doing 
very little to support victims. F. du Toit clarified that this was met mostly by Faith and 
Healing activities (personal message, 16 February 2001).  
On one hand, since religious groups dominated the TRC process and this aspect framed 
both its ideological and practical components, such a well-combined politico-juridical and 
religious approach was pioneering. Yet, Meiring (1999 & 2000) stated that, right to the end 
of the life of the TRC, the Christian influence continued to mount within and around the 
Commission. Apart from the four baruti [clerics]  the Archbishop and three pastors  who 
were in the Commission and its committees, a number of other Commissioners and TRC 
staff were loyal churchgoers and identified with the Archbishops sentiments (Graybill 
2002; Boraine 2000).  
On the other hand, the lawyers, politicians and some of the academics serving on the TRC 
sympathised with Randera. From outside the TRC, Cosmas Desmond brought the sharpest 
questioning. He stated that besides Tutu, obviously appointed to the TRC to be John the 
Baptist to Mandelas messiah, other churchmen and people who had close connections 
with ecumenical bodies were appointed to the TRC. Then, Desmond re-asserted that the 
churches were over-represented (Meiring 2000, 124 -125). At some levels, one agrees with 
Desmonds objection to the Archbishops boasting of Christian dominance in the TRC. 
These objections, however, confirm the presence and impact of the churches in the 
process.14 
Christian influence on the TRC is to be expected and could be valued positively, given the 
high proportion of Christians in the country. Bauer (1994) quoted the public census and 
polls indicating that 32,000,000 (82 percent) of South Africas population were Christian. 
Burgess Carr (1987) affirmed that Protestant clergy, especially from the DRC, had a strong 
influence in South Africa. Nonetheless, D. Tilton regretted that the largest number of 
believers (the AICs)  which could contribute more than all mainline churches  was not 
associated with the Commission (interview, 04 July 2001), and yet many people may be 
nominal members of churches. 
On one hand, 
  14 Desmond (2000) asserted that the first meeting of the Reparations Committee opened not only with 
prayer but also with an exclusively Christian prayer; according to Desmond, this illustrated in clear terms 
how the Commission had an individualistic understanding of human rights and their violation, rather than a 
more African approach. The objection is well grounded and substantiates the argument that Christianity 
influenced the TRC even if it had no formal mandate from the ruling councils of the churches. 
From the onset, the faith communities were involved in discussing the possibility of a truth 
commission and eventually in the drafting of the TRC Act. Workshops and conferences to 
further the aims of the TRC and to identify the churches and other communities role in the 
process were the order of the day. When the TRC hearings started, the local churches were the 
staunch co-workers of the Commission, helping to disseminate news, to encourage victims and 
perpetrators to approach the TRC and to act as facilitators and spiritual guides throughout the 
life of the Commission (Meiring 1999, 125). 
On the other hand, it is certain that  
Early in the life of the TRC, a TRC liturgy spontaneously developed, which very soon set the 
pattern for most of the Truth Commission hearings throughout the country. At the service of 
Dedication and blessing of Commissioners of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission in St 
Georges Cathedral in Cape Town (on 13 February 1996), a beautiful liturgy was introduced: 
the singing of hymns, prayers (inter-denominational and inter-faith), readings in many 
languages, the lighting of candles and presenting of olive branches (Meiring 2000, 125-126). 
The religious elements reappeared in most hearings. Tutu, seeking to respond to the 
spiritual needs of the victims and the audience, made ample use of hymns and prayers, not 
only to open and close each session, but also to guide the whole process, particularly in 
difficult moments (Ndebele 1998). This shows that the church institutions also played a 
part in addition to the role played by the denominations. Christian spirituality went far 
beyond mere reflection in the TRC process and in the practical provision of local 
infrastructures and services. Tutu contended that religion was central to the process of 
healing and therefore central to the life of the TRC. He stated,  
Those of us who stand within the Christian tradition havea special responsibility in this 
regard, because this nation has through the years employed Christian theological resources to 
promote Apartheid  a system that is today accepted by people throughout the world as a crime 
against humanity (TRC Final Report 1998 vol. 1, chap. 8; Meiring 2000, 126). 
This latter statement provides a clear answer to Desmonds objections. Submissions and 
hearings, however, did not involve Christians only. Representatives of other faiths  
Jewish, Muslim, Hindu and African traditionalist  joined in. They each provided a number 
of religious and ethical principles that could be of high value to the process of the TRC 
(Meiring 1999; Meiring 2000). However, Tutu (1990, 44) made the point that without the 
influence of the churches, things could have turned out differently. Christian leavening of 
the African culture of truth telling is a positive element that the South Africans explored 
usefully in the process. Thus, in the effort to settle their conflicts, other countries ought to 
consider embodying religious and contextual elements that can enhance the reconciliation. 
6.7 Catalytic factors 
The success of the TRC in South Africa was a result of the inclusion of catalytic elements 
that were religiously, scientifically, technically and politically loaded and embraced both 
local and international parameters. Thus, the TRC succeeded in carrying out many 
investigations even outside South Africa and received international support in this.  
The major challenges of the TRC were the provision of amnesty, the preparation of 
witnesses for statement taking and public confessions, impartial care of both the victims 
and perpetrators, carrying out the investigation without fear, and mainly holding to account 
the military and political leaders who provided live examples of public confession. Despite 
criticism about churches role in this perspective, in one way or another, the churches 
contributed much. J. Lamola stated that the most challenging characteristic of the TRC was 
the endeavour to meet the needs of the perpetrators. That attitude, like the provision of 
amnesty rather than a biased option solely for the victims, mirrored the unique morality of 
the process. Previous options allowed the choice of the victims to direct such processes and 
cared only for the survivors (Lamola 1991; Sarkin 1997). Further challenges included 
providing justice that did not impose retribution, but encouraging individual pardon and 
political forgiveness in exchange for truth disclosure (Mamdani 1996; Mululeke 1997).  
The first catalyst TRC was briefings/debriefings, which ensured that witnesses received 
sufficient information about the legal implications of their public testimonies. They also 
prepared witnesses psychologically to get ready to testify. Briefers had skills in 
counselling, psychology, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and gender awareness 
(Hamber 1999). Some survivors and families of victims, however, have accused the TRC 
of opening old wounds but failing to support them in dealing with their pain. One victim, 
now on the staff at the Trauma Centre (interview, 06 July 2001), S. Gunn (interview, 07 
July 2001) and Tutu (1999) blamed the government for being inactive in the face of the 
needs of those who testified. Humber (1999) asserted that at times, testifying initially 
masks long-term or deeper psychological issues that are at play. Moreover, data-takers and 
those working directly with victims also manifested symptoms of trauma and this problem 
needed specific and extended research after the process started. Churches could contribute 
further by providing practical assistance to victims. While Gunn agreed with Humber, she 
asserted that briefing was aimed mainly at protecting the TRC staff and regretted that the 
TRC did not do enough to protect the victims (interview, 07 July 2001).  
The second catalyst was the healing, implying rehabilitation and restoration activities as 
means of sustaining individuals traumatised by Apartheid, public confessions or both. 
Former MK Henry, who testified at the HRV Committee about his suffering at the hands of 
the police, actually feels that the healing activities should continue the work that the TRC 
left unfinished. He highlighted the need for a continued dialogue in South Africa. He 
asserted that the TRC process, despite some failures and contradictions, had important 
lessons for the people (interview, 15 September 2000). Henry agrees with Browns view 
that other countries and churches can learn from the South African TRCs success  
peoples dialogue  and failure of some Whites and politicians to apologise (interview, 26 
June 2001). 
The church was in a good position to be the most pragmatic in helping the victims to heal. 
However, most activities of this kind remained at the level of prayers and preaching, rather 
than more practical initiatives. Later, practical initiatives have taken place, including the 
Healing of Memories workshops run by Fr. M. Lapsley, the Year of Hope Project and 
community and church-based groups involved in the studies and practices of 
reconciliation, such as the Roman Catholic Lumko Pastoral Institute (Leary & Hay 2000). 
More varied initiatives need to develop following the example of the Western Cape Action 
Tour (WECAT), a peace initiative that grew out of a small mutual support group set up by 
former MK combatants  survivors. While it involves some other socio-economic 
activities, the WECAT encourages people to meet and dialogue (Henry 2000).  
The third catalyst was the safety people expected, mainly from the Witness Protection 
Programme (WPP). The TRC provided at least a safe space for victims to give testimony. 
However, Henry (2000) regretted the lack of sensitivity shown to witnesses once they left 
the confines of the TRC space. He agrees with Gunn (2001) that the TRC had neither the 
time nor the logistical capacity to honour or to continue protecting the space it had offered 
to them tell their stories. Henry said that it was already too late when he realised this: the 
process had moved on to its next hearings. The media was an instrument of briefing that 
might have encompassed elements of healing and rehabilitation. However, some survivors 
such as Gunn claim to have missed one or both of these (Gunn interview, 07 July 2001) 
and decided to sue the government (Tutu 1999, 141f).  
The fourth catalyst was a cultural element within which emerged the contradictions 
between the temporal safe space offered by the TRC and the realities of a post-TRC South 
Africa. WECAT is under the umbrella of the Khulumni Project, which also includes 
gender-specific activities nationwide. WECAT envisages fulfilling its goal through trans-
cultural dialogue and journeys, which immerse the participants in historical encounters 
with the socio-economic and cultural life of communities that endured political struggle 
against Apartheid. 
WECATs experience concurs with the Lumko Institutes findings (Leary & Hay 2000) 
that talking, encouraging one another and sharing have healed the survivors. The two 
institutions help individuals to come together, to speak from their hearts and to have their 
voices heard. This helps individuals to make sense of their traumatic experiences so that 
they may begin the essential process of healing the deep wounds and scars (Henry 2000). 
This was essentially a contextual and cultural element for the African whose life is only 
meaningful if it is harmonious and active in the community. Journeying together also 
stimulates both healing ones inner self and reintegration into society. 
Khulumani Groups have also discovered that interacting with other victims alone brings a 
measure of reconciliation to people (Leary & Hay 2000). This confirms Gunns view that 
reconciliation may happen without forgiveness (interview, 07 July 2001). It may be true 
also that interaction among perpetrators alone may lead to the seeking and obtaining of 
forgiveness. Thus, reconciliation is a channel of communication and vice versa; therefore, 
Christian worship and fellowship or friendly relationships are tools for reconciliation. 
Dialogue between witnesses could foster healing, reconciliation etc., but could also 
encourage more people to come forward, sharing with those who have testified and will 
testify in their turn. The account above indicates that some positive elements that were 
absent in the TRC itself emerged in the post-TRC period. However, Gunn is still searching 
for stable conditions for safe dialogue and healing; she said, our leaders have robbed us 
through the TRC; we exposed ourselves (interview, 07 July 2001). 
The cultural component implied focusing on categories such as women, youth and children 
in the hearings. Some literature suggested that traditional authority contributed to the TRC, 
but all respondents objected to this assertion. M. Mngese asserted that since the process of 
reconciliation embodied transitional tools (parties, constitution, elections etc.), it was 
regarded as a threat to traditional authority [chiefs] (interview, 29 June 2001). The TRC 
lacked these traditional elements, but, contrary to the African tradition, encouraged 
women. Women were the majority who testified (TRC Final Report 1998), also because 
families expected reparation or apology and sympathy; this exercise took away their pain.  
The fifth catalyst was amnesty/pardon leading to confessions and forgiveness. These were 
equally means of healing  mainly for perpetrators  and lessened the fear of prosecution. 
Amnesty is the overruling factor that made South Africas Commission more successful 
than its predecessors. It intended to help obtain more contributors of information and was a 
tool to get closer to the truth by encouraging individuals to testify (Christie 2000). 
Paradoxically, amnesty has been the most controversial aspect of the process. The most 
vociferous attacks came from Mangosuthu, the IFPs leader, who objected that  
Those seeking amnesty were required not only to speak about their conduct in respect of which 
they sought amnesty, but also in respect of anything else which the TRC could deem to fall 
under the statutory requirement of full disclosure. For him, amnesty was a means of 
intelligence to get as much information as possible (Christie 2000, 133).  
Conversely, S. Gunn asserted,  
The TRC led the victims to open wider their story and exposed them to more suffering, while 
perpetrators have not really told the whole story [truth] to the TRC, particularly the main party 
leaders (ANC and NP), who knew the danger they could risk. Amnesty has let the highest 
criminals and leaders remain free (interview, 07 July 2001).  
Gunns assertion confirms Browns statement that party leaders did not expose much (the 
truth), because they did not come down to apologise for what the parties did (interview, 26 
June 2001). Since the Amnesty Committee was one of the three statutory committees of 
the TRC, the Commissioners on the Committee assumed the responsibility of 
communicating the process and, in particular, the procedural requirement to the public. 
They had to visit the different centres and prisons, engage in public talks (TRC Final 
Report 1998 vol. 5, chap. 3, 2) and check who qualified to apply for amnesty. They also 
assisted in completion of the relevant forms. The forms used an understandable and 
friendly format in all South African official languages. All TRC offices were able to 
respond to any request to participate and communication campaigns and interpretation 
services were established to give access to members of the public, participants in hearings 
and the media (TRC Final Report 1998 vol. 5, chap. 3, 3). 
The Promotion of National Unity and Reconciliation Act No 34 of 26 July 1995 directed 
the committee, wherever possible, to give priority to applications from people in custody, 
though prisoners constituted the majority of applications rejected for falling outside the 
mandate of the committee. This implies that the goal of the TRC was not to achieve justice 
for all, though it was supposed to achieve justice for as many as possible. If ones case did 
not meet the criteria required by the Commission, the investigation committee and the TRC 
were not concerned. 
Photo 6.2: Closure of the Commission: 
Archbishop D. Tutu handing the TRC Report to President N. Mandela 
Source: <Davenport & Saunders 2000, front cover> 
A situation that the thesis regrets is that the Commission did not base its priorities on the 
suffering of victims or the high risk of the prisoners, but on the cases that served its 
political purpose. One wonders whether such a provision exemplified justice Very few 
people fell into the desired category, while those from the security police were accepted at 
an early stage. The Committee [s] obtained valuable assistance and co-operation from the 
various submissions of political parties  and from individual leaders (TRC Final Report 
1998 vol. 5, chap. 3, 3). The openness of the TRC was very much appreciated, including 
the fact that its Final Report was presented to the President of the country (see Photo 6.2) 
and also made available for more scrutiny. 
In spite of all success, the following imperfections in the practices required correction:  
 The legal assistance for representation was limited and the government tariff was low. 
The latter did not attract very skilled lawyers, whilst the Attorney General arranged for 
members of the government and liberation movements to be involved: their lawyers 
worked for a higher tariff than those provided by the Commission. This was a mark of 
unfairness towards victims and the poor. The TRC Final Report (1998) acknowledged this 
situation but did not challenge it properly, yet the situation affected the process.15  
 Bias was evident in granting amnesty, such as in the case of Trevor Tutu (the TRC 
Chairpersons son) who was guilty of an action that was not politically motivated - a stupid 
bombing at the Airport. Similar bias transpired towards thirty-seven ANC leaders, 
including Mbeki, by then President of South Africa, who were amnestied without being 
required to make disclosure of their offences (Meredith & Rosenberg 1999, 314).  
In short, despite its imperfections, the passion for truth, integrity and reconciliation guided 
the TRC, which reached most areas and maximised most means. These strategic examples 
  15 The TRC Final Report (1998, vol. 5, chap. 3, 4-5) indicates, the inherent inequality and unfairness of this 
situation is self-evident. Though the committee rendered a splendid service to the indigents, especially 
victims, it remains disturbing to realise that there may be instances where justice was not done in respect of 
poverty-stricken amnesty applicants (and victims) at amnesty hearings. 
set lessons for other countries. More findings are in relation to the possibilities of co-
operation between law and mercy (or faith), but also holding positively to account victims 
and perpetrators  plus politician and military leaders  positively to account and caring for 
The TRC investigated fearlessly without manipulation from the State. It has unveiled new 
tools to explore the socio-political dimension of truth and to search for peace by embracing 
culture and moral values. The most positive mark of the South African process was its 
openness to public scrutiny and reporting, which helped to overcome suspicion. Yet, in 
holding both the oppressor and the oppressed to account, it called for an attitude of mutual 
care in the future. The TRC was an all-inclusive pattern, which proved that involving 
churches in conflict settlement could be highly effective. Churches ought to combine their 
efforts to enhance truth, forgiveness and peaceful co-existence and reconciliation.
PART  THREE:    RWANDAS  CASE 
Chapter 7 
Country Context: Formative Attitude 
This chapter outlines the background to the conflict and genocide in Rwanda, and the role 
played by the church in the crisis. African Rights (1995), Des Forges (1999), and Adelman 
and Suhrke (2000) provided in-depth records on the part played by the Hutu Authority and 
paramilitary in the genocide. However, these writings paid little attention to the part played 
by the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF) and its army. The chapter examines further the role 
played by the RPF; it attempts to answer the following questions:  
 How did the conflict arise and why did it persist? Has the situation been examined  
sufficiently and understood as a basis for adequate solutions?  
 What has been the contribution of local churches in relation to these conflicts? Did  
Christianity contribute positively or negatively to these conflicts and the genocide? 
Rwanda is part of the Great Lakes Region of Central Africa. It is a landlocked area of over 
26,338 sq. km. It shares borders with Uganda in the north, Burundi in the south, Tanzania 
to the east and the Democratic Republic of Congo (former Zaire) to the west. It is an 
agricultural society; its economy relies on coffee production as its main cash crop. In 1991, 
Rwanda had a population of 7.15 million, with an annual increase of 3.1 percent and a 
density of 271 people per sq. km. It comprised 6.5 million Hutu (making up 90.4 percent of 
the population), 0.6 million Tutsi (8.2 percent), 30,000 Twa (0.4 percent) and less than 
5,000 Impunyu (a sub-group of Twa  forest dwellers).  
Figure 7.1: Population of Rwanda in 1994 
1,000,000
2,000,000
3,000,000
4,000,000
5,000,000
6,000,000
7,000,000
 Impunyu  <5000 1st Twa ~ = 30,000
<0.4%>
3rd Hutu =
6,500,000 <90.4%>
4th Tutsi = 600,000
<8.2%>
Impunyu
1st Twa
2nd Hutu
3rd Tutsi
About 94.6 percent of the population lived in the countryside; 48 percent were below 15 
years old. The average life expectancy was 53.1 years (Millwood 1996). At least 90 
percent of Rwandans were church members, out of whom between 62 and 63 percent were 
pro-Roman Catholic and 27 percent Protestant (including 8 percent Seventh Day 
Adventist). Muslims represented 1 percent; the remainder  roughly 10 percent  were 
followers of traditional religions (Millwood 1996 [1]; cf. Schonecke 1994; Brierley 1997). 
To grasp the Rwandan situation and the roots of its conflict, it is necessary to have in-depth 
knowledge of the ethnic relations and psycho-cultural aspects that marked the history of 
the country (Overdulve 1997; Chrtien in Mbokolo & Amssell 1985). Overdulve (1997) 
stated that such a retrospective approach to Rwanda should focus on the period from 1959-
1994, which ended with more frustration for the Hutu. He offers a nuance to previous 
research that faulted the colonial administration and the church alone for the making and 
polarisation of ethnic categories.  
Early inter-ethnic rapport in Rwanda typified a feudal system called ubuhake1 where the 
Hutu were subservient to the Tutsi (Linden 1999; van Butselaar 2002). The later build-up 
of politico-economic exclusion, which reactivated ethnicity in Rwanda, benefited from 
church-state co-operation (Linden 1999; Gatwa 2001). While Paternostre (1983), Linden 
(1999) and Gatwa (2001) blamed Western influence (social sciences, colonisation and 
Christian missionaries) for the shaping of ethnic exclusion, Overdulve (1997) and 
Mamdani (2001) noted that the Belgians reformed ubuhake without undoing the ties that 
existed between Hutu (clients: bagaragu [male] or baja [female]) and Tutsi (lords), but 
rather heightened tensions between the two groups. However, Overdulve located the roots 
of the exclusion and subsequent conflict in early Tutsi disdain and exploitation of the Hutu. 
Against this background, one can establish the origins of the conflict that led to the recent 
crisis in Rwanda.  
7. 1 The pre-colonial epoch and the origins of Rwandans 
Two stages represent pre-colonial Rwanda: the pre-monarchic epoch (up to 1350 AD), 
knowledge of which is very uncertain, and the monarchic era (1350-1895). Historians 
suggest that early in the first period, both Twa and Hutu groups came successively from 
the virgin forest of Central Africa, and settled in the Great Lakes Region.2 Early cultural 
historiography of East Africa asserted that the Tutsi group came from the Abyssinian 
  1 The socio-political and economic systems inherited from the pre-colonial era underwent a series of 
alterations during the colonisation to fit the new sciences and Europeans interpretations. Some writers 
defined ubuhake as clientship (Maquet 1961; Newbury 1978 & 1988; Vansina 1998) or cattle vassalage 
(Linden 1999). In reality, ubuhake was servanthood affecting all domains of ones life under a feudal 
contract. The system was so economically exploitative and politically oppressive that society hated it. It 
caused migration to escape the oppression. A common saying expresses the discontent against that system, 
ubuhake bubi bujya kukwica bukaguca iwanyu [servanthood that kills drives you away from home].  
  2 The modern-day descendants of first inhabitants in Rwanda are the Twa, who have been in the country 
since 2,000 BC. The Hutu arrived around 1,000 AD during the migration called Bantu expansion (Vansina 
2000 and de Heusch 1966). The Tutsi came between the eleventh and fifteenth centuries, the period known as 
the pastoralists migrations. The Tutsi achieved their settlement in the region through both conquests and 
peaceful assimilation (dHertfelt 1962; Lemarchand 1970; Vansina 1984). Given the absence of written 
sources and archaeological remains, the researcher acknowledges that reliable data on this subject for the 
period before the nineteenth century is rare.  
region (eighth & ninth centuries AD), and gradually entered the Twa and Hutu areas.3 
Most related research was inspired by early theory of Galla (Abyssinian) migrations, which 
also shaped the Hamitic Hypothesis produced by Speke (1863-4). Based on phenotype, 
Speke (1863-4) related the Tutsi people to the Wahima, whose origin is thought to be in 
Abyssinia and probably as far as Asia.  
Most writing suggests that the Twa group lived from hunting in the forests; the Hutu tilled 
the land, while the Tutsi raised cows. The writings agree with Rwandas oral literature that 
in the pre-colonial period, the Twa, Hutu and Tutsi groups enjoyed their life together and 
exchanged their products (animal products for crop products). These services constituted 
the basis of particular social interaction and co-existence between the three groups. 
Vansina (1962) and DHertfelt (1962) suggest that Hutu kings [bahinza] ruled over small 
kingdoms, which gradually unified to form Rwanda, which was later ruled by the Tutsi 
kings [bami]. The Tutsi bami gradually subjugated the bahinza, and exploited and 
oppressed all the Hutu and Twa. 
Vansina (2000), Lemarchand (1966) and Overdulve (1997) suggested that the peaceful and 
gradual assimilation of Tutsi by Hutu preceded the military conquests and establishment of 
Tutsi direct rule over the whole society. DHertfelt (1962) and Newbury (1974) asserted 
that the latter process became direct control over the means of production and enabled the 
monopolisation of power by the Tutsi, who misappropriated priority rights to land, cattle 
and labour. Research asserts, however, that in the wake of colonisation, Twa, Hutu and 
Tutsi still corresponded largely to occupational groups (Lemarchand 1966), whilst by then, 
  3 Overdulve (1997) suggested that the Hutu came from the north-west and found the Twa in the Great Lakes 
Region. In the mid fourteenth century, the Hutu had occupied the west of Akanyaru and were organised into 
small kingdoms independent from each other. Hutu leaders (kings) were called bahinza. During the following 
centuries, Tutsi Nyiginya monarchies subjugated the Hutu bahinza through wars for territorial expansion and 
power control. The Tutsi military wars led to the consolidation of the Nyiginya feudal monarchy (1800-1895) 
at the eve of colonisation and the dawning of Christianity in Rwanda. 
the Tutsi had imposed their regime over the other groups. The Tutsi king (mwami) was an 
absolute monarch, yet the three groups shared the same geographical location, language, 
traditions and religion.  
Overdulve (1997) holds that until the time of the institution of the Tutsi monarchy in 1350, 
there was no segregation in Rwanda; members from the three groups bore the same names 
and intermarried. He agrees with Chrtien (1985) and Mamdani (2001) that a tripartite 
hierarchical system comprising a land chief (umunyabutaka, always Hutu), a cattle chief or 
chief of pasture (umunyamukenke, mostly Tutsi) and an army chief (umutware wingabo, 
always a Tutsi) ruled together in the country under the mwami. 
The Tutsi and Hutu groups gradually marginalized the Twa; but later, the Hutu became an 
underclass in relation to the Tutsi. Although Twa, Hutu and Tutsi terms existed in the pre-
colonial era, European travellers  in particular the Englishman John Henning Speke 
(1863)  formally distinguished the Tutsi group from the others in terms of their origin, 
economic activities, social status and physical appearance (Prunier 1995; Taylor 1999; 
Melvern 2000). Speke constructed the theories attempting to account for these ethnic 
distinctions (vant Spijker 1990; Millwood 1996; Overdulve 1997).  
Maquet (1961), Vansina (2000) and Newbury (1988) agree with Isichei (1995) that later, 
the Tutsi formed an aristocratic pastoral caste with an elaborate oral literature, and were 
distinguished by their court culture and striking height. Their relationship with the Hutu 
was on a tributary basis, implying inequality between Tutsi and Hutu groups, and left the 
Twa relationship undefined. We noted that a group of Twa who remained forest dwellers 
called Impunyu, are actually the minority in Rwanda, and have been ignored by their 
compatriots and by most researchers. In rare cases  until the colonial period  those Hutu 
who raised some cattle could acquire Tutsi status. Conversely, since not all Tutsi 
controlled livestock and clients, the poorest Tutsi were at risk of falling into the Hutu 
category. Therefore, before becoming definite anthropological entities, Hutu and Tutsi 
categories first entailed both ethnic distinctions and politico-economic classes.  
Overdulve (1997) concludes that Tutsi rule gradually became offensive and discriminated 
against the grassroots people, mainly Twa and Hutu. Tutsi rulers did not base their power 
upon peoples consensus (as it was in times of their predecessors Hutu hinza), but rather 
their power depended upon the kings absolute authority. Overdulve (1997) clarifies that 
the Tutsi mwami, his dignitaries (bisonga) and chiefs (batware) could give or refuse land 
allocations as they wished. In this way, the Tutsi undermined and impoverished both Hutu 
and Twa.4 During my research interviews (15 August 2000), an elderly Hutu respondent 
stated that there has been no bad regime in the history of humanity equal to the Tutsi 
feudal monarchy, because of the pain it caused through ubuhake with subsequent 
uburetwa5 and agahato6, and related punishments: ingoyi7 and ikiboko.8 When a bystander 
objected that the ubuhake was not so bad, the respondent angrily asked him:  
Who would accept anywhere, anymore, the bearing of a hot pot of food on the head, for the 
chief, or allow the chief to have sex with ones wife or daughters? Is there anywhere else where 
a king, if he was about to journey, asked people (always Hutu) to stand, one on his right and 
another on the left, to plunge his swords into their shoulders as a sign of his departure? 
(interview, 15 August 2000)  
The elderly man added that the Tutsi dignitary and the chief often spoke to Hutu whilst at 
the same time pushing a spear into the foot of his Hutu client until their talk was over 
(interview, 15 August 2000). That attitude existed in Rwanda before any Western influence 
  4 To date, scholarship has failed to critically analyse this aspect.  
  5 Akazi kuburetwa (work of servitude).  
  6 Akazi kagahato (forced labour). 
  7 The client who failed to work underwent ingoyi (tying ones hands behind ones back to the point of 
bursting the chest). 
  8 Ikiboko was a painful rubber stick to beat (eight strokes) lazy or rebellious subjects. The Belgian 
colonisation introduced akazi and ikiboko in co-operation with the Tutsi regime. 
arrived. The account above is in line with Overdulve; he suggested that Tutsi rule was 
worse because of the humiliation of the people (viz. Hutu) by cutting off their genitals and 
hanging them on royal symbols ([drums] interview, 10 July 2000). That could never have 
happened to a Tutsi, except if he was a fierce enemy [umugome] of the mwami. Even then, 
it would usually only happen in times of warfare. Overdulve (interview, 10 July 2000) 
concluded that this attitude of the Tutsi and perhaps the lack of understanding by outsiders 
have deepened the sense of grievance by the Hutu and their hatred towards the Tutsi.  
Most informed researchers maintain that Hutu, Tutsi and Twa are not originally true ethnic 
groups, since they are not characterised geographically, linguistically or historically. 
Nevertheless, the groups started hardening their mutual relationships before any external 
involvement occurred. Chrtien (1985) observed that development of ethnic consciousness 
signifies a radical questioning of the other, and the politics of scorn, exclusion and the 
logic of apartheid built upon racial stereotypes. Chrtien (1985) is in line with Kalibwami 
(1979, 25) that by the time the first colonial power (German) was established in Rwanda in 
1900, political unity (implying Hutu  Tutsi rapport) was no longer existent.  
Vansina (1962), like Overdulve (1997) observed that the first historians of Rwanda were 
dignitaries living at the mwamis court and viewed the history of Rwanda as one of 
ceaseless progress of the elected people, the Tutsi, whose royal dynasty came from heaven. 
Des Forges (1972) suggested that they were all Tutsi and stressed Tutsi conquests, 
overlooking any failure and defeat. Vansina (1962, 6) regretted that Western 
historiographers reproduced only the interpretations of history told by the dignitaries  the 
only Rwandans they met  without realising that native historians had always conformed 
uncritically to a constant tradition. 
7. 2 Colonial era: ethnogenesis 
In the wake of colonisation, the Tutsi mwami ruled in Rwanda with absolute authority. A 
council of elites and rulers solely from the Tutsi ethnic group supported the mwami. Rare 
smaller Hutu states stayed autonomous in the north (mainly in Ruhengeri) until early in the 
20th Century (Overdulve 1997). Research agrees that the colonial administration brought 
these states under the authority of Rwandas Tutsi monarch, by joint military expeditions 
of Germans and Tutsi warriors. Although the Hutu Bakiga (northerners) were defeated, 
they remained bitter towards the Tutsi and southern Hutu Banyenduga (Millwood 1996; 
Sibomana 1997). Later, the Belgian colonial administration (1930s) imposed Tutsi chiefs 
throughout the country (Kalibwami 1979; Linden 1999; Gatwa 2001). In light of this 
knowledge, Mamdani (2001) and Kalibwami (1979) suggest that the Rwandan problem has 
come about mainly because of the way in which opposition and rivalries about political 
power and social and economic privileges have been polarised and interpreted in the 
context of ethnicity. 
Long before the first explorer entered the country, the ideology that most affected the 
Rwandan relationships was the hypothesis of the Galla migration constructed in the 17th 
Century (Prunier 1995). Speke (1863-4) spread theories asserting Hamitic superiority and 
origin, which H. Johnston and C. G. Seligman later supported; A. Pags and L. de Lacger 
popularised them (Taylor 1999). The reading of Speke (1863) shows that he did not enter 
Rwanda; he only saw three ethnic groups (including Hima) in the south east of Uganda, 
similar to those in Rwanda. From there, he constructed a theory about the pastoralist Hima, 
assumed descendants from Ethiopia (Galla). Chrtien (1985) has asserted that Spekes 
hypothesis made the pastoralist Hima, who are similar to the Tutsi of Rwanda, a people of 
mostly Asian origin. Sanders (1969) clarified that according to the Hamitic hypothesis, 
every trace and /or sign of what is usually termed civilised in Africa was attributed to 
alien, mainly Hamitic, origin. The Hamites were supposedly of Caucasian descent. 
Subsequent contacts with the West brought both colonisation and Christianity to Rwanda 
(Patermostre 1983; vant Spijker 1990; Linden 2001). Vansina (1962, 5-9) stated that 
anthropologists, colonial administrators and missionaries produced written sources on 
Rwanda, translating the writings of the first explorers. At their arrival, both German (1890-
1916) and Belgian (1916-1918 onwards) colonialists first respected the Rwandan socio-
political structure as it was. Later, Europeans who probably read Speke blindly appreciated 
his theory to reinterpret the socio-cultural realities of the region, especially in Rwanda 
(vant Spijker 1990). Taylor (1999) and vant Spijker (1990) concur with Vansina (1962) 
that the application of the theory to Rwandan people by various writers  including Pags 
(1933), de Lacger (1939 & 1940), Kagame (1943), Delmas (1950) etc.  added to 
missionary practices and the prejudice from the dynasty of Rwanda kings. These 
influences reinforced the myth of the superiority of the Tutsi and so crystallised the socio-
economic and political inequalities and generated ethnic consciousness and identity crisis.  
Consistent with the above, Kalibwami (1979, 36), vant Spijker (1990) and Overdulve 
(1997) clarify that the German colonial administration applied the principle of indirect 
rule, maintaining the existing indigenous administration built on the pre-existing socio-
cultural and economic structures. The Belgian colonial authorities, however, went beyond 
mere accommodation of these structures (vant Spijker 1990; Linden 1999; Gatwa 2001). 
Kalibwami (1979, 39-41), Overdulve (1997) and Gatwa (2001) asserted that Belgians 
reinforced the Nyiginya (clan) Tutsi monarchy that the Hutu, mainly the Bakiga, contested. 
Then further polarisation of Hutu-Tutsi relations occurred when the Belgians restructured 
the administration, removing all the Hutu chiefs and imposing Tutsi chiefs to rule 
throughout the country, even in the north, where there was no Tutsi population. 
Both the Germans and the Belgians sustained Rwandas ubuhake and monarchy through 
the principle of indirect rule, except that the Belgians hardened the existing tensions 
between the ethnic groups, leading to acute polarisation. Millwood (1996) concludes that 
during that period, a process of Tutsification resulted in a monopoly of political and 
administrative power in the hands of the Tutsi. Moreover, in 1933, the Belgians introduced 
the clearest ethnic labelling by the compulsory use of identity cards bearing ethnic origin. 
The number of cows owned determined ethnic status: one who owned 10 cows or more 
was entitled to Tutsi status, while others received Hutu status (Overdulve 1997; Linden 
1999; Gatwa 2001). Generally, the superior positioning of the Tutsi over the other groups 
was built on three elements: (1) the pre-colonial structures of ubuhake, (2) the old myth of 
born to rule and (3) the Western ideology  with subsequent practices  which asserted 
that the Tutsi were of superior origin and phenotype.  
On the one hand, the relationship between Hutu and Tutsi played its part in the 
establishment of the colonial rule that subsequently re-shaped socio-political reality in 
Rwanda (Kalibwami 1979, 33-36). On the other hand, by ignoring the presence of the Twa 
and Impunyu, many researchers, the media and political propaganda gave a limited or even 
twisted version of the situation in Rwanda and prevented a correct knowledge of the social 
fabric. Seemingly, bystanders ignore the Twa because they have not entered politics or 
competed for resources. They remain stagnant in most aspects. Even if the Twa would not 
offer much to the world of knowledge, politics and economy, overlooking them handicaps 
accuracy in social analysis of the evolving Rwandan context.  
Impartial research shows that the root causes of ethnic violence in Rwanda (1950s & 
1990s) lay in the extent to which collective identities were reactivated, mythologized and 
manipulated for political advantage. Lemarchand argues that before Rwandan 
independence,  
The Germans, the Belgian trustee administration, and the Roman Catholic Church, all 
adhered to the Hamitic theory of racial superiority of Tutsi. They agreed that indirect rule 
should be based on the existing political system through the Mwami (the king), and the ruling 
Tutsi elite. However, the measures they took had the effect of freezing and rigidifying the 
caste-like divisions and carrying them over into the changing contexts of the modernizing 
state. For instance, because of the belief in the superior intelligence of the Tutsi, the 
educational system was geared to recruit only Tutsi for posts in the administration, including 
technical departments such as agriculture, veterinary or medical services (1996, 253). 
Moreover, it is evident that the explorers and most researchers, mainly in colonial Rwanda, 
reported in favour of what they heard from the elite  the only natives they would have met 
at the Mwami and missionaries compounds (Vansina 1962, 5; Overdulve 1997). By 
chance, Rwandas oral traditions fitted Western interpretations (anthropology, colonial 
sciences and subsequent literature) of the myth dominating views of ethnic differentiation. 
So far, hostilities in Rwanda are still driven by ancient realities that modern structures 
spread and harden through education, religion and politics. Despite some researchers and 
politicians ignoring the working of interethnic enmity in pre-colonial and pre-Christian 
Rwanda, the allegoric accounts clarify the earliest existence of such rivalries:  
The people of the Rwandese monarchy told a story that in the beginning Kigwa, father of all 
people, came from heaven and had three sons, named Gatutsi, Gahutu and Gatwa. One day, 
as a test, he gave each a calabash of milk and went away on a journey, telling them to keep 
their milk safe until he returned next day. During the night, Gatwa grew hungry, could 
contain his greed no longer and drank his whole supply of milk. Gahutu, on the other hand, 
was clumsy, dropped and broke the calabash, spilling the milk. When Kigwa returned home, 
only Gatutsi had kept his calabash safe. So Kigwa made him ruler over his brothers for 
everIn another version Kigwa has a brother, Mututsi, who, with their sister Nyampundu, is 
said to have taught the Hutu already living in Rwanda the art of using iron, and was rewarded 
for this by being recognised as their 'shebuja' [lord] (West 2000). 
The Hamitic hypothesis  which ranked all races according to innate intelligence and 
abilities  simply provided a scientific basis for ascribing biological and intellectual 
superiority to Tutsi as distinct group (Fujii 2001). The identification of the Tutsi as a 
unique group  or the practice of elevating one tribe to assist in the governance of the 
colony  proved the impact of scientific racism (explained in Chapter 2). Given the link 
between sciences, exploration, Christianity, political and economic elitism, churches 
contributed to ethonogenesis and racialisation in Africa and part of India. Shearer (2005) 
calls this ethnic vehicle incarnated by Christianity in Rwanda racial Christianity.  
The current study agrees with Longman (1997) that the Roman Catholic Church benefited 
from colonial administration to establish its infrastructures and political position through 
helping the political administration to educate and prepare the sons of Tutsi for their ruling 
task.9 Then the whole class of Tutsi elite joined the Church. However, since the late 1940s, 
both the colonial rulers and the church have shifted their support from the Tutsi and the 
feudal monarchy in favour of independence and a republican regime. The shift enabled the 
Hutu to pursue and establish the new order in the early 1960s after toppling the Tutsi elite 
(Prunier 1995; Linden 1999; Gatwa 2001).  
The account above clarifies that the colonial administration, the Tutsi elite and the 
missionaries were aware  and contributed to the building  of the injustice committed 
through the manipulation of ethnicity in Rwanda. Thus, new law and new religion served 
the interest of the ruling class, and the rulers did not want to change the political 
superstructure until it was realised that it was impossible for it to persist. Accordingly, 
many colonial leaders and missionaries fought alongside the advocates of independence 
and democracy (Paternostre 1983; Overdulve 1997; Linden 1999). 
The eve of independence put to rest the myth of Tutsi superiority, but the elite Tutsi were 
not ready to accept the challenge to share power and economic privilege with the new Hutu 
rulers. Because of the bloody process called social revolution instigated to abolish the 
Tutsi monarchy and ubuhake, between 1959 and 1963 an estimated 120, 000 Tutsi became 
refugees in neighbouring countries. Tutsi Inyenzi (cockroaches: the name given to Tutsi 
raiders) refugees attempted to regain the country by force in the 1960s and 1970s but 
  9 For instance, Ecole de la Charit (in Butare), whose graduates were known as indatwa [pride], carried out 
the task to educate the sons of Tutsi chiefs. Kagabo (in Bray et al. 1997, 10) states, llite traditionnelle, 
instruite alors par les missionnaires se modernisa et pousa une certaine forme de la pense et dtre 
colonial. En deux gnrations, celle-ci occupa les meilleures postes dans ladministration du pays et dans 
lhirarchie Catholique [The traditional elite educated by missionaries was modernised and espoused a form 
of colonial ideology and being. For two generations, the elite occupied the best posts in the administration of 
the country and the hierarchy of the Catholic Church]. Thus, the injustice was not only in and from secular 
circles, but also in and from the religious sphere.  
failed. Van der Mereen (1996, 252-266) claims that the attacks rather intensified ethnic 
antagonism, which manifested as racial stereotypes. He asserts that the Tutsi who remained 
in Rwanda perceived neither the independence nor democracy as theirs; nor did they 
actively participate in the new republican regime. The new Hutu-led regime also never 
gave full confidence to the Tutsi to integrate into the leadership and engage in the 
management of the country.  
7. 3 Independent Rwanda: ethnic strategy, regionalism and the church  
7. 3.1 The war and the genocide  
Rwanda became independent on 1 July 1962. The first republic successively led by D. 
Mbonyumutwa and G. Kayibanda favoured Hutu from southern and central Rwanda. 
While most political leaders were from southern and central Rwanda, military posts were 
in the hands of Hutu northerners (Gatwa 2001). The second republic led by J. Habyarimana 
shifted all favour to northern Hutu (Bakiga). The abolition of the monarchy did not 
improve ethnic relations, either during Kayibandas popular regime, or with the 
Habyarimana charisma and principle of peace that he called 'Rwandas gold'. Other factors 
added to the worsening of the ethnic rapports, including issues compounding the refugee 
problem, political deception, structural adjustment and external factors including 
multiparty politics and globalisation.  
The Tutsi who had fled to neighbouring countries (Uganda, Burundi, Tanzania and Congo) 
as result of ethno-political war (1960s & 1970s) left intact the ethnic divide in the country 
(Prunier 1995; Khan 2000; Taylor 1999). Although they settled in the host countries, they 
became involved in the political life of these countries and became the scapegoats of ethnic 
conflicts within the Congo and Uganda. The anxiety led the Tutsi refugees to launch 
military invasions on Rwanda. Van der Meeren contends that: 
The effect of the Tutsi armys selective genocide of Hutu in Burundi, sabotaging all efforts at 
democratic reform, has had a significant impact on Rwandan ethnic polarisation.'The exodus 
of Tutsi refugees around 1960 resulted from the 1959 'social revolution' and the building up of 
Rwandan republic and independence. Consequently, the attitudes and organisation of the Tutsi 
refugees in the neighbouring host countries relate to the main changes within Rwanda up to 
1990 and the endless ethnic polarisation in Rwanda itself and Burundi. This contrasts with the 
situation of Tutsi integration in Burundi, Congo and Uganda. Uganda was the source of the 
Rwanda Patriotic Fronts successful organisation of an armed force, which invaded Rwanda in 
1990 and eventually took power in 1994 (1996, 252 f).  
To the ethnic tension was added the unfair distribution of resources, which, mainly since 
1988, served to harden relations between northern and southern Hutu in Rwanda. The 
Habyarimana regime became fraudulent and unpopular at domestic and international 
levels. It benefited a handful of people from Akazu (literally meaning a house set or small 
house) that comprised a clique from the family of Habyarimanas wife and those of the 
same region (north) who misappropriated state positions and resources. The injustice 
increased in biased admission to education, to the army, and to employment in public and 
private sectors (Gatwa 2001, 112 ff). The regime also unfairly allocated development 
projects, but most obvious was the deception and lack of dialogue in the political arena; 
rather, the leadership leaned on external allies.10 During this period, the Tutsi experienced a 
double jeopardy of ethnic and political exclusion. 
Moreover, every time ethnic clashes started in Burundi, they provoked reactions in 
Rwanda (in 1973 & 1993). As Burundian Hutu fled to Rwanda, in Rwanda the Hutu 
started to persecute the Tutsi in government institutions; as a result, a number of Tutsi civil 
servants and students went into exile. Such a crisis gave a pretext for Colonel Habyarimana 
to overthrow Kayibanda in a military coup in 1973. This resulted in the emergence of a 
northern Hutu-based regime until mid-1994 (Prunier 1995; Sibomana 1999). Ethnic and 
regional discrimination  the exclusion of the Tutsi and of the southerners from the means 
  10 France under Mitterrand supported the Habyarimana regime, whilst the current regime in Rwanda 
incarnates the American presence in the region. During a discussion organised by Christian Aid in London, 
on the theme Rebuilding Rwanda, How can Christian Aid help? (08 May 2000), a participant suggested that 
Habyarimana was looked at as French allied, while Kagame is said to be American. 
of control - increased in the late 1980s. These elements added to cross-boundary tensions,11 
the manipulation of ethnicity for political ends, and competition for scarce state resources 
and posts. The tensions increased between Hutu (Bakiga and Banyenduga) after 1988. 
From October 1990, the war worsened the situation and Rwandas economic decline and 
the international pressure for democratisation paved the way for more severe divisions 
among the Hutu (Sibomana 1999; Bertrand 2000).  
Collins (1998) argues that Western powers began to exert pressure upon Habyarimana to 
liberalise the political process by moving away from the one-party system. In that 
situation, the military wing of the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF)  the Rwandan Patriotic 
Army (RPA), comprising the exiled Rwandan Tutsi who had participated in Ugandas 
National Resistance Army (NRA) that brought Museveni to power (in 1986)  invaded 
Rwanda from Uganda in October 1990. The invasion and subsequent tensions marked the 
start of the war, whose later consequence was the genocide (Prunier 1995; Sibomana 1997; 
Bertrand 2000). Although most observers defined the 1990s war in Rwanda simply as an 
interethnic and internal war, it was primarily a military war provoked by a military 
invasion from outside (Uganda).  
Following the beginning of the crisis, negotiations started between the Habyarimana 
regime, emerging internal opposition parties, and the RPF.  
The combination of sustained pressure upon the Rwandan Government to make political 
concessions by Western powers and regional African States to an increasingly favoured RPF, 
and intensification of the civil war by the RPF itself, resulted in major concessions by 
Habyarimana in what became the 'Arusha Accords' in August 1993 (Collins 1998, 4).  
  11 The Berlin Conference (1882-4) identified with the division of Africa divided the continent between the 
European great powers, and subsequent manipulation of the policy moved Rwandas boundaries, leaving 
some Rwandans outside the new frontiers. Those left out were mostly in eastern Congo and southern Uganda. 
Later, North Kivu and Ijwi were taken from Rwanda in 1910. Therefore, some Rwandans have part of their 
families and ancestral land outside the country and continue to visit them. Rumours surrounding the RPA 
suggest that its invasion to DR Congo embodied the ambition to get back these lost territories.  
On 6 April 1994, a sophisticated missile, believed to have been launched by the RPA, 
downed the plane carrying President Habyarimana from the negotiations (Carrero 2001; 
Hakizabera 2000; Mugabe 2000, 11). The death of Habyarimana sparked off rapid and 
intensified fighting between the RPA and the then Rwandan regular army, creating a 
climate of generalised civil war throughout the country and the anti-RPF propaganda and 
their allies. Internal broadcasting encouraged assault on all Tutsi civilians and their 
associates. Within three months, the RPA defeated the official Rwandan army. Then the 
RPF seized power and proclaimed a new government on 31 July 1994, which received 
rapid recognition from Western countries: the USA stated its support in twenty-four hours 
(Prunier 1995; Collins 1998). Conversely, regarding the war that evolved into genocide 
and regime change, Sibomana (1999, 40) asserted, even if the [Rwandan] government was 
not in a hurry to seek the [Tutsi] refugees' return, negotiations were under way and were 
likely to produce a result Probably, he meant a better result. 
Between 6 April and mid July 1994, around 800,000 people, mostly Tutsi, died. Over three 
million, mainly non-Tutsi, fled the country. Tutsi and Hutu civilians suspected as 
accomplices (ibyitso) suffered fiercely at the hands of Hutu paramilitaries (Interahamwe) 
mostly from the unique party and the CDR (Coalition for the Defence of the Republic), and 
from other hardliner factions.12 The RPF counted some Hutu in its ranks, including P. 
Bizimungu and Colonel A. Kanyarengwe. Likewise, Interahamwe counted some Tutsi, 
even among its top leaders. Africa Rights (1995) and Guillebaud (2002) noted that R. 
Kajuga, the President of Interahamwe, was a well-known Tutsi. Chrtien (1995) also stated 
that Mrs A. Mukandutiye, known as la diabolique, the primary school Inspector in 
Rugenge (Kigali), was a Tutsi originally from Gisenyi, and was leader of Interahamwe of 
  12 Interahamwe literally means those who strike or work together, or those with a common perspective. It 
was the MRND youth league, officially created for tasks of social interest, such as umuganda, but around 
1992, it became a paramilitary group. Other political parties also had their own youth groups that later 
(mainly during the genocide) joined either the RPF militants or the Interahamwe, depending on the 
tendencies of their respective groups.  
Rugenge. This proves that the dynamics of the paramilitary actions, including the 
genocide, neither expressed the perspective of all Hutu nor of Hutu alone. Rather, the 
paramilitary seemed to be acting for political purposes only known to those who hired 
them.  
On one hand, the perpetrators of the genocide against Tutsi were mostly Hutu: 
Interahamwe and the Presidential Guards. However, eyewitnesses concur with Pottier 
(2002), and Longman and Rutagengwa (2001) that the Tutsi-led army (RPA) also killed a 
large number of Hutu and Tutsi associates, particularly in Mulindi (in 1990). RPA also 
killed after the genocide within the pretext of tracing Interahamwe in the camps of 
internally displaced people, such as in Kibeho (Sibomana 1997; Khan 2000; Reyntjens 
2004, 177-210). This also occurred in the camps outside the country (Collins 1998; Pottier 
2002). Reyntjens (2004, 194) estimated that the RPA had killed around 100, 000 people by 
September 1994. Sibomana (1997) and Melvern (2000) suggested that when three Roman 
Catholic Bishops, including the Archbishop V. Nsengiyunva, and ten priests were killed on 
5 June 1994 at Kabgayi, many other people died with them. It is estimated that 350, 000 
Rwandans were killed by RPA in the Congo.13 
Mushayidi (testimony, October 27-28, 2001), a Tutsi survivor of the genocide, later 
declared himself also a survivor of the RPA killings. This proves that the victims of the 
RPA are not only Hutu, but also Tutsi who opposed the politics of the RPF, rather 
advocating long-term peace and reconciliation, which implied power sharing. However, 
  13 Umutesi (2000) and Pottier (2002) are in line with Paterson (e-mail 19 March 2003) citing UN-Human 
Rights [that] Congo Killings Could Constitute Genocide. This confirmed Garretons team notes that under 
the cover of war in eastern Zaire, the RPA killed many Hutu Rwandan refugees including Interahamwe and 
former Rwandan military. FOJUPET (e-mail message, 20 July 2003) also quotes, Rwandan troops 
systematically went to Congolese villages killing all the Hutus they could find. They massacred as many as 
350,000 Hutu refugees, former U.S. Assistant Secretary of State Herman Cohen (2003) estimates. 
the RPF was not morally equal to the Hutu-led Government, which is responsible for the 
genocide of 10% of its population.  
Two theories have attempted to explain the ferocity and speed of the 1994 genocide in 
Rwanda: the killer culture and the genocide plan. The Presidential Guards set off the 
genocide and some political leaders incited popular participation (Longman 2001). It was 
evident that there was a plan leading the genocide (Dallaire 2004). However, large 
numbers of civilians participated, mostly because of pressure and manipulation by a 
section of the elite that presented the Tutsi and moderate Hutu14 as conspirators (ibyitso) 
and mortal enemies. Uvin (1998) was probably right in asserting that the elite spearheaded 
the genocide as a means to avoid the power sharing required by the Arusha Accords.  
Further factors of relevance include the lack of common vision and diplomatic skill among 
the Hutu leaders to compete with the Tutsi RPF. In light of the competition, Vandeginste 
(1998a) argued that the negotiations unevenly distributed power, giving too much to the 
emerging factions, mainly the RPF (40 percent), whilst taking almost everything at once 
from the Habyarimana Party. Melvern (2000) further suggests that the partiality in the 
process of mediation that led the Arusha Accords was another factor that facilitated the 
rallying of the Hutu populace behind the Habyarimana government to unite in opposition 
to the Tutsi RPF, which they viewed as a common threat.  
Consistent with the argument above, Uvin (1998), Sibomana (1997) and Jones (2001) 
agree that a section of the Rwandan elite manipulated the Hutu into the killings of Tutsi. 
Sibomana (1999) states that peasants passed on the information to others, telling them to 
  14 Although most researchers use this terminology, it does not express the reality. The people referred to as 
moderate Hutu were actually fierce opponents of Habyarimana  this is the reason why the supporters of 
Habyarimana, his Guards and Interahamwe hunted to death these so-called moderates. 
work (gukora), signalling  as if it were endorsed  to kill. However, Uvin (1998) 
contends that only some individuals and groups, defending their interests or fearing for 
their lives, involved the rest of the populace in killings. He seems to object to the view that 
the genocide was the general policy of the whole Rwandan Government. 
Sibomana (1997) argued that in addition, four years experience of war, political chaos, 
and mainly the selective killings that the RPA directed against the Hutu in war zones from 
1990 spread panic among all the Hutu and made it easy to manipulate them into killing the 
Tutsi (under the pretext of self-defence). Sibomana (1997) stated that as the stories told by 
displaced Hutu about the RPA were terrifying, other Hutu expected the atrocities against 
them to spread further throughout the country. This atmosphere increased fear and 
provoked a mixed desire for revenge, to prevent an RPA advance with all Hutus in its way 
being killed. Hutu peasants then speedily killed their Tutsis neighbours with whatever 
means were at hand, assuming that they were their deadly enemies. Sibomana (1997), 
Khan (2000) and Melvern (2000) seem to agree that at the wake of the Hutu army defeat, 
the fear also led the Hutu peasantry to enthusiastically welcome the French initiative 
(Turquoise), which blended the humanitarian mission with peacekeeping, whilst the FAR 
(Rwandan Army Forces) had started looting and abusing the population.  
Although there was no general hostility against Tutsi before the RPF waged the war, later 
the genocide was publicly encouraged through the media and political meetings (Chrtien 
et al. 1995). After the assassination of Habyarimana, some officials instigated and 
supervised the genocide. For instance, the President of the crisis government,15 T. 
Sindikubwabo, in his speech at Butare and Kibuye, thanked those who did the work 
(killing) and rebuked those who abstained (Africa Rights 1995; Des Forges 1999). On one 
hand, most analyses blame the genocide on the extremist Hutu and their media 
  15 It called itself a Government of crisis or Abatabazi, but was later seen as genocidal. 
propaganda, and on the Interahamwe who perpetrated the genocide. On the other hand, the 
analyses overlooked the RPF-owned broadcasting station (Radio Muhabura) that was 
vocal against Habyarimana and incited the Tutsi to rally behind the RPA (Higiro 1999; 
Twagiramungu 1998). Certainly, this also provoked the Hutu population.  
Carrero (2001) is in line with Pomerleau (1994) and De Standaar (1994): he asserted,  
It was the FPR [RPF] which was the first, starting in 1990, to found a series of media 
infrastructures such as Radio Muhabura, whose broadcasts did nothing but raise, stir up and 
poison the ethnic tensions in Rwanda  the RTLM (Radio Mil Colinas [sic]) was created only 
three years later in response to Radio Muhabura (Carrero 2001).  
He contended that newspapers such as Rwanda Rushya, Impuruza, Le Tribun du Peuple, 
Kanguka etc. answered to the RPF broadcasts on Radio Muhabura. Relating to the killings 
committed by the RPF, Des Forges explains,  
The RPF slaughter of civilians has been poorly documented. Even during the months when the 
RPF was establishing its control, it was remarkably successful in restricting access by 
foreigners to certain parts of the country Because this report focused on the genocide itself, 
we collected only limited data on crimes committed by the RPF (1999, 692). 
A week after the death of Habyarimana and his closest team, the remaining leadership 
acknowledged the breakdown in the government system and made repeated appeals to the 
international community to establish a cease-fire and to enable the resumption of 
negotiations (Klinghoffer 1998; Melvern 2000; Jones 2001). Kuperman (2001) asserts that 
the RPA at first declined the cease-fire but rather asked foreign troops that were evacuating 
their nationals to leave immediately without interfering. It was only on 23 April 1994 that 
the RPF proposed a nationwide cease-fire after two weeks of refusing an offer from the 
government. Klinghoffer (1998) contends that even the French Foreign Minister, A. Jupp, 
had proposed an external military intervention if the cease-fire were to break down. In line 
with Klinghoffer (1998), Adelman & Suhrke (2000, 271-80) state that none of those 
appeals received adequate responses to impose a cease-fire. There are grounds to believe 
that the vacuum in the government increased the chaos, which allowed willing people to 
organise and spread the killings throughout the country (Dallaire 2004).  
Killings began in Kigali City,  
The rebels [RPF] had launched their own campaign of political assassination against Hutu 
opponents by April 9, [1994] both in Kigali and in the countryside. The Abatabazi government 
exploited this by exaggerating the abuses of the RPF, charging on April 15 that the rebels had 
massacred 20,000 people. Early reports also indicated that the Tutsi-led rebels were winning 
the civil war and rejecting government offers of nationwide cease-fire, which contradicted any 
notion of Tutsi as victim (Kuperman 2001, 25). 
The RPF army, however, convinced international opinion that it was stopping the killings. 
Hence, none of its allies responded to the appeal for the cease-fire and further negotiation 
(Mugabe 2000). Then the Abatabazi government adopted a laissez-faire position towards 
those who promoted the genocide against the Tutsi. Rather than aiming for a cease-fire, 
truly stopping early genocide crime and seeking negotiations, the international community 
incarnated by the UN Security Council  Resolution 918 of 17 May 1994  set a firm arms 
embargo against the former Rwandan regime (Barnett 2002, 142; cf. Des Forges 1999, 
661f.). The embargo, however, empowered the RPA. Thus, the latter was no longer 
interested in cease-fire and negotiations.  
Sibomana (1999) and Prunier (1995) suggested that a cease-fire would have allowed the 
negotiations to resume; they could have been successful, but would have meant that the 
RPF would lose the opportunity to take control of the country. RPF internal sources assert 
that it expected the genocide as a reaction to the RPA's increasing force and winning of the 
battle (Mugabe 2000). The Abatabazi government in Rwanda ordered self-defence for 
civilians with the pretext that it could no longer resist the advance of the RPA, which killed 
the Hutu. Formal speeches from the government officials started ordering the population to 
cleanse (gutsemba) the enemy (Tutsi, according to the hard-liners definition).  
It is evident that the embargo, the rejection of the appeal for a cease-fire and negotiations 
were among the direct causes of the genocide. Although the RPA claims to have stopped 
the genocide, it later acknowledged that the genocide ended before the victory (Kuperman 
2001); it also true to say that there were no Tutsi left to protect. Also, the RPF declaration 
that the genocide was over and the premature assertion of victory while the war was still 
going on blocked any international initiative to intervene at the critical moment to save 
many Tutsi (Mugabe 2000). At the same time, Muhabura broadcasting worsened the 
situation by provoking more anger from its equally ethnicist RTLM to incite all Hutu to 
speedily kill the Tutsi and all presumed allies of the RPF. Kuperman (2001) agrees with 
Twagiramungu (1998) that RPF/RPA must accept part of the responsibility for killing and 
inciting others to kill.  
The climax of the war, the misinformation, and above all the partiality of mediation 
provoked all sides to slaughter their opponents, but the shooting down of Habyarimanas 
plane was the most revealing of the complicity that surrounded the negotiations, and added 
to the mistrust of the Tutsi by the Hutu. Moreover, the Abatabazi  leadership of 
Sindikubwabo (President) and Kambanda (Prime Minister)  which lacked political-
diplomatic experience, deliberately fuelled the killings (Prunier 1996; Melvern 2000). 
These factors fertilised the ground for the killings, but both the assassination of 
Habyarimana and the arms embargo were the most direct causes that activated the 
genocide.16 
Essack (1996) and perhaps Murison (1996) support Keanes (1995) assertion of a killer 
culture in Rwanda. However, there are no grounds to substantiate this theory, since there 
have been long periods of peace. Probably, Keane (1995) conceived the theory because the 
extent of inter-communal violence over three months was a remarkable phenomenon. 
There were rather repeated situations of impunity subsequent to political massacres. Pottier 
(2002) asserts that Keane [and perhaps most supporters of his theory] had no previous 
knowledge about Rwanda to balance with the one-sided information that he collected from 
  16 The opposition stated clearly that there could be no power sharing while MRND was still strong and its 
founder (Habyarimana) remained alive. Many Hutus stated publicly that they would prefer another oppressor, 
whoever that was, rather than MRND and the Akazu. 
angry victims. The theory of killer culture has created more confusion than clarification 
about the core causes of the genocide.  
Experts on Rwanda, such as Maquet (1954; 1961), Vansina (1962; 1998), Chrtien (1985; 
1997), Newbury (1978; 1988 & 1991), Reyntjens (1994), Overdulve (1997) etc. never 
evoke the killer culture. The assertion of that culture constitutes a new powerful vehicle 
for the ethnic polarisation. Pottier (2002) objects to that assertion and suggests rather that 
hired media and intellectuals have advocated a one-sided cause. He also noted that 
President Kagame acknowledged, we have a new way of doing things, probably implying 
that the fabricated version of the Rwandan situation favours the RPF. The failure to curb 
such biases keeps up ethnic hatred and maintains the conflict.  
Plausibly, there have been endless lies from the elite and their allies and a culture of 
impunity in Rwanda over centuries. Political manipulation and the blind obedience of the 
population also helped to devise hideous ideologies (Gatwa 2001). Uvin (1998) added that 
individuals insecurity about their interests caused some killings, just as hatred, mob justice 
and looting did. Most post-genocide literature asserts that the Rwandan authority 
encouraged spontaneous killing by the peasantry in line with a prior plan.17 The 
spontaneity was provoked by fear of RPA atrocities and the anger and sudden realisation 
that the terms of the Arusha Accords no longer constrained the struggle for power. Since 
the representation of the Rwandan Government in the accords ceased to exist on 6 April 
1994, force alone would determine the struggle (Vandeginste 1998a; Collins 1998). 
  17 By the term plan the thesis does not suggest a long term project planned over many decades, i.e. since 
1959, as some writings have suggested. By this term plan the thesis means that the killing (that led to the 
genocide) was organised  some time either before or after the downing of the Presidential plane  and 
thereafter ordered and supervised by some political and military leaders. 
There were killings directed against groups before and after 1994 in Rwanda, but the 
killings that occurred between 6 April and mid July 1994 are officially classified as 
genocide. After the assassination of Habyarimana, the killings of his Hutu opponents18 and 
of the Tutsi started in a more selective manner. This proved the existence of increased 
suspicion against Tutsi and members of the opposition and a supposed list of scapegoats 
(Collins 1998). However, even since late 1993, it was evident that the Tutsi community 
and the opposition were in danger if Habyarimana was killed, because in their political 
meetings they publicly expressed the desire to get rid of him.19 Klinghoffer (1998) suggests 
that mixed sentiments of anger and fear, and the desire for defence or vengeance, were 
apparent. Yet, despite the creation of the militia, there is no way to prove that before the 
killing of Habyarimana, his government or extremists had set up a genocide organisation.  
On one hand, people were officially targeted because they were a threat to the MRND 
(Magnarella 2000). The killings of such people had started even before 1994. In both Hutu 
and Tutsi groups, individuals were eliminated one by one  this could have continued even 
if Habyarimana had not been killed (Twagiramungu 1998). On the other hand, 
Twagiramungu states that the guards-led killings were not systematic in Kigali. 
Twagiramngu was a more likely target for assassination by the presidential guards, because 
he was the leader of the opposition (Dallaire 2004, 244). His statement allows us to assume 
that the guards shame at not protecting their chief, or at least in clarifying the 
circumstances of his death, led them to eliminate individuals they believed to have 
provoked or contributed to the circumstances in which Habyarimana died. The downing of 
  18 Towards the end of 1993, each party  mainly the opposition  was subdivided into two factions: those 
who called for democratisation at all costs and those who called themselves power, whose priority was to 
solve the armed conflict in their favour but also to reunite the population against their common enemy i.e. the 
RPF. The international political milieu, writers and journalists labelled the first faction moderates, whilst 
labelling the second faction hard-liners.  
  19 To express this desire in political meetings, the adherents of the opposition parties burned banana leaves 
and other things to indicate burning Habyarimanas thick head of hair. 
the plane, the surrounding confusion and the failure of the political system20 to control the 
situation fuelled further the extremism, hate and subsequent genocide. However, the aims 
and definitions distinguish political assassinations (such as those before April 1994) from 
genocide (race/group cleansing).  
Reyntjens (1996, 245) and West (2000) suggested that there has been the usual obedience 
of the Rwandan people  a culture of obedience  to their leaders. In addition to the 
obedience, the widespread genocide in a very short time was due to the power of both the 
national and international media, which promoted hate by pointing to what was going on in 
different regions of the country. Yet, the media had previously been the official means to 
instruct and educate the population (and were not condemning the killings). The peasantry 
did what the media said people in other places were doing. Sometimes, the incitements 
spread simply through broadcasting as if they were orders from the authority; these fuelled 
the genocide in areas that were still peaceful. The RTLM, however, openly incited the 
Hutu to kill all Tutsi (Klinghoffer 1998; Taylor 1999) and also built on the content of 
Muhaburas broadcasts, to justify that any Tutsi was the unique enemy of all Hutu. From 
then on, the Hutu saw every Tutsi (even babies, the disabled, the mentally ill and elderly 
people) as potential Inkotanyi (activist members of the RPF).  
Because the conflict was ethnically motivated, both the Hutu and Tutsi armies committed 
killings of civilians, which continued even after 1994. They key difference between the 
Hutu and Tutsi attitudes was the unbalanced proportion in terms of population: while Hutu 
  20 For example, there was a lack of peacekeeping ability to maintain relative peace until the creation of a 
credible and able government, which could best be established later. On the contrary, Abatabazi government 
was set up in a hurry and comprised elements with no experience in politics to handle such a difficult time. 
Additionally, there was no initiative to take off-air the broadcastings that promoted the right to kill the 
unique enemy (umwanzi), which was Inkotanyi [Tutsi tough fighters or RPF members. The arms embargo 
against the Hutu-led government that still represented the nation encouraged the RPF, politically, logistically 
and militarily, but also gave a reason for the Hutu-led government to allow the populace to defend 
themselves on the pretext that the regular army was not able to fight the RPA anymore and thus protect the 
population.  
peasants  numbering nine times the Tutsi  were easily manoeuvred to attack the Tutsi, 
because they could afford it. The small number of Tutsi civilians would not dare to attack 
the Hutu or to defend themselves. Therefore, even if not every Hutu was armed or engaged 
in killing, it was easy for outsiders to place the guilt on all Hutu because many Hutu 
civilians pitilessly slaughtered unarmed and defenceless Tutsis. 
When the RPF took power, most Hutu fled to neighbouring countries for fear of reprisals 
from the RPA. Arguably, the former leadership also encouraged the Hutu population to 
leave the country in order to make the RPF seek negotiations with the former regime and 
gain the confidence of the population. The exodus was probably also encouraged in the 
hope that it would draw international attention to the problem and that through the 
compassion of the international community, the cause of their leadership would be heard. 
Sibomana (1999) and Pottier (2002) assert rather that the RPA also perpetrated large-scale 
massacres against Hutu who remained in the country and this led many others to leave the 
country.  
The rate of the genocide and subsequent crises suggested that there would be other killings 
against Hutu after the RPF victory. The degree of hate grew high when the Hutu were in 
the camps or were internally displaced because of suffering, due to RPF lobbying and to 
the mixing of paramilitaries and politicians, presumed to be the killers, with innocent 
refugees. Nevertheless, the way the international community assessed and handled the 
conflict and the tough conditions endured by refugees were unique experiences (Kuperman 
2001; Pottier 2002). Recent analyses have admitted that what the Hutu suffered in the 
attack and killings by the RPA up to the DR Congo was also genocide. Mushayidi (2001), 
Paterson (citing Cohen 2003) and The Times (9 August, 2003) suggest that this was part of 
a plot between the RPF and the international community.  
Presumably, fear resulting from the memories of ubuhake, which it was believed the RPF 
victory could revitalise, added to the biased interventions, including the arms embargo, 
generalised the frustration of the Hutu regime and intensified hate against the Tutsi. Even 
though numerous factors fuelled the crisis, this does not deny the fact that the former Hutu 
state is liable for the genocide. The RPF is liable for the killings that occurred in its 
controlled zone, and as a whole since it took power after July 1994. The majority of the 
respondents to research interviews (77 percent) affirmed that since the respective regimes 
benefited from the full obedience of their population, given that there was a forum for 
negotiation and a peacekeeping force in place, the war and genocide were avoidable. 
Likewise, Feil (1998), Sibomana (1999) and Jones (2001) asserted that there is no excuse 
for the international communitys passivity regarding the genocide, which could have been 
stopped by negotiations or a peacekeeping force. 
Collins (1998) and Pottier (2002) assert that the international community closed its eyes in 
the face of the Hutu suffering, in the same way as it did during the genocide of the Tutsi. 
The same is true of both the post-genocide government and international opinion, which 
view Tutsi victims of the genocide as survivors (enabled to overcome the situation), while 
Hutu moderates who suffered the same atrocities continue to be made victims (with 
differences in substance and legal treatment). The reality proves that the international 
community has been notably unfair in this situation (Collins 1998; Pottier 2002). Yet, the 
attitude does not help to improve the interaction of the Rwandans. 
Omaar (1997) and Murison (1996) seem to support Keanes (1995) assertion that the 
reason for the mass fleeing from the country was a result of the Hutu killer culture. The 
assertion ignores the fact that all Rwandans share one culture and one language, and that 
the three ethnic groups have always lived in mixed communities. Incidents and atrocities 
occurred at many fronts and in different times throughout history. Thus far, both the Tutsi 
and Hutu have held power (and fled the country) alternately and killings occurred under 
both the Tutsi as well as the Hutu regimes. Even with regard to the genocide, Kuperman 
(2001) suggests that from outside, it was difficult to know who was killing and who was 
dying. In fact, the elite of the Hutu and Tutsi alternated in initiating atrocities. However, 
there had been no atrocities in Rwanda such as those perpetrated under the lead of the 
Interahamwe in the 1990s genocide.  
On one hand, Keane (1995) and Omaar (1997) agree with Murison (1996) that fighting 
was intrinsic to Rwandan culture, a natural malady of endemic killing. On the other hand, 
Pottier (2002) objected to this argument and suggested that the RPF hired some 
intellectuals and media to make the world believe such a new image of Rwanda at the 
expense of the Hutu and the countrys history. The post-genocide government also claims 
that Rwandas history has not been well written and there are attempts to revise it 
(Longman and Rutagengwa 2001). Even so, Twa, Hutu and Tutsi have lived together in 
long periods of peace, and they may still rediscover a peaceful coexistence.  
The dynamics that led to the imagined killer culture are similar to those that led to the 
Tutsi-led army being viewed as an alien force of occupation. The latter perception was 
the persuasive element that helped the extremist Hutu to create sufficient enthusiasm to 
drag most of the Hutu population to commit the genocide in fighting against the Tutsi. 
Hutu political extremists exploited the Hamitic Hypothesis  mainly the theories of early 
migrations and promoted the idea of Tutsi as aliens in public addresses and through 
RTLM broadcasting. Likewise, Tutsi political extremists promoted the notion of running 
against the Hutu through Muhabura broadcastings and in that way nourished the 
perception that Hutu are naturally killers. Both ideas - killer culture and alien Tutsi - 
were inspired by external perceptions of Rwanda. The first was mainly from the media and 
NGO representatives (namely Keane 1996; Omaar 1997); the second emerged from the 
myth promoted by the writings of explorers, historians, anthropologists (e.g. Speke 1863), 
missionaries (e.g., Pags 1933) and the colonial administration (cf. Taylor 1999).  
'Journalists and aid workers assumed that tales told to them of RPF atrocities were only 
because individuals felt the intimidating presence of the militias who would deal with them 
later if they had not stuck to the correct line' (Collins 1998, 18). The problem was that at 
the time, nobody questioned the rise of extremist parties, such as the CDR, and the 
broadcasting of RTLM and Muhabura, or attempted to stop their evil influence. Moreover, 
rather than supporting genuine mediation, the international community considered military 
activities and political statements made by the RPF as legitimate and correct. The opposite 
was true for the MRND regime. Unfortunately, there was no challenge to the international 
inaction regarding the Rwandan crisis. Although there was blame attached to the 1994 
genocide, nothing happened to prevent subsequent killings and genocide-like activity 
either in the country or outside it. In both the genocide and post-genocide Rwanda, there 
were possible ways to stop the war, violence and killings using neutral international efforts 
to help the RPF and the former government to resume the dialogue, which could have led 
to real settlement.  
Even Major-General R. A. Dallaire, former commandant of the UN peacekeeping force in 
Rwanda during the genocide, endorsed Feils (1998) Report to the Carnegie Commission 
on Preventing Deadly Conflict, asserting that the early use of force could have succeeded. 
Actually, measures were in place, but Dallaire was not authorised to act to prevent the 
genocide. Klinghoffer (1998), Jones (2001), Pottier (2002) and most respondents to the 
research interviews agree with Feil (1998) that the genocide could have been prevented, 
but that this failed to happen because of the lack of willingness from the international 
community to understand and respond effectively to the situation. Unpredictably, countries 
such as Belgium withdrew their troops just after the genocide started and the US 
pressurised the UN to refrain from using adequate force.  
A similar attitude was taken concerning the death of Habyarimana. While most Hutu were 
convinced that the RPA killed him, every other hypothesis rejected this possibility. It is 
puzzling that neither the RPF, nor successive Rwandan authorities, nor international 
surveillance is keen to investigate the shooting of Habyarimana, which triggered the 
genocide. Since no official inquiry followed the assassination and these families have 
taken no vigilant action, nor have their respective governments, even after evidence has 
emerged, much of the truth remains hidden (Braeckman 2000 and Edwards 2000 expand 
on this situation).21  
Consistent with the argument above are deeper analyses suggesting that the inadequacy 
and unpopularity of the Hutu leadership, in contrast with the vigilance of the Tutsi both 
nationally and internationally, silenced or distorted any inquiry (Des Forges 1999). Pottier 
(2002) asserted that the RPF benefited from its strong connections with some organisations 
and journalists of commercial professionalism, together with Radio Muhaburas refined 
propaganda. They increased fear and frustration among the Hutu population. The fear 
added to the diplomatic isolation of the Hutu rulers in the 1990s. Overdulve (interview, 11 
July 2000) suggested that the behaviour of the Hutu in 1994 was an expression of the long 
and strong frustration imposed on them by the RPF lobbying and the biased international 
assessment of the situation.  
  21 S. Edwards of National Post Canada [2 March 2000], Explosive leak on Rwanda genocide, Informants 
told UN investigators they were on squad that killed Rwandas president  and a foreign government helped, 
in ANB-BIA [African News Bulletin] 386, 15 March 2000, 5-6. Cf. S. Edwards (2000), 4-5 as reported by C. 
Braeckman, Qui a vraiment tu Habyarimana? Les rvlations mettant en cause le FPR dans lattentat 
de1994 ajoutent au malaise ambiant  Kigali, in ANB-BIA [African News Bulletin] 387, 1st April 2000.  
Numerous aspects increased hate, fear and suspicion between Hutu and Tutsi. The three 
decades the Tutsi spent in exile provided them with opportunities to connect with 
international organisations that backed any appeal for their cause against the Hutu, who 
were unwilling to welcome the Tutsi (Millwood 1996). The Hutu became frustrated partly 
because of their hard attitude towards Tutsi refugees (1959-1994). Thus, the Hutu attitude 
boomeranged and contributed to weaken their solidarity and leadership in the face of the 
increased solidarity and international influence of the Tutsi. Although the polarity in Hutu-
Tutsi relations had been acute since the 1950s, the increased frustration of Hutu leaders in 
the early 1990s led them to manipulate the public, added to painful memories of ubuhake 
and paved the way for the genocide. 
7. 3.2 Geo-politics and socio-economic realities 
When Habyarimana took power in 1973, the north/south divide among the Hutus that was 
under the surface emerged. The ethnic interpretation and justification altered accordingly 
(van der Meeren 1996). The position of the Tutsi who remained in the country improved 
during the 1970s. The civil service employed many Tutsi, while others built up successful 
businesses.  
Habyarimanas rule first tried to overcome the ethnic divisions while seeking economic 
and popular acceptance. The collapse of the world coffee price in the 1980s and the IMF's 
pressurising of Rwanda for structural adjustment increased difficulties for Habyarimana in 
trying to satisfy his entourage. The discontent arose from the southern Hutu and Tutsi, who 
gradually began to perceive the northerners as abo mu biryo (those from where food 
abounds). The labelling  Akazu  given to the politico-economic and regional solidarity of 
the clique with family links to Habyarimana and northerners expressed the high level of 
discontent among the southerners.22 
Van der Meeren (1996) asserts that the increasing north-south polarisation based on 
competition for scarce state resources led northern extremists to create a new feeling of 
being the only unadulterated Hutu (no intermarriage with Tutsi and cultural alteration). 
During the second Republic and particularly in the late 1980s, Bakiga perceived all 
southerners (Banyenduga) as Tutsi. This perception recalled that the pre-colonial Bakiga 
were independent from the Tutsi kingdom before Belgian rule toppled the Hutu chiefs 
(Linden 1977; Overdulve 1997; Gatwa 2001). Habyarimanas ascension to power (1973) 
occurred concurrently with the detention of most political leaders and business people who 
were close to his predecessor G. Kayibanda (a southerner). These prisoners died secretly in 
custody. Kayibanda was under house arrest and died in 1976 because he was denied 
medical care (Millwood 1996; Melvern 2000). This situation caused high tensions between 
the Banyenduga and the Habyarimana regime. The revenge of Banyenduga against 
Habyarimana materialised with the birth of the opposition early in the 1990s. Since most 
military officers were from the north, they supported Habyarimana (Gatwa 2001).  
In 1974, Habyarimana introduced communal work for development activities (umuganda), 
dance and lyrics (animation) with political mottos (Prunier 1995; Mamdani 2001). Fervent 
Christians (Balokole) and other religious groups  even grassroots,  opposed umuganda23 
and animation, but mainline churches gradually allied and rallied their followers behind 
  22 During the 1990s, opposition allies incited the population to rise against this economical-political 
injustice led by Akazu. Opposition slogans called on the masses to unite and burn the Akazu [small house]: 
meaning to fight the oligarchy and injustice brought by Habyarimanas entourage. 
  23 The President formally launched umuganda in February 1974 (Prunier 1995; Mamdani 2001). It was an 
unpaid co-operative and communal labour for public projects. 
umuganda and animation. The Rwandan state worked harder to blend in the church 
hierarchy.  
At that time, the Bakigas fear for the progress of the Tutsi and Banyeduga in politics and 
business increased. To maintain control, Habyarimana instituted an ethnic and regional 
quota system (iringaniza, from the Kinyarwanda verb kuringaniza: to balance or to make 
equilibrium) pretending to allocate administrative posts, scholarships and development 
projects proportionally to ethnic and regional groups.24 Churches and NGOs were 
instructed to apply the same policy in their domains. Nonetheless, the Bakiga benefited 
from most posts, resources and scholarships.  
Van der Meeren observed that 
The manipulation of ethnic categories and boundaries to dub central and southern Hutu, 
particularly those who were wealthy, educated and political opposition to Habyarimana ruling 
clique, as Tutsi-led and therefore traitors, was a purely political stratagem to cover the use and 
abuse of dictatorial power (1996, 257 f). 
The iringaniza increased ethnic and regional tensions. By the time of the so-called 
democratisation and the war in 1990, Rwanda was suffering from tense internal divisions. 
Then, the debate opened on issues of the Tutsi refugees who threatened to return to their 
homeland. Since Habyarimana avoided the debate on the pretext of land shortage in 
Rwanda, international pressure encouraged the remaining option for the Tutsi, which was 
to return by means of arms. Refugees lined up with the opposition and the situation 
degenerated further in 1994. At the start, religious leaders seemed to take a neutral stand, 
but later they initiated the mediation between the warring sides (van Butselaar 2001). 
  24 In practice, iringaniza was in that case a shrewd method of control to bar southerners and the Tutsi from 
rising through politics, economy and education, fearing that they would capture most means of control. 
7. 3.3 Church planting: co-operation with the state25 
There has always been a close relationship between religion and power in Rwanda. Pre-
Christian Rwanda knew kings courts, with sophisticated religious rules administered by 
specialists known as abiru: guardians of the esoteric royal code (Linden 1977; Overdulve 
1997; Gatwa 2001). Church-state ties were not a pattern that was innovated by colonial or 
independent Rwanda.  
Rwanda has a long cultural history of monotheist religiosity that eased the diffusion of 
Christianity. Missionaries adopted some terminology deep-rooted in the culture and the 
traditional religion, for example, Imana (God), igitambo (sacrifice) etc. Describing the 
transfer of the culture, Isichei (1995, 246) states, the twentieth-century history of Rwanda 
is a fascinating case study of the changing relationship between Christianity and African 
socio-political structures. The Tutsi formed an aristocratic pastoral caste, and created an 
elaborate oral literature.  
The first Western missionaries to come to Rwanda were the French Roman Catholic White 
Fathers (1900). They were first in Uganda, but did not work well with the Ugandan king. 
They also found it difficult to comply with the British colonial rule that favoured the 
Anglican Evangelicals of the CMS (Church Missionary Society). They decided to go 
southward to Rwanda, where they adopted another approach to win over the power holders 
before Protestants and Muslims arrived (vant Spijker 1990; Twagirayesu & van Butselaar 
1982). Their new strategies were to work with indigenous chiefs and the German and later 
Belgian colonial rulers.  
  25 In this thesis, church-state relations mainly imply varied deals between church leaders, mainly Roman 
Catholics, and government representatives. 
In Rwanda, the first converts of Roman Catholics were from the Hutu ethnic group. The 
Tutsi initially stayed away from missionaries (Linden 1999). Two of the first indigenous 
priests (D. Reberaho and B. Gafuku from the Hutu group) were ordained on 7th October 
1917 at Kabgayi. Their missionaries had no special rights in Rwanda during the German 
colonial rule, unlike the Belgian missionaries (after 1918) who were even assisted initially 
by their King (Twagirayesu & van Butselaar 1982).  
German Lutherans of the Bethel Mission of Von Bodelschwingh (actually known as the 
Evangelical Mission of Wuppertal [VEM]) arrived and established the first Protestant 
Church in Rwanda in 1907. The German missionaries left during World War I because of 
war. Soon after the war, several missionary organisations entered the country (van 
Butselaar 2002; Twagirayesu & van Butselaar 1982). Seventh Day Adventists and 
Anglicans arrived, followed by Baptists and Free Methodists; Pentecostals came later. The 
number of Protestant followers was small for a long time. In Anglican circles, however, the 
1930s witnessed a revival movement that had a big impact on the whole of East Africa. 
The Movement was not met with much understanding in the churches and scholars have 
found it difficult to understand it, because it did not build on critical theology, but on 
personal experience with God (van Butselaar 2002; Bowen 1996; Guillebaud 2002).  
A shift in relationship between the church and Mwami came when the missionary activities 
drew the attention of the populace. Linden (1999) and Ischei (1995, 247) assert that the 
Tutsi came to realise that Christianity and Western education were alternative sources of 
prestige and authority. Tutsi, even Musinga, the Mwami who had rejected Christianity, 
then attended classes in literacy. A mass of Tutsi entered the church in the 1930s and early 
1940s. To highlight the closeness between the Roman Catholic Church and the secular 
traditional leadership, the Roman Catholic Church consecrated Rwanda to Christ the King 
(van Butselaar 2000). 
Nonetheless, the White Fathers attitudes to the Rwandan political hierarchy were 
ambivalent; they were aware of the injustice that characterised Tutsi-Hutu relations, but 
they hoped for great things from the conversion of the rulers (Ischei 1997). Relationships 
between Catholics and Protestants in Rwanda were not good (Twagirayesu & van 
Butselaar 1982). As a reaction to their experience in Uganda, the Roman Catholics worked 
hard to block the chance of other faiths having a voice in Rwanda. The co-operation 
between the Roman Catholic Church and the state in Rwanda was evident throughout the 
last century.  
It is self-evident that colonisation, Christian missionaries and church-state relations 
crystallised the ethnic divisions in politico-economic and educational terms. However, for 
adequate understanding to emerge, the recent crisis in Rwanda requires deeper analysis 
than simply referring to the local churches. Moreover, it is difficult to isolate Rwanda from 
its neighbouring countries, mainly Burundi, in their historical and contextual perspectives, 
given their common features: language, ethnic mix, and colonial history, church planting 
and subsequent antagonistic regimes. Sundkler & Steed (2000) have suggested: 
Independent Burundi had in the 1970s a population of some 3.5 million of whom 85 per cent 
were Hutu and the rest Tutsi  In the phenomenal growth of the Catholic Church, particularly 
from 1935, and on the Protestant side, too, there was rapid growth of Pentecostals. In the first 
years after independence, Burundi was the scene of clashes and collisions with Prime Ministers 
appointed and assassinated until King Ntare V placed Micombero, a Tutsi, as Prime Minister 
[in 1965]. No sooner had Micombero taken office than he dethroned the king and proclaimed a 
republic with himself as president. The ever-repressed Hutu took chance of violent reaction and 
some Tutsi were killed. A bloody Tutsi revenge followed in which 131 Hutu parliamentarians 
were executed. This was only a dress rehearsal for an intense drama in 1972 with shocking 
violence. A cruel genocide was the result, in which at least 120,000 Hutu were killed, 
including a whole generation of educated Hutu. The Catholic Church, by what it did and by 
what it did not at the time, was deeply involved in this terrible drama  just as Rwandan Tutsi 
had fled east, into Tanzania, so Burundian Hutu now took the same direction and tens of 
thousands of them found a refuge within the Tanzanian borders (968-969).26 
  26 The phrase the Church was involved in this drama, either implies that leadership of national 
congregations or members did not do what they ought to do with regard to the protection of refugees or 
prevention of killing. It does not imply that the church leaders or all church members shot or killed others. 
In the last century, Rwanda and Burundi were marked by similarities in both church and 
state, and acquired independence on the same date in 1962. From the 1960s to 1994, 
however, Rwanda had a Hutu-led government, while Burundi had a Tutsi-led government. 
That reversed situation widened the gap between the two governments. Sundkler & Steed 
(2000, 969) assert that the origin of Roman Catholic policy in Burundi and Rwanda was a 
result of the policy of Vatican II (1962-1965), transforming the local churches on the hills 
into basic communities, which was felt by government as competing with its own 
restricting policy and made it nervous.  
When new political parties emerged in Rwanda, only the UNAR was pro-Tutsi; other 
parties were mostly pro-Hutu. The Bishop Bigirumwami (a Tutsi Roman Catholic) was an 
active member of UNAR; his daring to stand face to face with the emerging political 
changes proved the strength of the Catholic Church in Rwanda. Sundkler (2000) contended 
that for historical and other reasons, the Anglican CMS veered towards a pro-Tutsi 
position. Other Protestants, together with Jehovahs Witnesses, often caused problems for 
the political administration. Fervent members of the Jehovahs Witnesses and abalokole 
(saved ones) were jailed and their gatherings forbidden between the late 1970s and early 
1980s, because they contested umuganda and animation. In the mid-1980s, the churches 
top leaders were mostly Hutu, following government influence. To survive political 
pressure, the Protestant Church leadership joined the queue behind the Habyarimana 
government, seeking favour and comfort from him. The Roman Catholic Church, however, 
caused inter-denominational rivalries in its seeking to monopolise positions in government 
institutions and to be closest to the state.27 
  27 Given that most church leaders subscribed to the Habyarimana policy, there was no voice from the 
churches critically reflecting on umuganda and animation. Since even the daring clergy were obedient to the 
regime, they did not question the state with regard to ethnic controversies and subsequent practices.  
While Bishop Bigirumwami did not hide his politico-ethnic militancy in allowing 
recruitment to the seminaries to favour young Tutsi, another Bishop, Andr Perraudin (a 
Swiss national) switched allegiance and favoured the Hutu (Sundkler & Steed 2000) in 
Rwanda. By then the Roman Catholic clergy was mostly Tutsi and increasingly opposed 
the ecclesiastical regime installed by the White Fathers. Then, things changed radically in 
favour of the Hutu group during the Independence era. Towards 1980, most representatives 
of churches were Hutu, including the Archbishop V. Nsengiyunva (Catholic), who was a 
member of the central committee of the MRND (the unique political party). The church 
increasingly influenced the government; the spirit that guided the government policy of 
appointing Hutu to high positions in the civil administration also applied to church 
hierarchy.  
The government was pro-Catholic while it intimidated Protestants. For example, when the 
state misappropriated a prestigious Presbyterian College in Kigali, the church was unable 
to repossess it. Conversely, the Catholic Church could oppose the government, such as 
when the latter attempted to enforce the administration of artificial contraception in church 
hospitals in the 1980s in order to control the birth rate, despite the fact that this violated the 
Roman Catholic position (Longman 1998).  
Generally, political decisions took place after consultation with the church hierarchy. 
However, there was indifference amongst the middle clergy, in which the Tutsi still had 
influence: a sister in charge of a parish said, the position of the church is clear. We do not 
intervene in political affairs (Longman 1985). In general, churches and states co-operated 
in extending control over the population (Longman 1998). That climate did not help the 
churches to discuss openly the problem of the Tutsi refugees (how they could return 
home), and the government did not want this to happen. Therefore, the Tutsi attempt to 
break the silence through armed invasion from Uganda in 1990 ended in genocide, partly 
because church leaders feared to oppose the power of the state. Conversely, some clergy 
acted in full complicity with the state positioning (Ndahiro in Rittner et al. 2004). 
Chrtien (1985) asserted that Hutu generally saw the return of the Tutsi refugees as a 
coming back to rule over the Hutu with ubuhake, a version of Apartheid. In the research 
interviews, the painful memories of ubuhake and fear were obvious in each Hutus words; 
a former minister in Habyarimanas government (15 October 2000) suggested that the 
Tutsi intended to come back by force in order to rule with their old oppressive and 
exclusive system. He told me, I fear that you will trust them and added that foreign 
influence always backs them while demonising the Hutu.  
The churches hardly distanced themselves from the states pretence to defend the 
population, even when the situation required them to speak against injustice, strive for 
mediation or back positive policy amendments. Churches have never spoken out across the 
geo-political divisions, ethnic exclusion or economic injustice that worsened in the 1990s; 
yet, they were not courageous enough to condemn the genocide (Ndahiro in Rittner et al. 
2004). At a press conference in Nairobi in 1994, a Rwandan Anglican Archbishop and his 
colleagues refused to denounce the Hutu Abatabazi government (Human Rights 1995; Des 
Forges 1999). Alas, most media and church partners attributed this attitude to all Hutu 
clergy. Yet, Sibomana (1999) suggested that for the RPF, some people such as him were 
and continue to be suspects of genocide.  
In post-genocide Rwanda, the churches and the state have made no difference in terms of 
their relations. The church leaders either became an instrument of the government (Tutsi 
supporters of the RPF) or were prosecuted and jailed as suspects of genocide (or supporters 
of Hutu regime). To explain the situation further, Longman (1995) stated that the dancers 
have changed, but the drums are the same. This means that shifts occurred only within 
changing individual leaders from Hutu to Tutsi supremacy, while the policies and practices 
remain the same. The stakeholders in Rwanda have as yet experienced nothing different 
from the old practices and perspectives (Longman 1995; Theunis 1995; Sibomana 1999). 
In spite of the rise of membership figures, the assimilation of new influences or 
sophisticated mechanics of power struggle between factions and interests in the church in 
Rwanda, Evans (1999) claims that these are not necessarily valuable signs. Yet, as the 
church was involved in the crisis, it ought also to have played a major role for positive 
change. Regrettably, this has not happened. Apparently, Protestants rather enjoy a little 
calm in exchange for the increased pain of the Catholics.28  
Longman (1995) sums up the argument above, suggesting that Rwandas churches have 
been contested territory, within which various political alliances have competed for 
support. In serving the interests of the powerful and undermining their power, the churches 
appear Janus-faced.  
7. 4 Genocide climax, regional and international responses 
Western control introduced a new economic system involving money, a political system 
implying parties, and abolished the ubuhake in Rwanda (Overdulve 1997). Despite the 
political shift, since the eve of the Republic (January 1961) and Independence (July 1962), 
the Tutsi remained powerful and wealthy, but they were not yet the enemy of the Hutu. 
The Tutsi and Hutu had always lived together in the village communities, as they share the 
same clans, culture and language. However, memories of ubuhake re-emerge, troubling all 
  28 After reading the Report of the World Alliance of Reformed Churches (WARC) delegations visit to 
Rwanda, 18-25 January 1999, Hope Against Hope, one was shocked by the delegates assessment of the 
situation. K Maxey urged the church to be keen in their evaluation and not to admire Protestants efforts in 
Rwanda and their co-operation with the government initiatives at the expense of the Roman Catholics. He 
warned that this might pave the way for a situation similar to Northern Ireland to arise. He stated, of some 
importance is what I feel is a bit of an anti-Roman Catholic bias (Letter to the URC Secretary for 
International Relations, 9 September 2000). 
ethnic relationships and other domains. So, in the 1990s, political discourses in Rwanda 
evoked the ethnic distinctions and the abuses committed by the Tutsi leadership in the past. 
Before the Rwandan independence, extension of the wealth/class hierarchy was based on 
visible cattle wealth. The Hutu intelligentsia felt an acute syndrome of deprivation and 
exclusion from power and resources in the post-world war era. In the independence era, the 
situation turned against Tutsi. Later some Hutu  mainly Akazu  polarised with their Hutu 
brethren, as the situation was against the Tutsi when the latter held power.  
Van der Meeren (1996) agrees with Overdulve (1997) that the traditional justification for 
Tutsi power holding was in their ethnic superiority, with all the arrogance of those who 
believed themselves to be natural rulers. In the 1990s, the Hutu remembered that to achieve 
power before independence, they needed support from the colonial authority and the 
mobilisation of the Hutu in order to assert their majority rights for their own ethnic 
representation, as opposed to supporting the traditional Tutsi chiefs. The time was, 
however, too short for this social revolution (1959) to allow a smooth transition, given 
the lack of political awareness and education among the Hutu peasantry. Van der Meeren 
(1996) has asserted that Hutu support could only be gained through rebellion, ending in the 
elections to defeat the Tutsi. Similar processes seemed to occur in the 1990s when the 
Tutsi threat re-emerged.  
The Hutu leaders turned down the Tutsi justification for privilege. Then a Hutu myth 
emerged considering Tutsi to be illegitimate alien invaders who had tricked the Hutu by 
taking their land and political autonomy in exchange for cows (Mugesera speech, 22 
November 1992 cited by Prunier 1995). Even so, the Hutu did not invent this perception. It 
is a version of the Western interpretation of Rwandas history that the Rwandans 
reproduced (Prunier 1995; Overdulve 1997; Taylor 1999). Conversely, the Tutsi myth of 
supremacy was deep-rooted in Rwandas traditional culture. Colonial rule, missionary 
practices, colonial sciences and the change of regimes only solidified the belief that already 
existed among the Rwandans (West 1999). As the armed Tutsi threat mounted in the 
1990s, the rise of Hutu ideology portrayed the Tutsi as the enemy of the republic. Also, 
in an attempt to avoid the experience of the past, the Hutu leadership contested the call for 
liberation and new democratisation by the RPF because the latter was associated with 
ubuhake and ensuing abuses.  
However, the Tutsi refugees context did not allow them to see themselves as a privileged 
aristocracy overthrown through democratic means (elections); they only felt victims of the 
colonial switch in favour of Hutu (van der Meeren 1996). Moderate educated Tutsi who 
wanted democratic reforms tolerated the emancipation of the Hutu and stayed on in 
Rwanda. The early Tutsi raids were ineffective at conquering the country but rather 
hardened anti-Tutsi sentiment inside Rwanda and provoked the Hutu to reify the 
mythology that viewed the Hutu as the only indigenous people (cf. Mugesera 1992). Van 
der Meerens argument is credible, but it does not substantiate the Hutu myth. The thesis 
notes that subsequent ideology rather aimed to help the Hutu to gain popular support 
against their natural rivals (Tutsi). The ideology was a political strategy innovated by 
intellectuals, such as Mugesera, aiming to unite all Hutu in opposition against the RPF. 
The fact that the Belgians went away (1960s) and the French entered Rwanda (1970s) 
covered not only the scars of the impunity led by the Tutsi but also early atrocities 
committed by the Hutu associated with the Revolution. Rwandas people viewed the 
change (1959) as patriotism, further underpinning the Revolution in a country that was 
ruled by the developmentalist spirit on which the co-operation between the Rwandans 
and the French was built (Braeckman in Bray et al. 1997). Military and politico-economic 
co-operation between France and Rwanda increased in the wake of the RPA invasion in 
1990. 
Actually, among the direct causes that fuelled the genocide was the use of force to return 
the Tutsi refugees and the building up of the ethnic-based armies  RPA and FAR  also 
counting militia. Moreover, the suppression of memories of ubuhake (Brubaker 1995) and 
new abuses committed by the Tutsi were the most provocative to the Hutu. For every Hutu, 
the victories of the RPA signified the resurgence of ubuhake and Tutsi monarchy 
(interview, 15 October 2000). In fact, the RPA invaded the country (in October 1990) in an 
attempt to seize power and impose the return of the Tutsi refugees; but at the same time, 
the RPF launched a campaign in the country to raise the population against the Hutu-led 
regime. That incitement created generalised civil war in Rwanda and bitterness against any 
support for the invasion. Also, the population, being largely Hutu, was terrified as the news 
spread of the military superiority of the RPA in battle (van der Meeren 1996) and its killing 
of Hutu civilians who got in its way (Sibomana 1999).  
During that war, the RPF was also lobbying internationally among NGOs and western 
countries to help pressurise the Rwandan state to open up a multiparty system. The system 
unified the RPF and the internal opposition (Bertrand 2000), but isolated the unique party 
(MRND) and aimed to allow the opposition, especially the RPF, to take part in the 
government. The internal factors also included corruption, economic and political 
exclusion of Tutsi and Banyenduga. Evident injustice prepared the minds of the people to 
value imminent change (Sibomana 1997). Moreover, the use of austerity (umukanda) as an 
alternative to the structural adjustment requested by the IMF and World Bank, and the fall 
of the world coffee price, added to the external pressure (Bertrand 2000) and the regional 
tensions with a hidden agenda to get rid of Habyarimana. 
The killing of Ndadaye  the Hutu President of Burundi,  in 1993 by the Tutsi army 
heightened the ethnic tensions in Rwanda. The assassination of Habyarimana on 6 April 
1994 added to and triggered intensive massacres (Prunier 1995; Sibomana 1999; Barnett 
2002). However, the causes of the genocide targeting the Tutsi also related more to 
lobbying by the RPF, which gained external support at the expense of the Hutu and 
paralysed Habyarimana (Bertrand 2000) and later the Abatabazi government. 
Rwandan refugees, mainly young Tutsi students, joined the RPFs army in Uganda in the 
early 1990s, from Burundi, Tanzania, Zaire and Rwanda (Sibomana 1997; Kagame quoted 
in Dallaire 2004, 154). The killings in 1993 in Burundi (Prunier 1995), subsequent cross-
border movements of the Tutsi joining the RPA and Hutu Burundians fleeing to Rwanda 
increased hatred against the Tutsi in Rwanda. The hatred also increased because the Tutsi 
articulated and acted in support of the RPA. The general opinion of the Rwandan people 
was that Burundis Tutsi army supported the RPA. In this situation, the French 
Government supported Rwanda militarily, combating further external aggression from 
Uganda (Braeckman 1997). Conversely, Rwanda suspected the Belgian Government of 
supporting the RPA (Dallaire 2004). The responses to research interviews were in line with 
Braeckmans view (1997) that Belgian policies vis--vis Rwanda were dubious. Because of 
that, mistrust grew on both sides: Belgium and Rwanda. On one hand, Braeckman (1997) 
suggests that during the 1980s, the French Government supported Rwanda, which it 
viewed as progressive and stable compared to other African regimes, but ignored the 
unpunished carnage on which the regime was based. On the other hand, Boisbouvier 
asserts that initially, France adopted a strategy of military support and sided with the Hutu, 
encouraging a democratic transition which would allow the Habyarimana regime 
simultaneously to combat the RPF by ballot, and to gain a new democratic legitimacy 
(1997, 37). 
The international community did not show any concerted intention to stop the war and the 
genocide. Even proposals that emerged were handicapped at the last moment, partly by the 
US and Britain, which opposed the attempt from the Security Council to send 
peacekeeping forces to Rwanda (Klinghoffer 1998; Melvern 2000; Jones 2001). Likewise, 
the RPF sent a delegation comprising of C. Dusaidi and C. Muligande to Washington to 
stop the UN military intervention (Mugabe 2000). Mugabe revealed that:  
The reason behind avoiding that military intervention was to allow the RPF leadership the 
takeover of the Kigali Government and to show the world that they  the RPF  were the ones 
who stopped the genocide. Since the events of 1994, the lack of resolve by State to stop 
organised killings remained evident (Mugabe 2000, 19).  
The genocide could have been avoided had there been a single preventive action (Taylor 
1999; Melvern 2000). As for the overall situation, interview respondents (2000 & 2001) 
asserted that had Britain and the US urged the RPF regime to strive for indiscriminate 
justice and the security of all citizens, power sharing and eventual reconciliation, these 
could have become a reality in a matter of days. Similarly, France could have effectively 
advised the Hutu-led government it supported to work constructively for fair resolutions. 
While official sources did not demystify the death of Habyarimana, Braeckmans 
exploration on the issue concluded that whoever was responsible for the assassination must 
also bear the responsibility for triggering the genocide (Braeckman 1997, 32).29 
Boisbouvier (1997), Prunier (1995), Taylor (1999) and Barnett (2002) observed that after 
the assassination of Habyarimana and the start of the genocide, the French were blamed for 
being involved in the whole situation. Boisbouvier (1997) stated that the role of France in 
Rwanda was a polemical topic mostly in the Anglophone press, which pointed to Frances 
responsibility for the genocide. He substantiated, however, that the French motivation to 
intervene in Rwanda was to maintain its influence and hold together its old colonies and 
other Francophone countries. 
  29 Later sources counted former RPA soldiers who witnessed and affirmed their participation in downing the 
plane that carried Habyarimana (Edwards, National Post Canada in African News Bulletin [ANB] 386, 15th 
March 2000, 4-5).  
On the one hand, Western countries and the UN, as well as neighbouring countries and the 
OAU (Organisation of African Unity) were fully aware of the attempts to find a solution to 
Rwandas crisis. President Hassan Mwenyi of Tanzania facilitated the mediations between 
the RPF and the Habyarimana regime. Tanzania hosted the mediations, which resulted in 
the Arusha Accords (Melvern 2001; Vandeginste 1998a). On the other hand, many 
countries played a significant role in Rwandas crisis, taking sides with either the RPF or 
the Habyarimana regime. This created suspicions: for instance, the attitude of Belgium led 
most Rwandans to believe that Belgian troops were conspiring with the RPF and the 
opposition against the Habyarimana regime (Taylor 1999; Dallaire 2004, 240). It is also 
true that even France failed to take timely action, and based its politics on individual 
rapport between Mitterrand and Habyarimana rather than taking a clear line embracing 
both the leaders and their respective civil societies. Since international influence, the Hutu-
led and Tutsi-led leaderships played a part in the carnage in Rwanda; all three should take 
a share of the liability regarding the genocide and consequent settlement. 
Schreiter (2002, 106-107) doubted whether the central point in reconciliation related only 
to the slaughter that took place after the death of President Habyarimana (April 6, 1994), or 
whether the process should not look at the inequities between Hutus and Tutsis even under 
Belgian colonial rule. He also held doubts as to whether there could be a consensus on 
where to begin: whether reconciliation was the best way. He asked whether there was an 
alternative form of adjudication and what would happen to society if some form of 
reconciliation did not take place. Tutu (1999) answer would be that the cycle of atrocities 
would not stop. Top dogs would commit vengeance while under-dogs sought power and 
revenge: something should be done to rectify the situation. 
Consistent with the international dimension of the Rwandan crisis are the various 
tendencies among analysts to reproduce the image that the international media generated 
about the country during the genocide. Sometimes, journalists and analysts amplified the 
reality, twisted it or simply put across the uncritical or damaging positions taken by their 
respective governments. At other times, the media and analysts overstated the little they 
had heard from Rwandas elite, be it the Tutsi version or the Hutu version, neither of which 
represented the reality (Sibomana 1997). Thus, many analyses failed to fill the gap 
critically and impartially. For example, they ignored the existence of broadcasting by the 
RPF on Radio Muhabura, which, like RTLM, promoted ethnic hatred. Even specific 
literature on this subject, such as Rwanda: Les Mdias du Gnocide (Chrtien et al. 1995) 
and Broadcasting Genocide (by ICAS 1996), and UN reports do not adequately reveal the 
influence of Muhabura. Lemarchand (in Bray 1997) and Vansina (1998) suggested that the 
literature on Rwanda has also hindered the cause of truth and objectivity. The failure to 
debate such elements critically and objectively and to balance sources is one example 
among many of the way in which analysts missed the truth and misled other people. This 
attitude narrows or even suppresses the Rwandans memory. It signals injustice in dealing 
with the situation.  
Boisbouvier (1997, 44) states further that there has been no true willingness to resolve 
Rwandas problem. The literature has often been misleading, as have some media and 
NGOs. Concerning the NGOs, Klinghoffer (1998) and Jones (2001) seem to agree with 
Pottier (2002) that UNHCR in particular accepted uncritically the request from the RPF to 
convince the refugees to return home. The NGOs then worked hard through reports, 
broadcasting and addresses to the Rwandans, while overlooking the security conditions in 
Rwanda. Vassall-Adams (in Bray et al. 1997) adds that the international community has 
not even manifested a desire for human rights in Rwanda and does not assume its 
responsibility in assisting Rwandas recovery.  
In short, Rwandas conflict arose from the pre-colonial ubuhake and the myth of 
superiority. The conflict persisted because the colonial administration reinforced the 
ubuhake, added uburetwa and agahato and imposed leadership from one ethnic group over 
the others. Missionaries and churches were active in a way that increased ethnic conflict, 
through exclusive education, realizing ethnic policies and appointments to politico-
administrative posts and through regime change. The literature, international positioning 
and media also contributed negatively to the conflict. 
The armed invasion of Tutsi refugees revitalised old ethnic hatred and provoked further 
crisis. The genocide, however, was the final solution of a strategy used by close 
supporters of President Habyarimana to preserve their power by appealing to ethnic 
arguments (Longman 1997). The killing of Habyarimana added to the fear that an 
implementation of the Arusha Accords could jeopardise the interest of the Hutu regime 
and provided an alibi triggering the genocide. The conflict persisted, however, because of 
shrewd regional and international alliances, but also because of the pressure on Rwanda to 
democratise its institutions. In addition to partial mediations embodied in Arusha 
Accords, the conflict persisted further because of other measures, including the one-sided 
arms embargo and the obstruction of peaceful initiatives and dialogue. The Hutu regime is 
held responsible for the 1994 genocide, while the Tutsi regime is liable for the atrocities 
committed by the RPA and for the abuses committed under its leadership. However, the 
Rwandan situation has not been fairly, sufficiently examined in depth to be fully 
understood and to curtail deception and serve as a basis for finding the right way ahead.
Chapter 8 
Mediation and Reconciliation: Challenges to the Church 
8.1 Challenges to the churches in Rwanda (1990s) 
This chapter investigates the challenges posed by the search for peace in Rwanda. Firstly, 
it examines whether there were attempts to mediate between belligerent parties before mid-
1994 and the contribution of the churches to this endeavour. Secondly, it explores further 
peace-building initiatives, the prospect for reconciliation and mechanisms envisaged after 
the genocide. It attempts to answer the following questions: 
 Were there any attempts to mediate between belligerent parties in Rwanda before April 
1994 and to prevent the genocide? What has been the contribution of churches in the 
endeavour to settle the conflict and to prevent the genocide?  
 What are the prospects for reconciliation in post-genocide Rwanda? Are there any 
pragmatic actions for reconciliation in which the churches are involved?  
 Are Christians working in unison in facing the Rwandan crisis? Are Christians and 
non-Christians co-operating in this task? 
In this context, reconciliation encompasses two other concepts: the prevention of conflict 
and mediation in conflict. Contradictory accounts have emerged vis--vis the endeavours 
of the churches in relation to the genocide. On one hand, the former church hierarchy 
claims that they invested a lot of effort to help the warring factions come to an agreement 
(Mulunda 1997; RLD/WCC 1999; Butselaar 2002). On the other hand, the church 
leadership in post-genocide Rwanda accuses its predecessors of doing nothing effective to 
prevent the genocide (Schonecke 1994; Djereke 1995; WCC 1998; Gatwa 2001).  
Early in the 1990s, there were combined efforts in a search for peace at different levels, but 
there were also certain weaknesses. Various political and ecclesiastical, national, regional 
and multinational initiatives attempted to end the Rwandan war before the genocide. 
Similarly, a number of initiatives were taken to limit the damage of the genocide after 1994 
(AACC 1997; WCC/RLD 1999; Butselaar 2002).  
Many researchers assert that the Rwandan state and the church encouraged the practices of 
exclusion and division emanating from the policies of foreign Christian missions and 
colonial rule (Linden 1999; Gatwa 2001). The quarrels were about the means of control. 
Schonecke (1994) and Djereke (1995) argued that the conflict in the 1990s was primarily 
about power: a will to maintain or regain power so all-consuming as to justify any evil. 
President General Paul Kagame criticizes the fact that the affairs of the church had 
sometimes been confused with the affairs of the state.  
LEglise est l, nous vivons avec elle, quon laime ou quon ne laime pas... Il y a eu des 
problmes rsultant du fait que les affaires de lEtat se confondaient parfois avec celles de 
lEglise. Il est trs important de bien les sparer. LEtat et lEglise ont leur rle respectif  
jouer pour le dveloppement du pays, mais il ne faut pas mlanger les genres. [The church is 
there, we live with it, whether we like it or not There have been problems resulting from the 
fact that the affairs of the state were often confused with those of the church. It is very 
important to separate them. The state and the church have their respective roles to play for the 
development of the country, but one should not mix these categories] (Jeune 
Afrique/Lintelligent, August 2000, 29-30). 
After the genocide, the church and the state in Rwanda blamed each other for the situation. 
The dispute further confuses each ones vision and responsibility in relation to the historic 
conflicts, the genocide and its aftermath. 
Chapter 7 has demonstrated that before the genocide, the RPF sought to solve the refugee 
crisis by means of war. The majority of respondents interviewed argued that heavy support 
provided to one of the warring parties  the RPF  by foreign countries and Christian 
bodies endangered any prospects for peace. This support blocked peace talks and led to the 
genocide of the Tutsi and the exodus of the Hutu. Some informants suggested that a second 
genocide occurred against the Hutu when the RPF launched a campaign to dismantle the 
refugee camps in eastern Zaire. These events also led to human rights abuses being 
perpetuated inside and outside Rwanda, as well as injustice regarding property rights and 
the rights of prisoners (Sibomana 1999; Pottier 2002).  
The churches initiated peace talks and mediation between the belligerents before the 
genocide. After the genocide, the churches led reconstruction programmes. However, 
interviews revealed that effective reconciliation and peaceful coexistence among the 
Rwandan groups were far from being a reality. Many respondents (42 percent) doubted 
even the possibility of achieving reconciliation by applying the South African TRC 
process. Twelve percent of informants suggested the land alternative: strict spatial 
separation of Hutu and Tutsi groups. More people supported the idea of land with 
freedom for those willing to enjoy coexistence, as with the Belgian model: Walloons and 
Flemish have different governance but under a federal government. The system appealed 
to many exiled Rwandans. A number of respondents (31 percent) who believed that the 
Tutsi-led government was not keen on reconciliation also preferred the Belgian model.  
The majority of respondents manifested a strong pessimism towards the prospect of 
reconciliation. Those who were living outside Rwanda, mostly Hutu, alleged that, like the 
former Hutu-led regime, the post-genocide Tutsi-led regime does not welcome the 
participation of all the potential groups. They suggested that the former military and 
politicians of the defeated regime are not given a chance to participate in the 
reconstruction/reconciliation. No less than 77 percent of respondents (to the interviews & 
questionnaire) asserted that involving the former leaders of the Hutu-led regime could be 
an effective way towards reconciliation.  
Since the genocide, the Tutsis appear to perceive all Hutu as Interahamwe (militia), 
imposing guilt on all former military and politicians of the Hutu regime. Most respondents 
suggested that the best approach to a long-term solution would involve Hutu, Tutsi and 
Twa together, because victims of the genocide are found in all three groups (interviews, 
2000); members of the former leadership should also not be ignored. Concerning the 
militia, former army and politicians who may be guilty of crimes against humanity, Khan 
(2000) suggests that processes of justice should filter out who would or would not be 
answerable. The field research results agree with Sibomanas (1999) views that up to the 
late 1990s (even up to 2003), these processes did not permit the participation of all 
Rwandans and people were not free to tell the truth. This helped to mask the possible 
injustice perpetrated against those labelled Interahamwe, or prisoners, the majority of 
whom might be innocent (video-recorded speech, Sibomana 1997; Sibomana 1999).1 
Another and perhaps more acute problem is the accusation against the attitude of the 
churches. The accusation originated from non-Christian positions, mainly human rights 
organisations. A London-based organisation (African Rights) produced a report proposing 
  1 Soon after the genocide, A. Sibomana, former Director of Kinyamateka (the RCCR magazine), became 
Bishop of the Kabgayi Diocese. 
the prosecution of former Rwandan church leaders. The document appealed to action for 
fairness within the churches; it was presented to the WCC Assembly in Harare (December 
1998). Foreign Christian organisations and international political sensitivities also accused 
the churches. Leaders of missionary societies such as Bowen (1996) former Secretary 
General of Mid Africa Ministry, McCullum (1995) and many theologians also accused the 
Rwandan church of inactivity against the 1994 genocide. 
Accusations also mounted within the churches in Rwanda: Christians against their fellow 
Christians, and churches against other churches or their leadership (Theunis 1995). This 
has created a strong force against internal coexistence and social cohesion. The discord 
constitutes a force and a channel for intimidation (Sibomana 1999), which aims to silence 
the local church. Roman Catholic clergy, mainly Hutu, have to keep a low profile for their 
own safety or in the interest of others. In order to survive, anybody who was associated 
with the Hutu regime or political activism in the past prefers now to be an instrument of 
the new state, with no critical views. Otherwise, their rights are endangered (interview 
report, August 2000). 
Although there are alternative ways to settle the situation in Rwanda, only a fair, consistent 
and all-inclusive dialogue can establish a foundation for lasting peace (Khan 2000). On 
these principles, the Rwandans might gradually reach effective coexistence through the 
reconciliation processes. This is where one expects the churches to play the major role in 
present-day Rwanda. However, most previous researchers have asserted that before and 
during the 1994 genocide, the churches acted too late and offered very little (Gatwa 2001), 
or nothing. Others, like Spijker (1997) argued that the approach of the churches concerning 
the war was inappropriate, because it aimed to mediate between the belligerents rather than 
challenge the evils. Emeritus Archbishop of Canterbury, Carey (cited in African Rights 
1998) stated that the church missed the opportunity to be prophetic, to stop the genocide 
and give its testimony. 
Two issues provide the framework for this chapter: (1) mediation versus prevention before 
the genocide, and (2) context-based justice, which reclaims a liberal narrative and eventual 
reconciliation. Teitel (2000) defines the liberal narrative approach of justice as one that is 
appropriate to situations in order to allow the necessary transition (e.g., from dictatorship 
to a democratic regime). To foster such changes, justice might overlook actions such as 
riots and some crimes, which would be unacceptable in normal circumstances.  
8.2 Mediation: failure and the premise of reconciliation 
Processes of mediation were underway in Rwanda up to April 1994 but only boiled down 
to the hostilities that ended in the genocide. The silence about the death of the President 
and the will to investigate this matter, as well as the size of subsequent abuses and the 
genocide, increased suspicion among the Rwandan population, including both the political 
and religious leadership. After the end of the 1990-1994 war, acute conflict re-emerged 
from and within the churches in Rwanda, while aggressive individuals sought positions or 
revenge against those previous leaders who remained in the country. The RPF, the MRND 
and their respective allies, be they international bodies, church-related initiatives or NGOs, 
all become the subject of suspicion. The 1990s war, hunger for power and assets, and 
democratic claims left aggressive divisions in the Rwandan society. In order to attempt a 
reconciliation process, one key problem needs clarification: did the churches attempt to 
settle the war? What made the churches silent or inactive during this crisis?  
Butselaar (2000) has asserted that religious leaders in pre-Christian Rwanda had been 
important counsellors of chiefs, and the same pattern had developed more recently between 
the church and the state. The danger of such relations surfaced when new African leaders 
turned into dictators; church leaders found it difficult to dissociate themselves from their 
friends in politics. The Catholics maintained their vision of Rwanda as a Christian 
kingdom and their followers applauded the close relationship of the bishops with the 
President: this friendship was a continuation of the old social system. Butselaar (2000, 
331) asserted, however, that church leaders tried to redress difficult situations through 
confidential admonition. Yet, to the public eye, inside and outside, they were seen as 
uncritical. Referring to the genocide, Reyntjens (1996) suggested that because of intense 
media coverage, the world witnessed the events live and was shocked by the scope and 
cruelty of the violence, and had great difficulty in understanding it. This genocide became 
an alarm, calling the church to use her influence to tackle similar situations elsewhere.  
Reyntjens (1994, 166) suggested that the title: LEglise: Maitresse au Rwanda, Servante au 
Burundi [the Church: Master in Rwanda, Servant in Burundi] sums up the reality of the 
rapport between state and church as it was up to the early 1990s in Rwanda and Burundi. 
He stated that the alliances between the Roman Catholic Church and the Rwandan State 
are old and have great political significance. His argument agrees with most researchers, 
including Linden (1999) and Gatwa (2001), and in particular with the contention that the 
church is the father of the 1959 Rwandan revolution. Later, the church leaders assumed 
almost institutionalised roles (since the 1970s). The fact that the Rwandans understood 
democracy as the rule of the majority made it easy for the leaders of the churches to 
assume an institutionalised role in politics; since 62 percent of the population is Roman 
Catholic, the political leadership favoured the Roman Catholic Church in Rwanda 
(RCCR). 
In view of the above argument, most difficulties experienced in dealing with the conflict in 
Rwanda arose because churches allied themselves with and ascribed to a number of 
important state activities. As Reyntjens (1994) noted, the church is omnipresent in 
education, the press, printing services and economic activities in the form of the 
Economats gnraux (stores of the RCCR), which are centres of material production, 
distribution and employment. In the ideological domain also, few things would have led 
the Catholic Church to oppose the Rwandan regime, which it perceived as a Christian and 
political partner. The church had produced that very regime through her schools, such as 
Kabgayi, Nyakibanda, Nyundo, Zaza and particularly the Groupe Scolaire of Butare 
(Longman 1995 & 1998; Sundkler & Steed 2000). 
Reyntjens (1994) asserted that collaboration between the church and the state in Rwanda 
has great merit on the development level, which explains the causes of the uncritical 
attitude of the churches vis--vis the political crisis. In return for the contribution of the 
church to state building and development, the state offered positions and other favours to 
church people. In so doing, the government bound the prophetic challenge. In fact, some 
incidental criticism by the church towards the political machine hindered close 
relationships during the dual challenge of the war and democratisation. However, the ties 
between the church and the state could have provided an opportunity for the churches to 
voice a prophetic message and initiate effective mediation.  
Sibomana (1999) and Butselaar (2001) highlighted that the late Nsengiyunva, Catholic 
Archbishop of Kigali, had been a member of the MRND central committee and was a close 
friend of President Habyarimana. Butselaar asserted that the Rwandan population had seen 
the nomination of the Archbishop in the committee as a blessing. However, by the time the 
war started, the Archbishop had left the committee. Sibomana (1999, 122) added, most of 
the army, most of the judges, [government] ministers and prefects were Roman Catholics 
 the head of the church stood by the government, particularly the [former] bishops of 
Kigali and Byumba. Consequently, the church leaders failed to react rightly towards the 
role played by the government in the genocide. Sibomana (1999) deplored the fact that 
although most political leaders were Roman Catholic Christians on good terms with the 
clergy, the Rwandan society failed to prevent the catastrophe of 1994. He agreed with 
previous analysts (Reyntjens 1994; Longman 1995; Sundkler & Steed 2000; Gatwa 2001; 
Linden 1995) about the role played by the church in Rwanda, but his unique conclusion is 
that in the 1990s, there were signs of a grave breakdown in Rwandan society. 
In the wake of progress towards democratisation in the 1990s, the Rwandan Government 
persecuted two Catholic priests, S. Sindambiwe and A. Sibomana, successively Directors 
of Kinyamateka magazine, because they were articulate in challenging the abuse of the 
state. Then, due to the lack of internal freedom to bring to the debating table issues that 
involved ethnicity, the church hardly ever took a different position from the state. Most 
respondents to the research interviews clarified that Rwandans do not discuss ethnic-
related issues in the open. Additionally, the Rwandan clergy, being mostly Tutsi, did not 
match the demographic ethnic proportions in the country. Reyntjens (1994) asserted that as 
a result, the reversed demographic representation among the clergy perpetuated internal 
ethnic contradictions in the churches and reinforced the uncritical expression of the 
churches towards the regimes in Rwanda, even in times of gross crisis.  
It was very difficult to have a democratic compromise in the church in Rwanda, especially 
among the Roman Catholics. This was particularly the case if an issue to be discussed at 
the grassroots level or among the clergy involved ethnic dimensions. Likewise, there were 
no fair and democratic decisions on economic and political matters, since most economic 
and political positions benefited a tiny group of Bakiga. At both the lower and higher 
levels, the Hutu dominated churches, in terms of membership and the holding of office, 
while the middle rank clergy and elite theologians were Tutsi.  
The fact that the Tutsi were in the majority among the clergy in a Hutu dominated church 
caused difficult relations between church members and leaders. Bishops and the top 
representatives of the churches (mostly Hutu) defended the state rather than producing a 
prophetic message or linking the populace and the state. The top church leaders overlooked 
the middle clergy in relation to political issues. Bishops enjoyed direct dialogue with the 
top politicians but rarely met with those at the grassroots level. Magnarella (2000, 27) 
asserted, the reasons why political slaughter could be organised along fairly systematic 
lines was the existence of a culture of obedience. He agrees with West (2000) and 
Longman (1995) that when the example comes from above, the Rwandan populace 
respects it. However, research has also showed that most peasantry killed Tutsi who they 
believed to be accomplices of the RPA, because of fear that increasing support for the RPA 
was leading to the elimination of most Hutu. Extremist Hutu thought that the only way to 
stop the RPA from advancing and killing them was to eliminate its supporters. Thus, 
political leaders and their hired media adroitly promoted genocide with a message for self-
defence and a call for loyalty to the Habyarimana regime.  
8.3 Church contribution before the genocide  
There were talks between the church leadership and other organisations and governments 
concerning the Rwandan situation. National churches, jointly with regional initiatives, 
provided neutral ground for mediation between the RPF and MRND, but hard-liners in 
both organisations handicapped the proposals. An inquiry into the participation of the 
church in the mediation (or reconciliation) process ought to be considered under three 
categories: (1) wider ecumenical efforts, (2) initiatives of the Rwandan churches and (3) 
other specific groups.  
8. 3.1 Worldwide ecumenical efforts 
Joint efforts to initiate face-to-face dialogue between the RPF and the MRND were made 
inside and outside Rwanda before 1994. Christians invited other agencies to support the 
peace talks. The World Council of Churches (WCC 1999) states that from 1991, it had 
been participating in discussions. It informed the international community, the churches 
and the governments concerned about the signs of danger in Rwanda. The WCC and the 
All Africa Conference of Churches (AACC) engaged in efforts to bring conflicting parties 
together to resolve the differences through negotiation. 
On 10 January 1991, the Director of the Commission of the Churches on International 
Affairs (CCIA) wrote to the President of Rwanda about the arrest, torture and killing of 
civilians perpetrated by the Rwandan security forces. The message called for measures to 
correct inhuman conditions in prisons and to guarantee respect for human rights, as a 
means of restoration of peace and justice for all citizens (RLD 1999). In response to an 
appeal by the churches of Rwanda, a joint WCC-AACC consultation on Rwanda took 
place in Nairobi from 19 to 22 August 1991. It brought together church leaders (mainly 
Rwandans) and the representatives of governments and refugees in the region. In his 
address to the Consultation, the WCC General Secretary drew attention to the crisis and 
appealed to all parties to bring an end to violence and warfare (RLD 1999). 
On 21 October 1993, the Acting General Secretary of WCC wrote to the Secretary-General 
of the UN informing him of the Peace Accords in Rwanda, which had been concluded 
through the mediation of the churches. The AACC, the WCC and the World Alliance of 
Reformed Churches (WARC) supported the Rwandan churches in these discussions (RLD 
1999; Butselaar 2001 & 2002). The message urged international action in response to the 
coup dtat that had taken place the previous night in Burundi. RLD (1999, 2) states, these 
mediation efforts continued up to the time of genocide, but were cut short by the deaths in 
Kigali of the Presidents of Rwanda and Burundi when the plane in which they were was 
apparently shot down.  
After the killing of the other two Hutu Presidents on 7 April 1994, the WCC General 
Secretary issued an urgent appeal to the people of Burundi and Rwanda not to respond to 
the tragedy with renewed acts of terror and ethnic warfare. He further appealed to the 
international community not to abandon peoples long plagued by social and political 
chaos, misery and massive violence. He warned that the ethnic conflicts in Rwanda and 
Burundi threatened to spill over into the wider region, exacerbating tensions in 
neighbouring countries. The WCC General Secretary called on all nations and competent 
international organisations to redouble their efforts to assure order in these countries in the 
wake of this tragedy (RLD 1999; Butselaar 2001 & 2000).  
RLD (1999) suggests that two weeks later, on 18 April 1994, the WCC General Secretary 
condemned the widespread killings in Rwanda, recalling his own visit to Rwanda five 
months earlier. He stated that the suffering of the Rwandan people had gone beyond the 
limits of understanding and he called on the international community to assist in every 
possible way to bring about a cessation of hostilities, to find a peaceful solution to the 
conflict, and for humanitarian assistance. In May and June of 1994, the WCC sent similar 
messages to the Secretaries General of the OAU and UN. Later, the WCC conveyed 
similar messages to the Chairman of the RPF, to the French Foreign Affairs Minister Alain 
Jupp and to the new Rwandan President P. Bizimungu.  
Up to the second half of 1994, there was no reaction or clear stand from the international 
diplomatic or missionary organisations (RLD 1999). Like the diplomatic missions, other 
Western partners of the Rwandan churches  i.e., the Vatican, the Anglican Communion 
and Missionary Societies  had not clearly shown their support to the initiative for 
mediation. After 1994, the attitude of the partners of churches remained similar to the 
reaction of the international political bodies. Neither Christian Missions nor political 
organisations consulted with the ecumenical bodies, nor did they respond adequately, 
impartially and in time to intervene in Rwanda.  
8. 3.2 Initiatives of the Rwandan churches 
(a) Roman Catholic Church in Rwanda (RCCR) 
Reyntjens (1994), RLD (1999) and Spijker (1997) suggest that it was only after December 
1991 that churches in Rwanda openly debated the crisis. However,  
Even before the attack by the RPF, the Catholic Bishops [from Rwanda] had tried to create 
sensitivity to the dangers that were threatening the country. In a pastoral letter  Le Christ 
notre unit [The Christ our unity]  they had condemned ethnic conflict, regionalism, nepotism 
and other evils in the society (Butselaar 2001, 33 & 2002, 332).  
Many pastoral letters on these themes followed. Butselaar (2001 & 2002), however, 
observes that the messages of the Bishops failed to set the different groups on the road to 
peace because from the mid 1980s, the churches had lost all credibility in political matters. 
The moral crisis had been building up in the country. While the RCCR had been too close 
to the political regime, the Protestant churches kept very silent. Reyntjens (1994) and RLD 
(1999) assert that Catholics and Protestants in Rwanda reacted similarly for different 
reasons. 
Kinyamateka spoke out of reform (Longaman 1997). The document Convertissons-nous 
pour vivre ensemble en paix [Let us repent in order to coexist in peace] from the Kabgayi 
diocese underscored a unique local aspect of the RCCR initiative. The document was very 
critical of the political and ecclesiastical authorities; it summarised the conference that 
changed Rwandans attitudes towards the Tutsi refugees. The late Thadde Nsengiyunva, 
Bishop of Kabgayi, was instrumental in this shift of the church (Spijker 1997, 246).  
A month later, a pastoral letter from the bishops reflected the opinion of the Kabgayi 
document. The letter suggested that a national conference should debate the situation. At 
the same time, the Episcopal Conference (Catholic) and the Protestant Council of Churches 
in Rwanda attempted, with very little success, to gather political parties to unlock the 
stalemate that prevailed in 1992. Members of the churches  even non-Rwandans  were 
not unanimous over the vision. Reyntjens (1994, 167) establishes the cause of the delay: 
Pourtant, mme face au double dfi de la guerre et de la dmocratisation, elle (lEglise) a 
du mal  prendre clairement position, hsitation qui reflte sans doute ses contradictions 
internes, ethniques notamment [However, even in the face of the double challenge of the 
war and the democratisation, the church finds it difficult to take a clear stand, the 
reluctance indeed reflects the internal contradictions in the church, notably ethnic-based 
ones]. 
Some Western Christians, supporters of the democratisation process, had difficulties 
in accepting a shift in the direction involving the position of the church. Reyntjens 
states,  
De retour dune mission au Rwanda, Andr Louis, le secrtaire gnral de lInternationale 
dmocrate-chrtienne rdige un rapport qui constitue un vritable soutien au MRND et au 
Prsident Habyarimana et qui sattaque au pamphlet politique, enrob de phrasologies 
religieuses, qui attaquent le gouvernement de manire partiale du presbyterium de Kabgayi. 
Dans une lettre du 17 fvrier 1992, le nonce apostolique au Rwanda ragit contre ce document 
[rapport] assez invraisemblable et invite M. Louis  prendre ses distances par rapport  la 
mentalit et (les) mthodes de le partie unique. Le nonce apostolique d exprimer lopinion de 
tous les vques  sauf un, naturellement. [From a mission in Rwanda, Andr Louis, the 
secretary general of the International dmocrate-chrtienne wrote a report that gave a strong 
support to MRND and to President Habyarimana. The report attacks a political leaflet from the 
presbyterium of Kabgayi that was loaded with pseudo-religious expressions, and which 
constituted a partial attack against the Government. In a letter dated 17 February 1992, the 
apostolic nuncio in Rwanda reacted against M. Louiss report and invited him to distance 
himself from the mentality and methods of Rwandas former unique party. The apostolic 
nuncio claimed to express the opinion of all bishops  except one, naturally. Probably this 
implies Vincent Nsengiyunva, former RCCR Archbishop of Kigali, who was looked upon as 
the right hand man of President Habyarimana] (1994, 168). 
Apparently, even churches (the RCCR in particular) were disengaging from the state. 
Although the support of some prominent national and international church leaders was still 
absent, the new stand of the churches expressed in the document of Kabgayi symbolised 
the great shift.  
The assertions that the churches did not play a significant and timely role in challenging 
ethnicity or preventing the genocide could rather be a reading of the fact that there was no 
common view yet among the church hierarchy on ethnic and political matters in Rwanda. 
No preventive (practical) measures had yet taken place, and when the Rwandan churches 
entrenched the shift, their methods and scales of effort were not yet consistent. Churches 
had been reluctant and silent for too long. However, it was very clear that they were not 
sufficiently mature to withstand the political turmoil of 1994. Thus, the silence and 
inactivity reflected the situation inside the churches, which also still mirrored the ethnic 
and political divisions that continued to characterise Rwandan society beyond the 1990s 
(Longman 1995; Theunis 1995; Reyntjens 1996). 
Apart from the above factors, which hindered interaction within the churches and their 
role, Longman (1995) added that there was laxity on the part of the church workers. Their 
position was not to intervene in political affairs but only to read out the letters from the 
bishops and follow the orders. Moreover, the divergent positions the bishops took 
concerning political matters made it difficult for the churches to reach consensus. Again, 
suspicions by the bishops towards the Tutsi clergy and vice versa could not help 
communication and implementation amongst the congregation of pastoral decisions made 
from above. The middle clergy could not agree with the views of both top political and 
ecclesiastical leadership. Given the situation, the congregations and lay people, the 
majority of whom were Hutu, could not trust Tutsi spiritual leaders on political matters, 
because the latter were ethnically biased. Then, the Tutsi clergys stored-up anger emerged 
in their relations with the congregations. For example, the Tutsi priest at Mushubati used to 
mistreat his church members; one day in 1974, he narrowly escaped death when the bell of 
the church fell down a few seconds after he left the place where it landed. The members 
reported the event with regret that the bell had missed him. This situation was not unique; 
the priests have been the most oppressive and exclusive of all.  
The above account establishes the attitude of the RCCR in public affairs, and the attempts 
they made to intervene before the genocide. The analysis suggests that the Roman Catholic 
officials were not apt to denounce at both national and international levels the injustice the 
Hutus perpetrated against the Tutsi and vice versa. Spijker (1997) asserted that a change 
began following the initiative of the CPR (Council of the Protestant Churches in Rwanda) 
of which Pastor M. Twagirayesu was then the President. Spijker further stated that in 
August 1991, the AACC (of which the CPR is a member) organised a conference in 
Nairobi on the problem of the Rwandan refugees. Representatives of the refugees in 
Burundi, Uganda and Switzerland were able to exchange views with representatives of the 
churches and the Government of Rwanda.  
The presence of the RCCR was a big step forward, since the collaboration between 
Protestants and Catholics was very limited until then. The meeting allowed solutions to the 
problems of refugees to be submitted to the Rwandan Government (Spijker 1997, 244). 
(b) The Presbyterian Church in Rwanda (EPR) 
In February 1992, the Presbyterian Church of Rwanda (EPR) had invited various members 
of political parties and some clergy to Kibuye for a week of reflection, which was 
summarised in the booklet, Ukuri kubaka Igihugu (The Truth builds the Nation). The 
author of this thesis attended the reflection, which shaped the strategies for educating 
Rwandan Christians in political matters. The booklet explained the need for positive 
changes and the value of democratic institutions for the public, and urged Rwandas unique 
party regime, the MRND, to allow democratic institutions.  
Despite the suspicious attitude of the RPF towards initiatives from within the country 
before mid 1994, the neutrality of the Ukuri document affected both the RPF and the 
political parties. The initiative echoed the reconciliatory character of the EPR. The 
tradition in this church had prevented adherence to political parties or a joining in political 
activism. However, religious confessions were divided following the trend of their leaders 
and the affiliation of the members to political parties. Therefore, it was difficult to maintain 
neutrality in this situation.  
The EPR recommended the reading of the Ukuri booklet in church gatherings, including 
Sunday services and informative debates. The booklet appealed to nationals to engage in 
dialogue and to cultivate an inclusive spirit. The booklet also invited Rwandans who had 
stayed in the country to welcome the elements of the society that were outside.  
In 1993 the church began to take an even more public role. The President of the Presbyterian 
Church, Twagirayesu, gave a speech at the Protestant Theological Faculty in Butare entitled 
Quand les Eglises sortent de leur silence [when churches overcome their silence], in which he 
made the position of the churches clear (Butselaar 2001 & 2002).  
Butselaar (2001) observes that later, in October 1993, Twagirayesu had preached a 
courageous sermon on national radio, condemning racism and discrimination and calling 
on the government and the RPF to take the Arusha Agreements seriously. The initiative of 
the EPR challenged both the government and political parties to leave behind their 
exclusive attitude. 
(c) National ecumenical effort  
In February 1992, in a joint effort, RCCR and Protestant Church leaders in Rwanda set up 
an ad hoc Contact Committee that functioned as a liaison between the ruling regime and 
the RPF (Spijker 1997; Butselaar 2002). The committee tried hard to bring together the 
Habyarimana government, the internal political parties and the RPF; it recommended that 
the political regime renounce any form of dictatorship. It urged all conflicting parties to 
formulate a common message to present to the President of the Republic. This initiative 
opened the way for the formation of a multi-party government in 1992, and a move 
towards the protocol of the Arusha peace accords.  
Both Spijker (1997) and Butselaar (2001 & 2002) noted that the committee initiated 
successive meetings with delegates of the RPF in Nairobi (in February 1992) and 
Bujumbura (in March 1993). There seemed to be hope that the last meeting would resolve 
the Rwandan crisis at that stage. The proposals by local churches to meet the RPF were 
daring acts, because the RPF was branded by Rwandas leaders as the enemy that was 
illegally and cruelly occupying part of the country (Butselaar 2001). The efforts of the 
churches culminated in a broader scale event: as a result, a conference was held in 
Mombasa (27-29 November 1993) to implement the Arusha Agreements. On that 
occasion, the representatives of the Rwandan Government met with the officials of the 
RPF. Also present was the regional ecumenical organisation (the AACC), acting as a 
representative of the churches. However, Butselaar (2001) notes that the report of that 
meeting is not very remarkable. The AACC (1997) also claimed earlier that after the 
catastrophe of 1994, silence masked the positive outcome of this initiative.  
Enabling the parties to sit together was an important step forward. Butselaar (2001 & 
2002) states that it was one of the few occasions where the ecumenical bodies (AACC and 
WCC) acted positively to find a way for peace and reconciliation. He further suggests that 
it is not surprising that the efforts of the local churches did not yield very much, since on 
many occasions, their international partners, such as the AACC or WCC, came out as 
supporters of the RPF. Butselaar (2001 & 2002) asserts that in Nairobi at that time, the 
AACC was called the RPF in prayer, since the RPF supporters in high positions in that 
organisation were seen to be furthering the cause of their movement. Butselaar (2001 & 
2002) further states that the person responsible for the Rwandan question in the WCC was 
himself a Rwandan refugee who made sure that the council reacted in favour of the RPF at 
key moments. As a result, the churches in Rwanda lacked the support of an international 
mediator to counterbalance international political forces that backed either of the 
belligerents. The only international action of that nature occurred in May 1993, when Mgr. 
Guiseppe Bertello  the apostolic nuncio  left Kigali via northern Rwanda to visit the RPF 
authorities in the occupied zone (Theunis 1995; Butselaar 2001 & 2002). Sadly, this 
gesture also had no follow-up. 
The Rwandan churches participated actively in the meeting at Mombasa. The political 
parties, the RPF, the WCC and Rwandan refugees, and the representatives of the civil 
society, youth associations, the press, the Muslims and church-related organisations also 
attended the meeting. The theme stressed lasting peace (Spijker 1997, 246-247; McCullum 
1995). Butselaar (2001 & 2002) seems unimpressed by the consultation, but Spijker (1997) 
applauded the international backing given to local churches on this occasion by 
Archbishop D. Tutu and the Rev. J. Chipenda (then respectively President and General 
Secretary of the AACC). McCullum (1995) asserts that the AACC leaders made a strong 
appeal to Rwandan political leaders to use negotiation instead of arms. Spijker (1997) 
claims that the message of the consultation urged politicians to put national interests ahead 
of partisan and personal interests.  
In spite of the efforts of individual Christian leaders, apart from the above meeting, there 
was no joint and formal commitment from the WCC, the WARC and the Anglican 
Communion to support the local churches in their endeavour to solve the Rwandan crisis. 
After self-examination, the RCCR attempted to challenge the status quo in the local 
church, also challenging church-state relations, intimidation and the exclusionist policy of 
the Habyarimana regime. 
(d) Efforts of other specific groups 
Apart from the initiatives made by the churches, church-related groups tried to organise 
spiritual gatherings to deliver messages of support for peace. In 1992, the Christian League 
for the Defence of Human Rights, in collaboration with other human rights groups, 
organised an open protest to denounce the involvement of the local authorities in the 
massacres of Tutsi. The African Evangelical Enterprise (AEE) organised rallies in the 
spirit of revival in many cities; towards the end of 1993, the initiative continued as a 
Christian movement, setting up a number of rallies throughout the country. On 1 January 
1994, an ecumenical march on a national level called for the support of peace and the 
promotion of justice (Spijker 1997). It is probably these initiatives that led the President of 
AEE (I. Havugimana) to become a victim of the genocide, even though he was a Hutu. 
Despite all attempts to reach a peace agreement between the warring factions before the 
genocide, tense internal divisions affected the churches negatively. Within and between 
different confessions, divisions were evident. A document reporting a debate organised by 
the Rwandan refugees in Nairobi (1996) under the auspices of the AACC, acknowledged 
these divisions. Theunis (1995) noted that after the genocide, the situation did not change: 
the Church is more divided than ever, he asserted. He contended rather that the situation 
was moving from bad to worse, with divisions between Hutu and Tutsi and between 
Christians who stayed in the country and those who left. 
It is self-evident that the mediation approach followed by the local churches in the 1990s 
has raised more criticism from outside than support. Spijker (1997, 247) suggested,  
In general we might say that the leaders of the Church as a whole, if active at all in negotiating 
with political leaders, saw themselves mainly as mediators between the different politicians, 
rather than seeing critically to the Church itself, and taking their own position independent of 
the state.  
Spijker (1997) contends that mediators easily become facilitators, and church leaders who 
become facilitators between politicians easily forget to deliver a prophetic message. He 
suggested that the speech that the President of CPR M. Twagirayesu delivered at a meeting 
in Kigali in December 1993 to a gathering of AACC and WCC delegates exemplified such 
a deviation. The message read, these days, the relations between State and Church here in 
Rwanda can be qualified as very positive. Spijker (1997) argues that this was an address 
of satisfaction, seeking harmony, which, through reconciling good and evil, risked more 
than bringing a challenge.  
Spijkers (1997) argument is sustainable in theory and theologically credible. He is not, 
however, being realistic: in this context, to bring a challenge was not a workable pastoral 
approach. A challenge at the level that Spijker proposed could have helped only before or 
after the angry war and the genocide, not as the tragedy gathered pace. The first 
requirement was to stop the fight, and then gradually to settle its causes and the groups 
involved, since none of the warring factions were ready to listen at the time of intensive 
fighting and propaganda. Spijker worked hard to investigate the role played by the local 
churches but he failed to connect his analysis to the reality of that time. He seems not to 
have grasped the true workings of politics. Sadly, this approach is common among 
Christian leaders; their position on Rwanda clearly stood by the politics designed outside, 
which were indifferent to the Rwandan context. 
Spijker (1997) made the point that because the Protestant church had no experience in 
dealing with political affairs in public, the actions undertaken by church leaders and 
Christian laymen in this period of crisis are quite impressive. He further called for more 
reflection and stated, we may conclude that Christians were alarmed over the situation, 
overcame the boundaries of their denominations and developed efforts to make an end to 
the civil war, and to work for a new Rwanda. He observed, the ecumenism of the official 
church hierarchy tended to keep close to the political leaders in power, and restricted 
themselves to play [a] mediating role. Spijker (1997) claimed that there has been a 
tendency to compromise the church by keeping it too close to the state. However, this was 
less alarming than the fact noted by Schonecke (1994) that church leaders had created 
other classes identified with the regime and with ethnic groups. 
The analysis above assumes that church leaders in Rwanda showed weakness in their 
messages to the international community, the population and the belligerents when the 
genocide was underway. They asked the warring sides to stop the hostilities, which was the 
right and first thing to do. Nevertheless, rather than making further impartial challenges to 
both sides, the representatives of churches spoke in favour of the Rwandan Government. 
Yet, the churches did not deliver a plain and formal message or action (e.g., involving 
Western partners) to condemn the killings throughout the war. Only a few individuals and 
lay organisations tried to condemn the killings in their messages describing societys and 
the governments evil actions (Spijker 1997; Gatwa 2001). 
The attitude of the churches in Rwanda was well investigated by Linden (1999) and Gatwa 
(2001) in particular. Previous investigations argued that the churches derived this attitude 
from the missionary churches. Local church leaders keep alive the attitudes of the 
missionaries (The Ungodly Missionary legacy).2 The same repercussions are obvious in the 
mentality of the members of churches. Apart from the absence of unity in and between 
churches, there is lack of maturity in political theology (in education and practice) as well 
as weaknesses within other Christian bodies. The problem in analysing the role of the 
Church in Rwanda arose from endless reference to the failure as purely a lack of prophetic 
challenge from the local churches. Rwandan churches did not ignore the problem of Tutsi 
refugees, but neither did they elaborate a concrete programme to resolve the complex 
problems faced by the refugees (Towards Lasting Peace in Rwanda [1996]). There were 
  2 http://www.mediafilter.org.CAQ/CAQ52Rw2t.html 
some scattered initiatives (by the churches), but the church leaderships had not informed or 
educated their members in time to prepare them to face the socio-political realities.  
Most problems underlying the 1990s crisis in Rwanda (ethnic exclusion, the refugee crisis, 
injustice etc.) were evident and some increased the time for which Western bodies 
controlled the local administration and churches (cf. Chapter 7). Western missions did not 
equip the local churches theologically or later give the right advice to the respective 
leaderships. Yet, the local churches still depend on their mother churches in the West as 
partners for the education and finance that affect organisational affairs. Thus, the Rwandan 
crisis also calls for a deeper review of the influence of missions and organisations that have 
historical links with the country (i.e. the Vatican, the Church of England, the Reformed 
Church in Holland, etc.). These partners share the blame for the crisis in Rwanda.  
Investigation concerning the Rwandan crisis requires special attention to the literature. 
Because televisions are still few and even the churches have limited access to broadcasting, 
literature is the strongest medium of moral guidance for the population. While the 
mediation approach was on the lips of the clergy during the crisis, it did not come true in 
practice amongst their flocks. Few pastors and lay people attempted to reach the 
grassroots; Gatwa and Karamaga exemplified the challenge in two titles: Ubutegetsi ni 
ubwacu [The Power Belongs to Us] (1993) and Les Autres Chrtiens Rwandais: Prsence 
Protestante [The Other Rwandan Christians: The Presence of Protestants] (1990). These 
books represented a breakthrough in instructive information, preparing Christians for 
democratic change. M. Twagirayesu produced Inzira yamahoro [The Way to Peace] 
(1993), an edifying booklet published under the auspices of the CPR.  
On one hand, the substance of this literature raised awareness of issues of democracy, 
ethnic acceptance and the refugees problem, and instilled tolerance between political 
parties. Above all, it challenged the Habyarimana regime, which held onto the unique party 
system and regionalism at the expense of democratic institutions. On the other hand, 
Spijker (1990) asserted that in times of war, articulate intellectuals produced some 
literature that was read at the grassroots, and caused more harm than good; it is also true to 
some extent that people produced the literature on purpose or in a hurry, generating 
inadequate responses.  
The analysis above sketches the contribution of the church to peace building in the country 
before April 1994. Most writers, including Reyntjens (1994), Longman (1998), Sibomana 
(1997), Spijker (1997) and Gatwa (2001), suggested that the churches in Rwanda were 
conforming to government views in the face of the 1990s crisis. This research appreciates 
these researchers for their fair social analyses and their critiques on the position of the 
Rwandan church before the 1990s. However, this thesis deplores the failure by these 
researchers to point out the bias of foreign interventions in the 1990s, both secular and 
Christian. It also plausibly argues that in most cases the churches maintained the status quo 
with regard to the ethnic realities and the war in order to secure their own survival, while 
ethnic divisions and war threatened the churches through each party attacking the other 
(Schonecke 1994).  
This thesis clarifies that the churches in Rwanda had made some effort since 1990 to settle 
the situation, but compromised themselves with the political regime during the crisis of 
1994. Given the gravity of internal divisions that had shaped the political structure and the 
churches for long periods, after 1990, the churches sought WCC, WARC and AACC 
support to help restore peace and harmony. However, in mid-1994, the churches stood 
alone. The support of church partners, i.e. the Reformed Church in the Netherlands, the 
VEM, the DM, the PCUSA, the Anglican Church, the Anglican Communion and to some 
extent the Vatican, was absent in the critical time up to the end of the genocide.  
8. 4 Post-genocide, Christian perspective  
An analysis of the period identified with the genocide (April - July 1994) establishes the 
attitude of the churches towards the tragedy. Whereas expatriates did not delay in leaving 
desperate Rwandans behind, many who left silently were Christians who, among others, 
still raised simplistic accusations against the churches.  
Following the missile event on 6 April 1994, the Rwandan military command imposed an 
effective curfew all over the country. Hard-liners dominated the source of information, and 
apart from the people who prepared the killing, no one else moved for a week or so (Des 
Forges 1999, 181ff; African Rights 1995, 94ff). Civilians were afraid and confused, but 
also at the root of the whole tragedy was a mutual fear: the fear of individual and ethnic 
extermination. After a week, informal news, communicated by telephone calls and from 
fleeing people, revealed that the Presidential Guards had led massacres in the capital city 
(Kigali). The killings increased quickly in one week, involving Interahamwe in 
preparations on a very large scale for the extermination of the Tutsi, a plan that extended 
throughout the country. The RTLM (the MRND/CDR broadcasting) and Radio 
Muhabura (of the RPF) spread the panic and ethnic hatred among the population. 
Reyntjens (in Refugee Studies 1996, 247) states that the media were so blinded by their 
ethnic reading of the situation that Reuters for instance, labelled one of the first prominent 
victims, Prime Minister Agathe Uwilingiyimana, as Tutsi, although she was Hutu. 
Individual complicity and previous hatred made the killings and other forms of violence 
easier to undertake. However,  
Those killed on a massive scale were opponents, Hutu and Tutsi alike: politicians opposed to 
the presidential majority and/or adhering to [the] Arusha peace accord, persons active in 
Human Rights Associations, leaders of civil society, journalists and generally the Tutsi as a 
whole considered allies of the RPF (Reyntjens 1996, 246).  
While the silence of Radio Rwanda  the national/official broadcasting institution  
concerning the crisis puzzled Rwandas population, outsiders saw the genocide as a plot by 
the regime of the time. Others considered that the killings resulted from the absence of 
courage and clear strategy among Christians to stand up for human rights and moral 
integrity.  
8.4.1 World-wide ecumenical response 
The direct response that the ecumenical organisations envisaged was the creation of a 
humanitarian mechanism through Church World Action  Rwanda. The initiative sought to 
work with refugees who had fled into neighbouring countries. It also addressed the internal 
needs of the country, assisting in the trauma by deploying counselling teams through the 
local churches whose leadership had been devastated (RDL-WCC 1999; Butselaar 2002). 
In December 1994 the WCC convened a private meeting with leaders of nearly all 
churches in the North which had historic links with [the] Rwandan churches (including the 
RCCR). The RDLs Report (1999) states that the aim of the meeting was to share 
information and develop a common stand on the alleged complicity of some Rwandan 
church leaders in the genocide. 
In November 1996, the WCC brought together Rwandan church leaders to provide a 
platform for serious soul-searching on the part of the church leadership, and to begin in a 
small way the long process to repentance and confession (RLD 1999, 5). The meeting was 
held in South Africa, gathering the Rwandan church leaders from inside and from exile. 
The RLD states that the gathering brought out the tensions among the church leaders. For 
24 hours, they would not sit in the same room even to pray. A way was found to bring the 
participants together for difficult, yet fruitful work. Later, the meeting formed a Core 
Group to plan for further steps, including an ecumenical visit to the region by church 
leaders from the region, in order to stimulate repentance, forgiveness and healing (RLD 
1999).  
Following this suggestion, there were organised visits to Rwanda, Burundi, Uganda, Kenya 
and Tanzania, which resulted in two other meetings being called by the Core Group, the 
first in Entebbe (Uganda) in March 1997, and the second in Kigali in September 1997. The 
latter meeting agreed the principles for common Christian witness for peace and 
reconciliation (RLD 1999, 5). This resulted in the creation of the Great Lakes Advocacy 
Network, a network of ecumenical agencies, international relief groups and development 
organisations. Brown (1999) states that the network used their expertise and experience to 
assist European decision-makers, policy-makers and other international donors by 
providing information and making recommendations in relation to the region. However, 
this ad hoc plan did not consider the former church leadership in the country or those in 
exile, and did not follow up initiatives set at Detmold (1996), Namibia (1996), Nairobi 
(1996 & 7) and Machakos (1999) that stressed all-inclusive reconciliation (section 8.4.2.b 
expands on this point). One may agree with Butselaar (2001& 2002) that the ecumenical 
initiatives and plan were biased towards the new Rwandan regime and that the advocates 
of the RPF dominated the ecumenical offices. The ecumenical vision was limited and the 
political and diplomatic aspects of their initiatives overlooked the perspective of 
reconciliation, which calls for inclusion and impartiality. 
RLD (1999, 5) states that in October 1997, the WCC convened the Global Ecumenical 
Forum on the Great Lakes Region. Church representatives from the Great Lakes Region, 
Europe and North America participated in this forum. The last meeting endorsed the 
principles outlined in Kigali and attached an outline of platform action, which perhaps 
provoked the formation of the FECCLAHA (Fellowship of Councils and Churches in 
Great Lakes Region and Horn of Africa) in March 1999. The focus of the forum is on 
peace, reconciliation and the healing of memories.  
The analysis above shows that the WCC was inconsistent in action and above all in its 
assessment of the Rwandan situation. The failure transpired in WCC experts reports 
including McCullum (1995) and Jacques (1997). McCullums (1995) assessment of 
Rwanda in 1994 could not help the WCC and AACC to grasp the reality; he acknowledged 
that he had no previous knowledge about the country and that in times of war, journalists 
like him travel under the protection of the military of one side. Thus, the only information 
he could receive was from the side that was protecting him (the RPF). Likewise, in her 
report about post-genocide Rwanda and the reconciliation, Jacques was a WCC specialist 
in international affairs. On one hand, WCC (Press Release 1997) stated that after attending 
a seminar organised by the CPR that had brought together a cross-section of 60 Tutsi and 
Hutu church leaders from different denominations, Jacques suggested that the organiser 
was putting participants under heavy moral pressure, based on Christian principles, to 
forgive those who had done them wrong. On the other hand, Jacques (WCC 1997) asserted 
that the people in Rwanda badly needed to learn again to walk together and work together; 
and that there were signs that this was happening. There were examples of two groups 
sharing a house until they could build a new one together. Land was also being shared. 
Jacques suggested that there were positive signs of the acceptance of the other, that the 
other had the right to exist.  
Although Jacques saw the above situation as important steps along the way, she asserted 
that it was not reconciliation (WCC 1997). One would disagree with Jacques at this point 
but rather suggest that,  
in such a context in which the perpetrator carried out his actions in daylight and exposed the 
evil overtly, it is easier to define what reconciliation ought to be like. Equally, it is easier to 
realize whether the reconciliation started or largely happened. Only in a joint effort can 
victims, together with direct perpetrators, define what reconciliation is and the marks that 
prove whether it has fully materialised. Any responsible person can assume what reconciliation 
ought to be for Rwandans after the genocide (the marks and steps) because we know what 
happened and can know who did what. In reality coming together, staying and working 
together and sharing  these are rather the highest marks of reconciliation (Cyuma 2005, 1).  
Jacques claimed further that initiatives undertaken by other organisations were numerous, 
as if the whole world came to Rwanda; but she asserted that their methods were 
inadequate. She does not, however, point to any practical and efficient answer; nor does 
she offer any concrete alternative solution to reorient either the WCC vision in this 
perspective or those initiatives at work in Rwanda.  
In terms of reconciliation, despite all claims, the WCC did nothing of any practical 
significance in Rwanda until 2004, and gave no constructive advice to its partners in the 
country after the genocide (1995-1997). It relied on initiatives taken by its partners and 
their information. As Linden (1998) has suggested, the WCCs information sometimes 
turned out to be false, based on hearsay; unfortunately, it was never renounced. The WCC 
even misused some opportunities, like the meeting it held in South Africa in 1994, when 
the gathering brought out the tensions among the church leaders (RLD 1999, 5). Cyuma 
(2005) asserted that the tensions had opened a window to uncover the core conflict and to 
mediate between the leaders whose reconciliation could greatly promote the reconciliation 
countrywide in Rwanda; but the opportunity was mismanaged.  
However, in 2004, the WCC made a major step concerning the reconciliation strategies in 
Rwanda. Although the WCC expert had objected to hasty reconciliation and quick 
forgiveness,3 gladly, the new leadership of the WCC has amended that prejudgment and 
strove to grasp the reality in the country. The WCC, together with the AACC, has now 
exemplified a pragmatic pace with promising results: they supported a workshop of 
churches convened by the CPR and the Alliance of Evangelical Churches in Rwanda from 
16 to 18 April 2004, after which (on 19 April) Rwandas churches made a covenant in 
solidarity with the people. The participants  including ecumenical leaders from 20 African 
  3 J. Michel, Kigali Covenant: churches in solidarity with the people of Rwanda WCC, 19 April 2004; F. 
Nzwili, Denominations acknowledge inaction on Rwanda genocide Ecumenical News International, 21 
April 2004.  
countries  stressed the need to build the capacity of churches in advocacy and to be 
proactive in the prevention of conflicts. They challenged the leadership of churches and 
governments to feed the minds and souls of their people with love, peace and 
reconciliatory messages. They committed themselves to stand up and to speak against 
behaviour, pronouncements and practices that have the tendency to set one group of people 
against another. 
Michel (2004) and Nzwili (2004) state that the official document of the Kigali Covenant 
was read during a Sunday service at Kigali stadium. While the Covenant was a strong mark 
of peace building and the foundation for reconciliation, it was not the core act for national 
reconciliation, because it did not embody the official political workings of the state. Thus, 
it is too early to assess the outcome of this exhibition or whether it was worthwhile. 
National reconciliation requires an imprimatur (Vandeginste 1998a) from the state to open 
officially the process in the name of the nation. Yet, in the covenant, the voice of the 
RCCR, which that makes up 63% of the population, is absent; those in the covenant 
represent only 18% of the population.  
It is harder to depict the situation in the RCCR after the prosecution of a number of their 
clergy, including overseas missionaries such as Fr. G. Theunis of the White Fathers, in 
spite of the acquittal of Bishop A. Misago. Apart from the mark of relative silence of the 
RCCR, its top clergy did not validate the rationale of the Detmold Confession. Rather, 
one of the leading members of the Confession  L. Ntezimana, a layperson  who worked 
as Director of Theological Animation Commission of his Diocese (Butare), later resigned 
from this position.  
The question could be whether a process that does not yet engage the RCCR is promising. 
However, there is hope, since before the start of the workshop, the general secretary of the 
Lutheran Federation, Rev. Noko, sent a letter to President P. Kagame appealing for an end 
to the silence that permitted the genocide (Nzwili 2004). Additionally, the Covenant was 
taken for further study and implementation under the leadership of the WCC and AACC, 
the international ecumenical bodies (Michel 2004); hopefully, the appeal to the President 
and the commitment from ecumenical bodies will encourage the Catholics to join in the 
practices.  
8.4.2 The response of the Rwandan churches 
The first Episcopal (Anglican) response to the situation emerged on 21 April 1994. Gatwa 
(2001) suggested that the Rwandan bishops appealed to the RPF and the government to 
cease violence, to agree with one another and to issue mutual pardons. They asked the UN 
and various Church organisations, including the WCC, the AACC and Canterbury to 
mediate between the two parties. They declared that they shared the suffering of those who 
had lost their relatives, in particular the two Presidential families and the Prime Minister. 
They stated that the blood that flowed continuously following the inter-ethnic-violence 
sadly affected them. The appeal had no significant effect, but rather led its hearers to 
suspect the church hierarchy, since the appeal came when the war was over. Prelates from 
this denomination had shown no concern earlier, during the war.  
The Anglican Communion attempted to redress the situation inside Rwandas Episcopal 
Church, with no positive results. Linden (1998) asserts that at the meeting of the Rwandan 
Episcopal Bishops with the Archbishop of Canterbury and the representatives of the 
Anglican Communion in Nairobi, in early June 1994, Archbishop A. Nshamihigo and 
Bishop J. Ruhumuliza refused to denounce unequivocally the Abatabazi Government, 
which was behind the genocide. The latter representation of a minority church in Rwanda 
shaped the interpretation of most outsiders concerning the attitude of all the churches 
towards the crisis. Even though representatives all churches in Rwanda echoed almost 
similar message, the appeal from the Anglican Communion was, in general, misplaced. At 
that time, the international attitude and its refusal to intervene were far more puzzling, in 
that each church leader in Rwanda either became biased towards the former regime or the 
RPF, simply for the sake of safety.  
On 5 May 1994, the General Secretary of the CPR read on national radio a message on 
behalf of the chairperson of the council. The message asserted that the massacres in 
Rwanda were the consequence of the death of the President. It appealed to the RPF to 
renounce fighting and negotiate with the Government. It contained no clear reprimand to 
the Abatabazi Government for its wrongdoing. It only appealed to the government to 
guarantee security to each national (Gatwa 2001; Butselaar 2002 passim). Gatwa (2001) 
noted, however, that the message backed the Rwandan army and invited Christians to back 
the government. Most messages from the Rwandan churches at that critical moment were 
of this standard, which led Spijker (1997) to accuse the churches of attempting to be the 
facilitators who reconciled good and evil. 
Roman Catholic bishops joined the Protestant Church representatives on 13 May 1994 and 
issued a joint public statement calling for an end to the killings. They sent condolences to 
the families of the victims and called on the RPF and the government of Rwanda to set up 
new institutions for governance together. On the same day, the Contact Committee of both 
Catholics and Protestants addressed those threatened by the negative consequences of the 
war and massacres. Their communiqu condemned the profanity and destruction of the 
holy instruments of liturgy. The same message urged the RPF and the government to cease 
the war and stop the massacres. Thereafter, mediation by the church was offered (Gatwa 
2001).  
Concerning the substance of the church messages, the African [human] Rights report to the 
WCC General Assembly in Harare (1998) clearly made an important case. It deplored the 
failure of the churches to name the evil genocide and their lack of reference to the central 
responsibility of the Rwandan Government for the slaughter. In addition to the weaknesses 
of individual church leaders, this report makes a further point: complicity of the churches 
in the genocide. The report reads,  
Instead, it [church leadership] focuses on the war between the government and the Rwandese 
Patriotic Front (RPF), which followed the launch of the genocide. No one who reads it in the 
light of the massacres and desecration of churches and the murder of priests and nuns can avoid 
being struck by its conspicuous failure to call evil by its name, the deliberate confusion of the 
war and the genocide, and the reluctance to confront those who were propagating crimes 
against humanity.  
Linden (1995) suggested that the big swing occurred concurrently with church discourses, 
after the genocide and after the government fled. The tte--tte of the Anglican bishops in 
Nairobi advised the Rwandan Episcopal clergy to condemn the genocide.4 The 
international community clearly stated that the killings in Rwanda were genocide. While 
the best positioning for the church leaders was not to lean towards either side, the Nairobi 
talks split them into two camps. Spijker (1997) stated that the foreign clergy and the 
internal remnants of the Rwandan clergy were supportive of the Tutsi RPF setting up a 
new government. On the contrary, most Rwandan clergy in exile depended on the defeated 
Hutu regime and were hostile to the new Tutsi government.  
The then Episcopal Archbishop of Rwanda exemplified the impasse in his communication 
to the UN Secretary General, strongly condemning the October 1990 war as unjustifiable. 
He lamented the infringement of the principle that prevents refugees attacking their 
country of origin and host countries giving them a base for subversive activities (Gatwa 
2001). The prelate asserted that as the UN had committed itself to the democratisation of 
South Africa, it should also do the same in Rwanda, where the RPF had attempted to 
  4 State organised killing, targeting a distinct group of people distinguished by race, language, religion or 
culture. 
reinstate a monarchical regime rejected by the majority in 1960. He suggested that the UN 
should stop the war, in particular, the aggressor, and safeguard the rights of the majority 
and possibly of a certain group. This was, however, a message from one individual 
member of a minority church that had not been active in previous calls for mediation. 
However, this clumsy bias on the part of the prelate gave grounds for criticism of the 
Rwandan churches. Western governments justified their arguments with an appeal from the 
Archbishop.  
Soon, before the genocide ended, a meeting was held in Nairobi, gathering the representatives 
of the Anglican Communion led by the Archbishop of Canterbury Dr. George Carey to meet 
the Rwandan Anglican bishops. Their message urged the Rwandan bishops to return and 
shepherd their flock in the country. Most media indicated that the meeting ended with unhappy 
disagreement between the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Archbishop of Rwanda. On the 
one hand, most Rwandan prelates did not offer to return home. On the other hand, it is 
shocking that such a meeting was not set before to call to calm, stop the war and the genocide 
or to vigilantly guarantee the safe return of bishops, while the RPF had killed the Roman 
Catholic Bishops who remained behind in Kabgayi. Yet, most Anglican bishops who 
courageously returned were threatened, so that two of them returned in exile. Apparently, there 
was no good will from the Anglican Communion or others such as WCC to consider further the 
safe return of the clergy. One would question the motivation of such a hasty push with no 
guarantee for safety and eventual remorse (Cyuma 1999).  
The latter initiative was not effective, neither was it a good pastoral approach or 
commendable in that situation. The best approach required tackling both sides (the new 
regime in Kigali and the fleeing people) according to the old saying, ukoma urusyo akoma 
ningasire [one adjusts both the main and the small elements of the grind to make it sharp], 
as this protected the safety of returnees. Ideally, these leaders needed more time to re-
examine their attitude and probably to repent before rushing back or being pressurised in 
Rwanda. The most acute criticism is from Linden (1995) in his article The lesson from the 
Rwandan genocide. He built his argument on the position of the Episcopal Archbishop. 
However, it is clear that the prelate acted in accordance with his own understanding with 
no mandate from the Rwandan community, or from his fellow church representatives from 
the Anglican or Christian community in Rwanda. He uttered his views in a time of heated 
argument. Other individual bishops and church leaders simply did not acknowledge that 
the war led to the genocide, and some also seemed to be still only talking on behalf of the 
Abatabazi Government. Gatwa (1998) stated most of the failure of the church leaders to 
challenge both sides was due to the absence of consistent theological reflection with regard 
to violence, justice and mercy. They were vulnerable to political manoeuvring.  
Beside cases linked with individual motives, mainly their closeness to politicians, the 
attitude of the Rwandan churches can be understood in the light of the history of the 
country and the speed of changes from negotiation to genocide. On the one hand, the thesis 
has previously demonstrated that there were delicate divisions along ethnic lines in the 
same church (see 8.3.2 cf. Theunis 1995); regionalism added further discord. There were 
chronic divisions between Roman Catholics and Protestants (Twagirayesu & Butselaar 
1982). The situation could not allow the clergy to share a common vision. On the other 
hand, Spijker (1997) has clarified that the Protestant denominations lacked experience of 
dealing with political issues.  
From the latter analysis, one grasps the cause of the contradictory message, which raised 
international disgust against the Rwandan churches. The driving force also affected the 
outcome of the Anglican meeting in Nairobi, while the Rwandan Episcopal bishops could 
have benefited from the offer from the Archbishop of Canterbury. With the encouragement 
of the Anglican Communion, the Archbishop of Canterbury attempted to bring Rwanda's 
clergy to its senses, urging them to identify and condemn the evil that had deceived the 
churches through 1994. What Rwandas church might have realised, but too late  as the 
Archbishop of Canterbury stated (WCC Report 1998; Gitau/NNI 1995)  is that it had 
missed the opportunity to give its testimony. Although the church did not misuse this 
opportunity, it did not allow World Christianity to understand (through credible voices) 
what really happened in Rwanda. If the Rwandan clergy had delivered a clear message at 
that very moment, it could have prompted timely support to heal the nation (or eventually 
prevent the genocide). Some of the leaders of the churches were associated with decision-
making by the political leadership that had carried out the genocide (Longman 1995). 
Thus, they have a share of responsibility for the crisis, since they did not challenge the 
massacres or defend the actions of their subordinate priests, and when the attempt at 
mediation, which they guided, turned into a stalemate, they kept silent. 
The response of the Rwandan churches during the war in the 1990s was not regarded as 
prophetic and fair. What ensued was the misuse of leadership positions in the churches: the 
attitude of some individuals obscured the image of Christianity and the nation. Regrettably, 
the entire nation was not aware of what was going on (Longman 1995). However, some 
people performed exemplary acts of Christian faith and courage before and after the 
genocide. A few pastors and missionaries put their own security at risk, hiding and helping 
those whom the Interahamwe were hunting. At Rubengera (Kibuye), in the most difficult 
cases, religious people even paid money to save the hidden Tutsi and help them to escape 
the killers. The local clergy (Protestant) and Sr. Anke Slagmolen (Dutch) stayed with the 
group of Deaconesses of whom the latter was the leader until the genocide was over. Then, 
she took the whole Hutu-Tutsi mixed group abroad for a healing period. After the 
genocide, she also spent time leading fundraising to initiate a Village d enfants: a project 
for orphans of the genocide at Rubengera (personal contact 10 July 2000).  
Genevive, a Roman Catholic Sister based in Kibuye town, started the work of 
reconciliation in the post-genocide period. She explained that it helped her to overcome her 
own trauma. She visited people in prisons and encouraged reconciliation between Hutu and 
Tutsi. She ascertained that both Hutu and Tutsi are traumatised, and as survivors, they both 
need to be healed. In one visit to a prison, a man confessed before Genevive that he had 
killed her parents. Many other people made similar confessions. Igwara (paper, 07 January 
2002) stated that Genevive requested that the confessions had to be followed by a letter 
exposing all the details of what had happened and the letter given to the victims. Then 
Genevive would arrange for meetings between victims and perpetrators. Such processes 
were held in Kibuye and Gisovu prisons, particularly on the occasions of celebrating one 
hundred years of Catholicism in Rwanda. Widows of the genocide from Karama, near 
Kigali, are now committed to reconciliation practices similar to Genevives work. Igwara 
(2002) suggested that women from Butare and Kigali are helping each other in the same 
perspective. 
Experiences are varied; Igwara (2002) stated: one Priest told me, "I will never forgive". I 
asked him, "What do you tell your congregation, if you do not forgive?" One prisoner I 
met told me that the difficulty they met is the time they [offenders and victims] have to 
wait to meet. What transpired from the above paper is that the Tutsi who participated in 
the killings are no longer Tutsi; they are now Hutu (Igwara 2002). I asked Igwara whether 
the work done in Kibuye required authorisation from the church authority. She suggested 
that it could have been an independent initiative. Then I asked whether there is no risk that 
such initiative may be maliciously helping justice to catch nave wrongdoers, since it 
requires testimony to be written down and handed to the offended, while the offended do 
not necessarily want to forgive. Igwara replied that such fear and suspicion already exist 
among the people, so that as far as the judicial process is concerned the written confession 
might be used against the offenders and endanger the role of the church in reconciliation. 
In this practice, the person who confesses is not sure to be free from prosecution.  
In general, the strategy of the church hierarchy in Rwanda has been to follow the political 
and military will. However, failure by some of their leaders and some Christians cannot be 
the standard by which to judge all Rwandans.  
(a) The new vision of the CNER 
The General Assembly of CNER (Conseil National des Eglises au Rwanda [the National 
Council of Churches in Rwanda]) adopted a new vision. The CNER includes Roman 
Catholics and Protestants but not new sporadic groups called Evangelicals. The CNER 
held a meeting at Kabusunzu (in Kigali) on 29th and 30th May 1995. Good intentions paved 
the way for this meeting and its resolutions. The report of the Nairobi conference (1996) 
comments that the churches promised to put the outcome of Kabusunzu into practice, as 
was required. 
The conference in Nairobi (1996) asserted that the Kabusunzu commitments had not 
materialised; rather, churches had compromised themselves again in their rapport with the 
new political regime. It suggested that current leaders of the churches were involved in the 
inception of the RPF, and are still committed to its cause. Thus, these leaders are caught up 
in political affairs. To quote the report of Nairobi (1996), certains responsables actuels 
dEglises se sont mme impliqus dans la conception et le protocole du systme 
gouvernemental actuel de Kigali [some current leaders of the churches were involved in 
the inception and in the protocol of the system of the current government of Kigali]. In so 
doing, the churches become devices of the political regime, rather than critical prophets. 
This attitude is not surprising, given that most current church leaders took the opportunity 
to become the new stakeholders because of the circumstances that sent their predecessors 
into exile. The new church leaders either used force or intimidation and political power to 
benefit from the leadership vacuum in the churches. The situation allowed even unfit 
individuals to seize positions in the churches. Spijker (1997) asserted that in several 
churches, these questions were complicated when refugees from the years 1959  1973 
who had returned to their country looked for a proper place in the churches of their own 
denomination, and in their administration and hierarchy. They often did not share the 
political conviction and vision of those who had remained in the country. Others reasoned 
that all church leaders who had fled  and sometimes denied the facts that the genocide 
occurred  had lost their credibility and did not merit recognition any longer. In some 
cases, new church leaders were elected under pressure from the political regime. This was 
why some people who had remained in the country did not recognise these leaders. 
Certainly, the gaps needed filling in order to pastor the stranded flock; peace and 
reconciliation perspectives, however, did not feature in the urgent programme.  
Nevertheless, the effort of the churches in reconciliation is actually evident, mainly within 
the co-operation of international ecumenical bodies to set strategies and studies on 
nationwide reconciliation. Likewise, the leadership of the National Unity and 
Reconciliation Commission includes outstanding Christian leaders. For instance, the Vice 
Chairman of the Commission, A. Rutayisire, is General Secretary of the AEE (Africa 
Evangelical Enterprise). It is assumed that such Christian presence could develop strong 
links between the initiative of the churches and the Government plan for reconciliation (Ho 
2004).  
(b) The response of other specific groups 
Some practical initiatives have taken place in the post-genocide period to attempt to settle 
the situation. Five church-related initiatives exemplified the attempts at reconciliation.  
Firstly, in December 1996 a group gathering both Hutu and Tutsi from different 
denominations met in Germany to talk about repentance and reconciliation among 
Rwandans. Former missionaries, priests and friends of Rwandans confessed together 
(Confession de Detmold 1996; Rubayiza 1998; Butselaar 2002). Similar activities started in 
Rwanda and produced positive results. However, Butselaar (2002) suggested that the first 
initiative came from the refugee communities in Africa and Europe. Since post-genocide 
church leaders did not call for reconciliation, the laity assumed responsibility for that 
mission. A group of laity and pastors from different ethnic backgrounds in Rwanda and 
other countries wrote a declaration mutually confessing their guilt, and promised one 
another to work for reconciliation (Rubayiza 1998 and Butselaar 2002). Later, a delegation 
from the Detmold group visited Rwanda to explain the aim of their initiative (Butselaar 
2002).  
Secondly, the Presbyterian Church in Rwanda (EPR) welcomed the suggestion of the 
Evangelical Mission of Wuppertal (VEM) in Germany, which sponsored a meeting to 
attempt a reconciliation process. Delegates of the EPR from the country and others from 
the refugee camps in Zaire and Kenya met in Windhoek (Namibia) in September 1996. 
Both Pastor M. Twagirayesu and Pastor A. Karamaga (respectively former and new 
Presidents of the Presbyterian Church in Rwanda) were present. The VEM also invited its 
counterpart missionary organisations from the West; the latter chose L. R. Krol from the 
Netherlands to represent them on this occasion. The Rev. J. Chipenda, by then General 
Secretary of the AACC, facilitated this one-week meeting at Windhoek. Spijker (1997, 
251) contended, according to the reports the exchange of views was very difficult, the 
exiles being hardly prepared to recognise that the civil war had ended in genocide. The 
author of this thesis also attended this meeting.  
It was self evident that the situation in Rwanda was still tense; no talk envisaging 
reconciliation was acceptable in the country. Thus, the delegates resolved that it was wise 
not to write and circulate any formal report or statement relating to this meeting. However, 
Spijkers reading (1997) suggests that the exchange of views was difficult. The author of 
this thesis rather recalls that a time of dialogue occurred that nobody had expected, 
particularly towards the end of the meeting. Indeed, the meeting opened with some 
reservation, but soon after, fraternal chats became real and the sessions ended with a choir 
of former members of Kigali Parish. The AACC General Secretary was excited one 
evening after the hymn singing and asked whether it could be true that such a fraternal 
group had been for a time turned into hostile enemies The following day, the group was 
invited to visit the national park in Namibia. After that, they decided to continue with more 
talks in Johannesburg for the rest of the week (personal notes, Cyuma 1996).  
Spijker's (1997) comment that no other churches have organised meetings of this sort is 
credible. However, it is regrettable that the Presbyterians themselves have not continued in 
the same direction. Their Western partners have also abandoned the process, which 
engaged frank dialogue and called for goodwill from all Rwandan groups, inside and 
outside the country. The initiative of Windhoek suggested the creation of a joint mission 
with an itinerant missionary, who was to come from a mission in the Netherlands and 
operate between the camps and Rwanda to maintain more exchanges and promote 
reconciliation. Unfortunately, this suggestion never materialised; rather, the effort of the 
Rwandan church and its Western partners later focused only towards material 
reconstruction of the church in the country. 
Thirdly, the opportunity above opened invitations and meetings, giving the new leaders of 
the Rwandan church opportunities to visit their members in exile. Soon after, three 
representatives of the EPR visited their members in exile in Nairobi, Kenya. The delegates 
were Pastor N. Hitimana (then President of the General Synod and Vice-President of the 
EPR), Mme R. Gakwandi and Dr. G. Spijker (a Dutch missionary in Rwanda). This one-
week visit aimed to reinforce the dialogue; it was a sign of goodwill, a testimony from both 
sides, which illustrated the possibility for reconciliation. On this occasion, the first 
celebration of the Holy Communion after the genocide was held, gathering church 
members from within and from exile. The celebration took place in a Sunday service at St 
Andrews (Nairobi) in the Presbyterian Church of East Africa. Pastor Grard Spijker 
delivered the sermon while S. Cyuma conducted the service, including the Holy 
Communion. After the formal worship, Pastor N. Hitimana addressed the participants, 
stressing the will of the EPR to enhance dialogue among its members and encouraged them 
to return to Rwanda (personal notes, Cyuma 1996).  
Such meetings facilitated other talks; subsequent seminars took place in Nairobi, and 
exchange visits between members from inside and outside the country started. The main 
seminars took place in April 1996 and July 1997 under the auspices of the AACC on the 
theme Towards a lasting peace for Rwanda. The latter occasions were not exclusively 
Presbyterian gatherings; all willing Rwandans who were in Kenya were invited. The 
biblical theme and studies from Ezekiel 33:7 guided the seminars (in which the researcher 
of this thesis participated). The seminars also encouraged willing refugees to return to 
Rwanda. Subsequently, some people received material support from both the EPR and the 
AACC to return. Sadly, no further results in this direction continued after the war started in 
the Congo, where the majority of Rwandans were in camps.  
Fourth, the Newick Park Initiative (NPI) from the UK made great efforts towards 
organising a consultation in Kigali from 19 to 21 August 1997. The consultation involved 
Rwandan government officials, the churches and a number of experts from inside and 
outside Rwanda. S. Bishop claimed that the consultation could produce very positive 
results because of the experience the organisers had received from the South African 
process of reconciliation (personal communication 17 October 1999). However, in 
Rwanda, the NPI stopped its bold process after the first attempts, which rather increased 
suspicion and pushed for the prosecution of some clergy, including the Roman Catholic 
Bishop A. Misago, who was in the consultation. From this time, a series in the church 
magazine, Kinyamateka, included long comments on the tensions surrounding the 
prosecution of the bishop and his release. Later, tensions mounted between the RCCR and 
the government. The church-state relations with other churches were less tense but did not 
foster further reconciliation. 
Many Rwandans hoped that Western partners would help to reduce the tensions between 
the government and the churches. In a discussion with some prelates, I pointed out that the 
church in the West ought to facilitate dialogue and reconciliation in Rwanda. An Anglican 
Bishop reacted, asking, How can one talk of reconciliation in Rwanda after being shown 
the number of orphans that are there? We will only continue to listen to what people in 
Rwanda tell us (May 15, 2001). Nevertheless, some Christians are committed to the cause 
of truth and reconciliation in Rwanda. Canon B. Millingan, retired Commissioner of the 
Church of England, wrote to me, Truly, we have abandoned your country in time of 
difficulties; we should do our best to help Rwanda. In an attached report following his 
visit to East Africa (March 18-30, 2001), he concluded:  
Rwanda is recovering from the genocide; there is much courage and hope, but there is fear, 
pain, guilt, confusion  and prisons overflowing  The West and the international community 
have nothing to be proud of in its response to the troubles, and this is felt and at times 
expressed. Are there second chances to repair this? 
The NPI gave up its first tactic to help in Rwanda; its failure to bring about any kind of 
formal reconciliation led most initiatives to assume that the Rwandan situation needed a 
unique approach with more capacity and perhaps more flexibility. Spijker (1997) suggested 
that the NPI launched the initiative with a patronising attitude; that it could not succeed in 
Rwanda with the model transferred from South Africa. In informal discussions (04 October 
2001), it was pointed out that one does not see what reconciliation means in Rwanda, since 
there has been a lot of evil and no real actions taken by the government in the perspective 
of reconciliation. Many people suggested that the word reconciliation was only on the 
lips of the political leaders, with no prospect for the process itself to take place.  
Fifth, the workshop at Machakos in Kenya in 1999 was another initiative taken by the 
laity. It gathered people  some still living in their countries  from Burundi, Congo and 
Rwanda to study the problems in the Great Lakes Region. Butselaar (2002) suggested that 
the participants were mostly people of academic background who held important 
responsibilities under the old and new regimes. They came seeking inspiration from the 
gospel and prayer. One of the outcomes of Machakos was the creation of an Internet 
discussion forum where participants could exchange views and comments on events in the 
region (Actes du Colloque de Machakos 1999). 
Apparently, silence and suspicion between the churches and the government profit key 
players in the genocide. The Protestant clergy also seemed satisfied in their co-operation 
with the new regime, while the Roman Catholics faced the hardest challenges before 
tribunals. The situation, which was not conducive for truth, favoured the continuation of 
abuses and other forms of injustices. Among the victims of such injustice are pastors, 
priests, monks, nuns, and other religious people. In the face of justice and property rights, 
the churches have remained mute or blind; they rather subscribe to deceptive political 
slogans and propaganda.5 So far the churches, save the RCCR, have made no effort to 
make an impartial assessment of the situation in Rwanda; they rather risk becoming agents 
for the prosecution (cf. WCC 1998; WARC 1999). 
Theunis (1997) suggested that there is division between the dioceses, between Christian 
communities, within those communities and within religious congregations He wrote:  
Services are as well attended as before; the attention given to the word of God and to homilies 
is even greater most of the time; the hymns are sung heartily by all, but after the mass everyone 
hurries back home: people no longer talk to one another after Church, they distrust one another, 
they are frightened... 
The above source highlights the unchanged panorama and practices of the churches in 
Rwanda. The workings are deep rooted in the exclusive relations between the church 
  5 The Presbyterian Church of Rwanda invited delegates from the WARC for a visit (18-25 January 1999). 
The following impression transpired from the visit: its report states that the local church representative 
showed the historic memory to the delegation, emphasising the bad effect of the genocide. However, he did 
not express the new perspective of the church. No indication or plea concerning justice, prisoners or the 
refugees issues was made. There was rather a taste of the feeling and preoccupation of interpreting 
positively the political dimensions and support for the political regime. Paradoxically, the delegates seemed 
satisfied without questioning or reflection. Most first genocide trials and prosecutions of some church 
members (including the clergy) were contested internally and internationally, but none of the delegation 
asked questions about the churchs silence on this. The pity of it all was that the delegates did not show 
strong support for an all-encompassing dialogue.  
hierarchy and the political regime, and competitive attitudes in both institutions. The 
indifference of the churches towards the victims of the genocide and the prisoners 
exemplifies the degree of agreement or dissatisfaction between the government and the 
churches. During this research, one respondent (anonymous 2001) remarked, you know, 
most church ministers you knew disappeared, and nobody asked about them. He drew up 
a list of eight pastors who had either disappeared on their way from Sunday services or 
been taken from church compounds.  
After the genocide, the Protestant churches generally reclaimed the position formerly 
enjoyed by the RCCR. Likewise, Karayenga (2000) asserts that a new oligarchy [Akazu] of 
Tutsi elite comprising the clergy enjoys some benefits at the expense of the grassroots. 
Longman also outlines this situation, 
In the aftermath of the genocide, Rwandas churches have engaged in a limited process of self-
reflection. [] Anglicans and Presbyterians have admitted the failings of their predecessors. In 
practice, however, little has changed in the manner in which churches engage the society. Once 
again, church leaders have sought to ally themselves with the new RPF regime. While 
condemning the genocide, the churches have failed to condemn the principle of ethnic 
discrimination and, in fact, most churches have moved Tutsi into leadership positions in 
response to the new political realities. The churches have failed to address ongoing ethnic 
violence and human rights abuses. New alliances are being struck in local communities 
between church and state officials, and in many places, church personnel have again become 
the strongest supporters of the regime. Sadly, the Rwandan churches seem to confirm the 
Kinyarwanda adage, The dancers have changed but the drums are the same (1998). 
There is great progress towards peace and co-existence in post-genocide Rwanda. 
However, the processes of reconciliation and fair justice are not real. The situation calls the 
churches to take more incentives, strategic action and teamwork with the state. 
8. 5 Further initiatives: reconstruction, unity and reconciliation  
Beside the churches, there are three other agents of reconciliation in post-genocide 
Rwanda: justice mainly the participatory Gacaca, the National Unity and Reconciliation 
Commission (NURC) and collective memory (symbols and events). At the beginning of 
talks for reconciliation, the commitment of the Rwandan people was dubious because of 
fear of either the new regime or the old one. Moreover, the extent of the damage, the anger 
of survivors organisations, military action and subsequent crises would not allow a true 
dialogue. These realities had given the government a pretext of non-commitment to the 
rights of the people, justice and reconciliation (Sibomana 1999). Thus, the commitment to 
reconciliation from the external partners dried up (Millingam 2001; Butselaar 2002).  
However, there has been considerable achievement in terms of reconstruction. NGOs were 
competing to establish themselves in the country. Local initiatives and the international 
appeal for fundraising were successful; in particular, countries that had had no strong links 
with Rwanda before (such as the UK and the USA) contributed officially and through 
private initiatives. In 2001, Rwanda became the 10th largest recipient of British bilateral 
assistance (IRIN 11 February 2002). On one hand, however, it was difficult to initiate a 
direct dialogue between former belligerents after a crisis such as the 1994 genocide. There 
were real handicaps, including anger and excessive pain. On the other hand, the Hutu hard-
liners had not stopped their military sabotage against the new regime. Again, some pretexts 
served to cover up the refusal of the victorious side and its allies. During a visit by human 
rights NGOs to prisons in Kigali, a delegate asked why the government kept prisoners 
many of whom had no files or charges  in overcrowded and inhuman conditions. The 
representative of the Ministry of Justice avoided the question. He simply replied that those 
prisoners would remain in prison because they had committed genocide (Videotape I, 
Justice in Post-genocide Rwanda 1998). Thus, the type of justice was established in 
Rwanda was not fair, and was not working towards reconciliation. However, after some 
years, consistent requests came from various sources urging the Rwandan government to 
establish judicial processes that would lead to reconciliation.  
8.5.1 Judicial exertion and Gacaca 
Moghalu (1998b) commended the establishment of the International Criminal Tribunal for 
Rwanda (ICTR) and suggested,  
The Rwandan Tribunal is  a unique instrument of conflict resolution, being the first example 
of an international judicial dimension to the resolution of an internal conflict. Its creation is a 
firm statement that there can be no longer-term peace without justice in Rwanda.  
In another article, Moghalu (1998a) claimed that justice would help with reconciliation in 
Rwanda. Up to the year 2003, neither justice nor reconciliation was yet significant in the 
country.  In fact, there are some steps being taken towards fair justice, while 
reconciliation remains only on the lips of politicians and church leaders.  
Suggestions were pressurising the Rwandan authorities to acknowledge the need to provide 
justice for 130,000 prisoners (Magnarella 2000; Millingan 2001). Since it was difficult to 
try such a number in a short period, because of the shortage of magistrates and resources, 
two alternatives were suggested to speed up the processes: (1) applying the South African 
Truth and Reconciliation Commission (Vandeginste 1998a; Mbeki 2000; Mamdani 2001), 
or (2) one or both of traditional jurisdiction (Gacaca) and modern justice. In this 
perspective, the Rwandan Ambassador to the UK, Museminali (2001) stated,  
We are however convinced that there cannot be reconciliation without justice [in Rwanda]. 
Efforts have been made to rebuild the judicial system and bring those suspected of genocide to 
book. The Arusha Tribunal has been set up and with the co-operation of the International 
community, more criminals can be taken to face trials. In Rwanda, 5000 cases have been tried 
to date; at the Arusha tribunal about 5 cases have been tried. A special genocide law was 
enacted and takes into account the Participatory Justice System; Gacaca has been put into 
place to deal with the huge task of trying the numbers of genocide suspects. 
Museminali (2001) further announced the moves made by the Rwandan Government 
towards unity and reconciliation, including elections of local leaders, the Human Rights 
Commission, the Unity and Reconciliation Commission and a political parties forum. 
However, the question remains of how to achieve reconciliation without a neutral truth 
recovery process, either through a truth commission or the NURC. While seeking the truth 
requires involving both victims and perpetrators, national reconciliation would require 
involving old and new leaderships. The Ambassador did not mention any strategies for 
such actions, the timescale or the basic conditions required (such as the search for truth and 
equitability) before embarking on the process of reconciliation. Again, her address did not 
signal any invitation to members of the former and the new regimes to take part in this 
process. She only asserted that Gacaca was in prospect and that it had tried a few cases, 
and would presumably operate at national levels (Museminali 2001). Renewed Gacaca as 
context-based justice to lessen the problem of prisons is resolute, but it does not seem to 
embody a vision for reconciliation.  
The re-established Gacaca is composed of elected notables at different administrative 
levels: Cell, Sector, District and Province (Vandeginste 2003, 277). An improvement on 
the old structure is that one-third of the members are women and young people. The 
process operates in the presence of the local population from the administrative unit where 
everybody can give their testimony and supply clarification of it (Mukarubuga 2000). In 
the prevailing circumstances, Vandeginste (2003, 272) and Mucyo (speech 24 April 2002) 
observes that Rwandas Organic Law No.40/2000 of January 26, 2000 has established the 
following guidelines:  
 The Cell (lower administrative level) has to judge cases of looting and destruction 
of property during the Genocide: these are offences of category 4. 
 The Sector (second administrative level) tries category 3 offences: suspects 
associated with the killings, but who have not been charged with personally killing 
anyone.  
 The District (the third administrative level) will judge the gnocidaires, those who 
committed genocide (category 2) and admit this. 
The pattern would work on the prospect of reconciliation. However, Mukarubuga (2000) 
seems to agree with Mucumbitsi (1997) that whether this would happen depends on the 
willingness of the government. Mukarubuga (2000) claimed that since survivors are few in 
number, they might not dare to give testimonies relating to the atrocities they witnessed. 
Uwitonze (2000) rather suggested that some survivors saw the renewed Gacaca as a trick 
from the government to gain popularity in searching for forgiveness on behalf of 
gnocidaires. Others assert that the renewed Gacaca hides government intentions to 
identify criminals in order to give them exemplary punishment.  
Uwitonze (2000) asserts that there seems to be no interest in reconciliation or reparation 
for victims. The general opinion in Rwanda, however, is that Gacaca is both most 
welcome and the most effective remaining alternative capable of handling the aftermath of 
genocide (mainly the hatred and matters of prisoners), provided the process is well 
motivated and structured.  
Three problems are blocking the way: Firstly, victims have threatened to kill suspects in 
the case of acquittals without formal trial. Newbury (1998) suggested that a corporate view 
of ethnicity, which targeted all Tutsi during the genocide, is used in this case to label all 
Hutu as gnocidaires. She suggested that this view seemed to be part of a political 
programme of vengeance directed against Hutu. The ethnic hatred had grown to extreme 
heights in the 1990s, under successive regimes, due to the impunity, particularly with 
military and extra judicial reactions. Secondly, the Rwandan administration is not ready for 
judiciary independence; it would probably obstruct fairness in justice. The former US 
President, B. Clinton (speech, 25 March 1998) warned, there can be no peace in Rwanda 
that lasts without justice systems that are recognised as such. The fact that the state has 
given rigid guidelines and structures to Gacaca and wants to control the whole process 
from the top down to the grassroots signals an eventual obstruction.6 Thirdly, some 
individuals are afraid of injustice, since they are threatened with death because someone 
(especially the military) wants to take their property. The assets of prisoners encouraged 
the distortion of justice: in particular, it takes away the will to release people who face no 
charges. If these difficulties were overcome, fair justice, peace building and reconciliation 
would start to materialise. 
Zorbas (2004) asserts that within the spirit of realizing the new Gacaca is also a noticeable 
hostility towards White Peoples and Western justice. The main goal, however, is to 
promote reconciliation and healing by providing a platform for victims to express 
themselves, encouraging acknowledgements and apologies from the perpetrators, and 
facilitating meetings between victims and perpetrator. One may agree with Zorbas (2004) 
that this process replicates the TRC, save that the Gacaca  tribunal  does not have the 
power to offer amnesty in exchange for confessions but insists on incriminating co-
conspirators. Gahima (2004) confirmed Zorbas suggestion (2004) that the system will 
increase genocide-related suspects and eventual vendettas.  
Perhaps of the same vision as Gacaca was the society project proposal, which could 
retain the TRC pattern. It was a private initiative and is still under study. The argument 
behind the project was to reflect the desire of all nationals on the ways in which to leave 
the past behind and share a common perspective. It aimed first to investigate in-depth the 
direct and indirect causes of the conflicts. The second stage suggested a round table 
representing the whole nation and considering relationships between beneficiaries and 
victims, as well as ethnic, religious and regional influences. The international influence 
  6 Mucyo (in Villa-Vicencio & Savage 2001) agrees with Kinyamateka (5 November 2001, 1588) that the 
Rwandan Supreme Court and ASF/B (Avovats Sans Frontires [Lawyers Without Borders]) elaborated laws 
providing strict guidelines and specific training to apply to Gacaca before its structure was fully set and its 
members appointed. 
was to be called to play a great role in giving input, facilitating and financing this round-
table (Projet de Socit 1996).  
The society project would have been more likely to succeed than any other alternative 
and would have served a long-term purpose if it were built on solid agreements, 
considering former army and leaders views and encompassing a common vision. 
Regrettably, the Project was kept under wraps because of the prevailing uncertainties in the 
region, and the eventual connection with financing bodies. It also sought an intellectual 
reworking of the social method, as the new Gacaca did, with the difference that the Project 
was suggested to involve (and benefit from the support of) more of the grassroots from the 
earliest stage.  
However, Ntampaka (1999) contended that the renewed Gacaca as a birth of judiciary 
pluralism might present difficulties in practice, since it is reborn as a social necessity. Yet, 
it involves twinning two systems (traditional and modern justice). It might put the judge in 
the dilemma of choosing between the application of laws from the Constitution  that the 
eyes of the population may see as injustice  or of customs, which would be better 
understood by the people at large. The option to follow the traditional customs would lead 
the judge to break the written law. Thus, Ntampaka (1999) finds it utopian to anticipate the 
success of Gacaca entwining with laws. He stated that combining the two systems requires 
first a refined study of both traditional and modern practices and the evolution of case law 
rather than merely building on political statements.  
One would agree with Ntampakas (1999) argument, but the situation in Rwanda cannot 
remain as it is. It might be advisable to either review the ways of applying combined 
mechanisms or to seek a constitutional adaptation for the transitional situation in Rwanda. 
The constitutional adaptation may then embody reconciled laws, which perhaps the 
Organic Law (of January 26, 2000) implied; if not, the current Judicial and Constitutional 
Commission could design it (Mucyo in Villa-Vicencio & Savage 2001). Igwara (2002) 
stated that the government of Rwanda wanted to enforce combined retributive and 
restorative justices in Gacaca. However, she felt that the renewed Gacaca would not be 
enough; she suggested that through it, the judicial process risks pushing aside both the 
memories and emotions that needed be externalised.  
Gacaca is an everyday topic in post-genocide Rwanda, in informal discussions and official 
addresses. It is communicated in training/workshops and research, plays, weekly radio 
spots, the bi-monthly newspaper (Inkiko Gacaca), bi-weekly radio talk shows, Gacaca 
soccer matches, electronic campaigns, the Gacaca Song Competition and in research. 
These methods are promising in terms of information and popular sensitisation; it is 
regrettable, however, that church institutions are not involved in this activity and are not 
even among the official partners of this perspective,7 otherwise, Gacaca ideology could be 
effectively applied in the situation and integrate other positive socio-cultural and moral 
elements. 
Despite the official vision that renewed Gacaca aims at reconciliation and at limiting 
perpetual conflict, Mukarubuga (2000) suggested that the promises and praxis of political 
leaders do not stress the aspect of reconciliation. Survivors suspect it of being a form of 
disguised amnesty. Vandginste (in Bigger 2003, 275) asserts that fear has mounted about 
the Gacaca because it has become a state tribunal system and could be manipulated to 
settle personal scores through collusion or conspiracy of silence.  
  7 Up until 2003, the partners were the Ministry of Justice, the Centre for Conflict Management, the 
Rwandan National Information Office, Ibuka, CLADHO (Collectif des Ligues et Associations de Defense 
des Droits de lHomme au Rwanda) and the Muslim Association of Rwanda (information found on 
www.rwanda1.com/government/). 
Evidently, the new Gacaca contains some weak components, making people sceptical 
about its outcomes. (1) As Vandeginste (2003, 275) suggested, the most negative aspect is 
that the top leadership has dictated the pattern. (2) The state structure established this 
system: its composition, functioning and jurisdiction, and will apply the state law. (3) It is 
pyramidal, centrally steered and founded by the state as its tool. (4) Yet, it started when the 
society was still extremely divided8 following the war and genocide, and the subsequent 
killings. Moreover, the process has no competence to handle war crimes. Therefore, it has 
no independence from the regular administration and courts. To respond effectively to the 
restorative desire and reconciliation, people would need to own the process; again, it would 
require a high degree of freedom and openness. 
Given that the new Gacacas weakness and uncertainties affect cultural and spiritual 
values, the situation does not encourage fair justice and has no bearing on reconciliation. 
To be effective, the state must ensure the process rather than a given result, and should aim 
to benefit the whole society. There are questions to answer: (1) How could such a 
traditional institution be strengthened in order to make it respond effectively to the core 
problem and subsequent development? (2) Had modern tribunals in Rwanda tried their best 
to handle the problems, before referring back to the Gacaca alternative? Given that the 
victims will handle this process, together with the perpetrators, and that there are no prior 
agreements between the two sides on procedures, it will be difficult to proceed. Despite the 
sympathy given to the victims of the genocide, there are more unrecognised victims: most 
families are victimised by the imprisonment of family members for whom they have to 
  8 Spijker (2001, 257) agrees with Vandeginste (2003, 277); the former suggested that, the antagonisms 
within the population are much more complicated than those of Hutu and Tutsi. He stated that there is more 
conflict of interests between those people living in the cities and those in the hills, between survivors/victims 
and presumed criminals and their relatives, etc. Spijker (2001, 257) states, the live[s] of the people are 
characterised by anger, shame, deprivation, poverty and mistrust. An expression often heard in Rwanda is le 
tissue social est dchir i.e. the pattern of Rwandan society is torn to pieces. 
provide the means for survival. Yet, people should be considered innocent until proven 
guilty (Vandeginste 2003). 
8.5.2 National Unity and Reconciliation Commission (NURC) 
Another attempt to solve the Rwandan crisis is quasi-prosecutorial. The NURC was set up 
by Parliamentary law no 03/99 of 12 March 1999 (Inyumba 2002). So far, the Commission 
has achieved little. Ntezimana (2000, 2) attributed its shortcoming to the Rwandan 
Government. While the trajectory that the Commission should follow required public 
confession and political forgiveness, he suggested that the leadership themselves have 
something to hide and have not set an example in this perspective.   
Inyumba (2002), the Executive Secretary of the NURC, asserted that the Rwandan 
Government considered that unity and reconciliation of the people is the basis for defeating 
social, economic and political underdevelopment. She stated that the setting of the 
Commission marked a major change in the effects of bad governance based on 
discrimination and sectarianism; it started the healing of the hearts, a journey led by 
Rwandans themselves that would shape and influence how unity and reconciliation could 
be achieved.  
Until the end of 2004, the NURC had organised conferences and workshops on the theme 
of unity and reconciliation. Of particular significance were two summits gathering 
Rwandans from all levels. The first summit (19 October 2000) invited President T. Mbeki 
of South Africa to address the way to reconciliation. The Mozambican President addressed 
the second summit (26-28 October 2002). Longman & Rutagengwa (2001) and Zorbas 
(2004) agree with Inyumba (2002) that the Commissions workshops also targeted civil 
societys re-education, mainly through solidarity camps [ingando] in which ex-FAR, 
Interahamwe and other groups of newly repatriated people and those released from prisons 
were required to stay for about 7 weeks. In these camps, the NURC provides courses in the 
form of lectures, envisaging reintegration into society. Inyumba (2002) asserted that 
NURCs principal objectives for these consultations are to persuade the people of Rwanda 
to give their views on a more productive path to reconciliation.  
On 8-14 August 2001, the NURC organised a seminar for high-level leaders, including 
religious leaders, with the backing of international experts  E. Staub, L. A. Pearlman and 
A. DeLacour  as facilitators. It focused on understanding and preventing group violence 
and psychological trauma. It also highlighted the positive use and meaning of Hutu and 
Tutsi concepts and the traumatic effects of the genocide, and suggested a recovery of the 
factual history of Rwanda.9 Despite the relevant substance of the seminar, the list of 
participators shows that the seminar was limited to categories of people who were not 
involved in the field; they neither used the suggestions extensively nor disseminated them 
among those involved in practice.  
While it is widely known that Rwandas war and the genocide were products of ethnic 
differences leading to competition for power and other means of control, Inyumba (2002) 
asserted that Rwandans are discovering that the problem in Rwanda was not ethnic 
differences but bad governance. In so doing, she later addressed side factors with less 
focussed activities. She did not elaborate at any length the plan of the Commission or give 
practical examples of how the Commission translates its views in reconciliation practices 
either on national or grassroots levels. She simply mentioned that the Commission had 
proposed to the Parliament a law that would punish all kinds of discrimination. Yet, so far, 
nobody has clarified the linkage between the Commissions work and the Gacaca process. 
Inyumba (2002) stated, however, that the Commission rather coordinates activities relating 
  9 Http://www.heal-reconile-rwanda.org/leaderrec.htm 
to revenue, poverty reduction, scholarship, the National Examination Board, the Human 
Rights National Tender Board and the office of the Inspector General of the Government. 
Despite the positive activities of the NURC, Zorbas (2004), like this research, doubts the 
existence of any direct or indirect link between the Commission and Gacaca tribunals. She 
also asserts that while the NURC claims that it is working towards unity and reconciliation 
on a large scale, it is criticised for being only vertical, and operating as tool for central 
authorities. Conversely, Gacaca evidence might apparently turn against those it had 
sentenced. It is self-evident that its process serves the interests of the courts of tribunal. 
While it encourages grass-roots participation in hearings and fills in the gaps left by the 
NURC, as far as reconciliation is concerned, there is no way to estimate either the outcome 
of the NURC or actual Gacaca. 
From the same perspective as the NURC, there have been visits between South Africa and 
Rwanda (Boraine 2000; Villa-Vicencio & Savage 2001). However, there was no 
representation from the defeated side and the churches. Delegates of the TRC went to 
Kigali in September 1996. A Rwandan delegation went to South Africa in January 1997. It 
is believed that the early impulse for this initiative came from outsiders  Belgium, the 
Netherlands and Switzerland  that wanted to encourage Rwanda to benefit from South 
Africas experience of national reconciliation and reparation for victims. The three 
countries sponsored the NPI to apply the TRC in Rwanda (NPI 1997; Vandeginste 1998a). 
Regrettably, there was no consensus in Rwanda on whether or how to apply the TRC 
approach. Contradictions emerged from Rwandas government sources. F. Ntezilyayo, the 
Rwandan Minister of Justice in 1997, was optimistic about such non-judicial approach. In 
the conference in Kigali, he suggested,  
The truth and reconciliation commission on the South African model is an attractive option. I 
echo the desire to see such a commission established, but I feel that it is premature. It is hard to 
say what the official view is. I am not the Prime Minister so I cannot give you the government 
view. My own view is that we want mechanisms over and above the institutions of justice, 
something which is in line with social justice, which is indispensable for the society. I am far 
from feeling that a Truth and Justice Commission is not useful, I think that it is necessary, 
whether it is done through a Unity and Reconciliation Commission or not. It is just as 
necessary as a Commission for Human Rights. Whichever way one approaches this, anything 
which helps to bring healing will be helpful (NPI 1997,  1). 
The Minister asked whether a commission of justice and reconciliation, be it through the 
NURC or other channels, and a commission for human rights are incompatible. Arguing 
rather that justice must have roots and that the mechanism needed in Rwanda ought to be 
both social justice and above ordinary institutions, he stated that initiatives from within and 
outside the government could come together (NPI 1997, 6). This was ideal, yet was merely 
an individual call for all the initiatives to join their efforts. Alas, no formal call or response 
came from either the state or the churches;10 nor have they shown the desire to follow up an 
inclusive national dialogue. Apart from the initial support, there has been no other 
consistent follow-up to such a call, either from secular or religious domains. In his formal 
address, the Minister plainly asserted that truth and justice are key words for the 
construction of the new society (NPI 1997). Since both truth and justice are also central to 
the Christian faith, the latter ought to follow the same perspective. What has perhaps made 
Rwandas case particularly difficult is that the proposal for national reconciliation emerged 
mainly after one side was defeated. Thus far, it is an idea mostly from the remnants of the 
defeated side and their allies (Khan 2000). 
The proposal to launch a commission (eventually a TRC) for Rwanda had come originally 
from Zairian officials, Pakistani UN Official S. Khan and the former UN General Secretary 
B. Ghali (Khan 2000). Most people who supported the proposal urged that non-criminals 
alone would participate in the dialogue. Khan (2000), the UNs special representative to 
Rwanda during and after the genocide, had provided the groundwork for the reconciliation, 
placing it in the context of regional effort signalled by the Nairobi summit of 07 January 
1995 under the auspices of President Moi of Kenya. He stated,  
  10 The churches, joined with international ecumenical bodies, voiced a clear call in April 2004.  
I expected broad agreement on inducing an early return of refugees [from neighbouring 
countries to Rwanda] by controlling intimidation, arresting known criminals and ensuring 
fair treatment for the returnees. I anticipated, however, that Rwanda would come under 
pressure on the issue of national reconciliation from at least five of the other leaders who 
would press for a general amnesty and negotiations with former government elements. I 
expected President Museveni to back Rwandas firm opposition to this concept. In the first 
round of discussion, there was quick agreement on encouraging the early return of refugees. 
Zaire then spearheaded a proposal calling on Rwanda to engage in a dialogue with the 
opposition in the interests of national reconciliation. Tanzania, Burundi, Zambia and Kenya 
pursued a similar line, reasoning that the dialogue should take place with non-criminal 
elements of the opposition. Surely, they argued, not all members of the opposition were 
tainted with criminality. Surprisingly, President Museveni also joined in with the other five 
leaders in support of separating non-criminal elements of the former government from those 
who were clean and talking to them. President Bizimungu remained steadfast and alone in 
vehemently opposing any dialogue with the opposition. When pressed, he asked, who are 
these moderates that you are talking about? Can anybody give me the name of a person from 
the former government who has acknowledged that genocide should be condemned? Or who 
has shown regret and remorse over the genocide? (Khan 2000, 91-92). 
During the summit, Khan (2000) reiterated the importance of national reconciliation for the 
healing process and the voluntary return of refugees, but cautioned that overall healing 
would take time, while the middle and lower levels of society needed to be encouraged 
first. He argued that the communiqu from the summit was crucial; it paved the way for 
subsequent summits in Cairo and Tunis, save that the lack of international backers reduced 
its appeal. 
Khan (2000) stressed the necessity to call upon Y. Museveni to play a leading role in the 
reconciliation perspective. It is self-evident, however, that neither Moi nor Museveni could 
be neutral third parties, because Museveni was an ally of the RPF, whilst Moi sympathised 
with the MRND. Only both together could calm the parties, allowing them to meet and 
pursue the conciliation. Actually, reconciliation could happen only if there was no 
lobbying in favour of one or other of the parties by their respective allies. 
It has been noted that reconciliation does not build on repentance and forgiveness alone 
(OLeary & Hay 2000): readiness to sit and work together or to talk might do much more. 
In Rwanda, groups have started doing this (Jacques 1997). The question remains of how to 
involve judicial and diplomatic structures in the move. Mamdani (1998) and Sibomana 
(1999) have urged that reconciliation should not be synonymous with impunity or 
immunity. Likewise, Khan (2000) suggested encouraging leaders of the former 
government who were not tainted with criminality to return home; he advocated power 
sharing, reaffirming the Arusha Peace Accords. His unique proposal to secure coexistence 
and eventually reconciliation was to contact first and discretely the Hutu political leaders 
in exile who had not engaged in the genocide. In fact, the proposal was a replica of the 
pattern that guided the negotiations between the NP and ANC in South Africa (Mandela 
1994), save that its application to Rwanda excluded those individuals accused of genocide. 
The proposal was disregarded as a whole, and there is no indication as to whether it is 
among the possibilities that the Rwandan government envisages through the NURC 
(Sebarenzi 2002).  
So far, many opportunities that could have led to a viable solution in Rwanda have been 
missed. Conversely, Ndamage (2004) asserts that Rwandan political leaders have perverted 
the central meaning of national reconciliation and its effective tools. Such an attitude 
transpired in the earlier lack of consensus on the approach to pursue. Whereas Hutu urged 
for the TRC, Tutsi enforced prosecution. At the conference led by NPI (1997), the then 
Secretary-General of the Ministry of Justice, G. Gahima, held the opinion that the TRC 
approach was inappropriate for Rwanda. In his view, prevailing conditions in the country 
were not conducive for the TRC. He stressed that instead, law and punishment should 
apply (NPI 1997; Vandeginste 1998a). Despite the fact that some initiatives and remnants 
of political oppositions commended a non-judicial mechanism involving at least some 
form of consultation, the official view never endorsed this approach (see Bizimungu cited 
in Khan 2000; Gahima in NPI 1997) and no alternative objective suggestions were made, 
be they popular referendum or popular inquiries.  
Twagiramungu (Dialogue [205] Jul/Aug 1998, 93) clarified that both Hutu and Tutsi 
committed abuses (although not in equal measures). On the contrary, most inquiries and 
political sources have not acknowledged that the RPA were responsible for some killings 
(Garreton 1997). The positioning of such inquiries is an obstacle to the right way ahead 
and proves that truth recovery concerning the whole period of war is a precondition for 
genuine resolution. The sources above clarify that apart from the beneficiaries of the 
respective regimes in Rwanda, and people who have their reasons to fear the truth, most 
Hutu and Tutsi have called for a TRC-like process, stressing fair justice. 
On one hand, the NPI appeal (1997 & 1998) involving churches in Rwanda was in line 
with the proposals of the special envoy of the European Union, A. Ajello, who 
recommended that the international community should stimulate combined judicial and 
non-judicial approaches. Vandeginste (1998a) asserts that Ajello supported a judicial 
approach, which presupposes non-judicial initiatives with a leaning towards the South 
African model or other mechanisms from African tradition and culture (which could 
embrace authentic Gacaca, NGOs and church projects). Ajello suggested combining 
punishment and forgiveness, creating and consolidating the culture of forgiveness while 
putting an end to impunity. He urged ending the impunity of the masterminds and 
perpetrators of the genocide. He considered the mass of people implicated as a secondary 
group of victims of genocide, who were misled by leaders and could be forgiven.11  
On the other hand, the NPI proposal was not concurrent with the view of the UN 
Commissioner on Human Rights, M. Moussali. The latter urged the international 
community to support a prosecutorial approach (Vandeginste 1998a). In the end, the 
international community backed Moussalis view, perhaps because he was in line with the 
  11 A. Ajello. 1997. La petite ide dAldo Ajello pour ramener la paix entre frres ennemis in La Libre 
Belgique, 24 December 1997 (Cited in Vandeginste 1998a, 49-50). 
wishes of the then legitimate Rwandan regime. However, the measure as it started and the 
practices of its parallel NURC are not conducive to reconciliation and equitability. 
8.5.3 Collective memory, symbols and cultural performance  
The other, more symbolic agent of reconciliation is the collective memory embodied in the 
monuments, memorials and museums. Of the same nature are cultural performance, films, 
novel and songs and national holidays. In Rwanda, some of the monuments and museums 
are in former church premises in which many people died.  
The government has established a national day in order to foster collective memory by 
mourning the victims of the genocide. Each year, generally around the seventh of April, 
there is a time of mourning, and no celebrations take place during this period. In this 
period, one site is chosen where the exhumation of dead is followed by a reburial led by 
the President of Rwanda (Zorbas 2004; Longman & Rutagengwa 2001). However, 
Longman and Rutagengwa assert,  
The government has used trials, public addresses, commemorations and memorialization, 
school programs, re-education camps, and new changes in the national symbols to shape the 
collective memory of the Rwanda past, including the period of violence in the early 1990s, and 
thus to transform how Rwandans understand their social identities (2001, 1).  
Zorbas (2004) contends that Rwandan people perceive these symbols differently, 
particularly the monuments and mourning. The Hutu generally feel that it is an affair of the 
Tutsi  the only recognised victims  because the Hutu who died in the genocide and after 
are never mentioned. In the same perspective, Longman and Rutagengwa (2001, 5) states, 
there is no single site commemorating the [Hutu] victims of RPF massacres, though 
research clearly indicates that tens of thousands of people were killed in such attacks. 
During the research interviews (2000-2001), the Hutu suggested that such days of 
mourning, monuments and reburial rather revitalise ethnic hatred and block the move to 
unity and reconciliation. Despite the negative usage and effects of such performances, they 
are necessary as reminders to prevent the same thing from occurring again (for 
perpetrators) and important steps on the healing journey (for victims).  
In short, there were consistent attempts to mediate between belligerent parties in Rwanda 
before 1994 and the churches were most active in these ventures. However, no efforts were 
made to prevent the genocide. While the mediation by the churches was pragmatic, a 
power-hunt by political leaders and biased international intervention eclipsed it. The RPFs 
focus on international relations  securing its power  and its diplomatic skill were far 
more vigilant and impressed the world far more than the MRND regime. In post-genocide 
Rwanda, the desire for prosecution has suppressed eventual reconciliation.  Unfortunately, 
the international influence has even twisted the purpose of the ICTR. The state did not 
involve the churches at the inception of the new options (NURC and Gacaca). Even so, 
since 2004, the Churches have started working again in unison on reconciliation strategies. 
However, they are not yet all set for nationwide reconciliation practices neither in co-
operation with other faiths nor with the state. Moreover, Longman (1997) has rightly 
asserted that the complicity of the churches in the genocide is not merely a failing of 
Christianity in Rwanda, but of world Christianity as it has established itself in Africa. This 
ought to lead people of faith worldwide to re-examine the nature of religious institutions 
and the ways in which they exercise their power. 
PART  FOUR:    SIGNIFICANCE AND APPLICATION 
Chapter 9 
A Comparative Approach to the cases of South Africa and Rwanda 
This chapter compares the stages and components of the South African and Rwandan 
conflict settlement processes, stressing post-conflict reconciliation, the nature of churches 
and their contributions to settlement of their societies. It attempts to answer these 
questions: 
 Is the TRC transferable to Rwanda? Are the conditions and resources that the TRC 
depended on in South Africa prevailing in Rwanda? Are potential issues or institutions that 
were considered in the South African processes present in Rwanda? What are the likely 
limitations of the TRC approach in the Rwandan context?  
 How can suspicions be overcome and co-operation be initiated between the people and 
the state in Rwanda? Are there any lessons to learn from the South African post-conflict 
procedures and the TRC? 
 Is there any ideal period of time, or any space requirement, that is needed to reduce the 
tensions or for genuine reconciliation? 
A comparison of the South African and Rwandan contexts (see Tables 9.1 & 9.2), and their 
respective paradigms of conflict settlement (see Table 9.3), provides insights in the search 
to overcome the impact of the Rwandan conflict, the genocide and subsequent deadlock.  
9.1 Retrospective assessment 
9.1.1 The sources 
A survey of the literature shows that Khan (2000) took a potentially non-partisan attitude 
concerning the Rwandan crisis. He provides a clear review of, and guidelines for, the 
search for co-existence in Rwanda, exposing positive and negative aspects of the 
conflicting sides. He found abuses and killings on both sides (though not equal guilt); he 
was the first to propose reconciliation after the genocide.  
So far, Vandeginste (1998a & b) has provided good reflections on the possibilities of 
applying a quasi-judicial approach, envisaging reconciliation and eventual trial for major 
cases. Although he failed to value the participation of religion, above all the church, he 
added insights to previous research such as Claphams (1996) and the attempts at dialogue 
initiated by the NPI (1997). In the same perspective, Sarkin (in NPI 1997) provided 
groundwork calling for the participation of the church.  
Adelman and Suhrke (1999), Melvern (2000 & 2004), Kuperman (2001), Barnett (2002) 
and Pottier (2002) enlighten the review of the 1990s events. Until 1999, Reyntjens (1994) 
and Prunier (1995) had conducted the most consistent research. Sibomana (1999), a 
Rwandan Roman Catholic prelate, deserves attention for his original contribution to the 
objective knowledge of the Rwandan situation. However, no initiative followed up the 
perspective that Khan (2000) had suggested to attempt truth recovery and reconciliation. 
Most other literatures were more accusatory than effectively critical.  
Apart from the comparative instance made by Vandeginste (1998a), no study has made 
further attempts with regard to the approach or consistent application of the South African 
TRC to Rwanda, stressing the role of the church and the healing of pain. On one hand, this 
was partly because no useful evaluation of the TRC was available before 2000,12 as not all 
its committees had published their reports. Meredith and Rosenberg (1999), Jeffery (1999) 
and Tutu (1999) presented general approaches, whilst others, like Roteberg and Thompson 
(2000), expounded on particular concepts such as truth and justice. Meiring (1999), 
however, stressed the contribution of the church in the TRC. Later, Boraine (2000) gave an 
inside account of the Commission.  
On the other hand, before the year 2000, the Rwandan crisis could not have been analysed 
objectively. Rwandas people either suffered from fear or anger. Thus, talking of 
reconciliation was still unacceptable (Millingan, personal contact 2001; van Butselaar 
2002). By 2002, objective analyses on Rwandas genocide and the prospect of 
reconciliation had emerged, providing groundwork for comparison of the Rwandan and 
South African situations and the countries efforts to settle their crises. Additionally, a 
dialogue was established, engaging experts in human rights and peace studies and the 
leaders from both countries (see Villa-Vicencio & Savage [eds.] 2001).  
9.1.2 Comparability of the two cases 
It is evident that the governments and ruling elites of both South Africa and Rwanda had 
political agendas of exclusion and violence, which had negative effects on the individuals 
psyches. Both countries had two racial groups in conflict over resources and leadership. In 
both countries, exclusion led to bloody confrontation, increased injustice and oppression, 
which developed more hatred between the groups (see an outline of further similarities in 
Table 9.1). However, the international connections of the two countries and their peoples 
colour, ethnic realities and economies are different. South Africa has a long history of 
enforced separateness based on colour. Thus, Apartheid led to spatial separation of the  
  12 Such as Christie (2000), Boraine (2000), Villa-Vicencio & Verwoerd (2000), Wilson (2001), Graybil 
(2002), Posel & Simpson (2002), Bell & Ntsebeza (2003) and Sparks (2003). 
Table 9.1: Similarities between South African and Rwandan Contexts 
South Africa 
1) Two main groups of people: White and 
Black (and marginalized coloureds) 
2) Racist agenda:  
 - Whites against Blacks 
3) Prejudice and dictatorship 
4) Racial discrimination 
5) Political manipulation, dividing power and 
propaganda 
6) Intolerance/ HR abuses 
7) Resentment 
8) Moral degradation 
9) Inner wounds/ bitterness and suppressed 
memories 
10) Intensive reactions 
11) Experience of pain  
12) No guilty consciences (Afrikaners) 
13) Remembrance of violence 
14) DRC: ideological support to Apartheid  
(and state theology) 
15 Church ministry failed to challenge the 
situation 
16) Need for dialogue and change of attitude 
17) Peace committees involved churches 
18) Church leaders (mainly Afrikaners) 
 ambivalent 
19) Discrimination by race in churches ranks 
and governments services (exclusion) 
20) Suffering by innocent Blacks, unarmed 
students, women, protesters and township 
dwellers 
21) Political refugees 
22) Collaboration between white churchmen 
and statesmen  
23) DRC creation of Apartheid implying 
 theological support and origin, misuse of 
Bible 
24) Co-operative DRC leaders to create and 
 implement Apartheid  
25) Economic greed/exploitation 
26) Land issues 
27) Many victims but few beneficiaries 
Rwanda 
1) Two groups of people: Tutsi and Hutu (and 
marginalized Twa) 
2) Ethnic agenda: 
 - Tutsi against Hutu up to 1960s, and  
 - Hutu against Tutsi up to 1990s 
3) Prejudice and dictatorship 
4) Ethnic discrimination 
5) Political manipulation, dividing power and 
propaganda 
6) Intolerance/ HR abuses 
7) Resentment 
8) Moral degradation 
9) Inner wounds/ bitterness and suppressed 
memories 
10) Intensive reactions 
11) Experience of pain 
12) No guilty conscience (hard-liners: Hutu 
power and Tutsi Inkotanyi: one who strives 
or a fighter) 
13) Remembrance of violence 
14) Roman Catholic Church: support to 
previous regimes, both Tutsi and Hutu; 
exclusive (education to lead) 
15) Church ministry failed to challenge the 
situation 
16) Need for dialogue and change of attitude 
17) Comit de Contact involved churches 
18) Church leaders (Roman Catholic and 
Anglican archbishops) ambivalent 
19) Discrimination by ethnicity in churches 
ranks and states services (exclusion) 
20) Suffering of innocent Tutsi children, 
women and Hutu, unarmed amid manipulated 
peasantry 
21) Political refugees 
22) Collaboration between churchmen 
(including whites) and statesmen (exclusively 
Tutsi or Hutu) 
23) Invention and support for Tutsi origin and 
 superiority myth by priests, misuse of Bible 
24) Co-operative Roman Catholic Church 
leaders to make and implement state policies 
25) Economic greed/exploitation 
26) Land issues 
27) Many victims but few beneficiaries 
groups, which was not the case in Rwanda. While South Africa has natural resources and a 
strong economy, Rwanda is one of the worlds poorest countries. In contrast to their 
parallel nature and manifestation, the two cases were shaped by different dynamics (see 
Table 9.2).  
In South Africa, non-white Christians struggled under their leadership against Apartheid, 
inside and outside churches, over a long period. In Rwanda, some leaders of churches and 
ecumenical groups (e.g. the Comit de Contact) were outspoken only during the 1990s war 
against exclusion and ethnicism. Rallies contesting the war involved representatives of the 
churches (van Butselaar 2002). To a certain extent, the Comit de Contact resembled the 
South African Peace Committees. Unlike the South African liberation struggle involving 
the churches and their theology, the Rwandan churches did not firmly challenge injustice; 
they had neither prophetic theology nor liberation theology. 
During the second half of the last century, Apartheid was the policy of the South African 
white minority government, imposed upon the black majority, whereas in Rwanda the 
Hutu majority ruled over the Tutsi and Twa minority. There was torture and violence under 
the Apartheid regime, compared with full-scale war to settle old scores in Rwanda 
(Niyonsaba 1999). However, in the 1990s, changes were finally achieved peacefully in 
South Africa, while they were bloody in Rwanda. Most leaders of white churches 
supported the Apartheid system in which they benefited from building positions through 
the NP. The situation was more or less similar in Rwanda, where government positions 
attracted the leaders of churches. In both countries, many leaders of churches maintained 
tight relations with the repressive states.  
Conversely,  affirmative action 13  crystallising the philosophy of the South African  
  13 M. Mngese stated, in order to bridge and balance issues between the poor and the rich; it is a way of 
dealing with the unbalance of the past. Because legally Black people were pushed away from the economy of 
the country, a bill in the parliament articulated affirmative action after a long discussion. There was incentive 
from some companies as well and this is going well, though there are challenges (interview, 29 June 2001).  
Renaissance14 after Apartheid has no equivalent in Rwanda. The wide construct of the 
reconciliation procedure benefited from the TRC and related processes in which churches 
played a significant role. Up to 2003, the ICTR and its parallel tribunals and Gacaca in 
Rwanda were the only jurisdictions trying those accused of genocide. None of the three 
jurisdictions was envisaged as a true vehicle for reconciliation. Even Gacaca was enforced 
as a matter of absolute necessity, whilst churches were not viewed as formal partners in 
initiating Gacaca nor in its processes (www.rwanda1.com/government/; NPI 1997). 
Churches in South Africa were proactive and reactive and were called upon to join the 
legal institutions in putting the TRC in motion. Up to 2003, there has been no similar move 
in Rwanda, as churches have been only reactive, inactive or conflicted by prosecution.  
Common factors in South Africa and Rwanda that endangered the life of churches included 
church-state ties. With reference to Rwanda, vant Spijker (1997) agrees with Schonecke 
(1994) that a church too close to the state shares its fate. The Reich Church (in Germany) 
and the Afrikaners DRC (in South Africa) in particular exemplified the situation. The 
Apartheid state infiltrated the churchs affairs and the latter were jeopardised as the state 
ran its course. This was also the case in Rwanda in the 1950s and the 1990s, particularly 
with the Roman Catholic Church. The South African churches exemplified a positive shift 
in their relationships with the state towards the end of the 20th century. Some church 
leaders and theologians stood out against Apartheid and remained an active part of the 
changing political scene (de Gruchy 1979 & 2002). Mamdanis review (1996) concluded 
that, over time, a religious perspective began to shape the politics of reconciliation in South 
Africa. Rwandan churches have not reached that far. However, as victims of the Holocaust 
and Apartheid perpetuated the memory, survivors of the genocide in Rwanda are seeking 
  14 The renaissance that T. Mbeki spearheads is not a new concept. It means we need to develop our 
country, our continent. [] Considering the latest development, renaissance does not take people backward 
but looks forward. It is a concept that is threatening other concepts in the other world. It means young people 
are going to think critically (Mngese interview, 29 June 2001).  
something similar that can build the basis of peace in the future (The Times, 27 March 
2004).  
It is true that all churches have the responsibility to help communities overcome divisions, 
bearing the witness of Christs Gospel to the world (Yoder 2002, 16 ff). In both South 
Africa and Rwanda, the churches are entrusted with a ministry of bringing about peace, 
justice, healing and reconciliation. It is in this perspective that the South African churches 
called for justice and peace, unity and reconciliation. Conversely, the churches in Rwanda 
have been voiceless. There is a need to develop a culture of harmony in Rwanda that can 
help survivors15 to overcome anger and revenge, and culprits to overcome fear and guilt. 
However, the outcome depends on the pleas of both the survivors and the perpetrators, as 
they occurred in South Africa. This requires an act of courage, determination or passion to 
achieve reconciliation by means of repentance, forgiveness, restoration and communion in 
the light of Gods love and grace (Tutu 1999): this is what Gods justice is all about. Fair 
trial is a very constructive alternative for cases that do not meet the requirements of 
reconciliation, as exemplified in the TRC hearings. 
The practice of the TRC was in line with Assefa (1999) and Shriver (1995); reconciliation 
was the outcome of the restoration of a broken relationship between people, and between 
humans and God. Niyonsaba (1999) asserts that in Rwanda, war and assassination 
provided a pretext for revenge through killing, looting etc. In such a context, the healing 
journey should aim at a lasting solution, including healing peoples relationships. In 
contrast to some uncritical assertions, Vandeginste (1998a) asserts that the core motive of 
the Rwandan genocide  different from that of the war  was a sudden reaction provoked  
  15 The word survivors implies the overcoming of anger and cycle of revenge often expressed in the notion 
victims. The word victim implies that people continue to suffer without resisting the consequences. For 
example, Gunn (interview, 07 July 2001) suggests that Khulumani support groups rejected the notion 
victims. Like OLeary & Hay (2000), she supports the view that perpetrators should come together with 
victims.  
Table 9.2: Contrasts between South African and Rwandan Contexts 
South Africa 
1) People with different colours 
2) People with different cultures 
3) Different languages 
4) Immigrant Whites/settlers 
5) Different socio-religious background  
6) No social interaction, no free inter-
marriage 
7) Legacy of settlers, Afrikaner/British 
divisions in Whites language, culture, 
economies and politics 
8) Ghettoisation of Blacks and Coloureds  
9) Banning, exile under legal powers 
10) Reserves/homeland for Blacks/Coloureds 
11) Democratic transition 
12) Confrontation between heretical 
Apartheid and Christian groups 
13) Major role of mainstream churches 
against Apartheid from the second half of the 
20th century 
14) Separate church buildings and institutions 
15) Black Liberation Theology and Black 
Consciousness Movement 
16) Resistance of top church leaders 
17) Kairos document & theological backing 
18) Churches led Apartheid to adapt or die 
19) Small number of perpetrators 
20) Sizeable mineral resources and related 
finance 
21) Possibility of getting enough judges. 
22) No genocide and nationwide implication  
23) Balanced forces between belligerents & 
will to negotiate 
24) Mostly internal motivation 
Rwanda 
1) People with same colour 
2) People with same culture 
3) Same language 
4) No immigrant Whites/settlers 
5) Same socio-religious background 
6) Relative interaction and intermarriage 
7) Colonial legacy  
8) Symbiotic villages (Hutu, Tutsi & Twa) 
9) Hutu and Tutsi conflict resulted from 
economic and political interest not from 
legislation  
10) No reserves, for Hutu, Tutsi or for Twa 
11) No Democracy in practice in Rwanda 
12) Confrontation is not on issues of 
exclusive belief as in South Africa 
13) No major role played by churches in 
Rwanda to challenge ethnic exclusion 
14) Not in Rwanda 
15) No equivalent in Rwanda 
16) No equivalent prototypes 
17) No influential theological writing  
18) Nothing as such in Rwanda 
19) Large number of perpetrators 
20) Small size of mining resources and 
finance, coffee and tea instead. 
21) Lack of possibility of getting enough 
judges. 
22) Nationwide implication in genocide 
23) Unequal forces between belligerents no 
will to negotiate but lead defeated and victors 
24) Both internal & international motivations  
while the war was underway. His argument offers an interpretation that perhaps reflects the 
reality and could help in pursuing a lasting solution. It has been argued that the crises in 
Rwanda generally resulted from myths and imported ideologies  similar to the theology of 
the elect, etc. that underpinned Apartheid  which the population was unable to absorb. 
However, a political plan of exclusion, with subsequent violent mass killings, occurred 
repeatedly for centuries in Rwanda. Yet the Rwandan genocide is not a replica of an 
isolated final solution, with one definite goal, as it occurred in the context of Nazi 
Germany; nor is it equivalent to Apartheid. Biased interpretations, which simply acquit one 
side of the belligerents whilst overstressing the guilt of the other, cannot contribute 
effectively to reconciliation. Yet, as the theology of reconciliation, forgiveness and 
restoration took time to formulate in South Africa, emerging to respond objectively to the 
situation of Apartheid, the experience should also enlighten the Rwandan search for 
solution.  
The Rwandan genocide (and resolution) followed its own trajectory (Eltringham 2003, 67f; 
cf. Figure 9.2), arising in the context of war between two defined ethnic groups. Internal 
and international armed groups and backing and decisions  including religious positions 
and NGOs  allied either with Tutsi or with Hutu, helping them to fight and kill each other. 
There are differences between Rwandas genocide and other cases in terms of context, but 
also in terms of social fabric, means/weapons and popular participation. Tutu (1999) 
depicted the Hutu-Tutsi conflict as a permanent two-way offence, causing two-way 
defence with the result fostering acts of revenge against the defeated.  
I said that the history of Rwanda was typical of a history of top dog and underdog. The top 
dog wanted to cling to its privileged position and the underdog strove to topple the top dog. 
When that happened, the new top dog engaged in an orgy of retribution to pay back the new 
underdog for all the pain and suffering it had caused when it was top dog. The new underdog 
fought like an enraged bull to topple the new top dog, storing in its memory all the pain and 
suffering it was enduring, forgetting that the new top dog was in its view only retaliating for all 
that it remembered it had suffered when the underdog had been its master (1999, 208). 
Tutu stated that such a sad Hutu-Tutsi history of reprisal provoking counter-reprisal would 
not end until somebody did something. Alas, he did not suggest a path that could be 
followed in resolving this hiatus. 
The history and correlated narrative show that Rwanda has distinctive features that are 
different from South African realities: in addition to alternate political supremacy, Hutu-
Tutsi hatred has always been a two-way interaction that emerged gradually from the 
Tutsis belief in their superiority, their exploitation and their disdain for the Hutu 
(Reyntjens 1994; Overdulve 1997; Corey & Joireman 2004). Thus the Hutu regime 
excluded the Tutsi as revenge and as a result of fear of Tutsi comeback with their 
oppressive rule. But the international pressure favouring the refugees worsened the 
interethnic hate.  
On one hand, manhunts and killing by the ethnic groups have been realities under both 
Tutsi and Hutu regimes (Gatwa 1999). Both groups repeatedly exploited the notion of 
scapegoats to fuel conflicts over leadership and economic resources, while the churches 
remained mute regarding the situation under all regimes. On the other hand, although 
Rwanda had not known concentration camps before the genocide, the attitude of the 
churches (mostly RCCR and Anglican) had helped to cover up the evildoing.  
Based on the example of South Africa, the best way to combat racialisation or ethnisation 
is not by denying the existence of differences, as was the case in Rwanda, but rather by 
understanding the true nature of such differences so as to bring clarity; otherwise, 
remaining in the dark, ambiguity is exploited as a tool for discrimination and propaganda 
(Bolaffi et al 2003; Staub et al 2001). South Africa is the main example where the churches 
were directly involved in relation to conflict. Despite the contribution of some that 
supported Apartheid, at other times, the churches led the struggle against injustice for 
almost a century. The activism of the churches in the process of post-Apartheid 
reconciliation calls other churches to rethink their mission. The South African case is also 
challenging because of the zeal of some individuals, including the heroes of peace and 
liberation: D. Tutu in the churches, N. Mandela and F. de Klerk in politics. Indeed, no 
other country has three Nobel Peace Prize Laureates16 as South Africa does (Gatwa 2001). 
9.2 Processes in retrospect, alternative approaches  
9.2.1 Comparative assessment of the processes  
From three options for resolving widespread violence  prosecution, reconciliation and law 
combined with mercy  the post-genocide leadership in Rwanda enforced the prosecutorial 
process. The international community supported this option by setting up the ICTR 
(Rudasingwa 1996; Dupaquier 1996). A number of researchers and international leaders 
had, however, suggested applying the TRC pattern, which could also copy some aspects 
from national and international justice and other arrangements, largely pursuing truth and 
reconciliation objectives (NPI 1997; Annan 1998; Khan 2000).  
Since Nuremberg (1948), the TRC has become the fourth distinctive paradigm. It added 
the participation of churches and Christian values to previous patterns, just as the others 
often refined the work of their predecessors. Thus far, the TRC model has been the most 
appropriate, although it is faulted for its lack of consistent reliability on judicial 
requirements (Mamdani 1996; Mululeke 1997). The new challenge to the TRC is to 
maximise the value of judicial and cultural contributions. Moreover, the field research and 
interviews found fault with the TRC for not engaging the churches in following up the 
process and constantly assisting people who testified. Therefore, any paradigms that come 
after the TRC, such as the NURC, ought to explore a more symbiotic and balanced 
alternative, allowing for a form modelled on the TRC and stressing fair justice and cultural 
values, and consistently engaging churches in the core process and follow-up activities.  
The assessment of the TRC suggests that the paradigm is still in gradual formation, its 
latest version being the best, since it draws lessons from its predecessors (Bronkhorst 
1995). Consequently, the Rwandan initiative ought to learn much from the South African 
  16 A. Luthuli (1950), N. Mandela (1994) and D.Tutu (1984).  
experience. Since no model has fully integrated truth, justice and reconciliation, there is a 
challenge to Rwandan people to value and embrace judicial and non-judicial approaches 
equally. Moreover, the uniqueness of Rwandas crisis (genocide, hidden agenda and 
popular participation) makes it the first case that is likely to maximise the use of both truth 
and justice, if it aims to fill out the legal framework and reach a genuine reconciliation.  
Moghalu (1998a) contended that justice and accountability are important in resolving 
conflict because the punishment of perpetrators of mass atrocities builds the foundation for 
genuine reconciliation. He claimed that the ICTR is a unique instrument of conflict 
resolution. While Moghalu (1998b) asserted simply that justice would help reconciliation 
in Rwanda, Des Forges reinstated the proposal,  
Justice can contribute to reconciliation, provided it remains credible. There is a political choice 
on how you define genocide; Hutu also want justice, which will leave guilty and innocent 
people different, against globalisation. The RPF, which is the political force at the front, was 
organised on a pure ethnic system and has not prosecuted Tutsi for the crimes committed. 
MDR was an ally of the RPF, but has been banned as a gnocidaire party including Hutu 
survivors (Des Forges paper, 31 March 2004). 
Actually, Des Forges regretted that both the Rwandan Justice system and the ICTR ignore 
other categories of crimes, which are not genocide but might even be worse.  
The churches, provided they remain inclusive, could play the role of third party and/or 
bridge the gap defined by Lederach (1999). In Rwanda, the third party would be 
numerically the fourth, since the 1990s crisis already involved two groups (associated with 
the MRND and the RPF) and the opposition.17 Alas, most narrative has labelled Rwandas 
crises simply as an issue between the Hutu and Tutsi ethnies.  
Some proposals, such as Claphams (1996), stressed setting a pact to conclude the 
negotiation, as a signal of readiness by all parties to embark on the reconciliation practices. 
  17 However, the thesis uses third party as a concept, understood in the field as a neutral mediator or 
facilitator.  
He proposed an international mediation, which is in line with Khans (2000) and Assefas 
(1996) idea of third party involvement, without which a full settlement would be 
impossible in Rwanda. In spite of their consistent contribution, Vandeginste (1998a) and 
Sibomana (1999) did not clearly integrate either the idea of third party mediation or the 
interdependence theory of the three levels of the society. The three levels to consider in 
military, politics, religion, etc. consist of: top leadership, the middle class and the 
grassroots. For Lederach (1999), unless gaps in these levels and domains are filled, 
conflicts will persist. Additionally, Khan (2000) commended the co-operative principle. In 
his view, assigning posts to members of Rwandas former army and former government 
could be a good start for national reconciliation and needed to be encouraged. He warned, 
however, that reconciliation with political elements of the former government would have 
to await the start-up of the judicial system, both national and international. On most points, 
Khan agreed with Ghalis contention that: 
Unless there was definitive and early movement towards reconciliation between the leadership 
of both sides, the refugees would remain rooted in their camps. Only if they saw elements of 
their leadership operating with the government in Rwanda would real movement take place on 
refugee return and in favour of national reconciliation across the board. National reconciliation 
needed the catalyst of former government members being brought in to join the national fold 
(Khan 2000, 131-132). 
Identifying those who would take part in the negotiation would be simple, if it were agreed 
that only those facing trial for genocide should be excluded. However, Ghalis suggestions 
for reconciliation neither pleased the Rwandan authority nor persuaded Museveni to press 
the Rwandan authority to accept an all-encompassing round-table to launch reconciliation. 
Khan (2000) considered Ghalis logic persuasive, but foresaw that the RPFs intransigence 
could not allow the plan to materialise. Ghalis speech on 13 July 1995, implying the two 
sides' responsibility in the war, laid down the truth, referring to mutual exclusion between 
the RPA and FAR, and called for a dialogue of former belligerents, also involving the 
refugees. However, this speech increased the governments resentment against the 
suggestions for a national dialogue (Khan 2000, 139). 
The account above reflects the argument that the RPF politicians speak of reconciliation, 
but in practice they do not sustain the process (Sibomana 1997; Sebarenzi 2002; 
Ntezimana 2000). To express the situation, Sibomana (1997, 139) stated, official 
declarations are one thing; reality is anothernational reconciliation does not mean 
forcing people to subscribe to an ideology or to obey a new form of authority 
unquestioningly. He asserted further, 
As for reconciliation, it is as if Rwandans have been handed over from one administration to 
another without ever acquiring the right to think for themselves. That is extremely dangerous. 
The country had already seen the results of a cult of authority and blind obedience to order. 
The Rwandan state or Rwandan society will never recover without prior recognition of 
fundamental public liberties, which is far from being the case (Sibomana 1999, 139).  
Sibomana (1999) and Tutu (1999) agreed with Longmans (1995) observation that in spite 
of the change, past mistakes did not stop and internal tensions increased. Sibomana (1999) 
stated that apart from official statements, the country was not moving towards national 
reconciliation at all. He agreed with Ghali (2000) that both sides are responsible for the 
lack of progress towards reconciliation. 
We must remember that it takes two to achieve reconciliation, and many people on the other 
side are not playing by the rules either. I am not referring to Hutu extremists in exile who are 
proud of their crimes. I am thinking of those inside the country who have not always succeeded 
in shaking off the terrible propaganda, which led them to murder. The methods used by RPF to 
close the camp of Kibeho, massacring several thousand refugees, were scandalous and 
unacceptable (Sibomana 1999, 139-140).  
Tutu (1999, 206 ff.) suggested that what happens in Rwanda every twenty-five years is a 
reversal in the roles of the oppressor and oppressed. Sibomana (1999) noted further that the 
propaganda of extremists who carried out the genocide blocked attempts at reconciliation, 
while the RPA resumed killing as soon as it took power. The argument proves that hiding 
knowledge about the genocide activities protects both Hutu and Tutsi perpetrators. It 
supports the argument that all sides in must be involved in the reconciliation.  
Reconciliation between the traumatised communities would begin when justice was seen to be 
done and when the bulk of refugees trekked back home. To expect the new Rwandas political 
leadership to bury the hatchet with the leadership of the former government before the 
maturing of these two essential pre-conditions seemed unrealistic. Instead, a gradual 
reconciliation from the grassroots level upward appeared to be a more viable option (Khan 
2000, 191).  
Moreover, Khan (2000) called for economic and judicial reconciliation, which implies 
property rights and equal treatment of citizens, including returnees. He called for fair 
justice with competent magistrates and equal accountability. Twagiramungu (1998) was in 
line with Khan in asserting that the Rwandan situation required a process condemning all 
crimes and all criminals. On the core point, Twagiramungu agreed with Sibomana (1999) 
and Khans (2000) argument that without credible justice and the involvement of major 
antagonists, the refugees would not return and genuine reconciliation would not take place 
without the full participation of both sides. For Sibomana (1999), Khan (2000) and Ghali 
(2000), the reconciliation would be interdependent with credible justice (first security and 
fair treatment, then either justice or reconciliation).  
The evidence above provides a basis upon which national initiatives and international 
support could build to restore stability and to launch nationwide reconciliation and justice. 
As Ntezimana (2000) asserted, the fact that all the initiatives and proposals mentioned 
were ignored proves partiality and refusal by the new Rwandan authority, and the lack of 
international backing towards objective and lasting solutions. Yet, it is striking that many 
researchers and media do not refer to these well-grounded proposals and well-informed 
research. Any good approach to the situation in Rwanda  including the ICTR and national 
efforts  ought to build on such early suggestions and knowledge. However, because the 
crisis implied crimes against humanity, the Rwandan authorities alone may not have the 
definitive power to decide on a general amnesty, and simply to give amnesty in this case is 
not constructive.  
Consistent with this argument, a number of issues need clarification. While the acts of 
genocide committed by Impuzamugambi (the CDRs militia) and the Interahamwe were 
reported live by the media and meticulously documented (see African Rights 1995 and Des 
Forges 1999), those committed by the RPA were not. The RPAs bad side was covered up. 
Thus, early inquiries were biased, while those with objective clarity were silenced. 
Referring to this situation, Carrero (2001) states,  
The fact that the heads of the international news media blamed this triple crime on Hutu 
extremists, the so called Interahamwe, without conducting even the most minimal investigation 
or verification, surprises us  the UN has systematically been hindered in carrying out any 
sort of independent investigation into any of the many crimes of the RPF. 
Facts surrounding the assassination of Habyarimana and the implication of foreign factors 
have emerged and contradict theories (Carrero 2001). Thus, the reality of Rwandas war 
itself is still unknown; consequently, the genocide has not been correctly understood. This 
proves that the approach taken bears serious risks, since the consequences of the genocide 
have started to be solved without credible investigation of both sides and equal hearing of 
both the survivors and the perpetrators evidence under oath.  
Moreover, it is a pity that there was no questioning of foreign involvement in the war, 
namely that of Uganda. Yet, despite all the credible information that was available, no 
transparent investigation was made of the assassination of the two Presidents, which 
sparked off the genocide (Carrero 2001). Equally, the refusal to seek a ceasefire and the 
obstruction of peacekeeping forces to stop the genocide and protect the victims were not 
openly and objectively investigated. 
How, then, could subsequent prosecutions be fair when no light was shed on the above 
issues? Well-informed people such as S. Khan and B. B. Ghali, and the former Chief of the 
UN mission in Rwanda at the time of war  J-R. Booh Booh  have not been invited to 
expose their knowledge and proposals about the situation (Booh Booh 2005). Consistent 
with this problem, Ntezimana (2000) wondered how national reconciliation could start 
with no viable international input; how effective would the reconciliation approach through 
the NURC be within such a context, marred by global politics and power-positioning? 
Ntezimana suggested that only full revelation about these realities could unveil the truth 
about the 1990s war and allow viable solutions to be found. In the same perspective, 
Sibomana (1999), Khan (2000) and Ghali (2000) called for both sides to be heard equally.  
9.2.2 Alternative approaches 
Vandeginste (1998a) critically assessed previous commissions; his inquiry suggests 
combining the judicial and political approaches with para-judicial alternatives. He failed, 
however, to identify and/or integrate the moral (religious) contribution. His argument is 
rather law-biased, but it is more elaborate than previous research such as Claphams 
(1996), which is more historical. Thus, Vandeginste (1998a) approaches the subject that 
Clapham (1996) first raised from a broader spectrum, both focusing on human rights 
abuses and referring to the genocide in Rwanda. There had been no exhaustive assessment 
of the TRCs application to Rwanda other than Vandeginstes. While studies of the 
Holocaust are numerous and help one to understand some aspects of other genocide 
situations, the metaphor does not fully apply to South Africa and Rwanda.18 Vandeginstes 
(1998a) study drew more from Bronkhorst (1995) and Roht-Arriaza (1995), whose studies 
stressed the South African experience and extended to Chile, Argentina, El Salvador, Sri 
Lanka, etc.  
Also, building on previous studies, the core of this thesis is about the development of 
methodologies and practices aiming at reducing or preventing direct violence, and 
transforming structural violence. It deals with negotiation and peace accords that fashioned 
the process of structural change in order to bridge gaps that emerge in the absence of an 
adequate framework to address direct violence or promote social and economic justice. In 
this perspective, political assertions commend the TRC, whereas Mamdani (1998; 2000) 
  18 The metaphor has some useful examples (like the stand of the evangelical churches), but the nature and 
development of crisis are different from the making of the Rwandan genocide. The main difference is that in 
Rwanda, yesterdays perpetrators now become victims (Mamdani 1996); this switch is unknown in Germany.  
contends that the Commission received a diminished truth, which produced 
unaccomplished justice. Mamdani (1996) believes that the TRC achieved reconciliation 
through truth, aiming at the healing of the nation. His objection is that the TRC forged a 
justice without just punishment, because it called only a portion of perpetrators and 
addressed few abuses. 
With regard to Rwanda, until 2003, no judicial system had been set up that could, in a 
reasonable period, judge the number of accused in Rwanda (approximately 130,000). Only 
330 people had been convicted in more than one year. Former Attorney General Gahima 
(2003) claimed that between 1996 and 2000, Rwandan courts tried 6,000 suspects. As 
Human Rights Reports widely criticised the first trials, Sibomana (1999) also observed that 
conditions in the crowded prisons of Rwanda might lead to the death of a large number of 
prisoners before trials take place. In line with Sibomana, Makinda (1996) asserted that if 
the world expected justice leading to reconciliation through the ICTR, it might have to wait 
for a long time. Vandeginste (1998a) and Makinda (1996) rather called for complementary 
alternatives.  
After comparing the findings from other studies, Vandeginste (1998a, 3) suggested that 
the technique of a TRC be [sic] a useful alternative in addition to the current, exclusively 
judicial approach for Rwandas case. He assumed that the technique would foster truth 
telling, compensation for survivors, and combine prosecutions with comminution, if not 
pardon, for those found responsible for violations. Sarkin (1997) and Vandeginste (1998a) 
asserted, however, that pardon should not apply to offences of genocidal character.19  
Although Vandeginstes study is the latest and most consistently applied in relation to 
Rwandas case, it was carried out and concluded at an inappropriate time, when the TRC 
  19 Genocide being a crime against humanity, it calls for an international sanction.  
was still winding up its work and had not disseminated its findings and recommendations. 
The TRC achievements were not yet in the public domain, as its Final Report, the Amnesty 
Committee Report and related criticisms were not yet published. Therefore, Vandeginstes 
(1998a) study benefited neither from first-hand experience nor from independent 
assessment of the TRC. He explored references that were remote from the Rwandan and 
South African realities, and at that time, the ecclesiastical contribution to nationwide 
conflict resolution had not been raised. Relating to Rwanda, his study, like previous ones, 
lacks the major contributions made by Sibomana (1999) and Khan (2000). Despite these 
handicaps, Vandeginstes contribution (1998a) remains the first of this calibre, providing a 
basis for this study and further work.  
While appreciating Vandeginstes (1998a) integration of judicial and non-judicial 
approaches, this thesis avoids artificially excluding or undervaluing Christian efforts 
towards coexistence and reconciliation. It avoids obscuring the responsibility of the 
churches for cases where they failed to act to prevent killing or acted to encourage it. 
Among other elements that retained Vandeginstes (1998a) and Claphams (1996) attention 
in Rwanda were the components of the Arusha Peace Accords (1993), which provided 
for the establishment of an international commission of inquiry into human rights 
violations committed during the war. If the Accords were fully implemented, Vandeginste 
(1998a) anticipates two main constraints in relation to setting up a Rwandan commission to 
handle genocide crimes and massacres.  
Firstly, given the size of Rwandas tragedy, its complexity and its political nature, which 
led to nationwide involvement and contribution by its neighbours, it sidelined the Accords. 
Thus, it would not be wise to set a commission consisting solely of Rwandans. Secondly, 
insecurity problems and the lack of real intention to integrate the two armies fostered 
rebellion and made inquiries difficult. Makinda (1996) and Khan (2000) noted that the RPF 
also prevented any process considering criminal acts from the two sides (Tutsi and Hutu) 
on the same footing. In response to this concern, Clapham (1996) argued for the necessity 
of a prior political pact similar to the South African arrangement. In fact, Makinda (1996) 
and Vandeginste (1998a) suggest that the situation required setting a more viable 
alternative to the judicial approach (ICTR, National Courts and Gacaca under the state 
control). The constraints suggest that the only viable trajectory could be alternating or 
complementary judicial and non-judicial initiatives. One or the other approach might 
satisfy some cases, while others might require both patterns to work in a complementary 
Thus far, four elements are required for genuine reconciliation: (1) establishing undeniable 
truth, (2) rehabilitating and compensating survivors, (3) equitably trying crimes 
(sentencing and eventually pardoning in response to confession), and (4) preventing further 
violations (Bronkhorst 1995). The study of the TRC suggests that its replica is likely to 
succeed in Rwanda only if the society seeks international support and accepts an all-
encompassing dialogue built on agreements between the antagonists. Rwandas reality 
requires nationwide non-judicial and judicial structures working side by side. Because of 
the implication of genocide, international intervention is necessary, but a general amnesty 
may not be achieved. 
(a) Judicial approach  
The Rwandan people had experienced justice as a hand down from political power and 
individual interests for numerous years. They would not expect any judicial system to act 
differently (Vandeginste 1998a). About 130,000 suspects of genocide have been in 
Rwandas prisons since 1995. The UN-ICTR has a mandate to try only 400 suspects who 
had been identified.20 Actually, there are some preconditions before fair justice can be 
achieved. Bronkhorst (1995) suggests that the trial of individuals requires promotion of the 
rule of law and the identification and prosecution of those responsible for human rights 
violations. This also includes the provision of justice for the families of victims and for 
society as a whole, as it fits the requirements of truth and reconciliation.  
Moreover, Rwandas case presents four difficulties, each with either quantitative or 
qualitative dimensions: (1) The magnitude of the problem (the number and intensity of 
crimes). (2) The fact that the genocide annihilated the capacity of the judicial system (most 
magistrates died or fled the country). (3) The fact that the mechanism generating 
confession and guilty pleas provided for under the Organic law (to pass tens of thousands 
of judgements in a reasonable period) has not worked. Therefore, (4) trials will contribute 
minimally, if at all, to the short and long-term objectives of reconciliation (Vandeginste 
1998a), particularly if they continue to be one-sided, with prosecutors manipulating facts 
and not allowing a free flow of truth telling (Carrero 2001; Des Forges 2004). On top of 
these difficulties, it is necessary for the major groups (i.e. Hutu & Tutsi) and their allies to 
carry out the reconciliation process together. Therefore, there is a need for more promising 
alternatives, which are believed to come from a negotiated pact (Clapham 1996), to pave 
the way for combining or alternating judicial and non-judicial settlements. 
The new judicial system has inherited the popular perception of the former judicial system as 
being a dependent institution guided by political and personal interests and motives. Generally 
speaking, at the level of the state, justice has never been perceived as a source of truth, but 
rather as an instrument in the hands of those in power. This goes against the traditional justice 
system (non-state) of which the objective was mainly to re-establish social harmony 
(Vandeginste 1998a, 28). 
The non-state justice system refers to indigenous truth commissions: community based 
popular and independent systems such as authentic Gacaca. Such commissions would 
easily accommodate the power to judge, if they were allowed to be free from the states 
  20 UN Security Council, Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Assistance Mission for 
Rwanda, S/1995/457, 4 June 1995, quoted in Vandeginste (1998, 6). 
manipulation, and rather involve local leaders (Aguirre 2001; Inyumba 2002). Aguirre 
(2001) regrets that the institutionalisation of negative characterisations of local people by 
the state creates deep-rooted prejudice among many intervening agents. He contends that 
the indigenous commission would draw up an objective account of peoples history, free 
from prejudice, and would embrace all sectors of the society. It could involve local leaders 
as well as academics, religious leaders and historians. The Gacaca courts were effective in 
this framework, save that they have become an arm of prosecution, since the Ministry of 
Justice and the Supreme Court restructured them and continue to control their activities 
(see Mucyo in Villa-Vicencio & Savage 2001, 50). 
(b) Para-judicial approach 
Consideration of the analysis of the South African processes and the prospect for conflict 
settlements in Rwanda, while reviewing Vandeginstes (1998a) studies together with the 
broader inquiries made by Bronkhorst (1995) and Roht-Arriaza (1995), provides an 
optimistic view on the TRC pattern. Most inquiries concur that there are unique 
characteristics of the experience in each country, in terms of repression of people, history, 
economic development, and old and new political powers, traditional values and 
legislation.  
Vandeginstes (1998a) study confirms Bronkhorsts (1995) findings that no one state has 
closely followed the example of another in the process of discovering the truth. However, 
many elements reappear constantly in all diversities, and only a few basic patterns differ. 
Bronkhorst (1995) noted that most paradigms drew consistent components from 
international law to form the basis for new patterns that were adapted to particular 
contexts. Roht-Arriaza (1995) replicated the latter view, which Vandeginste (1998a) also 
stressed. Roht-Arriaza concluded that countries facing a heritage of human rights 
violations often take inspiration from the successes and failures of others, while bearing in 
mind the unique character of their particular situation. Chapter 6 of this thesis has also 
noted a degree of learning by the TRC from the experiences in post World War Two 
Germany, Chile, Argentina, Uruguay, etc., which has contributed to its success. Thus, there 
is ground to anticipate that Rwanda could learn much more from the South African 
Commission because it has captured those previous experiences. Even if the TRC did not 
fully fit a universal template, the Rwandan case (and following ones) would be more likely 
to succeed than its predecessors, even if it built only upon existing knowledge and success 
(TRC, authentic Gacaca etc.).  
Unfortunately, the proposals to replicate the TRC met with no positive responses from the 
Rwandan decision-makers and their international backers (Ndamage 2003), nor from 
scholars such as Ntampaka, who doubt its efficacy.21 Although they are excellent critics, 
they are not pragmatic, as they do not provide a more viable alternative. Despite promising 
advice to attempt the TRC approach22 and the Rwanda-South Africa dialogue, up to the 
year 2003, efforts to resolve the Rwandan situation had only launched judicial actions. 
Even if the new Gacaca were independent from the regular administration and courts, and 
was rather considered as an indigenous truth and justice commission, it would be popular. 
It could attract the churches support and integrate the publics interest and support, as it 
has received international praise. On this ground, 69 percent of the respondents to the 
research interviews affirmed that the Rwandan regime is not genuine about the 
reconciliation, since it controls the process and is unwilling to punish culprits among its 
supporters, nor to share power with its opponents.  
  21 E-mail: charles-ntampaka@fundp.ac.be, (12 March 2001). 
  22 UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan (SAPA 1998), former US President Bill Clinton and the NPIs attempt 
to initiate a TRC for Rwanda in 1997 was not enthusiastically received by the new Rwandan leaders.  
With reference to the three phases of transition defined by Bronkhorst (1995)  genesis, 
transformation and readjustment  Vandeginste (1998a) suggests that the transformative 
phase in Rwanda lay within the Arusha Accords, which were stillborn. Even if the killing 
(in 1993) of the democratically elected Hutu President of Burundi affected the Arusha 
Accords, the latter could still have succeeded if the attack on the presidential plane on 6 
April 1994 had not triggered the genocide (Vandeginste 1998a; Sibomana 1999; Khan 
2000). The alternative thesis was that another attempt at transformation and readjustment 
was underway, after the RPF rebels became the leaders of the country (Vandeginste 
1998a). Although the first thesis was not sufficiently substantiated, one could argue that 
the Arusha provision offered at least room for inclusion, whereas the post-genocide 
viewpoint is loaded with anger from both Tutsi survivors and now from Hutu who are 
undergoing victimisation.  
Whereas most truth and reconciliation processes take place during the transformation 
phase (Vandeginste 1998a; Teitel 1999), until the end of the 1990s, no real change had 
occurred in Rwanda. Furthermore, the Arusha Accords suggestion of an international 
commission to investigate human rights abuses committed during the war did not set out in 
detail how it could function, or whether it could include non-judicial processes. Bronkhorst 
(1995) contended that a genesis in the form of a military dictatorship leads more easily to 
prosecution of perpetrators of human rights violations than a one party system, where a 
large part of the population may be considered as being co-responsible for the repression.   
Sibomana (1999) and Vandeginste (1998a) applied the latter scenario to Rwanda after the 
RPFs military victory. At that time, not only the military victors but also all RPF 
sympathisers realised that most of their relatives had died. Thus, they exacted extreme 
revenge. Previous researchers have concluded that a more radical political change is more 
favourable to justice, truth and reconciliation than the progressive transition exemplified by 
the Arusha scenario (Vandeginste 1998a). While he advocates a truth and reconciliation 
alternative, Vandeginste (1998a) insists that both trial and reconciliation (calling for truth) 
ought to apply to the post-genocide period. Therefore, even if Rwandas people had 
considered the Arusha Accords as a quasi-judicial alternative to respond to the post-
genocide situation, they would need a complementary arrangement. 
While Vandeginste (1998a) asserted the absence of a universal model of a truth and 
reconciliation process, this thesis has made a case (see Chapter 4.2) that the core of Jesus 
teaching on dispute settlement provides a very relevant pattern of conflict resolution (Matt. 
5:21-26 & 18:15-17; Luke 17:3-4) that any effective settlement in any context ought to 
contain. In the case of Rwanda, Bronkhorsts reference (1995) to an industrial conciliation 
model (comprising investigation, mediation, arbitration/settlement and adjudication), 
leads to the phases of investigation being equated with the commission for inquiry. The 
mediation refers to local churches and international efforts (including the ICTR). As the 
arbitration failed as a result of the assassination of President Habyarimana, the adjudication 
did not come into being. Previous analyses suggest that the population may be afraid 
during the investigative phase, and the latter be inefficient if the beneficiaries of the ex-
regime are still operating (Vandeginste 1998a). Such a situation applied to Rwanda 
throughout the 1990s, because rebel forces associated with the former regime still existed 
around the country.  
However, Khan (2000) suggested that the new Rwandan government could create 
confidence in its opposition in order to reach a consistent result. In similar situations in 
South Africa, Guatemala and El Salvador, peace accords had preceded the commissions. In 
South Africa, the compromise and peace accords equate with the pact suggested by 
Clapham (1996) for Rwanda, to allow fair investigation and maximise inclusive 
participation and truth telling. In South Africa, NGOs, Human Rights organisations, 
victims families, etc. did parallel work, which the TRC integrated into the official inquiry 
(TRC Final Report 1998). In Rwanda, the NURC, or another organisation to fulfil the task, 
also ought to integrate available work/data. Roht-Arriaza (1995) argues that an imprimatur 
for this data work is required to give authority and credibility to the result. Bronkhorst 
(1995) and Vandeginste (1998a) agree that a complete documentation of previous 
violations of Human Rights is important to prevent oblivion and to provide a collective 
reminder of events. It could also help in resolving individual complaints. In the same 
perspective, the data on human rights abuses recorded by the TRC were archived in order 
to be accessible to the public (Brawn interview, 26 June 2000). Rwandans ought to explore 
this approach constructively. 
Whether under international patronage or not, the mediation or reconciliation procedure 
requires prior identification of the antagonists, the respective representatives and their 
responsibilities. Their figureheads might render the process difficult if not considered and 
involved from the start. Given his position, the refusal of C. Viljoen, the former head of the 
South African Army, to support a coup dtat on the eve of elections made the 
democratisation process possible (Defense & Foreign Affairs 1999). There might be 
similar personalities among Rwandans within the military ranks, new Akazu, the 
opposition and the monarchic wing that should also be considered. 
While the arbitration phase redresses violations, compensates victims and takes 
disciplinary action against the guilty, the adjudication stage is a phase of judgement that 
requires political determination to prosecute, judge and punish all those who have 
committed crimes. This stage distinguishes the areas in which court trials are unavoidable 
and the limits of non-judicial process. Consequently, cases may be classified almost as 
they have been in Rwanda (see Chapter 8.5.1). The adjudication helps to avoid plunging 
the country into endless political instability and keeps the trial processes from serving 
other objectives and interests such as ethnic exclusion and vendettas (Chapter 3 expands on 
this notion). Adjudication is urgent in Rwanda, since the government did not envisage an 
amnesty, which, according to the law, should follow prosecution (Vandeginste 1998a).  
Roth-Arriaza (1995) draws attention to the Geneva Convention, published in 1978, 
concerning internal armed conflict, to which Rwanda is a signatory. The convention 
considers amnesty for participants in an armed conflict. Referring to Rwandas context, the 
question remains whether members of armies and militia, who killed certain people simply 
because of their ethnic or political affiliation, were eligible for amnesty (Vandeginste 
1998a). Likewise, military personnel who killed when they were not at war and not 
defending public interests ought to come under prosecution.  
Vandeginste (1998a) agrees with (Gahima 2003) that in the case of mass violations, as in 
Rwanda, an ordinary judicial system is not capable of applying justice by identifying, 
prosecuting and sentencing perpetrators within an acceptable timeframe. Joinet (1996) 
agrees with Bizimungus suggestion of an independent extra-judicial commission of 
investigation, which guarantees impartiality and protection for victims, witnesses and 
suspected perpetrators (cited in Khan 2000).  
To some extent, the practices of the TRC (TRC Final Report 1998) and the ICTR concur 
with the proposal of a para-judicial commission ensuring equity, individuals safety and 
the assertion of their rights. Victims can assert their rights to justice and receive fair and 
effective remedy. As far as possible, forgiveness must have been sought in order for it to 
be granted. In the Rwandan case, apart from the peasantry, who admit their guilt (Igwara 
2002; Genevive 2003), no leaders have sought forgiveness: i.e., no leaders have admitted 
the responsibility for, or shown regret and remorse over, the genocide (Bizimungu, cited in 
Khan 2000, 92).  
Consistent with the right to justice is the right to amnesty and asylum, but also eventual 
extradition. South Africa is a typical example. In response to the report of the Goldstone 
Commission (1992), the Secretary-General of the UN recommended amnesty for all 
perpetrators of political crimes during the period covered by the TRC. The major part of 
Rwandas problem is that, until now, there has been no report of the calibre of the 
Goldstone report that has gained credibility in the international community and among the 
parties in conflict (Vandeginste 1998a). This also substantiates the argument that in 
Rwanda, there has been no fair investigation of crimes committed by the two sides. 
Concerning reparations, rehabilitation and healing vs. compensation, the government may 
co-operate with independent initiatives and international donors to develop a scheme in 
which churches could play an important role (TRC Final Report 1998; Schreiter 2002).  
Like Tutu (1999) and Boraine (2000), Vandeginste (1998a) and Bronkhorst (1995) also 
agree that unless the society acknowledges what happened, it will be unable to come to 
terms with the past. The two latter analyses suggest that reconciliation between opposing 
entities  like Hutu and Tutsi  could only occur once both sides have recognised the 
central facts, motives, emotions and their background. Nonetheless, truth constitutes a 
prerequisite sine qua non for all the other steps: mediation, reconciliation, compensation 
and justice. Therefore, Rwanda has another difficulty to overcome  establishing both 
sides truth in relation to the genocide  before it can claim that it has started the 
reconciliation process. 
Since the conflict in Rwanda is ethnically loaded and relates to power madness that 
involved nationwide genocide, reconciliation cannot be attained without credible 
representation of all parties in the process and the vigilance of international observers. Yet, 
there are handicaps to communicative competence (facts, proper judgement and sincere 
transmission of messages). To be effective, the process ought to build on comprehensive 
principles. Vandeginste (1998a) concluded that the integration of non-judicial initiatives 
should also strengthen the rule of law. This requires protection from arbitrary violence by 
the powerful. The process ought to be democratic and transparent, building on major 
participation of the population, taking place openly and under watchful national and 
international eyes, but also enforcing victims rights to restoration and restitution. This 
does not imply one group exercising moral superiority vis--vis the others, which the 
notion of the prerogative of the victim may suggest. Since a trial of all perpetrators is 
impossible in Rwanda, it requires at least sentencing those personae that ordered serious 
violations. The international bystanders should also assume their responsibility, repairing 
what they failed to do and helping the survivors, and inducing the Rwandan government to 
heed real national reconciliation.  
Since the size of the Rwandan case exceeds the capacity of existing judicial structures 
(Roht-Arriaza 1995; Clapham 1996; Vandeginste 1998a & 2003), it calls for combined 
judicial and non-judicial initiatives. Given the element of genocide, which international 
laws alone can resolve, the combination of the two initiatives alone is not enough. Yet, 
Rwandans alone cannot achieve impartiality in this case without an external third party 
assessing the fairness of the process: no judge tries himself. Considering Khans 
observations (2000), Rwanda could fulfil the categories that Joinet (1996) elaborated only 
if the former belligerents had neutral ground and a third party to enable them to engage in 
dialogue. The latter stage would help establish a pact signalling the agreement that 
Clapham (1996) suggested as a precondition for effective TRC and subsequent 
proceedings. The pact would minimise distortion of justice and the slow pace of unwilling 
leadership. At the acquisition stage (fact recovery and prevention of more crime), the TRC 
examined faults of omission and commission. There are no contradictions between the 
latter stages and the perspective of Nunca Ms. Vandegiste (2003) finds that the main 
handicap in Rwanda is that the victor has not accepted the principle of power sharing, on 
which all other effective initiatives would build. 
Ultimately, the Rwandan situation required a triple initiative: judicial and para-judicial 
processes and non-partisan international participation. The latter would bring parties to 
recognition of what happened so that they could assume their responsibilities. The 
difficulty is that there are no longer conflicting forces of equal status and capacity. Thus, 
there is a risk of reproducing a biased victors version of justice. If this is the case, the 
churches might intervene; but they ought to be non-partisan both nationally and 
internationally. The situation in Rwanda also requires selection of the crimes to be 
prosecuted and prioritised strategies targeting obvious perpetrators and violations. To 
secure a fair future, lustration and demotion could apply in cases of civil servants or 
military personnel who are found guilty.  
9.3 Lessons and suggestions 
The TRC typified reconciliation without tempering it with justice, while the alleged 
reconciliatory effort in Rwanda is just enraged trial. The middle ground could provide a 
solid base for a fair template for a reconciliation processes that may fit or embody a 
universal model. Such an approach ought to redefine justice in the Rwandan context and 
pursue it, eventually involving a third party.  
The application of the Holocaust measures is a response defined by the rage of survivors 
rather than a search for reconciliation. Such tribunals cannot lead to reconciliation between 
victims and perpetrators, especially if the political pre-requisite triggering the process is 
power-sharing between the two (Mamdani 1996). Shriver portrays forgiveness as the 
highest value, the one that leads to genuine and durable reconciliation, and argues that this 
is what state-led processes lack. Shriver (1995) and OLeary and Hay (2000) claim that in 
some less consistent processes or less difficult situations, reconciliation occurs when 
people come together to share memories. Before embarking on the process, however, 
parties ought to agree on their understanding of the notion of reconciliation and what it 
entails, because misunderstanding of its meaning is the major obstacle to genuine 
reconciliation (OLeary & Hay 2000). 
As the Nuremberg trials did not aim at healing or reconciliation (Hinton 2002), the same is 
true for any justice decided by the victor. In handling the crimes of the Apartheid regime, 
South Africa did away with the Nuremberg approach but did not seek amnesia either. The 
success of the South African model depended on the choice of a third way (Tutu 1999) or 
middle ground to seal the agreements, which led to the birth of the TRC.  
If there were faults in the TRC, most were due to its limited period and power to execute 
its recommendations. Although not all people who were competent fully co-operated with 
the TRC  which was the first experience of its type  or implemented its resolutions, it 
was the most successful model to settle old and structured hatred. Similarly, in the 
Rwandan case, it would not be constructive to apply solely a Nuremberg-type approach, as 
incarnated by the ICTR and other courts, which do not foresee the nations reconciliation. 
An additional device or adjustment of the NURC would be advantageous if justice, healing 
and reconciliation were in view. Such a special mechanism is necessary to decide upon 
those crimes that are not at the level of genocide. Cases genuinely identified with the 
genocide plan or its supervision ought to be referred to a Nuremberg-type trial. There is no 
alternative for these yet, unless Rwandas state was to seek a general amnesty backed by 
international jurisdiction.  
Failure in the TRC may also have come from its start, in which the core of the 
investigation stressed the relationship between popular victims and cruel perpetrators 
rather than relating the victimisation to the ingenious beneficiaries (Mamdani 1996). Most 
perpetrators were agents of beneficiaries. Therefore, the root cause of the problem was 
within the group of engineers and beneficiaries of Apartheid. The same is the case in 
Rwanda. It is unfair to consider Hutu peasant Interahamwe as major gnocidaires on the 
same footing as the leaders of the Abatabazi regime, or to regard all Tutsi as the only 
victims/survivors and the RPF elites as innocent victors. South Africa also showed a 
degree of injustice by allowing high quality lawyers with high fees to assist political 
leaders, while it provided low quality lawyers with low rates of pay to the surviving 
victims. Yet, the TRC did not require perpetrators to demonstrate remorse or give 
restitution to their victims (TRC Final Report 1998; Posel & Simpson 2002). Being 
pardoned required only telling the full truth. The thesis regrets that the TRCs prioritisation 
of cases of people in prisons did not extend to all people who were at high risk (e.g., the 
sick) and to prisoners with relatively light offences whose cases were referred to courts. 
Rwanda did better in giving priority to such cases.  
The eventual failure of the TRC was also due to the unbalanced power of the amnesty 
committee, which could implement its decisions in favour of perpetrators, while the 
reparation committee could not implement its recommendations to compensate the 
survivors. The main failure was the granting of amnesty to those who gave orders to 
execute abuses. However, unlike most previous situations in other countries, South Africa 
did not all police commanders free (de Kock & Gordin 1998). Some police officers (high 
criminals) are serving terms in jail, some for life. Also, the TRC punished some abuses and 
stopped others. Thus, as Ignatieff (1998) notes, the TRC made a difference: it has rendered 
some lies about the past impossible to repeat, and has set a template to find healing and 
justice for many other countries trying to come to terms with their history of tyranny. 
Rwanda has a long way to go even in terms of perspective, since it has only started its 
trials. 
In South Africa, however, the perpetrators were a small minority compared to countless 
victims and beneficiaries. In Rwanda, the perpetrators and victims were more numerous 
than the beneficiaries. As the latter were relatively few and identified with the elite, it is 
more difficult to handle the crisis. It was not easy for such categories and numbers of 
beneficiaries to objectively interpret the cause of victims and perpetrators, who were 
mostly at the bottom of the social pyramid (Mamdani 1996). All the same, the new elite in 
power would not easily welcome defeated predecessors tainted with the genocide (Khan 
2000). Therefore, it would benefit Rwandas people to start reconciliation from the grass-
roots level and within willing groups and institutions like the churches at numerous places, 
because otherwise it might take too long to reach a consensus or pact at the elite level, if at 
Ndamage (2004) states that political leaders in Rwanda have given another, less significant 
sense to National Reconciliation, by perverting all tools that could set in motion lasting 
unity and national reconciliation. Moreover, Mamdani (1996) observed that as perpetrators 
and victims have a past to overcome, beneficiaries and survivors have a present to come to 
terms with. Referring to Rwanda, he contended that a process that ignores the aspirations 
of the majority of victims risks turning outrage into frustration, and only gives room for 
demagogues to reap the harvest. Post-genocide injustice started with generalisation in 
identifying all Hutu with the genocide: making them all perpetrators. Even innocent Hutu 
became new victims, while all Tutsi identify themselves as survivors, reclaiming all the 
attention.  
The major lesson drawn from the comparison of two paradigms  reconciliation without 
justice and justice without reconciliation  is that the two are parallel trajectories, 
eventually reaching at the same point: revenge and perpetual exploitation. Mamdani 
(1996), however, misread the TRC in suggesting that it had no justice objectives. Justice 
was in view chiefly when deponents could not satisfy the conditions of truth conditions, or 
the requirements of amnesty, or when they refused to appear. Moreover, the TRC did not 
obstruct justice; it operated side by side with justice. It might have encouraged justice 
because swift volunteering to confess and apply for amnesty rescued some people who 
would otherwise have been liable to prosecution, whilst those who missed or misused the 
process were prosecuted. Although the TRC wound up, tribunals carried on working, but 
some South African people felt betrayed because without the TRC, others who still wanted 
to tell their stories had nowhere to go. Mngese claimed that the government foresaw the 
handicap but expected churches to take over the work of the TRC. It also found difficulties 
with the concept of compensating only victims who testified, because other victims would 
come on the pretext that they had nowhere to submit their ordeals after the TRC had 
closed. It could not satisfy all victims on its own (interview, 29 June 2001).  
One wonders whether there is no plot from the beneficiaries, i.e. the leaders, including 
those who refused to attend the TRCs hearings or did not satisfy its requirements, since 
nothing was done to follow up, least of all punish, recalcitrant perpetrators Rwandas 
Government may learn the lesson that it would be more effective to stress justice  which 
treats all criminals impartially  and more varied catalytic factors than was the case in the 
South Africa, and to provide a space for reconciliatory alternatives. Actually, impartiality 
and truth may awaken repentance and generate forgiveness, which are integral aspects of 
reconciliation. 
Before the 1959 revolution in Rwanda, the Hutu saw the Tutsi as devils. In much the same 
way, between the 1960s and the 1990s the Tutsi saw the Hutu as devils, and the cycle 
continues. Mamdani (1996) suggested that in such a situation, where you cannot banish the 
evil nor embrace it, the third choice is to seek alternative insights from religion and 
theology: justice that combines repentance and forgiveness as the foundation for 
reconciliation. History provides a further lesson: sharing memory and facing the past has 
shown that the evil is social rather than individual; however, Mamdani (1996) wondered 
how justice can be understood as social justice, in the interest of many? Jesus exemplified 
this on the cross, giving all for the benefit of all, to the point of giving up his life to death. 
What can provide a good basis for a political community? Truth alone is not enough, 
unless joined with a form of justice, and not merely for the sake of punishment. Mamdani 
(1996) and Vandeginste (1998a) are in line with Tutu (1999) that a permanent feature of 
Rwandas history is the refusal to share power. This refers to the time when power was in 
the hands of the Tutsi (1959) and in the hands of the Hutu (1973 and 1994), when the 
situation ought to have changed. Musabyimana questions even the post-genocide leaders. 
He states, 
What can we expect of RPF if it ever manages to impose itself militarily in power? Will it be 
able to resist the egocentric temptation to which its predecessors had succumbed? [He 
concluded that] The day that the winner of this conflict understands that it has to share power 
equitably with all the social forces in the country, will be the day that they have found the 
solution to the Rwandan problem (2003, 96-98). 
Rwanda ought to learn much more from South Africas national motivation to settle its 
conflict mainly by nationals, on nationals accords. Conversant researchers concur that the 
best resolution requires negotiation and consultation of all parties, religions and civil 
society, inside and outside the country (Vandeginste 1998a; Sibomana 1999; Khan 2000).  
Churches in Rwanda can learn a lesson of healing ministries as a life-long process from 
their counterpart South African churches: coming together, re-reading their storytelling and 
confessing their mistakes, within and between churches and beyond the confines of 
churches and acknowledging the failures of the past, before embarking on a new way for a 
better society and sharing a belief in the sanctity of life (Niyonsaba 1999; Gatwa 2001). 
The churches can learn how to provide a non-partisan forum, avoiding a lobbyist role, 
rather playing a reconciliatory role as mediators between Hutu and Tutsi. The churches in 
Rwanda  provided the leaderships first resolve their personal divisions  could do even 
better than the South African churches by making reconciliation an all-time ministry, 
superseding the tribunals whenever possible. 
9.3.1 Application to Rwanda  
South Africa and Rwanda have commonalties relating to church planting, church-state 
relations and their impact on ethnicity, social relations and politics. However, one finds 
few parallels in the nature of their political transitions and conflict settlement procedures. 
Unlike South Africa, there are no balanced forces in post-genocide Rwanda left to 
negotiate. There are the victorious and defeated parties and their respective forces. The 
victors (the RPA) are not ready to negotiate or to share power with the defeated side. Yet, 
the moral authority in Rwanda has no clear theological position against ethnic exclusion 
and other forms of structured injustice.  
No research has extensively investigated the possibility of settling the crisis in Rwanda by 
adapting the TRC. Most researchers have simply assumed that there is nothing to compare 
with the Rwandan genocide, and that the two countries have nothing in common to build 
on such a TRC. The attitude was an unhelpful point of departure, perhaps reflecting 
prejudice or ignorance about one or the other country. This research has highlighted the 
underlying long-term conflicts between two main ethnic groups in both countries. It has 
considered the high proportions of Christians in the population of the two countries. The 
following aspects are also evident:  
 In both countries, the history of churches is strongly associated with exclusive  
regimes, the church hierarchy and theology are associated with ethnic exclusion, 
oppression and exploitation, and church practices support social engineering, polarising 
ethnic conflicts and external influences that embody regional and international alliances.  
 Apart from differing choices of processes to resolve their respective crises, the  
proportion of beneficiaries and perpetrators, the nature of damage, levels of understanding, 
external interest and involvement in the transition are also different in the two countries. 
Moreover, the economic capacity and natural resources of South Africa have no equivalent 
in Rwanda. 
Given the analogy of internal dynamics in the two countries, Rwanda has much to learn 
from success and failure in South Africa. In both countries, human rights violations took 
place largely during intensified political tensions driven by internal (e.g., economic 
measures) and international factors (e.g., democratic demands and refugees conditions). 
While the TRC is the latest and the most creatively elaborate, consistent and effective 
pattern of nationwide conflict reconciliation, it cannot be a perfect template applicable to 
all situations. However, it provides a reference and basis for other processes. The victors 
recalcitrance, in contrast with the frustration, even guiltiness, of the defeated regime, has 
handicapped attempts to rediscover unity and reconciliation in Rwanda (Khan 2000; 
Mamdani 2001).  
The tri-polar representation of the Rwandan community (unique party/MRND, oppositions 
and the RPF, which fought and negotiated in Arusha) no longer exists. After the genocide, 
all people who were not members or allies of the RPF, or did not acclaim its victory and 
condemn the former regime, were identified with the gnocidaires. The RPF associated 
supporters of the MRND and Hutu with the Interahamwe/gnocidaires. This portrayal has 
further spoiled the credibility of the other side in the eyes of the international community. 
Unlike South Africa, Rwandas situation leaves the RPF  which lost nearly all its internal 
popular base  as the only representative (Vandeginste 1998a 27; Lemarchand 1995, 59 
ff.).  
In Rwanda, churches ought to take a clear position  like the Covenant of April 2004  and 
formally move towards practices, initiating reconciliation nationwide but also challenging 
political perversion of the path towards the national reconciliation. Numerous groups and 
NGOs, including Christians, have started isolated initiatives. Like the international 
community, however, the churches have not clearly challenged the distrust of one group 
for the other, which triggers ethnic enmity. Yet, not all Hutu-led initiatives have plainly 
condemned the genocide, perhaps because of fear of bearing subsequent responsibility 
(Gahima 1997). It is, however, imperative that the Hutu acknowledge the reality of the 
genocide against the Tutsi. Given that there has been no international consensus on general 
amnesty regarding Rwanda, at least restoration, symbolic punishment and reparation 
should apply, in order for reconciliation to go beyond simply signifying forgive and 
forget or let bygones be bygones (Bronkhorst 1995).  
In the light of the remarks above, the RPF holds the key to set out to remedy the situation. 
Since the RPF is the sole power  whether built on the Arusha Agreements or not  the 
other side is not represented in the Unity and Reconciliation fora. The Arusha Agreements 
had achieved nothing consistent compared with agreements that bore democratic 
institutions and later the TRC in South Africa. While the Arusha Negotiations were 
monitored from outside the country, South Africas arrangements emerged from internal 
negotiation as a national affair. Although the Arusha Agreements, as an instrument and a 
translation of political transition, embodied a range of matters relating to truth, unity and 
reconciliation, such as a peace agreement focussing on the promotion of human rights and 
combating impunity, not all measures were fair and constructive (Vandeginste 1998a).  
Table 9.3: Juxtaposition of South African Processes and Rwandan Prospects 
(rating of the processes)23 
PHASE I 
SOUTH AFRICA 
RWANDA 
Preparation 
Precursor 
Setting up 
Priorities: 
Investigation 
Public aware-
Churches 
NEGOTIATED AGREEMENTS + 
PEACE ACCORDS + 
- Idea agreed and signed on 14 
September 1991 by representatives of 
political parties, police, army, business, 
trade union, church, traditional & 
homeland + 
- Constructivism, peace building: peace 
committees, & more conducive 
conditions for TRC + 
- R. Goldstone commission, its report 
was acceptable record by all sides + 
- Visible role in national, regional & 
local peace committees; the public 
fearlessly owned the affair + 
- Visible role in inception & practice ~ 
ARUSHA AGREEMENTS ? 
Genocide & shift to Organic Law 
No 8/96 of 30 August 1996 
asserting prosecution + 
- Setting of GACACA courts by 
Organic Law No.40/2000 of 26 
January 2000; + 
not all Parties representatives, 
police, army, business, trade 
union, church etc. are associated  
- Justice, speed trials as response 
to overcrowded prisons ~ but, no 
conducive peace arrangements 
- No such commission & no 
report acceptable by all sides  
- Relative role in local Gacaca, 
vertical system, the Ministry of 
Justice, the Supreme Court 
monitor public participation ~  
- Churches not associated in 
inception, practice & strategies ? 
PHASE II 
Setting up 
Mandate & 
tasks 
Features 
T R C + 
By Parliamentary Act No 34 of 26 July 
1995 + 
- Some intervention of third party for 
NP, PPC & Freedom Party to join in the 
process ~ 
- Clear mandate: truth recovery, 
promoting unity and national 
reconciliation, healing of nation, facing 
the past with positive view + 
- National & local credibility. Free 
DDG, power to subpoena even political 
leaders, police and military, even 
outside the country. Public hearings 
&care are for both victims & 
N U R C 24 ~ 
By Parliamentary Act No 03/99 
of 12 March 1999 + 
- Former CDR, MRND leaders 
are not associated in NURC; this 
needs third party intervention  
- NURCs mandate is not clear: 
healing & trials are evident, but 
unity & reconciliation are not 
crystallising  
- There is rather suspicion, fear & 
no such free DDG & power to 
subpoena political leaders & 
military even inside the country. 
Public hearings in Gacaca do not 
  23  The rating is based on the research analysis: (+ successful), (~ Good), (? not clear), ( not promising). 
  24 Contrarily to the TRC, Gacaca came after NURC. Nonetheless, Gacaca is seen to produce more positive 
and visible result than the NURC. If the NURC applied at least Gacaca principles (openness to public 
scrutiny in assessing individuals liability, impartiality in re-reading stories), the NURC would play an even 
more positive role than the TRC did.  
Catalysts 
Data: 
Gathering 
Sampling 
Tools/analy-
Role of 
Churches 
Public 
Media 
Scholarship 
Cultural 
value tool 
Budget 
External 
influence 
Operation 
perpetrators 
- Success to shame police & military 
supporters of Apartheid principles. All 
big fish appeared: Whites/Blacks  + 
The TRC balanced participation of 
conflicting sides  + 
- Amnesty, briefings, witness protection 
program & moral/cultural values. 
Apologies & forgiveness  + 
- Pluralistic methods: comparison of 
multiple cases, places, witnesses, 
existing data from NGOs & family of 
victims + 
-Self selection, self sampling 
individuals volition  ~ 
- Starting from acceptable record, from 
both sides history + 
- Data treated with care, integrity & 
accessibility + 
- Built on existing tools, multiple 
methods, exchange data between offices 
& crosschecking comparison of cases, 
testimonies. Open to public scrutiny + 
- Inception & preparation, setting up 
TRC, submitted and confessed in TRC; 
churches supporting in briefing; and 
were invited to follow up the Process & 
briefings + 
- In inception, preparation, setting up, 
leading, informing & scrutiny + 
- Amnesty & refugees were called + 
- Two ways full use & open access for 
public + 
- Free to contribute & follow + 
- Less involved in TRC  
- Known + 
- Researchers, experience from other 
commissions: exchange e.g., with Latin 
America etc. ~ 
- Free: no fear or manipulation from the 
state. Looking ahead for the interest of 
cater for both  
-Does not dare to shame military 
abusers & supporters of ethnicism 
& ethnic ideology  
Not all big fish, only Hutu appear  
No balanced participation of 
conflicting sides.  
- No amnesty, no witness 
protection program,  but only 
form of briefings, moral, cultural 
values, apologies & forgiveness + 
- Prosecutorial methods, not 
pluralistic; no use of all existing 
data, but favours survivors 
complaints  
- Not individuals volition but 
prosecutorial approach, called 
witnesses & victims complaints ~ 
- Starting from one-side record & 
view of history  
- No so careful; less integrity nor 
accessibility  
- Not built on existing tools, or 
multiple methods, no open 
exchange of data & comparisons 
of cases. Not open to public 
scrutiny  
- Not in inception, preparation or 
Setting up NURC; no submission 
& confession to the NURC; no 
support in briefing yet or 
invitation for a follow up   
- Not in inception, preparation & 
setting up, but vertical principles 
& no public scrutiny. Ingando 
education is indoctrination  
- No amnesty & call to refugees  
- One way full use but not open 
access for public  
- National University & inter-
universities exchange: Never 
Again ~ 
- Not so evident in NURC, but in 
Gacaca, performance & some 
collective memories ~ 
- Unknown in public domain  
- Researchers, experience from 
other commissions: exchange 
e.g., with South Africa etc. + 
- Controlled by the state. Victims 
biased; no prior agreement of 
Timeframe 
Findings 
Final Report 
all citizens; agreement to work together 
leading to many other benefits + 
- Short but well known ~ 
- Objective: impartial evidence + 
- Impressive & open to public + 
former belligerents to work 
together to lead to other benefits  
- Not known ? 
- Not evident or known whether 
fair  
- Not evidently envisaged yet ? 
Regarding the measures against impunity, Vandeginste (1998a) and Ajello (1997) seem to 
agree that the violations committed by the RPA (in its operations in Rwanda, and in eastern 
Zaire at the end of 1996 and the beginning of 1997)25 should be prosecuted by the ICTR. 
Whether this counts or not, in the seeking for a balance of responsibility, the third party 
would help the RPF and its opponents to rediscover a space conducive for dialogue, and a 
credible representation of the other side (the Hutu group). Vandeginste (1998a) rather 
deplores that there has been a gradual monopolisation of power along ethnic lines, and a 
growing belief that the judicial system is an emanation of this power. Therefore, a better 
solution would come from a specialised independent commission. 
Rare diplomatic sources and studies have recommended a commission for Rwanda 
entailing both punishment and forgiveness, or at least a similar alternative, which could 
involve the churches. If they were structured accordingly, Gacaca could serve the purpose. 
However, the will for equity and to uncover the truth is still far from being a reality; even 
the proposal for such a commission has not been officially supported on either the national 
or partners agendas (Vandeginste 1998a). The international community or its special 
representatives of a non-partisan origin could still initiate such a process. Such a third party 
would easily team up and make use of national and international faith representation (e.g., 
  25 These are more or less similar to acts perpetrated by ANC inside and outside South Africa. 
CNER, WCC, AACC etc.), moral value fora and NGOs such as the NPI to counter-balance 
the three groups.26  
9.3.2 The state of the art  
Based on the present research, one may outline effective phases that Rwandas process 
could follow to settle its crisis. Settlements of national conflict either build on (1) Court 
trials and penalty, (2) Truth Commissions followed by amnesia, or (3) Truth and 
Reconciliation Commissions with eventual amnesty. Truth is a common factor to the three 
patterns and a component of justice and reconciliation. Thus, an ideal model integrates 
justice and reconciliation. Since international law gives room to reconciliation and cultural 
and religious traditions have forms of reconciliation, they may all be useful in this 
perspective (Bronkhorst 1995).  
(a) Constitutional reference 
Before trials or reconciliation proceedings, a constitutional reference is required, in order 
to amend the law to bring national legislation into conformity with the provisions of the 
agreements. The steps that Rwanda has made in this direction may be improved to meet the 
requirements of the pattern that is agreed upon. The Arusha Accords may be revised to 
make new engagements, since the former might no longer be applicable, as the context has 
changed: the number of political parties, ethnic proportions in the army and ethnic group 
data27 no longer apply. Further reflection and adjustment are required to design the period 
of transition, the eventual popular inquiry on the course of action and the commission that 
will effectively lead to viable democracy, as a step in reconciliation. The commission 
would elaborate electoral tools to design, prepare and organise the first democratic 
elections nationwide. 
  26 Tutsi-led regime, former Hutu-led leadership and eventual opposition. 
  27 Formerly, there were numerous parties; now the RPF is the only one that remains active.  
(b) Para-judicial framework 
The national commission, be it a Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission (TJRC) or 
a renewed NURC28 that is independent and parallel to tribunals, would seek a way ahead 
for nation-wide catharsis, doing so on three levels. (1) A mark of a national pact, be it a 
national day embodying the agreements on a society project29 or a covenant, would be 
sought, to set in motion a process entailing the national commission. (2) Regional and (3) 
local commissions (parallel to courts) would work in the same way as the Commission. 
The Commission and its branches would aim to purge harmful attitudes using genuine 
principles of Gacaca at local levels. The regional branches of the Commission would 
interconnect Gacaca, replicating its principles and linking them to the national level, which 
would follow up the society project.  
Figure 9.1: Structure of parallel judicial and non-judicial organisations,  
TJR model for post-genocide Rwanda 
 - COMMISSION FOR INQUIRY ICTR  SOCIETY PROJECT  ROUND TABLE -  
NATIONAL COURTS    <  >    NATIONAL COMMISSION 
 Regional  Courts          <           >       Regional Commissions    
 Local court  <> Local court<>Local court   < >  G  a  c  a  c  a <> G  a  c  a  c  a<>G  a  c  a  c  a 
Other independent initiatives (ADRs or counselling/briefings groups) by religious communities, NGOs and families 
N.B: The International Community (UN in particular) should be represented at the Round Table and 
subsequent follow up, and should provide funds for this Project.30 Churches ought to be represented at all 
levels except in courts. 
  28 The current National Unity and Reconciliation Commission could fulfil this role by stressing a 
nationwide, all-inclusive dialogue, transparency and impartiality. 
  29 A description of how to lead the Rwandan society ahead would be agreed upon at a round table of 
representatives of all ethnic groups with international facilitators. The round table would be held in a third 
party country, and would set up the National Commission. 
  30 Countries that led to the failure of peace keeping in Rwanda, mainly the US and the UK, should not play 
a leading role in the proceedings of reconciliation, but should contribute to funds for reconciliation, 
At present, a non-partisan third party is necessary to assist in minimising obstacles to 
dialogue leading to the national pact and subsequent initiatives. The third party may be a 
credible watchful reference, ensuring freedom of expression, popular input and impartiality 
about rights and judicial procedures, and that powers and representations are balanced 
(Sarkin 1997). If the Rwandan people could bravely agree on principles for such a process 
on their own, set its guidelines, reach fair decisions and proceed without third party 
oversight, this would be more promising for lasting coexistence and genuine reconciliation. 
The methods that were used to elect Gacaca leaders in the post-genocide period were a 
positive start. Ideally, the NURC might successfully evolve into the desired commission. 
Figure 9.1 illustrates how the parallel structures would operate. 
(c) Judicial framework 
At the international level, there ought to be a neutral UN commission of inquiry on human 
rights violations to deal with the actions of planners and instigators of the genocide by and 
against any group within and outside Rwandas borders. This Commission would differ 
from the three previous patterns and the three national levels, but would integrate their 
findings and make its data and findings open to further scrutiny. It could investigate the 
crimes and abuses committed against the Rwandan people and the country, and report to 
the UN, which would delegate the ICTR to examine charges of the first category, prosecute 
and try the suspects. 
National, regional and local tribunals should carry out investigations without obstructing 
the procedures of parallel commissions and vice-versa. National courts would re-examine 
charges, prosecute and try suspects who did not comply with the Commissions 
compensation and reconstruction as a gesture of apology. France, Belgium and Uganda too should not 
assume a leading role in the process but also ought to contribute financially.  
requirements for reconciliation. If the victims wished to pardon the offenders, the courts 
would respect the offer of forgiveness, free the offenders or refer the case to the 
Commissions, which could advise on restitution or symbolic penalty.  
(d) The role of the church  
The role of churches would be mainly to create awareness and disseminate information. 
Everything would take place under international auspices, which undoubtedly corresponds 
to the need for independence and absolute moral authority, essential for all investigative 
and truth commissions. Following the experiences from El Salvador (where an Argentine 
national was president of the Truth Commission after the 1991 peace agreement), Rwanda 
may also wish to appoint a non-national to lead the process, who may or may not be a 
religious figure, provided all parties agreed on the candidate. The church, in this context, 
does not solely imply the Rwandan churches, but both national and worldwide 
Christianity; their respective influences and related bodies ought to help the initiative.31  
The church ought to be a viable and formal partner in reconciliation, setting examples, 
contributing to the fund for the Commission and participating at every stage of the process. 
The church stands for fairness, truth, repentance and forgiveness, and ought to create 
actions and opportunities to follow up after trials or confessions. Confessions imply 
forgiveness, eventual amnesty or pardon in response to repentance. Churches ought to offer 
space and opportunities for healing, sharing and contributing to general funds for aid to 
victims and means to implement reparation.  
  31 If the initiative had to rely on the willingness of the local churches alone, it might not happen, because of 
internal divisions and abuses of positions in church leadership that office holders are not able or willing to 
repair. For example, ministers/priests flushed their colleagues out by malice, threats or force, or based on 
ethnicity in order to take their positions. Thus, church leaders are unable to reconcile even between 
themselves. 
The ideal period to investigate is from 4 October 1990 until 1998, or if necessary until the 
first democratic elections32 according to the will of the nation. The inclusion of earlier 
events would involve complex motives with no direct links to the 1990s crisis, and would 
render the task unmanageable. Since the ICTR mandate covers the period from January to 
the end of 1994, its extension should be sought to consider the same period covered by the 
new arrangement. Ordinary courts would continue to apply ordinary laws for other cases 
and handle all cases after the period of transition. An integrative administrative system 
accompanying reconciliation would allow unconditional access by international observers 
to detention centres and military camps, and condemn the acts of syndicates of 
denunciation (Vandeginste 1998a), i.e. ethnically-based NGOs forging charges against 
those holding different perspectives to those of these syndicates. Churches should also 
challenge such initiatives and syndicates, which are counter-productive in terms of justice 
and reconciliation; the syndicates increase hatred in society and hinder truth discovery.  
The general formula for the mechanism to respond to the Rwandan crisis requires a broad-
based preparation team, ethnically and regionally balanced, to reach all provinces, sectors 
and domains. The Commissions should have access to all possible tools of communication. 
Witnesses and the accused will require personal protection, if necessary, mainly after 
testifying. However, even before the new initiative starts, the state, which established the 
rule of law, ought to pursue justice, treating and protecting its citizens equally. The 
Commission creates conditions that are conducive to security when the initiative is 
representative of the nation and supported nationwide. The rebels, if any, would not ignore 
the initiative, for everything depends on political commitment. The preconditions for the 
new mechanism in Rwanda depend largely on the willingness of the RPF; the latter insists 
on prosecution and the other side seeks a guarantee of security, rights and equality (Khan 
  32 Free and democratic election is among other methods of conflict settlement; i.e. the elections of Gacaca 
leaders were a step forwards. The Presidential elections on 25 August 2003 were another step, though 
criticised of too many irregularities and intimidation.  
2000; Joinet 1996). Churches should be proactive advocates for constructive requirements 
from both sides. 
The number of detainees held would have repercussions for the setting up and operation of 
the process. It would require a sizeable staff and funds. Since 21,000 cases cost St.  14.0 
millions in South Africa, prisoners cases alone would cost St.  86.8 millions, if the same 
model were applied in Rwanda. In addition to its effectiveness, speed and minimizing 
death in prisons, Gacaca could be effective  as one aspect of the Commission  in 
lessening the cost. Other prerequisites are disciplinary and administrative sanctions against 
individual criminals still in public office.  
Non-partisan third parties that would be acceptable to both sides could include a 
Scandinavian country  because of its neutrality  or perhaps Tanzania, because of its 
knowledge of Rwanda. The third party state could play a positive role, and together with 
the UN, would hand over all documents and information deemed useful by the 
Commission (Vandeginste 1998a, 43).33 Khan has demonstrated integrity, diplomatic skill 
and knowledge through Rwandas hardest times. Such a personality would also be the best 
international advisor, to team up with the third party and help in the setting up of the 
Commission.  
Faith communities ought to encourage people to witness, confess or forgive. They ought to 
seek representation at all levels of the process (save perhaps in courts) and play the role of 
bridge builders to ensure that the model is applied fairly, caring for both victims and 
  33 If justice and (or) reconciliation are in view, then no data or informants ought to be overlooked. There 
should be no bias to some and neglect of others. It is regrettable that those dealing with Rwandas case seem 
to favour some informants, such as the Gen. Dallaire, while ignoring others, such as the former chief of the 
mission in Rwanda R. Booh Booh, and Ambassador S. Khan.  
perpetrators. It is fair to recognise that the churches, mainly the Roman Catholics, 
constitute a force for social mobility in Rwanda, and any initiative ought to take account of 
their presence. However, before getting involved officially, the churches ought to start 
mediation and reform within themselves. 
Figure 9.2: Levels of mutual participation in the search for solutions 
  Force              Adjudication           Arbitration          Negotiation              Mediation               Reconciliation 
 Low A                                                                                                                        B High 
   Conflict                           Conflict                   Conflict                  Conflict 
Suppression                   Management             Resolution       Prevention &Transformation 
*Rwanda: July 1994   >   Reactive   >       Relative Peace   >    Proactive    ~     2003 > 
                    Rwanda ICTR/Justice   NURC & Gacaca <> the non-judicial alternative 
                                                            [The contribution of churches are most needed here] 
Source: <Adapted from Assefa (1999 [1995], 37)> 
* The Rwandan trajectory goes from conflict to mediation, to war/genocide to trial and Gacaca; this pattern 
has some curves in its progress, and wrong sequences, which may result in shortcomings if not addressed. 
In short, the scale and nature of criminality in Rwanda and South Africa differ. A 
settlement in Rwanda should place more emphasis on justice than was the case in South 
Africa. Responding to criminal acts of planning and supervising genocide goes beyond the 
ability of non-judicial and national arrangements. There is a need for international 
intervention. However, Vandeginste (1998a) and Overdulve (interview, 12 July 2000)34 
recommend that all Rwandans should recognise and condemn the acts of genocide. 
Collective responsibility does not reduce the gravity of the offence; some Hutu have to 
confess their wrongdoings, just as some Tutsi should do.  
  34 He refers to the example commended by the Detmold confession, faulted as being partial. He suggests 
that it was not realistic, as hundreds of thousands of Hutu were also killed  whose collective confession 
would be needed for these crimes against humanity  and many Hutu [as well as Tutsi] are not guilty of 
anything.  
The Rwandan crisis calls for three considerations. (1) A gradual independent para-judicial 
mechanism ought to integrate cultural and religious aspects, and encourage co-operation of 
other institutions. (2) A national process should favour the religious and indigenous 
leaning, calling on modern courts and laws only in cases where the other procedure is not 
satisfactory. (3) An international mechanism, such as the ICTR, should be free to operate 
within and outside the country, carrying out prosecution on issues relating to the planning 
and supervision of genocide. Towards the end of the term of their mandate, the three 
aspects should merge into one entity operating in the country before being handed over in 
full to the national government. While international commissions and the ICTR are 
answerable to the UN, the National Commission should present its final report to 
Rwandas Government. 
In order to overcome suspicion, the process must be open to popular scrutiny, with the 
state providing credible schemes for the protection of witnesses, victims and culprits. The 
process ought to involve external observers and researchers, remaining more indigenous in 
principle and independent from the state and formal tribunals. There is much to learn from 
the South African precedent and later experiences, but additional aspects are imperative in 
Rwanda. In order to limit further damage, the ideal period for the process would be 10 
years, dealing with offences committed generally between 1990 and 1998. There is no 
need for spatial separation of the Hutu and Tutsi groups. While the location of the ICTR in 
Arusha is ideal, it ought to have a strong branch in Rwanda and remain free from state and 
international manipulation. In essence, the solution for Rwanda calls for a more pragmatic 
and original approach. 
Chapter 10 
Concluding Summary 
10.1 Introduction  
This study examined the process of conflict resolution and post-conflict reconciliation in 
South Africa (1990-1998) and its application to Rwanda (1990-2003). It focused on the 
TRC and the role of the churches in the two situations. The guiding disciplines for the 
study comprise history, theology, and peace studies and reconciliation in particular.  
The study concluded that conflict often arises because of limited communication. Conflicts 
often are a manifestation of peoples dissatisfaction or suppressed realities. Social analysis 
helps to understand how to deal with a situation. Prophetic theologies and cultural values 
can contribute effectively to restoring harmony. Conflict settlement requires reckoning the 
role played by all parties in conflict. The TRC maximised the use of means to ease the pain 
of the past, to restore peoples dignity and equal rights. In Rwanda, lasting peace also 
requires maximising the use of means of healing memories of ubuhake, tackling ethnicism 
and injustice. As the churches were seen as accomplices in the ethnic conflicts, they should 
confess the past, and their leaders reunite in order to recover credibility and contribute 
towards reconciliation. For the interest of all Rwandans, the new leadership ought to seek 
clearly the significance of national reconciliation, recognise its path and the positive 
impact it could have on governance. 
 The study ascertained that the entire structure of the TRC could not be applied 
successfully in Rwanda without prior adjustments (see Chapter 9). Rwanda could not offer 
the same conditions and resources that the TRC built on in South Africa. For instance, 
there was no agreement for peace between the Tutsi-led RPA and the Hutu-led FAR. 
Contrary to the situation in South Africa (Table 9.2; cf. Chapters 5 & 8), there is an 
absence of balanced forces in Rwanda: instead, there is the presence of the victorious 
(Tutsi/RPA) and defeated (Hutu/FAR) sides. There is also the absence of an offer of 
concessions, such as amnesty and the release of political prisoners, a guarantee of safe 
return for refugees and a witness protection plan. Everything depends on the willingness of 
the victor, who is in power (Chapters 7 & 8). 
Rwandas situation has unique qualitative and quantitative characteristics, in particular, the 
scale and speed of the genocide. The subsequent number of victims and prisoners made it 
difficult to carry out justice and promote truth telling (cf. Chapters 7 & 8). Rwandas 
Government chose tough prosecutions. However, Sarkin (1997) and Igwara (2002) 
observed that perpetrators confess more readily before a non-judicial authority. In the 
interest of reconciliation, only when the accused do not meet the conditions required of 
deponents should they appear before judicial proceedings (Genevive 2003). In this view, 
the situation in Rwanda requires that a non-judicial system deal first with those suspects 
willing to confess. It should receive their statements, provoke in-depth confessions and 
forgiveness to enhance the healing process of witnesses, give sanctions or pardon the 
offenders and compensate victims, following the example of South Africa (cf. Chapter 6).  
This study (Chapter 9) has identified an alternative structure (Figure 9.1) and model of 
reconciliation that takes into account both the contribution of churches and cultures, and 
combines law and mercy. It argued that churches ought to support prosecutions only as a 
last resort. It recommended a model built on the teaching of Jesus (see Chapter 4 cf. Table 
4.1), applicable to a variety of contexts including post-genocide Rwanda. The model is 
adaptable into community-based initiatives and can mesh with the cultural structure, such 
as authentic Gacaca (cf. Chapters 3 & 4). 
10.2  Major findings 
10.2.1  Effective conflict resolution   
The study found that any effective approach to the handling of conflict should be largely 
corrective and deal with the pain and the past, enabling people to identify the issues that 
were apparently forgotten or suppressed on purpose. Such an approach motivates all sides 
and seeks the satisfaction of conflicting sides, or at least considers impartially their 
respective claims. For this reason, that approach is called a third way or the middle ground. 
Social reconciliation implies the coming together of former enemies, to rebuild good 
relationships (cf. Chapters 2 & 3) through dialogue and co-operation. However, genuine 
reconciliation embodies repentance and forgiveness but also stresses healing and eventual 
restitution (including truth, rights and fair justice); what is often meant does not signify 
genuine reconciliation. The distinction of Christian reconciliation lies in the soteriological 
and eschatological realities on earth through relationships transformed within the 
community of believers helped by their observance of the sacraments (see Chapter 4). 
10.2.2  Conditions for successful reconciliation   
The study found that prior agreement  to specified principles (regarding interests, rights 
and power) for successful negotiations and settlement  and the sharing of pain allowed a 
genuine experience of reconciliation (see Chapters 5 & 6). Contrary to the claim that 
reconciliation requires a complete change in the nature of the person involved (cf. Chapter 
4), the study is in line with Rom. 5: 8 - 11: God showed his great love and offered his 
reconciliation with us when we were still sinners. Forgiveness generates reconciliation. 
Likewise, the dynamics of the TRC embodied overcoming the past, mainly by facing it 
with a positive outlook, and a passion for unity and reconciliation. Thus, social 
reconciliation is even possible without judicial procedure, repentance or forgiveness, in 
situations in which either the offender or the victim is absent (either dead, in prison or in 
exile). In this case, one side may work its way (be reconciled and healed) provided that the 
other side is not prevented from joining in. People, whether associated with the situation or 
not, may help in the process. In the case of big groups like Hutu and Tutsi, if the sides 
agree on principles or BATNA35, reconciliation could occur on both sides, provided 
individuals abide by the decisions of their representatives following these principles (cf. 
Chapters 2, 3 & 4). 
10.2.3  Difficulties in appertaining responsibility   
The study found that narrowed or suppressed memories of past situations have provided 
the impetus for endless conflicts and the genocide in Rwanda (see Chapters 7 & 8). It 
might be found that remote actors and bystanders committed some abuses directly or 
indirectly in the 1959 social revolution and the 1990s war.  
It might be agreed that those who were part of the 1990s conflict, through media and 
political campaign knowledge and the ideological backing of the belligerents, also 
participate in the settlement. Furthermore, it might be found that some remote actors 
contributed to the blocking of initiatives for peacekeeping during the 1994 genocide 
(Melvern 2000; Klinghoffer 1998; Feil 1998; Jones 2001; Mugabe 2001; Dallaire 2004). 
  35  Best Alternative to a Negotiated Agreement. 
Although the negative or positive external involvement depends on information from one 
or other of the belligerents, reconciliation requires also steadily dealing with the guilt of 
the bystanders and remote actors, who may have acknowledged their mistakes, but still 
their influence might handicap the process if they are not committed.  
10.2.4  The multiple causality of the genocide   
This study has ascertained that the Rwandan genocide was more the product of a political 
tactic than a resurgence of old ethnic hatred. However, the root causes of the conflict 
stretch back into the history of Hutu-Tutsi relations. Among other direct causes of the 
genocide were mutual fear of slaughter between the belligerents, mainly their leaders, and 
the deception of politicians associated with either side. Even so, the most direct cause was 
the successive killing of Hutu Presidents  allegedly calculated acts by Tutsi groups  
which caused Habyarimanas entourage feeling fearful having lost its power and interest. 
Consequently, each side prepared to do anything to ensure its survival (Schonecke 1994; 
Mugabe 2001). Further direct causes were the one-sided arms embargo (cf. Chapter 7; 
Berry & Berry 1999), the recalcitrant attitude of the RPF (Khan 2000), partial external 
intervention and mediation, and the ensuing accords (Melvern 2000; Klinghoffer 1998; 
Feil 1998; Jones 2001).  
The above factors increased the nervousness of the MRND and CDR members. Secretly, 
Hutu extremists  allied with Akazu  reacted immediately by creating killing mechanisms 
and stirring up the awkward Abatabazi government. Together they organised the genocide 
on the pretexts of self-defence and the view that given the one-sided arms embargo, the 
government army had no longer the means to protect the population against the Tutsi-led 
RPA. Actually, the subsequent bankruptcy of the leadership and the shortage of arms 
triggered a readiness of the people  with the added interests of looting and vengeance  
and militia to use any means and join in the killings (Chapter 7). Additionally, the 
leaderships of both sides were self-centred, driven by deception and hidden agendas to 
monopolise power and national assets. They had no fair and forgiving leaders as Mandela 
and de Klerk tried to do in South Africa. 
10.2.5  The ramifications of long-running inter-ethnic hostility   
The study has supported the hypothesis that the violence and exclusiveness of inter-ethnic 
groups in Rwanda have not been sincerely challenged at their roots  the rise of ubuhake 
and myths of superiority  either by the secular authorities or by the churches. The study 
(Chapter 7) found, however, that antipathy between Hutu and Tutsi emerged before 
colonisation and Christianity entered Rwanda, but increased in the colonial era into more 
structured injustice (agahato and ubureta), which continued to fuel violence in post-
colonial Rwanda. The antipathy, injustice and exclusion spread within the churches. The 
latter contributed to the further hardening of the Hutu and Tutsi relationship. 
This study (Chapters 7 & 8) has ascertained that there has been little regard given to truth 
and transparency in tabling and discussing these conflicts. However, the attempt to impose 
the Tutsi leadership in the 1990s was a form of suppression of memories (of abuses of 
ubuhake and correlated retribution associated with the Tutsi regime). The attempt 
resurrected ethnic hatred and the myth of Tutsi superiority. On the one hand, the structure 
of international rivalries and the media helped to exacerbate the conflict. Above all, the 
demands for democratisation had a peculiar impact on the situation (see Chapters 7 & 8 
and Clapham 1996). On the other hand, the total rejection of any level of amnesty and 
particularly the rejection of power sharing  by the present government  with the elements 
of the former regime are handicaps for reconciliation (Khan 2000). Chapters 8 and 9 
suggested that post-genocide interventions did not consider impartial inquiries and social 
analysis, but imposed their own perception of the situation. This added to existing biases 
and hence worsened the situation. 
 10.2.6  Inequalities in investigative and legal processes   
The study has found that the truth about both material and moral damage caused by the 
Hutu regime (1973 & 1990-4), its extremist media, the presidential guards and militia are 
evident and well documented: African Rights (1994) and Des Forges (1999) have 
consistently verified most of these claims. Likewise, the international media had reported 
the genocide live. Thus, ample literature, films and testimonies describing Hutu atrocities 
in the genocide are available. Paradoxically, the truth about the other side  the pre-1950 
regime and mainly the RPF (1994 onwards)  remains unexplored. The killings and 
deceptions of the RPF  claiming to bring democracy and to stop the genocide  were 
covert and there is no political will to investigate them (Carrero 2001; Hakizabera 2000; 
Mugabe 2001; Musabyimana 2003). As an example, no thorough accounts have been given 
of the RPF broadcasts: even the UN Department of Public Information does not refer 
plainly to Radio Muhabura. Sadly, prosecutions and settlement prospects are being 
established based on these one-sided records. 
Although the RPA and FAR bear unequal moral responsibility, the instruments of 
international justice have not indicted any RPA members for their human rights violations, 
even in cases officially acknowledged, such as the killing of the three Roman Catholic 
bishops and the priests and nuns at Kabgayi, as well as the killings at Kibeho (see Chapters 
7 & 8). Likewise, the UN has overlooked the reports about the 1994-98 massacres of Hutu 
by the RPA (cf. Garreton 1997). Therefore, there has not been impartial international 
vigilance to uncover and prosecute all offenders, least of all the big fish, as Aspagren 
(2002) claims the ICTR has done for the Hutu gnocidaires. World authorities, including 
the UN, that overlooked a report compiled by Ajello twisted (like others blocked) inquiries 
into the RPF/RPA (Vandeginste 1998a, Garreton 1997), and transferred (to cover up facts) 
the ICTRs General Persecutor C. Der Ponte, whose impartial vigilance was very effective.   
Again, the UN closed the files when new facts emerged (Mugabe 2001; Smith 2004), 
falsifying premature theses relating to the downing of the Habyarimana plane. 
Consequently, the judicial systems in both the international and national courts are not 
neutral given that truth recovery has not been given priority (see Chapter 8). This situation 
still creates barriers against full reconciliation. National reconciliation might not fully 
materialise if no light is shed on major issues such us the killing of Habyarimana and fair 
arrangements for power sharing. 
10.2.7  The churches reconciliation roles have yet to be filled   
The study (Chapters 7 & 8) found that old and new leaders of churches have failed to come 
together, to engage in dialogue and to promote reconciliation between themselves. 
Consequently, they are likely to fail in their stewardship of the churches and of the nation. 
Until they set an example in their own lives and relationships, they cannot help or honestly 
lead the reconciliation.  
It is worth considering that the Rwandan culture urges compliance to the example of the 
leadership. Again, Christian reconciliation calls individuals and leaders of institutions to 
come together and to repent for forgiveness: only this can lead to mutual healing through 
sharing memories. While healing to yield full reconciliation starts from ones heart 
(Ntezimana 2000), one cannot help others to heal if one has not experienced healing in 
ones own life. One cannot help others to repent or forgive without having oneself repented 
or forgiven. Moreover, healing in Rwanda requires correct interpretation through objective 
historical studies and media output, studies of groups interests and power struggles, 
interpretation of Hutu and Tutsi relationships and healing memories (putting the painful 
past to rest). Equally, there is a need for economic reconciliation (restitution, and reform 
for greater equitability), transformation of political structures and transformative theology 
to effect reconciliation.  
10.2.8  Applying South Africas reconciliation experience to Rwanda   
The study (Chapter 4) found that Jesus and by extension Christians principles for conflict 
settlement and reconciliation provide a model  but not a blueprint  that is universally 
applicable, and upon which effective processes, even national-level reconciliation, can be 
built up, be contextualised and applied on the ground.  
The TRC is one example largely shaped by Jesus model and can be adapted in other 
contexts. A TRC version for Rwanda could benefit from additional cultural and religious 
elements. Rwanda could learn from success, errors and remarks from the South African 
experience. It could also benefit from consistent teaching and experience of reconciliation 
within the churches and ritual assertions (see Chapter 4), but also from laying stress on 
justice where the option for reconciliation is still impossible (see Chapter 9). Thus, the 
thesis suggested a new model of resolutions nourished by Christianity, focused on 
balancing accountability (justice) and clemency (grace). A comprehensive model for 
Rwanda then ought to embed the truth and embrace justice and reconciliation (see TJR 
paradigm in Chapter 9, Figure 9.1). The NURC could either evolve or infuse successfully 
into such a comprehensive model. 
Jesus provided three starting points for full reconciliation: first and second, both the 
offender seeking forgiveness and the offended offering forgiveness should play equal parts 
in the process. Thirdly, bystanders have the duty to remind the culprit to seek forgiveness 
and the victim to forgive. Jesus teaching stresses that the breakdown of or unhealed 
relationship between human beings affects their harmony with God. Jesus sums up the 
complete approach to reconciliation in Matthew 5:21-26 and Luke 12:58-59.  
In Matthew 18:15-17 and Luke 17:3-4, Jesus stresses the bases for social reconciliation 
(sharing facts, repentance and forgiveness) across group boundaries, as opposed to 
prosecution. Chapter 9 found that the TRC process largely uses Jesus model. If it were 
transferred to Rwanda, it could have very positive effects. The extent of success would 
depend mostly on the willingness of the leading party/state (RPF) to co-operate with the 
churches and to some extent the readiness of church leaders to contribute and to set an 
example, and would also depend on the Hutu elite and the victims responses. The TRC or 
any resultant model (NURC, TJR-like) could interconnect the Gacaca and spiritualities (cf. 
Chapters 3 & 9).  
10.2.9  Perfection and practicality   
This study (Chapter 3) found that the Church usually professes a higher level (spiritual) of 
reconciliation  a perfection that may not be achieved fully on earth  but tends to overlook 
achievable realities such as peace, sharing, dialogue, equitability and co-operation that 
fertilise the ground for the higher quality reconciliation to occur. To date, the practices of 
the churches in Rwanda have laid stress on the higher perfection  healing, repentance and 
forgiveness  with too little regard to practical aspects and thus leaving big gaps in aspects 
of dialogue (between leaders), truth, impartiality, equitability, rights etc., which are vital 
for the reconciliation of society.  
The study found, however, that social reconciliation does not always wait for repentance 
and forgiveness. It may spring from peoples agreement (on principles), peoples material 
or psychological needs, or meeting and working together and sharing their pain or 
memories (Chapters 2, 4, 5 & 6). Paul (2 Cor. 5:17-20) highlights the fact that God has 
entrusted the Church with a ministry of reconciliation. Therefore, churches have the duty 
to play their part at the level of both individual and national reconciliation, through the 
exposition of biblical texts, combined with relevant application in context (see Chapter 4).  
Christians must strive to find practical means (for example ADR) that allow progress over 
time, whether by use of principles, opportunities or step-by-step repentance and 
forgiveness. Church leaders in Rwanda ought  and need help  to exemplify the model in 
their own relations and teaching (Cyuma 2005).  
10.3  Implications of this studys findings 
10.3.1  General issues 
Reconciliation is largely a post-conflict situation (Schreiter 2003). It can be prevention or 
mediation at other times. It may occur with or without third-party intervention. This study 
(Chapter 9) detailed many lessons (Chapter 9, 3) from the TRC experience, especially the 
possibility of delivering justice with no obligation to punish, but to correct and care for 
both the offender and the victim. Churches ought to contribute to such efforts. The TRC 
structure can be effectively adapted to other contexts, including Rwanda. However, it 
needs to be efficiently translated into local languages, and eventually utilise customary 
cultural tools, religious structures, etc.  
Through the biblical sources, Christianity provides guidelines for conflict settlement36, 
giving priority to love, peace and fellowship. Three major components of reconciliation are 
truth telling, repentance and forgiveness (cf. Chapter 4). Therefore, the large Christian 
populations and openness to spirituality characterising both Rwanda and South Africa were 
positive factors for reconciliation if their respective theologies were genuine. The 
application of Jesus paradigm  confession/repentance and forgiveness  by some 
individual Christians and church representatives in the TRC processes added to political 
forgiveness (or amnesty) and achieved effective reconciliation (see Chapter 6); people in 
Rwanda and other contexts could replicate such good examples.  
  36 (Gn 50:15-21; Matt 5:21-26, 18:15-17; Luke 12:56-59, 17:3-4; Ac 7:26; Rom 13:9-21; Eph 2:13-22). 
Theologies (teachings) of churches and their praxis do not often reflect per se Jesus 
instructions on conflict settlement (cf. Chapters 4, 7 & 8). Churches are often reticent vis-
-vis reconciliation and do not always offer inclusive and corrective models but are often 
victim-biased. Similarly, post-genocide church attitudes in Rwanda were prosecution-
biased (Chapter 7) and are still moving slowly towards reconciliation.  
Before the TRC started, there was a set of conditions and catalytic bargaining, for instance 
peace and inclusion, constitutional reforms, elections, definitions of goals, steps and 
principles of the process, amnesty provision, witness protection scheme, and information 
provision, i.e. briefing/debriefing about the legal implications of peoples testimonies (see 
Chapter 6). Therefore, a TRC system could not have worked effectively in mid-1994 in 
Rwanda, because these pre-conditions could not have been realised (cf. Chapters 8 & 
Table 9.2, no 19-24). Likewise, the churches in Rwanda before and after the genocide 
could not have effectively led reconciliation (applying Jesus model) unless they, and in 
particular the clergy, had first reconciled within themselves in order to preach from 
example (see Chapters 7 & 9).  
10.3.2  Implications for the churches in Rwanda 
Reconciliation is central in Christian ministry, theology and church praxis. While genuine 
reconciliation presupposes repentance and forgiveness of sins, the two outcomes require 
prior truth recovery and eventually justice (as equity). Gods justice is expressed in his 
mercy for confessing sinners. In order to help justice and reconciliation to materialise in 
Rwanda, the leaders of the churches need first to recover from the lies they spread about 
Rwandas past, conflicts and the genocide. 
Rwandans could learn from South African examples of reconciliation (see Chapter 6) that 
emerged from the church leaders, for instance the apologies made to leaders of other 
churches by Professor W. Jonker and the Moderator of the General Synod of the DRC. The 
two leaders challenged their colleagues in the DRC and other churches. Together with the 
forgiveness offered by Archbishop D. Tutu on behalf of other churches, this act led South 
African society to get on the move in unison to achieve reconciliation (see Chapter 5.4). 
The leaders of the churches in Rwanda also need first to find their own way back to God, 
living out truth, love in fellowship and honesty in order to teach credibly, helping their 
flock to do likewise.  
The Rwandan clergy ought to strive for reconciliation and healing among themselves, 
setting an example to the members of the churches and the nation. The church worldwide 
is no less guilty of errors (mainly regarding missionary policy and practice). It has 
contributed to the divisions in Rwanda and has not repented of this. Sadly, it is still 
dividing through its exclusive compassion to one or the other ethnic groups and exclusive 
support to ethnic-based leadership in the churches, and its ethnicising interpretation of the 
most recent situation in Rwanda, but overlooking the painful past and new refugees (see 
Chapters 7 & 8). Thus, church partners, missions and mother churches should not only 
repent of the past but also help to correct subsequent errors  that nourished the war and 
the genocide  and remove the pain they caused to the nation. They ought to help the local 
church leadership to become healed and reconciled. 
Up to 2003, the local churches were not able to handle the situation. They were not 
equipped theologically or prepared politically. Their leaderships were not spiritually and 
socially reconciled. They needed the ability to face the rampant effect of politico-economic 
globalisation and democratisation, but they may still not grasp these realities. The 
reorganisation of the churches in the post-genocide period was ethnically motivated, as 
some leaders had gained high positions after removing their former leaders, having often 
been helped to do so by political and military force (Spijker 1997). Thus, these new church 
leaders are also guilty of violence, and like their predecessors, they lack credibility. They 
need first to be reconciled with their predecessors in order to be trusted. Only after this can 
the clergy contribute to reconciliation nationwide, and the congregations replicate their 
example.  
As long as some churches in Rwanda are still identified with the political regime and 
ethnic groups, they continue to share their fate or success (cf. Table 9.1, # 14ff). This was 
the case (Chapter 7) with the Roman Catholic Church before the genocide, and was also 
the case (Chapter 5) with the DRC during Apartheid. Similarly, in post-genocide Rwanda, 
Protestant churches have given silent approval to the political regimes perversion of the 
significance of reconciliation and its effective tools. The approval was evident even with 
regard to killings and politico-economic injustice (see Chapter 8.4). However, the churches 
need to overcome their past and their leaders abstain from using instruments of vengeance. 
They need rather to promote the teaching of Jesus to offenders (repentance) and to victims 
(forgiveness), even where the local politics do not identify with this perspective.  
The thesis found that the churches need to discern the limits of their involvement: when to 
cooperate and when to distance themselves from political (damaging) drive and 
personalities. Church leaders must not be separate classes in the churches; they need to 
avoid being removed (by their life style) from the active community life of reconciled 
people. The teaching of the churches needs to deepen virtues such as the pursuit of truth, 
equity, pardon, rights, and stewardship (like democracy) for the good of the people. The 
teaching of the church on reconciliation and its practices should evolve where churches 
operate. Thus, worldwide Christian bodies should address the genocide not only through 
media in their respective countries, but also come to Rwanda, help face the realities, and 
preach through action. The Church worldwide in general needs to rethink its theology and 
practice on reconciliation to fit in with the teaching of Jesus (Chapter 4.1) and respond to 
the new reality.  
The thesis found that individual obedience to authority or Church obedience to the 
teaching of Christ (such as active non-violence) does not remove individual liability 
vis--vis the law. Conversely, obedience should not deter integrity but rather say no to evil 
systems. Church leaderships ought to allow dialogue in their ranks, and help the members 
to be an adequate model for the evolving society. This way the church can lead effective 
reconciliation and guide the state to do likewise. 
10.3.3  Implications for further research 
Future action research should focus on the application of the TJR model (see Chapter 9) 
and test the elicitive approach, cultivating receptivity and innovation, drawing on many 
actors and voluntarism. It should deepen inclusive and effective use of collective memories 
(cf. Chapter 8.5.3). 
The application of the TJR model in Rwanda (cf. Chapter 9.3.2, Figure 9.1) calls for 
deeper and neutral investigation, and the development of teaching media and public 
awareness, such as peace radio. It calls for the institution of official and unofficial, 
community-based, national and international dialogue. It calls for further study on the 
feasibility of using the means at hand: customary values and practices (for example 
Gacaca) and churches capacity. Further studies should review Gacaca so that it does not 
simply serve one groups concerns, such as survivors (for example Ibuka), prisoners, or 
securing the states agenda, but so that it responds fairly and constantly to all human need, 
solving the problem of prisons, uncovering perpetrators, redressing and healing victims 
and offenders, forgiving or punishing accordingly and providing possible symbolic or legal 
reparation. 
10.4  Limitations of the research 
There were multiple fields and domains to consult in the limited time, and a large quantity 
of divergent information and literature to sort out on both South Africa and Rwanda. 
However, ample use of research assistants, multiple research methods, reviewing the thesis 
draft, writing papers for conferences and lecturing on and discussing matters related to the 
research offered excellent opportunities to adjust the focus and overcome the difficulties. 
We investigated amnesty, security and public confessions as far as we could go and found 
that they contain valuable elements for conflict reconciliation.  
Some problems resulted from existing enthusiasm for and over-estimation of the 
achievements of the TRC in the context of South Africas Apartheid. The general belief 
that the TRC is able to resolve any other conflicts in any context tended to influence the 
researcher into accepting it quickly with no deeper investigation. Equally, as argued in 
Chapter 6, some errors occurred in the TRC process itself, for instance amnesty decisions 
at the expense of victims and lower categories of perpetrators while favouring the 
authorities, and that there was a lack of use of cultural tools. However, some submissions, 
hearings and their responses hide important facts: they imbedded lies or praise, rather than 
true confessions or correction. Both excess of excitement about the TRC on the one hand, 
and conflicting views relating to the contribution of the churches to the Commission on the 
other, risked hindering the researchers assessment of the TRC, the churches role and the 
follow-up process. To overcome the problem, we spent time on the ground, sharing and 
discussing first-hand information with victims, perpetrators, TRC staff and church leaders. 
Nonetheless, controversial views on the amnesty call for further studies. 
Other limitations of the research (Chapter 8) arose from the fact that people known to be 
knowledgeable about the local situations in Rwanda tendered quick solutions while hiding 
the truth about the cause of the war and the genocide, about those involved and the 
aftermath. The objectives of the perpetrators (Interahamwe, CDR and RTLM) were 
difficult to depict, since the leadership that allowed the genocide seemed to have had no 
cohesive vision. However, the RPFs political agenda being hidden made the investigation 
harder. Furthermore, there was fear and suspicion between Rwandans in and outside the 
country at the time the research was going on. After the genocide, the RPF resorted to the 
politics of terror and intimidation (Sibomana 1999), and any objective study of the post-
genocide situation encountered stereotypical positions among the political and church 
leaders. This was also evident among media personnel, researchers, representatives of the 
Rwandan Government and its opponents and the propaganda of their respective allies 
inside and outside the country. It could have been impossible to obtain useful data, but the 
multiple methods and research assistants used reached all useful sources. 
Other limitations resulted from internal and external authorities that were caught in the 
crisis and tried fiercely to cover up their errors. The deaths of knowledgeable individuals, 
missing records (for example about Radio Muhabura and the RPFs war plans), the lies of 
past and present leaders, persistent division between Bakiga and Banyenduga and the 
decline of some parties and organisations are other evident factors that may distort a study 
such as this if the researcher is not alert. There has been no specific and officially approved 
enquiry into the RPF/RPA invasion plan and subsequent abuses (see Chapter 8). Deception 
by the new oligarchy and the supporters of RPF inside and outside Rwanda perpetuates the 
problem in the same state as under the Habyarimana oligarchy. The extent of the damage 
of the Rwandan genocide also makes it harder for observers and some researchers to be 
objective. An inattentive researcher could not grasp every detail or some perspectives of 
the settlements in both diverse Rwandan and South African contexts. Everything was 
required to be examined with humility, with the support of research assistants and other 
people, and with patience, but also courage and many prayers.  
10.5 Recommendations for action 
Based on the research, we recommend the following suggestions: 
 The post-genocide situation in Rwanda requires holding to account both the offender 
and the offended from Hutu and Tutsi groups  without ignoring Twa and eventual 
bystanders  to condemn the past (the abuses of ubuhake, all forms of exclusion and 
exploitation, regionalism and the genocide), in a process which considers both sides 
stories, to encourage them to care for the future together.  
 There is a strong moral case for the USA freely to compensate the people of Rwanda in 
recognition of having blocked the initiative for genocide prevention (cf. Melvern 2000; 
Feil 1998; Jones 2001). Thus, the USA ought to support extensively the Rwandan justice 
and reconciliation processes.  
 S. Khan (2000) has shown unique neutrality in assessing Rwandas situation: he could 
be requested to help to create and guide a more neutral intervention that the UN ought to 
initiate. It transpired in the Arusha Accords and in other mediations between Rwandans 
that their delegates represented conflicting sides  ethnic but also regional groups  
defending their preset opinions and their interests rather than the national interest. The 
delegates condemned any opponents case. Therefore, a neutral third party alone could 
help the Hutu and Tutsi elites to get off the hook, providing them with a face-to-face 
space to discover mutual concessions, which they would otherwise fail to realise on their 
own (cf. Chapter 9). In this perspective, Rwanda may wish to request Mr N. Mandela to 
lead the process or to designate another person of integrity to lead it. 
 The process of national reconciliation ought to build openly and impartially upon 
positive elements from existing initiatives like the Arusha Accords, NURC, Gacaca etc., 
but reach beyond trials and falsity by unearthing the causes of evil, and healing the 
wounds. Rwandans should repent old ethnic and regional conflicts that still reshape 
political structures and the churches.  
 An effective response to the post-genocide situation needs to take a corrective approach 
that looks positively forward, equally allowing for all parties interests, rights and role in 
leadership. It calls for combining constructive law and mercy and for increasing the 
resources available for the benefit of reconciliation and the healing of the nation. It 
requires considering in particular the evidence of knowledgeable people  mainly 
Ambassador S. Khan, R. Booh Booh, the late A. Sibomana, A. Des Forges, F. Reyntjens 
etc. and R. Dallaires account of the genocide. It requires considering reports of experts 
giving full accounts of the realities of the 1990s situation, in order to punish fairly 
unrenounced evil and fully reconcile the nation. It requires a neutral intervention, in order 
to avoid repeating the error of the past: justice for the victor alone. The neutral third party 
could help, especially to try fairly the perpetrators who do not qualify for amnesty.  
 The churches should support the corrective aspect of justice  to balance with the 
punitive trend of tribunals in the absence of repentance or forgiveness  seeking 
agreements between the antagonists. The churches should initiate local ADRs and set 
structures (for example occasional school, small cells for briefing, programmes, special 
events such as Holy Communion, training materials production, Bible study materials, 
workshops, conferences, and interfaith consultations) on local, regional and national levels. 
The churches ought to provide adequate education, facilitation and follow-up for the 
reconciliation and healing processes. 
 The churches desperately need strong support from the worldwide Church to restore 
harmony, starting with its own hierarchy. Partners, primarily the Vatican, the Anglican 
Communion and the WCC, should join efforts and offer genuine contributions to 
Rwandas reconciliation. 
 The churches ought to support the state by promoting economic schemes at the 
grassroots level, to lessen the effects of the genocide, particularly inter-ethnic hatred, 
rampant poverty and HIV/AIDS, and to provide a safe space for society to exchange their 
memories and new perspectives. The churches ought to take part in (possibly lead) the 
dialogues engaging Rwandas nationals, both within and outside of the country, and with 
organisations to search for a better way ahead.  
                                        SOURCES AND REFERENCES 
1. Interview Responses, Audio &Videotape   
                  Codes       Dates            Methods  
General Knowledge: 
 CT.GN. CH   RL  03. 07. 2001  SI.ta 
OX.GN.GE.   JM   19. 06. 1999  FI.wr    
Specific to Rwanda: 
LO.RW.GN   BJ  27. 05. 2000  SI.wr 
ZW.RW.CH  OK   10. 07. 2000   SI.ta 
 EL.RW.GN   GS  04. 01. 2 001  SSI.wr  
LO.RW.GV   MC  09. 08. 2000  SSI.wr  
Specific to TRC: 
LO.SA.TR     YH   14. 09. 2000  FI.ta.wr  
 LO.SA.TR     KU  15. 09. 2000  FI.ta.wr  
 LO.SA.TR     CE  15. 09. 2000  FI.ta.wr  
 LO.SA.TR     MP  15. 09. 2000  FI.ta.wr  
 LO.SA.TR     KL  15. 09. 2000  SSI.wr & Q 
 CT.SA.CL     BM  24. 06. 2001[ff.25.06] FI.wr 
 CT.SA.MG    Gp  25. 06. 2001  FI.wr 
CT.SA.TRC   GM  06. 07. 2001  PI.ta  
 CT.SA.TRC   GS  07. 07. 2001  SI.ta  
TRC and the Church: 
 OX.SA.GN    MS  17. 05. 2001[ff.]  FI.wr 
 CT.SA.MF     Fs  24. 06. 2001  PI.wr 
 CT.SA.TRC  BL  26. 06. 2001  SI.ta & Q  
 CT.SA.CC    TD  28. 06. 2001[ff.04.07] FI.wr 
 CT.SA.CH    VK-R  28. 06. 2001  FI.wr 
 CT.SA.TS     Tg  28. 06. 2001  FI.wr 
 CT.SA IJR    DTF  29. 06. 2001  SI.ta & Q 
 CT.SA.HM   MM  29. 06. 2001  SI.ta 
 CT.SA.MG   Gp  29. 06. 2001  PI.wr 
 CT.SA.CH    CGp  01. 07. 2001  PO.wr 
 CT.SA.CH    CGp  02. 07. 2001  PO.wr 
CT.SA.CL    EM P   05. 07. 2001  SSI.ta 
Specific Christian Approach: 
OX.SA.CH   LP          17. 04. 2000 [ff 2001] SSI.ta & Q 
 CT.SA.YH   YH   23. 06. 2001  PI.ta & wr 
CT.SA.CH   GL   23. 06. 2001[ff.] FI.wr & Q 
 CT.SA.CH   GF   28. 06. 2001  SI.ta 
CT.SA.CH   DTB  28. 06. 2001  SI.ta 
CT.SA.GC   SR   03. 07. 2001  SI.ta 
 CT.SA.GC   GK  04. 07. 2001  SSI.ta  
 OX.Xn.GN  VM   18. 06. 2002  FI.wr 
Videotapes 
No 1. Le FPR, en majorit Tutsi, prend le pouvoir dans un pays en ruines. LONU cre   
            un tribunal pour juger les instigateurs du genocide. 1998  
No 2. Education and Culture in Rwanda. 1994 
No 3. Together as One. Post-Genocide Verdicts in Kibuye and the ICTR. 2000 
N.B. Responses from anonymous informants were received and evaluated in the form of a 
questionnaire. Like anonymous informants, most interviews on Rwanda were recorded and 
evaluated in the same way as the questionnaire [Q: questionnaire; ta: on tape; wr: written; FI: free 
interview; PO: participant observation; PI: participant interview; SI: structured interview; SSI: 
semi-structured interview]. 
2. Archives, Reports  
AACC: All Africa Conference of Churches, Reports, Nairobi 
Afrika Study Centrum, Leiden University, Leiden 
Amsterdam University, Amsterdam 
Bodleian Libraries, University of Oxford, Oxford 
Birmingham University, Birmingham 
British Library, London 
Centre for Conflicts Resolution, Cape Town 
CIIR: Catholic Institute of International Relations, Collections, London 
CMS: Church Missionary Society (Partnership House Archives), London; Special collections  
CODEP: Conflicts Development and Peace Network, Newsletters and Reports, London 
DRC: Dutch Reformed Church, Offices, Cape Town 
Edinburgh University, New College Library, Edinburgh 
EPR: Eglise Presbytrienne au Rwanda [Presbyterian Church in Rwanda], magazine,  
Twubake, Kigali 
IIMO: Interuniversity Institute for Missiological and Ecumenical Research, Heidelglaan 2, 
Utrecht 
Institute of Healing of Memories, Cape Town 
IJR: Institute of Justice and Reconciliation, Office, Cape Town 
Irish School of Ecumenics, Library, Dublin 
Leuven University, Library, Leuven 
Mennonite Centre, Library, London 
Mid-African Ministries, Partnership House, Library, London 
Missionary Council in Netherlands, Library, Amsterdam 
Newick Park Initiative, Reports, Jubilee House, Cambridge 
NNI: New Network International (Service News) 
Pusey House Library, Oxford 
RAS: Royal African Society, African Affairs Journals, London 
Religious Society of Friends, Library, London 
SACC: South African Council of Churches, Office, Cape Town 
SOAS: School of Oriental and African Studies, Library, London 
Trauma Centre, Cape Town 
TRC: Main Office, Cape Town 
The Centre for Defence Studies, The Conflict, Security and Development Group bulletin,  
London 
The Dutch Reformed Church: Present Challenges in the Light of the Past. Response on: A Socio-
linguistic and Theological Analysis of Die Kerkbode  
UNAFRAID: United Africa Aid, Reports 
VEM: Evangelical Mission of Wuppertal, Reports, Wuppertal II 
Vir: Kovent-Kennisame [The Road of Unity in the Family of Dutch Reformed Churches] 
WCC: World Council of Churches, Reports, Geneva 
WEC: Worldwide Evangelisation for Christ, Collections of Cuttings, UK 
3. Magazines 
De Standard, 5 June 1994 
Development, Fourth Quarter 2002 
Die Kerkbode, 21 October 1994 
EFAC bulletin [46] 1995 
Kinyamateka, RCCR, Magazine 
Le Soir, Quotidien [133] 9 June 2000 
Magazine, 20 March 2004 
Magazine, 27 March 2004 
New Times, 1 April 2004 T2 
The Guardian Weekly, 13 October 2001 
The Guardian Weekly, 20 March 2004 
The Independent, 27 February 1999 
The Times, 1 January 2003 
Times, 27 March 2004 
Times, 5 April 2004 
Times, 28 February 1995 
4. Books and Journals 
Acland, Andrew Floyer 
1995. Resolving Disputes without going to Court: A Consumer Guide to Alternative 
Dispute Resolution. Century Business books, London 
Actes du Colloque de Machakos 
1999. Colloque de la Socit Civille sur la Paix, la Reconstruction Morale et la 
Cohabitation Sociale dans les Pays des Grands Lacs dAfrique [Workshop of the Civil 
Society on Peace, Moral Reconstruction and Social Coexistence in the Countries of the 
Great Lakes of Africa]. Machakos 
Adam, Absalom M 
1994. Early Warning and Conflict Resolution. Review Article. Refugee, 14(4), 
August/September, 15-17 
Adelman, Howard & Suhrke, Astri (eds) 
1999. The Path of a Genocide: The Rwandan Crisis from Uganda to Zaire. Transaction, 
New Brunswick /London 
Adeney, Harold  
1963. Only one Weapon. Facing Difficulty and Danger with Christ in Troubled Rwanda. 
Rwanda Mission CMS, London  
Adeyemo, Tokumboh  
1997. Lessons of Rwanda for the Church in Africa. Evangelical Missions Quarterly. 
33(4), October 
African National Congress 
1997. Truth Submissions and Responses by the African National Congress to Questions 
raised by the Commission for Truth and Reconciliation. ANC, Johannesburg 
African Rights  
1995 [1994]. Rwanda: Death, Despair and Defiance. African Rights, London 
______ 
1995. Rwanda Not So Innocent, When Women Become Killers. African Rights, London 
______ 
1996. Rwanda: Assassinated Proof. African Rights, London 
______   
1998. Rwanda. The Protestant Churches and the Genocide. An appeal to World Council of 
Churches.  WCC, Harare 
______ 
2000. Confessing to Genocide: A Response to Rwandas Genocide Law. African Rights, 
London 
______  
2001. Witness to Genocide. Father Hormisdas Nsengimana accused of Genocide sheltered 
by the Church. November (14), African Rights, London 
______  
2003. Gacaca Justice: A Shared Responsibility. January, African Rights, Kigali 
Africas Troubled Transitions  
1992. Journal of Democracy. October, 98-109 
Aguilar, Mario I 
1998. The Rwanda Genocide and the Call to Deepen Christianity in Africa. AMECEA 
Gaba, Eldoret 
Aguirre, Monti 
2001. Indigenous Truth Commission Gets Underway. Latin American Campaigns, 
International Rivers Network, 14 March 
Ahmed, Akbar S 
2002. Ethnic Cleansing: A Metaphor for Our Time? Hinton, Alexander Laban (ed) 
Genocide: An Anthropological Reader. Blackwell, Massachusetts/Oxford, 211-130 
Alberts, Louw & Chikane, Frank (eds)  
1991. The Road to Rustenburg: The Church looking forward to a New South Africa. Struik 
Christian Books, Cape Town 
All Africa Conference of Churches  
1996. Towards Lasting Peace for Rwanda: A Reflection of the Rwandan Church leaders in 
Exile. April, Nairobi 
______ 
1997. La situation Socio-Politique du Rwanda et le Rle de lEglise [The Socio-Political 
Situation of Rwanda and the Role of the Church]. Report of workshop organised for 
Rwandan Church Leaders in Exile, 10-13 July, Nairobi 
Allen, Mike; Donohue, William & Stewart, Becky 
1990. Comparing Hardline and Softline Bargaining Strategies in Zero-Sum Situations 
Using Meta-Analysis. Rahim, M Afzalur (ed) Theory and Research in Conflict 
Management. Praeger, New York, 86-104 
Amnesty International 
1994. Rwanda: Reports of Killings and Abdications by the Rwandese Patriotic Army. 
London, April-August  
______ 
1995. Rwanda: Crying for Justice. London 
Amsell, Jean-Loup and Elikia Mbokolo 
1985. Au Coeur de lEthnie. Ethnies, Tribalisme et Etat en Afrique [At the Heart of 
Ethnicity. Ethnicity, Tribalism and the State in Africa]. Dcouverte, Paris  
Anonymous 
1996. Projet de Socit [Society Project]. Working paper, Nairobi 
Aprodev  
1997. Bulletin. Centre for Conflict Resolution, Cape Town 
Arnold, Johann Christoph 
1998. Seeking Peace. Notes and Conversations along the Way. Plough, Farmington/ 
Robertsbridge 
Arnold, Johann Christoph  
2000. Why Forgive? So Powerful that Tears often Impede Reading. Plough, Farmington 
/Sussex  
Asmal, Kader; Asmal, Louise & Roberts, Suresh Ronald  
1997 [1996]. Reconciliation through Truth: a Reckoning of Apartheids Criminal 
Governance. David Philips/James Carrey/St. Martins, Cape Town/Oxford/New York 
Aspegren, Lennart 
2002. Rwanda: The 1994 Genocide and the UN Tribunal. Paper Presented at Stockholm 
International Forum, on Truth, Justice and Reconciliation. 23  24 April 
Assefa, Hizkias 
1996. Peace and Reconciliation as a Paradigm. Assefa, Hizkias & Wachira, G (eds) Peace 
making and Democratization in Africa. East African Educational Publisher, Nairobi, 42-69 
______ 
1999. The Meaning of Reconciliation. Bureau M & O (eds) People Building Peace: 35 
Inspiring Stories from Around the World. European Centre for Conflict Prevention, 
Utrecht, 37-45 
Augusburger, David W 
1992. Conflict Mediation across Cultures: Pathways and Patterns. Westminster/John Knox, 
Louisville.   
______ 
1996. Helping People to Forgive. Westminster/John Knox, Louisville 
______ 
2000. The New Freedom of Forgiveness, with Study Guide. Moody Press, Chicago 
Augusburger, Myron S 
2000. The Robe of God: Reconciliation, the Believers Church Essential. Herald Press, 
Scottdale/Waterloo 
Avruch, Kevin & Black, Peter W 
1993. Conflict Resolution in Intellectual Settings: Problems and Aspects. Sandole, 
Dennis, J D & van der Merwe, Hugo (eds) Conflict Resolution Theory and Practice: 
Integration and Application. Manchester University Press, Manchester/New York, 131-145 
Azar, Edward 
1997. Protracted Social Conflicts and Problem-Solving Forums. Fisher, Ronald J (ed) 
Interactive Conflict Resolution. Syracuse University, Syracuse, 77-97 
Banks, R (ed) 
 1974. Reconciliation and Hope. William B. Eerdmans, Grand Rapids 
Banton, Michael 
 1998. Racial Theories. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 
Barber, James  
1999. South Africa in the Twentieth Century. A Political History  In Search of a Nation 
State. Blackwell, Oxford 
Barmen Declaration  
1998. Christian thoughts. 190-191 
Barnett, Michael 
2002. Eyewitness to Genocide. The United Nations and Rwanda. Cornell University Press, 
New York/Ithaca/London 
Barry, Brian 
 1996. Justice as Impartiality. Clarendon Press, Oxford 
Barth, Karl 
1998. The new orthodoxy. Let God be God. Christian Thoughts. 186-191 
Battle, Michael  
1997. Reconciliation. The Ubuntu Theology of Desmond Tutu. Pilgrim Press, Ohio. 
Baum, G. & Wells, H. (eds) 
1997. The Reconciliation of Peoples: Challenge to the Churches. Orbis Books/WCC, 
Maryknoll/New York 
Bauman, Rony 
 1994. Devant le Mal: Rwanda, Essai sur le Gnocide. Le Seuil, Paris 
Beinart, William & Dubow, Saul (eds) 
1999. Segregation and Apartheid in Twentieth-Century South Africa. Routledge, 
London/New York 
Bell, Terry & Ntsebeza, Dumisa Buhle 
2003. Unfinished Business: South Africa, Apartheid and Truth. Verso, London/New York 
Berkeley, Bill 
2001. The Graves are not yet full: Race, Tribe and Power in the Heart of Africa. Basic 
Books, New York 
Bertrand, Jordane 
2000. Rwanda Le Pige de lHistoire. LOpposition Dmocratique Avant le Gnocide 
(1990-1994). Karthala, Paris 
Berry, John A. & Berry, Carol Pott (eds) 
 1999. Genocide in Rwanda: a Collective Memory. Howard, Washington D C 
Bethge, Eberhard (ed) 
1965 [1949]. Ethics, Bonhoeffer. Macmillan, New York, 363-372 
Beyna, Larry S; Lundi, Michael; Stacy S Stacks et al. 
2001. Great Horn of Africa Peace Building Project, the Effectiveness of Civil Society 
Initiatives in Controlling Violent Conflicts and Peace: A Study of Three Approaches in the 
Great Horn of Africa, Synthesis Report on Key Findings and Lessons for improving 
Practice. USAID Management Systems International, Washington D C 
Biggar, Nigel (ed) 
2003. Burying the Past: Making Peace and Doing Justice after Civil Conflict. Georgetown 
University, Washington D C 
Bilindabagabo, Alexis 
2001. Rescued by Angels: The Story of Miracles during the Rwandan Genocide. Acorn, 
Brunswick 
Bishop, Sophie K 
 1999. Conciliation in Africa, NPI, Cambridge 
Bizimungu, Pasteur 
1999. The Speech of President at Kibeho on 7 April 1999. C. Braeckman. Dialogue 
Revue d Information et de Reflexion,  Chacun ses Responsabilits. Bimestriel 212, 
September/October, 84 
Boisbouvier, C 
1997. Le Rle de la France au Rwanda depuis 1990. Bray et al. Rwanda: Perspectives. 
University of Westminster Francophone Africa Research Centre, London, 37-45 
Bolaffi, Guido; Bracalenti, Raffaele; Peter Braham & Gindro, Sandro (eds) 
 2003. Dictionary of Race, Ethnicity and Culture. Sage Publication, London/Thousand  
Oaks/New Delhi 
Booh Booh, Jacques-Rogers 
2005. Le Patron de Dallaire Parle: Rvrations sur les Drives dun Gnral de lONU au 
Rwanda. Duboiris, Paris 
Boraine, Alex; Levy, Janet & Scheffer, Ronel  
1997 [1994]. Dealing with the Past, Truth and Reconciliation in South Africa. IDASA, 
Cape Town 
Boraine, Alex 
2000. A Country Unmasked Inside South Africas Truth and Reconciliation Commission. 
Oxford University, Oxford 
Botman, H Russel & Petersen, Robin M (eds)  
1996. To Remember and to Heal. Theological and Psychological Reflections on Truth and 
Reconciliation. Human and Rousseau, Pretoria/Cape Town/Johannesburg 
Botman, H. Russel 
1997. The DRC continues its Journey with Apartheid. Challenge, 44, October/November. 
Bour, Alfred 
1998. Oser la Non-Violence Active, une Force au Service de la Paix, Manuel Pedagogique. 
[Dare Active Non-violence, A force at the Service of Peace, Pedagogic Manual]. Service 
dAnimation Thologique, Butare 
Bowen, Roger 
1996. Rwanda  Missionary Reflections on a Catastrophe. J. C. Lectures 13(1), 33.  
Bowen , John R 
2002. The Myth of Global Ethnic Conflict. Hinton, Alexander Laban (ed) 
 Genocide: An Anthropological Reader. Blackwell, Massachusetts/Oxford, 334-343 
Braeckman, Colette 
 1994. Rwanda, Histoire dun Gnocide. Fayard, Brussels 
______ 
1997. Le Rle de la France au Rwanda: Un Gnocide par Inadvertance. Bray et al. 
Rwanda: Perspectives. University of Westminster Francophone Africa Research Centre, 
London, 32-36 
Brand-Jacobsen, Kai Frithjof 
2000. Beyond Security; New Approaches, New Perspectives, New Actions. TFF Meeting 
Point. Available at  http://www.Transnational.org/forum/meet/2000/beyondsecurity. 
Accessed 2. 21. 2000 
Brauman, Rony; Smith, Stephen & Vidal, Claudine  
2000. Rwanda. La Politique de Terreur, Privilge dImpunit [Rwanda. Politics of Terror, 
Privileges and Impunity]. ESPRIT, August/September 
Bray, Maryse; Cook, Aline & Neath, Samantha (eds) 
1997. Rwanda: Perspectives. University of Westminster Francophone Africa Research 
Centre, London 
Breytenbach, C  
1990. On Reconciliation: An Exegetical Response. Journal of Theology for Southern 
Africa. (70) 
http://www.transnational.org/forum/meet/2000/beyondsecurity
Brierley, Peter (ed) 
 1997. World Churches Handbook. Christian Research, London 
British Council of Churches/Christian Aid (eds) 
 1989. Standing for the Truth, Britain and South Africa 
Brock, Jonathan & Cormick, Gerald W 
1989. Can Negotiation be Institutionalized or Mandated? Lessons from Public Policy and 
Regulatory Conflicts. Kressel, Kenneth; Pruitt, Dean G &  Associates (eds) Mediation 
Research: The Process and Effectiveness of Third-Party Intervention. Jossey-Bass 
Publishers, San Francisco/London, 138-165 
Bronkhorst, Daan 
1995. Truth and Reconciliation: Obstacles and Opportunities for Human Rights. Amnesty 
International, Amsterdam 
Brown, Jenny 
1999. Conflict in the Great Lakes. Towards Peace through Education. Working paper. 
Christian Aid, London 
______ 
1999. Advocacy Opportunities for the Churches in the Region. Paper presented on 21 
September, London 
Brown, Michael E 
1997. Cause and Implication of Conflict. Guibernau, M & Rex, J (eds) The Ethnicity 
Reader. Polity Press, Cambridge  
Brown, Michael E & Rosecrane, Richard N  
1999. The Costs of Conflict, Prevention and Care in the Global Arena. Rowan and 
Littlefield, New York/Oxford  
Brubaker, Dave 
1995. Reconciliation in Rwanda: the Art of the Possible. (Summary by Mariya 
Yevsyukova, 1998, Conflict Research Consortium). Conflict Resolution Notes. 12(3), 
January, 25-27 
Brueggeman, Walter 
1992. Hopeful Imagination: Prophetic Voices in Exile. SCM, London 
Bureau M & O (eds)  
1999. People Building Peace: 35 Inspiring Stories from Around the World. The European 
Centre for Conflict Prevention, Utrecht 
Burton John W 
1987. International Conflict Resolution and Problem Solving. Sandole, Dennis J D & 
Sandole-Staroste, Ingrid (eds) Conflict Management and Problem Solving: Interpersonal to 
International Applications. Frances Pinter, London, 251-258 
______ 
1993. Conflict Resolution as a Political Philosophy. Sandole, Dennis, J D & van der 
Merwe, Hugo (eds) Conflict Resolution Theory and Practice: Integration and Application. 
Manchester University Press, Manchester/New York, 55-64  
______ 
1997. Controlled Communication to Analytic Problem Solving. Fisher, Ronald J (ed) 
Interactive Conflict Resolution. Syracuse University, Syracuse 19-36 
Burton John W (ed) 
 1990. Conflict: Human Needs Theory. Macmillan, Basingstoke/London 
Buruma, Ian 
2002. The Wages of Guilt: Memories of War in Germany and Japan. Phoenix, London 
Butselaar, Jan van 
2001. Church and Peace in Africa. The Role of the Churches in the Peace Process. 
Netherlands Missionary Council, Amsterdam 
______ 
2002. Religion, Conflict and Reconciliation in Rwanda. Gort, J D; Jansen, H & Vroom, H 
M (eds) Religion, Conflict and Reconciliation: Multifaith Ideals and Realities. Rodopi, 
Amsterdam/New York 
Buzzard, Lynn R 
 1982. Tell it to the Church. David C. Cook, Eligin, Ilinois/Western Ontario 
Carrero, Juan 
2001. The African Great Lakes: The forgotten Genocide [Speech] 15 February 
Carr, Burgess 
1987. Apocalypse now: The Churches and Revolution in South Africa. International 
Peace Academy. Southern Africa: Prospects for Peace and Security. 
Dordrecht/Boston/Lancaster, 67-79 
Castonguay, Jacques 
 1998. Les Casques Bleus au Rwanda. LHarmattan, Paris/Montral 
Centre for Conflict Management 
Ruptures Socioculturelles et Conflict au Rwanda [Socio-cultural Ruptures and Conflict in 
Rwanda]. Cahiers du Centre de Gestion des Conflicts, no 2, Universit Nationale du 
Rwanda 
Chambers 
2003. The Chambers Dictionary. Chambers Harrap, Edinburgh 
Chapman, Audrey R & Spong, Bernard (eds) 
 2003. Religion & Reconciliation in South Africa. Voices of Religious Leaders. Templeton  
Foundation Press, Philadelphia/London 
Chase, Kenneth R & Jacobs, Alan (eds) 
2003. Must Christianity be Violent? Reflections on History, Practice, and Theology. 
Brazos Press, Grand Rapids 
Chrtien, Jean Pierre 
1985. Hutu et Tutsi au Rwanda et au Burundi. Amselle, Jean-Loup & MBokolo, Elikia 
(eds) Au Coeur de lEthnie: Ethnie, Tribalisme, et Etat en Afrique. La Dcouverte/Poche, 
Paris 
______   
1995. Rwanda 1994: Mmoire ou Ngation dun Gnocide? Esprit 99(111), March/April 
______   
 1997. Le Dfi de lEthnisme. Karthala, Paris 
Chrtien, Jean-Pierre; Dupaquier, Jean-Franois ; Kabanda, Marcel & Ngarambe Joseph 
1995. Rwanda Les Medias du Gnocide. Karthala, Paris 
Christie, Kenneth 
2000. The South African Truth Commission. Macmillan, London 
C I I R 
 1980. South Africa in the 1980s State of Emergency. CIIR, London 
______ 
1985. Challenge to the Church, a Theological Comment on the Political Crisis in South 
Africa. The Kairos Document. C I I R & BCC, London 
Clapham, Christopher 
1996. Rwanda: The Perils of Peace-Making. ASC UK (African Studies Conference of the 
United Kingdom), BIENNIAL Conference, 9-11 September 
Clark, Mary E 
1990. Meaningful Social Bonding as a Universal Human Need. Burton John W (ed) 
Conflict: Human Needs Theory. Macmillan, Basingstoke/London, 34-59 
Clinton, Bill 
1998. Remarks by the President of the United States of America, H. E. Bill Clinton, to 
Genocide Survivors, Assistance Workers, and US and Rwanda Government Officials. 
Exchange Information Rwanda. 42(04). Available at http://www.rwanda.net/clinton. 
Accessed 10. 29. 1999 
Cochrane, James R 
1999. Facing the Truth: South African Faith Communities and the Truth and 
Reconciliation. David Philip, Cape Town 
______ 
2002. Forgiveness: Finding Freedom through Reconciliation. Crossroad, New York 
Cohen, Louis; Manion, Lawrence & Morrison, Keith 
 2000. Research Methods in Education. (5th edn) Routledge Falmer, London 
http://www.rwanda.net/clinton
Coleman, Peter T 
2000. Power and Conflict. Deutsch, Morton & Coleman, Peter T (eds) The Handbook of 
Conflict Resolution, Theory and Practice. Jossey-Bass Publishers, San Francisco, 108-130 
Colletta, Nat J.; Kostner, Marcus & Wiederhofer, INGO 
1996. The Transition from War to Peace in Sub-Saharan Africa. Directions in 
Development. World Bank, Washington D C 
Collins, Barrie 
1997. Obedience in Rwanda. A Critical Question. School of Cultural Studies, Sheffield 
Colosi, Thomas 
1987. A Model for Negotiation and Mediation. Sandole, Dennis J D & Sandole-Staroste, 
Ingrid (eds) Conflict Management and Problem Solving: Interpersonal to International 
Applications. Frances Pinter, London, 86-99 
Commission Episcopal; Conseil Protestant du Rwanda & Newick Park Initiative 
1999. Rapport du Seminaire sur Le Rle des Eglises dans les Juridictions Gacaca. Sovu, 
22- 24 September  
Confession of Detmold 
1997. Confession de Detmold, Signe dEspoir pour le Rwanda [Detmold Confession, Sign 
of Hope for Rwanda], Landeskirchenamt der Lippischen Landeskirche/Detmold-
Hiddescen, December 
Corey, Allison & Joireman, Sandra F  
2004. Retributive Justice: the Gacaca courts in Rwanda African Affairs 104/410, 73-90 
Cornik, Mark R 
2002. To Strive in Peace, Biblical Faith and the Changing Inner City. Eerdemans, Grand 
Rapids, Michigan/Cambridge 
Coser, Lewis A 
 1956. The Functions of Social Conflict. Routledge & Kegan Paul LTD, London 
Courtemanche, Gil 
 2004. A Sunday at the Pool in Kigali. Canongate Books, London 
CovertAction Quarterly 
1999. The Ungodly Missionary Legacy. Genocide in Rwanda, Continued.  Available at 
http://www.mediafilter.org/CAQ/CAQ52Rw2t. Accessed 06. 04. 1999 
Cyuma, Samuel 
2000. Unity and Reconciliation: A Christian Perspective in the Rwandan Context. Paper 
presented at Oxford, Summer 
______ 
2001a. Rwanda: Country Profile, Church and Ethnic Crisis. Paper presented at Oxford, 
19 May 
______ 
2001b. Let Them Grow Together. Paper presented at OCMS, Christmas 
______ 
2002. Civil Society and the Church in Search for Peace: Rwanda since 1990. Paper 
presented at African Studies Association of the UK, Biennial Conference 9 -11 September, 
Birmingham 
______ 
2005. The Churches and Reconciliation in Rwanda. Paper presented at OCMS, 1 
February 
Dallaire, Romo 
2004 [3]. Shake Hands with the Evil: The Failure of Humanity in Rwanda. Arrow Books, 
London 
Davenport, Rodney & Saunders, Christopher 
 2000. South Africa, a Moderm History. (5th edn) Macmillan, London  
De Brito, Alexandra Barahona; Gonzalz-nrquez, Carmen & Aguilar, Paloma (eds) 
2001. The Politics of Memory: Transitional Justice in Democratizing Societies. Oxford 
University, Oxford 
http://www.mediafilter.org/CAQ/CAQ52Rw2t
Dedjii, Valentin 
1999. Liberalisation and Reconstruction in African Christian Theologies. Ph.D Thesis, 
University of Cambridge 
De Dorlodot, Philippe 
1996. Les Rfugis Rwandais  Bukavu au Zaire. De Nouveaux Palestiniens? Groupe 
Jrmie/ LHarmattan, Paris 
Defense & Foreign Affairs and ISSA 
1999. Rwandan Monarchy Makes a Firm Statement of Position. [12 paragraphs], 1 
October. Available at http:// www.strategicstudies.org/crisis/rwanda. Accessed 5. 5. 2000 
De Gruchy, John W 
1979. The Church Struggle in South Africa. Collins, London 
______ 
 2002. Reconciliation Restoring Justice. SCM, London 
De Kock, Eugene & Gordin, Jeremy  
1998. A Long Nights Damage. Working for the Apartheid State. Contra Press, Saxonwold 
De Lacger, Louis 
 1961. Rwanda. Editions Grands-Lacs, Kabgayi 
Delmas, R.P 
 1950. Gnalogy de la Noblesse du Rwanda. Imprimerie de Kabgayi, Kabgayi 
Denniston, Robert 
1999. Trevor Huddleston-A Life. Macmillan, Oxford 
Des Forges, Alison 
1969. Kings without Crowns: The White Fathers in Rwanda. Daniel F. McCall, Norman 
R. Bennett, and Jeffrey Butler (eds) Eastern African History. Praeger, New York 
______ 
1972. Defeat is the Only Bad News: Rwanda under Musinga 1896-1931. Dissertation, 
Yale University 
______ (ed) 
1997. Aucun Tmoin ne doit Survivre: Le Gnocide au Rwanda [English translation: 1999. 
Leave None to Tell the Story: Genocide in Rwanda]. HRW FIDH, London 
______  
2004. Ten Years after the Rwanda Genocide. Paper delivered at Royal Institute of  
International Affairs, 31 March, London 
______ 
2005. Legal Responses to Genocide in Rwanda. Available at http://faculty.Vassar.edu/ 
tilongma/justice. Accessed 02. 14. 2005 
Desmond, Cosmas 
1978. Christians or Capitalists? Christianity and Politics in South Africa. The Bowerdean, 
London 
Destexhe, Alain 
1995. Rwanda and Genocide in the Twentieth Century. Pluto, London/East Haven, 
Connecticut 
Deutsch, Morton 
1973. The Resolution of Conflict: Constructive and Destructive Processes. Yale University 
Press, New Haven/London 
______ 
1987. A Theoretical Perspective on Conflict Resolution. Sandole, Dennis J D & Sandole-
Staroste, Ingrid (eds) Conflict Management and Problem Solving: Interpersonal to 
International Applications. Frances Pinter, London 38-49  
______ 
1991. Subjective Features of Conflict Resolution: Psychological, Social and Cultural 
Influences. Vyrynen, Raimo (ed) New Directions in Conflict Theory: Conflict Resolution 
and Conflict Transformation. Sage, London/Newbury Park/New Delhi, 26-56 
http://faculty.vassar.edu/
______ 
2000. Cooperation and Competition. Deutsch, Morton & Coleman, Peter T (eds) The 
Handbook of Conflict Resolution, Theory and Practice. Jossey-Bass Publishers, San 
Francisco, 21-40 
______ 
2000. Justice and Conflict. Deutsch, Morton & Coleman, Peter T (eds) The Handbook of 
Conflict Resolution, Theory and Practice. Jossey-Bass Publishers, San Francisco, 41-64 
Deutsch, Morton & Coleman, Peter T (eds) 
2002. The Handbook of Conflict Resolution: Theory and Practice. Jossey-Bass Publishers, 
San Francisco 
De Waal, Victor 
 1990. The Politics of Reconciliation. Zimbabwes First Decade. Hurst, London 
DHertfelt, M. et al. 
1962. Les Anciens Royaumes de la Zone Interlacustre Mridionale (Rwanda, Burundi, 
Buha). Musee Royal dAfrique Centrale, Tervuren 
DHertefelt, Marcel & Lame, Danielle 
1987. Socit, Culture et Histoire du Rwanda, Encyclopedie Bibliographique. 1863-
1980/97 Tome I A-L, Muse Royal de lAfrique Centrale, Tervuren 
______ 
1987. Socit, Culture et Histoire du Rwanda, Encyclopedie Bibliographique. 1863-
1980/97 Tome II M-Z Index, Muse Royal de lAfrique Centrale, Tervuren  
Djereke, Jean-Claude 
1995. Peace and reconciliation in Rwanda. What can the Church do? Vidyajyoti journal 
of theological reflection. 59(4), April 
Document Rwanda 
2000. Six Ans aprs le Gnocide, le Chagrin et la Foi [Six Years after the Genocide, Grief 
and Faith]. La Vie: Magazine Chrtien dActualit. 2860 (22), June 
Domeris, W.R 
1987. Biblical Perspective on Reconciliation. Journal of Theology for Southern Africa. 
60, Summer, 77-80 
Doob, Leonard 
1997. Human Relations Workshops Applied to Conflict Resolution. Fisher, Ronald J (ed) 
Interactive Conflict Resolution. Syracuse University, Syracuse, 37-55 
DRC (Dutch Reformed Church) 
[.]. The story of the Dutch Reformed Churchs Journey with Apartheid. 1960-1994. A 
Testimony and confession. Produced by order of the General Synod Commission of the 
Dutch Reformed Church (Nederduitse Gereformeerde Kerk). English extract from the 
Afrikaans document 
Druchman, Daniel 
1993. An Analytical Research Agenda for Conflict and Conflict Resolution. Sandole, 
Dennis, J D & van der Merwe, Hugo (eds) Conflict Resolution Theory and Practice: 
Integration and Application. Manchester University Press, Manchester/New York, 25-42 
Dugan, Maire A 
1987. Intervenor Roles and Conflict Patholgies. Sandole, Dennis J D & Sandole-Staroste, 
Ingrid (eds) Conflict Management and Problem Solving: Interpersonal to International 
Applications. Frances Pinter, London, 57-61 
Dupaquier, Jean-Franois 
 1996. La Justice Internationale Face au Drame Rwandais. Karthala, Paris 
du Toit, C W 
1998. Confession and Reconciliation, a Challenge to the Churches in South Africa. 
Research Institute for Theology and Religion/UNISA, Pretoria, 24-26; 38-40; 47-51 
Edwards, Steven (National Post) 
2000. Explosive Leak on Genocide, Informants told UN Investigators they were on the 
squad that killed Rwandas President  and foreign government helped. ANB-BIA 
[African News Bulletin] 386, 15 March, 4-5 
______ 
2000. in C. Braeckman, Qui a vraiment tu Habyarimana? Les rvlations mettant en 
cause le FPR dans lattentat de 1994 ajoutent au malaise ambient  Kigali. ANB-BIA 
[African News Bulletin] 387, 1 April, 4-5 
Egan, Eileen 
1999. Peace be with You: Justified Warfare or the Way of Nonviolence. Orbis Books, 
Maryknoll 
Eglise Presbyttienne au Rwanda (EPR) 
 1992. Ukuri kubaka Igihugu [The Truth builds the Nation]. Urwego, Kigali 
Elphick, Richard and Davenport, Rodney (eds) 
1997. Christianity in South Africa. A Political, Social and Cultural History. James 
Curry/David Philip, Oxford/Cape Town 
Elmer, Duane 
1993. Cross-Cultural Conflict: Building Relationships for Effective Ministry. IVP, 
Downers Gove 
Eltringham, Nigel  
1999. Bishops' Trial puts Church in Dock for Rwandese Massacre in Institutions and 
Individuals. The Rwandan Church and the Discourse of Guilt. Paper presented at SOAS, 
21 September 
______ 
2003. Accounting for Horror: Post-Genocide Debates in Rwanda. Pluto, London/ Sterling 
Enright, Robert D & North, Joann (eds) 
1996. Exploring Forgiveness. University of Wisconcin Press, Madison 
Erny, Pierre 
 1994. Cls pour Comprendre le Calvaire dun People. LHarmattan, Paris 
______ 
2001. L Ecole Coloniale au Rwanda (1900-1962). LHarmatta, Paris 
Essack, Karim 
1996. Rwanda. The International Significance of the Liberation Struggle. 
Thackers/Manifest, Dar-es-Salaam 
Evans, Jean 
1999. The Enemys Hand: Evil, the Gospel, Rwanda 1994 in Missionalia 27(3), 
November, 342-353 
Fairfield, James 
 1977. When you dont Agree. Wipf and Stock Publishers, West Broadway 
Falconer, A D & Liechty, J 
 1998. Reconciling Memories. Columba Press, Dublin 
Feil, Scott R 
1998. Preventing Genocide: How the Early Use of Force Might have succeeded in 
Rwanda. A Report to the Carnegie Commission on Preventing Deadly Conflict. Carnegie 
Cooperation, New York 
Fein, Helen 
 2002. Genocide: A Sociological Perspective. Hinton, Alexander Laban (ed) 
 Genocide: An Anthropological Reader. Blackwell, Massachusetts/Oxford, 74-90 
Ferguson, John 
1970. The Politics of Love, the New Testament and Non-violent Revolution. James Clarke, 
Surrey 
Fisher, Roger and William Ury 
1999 [1981]. Getting to Yes: Negotiating and Agreement without Giving in. Random 
House/Business Books, London 
Fisher, Ronald J 
1990. Needs Theory, Social Identity and an Eclectic Model of Conflict. Burton John W 
(ed) Conflict: Human Needs Theory. Macmillan, Basingstoke/London, 89-114 
Fisher, Ronald J (ed) 
 1997. Interactive Conflict Resolution. Syracuse University, Syracuse 
Fisher, Simon et al. 
 2000. Working with Conflict: Skills and Strategies for Action. Zed Books, London 
FOJUPET 
2003. FOJUPET@groups.msn.com Available at http://www.groups.msn.com/FOJUPET/ 
lupourvous.msnw. Accessed  7. 29.  2003 
Folger, Joseph P & Jones, Tricia S (eds) 
1994. New Directions in Mediation: Communication Research and Perspectives. Sage 
Publications, Thousand Oaks/London/New Delhi  
Foot, Rosemary; Gaddis, John Lewis & Hurrell, Andrew (eds) 
 2003. Order and Justice in International Relations. Oxford University Press, Oxford 
Forster, PG et al. 
 1999. Race and Ethnicity in East Africa. Macmillan, Basingstoke 
Friedmann, I M 
1990. Helping Resolve Conflict: True Experiences of a Christian Anthropologist. Herald 
Press, Scottdale/Waterloo 
Friedman, Yona 
1990. The Role of Knowledge in Conflict resolution. Burton John W (ed) Conflict: 
Human Needs Theory. Macmillan, Basingstoke & London, 257-264 
Friesen, Duane K 
1986. Christian Peacemaking and International Conflict: A Realist Pacifist Perspective. 
Herald Press, Scottdale/Kitchener 
Frost, Brian 
1998. Struggling to Forgive. Nelson Mandela and South Africas Search for 
Reconciliation. Harper Collins, London 
Fujii, Lee Ann 
 2001. Origins of Power and Identity in Rwanda. Paper, Annual Conference of the 
International  
Studies Association, 20-24 February, Chicago 
Gahima, Gerald 
1997. What is understood by Justice today? What can be justified in Rwanda Today ? 
Newick Park Initiative, on The Churches Role in the Restoration of Justice in Rwanda. 19 - 
21 August, Kigali 
______ 
2003. Prosecuting Genocide in Rwanda. Paper presented at the Irish Centre for Human 
Rights, 7-10 June 
Galtung, Johan  
1990. International Development in Human Perspectives. Burton John W (ed) Conflict: 
Human Needs Theory. Macmillan, Basingstoke/London, 301-335 
Garreton, Roberto 
1997. The Massacres in Former Zaire. Mission Impossible. Le Monde Diplomatique, 
December   
Gasana, K. James  
1997. Church-State Relations and other Factors Relating to the Hutu-Tutsi Antagonism in 
Rwanda. Instrument for Durable Peace. Paper presented at Spring Conference. Central 
Africa Health Care Organisation, 26-28 April, Michigan 
Gasana, K J & Nzacahayo, Paul 
1997. La Confrence de Detmold, une Rponse Creuse  un Problme Profond [Detmold 
Conference, a Shallow Response to a Deep Problem]. Lausanne 
Gastrow, Peter 
1999. A Joint Effort  The South African Peace Process. Bureau M & O (eds) People 
Building Peace: 35 Inspiring Stories from Around the World. The European Centre for 
Conflict Prevention, Utrecht, 
Gatwa, Tharcisse & Karamaga, Andr 
1990. Les Autres Chrtiens Rwandais, Prsence Protestante [Other Rwandan Christians, 
the Presence of Protestants]. Urwego, Kigali 
Gatwa, Tharcisse & Karamaga, Andr 
1993. Ubutegetsi ni Ubwacu [The Power belongs to Us]. Urwego, Kigali 
http://www.groups.msn.com/FOJUPET/
Gatwa, Tharcisse 
1997. Mission and Ethnicity in Rwanda. History and Perspective. University of 
Edinburgh, Edinburgh 
______ 
1999. Victims or Guilty. Can the Churches Repent and Bear the Burden of the Nation for 
the 1994 Tragedy? International Review of Mission, October 88/351,347-363 
______ 
2001. Rwanda, Eglises: Victimes ou Coupables? Les Eglises et lIdeologie Ethnique 
[Rwanda, Churches: Victims or Culpable? Churches and Ethnic Ideology]. Cl, 
Yaound/Haho, Lom 
Genevive (Sister [report by Mary Kimani]) 
2001. News Analysis / Rwandas Dilemma: Striking a Balance between Justice and 
Reconciliation. Available at 
http://www.internews.org/activities/ICTR_reports/ICTR_reports_ may2001. Accessed  6. 
2. 2002 
Gerstner, Jonathan N 
1997. A Christian Monopoly: The Reformed Church and Colonial Society under Dutch 
Rule in Elphick , R. & Davenport. R. (eds) Christianity in South Africa. A Political, Social 
and Cultural History. James Curry/David Philip, Oxford/Cape Town. 16-30 
Gheorghita, Radu 
1999. Responses to Miroslav Volf. Transformation, 16 (1), January/March, 13-17 
Gibson, James L 
2004. Overcoming Apartheid: Can Truth Reconcile a Divided Society? HSRC Press, Cape 
Gifford, Paul  
1995. African Christianity: Its Public Role. Gifford, Paul (ed) The Christian Churches 
and Democratisation of Africa. E J Brill, Leiden, /New York /Kln 
Giliomee, Hermann 
 2003. The Afrikaners, Biography of a People. Hurst, London 
Gillwald, Katrin 
1990. Conflict and Needs Research. Burton John W (ed) Conflict: Human Needs Theory. 
Macmillan, Basingstoke/London, 115-125 
Glen, Stressen (ed) 
1998. Just Peacemaking: Ten Practices for Abolishing War. The Pilgrim Press, 
Cleveland/Ohio 
Gourevitch, Philip 
1999. We wish to inform you that tomorrow we will be killed with our families. Stories 
from Rwanda. Picador, London 
Graybill, Lyn S 
1997. Pursuit of Truth and Reconciliation in South Africa. Today, Crisis in Central  
Africa. 45(1), January/March 
______ 
2002. Truth & Reconciliation in South Africa. Miracle or Model? Lynne Reinner, London 
Gribbin, Robert E 
2005. In the Aftermath of Genocide. The U.S. Role in Rwanda. Universe, Inc., New York 
Guichaoua, Andr (ed) 
 1995. Les Crises Politiques au Burundi et au Rwanda (1993-1994). Karthala, Paris 
Guillebaud, Meg 
2002. The Land God Forgot? Revival Genocide & Hope. CMS/Mid-Africa Ministry, 
London 
Hakizabera, Christophe 
 2000. ANB-BIA [African News Bulletin] 387, 1 April 2000, 2-5 
Halverstadt, Hugh F 
 1991. Managing Church Conflict. Westminster/John Knox, Louisville 
http://www.internews.org/activities/ICTR_reports/ICTR_reports_
Hamber, Brandon 
1995. Community Policing: Tentative Steps towards True Reconciliation. CSVR, 
Johannesburg 
______ 
1999. The Burdens of Truth. CSVR, Johannesburg 
Haralambos, Michael & Holborn, Martin 
 2000 [1980]. Sociology Themes and Perspectives. (5th edn) Collins, London 
Harrington, Christine B 
1985. Shadow Justice: The Ideology and Institutionalization of Alternatives to Court. 
Greenwood Press, Westport/London  
Harris, Richard 
1986. Christianity and War in a Nuclear Age. Mowbray, London/Oxford 
Hastings, Adrian 
1979. A History of African Christianity 1950-75. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 
______ 
1997. The Construction of Nationhood: Ethnicity, Religion, and Nationalism. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge 
Hastings, James et al. (eds)  
1921. Dictionary of the Bible. T &T Clark, Edinburgh, 784  785 
Hay, Mark OMI 
 1998. Ukubuyisana: Reconciliation in South Africa. Cluster, Pietermaritzburg. 
Hayner, Pricilla 
1994. Fifteen Truth Commissions 1974-1994: a Comparative Study in Human Rights 
Quarterly, 16(1)  
Healy, Nicholas M 
2000. Church, World and the Christian Life: Practical-Prophetic Ecclesiology. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge 
Hegel, G. W.F 
1956. The philosophy of History (Trans. J. Sibree). Dover, New York 
______ 
1991. Elements of the Philosophy of Right. Wood, Allen (ed) Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge 
Helmick, Raymond G S J & Petersen, Rodney L (eds) 
2001. Forgiveness and Reconciliation: Religion, Public Policy and Conflict 
Transformation. Templeton Foundation, Philadelphia/London 
Helmut, G Raymond; Rodney, S J & Peter, L 
2001. Forgiveness and Reconciliation: Religion, Public Policy and Conflict Transformation 
Henderson, Michael 
 2002. Forgiveness: Breaking the Chain of Hate. Grosvenor Books, London 
Hermans, Roger 
1971. Introduction  lHistoire du Rwanda. Editions Rwandaises, Kigali 
Herring, R S 
1974. A History of the Labour Hills. PhD Thesis, University of California, Santa Barbara 
______ 
1979a. Hydrology and Chronology. Webester 1979, 39-86 
______ 
1979b. The View from Mount Otuke: Migrations of the Lango Miro. Webster 1979, 283-
Hilsum, Lindsey 
1997. Update: 1997. Bray et al. Rwanda: Perspectives. University of Westminster 
Francophone Africa Research Centre, London, 80-82 
Hinton, Alexander Laban (ed) 
 2002. Genocide: An Anthropological Reader. Blackwell, Massachusetts/Oxford 
Ho, Stephanie 
 2004. New Documentary Examines Relationships Between Victims, Perpetrators of 
Rwandas  
Genocide. VOANews.Com, p 2 
Hoover, Kenneth; Marcia, James & Parris, Kristen  
1997. The Power of Identity, Politics in a new Key. Chatham House, New Jersey 
Hopkins, Jeffrey (ed) 
 2000. The Art of Peace. Nobel Peace Laureates discuss Human Rights, Conflicts and  
Reconciliation. Snow Lion, New York 
Huggett, Joyce 
 2003. Conflict: Constructive or Destructive? Kevin Mayhew, Suffolk 
Hurley, Michael S J (ed) 
1994. Reconciliation in Religion and Society (Proceedings of a Conference organised by 
the Irish School of Ecumenics and the University of Ulster. I.I.S, Belfast/Ulster 
Ignatieff, Michael 
1998. The Warriors Honour: Ethnic War and Modern Conscience. Chatto & Windus, 
London 
Igwara, Obi (ed) 
 1995. Ethnic Hatred, Genocide in Rwanda. ASEN, London 
______ 
2002. Restorative Justice and Reconciliation: Women Remaking Rwanda in the Shadow 
of Violence. Paper presented at Queen Elisabeth House Oxford, 07 January 
I J R 
2001. Reconciliation Survey Research Report. Available at http://www.ijr.org.za/index. 
Accessed  4. 17.  2004 
Ike Udogu, E 
1998. Ethnicity and Democratization in Sub-Saharan Africa. Africa and Globalisation: 
Towards the Millennium. Francis Mario University, Florence 
Institute for Justice and Reconciliation 
1998. Time to Act. The Recommendations of the Truth & Reconciliation Commission. IJR, 
Cape Town 
International Centre Against Censorship 
1996. Broadcasting Genocide. Censorship, Propaganda & State-Sponsored Violence in 
Rwanda 1990  1994. I C A S, London 
Inyumba, Aloysea 
2002. Restoring Human Dignity and Reconciling the People of Rwanda. Paper presented 
at Stockholm International Forum on: Truth, Justice and Reconciliation, 23-24 April 
2002. IRIN News. Available at http://www.irinnews.org/print.asp?ReportD=20525. 
Accessed 2. 11.  2002 
Jacques, Genevieve 
1997. Hasty Reconciliation and Quick Forgiveness not Possible in Rwanda Available 
at http://www.wfn.org/1997/03/msg00129. Accessed  01. 24 .2005 
James, Wilmot and Linda van de Vjver (eds) 
2000. After the TRC. Reflections on Truth and Reconciliation in South Africa. David 
Philip, Cape Town 
Jary, David and Julia Jary 
1995. Dictionary of Sociology. (2nd edn) Collins, Glasgow 
Jeffery, Anthea 
1999. The Truth about the Truth Commission. South African Institute of Race Relations, 
Johannesburg 
______ 
1999. The truth about the Truth Commission. R. Johnson. Why there is no easy way to 
dispose of painful history. Review of Books, London, 14 October 
Jennings, Christian 
2000. Across the Red River, Rwanda, Burundi & the Heart of Darkness. Phoenix, London 
http://www.ijr.org.za/index
http://www.irinnews.org/print.asp?ReportD=20525
http://www.wfn.org/1997/03/msg00129
Jentleson, Bruce W (ed) 
2000. Opportunities Missed, Opportunities Seized Preventive Diplomacy in the Post-Cold 
World War.  Rowman & Littlefield, New York/Oxford 
John Paul II 
1984. Apostolic Exhortation on Reconciliation and Penance, Origin and Meaning of the 
Document. Reconciliation et Paenitentia Available at http//: www. cin.org/jp2ency/ 
reconcil. Accessed  3.  20.  2002 
Johnston, Alexander 
1995. Conflict in South Africa. Conflict in Africa. Furley, Oliver (ed) 46-71. I. B. Tauris, 
London 
Johnston, Douglas & Sampson, Cynthia 
1995. Religion, the Missing Dimension of the Statecraft. Oxford University Press, New 
Joinet, Louis 
1996. The Administration of Justice and the Human Rights of Detainees, Question of the 
Impunity of Perpetrators of Violations of Human Rights (Civil and Political rights): Final 
Report prepared by Mr. L. Joinet, Pursuant to Subcommission Resolution 1995/35. UN 
High Commission on Human Rights, Geneva 
Joint Evaluation of Emergency Assistance to Rwanda (Millwood, David [ed]) 
1996. Synthesis Report. The International Response to Conflict and Genocide: Lessons 
from the Rwanda Experience. Steering Committee 
______ 
1996. Historical Perspective: Some Explanatory Factors. The International Response to 
Conflict and Genocide: Lessons from the Rwanda Experience. Steering Committee 
______ 
1996. Early Warning and Conflict Management. The International Response to Conflict 
and Genocide: Lessons from the Rwanda Experience. Steering Committee 
______ 
1996. Humanitarian Aid and Conflict. The International Response to Conflict and 
Genocide: Lessons from the Rwanda Experience. Steering Committee 
______ 
1996. Rebuilding Post-War Rwanda.  The International Response to Conflict and 
Genocide: Lessons from the Rwanda Experience.  Steering Committee 
Jones, D. Bruce 
 2001. Peacemaking in Rwanda, the Dynamics of Failure. Lynne Reinner, London 
Jones, L G 
1995. Embodying Forgiveness, a Theological Analysis. Eerdmans, Grand Rapids 
Jones, L G & Buckley, J J (eds) 
1997. Spirituality and Social Embodiment. Blackwell, Oxford 
Kagabo, Jos 
1997. Le Rwanda aprs la Tragdie de1994. Retour  L Histoire et Perspective dAvenir. 
Bray, Maryse et al. (eds). Rwanda: Perspectives. University of Westminster Francophone 
Africa Research Centre, London, 9-21 
Kagame, Alexis 
 1954. Les Organisations Socio-familiales de lancien Rwanda. ARSC, Brussels 
Kagame, Paul 
2000. Kagame parle in Jeune Afrique/lintelligent. 2064, 1-7 August 
Kalibwami, Justin 
 1979. Le Rwanda face  son Avenir. Etudes Socio-politiques. Hermlin & Fils, Paris 
Kamukama, Dixon 
1995. Rwanda Conflict. Its Roots and Regional Implications. Fountain 
______ 
1998. Recent Conflicts in the Great Lakes Region. Makerere University, Kampala 
Kanyamachumbi, P 
1995. Socit, Culture et Pouvoir Politique en Afrique Interlacustre, Hutu et Tutsi de 
lancien Rwanda [Society, Culture and Power Politics in Interlacustrine Africa, Hutu and 
Tutsi of ancient Rwanda]. Viking, London 
Karamaga, Andr 
1994. Les Eglises Protestantes et la Crise Rwandaise. Guichaoua, Andr (ed) 1995. Les 
Crises Politiques au Burundi et au Rwanda (1993-1994). Karthala, Paris 
Karekezi, P D 
1999. Gacaca Nshya Kinyamateka. 66 (1512), Werurwe, 1 
Kean, Fergal 
1996. Season of Blood, A Rwandan Journey. Penguin, London. 
Kelman, Hebert 
1997. Interactive Problem Solving. Fisher, Ronald J (ed) Interactive Conflict Resolution. 
Syracuse University, Syracuse, 56-76 
Kgalema, Lazarus & Gready, Paul 
2001. Transforming a Politicised System of Justice: A case Study of Magistrates in South 
Africa. CSVR 
Khan, Shaharyar M 
 2000. The Shallow Graves of Rwanda, I. B. Tauris, London 
Kibble, Steve 
2000. The Changing Nature of Violence in South Africa. Working paper, presented at 
SOAS, 18 May 
Kimmel, Paul R 
2000. Culture and Conflict. Deutsch, Morton & Coleman, Peter T (eds) The Handbook of 
Conflict Resolution, Theory and Practice. Jossey-Bass Publishers, San Francisco, 453-474 
Klinghoffer, Arthur Jay   
1998. The International Dimension of Genocide in Rwanda. Macmillan, Basingstoke.    
Knighton, Ben. 
2001. Forgiveness and Disengagement in a Traditional African Cycle of Revenge. 
Exchange 30/1,18-32 
Koff, Clea 
2004. The Bone Woman, Among the Dead in Rwanda, Bosnia, Croatia and Kosovo. 
Atlantic Books, London 
Kolini, Emmanuel  
1995. The Church as Sanctuary. Working paper 
Kottlen, Jeffrey A 
1994. Beyond Blame, A New Way of Resolving Conflict in Relationship. Jossey-Bass 
Publishers, San Francisco 
Krauss, Robert M & Morsella, Ezequiel 
2000. Communication and Conflict. Deutsch, Morton & Coleman, Peter T (eds) The 
Handbook of Conflict Resolution, Theory and Practice. Jossey-Bass Publishers, San 
Francisco, 131-143 
Kraybill, Ronald S; Evans, Robert A & Evans, Alice Frazer  
2001. Peace Skills: Manual for Community Mediators. Jossey-Bass Publishers, San 
Francisco 
Kressel, Kenneth; Pruitt, Dean G &  Associates (eds) 
1989. Mediation Research: The Process and Effectiveness of Third-Party Intervention. 
Jossey-Bass Publishers, San Francisco & London 
Kritzinger, J. J  
1996. The Rwandan Tragedy as Public Indictment of Christian Mission. Missiological 
Reflection of an Observer. Missionalia. 24(3), November 
Krog, Antjie 
1998. Truth and Reconciliation Commission. James, W. & Levy, M. Pulse; Passages in 
Democracy-building: Assessing South Africas Transition. IDASA, Cape Town 
______  
1999. Country of my skull. Vantage, London 
Kuperman, J. Alan 
2001. The Limits of Humanitarian Intervention, Genocide in Rwanda. Brookings, 
Washington D C 
Kumar, Krishna (ed)  
1996. Rebuilding Societies after Civil war: Critical Roles for International Assistance. 
Lynne Rienner, Boulder  
Laegreid, Turid 
1999. U.N. Peacekeeping in Rwanda. Adelman, Howard and Suhrke, Astri (eds) The Path 
of Genocide, The Rwandan Crisis from Uganda to Zaire. London/New Jersey 
Lambourne, Wendy 
1999. Genocide & the International Human Rights. The Pursuit of Justice and 
Reconciliation: Responding to Genocide in Cambodia and Rwanda. Working papers, 
International Studies Association 40th Annual Convention 16-20 February 
Lamola, John 
1991. The Morality of Reconciliation in South Africa. Reconciliation in Southern Africa. 
Conference Report. Harare, WEPAA, 28-31 October 
Lash, Nicholas 
1997. The Church in The State Were In. Jones, L. G. and J. J. Buckley (eds)  Spirituality 
and Social Embodiment. Blackwell, Oxford, 121-137 
Laue, James H 
1987. The Emergence and Institutionalization of Third Party Roles in Conflict. Sandole, 
Dennis J D & Sandole-Staroste, Ingrid (eds) Conflict Management and Problem Solving: 
Interpersonal to International Applications.  
Frances Pinter, London, 17-29 
Leary, Sen O and Mark Hay (eds)  
2000. Understanding Reconciliation. No. 033B-Social Awareness Series. Lumko Institute, 
Germiston 
LeBaron, Michelle  
2002. Bridging Troubled Waters. Conflict Resolution from the Heart. Jossey-Bass 
Publishers, San Francisco. 
Lederach, John Paul     
1992a. Mediation Training Manual, Skills for Constructive Conflict Transformation. 
Mennonite Central Service, Akron PA 
______     
1992b. Preparing for Building Peace; Sustainable Reconciliation in divided Societies. 
Mennonite Central Service, Akron PA 
______ 
1996. Preparing for Peace, Conflict Transformation Across Cultures. Syracuse University, 
Syracuse, New York 
______  
1997. Building Peace, Sustainable Reconciliation in Divided Societies. United States 
Institute of Peace Press, Washington D C 
______  
1999a. The Journey towards Reconciliation. Herald Press, Scottdale 
______ 
1999b. The Challenge of the 21st Century: Justpeace. Bureau M & O (eds) People 
Building Peace: 35 Inspiring Stories from Around the World. The European Centre for 
Conflict Prevention, Utrecht, 27-36 
______ 
 2003. The Little Book of Conflict Transformation. Good Books, PA 
Leeds, C.A 
 1981. Political Studies. Macdonald & Evans Ltd, Plymouth 
Lemarchand, Rn 
1967. Power and Stratification in Rwanda. A Reconsideration. Cahier dEtudes 
Africaines 24 
______ 
1994. The Apocalypse in Rwanda. Ethnic Conflict: the New World Order. Cultural 
Survival. Quarterly Summer/Fall, 29-33 
______ 
1995. Rwanda: the Rationality of Genocide. Obi Igwara (ed) 1995. Ethnic Hatred:  
Genocide in Rwanda. ASEN, London, 59-70 
______ 
1997. Rwanda: The Reality of Genocide. Bray et al. (eds) Rwanda: Perspectives. 
University of Westminster Francophone Africa Research Centre, London, 22-31 
Lewicki, Roy J & Wiethoff, Carolyn 
2000. Trust, Trust development and Trust Repair. Deutsch, Morton & Coleman, Peter T 
(eds) The Handbook of Conflict Resolution, Theory and Practice. Jossey-Bass Publishers, 
San Francisco, 86-107 
Linden, Ian 
1977. Church and Revolution in Rwanda. Manchester University, Manchester 
______ 
1995. The Churches and the Genocide: Lessons from the Rwanda Tragedy. Gregory 
Baum and Harold Wells (eds) 1997. The Reconciliation of Peoples. Challenge to Churches. 
Orbis Books, Maryknoll/New York. 43-55 
______ 
1999. Christianisme et Pouvoirs au Rwanda (1900-1990). Traduit et Rvis de lAnglais 
par Paulette Grard.  Karthala, Paris [English version: Church and Revolution in Rwanda.  
Manchester University, Manchester, 1977] 
Lokingo, Antoine Roger 
2004. The Genocide in Rwanda: 10 Years on Why did this killing happen? How does it 
compare with another Genocide now being perpetrated in the neighbouring Democratic 
Republic of Congo? The Congo Panorama: The Democratic Republic of Congos Voice in 
English-speaking world. Spring 
Longford, Frank  
1997. Forgiveness of Man by Man. Oxford University, Oxford 
Longman, Timothy  
1995. Christianity and Democratisation in Rwanda: Assessing Church Responses to 
Political Crises in 1990s. Gifford, P (ed) The Christian Churches and Democratisation of 
Africa. Studies of Religion in Africa. 12, E J Brill, Leiden, 188-204 
______ 
 1997. Christian Churches and Genocide. Paper (Revised), Conference on Genocide, 
Religion,  
and Modernity, 11-13 May. United States Holocaust Memorial Museum 
______ 
1998. Empowering the Weak and Protecting the Powerful. The Contradictory Nature of 
Christian Churches in Rwanda, Burundi, and the Democratic Republic of Congo. Vassar 
College 
Macdonald, John 
 2000. Successfully Resolving Conflict in a Week. Hodder & Stoughton, Oxon 
Mackintosh, HR  
1934. The Christian Experience of Forgiveness. (2nd edn) Nisbet, London 
Maepa, Traggy (ed) 
2005. Beyond Retribution: Prospects for Restorative Justice in South Africa. Institute for 
Security Studies/Restorative Justice Centre, Pretoria 
Mafani, Pumeza  
2000. Victims Understanding of Forgiveness and how they relate to Reconciliation [South 
Africa]. Paper presented at London Institute of Common Wealth Studies, 14-16 
September 
Magnarella, J. Paul 
2000. Justice in Africa, Rwandas Genocide, its Courts, and the UN Criminal Tribunal. 
Ashgale, Aldershot 
Makinda, Samuel M 
1996. Revisiting Rwanda: Reconciliation postponed. The World Today. May, 125-128  
Malkki, Liisa H 
1995. Purity and Exile: Violence, Memory, and National Cosmology among Hutu 
Refugees in Tanzania. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago/London 
Mamdani, Mahmood 
1996. Reconciliation Without Justice. South African Review of Books.  46 (11) 
______   
1998. A Diminished Truth. Siyaya 3, Spring, idasa, 38-41  
______   
2000. A diminished Truth. W. James and L. van de Vijver. 2000. After the TRC.  
David Philip, Cape Town, 58-61 
______   
2001. When Victims Become Killers: Colonialism, Nativism, and the Genocide in 
Rwanda. James Currey, Oxford  
Mandela, Nelson 
 1996. Long Walk to Freedom. ABACUS, London 
Mani, Rama 
 2002. Beyond Retribution: Seeking Justice in the Shadow of War.  Polity, Malden 
Maquet, Jean Jacques 
1954. The Kingdom of Rwanda. D Forde (ed) African Worlds. Studies in the 
Cosmological Ideas and Social Values of African Peoples. Oxford University Press, 
London 
______ 
1961. The Premise of Inequality. Oxford University Press, Oxford 
Marais, Hein   
1998. South Africa Limits to Change. The political Economy of Transformation. UCT, 
Cape Town 
Marks, Susan Collin  
2000. Watching the Wind. Conflict Resolution during South Africas Transition to 
Democracy. United States Institute of Peace, Washington  
Marshall, Christopher D  
2001. Beyond Retribution: A New Testament Vision for Justice, Crime, and Punishment. 
Eerdmans, Grand Rapids/Cambridge/LGHP/Auckland/Sydney 
Martin, John 
1995. Rwanda: Why? EFAC Bulletin 46, 1-4 
Mas, Monique 
1999. Paris-Kigali 1990-1994. Lunettes Coloniales, Politique du Sabre et Onction 
Humaine. Pour un Gnocide en Afrique. LHarmattan, Montral/Paris 
Mathole, K  
1998. Democracy and Conflict in Post-Apartheid Southern Africa: Dilemmas of Social 
Change in small States. International Affairs 74 (2), April, 319  31 
Mayson, Cedric 
 1998. Finding Faith Power again. Challenge 49, August/September 
Mbeki, Tambo 
2000. Address at the National Summit of Unity and Reconciliation in Rwanda. Kigali, 19 
October 
McCullum, Hugh  
1995. The Angels Have Left Us: The Rwanda Tragedy and the Churches. WCC, Geneva 
McGarry, John & OLeary, Brendan (eds) 
1993. The Politics of Ethnic Conflict Regulation. Case Studies of Protracted Ethnic 
Conflicts. Routledge, London/New York 
McNitly, Mel 
 1999. Militarization of Ethnicity and the Emergence of Warlordism in Rwanda Rich   
81-102 
McTernan, Oliver 
2003. Violence in Gods Name: Religion in an Age of Conflict. Longman and Todd, 
Darton 
Mdecins Sans Frontires (MSF) 
 2002. R-D Congo, Silence on Tue  Tmoignages. LHarmattan, Paris 
Meinhof, Carl 
 1912. Die Sprache den Hamiten. Friederichsen, Hamburg 
Meiring, Piet  
1999. Chronicle of the Truth Commission. A Journey Through the Past and Present  into 
the Future of South Africa. Carpe Diem, Vanderbijlpark  
______ 
2000. The Baruti versus the Lawyers: The Role of Religion in TRC Process. C.  
Villa-Vicencio and W. Verwoerd (eds) Looking Back Reaching Forward: Reflections on 
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of South Africa. UCT, Cape Town, 123-131  
Mekenkamp, Monique; van Tongeren Paul & van de Veen, Hans (eds)  
1999. Searching for Peace in Africa. An Overview of Conflict Prevention and Management 
Activities. European Centre for Conflict Prevention, Utrecht 
Melvern, Linda 
2000. A betrayed People. The Role of the West in Rwandas genocide. Zed Books, 
London/New York 
______  
2004. Conspiracy to Murder: The Rwandan Genocide. Verso, London/New York, 
Melvern, Linda & Williams, Paul 
2004. Britain waived the Rules: The Major Government and the 1994 Rwandan 
Genocide. African Affairs. The journal of the Royal African Society, 103 (410) January, 
Meredith, Martin and T. Rosenberg  
1999. Coming to terms: South Africas search for truth. Public Affairs, New York  
Merrills, J. G 
1993. International Dispute Settlement. (2nd edn) Grotius, Cambridge 
Merton, Thomas [ed. William H Shannon] 
 1997. Passion for Peace. The Social Essays. Thomas Merton. Crossroad, New York. 
Merwe, Hugo van der 
1993. Relating Theory to the Practice of Conflict Resolution in South Africa. Sandole, 
Dennis, J D & van der Merwe, Hugo (eds) Conflict Resolution Theory and Practice: 
Integration and Application. Manchester University Press, Manchester/New York, 263-275 
Meyer, Birgit & Geschiere, Peter (eds) 
 1999. Globalization and Identity: Dialectics of Flow and Closure. Blackwell, Oxford 
Miall, Hugh; Ramsbotham, Oliver & Woodhouse, Tom 
 2003. Contemporary Conflict Resolution. Polity, Malden  
Michel, Juan 
2004. Kigali Covenant: churches in solidarity with the people of Rwanda. WCC Press 
Release, 19 April. Available at http://www2.wcc-coe.org/pressreleasessp.nsf/index/pu-
04022. Accessed 01. 25. 2005 
Millingan, Barey 
 2001. Report on Visit to East Africa, 18  30 March   
Milton, Lesley 
1996. Be reconciled to God (2 Cor. 5-20): Biblical Theology and Social Praxis. Guma, 
M & Milton, A L (eds) 1997. An African Challenge to the Church in the 21st Century. 
SACC, Cape Town 
Minow, Martha 
1998. Between Vengeance and Forgiveness. Facing History after Genocide and mass 
Violence. Beacon Press, Boston 
Mitchell, Christopher 
1990. Necessitous Man and Conflict Resolution: More Basic Questions About Basic 
Human Needs Theory.  Burton, John W (ed) Conflict: Human Needs Theory. Macmillan, 
Basingstoke/London, 149-176 
Mitchell, Christopher R 
1993. Problem-Solving Exercises and Theories of Conflict Resolution. Sandole, Dennis, J 
D & van der Merwe, Hugo (eds) Conflict Resolution Theory and Practice: Integration and 
Application. Manchester University Press, Manchester/New York, 78-94 
http://www2.wcc-coe.org/pressreleasessp.nsf/index/pu-04022
http://www2.wcc-coe.org/pressreleasessp.nsf/index/pu-04022
Moghalu, Kingsley 
1998a. Justice will clear the Way in Rwanda. Electronic Mail & Guardian.  Available at 
http://www.mg.co.za/mg/news/98aug2/20aug-rwanda. Accessed  9.  20.  2000 
______  
1998b Justice will help Reconciliation in Rwanda. ACCORD Online. Available at 
http://www.accord.org.za/publications/ctl/Rwanda. Accessed 9.  20.  2000  
Montville, Joseph V 
1993. The Healing Function in Political Conflict Resolution. Sandole, Dennis, J D & van 
der Merwe, Hugo (eds) Conflict Resolution Theory and Practice: Integration and 
Application. Manchester University Press, Manchester/New York, 112-128 
Morgenthou, Hans J 
2006. Politics Among Nations: The Struggle for Power and Peace. (7th edn) Mc Graw Hill, 
Boston/New York etc.   
Morison, Judith (ed) 
1996. Fleeing the Jungle Bloodbath: The Method in the Madness British Press Reporting of 
Rwanda. Occasional Papers no 65. Centre for African Studies, University of Edinburgh  
Mosala, I M  
1987. The Meaning of Reconciliation: A black Perspective. Journal of Theology in South 
Africa. 59, 19-25.  
Moule, CFD  
1998. Forgiveness and Reconciliation and other New Testament Themes. SPCK, London 
Mucumbitsi, Joseph 
1997. La Justice et les Droits de lHomme au Rwanda. Bray et al. Rwanda: Perspectives. 
University of Westminster Francophone Africa Research Centre, London, 57-65 
Mucyo Jean de Dieu 
2001. Gacaca Courts and Genocide. Villa-Vicencio, C & Savage, T (eds) Rwanda and 
South Africa in Dialogue, Addressing the Legacies of Genocide and a Crime Against 
Humanity. IJR, Cape Town, 49-54 
Mugabe, Jean Pierre 
20001. The Shooting down of the Aircraft Carrying Rwandan President. Declaration on the 
Shooting down of the Aircraft Carrying Rwandan President Juvenal Habyarimana and 
Burundi President Cyprien Ntaryamira on April 6, 1994. September 
Mujawayo, Esther & Belhaddad, Soud 
 2004. Survivantes: Rwanda, Dix Ans aprs le Gnocide. LAube, La Tour dAigues 
Mukarubuga, Cecile 
2000. Local Responses to National, Regional or Global Conflicts. Paper presented at 
CODEP Conference on Critical Partnerships for Peace: Dynamic Collaborations in 
Conflict Situation. London 
Mukeshimana-Ngulinzira, Florida 
2001. Un Autre Rwanda, Combat Postume. LHarmatta, Montral/Paris 
Muller-Fahrenholz, Geiko 
1996. The Art of Forgiveness: Theological Reflections on Healing and Reconciliation. 
WCC, Geneva 
Mululeke, Tinyiko Sam 
1997. Truth, National Unity and Reconciliation in South Africa: Aspects of the emerging 
agenda. Guma, M & Milton, L (eds) African Challenge to the Church in 21st Century. 
SACC, Cape Town 
Mulunda-Nyaga, N D  
1997. The Reconstruction of Africa. Faith and Freedom for a Conflicted Continent. AACC, 
Nairobi 
Munyarugerero, Franois-Xavier 
2003. Rseaux, Pouvoirs, Oppositions. La Competition Politique au Rwanda. LHarmattan, 
Paris 
Murengerantwali, T  
2000. Ntinyutse kukwandikira Nyakubahwa Prezida Kagame. Ibarwa Ifunguye. [Let Me 
dare Writing you Honourable President Kagame. An Open Letter]. Cyangugu, Petit 
Sminaire, 05 June 
Murphy, J.G & Hampton, J 
1988. Forgiveness and Mercy. Cambridge University, Cambridge 
Musabyimana, Gaspard 
 2003. La Vraie Nature du FPR? APR dOuganda en Rwanda. LHarmattan, Paris 
Museminali, Rosemary 
2001. Rwanda 7 years after Genocide, Challenges and Progress to date. Paper presented 
at Africa Centre, London, 07. April, 
Mushayidi, Deo 
2001. Tmoignage de Do Mushayidi, un Rescap du Gnocide de 1994. Genocide in 
Rwanda & War in Congo: What we have learnt & What can be done? Edenbridge 
Conference by Pax-Peace for the African Great Lakes, 27/28 October 
MZALA 
 1988. Gatshya Buthelezi, Chief with a Double Agenda. 
Narayan, Deepa 
1996. Toward Participatory Research. 307, World Bank Technical Paper, Washington, D C 
Nations Unies, Bureau de Coordination des Affaires Humanitaires 
2002. Vues de Bill Clinton sur le Gnocide de 1994. Grands Lacs: IRIN-CEA Bulletin 
1086, 5 January 
Nattrass, Nicoli  
1999. The Truth and Reconciliation Commission on Business and Apartheid: a Critical 
Evaluation. African Affairs. The journal of the Royal African Society, 98 (392), July, 373 
 391 
Ndagijimana, F 
1990. L Afrique face  ses Dfis. Les Problmes des Rfugis Rwandais. Arunga, Geneva 
Ndahiro, Eugne 
 2003. Dballoner le Rwanda: pour un Nouveaux Pact Social. LHarmattan, Paris 
Ndamage, Vnant 
2004. Rwanda: Autorconciliation et Droits Citoyens, Une Dialectique Politico-Culturelle. 
Collection Point de Vue Concrets LHarmattan, Paris 
Ndebele, N. S 
1998. Moral anchor, Archbishop Tutus Moral Authority was a key Management Tool that 
united a diverse Commission. Siyaya. 3 Spring, IDASA 
Ndelu, T 
1998. Conflict Management and Peace building through Community Development (South 
Africa). Community Development Journal, 33 (2), April, 109  16 
Nduwayezu, Augustin 
 1991. Imburagihana: Urubanza rwa Sebahinzi na Sebatutsi. Barama, Kigali 
Newbury, Catherine 
 1974. Deux Lignages au Kinyaga. Cahier dEtudes Africaines, 14 (1) 
______ 
1978. Ethnicity in Rwanda: The Case of Kinyaga. International African Institute, 48 (1) 
______  
1988. The Cohesion of Oppression: Clientship and Ethnicity in Rwanda, 1860-1960. 
Columbia University, New York 
______ 
1998. Today Crisis in Central Africa, 45(1), January/March, Lynne Reinner, Africa Today 
Associates 
______ 
1991. Rwanda: Recent Debates over Governance and rural Development. Hyden, G & 
Bratton, M (eds) Governance and Politics in Africa, 193-219 
Newick Park Initiative 
1997. The Churches Role in the Restoration of Justice in Rwanda. 19 - 21 August 1997, 
Kigali 
Nicholson, Michael 
1991. Negotiation, Agreement and Conflict Resolution: The Role of Rational Approaches 
and their Criticism. Vyrynen, Raimo (ed) New Directions in Conflict Theory: Conflict 
Resolution and Conflict Transformation. Sage, London/Newbury Park/New Delhi, 57-78  
Nduwayo, Lonard 
 2002. Giti et le Gnocide Rwandais. LHarmattan, Paris  
Niebuhr, R 
1959. An Interpretation of Christian Ethics. Living Age Books, New York, 201-206 
Nighton, Ben 
[]. Forgiveness or Restoration, Dissembling or Disengagement in a Traditional African 
Cycle of Revenge. Working paper 
Niwese, M 
2001. Le Peuple Rwandais, Un Pied dans la Tombe, Rcit dun Rfugi tudient. 
LHarmattan, Paris 
Niyonsaba, Andr 
 1999. Pastoral Reflection on the 1994 Genocide in Rwanda and the Process of  
Reconciliation. D Min. Thesis, San Francisco Theological Seminary, October 
Nkundiyaremye, Alype 
 1999, Plaidoyer pour lArrt de lAide Extrieure accorde au Rwanda. June 
Norfolk, Simon & Ignatieff, Michael  
1998. The Most of it, I have no Words Landscape, and Memory. Dewis Lewis, 
Stockport 
Nouwen, Henri J.M 
2002. The Return of the Prodigal Son. A Story of Homecoming. Darton-Longman & Todd, 
London 
Ntampaka, Charles 
1999. Droit et Croyances Populaires dans la Societ Rwandaise Traditionnelle [Law and 
Popular Beliefs in the Traditional Rwandan Society]. Dialogue. Bimestriel 211, 
July/August, 3-18 
______ 
2001. La Gacaca Rwandais, une Justice Rpressive Participative [Rwandas Gacaca, a 
Repressive Participant Justice]. Faculits Universitaires Notre Dame de la Paix, Namure, 
211-225 
Ntezimana, Laurien 
2000. Work of Reconciliation in Rwanda: The Confession of Detmold. Forum for 
Liberation Theologies, Annual Report 1999-2000. Centre for Liberation Theologies 
Ntsebeza, Dumisa 
2000. The Struggle for  Human Rights : From the UN Declaration of Human Rights to 
Present. Villa-Vicencio, Charles & Verwoerd, Wilhelm. (eds) Looking back Reaching 
forward. Reflections on the Truth and Reconciliation Commission in South Africa. UCT, 
Cape Town, 2-13 
Nudeler, Oscar 
1990. On Conflicts and Metaphors: Towards an Extended Rationality. Burton, John W 
(ed) Conflict: Human Needs Theory. Macmillan, Basingstoke/London, 177-204 
Nurnberger, Klaus & Tooke, John  
1988. The Cost of Reconciliation in South Africa. The National Institution for 
Reconciliation. Methodist Publishing House, Cape Town 
Nyankazi, Edward L 
1998. Genocide: Rwanda and Burundi. Schenkman Books, Rochester 
Nzwili, F 
2004. Denominations acknowledge inaction on Rwanda genocide. Ecumenical News 
International, 21 April. Available at http://www.umc.org/interior.asp?ptid=2&mid=4182 
Accessed 01. 25. 2005 
http://www.umc.org/interior.asp?ptid=2&mid=4182
Ochieng, L 
2000. Genocide Verdict: Bishops Acquittal divides Rwandans. The East African. 
Nairobi Africa News Online.  Available at http://www.africanews.org. Accessed  7. 6. 
Office of the President no. 1111 (Republic of South Africa) 
1995. Promotion of National Unity and Reconciliation Act, No 34 of 26 July 1995. 
Available at http://www.truth.org.za/legal/act9534. Accessed 4.14.2000 
Office of the President no. 1111 (Republic of South Africa) 
1997. Promotion of National Unity and Reconciliation Second Amendment Act. Available 
at http://www.truth.org.za/legal/act9784. Accessed 4.14.2000 
Omaar, R & de Waal, A 
 1995. Rwanda: Death and Defiance. Africa Rights, London 
Omaar, Rakia 
1997. A Genocide Foretold. Soundings Issue, 7. Soundings LTD, London, 110 
Onana, Charles 
2001. Les Secrets du Gnocide Rwandais. Enqute sur le Mystre dun Prsident. Minsi, 
Tervuren 
______ 
 2003. Silence sur un Attentat: Le Scandale du Gnocide Rwandais. Duboiris, Paris 
Opotow, Susan 
2000. Agression and Violence. Deutsch, Morton & Coleman, Peter T (eds) The 
Handbook of Conflict Resolution, Theory and Practice. Jossey-Bass Publishers, San 
Francisco, 403-427 
Overdulve, Cees M 
1997. Rwanda. Un Peuple avec une Histoire. LHarmattan, Paris 
______ 
1997. Reflection on the Detmold Confession of Rwanda Hutus and Tutsis. Exchange 29 
(3), 254-264 
Pags, Albert 
1933. Un Royaume Hamite au Centre de lAfrique. Institut Royal Colonial Belge, Brussels 
Paris, Erna 
2000. Long Shadows: Truth, Lies and History. Bloomsbury, London 
Paternostre de La Mairieu, Baudouin 
1983. Le Rwanda et son Effort de Dveloppement, Antcdents Historiques et Conqutes 
de la Rvolution Rwandaise. Editions Rwandaises, Kigali 
Paterson, Scott 
2000. Me Against my Brother: At War in Somalia, Sudan, and Rwanda. Routledge, New 
York/London 
Patrice, N 
2000.Ukuri kwibera umugabo.[Truth is witness for itself] Kinyamateka. 67(1555), 
Kamena, 1 
Pityana, N. Barney and Charles Villa-Vicencio (eds)   
1995. Being the Church in South Africa today. Papers delivered at the Consultation on: 
South Africa in Regional and Global Context: Being the Church Today. South African 
Council of Churches, Johannesburg 
Pomerleau, Yvon 
 1994. IDEE, 5(2), June 
Posel, D. and Graeme Simpson (eds) 
2002. Commissioning the Past. Understanding South Africas Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission. Witwatersrand Universty, Johannesburg 
Pottier, Johan 
2002. Re-Imagining Rwanda: Conflict, Survival and Disinformation in the Late Twentieth 
Century. Cambridge University, Cambridge 
Power, Samantha 
 2003. A Problem from Hell. American and the Age of Genocide. Perenial, New York 
http://www.africanews.org/
http://www.truth.org.za/
http://www.truth.org.za/
Price, Huw  
1988. Facts and Functions of Truth. Basil Blackwell, Oxford 
Prunier, Grard 
1995. The Rwanda Crisis (1959-1994). History of a Genocide. Hurst and Company, 
London 
______ 
1999. Rwanda in Zaire.  Hurst, London 
Pruitt, Dean 
1987. Creative Approaches to Negotiation. Sandole, Dennis J D & Sandole-Staroste, 
Ingrid (eds) Conflict Management and Problem Solving: Interpersonal to International 
Applications. Frances Pinter, London, 62-76 
Quarmby, Katharine 
1999. Reconciliation in Rwanda. Daily Express.  Available at http://www.lineone.net/ex 
press/99/04/08/features/ackoal-d. Accessed  9.  20.  2000 
Quicherat, L & Daveluy, A 
 1908. Dictionnaire Latin-Franais. (45th edn)  Hachette et Cie, Paris 
Rader, Victoria 
1990. Human Needs and the Modernization of Poverty. Burton John W (ed) Conflict: 
Human Needs Theory. Macmillan, Basingstoke/London, 219-234 
Rahim, M Afzalur (ed) 
1990. Theory and Research in Conflict Management. Praeger, New York 
Rawson, David 
1995. Rwanda. Analysis by USA Ambassador. Evangelical Missions Quarterly, 31(3), 
July, 320-323 
Ray, Larry 
1987. Trends towards Alternative Dispute Resolution. Sandole, Dennis J D & Sandole-
Staroste, Ingrid (eds) Conflict Management and Problem Solving: Interpersonal to 
International Applications. Frances Pinter, London, 77-80 
Redekop, Vern Neufeld 
2002. From Violence to Blessing: How an Understanding of Deep-Rooted Conflict can 
open Paths to Reconciliation. Novalis, Saint Paul University, Ottawa 
Refugee Studies (Journal) 
1996. The Rwandan Emergency: Causes, Responses, and Solutions? Special Issue, 9(3), 
September 
Research Institute for Theology and Religion 
1998. Confession & Reconciliation: Challenge to Churches in South Africa. University of 
South Africa, Pretoria 
Reyntjens, Filip 
 1985. Pouvoir et Droit au Rwanda. Muse Royal de lAfrique Centrale, Tervuren 
______ 
 1990. Le Gacaca ou la Justice du Gazon au Rwanda. Politique Africaines (40), 31-41 
______ 
1994. LAfrique des Grands Lacs en Crise. Rwanda Burundi 1988-1994. Karthala, Paris 
______ 
 1995. Rwanda: Trois Jours qui ont fait Basculer lHistoire. Institut Africaine, Brussels 
______ 
1996. Rwanda: Genocide and Beyond. Journal of Refugee Studies: The Rwandan 
Emergency: Causes, Responses, and Solutions? Special Issue 9(3), September 240-251 
______ 
1999. A Dubious Discourse on Rwanda. African Affairs. Journal of the Royal African 
Society. 98(390), January, 119-122 
______ 
2004. Rwanda, ten years on: From genocide to dictatorship. African Affairs. Journal  
of the Royal African Society. 103(411) April, 177-210 
Rich, Paul B (ed) 
 1999a. Warlords in International Relations. Macmillan, Basingstoke 
http://www.lineone.net/ex press/99/04/08/features/ackoal-d
http://www.lineone.net/ex press/99/04/08/features/ackoal-d
Richard, Pierre-Olivier 
1997. Casques Blues, Sang Noir : Rwanda 1994  Zaire 1996: un Gnocide en Spectacle. 
EPO, Brussels 
Rigby, Andrew 
 2001. Justice and Reconciliation after the Violence. Lynne Reinner, Boulder/London 
Rittner, Carol; Roth, John K & Whitworth, Wendy 
 2004.  Genocide in Rwanda: Complicity of the Churches? Paragon House, Minnesota. 
Rapoport, Anatol 
1989. The Origins of Violence: Approaches to the Study of Conflict. (1st edn). Paragon 
House, New York 
Robert, D Ensight & North, Jourma (eds) 
1998. Exploring Forgiveness. University of Visconsin, Medison/Visconsin.  
Roht-Arriaza, Naomi (ed) 
1995. Impunity and Human Rights in International Law and Practice. Oxford University,
 New York/Oxford 
______ 
2001. The Role of International Actors in National Accountability Processes. De Brito, 
Alexandra Barahona et al. (eds) The Politics of Memory: Transitional Justice in 
Democratizing Societies. Oxford University, Oxford 2001, 55-64 
Ross, Marc Howard 
1993. The Culture of Conflict: Interpretations and Interests in Comparative Perspective. 
Yale University Press, New Haven/London 
Ross, Robert 
1999. A Concise History of South Africa. Cambridge University, Cambridge 
Rotberg, I  Robert & Thompson, Dennis (eds) 
2000. The Morality of Truth Commissions. Truth v. Justice. Princeton University, 
Princeton/Oxford 
Rosenthal, Jim 
1997. Uganda: Anglicans leads Reconciliation Movement in Rwanda. Anglican 
Communion News Service. 8 May 
Rubayiza, Fulgence 
1998. Gurrir le Rwanda de la Violence. LHarmattan, Montral/Paris 
Rubenstein, Richard E 
1990. Basic Human Needs Theory: Beyond Natural Law. Burton John W (ed) Conflict: 
Human Needs Theory. Macmillan, Basingstoke & London, 336-355 
Rudasingwa, Thogne 
1996. Rwanda. National Unity, Reconciliation, Democratisation and Justice. Thackers, 
Dar-es-Salam 
Rumiya, Jean  
 1992. Le Rwanda sous le Rgime du Mandat Belge 1916-1930. LHarmattan, Paris 
Rutayisire, Antoine 
2000. Forgiveness among Rwandan Prisoners. World in Action. Spring, Bible Society. 
Swindon 
Rutayisire, Paul 
1987. La Christianisation du Rwanda (1900-1945): Mthode Missionnaire et Politique 
selon Mgr Lon Classe. Edition Universitaires, Freiburg 
Ruzibiza, Abdul Joshua 
 2005. Rwanda: L Histoire Secrte. Panama, Paris 
Rwanda National Information Office 
2003. Gacaca. Available at http://www.rwanda1.com/government/. Accessed  11. 15. 
Salih, MAM & Maekakis, J (eds) 
 1998. Ethnicity and the State in Eastern Africa. Nordiska, Uppsala 
Sanders, Edith R 
 1969. The Hamitic hypothesis: Its origin and functions in times perspective. Journal of  
African History. 10 (4), 521-532 
http://www.rwanda1.com/government/
Sandole, Dennis J D 
1999. Capturing the Complexity of Conflict: Dealing with the Conflict of the Post-Cold 
War Era. Frances Pinter, London/New York 
Sandole, Dennis J D & Sandole-Staroste, Ingrid (eds) 
1987. Conflict Management and Problem Solving: Interpersonal to International 
Applications. Frances Pinter, London 
Sandole, Dennis J D 
1987. Conflict Management: Elements of Generic Theory and Process. Sandole, Dennis J 
D & Sandole-Staroste, Ingrid (eds) Conflict Management and Problem Solving: 
Interpersonal to International Applications. Frances Pinter, London, 289-297 
Sandole, Dennis, J D & van der Merwe, Hugo (eds) 
1993. Conflict Resolution Theory and Practice: Integration and Application. Manchester 
University Press, Manchester/New York 
SAPA-AP 
1998. BBC: U.N. Secretary General backs Rwandan Truth Commission. Available at 
http://www.truth.org.za/sapa/9805/s980503a. Accessed 1. 17. 2000 
Sarkin, Jeremy 
1997. Notes of Presentations  Newick Park Initiative. The Churches Role in the 
Restoration of Justice in Rwanda. 19 - 21 August, Kigali 
______ 
2001. Gacaca Courts and Genocide. Villa-Vicencio, Charles & Savage, Tyrone (eds) 
Rwanda and South Africa in Dialogu. Addressing the Legacies of Genocide and a Crime  
Against Humanity. IJR, Cape Town, 54-97 
Scheer, Gary 
1995. Rwanda. Where was the Church? Evangelical Missions Quarterly, 31(3),  
July, 324-328 
Schellenberg, James A 
1996. Conflict Resolution: Theory, Research, and Practice. State University of New York, 
Albany 
Scherrer, Christian 
1999. Genocide and Genocide Prevention: General Outlines Exemplified with the 
Cataclysm in Rwanda 1994. [Draft] 
Schonecke, Wolfgang 
1994. What does the Rwandan Tragedy say to AMECEA Churches? AMECEA 
Documentation Service, 15 September 
Schreiter, Robert J 
1999 [1992]. Reconciliation: Mission & Ministry in a Changing Social Order. Orbis 
Books, Maryknoll, New York 
______ 
2002 [1998]. The Ministry of Reconciliation: Spirituality and Strategies. Orbis Books, 
Mayknoll, New York 
______ 
2003. Theology of Reconciliation and Reconciliation as a Paradigm for Mission. Paper 
presented at Edinburgh University, 24 June 
Schrock-Shenk, Carolyn and Ressler, Lawrence (eds) 
1999. Making Peace with Conflict: Practical Skills for Conflict Transformation. Herald, 
Scottdale, Waterloo-Pennsylvania /Ontario  
Schrock-Shenk, Carolyn (ed) 
2000. Mediation and Facilitation Training Manual: Foundation and Skills for Constructive 
Conflict Transformation. Mennonite Conciliation Service, Akron -Pennsylvania 
Schwager, S J Raymond (ed) 
2000. Must there be Scapegoats? Violence and Redemption in the Bible. The Crossroad, 
New York 
http://www.truth.org.za/sapa/9805/s980503a
Scimecca, Joseph A 
1993. Theory and Alternative Dispute Resolution: A Contradiction in Terms? Sandole, 
Dennis, J D & van der Merwe, Hugo (eds) Conflict Resolution Theory and Practice: 
Integration and Application. Manchester University Press, Manchester/New York, 211-221 
Sebarenzi, Joseph 
2002. Rwanda: The Fundamental Obstacles to Reconciliation. GSC Quarterly No. 3,  
Sebasoni, Servilien M 
 2000. Les Origines du Rwanda. Point de Vue/LHarmattan, Paris/Montreal 
Semujanga, Josias 
 2003. Origins of Rwandan Genocide. Humanity Books, New York 
Snat de Belgique, Session Ordinaire 
2002. Commission dEnquete Parlementaire <Grands Lacs>. Auditions Vendredi 1er 
Mars 2002 Runion de laprs-midi, Compte rendu. 
Sharp, J 
1998. Non-racialism and its Discontents: A Post-apartheid Paradox. International Social 
Science Journal, 50 (2), June, 243  52 
Shaw, Martin 
 2003. War & Genocide. Polity, Cambridge 
Shea, Dorthy  
2000. The South African Truth Commission. The Politics of Reconciliation. United States 
Institute of Peace, Washington D C 
Shearer, S R 
[2005]. The Hamitic Hypothesis: Racial Christianity in the Service of Business and 
Political Elites. Antipas Ministries: Endtimes Network. Available at 
http://www.antipasministries. com/oldnews/hamitic. Accessed  5. 10.  2005 
Shenk, David W 
 1997. Justice, Reconciliation & Peace in Africa. Uzima, Nairobi 
Sheppard, Blair H; Blumenfeld-Jones & Roth, Jonelle 
1989. Informal Thirdpartyship: Studies of Everyday Conflict Intervention.  Kressel, 
Kenneth; Pruitt, Dean G &  Associates (eds) Mediation Research: The Process and 
Effectiveness of Third-Party Intervention. Jossey-Bass Publishers, San Francisco/London, 
166-189 
Shriver, Donald W Jr 
1995. An Ethic for Enemies. Oxford University Press, Oxford/New York 
Sibomana, Andr 
1999. Hope for Rwanda, Conversations with Laure Guilbert and Herve Deguine. 
(Translated with a Postcrip by Carine Tertsakian, Foreword by Alison Des Forges). Pluto, 
London 
Sider, E. Morris and Keefer, Luke Jr (eds) 
 2002. A Peace Reader. Evangel Publisher House, Nappanee 
Sites, Paul 
1990. Needs as Analogues of Emotions. Burton John W (ed) Conflict: Human Needs 
Theory. Macmillan, Basingstoke/London, 7-33 
Siyaya  
1998. Truth and Reconciliation Commission. IDASA 
Smith, Anthony D 
1986. State-making and Nation-Building, Hall, A (ed) States in History. Basil Blackwell, 
Oxford 
Smith, Stephen. 
2004. La Boite noire du Falcon aurait t transfre, il y a dix ans, au sige de ONU 
Edition du Monde. 10 March 
South Africa Council of Churches 
 1997. Submission to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission. August, 1-12 
Soyinka, Wole 
1999. The Burden of Memory: the Muse of Forgiveness. Oxford University, Oxford 
Sparks, Allister 
 2003. Beyond the Miracle: Inside the New South Africa. Profile Books, London 
http://www.antipasministries/
Speke, John Hanning 
 1864. Journal of the Discovery of the Source of the Nile. Dent, Edinburgh 
Spijker, Grard 
1990. Les Usages Funraires et la Mission de lEglise. Une Etude Anthropologique et 
Thologique des Rites Funraires au Rwanda. Doctoral Thesis, Kampen  
______   
1997. The Church and the Genocide in Rwanda. Exchange, 26(3), September 
______ 
2001. New Credal Hymns in Rwanda. Exchange, 30(3), July, 257 
Staub, Ervin 
1989. The Roots of Evil, the Origin of Genocide and other Group Violence. Cambridge 
University, Cambridge 
Staub, Ervin & L. A. Pearrlman (facilitators) 
2001. Heal Reconcile Rwanda [Summary of Seminar Organised by National Unity and 
Reconciliation Commission]. Available at http://www.heal-reconile-rwanda.org/leaderrec. 
Accessed 12.  10. 2002 
Staub, Ervin & L. A. Pearrlman 
 2001. Healing, Reconciliation, and Forgiveness. Helmick, R G et al. (eds) 
Forgiveness and Reconciliation: Religion, Public Policy and Conflict Transformation. 
Templeton Foundation, Philadelphia/London. 205- 227 
Stewart, Frances; Humphrey, Frank P & Nick, Lea  
1997. Civil Conflict in Developing Countries over the Last Quarter of a Century: An 
Empirical Overview of Economic and Social Consequences. Oxford Development 
Studies, 25 (1), 11f 
Stone, Douglas; Patton, Bruce M & Heen, Sheila  
 1999. Difficult Conversations: How to discuss what matters most. Penguin, London 
Stove, Tracy 
 2000. Different Orientations of Dealing with Conflict. Working paper, Oxford, 1- 6 
Tadjo, Vronique 
2002. The Shadow of Imana. Travels in the Heart of Rwanda. [Translated from French by 
Vronique Warkeley]. African Writers Series/Heinemann, Oxford 
Taylor, Vincent  
1946. Forgiveness and Reconciliation. (2nd edn) Macmillan, London 
Taylor, Jane 
1998. Ubu and the Truth Commission. UCT, Cape Town 
Taylor, Christopher C 
 1999. Sacrifice as Terror, The Rwandan Genocide of 1994. Berg, Oxford 
Ted, Grimsrud & Loren, L. John (eds) 
1999. Peace and Justice should Embrace: Power and the Politics in the Bible. Herald Press 
& Scottdale, Telford/Pennsylvania 
Teitel, G. Ruti 
2000. Transitional Justice. Oxford University Press, Oxford/ New York 
Temple-Raston, Dina 
2005. Justice on the Grass: Three Rwandan Journalists, Their Trial for War Crimes, and a 
Nations Quest for Redemption.  Free Press, New York/London/Toronto 
The Conflict, Security and Development Group 
1999. Bulletin. The Conflict, Security and Development Group 
Theunis, Guy  
1995. What future for the Church in Rwanda? Translation of paper written by Father Guy 
Theunis on Strategic Priorities for Development Assistance to Rwanda. Presented at NPI 
Conference at Ashburham Place, 14 March 
The Washington Forum 
1994. Reconciliation in Difficult Places: Dealing with our Deepest Differences. World 
Vision, Monronvia, CA 
Tidwell, Alan C  
1998. Conflict Resolved? A Critical Assessment of Conflict Resolution. Pinter, 
London/New York 
http://www.heal-reconile-rwanda.org/leaderrec
Tlakula, M  
1998. The elin Care group: Conflict in Community Development Styles [South Africa]. 
Community Development Journal. 33 (2), April, 157  64 
Touval, Saadia & Zartman, I William 
1989. Mediation in Internatioal Conflicts. Kressel, Kenneth; Pruitt, Dean G &  Associates 
(eds) Mediation Research: The Process and Effectiveness of Third-Party Intervention. 
Jossey-Bass Publishers, San Francisco/London, 115-137 
Transformation (Journal) 
1995. Refugees, Ethnicity and Renewal. Transformation. 12 (2), April/June 
Truth and Reconciliation Commission 
1998.  TRC Final Report. Available at 
http//:www.polity.org.za/govdocs/commissions/1998/ trc/. Accessed 2. 23. 2001 
Tutu, Desmond M & Boraine, Alex (eds) 
1994. Dealing with the Past. Truth and Reconciliation in South Africa. IDASA, Cape 
Tutu, Desmond M 
1994. The Rainbow People of God- The making of a peaceful revolution. Doubleday, 
London 
______ 
1999. No Future without Forgiveness. Rider, London 
Twagiramungu, Faustin 
1998. Condanner tous les Crimes et tous les Criminels [Condemning all Crimes and all 
Criminals]. Dialogue. (205), July/August, 89-96 
Twagirayesu, M & Butselaar, J van (eds) 
1982. Ce Don que nous avons recu: Histoire de lEglise Presbyterienne au Rwanda (1907-
1982). EPR, Kigali 
Twagirayesu, Michel 
 1993. Inzira yAmahoro. Urwego, Kigali 
Twagirimana, Aimable 
 1998. Hutu and Tutsi. Rosen, New York 
______ 
2003. The Debris of Ham: Ethnicity, Regionalisn and the 1994 Rwandan Genocide. 
University Press of America, New York 
Umutesi, Beatrice 
 2000. Fuir ou Mourir au Zaire, le Vcu d une Refugie Rwandaise. LHarmatta, Paris 
United Nations 
1996. The United Nations and Rwanda 1993-1996. Blue Books Series, Vol X. Department 
of Public Information, New York 
United Nations Development Programme 
2000. Human Development Report. OUP, New York/Oxford 
UN Secretary General to the Security Council 
1998. The Causes of Conflict and the Promotion of Durable Peace and Sustainable 
Development in Africa: Report of the United Nations. United Nations, New York 
Uroh Okechukwa, Chris 
1998. Ethnic Conflict and the Crisis of State in Africa. Exploring a New Theoretical 
Possibility. African Studies Association. Towards the Millennium. April 
Ury, William L; Brett Jeanne M & Goldeberg, Stephen B  
1993 [1988]. Getting Disputes Resolved: Designing the Systems to Cut the Costs of 
Conflict. Pon Books, Harvard 
Uvin, Peter 
1998. LAide Complice? Cooperation Internationale et Violence au Rwanda. LHarmattan, 
Paris 
Uwitonze, C  
2000.Rwanda, inkiko za Gacaca ziziye igihe. Kinyamateka. 67(1548), Werurwe, 4ff 
Vandeginste, Stef 
1998 a. A Truth and Reconciliation Approach to Genocide and Crimes against Humanity in 
Rwanda. Universitair Centrum, Antwerpen 
http://www.polity.org.za/govdocs/commissions/1998/ trc/
______ 
1998 b. Human Rights Accountability: Issues of Justice, Conflict Resolution and 
Reconciliation, the Case of Rwanda. African Studies Association, 16 September, 1998 
______ 
2000. The Re-establishment of the Traditional Gacaca Jurisdiction in Rwanda: A Step 
forward to Reconciliation? Draft paper. Centre of African Studies, Brussels 
______ 
2003. Rwanda. Dealing with Genocide and Crimes against Humanity in the Context of 
Armed Conflict and Failed Political Transition. Nigel Biggar (ed) Burying the Past. 
Making Peace and Doing Justice after Civil Conflict. Georgetown University, Washington, 
D C., 251-285 
Van den Berghe, Pierre L 
 1981. The Ethnic Phenomenon. Elsevier, New York/Oxford 
Van der Meeren, Rachel 
1996. Three Decades in Exile: Rwandan Refugees 1960-1990. Jurnal of Refugee Studies 
Vol 9. No.3 1996, 252-266 
Vansina, Jan 
1998. The Politics of History and the Crisis in the Great Lakes. Crisis in Central Africa. 
Lynne Reinner/Africa Today Associates, 45 (1), 41 
______ 
2000 [1962]. LEvolution du Royaume Rwanda des Origines  1900. Acadmie Royale des 
Sciences dOutre-Mer, Brussels 
______ 
 2004. Antecedents to Modern Rwanda, The Nyiginya Kingdom. James Currey, Oxford 
Vassall-Adams, Guy 
 1994. Rwanda. An Agenda for International Action. Oxfam, Oxford 
______  
1997. Lessons for the International Community. Bray et al. Rwanda: Perspectives. 
University of Westminster Francophone Africa Research Centre, London, 46-56 
Vyrynen, Raimo (ed) 
1991. To Settle or to Transform? Perspectives on the Resolution of National and 
International Conflicts. New Directions in Conflict Theory: Conflict Resolution and 
Conflict Transformation. Sage, London/Newbury Park/New Delhi, 1-25 
Verschave, Franois Xavier 
1994. Complicit de Gnocide? La Politique de la France au Rwanda. La Dcouverte, Paris 
Verwoerd, Wilhelm 
1997. My Winds of Change. Ravan Press, Randburg 
Verwoerd, Wilhelm & Mabizela, Mahlubi Chief (eds) 
2000. Truths drawn in Jest. Commentary on the Truth and Reconciliation Commission 
through Cartoons. David Philip, Cape Town/Johannesburg 
Vidal, Claudine 
1985. Situation Ethnique au Rwanda. Amselle, Jean-Loup and Elikia Mbokolo (eds) Au 
Coeur de lEthnie. Ethnie, Tribalism et Etat en Afrique. Dcouverte, Paris 
______ 
 1991. Socialogies des Passions. Karthala, Paris 
Villa-Vicencio, Charles & Verwoerd, Wilhelm (eds) 
2000. Looking back Reaching forward. Reflections on the Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission in South Africa. UCT, Cape Town 
Villa-Vicencio, Charles (ed) 
2000. Transcending a Century of Injustice. Institute for Justice and Reconciliation, Cape 
Villa-Vicencio, Charles & Savage, Tyrone (eds) 
2001. Rwanda and South Africa in Dialogu. Addressing the Legacies of Genocide and a 
Crime Against Humanity. IJR, Cape Town 
Villa-Vicencio, Charles & Doxtader, Erik (eds) 
2004. Pieces of the Puzzle: Keywords on Reconciliation and Transitional Justice. Institute 
of Justice and Reconciliation, Cape Town 
Vine, W E; Unger, Merill F & White, William Jr  
1985. Vines Complete Expository Dictionary, Old and New Testament Words. Ritchie, 
Nashville/London 
Vision, Gerald  
1988. Modern Anti-Realism and Manufactured Truth. Routlege, London 
Volf, Miroslav 
1996. Exclusion and Embrace. A Theological Reflection on Identity, Otherness, and 
Reconciliation. Abingdon Press, Nashville 
______ 
1999. The Social Meaning of Reconciliation. Transformation, 16(1), January/March, 7-12 
______ 
2002. Reconciliation: Memory in the context and Redemption, Seminar Paper presented 
at Oxford, 10 June 
Waldmeir, Patti  
1998 [1997]. Anatomy of a Miracle. Penguin Books, London 
Wall, James A Jr & Rude, Dale E 
1989. Judicial Mediation of Settlement Negotiations. Kressel, Kenneth; Pruitt, Dean G &  
Associates (eds) Mediation Research: The Process and Effectiveness of Third-Party 
Intervention. Jossey-Bass Publishers, San Francisco/London, 190-212 
Wallensteen, Peter 
1991. The Resolution and Transformation of International Conflicts: A Structural 
Perspective. Vyrynen, Raimo (ed) New Directions in Conflict Theory: Conflict 
Resolution and Conflict Transformation. Sage, London/Newbury Park/New Delhi, 129-152 
Waller, David 
 1993. Rwanda. Which Way? Oxfam, Oxford 
Walshe, Peter 
1995. Prophetic Christianity and the Liberation Movement in South Africa. Cluster, 
Pietermazburg 
1999. Hope against Hope. Report of Delegations visit to Rwanda 18-25 January, World 
Alliance of Reformed Churches, Geneva 
Washington Post 
1999. Confession on Rwanda. Available at http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-
srv/Wplate/1999-12/20/0011-122099-ids. Accessed 1. 20.2000 
Watson, Catherine 
1991. Exile from Rwanda: Background to an Invasion. US Committee for Refugees, 
Washington D C 
Waugh, Colin M 
2004. Paul Kagame and Rwanda: Power, Genocide and the Rwandan Patriotic Front. 
McFarland & Company, Jefferson/London 
1999. Unresolved Questions related to the Genocidal Killings in Rwanda. Background 
Information and Suggestions for Advocacy. RLD Council of Churches, Geneva 
Weaver, J Denny 
 2001. The Nonviolent Atonement. Eerdmans, Grand Rapids Michigan/Cambridge 
Webster, J B (ed) 
 1979. Chronology, Migration and Drought in Inter-lacustrine Africa. Longman, London 
Wedge, Bryant 
1987. Conflict Management: The State of the Art. Sandole, Dennis J D & Sandole-
Staroste, Ingrid (eds) Conflict Management and Problem Solving: Interpersonal to 
International Applications. Frances Pinter, London, 279-288 
Weeks, Dudley 
1994 [1992]. The Eight Essential Steps to Conflict Resolution, Preserving Relationships at 
Work, at Home, and in the Community. Tarcher/Putnam, New York 
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/Wplate/1999-12/20/0011-122099-ids
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/Wplate/1999-12/20/0011-122099-ids
Weitzman, Eben A & Weitzman, Patricia Flynn 
2000. Problem Solving and Decision Making in Conflict Resolution. Deutsch, Morton & 
Coleman, Peter T (eds) The Handbook of Conflict Resolution, Theory and Practice. 
Jossey-Bass Publishers, San Francisco, 185-210 
Wells, Harold 
1997. Theology for Reconciliation: Biblical Perspectives on Forgiveness and Grace. in 
Gregory Baum and Harold Wells (eds)  The Reconciliation of Peoples: Challenge to the 
Churches. Orbis Books/WCC, Maryknoll /New York, 1-15 
West, Peter 
2000. Rwanda Return: Part One, History. Visiting Christian Aid Partners, Reflections 
Willam, Jean-Claude 
1997. Les Belges au Rwanda. Le Parcours de la Haunte. Commission Rwanda: Quels 
Enseignements [Belgians in Rwanda. The Trajectory of Shame: Rwanda Commission: 
What Lessons]. Complexe, Brussels 
Williams, Brian 
 2005. Victims of Crime and Community Justice. London, Jessica Kingsley Publishers 
Willmer, Haddon 
 2000. Reconciliation. Working paper 
Wilson, A. Richard 
2001. The Politics of Truth and Reconciliation in South Africa. Legitimising the Post-
Apartheid. Cambridge University, Cambridge 
Wink, Walter (ed) 
2000. Peace is the Way: Writings on Non-violence from the Fellowship of Reconciliation. 
Orbis Books, Maryknoll-New York 
Wink, Walter 
 2003. Jesus and Nonviolence: a Third Way. Fortress, Augusburg 
Woodstock Theological Centre 
  1998. Forgiveness in Conflict Resolution: Reality and Utility. Woodstock 
Worthington, Everett 
1998. Dimensions of forgiveness. Templeton Foundation, Philadelphia 
Wright, Martin 
1996. Justice for Victims and Offenders. A Restorative Response to Crime. (2nd edn) 
Waterside Press, Winchester 
Yancey, Philip 
1997. Whats so Amazing about Grace? Grand Rapids, Michigan 
Yinger, John Milton 
 1994 [1981]. Ethnicity: Source of Strength? Source of Conflict? SUNY, Albany 
Yoder, John Howard 
 1972. The Politics of Jesus. Eerdmans, Grand Rapids-Michigan 
______ 
 2002. The Christian Witness to the State. Herald, Scottdale Pennsylvania 
Yoder, John Howard 
1992. If a Violent Person Threatened to Harm a Loved One What would you do? 
Herald, Scottdale Pennsylvania/Waterloo Ontario 
Zartman, W & Rasmussen, J  L  (eds) 
1997. Peacemaking in International Conflict, Methods & Techniques. United States 
Institute of Peace, Washington D C 
Zehr, Howard 
 2002. Restorative Justice. Good Books, Intercourse PA 
Zorbas, Eugenia 
2000. Towards Justice and Reconciliation in Rwanda: Taking Stock. Pambazuka News. 
Available at http://www.pambazuka.org. Accessed 5. 3. 2005 
______ 
2004. Reconciliation in Post-Genocide Rwanda. African Journal of Legal Studies. 2004 
vol 1, No 1. 
Appendix 1: Chronology of events 
a) South Africa1 
1899/1902 
Dutch settlement at the Cape. 
Arrival of French Huguenots settlers at the Cape. 
Early British occupation. 
Emancipation of slaves at the Cape. 
Beginning of the Great Trek. 
British annex Natal. 
Transvaal gains independence as Boer Republic. 
Orange Free State gains independence. 
Anglo-Boer War.  Britain conquers the two Boer republics. 
British colonies (Cape Colony and Natal) join to form the Union with Boer Republics 
(Transvaal and Orange). 
South Africa Native National Congress founded (later becomes ANC). 
Native Land Act (also revisited in 1936) limiting African land-ownership to the reserves 
(Homelands); divides the country into black and white areas. Afrikaner National Party 
founded. 
N Mandela born. 
Mandate to South Africa from the League of Nations to administer Namibia. 
Jan Smuts becomes Prime Minister.   
Communist Party of South Africa founded. 
Urban Areas Act restricts Africans from living in the cities. 
J B M Herzog becomes Prime Minister. 
Jan Smuts becomes Prime Minister. 
Bus boycott. 
National Party gains control of government, Apartheid starts.  D F Malan becomes Prime 
Minister. ANC League Youth is formed, call for boycotts, strikes and demonstrations. 
Population Registration Act, classification of the people into White, Coloured, or 
  1 For a more detailed chronology of events in South Africa, see Graybill (2002), Sparks (2003) and in 
particular Davenport & Saunders (2000).  
1976-81 
1981-88 
African. Suppression of Communism Act. 
Bantu Education Act. 
Malan retires; J G Strijdom becomes Prime Minister. 
Congress of the People adopts Freedom Charter. 
Treason Trial of 156 Congress Alliance. 
Hendrik Verwoerd becomes Prime Minister. 
Promotion of Bantu Self-Government Act.  PAC breaks away from the ANC. 
Sharpeville massacres: sixty-nine PAC identity-pass protesters die.  ANC and PAC 
banned. 
South Africa becomes Republic, leaving the Commonwealth.  ANC forms MK  
Mandela arrested, Mbeki flees the country. 
Rivonia trial, Nelson Mandela sentenced to life imprisonment 
J Vorster becomes Prime Minister. 
Birth of Inkatha (later becomes IFP). 
Soweto uprising, students against use of Afrikaans in school. 
South Africa grants independence to Transkei, Bophuthatswana, Venda and Ciskei 
homelands. 
S Biko murdered. 
P W Botha becomes Prime Minister. 
Black trade unions legalised. 
South African forces invade Angola, make raids into Zimbabwe, Lesotho, Mozambique 
and Zambia.   ANC guerrillas sabotage South African cities. 
Right-wing whites break from the National Party. 
Church Street bombing; Tricameral Parliament established; Botha becomes President; 
UDF forms, against the Constitution establishing the Tricameral Parliament. 
D Tutu receives the Nobel Prize. 
COSATU formed as largest trade union federation. State of emergency.  Kairos 
Document signed by a number of theologians. 
Identity-pass laws repealed. 
Security Forces blow up COSATU headquarters house. 
Bombing headquarters of SACC.   
F W de Klerk becomes Prime Minister. 
Release of N Mandela on February 11th.  Ban on ANC and other organisations lifted.  
Namibia becomes independent; SWAPO wins elections.  Rustenburg Declaration.  
Natives Land Acts, Groups Areas Acts, Population Registration Acts and Separation of 
Amenities Act repealed.  ANC and Government meet at Groote Schuur and sign accords 
opening the way for negotiations. 
F W de Klerk wins white referendum.  
Chris Hani  General Secretary of South African Communist Party - murdered.   N  
Mandela and F W de Klerk receive Nobel Prize jointly.  Adoption of interim 
constitution. 
First democratic election in South Africa [April 27-29].  N Mandela becomes President 
on May 10th. 
Promotion of National Unity and Reconciliation Act signed into law. 
TRC hearings begin in East London.  National Party withdraws from the Government of 
National Unity.  Adoption of South African constitution. 
TRC submits five-volume final report to President N Mandela.   
T Mbeki becomes president of South Africa 
TRC dissolved. 
b) Rwanda2 
1896/7 
1962. 7 
1963. 12 
1973. 2-7 
German explorers discover Rwanda. 
German occupation.                        
White Fathers establish the first Roman Catholic Mission at Save. 
German diplomatic residence, military commander; Protestants establish the first 
Mission.    
Belgium takes over Rwanda and relies on traditional elites to govern the country. 
The League of Nations puts Rwanda-Urundi territory under Belgian supervision. 
Belgians consolidate both their power and Tutsi domination, enforce forced labour 
Census and classification of Rwandans into Twa, Hutu and Tutsi: introduction of ID 
cards.   
UN puts Rwanda & Burundi under Belgian trusteeship.  Dedication of Rwanda to 
Christ the King.   
First representative council, the Superior Council, composed of prominent Tutsi. 
First local elections in Rwanda for councils of chieftaincies and sub-chieftaincies.  
Publication of Hutu Manifesto, on social aspects of racial problem, denouncing 
feudalism 
King Mutara Rudahigwa dies in suspicious circumstances in July in Burundi, political 
parties emerge, revolution begins: massacres of Tutsi, few flee the country.  
Local elections elevate Hutu to power. 
Monarchy abolished, Referendum, Parmehutus victory and Proclamation of first 
Republic.  
Rwanda becomes independent from Belgium. 
Tutsi refugees raids from Burundi provoked violence against Tutsi in Rwanda. 
Massacres of ~ 200, 000 Hutu in Burundi. 
Violence against Tutsi; many more of them flee, Coup dEtat, Habyarimana takes 
power. 
Creation of MRND.   
New Constitution declares each Rwandan as a militant of MRND, the unique party. 
  2 For a more detailed chronology of events in Rwanda, see the United Nations Blue Book Series (1996) Vol 
X, Joint Evaluation of Emergence to Rwanda (1996) Synthesis Report, Sibomana (1999) and Melvern 
(2000).  
1988.12 
1989-90 
1990. 10 
1990. 11 
1990. 12 
1991. 1 
1991. 2 
1991. 3 
1991. 9 
1992. 3 
1992. 4 
1992. 5 
1992. 6 
1992. 7 
1992. 8 
1992. 10 
1993. 1 
1993. 2 
1993. 7 
1993. 8 
Creation of RANU in Kenya by Rwandan Tutsi refugees. 
International conference of Rwandan refugees in Washington DC; birth of RPF in 
Uganda. 
Re-election of Habyarimana (by 99 per cent). 
First Rwanda-Uganda ministerial meeting to discuss the refugee problem. 
Socio-political crisis, economic crises in Rwanda due to fall of coffee price. 
In July, Habyarimana concedes to the principle of multiparty politics; in September, 
thirty three intellectuals publish a letter denouncing the unique party. Pope Jean Paul II 
visits Rwanda. 
RPA invasion of Rwanda from Uganda, starting civil war in Rwanda. 
Negotiation in Goma, Zaire. 
Publication of 10 Hutu commandments by Kangura. 
RPA established in Byumba.  Massacres of Tutsi group Bagogwe. 
Conference at Dar-es-Salaam on possibility of refugees return. 
Cease-fire between Rwandan Government and RPA. 
Pluralistic Constitution, freedom of press in June followed by the birth of political 
parties (MDR, PSD & PL).  Later, opposition to the Government start public 
demonstration. 
OAU Neutral Observer Group monitors the boarders between Rwanda and Uganda. 
Birth of the extremist party CDR <-> massacres of Tutsi begin in Bugesera. 
Transitional Government headed by the opposition, D Nsengiyaremye is Prime 
Minister. 
New offensive of RPA, many people are internally displaced by the war. 
Opposition and RPF meet in Brussels to form a united front against Habyarimana. 
Cease-fire concluded at Arusha, Tanzania. 
Peace Conference formally opens. From September, extremist militia begins. 
Violent demonstrations by MRND and CDR supporters and militias start. 
Composition of broad-based transitional government. International inquiry on killing. 
New offensive of RPF 
A Uwilingiyimana forms a new Government providing power sharing. 
Arusha Peace Agreement [comprehensive version] signed between Habyarimana and 
1993. 10 
1993. 12 
1994. 2 
1994. 4 
1994. 5 
1994. 5 
1994. 6 
1994. 6 
1994. 7 
1994. 8 
1994. 9 
1994. 11 
1995. 4 
1996. 8 
1996. 12 
1998. 4 
1998. 7 
1998. 9 
UN Security Council approves the sending of troops, UNAMIR, to Rwanda; Hutu 
president  M Ndadaye  of Burundi assassinated. 
French military Operation Noroit leaves Rwanda, UNAMIR and RPF troops enter 
Kigali. 
Influential Hutu political leaders  F Gatabazi and M Bucyana  assassinated.  
President Habyarimana and Ntaryamira assassinated on 6th; beginning of genocide. 
Presidential guard kill Prime Minister A Uwilingiyimana on 7th.   On 8th, Sindikubwabo 
announces an interim Government, RPA leave their garrison and launch an offensive in 
the North and Kigali.  
UN Security Council Resolution 918[1994] sets a firm arms embargo against the 
former Rwandas regime on 17th.  
RPA capture Kigali airport & Kanombe barracks on 22nd. 
RPA acknowledge killing of three Bishops and 10 priests. 
Opration Turquoise [French troops arrive in Rwanda]. 
RPF control over Kigali. 
UNAMIR II replaces Opration Turquoise, which ends on 22nd. 
RPA control all the country. 
UN Security Council votes for an International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, on 8th.  
RPA massacre Hutu internally displaced at Kibeho, Gikongoro on 22nd.  Break-up of 
Government of National Unity, Prime Minister F Twagiraungu flees the country.  
Adoption of new law on crimes of genocide.  
Forcible closure of Hutu refugee camps in Tanzania. 
Execution of 22 Hutu sentenced to death by the RPF regime in Kigali. 
The Rwandan Government asks UN Human Rights Field Operation to leave Rwanda. 
Former Prime Minister Hutu, J. Kambanda sentenced to life imprisonment by ICTR in 
Tanzania. More Hutu former leaders are indicted. 
   Appendix 2: Maps 
    Appendix 3: Questionnaire 
A)   QUESTIONNAIRE/QUESTIONS FOR INTERVIEWS IN SOUTH AFRICA 
                                                                                                                                  R E S U L T S 
CORE QUESTIONS 
Affirmative 
answers 
Negative 
Answers 
Did the TRC reach its main goal towards the objectives? 
Q2 Was the TRC aiming at a single goal (uniting and reconciling South 
Africans)? 
Q3 Did people come to the TRC willing to tell the whole truth 
(wrongdoing or suffering etc. that they knew of)? 
Q4 Did amnesty encourage people to give testimonies for the success of 
the TRC? 
Q5 Did the TRC succeed to reconcile South African Coloureds3 and 
Whites? 
Q6 Was the process of the TRC more effective than judicial courts? 68% 32% 
Did the TRC gain from Christian/theological influence? 
Q8 Did churches put into practice the suggestions that the TRC 
recommended? 
Q9 Is it useful to continue some form of the hearings after the TRC has 
produced its report (official closure)? 
Q10 Are there any forms of follow-up of the recommendations/findings 
from the TRC? 
Q11 Are there any lessons to learn from the TRC, to help to settle conflict 
in other countries such as Rwanda? 
Q12 Did you benefit positively (personally feel a positive change) from the 
  3 Currently, coloured implies anyone who is not pure White. 
B)    QUESTIONNAIRE/QUESTIONS FOR INTERVIEWS IN RWANDA      
                                                                                                                           R E S U L T S 
CORE QUESTIONS 
Affirmative 
answers 
Negative 
Answers 
Has Rwandas conflict been discussed in transparency as the basis 
for resolution?4 15% 85% 
Could justice contribute effectively towards reconciliation in 
Rwanda? 77% 23% 
How long might it take for reconciliation to become reality in Rwanda? 
[Response: ~ 2 generations] 19% 81% 
Are there elements that still need consideration for genuine 
reconciliation in Rwanda?  85% 15% 
Is separation of Hutu and Tutsi land a valuable alternative for 
settlement in Rwanda?  12% 88% 
Could overseas initiatives play a positive role in the process of 
reconciliation in Rwanda? 73% 23% 
Who are victims of the 1990s conflict/genocide in Rwanda? 
[Response: all Twa, Hutu & Tutsi] 38% 62% 
Q8 Do Rwandan people interpret their history objectively? 35% 65% 
Is the Rwandan Government keen (will it make the necessary 
effort) on genuine reconciliation? 31% 69% 
Could involving former leaders of the Hutu led regime be effective 
for the reconciliation? 77% 23% 
Was the Rwandan war in the 1990s avoidable (were other 
solutions possible)? 77% 23% 
Are commemoration and monuments of the genocide enhancing 
peace in Rwanda?  35% 65% 
Was the attitude of the Rwandan church a factor encouraging the 
genocide in 1990? 38% 62% 
Can South Africas model of Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission help in Rwanda? 58% 42% 
Is there any theological basis (book/argument/verses) that could 
help reconciliation? 77% 23% 
  4 Resolution refers to Arusha agreements before the genocide and later the eventual move towards justice 
and reconciliation. 
     Appendix 4: Profiles and Economies: comparison  
S O U T H    A F R I C A 
Year 2002 
R W A N D A 
Year 2003
People  
- Population , total  
- Population growth  
(annual %) 
- Life expectancy  (years) 
- Illiteracy total (% age 15 and above) 
Environment 
- Surface area (sq. km) 
Economy 
- GNI per capita 
- Export of goods and services (% of 
- Import of goods and services (% of 
43.6 million 
1.2 million 
2.600.0 
People 
- Population, total  
- Population growth  
(annual %) 
- Life expectancy  (years) 
- Illiteracy total (% age 
15 and above) 
Environment 
- Surface area (sq. km) 
Economy 
- GNI per capita 
- Export of goods and 
services (% of GDP) 
- Import of goods and 
services (% of GDP) 
8.2 million 
26,340.0 
230.0 
      NB.  The unit of South African currency is Rand [R].  1 US Dollar = R 10 as of October 31st, 2001. 
              The unit of Rwandan currency is Franc [Fr].  1 US Dollar = Fr 1, 070 as of January 30th, 2004. 
	PART  ONE:    THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 
	Chapter 1 
	General Introduction 
	Chapter 2 
	Conflict: Concepts and Theory 
	2.3 Concepts and perceptions of conflict 
	2.4.1 Conflict dynamics 
	Chapter 3 
	Methods of Reduction and Resolution of Conflicts 
	3.3 Justice  and truth  
	  Top level leadership                Focus: high level negotiations, cease-fire 
	  Military, Political and Religious  Led by highly visible single personality  
	    Leaders with high visibility          Mediators 
	     (Depends on very few)             (Affects many)                                                                                                                 
	  Middle level leaders    Problem-solving workshops 
	Chapter 4 
	Conflict Reconciliation: Christian Perspectives 
	Chapter 5 
	Country Context: Formative Attitude 
	National Peace Committee 
	Chapter 6 
	TRC: Findings from Documentation and Field Interviews 
	PART  THREE:    RWANDAS  CASE 
	Chapter 7 
	Country Context: Formative Attitude 
	Chapter 8 
	Mediation and Reconciliation: Challenges to the Church 
	8.2 Mediation: failure and the premise of reconciliation 
	(c) National ecumenical effort  
	Following the missile event on 6 April 1994, the Rwandan military command imposed an effective curfew all over the country. Hard-liners dominated the source of information, and apart from the people who prepared the killing, no one else moved for a week or so (Des Forges 1999, 181ff; African Rights 1995, 94ff). Civilians were afraid and confused, but also at the root of the whole tragedy was a mutual fear: the fear of individual and ethnic extermination. After a week, informal news, communicated by telephone calls and from fleeing people, revealed that the Presidential Guards had led massacres in the capital city (Kigali). The killings increased quickly in one week, involving Interahamwe in preparations on a very large scale for the extermination of the Tutsi, a plan that extended throughout the country. The RTLM (the MRND/CDR broadcasting) and Radio Muhabura (of the RPF) spread the panic and ethnic hatred among the population. Reyntjens (in Refugee Studies 1996, 247) states that the media were so blinded by their ethnic reading of the situation that Reuters for instance, labelled one of the first prominent victims, Prime Minister Agathe Uwilingiyimana, as Tutsi, although she was Hutu. Individual complicity and previous hatred made the killings and other forms of violence easier to undertake. However,  
	Those killed on a massive scale were opponents, Hutu and Tutsi alike: politicians opposed to the presidential majority and/or adhering to [the] Arusha peace accord, persons active in Human Rights Associations, leaders of civil society, journalists and generally the Tutsi as a whole considered allies of the RPF (Reyntjens 1996, 246).  
	While the silence of Radio Rwanda  the national/official broadcasting institution  concerning the crisis puzzled Rwandas population, outsiders saw the genocide as a plot by the regime of the time. Others considered that the killings resulted from the absence of courage and clear strategy among Christians to stand up for human rights and moral integrity.  
	8.4.1 World-wide ecumenical response 
	PART  FOUR:    SIGNIFICANCE AND APPLICATION 
	Chapter 9 
	A Comparative Approach to the cases of South Africa and Rwanda 
	South Africa 
	South Africa 
	9.3.1 Application to Rwanda  
	Chapter 10 
	Concluding Summary 
	                                        SOURCES AND REFERENCES 
	Appendix 1: Chronology of events 
	   Appendix 2: Maps 
	    Appendix 3: Questionnaire 
	                                                                                                                           R E S U L T S 
	     Appendix 4: Profiles and Economies: comparison  
	CyumaPhD2005AcknContAcro.pdf
	List of Figures, Tables and Photos  ........     vi Acronyms              .........    vii 
	PART  ONE:    THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 
	PART  THREE:    RWANDAS  CASE 
	PART  FOUR:    SIGNIFICANCE AND APPLICATION 
	  Sources and References  .      403 
	  Appendices   
